Flores Solitudinis.

Certain Rare and Elegant PIECES; Viz. Two Excellent Discourses Of 1.
Temperance, and Patience; Of 2. Life and Death. BY I.E. NIEREMBERGIUS. THE
WORLD CONTEMNED; BY EUCHERIUS, BP of LIONS. And the Life of PAULINUS, BP of
NOLA.

Collected in his Sickness and Retirement, BY HENRY VAUGHAN, Silurist.

Tantus Amor Florum, and generandi gloria Mellis.
London, Printed for Humphrey Moseley at the Princes Arms in St Paul's
Churchyard. 1654.

TO THE TRULY NOBLE And Religious Sir CHARLES EGERTON Knight.
SIR,
IF, when you please to lock upon these Collections, you will find them to
lead you from the Sun into the shade, from the open Terrace into a private
grove, and from the noise and pomp of this world into a silent and solitary
Hermitage: do not you think then, that you have descended (like the dead) in
Occidentem and tenebras, for in this withdrawingroome (though secret and
seldom frequented,) shines that happy star, which will directly lead you to
the King of light. You have long since quitted the Public, and to present you
now with some thing of solitude and the contempt of the world, would look like
a design to Flatter you, were not my Name, argument enough for the contrary.
Those few that know me, will (I am sure) be my Compurgators; and I my self
dare assert this, you have no cause to suspect it. But what ever the thoughts
of men will be, I am already sure of this advantage, that we live in an age,
which has made this very Proposition (though suspected of Melancholy,) mighty
pleasing, and even mean wits begin to like it; the wiser sort always did,
for what (I beseech you,) has this world, that should make a wise man in love
with it? I will take the boldness to describe it in the same character which
Bisselius did the hansome concubine of Mahomet the great: Puella tota quanta,
nil erat aliud
Quam Illecebra picta, delicatus harpago, etc.
The whole wench (how complete soe'r) was but
A specious bait; a soft, sly, tempting slut;
A pleasing witch; a living death; a fair,
Thriving disease; a fresh, infectious air;
A precious plague; a fury sweetly drawn;
Wild fire laid up and finely dressed in Lawne.


This delicate, admired In^hantresse (even to those who enjoy her after their
own lusts, and at their own rate,) will prove but a very sad bargain; she is
all deception and sorrow. This world and the prince of it are the Canker-Rose
in the mouth of the fox; Decipit, arefit, pungit. But those future, supreme
fruitions which God has in store for those that love him are neither
Phantasmes, nor fallacies; they are all substantial and certain, and in the
Apostles phrase, (...), a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.
Nothing can give that, which it has not, this transi^ory, changeable and
corrupt world cannot afford permanent treasures. All it gives, and all it
shows us, is but trash and illusion. The true incorruptible riches dwell above
the reach of rust and thieves.

Man himself in his outward part, which was taken out of the world, feels the
like passions with the world, he is worn, was^ed, dissolved and changed, he
comes hither, he knows not how, and goes from hence, he knows not whither.
Nescio quo vado, valete posteri! was the Roman's Epitaph: One generation
comes, and another passes away. Properant and decurrunt in absconditum, they
hasten and drive on to their appointed place, until the great day of account.
All the several shapes and gestures we see in this wild Masque of time are but
so many disguises which the Spirits that first assumed them, cast off again
when they have acted their parts. Most elegantly did Augurellius sing to Peter
Lipomanus upon the death of his sister Clara; Amaena, Petre, cum vides, etc.
Peter, when thou this pleasant world do see,
Believe, thou see mere Dreams and vanity;
Not real things, but false: and through the Air
Each where, an empty, slipp'rie Scene, through fair.
The chirping birds, the fresh woods shadie boughs,
The leaves shrill whispers, when the west-wind blows.
The swift, fierce Greyhounds coursing on the plains,
The flying hare distressed 'twixt fear and pains;
The bloomy Maid decking with flowers her head,
The gladsome, easy youth by light love lead;
And whatsoever here with admiring eyes
Thou seem to see, it is but a frail disguise
Worn by eternal things, a passive dress
Put on by beings that are passiveles.


All the gay appearances in this life seem to me but a swift succession of
rising Clouds, which neither abide in any certain form, nor continue for any
long time; And this is that, which makes the fore travel of the sons of men
to be nothing else, but a mere chasing of shadows. All is vanity (said the
Royal Philosopher,) and there is no new thing under the Sun.

I present you therefore with a discourse persuading to a contempt and a
desertion of these old things which (our Savior tells us) shall pass away;
And with an historical, faithful relation of the life and happiness of a
devout, primitive father, who gave all that he had upon earth to the poor,
that he might have treasure in heaven. Some other Additions you will find,
which meeting now in this volume under your name, will in their descent to
posterity, carry with them this fairest Testimony, I loved you. This (Sir) is
my maine and my sole design in this Address, without reservation and without
flattery, for which respect, and for no other, I believe you will accept of
what I have done, and look upon my sudden and small Presents, as upon some
forward flowers whose kind have has brought them above ground in cold
weather. The incertainty of life, and a peevish, inconstant state of health
would not suffer me to stay for greater performances, or a better season; least
loosing this, I should never again have the opportunity to manifest how much
and how sincerely I am

Sir Your Servant and well-wisher Henry Vaughan.
Newton by Vske near Sketh-Rock. 1653.
To the only true and glorious God, the Sole disposer of Life and Death.
O Do not go, thou know I Will dye,
My Spring and Fall are in thy Book!
Or if thou go, do not deny
To lend me, though from far, one look!
My sins long since have made thee strange,
A very stranger unto me;
No morning-meetings (since this change)
Nor Evening-walkes have I with thee.
Why is my God thus hard and cold,
When I am most, most sick and sad?
Welfare those blessed days of old, ( Lad!
When thou did hear the weeping
O do not thou do as I did,
Do not despise a lovesick heart!
What though some Clouds defiance bid,
Thy Sun must shine in every part.
Though I have spoiled, O spoil not thou,
Hate not thine own dear gift and token!
Poor Birds sing best, and prettiest show,
When their neast is fallen and broken.
Dear Lord! restore thy Ancient peace,
Thy quickening friendship, man's bright wealth;
And if thou will not give me Ease
From sickness, Give my Spirit health!
To the Reader.
CAndidus and medicans Ignis deus est. So sings the Poet, and so must I
affirm, who have been tried by that white and refining fire, with healing
under his wings. Quarrelling with his light, and wandering from that fresh and
competent gourd, which he had shadowed me with, drew those Sunbeams upon my
head, whose strong and fervent vibrations made me oftentimes beg of him, that I
might dye. In these sad Conflicts I dedicated the Remissions to thy use,
Reader, and now I offer them to thy view. If the title shall offend thee,
because it was found in the woods and the wilderness, give me leave to tell
thee, that Deserts and Mountains were the Schools of the Prophets, and that
Wild-hony was his diet, who by the testimony of the Son of God, was the
greatest amongst those that are borne of women. It may be thy spirit is such a
popular, fantastic fly, as loves to gad in the shine of this world; if so,
this light I live by in the shade, is too great for thee. I send it abroad to
be a companion of those wise Hermits, who have withdrawn from the present
generation, to confirm them in their solitude, and to make that rigid
necessity their pleasant Choice. To leave the world, when it leaves us, is both
sordid and sorrowful; and to quitt our station upon discontents, is nothing
else, but to be the ^pes of those Melancholy Schismatics, who having burnt off
their own hands in setting the world on fire, are now fallen out with it,
because they cannot rule it. They are Spirits of a very poor, inferior order,
that have so much Sympathy with worldly things, as ^o weep at Parting; And of
as low a Parentage are those, that will be sick of Leap-yeares and Sublunarie
mutations. I honor that temper, which can lay by the garland, when he may
keep it on: which can pass by a Rosebud, and bid it grow, when he is invited
to crop it, -- Whose gentle measure
Complyes and suits with all estates;
Which can let loose to a Crown, and yet with pleasure
Take up within a Cloister gates.
This Soul does Span the world, and hang content
From either pole unto the center,
Where in each Room of the well-furnished tent
He lies warm and without adventure.


Prince Jews, the eldest Son of Charles King of Naples, at the age of twenty
one years, and just when he should have been married to the youthful
Princess of Majorica, did suddenly at Barcellon put on the rou^h and severe
habit of the Franciscans: The Queens and Princesses theye met to solemnize the
marriage of his sister Blanch with James King of Aragon, employed all their
Rhetoric to dissuade him from it; but to no purpose, he loved his Sackcloth
more then their silks, and (as Mounsier Mathieu (alluding to that young
Princess,) speaks of him,) Left Roses to make Conserve of thorns.
Resolution, Reader, is the Sanctuary of Man, and Saint Paul's content is that
famous Elixir, which turns the rudest metal into smooth and ductible gold:
It is the Philosophers secret fire, that stomach of the Ostrich which digests
Iron, and dissolves the hardflint into blood and nutriment. It was an honest
Reply that his Cook made unto the Duke of Millain, when worsted in a great
battle by the Florentines, the over passionate resentment of so unexpected a
repu'se, made him quarrel with his meat: If the Florentines (said he) have
spoiled your taste, that is no fault of mine; the meat is pleasant, and well
dressed, but the good success of your Enemies has made your appetite ill.

I protest seriously unto thee, and without Scepticisme, that there is no such
thing in this world, as misfortune; the foolish testiness of man arising out
of his misconstruction and ignorance of the wise method of Providence, throws
him into many troubles. The Spouse tells us, that the fingers of the
Bridegroom are decked with Beryll and precious stones: what ever falls upon us
from that Almighty hand, it is a diamond; It is celestial treasure, and the
matter of some new blessing, if we abuse it not. God (says the wise King,)
created not Evil, but man (who was created upright) sought out many
inventions: these indeed be get that monster; his ill digestion of his
punishment (which is a kind of divine diet,) makes him to pine away in a
sinful discontent. If thou art sick of such an Atrophie, the precepts laid
down in this little book (if rightly understood, and faithfully practiced)
will perfectly cure thee.

All that may be objected is, that I write unto thee out of a land of
darkness, out of that unfortunate region, where the Inhabitants sit in the
shadow of death: where destruction passes for propagation, and a thick black
night for the glorious dayspring. If this discourage thee, be pleased to
remember, that there are bright stars under the most palpable clouds, and
light is never so beautiful as in the presence of darkness. At least entreat
God that the Sun may not go down upon thy own dwelling, which is heartily
desired and prayed for, by

Hen: Vaughan.
Newton by Vsk in South Wales. April. 17. 1652.
Two Excellent DISCOURSES Of 1. Temperance and Patience. Of 2. Life and Death.
Written in Latin by Johan: Eusebius: Nierembergius.

Englished by HENRY VAUGHAN, Silurist.

-- Mors Vitam temperet, and vita Mortem.
LONDON: Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at the Princes Arms
in St Paul's Churchyard. 1654.

OF TEMPERANCE AND PATIENCE.
THe Doctrine of good living is short, but the work is long, and hard to be
persuaded, though easy to be learnt: for to be good, is of all things the
most easy, and the most ready, if we could learn but one other Art, which
Antisthenes termed the most necessary, I will add, the most difficult, and that
is, to forget to do Evil. I find that peace and joy have two handles, whereby
we may take hold of them, Patience, and Temperance. Rule thy Evil with these,
and then thy will may rule thee well. Horses are ruled with bridles and spurs.
In prosperity use the first, that is, restrain, or keep in thy self. In
adversity the last, that is, Incite, and use thy self to a gallant Apathie,
and contempt of misfortunes. Generous and metlesome Coursers when they are
breathed, or rid abroad, are compelled to trample upon those very things, whose
first sight startled and terrified them; do so with thy self: tread under thy
feet thy most hideous adversities; so shall thou forget the fear of fortune,
which makes men unfit for virtue. Patience in adversity is temperance in
prosperity. Nor can it be easily resolved, which of these two excells: This is
most certain, that noble sufferance is as necessary to man, as the virtue of
temperance. Some few Crosses thou can bear well, but fortune can afflict
thee with many, and thou by patience (the greatest of virtues) must afflict her
with more; for -- The naked man too getts the field,
And often makes the armed foe to yield.


It costs not much to live well, and it is as cheap to learn it. The whole
Art is comprised in these two words, Patience, and Temperance. In these lies
all the Mystery of Peace: you would think it a Secret of the Priests of Ceres,
it is so unknown to any, but sacred minds. These are the Domestic Gods of
tranquillity, and the tutelar Angels of good men: believe with Epictetus, that
the Quintessence of all Philosophy is squeezed into these two, (...) bear and
forbear. He neither obtaines, nor retains his joy, that does not abstain, and
sustain. These are the two Poles upon which tranquillity and virtue move. To
obtain peace, you must bear; to retain it, you must forbear. An odd way of
fruition; By refusing you obtain, and by suffering you preserve: by refusing
the favors, and suffering the spite of fortune. By this very carriage did
Diogenes believe that he had quite deposed and overthrown her: he crowned his
temples with branches of Pine, the old Isthmian ceremony, and walked like an
absolute victour in the Sacred Games. Being required by a cross fellow, not to
usurp that honor till he had lawfully strived, he answered, that he had
overcome two enemies, Pleasure and Grief, the one by forbearing, the other by
bearing. Make not thy self a Woman: thou have (if thou will use them) both
Temperance and Patience, the best Stratagems, and Countermines against the
Wiles of Fortune. Her storms and suddain^ furies (which are always clean, and
without dissimulation,) thou may break and overcome by bearing; Her Arts, her
deep and cankerd hatred, by listening to Reason, and a wary, stayed
Circumspection, while she spends and wastes with her own malice. The wrath of
furious and hasty persons is sincere, and without artifice; It has no poison,
but what breaks out presently at the tongue, or the hand: Fortune too, when in
this humor, is less Noxious, for She makes then an indifferent use of all
Tools, and disposes of them without Study. But when She begins to hate, She
becomes slow and weary, and not contented with open valor, adds to it
Treachery. She pines with the Memory of her old favors, and that She may pull
down what She built, adornes her most deadly Intentions, as Poverty and
grievous Miseries, in the dress of Felicity. All her projects, machinations
and Engines to Torture and vex Man, amount to no more, then to give him what he
would not have, and to deny him what he would have. He breaks her neck that
abstaines from the first, and contemnes the last.

But here is our double Disease, by which Virtue Conceived for a great end,
together with Felicity, become both abortive, that we neither rightly wish,
nor rightly abstain, loath, or love, but do both most absurdly, most
preposterously. We Covet most unseasonably, when even necessity is necessary,
and this to him that wants, is no more then a wish. We covet, I say, such
things as fortune has not, and in a time when they may not be had. We would
have Cherries in January: These wishes are their own Torments: Fortune too most
Commonly gives them but cold Comfort. Why should we Covet extraneous Goods? It
is better to serve the necessity of the time, then to be a slave to Fortune.
We are set upon longing like Women with Child, that labor with strange
appetites and depraved stomachs; that loath healthful Viands, and (which in
them is very strange) abhor sweet meats; That affect raw, absurd
compositions, that eat lime, Charcoles and Ashes, that in the dead of Winter
long for Summer-fruits, and in Summer for Winter-fruits. What do thou think
is bearing and forbearing? It is to be even with Fortune, discreetly to
abstain, discreetly to will, and to covet nothing. Abstain then: otherwise
what will thou do by Coveting, but make way for Fortune, and enlarge her
Empire? Though she would not, she must needs hit thee. Her being blind, hinders
not but she may shoot well: When the mark is have at all, and every where: an
Archer without out Eyes cannot miss it. Though unwilling, her Arrows cannot
wander from him, whose lust wanders after all things. She will hit him without
Aiming, whose hope aims at every thing. No Weapon falls in vain amongst a
multitude. Her scope to hurt, is the same scope thou take to wish.

Thou must know that the Command of Fortune over man about these outward
things, lies in the midst of the will, as the hand in the midst of a bended
bow. If thou hold thy will by the middle, then art thou master of both ends,
and may do any thing. If thou commandst the one half, I will not say, thou
have no hold at all. Liberty has two Limbs, to Will, and to refrain: The one
is a strong Arm, the other a weak Hand: What thou have not, thou may
refrain from wishing to have, but no man can have what ever he would have.
When you refrain from willing, then have you Power over all things; when your
will lusts, then you are subject to all things. Outward goods are fleeting
things, and the faithful servants of unfaithful chance. O how great a
treasure, how provident and infallible a supply against these sudden Ebbs and
diminutions is a regular and resolute will! Why are we troubled at them! We are
too hard for Fortune, and by much too hard, if we command but the one half of
our will; that maimed and halting hand (if I may so speak) will overtake and
bring back the most averse and winged Felicities. It will enrich us sooner and
surer then all the Treasures of Croesus: Those are but beggerie before thee if
thou covet them not, if thy will be not a beggar. Not to will, makes thee
securely rich, even when thou will, that is, when thou do will nothing. Thou
make Fortune poor by leaving her no power over thee, and nothing in her
self, wherewith to please thee; I mean to deceive thee. Thou will be richer
than Attalus by contemning his store, and of greater power than Midas; for his
was placed in fruition and touching, but thine in absence and emptiness. By
wishing nothing thou have all, yea those things which thou see not: and what
wonder then, if those things thou seek not, being abundantly enriched by thy
most precious poverty? It was Divinely argued by Eusebius, That he only
should be esteemed rich, who was persuaded that he had enough. For those that
add still to what they have already gotten, and never think that they can get
enough, though richer than Midas, are most poor and miserable beggars; because
they are nothing rich in their own minds. And in another place, An unreasonable
covetousness (says he) is sooner driven away with the loss of riches
already gotten, then by a plenteous and daily access of more treasures.
Wherefore thou art then only rich, and possessest all things to thy mind, when
to have nothing is in thy will: When ever thou say, It is enough, thou have
all. Yea, thou have more then thou should have. All that comes afterward
does but load and overwhelme thee.

Of such an Immoderate use is Temperance, and I Judge Patience to be of no
lesser. Happily it may be easier; for having learnt to abstain, we may the
better sustain. Impatience arises naturally out of Cupidity, and fear is the
Daughter of hope. Cast these away, and you will find, that an adverse Fortune
may be entertained, not only with Patience, but with much welcome. Crates, or
Zeno (a gallant man, if either of the two) being at Sea in a great storm,
caused all his goods (wherewith the Ship was Laden) to be thrown over board,
and thanked Fortune for the kindness: do thou the like, and approving of thy
misfortunes, say, It is well done, Fortune, thou have read me a good lesson,
thou have had care of my Soul. I thank thee that thou art Come thy self to
fetch these burdens, which I should have brought thee home. Thou have dealt
courteously to lend me their use, and to prevent their Abuse. I like thy
Method, and prefer thy advise to thy favors; I know thy meaning. I must make a
wise use of these crosses, I must have recourse to virtue, to my self, and to
my God. Thou do not only Incite, but compel me to goodness. I am brought
safe to shore, by the splitting of the Ship: hereafter I will be better
provided. Behold, thou have left yet behind thee some movables, which thou
should have taken with thee, they are thine by right. Thou gave me so many
things, that thou can not well remember them. I desire not to conceal them,
take all thy Relics and appendencies with thee, all that is here besides my
self; I hold thy leavings not worthy of acceptance from the mind of man. I
wish that we would so deal with Fortune, as a certain old man did with thieves
that came to rob his house. Take with you (said he) all that you see here. They
did so, leaving nothing behind them but an empty purse; which the old man took
up, and following after, called to them; Take this also with you, which you
forgot to put up. Fortune perhaps amazed at such a Noble, Serene disposition,
would restore all: It is most certain the Thieves did. But let a Christian
reject this figment of Fortune, and in all worldly mutations acknowledge and
kiss the divine hand.

But if after all this, thou will not excuse the outward and ravenous manners
of Fortune; there will be no Just cause for thee to accuse them, having
received no damage by her. If thou will purge thy mind from wishes and hopes,
thou may safely place thy self before her very Arrows, and defy them. And
truly I believe it will be thy most secure station. When Stratonicus saw an
unskilful fellow shooting at Buts, he got presently close to the White, as
the only place free from danger: and being asked his reason for that unusual
Refuge, he answered; Least that fellow should hit me. Fortune (we say) is
blind; stand then in her way: She hits that the least, which she most aims at;
but if all her shafts should fall upon thee, they can draw no blood from thee,
as long as thou art not drawn by covetousness. If you break off the point of
the Weapon, it cannot hurt you. Our own Covetousness is Fortunes edged tool;
take that away, and you disarme her, and secure your self: blunt weapons wound
not to blood.

I suppose now that Epictetus his abridgement, or reduction of Philosophy into
two words, Abstain and Sustain, will seem prolix enough to you. The first we
have past through; the second and last, I mean Sustain, or the Art of bearing
well, we shall find tedious enough. He cannot be said to wish for nothing,
that finds fault with that which he has. This bearing well is to desire
nothing but what we have. A Serene, bright Will then, not clouded with thick
and muddy desires, will find the burdens of Fortune to be very light: For
Fortune of her self is very light and easy, but she has for pannels our own
Lusts, which are heavier than her packs, and without these she puts not one
load upon us. Nothing tires and weighs us down but our own wishes, which
evils (being ignorant that our burden proceeds from them,) we multiply with
an Intent to ease our selves, but in the mean time the weight increases. A
certain plain Countryman wearied with ploughing, and returning home from the
field after his days task, tied the Plough to his Ass, and afterward mounted
himself upon his back; but the tired Ass, and overloaden, could not stir
from the place; whereupon the Countryman lights, and with the Plough upon his
back remounting the Ass, tells him, Now I hope thou can go well, for it is
not thou, but I that carry the Plough. We are every day as ridiculous, though
not so harmless as this Countryman. We study with new cares and new desires
to ease and diminish our old lusts; which not only keeps under, but choaks
and presses to death all the seeds of Joy and Content. This is nothing else,
but to retain the former load undiminish'd, and to put another on the top of
it. As long as we tolerate these burdens, we become intolerable to our
selves, without any exaggeration of Fortune. Let us shake them off, let us cast
off hope, that troublesome Tympany; so shall we find Fotune light, and be able
to bear both her and our selves. All things may be born of him, that bears not
future Evils; Those are grievous burdens, which miraculously oppress us, and
so strangly accommodate themselves to our hurt, that they exist in the heart,
and vex it, before they can exist in time. Not only Evil, but Good, when it
is hovering and uncertain, does afflict us. Of Evils themselves there cannot
come so many together upon us, as we can fear: fortune can throw at us but few
darts at one time, and were she not still furnished by our lusts, we should
quickly see her quiver empty. Abstinence then, or the restraining of our
desires is the Nurserie of patience, by a like title as the toleration of evil
and good

But when I name Patience, I speak not of a Simple thing; for there is not
only patience in Evil, but in Good also, and this later is sometimes the most
difficult. There is one when we suffer, and another when we act. There be also
other divisions of Patience. Holy Ephrem makes it threefold: the first toward
god, the second toward the tempter, or wicked Angel, and the third toward
man. I shall add a fourth, and the most difficult of all, toward our selves;
or I will make it only twofold, first toward those that are without us, the
second and last toward our selves, or those commotions which fight against us
from within. This last is the greatest, because it teaches us to bear those
pressures which lean upon us, and bow us down. It is harder to resist those
weights which come forcibly upon us from above, then those which come
oppositly, or over against us. The beasts can draw more after them, then they
can carry upon their backs. Man has enough to bear within himself: but
evils are a great family, and keep as well without doors as within. Every
minute of our tranquillity is purchased with patience; It is the great Sacrament
of peace, the Sanctuary of Security, the Herald and the badge of felicity. What
will it avail us to be at peace with those that are without, while we suffer
intestine wars and tumults within? let us have peace in our selves, and
having mastered the rebellion and disorders of the will, let us be the patients
of our sadness, yea of our Impatience, and some times of our patience.

As nothing is more accidental to man then to suffer, so should he conclude,
that nothing is more necessary for him than patience. It is the natural
medicine for all humane calamities, with which (as the heart with Dittany) we
pull out the heads and splinters of those arrows which the mighty hunters of
this world shoot at us. Nature dealt not more unkindly with man, than with
other creatures: The Boar is cured with Ivy, the Dragon with wild-lettice,
and the Snake with Fennel. Others have their cure nearer, in their own
members: his tongue is the Balsom to a wounded dog; and the Catholicon of man
is silence and patience. But did I say that to suffer was accidental to man? I
blot out that error, and affirm, It is necessary: wherefore patience is most
necessary; for by that we are freed from a slavish sufferance, as by a certain
gifted premunition and defensive faculty. By patiently enduring we become
impassible. The mind is invulnerable, unless in the fits of impatience, as
Achilles was in the heel. Think not the Art of patience to be any more, then
not to suffer voluntarily; at least, not in spite of thy will. He that gently
endures, does by a short cut free himself from the tedious labors and numerous
punishments of life. Necessities should be chearefully borne. The hands, the
feet, and the other limbs will sooner fail to execute their duties, then to be
Insensible of pain. The sick, the maimed, yea and the dismembered are not so
morcified, but they are subject to sensation. It was an excellent saying of
Herod the Sophist, when he was pained with the gout in his hands and feet;
When I would eat, (said he) I have no hands; when I would go I have no feet;
but when I must be pained, I have both hands and feet. So entire and whole are
we always to grief; which sufficiently shows, that the soundness of man is
best seen in his patience; and such a strong necessity of suffering is laid
upon us, that when our limbs fail us in their offices, they must not fail of
sufferings. Thou will ask then what can they suffer, when without spirit and
motion? I will tell thee; Not to be apt to suffer, is their suffering. Nothing
is lacking to the misery of man, though his limbs should be wanting, his grief
by that defect will abound the more.

Deeply, and into the Inmost Closets of our hearts should that saying of the
Temanite descend, Man (said he) is borne unto trouble, and the bird to fly.
Observe, if the birds be unfurnished of any thing for flight: they are all over
armed for it; Their Bills are keen and sharp-pointed, and serve like foredecks
to cut their air; Their pinions are two swift rowers, and the feathers in both
wings placed orderly every one longer then the other represent so many oars.
Their trains are the Sternes, with which they bend their whole bodies, and
govern them in their flights, and with their feet and crooked claws like
Anchors, they stick and fasten themselves to the green branches, which are
their Havens, and shady Harbors. Though thou had never seen them use their
wings, yet by their very Structure, thou would Judge that those feathered
Sails were designed for the air, and flying. Man is every way as well
accoutred for trouble. Observe him: Thou shall find nothing wanting that may
conduce to his passion, though he wants much of Patience. Man is every way most
exactly trimmed and adorned for trouble; He was made unfit for labor, that he
might be fit for sufferings; He has no wings to fly from them, he is poor,
infirm, naked, defencelesse; and (which is worse than all) forsaken of
himself: Betwixt nakedness and poverty he is on all sides exposed and
appointed for misery, as the bird is for the flight. Thou shall observe all
this in him; for wanting all the necessaries which support life, he is
surrounded only with those sad necessities and intanglements which make life
grievous and burdensome; as a Sparrow is dressed and clothed all over with
those soft habiliments which make his flights easy and pleasant. The only
difference betwixt them is this, that those Instruments of flying may fail the
birds, but those of suffering cannot fail Man. So careful was Nature of Man's
condition, that she would not trust Fortune with his relatives. The Eagle may
casually lose his sharpness of sight, the Roe her swiftness, and the Lion his
strength; but Man while he lives cannot not miss of afflictions. There is a
greater care had of our affairs; And to a glorious end are these Calamities
made sure unto us, if we can make them beneficial.

The first token, and evidence of life is crying. The Prim-roses, or first
blossoms of it are tears; from these it take its inauguration. Man is not
borne before he suffers: Yea, he groans and complains in his very passage into
the World. The first homage he pays to life is sufferance, and from that
minute to his last, he becomes (as Blesensis says) a constant tributary to
misery. I Judge him that murmurs at this payment, that kicks under this
general burden, to wrong and disesteem the Noblest Nature, I mean Man; and to
be worthy of this very puishment, not to be at all. He is a most vile abuser of
Humane Nature, that thinks it not worth his patience, and values himself at a
most sordid rate; let him bear in his manhood, what he bore in his Infancy,
and not be ashamed of his Investiture, because he felt affliction, before he
felt the light. It is the first lesson we are taught here, and the last that
we shall learn. All other Creatures, as soon as they are born, make some use
of their strength; but Man knows no use of any thing but tears: He must
afterward be taught the cause of them. We must teach him every thing, but
weeping. All other things are given him for his labor, but tears he can have
for nothing. This only faculty was bestowed upon him gratis, all other
concessions are the rewards of his pains; but tears were given him freely,
because they ease and allay his sorrows. This convenient Salve did nature
ordain for some inevitable Sores. She prepared this Oil to allay the aching of
those stripes the World gives us, which without this Native Ointment would have
smarted more: for those wounds, whose anguish is not vented at the Eyes, lie
heaviest upon the heart. And by this I am induced to believe, that it is
natural for man to Suffer, because he only naturally weeps. Every extraneous
felicity of this life is violent, or forced; and these constrained, though
splendid Adjuncts of Fortune are therefore short, because noe violent thing can
be perpetual. To suffer is the natural condition and manner of man, this is
believed to be his misery: without patience, I confess, it is. Nature never
fails us in those things which are needful, much less divine providence and
grace: We shall therefore never fail of Sufferings, because they are the
great Necessaries, and Medicines of Humane Nature. We read of many men that
never laughed, but never heard of any that never wept. Democritus himself came
weeping into the World; none ever came without labor, none without grief.

Thou will ask, why man, the only creature addicted to beatitude, should be
borne to trouble? why through the vale of tears travells he to the house of
joy? why is he alone, being capeable of felicity, made subject unto misery?
Because he is borne for virtue, the next and readiest instrument to attain
beatitude. Now troubles, or misery are the mass, or first matter of virtue,
and without this hard rudiment, without this coin of sorrow he cannot purchase
it. Nor are the good offices which these calamities do for us, either mean or
few; for wherefore flows, yea overflowes the divine mercy upon man, but
because he is miserable? wherefore is Gods sure power and saving arm stretched
out, but because he is frail? wherefore are his comforts and refreshments so
plentifully showred down, but because he is sorrowful and helpless? wherefore
is his liberality and most faithful providence seen every minute, but because
he is poor and constantly needy? yea wherefore is Immortality, everlasting
pleasures, and a glorious resurrection secured unto us, but because our bodies
are mortal, and subject to death and putrefaction? By this time perhaps you see
the appositnesse of that comparison which Eliphaz made betwixt man and a bird.
The bird by nature lifts himself above the earth upon his wings, he passes
from hence into the clear confines and neighborhood of heaven, where he
dwells for a time, and looks with contempt upon this inferior darksome portion
of the world: when he descends toward the earth, he keeps still above us,
he lodges in the height and freshness of the trees, or pitcheth upon the
spires or ridges of our houses, or upon some steep rock, whose height and
inaccessibleness promise him security; something that is eminent and high he
always affects to rest upon. Man likewise ordained for heaven, and the
contempt of this spot of earth is by his very calamities borne up and carried
above the world, yea into heaven, as an Eagle by the strength of his wings
ascends above the clouds. O the depth of the riches of the wisdom of God! O
the merciful design, and devic^ of his providence! who knowing our corrupt
nature, has laid upon us a necessity of seeking those blessings, whose
inestimable value ought to stir us up to a most voluntary and diligent
searching after them. To this necessity by the same chain of his providence
has he tied utility. These are sufficient motives to persuade us to patience.
It was wisely said by some Arabian, that the hedge about patience was profit:
for he that thinks gain to be necessary, must think labor so too. Allthough
Fortune should be so prodigal as to pour all her Treasures into the bosom of
one man, and not repent when she had done; yet would this very man sometimes
feel strong exigencies in indigencie. Pompey, and Darius were both hardly
distressed with thirst; they that were Lords of so many Rivers, did then wish for
one drop of Water. Alexander the Great, in some of his expeditions was like to
perish with cold, though his Dominion did in a manner extend to the very Sun;
for in the East (which I may call the Suns House,) he was such an absolute
Lord, that (bating the Power to forbid the Sun to rise) there was nothing more
could be added to his conquests.

Seeing then that labor or troubles are a necessity imposed upon man, it
follows, that there are other labors belonging unto him, which are also as
necessary; and those I shall term Voluntary Labors. O^ these the Elegant
Philosopher Eusebiu^ has excellently spoken; Voluntary Labors (says he) are
necessary, because of future Labors which hang over our heads: he will bear
those with more ease when they fall upon him, who of his own accord, and
beforehand has exercised himself in them: But you see that in this course also
the maine remedy is patience. He that suffers willingly, suffers not, even that
which is necessary to be suffered. One wedge drives out another. Venomous
bitings are allayd by Venomous Medecines; therefore in necessary troubles,
there is a necessity of voluntary Labors, that Violent Evils meet not with
Obstinate Wills: but the unavoydablenesse of suffering would not be grievous,
nor the necessity or Law of Nature any way rigorous, did not we by our own
exaggerations add to their weight, and our own pain. We help to increase
our own Calamities by reasom of our Inerudition, as Diphilus tells us, who
advises even the happy man to learn miseries. What can we do more becoming
our frail condition, then to teach our Mortality the troubles of life, which
are certain prolusions, or arguments of death? What is more beneficial, then
to learn great trials and dangers, that we may leave that servile custom of
fearing? Fortune, whose burdens we ought to bear as willingly, as if we
desired to undergo them?

It is a great rudiment of patience to suffer willingly, when we least expect
sufferings. It is strange, that although we see nothing in the course of this
life more frequent then miseries, yet will we not be persuaded that they may
fall into our share: Our griefs come most commonly before we believe they may
come. Nothing can make us believe, that we may be miserable, until misery it
self assures it to us. The mind therefore should be tried and prepared for it,
with some lusorie or mock-misfortunes. Nor must we give ear to Democritus,
whose saying is, That if there be any things for us to suffer, it is good to
learn them, but not to suffer them. It is good indeed to learn them, but if
they must be unavoydably suffered, what will our learning of them avail us? A
most ridiculous advise, in my Judgment: And if the Author of it had been wise,
he had laughed at nothing more then at this his own Conclusion. It is good to
learn to suffer Evils, but not to be evil. It will benefit us much to learn
to suffer them, if not as they are Evils, yet lest we our selves become
Evil; for such we shall be by impatience. Besides the overcomming of real
evils, there remain other slight hurts, as the discourtesies of nature,
chance and fury, of our enemies and our selves also, which we cannot avoid;
but these last are no evils, but the sheaths or quivers of evils; out of
these either our opinion, or our impatience draw evils upon our selves. Bion
used to say, that it was a great evil, not to be able to bear evils. Without
this ability, life cannot be pleasant to any, and in this consists the skill
and knowledge of life.

Let the mind then learn to buckle with these rude toils of life, and by a
frequent velitation or light skirmishing with troubles so improve it self,
that when we come to deal with the serious hand, and close encounters of
fortune, we may receive her at sharp, and like active, vigilant Duellists, put
by her most Artfull and violent thrusts. One Salustius that lived in the time
of Simplicius did put upon his bare thigh a burning cole, and to keep in the
fire did gently blow it, that he might try how long he could endure it. I
believe that fire did put out and quite extinguish all the burnings and raging
flames of incensed fortune. If crosses foreseen are always held light, those
we taste and make experiment of before they come, must needs be lighter, because
after trial we fear them not: fears are the forete^^h of miseries, which
bite us sor^st, and m^st intollerably. It was a most ridiculous judgment which
that Sybarite (mentioned by Serinus) past upon the valor of the Spartans. This
tender Citizen traveling by chance into Lacedemon, was so amazed at the severe
discipline of that manly nation, who brought up their children in all rigorous
and laborious exercises, that being returned home he told the Fiddlers of A
town in the higher Calabria in Italy 20. miles distant from Rome: the
Inhabitants were mightily given to pleasure, and taught their horses to dance
to the pipes; which the Crotoniatae their deadly enemies observing, brought
into the field a company of minstrels: the Sybarits horses bearing the pipes
began to dance, and disordered their Army, by which means they were
overthrown to the number of 300000.
Sybaris, that the forwardness of the Spartan Youths to dye in battle was,
because they would not be compelled any longer to such a toylsome life. This
soft fellow knew not how much Industry could prevail against misfortune, and
patience against passion. That valor of the Spartans was not despair, but the
virtue of suffering perfected. Their voluntary labors at home had so
excellently improved them, that they could not only slight the necessary and
common afflictions of life, but overcome also (by a noble volunteering,) the
very prerogative of fate, violating even the violence of death, while they dyed
unconstrayned and undisturbed. Mithridates his fear of being poisoned, made
him use himself to a venomous diet, by which he came at last to digest all
sorts of poisons without any prejudice to his health: so that afterward when
he would have poisoned himself in good earnest, he could not possibly do it.
By this destroyer of mankind did he secure himself even from himself, and by
long acquaintance made this deadly enemy a faithful friend: he fed life with
the provision of death. By a like sagacity should we forearme our selves
against the conspiracies (if I may so say) of nature. Let us labor against
labors; It will much avail us: our very fears will prove comforts; by using
our selves to sufferance, the Antidote of life, which is Patience, becomes
effectual.

Of such great importance is this assiduous exercise in troubles, that it lets
in the nature of Constancy, and is a sure manuduction to that sincerest
virtue. The Roman Fencers, players for prizes, barbarous and dissolute livers,
if but indifferently skild, received their wounds without groans, or any
alteration of gesture or countenance, because they would not be judged
pusillanimous, nor cowardly decliners of danger; If at any time they fell by
the violence of wounds, they sent presently to know their masters pleasures,
(because they would satisfy them,) for they themselves were contented to dye;
If their masters (finding them incurable) bad them prepare for death, they
would presently hold forth their throats and receive the sword most willingly.
O the serious faith of Plays! O the faith of Players in serious dangers! It is
all one then, whether thou think fortune a mere pageant and pastime, or
not; Thou should obey with an Immortal faith even to the death. Let a wise
man execute the commands of his creator, let him like a faithful soldier of
JESUS CHRIST certify his great master, that he is ready and willing to do him
service, that he will lose his life, and choose rather to dye, then not to
submit to his pleasure. The conflicts of a good man with calamities are sacred:
he is made a spectacle to the world, to Angels and men, and a h^llowed Present
to the Almighty. Let him in this state overcome his Enemies! A more glorious
garland then the Olympic Olive-branches shall crown an enduring Patience,
which by an humble, but overcomming Sufferance wearies the hands of those that
beat us. It is the part of a wise man, to tire and wear out the malice of his
Enemies. I say not by Suffering, but by Patience, which makes him neither their
Patient, nor trampled upon, but a trampling overcomer. This was the glory of
Melancoma, who lived not one day without an Enemy. In the most vehement season
of the year, he judged his single-selfe hard enough for his two Adversaries:
He could bear with the Sun, his most obstinate Antagonist, though fighting
against him in the heat of the Summer with so many hands as he had Rays.:
When he might have gotten the Victory by Opposition, he would not but by
Submission. He considered, that the best might be overcome by the worst, if
force should take place. That Victory was in his Judgment the Noblest, when
the Enemy, yet whole and without any hurt, was compelled to submit. There is he
overthrown, when not by wounds, but by himself.

Therefore what vice, and a spurious Patience did in the Roman Fencers, let
Virtue and true Patience perform in thee: and what custom and exercise
wrought in Melancoma, let reason and Judgment work in thee: What reason
effected in Possidonius, let grace effect in thy heart, and let not grace which
workt mightily One of the Courtiers of the Emperor Traian, and afterward a
most glorious Martyr.

Being in Chase of a Stagge, he observed betwixt his horns the sign of the
Cross, and heard a voice out of his mouth, speaking to him in the Latin tongue,
Cur me persequeris? Whereupon leaving his game, he retired presently into his
own house, and having called together his wife and children, were all baptized
and received the Christian Faith. But in the persecution under Hadrian, he and
his wife Theophila for their faithfulness to JESUS CHRIST, were burnt
together in a brazen bull; And so having overcome and endured unto the end,
they received the morning star, and crowns of life, which shall never be taken
from them. See Volater lib. 15.


in Eustathius, and sufficiently in many others, languish and fail in thee
alone. The power of God is perfected in weakness, giving us some prelibations
(as it were) of it self; whither by bearing with our Infirmities, or by our
bearing his Operations. I believe this last: for the glory of an almighty power
against a weak thing would be very small; how little then against Infirmity it
self? That power is truly glorious, and has matter for glory, which prevails
against the mind, a free unconfined thing, and holds it firm though surrounded
with Infirmities: The power of God Glories more in prevailing against us, then
against our infirmities.

B^t if we seek for more delicate or easy remedies, and dare not arm our
selves against misfortunes with this harness of proof, because we think it
too heavy; It remains that we must make use of either Hope, or Expectation.
Evils that are foreseen, lose much of their edge: But because we promise our
selves the favors of Fortune (of whom we have always a good opinion, though
we seldom speak well of her, and she deserves as ill,) our calamities, while
this credulous remissness keeps us from looking to them, find way to surprise
and oppress us at once. Against violent misfortunes we may not use violence.
Expectation will sometimes serve us best, if it be accompanied with a strong
and irremisse belief, that the Cross is at hand, and will not delay. For what
happens in this life more frequent, than unthought of events? We meet
oftentimes even in one day with matter of grief, and matter of Patience. It is
strange, that for those two meals we eat in the day, we are all the day, and
all our life long providing: But for trouble, for griefs and sadness, which
take not up two hours in the day, but all the hours and days of our lives,
we never think to make any preparation. Cast up (if thou can) how many
things must be had to humor the pride of man's appetite; more than for a
Sacrifice. It is no small state, nor ceremony that the belly is served with:
How many men does this worms-meat Employ, Cooks, Bakers, Fishers, Fowlers,
Hunters, Sheepfeeders, Herdsmen, Millers, Colliers, and Butchers? How many
Instruments, Spits, Pots, Trivets, Cauldrons, Chasing-dishes, Chargers,
Platters, and a thousand other utensils of gluttony? And to what end is all
this preparation? But to please one palate once in the day, or twice at most. O
foolish men! We are ever providing for pleasures, but never for troubles,
which not twice, but for a great portion of our time, (if not continually) we
must needs endure. Who against the certain approach of an Enemy, will be secure
and quiet, and upon the coming of a friend watchful and sollicitous? Why do
we provide so much for pleasures and vanity, and provide nothing against the
day of trouble and misery? We are guarded about with Clothes of state,
Canopies, Couches, Silk-Curtains, Feather-Beds and Pillowes; we arm our
selves for delights and softness, for sleeping and eating, because they are
every days works; but hear not every day telling us, that the Evil day is
behind. We labor to provide for the back and the belly, why not for the
better part, why not for our frail condition? The Sense of the secure liver is
too too delicate: The affliction of the Inconsiderate or unprepared too bitter.
Chance throws down the careless violently: and Fortune tires the idle even
to vexation. The rude and unexperienced in troubles afflicts and macerates
himself with an impatient mind in the very midst of his most affected
bla^dishments, and in the bosom and calm of all his pleasures.

I hold Impatience to be a kind of Nightmare which comes upon us waking, or
the Day-hag of life: This troublesome disease (for our time of rest is his time
of mis^ule, and when we are sleeping, then is he stirring,) sets upon us when
we are most at ease, and with a certain strange heaviness seems to oppress
and smother us, when in the mean time that weight which so much oppresses us,
is laid on by our own Imagination: and this sometimes makes us cry out, as if
we were killed; others, according to Lucretius, Struggle and groan as if by
Panthers torn
Or Lions teeth, which makes them lowdly mourn.
Some others seem unto themselves to die.
Some clime steep solitudes and Mountains high,
From whence they seem to fall inanely down,
Panting with fear, till waked, and scarce their own,
They feel about them if in bed they lie,
Deceived with dreams, and nights Imagerie.


But the greatest trouble of all, is, that without any hope of remedy, they
vainly strive and endeavor to shake off this shadow of heaviness; In vain
with earnest struglings they contend
To ease themselves: for when they stir and bend
Their greatest force to do it, even thenmost
Of all they faint, and in their hopes are crossed.
Nor tongue, nor hand, nor foot will serve their turn,
But without speech and strength within they mourn.


What more express Image can there be of Impatience lying heavily especially
upon those, who drouse away their time in a vicious rest and Idleness? They
are oppressed, cry out, rage, and vainly resist, without any burdens but what
their own fancy lays upon them. They feel the weight the heavier, the more
they stir it, without they shake it quite off. To refuse, or not willingly to
undergo burdens, is the only burden of Impatients. But if they would awake
to themselves (which of necess^ty they must, for when can the will be more
Rational, than when necessity is unreasonable) all these factitious weights and
seeming heaviness would quickly vanish: Force must not be used against
Fortune, but Patience. This excells so much in strength, that it bears all: For
it bears what ever it will, and for this very reason because it Wills. Samson
carried away the do^es, the two posts, and the bar of the Gate of the City of
Gaza; but this strength lay in his hair, like the locks of Nisus and
Pterelaus. A miraculous strength; but weakly secured. The strength of Patience
is more safely seated; It lies not in a lock, which may be cut off by some
Dalilah, or Comethe, or Scylla, or any womanish and fearful hand. To Will, is
the Sanctuary of its strength; by being willing it is not only enabled to
bear, but also bears. The back and shoulder of Patience is the Will. This
voluntary fortitude of the mind will do all its business, without the help of
outward Engines; It needs not the assistance of the Arms, nor the weak use of
wishes. The strength of Virtue is not external, but in it self.

There remain also other necessary Indurances, though not to those that suffer
them already, yet to others that may, or are about to undergo them: For the
preservation of our Country and liberties we ought patiently to suffer even
unto death. It is not too dear a rate to pay that debt we owe to Nature, for
the defense of Nature in our public Persons: To this we want not the
Encouragement of examples. What ever has been suffered heretofore, may be
suffered now by us. But if those presidents rather cool, then provoke our
Courage, why dare not we suffer a little, seeing they suffered so much? To
teach us this Virtue of Patience, and strengthen our ruinous brittle condition,
the motherly love and fatherly care of the eternal, Divine mind, did provide
and disperse through certain spaces and Intervalls of time (like knots for the
strengthening of a weak reed,) persons of such eminent Patience and Piety, as
might by their examples sustain and bear up mankind, until the Ancient of
days, and Father of Immortality himself should descend into this mortal life,
and be born for Patience, and for death. In the mean time, that the populous
World might not want a Glass to dress themselves by, he sent these to be the
substitutes and forerunners of his mighty and inimitable Patience. The first he
consecrated to this dignity was Abel, in whom Patience (says holy Aldhelmus)
was Original, as Sin was in Adam. God joined Patience to his Innocence by a
certain Original Justice or claim in him; but to the rest of the Just it
descends together with sufferings, by right of Inheritance: to none more, to
none better then to the Innocent. But now even by this, those suffer most, that
should suffer least, the good and the Just. But those sufferings are most
sacred, that are most unjust. Adam found out afflictions, and Abel Patience;
the medicine presently followed the disease. Evils were the Inventions of
Sin, Patience was the Device of Innocence. So that Patience as their peculiar
Treasure abounds more, and is more beloved by the Just, then by any else. But
that Posthume Cry of Abel proceeded not from Impatience: For God would not have
taken to himself the cause of one dying discontentedly, and with Indignation;
but as devout Alexandrinus says, (...), etc. Abel the Just dying unjustly was
the first of men that showed the foundations of death to be ruinous; wherefore
he being dead yet speaks. Death, whose right came by unrighteousness, laid
ruinous foundations indeed, because ill-layd, upon the Just dying unjustly. It
has cause to grieve, that it erred so foully in its first stroke, seeing it
might have made a better beginning in wicked Cain. But there was Divinity in
it, that death taking possession of mankind by the Murder of the Just, might
be justly exterminated and swallowed up in Victory by the undefiled
Virgin-Prince of the Just, who for that end was born of a Virgin. Ephrem says,
that death howled or lamented in her very beginning, which showed what would be
her end. The Hern by instinct of Nature Chatters and mourns, before he becomes
the prey of the Falcon. Death dyed by him, over whom she had no power. Only
there is the night of death, where sin, where corruption lives.

Another tie of Constancy laid upon the World, after a convenient space, was
Job, who retained his Patience after prosperity, and after Innocence. Patience
is no where merrier, nor better contented with it self, then in the Innocent.
Integrity and Fortune seldom lodge together. Adversity is the Whetstone which
keeps it from rust, and makes it shine. No Virtues can subsist without
troubles, which are their food. They live not commodiously, where their
Provision is far from them: Wherefore holy and Just men have adversity
always (like a Well) at their doors. I shall take up then with that saying of
Eliphaz: Affliction comes not forth of the dust, nor does trouble spring out of
the ground; but rather from Heaven; and comes oftener to holy and heavenly
livers, then to Worldly and unrighteous persons.

After Job, and at a convenient distance from his time was Tobiah appointed,
who instead of Celandine, made use of Patience to heal his Eyes: being blind^d
by the Swallows, he found a more precious medicine then their He^be, and his
glory is more by bearing with the living, than burying the dead. This holy man
also after Innocence, though not after prosperity, retained his Patience;
until at last the Son of God himself, after Impassibility and Allmightinesse,
became woefully passible, and humbled himself to the death of the Cross: of so
great an example was Patience worthy, and so necessary was this voluntary
passion of God himself to our fatal necessity of suff^ring. By this mighty
example of himself he has sanctified Patience to be the All-heal, or Universal
Antidote of Evils, and the Sovereign Lenitive of sorrows. Divinely did one
sing to the blessed JESUS. (...).
Thou the Nepenthe easing grief
Art, and the minds healing relief.


At this secret Counsel of the Almighty, did the rude Instincts, or
hallucinations rather of the old Heathens (proceeding, noe doubt, from their
sense of Humane misery.) blindly aim. They dreamt of some Son of God to be the
great exemplar of Patience, and pattern of Virtue; but finding none, they made
and proposed to themselves Hercules the Son of Jupiter, for a president of
continual Patience, Obedience and Virtue: about whose labors and
achievements, Antiquity has mightily pleased it self with lies and Fables.
This (indeed) they rightly apprehended, that labor or troubles are rather
repugnant to, then unworthy of Divinity; they held them becoming Vir^ue, and
withal necessary, that they might adorn Patience with these two Jewels, the
reward of suffering, and the dignity of the Sufferer. But the Truth of God has
now outdone the Fictions of men; It has exceed all they did licentiously
wish, but could not hope for. Our Patience is now sufficiently instructed by
the SON of God, who is the pleasant remedy and Panacea of Evils. The blessed
JESUS breathed nothing but Patience, nothing but mildness in his life, in his
Doctrine.

These are the great examples which true Christians should follow; not those of
spurious Patience, and a narrow, heathen fortitude, which after it had born
some Evils indeed, dyed at the root, and could not bear it self. Seneca
(otherwise in many things a very true, and sometimes a Christian Philosopher,)
proposes to his readers the example of Cato; but I utterly reject it; for he
destroyed himself, because he could not save his Commonwealth. What Constancy
was here, though in a state that concerned not his private happiness? or what
manner of Constancy was that, which durst not endure and hold out, but was
overcome, not by irrecoverable, fallen affairs, but falling: Not collasped and
ruined, but tottering and doubtful? I confess, it was a spectacle, which the
Eye of God Intentive to his great and various works might behold with glory:
and I confess him a brave Heathen, Ill-disposed. But I see nothing glorious
and excellent in him, nothing of true worth, but what I can find as well in the
most degenerate and womanish Sardanapalus. If we look upon Cato amidst the
public ruins, we shall find him overthrown and laid along, where an old
wall stands up, no Enemy having touched him. A most unworthy man* (if he was a
man,) to fall thus basely like a Woman; who at the noise of any thing suddenly
thrown down, casts her self to the ground, and squeaks though untouched, and
far enough from danger. But thou will say, Though all things became subject to
one man, though his legions possessed the Earth and his Navies the Seas, yea
though Caesar's own regiment was in the gates, yet Cato made his way out. An
honest voice, if it were not flattery: I tell thee he did not make his way, but
sneakt and fled out most shamefully: His legs could not carry him off, and
therefore he ran away upon his hands. But it is all one, fly with which he
will, it is a plain flight; his busy and searching fear, which in him (by
reason of a sudden, unmanly astonishment) was most Sagacious, showed him this
postern or backdoor, which he most basely fled out at. But what could that man
be afraid of, that had born so often the Assaults of Fortune? He feared that
very same Fortune: How can that be, (say thou) seeing he had coped with her
so long before? For that valor let him thank his error: He believed Fortune
(according to her old vogue) to be still inconstant, he expected that the Tide
should turn; but finding her obstinate, and resolved in earnest to the
contrary, he feared her last blow, and providing for himself by a most
dastardly tenderness, did with his own hands dress and make a wound to his
own liking. To be patient, or to suffer as we please, is not Patience. He
could bear the anger, but not the hatred and feud of Fortune. That is poor
valor, that bears only the flourishes and pickearings of an Enemy, but dares
not receive his full charge. A weak man will for some time stand under a great
burden; but he that carries it through, and home, is the strongest. Cato then
was a most base, pusillanimous combatant; he quitted his ground, and left
Fortune in the field, not only unconquered, but untir'd, and flourishing with a
whole Arm, which he had not yet drawn blood from: What Inconstancy can be
greater then his, who was more Inconstant than Vertiginous Fortune? Or who more
a Coward then he, that fled and ran away swifter and sooner than her wheels?
To call Cato then either constant, wise, or good, is most unjust; nay more, it
is an Injury to mankind, to call him a man, who has deserved so ill of
Wisdom and men, by thinking that any Cause, or Chance in this World can be
worthy of a wise man's death. I would he had read the Conclusion of Theodorus,
not the dissertation of Socrates! Theodorus Cythereus most truly affirmed, that
there never can be cause enough for a wise man to cast away his life; And he
proves it by invincible reason: For him (says he) that contemns humane
Chances, to cast away his life because of them, how contrary is it to his own
Judgment, which esteems nothing good, but what is Virtuous, nothing vicious but
what is evil? I wish, when he did read Socrates, that he had also understood
him! for then he should have heard him condemning that (...), or mad refuge of
selfemurther, and commanding him not to stir out of his appointed station
without full Orders from the great General of life. Why then do thou cry up
Cato for a great leader, who was a most cowardly common Soldier, that forsook
his Charge, and betrayed the Fort entrusted to him by the Prince of Life? But
here thou will reply, that his last nights contemplation, just before he
quitted it, was Immortality. The end he did study it for, made it then
unseasonable: And I know not (seeing he was but an Imperfect speculator in the
Doctrine of Immortality,) why he should be so hasty to try whither Eternity
was perishable, or not, by casting away his own. He should have expected it, as
he did expect the change of Fortune, which till that night he always esteemed
Mortal: He should have prepared for it by making trial of his Constancy
before Eternity.

What praise then either of Patience, or Fortitude has he deserved? he did no
more then the most effeminate, Hemon and Sardanapalus. O the glorious Act of
Cato then, equal to his, that handled the Spindles! An Act of Women, Evadne,
Jocasta, and Auctolia. An Act of Whores, Sappho and Phaedra. An Act of Wenches,
Thysbe, Biblis, Phillis and Anaxarete. An Act of Boys, Iphis and Damocles. An
Act of Doting, decrepit men, Aegeus, Sesostris and Timathes. An Act of Crazie,
diseased Persons, Aristarchus and Erat^sthenes. An Act of Madmen, Aristotle,
Empedocles, Timagoras and Lucretius. A rare commendation indeed for a wise man,
to have done that which Whores, Wenches and Boys, sick men and Madmen did,
whom either the Impatience of their lust, or Fortune made Impatient of life.
Whither thou will say, that Cato killed himself to fly from Fortune, or to find
Immortality, thou can in neither deny his Impatience either of Joy, or else
of fear, and in both of life. I would he had been as patient now of life, as
he was sometimes of thirst! That voice of Honor, upon the Sands of Libya, was
his! where (the R^man Army like to perish with thirst) a Common Soldier that
had taken up a little muddy Water in his Helmet, presenting it to him, had in
stead of thanks this bitter rebuke, Base man! and could thou think Cato alone
Wants courage to be dry, and, but him, none?
Looked I so soft? breathed I such base desires,
Not proof against this Libye Sun's weak fires?
That shame and plague on thee more justly lie!
To drink alone, when all our troops are dry.
Here was a glorious Voice, and there follows it a more glorious hand: For,
with brave rage he flung it on the Sand,
And the spilt draught sufficed each thirsty band.


This manly Virtue he degenerated from in his last Act, and all his friends
wisely bending to the present necessity, he onley broke. The people being all
taken, he only fled. To see Cato a sufferer in the public misery, had been a
Public comfort; they would have judged it happiness to have been unhappy with
him. It is Honor to suffer with the Honorable, and the Tyranny of Fortune is
much allayed, and almost welcome to us, when she equally rages against the
good and Noble, as against our private selves. If, as he refused the remedy of
thirst, he had also rejected this ill remedy against misfortune, his glory had
been perfect.

We must then be the Patients of life; and of this Patience (which I think
the greatest of any,) we have two eminent examples in Job and Tobiah, who not
only provoked by Fortune, but by their wives also, defended their Calamities
in the defense of life. For the other Patience in death (which is the least,)
the example of Abel sufficed, designed by the wonderful Counsel of God
(until the manifestation of his Son, that great Arch-type of Patience in life
and death,) to suffer, though Innocent, a violent and unexperienced death, that
the first onset of fate (which was most furious,) meeting in him with an
unconquerable Patience, might be so^^ what tamed, and the weapons of death
having their edge dulled in the first conflict, might afterward be of less
terror to mankind. Just Abel was the first that showed us the way of dying,
when the name of death, as yet untri'd, was most formidable unto life; that he
might teach man Patience in his death, and leave it to posterity as a Medicine
found out by him. But when men (by a sad experience grown wise,) found out a
greater Evil then death, which to religious men was this sinful life, and to
the miserable and Impatient their own lives; then were Job and Tobiah set forth
the convincing examples of Patience in life, who endured a life more bitter
than death, lest by not enduring, they should, to their misery, add sin.
They taught the World that Patience was a better Medicine for Evils than
death, and withstood the opinions of the Lunatic people. Falsely did Euripides
(arrogating a laudable Title to death,) term it The greatest medicine of
Evils,
(...).


As if he in another place had not termed it the greatest of Evils. If death
then be not its own Medicine, how can it be the Medicine of Evils? It is an
Evil great enough, that it is not the Medicine of Evils; but that suffices
not, it is also the greatest Evil. Aeschylus is in the like error, for it is
called by him The Physician of incurable Evils,
(...).


A most ridiculous appellation: How can that be the Physician of incurable
Evils, which is it self such an incurable Evil as their own Machaon could
not resist? Equally false is that of Sophocles, The last Curer of diseases is
death.
(...).


If death it self be a disease, which must, and shall be healed, how can it be
the last curer of diseases? But these men (after the Common manner of
Physicians,) held the cure of great Evils to consist in desperate remedies, as
obstinate diseases are expelled by strong and Diaphoretick Medicines: Health
indeed is dear unto us, and death, I confess, puts an end to all its diseases,
and to all Medicaments too. It takes away the disease sooner and oftener then
any other remedy; but these Poets themselves (as sick men say of their Potions)
deny not but it is bitter.

(...).
It is better to live ill, then to dye well,
Says Euripides himself in another place; such a good opinion had he of
death. It had been but a sorry provision for mankind, if God had given us no
other Medicine against Temporal Evils, but death. The cure of our miserable
condition had been both imperfect and uncertain, and to our sad necessity there
had been added necessary despair, when the cure of small Evils had been by a
greater, and the great Evil it self left incurable.

But (Glory to the blessed Jesus!) we are both fully c^red, and faithfully
cared for! That which can cure all Evils, must be something that is not Evil;
Therefore death cannot cure them, because it is an Evil; for God created it
not, but it came into the World through the envy of the Devil: Good men hold
it to be Evil, and the bad find it so. Thou will ask then, what is the
Medicine of Evils? I answer, it is that, which is the Medicine that
strengthens us to bear the violence, and the pangs of death; that which the
very Enemies of it cannot deny to be good, I mean Patience: that which being
made Evil by abuse, yet in that state has been commended by men that were not
Evil, by Seneca in his Cato, Dion in his Melancoma, and Philo in his
Pancratiastes: So winning and attractive is the Virtue of Patience, that the
very shadow of it procures reverence, and make the very abuse and corruption of
it laudable. If then the Counterfeit of it could beautify vice, and make it
amiable even to wise men, what wonder is it, if the Substance be a protection
and ornament to Virtuous persons? This is the Medicine which Leonides gave
against death. Let those Titles therefore which death usurped, be vindicated by
the right owner. Patience then is the best medicine of Evils; It is the cure
of the Incurable, the last Physician, the Ease in death, the mollifying Oil,
the gentle purge, the pleasant Potion, and that I may recover its right to
another Title which death usurped from the pen of B^etius, It is a sanctuary
that lies always open to the distressed. Lastly, lest I should deny that,
which even the envy of Fortune could not deny, Patience (as Zeno elegantly
said,) is the Queen regent of all things, yea of that rebellious changling
Fortune. But let us add to the certainty of the cure, the easiness of coming
by the medicine: We need not send for it into Foreign Regions, nor dig it out
of Mines, nor extract it out of the Veins of Herbs, or the vital parts of
beasts: We need not go for it to the Apothecary, nay I shall add, we need
not wish for it; It is already in our custody, a manual Antidote that is
always about us, and in us, effectual for all things, and ready for all men.
It is a Physician we need not call upon; not like death, that forsakes the
wretched, and those that earnestly long for it, that has no pity upon tears,
but keeps off, -- And will not hear the Cry
Of distressed man, not shut his weeping Eye.


Hitherto we have taken view but of one side of Patience, and that half of her
which she opposes to Evils. Every part of her is lovely and excellent: and if
we remove now from this Collateral station to a direct, we shall behold her
entire beauty, and how well she deserves of good. The Sacraments of this
Virtue are two: To suffer Evil: to do good: Nobly does she celebrate both;
with her there is no Evil, without her there is no good. I think her the Mart,
and Mother-City of all that is good. Every Virtue is a Colonie of Patience,
planted and nourished by her. Virtues owe their Original to her, she is part of
it, and in every one of them. She is their holy fire, their Vesta, and
Lararium, or private Chapel; they are her Nuns or Virgins, what ever they
have, either sacred or glorious, is from her: To the perfection of man there is
nothing more necessary: For as Brass must be first melted, and afterward
cast; so the hard and rigid matter of Virtues must be softened and dissolved by
Patience, that man may become a glorious and living Statue of Divinity. No
marvel, that we require labor and hardness in Virtuous persons, seeing we
expect it from Smiths; A certain Just Law of all the World has exacted it to
be the price of Virtue. Bear what thou would not, and thou shall enjoy what
thou will. Labor is the good man's purse: Patience is his Gold: Only an
obstinate, sordid Idleness makes men poor, not only in body but in mind also:
Without Patience they cannot possess their own Souls. Neither Nature, nor
Virtue, nor Fortune (and this last thou will perhaps think strange,) trust us
with their goods without this. Prosperity, when it is lent to man, dispensenth
its treasures to none so plentifully, as to the laborious: Without a blow it
strokes us not. The sweetmeats it brings are not eaten, but in the sweat of
the face. It was truly said of Fortune, Give bread to the poor, but give him
thy fists for sauce.
(...).


The Snake will easily slip through our hands, unless we grasp her with
Figleaves, or some knotty, rough grass; Fortune is very slippery, and without
labor, and a strong hand, she will not be held. Honest gain breeds most Joy,
I shall add most security, when it is gotten with most pain. Labor is the
earnest we give for after-Joyes, which are an addition, or consequence rather,
attending the other fruits of it. Though it goes before them, yet it is
refreshed with their following after; As hunger, which is a Natural sauce,
sweetens the meat, and the Joys of the eater, even before ^e eats: We look
with most delight upon those things which we think to be our own, and we think
them most, which we have most labored for. Patience is a certain Title to
possession, but labor gives the Right. The Mother loves those children best,
and as most hers, which she brought forth with most pain. Honey is gathered of
bitter herbs; they that love not the bitterness, must not eat of the Honey.
The drones of Attica (says Tzetzes,) will not touch the honey of Hymettus,
because it is gathered of Thyme, which the Attic drone cannot endure to light
upon. The Noble Xenophon loved no glory, but that which was purchased by his
own Industry.

The glory of God himself is not without labor, which he has showed unto us
by his works, and amplified in particular natures according to his wisdom, for
our example. Wickedly did Hermogenes think of that Supreme, eternally active
Mind, esteeming him to rest, by reason of idleness and inefficacie, though
elegantly refuted by Afer in these words, his glory is the more in that he has
labored. God does not only look upon, and rule the World, he made it also;
And which of these, think thou, is most worthy of glory? is it not to have
made it? What is more glorious then to have made glory? In the present Sabbath
and solemnity of Gods rest, the works which he has made, declare his glory
unto men, whose task also is, to work. Besides, this first curious draught of
his Almighty hand contributes something to the perfect beauty of his immortal,
last one; for the Divine Eye (reflecting upon this proof,) will adorn that
building of holiness and glory with everlasting strength, and an inviolable,
Celestial freshness. God made not man by a Fiat, as he did the rest of the
Creatures, but fell to work himself, and like the Potter that first tempers,
then fashions the Clay, he made him by making, not by speaking. That one
royal creature capable of felicity, was consecrated for beatitude, and the
Divine likeness with the ceremony of labor: Here man was instructed, before
he was made: he received the exemplar of living before he received life:
Idleness was forbidden him, before he had the Power given him to be active.
But when he gave him life, he gave him also with it another Specimen, or Item
of labor, breathing into him, as if he had used respiration (which refreshes
the laborious,) to show man the use of his breath. All things that were created
for the service of mankind, were by the manner of their Creation (which was
with a Fiat, or command,) taught to be obedient and humble: But man was first
ordained for Dominion, afterward for labor; And God himself, the Lord of all,
labored in his Creation, that He might make him to be in love with his
Ordinance, and that God (plotting as it were against himself,) might by that
love of man be induced to love him the more, and to esteem him more his own
Creature then any other, because he only (like his Creator) loved Activity,
and the use of life. And this I believe is the meaning of Xenophon: Labor
(says he) is a certain over-measure, or extraordinary favor of love.

So glorious an Ornament is Patience, either in suffering, or else in doing, I
believe in both (for Labor, without the good of Patience, is good of it
self,) that for no other end, but to be thought temperate and wise, the
Pythagoreans commended abstinence, the Stoics severity, the Cynick exceeded to
rigor, the Gymnosophists to cruelty, and a face of madness and despair. Every
one of these adorned his Heresy with Patience, and all the rude statues they
erected to wisdom, were crowned with this Virtue. Edesius being sent by his
Father to traffic into Greece, quitted the Merchant, and turned Philosopher:
His Father upon his return receiving him with stripes, and he patiently
bearing them, asked him, what he had learnt in the Schools of the
Philosophers? He answered, To bear your anger dutifully: With the same
testimony did another Scholar of Zeno adorn the Stoa: but Possidonius was
hardlier provoked then either; he was so tortured with bodily pain, as if the
disease had maliciously labored to confute his principles: but how far it
prevailed, appears best by his own words; It is to no purpose, (said he) vex
me as much as thou can, thou shall never make me give thee an ill word. So
careful was he of the reputation of his Master. But Dionysius Heracleotes, not
able to rule his passions, lost the repute of a Philosopher. So much does that
Majesty and tacit reverence we admire in Virtue depend upon Patience.

Patience does that for the private man, which their life-guards do for Kings:
It keeps him safe, and reverenced. It is the minds main-guard, that preserves
the Authority of Virtue, and secures the Virtuous person, lest Evils should
make him Evil. It is in the oppressed a certain tutelar Angel, and the sacred
Guardian of their Spirits from Affliction. Most appositely did Halitargius call
Patience the Conservatrix of our Condition. O how great is the Glory of Virtue,
whose Guard and attendant is Patience, the Queen of all things! She is not
only the Crown and Ornament of Philosophy, but the badge and Garland of the
Christian warrior. She is not only honored by the Impatient themselves, but
by the furious and Salvage. Abraames, almost slain and martyred by the Indian
Infidels, did with this one weapon not only resist, but overcome a whole City:
And that with more expedition then Caesar, and with better success then
Alexander; for to such admiration and reverence of his person did his patience
drive them, that in the very midst of the storm his persecutors b^came
suddenly calm, begging forgiveness with tears, and with the general consent
of the people elected him for their Patron and President, whom a little before
(having not seen this pearl of Patience,) they designed for destruction and
death. It was the Majesty of this Immovable, Serene Virtue, that forced them
to this miraculous Election, adjudging it of most royal Excellency, and most
worthy of Sovereignty.

Leander told the Fathers, met at Toledo, that Patience would either win, or
overcome her adversaries. Solon knew this: For being checked by some standers
by, because he suffered an uncivil fellow to spit upon him, he answered:
Fishermen, that they may catch one whiting, suffer themselves to be dashed
over with the foam and flowings of the Sea-waves; and shall not I do the like
to catch a man? Whither he catched him, or not, I cannot tell: But I am sure,
that John Fernandius, a Servant of JESUS CHRIST, and a Fisher of men, caught a
whole Kingdom with that very bait. He preaching to the Indians in the
street, one barbarous Infidel, having gathered his mouth full of sordid
spittle, came pressing through the crowd to the place where he stood, and
delivered it just in his face; but he nothing moved therewith, and neither
rebuking the Barbarian, nor discomposing his former gesture, persisted in his
Masters business, and preached on: His Doctrine though powerful, after the
silent Rhetoric of this public example, might for that time have been well
spared. Here was the foundation of the Churches of Japan and Amangucia: This
very Indian (and none before him) becoming the first fruits of that region
unto CHRIST. So glorious a document of Patience made him envy our Divine
Philosophy, that envy made him Ambitious, and his holy Ambition made him a
Christian. So gainful an Industry is Patience, and such a compendious Art of
overcomming. Most wholesome is the advice of Pimenius: Malice (says he) never
overcomes malice, you must overcome malice with goodness: But if we could
overcome one Evil with another, why will we not reserve that Glory for
Virtue? By such a bloodlesse Victory did Motois overthrow his Adversary; from
whom he fled most valiantly, lest he should offend him; I do not say with his
hands, but with his sight; for Patience has no hands, but shoulders. His
Adversary pursues: Motois had locked himself up, and became his own prisoner,
esteeming it guilt enough, that another could be angry with him: But hearing
that his Enemy was come in (being only Impatient till he had showed more
Patience,) he breaks open the door, bids him welcome, and like one that had
offended, desires to be forgiven, and afterward feasts him. This story I have
touched upon, that thou may see how powerful an Instrument of tranquillity,
and a quiet, happy life, Patience is, that makes peace to bear fruit in
another man's soil, and civilizeth forraigners. How fruitful then is she at
home,? How prosperous a dresser of Virtues in himself is the patient man, that
will not suffer the propagation of Vices in another?

But Leander said, that Patience does either overcome, or else win her Enemies;
I say, she does both win and overcome: She wins men, and overcomes Fortune;
nay, she makes her (though unwilling) a most officious servant of Goodness.
The name of Patience is not an empty, titular Honor; it has also very large
and princely revenues for the maintenance of Virtue. That Fable of the Divine
in holy Maximus is truth. He says, that wise men dwell in the shadow of a
tree, which the more the people cut it, grows the more. It strives, and vies
with the Iron; or to borrow the Poets expression, (...), It lives when killed,
and brancheth when it is lopt. His own Mythology is most elegant: By this tree
(says he) is signified wisdom, which tur^ es misfortunes into Ornaments,
trouble into Virtue, loss into gain, and scars into beauty: For the Patient
and wise liver, like the Serpent of Lerna, when he is most mangled, is most
entire; he drinks in fresh spirits through his very wounds, his courage is
heightened by them, and his spilt blood, like dew, does cherish and revive him,
Like some fair Oak, that when her boughs
Are cut by rude hands, thicker grows:
And from those wounds the Iron made,
Resumes a rich and fresher shade.


The benefit then we receive from Patience, is twofold: It diminishes the
sorrows of the body, and increases the treasure of the mind: Or to speak more
properly, there is one great benefit it does us, It turns all that is Evil
into Good. Most apposite to this, is that of Nazianzen, Patience digesteth
misery.

Concoction and Digestion of meats are the daily miracles of the stomach: they
make dead things contribute unto life, and by a strange Metamorphosis turn
Herbs, and almost all living Creatures into the Substance of Man, to preserve
his particular Species: No otherwise does Virtue by Patience (which is her
stomach,) transform and turn all damages into benefits and blessings, and
those blessings into it self. Lupines, or bitter Pulse, if steeped in water,
will grow sweet and nourishing: Patience does macerate miseries, to fatten it
self with them. Certain Divine Rays break out of the Soul in adversity,
like sparks of fire out of the afflicted flint. The lesser the Soul minds the
body, the lesser she adheres to sensibility, she is by so much the more
capable of Divinity, and her own Nature. When her Den of flesh is secure and
whole, then is she in darkness, and sleeps under it: When it is distressed and
broken, then is she awake, and watches by some Heavenly Candle, which shines
upon her through those breaches. The wounds of the Body are the windows of the
Soul, through which she looks toward Heaven; light is her provision, she
feeds then upon Divinity. Sublime is that rapture of the most wise Gregory, --
(...). --
-- one food the best for all
Is to feed on the great Gods mind, and draw
An Immense light from the bright Trinity.


Death it self, which the lust of eating brought into the World inedible, or as
Zeno says, indigestible, is eaten, digested and transubstantiated into life by
Patience, begun in Abel, and perfected in JESUS CHRIST. So that now, that
saying of Pirrho, who affirmed, that there was no difference betwixt death and
life, is no longer a Paradox; nor need we make use of that shrewd exaggeration
of Euripides: who knows (said he) but this which we call life, is death, and
death life? we see, that men, when they are (as we speak) alive, are then only
sick, but the dead neither sicken, nor suffer any sorrows: Certainly the death
of a good liver is eternal life.

Every Action of a wise man is a certain emulation of Death; we may see it
expressed in his patience. The Soul by this Virtue disintangles, and frees her
self from the troubles of Mortality: For the frivolous flesh burning with
fevers, or drowned in dropsies, or any other diseases, the attendants of
corruption, which possess and fill up the narrow Fabric of Man; the Soul (as
in great inundations, when the lower rooms are overflown) ascends to the
battlements, where she enjoyes a secure, healthful air, leaving the
ground-roomes to the tumult and rage of the distempered humors. She ascends
thither, where grief cannot ascend. Carneades, coming to visit Agesilaus
grievously tormented with the Gout, and turning his back to be gone, as if
impatient of the violence and insolency of the disease (whose custom it is to
show little reverence toward the best men, the prerogative of Vir^^e can give
no protection to Nature,) Agesilaus pointing from his feet to his breast, calls
him back with this Check, stay Carneades, the pain is not come from thence
hither. He showed by this, that his mind was in health, though his feet were
diseased, and that the pain had not ascended thither, where the Soul sat
inthroned. At this height she has two privileges more then ordinary; she is
less affected with the body, because at some distance from it; and hovers
above grief, because above sensibility; she is nearer to God, and dresseth
her self by his beams which she enjoyes more freely, as from a kind of
Balconie, or refreshing place, having only a Knowledge, but no Sense of the
bodies affliction. From this place she overlookes the labors and conflicts of
the flesh, as Angels from the windows of Heaven behold War, and the
Slaughter of distracte^^^en. One benefit more she has by Patience, that
though shut up in the body, yet she can have a taste of her glorious posthume
liberty. Death loses the Soul from the body, it breaks in sunder the secret
bonds of the blood, that she may have the full use of her wings, and be united
to Divinity. Patience, though it does not quite loosen the chain, yet it
lengthens it, that she may take the air, and walk some part of the way toward
Home: Though it frees not the Soul from the body, yet it gives her liberty and
dominion over it. He that is tied up by a long Cord, is within the compass
allowed him untyed, and a free man. The Spirit of man incensed by adversities,
and collected into it self, is by a certain Antiperistasis made more ardent
and aspiring: Fire is never stronger, nor more intense then amongst Water; In
the bosom of a cloud it breaks forth into thunder: So this Divine Spark,
which God has shut up in Vessels of Clay, when all the passages of pleasures
are stopped, his rays (which before were diffused and extravagant) return into
it self, and missing their usual vent, break forth with such violence, as
carries with it sometimes the very body, and steals the whole man from passion
and mortality. The Levitie of fire is of greater force, then the Gravity and
Massinesse of Earth: His Spirit is unresistable, and the unknown force of it
will blow up the greatest Mountains, and the strongest Castles this earth
affords.

Hitherto have I discoursed of outward Evils, I shall now consider the Inward,
and how Patience is their Antidote. You have seen her Prerogative over Fortune,
and reputed Evils, which are called Evils, because they seem to be so, not
because they are so; as disgrace, grief, and poverty. All these are but
fictitious Evils, which Custom and Humane error have branded with that
injurious denomination: for in these contingencies there is no real Evil, but
the Evil of opinion; neither is any man miserable but in his own conceit, and
by comparison. The glory of Patience would be but poor and trivial, if it could
do no more then take away, or bear with such frivolous and fictitious
troubles as these: If it prevailed only against Evils, which we do not
suffer, but invent. Its true glory is, that it subdues true Evils: Not that it
bears them, but that it removes them far from us: Not that it endures them, but
than it abstaines from them: For truly to suffer Evil, is to do Evil, whose
Agent always the Patient is, by reason of a most ill impatience: But Patience
is only excellent, because it suffers not. This worst kind of Evil is
therefore the greater, because because when it is in acting, it is not seen; and
were it not afterward felt, there would be no place left for Virtue. This is
the usual method of Vice, a flattering, Comical entrance, and a Tragical exit.
The force and malice of Evil Actions may be gathered by their Nature: They are
so powerfully hurtful, that when they cease to be, they cease not to torment
us: and so malignant, that while we act them, they flatter us, that being
Acted, they may afflict us: While we are doing them, they conceal and deny
themselves; but being done, they appear to our sorrow. Wherefore he that will
lead a blessed, a joyful, and a peaceful life, must make it his whole work, to
do no work, but what Religion and Virtue shall approve of. What peace and
security can he enjoy that will revenge himself, (what more would cruelty
have?) according to his own lust? What life can he be said to live, that kills
himself to please his inordinate affections? What joy can he have, whose
troubled conscience is his continual Executioner, racking and tormenting him in
the very embraces of smiling Fortune? No outward Fomentations will serve turn
against that Indisposition to which fevers and fire are but coolers. We can
provide against the violence of winter and Summer-weather when and how we
please: But the inward heats and colds, the raging accessions of the Spirit
admit no cure. Patience, though Fortune should assist her, will never heal the
wounds of conscience.

He that suffers by the guilt of Conscience, endures worse torments then the
wheel, and the saw: As that heat which ascending from the liver, and the region
of the heart, does diffuse it self through the body, is greater then the
united flames of the dog star and the Sun. What torturing invention of
Amestris, Pher^tima, or Perillus did ever so afflict distressed wretches, as
the fury of his own Conscience did torment Orestes, though freed from all men
but himself? no Tyrant is so cruel as a guilty spirit: Not Scylla with his
prison, Siuis with his Isthmian pine, Phalaris with his bull, Sciron with his
Rock, nor Faunus in his Inn. The Pelusians when they punished Parricides,
conceived no torture so answerable to the heynousnesse of the crime, as this
inward Divine revenge; neither the Pliny mentions this punishment: the
parricide after his apprehension, to augment the horror of his conscience, was
first whip^ with rods dipped in the blood of his murdered parents: and
afterward together with a dog, an ape, and a cock (Creatures which show little
reverence toward their sires) he was thrust alive into a strong sack, and so
thrown into the Sea.
Sack, nor the Limekil pleased them so much as this gnawing worm, the terrible
and luctual excogitation of the wise Father of Nature. They ordered therefore,
and enacted it for a Law, that the murderer for three days and three nights
should be pent up in some narrow room together with the naked body of the
slain, and be forced to look upon it, whither he would, or not; which was
effected by putting him in such a posture, as permitted him not to look any
way, but just upon the dead. The Sicilian Tyrant himself knew that conscience
was a more cruel torment then the bull of brass. This made him spare the most
unnatural and bloody offenders, that they might be tormented, not with
scalding metalls, and glowing Iron, but by a damning conscience. The first
penalty for murder was conscience: The first Actor of a violent death was
punished with life: He that first saw, and introduced death, was thought worthy
of no other punishmen^, but the security of life, which he first showed to be
not secure: for it is a more merciless punishment then death, to have long
life secured with a killing conscience. So he that brought murder first into
the World, was first punished with the terrourr of conscience: Which are then
most torturing, when health and strength are the capital punishments. The
Protoplasts themselves, the parents of death, and of mankind too, who gave us
death before they gave us life, thought it a greater plague then death, to be
still alive, and yet to be guilty of death? They would have fled to death, to
fly from themselves. Apposite to this is that of Marius Victor, -- They feign
would (if they might)
Descend to hide themselves in Hell. So light
Of foot is vengeance, and so near to sin,
That soon as done, the Actors do begin
To fear and suffer by themselves: Death moves
Before their Eyes; Sad dens, and duskie groves
They haunt, and hope (vain hope which fear does guide!)
That those dark shades their inward guilt can hide.


You see now that conscience, even amongst The inhabitants of Pelusium, a town
in the borders of Egypt, now called Damiata; It was built by Peleus the
fratricide, from whom the Citizens descended.
the Pelusians, was held a legal and politic punishment, that in Phalaris it
was a Tyrannical devise, in Cain the Divine vengeance, and in Adam and Eve, the
Justice of Nature. God, Nature, Reason, and fury it self (which in this case
must not be defined madness,) do all bear witness, that selfe-condemnation,
or the guilt of conscience is of all others the most bitter and avenging
torment.

Add to this, that the certainty of it is as infallible, and inevitable, as
the extremity and fierceness of it are implacable: there was never any Tyrant
so cruel, but would pardon some offender: There was none so severely
inquisitive, but some might either escape from him, or deceive him: But the
rigor of conscience permits neither favor, flight, nor fraud. It is utterly
inexorable, and neither our feet will serve us to ran away, nor our hands to
free us: whither shall a man ran from himself, from the secrets of his own
spirit, from his life? No man can be an Impostour or dissembler with his own
heart, no man can undo what he has already done: to have sinned is the
remediless plague of the Soul. It was a slow expression of Victor, that
Vengeance is near to sin. It is swifter then so: It is not consectaneous, or
in chase of it, but coetaneous with it, and its foster-sister The punishment
has the same birth with the offense, and proceeds from it; It is both the
Sister, and the Daughter of it: Wickedness cannot be brought forth without its
penalty: The breast that conceives the one, is big with the other, and when the
one is borne, he is delivered of both. It is a fruitfullnesse like that of
Mice, whose young ones are included the one in the other, and generate in the
very womb. Conscience, while man thinks of Evil, even before he acts, does
rebuke that thought: so that the punishment is praeexistent to the crime,
though in the reign of Virtue it is noiselesse and useless; as penal Laws
are dead letters, until they are quickened by offenders. It is then in its
minority, and without a sting, or else it is asleep, until the Cry of Sin
awakes it. In the state of Evil, Conscience is the first and the last
revenger: when small offenses are wiped out, enormous crimes like capital
letters will still remain.

No man can find a Sanctuary to save him from himself. No evil doer can so fly
for refuge, as to be secure, though he may be safe: He will be afraid in that
place, where he thought not to fear: Though he fears not the friends of the
murdered, yet he finds that within him, which makes him sore afraid: He may
escape the Executioner and the sword, but he will be overtaken by himself; and
being safe, he will be afraid even of his safety: Though he may find fidelity
in his fellow-Tyrants, yet shall he find none in his own bosom, which is ever
clamorous, and spues out blood and guilt. Nature devises such a punishment for
evil doers, as that which tied living Malefactors unto the putrid Carcasses of
dead men, that the horror and stench of them might afflict their spirits, and
the quick flesh be infected and devoured by the dead and rotten. The punishment
sticks fast unto us after the offense, whose carcass is terror of Conscience,
Shame, and a gnawing remorse, that feeds still upon the faulty, but is not
satisfied. The guilty person can have noe peace, But night and day does his
own life molest,
And bears his Judge and witness in his breast.


Add to this, that Reason which in all other pressures and misfortunes is the
great Auxiliary and Guardian of man, is in an offended Conscience his greatest
Enemy, and imploys all her forces to his vexation and ruin.

Fortune therefore is not the only cause of our contristation; we our selves
do arm adversities, and put a sword into the hand of grief to wound us with;
we are sticklers against our selves. Evil Actions afflict more then Evil
Fortune; We are not only troubled that it was Chance, but that it was our
Choice. It is the worst kind of misery, to be made miserable by our own
approbation. That evil which we procure to our selves, must needs grieve us
more, then that which we casually suffer: Noe damage is so doleful, as a
condemning conscience. Truly, I do believe, that the only misfortune of Man is
Sin. And so very bad and mischievous a Cheat it is, that when it is most
punished, we think it most prospers; neither can Fortune be justly termed
Evil, but when she is the Assistant of Evil men, and the surety for Evil
doing. This permitted success makes the affairs of the most unrighteous to be
esteemed Just: This is a felicity like that of beasts, which we put into
pleasant and well watered pastures, that they may be fed for slaughter. Against
this true misfortune, as well as the false and seeming, Patience must be our
Antidote; not by bearing, but by abstaining from it. Patience in this Case must
elevate it self, and pass into a virtuous anger and contempt of sinful
prosperity: We must be piously impatient of all their proffers and poisonous
allurements; Impatient, I say, that we may patiently overcome them.

Therefore as I have formerly exhibited the Art of bearing well to be the only
remedy against Fortune: So now I shall demonstrate to you, that the Art of
abstaining well, is the sole medicine against these true and inward
misfortunes: Differing diseases must have different cures. Patience is the
poison that kills Fortune, and the Balm that heales her stripes: but a sacred
impatience, or abstinence from Sin is the Antidote of Conscience; and the
Basis or foundation of this holy impatience is transcendent and triumphant
Patience. To mitigate or overcome Fortune is a trivial trick: Flattery will do
it, if we can but descend to approve of, and commend all that she does. To
preserve the peace of Conscience, we must be rigid, and censorious: We must
speak home, and truly: We must examine before we Act, and admit of no Action
that will be a just cause but for to blush. The approaches of Fortune are
abstruse: She moves not within the light of Humane wisdom; or if she does,
the strength of her Prerogative lies betwixt Willingness and Constraint: It is
a kind of fatal fooling: Man plays with his Stars until they hurt him: But
the cause of an evil Conscience is within our view, and may be prevented by
Counsel; For no man can Sin against his Will, or without his Knowledge. One
nail must drive out another: He that would avoid damnation, must avoid also
those things which are damnable: He cannot grieve too much, that grieves only
to prevent Eternal grief. The helps we use against Fortune are aftergames. But
the Salves of Conscience must precede the wound; the cure of spiritual
diseases is their prevention. In the affairs of this World the best man is the
experienced: But in the distresses and affairs of Conscience, he is the wisest
that is most ignorant. A noxious Knowledge is death, and every Sinner is a
Fool. The wised^me of Doves is innocence, and that which makes the light to
shine is its simplicity. Light is a Type of Joy, and Darkness of Sorrow: Joy
is the fruit of innocence, and sorrow of Sin. The sorrow we take for Fortune
is hurtful: Those tears, like tempestuous droppings, if not kept out, will
rot the house: But the sorrow for sin is healing. Penitential tears are the
O^le of the Sanctuary: God gives them, and afterward accepts them: they both
cleanse us and cherish us. When Marble weeps, it washes off the dust: Worldly
tears are the waters of Marah; the tree that sweetens them, must be showed by
the Lord: The waters of the pool the word in the He brew signifies, the house
of pouring out: which in a secret Allegory may very well concern man.
Bethesda healed not, until the Angel stirred them; without true remorse
tears profit not: but if they have that Ingredient, they are showers which the
Lord has blessed, and must not be stopped, although they might. As courage,
and a joyful heart are the ripe fruits of innocence, so shame and sorrow are
the hopeful buds and primroses of it. Contrition is the infancy of Virtue:
Therefore that sadness must not be expelled which expels Vice. It is an
invention of the Deity to destroy Sins: That they might be either
unfruitful, or fruitful only to their own destruction: For this we have two
instances from Nature, in the Mule and the Viper: Whereof the one is barren,
and the other unhappily fruitful. Nature is careful that Evils may not
multiply, or if they do, that they may not prosper. The Mule is barren, lest
there should be an increase of Monsters. Apposite to this, is that saying of
Gregory Cerameus, (...) etc, Evils (says he) are denied from God the power of
propagating, as mules have not the faculty to preserve their kind by generating
one another. The Viper notwithstanding is a mother, but she brings forth her
own destruction: The birth of her young ones is her death. So sorrow, that is
the child of sin, is the death of it also. Let therefore this saving
destroyer of sins be made much off, let this godly sorrow be still cherished,
and never rebuked: he that dryes up his tears, before he is cleansed, takes
delight in his filthiness, and like the loathsome drunkard, would sleep in his
vomit: Penitent afflictions should never be resisted but by precaution.

He then that would not drink of this Wormwood, must be sure to refuse the
sugared venom of sin: No man is Evil for nothing. Every defect in life is
occasioned by a defect of Patience: because we cannot endure to be constantly
good: because we are impatient of continual holiness. Two Evils attend upon
Sinners, the Evil of sin, and the Evil of Punishment, which is the Evil of
sorrow: To escape the last, we must abstain from the first: we must be either
impatient of the first, or else the patients of the last: Unless we will
suffer a little to avoid offenses, we must suffer much after we have fallen
into them. A short displeasure is better then a long torment: This previous
Patience of abstaining, frees us from two subsequent Evils: The pain of
Conscience until we repent, and after that the pain of Penitence: These two
are the Appendants, or retinue of every sin; A seasonable, innocent
forbearance is the fense against them both: one small grief averts these two
great ones: How wholesome and comfortable is that Patience which prevents sin
and sorrow, the Consequent of it? But Virtue, when it is most healthful, is in
the estimation of some reputed to be poison: For no other reason do they reject
it, of whom Theodotus elegantly sings, Virtues fair cares some people measure
For poisonous works, that hinder pleasure.


This Patient abstinence from Evil is the Mother of holy Joy, it keeps the
mind pleasant and serene: What is there, or what can there be more beneficial,
or delightful to man, then a pure, innocent conscience, where all the Virtues
(like busy Bees) are in constant action, as in a fair, flowery field, or rather
in Paradise? where all is Divine, all Peaceful, nothing polluted, no fear, no
distraction. In this state, as Theophanes says, The wise man is adorned with a
Godlike Conscience, and a mind becoming the very Deity. What is there more
joyful, then to be master of such a Power, as cannot be violated by Tyrants and
Torments? It was a golden and Victorious saying of Tiburtius: Every punishment
is poor, when a pure Conscience keeps us company: For as the guilty can
receive no comfort: So the Innocent cannot lose his Joy. The Joy of Conscience
is Natures recompense, the coalescent reward, or fruit of integrity, an
entailed happiness, the native blandishment of life, and the minds mighty
purchase: What happier gain can be, then to rejoice always, for what we have
done but once? or what greater damage then an unrighteous gain? It was bravely
said by Chilo, that the heavi^st loss was to be chosen before base gain: That
will grieve us but once, the other always. The loss of temporal goods will
trouble us but for a time, but a lost Conscience will torment us Eternally.
What greater liberty can there be, then not to fear any thing? And what can he
be affeard of, that is not frighted by the guilt of his own spirit? when
Periander was asked, what liberty was? he answered, A good Conscience. And
another says, that Man should with Virtue armed, and hearten, d be,
And innocently watch his Enemy:
For fearlesse freedom, which none can control,
Is gotten by a pure and upright Soul.


Sin makes remiss and c^wardly spirits to be the constant slaves of misery:
what liberty, yea, what joy can he have, or what dares he do, Whose guilty soul
with terrors fraught, does frame
New torments still, and still does blow that flame
Which still burns him: nor sees what end can be
Of his dire plagues, and fruitful penalty?
But fears them living, and fears more to dye.
Which makes his life a constant Tragedy.


Therefore to preserve the mirth and peace of Conscience, righteous, or honest
Actions are mainly conducing, and should be always our employment; for this is
the appointed task of man, and it is his mystery too. The hand is the best
Sacrifice. The Ancient Portugals used to dedicate to their Gods the right hands
of their captives; but offer thou thine own, and not another. To be only
without Vice, is a vicious commendation: Nay, it is not commendable at all, but
self-indulgence, or a flattering of our own corrupt inactivity. To such a
pass is man come, that he is not ashamed to do less for Virtue, then the
vicious will do for Vice. It is a most poor and fordid glory, to be only not
numbered amongst the bad: It is a base degree of praise, to be reputed only not
base. To be without Vice, is not to be good: Not to be vicious, and to be
Virtuous, are two things. To refrain from Evil, is scarce not Evil,
especially if we proceed no further: For to be able to be good, and not to be
thoroughly so, is, if not Evil, a neighborhood to Evil. True praise consists
not in a bare abstinence from Evil, but in the pursuance and the performance
of good. It suffices not therefore that we do nothing which may afflict us,
but we must withal do something that may exhilarate us. This we must
remember, that to do good is one thing, and to become good is another; Although
we cannot become good, unless we do good; But we become good, not because we
have done good works, but because we did them well. Discretion, which considers
the manner of doing good, orders the Action so excellently, that oftentimes
there is more goodness in the manner, then in the Action: What will it avail
us to do good, if it be not well done? It is to write fair, and then to pour
the Ink upon it. Actions cease to be good, unless well acted, they are like
excellent colors ill-layed on. The more glorious thy intention is, the more
carefully thou must manage it. Indiscretion is most evident in matters of
importance: One drop of Oil upon Purple, is sooner seen, then a whole quart
that is spilt upon Sackcloth.

The Ermyn keeps his whiteness unstained with the hazard of his life: He
values himself at a most sordid rate, that esteems less of Virtue, then this
beast does of his skin; that prefers a foul life to a fair death, that loves
his blood more then his honor, and his body more then his Soul. Ennius says,
that the way to live, is, not to love life. Life is given us for another cause,
then merely to live: he is unworthy of it, that would live only for the love
of life; the greatest cause of life is Virtue: what more absolute madness can
there be, then to make life the cause of sin, yea the cause of death, And for
life's sake to lose the crow^ of life?

What greater unhappiness, then to dye eternally by refusing death? The
Virtuous youth Pelagius, rather then he woul^d lose his Innocence, suffered the
most exquisite and studied torments of that impure Tyrant Habdarrhagmanus: He
suffered many deaths before he was permitted to dye: He saw his limbs, his
hands, and his sinews cut in sunder, and lying dead by him, while he yet
lived. This preservation of their honor some chaste beauties have paid dearly
for. It cost Nicetas his tongue, Amianus his Eye, Saint Briget her face,
Apollonia her teeth, and Agatha her breasts: The lovely Cyprian Virgin paid her
life for it. Nature even for herself does lay a snare,
And handsome faces their own traitors are.


The beauty of Chastity is best preserved by deformity, and the purity of life
by a contemptible shape.

The Shoemaker is careful of the neatness of a shoe, which is made to be
worn in dirt and mire: And shall man be negligent to adorn his Soul, which is
made for Heaven, and the service of the deity? Every artificer strives to do
his work so, as none may find fault with it; And shall we do the works of life
perfunctorily and deceitfully? All that makes man to be respected, is his
work, as the fruit does make the Tree: and a good work can never be too much
respected. Keep thy self always in respect by doing good: Thy own dignity is
in thy own power: If thy works be good, thou shall be accounted good too; If
better then any, thou shall be acknowledged for the best. Man is the effect of
his own Act, he is made by those things which he himself makes: He is the work
of his own hands. A rare privilege, that permits men, and impowers them to
make themselves: Thou have leave to be whatsoever thou would be. God would
not limit thy happiness: He left thee power to increase it, to polish and
beautify thy self according to thy own mind. Thy friend, or thy neighbor
cannot do it: Thy own good must be thy own industry. Virtue, because she
would be cross to Fortune, is not adventitious. It is our great happiness,
that this great good must not be borrowed. Blessed be that Divine mercy which
has given us means to be saved without the assistance of our neighbors, who
have endeavored to damn us! That almighty hand which first Created man in the
Image of his Creator, finished him not, but left some things for him to do,
that he might in all things resemble his maker. It is one thing to be an Idol,
or Counterfeit, and another to be a lively Figure and likeness: There are many
Coppies, which are not assimilant to their Originals, like Pictures that have
not so much as an air of those faces they were drawn by. To the Politure and
sweetning of the Divine Image, there are some lines expected from thine own
hand. If some expert Statuary, suppose Phidias himself, should leave
unfinished some excellent piece, like that Statue of Minerva at Athens, and out
of an incurious weariness, give himself to some obscure and Artlesse
employment, or to mere Idleness, would not thou much blame and rebuke him
for it? And can thou deserve any less, if by a loose and vicious life thou will either totally deface the Image of God in thy self, or else leave it
unfinished? Do thou think that God is maimed, seeing thou do leave his
Image without hands, I mean, without good works? Do thou think that he is
blind, seeing thou do extinguish, or put quite out that discerning light and
informing wisdom which he has given thee? He that does not integrally
compose himself, and will not carefully strive for perfection, would represent
God to be imperfect, and a Monster. Virtuous manners (says holy Maximus) are
types of the Divine goodness, by which God descends to be represented by man,
assuming for a body those holy habits, and for a soul the Innocent dictates of
wisdom in the spirit, by which he makes those that are worthy, to become Gods,
and seals them with the true character of Virtue, bestowing upon them the solid
riches of his infallible and immortal Knowledge.

Work then while it is day, while it is lifetime; work and cease not: Finish
this expectation, this great spectacle, not of men only, but of God and
Angels. Remember that the rewards and applause of this World are but a Paint of
eternity: The solid and permanent glory is given in Heaven, When every man
shall have praise of God. The Limbner is careful to beautify and show his
utmost skill in that piece, which he knows to be intended for judicious eyes:
Thou art not to paint, but really to make a living Image of the Divine mind,
which also must be examined and judged by that searching eye, from which
nothing can be hidden: have a care that no ill mixture, nothing
disproportionable, nothing uneven or adulterate may be found in it. The
presents we offer to the true God, must be true and solid works, not the
fictitious oblations of Jupiter Milichus: Why will thou delight in a maimed
Soul, or which is worse, in a Soul whose best part is dead? Thou had rather
have a member cut off, then hanging dead by thee: Thou would then only wish
for its company, when it would be no hindrance to thee. And can thou endure
the immortal Soul to be sick of death, to be sick in his best part, in the
head? will thou suffer thy mind to drowse, to be paralytical and senseless,
never thinking of God, nor of doing good? In such a liver, the beauty of his
immortal part is crusted over with an incurable leprosy; and reason, which is
the Souls Countenance, is most ingloriously ecclipsed. The Task of life is to
labor, and the Sacrament of the Soul is to work rationally. Idleness is a
Parenthesis in the line of life: When we do nothing, we do not live.

Slothfullnesse is a dead Existence, a kind of sleep when we are awake: That
life is empty, that is not filled with the care of living well. It was truly
said by Possidonius, that one day of a learned man's life, was more pleasant,
then all the years of the unlearned: One hour, one minute well spent, is to be
preferred before a sinful, voluptuous for-ever. Time is a sacred thing: it
flows from Heaven, it is a thread spun from thence by the motion and
circumvolution of the spheres. It is an emanation from that place, where
eternity springs. The right use of it, is to reduce it to its Original: If we
follow time close, it will bring us to its Fountain. It is a clue cast down
from Heaven to guide us thither. It is the younger brother of eternity, the one
must be sought in the other. It has some assimilation to Divinity: it is
partly knowable, and partly not: We move in it, and we see it not: It is then
most invisible; when most present. If we be careful of it, the benefit is
ours: If we neglect it, we cast away our selves. He lives not at all, that
lives not well: And he that lives ill, shall dye worse: He suffers a living
and sensible death: It is death, because it wants the fruit of life; and it is
sensible, because it is with loss and punishment. Many ill livers comfort
themselves with a vain conceir, that the state of death is senseless: But Vice
and Idleness are more malicious deaths, they carry with them the penalty of
sense: They are fertile in evils, and barren of good, like a cursed ground
that bringes forth nothing but thorns and thistles.

You expect grapes from your vines, and corn from your Fields, but no Fruit at
all from your selves: Were you made to be good for nothing? for shame be your
own dressers, Manure your selves, and prune your vain and noxious affections.
Man himself is his own precious Soil, his own fruitful field, and thriving
Plant: let him that expects fruits from extraneous things, taste first of his
own. Good works are the apples of this Heavenly Plant. The Vine and the Field,
though they bear not for themselves, pay their annual proventions. If they had
been left to their first fruitfullnesse before the Curse, they had exceeded in
a most uberous, spontaneous fertility; if they should yield nothing now, they
would be good for nothing. Man bears fruit for himself, and may bear as much
as he pleases: Will thou then keep back thy own provision? Will thou pine
thy self? or by burying thy talent in the dust, be an enemy to thy own soul,
and envious toward others?

Virtue in my opinion is like to Music: it pleases most of all the Virtuous
man himself; and it pleases also the vicious, whose Conscience does force him
to admire that in others, which he neglects in himself. Music delights both
the Musician, and the unskillfull. Music built the Walls of Thebes; and Virtue
must build the new Jerusalem. Music and Virtue are the performances of the
hand, and the Cordials of the mind. Every lover of Virtue is Musical, that is
so say, he is pleased with the suffrages of his own Conscience, and solaced
with the Celestial flights of his pure Spirit: He loves the works of Virtue
(not to gain the peoples applause,) but for Virtues sake, whose beauty and
power are best seen in her works. Honesty is one of the liberal Arts, it is a
trade of Conscience, not of gain. Craftsmen show their skill in their works:
The Sculptor in his Cuts, the Painter in his limnings, and the Goldsmith in his
Plate. To do something, not the manner of doing it, is their care: Their work
may be well done, though negligently, and without much Art. The Limner may give
a stroke in have or anger, which neither Judgment, nor curiosity can ever
match. Giotto's circle, though drawn perfunctorily, surpassed the most
elaborate pieces of other Ar^^sts. Virtue alone makes no use either of error
or chance, and this she does merely to oppose Fortune. In virtuous actions, if
we err in doing, though we do good, yet the work of Virtue is not well done.
In other Arts, one Exemplar, or Act may serve to show the Artificers skill,
though he should never work more: But it is not so in Virtue; As we cannot know
a skillfull Musician, unless he plays upon some Instrument; so Virtuous men
are not manifested until they Act: He that will give any proof of himself,
must needs be active; but to be so once, is not activity.

Virtue is a most useful thing, and the use of it dies not after it is used:
For allthough all the actions of man are transitory, yet when they proceed from
Virtue, they are permanent. I advise thee therefore to be permanent, yea to be
immortal. Care not for those things which the World esteems to be enduring, as
Gold, and the Wealth of Fortune; those will make them wings and fly away, when
thou do least look for it. Care thou for those things which the people, and
their Hypocritital rulers value not, because they believe them to proceed from
a sheepish and rewardlesse tamenesse, and not from grace, and the secret
dispensations of the God of peace. Care, I say, for Righteousness and
Innocence; Care that thy Actions be upright: These are the treasures which the
World believing to be transient, shall find one day to be truly solid and
permanent. Thou have read sometimes that advice of the Apostle, Redeem the
times: That is to say, what thou do well at one time, thou shall have it at
all times: Thy good Actions, with^rsoever thou go, will bear thee company:
They are Companions of a most rare fidelity, and will leave thee neither in the
hour of death, nor after death. When our friends cannot follow us, then do our
good works travel with us, they are then our best friends, and overcome our
foes. Envy it self is appeased with death, it falls off with the body. Malice
knows no posthume persecution, and the glory of Virtue in that state is above
the reach of her Enemies: though they may disturb our temporal rights, they are
too short to oppose our claim to immortality: The only peaceful possession of
the dead, is his good life, and righteous dealings: what will it avail the rich
oppressors of this World, to have their Carcasses buried in the abundance of
their treasures, unless they mean by it, to restore that unto the Earth which
was dug out of her bowels? Gold and Silver are no ransom for
unrighteousness. Virtue alone, which survives death, is the refreshment of the
dead: He cannot be affeard to die, who is assured of a better subsistence after
death: Their dissolution is only fearful to those, who lose all by it, and
their life to boot. The Posthume Inheritance of man is his righteousness and
integrity, which death takes not from him, but puts him in possession of them.
Thou may gather, that good or Virtuous works are proper and necessary to the
Soul, out of man's natural desire of fame, and that innate appetite of
immortality which is planted in his Spirit: Nature desires nothing which is not
rational, and her persuasions, even when they degenerate, strain, and point at
some primitive delights, and innocent privileges which she was free to before
her corruption. All secular glories dye with the body, goodness only is above
the power of death: That fair part of life is kin to the Supreme good, and
death cannot hurt it; yea it is secured by death, which kills envy, and frees
the virtuous both from the malice of their Enemies, and the possibility of
failing in themselves.

Therefore the best employment for man (if he will consider either his own
benefit, or the approbation and liking of nature, which aims also at
immortality) is the work of virtue, yea far better then the work of reason.
Many, while they study the reason of virtuous works, pass by virtue it self.
By a fruitless study how to do good, they lose their time, and do none at all.
Theorie is nothing so beneficial as Practice. It is a true saying that
Jamblichus cites out of Pythagoras; Every good thing consists of substance and
use, and not of mere knowledge. To be good, is to do good. The knowledge of a
skillful Physician profits not the sick, unless he falls to practice, and
gives him something toward his cure. Learned Aphorisms heal not the diseased,
but bitter Medicines. That Soul which can reason subtly, and discourse
elegantly, is not saved; but the Soul which does good works: Knowledge and
Faith without actual Charity are both dead.

Nevertheless there is amongst men a certain covetousness of Wisdom and
Knowledge, as well as of Money. The acquisition pleases them, but they will
not set it out to use. As Usurers hoard up their money, laying it out neither in
pious works, nor for their own necessities, but suffer it to lie under rust and
darkness: So some Learned men neither practice those excellent rules of Living
which they have learnt, nor will they impart them unto others: They study still
more curiosities, being in the mean time incurious of their salvation. I will
say of them, as Anacharsis said of the Athenians, They know no use of money but
to count it. There is no man poorer then the rich miser, and none more
unlearned then the unpractised. Nature is contented with mediocrity: The World
has many things in it which humane affairs have no need of. Virtue also is
perfected in few precepts: Though we fill the world with our Writings, it is
not our Volumes that can make us good, but a Will to be so. Book-men write out
of no other design, but to reform and civilize Mankind: They make several
Assayes, numerous attempts, and then renew them. The Dice run not well always,
the last cast may carry more then all the former. Therefore to stir up and
incline the Will to goodness, many things are necessary; but to be good there
is nothing needful but willingness. We suffer our selves to be cheated by
hope; we trust that when we have gathered so much knowledge as we covet, then
we shall do all that we can desire. O foolish and vain pr^crastination.
Alchuvius terms it a Palsy, I am sure it is a madness. We stay like that
foolish Beggar for a Mess from the Kings table, and in the mean time starve. We
care not to use this present life which is our own, but study the secrets of
another, which as yet is not ours. We would learn Mysteries, and some things
that are either out of our way, or else beyond it. Christians should neither
wander, nor sit down, but go on; What is that to thee? follow thou me. Content
is a private sphere, but wants nothing, and is ever calm. They that study the
world are (of the two) the worst Speculators. Popular, politic persons live
always by events: Their ambition and firienesse makes their lives uneven, and
uncertain: innocent, and undisturbed habits are the companions of Humility.
Giant-spirits, though they may flash sometimes with fair thoughts, have
always dark and stormy affections. Men, or the most part of men, are like
Swans, whose feet though ever in a living Bath, are always black; but their
wings and down, which keep above those streams, are pure white. That part of
our lives which is ever padling with the current of Time, is foul and defiled;
but that which soars above it, is fair and holy. Worldly business is the
Souls Idleness.

Man, ordained to be King of the Worlds Republic, had been a mere Cipher, if
without Soul-imployment. He had been created to no end without this Aim. If he
for whom all things were made, will not endeavor to secure himself being made,
he was made in vain. An ornament to the World he cannot be: He was not made
with any great gaity, and his decaies are both numerous and hasty. If to be
seen only, were the duty of created things, the Stars should have been only
fixed, and not moving. Stop (if thou can) the course of the Sun, his restless
and vast circ^mvolution: As motion makes him bright and lively (for he
rejoices to run his race) so standing still, and slothtfulnesse would make him
sad and sullied; the beauty of the Firmament would be darkened, the freshness
of the earth would fade, and the whole family of Nature missing those
cherishing beams, would pine and decay: Rivers would fall asleep, Minerals
would prove abortive, and the mourning world would wast away under darkness
and sterility. But the Sun though he should not move, would not be useless;
his very sight is beneficial. He is the created light of the visible world, a
mavelous vessel, and an ornament in the high places of the Lord. But man for
whom all these things were made, without he b^ active and serviceable to his
own Soul, is good for nothing. There is nothing more pleasant, nothing more
peaceful, nothing more needful then an industrious, Wise man, and nothing
more impertinent, and useless then the sluggard. The rest of the mind is the
motion of Virtue, and the idleness of the idle is the disturbance of his
Spirit. He that does nothing, is of less use, and by much worse then nothing
it self. Would thou be reduced into that unnatural Vacuity of not being,
which is without form and void? Cease to do good, and it is done. The
fruitless tree must be cut down: Do thou ask why? That it may not be; yea,
that it may be nothing, and not cumber the ground. Annihilation is more
profitable then a fruitless being. In this Family of Nature, every one has
his task: None may be idle. The best and the Noblest are the most laborious.
Consider Heaven, the first Exemplar of agility; the brightest and the most
active Elements are the next to it, and above them move the Stars. Fire is the
Suburb of Heaven: The Earth which is cold and dull, like an Island lies most
remote, and cut off (as it were) from the neighborhood of light. Nothing has
commerce with Heaven, but what is pure: he that would be pure, must needs be
active: Sin never prevails against us, but in the absence of Virtue, and
Virtue is never absent, but when we are idle. To preserve the peace of
Conscience, we must not fear sufferings; if the hand of man wound us, God
himself will cure us: But if we wound our selves by resisting him, the hands
of all his creatures will be against us, because ours was against his.

Having now taught you how to master Adventitious, Personal Evils, and to
prevent the Evils of Conscience; It orderly follows, that I should teach you
how to subdue and triumph over Public Evils, or National Calamities. The
sufferings of just persons wound the heart of a wise man, when his own cannot
grate upon it. Fortune, that could neither hurt him by force, nor by fraud,
draws blood from him through the sides of others. The righteous liver is
troubled more with the losses of his neighbors, then with his own. He whose
patience could not be overcome by passion, lies open and naked to the assaults
of compassion. The life of the wise man is the most precious and profitable, he
lives not only for himself, but for others, and for his Country: The safety of
the imprudent is his care, as well as his own: He is not only their
compatriot, but their patriot and defender. Excellent is that rapture of
Menander, -- True life in this is shown,
To live for all men's good, not for our own.
He only truly lives, that lives not merely for his own ends. To live is not a
private, but a public good: The Treasure of good living is diffusive. The
Civil Guardian looks to the goods of his Wards: but the wise man is the
natural Tutor of the people, and looks to the public good, and to the aged
as well as those that are in their Minority. It will therefore be worthy our
pains, to consider and enquire how such men should carry themselves in popular
and grand mutations; Whither they should change their Nature, or their Manners,
or retain them both, when both fortune, knaves and fools are most changing. In
National alterations, a wiseman man may change his outward carriage, but not
his inward: His mind must be dry and unmoved, when his Eyes flow with tears:
He must bestow a compassionate, Fatherly look upon the afflicted, and those
that are so weak, as to believe that temporal sufferings can make them
miserable. But neither his tears, nor those that he bewailes, must work so far
upon him, as to break his inward peace by admitting of fear, or hope, or the
desire of revenge; and though he himself stands in a secure station, from
whence he can both distress and defeat Fortune, yet must he help also to
redeem others; he must take the field with his Forces, and set upon her with
open valor, doing good ( as Tzetzes says) to all men, and abolishing every
where the power of Fortune. If he finds that the breasts of others are too
narrow to entertain Royal Reason, he must labor by Stratagems, by
Manuductions, and inducing circumstances to encourage and strengthen them; He
must not leave them, until he has secured them. Antisthenes said, that a good
man was a troublesome burden. Who but insipid wretches, that have no feeling
of their misery, will assent to this position? A good liver is troublesome to
none, but to the bad, and he is by so much the more precious and desirable.
That wound which makes the patient senseless; is more dangerous then that
which smarts and grieves him. But if their misery when it is made apparent to
them by the good man is thereby diminished, and they acknowledge themselves to
have been made so by their own vain opinion; it is just that they confess
Virtue to be healing, and that by her means they found help from a strangers
hand, when their own were infirm and helpless. O Virtue, the great lenitive of
mankind! Yea of those who are thine Enemies! Thy hand heals him, that would
hurt thee, As Egypts drought by Nilus is redrest,
So thy wise tongue does comfort the oppressed.


Yea, the Evil by whose association thy purity was never defiled, thou do
help by the good. In every virtuous man I hold that saying to be true, which
Venantius spoke of the great Captain Bonegissus: His hand restores, his Counsel
secures: whom Fortune rejects or casts out of her arms, he takes up and
guards them in his. And hence I am induced to differ in my opinion from Philo,
about that saying of the Jews Lawgiver, that a wise man has heavy hands. What
wonder is it if they be so, seeing the imprudent, the afflicted, and the
disconsolate, who are grievous and heavy to themselves, do all depend and hang
upon his arms, like Infants upon their mothers?

To help these hangers on, he must needs be bowed, and by speaking fair to
their grievances, begin to redress them. This is the property, or rather the
prerogative of the constant and wise man; He can descend safely from the
Sphere of his own happiness to mingle with, and to comfort the miserable. Noe
man by standing still can rescue one that is carried away by a violent torrent,
and ready to be drowned; nor if he also be overcome by the same stream, can he
save the other. It is one thing to be thrown down, and another to be bowed
down. He that would not be thrown down, must look to the liberty of his Will,
and not submit it to Fortune. But to restore, or raise up others, it is
necessary that he must bow. No man can take up a Child that is fallen, but by
bending himself: To cure the ill-affected, we must in some things incline to
their affections. Comfort is a potion of that nature, that heals not the sick,
without an appearance of the same indisposition in the very Physician: The
patient will otherwise suspect that for poison, which is meant for his health.
He that is ill-affected, will be unwilling to believe that another which is not
so, can have any skill to cure him: And he that labors with the same disease,
can neither cure others, nor himself. Therefore he that would minister comfort
unto the distressed, must of necessity have his will above the Tyranny of
Fortune, he must have a mind that is invulnerable, and yet seem to be very
tender and sensible of her lightest strokes. It is one thing to be subject to
these affections, and another to rule them: To be had of them, and to have
them. He that would loose others, must not be bound himself. When Mus^nianus
observed a Troop of horse, that was under his command, to halt, and make a
stand, expecting some Omen from a bird that had suddenly pitched before them,
he bent his bow, and riding up to the front of the Troop, shot at the bird, and
killed him: Then laughing at their folly, he told them, that there was but
little advice or help to be expected from such irrational creatures, that were
not only ignorant of the destiny of others, but could not foresee their own
ill luck. We must look first to our own safety, afterward to others: The hand
of the helper should make the first assay upon himself: He that experimentally
knows, he can swim, is fi to save another that is in danger to be drtowned.

But when I speak of tenderness, and a seeming compliance with the weakness
of others; I mean not dissimulation. I allow a community of tears, but not of
the cause of tears. Let the miserable bewail their misery, and let the wise man
mourn with those that mourn, because they mourn amiss, not because they
suffer. Let him not mourn for the power of Fortune, but for the weakness of
man. When a friend of Solon found him weeping, he told him, That tears were
not the potion against Fortune, and would therefore profit nothing; I know it
well (said Solon) and that is it which I Lament. He bewailed the tears of
others, not the cause of their tears: That is it which a wise man (the enemy
and the avenger upon Fortune,) may justly bewail, to see men weep, when weeping
availes not. He is troubled, not because they suffer, but because they will not
be comforted; yea, because they will not be men: He thinks not that it is
Evil to suffer worldly afflictions; Nay, he knows it is good, but he knows
withal that worldly sorrows slay the Soul. This is the consideration that
calls forth his tears: He wisely distinguishes, that man is not made
miserable by any outward accidents, but by his own opinion: For no man is made
unhappy, because he exists, or is, but because he thinks himself to be so: The
wise man bewailes a greater Evil then the Evil of misfortune, and that is the
inability of some men to bear Evil. He mourns not because they are Patients,
but for their impatience. The true or real Evil which he knows to be in them,
is their ignorance of false or reputed Evils. That which causes him to weep,
is their causeless weeping. He that disguiseth his constancy thus, dissembles
not. I make not a wise man to be impassible, but enduring and compassionate,
yea the Patient of compassions: Though I exempt him from the crowd and
populacie; I place him not above Humanity: Though he is no peer of the
Multitude, yet he descends to pity them: But we do not therefore disturb his
peace and serenity, because he is merciful and condoling; but because it is
his expectation, his desire. He is not stormy, nor treacherous, nor base, but
courteous, liberal and happy; he is in all estates master of himself; he is
kept fresh and pleasant by the secret Joys and vivifications of an unoffended
Conscience. It was well said by the School-Divine; That the tears of the
righteous were the smiles of their Souls.

Gregory Nazianzen commended his Brother Cesarius for his honest dissimulation
with the dissembling Court. He was inwardly an Anachorite, and outwardly a
Courtier. In public and splendid affairs affairs (which are more seducing
and inconstant then private,) this policy is necessary: We should always
have a snare ready for them, that we may escape theirs. In the downright blows
of Fortune, that is, in our own domestic losses, We should be sincere and
naked; we should put on nothing but our native complexion, and a serene mind.
In this Case, we should be so undaunted, as to look upon upon Fortune, and
overcome her without any weapons, we should set naked upon her, not only
without defensive arms, but without clothes. In the dangers of others, we must
deal otherwise; we must use all means to secure them: We must deal with
Fortune as she deals with us, by disguises and stratagems: All her wares are
but gilded clouds, a Superficial wash; they are not that which they seem to
be; to be true to our selves, we must be false to these, we must not trust
them. She cannot require more from us, or better, then what she gives: Her
Good, and her Evil are both counterfeits, and he that dissembles with them,
offends not. The riches of this world are not sound within: We may not for
their sakes corrupt our Souls, and be mad^ like unto them. Let the peace of
Co^^^^^nce shine within, upon a white and undefiled Throne, though we look
mournful and ragged without. No Man deals better, or more justly with this
World, then he that lends her his face, but keeps his heart. This is the Nature
of the World, to give us a fair look, and an empty hand. Consider thy self:
How often have thou been that Creature, which thou did not seem to be? All
the accoutrements of Fortune, all her pomp, and the transitory course thereof,
when laid out with the best advantage, seems to me but a Stage Play. Her most
glorious favorites pass by like Whifflers, which carry Torches in their hands
only to show the deformity of their vizards: They hasten away, and like To
speedy posts, bear hence the Lamp of life.

All the glory of this World, has darkness, and treachery in it. It passes
gloomily by us, like high-way-men that traverse the road with veiled faces: he
that will be even with this Counterfeit, must clap on a vizard too, and by an
honest dissimulation, preserve himself.

In the funerals of our friends, our kindred and benefactors, we may
moderately mourn; but we must not lose our Patience, nor that Christian peace,
which is the golden fruit of faith and hope. The great mercy of God has so
provided, that Evil when it sets upon us, is but an apparition; there comes
good presently after it. To live well, we have in our selves more then enough:
we need not any extraneous help; our very desiring of it, makes us miserable.
So excellently best is our condition, that the blessed life is ours gratis, but
misery we must hunt after. The happy life needs neither riches nor wishes;
Misery cannot be had without desiring, and it is never given without
Covetousness, which is the price paid for it. We suffice of our selves for a
happy life; why not for mere life, which is something less? shall we think
our selves poor, because we abound with the means of happiness? As long as the
batteries of Fortune cannot shake the mind, nor make the will to fly into
shivers; the heart is whole, and our peace is secure: Her musters and
preparations seem formidable but to children only: Take off the helmet, or
vizard of Evil, and underneath it, you will find good: Have thou lost a friend
that took care for thee like a mother, and furnished the like a Father? that
very loss is an occasion of greater gain, though at first it appears not.
Parents sometimes to sport with their Children disguise themselves: The Child
at the first sight is dejected, but having taken off the Masque, he finds his
Mother: He laughs, kisseth and embraces her, and if she comes again in that
dress, he fears her not. Who would not be astonished at that furious Army of
Evils, which fought against holy Job? It was a sad sight to see a Father, after
the loss of his Children, and substance, to lie languishing under the Tyranny
of a devouring Ulcer, And where? upon a dunghill, the very sink of uncleanness
and corruption. But this frighted him not: He was so far from thinking it an
Evil, that he played with the worms, and made that, which his friends esteemed
for vengeance and misery, to be his meditation and mirth: He was sure that he
was innocent, and retaining his integrity, he could not miss of joy. He saw
through that Crust and Scab, the sure mercies of God: His beautiful and
healing hand, shined through that loathsome Veyle. He desired not the comforts
of his kindred, nor his friends: he said to corruption, thou art my Father, and
to the worms, you are my Sisters. This was only a shel, or seeming Evil; but
the kernel, or substance that lay within it, was solid and real good. As
Children deal with nuts, so good and wise men deal with Calamities; they break
the shell, and eat the kernel: both the Good and Evil of this World have
their fucus, and outside: He that knows that, and knows how to take it off,
is a knowing man, and knows how to use them.

This lesson Saint Paul taught the Citizens of Corinth. Let them that weep
(says he) be as though they wept not: and they that rejoice, as though they
re^oyced not: And they that buy, as though they possessed not. He allows only
an illusive and seeming commerce with the World: Hear his reason, and you will
acknowledge his Justice: The fashion of this World (says he) passes away, or
is transient and deceiving: That which men call fruition in this World, is but
face-acquaintance: All temporal possession is but a looking on, the things
themselves pass away. They are still in a Cryptical, unperceived motion, when
we suppose them to be fast locked, and fettered in our arms: They creep from us
like a mist or smoke, which in confused and silent Evolutions steals out at
the top of the chimney, after it has fouled it within.

All worldly things, even while they grow, decay,
As smoke does, by ascending, wast away.
Says Dionysius Lyrinensis. The Apostle would have us to put on the same
disposition, and to be even with this great deceiver by a like deception. Let
us give it but a glimpse, and half a face, as it gives us but a transient and
flattering salute. Let us weep and not weep, rejoice and not rejoice, use it
and not use it. This we can never Act handsomely without personating, or rather
mocking this Arch-cheat. When our Eyes flow with tears, we must keep our
Consciences smiling and pleasant: We must have Heraclitus his face, and
Democritus his heart. The forehead is the Index of the mind; but the Soul of
the just must shine, when his face is most clouded. We must not give our
strength unto the World, that is to say, we must not seriously affect it: In
all our negotiations with it, we must stand at a distance, and keep our
affection for him, who must be loved with all the heart, with all the strength,
and with all the Soul. Saint Paul (when he made use of this expression,) had
respect, I believe, unto the rites of the Roman Theater, the Comic and Tragic
Laws of their Poets, which together with their Government, were dispersed into
all civil climates: He applied to the various representations, sudden changes
and successive shows of the Stage, where Truth moved in disguise, and the
serious travels of the Sons of Men, were by Masquers and personating
Counterfeits solidly Acted: Where the short flourish of humane affairs did
wither by degrees, and ended in a sad Catastrophe, while the Poets plot
upbrayded the vanity of States-mens policy. The World is a mere Stage; the
Master of the Revels is God; the Actors are Men; the Ornaments and flourishes
of the Scenes are honor, power and pomp; the transitory and painted Streams of
Mortality, which pass along with the current of time, and like flowers, do but
only appear, when they stay longest: He that enjoyes them most, does but
smell to them, and the shortest fruition permits as much.

What else was the Majesty of the Assyrian Empire, but a tractitious, vanishing
apparition, a slight Flash of transient glory? It shot by like a falling star,
and was presently succeeded by the Medes and Persians: after them came the
Macedon, and last of all the Roman. The Kingdoms of mortal men are not
Immortal: they are no better then their Rulers. Where is Ninus now, where is
Semiramis, Cyrus, Darius, Alexander, Antipater, Ptolomie, Julius Caesar,
Octavian, and Tiberius? Where now are these Patriarchs of amb^ition, these weak
roots of the Assyri^n, Median, Persian, Macedonian, Asian, Egyptian, and Roman
greatness? What is become of these Primats of pride, these eldest Sons of
Fortune, these prosperous disturbers of mankinds peace, before whom the world
became dumb, like a Sparrow before a Kite? what a deep Silence! What a thick
darkness is now drawn over them! Nothing remains of them but their names, and
the bare Skeleton of glory: Their only boast, is, that they have been: Our
only Knowledge, is, that they are vanished. Nay, it is most certain, that we
Vixere fortes ante Agamemnona multi; sed omnes Illach ymabiles urgentur,
ignotique longa nocte, carent quia vate sacro.
know not all their names; those we are acquainted with, are not many: so
ruinous a thing is humane glory, though held by mortal men to be immortal. They
are deceived: It leaves neither Relics, as their bodies do; nor Inscriptions,
like their Sepulchers. The glory of men is more mortal then their Carcasses.
Their bones remain after their Funerals, after the fire, and Executioner; And
their teeth may be seen, when they can neith^r snarl^, nor bite. But their fame
is edibl^, it is dev^^red by time without F^re, ^^a, without Air; for by no^
re^^^^ing p^s^erity, it becomes dumb, and miss^^h their ^ongues, by whose
speaking it lives. All the felicity of men is a dream, it comes on they know
not how, and when it vanishes, they cannot so much as discern its Back-parts.
If these recorded Empires, these famous Yoaks and Burdens of the World came so
suddenly to nothing; what will be the lot of these petty fetters, these leaden
manacles that we are bound with? If those massy and mighty weights were so
clearly blown off; what will become of these loose Packes, which have nothing
to balasse them, but feathers, but chafe and motes? Those universal
Monarchies founded upon the principal Cities of the World, whose Colony was
the whole Earth: Those Cities whose bulwarks did threaten the Clouds, whose
Armies and Fleets made the Earth to tremble, and the Seas to groan: whose Laws
(like Oracles) were held sacred and unalterable; found no security against the
Arm of God, which tears the Crown from the Head, and the Scepter from the
right hand of the Lawgiver. He considers in his dwelling pl^c^, like a cl^^r
(...) upon h^^bs: ^e (...) the things that are to c^^e: He ^^^^th the Nations
with the S^ve of (...): He b^owes upon them, and they with (...) and shall not
be planted. And why t^in^ ^ou the^ that these dry and fading (...) f^ourish for
ever? All temporal tri^mphs have their date: they pass away in a sure and
uninterrupted course, and when they begin to decay and unloade themselves, then
they are swiftest. All the pomp of this World, is but gilded emptiness^, a nine
days blossom, whose beauty drops into the same Mould from whence it sprung.
It is the Consciousnesse of their delusion, that makes these worldly honors
fly from us so fast; lest if they should stay long, we should discover their
Cosenage; the discoverer then would be ashamed of his dot age, and the
discovered would blush at his deceit.

Therefore Saint Paul, in these versible and transitory fashions of the World,
would have us to personate Stage Players, who when they weep, grieve not; when
they b^y, they poss^sse not; when they command, they are without authority.
Seeing the World is but a play, and a fable, he would not have us to act in
earnest. Players Act the lives of others, not their own: I wish that we could
do so too. Excellent is that advice of the divine, To live a stranger unto life.

Why should I be troubled with the affairs of others, more then with their
Agues or Fevers? he that lives without the Affections of this life, is master
of himself, and looks upon all things, as Spectators do upon Stage Plays, who
are without passion, because without Interest. The Actors care not how the
Scenes vary: they know, that when the Play is ended, the Conqueror must put
off his Crown in the same Wardrobe where the Fool puts off his Cap. Take this
wholesome Counsel of resting quiet in the degree appointed thee, not from the
mouth of Musonius, Teletes, or Epictetus, who advises thee to be a Pantomime,
or shifting Masquer in these worldly Enterludes, but from the mouth of Saint
Paul, that great Doctor of the Universe. Let every man wherein he is called,
therein abide with God.

That Supreme, Eternal mind is the master and deviser of this worldly Drama:
He brings on the persons, and assigns them their parts. Art thou called to be
a servant? be not troubled at it: Has he ordained thy life to be short? desire
not to have it lengthned: If poor, desire not to be made rich. What part soever
he has appointed for thee, be contented therewith, and Act it faithfully. It
is thy duty to represent the person thou were chosen for, and not to choose;
that is the prerogative of thy great master. If it be his will, that thou
should Act a beggar, a sick man, or an afflicted, let it be thy care to act
it well, and to meddle with no other action. The stageplayer is not commended,
because he acts the part of a Prince, but because he acts it well, and like a
Prince. It is more commendable to act a fool, a beggar, or a mourner to the
life; then to act a King, or a Philosopher foolishly. In the beginning, the
middle, and the end of thy Course, keep thou to thy part. The best way of acting
is to make thy heart consentaneous to thy tongue, thy deeds to thy words, and
thy conversation to thy doctrine. In all the tumults and combustions of this
World, keep constant to thy station; comfort the afflicted, and envy not the
wicked; despise not the one, and flatter not the other: remember thy Creator,
and forget not thy end.

Gloria tibi mitissime Jesu!
OF LIFE and DEATH.
THE People think Life to be the greatest good, and Death the greatest evil.
They are mightily deceived: And as in the least blessings, so in this, which is
the greatest, they greatly err. For Life, if thou live not well, is the
greatest evil; and Death, if thou dyest not ill, is the greatest good; and dye
ill thou can not, unless thou live ill. A life that is not good increases
evils and wickedness; and the death of the good sets an end to afflictions and
miseries. Those that are sick of the Jaundis, judge the sweetest honey to be
the most bitter: So evil men esteem Death to be evil, because of their evil
conscience; but Death is not so to any, but to those only, whose evil lives
end in the evil of endless death. This controversy I shall decide with such
reasons as must not be numbered, bu^ weighed. If we look upon Philosophy, it
takes part with Death, and is the first that marches into the field against
this popular error. It teaches us that this hideous nothing, this imaginary
fear of the multitude should be always contemned, and sometimes desired. How
many wise men has this contempt of Death made Immortal? For those, who by a
continual remembrance of death, did compose and regulate their lives, are now
by the memory of their virtuous lives vindicated from death. Socrates perfected
his wisdom by his willingness to dye; Pythagoras by his gentleness;
Anaxagoras dyed merrily; One of the Indian Gymnosophists, who feeling himself a
little sick made a great Bonefire, and in the presence of Alexander burnt
himself therein. Alexander a little before asked him, What he would have? he
answered, I shall see thee shortly. Which fell out, for he dyed at Babylon few
days after.
Calanus resolutely; he would not stay to be tamely besieged by her, but sally
edout, and took her. he surprised death and a^l of them despised her. No
definitions we can give will suffice to make Death odious, every one will make
it desirable. Whither you consider what Death is, or what are the effects, or
consequents of it; whether the evil or the good attending it; or whether Death
it self be a mere evil or mere good all make for it. For though it should be
an evil, yet the good that comes by it exceeds that evil; and being evil, it
cannot be so great an evil as all those evils it puts an end to.

What one thing has Life that is desirarable? Contentions, and obstinate,
busy miseries, whose frequency and number has made them less feared then
Death, which comes but once: Whose assiduity, or daily malice to afflict us,
has by a long custom made us not valiant, but senseless and blockish. Orpheus
defined Life to be the penalty of Souls; and Aristotle added, That it was a
punishment like to that, which tied the living to the dead, mouth to mouth, and
breast to breast. The pure and eternal Soul is tied to the putrid and wasting
carcass. If God should now suddenly create a man, giving him withal in that
very instant the perfect and free use of his mind, and should then bring before
him all Mankind (as he did all living creatures before the first man) and show
him in this mixed multitude some weeping and sighing; some without eyes to weep;
some without hands; others without legs; some sick and languishing; others
eaten up with horrid, impure ulcers; some beging; others quarrelling; some
plotting treason, and washing their hands in innocent blood; some old and
decrepi^, quivering, trembling, and leaning upon staves; some distracted, and
bound up in chains; others plundered, tortured, murdered, and martyred; their
murderers in the mean time pretending Religion, Piety, and the Glory of God:
And after all this outward Scene, should so enlighten his eyes, that he might
discover another inward one, I mean their secret thoughts, and close devices,
their tyranny, covetousness, and sacrilege varnished outwardly with godly
pretenses, dissembled purity, and the stale shift of liberty of Conscience: Is
there any doubt to be made, think you, but after such impious, and astonishing
spectacles, he would quickly repent of his existence or being, and earnestly
desire to be dissolved again, that he might rest in peace, and not be cast into
this hospital, and valley of villainies which we call the World. It is for this
cause, that wise Nature is so slow and niggardly in her dispensations of reason
and maturity unto man, lest a sudden perfection should make us loath her, and
lest the necessary evils of life understood in gross, and upon our first
entrance into life should discourage us from undergoing those miseries which by
degrees, and successive conflicts we more willingly struggle with. Abner the
Eastern King, so soon as his son was born, gave order for his confinement to a
stately and spacious Castle, where he should be delicately brought up, and
carefully kept from having any knowledge of humane calamities; he gave special
command that no distressed person should be admitted into his presence; nothing
sad, nothing lamentable, nothing unfortunate; no poor man, no old man, none
weeping nor disconsolate was to come near his Palace. Youthfulness, pleasures,
and joy were always in his presence, nothing else was to be seen, nothing else
was discoursed of in his company. A most ridiculous attempt to keep out sorrow
with bars and walls, and to shut the gates against sadness, when life is an
open door by which it enters. His very delights conveyed displeasure to him,
and grief by a distaste of long pleasure found way to invade him. So constant is
pleasure in inconstancy, that continual mirth turns it into sadness. Certainly
though Abner by this device might keep all sorrows from the presence of his
son, he could not keep them from his sense: He could keep out, and restrain
external evils, but could not restrain his inherent affections. His son
longed; this made him sad in the very midst of his joys. And what think thou
did he long for? Truly, not to be so cumberd with delights. The grief of
pleasures made him request his father to loose the bonds of his miserable
felicity. This suit of the Son crossed the intentions of the Father, who was
forced to give over his device to keep him from sadness, lest by continuing
it, he should make him sad. He gave him his liberty, but charged his
attendants, to remove out of his way all objects of sorrow: The blind, the
maimed, the deformed, and the old must not come near him. But what diligence is
sufficient to conceal the miseries of Mortality? they are so numerous, that
they may as soon be taken out of the world, as hidden from those that are in
the world. Royal power ^^^vailed less here then humane infirmity; for this
last took place in spite of the first. The Prince in his Recreations meets
with an old man, blind, and leprous; the sight astonisheth him; he startles,
trembles, and faints, like those that swound at the apparition of a Spirit;
enquires of his followers what that thing might be? And being inwardly
persuaded that it was some fruit of humane life, he became presently wise,
disliked pleasures, condenmed mirth, and despised life. And that his life might
have the least share here, where Fortune has the greatest, he rejected the
hopes and blandishments of life, yea that which is to many the price of two
lives, his Kingdom, and royal Dignity: He labored with all diligence to live
so in the world as if he had been dead, that by avoiding sin, the cause of
sorrow, he might be, though not safe, at least secure. If this single accident
made him so much offended with life, what (think you) would he have done, had
his liberty been universal, and unbounded? What if he had seen the inside of
those stately Tombs we build for the worms to eat us in, where they feed upon
such fat oppressors as have been fed here with the tears and pillage of the
oppressed? What if he had narrowly searched every corner of the world, and seen
those necessary uncleanness in which the birth of man is celebrated, in which
this misery is inaugurated, by the pains of the Mother, and the cries of the
Infant? What if he had entered into their bedchambers and bosoms, where some
sit weeping, others wishing; some surfeited and sick with fruition? where some
mourn for their wives, others for their children; some pine and starve with
want, others are full and vomit; some are troubled with lack of necessaries,
and others are as much vexed with abundance and superfluity? What if after all
this search, and wide disquisition he could not have found one house without
some misfortune, and none without tears? What if he had been admitted into the
breasts of all those, whom either domestic, hidden griefs, lingering diseases,
worldly cares, or an insatiable covetousness is ever tormenting? Perhaps they
sight of so many evils had driven him to a refusal of life, in which we do so
dye with miseries, and by which miseries do so live in us; at least he had
earnestly wished and groaned for some means of redemption from so miserable a
bondage. If any had brought him the joyful news of liberty, and affirmed that
some were already made free, he had certainly envyed them very much, and would
have been impatient to know the means. But when it had been told him that the
device and release was death, I do not only think, but I verily believe that
he had both approved of it, and would have sought for it more then for hidden
treasure. He had judged it not only desirable and convenient, but necessary,
and the greatest felicity, and favor that the living could expect.

If some solitary travellour, shut up in a wilderness, and surrounded with wild
beasts, should on the one side see a Tiger making toward him, on the other a
Lion, and from some third place a scaly, winding Serpent, or a Basilisk, which
kills with ^is very looks, Whose hissings fright all Natures monstrous Ills,
His eye darts death, more swift then poison kills.
All Monsters by instinct to him give place,
They fly for life, for death lives in his face;
And he alone by Natures hid commands
Reigns Paramont, and Prince of all the sands.


If these, with a thousand more, as Bears, Leopards, Wolves, Dragons, Adders,
and Vipers were gathered together about him, and ready to seize upon him, what
would not he give to be freed from the violence and rage of such destroyers?
What greater felicity could he desire, then to be redeemed from such an horrid
and fatal distress^? And is it a lesser blessing to be delivered from greater
evils? We are surrounded with calamities, torn by inordinate wishes, hated by
the world, persecuted, pressed, and trodden upon by our enemies, disquieted with
threatenings, which also torture and dishearten some; for in pusillanimous
dispositions fear makes words to be actions, and threats to be torments. Death
is a divine remedy which cures all these evil Death alone is the cause that
temporal miseries are not eternal. And I know not how that came to be feared,
which brings with it as many helps, as the world brings damages. Danger it self
is a sufficient motive to make us in love with security. Death only secures us
from troubles: Death heals, and glorifies all those wounds which are received
in a good cause. When Socrates had drank off his potion of hemlock, he
commanded that sacrifices should be offered to Aesculapius, as the Genius of
Medicine. He knew that Death would cure him. It was the Antidote against that
poisonous Recipe of the Athenian Parliament. Tyranny travels not beyond Death,
which is the Sanctuary of the good, and the Lenitive of all their sorrows.

Most ridiculous were the tears of Xerxes, and worthily checked by his Captain
Artabazus; when seated on the top of an hill, and viewing his great Army
(wherein were so many hands as would have served to overturn the world, to
level mountains, and drain the seas, yea to violate Nature, and disturb Heaven
with their noise, and the smoke of their Camp) he fell to a childish whining,
to consider in what a short portion of time all that haughty multitude, which
now trampled upon the face of the earth, would be laid quietly under it. He
wept to think, that all those men (whose lives notwithstanding he hastened to
sacrifice to his mad ambition) should dye within the compass of an hundred
years. The secular death, or common way of mortality, seemed very swift unto
him, but the way of war and slaughter he minded not. It had been more rational
in him to weep, because death was so slow and lazy, as to suffer so many
impious, inhumane soldiers to live an hundred years, and disturb the peace and
civil societies of Mankind. If as he saw his Army from that hill, he had also
seen the calamities and mischief they did, with the tears and sorrows of those
that suffered by them, he had dried his eyes, and would not have mourned,
though he had seen death seizing upon all those salvages, and easing the world
of so vast an affliction. He would not have feared that, which takes away the
cause of fear: That is not evil, which removes such violent and enormous
evils. If I might ask those that have made experiment of life and death,
whither they would choose (if it were granted them) either to live again, or to
continue in their state of dissolution, I am sure none would choose life but the
wicked, and those that are unworthy of it; for no pious liver did ever repent
of death, and none ever will. The Just desire not this life of the unjust,
which (were it offered them,) they would fear it more, (now being at rest,)
then ever they feared death, when they lived. The story runs that Stanislaus
the Polonian, a man of mavelous holiness and constancy; had the opportunity
to put this question, and the respondent told him, that he had rather suffer
the pains of dissolution twice over again, then live once: He feared one life,
but did not fear to die thrice.

Having this Solution from the experienced, it is needless, and fruitless to
question on the living. If Souls were Praeexistent, as one Origin dreamt, as
Cebes, Plato, Hermes, and other Philosophers, the great Fathers of Heretics,
have affirmed; We might have reason to conclude, that they would obstinately
refuse to be imprisoned in the wombs of women, and wallow in Seminal humors.
What if it were told them, that they must dwell nine months in a thick
darkness, and more then nine years (perhaps all the years of their sojourning)
in hallucinations, and the darkness of ignorance? what if the pains, the
exigencies, the hunger and thirst they must endure, before they can be
acquainted with the miseries of life, were laid before them? The Infant while
he is yet in the womb, is taught necessity. Quest for food makes him violate
that living Prison, and force his way into the World. And now comes he forth,
(according to the Sentiment of Hippocrates,) to seek for Victuals; the
provision which proceeded from his Mother, being grown too little for him. But
he comes from one prison into another, and breaks through the first to enlarge
his own, which he carries with him: But if the Souls ^hus incarcerated (like
Prisoners through a grate) might behold the various plagues and diseases of
those that are at liberty, as Palsies Passions of the heart, Convulsions,
Stranguries, the Stone, the Gout, the Wolf, the Phagedaena, and an hundred
other horrid incurable Evils, such as Pherecides, Antiochus, and Herod were
tormented with, or that fearful sickness of Leuthare, which was so raging and
furious, that she did eat her own flesh, and drink her blood in the extremity
of the pain: Or if they might see those Evils, which man himself has sought
and found out for himself; as emulations, wars, bloodshed, confusion, and
mutual destruction; Is there any doubt to be made, think you, but they would
wish themselves freed from such a miserable estate; or that their intellectual
light were were quite extinguished, that they might not behold such horrid and
manifold calamities. Plato imputed the suspension of Reason in Infants, and the
hallucinations of Childhood to the terror and astonishment of the Souls,
which he supposed them to be possessed with, because of their sudden
translation from the Empyreal light, into the dark and gross prisons of
flesh, and this inferior World; as if such a strange and unexpected change
(like a great and violent fall,) had quite doated them, and cast asleep their
intellectual faculties. Proclus assisted this conjecture of Plato, with
another argument drawn from the mutability, and the multitude of Worldly
Events, which in the uncertain state of this life, the Souls were made
subject unto. Add to this, that the merriest portion of life, wihch is youth,
is in both sexes bedewed with tears, and the flowers of it are sullied, and
fade away with much weeping, and frequent sadne^se. Children also want not
their sorrows: The Rod blasteth all their innocent joys, and the sight of the
Schoolmaster turns their mirth into mourning. Nay that last Act of life,
which is the most desirable to the Soul, I mean old Age, is the most miserable.
The plenteous Evils of frail life fill the old:
Their wasted Limbs the loose skin in dry folds
Does hang about; their joints are numm'd and through
Their veins not blood, but rheumes and waters flow.
Their trembling bodies with a staff they stay,
Nor do they breath, but sadly sigh all day:
Thoughts tire their hearts, to them their very mind
Is a disease; their Eyes no sleep can find.


Add to these usual infirmities, the confluence of adventious maladies: For
all the former distempers and corruptions of life gather themselves together,
and make head in old age; when the inward strength, and expulsive power of
Nature is decayed, when we are almost dead, then do they revive and rage most
of all. Rivers are no where more full, nor more foul then toward the
Channell-end. But this general decay I acknowledge to be a great benefit,
because it drives away all voluptuous and unseemly delights from the aged, that
their Souls may be lively and in health, when the hour of dissolution comes.
And indeed it is necessary, that griefs and unpleasantnesse should lay hold
upon age, because men (who are always unwilling to think of dying,) may be
thereby weaned from the delights of life, and learn to dye before the day of
death. Seeing then, that the temporal life is in all its portions so full of
misery, it is not irrational to conclude, that Souls (if they were
praeexistent,) would be very unwilling to submit to this sad Bondage of flesh
and blood. Nor do I wonder that Isis, in his sacred Book, writes, that the
Souls, when they were commanded to enter into the bodies, were astonished, and
suffered a kind of Deliquium, or trance; and that they did hiss and murmr,
like to the suspirations of wind. Camephes sets down their complaints: (...),
etc. Miserable wretches! in what have we so foulely trespassed, what offense so
heinous and worthy of so horrible a punishment have we committed, as to be shut
up and imprisoned for it, in these moist and cold carcasses? Our Eyes from
henceforth shall not behold the Divine spirits, for we shall only peep
through two small Spheres made of gross and corrupt humors. When we look
toward Heaven, we shall have only the liberty to groan for the presence of
our Creator, but see him we may not; for we shall see then by a Secondary
light, which is the light of the lower World, and not be permitted to use our
own discerning light, etc. We shall hear our Kindred rejoicing in the air, and
mourn that we are not partakers of their liberty, etc. But thou great Father
and maker of Spirits, who do dispose of all thy works as it pleases thee,
appoint we beseech thee some term to our sad bondage, and let this punishment
pass quickly over us, that we may be restored again to our celestial liberty,
to behold (without obstruction) the perfect beauty of all thy works, etc. They
comforted themselves with the thought of the bodies dissolution, and petitioned
before their captivity, that their enlargement might be hastened: when they were
excluded from the heavenly life, there was no greater blessing then the death
of the body, which sets an end to the earthly. He that loves death, hates a
transitory corrupt condition, and he that hates his own life here, shall keep
it unto life erernall.

I do verily believe, that to him that thoroughly considers it, no part of life
can be desirable. It is altogether so full of sorrows; It is a piece weaved
of calamities and troubles, yea, life it self is its own vexation. As those
that travel in rough, uneven and mountainous roades are always gasping and
weary, which makes them sit down often, to recover their spent breath, and
refresh themselves, that having reached the brow and crown of the hill, they
may walk onwards with more delight, and be at leisure to feed their Eyes with
the beauteous prospect, and freshness of those green and flowery plains which
lie extended before them: So this troublesome and tumultuous life has need of
death, for its ease and repast, as a state in which it does repair and
strengthen it self against the fair Journey and progress of eternity. Frail
and weary life cannot last, and hold out until the Indiction of immortality;
So long a journey cannot be performed without subsiding; A resting place must
be had: Death is the Inn where we take up, that we may with more
chearfullnesse set forwards, and be enabled to overtake, and to keep company
with eternity. Nay, so frail is life, that it cannot expect, or stay for the
day of death without some prevening recreations: It travells by Stages, and
Periodical Courses, where it breathes, and gathers strength against the next
motion. As tired travellours make frequent Pauses in the very Road, and cannot
stay for the refreshment of lodging; So life, by reason of the importunity, and
the multitude of humane troubles, cannot endure or hold out till it reaches
the Inn, which is death; but is driven to rest in the shade upon the way-side;
for sleep (the shadow of death) is nothing else but a reparation of weary and
fainting life. So much more excellent then life is death, that life is driven
to be sustained by so many deaths, that is to say, the mortal life is
necessarily preserved by sleep, which is the usher and Masquerade of death.
Reeds, because they are very weak and brittle, are strengthened with distinct
knots or joints, which makes their length firm, and keeps them from cleaving:
So life, if it were not refreshed and mantained still by successive, set
allevations of certain prolusions of death, would fall asunder and vanish upon
its first appearance.

Hitherto we have discoursed of life, let us now consider death, and compare it
with life. If death in its shadow and projection be the recreation of life, how
delightful will it be at home, or in it self! Weariness is a preparative
which makes rest pleasant: That Recipe which succeedes bitterness, must needs
be sweet. Charidemus used to say, That through all temporal things there was a
chain drawn, whereof one link was pain, and the other pleasure: That these
succeeded one another, and so (said he) after great sorrows there come greater
joys. What greater sorrows can there be, then the sorrows of life? There is
therefore no greater pleasure then the pleasure of death, which succeed those
great sorrows. Phalaris said, That men held life to be pleasant, because they
suspected death to be grievous and irksome. He speaks after the sense of the
people, and abuses life, not esteeming it to be good, but because he thinks
death to be Evil. I shall cross his saying, and infer that death should be
esteemed pleasant, because we are sure that life is painful: But there is an
appearance of something like error, because we see many here, that pass
through their whole lives without any troubles or discontents. That felicity is
rare and adulterate, and happens most commonly to those that desire it not:
look not upon those few which escape in this storm, but upon those which are
drowned: these last are innumerable, thought it is thought otherwise, because
they are sunk into the bottom, and cannot be seen.

Admit not, I beseech thee, for a testimony against^ Death, those ejulations
and tears which darken Funerals, and make foul weather in the fairest faces.
Opinion makes the people compassionate, and they bewail not the party that is
dead, but their own frailty. Call not for evidence to the tears of strangers,
because thou know not whence they flow; but call for it to thine own, for
none of us is happy or miserable but in his own sense which makes us any thing.
What reason have thou to think life better then death, because others mourn
when thou dyest, who when thou were born, did weep thy self? It is madness
to judge our selves miserable, because others think so. The solemnities of
death are contrary to the ceremonies of life. At the birth of man others laugh,
but he himself weeps. At his death others weep, but surely he rejoices,
unless his ill life has made his death deadly. Nor must thou think that his
joy is either little or none at al, because it is not manifested unto thee:
Thou may lie watching by the side of one that dreams of Heaven, and is
conversing with Angels, but unless he tells it thee when he is awaked, thou
can discover no such thing while he sleeps. The Infant that is born weeping,
learns to laugh in his sleep, as Odo and Augustine have both observed: So, he
that bewailed his birth with tears, welcomes the shadow of his death with
smiles: He presaged miseries to follow his nativity, and beatitude his
dissolution. Weeping is natural; tears know their way without a g^ide: Mirth is
rude, and comes on slowly, and very late, nor comes it then without a supporter
and a leader: It must be taught, and acquired. Weeping comes with the Infant
into the world; Laughing is afterward taught him; the Nurse must both teach,
and invite him to it. When he sleeps, then he sips and tastes joy; when he
dies, then he sucks and drinks it. Mourning and grief are natural, they are
born with us; Mirth is slow-paced, and negligent of us: The sense of rejoicing
(if we believe Avicenna) comes not to the most forward child till after the
fortieth day. Men therefore weep at thy death, because it is an experiment they
have not tried; and they laugh at thy birth, because the miseries of thy life
must not be born by them. Thou only art the infallible diviner of thy own
frail condition, who refusest it with tears, which are the most proper
expressions of unwilling, and constrained nature.

But as the ceremonies of Life and Death are contrary, so he that is born, and
he that dies, have different events. Death to some seems to destroy all, but
she restores all: By discomposing things she puts them in their order: For he
that inverts things that were before inverted, does but reduce them to their
right Positure. The Funeral rite of the T^bitenses (who are certain
East-Indians) is to turn the inside of their garments outward; they manifest
that part which before was hidden, and conceal that part which before was
manifest; by which they seem, in my opinion, to point at the liberty of the
soul in the state of death, and the captivity of the body, whose redemption
must be expected in the end of the world. This inversion by death is
reparation, and a preparative for that order wherein all things shall be made
new. Most true is that saying of the Royal Preacher, (...). A good name is
above precious ointment, and the day of death is better then the day of ones
birth. But thou will ask, To whom is the day of death better than the day of
his nativity? It is in the first place to him that dies; True (thou will say)
if he be a just and holy man; Yea (say I) though he be wicked. Who doubts that
there can happen in all their lives a better day to the just and honest, then
the day of death, which frees them both from seeing, and from feeling the
miseries which are in this world? As for the unjust, it is most certain, that
no day can be more beneficial to them, then that which sets an end to their
impieties, tyranny, perjury, and sacrilege. To deny a sword to one that would
murder himself, is benevolence; to deny money to a Gamester that would
presently cast it away, is courtesy; and to deny life to those that would use
it to their own damnation, is Mercy, and not Judgment. But to whom besides
these is the day of death better then the day of life? Certainly to God
Almighty; because in that day when the wicked dye, his Justice on them, and his
Mercy toward his own are conspicuous to all, and acknowledged by all. And to
whom else? Not to speak of the rich and amb^tious, It is good to all men, to
the whole Creation, and to Nature it self: For in that day the fair order and
prerogative of Nature is vindicated from the rage and rape of lustful,
intemperate persons: It becomes constant, consonant, and inviolable, by putting
off those gross vestiments which make her productions subject to the assaults and
violence of man, who is the most perverse and shameless defacer of Gods Image
in himself, and the most audacious and abominable contemner of his Ordinances
in his works, by using them to a contrary end, and quite different from that
which their wise Creator made them for.

But let us not consider the goodness of death by those evils only which it
freeth us from, but by the blessings also which it brings along with it. Their
souls are by some men less valued then Fortune and temporal power; Some cast
away their lives to win a Crown, yea the Crown, and the Kingdom of
another. They plot to forfeit a Crown of Eternal glory, by usurping a
transitory one: They murder their own souls by shedding the blood of some
innocent persons, permitted to be overcome by men, that they might have power
with God, and prevail. Shall the short sove^aignty and sway of some small
corners and spots of earth be compared to the everlasting triumphs in the
Kingdom of Heaven? The death of the sufferer is in this case the most gainful;
the more he loses by it upon earth, his gain is by so much the greater in
heaven. The shorter our stay is here, our time above (if reckoned from the day
of our death) is the longer, but has no end at all; and the more our
sufferings are, the greater shall our glory be. Hegesias the Cyrenian, when he
praised death, promised not these blessings of Immortality, but only an end of
temporal miseries; and yet he did so far prevail with his Auditors, that they
preferred death to life; they contemned the one, and so lusted after the other,
that they would not patiently expect it, but did impatiently long for it; they
fell upon their own swords, and forced death to come on, by turning life out of
doors before her lease was out; and had not Ptolomie by a special Edict
silenced his Doctrine, he had robbed him of more subjects then ever War or the
Plague could have taken from him. Before the blessed Jesus had made his
entrance through the veil, and opened the way to heaven, the reward of
righteousness and sanctity was long life, the peculiar blessing of the
Pa^riarchs: It was a favor then not to appear before perfect purity, a Judge
of infinite, and all-seeing brightness, without an Advocate or friend to speak
for us, in the strength and heat of irregular youthfulness, when not so much
as time had subdued or reformed the affections; but now because Christ is gone
thither before, and has provided a place for us, the greatest blessing, and
highest reward of holiness is short life, and an unseasonable, or a violent
death: For those harsh Epithets (which are but the inventions of fearful, and
sinful livers) are swallowed up of immort^lity, and an unspeakable heavenly
happiness which crowns and overflowes all those that dye in Christ. We
consider not those blessings which death leads us to, and therefore it is, that
we so frequently approve of our most frivolous, wordly wishes, and sit weeping
under the burdens of life, because we have not more laid upon us. A certain
groundless suspicion, that death is evil, will not suffer us to believe it to
be good, though the troubles of life make us complement, and wish for it every
day. This foolish fear and inconstancy of man, Locmannus (one of the most
ancient Sages of Persia, and admitted also into the Society of the Arabian
Magi,) has pleasantly demonstrated in the person of an Old man, loaded ^ith a
great burden of Wood; which having quite tired him, he threw down, and called
for death to come and ease him: He had no sooner called, but death (which
seldom comes so quickly to those that call for it in earnest,) presently
appeared, and demands the reason, why he called? I did call thee (said he) to
help me to lift this burden often wood upon my back, which just now fell off. So
much are we in love with miseries, that we fear to exchange them with true
happiness: we do so doat upon them, that we long to resume them again, after
we have once shaked them off; being either faithless and wavering, or else
forgetful of those future joys, which cannot be had without the funeral and
the death of our present sorrows.

What man distressed with hunger, if he sat upon some Barren and Rockie bank,
bounded with a deep River, where nothing could be expected but Famine, or the
Fury of wild beasts; and saw beyond that stream a most secure and pleasant
Paradise, stored with all kinds of bearing Trees; whose yielding boughs were
adorned and plenteously furnished with most fair and delicate fruits; If it
were told him that a little below, there was a boat, or a bridge to pass
over, would refuse that secure conveyance, or be affeard to commit himself to
the calm and perspicuous streams, choosing rather to starve upon the brink,
then to pass over, and be relieved? O foolish men! For Gold, which is dug
out of the Suburbs of Hell, we trust our selves to the raging and unstable
Seas, guarded with a few planks, and a little pitch; where only a Tree (as
Aratus faith) is the partition betwixt death and us: And after many rough
disputes with violent perils, and the fight ^f so many more; we perish in the
unhappy acquisition of false happiness; the Sea either resisting, or else
punishing our covetousness. But to pass into our Heavenly Country, into the
bosom and embraces of Divinity, into a Realm where Fortune reigns not, we
dare not so much as think of it. Who after long banishment, and a tedious
pilgrimage, being now come near to his native Country, and the house of his
Father, where his Parents, his brethren, and friends expect him with longing,
would then turn back, and choose to wander again, when he might have joy, when
he might have rest? God the Father expects us, the blessed Jesus expects us,
the mild and mourning Dove does long and groan for us: The holy Virgin Mother,
the Angels our friends, and the Saints our kindred, are all ready to receive
us. It is through death that we must pass unto them: Why grieve we then, yea,
why rejoice we not to have this passage opened?

But let us grant that death were not inevitable, yea, that it were in the
power of man, and that every one had a particular prerogative given him over
destiny; So that this greatest Necessity were the greatest freedom, yea, that
man could not dye, though he desired death: Yet in this very state, would he
be troubled with Fortune and Hope. He would be a fool that would not venture to
dye, to enjoy true felicity: That would choose rather to live always in the
changeable state of most unchangeable and lasting miseries, then to put an end
to them all by dying once. It is madness to fear death, which (if it reigned
not upon the Earth) we would both desire and pray for. It was wisely adjudged
by Zaleucus, that death ought to be publicly proclaimed, though men had been
immortal. Had death been arbitrary, and at every man's pleasure, I believe we
had esteemed it as desirable as any other joy; now because it is Imperial, and
above us, let it not seem too much, if we grant it to be tolerable. It was
absurdly said by on^, that death was a necessary Evil, and ought therefore to
be patiently born. His Inference was good, though from a bad Principle: Death
is rather a necessary good: And if necessity makes Evils to be tolerable, there
is more reason, it should make good so. Death because it is good, should be
made much of; and we should rejoice that it is necessary, because that makes
it certain. How great a good is that, by which it is necessary that we be not
miserable! Which frees the captive without ransom, dismisseth the oppressed
without the consent of the oppressor, brings home the banished in spite of the
banisher, and heal^s the sick without the pain of Physic: Which mends all
that Fortune marred; which is most just; which repaires and makes even all the
disorders and inequalities made by time and chance; which is the blessed
necessity that takes away necessary Evils? He had erred less^, if he had
mentioned a necessity of bearing life patiently, whose more proper definition
that sorry proverb is; for it casts us into necessary Evils against our will,
and is the cause that we wilfully meddle with Evils that are unnecessary. It
is a discreet method of nature, that infuseth the Souls into the body in such
a state that is not sensible of their captivity, lest they should murmur at the
decrees of the great Archiplast. What wise man that were near the term of his
appointed time, if he were offered to have life renewed, would consent to be
born again, to be shut up in flesh, and fed for nine months with
excrementitious obscenities, to bear all the ignominies of Nature, all the
abuses of Fortune, to resume the ignorance of Infancy, the fears of
Childhood, the dangers of youth, the cares of manhood, and the miseries of old
age? I am of ^eliefe that no man did ever live so happily, as to be pleased
with a repetition of past life. These Evils which with our own consent we
would not have reiterated, we are driven into without our consent: They are
necessarily inferred, that they may be willingly borne, to show the necessity
of Patience. We are born on condition, that we must dye. Death is the price
or reward of life: It is the Statute Law of mankind, and that ought to be born
as a public good, which (were it not already enacted) would be the spontaneous
petition of all men. Certainly if life were without the Jubilee of death, it
were just to refuse it, as a servitude which has no year of release.

Let us now clearly prove, that death is not Evil, out of her assimilation and
conformity to those things, which are most excellently good. None lead a
better life, then those that live so, as if they were dead, Romans C^ap. 6. ver.
7. For he that is dead, is freed from Sin. Therefore that which is the
exemplar of goodness, cannot be Evil: The only true praise of the living, is
to assimilate death: He is the most commendable liver, whose life is dead to
the World, and he is the most honest that lives the least to it; whose Soul
listens not to the body, but is at a constant distance from it, as if they were
dissolved; or though it sojournes in it, yet is not defiled by it, but is
separated from sensuality, and united to Divinity. What is the reason (think
thou,) that the Divine Secrets are revealed to men most commonly in their
sleep; because that similitude of death is most pleasing to God. Life is a wild
and various madness, disturbed with passions, and distracted with objects;
Sleep (like death) settles them all; it is the minds Sabbath, in which the
Spirit, freed from the Senses, is well disposed and fitted for Divine
intimations. The Soul is then alive to it self, while the body reigns not, and
the affections are ecclipsed in that short Interlunium of the temporal life.

Philosophy, or humane Knowledge is nothing else but a Contemplation of death;
not to astonish or discourage men, but first to inform, and then to reform
them: for the fruit of Philosophy is Virtue, and Virtue is nothing else but an
imitation of death, or the Art of dying well, by beginning to dye while we are
alive. Virtue is a certain Primrose, a prolusion or Assay of dying. Therefore
that by which man becomes immortal and eternal is the preface, and the
Inch^ation of death. This is the main drift of Philosophy, to make life
comfortable by conforming it unto death, and to make death immortality by
regulating life. Death is intolerable to him only that has not mortified his
desires, while he yet lives; but expects to swallow up death, and all the
powers of it at once; that is to say, in the hour of death. We cut our meat,
and feed on it by bits, lest we should be choked by swallowing it whole; so
death, if it be assayed and practiced by degrees, will be both pleasant in the
taste, and wholesome in the digestion; if we mortify one affection to day, and
another to morrow. He that cannot carry a great burden at once, may carry it
all by portions. Philosophy acts the part of death upon the Stage of life: it
kills sensuality, and makes death most easy to be born by teaching us to dye
daily. What can be more grievous then death unto him, who together with his
own, feels the pain of a thousand other dying cupidities? We fail not to
bewail the loss of one thing, whither honor, pleasure, or a friend: How much
more when we loose all at a blow, and loose eternal life in one short minute?
The Soul of the wise man frees her self from the body in an acceptable time,
she casts off the delectations of the flesh, and the cares of this World while
it is daylight, that she may enjoy her self, and be acquainted with God
before the night comes. She finds by experience, that her forces are more
vigorous, and her light more discerning, when she is not sullied with Earthly
negotiations, and the gross^ affections of the body; she finds that
covetousness, love and fear permit her not to see the truth, and that the
affairs of the body are the Remora's of the Spirit: and therefore she
concludes, that he must neglect the cries of the flesh, and be attentive only
to the voice of God; and upon these considerations, she shakes off that
Bondage; she deserts the familiarity and consultations of blood, that she may
advise with, and discern the most clear light of truth; she casts off
pleasures, by which even Spirits are made subject to sense and pollution. The
truth is most pure, and will not be manifested, but to the pure and the
undefiled: Therefore all the scope and the end of Virtue is, to separate the
Soul from the body, and to come as near death as possibly may be, while we are
yet alive. This is the cause that wise men do so much love and long for death,
at least they fear it not. How can he fear death, who by dying passes into
the life of the blessed? Who has already delivered himself from more fears
and inconveniences then death can free him from? Yea from those dangers which
make death fearful? Who before his dying day, has disarmed and overcome
death? Shall he that all his lifetime desired to be separated from the body,
repine at the performance and fullfilling of it? It were most ridiculous, if
hasting toward home, thou would refuse the help of another to convey thee
thither with more speed, and be angry at thy arrival in that Port, whither thou
did bend thy course since the first day thou did set forth. There is no man
that seeking for a friend, will not rejoice when he has found him. No man will
be angry if another perfects what he did begin, but was not able to finish.
Nature by death perfects that which Virtue had begun in life, and the endeavor
dies not, but is continued, and thrives by a necessary transplantation. While
he yet lived, he denied himself the use of the body, because it hindr^d the
course of the Soul; and the body dying, he does but persist in the same just
denial. It is a greater pleasure to want, then not to use what we do not
want.

This Correlation of Death and Virtue I shall exhibit, or lay out to your
view, by a discussion of those honors which each of them procures. As Virtue
by the Consideration of death, orders and preserves her Majesty; so by
imitating death, she obtaines the reverence and admiration of all: What more
reverend thing can we labor for, then that, which by our reverence of it,
makes the worst livers to be reputed not bad? As those who are Evil, are loath
to believe themselves to be such, because of an innate reverence due from every
man to Virtue, which makes them love the repute of Excellency, though not
inherent, and rejoice to be accounted good of themselves, or in their own
esteem, though they be evil, taking pleasure in that self-deception: So those
who have been vicious in their lives (out of the reverence we owe to death,)
we dare not speak evil of when they are once dead; Nay, it is not civil, nor
pious, to mention the dead without commendation, either by praise, or else by
prayer, and our Christian well wishes, as if they had been most deserving in
their lives. So powerful is the Majesty of death, that it makes the most
contemptible, venerable. Those we most envy while they live, we speak well of
when they are dead. Excellent is that observation of Mimnermus, Against the
Virtuous man we all make head,
And hate him while he lives, but praise him dead.


Envy pursues us not beyond the grave, and our honor is not free and secure
til we are laid in it. That humble and quiet dust stops the lying and malicious
mouth. Socrates foresaw that his draught of hemlock would (after his death)
make his very enemies his worshippers: He saw his Statues erected by the same
decree that did cast him down: And what was the motive (think thou) that
made his enemies worship him dead, whom they persecuted living? There is
amongst the people a secret tradition that whispers to them, that those who are
freed from the miseries of this life, live happily in another world. Now
happiness even in their opinion is worthy of honor; therefore the honor or
veneration which death exacts, is a certain tribute, or a debt rather that is
due to happiness; and if for this thou will advise with thy Aristotle, he will
not deny it. The Lacedaemonians bestowed the Olympic palms and honors (which
whosoever won in his life time, he was accounted most happy) upon all that
dyed, without exception, or extenuation; adorning the statutes of some, and the
tombs of all with the green and flourishing Laurel, esteeming every one of the
dead as happy as the most fortunate Victor that lived. The ancient Romans held
the greatest honor of the living to consist in the renown of their dead
Ancestors: They judged him to be highly honored, that was enjoined by any
dying persons to perform some extraordinary service for them, as an Embassy,
or some other weighty negotiation: And One of the Counselors of Alexand the
great.
Callistratus in his first book of Questions affirms, That Ambassadors so
employed are the most honorable; because that the suffrages and election of
dying men is most venerable, as being then upon the borders of immortality, and
discerning more then those who are yet in the midst of life, and more in the
clouds of thick-sighted humanity. That honor is the greatest which is done us
by the honorable. Nor is this glory of death a Relative of the Soul only;
Look well upon the body, that provision of the worms, a frail and perishing
objects, but full of Majesty. We are nothing so moved, nor do we so gravely
compose our selves at the presence of a King, as at the sight of a dead body.
With how much awfulnesse does it lie along! with what a secret mysterious
command does it check all about it! It is a silent, abstruse Philosopher, and
makes others so too: Nor is it only venerable, but sacred, and the Depositum,
and Index of an almighty Restauratour. The honor of Sepulture is a part of
Religion.

Now, if it be argued that goodness consists only in utility, or benefits, it
follows that nothing is good, but that which profits: Death then is the best,
and the greatest subordinate good of all; for the death of others benefits
those that see it, and their own death is most profitable to those that mind
it. The Lamae (who are the Priests of the Tehitenses) are in this point the
most excellent Philosophers in the world: When they prepare to celebrate
prayers, The pipes of death used by the Lamae.
they summon the people together with the hollow, whispering sounds of certain
Pipes made of the bones of dead men; they have also Rosaries, or Beads made of
them, which they carry always about them, and they drink constantly out of a
Skull: Being asked the reason of this Ceremony by Antonie Andrada, who first
found them out; one that was the chiefest amongst them, told him, that they did
it, Ad Fatorum memoriam. They did therefore pipe with the bones of dead men,
that those sad whispers might warn the people of the swift and invisible
approach of death, whose Music they termed it, and affirmed it to be the most
effectual of any; That the Beads they wore did put them in mind of the frail
estate of their bodies, and did in prayer-time regulate and humble their
thoughts; That a constant commemoration of death was as beneficial to the Soul
as devotion, and therefore they carried them always about them as the powefull
Momento's of their approaching departure out of the Land of the living. To this
he added, that their drinking in a skull did mortify their affections,
repress pleasures, and imbitter their taste, lest they should relish too much
the delights of life; Lastly, he added that this constant representation of
death, was an Antidote against all the sinful Excesses and deviations of man.
With the same Medicine they secured themselves from other iniquities: When they
were to swear concerning any thing, they laid their hands upon certain Images
set with the bones of dead men, by which ceremony they were put in mind of the
last Judgment, and the Account which the dead and the Quick must give in that
great, that impartial and censorious day. Certainly this was no barbarous, but
a very humane and elegant Philosophy, which taught men to season, and redeem
all the days of their lives, with the memory of the one day of their death.
Admirable was the memory of Mithridates, who was master of two and twenty
Languages, and could readily discourse in every one of them; and no less happy
was that of Cyrus, Themist^cles and Seneca; but a constant memory of man's
miseries, and his death exceeds them all. As the roots of the tree in the I Will
of Malega, upon that side which looks toward the East, are an Antidote or
preservative, but those which spread Westward are poisonous and deadly: So the
Cogitations of a Christian, which are the Roots by which he sticks to Heaven
(for every Christian is a Tr^e reversed,) when they look toward the West, or
setting point of life, are healing and salutiferous; but those which reflect
still upon temporal things, and his abode in this World are destructive and
deadly. Nature does every minute commend unto us this memorial of death.
Hermes in his sacred book contends, that respiration was given to man, as a
sign of that last efflation, in which the Soul parts from the body. We should
therefore as often as we breath, remember death, when we shall breath our
last, when the Spirit shall return unto him that gave it. Our whole life is
nothing else but a repeated resemblance of our last expiration; by the emission
of our breath we do retain it, and (as I may say) spin it out. God gave it
not continual and even, like fluent streams, or the calm and unwearied
Emanations of light, but refracted and shifting, to show us that we are not
permanent but transitory, and that the Spirit of life is but a Celestial Gale
lent us for a time, that by using it well, we may secure it Eternally. Another
Hermetist advises us, Adorare relliquias ventorum, to make much of, and to
honor our Souls, which are the breathings, and last dispensations of the
still fruitful, and liberal creator: This we can never do but by a frequent
study of our dissolution, and the frailty of the body. Of such an effectual
goodness is death, that it makes men good before it comes, and makes sure of
Eternity by a virtuous disposing of time. Think not that evil, which sends
from so far the beams of its goodness. There is no good liver but is a debtor
to death, by whose lendings, and premunitions we are furnished and fitted for
another world.

The certainty of it, and the incertainty of the time and manner, (which is the
only circumstance that seems to offend us,) if it were seriously considered,
deserves to be the most pleasing and acceptable; for amongst all the wondrous
Ordinances of Divine providence, there is none more Excellent for the
Government of man then death, being so wisely disposed of, that in the height
of incertainty it comprehends and manifests an infallible certainty. God would
have us to be always good, to keep in his likeness and Image: Therefore it is
his will, that we should be always uncertain of our most certain death. Such
is his care of us, lest the knowledge of a long life, and a late death should
encourage us to multiply our transgressions, as the notice of a swift
dissolution might dishearten and astonish us. But being left now in a
possibility of either, we are taught to live soberly, and to expect the time of
our change in all holiness and watchfullnesse. The possibility of dying
shortly, does lessen the cares of life, and makes the difficulties of Virtue
easy. Bondage and Slavery (if it be but short,) is to those that suffer it the
lighter by so much: And a large allowance of time makes us slow to Virtue, but
a short portion quickens us, and the incertainty of that very shortness makes
us certain to be good. For who would weep, and vex himself for worldly
provisions, if he certainly knew that he should live but one month? and how
dares he laugh, or be negligent of his Salvation, that knows not whither he
shall live to see one day more, yea, one hour? The incertainty of death makes
us suspect life, and that suspicion keeps us from sinning. The world was never
fouler, nor more filled with abominations, then when life was longest, when
abused Nature required an Expiation by waters, and the general submersion of
her detestable defilers. Theophrastus did unjustly to rail at Nature, and
condemn her of partiality* when he envyed the long life of some plants and
inferior creatures, as the Oak, the Heart, the Ravens; some of which live to
feed and fly up and down in the World above five hundred years. He quarrelled
with the wise dispensations of Divinity, because a slight suite of feathers,
and a renewed dress of green leaves could wear out a building that lodged a
rational Soul, and the breath of the Almighty. Both his wish and his reason
were erroneous: He erred in desiring long life, and in judging happiness to
consist in the multitude of years, and not the number of good works. The
shortness of life is lengthned by living well: When life was reckond by
centuries, the innumerable sins of the living so offended God, that it repented
him to have made impenitent man: Those that sinned out of confidence of life he
punished with sudden destruction. That long lived generation had made the world
unclean, and being polluted by their lives, it was purged by their deaths. He
shortened afterward the lease of life, reducing it to an hundred and twenty
years, that by the diligence of frequent death, he might reform the past
disorders of long life, and prevent them for the future, teaching both sexes to
amend their lives by giving them death for their next neighbors. So
beneficial is death, so much profits the certainty of it, and as much the
incertainty: The ignorance of the day of death is in effect the same with the
knowledge of it; the first makes us watch, lest it come upon us unawares; and
the last (though it might name the day to us) yet could it not arm us better
against it, perhaps not so well. This incertainty of dying, certainly secures
us from many errors; it makes us prudent, provident, and not evil. Death
therefore is a device of the Almighty, and a wise instrument of divine policy.
Zaleucus so highly approved of it, that he was about to enact and proclaim a
Law for dying, had he not found it already published by the edict of Nature:
And in his Preface to those Laws made for the Locrenses, he warns them, (...),
etc. To have always before their eyes that time, which is to every one the end
of life, because a hearty repentance for all former injuries seiseth upon all
men that think of death, and an earnest desire or wishing, that all their
actions in life had been just. Wherefore it is expedient that in all our
dealings and thoughts death should act a part, and be our familiar counselor,
ever present with us; so shall we be careful to do all things virtuously and
justly. Death then is most necessary to govern mankind, because the memory of
it keeps us in awe, and conformable to virtue. All Commonwealths that follow
the method of Nature, must approve of this Law of Zaleucus, and death in all
their consultations should guide their lives.

Certainly in the Government of the rebellious Generation of Man, Death has
been the most awful Engine of the Deity; without this stern he guided them
not: When man was immortal, God saw it necessary to preserve his immortality
by death; he enjoined the Law of Abstinence to Adam, under the penalty of
dying, which is continued still by the same artifice of death, lest iniquities
should be immortal, and wickedness should escape punishment: by the patience
and submission of his only Son to death he restored dead men to life, he
conferred upon him all his lost honors, renewd and confirmed his old
prerogative, and together with the salvation of his Soul gave him a sure
promise, that his body also should be made Immortal; but in all these favors,
and after full reconciliation, he would not remove death, but continued it
still, and the incertainty as well as the certainty of it. This divine devise
of death so pleased God, and was so necessary for the good of man, that though
by the merits of his dying Son he changed all the former things, blotting out
ordinances, abolishing Ceremonies, and opening the gates of Heaven to all
believers, yet would not he Exterminate death. It was out of his mercy that he
refused to abrogate it, that while corruption reigned, death also might reign
over it, lest this poison should want its Antidote. We have therefore no just
cause to complain of death, which is an Invention conducing to our great good,
and the incertainty of the time (though it most vexes us) is notwithstanding
the most beneficial Circumstance that attends it. The time of life is certainly
known, and there is but one entrance to the light of this World: The Ceremony
of dying is not formal; It keeps not to one time, nor one manner, but admits of
all times, and many manners. Life comes into the World but one way, but has
many ways to go out. It was the benevolence of God to open so many doors to
those that fly for refuge. One way is more then enough to find out dangers,
but to escape them, many are but necessary. Death is not a burden of seven or
nine months, but life must have time before it sets forth. And what are the
first encounters of it? Tears and Bonds. It cannot avoid Evils, and it is
afeared to bear them; therefore it delays time, and when it cannot lurk any
longer, it comes forth Crying. Death leads us forth to joy and liberty:
Therefore it stays not, it seeks no corners nor protractions. Nor does death
free us only from suffering Evils, but keeps us also from doing any: To be
good every day, thou m^st dye daily. The incertainty also of the time of death,
and the manner of it, like a busy Monitour, warnes thee to do good, and to be
good at all times, and in every place, private or public: And the
inevitablen^sse of it takes away all Excuse or pretensions for thy
impreparation.

The Glory of death, is also much augmented by its facility, in redressing the
difficulties of life. It is not without the Divine counsel, and a special
privilege that the Soul of man is so easily parted from the body; the life of
beasts is more tenacious, and will suffer much indignity and fury before it
leaves them. There is n^ living creature more frail, none more weak then man;
the lightest str^ake fells him; the Soul is very nice, and will quickly cast
off the body if it persists but in the least Indisposition. A single hair
killed Fabius, and a Grape Anacreon; these contemptible instruments destroyed
them as effectually as the thunderbolt did Esculapius. Coma dyed as easily as
he could wish, and Baptist a Mirandulus as he could think: His Soul quitted
his body without any grudging, without a disease, without poison, without
violence, or any fatal mischance. No door can keep death out, it defeats life
with its own weapons, and kills us with the very Cordials and comforts of it.
Perhap^ no kind of death is more violent then th^^ which sets upon us with the
forces o^ l^^e, because it kills when life is most vigorous and pleasant. Their
own wishes have destroyed many: And life has oftentimes perished by her own
contrivements. Clidemus was killed with honor, Diagoras with joy, Plato with
rest, and Philemon with laughter. This last is both a merry, and a frequent
destroyer, and freed Sicily from one Tyrant. Death also makes use sometimes of
our very virtues to exanimate us: Shame killed Diodorus, and the Mother of
Secundus the Philosopher dyed with blushing, and an excessive modesty. Life is
a frail possession, it is a flower that requires not rude and high winds, but
will fall in the very whispers and blandishments of fair weather. It is folly
to labor to retain that which will away; to fly from that which will meet us
every where, yea, in the way we fly, is a vain and foolish industry. Whither we
seek death or avoid it, it will find us out: Our way to fly, and our very
flight end both in death; by hasting from it, we make have to it. Life is a
journey, whose end cannot be mist; it is a steady aiming at dissolution: Though
we fetch wide Compasses, and traverse our way never so often, we can neither
lengthen it, nor be out of it: What path soever we take, it is the Port-roade
to death. Though youth and age are two distant Tropicks of life, yet death is
as near to the one, as to the other: And though some live more, and some less,
yet death is their equal neighbor, and will visit the young as soon as the
old. Death is a Cross, to which many ways lead, some direct, and others
winding, but all meet in one Center: It matters not which thou take, nor
whither thou art young or aged: But if thou be young, thou may come sooner
thither, then the old, who is both doting and weary. It was necessary that a
Sanctuary being provided for the distressed, the way to it should be easy,
pervious, and at an indifferent distance from all parts. Good should be
diffusive, and the gate that leads to it, must be without doors and bolts. The
entrance into this life, is narrow and difficult, it is difficultly attained,
difficultly retained, and lies always in the power of another. Every man may
take life from us, none can take death. Life is subject to the Tyranny of men,
but death is not; life makes Tyrants, and death unmakes them. Death is the
slaves prerogative ^oyall, and the Sabbath of the afflicted. Leo Iconomachus
the Emperor, made the birth of both sexes tributary: but death never paid
taxation. It was not lawful in his reign to get Children without paying for
them; every Infant so soon as borne, was to give him contribution, they paid
then the Excise of life. Death only frees us from these Impositions of Tyrants.

And will thou then condemn liberty, and that maturity of death by which it
ripens every age? will thou the divine liberality blame, because thy life is
short, or may be so? thou have no reason to find fault with the years already
given thee, because thou shall not have more: thou may as well quarrel with
Nature, because she made not thy dimensions larger, and thy body heavier by
eighty or a hundred pounds: he that measured thy proportion, measured thy time
too: and too much of this last would have been as troublesome and unweildy as
too much of the first: for Long life, oppressed with many woes,
Meets more, the further still it goes.


Death in every age is seasonable, beneficial, and desirable: It frees the old
man from misery, the youthful from sin, and the infant from both. It takes the
aged in the fulness of their time; It turns the flowers of youth into fruit;
and by a compendious secret improvement, matures infancy, leading it into the
Gate of Heaven, when it cannot go one step upon Earth, and giving it the wings
of a Dove to fly, and be at rest, before it can use its feet.

To these past arguments of the goodness of death, I shall add another. Death
in the old world, (before the manifestation of God in the flesh,) was the
public index, or open sign of hidden divinity. It is the gift of God, who
gives nothing but what is good. The Devil playing the Ape, and laboring to
imitate the Inimitable Jehovah, did by asserting death to be the greatest good,
mainly fortify those abominable rites and honors conferred upon him by his
blind worshipers: When they petitioned him for the greatest blessing that the
Gods could give to man, he (by the permission of the true God whom they had
deserted) would within three days strangle them in their beds, or use some
other invisible means to set an end to their days. Thus he served Triphonius,
Agamedes, and Argia for her three Sons: This miserable mother requested of him,
that he would give the best thing to her children, that could be given to men:
her petition was granted, and within a very short time they received that which
she thought to be the worst, namely death. So great is the ods betwixt seeming
to be, and being really: betwixt opinion and truth: yea that death which we
judge to be the worst, I mean the immature, is oftentimes the best. What
greater good had decked great Pompey's Crown
Then death, if in his honors fully blown,
And mature glories he had dyed? those piles
Of huge success, loud fame and lofty styles
Built in his active youth, long, lazy life
Saw quite demolished by ambitious strife:
He lived to wear the weak and melting snow
Of lucklesse Age, where garlands seldom grow.
But by repining fate torn from the head.
Which were them once, are on another shed.


Neither could I ever grant that the death of Infants and Children, though
commonly bewailed as unseasonable, were the parents misfortunes, but the
courtesies rather, and mercies of the almighty. To omit Amphiaraus, and other
Ethnic instances; I shall make use of a true and Christian History, which in
these later years, was the great admiration of King Philips Court. Didacus
Vergara, a most noble hopeful ^outh, adorned with all those virtues which
^eautifie a blooming life, was famous in the mouths of all good men, and as
dear in their hearts. But what was the reward (think thou) of his virtuous
life? An immature and almost a sudden death; So that it is not to be doubted,
but it was a divine favor. Being to go into bed, he spoke to his sister, O
what manner of night will this be unto me! I beseech you, dear sister, furnish
me with some candles, and leave one to burn by me. Abought midnight he suddenly
called, so that all the family was awaked, and got up; to whom he told that he
should dye that night; and desired them to send presently for his Confessor.
They all imagined that he had been troubled with some dream, especially his
Father, a most renowned Physician, when he felt his pulse to beat well and
orderly. But notwithstanding all this, they omitted not to send for his
Confessor, who was Gasper Pedroza: He (as if touched with some Divine
presension) was at that dead time of the night awake, and being come to the
sorrowful Father, he told him, that Didacus was expected in another World
before day, that the Virgin-Q^eene of Heaven had revealed so much to him, and
that he would be gone as soon as the Sacraments could be administered unto him.
It fell out just so: For those sacred sol^mnities were no sooner ended, but he
was dissolved, as if he had stayed only for that spiritual refection to
strengthen him in his Journey. He left this dark and low World toward the
first breakings of the day, and ascending to eternity upon the wings of the
morning. He might have past from thence with lesser noise, and in a shorter
time; but he expired more solemnly then so; and yet without weary accessions,
and the Tyranny of sickness: He stayed for the saving institutions of his
redeemer, the business that detained him so long, was Heaven, and not the
tumults of a tyring and obstinate dissolution; all this proves it to have been
the hand of God, and not an unfortunate, sudden death; the precise Actions of
the deity must be attended with unusual circumstances. Whom God does take
care for and love,
He dies young here, to live above.


There is room enough for life within the compass of few years, if they be not
cast away: Think not that to last long, and to live long is the same thing:
every one that has stayed long upon earth, has not lived long.

Some men find fault with death, because no experiment can be made of it,
without an absolute dissolution: they would dye twice, to try what kind of
state it is, that they may be fitly furnished against the second time, when
they must dye in earnest. But this is madness, and were it granted them, the
good they pretend would not be performed. For he that will cast away one life
without preparing for death, will not fear to hazard another; desperate
malefactors will take no warning by r^prieves. Besides, what benefit would
there be by dying twice, seeing that of necessity they must live twice too, and
so be twice miserable, if not twice impious? It is strange, that these men who
fear death, and adjudge it to be evil, should desire to have it doubled, and
that which, by their good will, they would not taste once, they will beg to chew
and swallow down twice; whereas if death were an Evil, it would be so much
the lesser by coming but once. The miseries of life are nothing so civil;
they are instant, importunate, and outrageous; they will reinforce themselves,
and set upon us twice or thrice, yea, a thousand times. Death is more modest,
she wearies us not as long as we are well: When our disorders have turned the
harmony of life into discord and noise, then she comes to cast those murmurers
asleep, and to give the Soul peace: He is no troublesome guest that comes but
once. But it were a great happiness, thou will say, if men did experimentally
know what it is to dye: Truly this Felicity is not wanting: Death is a most
admirable, ingenious Excogitation: Though we dye but once, yet do not we dye at
once: We may make, yea we do make many assaies or trials of dying: Death
insinuates it self, and seizes upon us by peecemeals; it gives us a taste of
it self: It is the Cronie, or Consort of life: So soon as we begin to be, w^e
begin to wast and vanish; we cannot ascend to life, without descending toward
death: Nay we begin to dye before we appear to live; the perfect shape of the
Infant is the death of the Embryo, childhood is the death of Infancy, youth of
Childhood, Manhood of youth, and old age of Manhood. When we are arrived at
this last stage, if we stay any long time in it, and pay not the debt we owe,
death requires interest; she takes his hearing from one, his sight from
another, and from some she takes both: The extent and end of all things touch
their beginning, neither does the last minute of life do any thing else, but
finish what the first began. We may know also what death is, by the apparition
or Image of it. We see it, and make trial of it assiduously: we cannot act life
one day, but we must act death at night: Life is a Terrace-walke with an
Arbor at one end, where we repose, and dream over our past perambulations.
This lesser rest, shows us the greater; the Soul watches when we sleep,
and Conscience in the Just as well as the unjust will be ruminating on the
works of life, when the body is turned into dust. Sleep is nothing else but
death painted in a nightpeece; it is a prelibation of that deep slumber, out
of which we shall not be awaked until the Heavens be no more: We go to bed
under a Scene of Stars and darkness, but when we awake, we find Heaven
changed, and one great luminary giving light to all: We dye in the state of
corruption, errors, and mistiness: But we shall be raised in glory, and
perfection, when these clouds of blackness that are carried about with diverse
winds, and every Enemy of truth shall vanish for ever, and God alone shall be
all in all. We affect sleep naturally, it is the reparation of man, and a
laying by of cares. The Copy cannot match the pattern: if we love sleep then,
why should we hate the Idaea of it; why should we fear death, whose shadow
refreshes us, which nature never made, nor meant to fright us with? It was her
intention to strengthen our hope of dying, by giving us the fruition of this
resemblance of death; lest we should grow impatient with delay, she favored us
with this shadow and Image of it, as Ladies comfort themselves with the
pictures of their absent lovers. There is no part of life without some portion
of death, as dreams cannot happen without sleep, so life cannot be without
death. As sleep is said to be the shadow of death; So I think dreams to be the
shadows of life, for nothing deceives us more frequent then it: When we shall
be raised from death, we shall not grieve so much because the joys of life were
not real, as because there were none at all. It was said by one, that he had
rather dream of being tormented in Hell, then glorified in Paradise: for being
awaked, he should rejoice to find himself in a soft featherbed, and not in a
lake of unquenchable fire: But having dreamt of Heaven, it would grieve him
that it was not real. Paracelsus writes, that the watching of the body is the
sleep of the Soul, and that the day was made for Corporeal Actions, but the
night is the working-time of Spirits. Contrary natures run contrary courses:
Bodies having no inherent light of their own, make use of this outward light,
but Spirits need it not. Sunbeams cannot stumble, nor go out of their way.
Death frees them from this dark Lantern of flesh. Heraclitus used to say, that
men were both dead and alive, both when they dyed, and when they lived: when
they lived their Souls were dead, and when they dyed, their Souls revived.
Life then* is the death of the Soul, and the life of the body: But death is
the life of the Soul, and the death of the body.

I shall return now to prosecute the Commendations of death, because it comes
but once. Death (like the Phoenix) is only one, lest any should be ill. That
which comes but once, is with most longing looked for, and with most welcome
entertained. That poor man, the owner of one Ewe, nourished her in his bosom,
she did eat of his meat, and drank out of his Cup, as Nathan exemplified. The
Father that has but one Son, has more cares, then he that has many; so
should we be more careful to provide for death which comes but once, then for
the numerous and daily calamities of life: By providing for that one, we turn
the rest all into so many joys. Whatsoever is rare, whatsoever is precious, it
is single, and but one. There is nothing so rare, nothing that is comparable to
a good death. But it is not the universality or diffusivenesse of it that makes
it so, but the contempt and the subduing of it; h^s death is most precious, by
whom death is contemned. Dissolution is not a mere merit, but a debt we owe to
nature, which the most unwilling must pay. That wisdom which can make destiny
to be her servant, which can turn necessity into virtue, Mortality into
Immortality, and the debt we owe to nature into a just right and Title to
eternal glory, is very great. What greater advantage can there be, then to
make Heaven due to us, by being indebted to nature, and to oblige Divinity by
paying a temporal debt? Clemens called them Golden men, who dyed thus; that is
to say, when it was necessary to dye. They made necessity their free will, when
either the public liberty, the prerogative of reason, or the word of God
called for their sufferings: For though death be a debt due to Nature, yet in
these causes, Nature does willingly resign her right, and God becomes the
Creditor. If we pay it unto him before the time of pure resolution, Nature is
better pleased with that anticipation, then if we kept our set day: He is the
best debtour, that paies before the time of payment. The day of payment by the
Covenant of Nature is old age, but the good man paies before the day. If the
nobleness of thy mind will not incite thee to such a forward satisfaction; let
the desire of gain move thee, for the sooner thou payest, the more thou do
oblige. He that suffers an immature death for the good of his Country, for the
sacred laws, or the vindication of the truth of God, and not for his own vain
glory, does free himself from the Natural debt, and does at the same time make
God his debtour, and all mankind? To a man that dies thus, all men are
indebted: God owes him for the Cause, and men for the effect: The last does at
least set us an example, and the first improves the faith, and gives life to
Charity.

Add to this, that this great good of a passive death, is a voluntary
imitation of the Son of God, who laid down his life for the life of the World:
And it is also done without our industry; this great virtue, this glorious
perfection requires not our care and activity to bring it about. This death is
most precious and the best, because it is executed by others, and not by
ourselves: To suffer death, not to dye, is glorious. If prisoners break their
chains, it is neither their glory, nor their security, but augments their
Guilt, and hastens their condemnation: So he that violates his own body, and
makes way for the Soul to fly out with his own hands, is damned by the very
Act: but if another does it to him, it is both his Salvation and his Crown. The
heathens esteemed it no honor for Captives to have their bonds loosed: It was
their freedom, but not their glory. When the jugde himself did break off their
Chains, that they accounted honorable. By this Ceremony did Vespasian and
Titus acknowledge the worth of Joseph the Jew: This vindicated his integrity:
By cutting his bonds with their Imperial hand, they freed him both from
captivity and disgrace. Titus said, that if they would break off his fetters,
and not stay to take them off, his honor would be so perfectly repaired by it,
as if he had been never bound, nor overcome. The same difference (in point of
honor) is betwixt the natural death and the violent: betwixt dying when we
are full of days, and the death which Tyrants impose upon us, when we are
mangled and grinded by their fury. This honor is then greatest, when the body
is not dissolved, but distorted and broken into pieces. Certainly the best men
have ever perished by the violence of Tyrants; nature (to preserve her
innocence) being very backward and unwilling (as it were) to take away such
great and needful examples of goodness. Treachery and violence were ordained
for the just in the death of Abel; who dyed by the wicked. This better sort of
death was (in him) consecrated to the best men; those persons whom Nature
respects, and is loath to meddle with, envy lays hands upon: Whom the one
labors to prefer, the other plotteth to destroy. Nor deals she thus with the
good only, but with the eminent and mighty too: thus she served Hector
Alexander and Caesar: the goodliest object is always her aim. When Thrasybulus
the Astrologer told Alexander the Roman, that he should end his days by a
violent death, he answered, that he was very glad of it, for then (said he) I
shall dye like an Emperor, like the best and the greatest of men, and not
sneak out of the World like a worthless, obscure fellow. But the death of
these Glorioli was not truly glorious: I have only mentioned them, because
that a passive death (though wanting religion) has made their honor
permanent. That death is the truly glorious, which is sealed with the joy of the
sufferers spirit, whose Conscience is ravished with the kisses of the Dove: Who
can look upon his tormentour with delight, and grow up to Heaven without
diminution, though made shorter on Earth by the head.

This is the death which grows precious by contempt, and glorious by disgrace:
Whose sufferer runs the race set before him with patience, and finisheth it
with joy. We are careful that those things which are our own, may be improved
to the utmost; and why care we not for death? what is more ours then
mortality? Death should not be feared, because it is simply, or of it self, a
great good, and is evil to none but to those that by living ill make their
death bad: What ever evil is in death, it is attracted from life. If thou
preservest a good Conscience while thou live, thou will have no fear when
thou dyest, thou will rejoice and walk homeward singing. It is life therefore
that makes thee fear death: If thou did not fear life, if life had not
blasted the joys of death, thou would never be afraid of the end of
sorrows. Death therefore is of it self innocent, sincere, healthful, and
desirable. It frees us from the malignancie and malice of life, from the sad
necessities and dangerous errors we are subject to in the body. That death,
whose leaders are Integrity and virtue, whose cause is Religion, is the Elixir
which gives this life its true tincture, and makes it immortal. To dye is a
common and trivial thing, for the good and the bad dye, and the bad most of
all: but to dye willingly, to dye gloriously is the peculiar privilege of good
men. It is better to leave life voluntarily, then to be driven out of it
forcibly: let us willingly give place unto posterity. Esteem not life for its
own sake, but for the use of it: Love it not, because thou would live, but
because thou may do good works while thou live. Now the greatest work of
life is a good death. If life then ought to be less esteemed then good works,
who would not purchase a good death with the loss of life? why should we be
afeared of politic, irreligious Tyrants, and an arm of flesh though guarded
with steel? Nature it self threatens us with death, and frailty attends us
every hour: Why will we refuse to dye in a good cause when it is offered us, who
may dye ill the very next day after? let us not promise our selves a short
life, when our death assures us of eternal glory.

But if it were granted that death were neither good nor honorable, but evil
and fearful, why will not we take care for that which we fear? Why do we
neglect that which we suspect? Why, if it be evil, do not we arm and defend
our selves against it? we provide against dangerous contingencies, we labor
against casual losses, and we neglect this great and enevitable peril. To
neglect death, and to contemn death are two things: none are more careful of
it, then those that contemn it; none fear it more then those that neglect it;
and which is strange, they fear it not because they have neglected it, but they
neglect it, when they fear it: they dare not prepare for it, for fear of
thinking of it. O the madness and Idleness of mankind! to that, which they
adjudge to be most Evil, they come not only unprepared, but unadvisedly, and
without so much as forethought. What mean we, what do we look for? Death is
still working, and we are still idle, it is still traveling toward us, and
we are still slumbering and folding our hands. Let us awake out of this dark
and sleepy state of mind, let us shake off these dreams and vain propositions
of diverse lusts: let us approve of truth and realities, let us follow after
those things which are good; let us have true joy made sure unto us, and a firm
security in life, in death. Sickness and death, you are but sluggish things,
And cannot reach, a heart that has got wings.


FINIS.
THE WORLD CONTEMNED, IN A Parenetical Epistle written by the Reverend Father
EVCHERIVS, Bishop of Lions, to his Kinsman VALERIANVS.

Love not the World, neither the things that ar^ in the world. If any man love
the world, the love of the Father is not in him.

1 Ioh. 2.15. They are of the world, therefore speak they of the world, and
the world hears them.

Chap. 4. verse. 5. If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it
hated you.

Ioh. 15. verse 18. If ye were of the world, the world would love his own, but
because ye are not of the world, out I have chosen you out of the world;
therefore the world hates you.

ver. 19. Remember the word that I said unto you, the Servant is not greater
than the Lord: if they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you: If
they have kept my saying, they will keep yours also.

v. 20. London, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, at the Princes Arms in St Paul's
Churchyard. 1654.

Advertisement.
HEribert Ros-weyd published this piece at Antwerp 1621. It is mentioned by
Gennadius cap. 63. ^e Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis; and Erasmus (long before
Ros-weyd's Edition) writ some Notes upon it. The Author Eucherius was a Roman
Senator, but being converted to the Faith, he left the Senate, and lived in a
poor Cell by the river Druentium, where his Wife Galla died. His two daughters,
Consortia, and Tullia, having learnt Christ, continued both in the Virgin-life,
and signorum gloria claruerunt. He sat Bishop in the chair of Lions (as I find
him placed by Helvicus) in the year of our Lord 443. Some will have him a
Century lower, but that difference weakens not the certainty of it. The piece
it self (in the Original) is most elaborate and judicious, and breaths that
togatam elegantiam which in most of the Roman Senators was not more acquired*
then natural. What this Valerian was (more then our Authors Kinsman, by whose
pen his name lives) is not certainly known. Some will have him to be Priscus
Valerianus, the Prefect, or Deputy of France, mentioned by Sidonius
Apollinaris: Others are willing to let him pass for that Valerian, whose
Homilies now extant were published by Sirmondus. But as it is not determinable,
so is it not material: This we may safely conclude, that he was a very eminent,
noble. Personage, and one that followed too much after temporal pomp, and the
powers of this world; though neither of them could lend him so much light, as
would keep him from obscurity. To bring down these top-branches, Eucherius
lays the Axe to the root of the tree, by showing him the vanity, and the
iniquity of riches and honors, the two grand inticements of popular spirits.
And this he does with such powerful and clear reasons, that to virtuous and
peaceful minds he has renderd them not only contemptible, but odious. Much
more might have been spoken against them, but (seeing the Age we live in, has
made all his Arguments, Demonstrations) he has in my judgment spoken enough.

H.V.S.

EVCHERIVS to his Kinsman VALERIANVS, etc.
THEY are happily linked in the bond of blood, who are held together by the
bond of love. And for this gift (which is descended upon us from the Father of
lights,) both you and my self may greatly rejoice: Whom love as well as
kindred has united, and those two fair obligations have betrothed in one
entire affection. One of them we took from the Fathers of our flesh, and the
other from our private dispositions. This double tie by which (love binding us
on the one side, and blood on the other,) we are mutually knit together; has
enforced me to enlarge my self in this Epistle with some excess more then
usual; that I might commend unto your Consideration the Cause of your own
Soul, and assert the work of our profession to be, that Supreme beatitude which
is only true, and capable of those things which are Eternal.

And indeed your own pious propension is not repugnant to the profession of
holy living, who already by a forward felicity of manners have in some points
prevented, and met with many things which are taught un^o us by sacred
learning: So that by the means of provident and discreet Nature, you seem unto
me to have seized upon many duties of Religion; as the Concessions and
Indulgences of our good God toward you, whose gift it is, that the Divine
wisdom should partly find in you, and partly confer upon you the riches of
his Kingdom.

But although (by the hands of your Father, and Father in law,) you have been
already advanced and seated upon the highest pinnacles of temporal honors,
and are still adorned and surrounded with illustrious titles descending from
them both; Yet I desire, and long to find in you a thirst of greater and far
higher honors, and shall now call you not to Earthly, but Heavenly honors,
not to the dignities and splendor of one short age, but to the solid and
enduring glories of eternity: For the only true and indelible glory is, to be
glorified in Eternity.

I shall therefore speak unto you, not the wisdom of this World, but that
secret and hidden wisdom which God ordained before the World unto our glory. I
shall speak with much care and affection toward you, and with very little
respect or animadversion of my self; for I have in this attempt considered
more, what I wish to see perfected in you, than what I am able to do in my self.

The first duty of Man ordained and brought forth into this World for that end,
(my most dear Valerian!) is to know his Creator, and being known, to confess
him, and to resign or give up his life (which is the wonderful and peculiar
gift of God,) to the service and worship of the giver; that what he received by
Gods free donation, may be employed in true devotion, and what was conferred
upon him in the state of wrath and unworthiness, may by an obedient
resignation make him precious and beloved. For of this saving opinion are we;
That as it is most certain, that we came forth first from God, so should we
believe it, and press on still toward him: Whereupon we shall conclude, that
he only, rightly and divinely apprehends the purpose of God in making man, who
understand it thus, That God himself made us for himself.

It is then our best course, to bestow our greatest care upon the Soul; So
shall that which is the first and highest in dignity, be not the lowest, and
last in consideration. Amongst us Christians, let that which is the first in
order, be the first cared for; let Salvation which is the chiefest profit be
our chiefest employment. Let the safeguard and the defense of this, take up all
our forces; let it be not only our chiefest, but our sole delight. As it
surpasses all other things in excellency, so let it in our care and
consideration.

Our Supreme duty is that which we owe to God, and the next to it appertains
to the Soul. And yet these two are such loving correlates, that though every
one of them is a duty of Supreme consequence, and such as by no means we may
presume to neglect or omit, yet cannot we possibly perform any one of them
without the other. So that whosoever will serve God, does at the same time
provide for his own Soul; and he that is careful for his own Soul, does at the
same time serve God. So that the state of these two sovereign duties in man, is
by a certain compendious dependencie and co-intention rendered very easy, while
the faithful performance of the one, is a perfect consummation of both: For by
the unspeakable tenderness and mercy of God, the good we do to our own
Souls, is the most acceptable service and sacrifice that we can offer unto him.

Much Physical curiosity, much care and many strict observations are bestowed
upon the body; much pain it undergoes in hope of health; and deserves the Soul
no Medicine? If it be but fit and necessary, that diverse helps and means of
healing are sought for the body, for the recovering only of a temporal and
transitory health, is it not unjust that the Soul should be excluded, and be
suffered to languish and putrify with deadly and spiritual diseases? Shall
the Soul only be a stranger to those proper and precious remedies ordained for
it by the great Physician? Yea rather, if so many things are provided for the
body, let the provision for the Soul be far more abundant: for if it was truly
said by some, that this fleshly frame is the servant, and the Soul the Mistress,
then will it be very undecent and injurious, if we shall prefer and place the
servant before the Mistress. It is but a just claim, that the better part should
require the better attendance; for with constant and intentive diligence should
we look on that side, where the greater dignity and our most precious treasure
is laid up. It is not agreeable to reason, and it takes from the honor of our
employment, that we should subject it to the unworthier party. The flesh being
allwaies inclined to vitiousnesse, draws us back to the Earth, as to its
proper center and Original: But the Soul being descended from the Father of
lights, is like the sparks of fire still flying upwards. The Soul is the Image
of God in us, and the precious pledge of his future munificence. Let us employ
all our innate forces, and all outward Auxiliaries for the preservation of
this: if we manage* and defend it faithfully, we take care for, and protect
the entrusted pledge and purchased possession of God. What conveniencie can we
have to build, unless we do first of all lay the foundation? but to him that
has designed a superstructure of true blessings, the fundamental must be
Salvation. And if he has not laid that foundation, upon what can the
Consequences he hopes for be builded? how shall he be filled with the Increase
of those remunerations and after-blessings, that wants the first fruits, and
denies the rewarder? what portion can he have in the joys of Eternity, that
will be wanting to his own Salvation? How can he live the life of the blessed,
that will not rise from death? or what will it benefit him to heap up temporal
provision, and the materials of this World; when he has stored up nothing for
the comfort of his Soul? Or as our Lord JESUS CHRIST has said, What is a man
profited, if he gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? There can
therefore be no cause for sparing and laying up, where it is manifest, that the
Soul is already lost; where Salvation is forfeited, what gain or profit can be
hoped for? Or wherein shall the true treasure be laid up, or wherewith shall he
receive it, when the Souls precious vessel, and the storehouse of Eternal
joys is utterly ruined and broken? let us therefore while we have time, labor
for true riches, and make earnest have to that holy and Heavenly commerce,
which is worth our looking and longing after.

Eternal life may be obtained in a very few days: Which days though they
should be blessed with an inoffensive and untainted holiness of life, yet
because they are but few, are to be lightly esteemed of: for nothing can be
rich in value, which is but short in duration: Nor can that procure any long or
durable joys, whose time of existence or abode is narrow and transient. The
short Accommodations of this life have but short effects. It seems therefore
but just unto me, that to the joys of this present life (if it has any) we
should prefer the true and indubitable joys of that which is everlasting.
For the felicity we enjoy here, is at best but temporal, but the other is
eternal; and the fruition of a transitory, uncertain happiness is but a
frailty and accident; but the possession of inviolable and never ending joys,
is triumph and security.

It is clear then, that the Eternal life is most blessed; for what other thing
can be named, or thought upon, that is more happy then everlasting life? As for
this present short life, it is so very short, that it is withal most
miserable. It is pressed and assaulted on every side with surrounding, inevitable
sorrows, it is distressed with many evil defects, and tossed to and fro by secret
and penal accidents. For what is there in all the whole World that is so
uncertain, so various, and so replenished with troubles, as the course of this
life? Which is full of labor, full of anguish, fraught with cares, and made
ominous with dangers: which is distracted with violen^ and sudden mutations,
made unpleasant with bodily distempers, afflicted with thoughtfullnesse, and
mental agonies, and lies naked and open to all the Whirlwinds of time and
Chance? What benefit then, yea, what reason have you to turn aside, and run
away from Eternal joys, that you may pursue and follow after temporal
miseries.

Do not you see, my dear Valerian, how every one that is provident (even in
this life,) does with plenty of all necessaries furnish that cottage or field,
where he knows he shall reside? and where he abides but for a short time, his
provision is accordingly, where he intends a longer stay, he provides likewise
a greater supply? unto us also, who in this present World (being straightned on
every side) have but a very short time, are Eternal ages reserved in the World
which is to come; if so be that we competently provide for an Eternal state,
and seek only what is sufficient for the present, not perversely bestowing
the greatest care upon the shortest and smallest portion of time, and the
smallest care upon the time of greatest and endless extent.

And indeed I know not, which should soonest, or most effectually incite us to
a pious care of life Eternal, either the blessings which are promised us in
that state of glory, or the miseries which we feel in this present life. Those
from above most lovingly invite and call upon us; these below most rudely and
importunately would expel us hence. Seeing therefore that the continual
Evils of this life, would drive us hence unto a better, if we will not be
induced by the good, let us be compelled by the Evil: Both the good and the
bad agree to incite us to the best, and though at difference amongst
themselves; yet both consent to make us happy. For while the one invites us,
and the other compells us, both are sollicitous for our good.

If some eminent and powerful Prince having adopted you for his Son, and
co-partner, should forthwith send for you by his Ambassador; you would (I
believe) break through all difficulties, and the wearisome extent of Sea and
Land, that you might appear before him, and have your adoption ratified. God
Almighty, the Maker and the Lord of Heaven and Earth, and all that is in them,
calls you to this adoption, and offers unto you (if you will receive it,) that
dear style of a Son, by which he calls his only begotten, and your glorious
Redeemer. And will you not be inflamed and ravished with his Divine love? will
you not make have, and begin your Journey toward Heaven, lest swift
destruction come upon you, and the honors offered you be frustrated by a sad
and sudden death?

And to obtain this adoption, you shall not need to pass through the
unfrequented and dangerous Solitudes of the Earth, or to commit your self to
the wide and perilous Sea: When you will, this adoption is within your reach,
and lodges with you. And shall this blessing, because it is as easy in the
getting, as it is great in the consequence, find you therefore backward or
unwilling to attain it? How hard a matter to the lukewarm and the dissembler
will the making sure of this adoption prove? for as to the faithful and
obedient it is most easy, so to the hypocrite and the rebellious, it is most
difficult.

Certainly, it is the love of life that has inslaved us so much to a
delectation, and dotage upon temporal things. Therefore do I now advise you,
who are a lover of life, to love it more. It is the right way of persuading,
when we do it for no other end but to obtain that from you, which of your own
accord you desire to grant us. Now for this life which you love, am I an
Ambassador; and entreat that this life which you love in its transient and
momentary state, you would also love in the Eternal. But how, or in what manner
you may be said to love this present life, unless you desire to have it made
most excellent, perfect, and etternally permanent, I cannot see; for that which
has the power to please you when it is but short and uncertain, will please
you much more, when it is made eternal and immutable: And that which you dearly
love and value, though you have it but for a time, will be much more dear and
precious to you, when you shall enjoy it without end. It is therefore but fit,
that the temporal life should look still toward the Eternal, that though the
one, you may pass into the other. You must not rob your self of the benefits
of the life to come, by a crooked and perverse use of the present. This life
must not oppose it self to the damage and hurt of the future: For it were very
absurd and unnatural, that the love of life should causse the destruction and
the death of life.

Therefore whither you judge this temporal life worthy of your love, or your
Contempt; my present argument will be every way very reasonable. An excellent
Dilemma.
For if you contemn it, your reason to do so, is, that you may obtain a
better: and if you love it, you must so much the more love that life which is
eternal.

But I rather desire, that you would esteem of it, as you have found it; and
judge it to be (as it is indeed) full of bitterness and trouble, a race of
tedious and various vexations; and that you would utterly forsake and renounce
both it, and its occupations. Cut off at last that wearisome and endless chain
of secular employments, that one and the same slavery, though in several
negotiations. Break in sunder those cords of vain cares, in whose successive
knots you are always entangled, and bound up, and in every one of which you
travel is renewed and begun again. Let this rope of sands, this coherencie of
vain causes be taken away: In which (as long as men live) the tumult of
affairs (being still lengthened by an intervening succession of fresh cares) is
never ended, but runs on with a fretting and consuming sollicitousness, which
makes this present life, that is already of it self short and miserable
enough, far more short and more miserable. Which also (according to the
success or crosnesse of affairs) lets in diverse times vain and sinfully
rejoycings, bitter sorrows, anxious wishes, and suspicious fears. Let us last
of all cast off all those things which make this life in respect of their
employment but very short, but in respect of cares and sorrows very long. Let
us reject, and resolutely contemn this uncertain world, and the more uncertain
manners of it, wherein the Peasant as well as the Prince is seldom safe, where
things that lie low are trodden upon, and the high and lofty totter and
decline. Choose for your self what worldly estate you please: There is no rest
either in the mean, or the mighty. Both conditions have their miseries, and
their misfortunes: The private and obscure is subject to disdain, the public
and splendid unto envy.

Two prime things I suppose there are, which strongly enchain, and keep men
bound in secular negotiations; and having bewitched their understanding,
retain them still in that dotage; the pleasure of riches, and the dignity of
honors. The former of which ought not to be called pleasure, but poverty; and
the latter is not dignity, but vanity. These two (being joined in one subtle
league) set upon man, and with alternate, insnaring knots disturb and entangle
his goings. These (besides the vain desires which are peculiar to themselves)
infuse into the mind of man other deadly and pestiferous lustings, which are
their consequents; and with a certain pleasing inticement solicit and
overcome the hearts of Mankind.

As for Riches (that I may speak first of them) what is there, I pray, or what
can there be more pernicious? They are seldom gotten without Injustice; by such
an Administrator are they gathered, and by such a Steward they must be kept;
for Covetousness is the root of all evils. And there is indeed a very great
familiarity betwixt these two, Riches Divitiae and Vitia.
and Vices in their names, as well as in their nature. And are they not also
very frequently matter of disgrace, and an evil report? Upon which
consideration it was said by one, that Every rich man is either a tyrant
himself, or the son of a tyrant.
Riches were tokens of Injuries. In the possession of corrupt persons they
publish to the world their bribery and unrighteousness, and elsewhere, they
allure the eyes, and incite the spirits of seditious men to rebellion, and in
the custody of such they bear witness of the sufferings, and the murder of
innocent persons, and the plundering of their goods.

But grant that these disasters should not happen, can we have any certainty,
whither these things that make themselves wings, will fly away after our
decease? He lays up treasure (says the Psalmist) and knows not for whom he
gathers it.

But suppose that you should have an heir after your own heart, does he not
oftentimes destroy and scatter what the Father has gathered? does not an
ill-bred son, or our ill choice of a Son-in-law prove the frequent ruin of all
our labors and substance in this life? What pleasure then can there be in such
riches, whose collection is sin and sorrow, and our transmision, or bequeathing
of them anxious and uncertain?

Whither then at last will this wild and deviuos affection of men carry them?
You know how to love accidental and external goods, but cannot love your own
self. That which you so much long for is abroad, and without you; you place
your affection upon a forraigner, upon an enemy. Return, or retire rather into
your self, and be you dearer, and nearer to your own heart then those things
which you call yours. Certainly if some wiseman, and skillful in the affairs
of this world, should converse, and come to be intimate with you, it would
better please you, that he should affect your person, then affect your goods;
and you would choose, that he should rather love you for your self, then for
your riches; you would have him to be faithful unto man, not to his money. What
you would have another to perform toward you, that do you for your self, who
ought to be the most faithful to your self. Ourselves, ourselves we should
love, not those things which we phantastically call ours.

And let this suffice to have been spoken against Riches.

As for the Honors of this world (to speak generally, and without exception*
for I shall not descend to particulars) what dinity can you justlt attribute to
those things which the base man, and the bad, as well as the noble and good,
promiscuously obtain, and all of them by corruption and ambition? The same
honor is not conferred upon men of the same merits, and dignity makes not a
difference betwixt the worthy and the unworthy, but confounds them. So that
which should be a character of deserts, by advancing the good above the bad,
does most unjustly make them equal; and after a most strange manner there is in
no state of life less difference made betwixt the worst men, and the best,
then in that state which you term honorable. Is it not then a greater honor
to be without that honor, and to be esteemed of according to our genuine
worth, and sincere carriage then according to the false gloss of promiscuous,
deceiving honors?

And these very things (how big soever they look) what fleeting and frail
appearances are they? We have seen of late men eminently honorable, seated
upon the very spires, and top of dignity, whose incredible treasures purchased
them a great part of the world; their success exceeded their own desires, and
their prodigious fortunes amazed their very wishes: But these I speak of were
private prosperities. Kings themselves with all their height and
imperiousness, with all their triumphs and glory shined but for a time. Their
cloathings were of wrought of gold, their diadems sparkled with the various
flames, and differing relucencies of precious stones; their Palaces were
thronged with Princely attendants, their roofs adorned with gilded beams, their
Will was a Law, and their words were the rules and coercive bounds of Mankind.
But who is he, that by a temporal felicity can lift his head above the stage of
humane chances? Behold now, how the vast sway and circumference of these mighty
is no where to be found! their riches and precious things too are all gone, and
they themselves the possessors and masters of those royal treasures! most late,
and most famous Kingdoms (even amongst us) are now become a certain fable. All
those things which sometimes were reputed here to be very great, are now become
none at all.

Nothing I think, nay I am sure, of all these riches, honors, powers went
along with them from hence: All they took with them was the precious substance
of their faith and piety. These only (when they were deprived of all other
attendants) waited on them, and like faithful, inseparable companions,
traveled with them out of this wrold. With this provision are they now fed;
with these riches, and with these honors are they adorned. In these they rest,
and this goodness is now their greatness.

Wherefore, if we be taken at all with honors and riches, let us be taken with
the true and durable ones: Every good man exchangeth these earthly dignities
for those which are celestial, and earthen treasures for the heavenly. He
lays up treasure there, where a most exact and inconfused difference is made
betwixt the good and the bad; where that which is once gotten shall be for ever
enjoyed; where all things may be obtained, and where nothing can be lost.

But seeing we are fallen into a discourse of the frailty of temporal things,
let us not forget the frail condition of this short life. What is it, I beseech
you, what is it? Men see nothing more frequently then death, and mind nothing
more seldom. Mankind is by a swift mortality quickly driven into the West, or
setting point of life, and all posterity by the unalterable Law of succeeding
ages and generations follow after. Our fathers went from hence before us; we
shall go next, and our children must come after. As streams of water falling
from high, the one still following the other, do in successive circles break
and terminate at the banks; so the appointed times and successions of men are
cut off at the boundary of death. This consideration should take up our
thoughts night and day; this memorial of our frail condition should keep us
still awake. Let us always think the time of our departure to be at hand; for
the day of death, the farther we put it off, comes on the faster, and is by so
much the nearer to us. Let us suspect it to be near, because we know not how
far. Let us, as the Scripture says, make plain our ways before us.

If we make this the business of our thoughts, and meditate still upon it, we
shall not be frighted with the fear of death* Blessed and happy are all you who
have already reconciled your selves unto Christ! no great fear of death can
disturb them, who defsire to be dissolved that they may be with Christ; who in
the silence of their own bosoms, quietly, and long since prepared for it,
expect the last day of their pilgrimage here. They care not much how soon they
end this temporal life, that pass from it into life eternal.

Let not the populacy and throng of loose livers, or hypocritical
time-pleasers persuade us to a neglect of life, neither be you induced by the
errors of the many to cast away your particular salvation. What will the
multitude in that day of Gods judgment avail us, when every private person
shall be sentenced, where the examinations of works, and every man's particular
actions, not the example of the common people shall absolve him? Stop your
ears, and shut your eyes against such damnable Precedents that invite you to
destruction. It is better to sow in tears, and to plant eternal life with the
few, then to lose it with the multitude. Let not therefore the number of
sinful men weaken your diligence of not sinning; for the madness of those
that sin against their own souls, can be no authority unto us; I beseech you
look always upon the vices of others as their shame, not your example.

If it be your pleasure to look for examples, seek them rather from that party,
which though the least, yet if considered as it is a distinct body, is numerous
enough: Seek them (I say) from that party, wherein you shall find those ranged,
who wisely understood, wherefore they were born, and accordingly while they
lived, did the business of life; who eminent for good works, and excelling in
virtue, pruned and dressed the present life, and planted the future. Nor are our
examples (though of this rare kind) only copious, but great withal, and most
illustrious.

For what worldly nobility, what honors, what dignity, what wisdom, what
eloquence, or learning have not betaken themselves to this heavenly warfare?
what sovereignty now has not with all humility submitted to this easy yoke of
Christ? And certainly it is a madness beyond error and ignorance for any to
dissemble in the cause of their salvation. I could (but that I will not be
tedious to you) out of an innumerable company produce many by name, and show
you what eminent and famous men in their times have forsaken this World, and
embraced the most strict rules of Christian Religion. And some of these
(because I may not omit all,) I shall cursorily introduce.

Clement the Roman, of the stock of the Caesar's, and the Ancient Lineage of the
Senators, a person fraught with Science, and most skillfull in the liberal
Arts, betook himself to this path of the just; and so uprightly did he walk
therein, that he was elected to the Episcopal dignity of Rome.

Gregory of Pontus, Gregorius Thaur^aturgus.
a Minist^r of holy things, famous at first for his humane learning and
eloquence, became afterward more eminent by those Divine Graces conferred upon
him. For (as the Faith of Ecclesiastical History testifies,) amongst other
miraculous signs of his effectual devotion, he removed a Mountain by prayer,
and dried up a deep lake.

Gregory Nazianzen, another holy Father, given also at first to Philosophy and
humane literature, declined at last those Worldly rudiments, and embraced the
true and Heavenly Philosophy: To whose industry also we owe no meaner a person
then Basil the Great; for being his intimate acquaintance, and fellow-student
in secular Sciences, he entered one day into his Auditory, where Basilius was
then a Reader of Rhetoric, and leading him by the hand out of the School;
dissuaded him from that employment with this gentle reproof, Leave this
Vanity, and study thy Salvation. And shortly after both of them came to be
famous and faithful Stewards in the house of God, and have left us in the
Church, most useful and pregnant Monuments of their Christian learning.

Thou have his life annexed to this Epistle: as a precedent after these
precepts.
Paulinus Bishop of Nola, the great Ornament and light of France, a person of
Princely revenues, powerful eloquence, and most accomplished learning, so
highly approved of this our profession, that choosing for himself the better
part, he divided all his Princely Inheritance amongst the poor, and afterward
filled most part of the World with his elegant and pious writings.

Hilarious of late, and Petronius now in Itaelie, both of them out of the
fullness of Secular honors and power, betook themselves to this Course; the
one entering Hilarious about this time (which was 435. years after Christ) did
lead a monastical life; but upon the death of Honoratus, he was ele^ted his
successor in the Bishopric of Orleans, in which dignity he continued not long,
for being addicted to solitariness, he resigned it, and turned into the
Wilderness.
into the religion, the other into the Priesthood.

And when shall I have done with this great cloud of witnesses, If I should
bring into the field all those eloquent Contenders for the Faith, Firmianus,
Minutius, Cyprian, Hilary, Chrysostom and Ambrose? These I believe spoke to
themselves in the same words which St. Augustine.
another of our profession used as a sparre to drive himself out of the
Secu^ar life into this blessed and Heavenly vocation; They said, I believe:
What is this? The unlearned get up, and lay hold upon the Kingdom of Heaven,
and we with our learning, behold where we wallow in flesh and blood. This
(sure) they said, and upon this consideration they also rose up, and took the
Kingdom of Heaven by force.

Having now in part produced these reverend witnesses, whose zeal for the
Christian faith has exceeded most of their successors, though they also were
bred up in secular rudiments, persuasive eloquence, and the Pomp and fullness
of honors; I shall descend unto Kings themselves, and to that head of the
World, the Roman Empire. And here I think it not necessary that those Royal,
religious Ancients of the old World should be mentioned at all. Some of their
posterity, and the most renowned in our Sacred Chronicles I shall make use of;
as David for Piety, Josiah for Faith, and Ezechias for Humility. The later
times also have been fruitful in this kind, nor is this our age altogether
barren of pious Princes, who draw near to the Knowledge of the only true and
Immortal King, and with most contrite and submissive hearts acknowledge and
adore the Lord of Lords. The Court, as well as the Cloister, has yielded
Saints, of both Sexes. And these in my opinion are more worthy your Imitation,
then the mad and giddy Commonalty; for the examples of these, carry with them
in the World to come Salvation, and in the present World, Authority.

You see also how the days and the years, and all the bright Ornaments and
Luminaries of Heaven, do with an unwearied duty execute the commands and
decrees of their Creator; and in a constant, irremissive tenor continue
obedient to his ordinances. And shall we (for whose use th^se lights were
created, and set in the firmament,) seeing we know our Masters will, and are
not ignorant of his Commandments, stop our ears against them? And to these
Vast members of the Universe it was but once told, what they should observe
unto the end of the World; but unto us line upon line, precept upon precept,
and whole volumes of Gods Commandments are every day repeated. Add to this,
that man (for this also is in his power) should learn to submit himself to the
will of his Creator, and to be obedient to his Ordinances; for by paying his
whole duty unto God, he gives withal a good example unto men.

But if there be any that will not return unto their maker and be healed, can
they therefore escape the Arm of their Lord, in whose hand are the Spirits of
all flesh* Whither will they fly, that would avoid the presence of God? What
Covert can hide them from that Eye which is every where, and sees all things?
Let them hear thee, holy David, let them hear thee. Psalm 139. Whither shall
I go from thy presence, or whither shall I flee from thy Spirit?

If I ascend up into Heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in Hell, b^hold
thou art there.

If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the
Sea;

Even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand stall hold me.

If I say, surely the darkness shall cover me: even the night shall be light
about thee.

Yea the darkness hides not from thee, but the night shines as the day: the
darkness and the light are both alike to thee.



Therefore (willing or unwilling) though they should absent themselves from the
Lord of all the world by their Wills, yet shall they never be able to get their
persons out of his Jurisdiction and Supreme right. They are absent from him
indeed in their Love and affections: But he is present with them in his
prerogative and anger. So then being ranagates, they are shut up, and (which is
a most impious madness) they live without any consideration or regard of God,
but within his power. And if these being earthly Masters, when their servants
run away from them; with a furious and hasty search pursue after them; or if
they renounce their service, prosecute them for it, and become the assertours
of their own right over them; why will not they themselves render unto their
Master which is in Heaven his most just right? Why will they not stay in his
Family, and freely offer themselves unto his service, and be as impartial
Judges in the cause of God as in their own?

Why with so much dotage do we fix our Eyes upon the deceitful looks of
temporal things? Why do we rest our selves upon those thorns only, which we
see beneath us? Is it the Eye alone that we live by? Is there nothing useful
about us but that wanderer? We live also by the ear, and at that Inlet we
receive the glad tidings of Salvation, which fill us with earnest groans for
our glorious liberty and the consummation of the promises; Whatsoever is
promised, whatsoever is preached unto us, let us wait for it with intentive
wishes, and most eager desires. That faithful one, the blessed Author of those
promises assures us frequently of his fidelity and performance, let us covet
earnestly his best promises.

B^t notwithstanding this which has been spoken, if a sober and virtuous use
were made of the Eye, we might by that very faculty be drawn to a certain
sacred longing after Immortality, and the powers of the World to come; if that
admiration, which by contemplating the rare frame of the World we are usually
filled with, were returned upon the glorious Creator of it, by our praises and
benediction of him; Or if we would meditate what a copious, active and
boundless light shall fill our eyes in the state of Immortality, seeing so
fair a luminary is allowed us in the state of corruption: Or what transcendent
beauty shall be given to all things in that eternal World, seeing this
transitory one is so full of Majesty and freshness; There can be no excuse for
us, if we solicit the faculties of these members to abuse and perverseness:
Let them rather be commodiously applied to both life's, and so minister to the
use of the temporal, as not to cast off their duty to the Eternal.

But if pleasure and love delight us, and provoke our Senses, there is in
Christian Religion, a love of infinite comfort, and such delights as are not
nauseous and offensive after fruition. There is in it, that which not only
admits of a most vehement and overflowing love, but ought also to be so
beloved; namely, God, blessed for evermore, the only beautiful, delightful,
immortal and Supreme good, whom you may boldly and intimately love as well as
piously; if in the room of your former earthly affections, you entertain
Heavenly and holy desires. If you were ever taken with the magnificence and
dignity of another person, there is nothing more magnificent then God. If with
any thing that might conduce to your honor and glory; there is nothing more
glorious then him: If with the splendor and excellency of pompous shows,
there is nothing more bright, nothing more excellent. If with fairness and
pleasing objects, there is nothing more beautiful. If with verity and
righteousness, there is nothing more just, nothing more true. If with
liberality, there is nothing more bountiful. If with incorruption and
simplicity, there is nothing more sincere, nothing more pure then that Supreme
goodness. Are you troubled that your treasure and store is not proportionable
to your mind? The Earth and the fulness thereof are under his lock: Do you
love any thing that is trusty and firm? There is nothing more friendly, nothing
more faithful then him: Do you love any thing that is beneficial? There is no
greater benefactor. Are you delighted with the gravi^y or gentleness of any
object? there is nothing more terrible then his Almightinesse, nothing more
mild then his goodness. Do you love refreshments in a low estate, and a merry
heart in a plentiful? Joy in prosperity, and comforts in adversity are both
the dispensations of his hand. Wherefore it stands with all reason, that you
should love the giver more then his gifts, and him from whom you have all these
things, more then the things themselves. Riches, Honors, and all things else,
whose present luster attracts and possesses your heart, are not only with
him, but are now also had from him.

Recollect your dispersed, and hitherto ill-placed affections, employ them
wholly in the Divine service. Let this dissolute love and compliance with
worldly desires become chaste piety, and wait upon sacred affairs. Call home
your devious and runnagate thoughts, which opinion and custom have sadly
distracted; and having suppressed old errors, direct your love to his proper
object, bestow it wholly upon your Maker. For all that you can love now is his,
his alone, and none else. For of such infiniteness is he, that those who do
not love him, deal most injuriously: because they cannot love any thing, but
what is his.

But I would have an impartial judgment to consider, whether it be just for
him to love the work, and hate the Workman; and having cast by, and deserted
the Creator of all things, to run and seize upon his creatures every where, and
without any difference, according to his perverse and insatiable lust. Whereas
it behoved him rather to invite God to be gracious and loving to him, by this
very affection to his works, if piously laid out. And now man gives himself
over to the lusts and service of his own detestable figments, and most
unnaturally becomes a lover of the Art, and neglects the Artificer, adores the
Creature, and despises the Creator.

And what have we spoken all this while of those innumerable delights which are
with him? or of the infinite and ravishing sweetness of his ineffable
Goodness? the sacred and inexhaustible treasure of his Love? or when will it
be that any shall be able to express or conceive the dignity and fullness of
any one Attribute that is in him? To love him then is not only delightful,
but needful: For not to love him, whom even then when we love, we cannot
possibly requite, is impious; and not to return him such acknowledgements as
we are able, whom if we would, we can never recompense, is most unjust: For
what shall we render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward us? What shall
we render unto him for this one benefit, that he has given salvation to man by
faith, and ordained that to be most easy in the fact, by which he restored
hope to the subjected world, and eternal life unto lost man?

And that I may now descend unto those things which were sometimes out of his
Covenant, I mean the Nations and Kingdoms of the Gentiles, do you think that
these were made subject to the Roman power, and that the dispersed multitude of
Mankind were incorporated (as it were) into one body under one head for any
other end, but that (as Medicines taken in at the mouth are diffused into all
parts of the body) so the Faith by this means might with more ease be planted
and penetrated into the most remote parts of the world. Otherwise by reason of
different powers, customs, and languages, it had met with fresh and numerous
oppositions, and the passage of the Gospel had been much more difficult.
Blessed Paul himself describing his course in planting the Faith amongst this
very people, writes in his Epistle to the Romans, That from Jerusalem and
round about to Illyricu^ he had fully preached the Gospel of Christ. And how
long (without this preparation in the fullness of time) might this have been in
doing, amongst Nations, either innumerable for multitude, or barbarous for
immanitie? Hence it is that the whole earth now from the rising of the Sun unto
the going down thereof, from the farthest North and the frozen sea breaks forth
into singing, and rings with the glorious name of Jesus Christ. Hence it is,
that all parts of the world flock and run together to the Word of Life: The
Thracian is for the Faith, the African for the Faith, the Syrian for the Faith,
and the Spaniard has received the Faith. A great argument of the divine
clemency may be gathered out of this, that under Augustus Caesar, when the
Roman power was in the height, and Acmie, then the Almighty God came down upon
the earth and assumed flesh. Therefore that I may now make use of those things,
which you also are versed in, it may be clearly proved (if any skilled in your
Histories would assert the truth) that from the first foundation of the Roman
Empire (which is now one thousand one hundred and eighty five years ago) what
ever additions and growth it gathered either in the reign of their first Kings,
This letter was written in the year of our Lord 435.
or afterward under the administration of Consuls, all was permitted by the
only wise, and almighty God to prepare the world against the coming of Christ,
and to make way for the propagation of the Faith.

But I return thither, from whence I have digrest. Love not the world (says
St. John) neither the things that are in the world; for all those things with
delusive, insnaring shows, captivate our sight, and will not suffer us to look
upwards. Let not that faculty of the eye which was ordained for light, be
applied to darkness, being created for the use of life, let it not admit the
causes of death. Fleshly lusts (as it is divinely spoken by the Apostle) war
against the soul, and all their accoutrements are for the ruin and destruction
of it. A vigilant guard do they keep, when they are once permitted to make
head, and after the manner of foreign and expert enemies, with those forces
they take from us, they politickly strengthen and increase their own.

Thus hitherto have I discoursed of those splendid allurements, which are the
chiefest and most taking baits of this subtle world, I mean Riches and
Honors. And with such earnestness have I argued against them, as if those
blandishments had still some force. But what beauty soever they had, when cast
over heretofore with some pleasing adumbrations, it is now quite worn away, and
all that paint and cousenage is fallen off. The world now has scarce the art
to deceive. Those powerful and bewitching looks of things, beautiful
sometimes even to deception, are now withered, and almost loathsome. In former
times it labored to seduce us with its most solid and magnificent glories, and
it could not. Now it turns cheat, and would entice us with toys, and slight
wares, but it cannot. Real riches it never had, and now it is so poor, that it
wants counterfeits. It neither has delectable things for the present, nor
durable for the future; unless we agree to deceive our selves, the world in a
manner cannot deceive us.

But why delay I my stronger arguments? I affirm then that the forces of this
world are dispersed and overthrown, seeing the world it self is now drawing
toward its dissolution, and pants with its last gasps, and dying anhelations.
How much more grievous and bitter will you think this assertion, that for
certain it cannot last very long? What should I trouble my self to tell you
that all the utensils and movables of it are decayed and wasted? And no
marvel that it is driven into these defects, and a consumption of its ancient
strength, when now grown old and weary it stoopes with weakness, and is ready
to fall under the burden of so many ages.

These latter years and decrepitness of time are fraught with evils and
calamities, as old age is with diseases. Our forefathers saw, and we still see
in these last days the plagues of famine, pestilence, war, destruction, and
terrors. All these are so many acute fits and convulsions of the dying world.
Hence it is that such frequent signs are seen in the firmament, excessive
Ecclipses, and faintings of the brightest Luminaries, which is a shaking of the
powers of heaven; sudden and astonishing Earthquakes under our feet,
alterations of time^ and governments, with the monstrous fruitfulness of
living creatures; all which are the prodigies, or fatal symptoms of time
going indeed still on, but fainting, and ready to expire. Nor is this confirmed
by my weak assertions only, but by sacred authority and the Apostolical
Oracles: For there it is written, that upon us the ends of the world are come,
1 Co^. 10.11 Which divine truth seeing it has been spoken so long ago, what
is it that we linger for, or what can we expect? That day, not only ours, but
the last that ever the present world shall see, calls earnestly for our
preparation. Every hour tells us of the coming on of that inevitable hour of our
death, seeing a double danger of two final dissolutions threatens every one in
particular, and all the world in general. Wretched man that I am! the
mortality of this whole frame lies heavily upon my thoughts, as if my own were
not burdensome enough. Wherefore is it that we flatter our selves against
these sure fears. There is no place left for deviation: A most certain decree
is past against us, on the one side is written every man's private dissolution,
and on the other the public and universal.

How much more miserable then is the condition of those men (I will not say, in
these outgoings, or last walks of time, but in these decays of the worlds
goodly things) who neither can enjoy ought that is pleasant at the present, nor
lay up for themselves any hope of true joys hereafter. They miss the fruition
of this short life, and can have no hope of the everlasting: They abuse these
temporal blessings, and shall never be admitted to use the eternal. Their
substance here is very little, but their hope there is none at all. A most
wretched and deplorable condition! unless they make a virtue of this desperate
necessity, and lay hold on the only sovereign remedy of bettering their
estate, by submitting in time to the wholesome rules of heavenly and saving
reason. Especially because the goodliest things of this present time, are such
rags and fragments, that he that loses the whole fraught, and true treasure of
that one precious life which is to come, may be justly said to lose both.

It remains then, that we direct and fix all the powers of our minds upon the
hope of the life to come. Which hope (that you may morefully and clearly
apprehend it) I shall manifest unto you, under a type or example taken from
temporal things. If some man should offer unto another five pieces of silver
this day, but promise him five hundred pieces of gold, if he would stay till
the next morning, and put him to his choice, whither he would have the silver
at present, or the gold upon the day following, is there any doubt to be made,
but he would choose the greater sum, though with a little delay? Go you and do
the like: Compare the Crummes and perishing pittance in this short life, with
the glorious, and enduring rewards of the eternal: And when you have done*
choose not the least and the worst, when you may have the greatest and the best.
The short fruition of a little is not so beneficial, as the expectation of
plenty. But seeing that all the frail goods of this world are not only seen
of us, but also possessed by us: It is most manifest that hope cannot belong
unto this world, in which we both see and enjoy those things we delight in: For
Hope that is seen is not hope; for what a man sees, why does he yet hope for?
Romans 8. ver. 24. Therefore however hope may be abused, and misapplyed to
temporal things, it is most certain that it was given to man and ordained for
the things that are eternal; otherwise it cannot be called hope, unless
something be hoped for, which as yet (or for the present life) is not had.
Therefore the substance of our hope in the world to come is more evident and
manifest, then our hope of substance in the present.

Consider those objects which are the clearest and most visible; when we would
best discern them, we put them not into our eyes, because they are better seen
and judged of at a distance. It is just so in the case of present things and
the future: For the present (as if put into our eyes) are not rightly and
undeceivably seen of us; but the future, because conveniently distant, are most
clearly discerned.

Nor is this trust and Confidence we have of our future happiness built upon
weak or uncertain Authors, but upon our Lord and Master JESUS CHRIST, that
allmighty and faithful witness, who has promised unto the just, a Kingdom
without end, and the ample rewards of a most blessed eternity. Who also by the
ineffable Sacrament of his humanity, being both God and Man, reconciled Man
unto God, and by the mighty and hidden mystery of his passion, absolved the
World from sin. For which cause he was manifested in the flesh, justified in
the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed upon in the
World, and received into glory. Wherefore God also has highly exalted him,
Philip. Chap. 2. ver. 9, 10.
and given him a name which is above every name: that at the name of JESUS
every knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things
under the Earth. And that every tongue should confess that the Lord JESUS is
in glory, both God and King before all ages.

Casting off then the vain and absurd precepts of Philosophy, wherein you
busy your self to no purpose, embrace at last the true and saving Knowledge
of Christ. You shall find even in that, employment enough for your eloquence
and wit, and will quickly discern how far these precepts of piety and truth
surpass the conceits and delirations of Philosophers. For in those rules which
they give, what is there but adulterate virtue, and false wisdom? and what in
ours, but perfect righteousness and sincere truth? Whereupon I shall Justly
conclude, that they indeed usurp the name of Philosophy, but the substance and
life of it is with us. For what manne^ of rules to live by could they give, who
were ignorant of the first Cause, and the Fountain of life? For not knowing
God, and deviating in their first principles from the Author, and the
Wel-spring of Justice; they necessarily erred in the rest: Hence it happened,
that the end of all their studies was vanity and dissension. And if any amongst
them chanced to hit upon some more sober and honest Tenets, these presently
ministered matter of pride and Superstitiousnesse, so that their very Virtue was
not free from vice. It is evident then, that these are they, whose Knowledge is
Earthy, the disputers of this world, the blind guides, who never saw true
justice, nor true wisdom. Can any one of that School of Aristippus be a
teacher of the truth, who in their Doctrine and Conversation differ not from
swine and unclean beasts, seeing they place true happiness in fleshly lusts?
whose God is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame. Can he be a Master
of Sobriety and Virtue, in whose School the riotous, the obscene, and the
adulterer are Philosophers? But leaving these blind leaders, I shall come
again to speak of those things which were the first motives of my writing to
you.

I advise you then, and I beseech you, to cast off all their Axioms, orgeneral
Maxims collected out of their wild and irregular disputations, wherein I have
known you much delighted; and to employ those excellent abilities bestowed
upon you in the study of holy Scripture, and the wholesome instructions of
Christian Philosophers. There shall you be fed with various and delightful
learning, with true and infallible wisdom. There (to incite you to the Faith)
you shall hear the Church speaking to you, though not in these very words, yet
to this purpose, He that believes not the word of God, understands it not.
There you shall hear this frequent admonition; Fear God, because he is your
Master, honor him because he is your Father. There it shall be told you, that
the most acceptable Sacrifice to God are justice and mercy. There you shall be
taught, that, If you love your self, you must necessarily love your neighbor;
for you can never do your self a greater Courtesy, then by doing good to
another. There you shall be taught, that, there can be no worldly cause so
great, as to make the death of a man legal or needful. There you shall hear
this precept against unlawful desires. Resist lust as a most bitter enemy,
that uses to glory in the disgrace of those bodies he overcommeth. There it
will be told you of Covetousness, That it is better not to wish for those
things you want, than to have all that you wish. There you shall hear, that he
that is angry, when he is provoked, is never not angry, but when not provoked.
There it will be told you of your Enemies, Love them that hate you, for all men
love those that love them. There you shall hear, that he lays up his treasure
safeliest, who gives it to the poor, for that cannot be lost which is lent to
the Lord. There it will be told you, that the fruit of holy marriage is
chastity. There you shall hear, that the troubles of this World happen as well
to the just, as the unjust. There it will be told you, that it is a more
dangerous sickness to have the mind infected with vices, then the body with
diseases. There to show you the way of peace and gentleness you shall hear,
that amongst impatient men, their likeness of manners is the cause of their
discord. There to keep you from following the bad examples of others, it will
be told you, That the wise man gains by the fool, as well as by the prudent:
the one shows him what to imitate, the other what to eschew. There also you
shall hear all these following precepts. That the ignorance of many things is
better then their Knowledge; and that therefore the goodness or mercy of God
is as great in his hidden will, as in his revealed. That you should give God
thanks as well for adversity, as for prosperity; and confess in prosperity,
that you have not deserved it. That there is no such thing as Ear; and for
this let the Heathens examine their own^ Laws, which punish none but wilful
and premeditating offenders. There to keep you stable in faith, it will be told
you, That he that will be faithful, must not be suspicious; for we never
suspect, but what we slowly believe. There also you shall hear, that
Christians when they give any attention to the noise and inticements of their
passions, fall headlong from Heaven unto Earth. It will be also told you there,
that seeing the wicked do sometimes receive good things in this world, and the
just are afflicted by the unrighteous, those that believe not the final
Judgment of God after this life, do (as far as it lies in them) make God
unjust, and far be this from your thoughts. There it will be told you about
your private affairs, that what you would have hidden from men, you should
never do, what from God, ye should never think. There you shall here this
rebuke of deceivers; It is lesser damage to be deceived, then to deceive.
Lastly you shall hear this reproof of self-conceit, or a fond opinion of our
own worth; fly vanity, and so much the more, the better thou art: all other
vices increase by vitiousnesse, but vanity is oftentimes a bubble that swims
upon the face of Virtue. These few rules, as a taste and invitation, I have (out
of many more) inserted here for your use.

But if you will now turn your Eyes toward the sacred Oracles, and come your
self to be a searcher of those Heavenly treasures, I know not which will most
ravish you, the Casket, or the Jewel, the Language or the Matter. For the
Book of God, while it shines and glitters with glorious irradiations within,
does after the manner of most precious gems, drive the beholders Eyes into a
strong and restless admiration of its most rich and inscrutable brightness.
But let not the weakness of your Eyes make you shun this Divine light, but
warm your Soul at the beams of it, and learn to feed your inward man with
this mystical and healthful food.

I doubt not but (by the powerful working of our merciful God upon your
heart,) I shall shortly find you an unfeyned lover of this true Philosophy,
and a resolute opposer of the false; renouncing also all worldly oblectations,
and earnestly coveting the true and eternal. For it is a point of great
impiety and imprudence, seeing God wrought so many mavelous things for the
Salvation of man, that he should do nothing for himself: and seeing that in all
his wonderful works he had a most special reguard of our good, we our selves
should especially neglect it. Now the right way to care for our Souls, is to
yield our selves to the love and the service of God: For true happiness is
obtained by contemning the false felicities of this World, and by a wise
abdication of all earthly d^lights, that we may become the Chaste and faithful
lovers of the Heavenly. Wherefore henceforth let all your words and actions be
done either to the glory of God, or for Gods sake. Get Innocence for your
Companion, and she is so faithful, that she will be also your defendresse. It
is a worthy enterprise to follow after Virtue, and to perform something while
we live, for the example and the good of others: nor is it to be doubted, but
the mind, by a virtuous course of life, will quickly free it self from those
intanglements and deviations it has been formerly accustomed to. That great
Physician to whose cure and care we offer our selves, will daily strengthen and
perfect our recovery.

And what estimation or value (when in this state) can you lay upon those
glorious remunerations that will be laid up for you against the day of
recompense? You see that God, even in this life, has mercifully distributed
unto all (without any difference) his most pleasant and useful light. The
pious and the impious are both allowed the same Sun, all the creatures
obediently submit themselves to their service: And the whole Earth with the
fulness thereof is the indifferent possession of the just and unjust. Seeing
then that he has given such excellent things unto the impious, how much more
glorious are those things which he reserves for the pious? he that is so great
in his free gifts, how excellent will he be in his rewards? He that is so Royal
in his daily bounty, and ordinary magnificence; how transcendent will he be in
his remunerations and requitalls? Ineffable and beyond all conception are those
things which God has prepared for those that love him; And that they are so is
most certain: For it is altogether incomprehensible, and passes the
understanding of his most chosen vessels to tell, how great his reward shall be
unto the just, who has given so much to the unthankful and the unbelieving.

Take up your Eyes from the Earth, and look about you, my most dear Valerian;
spread forth your sails, and hasten from this stormy Sea of Secular
negotiations, into the calm and secure harbor of Christian Religion. This is
the only Haven into which we all drive from the raging Surges of this
malicious World. This is our shelter from the loud and persecuting whirlwinds
of time: Here is our sure station and certain rest: Here a large and silent
recesse, secluded from the World, opens and offers it self unto us. Here a
pleasant, serene tranquillity shines upon us. Hither when you are come, your
weather-beaten Vessel (after all your fruitless toiles) shall at last find
rest, and securely ride at the Anchor of the Cross.

But it is time now that I should make an end. Let then (I beseech you,) the
truth and the force of Heavenly Doctrine Epitomized here by me, be approved of
and used by you to the glory of God and your own good. These are all my
precepts at present: pardon the length, and acknowledge my love.

Gloria tibi mitissime Jesu!
Primitive Holiness, Set forth in the LIFE of blessed PAULINUS, The most
Reverend, and Learned BISHOP of NOLA:

Collected out of his own Works, and other Primitive Authors by Henry Vaughan,
Silurist.

2 Kings cap. 2. v.r. 12. My Father, my Father, the Chariot of Israel, and the
Horsemen thereof.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1654.

TO THE READER.
IF thou love Heaven, and the beauty of Immortality, here is a guide will
lead thee into that house of light. The earth at present is not worth the
enjoying, it is corrupt, and poisoned with the curse. I exhort thee therefore
to look after a better country, an inheritance that is undefiled and fades not
away. If thou do this, thou shall have a portion given thee here, when all
things shall be made new. In the mean time I commend unto thee the memory of
that restorer, and the reward he shall bring with him in the end of this world,
which truly draws near, if it be not at the door. Dote not any more upon a
withered, rotten Gourd, upon the seducements and falsehood of a most odious,
decayed Prostitute; but look up to Heaven, where wealth without want, delight
without dist^st, and joy without sorrow (like undefiled and incorruptible
Virgins) sit clothed with light, and crowned with glory. Let me incite thee to
this speculation in the language of Ferarius: Define tandem aliquando prono in
terram vultu, vel praeter naturam brutum animal, vel ante diem silicernium
videri. Coelum suspice, ad quod natus, ad quod erecta statura tuendum
tenendumque factus es. Immortalia sydera caducis flosculis praefer, aut eadem
esse Coeli flores existimato nostratibus Amaranthis diuturniores. Farewell, and
neglect not thy own happiness.

H.V.

THE LIFE OF HOLY PAVLINVS, THE BISHOP of NOLA.
BEn Sirach finishing his Catalogue of holy men (to seal up the sum, and to
make his list complete) brings in Simon the Son of Onias: And (after a short
narration of his pious care in repairing and fortifying the Temple) he
descends to the particular excellencies, and sacred perfections of his person.
Which to render the more fresh and sweet unto posterity, he adornes with these
bright and flowrie Encomiums.

1. He was as the Morning Star in the midst of a cloud, and as the Moon at the
full.

2. As the Sun shining upon the temple of the most high, and as the Rainbow
giving light in the bright clouds.

3. As the flower of Roses in the spring of the year, as Lilies by the rivers
of waters, and as the branches of the Frankincense-tree in the time of summer.

4. As fire and Incense in the Censer, and as a vessel of beaten gold set with
all manner of precious stones.

5. As a fair Olive Tree budding forth fruit, and as a Cypress tree which
grows up to the clouds.

6. When he put on the robe of honor, and was clothed with the perfection of
glory, when he went up to the holy Altar, he made the garment of holiness
honorable.

Most great (indeed) and most glorious Assimilations, full of life, and full of
freshness! but in all this beauty of holiness, in all these spices and
flowers of the Spouse, there is nothing too much, nothing too great for our
most great and holy Paulinus. The Saints of God (though wandering in
sheepskins, and goat skins, in caves, and in mountains) become eminently
famous, and leave behind them a more glorious and enduring memory, then the
most prosperous tyrants of this world; which like noisome exhalations, moving
for a time in the Eye of the Sun, fall afterward to the earth, where they rot
and perish under the chains of darkness. The fame of holy men (like the
Kingdom of God) is a seed that grows secretly; the dew that feeds these plants
comes from him, that sees in secret, but rewards openly. They are those trees
in the Poet, Which silently, and by none seen,
Grow great and green.


While they labor to conceal, and obscure themselves, they shine the more. And
this (says Athanasius in the life of Antonie the great) is the goodness of
God, who uses to glorify his servants, though unwilling, that by their
examples he may condemn the world, and teach men, that holiness is not above
the reach of humane nature. Apposite to my present purpose is all this
prolusion, both because this blessed Bishop (whose life I here adventure to
publish) was a person of miraculous perfections and holiness, and because
withal he did most diligently endeavor to vilify his own excellent
abilities, and to make himself of no account. But Pearls, though set in lead,
will not lose their brightness; and a virtuous life shines most in an obscure
livelihood.

In the explication of his life I shall follow first the method of Nature,
afterward of Grace: I shall begin with his Birth, Education, and Maturitie;
and end with his Conversion, Improvements, and Perfection. To make my entrance
then into the work, I find that he was born in the City of Bordeaux in
Gascoyne, in the year of our Lord three hundred and fifty three, Constantius
the Arian reigning in the East, and Constans in the West, and He subscribed to
the damnable heresy of Arius, as both Hierome and Athanasius testify against
him.
Liberius being Bishop of Rome: In a Golden Age, when Religion and Learning
kissed each other, and equally flourished. So that he had the happiness to shine
in an age that loved light, and to multiply his own by the light of others. It
was the fashion then of the Roman Senators to build them sumptuous houses in
their Country-livings, that they might have the pleasure and convenience of
retiring thither from the tumult and noise of that great City, which sometimes
was, and would be yet the head of the World. Upon such an occasion (without
doubt) was Bordeaux honored with the birth of Paulinus, his Fathers estate
lying not far off, about the town of Embrau, upon the River Garumna, which
rising out of the Pyrene hills washes that part of Guienne with a pleasant
stream, and then runs into the Aquitane sea. By this happy accident came France
to lay claim to Paulinus, which she makes no small boast of at this day. But
his Country indeed (if we follow his descent, which is the right way to find
it) is Italy, and Rome it self; his Ancestors were all Patricians, and
honored (by a long succession) with the Consular purple. His Patrimonies were
large, and more becoming a Prince then a private man; for besides those
possessions in the City of Bordeaux, and by the River Garumna, he had other
most ample Inheritances in Italy about Narbone and Nola, and in Rome it self.
And for this we have a pregnant testimony out of Ausonius, who laboring to
dissuade him from Evangelical poverty, and that obscure course of life (as he
is pleased to term it) lays before him (as the most moving arguments) the
desolation of his ancient house, with the ruin and sequestration (as it were)
of his large possessions; his words are these. Ne raptam sparsamque domum, etc.
Let me not weep to see thy ravished house
All sad and silent, without Lord or Spouse,
And all those vast dominions once thine own,
Torn 'twixt a hundred slaves to me unknown.


But what account he made of these earthly possessions, will appear best by
his own words in his fifth Epistle to Severus: Ergo ^ihil in hunc mundum
inferentibus substantiam rerum temporalium quasi tonfile v^ll^s app^^it, etc.
God (says he) lays these temporal accommodations upon us that come naked into
this world, as a fleece of wool which is to be sheared off. He puts it not as
a load to hinder us, whom it behooves to be born light and active, but as a
certain matter which rightly used may be beneficial. And when he bestows any
thing upon us, that is either dear or pleasant to us, he gives it for this end,
that by parting with it, it may be a testimonial, or token of our love and
devotion toward God, seeing we neglect the fruition of our best present things
for his sake, who will amply reward us in the future.

He had conferred upon him all the ornaments of humane life which man could be
blessed with. He was nobly born, rich, and beautiful, of constitution slender
and delicate, but every way fitted for virtuous employment; of an excellent
wit, a happy memory, and, which sweetened all these gracious concessions, of a
most mild and modest disposition. To bring these seeds to perfection, his
Father (having a care of him equal to his degree) caused him to be brought up
under the regiment of Decius magnus Ausonius, a famous Poet and Orator, who at
that time kept a School of Grammar and Rhetoric in the City of Bordeaux. The
Ingenuity and sweetness of Paulinus so overcame and ravished Ausonius, that he
used all possible skill and diligence, to adorn and perfect those natural
abilities which he so much loved and admired in this hopeful plant. The effect
was, that he exceeded his Master. Ausonius upon this being called to the Court
by the old Emperor Valentinian; Paulinus gave himself to the study of the
Civil Law, and the acute and learned pleadings of that age, wherein he was so
excellent, that the Emperor taking notice of his Abilities, took order for his
Election into the Senate, and this a very long time before his Tutor attained
to that honor. This praecedence of eloquence and honor Cedimus ingenio
quantum praecedimus aeyo, Assurgit Musae nostra Camaena tuae. Sic and fastorum
titulo prior, and tua Romae Praecessit nostrum sella curulis ebur.
Ausonius himself confesses; but having a greater witness, I shall leave his
testimony to the Margin, to make room for the other. Take then (if it please
you) the Judgment of that glorious and Eloquent Doctor Saint Hierome, for
thus he writes in his thirteenth Epist. to Paulinus, O si mihi liceret
istiusmodi ingenium non per Aonios montes and Heliconis vertices, ut poetae
canunt, sed per Sion, etc. O that I were able (says he) to extol and publish
your ingenuity and holy learning, not upon the Aonian hills, or the tops of
Helicon (as the Poets sing) but upon the Mountains of Sion and Sinai; that I
might preach there what I have learnt from you, and deliver that sacred
mysteries of Scripture through your hands; I might then have something to
speak, which learned Greece could never boast of. And in another place, A most
pregnant wit you have, and an infinite treasure of words, which easily and
ap^ly flow from you, and both the easiness and the aptness are judiciously
mixed.

To these Divine favors already conferred upon him, God added another great
blessing, the Crown of his youth, and the Comfort of his age; I mean Therasia,
a Noble Roman Virgin, whom he took to wife in the midst of his honors, and
who afterward (of her own free will) most joyfully parted with them all, and
with her own pleasant possessions to follow Christ in the regeneration.

At this height of honors, and growing repute, he was employed (upon some
concernments of the Empire) into Italy, France, and Spain; Where he was
detained (together with his dear consort) for the space of almost fifteen
years; during which time, he secretly labored to make himself acquainted with
the glorious Fathers of that age, and (the Spirit of God now beginning to
breath upon him) he was strongly moved to embrace the Christian Faith. In
these travells of his, it was his fortune to arrive at Millaine, where Saint
Augustine, and Alypius, the Bishop of Tagasta in Africa, did the Sojourne; here
by accident he was known of Alpyius, though unknown to him; as we see it often
fall out, that great persons are known of many, which to them are unknown.

Much about this time (which was the eight and thirtieth year of his age,) he
retired privately with his wife into the City of Bordeaux. And the hour being
now come, that the singing of birds should be heard, and the lips which were
asleep should speak: He was there by the hands of holy Delphinus (who then
sat Bishop in the Sea of Bordeaux,) publicly baptized, from which time
forward he renounced all his Secular acquaintance, associating himself to the
most strict and pious livers in that age, especially to Saint Ambrose the
Bishop of Millan, and Saint Martin the Bishop of Tours. That he was baptized
about the eight and thirtieth year of his age, is clear by his own words in
his first Epistle to Saint Augustine, Nolo in me corporalis ^rtus, magis quam
spiritalis exortus aetatem consideres, etc. I would not (says he) that you
consider my temporal age, so much as my spiritual; my age in the flesh is the
same with that Cripple, who was healed in the beautiful gate by the power of
Christ working by his Apostles; but my age in the regeneration is the same with
the blessed Infants, who by the wounds intended for Christ himself, became the
first fruits unto Christ, and by the loss of their innocent blood, did
foreshew the slaughter of the Lamb, and the passion of our Lord. Now for the
first, Saint Luke tells us, That the Cripple upon whom this miracle of healing
was shown, was above forty years of age (Acts Chap. 4. ver. 22.) and for the
Infants, the Evangelists words are, that Herod sent forth his messengers, and
slew all the Male Children that were in Bethlem, and the Coasts thereof, from
two years old and under. So that considering all the Circumstances which offer
themselves for the clearing of this point, it will evidently appear, that he
was baptized (as I have said before) in the eight and thirtieth year of his
age. The only Instrument which God was pleased to ordain, and employ upon the
Earth for his Conversion, was his dear and Virtuous Wife Therasia; Which makes
me conjecture, that she was borne of Christian parents, and had received the
faith from her infancy. This Ausonius his old Tutor, (who was scarce a good
Chrihian,) forgot not to upraid him with in most injurious terms, calling her
Tanaquil, and the Imperatrix of her Husband: To which passionate passages
(though sadly resented) Paulinus r^plyed with all the humanity and sweetness
which language could expr^sse. Thus Ausonius barks at him. Unde istam meruit
non foelix Charta repulsam?
Hostis ab host tamen, etc.
-- how could that paper sent,
That luckless paper, merit thy contempt?
Even foe to fo (though furiously) replies;
And the defied, his Enemy defies:
Amidst the swords and wounds there is a Salute.
Rocks answer man, and though hard, are not mute.
Nature made nothing dumb, nothing unkind:
The trees and leaves speak trembling to the wind.
If thou do fear discoveries, and the blot
Of my love, Tanaquil shall know it not.


To this Poetical fury, Paulinus reposeth with that Native mildness, which he
was wholly composed of: Continuata meae durare silentia linguae,
Te nunquam tacito memoras; placit amque latebris
Desidiam exprobras; neglectaeque insuper addis
Crimen amicitiae; formidatamque Jugalem
Objicis, and durum iacis in mea viscera versum, etc.
Obdurate still, and tongue-tyed you accuse
(Though yours is ever vocal) my dull muse;
You blame my Lazy, lurking life, and add
I scorn your love, a Calumny most sad;
Then tell me, that I fear my wife, and dart
Harsh, cutting words against my dearest heart.
Leave, learned Father, leave this bitter Course,
My studies are not turned unto the worse;
I am not mad, nor idle; nor deny
Your great deserts, and my debt, nor have I
A wife like Tanaquil as wildly you
Object, but a Lucretia, chaste and true.


To avoid these clamours of Ausonius, and the dangerous solicitations of his
great kindred and friends, he left Bordeaux and Nola, and retired into the
Mountanous and solitary parts of Spain, about Barcin^e and Bilbilis upon the
River Sale. Two journeyes he made into Spain, this last, and his first (before
his baptism) upon the Emperors affairs; he Sojourned then in new Casti^e, in
the City of Complutum now called Alcala de henares, where his wife Therasia was
delivered of her only Son Celsus, who died upon the eighth day after his
birth. Holy Paulinus in his Panegyric upon the death of Celsus the Son of
Pneumatius, by his Wife Fid^lis, takes occasion to mention the early death of
this blessed infant, Hoc pignus commune superno in lumine Celsu
Credit vivorum lacte favisque frui.
Aut cum Bethlaeis infantibus in Paradiso
(Quos malus Herodes perculit invidia,)
Inter odoratum ludit nemus, etc.
This pledge of your joint love, to Heaven now fled,
With honey-combs and milk of life is fed.
Or with the Bethlem-Babes (whom Herod's rage
Killed in their tender, happy, holy age)
Does walk the groves of Paradise, and make
Garlands, which those young Martyrs from him take.
With these his Eyes on the mild lamb are fixed,
A Virgin-Child with Virgin-infants mixed.
Such is my Celsus too, who soon as given,
Was taken back (on the eighth day) to Heaven,
To whom at Alcala I sadly gave
Amongst the Martyrs Tombs a little grave.
He now with yours (gone both the blessed way,)
Amongst the trees of life does smile and play;
And this one drop of our mixed blood may be
A light for my Therasia, and for me.


These distant and obscure retirements he made choice of, because he would not
be known of any, nor hindered in his cours^; Which at Nola, and the adjacent
parts of Rome (where his Secular honors an I ancient descent made all the
people obsequious to him) could not possibly be effected Besides very few in
those Western parts (especially of the Nobility) had at that time received the
Christian Faith; for they looked upon it as a most degenerate, unmanly
profession: such a good opinion had those rough times of peace and humility.
This made him less looked after by the Inhabitants of those parts; and his own
friends not knowing what became of him, began to give him over, and not only
to withdraw from him in their care, but in their affections also, giving out
that he was mad, and besides himself. But all this moved him not: he was not
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, he counted all things dung that he might gain
his Savior, and he fainted not, but endured, as seeing him that is invisible.
The first step to Christianity (says Saint Hierome) is to contemn the
censures of men. St. Hierome Ep. 26.
This foundation he laid, and upon this he built; he had given himself wholly
to Christ, and rejected the world; he took part with that man of sorrows, and
suffered the scoffs and reproaches of these men of mirth. The people are the
many waters, he turned their froth and some into pearls, and wearied all
weathers with an unimpaired Superstitie. He was sounded upon that Rock, which
is not worn with time, but wears all that oppose it. Some dispositions love to
stand in rain, and affect wind and showers beyond Music. Paulinus sure was of
this temper; he preferred the indignation and hatred of the multitude to their
love, he would not buy their friendship with the loss of Heaven, nor call
those Saints and propagators, who were Devils and destroyers. What courage he
had in such tempests, may be seen in every line almost of his works; I shall
insert one or two out of his 6th Epistle to Severus: Utinam, frater mi, digni
habeamur qui maledicamur, and notemur, and conteramur, atque etiam
interficiamur in nomine Jesu Christi, dum non ipse occidatur Christus in nobis.
etc. I would (says he) my dear brother, that we might be counted worthy to
suffer reproach, to be branded and trodden upon; Yea, and to be killed for the
name of Christ, so that Christ be not killed in us. Then at last should we
tread upon the Adder, and the Dragon, and bruise the head of the old Serpent.
But (alas!) we as yet relish this World, and do but pretend to love Christ; we
love indeed to be commended and cherished for professing his name, but we love
not to be troubled and afflicted for his sake. And in his first Epistle to
Aper; O blessed displeasures (says he) to displease men by pleasing Christ!
Let us take heed of the love of such, who will be pleased without Christ. It is
an observation of the Readers of Saint Cyprian, quod in ejus scriptis singula
prope verb^ Martyrium spirant, that through all his writings, almost every word
does breath Martyrdom. His expressions are all Spirit and Passion, as if he
had writ them with his blood, and conveyed the anguish of his sufferings into
his writings. I dare not say so much of Paulinus, nor of any other Father of
the Church; but I fear not to say that Paulinus both durst, and (had he been
called to it) would have laid down his life for the love of Christ.

Four years he spent in these remote parts of Spain, during which time, he
did lead a most solitary and austere life, laboring by all means to conceal
and vilify himself. But a City that is built upon a hill cannot be hidden; his
holiness and humility had so awaked the Common people dwelling about the place
of his abode, that they would not rest again till they had him for their
Minister. This most honorable and sacred charge he would by no means
adventure to undergo, judging himself a most unworthy vile sinner, not fit to
deal in holy Scripture, much less to handle and administer the mystical
Elements of life. But God, who had ordained him for it, would not suffer this.
For the people (not without violence and some rudeness,) carried him away to
Barcinoe, where holy Lampius, then Bishop of that Sea, did upon Christmasse day
by the laying on of his hands, consecrate him a faithful steward and learned
dispenser of the Mysteries of God. This passage we have fully related in his
sixth Epistle to Severus, Nos modo in Barcinonensi (ut ante Scrips^ram)
civitate consistimus, etc. I live now (says he) as I formerly writ to you in
the City of Barcinoe, where (since the last letters received from you) I was by
the violence of the people (God, I believe, having foreordained it) compelled
to enter into holy Orders upon that day in which our Lord was born. I confess
it was done against my will, not for any dislike that I have to the place (for
Christ is my witness, that my highest desire was to begin my employment in his
house with the office and honor of a doorkeeper) but having designed my self
(as you know) For Nola.
elsewhere, I was much terrified with this sudden and unexpected pleasure of
the Divine will: However I refused it not, but submitted with all humility, and
have put my neck into the Yoke of Christ, though altogether unworthy and
unable. I see now that I have meddled with things that are too wonderful for me;
I am made a Steward of the Secrets of the Almighty, and honored with the
dispensation of Heavenly things, and being called nearer to my Master, I am
exercised about the Body, about the Spirit, and the glory of Jesus Christ. The
narrowness of my understanding cannot comprehend the signification of this
high and sacred dignity, and I tremble every minute (when I consider my own
infirmities) to think of the great burden that is laid upon me. But he that
gives wisdom to his little ones, and has perfected praise out of the mouths
of babes and sucklings, is able to finish what he begun in me, that by his
mighty working, I may be made worthy, who was most unworthy to be called. The
Priesthood is an Office belonging to the Kingdom of Heaven. It is an honor
that is ranged upon holy ground, and by it self. Worldly dignities, which are
but humane inventions, are, and may be acquired (with less offense) by humane
means, as bribery, ambition, and policy. But to take hold of this white robe
with such dirty hands, is nothing less then to spit in the face of Christ, and
to dishonor his Ordinance. He that does it, and he that permits it to be done,
agree like Herod and Pilate, to despise and crucify him. They that Countenance
and ratify such disorders, take care to provide so many Judasses to betray
Christ, and then vote the treason to be lawful. Every man can speak, but every
man cannot preach: Tongues and the gift of tongues are not the same things: The
wisdom of God has depth and rich^s, and things hard to be spoken, as well as
milk, and the first principles of his Oracles. We have amongst us many
builders with hay and stubble, but let them, and those that hired them, take
heed how they build; The trial will be by fire, and by a consuming fire. The
hidden things of dishonest, the walking in Craftiness, and the handling
deceitfully of the word of God they are well versed in; b^ true sanctify, and
the S^irit of God (which Saint Paul thought he had) I am very sure they have
not.

A modest reader would now think that Paulinus had removed himself far
enough from the elaborate temptations, and clamorous pursuits of Ausonius; But
even in this will he be deceived. For at the fourth years end, did the
Incantations of this busy and obstinate Charmer find him out. God (no doubt)
providing for the security of his servant all that while, by delaying them in
several regions, or else by concealing the abode of his beloved votary, from
this pursuer of Souls. For with all the artifice and strength of wit, did he
set upon him in this last letter, which the divine providence suffered not to
come into his hand, till he had set both his hands to the plough, and sealed his
conformation with that indelible Character. And now having set a hedge about
his beloved, he suffered this Foul of the Evening to fly over, which chattered
to him in these melodious numbers. Vertisti, Pauline, tu^s dulcissim^ mores?
etc.
Sweet Paulinus, is thy nature turned?
Have I so long in vain thy absence mourned?
Will thou, my glory, and great Romes delight,
The Senates prop, their oracle, and light,
In Bilbilis and Calagurris dwell,
Changing thy Ivorie-chair for a dark Cell?
Wilt bury there thy Purple, and contemn
All the great honors of thy noble stem?


To this Roman Magic, and most pernicious Elegancy, Paulinus replied with a
certain sacred and serene simplicity, which proved so piercing, and powerful,
that he was never after troubled with the Poetry of Ausonius. -- Revoe andum me
tibi credam,
Cum steriles fundas non ad divina percatus?
Castatidis supplex averso numine musis, etc.
Shall I believe you can make me return,
Who pour your fruitless prayers when you mourn,
Not to your Maker? Who can hear you cry:
But to the fabled Nymphs of Castalie?
You never shall by such false Gods bring me
Either to Rome, or to your company.
As for those former things you once did know,
And which you still call mine, I freely now
Confess, I am not he, whom you knew then;
I have dyed since, and have been borne again.
Nor dare I think my sage instructor can
Believe it error, for redeemed man
To serve his great redeemer. I grieve not,
But glory so to err. Let the wise knot
Of worldlings call me fool; I slight their noise,
And hear my God approving of my choice.
Man is but glass, a building of no trust,
A moving shade, and, without Christ, mere dust:
His choice in life concerns the Chooser much:
For when he dies, his good or ill (just such
As here it was) goes with him hence, and stays
Still by him, his strict Judge in the last days.
These serious thoughts take up my soul, and I
While yet it is daylight, fix my busy eye
Upon his sacred Rules, life's precious sum,
Who in the twilight of the world shall come
To judge the lofty looks, and show mankind
The difference 'twixt the ill and well inclined.
This second coming of the worlds great King
Makes my heart tremble, and does timely bring
A saving care into my watchful soul,
Lest in that day all vitiated and foul
I should be found: That day, times utmost line,
When all shall perish, but what is divine.
When the great Trumpets mighty blast shall shake
The earths foundations, till the hard Rocks quake,
And melt like piles of snow, when lightnings move
Like hail, and the white thrones are set above.
That day, when sent in glory by the Father,
The Prince of life his blessed Elect shall gather;
Millions of Angels round about him flying,
While all the kindreds of the earth are crying,
And he enthroned upon the clouds shall give
His last just sentence, who must die, who live.
This is the fear this is the saving care,
That makes me leave false honors, and that share
Which fell to me of this frail world; lest by
A frequent use of present pleasures I
Should quite forget the future, and let in
Foul Atheism, or some presumptuous sin.
Now by their loss I have secured my life,
And bought my peace even with the cause of strife.
I live to him, who gave me life and breath,
And without fear expect the hour of death.
If you like this, bid joy to my rich state,
If not, leave me to Christ at any rate.


Being now ordained a Minister of holy things, and a feeder of the flock of
Christ, that he might be enabled to render a joyful account at the appearance
of the great Shepherd, he resolved with all convenient expedition to sell and
give away all his large and Princely Possessions in Italy and France; which
hithert^ he had not disposed of; for he looked upon his great Patrimonies as
matters of distraction and backsliding, the thoughts and solicitousnesse about
such vast revenues disturbing his pious affections, and necessarily intruding
into his most holy exercitations. Upon this rare resolution he returns with
his faithful Consort into France, leaving Barcinoe and holy Lampius in much
sorrow for his departure. For though he had entered there into the Ministry,
yet was he no member of that Diocese. And here (says Uranius, who was his
Presbyter, and wrote a brief narration of his life) did he open his Treasuries
to the poor and the stranger. He did not only refresh his neighbors, but sent
messengers into other remote parts to summon the naked, and the hungry to this
great Feast, where they were both fed and clothed with his own hands. He eased
the oppressed, freed the captives, paid the debts of whole families, and
redeemed diverse persons that were become bondslaves to their creditors.
Briefly, he sold all that he had, and distributed the money amongst the poor,
not reserving one penny either for himself, or his dear Therasia. Saint Ambrose
in his thirtieth Epistle to Sabinus confirms this relation: Paulinum
splendore generis in partibus Aquitaniae nulli secun^um, venditis facultatibus
tam ^uis quametiam conjugalibus; etc. Paulinus (says he) the most eminent for
his Nobility in all the parts of Aquitane, having sold away all his
patrimonies, together with the goods of his wife, did out of pure love to Jesus
Christ divide all that vast Sum of Money amongst the poor; and he himself
from a rich S^nator is become a most poor man, having cast off that heavy
secular burden, and forsaken his own house, his country, and his kindred, that
he might with more earnestness follow Christ. His Wife also, as nobly
descended, and as zealous for the Faith as himself, cons^nted to all his
desires, and having given away all her own large possessions, lives with her
husband in a little thatched cottage, rich in nothing but the hidden treasures
of Religion and holiness. Saint Augustine also in his first book de Civitate
Dei, and the tenth Chapter, celebrates him with the like testimony: Our
Paulinus (says he) from a man most splendidly rich, became most poor most
willingly, and most richly holy. He labored not to add field unto field, nor
to enclose himself in C^dar and Ivory, and the drossie dark gold of this
world, but to enter through the gates into the precious light of that City,
which is of pure gold like unto clear glass. He left some few things in this
world, to enjoy all in the world to come. A great performance certainly, and a
most fair approach toward the Kingdom of heaven. He that fights with dust,
comes off well, if it blinds him not. To slight words, and the names of
temptations, is easy, but to deal so with the matter, and substance of them,
is a task. Conscience has Music, and light, as well as discord and darkness:
And the triumphs of it are as familiar after good works, as the Checks of it
after bad. It is no heresy in devotion to be sensible of our smallest
Victories over the World. But how far he was from thinking this a Victory, may
be easily gathered out of his own^ words in his second Epistle to Severus;
Facile nobis bona, etc. The goods (says he) I carried about me, by the
slipping of my skirt out of my hand, fell easily from me: And those things
which I brought not into this World, and could not carry out of it, being only
lent me for a time, I restored again. I pulled them not as the skin off my
back, but laid them by, as a garment I had sometimes worn. But now comes the
difficulty upon me, when those things which are truly mine, as my heart, my
Soul, and my works must be presented and given a living Sacrifice unto God. The
abdication of this World, and the giving of our temporal goods amongst the
poor, is not the running of the race, but a preparing to run; it is not the
end, but the beginning, and first step of our Journey. He that striveth for
masteries, shall not be crowned, except he first strive lawfully; And he that
is to swim over a River, cannot do it by putting off his clothes only, he
must put his body also into the stream, and with the motion of his arms, his
hands and feet, pass through the violence of the Brook, and then rest upon
the further side of it. And in his 12th Epistle, he cries out, O miserable and
vain men! We believe that we bestow something upon the poor: we trade and
lend, and would be counted liberal, when we are most covetous. The most
unconscionable userers upon Earth are not so greedy as we are, nor their
interest and exactions so unreasonable as ours. We purchase Heaven with Earth,
happiness with misery, and immortality with rust and rottenness. Such another
Divine rapture is that in his Poems. -- Et res magna videtur,
Merc ari propriam de re pereunt^ salutem?
Perpetuis mutare caduca? etc.
-- And is the bargain thought too dear,
To give for Heaven our frail subsistence here?
To change our mortal with immortal homes,
And purchase the bright Stars with darksome stones?
Behold! my God (a rate great as his breath!)
On the sad cross bought me with bitter death,
Did put on flesh, and suffe'rd for our good,
For ours, (vile slaves!) the loss of his dear blood.


We see by these Manifesto's what account he made of this great deed; so
great, that none now adays think of doing it. Go thy way, sell whatsoever
thou have, and give to the poor, is a commandment, as well as, take up the
Cross and follow me. This last cannot be done, but by doing the first. Well
sell oftentimes, but seldom give: and happily that is the reason we sell so
often. He that keeps all to himself, takes not the right way to thrive. The
Corn that lies in the Granarie will bring no harvest. It is most commonly the
food of vermin, and some creatures of the night and darkness. Charity is a
relic of Paradise, and pity is a strong argument that we are all descended
from one man: He that carries this rare Jewel about him, will every where
meet with some kindred. He is quickly acquainted with distressed persons, and
their first sight warmes his blood. I could believe, that the word stranger is
a notion received from the posterity of Cain, who killed Abel. The Hebrews in
their own tribes, called those of the farthest degree, brothers; and sure they
erred less from the law of pure Nature, then the rest of the Nations, which
were left to their own lusts. The afflictions of man are more moving then of
any other Creature; for he only is a stranger here, where all things else are
at home. But the losing of his innocence, and his device of Tyranny have made
him unpittied, and forfeited a prerogative, that would have prevailed more by
submission, then all his posterity shall do by opposition. Not to give to one
that lacks, is a kind of murder: Want and famine are destroyers as well as the
sword, and rage very frequently in private, when they are not thought of in the
Public. The blessed JESUS who came into the World to rectify Nature, and to
take away the inveterate corruptions of man, was not more in any of his
precepts, then in that which bids us Love one another. This is the cement not
only of this World, but of that other which is to come. Blessed are the
merciful; and, give to him that asks thee, proceeded from the same lips of
truth. And in his description of the last judgment, he grounds the sentence of
condemnation pronounced against the wicked upon no other fact, but because they
did not cloth the naked, feed the hungry, and take in the stranger. Love
covers a multitude of sins, and God loves the cheerful giver. But this is not
our whole duty: though we give our bodies to be burnt, and give all our goods
unto the poor, yet without holiness we shall never see the face of God.
Darkness cannot stand in the presence of light, and flesh and blood cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God. The great difficulty then (as our holy Bishop here
says) is to become a living sacrifice; and truly the next way to it, is by an
Evangelical disposing of these outward encumbrances; this will open and prepare
the way before us, though it takes nothing from the length of it. The Hawke
proines and rouseth before she flies, but that brings her not to the mark:
Preparations, and the distant flourishes of Array will not get the field, but
action, and the pursuance of it.

His Estate in France being thus disposed of, he retired into Italy; where
having done the like to his Patrimonies there, he came to Millaine, and was
honorably received by holy Ambrose, then Bishop of that Sea. But these gay
feathers of the World, being thus blown off him, by the breath of that Spirit
which makes the dry tree to become green, and the spices of the Garden to flow
out, all his kindred and former acquaintance became his deadly Enemies. Flies
of estate follow Fortune, and the Sunshine; friendship is a thing much talked
off, but seldom found; I never knew above two that loved without selfe-ends.
That which passes for love in this age, is the mere counter to it; It is
policy in the clothes of love, or the hands of Esau with the tongue of Jacob.
These smooth Cheats the World abounds with: There is Clay enough for the
potter, but little dust whereof comes Gold. The best direction is Religion;
find a true Christian, and thou have found a true friend. He that fears not
God, will not fear to do thee a mischief.

From Millaine he came to Rome, where he was honorably entertained by all, but
his own kindred, and Siricius the great Bishop. It was the ill Fortune of this
zealous Pope, to be offended not only with Paulinus, but with that glorious
Father Saint Hierome. It was a perilous dissoluteness of some Bishops in that
Century, to admit of Laymen, and unseason'd persons into the Ministry. This
rash and impious practice Siricius had, by several strict Sanctions or
decrees, condemned and forbidden; and it is probable that the reason of his
strange carriage toward Paulinus and Hierome was, because he would not seem to
connive at any persons that were suddenly ordained, though never so deserving,
lest he should seem to offend against his own edicts. It is a sad truth that
this pernicious rashness of Bishops (fighting ex diametro with the Apostolical
cautions) has oftentimes brought boars into the Vineyard, and Wolves into the
sheepfold; which complying afterward with all manner of Interests, have torn
out the bowels of their Mother. We need no examples: We have lived to see all
this our selves. Ignorance and obstinacy make Heretics: And ambition makes
Schismatics; when they are once at this pass, they are on the way toward
Atheism. I do not say that Ecclesiastical pol^ty is an inviolable or sure
sense against Church-rents; because there is a necessity that offenses must
come, though woe to them by whom; but rules of prevention are given: and
therefore they should not be slighted. The Bridegroom advises his spouse to
take these foxes while they are little.

In a pleasant field half a mile distant from Nola lies the Sepulcher of the
blessed Martyr Felix. To this place (which from his youth he was ever devoted
to,) did Paulinus now retire. It was the custom of holy men in that age no^
only to live near the Tombs of the Martyrs, but to provide also for their
burial in those places; because they were sure, that in the Resurrection, and
the terrors of the day of Judgment God would descend upon those places in the
soft voice, that is to say in his love and mercies. Eusebius is his fourth
Book, and the sixth Chapter of the life of Constantine tells us, how that great
Emperor gave strict order for his burial amongst the Tombs of the Apostles,
and then adds, (...). Saint Chrysostom in in that homily which he writ to
prove that Christ is God, gives the same relation, (...), etc. The Emperors of
Constantinople (says he) esteem it for a great honor, if they be buried not
within the shrines of the Apostles, but at the Gates of their Temple, that they
may be the door-keepers of those poor fishers. So Marcellina, descended from
the consular Nobility of Rome, refused to be buried amongst her Ancestors, that
she might sleep at Millaine with her great Brother Saint Ambrose, where she
lies under this Epitaph. Marcellina, tuos cum vita resolveret artus; Sprevisti
patriis, etc.
Life, Marcellina, leaving thy fair frame,
Thou did contemn those Tombs of costly fame,
Built by thy Roman Ancestors, and lie
At Millaine, where great Ambrose sleeps in Christ.
Hope, the deads life, and faith, which never faints,
Made thee rest here, that thou may rise with Saints.


To this place therefore near Nola in Campania (a Country lying within the
Realm of Naples, and called now by the Inhabitants Terra di Lavoro,) as to a
certain Harbor and recesse from the clamours of their friends, and the
t^mptations of the World, did Paulinus and Therasia convey themselves. His
affection to this holy Paulininus calls him a Martyr, quia multa pro Christo
passus, ersi non occi^us.
Martyr was very great: for frequenting Nola, when he was yet a youth, he would
oftentimes steal privately to visit his Sepulcher: and he loved the
possessions which his Father had left him in those parts above any other,
because that under pretense of looking to his estate there, he had the
convenience of resorting to the Tomb of Felix; where he took in his first
love, and in the seven and twentie^h year of his age, made a private vow to
become a Servant o^ Jesus Christ. This Felix was by a descent a Syrian, though
born in Nola, where his Father (trafficking from the East into Italy, had
purchased a very fair estate, which he divided afterward betwixt him and his
Brother Hermias; but Felix following Christ, gave all to his brother. The
frequent miracles manifested at his Tomb, made the place famous, and resorted
to from most parts of the world. Saint Augustine, upon a Controversy betwixt
his Presbyter Boniface, and another fellow that accused him, when the truth of
either side could not be certainly known, sent them both from Hippo to Nola, to
have the matter decided upon Oat^, before the Tomb of Felix; and in his 137th
Epistle, he sets down the reason, why he sent them so far. His words are
these: Multis notissima est sanctitas lo ci, ubi Felicis Nolensis corpus
conditum est, quo volui ut peragrent, quia inde nobis facilius fideliusque
scribi potest, quicquid in eorum aliquo divinitus fuerit propalatum. The
holiness (says he) of that place where the body of Felix of Nola lies
interred, is famously known to many; I have therefore sent them thither,
because that from thence, I shall be more easily and truly informed about any
thing that shall be miraculously discovered concerning either of them.

Paulinus had not lived very long in this place, but it pleased God to visit
him with a very sharp and tedious sickness. He had now (upon Earth) no
Comforter but Therasia; His Estate was gone, and his contempt of that made the
World contemn him. In this solitude and poverty, he that tries the reins and
the heart, begins to take notice of this his new servant, and the first favor
he conferred upon him was a disease. Good Angels do not appear without the
Ecstasie and passion of the Seere: without afflictions and trialls God will not
be familiar with us. Fruit Trees if, they be not pruned, will first leave to
bear, and afterward they will dye. Nature, without she be dressed by the hand
that made her, will finally perish. He that is not favored with visitations,
is (in Saint Paul's phrase) a bastard, and no Son of the Superior Jerusalem.
Paulinus had put from him all occasions of worldly sorrows, but he wanted
matter for Heavenly Joys. Without this disease, he had not known so soon,
how acceptable his first Services were unto his Master. This sickness was a
pure stratagem of love, God visited him with it for this very purpose, that he
himself might be his Cordial.

Man and the Eagle see best in the daytime, they see by the light of this
World: but the Paulinus will have the word which is commonly used in the Latin,
to be Nicticora, from (...) and (...), which signifies the apple or candle of
the eye, and not from (...). And this he says was told him by a holy man, that
had lived a long time in the deserts of Egypt, where he observed the nature of
this bird of night, and the Pelican.
night-Raven is a bird of Mystery, and sees in the dark by a light of her
own. Paulinus hought now (like the servant of Elisha) that he had not a friend
in all the World to be of his side; but God removes the mist from his Eyes, and
showed him a glorious Army of Saints and Confessors, who during the time of
his sickness, did so throng and fill up his Cottage, and the fields about it,
that neither his Palace in Rome, nor his house in Bordeaux could ever boast of
such a number. These Comforters he has recorded with his own pen in his first
Epistle to Severus; viderant pueri tui, etc. Your men (says he) that were here
with me, have seen, and can tell you with what constant diligence all the
Bishops, and my brethren the Clergy, with the common people my neighbors, did
minister unto me all the time of my sickness. Unto you, who are unto me as my
own soul, I take leave to boast and glory in this mercy of the Lord, whose
goodness it is, that I am so plentifully comforted. There is not one Bishop in
all Campania that did not come personally to visit me, and those whom either a
farther distance, or their own infirmities would not permit to travel, fai'd
not to visit me by their Presbyters and letters. The Bishops of Africa also
with the beginning of the spring, sent their particular letters and messengers
to comfort me. Thus he that forsakes houses and brethren, and lands to follow
Christ, shall receive an hundred fold even in this World, and in the world to
come life everlasting.

As touching the letters or Embassage rather of the African Bishops to
Paulinus, it happened on this manner. Alypius, the Bishop of Tagasta in Africa,
had at Millain (as I intimated before) taken special notice of Paulinus: And
the rumor of his Conversion (as the actions of eminent and noble personages
pass quickly into the most distant regions,) had filled with joy not only the
Churches of Africa but the most remote corners of Christianity, even the very
wilderness and the scattered Isles, which in those days were more frequented
by Christians, then populous Continents and splendid Cities. Alypius upon this
(because he would not loose so fair an opportunity to ground his acquaintanec,)
dispatcheth a letter from Tagasta to Paulinus, to gratulate his conversion to
the Faith; encouraging him withal to hold fast his Crown; and for a token,
sent him five of Saint Augustines books against the Ma^ichaeans, which in that
age (when the Invention of the Press was not so much as thought of,) was a
rich present. Paulinus was so taken with the reading of these Volumes, that he
conceived himself not only engaged to Alypius, but to Augustine also.
Whereupon he sent his servant from Nola with letters full of modesty and
sweetness to them both, and with particular commendations to other eminent
lights of the Church then shining in Africa. These letters received by
Augustine and Alypius, and communicated by them to the other Bishops, and the
African Clergy, were presently Coppied out by all, and nothing now was more
desired by them, then a sight of this great Senator, who was turned a poor
Priest, and a fool (as Saint Paul says) for Christ his sake, and the
offscouring of the World. But above all, the Souls of holy Augustine and
Paulinus (like Jonathan and David, or Jacob and Joseph) were knit together, and
the life of the one was bound up in the life of the other. The perfect love and
union of these two, can by none be more faithfully, or more elegantly
describ^d, ^hen it is already by Saint Augustine himself. I shall therefore
insert his own words, the words of that tongue of truth and Charity; August.
Epistol. 22. ad Paulin.
O bone vir, O bone frater! lei dico ut toleret, quia adhuc lates oculos meos,
latebas anima^ mea^, and and vix obtemperat immo, non obtemperat. Quomodo ergo
non dolea^ quod nondu^ faciem tua^ novi, hoc est, domu^ animae tuae, quam sicut
mea^ novi? legi enim literas tuas fluentes lac and mel, praeferentes
simplicitate^ cordis, in qua quaeris dominu^, sentiens de illo in bonitate, and
afferens ei claritate^ and honorem. Legerunt fratres and gaudent,
infatigabiliter and ineffabiliter tam uberibus and tam excellentibus donis dei,
bonis tuis. Quotquot eas legerunt, rapiunt; quia rapiuntur, cu^ legunt. Quam
suavis odor Christi, and quam fragrat ex eis? dici non potest, illae literae
cum te offerunt ut videaris, quantu^ nos excitent ut quaeraris: nam et
perspicabile^ faciunt, and desiderabilem. Quanto enim praesentiam tuam nobis
quodammodo exhibent, tanto absentiam nos far non sinunt. Amant te omnes in
eis, and amari abs te cupiunt. Laudatur and benedicitur deus, cujus gratia tu
talis es. Ibi excitatur Christus, ut ventos and Maria tibi plasare tendenti ad
stabilitatem suam dignetur. Ibi conjux excitatur, non dux ad mollitiem viro
suo, sed ad fortitudinem redux in ossa viri sui: quam intuam unitatem redactam,
in spiritualibus tibi taus firmioribus quanto castioribus nexibus copulatam,
officijs vestrae sanctitati debitis ir te, uno ore salutamus. Ibi cedri Libani
a terram depositae, and in arcae fabricam compagine charitatis erectae, mundi
hujus fluctus imputribiliter secant. Ibi gloria ut acquiratur, contemnitur; and
mundus, ut obtineatur, relinquitur. Ibi parvuli, si^e etiam grandiusculi filij
Babylonis eliduntur ad petram, vitia scilicet confusionis, superbiaeque
secularis. Haec atque hujusmodi suavissima and sacratissima spectacula literae
tu^ praebent legentibus; literae fidei non fictae, literae spei bonae, literae
purae charitatis. Quomodo nobis anhelant sitim tuam, and desiderium defectumque
animae tuae in atria domini? Quid amoris sanctissi^i spirant? Quantam
opulentiam sinceri cordis exaestuant? Quas agunt gratias deo? Quas impetrant a
deo? blandiores sunt, an ardentiores? luminosiores, an faecundiores? Quid enim
est, quod it a nos mulcent, ita accendunt, it a compluunt; and it a screnae
sunt? Quid est, quaeso te, aut quid tibi pro eis rependam, nisi quia totus sum
tuus in eo, c^ us tot us es tu? si parum est, plus certe non h^beo. O good man,
O good brother! you lay hidden from my Soul, and I spoke to my Spirit, that it
should patiently bear it, because you are also hidden from my Eyes; but it
scarce obeyes, yea it refuses to obey. How then shall I not grieve, because I
have not as yet known your face, the habitation of your Soul, which I am as
well acquainted with as my own? For I have read your letters flowing with milk
and honey, manifesting the simplicity of your heart, in which you seek the
Lord, thinking rightly of him, and bringing him glory and honor. Your brethren
here have read them, and rejoice with an unwearied and unspeakable Joy, for the
bountiful and excellent gifts of God in you, which are your riches. As many as
have read them, snatch them from me; because when they read them, they are
ravished with them. How sweet an Odor of Christ, and how fragrant proceeds
from them? It cannot be expressed how much those letters, while they offer you to
be seen of us, excite us to seek for you: They make you both discerned and
desired: For the more they represent you unto us, we are the more impatient of
your absence. All men love you in them, and desire to be beloved of you. God is
blessed and praised by all, through whose grace you are such. There do we find
that Christ is awaked by you, and vouchsafes t^ rebuke the winds and the Seas,
that you may find them calm in your Course toward him. There is your dear
wife stirred up, not to be your leader to softness and pleasures, but to
Christian fortitude; becoming Masculine again, and restored into the bones of
her Husband: whom we all with one voice salute and admire, being now united
unto you, serving you in spiritual things, wherein you are coupled with mutual
embraces, which the more chaste they be, are by so much the more firm. There do
we see two Cedars of Libanus felled to the Earth, which joined t^gether by
love, make up one Arc, that cuts through the Waves of this World without
detriment or p^trefaction. There glory, that it may be acquired, is contemned;
and the World, that it may be obtained, is forsaken. There the Children of
Babylon, whither little ones, or of Maturer age; I mean the Evils of Confusion
and secular pride, are dashed against the stones. Such sacred and delightful
spectacles do your letters present unto us: O those letters of yours! Those
letters of an unfeigned faith, those letters of holy hope, those letters of pure
Charity! How do they sigh and gasp with your pious thirst, your holy longings,
and the Ecstatical faintings of your Soul for the Courts of the Lord? What a
most sacred love do they breath? with what treasures of a sincere heart do they
abound? How thankful to God? How earnest for more grace? How mild? How
zealous? How full of light?? How full of fruit? Whence is it that they do so
please us, and so provoke us, to shower and rain upon us, and yet are so calm
and so serene? What is this I beseech you? or what shall I return unto you for
these letters, unless I tell you, that I am wholly yours in him, whose you are
altogether? If this be too little, in truth I have no more.

These were the first effects of Paulinus his letters; but shortly after, St.
Augustine sent him others, nothing inferior to this first, either in
affection, or Piety. And the year following, being elected by Valerius to fit
his Coadjutor in the Sea of Hippo, where he afterward succeeded him; It was
resolved by them all, namely by Valerius, Augustine, Alypius, Severus, and
Profuturus, the African Bishops, that a messenger should be dispatched into
Campania to ^resent Paulinus with their several letters, and the sincere
gratulations of their respective Clergy; which accordingly was performed.

In the beginning of this year, which was the three hundred ninety and fifth
after Christ, Theodosius Augustus the first, a most pious Emperor, and a
Nursing Father of the Church departed this life. The Ethnic writers hating his
memory as virulently as his person, labored with all manner of lies and Libels
to render him odious and detestable to posterity. Holy Endelochius awaked with
these scandalous clamours, and the insolent aspersions cast upon so religious
an Emperor, writes earnestly to Paulinus, and prevails with him, to employ
those excellent abilities bestowed on him, in the defense of this faithful
Soldier of Jesus Christ, and Champion of his Spouse. This task Paulinus
performed, as appears by his own words in his 9th Epistle to Severus, to whom
he sent a Copy of his learned Panegygick; however posterity have suffered in
the loss of it. But we want not another witness: That learned Father, and
happy translator of the book of God in his thirteenth Epistle to Paulinus,
gives us a very fair and full account of it. Librum tuum quem pro Theodosio
principe prudenter ornateque, etc. Your book (says he) whihc elegantly and
judiciously you composed in the defense of the Emperor Theodosius, and sent to
me by He proved afterward a most detestable Heretic.
Vigilantius, I have with much delight read over. What I admire in it, is your
Method: For having excelled all other writers in the first parts, you excel
your self in the last. Your style is compact and neat, and with the
perspicuity and pureness of Cicero, and yet weighty and sententious; for that
writing which has nothing commendable in it, but words, is (as one says) mere
prating. The consequence besides is very great, and the coherence exact. What
ever you infer, is either the confirmation of the antecedent, or the inchoation
of the subsequent. Most happy Theodosius, to be vindicated by such a learned
Orator of Christ! You have added to the glory of his Imperial robe, and made
the utility of his just laws sacred to posterity. But this rare piece, with
many more mentioned by Gennadius, either through the envy of the Heathen, or
the negligence of our own, are unfortunately lost; especially a Volume of
Epistles written to his Sister, with some controversial pieces against the
Ethnic Philosophers, mentioned also by Saint Augustine in his four and
thirtieth Epistle; and a most learned Treatise of true Repentance, and the
glory of Martyrs.

Much about this time, the name of Paulinus began to be famous in the East; and
not only there, but in all parts of the Christian World. It is almost
incredible (especially in this age of Impieties and Abominations) how much the
example of this one man prevailed over all. The Course he ran, drew another
wealthy and noble R^man (I mean Pammachius) from the Senate to the Cell; and
all the Fathers of that age, when they pressed any to holy living, and a
desertion of the World, brought in Paulinus for their great exemplar, and a
star to lead them unto Christ. St. Augustine propounds him to Romanianus and
Licentius, Saint Hierome to Julian, and the Daughters of Geruntius; and Saint
Chrysostom in his thirteenth homily upon Genesis, sets him down for a pattern
to the husbands, and Therasia to the wives. The reverend Bishop of Hippo did
very earnestly solicit him to come over into Africa, and he gives his reason
for it in these words: Non imprudenter ego vos rogo, and flagito, and postulo,
etc. Not unadvisedly do I entreat and earnestly desire, and require you to
come into Africa, where the Inhabitants labor more now with the thirst of
seeing you, then with the famous thirstinesse of the Climate. God knows, I ask
it not for my private satisfaction, nor for those only, who either by my
mouth, or by the public fame have heard of you; but for the rest, who either
have not heard, or else having heard will not believe so great a change; but
when they themselves shall see the truth, they will not only believe, but love
and imitate. It is for their sakes therefore, that I desire you to honor these
parts with your bodily presence: Let the Eyes of our flocks also behold the
glory of Christ in so eminent a Couple, the great exemplars to both Sexes, to
tread pride under their feet, and not to despair of attaining to prefection.
And in his fifty ninth Epistle to Paulinus, when (according to the custom of
those holy times) he had sent his Presbyter to him to be instructed, he cannot
(says he) profit more by my Doctrine, then he can by your life. Saint Hierome
uses the same Engine to bring down the high thoughts of Julian: Art thou
(says he) nobly descended? So were Paulinus and Therasia, and far nobler in
Christ. Art thou rich and honorable? So were they: and from the height of
honors and worldly riches became poor and inglorious, that they might gain
Christ. Dearly did Anastasius, who succeeded Siricius in the Sea of Rome,
affect this holy Bishop, as appears by his own words in his sixteenth Epistle
to Delphinus the Bishop of Bordeaux.

But amidst all these triumphs of the Church of God, for the conversion of so
eminent a person, and the frequent gratulations of learned men, expressed by
their letters or personal visits, there were none that raged with so much
hatred and malice against him as his own kindred, and former acquaintance. A
Prophet has no honor in his own Country, and those of his own house will be
his Enemies. There are no such persecutors of the Church, as those that do it
for selfe-ends, and their private advantage. Sweetly does he complain of these
bitter, unnatural dealings in his fifth Epistle to Severus. Potiore mihi
parente germanus es, quam illi quos caro tantum and sanguis mihi sociat, and.
You are my Brother now by a greater Father, then those who are tied to me by
flesh and blood only. For where is now my great affinity by blood? Where are
my old friends? where is my former acquaintance? I am become as a dream before
them all, and as a stranger to my own brothers, the Sons of my Mother. My
kinsmen and my friends stand looking upon me afar off, and they pass by me
like hasty floods, or the streams of a brook that will not be stayed. They
convey themselves away, and are ashamed of me, who displeased them by pleasing
God. And in his first Epistle, I beseech you (says he) If I shall have need
(for now my servants, and those I made freemen, are become my despisers,) that
you would take care to send the old Wine, which I believe I have still at
Narbon, hither unto me, and to pay for the carriage: Do not fear, dear brother,
to make the poor your debtor, etc. The Noble Spirit is the bravest bearer of
indignities: and certainly extraction and a virtuous descent (let popular
flatterers preach what they will to the contrary,) is attended with more
Divinity, and a sweeter temper, then the indiscrete Issue of the multitude.
There is an eminent difference betwixt flowers and weeds, though they spring
from the same mould. The Ape contending with the Lioness, told her, that she
was a very fair creature, but very barren: For you (said the Ape) bring forth
but one at a birth, and I bring six, or more; It Is true (replied the Lioness,)
but thy fix are six Apes, and my one is a Lion. The greatest part of men, which
we commonly term the populacy, are a stiff, uncivil generation, without any
seed of honor or goodness, and sensible of nothing but private interest, and
the base ways of acquiring it. What Virtue, or what humanity can be expected
from a Raymond Cabanes, a Massinello, or some Son of a Butcher? They have one
barbarous shift, which Tigers and Bears would blush to commit: They will cut
the throats of their most generous and Virtuous Benefactours, to comply with
times, and advantage themselves; Yea, they will rejoice to see them ruined, and
like inhumane Salvages, insult over their innocent and helpless posterity. I
could compare those fawning Hypocrites, that wait not upon men, but upon their
Fortunes, to that smiths bitch in the Apologues of Locmannus the Persian, which
sleeping in the forge, could not be awaked with all the noise of the hammers,
the Anvile, and the Bellows: but if the smith would offer to stir his teeth
to eat, she would start up presently, and attend upon him with all
officiousness. She would share with him in the fruits of his labors; but
would not watch and look to the shop one minute while he labored.

Paulinus had now first lost these false friends, but was loaded for it with
the love and commendations of true ones; And I know not which offended him
most, to be despised by the first, or commended by the last. He had (like Saint
Paul,) great heaviness, and continual sorrow of heart, to see that his
brethren and kinsmen according to the flesh, hated him because he loved Christ:
And on the other side, his humility would not suffer him to bear the labor of
love, I mean the general applause and sincere commendations conferred upon
him by his Christian friends. Severus in one of his Epistles written to him
(after he had spent some lines in the commendation of his zeal and
constancy,) contrary to the custom of that plain age, subscribed himself, Te
multa dilectio ad mendacii peccatum traxit.
his Servant. To the first he replied, that his excessive love had drawn him to
the sin of untruth: And the last he desired him to desist from, for this
reason; Cave ergo ne posthac, etc. Have a care hereafter (says he) that you
who are a Servant of Christ, called unto liberty, term nor your self the
servant of a sinner, and of one that is not worthy to be called your
fellow servants. The virtue of humility will not excuse the vice of flattery.
Thus Gregory the great, when Pope Anastasius had exceeded toward him in his
laudatory elocutions, blasted them all with this humble reply; Quod vero me ^s
domini, quod lucernam, etc. Your calling me the mouth of the Lord, a shining
light, and a strong helper, is nothing else but an augmentation of my iniquity;
for when I deserve to be punished for my sins, then do I instead of punishment
receive praise. Severus, in another of his Epistles to Paulinus, earnestly
entreated him to suffer his picture to be taken by a limner, which he had sent
to him for that purpose, that he might have it to set up, together with the
picture of Saint Martin, before the sacred font in a fair Church which Severus
was then in building. This friendly motion Paulinus was very much offended
with, and would by no means consent unto, teling Severus, that too much love
had made him mad; And in his eighth Epistle, reasoning with him about this
request, What kind of picture (says he) would you have from me, the picture of
the earthly, or the Heavenly man? I know you love only that incorruptible
image, which the King of Heaven does love in you. I am ashamed to picture what
I am, and I dare not picture what I am not. But Severus resolving to force it
from him, would not be satisfied with any other return; whereupon he sent it
to him, with these following verses, the elegant express of his unfeined
humility. The first copy relates to the pictures, and the latter to the Font.
Abluitis quicunque animas and membra lavacris,
Cernite propositas ad bona facta vias, etc.
You that to wash your flesh and Souls d^w near,
Ponder these two examples set you here.
Great Martin shows the holy life, and white;
Paulinus to repentance does invite*
Martins pure, harmless life took Heaven by force,
Paulinus took it by tears and remorse.
Martin leads through victorious palms and flowers,
Paulinus leads you through the pooles and showers.
You that are sinners, on Paulinus look,
You that are Saints, great Martin is your book.
The first example bright and holy is,
The last, though sad and weeping, leads to bliss.


The verses relating to the Font, were these. Hic reparandarum generator fons
animaru^
Vivum viventi lumine flumen agit, etc.
Here the great wellspring of washed Souls, with beams
Of living light quickens the lively streams;
The Dove descends, and stirs them with her wings,
So weds these waters to the upper springs,
They strait conceive: A new birth does proceed
From the bright streams by an immortal seed.
O the rare love of God! sinners washed here,
Come forth pure Saints, all justfied and clear.
So blessed in death and life, man dies to sins,
And lives to God; Sin dies, and life begins
To be revived: Old Adam falls away,
And the new lives, born for eternal sway.


Nor did the manners of holy Paulinus differ from his mind: all his Garments,
all the Utensils of his poor Cot, were so many emblems and memento's of
humility. Grace is an Elixir of a contrary Nature to the Philosophers stone, it
turned all the gold and Silvervessells of this great Senator into earthen
dishes and wooden spoons. Righteousness and honesty are always poor. In his
first Epist. to Severus, he presents him with some of this innocent furniture;
Misimus testimonialem divitiarum scutellam buxeam, etc. I have sent you (says
he) a platter made of a box-tree, for a testimonial of my, riches; receive, it
as a pledge or earnest of Evangelicall poverty, and let it be an example to
you, if as yet you will make use of any Silver platters. To this he adds, that
he was very desirous to be supplied with some more earthen dishes, which (says
he) I do very much love; and then subscrib^s reason, quod secundum Adam cognata
nobis sint, and domini th^saurum in talibus vasis commissum habeamus; because
they are near kin to us by Adam, and because the treasure of the Lord is
committed to our care in such vessels. Certainly poverty (as man is now to be
considered) is his best, and his true estate. Riches, though they make
themselves wings, yet do they not fly to Heaven. The h^m^ or house of gold, is
the heart of the Earth, and mineralls are a fuel of hellfire. Poverty was the
Inauguration of the first man, who was made naked, and all his posterity are
born, so. This only have I found (says Solomon) that God made man upright,
but he has sought out many invention. By Covetousne^se we loose our
uprightness: We come here light and easi^, b^t we load our selves af^^rwards
with ^nnecessary burdens. Perditi^ tua ex te, these weights that we take up,
sink us down: Our temporal misery as well at the Eternal is from our selves.
The merriest creature that I can see, is the Paulinus calls Christ (mstically)
a sparrow: H^c est ille pass^r, qui requirentibus se n viis hilariter ostend
it; nunc in portis fit obvius, nunc in platis occurrit, nunc in muris vel
turribus sublimis convocat ad se amatores suos, and invitat cos in altitudines
habitationum suarum, ut impleat ve^bum suum, and exaltatus omnia ad se trahat.
Quis dabit nobis p^nnas columbae deargentatas, ut pennati pervolemus ad bravium
supernae vocationis, sequentes istum passerem solitarium, qui est unicus dei
filius, supervolitantem, cui in altis habitat, and humilia respicit?
Sparrow. This makes me think, that he is not troubled with forethoughts,
which are the hands of covetousness. What man and beasts scatter and leave
behind them, is his provision: his table is laid every where, and the first
bush he meets with, is his bed. Our Savior, who knew the nature and thoughts
of all created things, was pleased to send us to school to the birds. They are
always full of Musical liveliness, and a certain bright freedom, which
descends not so low as men and beasts. Spirits, when they have business upon
Earth, must assume bodies. Clarity and purification is a kind of poverty: it is
a state that have cast off dregs and burdens. Divine is that saying of Gr.
Pi^ides. (...).
Poor habits are naturally heaven-seekers.


But Paulinus, though he was poor, yet was he charitable, and withal liberal.
The widows mite is more then the rich men's abundance. In the four hundred and
tenth year after Christ, when the Goths raged in Italy, and had sacked Nola,
Paulinus (amongst many others,) was taken prisoner by them; Lib. 1. d* Civitate
de^.
And thus (says Saint Augustine) as I afterward learnt from him, did he then
pray in his heart. Domine, ne excrucier propter aurum and argentum; ubi enim
omnia mea sunt, tu scis. O Lord suffer me not to be troubled with the loss of
Gold and Silver, for thou know where all my riches are laid up. His treasure
was laid up in Heaven, where he commanded us to lay it, who foretold, that
these calamities should come upon the World. And God (without doubt) had
reguard unto his prayer, for the barbarous enemy leading all the rest into
captivity, he only was left behind. But amongst all these plunderings and
outward afflictions, he never failed in his daily alms to the poor, nor was
the hand of his faithful Therasia any way shortened. At last his store failing,
and no more provision being left, then only one loaf of bread; A poor man
coming to the door for relief, Paulinus commands it should be given him. But
Therasia (arguing with herself, that no beggar could be poorer then Paulinus
now was, and that it was as much charity to keep it for him, as to give it to
another,) concealed the loaf, and suffered the poor man to go without it. A
day or two after, some men that were sent with relief to Paulinus, from his
friends, arrive at Nola, and tell him that they had been there much sooner, had
not one of the ships, which was laden with corn, been cast away almost in the
Harbor; the rest that were fraught with Wine and other Victuals, being come
safe to shore. Whereupon Paulinus turning toward Therasia, put her in mind of
her overmuch carefullnesse, with these words, Understand now Therasia, that
this great ship full laden with Co^ne, was cast away for that one loaf of
bread which thou did steal from the poor man.

But pass we now to his Episcopal dignity. In his own Works we have not one
line that mentions this Ecclesiastical honor, nor any other passage of his
life, that might but seem to conduce to his own glory. They breath nothing but
humility, nothing but self-denial and dedignation. We must be guided then
through this part of his life by other Authors, and such faithful records as
are come unto us, from the hands of learned and public persons; who either
upon the general interest and concernments of the Church, or their own private
merits, and not by reflection were acquainted with him. The first that offers
himself to us, is Uranius, his own Presbyter, who in that short narration which
he wrote of his life, sets him forth to posterity in this following Character;
Cum autem ad summum sacerdotij gradum, etc. When he was honored (says he)
with the highest degree in the Priesthood, he did not show himself such a
Bishop that desired to be feared, but one that endeavored to be beloved. He
was never so far angry, as not in his anger to show mercy. Nor could that man
indeed be angry, for he regarded not calumnies, and he avoided hatred. He never
sat in Judgment, but mercy sat close by him. He was truly such a Bishop as
labored to get the love of all. For he lived a Consolation to all, and their
great example to make sure their Salvation. Nor is this my voice only: even
the barbarous Nations who knew my Lord Paulinus by report only, will testify
as much. And worthily was he beloved of all, who was a friend to all. For who
was there cast down, and he did not lift him up? who ever called to him for
help, and was not piously and comfortably answered? For he was pious, tender
hearted, humble and courteous, hating none, despising none. He gave to all, he
cherished all: he encouraged the fearful, pacified the violent, those with his
words, these with his example; Some he comforted with his letters, and those
that wanted, with his money. He loved not any riches, nor any treasures, but
those which Christ promised to his followers. Gold and Silver, and the other
accommodations of life he approved of, if they were liberally given to the
poor, not covetously hoorded up. Briefly, he had in him all goodness, for he
loved Christ. He had Faith, Meekness, love toward his neighbors, a constant
care of the poor, compassion upon the weak, and labored for nothing in his
life, but peace and charity. All his endeavors were to make men good, and to
save their Souls. What place is there in the World, what solitude, what Seas
which acknowledge not the good works of holy Paulinus? All men desired his
acquaintance, and did extremely long to have a sight of him. Who ever came to
him without joy or who went from him, but he desired to stay longer? those that
could not see him in the body, desired to see him in his writings; for he was
sweet and gentle in his Epistles, elegant and ravishing in his Poems. What more
shall I say? The relations that may be given of him, would be scarce credible,
but that his known integrity is above falsehood.

Nola was at this time a very famous and splendid City, nothing inferior to
the best Emporiums of Italy, and had withal a very rich Sea; which
questionless was a great occasion, that the piety of this blessed Bishop was
so renowned, and so familiarly spoken of in the most remote parts of the World.
So the just and faithful God exalts those that humble themselves, and
honors those that honor him. He had been faithful in those things that were
his own, and was therefore entrusted with the treasures of the Church. Prosper
in his second book, de vita Contemplativa, and the ninth Chapter, tells us, how
he disposed of them; Sanctus Paulinus (ut ipsi melius nostis) ingentia praedia
quae fuerunt sua, vendita pauperibus erogavit: sed cum postea factus esset
Episcopus, non contempsit Ecclesiae facultates, sed fidelissime dispensavit.
Holy Paulinus (says he) as you best know, sold all those princely Possessions
which were his own, and gave of them to the poor: but when he was afterward
consecrated Bishop, he neglected not the revenues of the Church, but was a most
faithful Steward and dispenser of them. So faithful, that when he lay upon
his death bed, he had not one piece left to relieve himself, but was driven to
lay out for some Clothes which he had given to the poor, a small sum of
money, which God ordained to be sent to him for that very purpose a little before
the hour of his dissolution. So that living and dying, he kept to the Apostles
rule, and owed no man any thing but love. He was a great lover of learned and
holy men, and confesses in one of his Epistles to Alypius, that his affection
to Saint Ambrose, was the first inducement which he felt to incline him to
Christianity. His dearest and most intimate friends were Saint Augustine, Saint
Ambrose, Saint Hierome, Saint Martin the Bishop of Tours, Delphinus the Bishop
of Bordeaux, and Amandus his Successor; Alypius the Bishop of Tagasta,
Januarius the Bishop of Naples, afterward a Martyr, Victricius the
Rhotomagensis, Aper, Severus, and Nicetas of Da^ia. I may say of him as the
Scripture says of Moses, he was the meekest man upon the face of the Earth. He
was not only obedient and serviceable to these Fathers, and pillars of the
Church, but to his own Presbyters and Domestics: he judged himself the most
unworthy, and the most unable of all his brethren. Victor the Monk, sent from
Severus to see him (according to the custom of those times) washed his feet.
This was a ceremony, which in that age of holiness could not be refused. But
Victor by this did not only wash his feet, but his face also; for he drew
tears from him, because he might not deny him the performance of that
Evangelical service. Servivit ergo mihi peccatori, and vae misero mihi quod
passus sum; he served me a sinner (says the holy Bishop) and woe is to me
because I suffered him. But he staid not at tears, for as soon as Victor had
done washing his feet, to requite his service, he fetched him clean water, and
held the basin while he washed his hands. He was not like that insolent Abbot
that did cast off his humility with his Cowle, and being asked by his brethren,
why he was then so proud, that was formerly such an humble Monk, made answer;
that in his Monachisme, when he went so low, and stooping, he was searching for
the keys of the Abbey; but now having found them, he did hold up his head to
ease himself.

This true carriage of an Evangelist, made him both honored and beloved; the
Church rejoiced, and glorified ^od for him, and the Court admired him.
Holiness is a light that cannot be hidden: It is a candle set upon a hill:
stars never shine more glorious, then when they are near black Clouds. In the
year of our Lord, four hundred and nineteen (a grievous Schism then happening
in the Church,) there was a convention of certain Bishops and Fathers at Rome,
to quiet those groundless perturbations, and stop the breach. But Honorius the
Emperor, judging by his skill in the temper of those Churchmen, that no good
would be done without the presence of Paulinus, who then lay sick at Nola,
dispatched his Imperial le^ter to this holy Bishop, wherein he earnestly
entreated him (if possible) to shake off his present indisposition, and to
repair in person to the Synod, lest that great blessing of peace, which he and
the Church did earnestly hope and long for, might by his absence unfortunately
miscarry. This royal record (because it is a monument of no less sincerity
then concernment, and discovers unto us much of the face of those times) I
shall verbatim insert. Sancto and venerabili Patri, Paulino, Episcopo Nolensi.
TAntum fuit apud nos certa sententia, nihil ab his sacerdotibus, qui ad
Synodum convenerant, posse definiri, cum beatitudo tua de corporis
inaequalitate causata, itineris non potuit injuriam sustinere, ut propter
absentiam sancti viri, non quidem obtentura: Interim tamen vitia gratulantur,
cum prava and vetus ambitio, and cum benedicto viro sanctaeque vitae diu vel^t
habere certamen, ut contra haec Apostelicae institutionis bona, de praesumptis
p^r vim pariet^bus ^xistimet confidendum. O vere digna causa quam non nisi
coronae t^ae beata vita designat! Dilatum itaque Judicium nuntiamus, ut divina
praecepta ex venerationis tuae ore promantur, qui easecutus implesti; nec
potest alius ^orum praeceptorum lator existere, quam qui dignus Apostolicis
disciplinis est approbatus. Specialiter itaque domine sancte, merito
venerabilis pater, Justus dei famulus, divinum opus, contemp^o labor, tributum
hoc nobis visitationis tuae (si ita dicendum est) munus indulge, ut postpositis
omnibus, quantum temperantia his and tranquillitas suffragantur, Synodo
profuturus, sine intermissione etiam desideriis nostris, and benedictioni quam
cupimus, te praestare dig^eris.


To the holy and reverend Father PAULINUS, Bishop of Nola.
SUch a firm opinion have we that nothing can be agreed and concluded upon by
the Bishops met in this Synod, (your Holiness by reason of your bodily
indisposition being not able to travel hither) that for your only absence it
is not like to continue: In the mean time offenses triumph and rejoice at it,
and the old and wicked sin of ambition, which of a long time desires to
contend even with your holiness and upright life, presumes now, and is
confident that having forcibly taken the wall from us, it will carry you also
against the wholsomnesse of Apostolical institution. O! a cause truly worthy
not to be determined, but by your holy life, which is your Crown* we therefore
d^clare unto you, that we have suspended our judgment for the present, that we
may have the truth of these Divine precepts pronounced by your reverend mouth,
who have both followed them, and fullfilled them: For none can be a fit arbiter
of those rules, but he that has approved himself worthy and conformable to
Apostolical discipline. Wherefore, holy Sir, worthily reverend Father, the
faithful Servant of God, and his Divine work, we entreat you particularly,
that slighting the troubles of this Journey, you would favor us with this gift
and tribute (if I may so speak) of your presence: and laying aside all other
concernments (so far as your health and ease will permit,) be in your own
person at this Synod, and vouchsafe to lend your assistance to our desires, and
that blessing which we earnestly long for.




We see by this letter in what account he was with the Emperor, and that his
integrity and holiness were not dissimulations and popular Fables, but
experimental truths so known and so believed; he was a true Christian, and no
Impostour. It was not the Custom, but the nature (if I may so say) of those
Primitive times to love holy and peaceful men. But some great ones in this
later age, did nothing else but countenance Schismatics and sedicious raylers,
the despisers of dignities, that covered their abominable villainies with a
pretense of transcendent holiness, and a certain Sanctimonious excellency
above the Sons of men. This Veil (which then cousend weak eyes) is now fallen
off their faces, and most of their patrons have by an unthought of Method
received their rewards: The rest without doubt (though they shift themselves
into a thousand shapes) shall not escape him, whose anger is not yet turned
away, but his hand is stretched out still. But retur^e we to Paulinus: Whose
Charity and tenderness toward the poor, was both inimitable and incredible;
This iron age wants faith as well as mercy: When he had given them all he had,
to the last that begged he gave himself. Gregory the great, in the third Book
of his Dialogues, and the first Chapter, has recorded this memorable passage.
I shall cut it short, and in as, few words, as conveniently may be, give you
all that is material. When the Vandals had miserably wast^d Campania, and
carried many of the inhabitants into Africa, blessed Paulinus gave all that he
had both toward his own sustenance, and the relief of the poor, amongst the
prisoners and Captives. The Enemy being departed, and his prey with him; a poor
Widow (whose only Son was (amongst the rest of the Natives) by a Son in law of
the King of the Vandals carried into Bondage,) comes to petition Paulinus for
so much Money as might serve to redeem him. Paulinus told her that he had
nothing then left, either in money or other goods, but promised, if she would
accept of him, to go with her into Africa, and to be exchanged for her Son. The
poor Widow taking this for a mere scoff, turns her back to be gone.
Paulinus follows after, and with much ado made her believe, that he meant it
(as he did indeed) in earnest. Upon this, they traveled both into Africa, and
having opportunity to speak with the Kings Son in Law, the poor widow begged
of him first* to have her son restored unto her Gratis: but the youthful and
haughty Vandal averse to all such requests, would hear her no farther;
whereupon she presents him with Paulinus, and petitioned to have her Son set at
liberty, and the other to serve in his stead. The Prince taken with the comely
and reverend countenance of Paulinus, asked him, what his occupation or trade
was? Paulinus answered, that he never followed any trade, but that he had good
skill in dressing of Herbs and Flowers. Upon this, the Prince delivered her
Son to the Widow, who took him home with her, and sent Paulinus to work into
his Gardens.

The Prince delighting much in Flowers and Sallets, would very frequently visit
Paulinus, and took such delight in him, that he forsook all his
Court-associates to enjoy the company of his new Gardener. In one of these
visits, Paulinus taking occasion to confer seriously with him, advised him to
be very careful of himself, and to consider speedily of some means to secure
and settle the Kingdom of the Vandals This was about the year of our L. 428.
about which time the Vandals after their excursions through Polonia, Italy,
Franconia, and Andalusia had settled in Africa, where they continued quietly
until the reign of Justinian, bu^ rebelling against him, they were together
with their King Gillimer totally overthrown by the great Captain Beli^arius
An. Christi 533.
in Mauritania; for (said he) the King your Father in law will shortly dye. The
Prince something troubled with the sudden news, without further delay
acquaints the King with it; and tells him withal, that his Gardener (whose
prediction this was) excelled all other men both in wisdom and learning.
Whereupon the King requested, that he might see him; you shall, replied the
Prince, for to morrow when you are at dinner, I will give order that he shall
come in person with the dishes of Sallate to the Table. This being agreed upon,
and accordingly performed, the old Tyrant upon the first sight of Paulinus
exceedingly trembled, and speaking to his Daughter, who sat next to him, to
call to her husband, he told him, that the prediction of his Gardener was very
true; for yesternight (said he) I saw in a dream a great tribunal with judges
sitting thereon, and amongst them this Gardener, by whose judgment a scourge
which had been formerly put into my hands, was taken from me. But learn of him
what his profession is, and what dignity he had conferred upon him in his own
Country, for I cannot believe him to be (as he pretends) an inferior or
ordinary person.

As soon as dinner was ended, the Prince stole from the presence into the
Garden, and earnestly entreated Paulinus to tell him, who he was; I am (said
he) your Gardener, which you received in exchange for the Widows Son. I know
that, replied the Prince, but I desire to know your profession in your own
Country, and not the servitude you have put your self in with me for the
present; To this Paulinus answered, that he was by profession a Bishop, and a
servant of Jesus Christ the Son of the living God. At these words the Prince
was mightily troubled, and requested him to depart again into his own Country,
assuring him, that before he departed, he would give him any thing that he
should please demand. Paulinus replied, that he would desire nothing, but to
have those Captives which were carried out of Campania, set at liberty, and
transported to their Native Country. To this the Prince consented, and for
Paulinus his sake, furnished them with shipping and all other necessaries for
their voyage, and sent them home joyful in the Company of their blessed and
beloved Bishop.

Some few days after, the old Tyrant (as God had foretold by his holy Servant)
departed out of this World into his own place; And so that scourge which God
had put into his hand for the punishment of a great part of the Christian
World, was taken away, and the instrument cast into the fire. Wherefore whoever
thou be, that read this book, and art a sufferer thy self, or do see
and grieve for the calamities of the Church, the oppression of the poor, and
the violent perverting of judgment and justice in a province, do not thou
marvel at the matter, nor vex thy self; for he that is higher then the highest,
regards it, and there be higher then they. Envy not the glory of Sinners, for
thou know not what will be their end; but submit thy self under the mighty
hand of God, expecting with patience the time of refreshing, and I do assure
thee upon my Soul, thou shall not be deceived,

Paulinus, with all his joyful Captives, was now landed in Campania, where all
the Inhabitants, as upon a solemn feastday flocked together to welcome him,
and to pour their joys into his bosom; some received their Sons, some
their brothers, and some their husbands: both the receivers and the received
were beholding to Paulinus. They commended, honored and admired him: He
exhorted, encouraged and confirmed them. Mutual Consolations are a double
banquet, they are the Churches Eulogiae, which we both give and take. What the
Campanians most admired in Paulinus, was that which the Scripture commends in
Moses: youthfullnesse in old age. He was now as earnest, as hearty, and as
active for the glory of God, as in his most vigorous years. His spiritual force
was not abated, nor the Eye of his Soul any way dimmed. He did not cool
toward his setting, but grew more large, more bright, and more fervent.
Bearing trees, when their fruit is ripe, bend their boughs, and offer
themselves to the gatherers hands. He knew that his time of departure was at
hand, and therefore Moses-like he made his Doctrine to drop as the rain, and
his speech distilled as the dew. He poured out his milk and his Wine, and made
them drink abundantly. To labor in the heat of the day, and to give over in
the cool, is great indiscretion, the contention should be always hottest
toward the end of the race.

I am now come to my last Paragraph, which all this while I did reserve for his
Works of Piety. And these indeed (if we consider his unworldlinesse, and
religious poverty) were very great and very sumptuous. He repaired and
beautified the four old Basilica's, or Churches, dedicated to the Martyr Felix,
and built the fifth, which exceeded them all, both for beauty and largeness.
This he dedicated to our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. It was adorned with two
stately Porches, the one opend toward the way of Public resort, the other was
a private Postern; and the path leading to it, was through a pleasant green
field set with fruit trees and other shady wood, ^enced about with a very high
and sumptuous wall; The entrance into this Court was through a fair
Marble-Gate, in whose Front were cut these following verses. Caelestes intrate
vias per amoena vireta, etc.
Through pleasant green fields enter you the way
To bliss; and well through shades and blossoms may
The walks lead here, from whence directly lies
The good man's path to sacred Paradise.


This Church was joined to the other four, and an entrance made from the one
into the other, by high and spacious Arches, supported with pillars of Marble.
Through these pillars (whose height did almost reach to the roof,) as through a
traverse was to be seen, by those that came from the old Church into the new,
the picture of the Cross, limned in most lively and glorious Colors, and hung
with Garlands of palms and flowers; above it shined a clear and luminous sky,
and on the Cross, which was all Purple, sat perching a flock of white Doves;
at the bottom of this Paisage were written these verses. Ardua florifera Crux,
etc.
The painful Cross with flowers an^ Palms is crowned,
Which prove, it springs; though all in blood' is drowned:
The Doves above it show with one consent,
Heaven opens only to the innocent.


In the Courts belonging to this Church, were very fair and spacious walks,
paved with stone, and covered over head against the violence of weather. The
outside was supported with Pillars, and the Inner was divided into neat and
cleanly Cells, opening toward the Walks, where the people that came thither to
celebrate the Vigils of Felix, reposed themselves. Round about these Courts
were great Cisterns, and Lavers of several kinds of Marble most curiously
polished, whose diverse-formes and colors were very delightful, and much
recreated the beholders. The Porches, which were very large, and contained with
in them many private Oratories, or places of prayer, were all richly pictured
with sacred Histories out of the Pentateuch, the book of Joshuah, Judges and
Ruth; This Church is fully described in his twelfth Epistle to Severus, and his
ninth Natalis, when Nicetas came out of Daciae to see him. Ecce vides quantus
splendour velut aede renata
Rideat, insculptum camera crispante lacunar
In ligno mentitur ebur; tectoque superne
Pendentes lychni spiris retinentur ahenis,
Et medio in vacuo laxis vaga lumina nutant
Funibus, undantes flammas levis aura fatigat, etc.
You see what splendor through the spacious Isle,
As if the Church were glorified, does smile.
The Ivory-wrought beams seem to the sight
In graven, while the carved roof looks curled and bright.
On brass hoopes to the upmost vaults we tie
The hovering Lamps, which nod and tremble by
The yielding Cords; fresh Oil does still repair
The waving flames, vexed with the fleeting air.


Having finished this Church, he built another, not far from Nola, in a little
Town called Fundi, where his possessions (which he afterward sold and gave to
the poor,) were situate; this also de dedicated to our Lord Jesus, whom he used
to call the Saint of Saints, and the Marty of Martyrs. In this Church in the
great Isle leading to the Altar, he caused to be put up another piece of
Limning, or sacred Paisage, which for b^auty and exce^l^ncie exceeded all the
form^r. We have it most lively described and explained in these following
verses. Sanctorum labor and merces sibi rite cohaerent,
Ardua Crux, pretiumque crucis sublime, corona, etc.
The pains of Saints, and Saints rewards are twins,
The sad Cross, and the Crown which the Cross wins.
Here Christ the Prince both of the Cross and Crown
Amongst fresh Groves and Lillies fully blown,
Stands, a white Lamb bearing the purple Cross,
White shows his pureness, Red his bloods dear loss:
To ease his sorrows the Chaste Turtle sings,
And fans him swetting blood with her bright wings;
While from a shining Cloud the Father Eyes
His Sons sad conflict with his Enemies,
And on his blessed head lets gently down
Eternal glory made into a Crown.
About him stand two flocks of di^fering notes,
One of white sheep, and ^^e of sp^ckled goats,
The first possess his right hand, and the last
Stand on his left: The spotted Goats are cast
All into thick, deep shades, while from his right
The white sheep pass into a whiter light.


But in all these sacred buildings, our most pious and humble Bishop did not so
much as dream of Merit. He thought (as bl^ssed Mr. Herbert did) that they were
good works, if sprinkled with the blood of Christ; otherwise he thought them
nothing. It will not be amiss, nor perhaps needless, to produce his own words
in his own defense: Nisi dominus aedificaverit domum, vano aedificantes labor
sudabimus. Oremus ergo dominum, ut dum nos illi aedificamus domicilia quae
videntur, ille nobis intus aedificet illa quae no^ videntur, domum videlice^
illam non manufactam. Unless the Lord build the house, we labor in vain to
build it. Let us therefore (says he) pray to the Lord, that while we
outwardly build unto him these visible buildings, he would build inwardly in
us those which are invisible, that is to say, the house not made with hands.
How can a servant merit by making use of his masters goods? All we do, and all
we give are but his concessions and favors first given unto us. Cum suis and
hic and ibi rebus lo^upletamur, in this World, and in the World to come all ou^
magnificence is but his munificence. But Paulinus was not only outwardly
pious, but inwardly also. He did so abound with private devotions, that all the
time from his Baptism to his burial, may be truly called his Prayer-time. All
that he did think, all that he did speak, and all that he did write, was pure
devotion. Either public or private prayers took up all his tim^. Our Savior
tells us, that Gods Elects cry day and night unto him, Luke 18.
and Saint Paul advises us to pray without ceasing, and in every thing to give
thanks, for this (says he) is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you.
Holy Paulinus called Saint Paul his Master, having made himself his Disciple,
he would not neglect his commands: If you continue in my word (says our
Savior) then are you my Disciples indeed.

To this I shall add his Conformity and obedience to the Church, a blessing of
no small consequence in all ages, especially in this age of Schisms and
Heresies. He highly honored the memory of the Saints of God, and was a most
cheerful and devout observer of Sacred Festivals, or holy days. His pious
affection to these blessed seasons, together with the necessity and convenience
of them, he has most elegantly and learnedly demonstrated in his Poems. -- hos
per long a morantes
Tempora, dum tardi splendens rota vertitur anni
Sustineo intentis affecto pectore votis:
Quos cupio totis mihi praelucere diebus,
Vel quando veniunt ita compensare moras, ut
Aestivis possent spatiis producere lucem,
Aut illum pensare diem, qui sistere Jussis
Syderibus, longo lassavit lumine mundum,
Humanos duplicans dilata nocte labores.
Ergo velut caelum stellis, and floribus arva
Temporibusque annos dominus, sic ipse diebus
Tempora distinxit festis, ut pigra diurnis
Ingenia obsequiis, saltem discrimine facto,
Post intervallum reduci sollemnia voto
Sancta libenter agant, residesque per annua mentes
Festa parent domino, quia Jupiter intemeratos
Justitiae servare piget: delinquere suetis,
Parcere peccato labor est: decurritur omni
Valle, per ascensum non est evadere cursu.
Inde bonus dominus cunctos pietatis ut alis
Contegat, invalidis niti v^rtutis ad arcem
Congrua sanctorum dedit intervalla dierum,
Ut saltem officiis mediocribus ultima Christi
Vestimenta legant, and eos sacra fimbria sanet.
Primus enim gradus est caelo pertexere cunctos
Continua bonitate dies, and tempore toto
Pascha sacrum Christi Cultu celebrare pudico.
Quod si mista seges tribulis mihi germinat, and cor
Incultum stimulat terreni spina laboris,
Vel festis domino studeam me offere diebus,
Ut vel part mei tanquam confinia Vitae,
Corpore ne toto trahar in Consortia mortis.


Englished thus. Those sacred days by tedious time delai'd
While the slow years bright line about is laid,
I patiently expect, though much distressed
By busy longing, and a love-sicke breast*
I wish, they may outshine all other days,
Or when they come, so recompense delays
As to outlast the Summer-hours bright length,
Or that famed day, when stopped by Divine strength,
The Sun did tire the World with his long light,
Doubling men's labors, and adjourning night.
As the bright Sky with stars, the fields with flowers,
The years with differing seasons, month^ and hours
God has distinguished and marked; so he
With sacred feasts did ease and beautify
The working days: because that mixture may
Make men (loath to be holy every day,)
After long labors with a freer will.
Adore their maker, and keep mindful still
Of holyness^, by keeping holy days:
For otherwise they would dislike the ways
Of piety as too severe. To cast
Old customs quite off, and from sin to fast
Is a great work. To run which way we will,
On plains is easy, not so up a hill.
Hence it is our good God (who would all men bring
Under the Covert of his saving wing,)
Appointed at set times his solemn feasts,
That by mean services, men might at least
Take hold of Christ as by the hemme, and steal
Help from his lowest skirts their Souls to heal.
For the first step to Heaven, is to live well
All our life long, and each day to excel
In holiness; but since that tares are found
In the best Corn, and thistles will Confound
And prick my heart with vain cares, I will strive
To weed them out on feast-daies, and so thrive
By handfuls, 'till I may full life obtain,
And not be swallowed of Eternal pain.


Two places upon Earth were most renowned with the memory of our Savior,
Bethlem for his birth, and mount Calvarie for his passion. To extirpate all
remembrance of his Humanity out of these places, Hadrian the persecutor caused
the Idol of Jupiter to be set up, and worshipped in Mount Calvarie; and in
Bethlem he built a Mosquie for that Egyptian block Adonis, which the Idolatrous
Jews called Thamuz. Some men amongst us have done the like: Two Seasons in the
year were consecrated by the Church to the memory of our Savior: The Feast of
his Nativity and Circumcision, and the Feast of his Passion and Resurrection.
These two they have utterly taken away: endeavoring (in my opinion) to
extinguish the memory of his Incarnation and Passion, and to race his blessed
name out of those bright columns of light, which the Scripture calls days.
They will not allow him two days in the year, who made the day^s and the
nights. But it is much to be feared, that he who has appointed their days
here, will allow them for it long nights.

Holy Paulinus had now attained a good old age, the forerunners (as Master
Herbert says) were come, and the Almond tree did flourish: he was all white
with years, and worshipped (like Jacob) lea^ing upon the top of his staff. His
virtuous and dear Therasia had died (I believe) long before this time; God
having ordained him to be hindmost, who was the stronger Vessel, and best able
to bear her absence, and the unavoydable disconsolations of flesh and blood.
And now (having for some time stood gazing after her,) he begins to follow, God
visiting him with a strong pain in the side, which in a few days did set him
at liberty to overtake her, by breaking the prison.

Three days before his dissolution, Symmachus and Hyaci^thinus, two Bishops of
his acquaintance come to visit him; whereupon he spoke to Uranius his
Presbyter, that he should prepare to attend him in the administration of the
Sacrament; for (said he) I desire to receive it in the company of my brethren,
which are now come to see me. This sacred Solemnity was no sooner ended, but
suddenly he began to ask, where his brothers were? One that stood by,
supposing that he had asked for the two Bishops, answered, Here they be: I know
that, replied Paulinus, but I ask for my brothers Januarius and Martinus,
Januarius was Bishop of Naples, and a Martyr; and Martinus was the Bishop ^f
Tours in France
who were here with me just now, and promised to come to me again. And having
thus spoken, he looked up toward Heaven, and with a voice as cheerful as his
countenance, which seemed to shine and revive with joy, he sung out the one
hundred and twentieth Psalm, I lift up mine Eyes unto the hills from whence
comes my help. My help comes from the Lord, who made Heaven and Earth.

This being done Posthumianus, another Presbyter that was then present, told
Paulinus, that there were forty shilling^ unpaid for the Clothes which he had
given to the poor, before be fell sick. To this Paulinus replied with a smile,
that he remembered it very well: and Son (said he) tak^ no thought for it, for
believe me, there is on^ that will not be wanting to pay the debt of the poor.
The words were no sooner out of his mouth, but presently there comes in from
the parts of Lucania (now called Basilicata) a Presbyter sent from the holy
Bishop Exuperantius to visit Paul^nus; who brought him fifty shillings for a
token from the Bishop. Paulinus receiving the money, blessed God, saying, I
thank thee O Lord, that have not forsaken them that seek thee. Of these fifty
shillings he gave two with his own hand to the Presbyter that brought them,
and the rest he delivered to Post humianu^ to pay for the Clothes which were
given to the poor.

The Evening now drawing on, he remained quiet and well at ease until
midnight: but the pain then increasing in his side, he was troubled with a
great difficulty, and shortness of breathing, which held him till five in the
morning. The day beginning to break, he felt the usual motions of holiness
awaking his Spirit, to which (though weak) he cheerfully obeyed, and sitting up
in his bed, celebrated Mattins himself. By this time all the Deacons and
Presbyters of his diocese were gathered together at the door, and came (like
the Sons of the Prophets) to see the translation of their aged Father. After
some short exhortations to holiness and Christian courage, he lifted up his
hands and blessed them, mindful (it seems) of our Saviors carriage at his
ascension, whose peace he prayed might rest upon them.

Shortly after (the pain still increasing and prevailing against him) he
became speechless, and so continued until the Evening; when suddenly sitting
up (as if he had been awaked out of his sleep) he perceived it to be the time
of the Lucernarium, or Evening-Office, and lifting up his hands toward Heaven,
he repeated with a low voice, this verse out of the Psalms, Thy word is a
Lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my paths. About the fourth hour of the
night, when all that were present sat diligently watching about him; his poor
Cottage did suddenly shake with such a strong Earthquake, that those who
kneeled about his bed were something disordered with it, and fell all trembling
to their prayers. The Guests of Eternal Glory were now entered under that narrow
roof, where (after the abdication of his great worldly honors) he had lived so
long in all holiness and humility. For in that instant of time (says Uranius)
he was dissolved, the blessed Angels testifying that they were present to
conduct his happy and glorious Soul into the joy of his Master. By the like
sign did Christ signify to his Church in Jerusalem, that he heard their
prayers when they were persecuted by the merciless Jews. Gregory the great, in
the place

(...) St. Paulinus to his Wife Therasia.
COme my true Consort in my Joys and Care!
Let this uncertain and still wasting share
Of our frail life be given to God. You see
How the swift days drive hence incessantly,
And the frail, drooping World (though still thought gry,)
In secret, slow consumption wears away.
All that we have, pass from us: and once past
Return no more; like clouds, they seem to last,
And so delude loose, greedy minds. But where
Are now those trim deceits? to what dark sphere
Are all those false fires sunck, which once so shined
They captivated Souls, and ruled mankind?
He that with fifty ploughes his lands did sow,
Will scarce be trusted for two Oxen now,
His rich, loud Coach known to each crowded street
Is sold, and he quite tired walks on his feet.
Merchants that (like the Sun) their voyage made
From East to West, and by wholesale did trade,
Are now turned Sculler-men, or sadly swett
In a poor fishers boat with line and nett.
Kingdoms and Cities to a period tend,
Earth nothing has, but what must have an end:
Mankind by plagues, distempers, dearth and war,
Tortures and Prisons dye both near and far;
Fury and hate rage in each living breast,
Princes with Princes, States with States contest;
An Universal discord mads each land,
Peace is quite lost, the last times are at hand;
But were these days from the last day secure,
So that the world might for more years endure,
Yet we (like hirelings) should our term expect,
And on our day of death each day reflect.
For what (Therasia!) does it us avail
That spacious str^ames shall flow and never fail,
That aged forests hie to tire the Winds,
And flowers each spring return and keep their kinds?
Those still remain: but all our Fathers dyed,
And we our selves but for few days abide.
This short time then was not given us in vain,
To whom time dies, in which we dying gain,
But that in time eternal life should be
Our care, and endless rest our industry.
And yet, this Task which the rebellious deem
Too harsh, who god's mild laws for chains esteem,
Suites with the meek and harmless heart so right
That it is all ease, all comfort and delight.
" To love our God with all our strength and will;
" To covet nothing; to devise no ill
" Against our neighbors; to procure or do
" Nothing to others, which we would not to
" Our very selves; not to revenge our wrong;
" To be content with little; not to long
" For wealth and greatness; to despise or jeare
" No man, and if we be despised, to bear;
" To feed the hungry; to hold fast our Crown;
" To take from others naught; to give our own;
These are his precepts: and (alas!) in these
What is so hard, but faith can do with ease?
He that the holy Prophets does believe,
And on Gods words relies, words that still live
And cannot dye; that in his heart has writ
His Savior's death and triumph, and does yet
With constant care, admitting no neglect,
His second, dreadful coming still expect:
To such a liver earthy things are dead,
With Heaven alone, and hopes of h^av'n he is sed;
He is no Vassal unto worldly trash,
Nor that black knowledge, by which pretends to wash,
But does defile: A knowledge, by which Men
With studied care loose Paradise again.
Commands and titles, the vain worlds device,
With gold, the forward seed of sin and vice,
He never minds: his Aim is far more high,
And stoopes to nothing lower than the sky;
Nor grief, nor pleasures breed him any pain,
He nothing fears to loose, would nothing gain;
What ever has not God, he does detest:
He lives to Christ, is dead to all the rest.
This Holy one sent hither from above
A Virgin brought forth, shadowed by the Dove;
His skin with stripes, with wicked hands his face,
And with foul spittle soyl'd and beaten was;
A Crown of thorns his blessed head did wound,
Nails pierced his hands and feet, and he fast bound
Stuck to the painful Cross, where hanged till dead
With a cold spear his hearts dear blood was shed.
All this for man, for bad, ungrateful Man
The true God suffered! not that sufferings can
Add to his glory ought, who can receive
Access from nothing, whom none can bereave
Of his all-fullnesse:: but the blessed design
Of his sad death was to save me from mine;
He dying bore my sins, and the third day
His early rising raised me from the clay.
To such great mercies what shall I prefer,
Or who from loving God shall me deter?
Burn me alive, with curious, skillful pain
Cut up and search each warm and breathing vain:
When all is done, death brings a quick release,
And the poor mangled body sleeps in peace.
Hale me to prisons, shut me up in brass:
My still free Soul from thence to God shall pass;
Banish or bind me, I can be no where
A stranger, nor alone; My God is there.
I fear not famine; how can he be sed
To sterve, who feeds upon the living bread?
And yet this courage springs not from my store,
Christ gave it me, who can give much, much more;
I of my self can nothing dare or do,
He bids me fight, and makes me conquer too.
If (like great Abr'ham,) I should have command
To leave my fathers house and native Land,
I would with joy to unknown regions run,
Bearing the Banner of his blessed Son.
On worldly goods I will have no design,
But use my own, as if mine were not mine;
Wealth I Will not wonder at, nor greatness seek,
But choose (though laughed at,) to be poor and meek.
In woe and wealth I Will keep the same stayed mind,
Grief shall not break me, nor joys make me blind:
My dearest Jesus I Will still praise, and he
Shall with Songs of Deliverance compass me.
Then come my faithful Consort! join with me
In this good fight, and my true helper be;
Cheer me when sad; advise me when I stray;
Let us be each the others guide and stay;
Be your Lords Guardian: give joint aid and due;
Help him when fallen; rise, when he helps you;
That so we may not only one flesh be,
But in one Spirit, and one Will agree.
FINIS.

