THE Ungrateful Favorite. A TRAGEDY.

WRITTEN By a Person of Honor.

Ficta, voluptatis causa, sint proxima veris.

Horat. de Art Poet. Licensed,

May 11. 1664.
Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON: Printed by J. Cottrel, for Samuel Speed, at the Rainbow near the Inner
Temple-gate in Fleetstreet. 1664.

Drammatis Personae.
KING of Naples, Old and timorous, fears to be dethroned by his Son. AMINTOR,
the Prince, His Son, Generous and Popular, yet full of respect and duty to the
King, a Lover of Clariana. VALERIO, a Count, In love with the Princess, and
after General for the King. TERRAEFILIUS, An unknown person, fancied by the
Prince for his rare parts and qualities, and by him advanced to highest
Dignities, called in Court Calisto. DUKE of Calabria, A Favourer of the Prince,
and Father to Clariana. FRANGYPANE, A Nobleman, endu'd with Courage, and other
brave qualities, which are destroyed by the infection of Love and Poetry: He is
in love with Livia. MALIGNO, LUSSURIO, Two Sycophants that batten upon the
Kings weakness, and great enemies to the Prince. HORTENSIO, Lieutenant to
Valerio, a worthy Gentleman. Captains, Soldiers, a Spirit, Messenger. JULIANA,
The Princess, in love with Valerio. CLARIANA, The Dukes Daughter, in love with
the Prince. LIVIA, A Lady attending the Princess, beloved by Frangypane.
Ladies.
Scoene NAPLES.

PROLOGUE.
Enter a Drunkard, a Morice-dancer, a Buffoon, a Bawd, a Whore, and a
She-Gypsie; they dance an Antic. Which done, Enter Tragedy in state, in a
Crimson Robe held up by two Roman Gladiators, a Crown upon her head, a Scepter
in one hand, and a Poniard in the other; at whose entrance the Dancers all
start back.

Tragedy.
YOu seem amazed; pray let me wonder too:
I have more cause to stand amazed thin you,
To see your mimick faces usher in
So deep a Tragedy. Those that have seen
My Crimson Visage on the Stage before,
Expect designs both deep and dark: nay more,
Counsels of Kings disclosed: They look to see
Me ushered in with wonted Majesty,
No light Morice. Sure the Author's frantic,
To present for a Prologue such an Antic;
Or else he humors those that are so: few
Can like things so extravagantly new,
I mean, that are judicious: some think fit
To number Dances in the rank of Wit.
Such may his entrance please; whilst only they
Of deeper judgment do applaud his Play.
THE Ungrateful Favorite.
ACTUS PRIMUS.
Scoena Prima.
Prince, Terraefilius. Prince. THou love us, Terraefilius?


Ter. Love you, my Lord? What man dare question it
That has a life, or may be mortal? Would
I could find a word apt to express it,
And then some action to make good that word;
My love would throw me on the enterprise,
And banish by performance the least doubt
Might bring my Love or Duty in suspect.

Prince. Neither is doubted, Terraefilius;
I do believe, and cherish both.

Ter. Give't (my Lord) the name of Duty only;
A Vassal's love unto his Prince is such:
Or, if you please, of Gratitude, for all
Those Favors, those Seas of Princely Favors,
Your Bounty prodigally shower'd on me.

Prince. I count them, Terraefilius, well bestowed:
When Princes meet with a clear faithful Breast,
One, who nor flatters nor betrays his trust,
(As I have done in thee) they ought esteem't
The richest Jewel in their Diadem.
When Hunting accidentally I found thee,
Clad in the roughness of a Soldiers Garb,
Then did I see Desert shine through thy Rags,
A valiant look linkt to an honest heart;
And since, thy virtue has made good all my
Predictions of thee.

Ter. Your Grace does ruin my small stock of worth,
Quite bankrupt my hopes, which are by service
To deserve your favor. But Nature's poor
In but affording me a single life,
Scarce valuable to loose in your defense:
The sum of all my riches is your love.

Prince. In which Exchequer, thou shall find no waste,
Nor study wanting to advance thy State:
For I design Virtue a Triumph in*
Thy Greatness; therefore, Terraefilius,
I will prefer thee to my Fathers love,
Endear thee to his heart: such honest Souls
Should still cohabit with a Monarchs ear.

Ter. Your Grace does seem to love me,
Yet you would loose me.

Prince. Loose thee, Terraefilius? I Would advance thee.


Ter. Thus to advance me, is to cast me down;
Honesty dares not lurk too near a Crown:
Policy undermines and ruins her:
Truth's an unwelcome Guest unto a King,
Whose ears have been the Inns of flattery,
Who never yet knew one truth of himself,
Or of his people. (Pardon my honest bluntness.)
And next consider, if a man that knows
His duty binds him speak his honest thoughts
T'inform his Prince of those abuse his ear,
And let him know his Peoples Grievances,
Can be a Grateful Favorite.

Prince. You must learn to Temporize.


Ter. Yes, be a Dog, and fawn upon each Lord; be injured, and give thanks; that
is the thriving way: never speak a truth, but when it is injurious; detract
from true deserts, and praise shallow great ones to their ruin.


Prince. Thou have the Theory, now try to practice.


Ter. To be a Knave, a Politic Courtier; had I somewhat of the Fool too, they
were very fortunate properties.


Prince. Although the Place seem such an Antipode
Unto thy honest Nature, when thou know
My Interest urges my Commands, thou wilt flee
Swister then Lightning to perform my wish;
I know thou will.

Ter. Were the Devil there, as Vices are his Agents, your interest would make
me dare him too; and to promote it, vanquish him.


Prince. Thy bluntness savours much of manly truth;
I 'll therefore use no further circumstance,
But open the very soul of my design
In placing thee at Court; which is, to find
Out such as are my enemies, and do
Infect my Fathers Soul with Jealousy,
Insinuating to his fearful thoughts
My Popularity. Which when thou have
Discovered, at leisure we'll contrive
Their overthrow. Two of those Slaves are now
Within the level of my just Revenge;
But so endeared unto my Fathers Soul,
He Would think it a violence unto himself,
Should we but touch them.

Ter. Give me, Sir, their Names;
I Will mark them out for Hell immediately.

Prince. You shall have fit Directions. -- You cannot
Be ignorant how I have suffered,
And still suffer through my Fathers weakness;
Of whom I now am rather feared, then loved:
The many Penances I Have undergone
To gain the good Opinion of the King,
Must likewise be familiar to your thoughts,
Who can best witness the obscurity
In which I 've lived; how much below my birth;
Wedding my self unto a solitude
Little beseeming such a Kingdoms Heir,
All to regain the Kings Opinion
Of my Loyalty: A thing impossible,
Unless by Policy I could remove
Those brace of Leeches that do hourly feed
Upon my Fathers weakness; His Aged Fears.

Ter. I Am bound to serve you. Did your Highness know
How loath I am to leave you, what a contest
There Is grown between my Duty and my Love,
You Would surely pity me: But I serve you,
Though I Am banished from you, that is my comfort.

Prince. I see you will prove a Courtier; let us invent
The aptest form now to prefer thee in:
For should my Father learn thou came from me,
He Would never trust, but think it a design
Upon his Person. Have been seen in Court?

Ter. Never, my Lord: nor do I think my self within the verge of knowledge,
since my transformation from a Mendicant in Buff, to a Silken Favorite.


Prince. It Is well: but yet I fear, although thy birth.
Was mean, thy Soul and Education both
Too Noble are to personate so base
A spirit,
As must endear thee to my Fathers love.

Ter. Doubt me not; love makes all service easy.


Prince. But you are to play a part so opposite
Unto thy Genius, thou't never humor it.
Can act a Coward, a Slave, as timoroue
As a Virgin-Bride, lying suspended
'Twixt her hopes and fears, in expectation
Of her a norous Groom?

Ter. A Coward, Sir?


Prince. Yes, a wise cautious Coward; a formal
Coxcomb, thou never enterest my Fathers
Books else, nor so much credit gain'st to do
Me good: my Father entertains all such
About his Person for security:
His valiant Guard wait at the Palace-gate,
Not daring to trust them nearer his Person.

Ter. Your Highness makes me wonder.


Prince. To such a wonder Age has brought the King;
More my misfortune: wilt counterfeit
This Personage?

Ter. I Will more then counterfeit to serve you; I Will be
The thing you wish.

Prince. Receive in writing these Directions then,
And fail not (as you love your Prince) to act
Accordingly.

Ter. This is the square I Will rule my actions by.


Prince. Let Us then by execution give life
To our design; extend a Princely Arm,
And make those Sycophants this Maxim know,
It Is dangerous to be a Princes Foe.

Exeunt. Scoena Secunda.
Lussurio, Malcigno, Juliana, Valerio. Lus. WE have a fine time on it in faith,
to be sole Companions, Favorites and Chamber-fellows to the King.


Mal. Chamberlains, and chief Gentlemen of the Chamber? we are Totum in Toto,
or Fact-Totums.


Lus. Not too much Latin, Brother.


Mal. For indeed all things pass through our hands; and therefore it is reason
we should have a feeling in 't.


Lus. How happy were we, to be born patient Gentlemen! not to have one angry
Planet reign at our Nativities! not one scruple of Choler in both our
Compositions.


Mal. Choler? Thou Ruby-fac'd Gentleman with a Carbunkled Nose, I do contemn
thee: I Will not give a rush for thee as the time goes; for thou art more out of
fashion then Picketde-vaunt Beards, or Plain-dealing at Court; and more
ridiculous then Dancing to a Dead man, that sees not the Mufick.


Lus. Fighting Valor, Vostre servittur, you must not come within the smell of
the Court now, and yet we are valiant too; for true Valor consists in
suffering.


Mal. Right: for if a Blow or a Kick will do a friend a kindness, let him take
it, and be gone: if he be actively valiant in striking, we will be more
passively valiant in bearing, and oppose Flesh to Flesh, the Cheek to the Palm:
for if he use the Batton, he is a Coward, and not valiant by Nature, because he
refuses the use of Natural Weapons.


Lus. Which the Lion, and other valiant Animals, employ.


Mal. True: but thanks to our good Kings peaceable temper, we are freed from
such unnatural Fencers.


Lus. And from the Natural too, praised be the patient Stars: they were both a
continual torment to us in our days of adversity. I could never keep my Curls
in order; for the roaring of some Drum-headed Raskal or other would make them
stare, and stand an end.


Mal. That affliction could I bear; but when they tore Hair and Ears up by the
roots, it required a treble-fortified patience.


Lus. Oh, but the Villainous Kick given by the Horned shoe!


Mal. That fashion was invented in the City, and came from head to foot
immediately: but the durty shoe do I exclaim against; it has spoiled me many
a Satin Hose.


Lus. But now thanks to our generosity in suffering, we have overcome our
griefs, to the great grief of our Offenders, who daily come with Cap in hand to
sue to us for favor.


Mal. Whilst we delay their suits, and make them participate of our virtue.


Lus. Patience, Brother.


Mal. 'Twas that I was going to say: therefore it is fit now we are called to
the Helm, Brother, (mark me) to the management of State Affairs, we should be
grateful to the virtue that has exalted us.


Lus. Patience.


Mal. Still thou take the word out of my mouth: A bearing Patience, Brother:
(observe me) I have a design to bring it in fashion; for I conceive it very
advantageous and profitable to the Commonwealth.


Lus. As how, dear Brother?


Mal. If you mark it, for it is a State-point: Bearing is the cause of
Advancement, Peace and Defense to a Commonwealth; of Advancement in us, who
whilome were the dregs, and are now become the very cream of the Commonwealth,
and swim atop. Patience is a certain cause of Peace, for it makes the Citizen
bear with his Wife, whilst she is bearing the Courtier: so every man bears one
with another. Lastly, it is a defense to the Commonwealth: for it chiefly
causes the generation of her Defendor.


Lus. Learnedly argued, Brother! What Flesh can say more in praise of patient
bearing? Undertake thou the fashion amongst the men, and let me alone to
persuade the Women; they have a natural faculty in it. But mum: Enter Valerio,
Princess. Here comes the Princess and Valerio, whose Physiognomy is more
terrible then an apparition of Satan, with a visible Cloven foot.


Mal. His looks congeal my very blood; my heart is but one lump of Ice.


Lus. But for the privilege of the Peace, I durst not come within the scent of
his Valor, I thank my fear,


Mal. Yonder Is my Mistress too; and if his very aspect have not conjured down
all my affections, and laid the Devil flat, may I never rise to the
Council Board.


Lus. By this cudgelled Carcass, she is a dainty morsel of Man's flesh: Oh that I
had her in place where --


Mal. How thou swell'st at the sight of a handsome Woman!


Lus. Oh, she has eyes, whose sparkling Glances invite a man to Leudness.
Prithee let us Court her to the next Lobby; my thoughts are Fornicators already.


Mal. Thou wantst a Cooling Julep; faith Brother you must purvey elsewhere;
this Lady is selected for a lawful affection.


Lus. No monopolizing, Brother: if I can get a consent before thee, I Will make
bold with the first cut.


Mal. However, I Will venture on the invitation; she is too honest for thy purpose.


Lus. I would fain see an honest Woman; but Miracles are ceast sure.


Exeunt with Lucia. Val. I dare not nourish the bold thoughts of love,
Yet still I must admire you, still adore you
As a Star above me; a happiness
Like heaven, in this life not to be obtained,
Though wished for, yet there after good actions
Through the Port of Death we may at last arrive,
But to the accomplishment of my desires,
I fear never: how can I fear a thing
I dare not hope for?

Jul. You are (my Lord) too cruel to your self,
Too superstitious in your love, to which
Although I dare give no encouragement,
Not being my own Disposer, might I
Advise, it should be constancy.

Val. Madam,
Could I be guilty of so great crime,
Or Heaven be so cruel to impose
(For secret sins) so high a punishment,
As make me know a change in my Devotions
To your Grace, yet your Virtuous Counfel
Would strengthen and reanimate my love
To such a vigorous perfection,
It would appear invincible to all
The incounters of an adverse fortune.

Jul. You're very confident of your affection.


Val. Your Goodness (Madam) did first give it birth:
But if I have offended, pardon me,
And I will teach my tongue forget that Name,
That Divine Name of Love. I 'd not offend
Your Virtue willingly: but if a service,
Pretending nothing but from your merit,
A pure flame, free from the smoke of lust,
Zealous Devotions, no ways counterfeit,
Can pretend to the Character of Love,
Pray let me read it in a smile: You are
In this too bountiful, and I in the
Request (I fear) too impudent: if so
With a frown you chide away my Soul whilst dying
On your hand, I vow my self your Martyr.

Jul. How he moves me! I have too much Woman:
My Lord! see how unmovedly he stands!
Just like Loves Statue, and as lovely. Sure
He Is transported in his thoughts: How his Fancy
Labors! 'twere sin beyond a cruelty to scorn
Such love, which in a sweet, yet negligent
Distraction, displays both Truth and Passion.
But he recovers!

Val. What a Paradise has my thoughts enjoyed!
What Seas of Pleasures has my Fancy waded!
Most Divine Power of Love! thy Joys and Griefs
Are both inscrutable, and not to be
Comprehended.

Jul. How do you do, my Lord?


Val. Very exceeding well, never better:
Surely Sickness dares not approach me now,
Now you are present, who are both my life
And health, indeed my All: for less cannot
Express you; nor that at full.

Jul. You set (my Lord) too great a value on
A worth that is borrowed from the Barren Dust
Of Ancestors: Their peculiar Virtues
Made them Kings, my Fortune me a Princess:
I might as well been born the neglected
Issue of a Shepherdess, and past as
Unregarded; your Lordship then (I doubt)
Would scarce have thought my Virtue a full Dowry,
My Chastity a Nobleness in Nature.

Val. How much you wrong my thoughts, (Madam!) my Love's
No common flame wedded to Lust, or to
Ambition; it is your Soul, your Soul
Of Virtue I am ravished with: had it
Inhabited the coarsest blackest earth
Afric did ere produce, 'twould have rendered
It Divine, and through that Sable Cloud
Cast forth its glorious Beams of brightness.

Jul. Continue still a President for Lovers;
Steer them a course to everlasting love,
Immortal as the Soul. Tell them, Beauty
Is fading; such will be their love if placed
On her; Greatness unstable, no secure
Prop to build it on. Virtue's the Pillar
That will never fail: She Is your Advocate,
And pleads (my Lord) your interest in my heart:
Dote on her still; for she will deserve your love.

Val. I have ever done so, (Madam) doated
On you; but with such reverence, such a
Becoming duty, as best might suit my
Meanness, and your great Birth.

Jul. Continue constant.


Exit. Val. Continue constant? excellent Motto!
Thou shall be ingrav'd in lasting Characters
About my heart, and excho thence
Those sacred words, until my tongue forget
All frivolous Discourse; only her name
Shall intermixedly make up
Loves Harmony, whilst daily I admire
Those Blazing Stars which set my heart on fire.

Exit. Scoena Tertia.
Prince, Terraefilius in a plain simple dress. Prince. IF thou can suit thy
Garb unto thy dress,
Thou gain'st access and credit with the King.
But Terraefilius, do not forget
The ends for which I placed thee there, to work
For my advantage, and to plead my cause
Like a double-fee'd Advocate, which must
Be with success; the Kings Aged Weaknesses
Being of such an easy mold, they take
Impressions, good or bad, as those about
Him stamp on his Belief.

Ter. For the future, it shall bear the Signet
Of your Virtue, which I Will impress so deep
Into his Soul, that Age, nor eating time
Shall never raze. I Will let him know how sweet
A hope he has for to succeed him: how
Noble a Son, how generous a Prince,
How full of duty and of humble thoughts.

Prince. Thou will in this so far oblige us, that
I shall esteem my Favors past but Trifles.

Ter. I Am richly recompensed in your Princely Love!
Continue me but there, I wish no greater
Fortune.

Prince. Would I could take thee nearer to my Soul,
Thou art so good: but being already at height
In my affection, I will raise thee to
An equal highth in Fortune: when I reign,
It Is Terraefilius that must command.

Ter. I am (my Lord) your Vassal, born to serve,
Not to oblige you: yet I would not change
My bondage to be a Monarch; so much
I prize your love and service!

Prince. I know thou love us, and need no farther
Argument to confirm the truth. But now
To my Design: This leads to the Presence,
I must commit thee to thy fortune; for
I dare advance no further, it would breed
Too much suspicion: you know your task.

Ter. And will perform't with all fidelity.


Prince. It Is in thy power to oblige thy Prince;
And to mistrust, were too much injury,
Where I have found so much fidelity

Ter. I were too base a Villain to deceive
So generous a Prince: Your confidence
Would make a Traitor Loyal, but on me
Mere Gratitude does put a double eye.

Prince. May the Gods favor our designs!


Ex^^ Ter. They Are obliged to favor Justice, Sir.
Poor Prince! I pity him: I see Content
Is seldom conversant with high Estates;
Most Virtuous Souls are injured most by Fates.

Scoena Quarta.
Lussurio, Malcigno, Terraefilius. Lus. FEllow Malcigno! let us be watchful,
vigilant and careful in our Office; the King is upon entrance, and relies upon
our honesty for his Safeguard.


Mal. Therefore it is safe we search each corner wherein Treason may lurk.


Ter. What a brace of Baboons are these? fitter to keep Centinal at a Ladies
Closet, then at a Kings Bed chamber. -- But I must try my fortune, and accost
them: Worshipful Gentlemen!


Lus. Ha! what Fellow's that speaks to us with his Justice of Peace his Title?


Ter. Right Worshipful Gentlemen!


Mal. So, he rises a note, but has not attained our style.


Lus. Brother, take no notice of him; Austerity and Gravity are the Essence of
Greatness and Place.


Mal. Let us then walk by him with as much contempt as a begging Spaniard
refuses an Alms before witness.


Ter. What Musk-cats are these, to guide a tottering State, whose Wisdom is
mere Formality; Honesty, Baseness; and greatest Virtue, Cowardice? But I must
temporize with these State-Leeches: Right Honorable, I have an humble suit to
your Honors.


Lus. An humble suit to your Honors? This is somewhat like.


Ter. That your Honors would deign to prefer me to the King, as a person
dignified with the Virtue Patience, which his Gracious Pleasure has newly
rendered a Majestical Virtue.


Mal. Fellow, I fear thou have not undergone all the trial of that magnanimous
Virtue.


Lus. Brother, you say right: for those Carbuncles in his face denote Choler,
heat of Liver, and Inflammations of Anger: therefore, Fellow, we cannot; it is
absolutely against. Allegiance to ad nit thee.


Mal. How many trials of patience have thou past through?


Ter. Various sufferings, Sir, and Militant afflictions; as, the Bastinado, the
Horn'd-shooe-kick, the Twinge by the Nose, the Lug by the Ear, and penetrating
Lash; all which I have born with patience, because I would not stain my Honor.


Mal. Certes, Brother, this Fellow has Virtue in him.


Lus. If I could but see Golden Proofs, I should believe: But to introduce a
Fellow to our capacity, (do you conceive me, Brother?) is no small kindness.


Mal. I Would be of your Opinion, had the Fellow Wit or Policy; but he is a Fool,
you may see by his Garb.


Ter. The fool may chance to colt you, rather uncolt you: cast you from the
Saddle of preferment. But I must buy my place, I see that: there is no Courtier
has so little Wit, but he can take money for an Office. Gentlemen, presuming
you have considered my aptitude for the Kings service, and that your
resolutions are in my favor, I take the boldness to present you this parcel of
Crowns.


Lus. Now we understand him, these are the only Pleaders.


Mal. Next to Women, Brother.


Lus. Women, I grant, are very prevalent: I saw the Fellows aptitude before: if
you mark it, he has an ingenious countenance; we'll prefer him.


Mal. Content: to say truth, the weight of Government is too ponderous for two.
Come, Fellow, and be obedient, thou art made for ever: if otherwise, we will
take the Prop of our favor from thee, and expose thee to the perils of fortune.


Ter. I shall be still your Creature.


Lus. He will thrive, I warrant him; he has learnt to flatter great Ones.


Exeunt. Ter. Good Dog-Whelps, you that sell your Princes smiles
For Crowns, would for a sum of Angels sell
His Crown, and Life to boot: Such sweet Engines
(Giving a handsome opportunity)
Might transform a Politician to
A Traitor; which proves this Axiom true,
That Prince can never be safe who much depends
On Knaves for Counsel, and makes Cowards Friends.

Exit. ACTUS SECUNDUS.
Scoena Prima.
King, Juliana, Lussurio, Malcigno, Terraefilius. King. DO you all know him?


Lus. Know him, my Liege? better then our selves: an honest Fellow, an' please
your Majesty; and so holy, he has almost worn out his fingers ends with
dropping Beads.


Mal. He prays so continually, the Devil's grown weary to disturb his
Meditations.


Lus. Did you but see him at his Orizons, you would swear he enticed Heaven by his
amorous postures to an embrace. I never courted Wench with half such an
Alphabet of Gestures.


King. It Is well, it does become your care to place such near our Person; for
we rely upon your faiths: I don't affect these Men-killers styled Valiant;
they are cruel, and gain a reputation by spilling Humane Blood.


Mal. This Gentleman's so merciful, he will not crack a Lowse for fear of
spilling it.


King. What does our Daughter think of this new Courtier?


Jul. I think he may be worth your favor, Sir:
If one may judge by looks, his countenance
Befriends him: truly I think him faithful:
Nor can I fancy any man so cruel,
So much at enmity at least with Heaven,
As to wish harm unto their Sovereign.

King. Your Innocence let us you not see the dangers
Threaten us: Our ears are every where;
Nor want we power to prevent
All those designs of blood that menace us.

Jul. Boody designs indeed! sure such evils
Cannot inhabit in a subject Soul.
Weeps.
King. Poor Girl! she weeps: I wish her Brother were
Of this soft strain: but he is all Martial,
And bears Destruction in his very looks,
To Us, and to our Kingdom. He might stay
Till Nature force me to resign it up
To his Protection, without seeking
Thus to encroach upon my subjects loves.
We shall not long trouble him: Me thinks our Age,
Did not the Law impose a double tie
Of Son and Subject, might incline his heart
To due obedience; but Naught works on him.
A Crown's esteemed a thing of so much weight,
Men seldom weigh by what means it is obtained.
Treason we never do for just allow,
But when she pearches on a Monarchs brow.
When I am dead, none dare the Deed disown;
The Prince will justify it by my Throne.

Ter. Does he use to talk to himself thus?


Lus. It Is his daily exercise: for he will admit no company but the Princess and
us; and we are commonly so busied for his safety, he cannot think it safe to
trouble us with so much talk.


Ter. It Is a strange melancholy has possessed him.


King. Calisto!


Ter. Your Majesty's Creature: I Will wait upon you.


Lus. He called for Calisto:
Exeunt King, Juliana, Terraefilius. Did you observe? I like it not.

Mal. Your fears are now too busy: if the King use him for other then a
Jester, never trust my Policy.


Lus. Let Us have a care, for favor makes men bolder:
I would be loath he caper over my shoulder.

Exeunt. Scoena Secunda.
Livia, Frangypane, Terraefilius, Juliana. Live. ARe you often troubled with these
Poetical fits?


Fran. Fairest of Ladies, did you never know it,
How in a dream I was ordained a Poet?

Live. Not I, my Lord.


Fran. Then listen pray, the story straight will follow:
Being one night drunk, and dreaming of Apollo,
That Riming god, I in a rapture fell,
Which made my Buttons crack, my Body swell;
And in Poetic fury by exclaims,
I called the Muses by their proper names:
The Furies all, it is truth that I do tell ye,
I straight did feel to rumble in my Belly;
Furies within, the Muses nine without me;
You may imagine how I laid about me.
Out-thundring Jove, with fancies that I stole,
And frighted Phoebus with an Hyperbole
Which was too high for to be understood,
Or of my self or him: but sure 'twas good;
For suddenly, as I do think, did follow
My Installation by the god Apollo;
Who rose resplendently from off his seat,
With such a vast illuminary heat,
As put me something in a sweat.

Live. The last Verse wants a foot; lend it a crutch.


Fran. No wonder; sure the Verse was at a stand,
Wanting a foot; for then I used my hand
To wipe away the sweat from off my face:
The heat my pardon pleads in such a case.

Live. And justly too: me thinks you still are hot:
Put not your Muse unto so hard a task:
Pray tell your tale in Prose.

Fran. Truly I am none of those
That knows how to speak in Prose:
Since my Instalment Verse does flow
From me wheth'r I will or no:
Therefore if you will hear the story
In my Language, I am for ye.

Live. So you will be brief, (my Lord) I am content,

Fran. Apollo risen, (as I said before)
In his right hand a Cypress Garland bore,
In's left a Lash, by which he did presage,
That with my Satyrs I should scourge the Age.

Live. Then you are much Satirical.

Fran. I am all the parts of Poesy and love;
Pray hear me out,
I Will clear all doubt
Your Criticisms can object or move.

Live. It Is pity so brave a Fellow should be fooled by fancy,
And Valor wedded to such indiscretion.

Fran. Silence, Madam, in a Woman
Is a Virtue, but not common.

Live. Proceed; I am most attentive.

Fran. Then Phoebus put the Garland on my head,
And straight by him my Destiny was read,
That I should languish much for my first Love:
But if to me she too unkind did prove,
Each Lady that did hear a Verse of mine,
At first should love, but if refused, should pine.
It Is you I first affect.

Live. Indeed, my Lord?


Fran. Yield love for love.


Live. Oh excellent Poetical Courtship!


Fran. Lest your whole Sex do these disasters prove.


Live. Most dire and terrible!


Fran. Now if you can affect me, I pray show it
To him Apollo styled the Cypress Poet.

Live. My Lord, you are all affected.


Fran. By all affected, and refused by you,
Were in my Cypress Wreath to mingle Rue.

Enter Juliana, Terraefilius. Jul. How now, my Lord?
You spend your time in Courtship.

Live. A Poet, Madam, always is in love.


Jul. But is it true? I heard that Miracle, and wanted faith.


Live. Most true: he can both seign and rhyme.


Jul. I thought his Lordship had scarce wit to be guilty of such a folly.
Calisto, what think you? does not his face betray him for a Lord?


Ter. More then a Poet, Madam: for me thinks he wants much of their crabbedness
in his countenance: he looks not as if he had lately contracted his brows in a
Purse-net for a Conceit: besides, his Hair grows thick upon the Temples; which
Poets still tug off, with pumping for inventions.


Live. But his are free; his Verse all unconstrained:
For he has quite forgot his Mother Tongue,
And Meter flows more plentifully from
His lips, then Claret from a Conduit-pipe
At a Coronation.

Jul. Sure he is inspired, Livia: he was wont
To be content with Prose, although it came
A little short of sense.

Live. Indeed he used a Martial bluntness, Madam:
But give him still his due, he was a Soldier.

Jul. Sure the Wench loves him.


Live. Your Highness is deceived; it is he loves me;
And yet I pity him, that for my sake
He should incur so great a Lunacy.

Jul. As love? is that a madness?


Live. Oft-times it self: but in a Martial Scull,
And joined with Poetry, a double Lunacy.

Ter. See how his Muse labors! he stands as if he were
Casting Figures, or conjuring for Verses.

Fran. Hieroglyphick love, that with Geometrical are,
Takes the dimension of each Triangle heart.

Ter. Those words lay hard upon his Stomach.


Jul. They were bad of digestion toward bedtime:
Ha, ha, ha! he turns: his eyes are fixed on Livia.

Ter. He Would make a gallant Setter.


Jul. A pretty Puppy for a Ladies Lap.


Fran. Frangypane sings. Is it your Nature, Lady, or your Will,
That makes you cruel still?

Live. My Will.


Ter. He varies too much his humor to be mad^


Fran. Frangypane sings. Will you be then against Reason still unkind;
And count my Passion Wind?

Live. Wind.


Jul. Well sung echo.


Fran. Frangypane sings. Wind is but Air, and with a puff is paid:
Will you still live a Maid?

Live. A Maid.


Fran. Then by this puff of scorn you have betrayed
Your Sex to ruin: had you my love cherisht,
You had been safe, and none of them had perished.

Exit. Ter. He can vail out of Tune.


Jul. But not in Prose.
This Fellow's humor might become the Stage
Exceeding well, but that it would be thought.
Too much extravagant. To what a height
Of madness may fancy bear a man!

Live. Madam, you mist the best; I had the whole
Relation of his Instalment.

Jul. Come in, and tell the story; such harmless mirth
Best pleases: I shall be mindful of my Brother's
Business; he gives you a noble character.

Exeunt Jul. Live. Ter. Ever a Slave unto your Virtues, Madam:
I would I were your Master! Rebellious
Thoughts, how dare ye assume a voice to give
Your selves a sound articulate? Die, die,
And with you perish all my fonder hopes,
Grounded upon ambitious Policy.
My honest thoughts, keep guard upon my heart;
For love does seek to undermine the fort,
And so betray me to ingratitude.
Still the infection seizes on my heart;
Love like a Poison spreads its Leprosy;
Which will too soon I fear corrupt my soul,
For it already does my thoughts control.

Exit. Scoena Tertia.
King, Lussurio, Malcigno, Terraefilius. King. THat was Calisto sure that
parted hence?


Lus. It was, an' like your Majesty.


King. Send him to us, and be you diligent
In keeping watch the while for our safety.

Lus. We shall, Sir: I like not this familiarity,
Brother, we must rid us of this fear.

Mal. We'll find occasions to disgrace him, fear not:
But to our task.

Exeunt. King. My safety bids me try him ere I trust:
For I perceive him of a subtler mold
Then all my other Servitors. He Is fit
(If I sind him honest) to be trusted
In the full management of those affairs
Nearest concern us; our proper safety;
And next, the peace and welfare of the State:
Both which are threatened by the Prince; a Son
In Title, in Duty a mere stranger:
Where I should love, there I have cause to fear;
But what I want in Son, I have in Heir:
Yet he shall stay his time, maugre his spirit;
It Is just his Father die before he inherit.
Calisto!

Enter Terraefilius. Ter. My Liege.


King. You promised us when last we did discourse,
To give us your opinion of our Son:
We have given you time to recollect your knowledge;
Therefore speak.

Ter. Sir, your request is of so deep concern,
And I so little in his nature verst,
I never durst have undertook the task, which to dispute
Had not your dread Commands
Were impudence in me) constrained me to it.

King. We like your honest caution; speak your
Thoughts freely.

Ter. You give a Noble freedom, which I Will use
As best becomes a subject that speaks truth.
You have a Son so full of Piety,
So enriched with Wisdom, Valor, indeed all
Those Virtues which adorn a Noble Prince,
Or Kings may hope for in their Successors,
To make their Kingdom happy.

Aside. King. Is this through ignorance or love? I Will sound him:
Calisto, thou do flatter him, basely
Belie his Vices: believe it, he is more proud
Then Lucifer; in Ambition greater
Then the Giants that threatened Heaven:
For Cruelty, no Tygres equal him;
He wears a bloody mantle over his thoughts,
And underneath obscurely lie involved
The darkest Policies Hell ever contrived.
He well may term himself the scourge of the Gods;
For he is his Fathers terror, his disquiet:
How can I be a King, and fear? Can Nature
On my Prerogative so far prevail,
To make me live in bondage to a Son?

Ter. Aside. He Is much incensed: Policy bids comply.
I see your Majesty's much better read
In the obscure Volume of the Princes heart
Then I; in which appears such gentle mildness,
So intermixed with duty to your self,
As might deceive a wiser man then I.

King. Aside. This Fellow's honest sure.
All Is but Hypocrisy, and mere Deceit;
Rebellion still has worn Religions Cloak:
Worst Acts are faced with Piety. Believe't,
Policy has taught the Prince first what to seem,
Then what to be: but I know all his haunts;
There Is not a corner of his heart lies hid
From my discovery: his secret Plots
Appear as plain as the unclouded Sun
In the Meridian.

Ter. How men may be abused! I do protest
The World believes him a Miracle
Of Virtue, and thence erect a pity
To his Person: some are so bold to term
You cruel, others unjust unto his worth;
Which is by all admired: I cannot blame
Your Majesty to fear, though much I grieve
You should have cause of fear; especially
From him, whereon your Kingdom does erect:
Such hopes: but your Majesty is wise.

King. We will begin to be so: now thou perceiv'st
Our injuries.

Ter. With too much grief.

King. Honest Calisto, thou shall share our bosom:
We intend this night for to secure the Prince.

Ter. Your Majesty's a miracle of Wisdom.

King. We have intelligence he is to sup
With the Duke of Calabria to night;
A notable Favourer of his faction.

Ter. Heaven I hope favors your Majesty,
And then you need not fear.

King. Fear (Calisto) shall henceforth loose her Name;
It Is Action now that must secure us.

Ter. You are an Oracle unto your self,
And need no second counsel.

King. It is not safe to stroke a Lions Whelp
Whence once he does begin to find his strength;
Much less to trust so popular a Prince,
Molded by War to every act of Blood,
With liberty, and all the peoples hearts.
Those Princes by a Politic compass steer,
Who still secure what they have cause to fear.

Exit. Ter. So, I Am a Favorite already: sure
The Air of the Court's unwholsom, and infects,
I could not else so soon become a Knave;
Nay worse, a Traitor to my Princes trust;
And if that worse may be, ungrateful too
To a man that raised me from the dust, from whence
He snatched me up to plant me in his breast:
And for this good must I now cut his throat?
The time requires it: Pox on Machiavel,
I had been honest had I never read thee:
But now the Devil chalks me out a way
To be a King, my Virtue cannot resist
So rich a bait: Ambition whispers me;
How near were Terraefilius to a Throne,
Could he but make the Princess once his own!

Exit. Scoena Quarta.
Clariana, Prince, Duke. Clar. What haste you make away!


Prince. Business calls loud upon me.


Clar. Nay, use your pleasure, Sir, since I am grown
So great a burden to your thoughts: you seem
Distasted with my company, which used
To be so pleasing, (at least you made me
Think so) Melancholy durst not approach
Your heart whilst you possessed it.

Prince. It Is still as grateful; and, Clariana,
More precious to my soul then ever.
I must' confess some melancholy thoughts
Perplex my mind, and raise disturbances
Within my soul, I know no reason for it.
I never yet (to my remembrance)
Surprised was with such a sudden fear:
My whole frame shakes, as if my innocent Soul
Were guilty of some crime she durst not think on.

Clar. I feared somewhat relating to my self
Had raised that stormy weather in your looks:
I would not willingly through ignorance
Offend a Person, to whom knowingly
Love has not left me power to wish ill.

Prince. It is not in thy power to offend;
But you are too indulgent to your fears:
Would I could dress my face in such a look
As might still give assurance of my love,
And so kill suspicion. Clariana,
It is the misery of Lovers still
To fancy or too little, or too much:
They conster frowns, and misinterpret smiles
For fears or hopes, as love their fancy guides.

Clar. Love knows no reason, therefore is governed
By appearances: besides, the face is termed
The Index of the mind, wherein's discerned
Each passion of the Soul: Gladness and Joy
Are there enthroned, and circled in with smiles:
Distaste appears in Frowns; Anger and Rage
Still shoots from the eye, and so does scorn:
But Melancholy is too bold a Guest,
Engrossing all these Lodgings to himself.

Prince. This were an Art worth studying: had men
So fair a Book as your face to read it,
They would out-stare Astronomers, and be
More wakeful then a Nurse-keeper that had
Newly learnt to watch with her eyes open.
The News? --
Enter Messenger.
Mess. This Letter to your Highness.


Exit. He reads it. Prince. What, is he gone? -- Oh my Prophetic fear!


Clar. How fares my Lord the Prince?


Prince. Read, Clariana, read; and tell me then
If I have cause to grieve: Terraefilius
Says there the King intends to secure us,
Immediately to coop and cage me up.
What then his Parasites may work him to,
Let all men judge that have a grain of sense.
Experience does make me justly fear,
A Princes Prison and his Grave are near.
Alas, poor Clariana! Why do spend
She weeps. Those precious Tears in vain? Preserve them
To embalm my Hearse: for they are useless now,
Could they dissolve a Rock of Adamant;
For the Kings heart's a much more hardened substance.
Enter Duke. Here comes thy aged Father weeping too,
As if his Tears held counsel with my fate.

Duke. Flee, flee, my Lord! and by escape prevent
The fury of the King, whose Officers
Are making down the Street to apprehend you.

Prince. Why let them come: my innocence is so
Secure a Guard, I cannot fear.

Clar. Virtue may be by Violence oppressed:
Oh good my Lord, seek to preserve your self;
You do not know the ruin threatens you.

Duke. It is no idle fear; there are strange whispers;
And how far the Kings jealousy may work
Upon him, none but the Gods can tell: We'ave
All cause to doubt, since from his love and counsels
All worthy Souls are banished. You he has
Banished too; you, whom he ought to esteem
The chiefest Pillar to support his State.
But we have no time for Arguments, my Lord;
I hear the Officers.

Clar. Oh hear me on my knees! Listen to her
You often have styled Commandress of your heart;
She begs you would be kind unto your self;
If not unto your self, unto the State,
Whose welfare on your safety does depend.
If all this cannot move, yet pity me:
Nay, I Will not rise until you grant my boon.

Prince. I can deny thee nothing: Rise.


Clar. Oh give me then your safety by your flight!


Duke. My Lord, you must not now delay: to horse;
And with a winged speed let us to Calabria:
We have all an interest in you, and dare not
Let you perish.

Prince. Your goodness does overcome me: nothing grieves me,
But thus to part with thee, my Clariana:
It is an Exile worse then death: but Fate
Must be obeyed. Farewell.

Exit with Duke. Clar. Take all my Prayers, and choicest Wishes with you,
Whilst I remain at home the wofull'st Maid
That love ere brought acquainted with mishap.
But I must dry my eyes, and for a time
Take truce with grief. Here comes the Officers.
Enter Officers. Fortune assist my Lord in his escape,
And I Will forgive thee all thy treacheries,
And with a Stoics Patience sustain
The Princes absence.

Lus. Yonder Is the daughter, she is lawful prize:
I Will seize on her.

Clar. How bath my guiltless self offended, that
You dare commit this Rape? Pray let me know
My crime: if by Authority you act,
The Law prescribes no punishment but to
Offenders.

Lus. We are not bound to give account; it is the Kings
Pleasure, and as a subject you must obey.

Clar. Come, Jaylors, lead; I Will use for my defense
What you could never boast, bright Innocence.

Exeunt. ACTUS TERTIUS.
Scoena Prima.
Terraefilius, Juliana, Livia, Frangypane, Lussurio, Maligno, Valerio. Ter. THe
Prince his flight was happy 'bove my wish:
Had he complotted with me my designs,
He could not more advance them. The fearful King
(By this convinced of his Disloyalty)
Has levied forces to reduce the Prince,
And named (by my advice) Valerio
For General. Thus has my Policy
At one blow removed a Rival here at
Home, to promote my interest abroad.
He Will either overcome the Prince, or die
IN the enterprise: I know his Valor well;
Either will make for me: for both must fall
Low as the Grave, before I can ascend
This wished for Throne, or gain Juliana's love:
That Is the grand wheel whereon my Plots do move.
See, here she comes! Mirth triumphs in her face:
Enter Juliana, Livia, Frangypane, Lussurio, Maligno. She Is ignorant her Lover
is advanced:
But I Will observe.

Jul. What makes him flee me thus?


Live. For fear, Madam, you should undergo a punishment threatened all our Sex,
for my neglect of his good parts.


Jul. We'll give this hour to mirth; I Will prosecute the humor.
Sweet Frangypane, how affable he looks!

Fran. This did I still foresee: Pray look not on me,
Lest a Judgment fall suddenly upon thee.

Ter. His rhyme makes him very familiar; fine foolery.


Fran. For Phoebus swore an Oath of dreadful awe,
Soon as the scorn of Livia he saw,
In such a manner he would revenge his Poet,
That all the Sex of woman-kinde should know it:
For hear, quoth he, thou Cypress Lawreat.

Live. Ha, ha, ha! a Cypress Laurel!


Jul. You Will make him forget his Rhyme.


Fran. Though we do not intend to alter fate,
Which has thy love to Livia decreed,
Her scorn to thee shall make a thousand bleed.

Jul. A direful Sentence!


Fran. Therefore, O Princess, I this boon implore,
That you would never look upon me more:
For though your heart with loves strong fangs were torn,
Your kindness I must still return with scorn:
And I perceive, Oh me, she drops her Glove,
A certain token that she is in love.

All. Ha, ha, ha!


Fran. Slaves, how dare ye at a Poet laugh,
Who can at pleasure Cudgel with a staff
Of Verses most Satirical your bodies,
Till you become bald Puppies, arrant Noddies?

Lus. Inspire me (Muse;) were it before a Jury,
I could no longer now contain my Fury:
Raptures, ye Slaves, within my head do rumble,
And thus their furious weights upon you tumble.

Lus. Oh good Sir! Oh my bones!

He beats Lus. and Mal.
Mal. Is this basting in Verse, pray?


Fran. What, do you gape, and in contempt still stand,
As if you did divide the Muses hand?
Then it is convenient, Raskals, that we greet
Your Bums in measure with Poetic feet.
He kicks them. Lus.
Lus. Oh Lord, Oh Lord, Sir, what do you mean?


Mal. A Pox* this is worse then kicking in Prose.


Jul. Good Livia take him off; his humour's tedious:
Should the King come and see his Favorites
Corrected thus, he would be displeased.

Live. Sweet Seignior Frangypane!


Fran. Sweet is the Name, since you do give it voice;
But sweeter were it, were that Name your choice.

Live. Here it is too public to discover love.


Fran. I Will wait on you to the adjacent Grove.


Exit with Livia. Ter. Pretty foolish pastime this; but I have other Engines
working here.


Exit. Jul. How do you find your bodies, Gentlemen?


Lus. As well as beaten bodies, Madam, sore and bruised:
Patient Valor is subject to these corrections.

Mal. A Pox upon Poetical feet; especially when they don't run smooth: they
gall most damnably, and then they come with such a fury! to be enclosed in a
Barrel full of Nails, and rolled down a hill, is no torment to it.


Lus. A mere May Game: I shall hate a Poet whilst I live.

Enter Valerio.
Jul. You must be charitable, and forgive.


Lus. Our Patience shall supply that virtue.


Val. Gentlemen, the King enquires for you.


Lus. He shall not long, if this limping pace will bear us to him.


Val. Madam, I Am come to take my latest leave.


Exeunt. Jul. Your leave, my Lord?


Val. And like an humble Lover, offer on
The Altar of your hand, my faithfull'st Vows.

Jul. Are you to go a Voyage?


Val. A Pilgrimage to death: for every step
That contributes to the separation
Of Valerio from your Princely presence,
Leads to my grave.

Jul. I cannot reach your meaning: if my sight
Be so necessary an ingredient
To the composition of your life,
You may defer the Journey.

Val. Although, great Princess, you might much command
By Loves Prerogative, indeed my life,
I must not now obey.

Prince. You speak in Parables.


Val. It Is easily explained: I now must leave
Loves gentle Theme, and treat of naught but War:
The King has ruined me with Honor, (Madam;)
Makes me a General of men abroad,
Whilst my poor heart's at home a Prisoner.

Jul. Is this your woeful Pilgrimage to death?
This your Mishap? Is it the War you fear?
Hen-hearted Man! where did thy courage loose?
Or had thou ever any? Valerio.
Let me not loose the hopes I had in thee,
To find a Man that is absolute in all,
Courtly in Peace, and yet more stern in War
Then Pallas in her Martial-Robes.

Val. It Is not the War, nor all those horrors, (Madam)
Which are Companions to a Martial life,
Can move a panick thought: It Is to leave you
That startles me, and lays my Courage waste:
My heart would better brook to stand a breach
When Death and Horror both did hem me in,
Then one day bear the burden of your absence.

Jul. I must not have you thus effeminate
In your affections, forsaking Honor
To content your Eye. What Noble Spirit
Would for a Mistresses fleeting smiles exchange
So glorious a Title? Kings need not blush
To wear it! A General comprehends
All Titles in it self; those glorious Honors
Virtue, Valor, or Desert can merit.
Fortune has painted you out a copious Field
To merit what your birth dares not pretend,
My Love: if you esteem it at the rate
Your tongue so prodigally has expressed,
You Will judge it meriting one generous
Achievement, as an evidence at least
To the world my favors were bestowed on Virtue.

Val. Enough: your speech has shot into my breast
Another soul: I am your Soldier:
Though I despair of being so fortunate
To merit what all worth can scarce deserve,
Your favor, I shall do something, Madam,
(Encouraged by your smiles) that may appear
Like merit.

Jul. I no ways doubt it: all my discourse
Was to withdraw you from Love-Lethergie,
Fondness, and Chamber-courtship. It is poor
For men to say they love, and give no proof
Of their affections: I would have you
Rather by actions then by words subdue.

Exeunt. Scoena Secunda.
King, Terraefilius, Valerio, Maligno. Ter. YOu must be speedy, Sir, when
Treason does
Assume so bold a front to show her self
IN the open field: Delays are dangerous:
So many minutes as you let them breathe
The sweet air of repose, so many men
You arm against your self. The Peoples love
Unto the Prince (which gives their courage wings
Soon as they hear him in a settled posture)
Will move them all to flee unto his aid.
Traitors like Foxes should be hunted still:
Though in the chase of every other beast
The Huntsman gives a Law to save their life,
He never spares the Fox: the application's easy.

King. Thou art a just Adviser, and do weigh
In Wisdoms scale the safety of thy Prince.
We have too much considered, too little done:
Our Counsels henceforth shall be dressed in Acts
Soon as conceived. The Traitors shall no longer
Triumph by our sloth. How strong are we?

Ter. But yet six thousand; most of them compelled,
Which shows their small affections to their King;
And how their souls, although their body's pressed
Unto your service, wish your son Victory:
I dare not call him Prince, since he forsook
Allegiance to your Majesty: before,
He was the very Idol of my soul;
But when he forsook Virtue, I left him.

King. Honest Calisto, we'll find a time to recompense thy love.


Ter. If you forget, I Will find a time my self.

Enter Valerio, Here comes my Lord Valerio; I beseech
Your Majesty to hasten his dispatch:
I cannot conceive you safe whilst your General's in Silk.

Val. I have used all diligence, yet cannot learn
With any certainty which way the Prince
Has steered his course: two Scouts are new returned
As ignorant as when I sent them forth.

Ter. This falls unleckily; he must be removed,
Or all the Politic Wheels within this Scull
Are at a stand.

King. What Is to be done, Calisto?


Ter. Why, let the Army march.


Val. But whither?
The Station of the Prince is yet unknown.

Ter. It is impossible!


Val. That frown, Calisto, might be spared.
Please your Majesty a word in private.

Ter. All my designs are strangled in their birth.
A Pox on Fortune, and her Lady Humors:
Must these dull Brains be useless in extremes,
When they should be more active then a flame,
Consume to ashes every obstacle
That stands between me and my dearest hopes?

King. I am convinced; you shall defer your march.


Val. It were too much unsafe for me to march
At any distance from your Majesty:
For soon as the Enemy does hear which way
I move, they may retain some pety force
TO allure me on, and keep me there in Play,
Whilst their main body, nearer your sacred
Person, may appear to disturb your Peace,
And terrify your people.

King. It Is true, our own security must first be studied.


Ter. What easy Arguments seduce a t^morous Prince! I Will follow the stream a
while, that I may turn the current with more ease. Maligno, the News?

Enter Maligno hastily.
Mal. Soft, Sir, it is for your Master.


Ter. Prithee be less a Statesman: come, reveal.
To me, dear Camerade, this Nicety?

Mal. It must not be purchased with fair words; it is a News beyond the price
of Gold. An' please your Majesty!


Ter. Fie, be not impudent; you see the King is busy with the General. Well, I
could tell thee that concerning thy Mistress might deserve a Novelty.


Mal. What, of my Livia?


Ter. And of another within thy knowledge, to whom she does more favors then
ever City-wife bestowed upon her Husband at midnight, when she had made him
Cuckold the day before.


Mal. But can thou give me proof?


Ter. Yes, visible proof; and that is the certainest: I think it concerns thee,
if thou art so near marriage as rumor gives out.


Mal. Dear Calisto, thou wilt oblige me thine; and for the Novelty thus, a Scout
is new come in, that brings advice of two thousand men in Arms in Caelabria,
headed by the Prince.


Ter. Enough; be gone; observe your Mistress well: I Will keep my word: observe
Lussurio too; I say no more.


Mal. I ever feared that Smock-smelling Raskal: if I had but heart enough to
cut his throat, it were some satisfaction; for on my conscience he would make no
resistance: the danger would be, if the sight of his blood should turn my
stomach, I shall go near to swoon, or else perfume the Palace: I Will consider
on it.


Exit. King. Is this intelligence true?


Ter. Maligno so affirms: the Scout's arrived,
And says he saw four thousand men in Arms
All well appointed; that they did increase
Their numbers daily. I must spur his fears
With dangers (though no truths) to hasten Valerio's journey.

Val. If you esteem it necessary, Sir,
I Will march to night, and leave my carriages
Behind to follow me. I have made choice
Of Hortensio, if your Majesty
Think fit, for my Lieutenant.

King. He Is an honest Soul; so's Frangypane,
Though somewhat tainted with his Poetry;
Take him along, the Wars may cure him,
Or at least wake him from these idle dreams,
Offspring of ease and love.

Val. The War's a Noble School.


Ter. For honest Virtuous Souls.


Val. You are a man of peace, Calisto; want faith to ward a Bullet.


King. He can make War by's brain: but we loose time;
I Will give you some instructions, and dispatch you:
Spare not the Traitors, though the chief's our Son,
But look on them as Rebels to our Throne.

Val. I dare not be disloyal.


Exit with the King. Ter. Fortune, I adore thee: these tidings came
Just in the nick of time: when my dull brains
Were on the rack for some neat stratagem,
One favorable smile of Madam Chance
Set all my designs in tune. He removed,
My prospect level to the Princess lies,
No obstacle between us save my birth,
Yet we may mix, for we are both but earth.

Exit. Scoena Tertia.
Prince like an Egyptian, Duke disguised, Juliana, Clariana. Duke. HAving now
brought you to the Palace-gate,
I must commit you to your Destiny:
The Army does expect my swift return.

Prince. It Is time you now were with them: they believe
You Are but retired to your Country House
To setch them some pecuniary supplies.
You must continue still the false report
Of my being gone to head some other Troops
That lie concealed in a place remote,
Expecting a fit opportunity
Upon advantage to disclose themselves;
For this will raise a terror in the King:
Still keep their wisest Counsels in suspense,
That they 'll be long resolving what to do:
At worst, they will not dare employ their force
Against our Army in Calabria,
For fear our rumored forces here at home
Should suddenly the King and Court surprise.

Duke. I shall observe all your directions,
And make a Politic use from time to time
Of these blanks by your Princely hand subscribed;
On Terraefilius specially, whom I mistrust.

Prince. Let not your Zeal, my Lord, so injure him;
Y' are both my friends; yet Terraefilius
Is of so dear concern unto my Soul,
I sooner should mistrust my self then him.
Nature has molded all his faculties,
As if she intended him fair Virtues Shrine:
And Education has so strengthened
Those Natural Seeds of Honesty, that
In spite of Envy they must ever flourish.

Duke. I wish your confidence meet no deceit;
Your Nature is too Noble to mistrust:
But if his intimacy with the King
You Would justly weigh in Reasons equal Scale,
And how since his endearment the old King's
Ill-grounded Hatred to your self's increast,
'Twere worthy a suspicion.

Prince. Well, I am content to try his Loyalty.


Duke. I wish you find all false: however, you will be
Near enough to dive into his Policy.
Enter Juliana, Clariana.
Prince. No more; here comes my Clariana, and
My Sister: I hope I Am far from knowledge.
Now, my Lord, we must but sigh a parting wish,
And separate.

Duke. Wishing your Highness safety, I am gone:
I hope to meet you next time on your Throne.

Prince. Not whilst my Father lives: for I would prove
Not Heir unto his Kingdom, but his Love.
Exit Duke.
Jul. I am glad however my Brother is escaped,
Since that the King designed him for a Prison.

Clar. Such a restraint his Spirit could never brook;
His Noble Soul would scorn to be confined,
And grown intemperate with injuries,
Might have exposed his body unto some
Contagious and Pestilential Fever,
Or more distractive Melancholy killed him.

Jul. So may the Wars: thou have not named my fear,
Which was the secret murder of the Prince;
My credulous Fathers nature being apt
By bloody Villains to be workt upon.
But now my Brother has a spacious field
To justify his innocence, or die
In the Bed of Honor.

Clar. Die! dear Madam: that word's destructive to us all.


Jul. He was not born immortal, Clariana:
We all must die: Death is to none a shame,
But those whose vicious lives do merit blame.

Prince. I honor thy bravery of spirit:
My Clariana's more effeminate,
Fit for loves Dulcet charms; yet is her Soul
With Virtues much enriched, though Pity most
Within her Breast her Excellence may boast.
He goes to them. Hail, gentle Ladies, you both are
Much less fortunate then fair:
I read a sorrow on your brow,
And by a secret knowledge know
The true cause of all your woe.

Clar. What Is this? a Soothsayer?


Jul. One that pretends to Augury it seems: I Will try his Art.

Takes her by the hand.
Prince. Sacred Madam, as you stand,
This appears a Princess hand:
Mars and Venus do conjoyn
Here within this amorous Line;
By which Art does make us know,
You affect Valerio.

Jul. A strange knowledge, Clariana!


Clar. It amazes me.


Jul. Pray proceed.


Prince. By this Triangle, Mars his square,
He should now be gone to the War;
And by this same Line of Life,
You may live to be his Wife.
Though he be gone with bloody mind,
He shall never your Brother find:
His aim is War, Blood his intent,
Yet in his soul he is innocent.

Jul. Stranger still!


Prince. In your ear, Madam, by the way,
One thing I have more to say:
It Is in your power to command,
And withhold Valerio's hand:
Use your interest; do this good,
Save your Lover, and much blood;
Else on you will lie the guilt
Of all the blood that is to be spilt.

Clar. Take his counsel, Madam: for sure his Art's
Divine, and he by the Gods from Heaven sent
Our dangers to foretell, our griefs prevent.

Jul. Most learned Sir, let us entreat your stay,
That we may yield just Honors to your Art.

Prince. Madam, you shall command it.


Jul. You honor us, whilst we enjoy your skill;
We Are careless of our fate, and fear no ill.
Exeunt.
Scoena Quarta.
Terraefilius, Lussurio, Maligno, Prince, Clariana. Tor. It Is as I tell thee:
she loves thee dearly; dotes on thee almost to death.


Lus. Dear Calisto, may I credit this? Livia love me!


Ter. Thou art the very Idol of her soul;
Her Titular Saint. As I was walking
Two hours since behind the Mirtle-Grove
Under a Cypress Tree, I Livia spyed
In such a posture, as I soon did guess
Love was the cause of her retirement.
Which moved my curiosity to draw
Nearer, where, undiscerned, I overheard
Her thus complain unto her self: Livia,
How hard's thy fate, to be beloved by one
Unworthy of thy love; and to affect
Lussurio, dear Lussurio! With which
Her tears so plentifully flowed, they stopped
A while her Speech, but taking truce with grief.

Lus. What followed then, my dear Calisto?


Ter. She said, I must devise some way to let him know I love, and how withal I
hate Maligno; betwixt whom and me, Nature has placed such an Antipathy, I
cannot live till he is destroyed, and by Lussurio.


Lus. I would I had the heart, I Would do it straight, and merit her.


Ter. It Is a strange longing, Sir! but Women's appetites are very exorbitant,
especially when they are in love.


Lus. It is her longing moves me.


Ter. Nay, you are obliged in conscience, since she loves you, and hates for
your sake Maligno thus.


Lus. Nay, I Would do it willingly but for two rubs; the danger, Calisto, and a
certain natural aversion from spilling humane blood.


Ter. It Is considerable: but my life's at your service. Here he comes: observe
that frown, and neglect not this opportunity to see your Mistress.


Lus. Ha, ha, ha! He has received but a frothy entertainment.


Mal. How merry the Slave is!


Exit. Ter. Has he not cause, that triumphs in his Mistresses favors? He has
wearied me with amorous passages: were I as you, I would not bear the affront.


Mal. Were I confirmed, you promised visible proof.


Ter. Well remembered; make haste; you will find them now together: you soon may
guess what men and women do in private.


Mal. If I find him there, he dies.


Exit. Ter. Yes, fifty odd years hence. Although these Slaves
Want Policy to dive in my designs,
Envy may make them vigilant to mark
My actions. Malice many times gives Wit;
I therefore thought it Wisdom to create
This difference, to keep them so employed
In countermining of each others love,
That all my actions might pass unobserved.
But here comes Clariana with the Moor:
I must obscure.
Enter Prince, Clariana.
Clar. Now we are in private, I must claim your promise.


Prince. Past passages I Will first relate,
And thence the future calculate:
You Have loved, and been beloved long since,
By this same Kingdoms Heir, a Prince.

Ter. Say you so? I Will listen nearer.


Prince. Whose virtues are his crimes; the love
The people bear him, some fears move
Within his fathers breast: but he
Cannot be guilty of disloyalty.

Clar. Your speech is Oracle: let me entreat
The Issues of our love.

Prince. By the influence of your Stars,
Naught should threaten it but Wars;
Yet in this Ascendent-line,
Venus does so swiftly join
The God of War, that you may prove
Most happy in the Prince his love.

Clar. Can you not be more positive, and tell
Each accident that shall befall our loves?

Prince. It Is not in the power of Art,
Such high secrets to impart:
For though we read within the Skies,
Heavens dark-hidden mysteries,
They Are so obscurely there expressed,
That by most they are but guest.
If I may judge by what is revealed,
And that the Stars have naught concealed,
Then this I boldly dare foretell,
Your loves will happy prove, all well.

Ter. A pretty equivocating Prophet.


Clar. May all the Gods say, Amen, to your prediction
Could you but tell me where he now resides,
At your own rate I would the secret buy.

Prince. I cannot by the Stars: for your desire
Would too much time and study both require:
Yet am I not so unskilful in my Art,
But that in a short space I could impart
A larger knowledge, and by Magic power
Transport the Prince in the compass of an hour
From his concealed abode: but that would wrong
Too much his peace; the other way's too long.

Ter. A strange Promiser! yet I have heard that
Magic has raised dead men from the Grave.

Clar. Besides my thanks, as an acknowledgement
Of your high learning, and so famed deserts,
I do beseech you wear this Jewel.

Prince. As Virtues badge upon my breast,
May fortune make you ever blessed.

Exit Clariana. Ter. A notable cunning Raskal! he may be useful in my design
upon the Princes love: so the plot is formed, I Will but confirm my faith by
certain questions of the particulars of my actions past, and straight employ
him.


Ter. Hail, reverend Sir!


Prince. The Stars protect you, what is your will?


Ter. With what a state he nods! I am informed
That by laborious and unwearied study,
You have obtained the sacred skill
Of Divination, and telling all futurities.

Prince. Your information has not wronged you, Sir.


Ter. Might I assume the boldness to desire
You would inform me of some passages
That nearly do concern me, and how therein
I ought my self comport for to avoid
The perils of my fate, I should
Be bountiful in my acknowledgements.

Prince. Lend's your hand:

If every circle be well scanned
Within the Tablet of your hand,
It does most evidently show,
You to a Prince's bounty owe
All that you are.

Ter. The Devil's in his tongue sure, or near it, to inform him.


Prince. You seem amazed,
But your wonder will be raised,
When unto you I do realte
How almost from a starving state
You were advanced to this height:
Pray then do your Advancer right;
Plead well his cause, to him be just,
Or you will soon return to dust.

Exit. Ter. His knowledge startles me, and more in this
Then all he has declared: these secrets
Were only known unto the Prince and me.
H'hath a strange Genius! I must make him mine:
If Gold or Promises have power to work
Upon his dark-complexion'd face,
I Will him corrupt: none ere resisted Gold;
'Twould purchase Heaven, were it to be sold.
I Will find him out.

Exit. Scoena Quinta.
Lussurio, Livia, Maligno. Luss. DEnials are all vain, they must not pass for
current; I am too well assured both of your love to me, and hatred to Maligno.


Live. The last was well guest of a blind Prophet: but how I should love you,
when, or for what, are all without my memory.


Lus. Your Modesty bars confession, but in your looks I plainly read your
heart: do you remember the Mirtle-Grove? Oh Lussurio, dear Lussurio!


Live. Is the Fool mad?


Lus. I must devise some way to let him know I love: Do you remember this?


Live. What should this mean?


Lus. Some sparks of affection, Lady, which not stifled would break into a
flame. To be plain, your love to me was overheard; and I being full of pity,
loath that so fair a creature should pine for me, am come to make a tender of my
person.


Live. Some Wag has workt upon his easy faith,
Intending to make sport, which I Will not hinder:
I love wit a life; there is no pleasure
Comparable to making fools. Ha, ha, ha!
Enter Mal. Yonder Is Maligno too: I spy him peeping:
If I don't play my part, I am no woman. Oh ho!

Lus. Did not I tell you this? you must conceal
Your love: alas, poor soul, she swoons. Dear Livia!
Feigns to swoon.
Mal. See, she is within his arms: how the Slave hugs her!


Live. Oh Lussurio!


Lus. Madam, I am here, I am here to serve you, love you, any thing you shall
command.


Live. If you love me, fight Maligno; he is the man I hate.


Lus. Let me receive a warrant from your lips, and through seas of blood I Will
swim to the performance of your will.


Mal. Oh the Devil, how he slavers her! Would my eyes were Basilisks, to look
him dead.


Live. I hope you will make a noble use of this discovery: for had you not
o'er-heard my love, it should have quite consumed my heart; but since so
unexpectedly you come to know it, dissimulation's vain. So I commit Maligno to
your fury.

Lussurio shakes her by the hand.
Mal. What a letcherous gripe was there! Would this Blade were in thy Guts to
cool thee: If wishes could destroy, or curses kill, I Would be revenged of all my
enemies.


Lus. Account him dead: he is so base a Coward, I Will use no other VVeapon then
my looks.


Live. God-a-mercy Fear: he dares not look upon a sword: Ha, ha, ha! what a rare
Duel will these Herculean spirits make! I shall guess your love by your sudden
execution.


Exit Livia behind the Scoene. Lus. Thunder destroys not quicker then my rage:
He comes! Ha, ha, ha!


Mal. You Are very pleasant, Sir: fools laugh at shadows.


Lus. If I laugh, I have cause: so wise men laugh at fools. You saw Livia here,
a pretty Maid, and of a handsome fortune.


Mal. And what of her? did she tickle your spleen?


Live. Perhaps all men are not of the same complexion: I may be worth her
smiles, whilst others seem toads in her eyes.


Mal. I seem a Toad?


Lus. Basto, I Have said.


Mal. Enough to consume thee, Scondrel.


Lus. Ha, ha, ha! sure now they will draw.


Mal. But that I scorn to stain my sword in blood So base, I Would spit thee for
this injury.


Lus. I wear Steel, Maligno; and in a cause like this, Wherein my love to
Livia is concerned.


Mal. Thy love to Livia, Slave?


Lus. Yes, and her love to me.


Live. Now they will fight, or never.


Mal. I can no longer: Draw!


Lus. But that you know I lately breathed a vein,
You durst as well wade through the Ocean
As breathe that sound.

Mal. Could I but spy a loose seam! for if I kill him not outright, he will gasp
with such an horrid countenance, it will disturb my dreams a twelvemonth
after. I say, Defend thy self.


Lus. This is dishonorable, and base, to make a pass at a naked man.


Mal. Draw then! I Am resolved.


Lus. I Will suck thy soul through a Tobacco-pipe, and blow thee with a breath to
the Infernal Lake.


Mal. How the Rogue quakes! he dares not look upon a sword, and I dare as well
be hanged as use one.

Livia comes out.
Live. Now Champion, perform bravely my command.


Lus. I am engaged: she will not have the heart to see me bleed.

Draws.
Mal. How Is this? He draws.


Lus. I Will make thee a bleeding sacrifice to this Ladies wrath.


Mal. He has courage too: Love has conjured up his Valor sure: I am the same
in love and hatred, a Coward still; but rather then loose her thus, I Will wink;
for fighting so, I shall not see my danger.

Come on!

Being both ready to make a pass, Music sounds for the Kings entrance.
Lus. Sa, sa.


Mal. Make way for the King; bear back there.


Lus. 'Void the Room; the King's a coming.


Live. Any excuse serves Cowards: this Jest shall to the Princess.


Exit. Scoena Sexta.
King, Terraefilius, Prince, Lussurio, Maligno. King. YOu are all dull and
negligent, or else
It were impossible a Traitor should
Lie thus concealed within our Territories.

Ter. Upon my life it is but an idle fear,
A vain report spread by the Enemy,
To discompose your Council, and suspend
The execution of your just revenge.

King. It cannot be: by Letters from the Camp
We have received assured intelligence
Our Son's not there, and that the Duke commands
As General.

Ter. The last may be: but that your son's not there,
My faith cannot digest: It is too gross.
Please but your Majesty a little weigh
In Reason's balance every circumstance,
You Will soon perceive the impossibility
Of the Princes lying hid, at the least
With any power, either capable
To disturb your peace, or awake your fears.
An Army's not covered with a Bushel,
Nor circumscribed in the compass of a Cave:
Might I be worthy to advise you, Sir,
Your Army should all march: for that small part
The General did take with him along,
At best can only keep your Foes in play,
Not conquer them. It Is good, Sir, to make sure:
Whilst Treason breathes, no Prince can be secure.

King. We will consider on it.

Enter Prince.
Ter. Let me offer one consideration more.


Lus. This Magician can resolve me whether my love shall be successful. See!
Maligno's at it: May Saturn and Diana have been in Conjunction at thy Nativity,
and just in Opposition to Venus, to cross thy affections.


Prince. Saturn does so much command
Within the tablet of your hand,
And crosses every Planet so,
You should be Knaeve and Coward too.

Lus. Ha, ha, ha! his nature to an inch.


Mal. It Is rather thine: the Devil always lies.


Prince. If that Rule hold, you should be Satan's Ape.


Lus. Sfoot, a rare Fellow! how he jeers him! Prithee wilt tell my fortune, and
whether I shall thrive in Livia's love?


Mal. Good dark-complexion'd Sir, satisfy his curiosity: He has a great fancy
to marriage, that goes to the Devil for a Wife.


Prince. Lend me your Paw, I must be just;
You are too much inclined to Lust;
Envious, Malicious, Coward, want
No Vice becomes a Sycophant:
Livia 's not to be thy Wife,
Until thou do amend thy Life.

Lus. The Devil's turned Friar, I think, and gives instruction.


Mal. Does truth gaul you? Ha, ha! his nature to an inch.


King. Is he so great a Master in his Art?


Ter. Your Majesty would wonder at his skill:
His constant study, and deep-diving Brain,
Have plunged into the subtleties of Art,
And searched the bottom of Astronomy;
By which his knowledge is so far improved,
That by a speculation in the Stars,
And other Planets that do govern us,
He Is able to foretell our fate; and as
A proof of his undoubted skill, although
A stranger to this State and us, he can
Unfold the secret actions of our life.

King. We'll find a time to talk with him about Our near concerns.


Ter. Shall I present him to your Majesty?


King. Not now; we are indisposed: bring him In private to us.


Ter. I shall, my Liege: Please you to honor him With your hand in passing by.


King. Present him to us.


Ter. I Have given you a high character to the King, Who is disposed to honor
you.


Prince. You Are most obliging.

He presents him to kiss his hand.
King. Your worth is known to us already, Sir:
We shortly shall consult your best advice
Concerning some passages of our life.

Prince. Your Majesty's commands will honor me.


King. Bring him some two hours hence unto our Cabinet. Maligno! Lussurio!


Exit. Lus. So, we are called upon again; a good Omen we are not out of favor.


Mal. Since it is so well, let us shake hands, Brother, and plot together whilst
we enjoy the Kings smiles, against Calisto: The Upstart is false-hearted.


Lus. Though we are not perfect friends, we'll join against the common enemy.


Mal. Content. We'll wrangle like City-Atturneys at Loves Bar, and join like
Brothers in Calisto's ruin.


Exeunt. Ter. And if your Art with the Princess does prevail,
As she is superstitious enough
For to be wrought (and with much ease) into
A firm belief the Gods decree her mine,
I Will make thee richer then thou wilt wish thy self.

Prince. You shall command my Art. But, Sir, me thinks
If you had made the motion first, and tried
Her pulse, how to your Person she is inclined,
It had not been improper.

Ter. I have; but find her more averse unto
My ends then Anchorites to Lust: she vowed
That I appeared more loathsome to her eyes
Then a swollen Toad, that betwixt things in Nature
Most opposed, there could not be found the like
Antipathy. By Courtship I despair
TO obtain her love, unless that mine be gilt
With some feigned Piety, as a command
Fro' the Gods, or by affirming that
This Match will work a Peace betwixt her Brother
And the King: for she will swallow any thing
From you, though never so ridiculous;
Her faith is so confirmed by your Art.

Prince. Sir, this appears too circular a course;
You wheel too much about: would you give way,
And free me by your Power from the Law,
By Magic Art I could compound a charm,
Which soon as tasted should procure love.

Ter. Could thou do this, thou would enslave me to thee.


Prince. Rely on me: within this hour call for it.


Ter. Perform, and I will have thee Deified,
Then worship thee my self.

Exit. Prince. Confide in me. -- Ungrateful Villain!
Since thou have thus deceived my trust, I will
Despair to find an honest man. Through the
Small Pilgrimage of my life I ve made search,
And before this could never meet a man
Whom I could think worthy to share my heart:
This I have trusted with my secret sins,
Tried with all baits that might corrupt a Knave,
As Honor, Riches, Opportunity,
And still I found him honest; no Ambition,
No Deceit, no Falsehood, no Flattery
Could I ere perceive: Yet I watched him near,
And on a sudden to have his heart beget
So proud a thought as marrying my sister,
Appears a miracle in Nature: sure
The Court spreads a corruption through each soul
Sucks in that poisonous Air: But in this shape
I Will dive into his soul, and thence extract
Each hellish thought his brain does hammer out:
For I do calculate by his discourse,
Some dark Designs lie hid within his breast.
I Will play the Midwife, give his Projects birth,
Which I Will transmute to Air, but him to Earth.

Exit. ACTUS QUARTUS.
Scoena Prima.
Pistols discbarg'd within. Enter Frangypane driving balf a score before him,
-- Valerio, Hortensio. Fran. SLaves, my Livia straight restore,
Or I will swim in bloody gore
Unto her rescue.

Guard. Arm, Arm!


Within. Arm, Arm!


Fran. Give to the Dukes Tent an alarm.
I Will cut my way unto the place
Where you in bondage and disgrace
My Livia keep: I Will set her free:
My Sword shall give her Liberty.

Val. What has the Madman done! h'as lost himself,
Enter Valerio, Hortensio, with their swords drawn. And desperately engaged our
ruin too:
This comes of foolish Jests: we must make sport
With Madmen! A Plague upon the brain that
Did contrive the Letter.

Hor. None would have thought him such a Madman, as to engage his personal
Valor amongst thousands, upon a bare suggestion that his Mistress was taken
Prisoner.


Val. To what folly will not love engage men!
But let him perish, and the fool die with him,
So we are safe. Should the enemy but know*
How small a strength we are, alarmed by
This fool, their rouzed Valors might pursue us
TO our very Tents, and there devour us
Before the body of our Army come.

Hor. Your Excellence says true: one desperate sool
May more injure a well-ordered Camp, then
Then Valors of a thousand can repair.
Yet it is pity he should perish thus:
The Alarm still continues: I believe
He is not yet destroyed; would your Excellence
Give way, I would endeavor with a Troop --

Val. We may not engage so many lives upon
So desperate a design. Go rally up
Our Troops, and let them take the advantage of
The field. Draw them up in such a figure
As may best offend their enemies, and
Defend themselves. The Duke perhaps seeing
Our willingness to take the field, will judge
Us Masters of more strength in the Town.

Hor. Your Orders shall be punctually observed.


Exit. Val. For public safety having taken care,
I may bemoan my Cousins severe fate,
Whose soul though tainted much with Poesy,
And more enslaved to love, was of a strain
Noble, and valiant like his Ancestors:
So many Virtues did adorn his mind,
As for one folly may well plead's excuse.
All Great men, are not Statesmen; and if he
Did want some judgment to control his wit,
Envy her self will say his bloody fate
Did buy our Pastime at too dear a rate.

Exit. Scoena Secunda.
Duke, Captain. Duke. DId none second him?


Capt. None.
His single courage did disarm our Guards;
Which having put to flight more by surprise
Then a judicious Valor, he boldly
Fronted our whole Army, and bad restore
His Livia: whereat we stood amazed,
Whilst he (as if some Fury had possessed
His Arm) broke through our Troops, where like
A God of War he cut his way:
For all our faculties were so employed
In admiration of the bold attempt,
We let our selves be slain; until a Fellow
Of a duller soul, and quite incapable
Of admiration, shot him through the head.

Duke. 'Twas pity so much Valor should be wed*
To so much indiscretion: did he die
Immediately upon the Wound?

Capt. No, my Lord:
Having with sighs bemoaned his Mistress fate,
Condemned his Courage, and his Fortune cursed
For setting of this period to his life
Before he had his Livia enlarged,
He did begin to faint, and thereupon
Two of our skilfull'st Chyrurgeons were called
To sound the Wound: which they so mortal found,
And him with loss of blood so faint, they judged
Him dead, as in effect he was, when on
A sudden, as if another soul were
Shot into's breast, his cheeks began to wear
The Livery of Life, and by their scarlet
Tincture did proclaim that his remaining blood
Did yet sustain his Vital parts.

Duke. When Nature was so strong, could not their Art Preserve him?


Capt. It was impossible: for all our hopes
Were but mere lightnings before his death.
As you have seen a poor departing snuff
A while burn dim, and on a sudden blaze,
Then droop again, then blaze, and quite go out:
So he would seem almost revived, and vent
Poetic Raptures of so high a strain,
As all did judge him in Elysium then.
In fine, he di'd our wonder and our grief.

Duke. Poor Gentleman! I much condole his fate;
He does deserve our pity, not our hate.
See that his Obsequies be well performed,
Agreeable unto his Noble Birth.

Capt. I shall, my Lord.


Duke. And that severest Discipline be kept
Throughout the Camp; unless the Foe assault,
Let none presume by any Hostile act
TO exasperate the Enemy: until
I do receive instructions from the Prince,
I would not willingly engage: for they
Who venture all, should with much caution play.

Exeunt. Scoena Tertia.
Terraefilius, Prince, Juliana, Clariana. Ter. It Is in your power to oblige me,
Sir,
And build your self a fortune: I shall less
Doubt your performance of our will, because
Your interest is linked with mine.

Prince. Were there no other motive then the Trust
You do impose upon my faith, it were
A bond inviolable: but ye are my Lord,
Patron, indeed the Basis of my fate.
Judge not my heart, Sir: By this sable Busk,
I wear my blackest Livery in sight;
Within, my soul's all innocent and white.

Ter. I am confirmed: make but the Princess mine,
And to thy Art I will erect a Shrine.

Exit. Prince. I Am your creature: the whirlpool of his heart
Is bottomless; I cannot sound the depth;
Yet I perceive a mass of confused ills
Lie there upon a heap, expecting a
Fit time to take their shapes: some deep design
In Embryon lies, as yet unripe for birth:
But he is so Politic, that by no means
Can I obtain the knowledge; yet sometimes
(As my distrust makes me observe him still)
He Will speak suspitiously, as if he were
Ambitious of a Crown, and did aspire
Beyond my Sisters love, as if he meant
To raise his fortune upon my descent.
It must be so: but I Am resolved to try
How far the bargain's drove 'twixt him and Hell;
For he is much Devil since he came to Court.
But here is my sister, she must first be tried,
Enter Juliana, Clariana. And so must Clariana too: It Is just
Being once deceived, that I should all distrust.

Jul. I did long since suspect my Brothers love
By 's frequent Visits to the Duke, and am
Much pleased in the discerning choice he made
In you: for believe me, Clariana,
I am proud to call your Beauty Sister.

Clar. Your expressions, Madam, rather teach me
What to desire, then show me what I am,
Ever a servant unto your Excellence.
The style of Sister is an Epithet
My humble birth and fortune dare not hope;
And yet to doubt it, such a Treason were
To the Princes virtue and integrity,
I should deserve to perish through despair;
And whilst I doubt his love, by 's hatred die.

Jul. Your love's too hard a Riddle to find out:
You dare not hope, and yet you dare not doubt.

Clar. I dare not doubt his love, nor build my hope
Upon the merit of my own deserts;
Yet my demerit by his bounty may
Be elevated to a height: his love's
Capable to create within my soul
All those Seraphick Virtues which the Gods
Enrich the souls of Monarchs with. My grief's,
The world should think my loves to's Title's linkt,
When it is his Virtue only charms my soul:
His Star-like Minde's the thing I dote upon,
And superstitiously adore.

Prince. With what a Zeal she does unvail her heart!
Though I forswore hereafter to confide
In any Mortal, I cannot her distrust.

Jul. Grieve not your self: the world will soon discern:
Your love's unfeigned, by your so deep concern.

Clar. You too much honor me in your belief
Of my unfeigned love; and as for those
Whose self-deceit does teach them to mistrust,
I shall convince them by my tears; and if
The Prince (the Gods avert so great an ill!)
Should meet with a sinister fate, my death
Shall register to all succeeding time,
A Woman once did love, and faithfully!

Prince. That Miracle would scarcely gain belief:
Yet if any of the Sex ever guilty were
Of Constancy, this Lady must be she.
In general Rules there some exceptions be:
But I Will accost them.
Ladies, I wish the Stars may still
Be propitious to your Will.

Jul. Your wishes do deserve our thanks.


Prince. Madam, laying my Oracles aside,
I have a Message to you from a friend
That loves you more then life: for with his soul
He Would purchase your affection.

Jul. What should this mean? he speaks no canting Language. Proceed, Sir, to
his Name.


Prince. That secret must not be communicated
To any but your self.

Jul. This Lady shares my counsels: be bold, and name him.


Prince. But first, I must entreat you to resolve
These two Queries, Whether your heart be still
Your own, or predispos'd unto some secret Love.

Jul. Your question's somewhat saucy: to the next.


Prince. Pardon, Madam, if I deliver in
Too blunt a phrase my Embassy: I was
Not bred an Orator: but I Will proceed.
If in the Book of Fate it were decreed
That you must marry the Ungrateful'st Knave,
The Bloodiest Villain, and most Devil-man,
Or see the total ruin of your State,
Your Brothers Martyrdom, your Fathers death,
With the destruction of your Family,
Which would you first embrace? that Monster Man,
Or the immediate ruin of your Race?

Jul. I had rather hazard all, a thousand ills
Besides those you have named, then in a thought
Be guilty of such crimes: the greatest good
That Is purchased with a sin, is too dear bought.
But I suppose, Sir, that your Queries were
A mere device to dive into my thoughts:
Your Art is built on cunning more then truth.

Prince. Upon my Life these dangers menace both
The State and your whole Family, unless
You marry this same man.

Jul. Ha, ha, ha! he has a Name.


Prince. Do not deride my Art, unless that I
Employ my utmost power to oppose
Calisto's fortune: Madam, that is his Name:
These evils will ensue.

Jul. Still more ridiculous!


Clar. Was It he we laughed at in the Gallery?


Jul. Yes, that formal Coxcomb, that would needs make love to us, has see'd
this Fellow for his Advocate.


Clar. Oh do not injure him, his knowing soul
May hold a strict intelligence with fate.

Jul. The Gods are too just to impose such cruelties.


Prince. Aside. My Mistress is of a more easy faith;
But it is her Zeal to Virtue: Superstition
Is Religions Fool. Madam, you would
Not be so obstinate, should the Kingdoms
Safety depend upon your love, to scruple
Change.

Clar. The world should rather perish then I
Redeem it by Inconstancy.

Prince. Y' are generous both, Ladies of noble souls;
I admire you.

Jul. Whither will this man?


Prince. Since I have found you both such great examples
In Virtues, generous beyond your Sex,
I Will put my life into your hands. Know, that
By the Prince your Brother I am here employed
To propagate his Interest in this Court:
For doubting of Calisto's faith, (as he
Has cause: for it is evident that false
Favorite endeavors on your love, and
On your Brothers ruin, to build himself
A fortune) he sent me hither to dive
Into his soul, which I have done with all
The policy I could, yet cannot sound
Its depth. Would but your Highness feign a kind
Concurrence with his love, (thereby heightened
In his hopes) he would explain himself.
Prosperity makes men bold; but joined with love,
All thoughts of danger it will quite remove:
Drunk with ambition, he will his thoughts disclose;
Grasp at the shadow, and the substance lose.

Jul. I would do much to serve my Brother, but
I Am yet unsatisfi'd of your commission:
You may prove some great Impostor, perhaps,
One of Calisto's creatures, hither come
To teach me first to feign, and then consent:
But I Will distrust, and then I shall not repent.

Prince. This Ring is my Commission.


Clar. You Are my Lord the Prince.

She runs to him, and embraces him.
Prince. Madam, what do you mean?


Clar. Do not disguise your self: you are either he,
Or else his Murderer: for with that Ring
He swore he would never part whilst he had life.

Prince. Nor will he, Clariana.


Clar. My dearest Lord!


Jul. My Princely Brother!


Prince. I could divide my self between you two:
You share my heart and love. But see where comes
That cursed Calisto to prevent our joys.
Enter Terraefilius. Dear Sister, for my sake assume the shape
Of Love: flatter his credulous ears with
Sugared hopes, till from the very center
Of his heart each secret we extract,
And punish him according to his fact.

Jul. I Will do my best to serve you.


Prin. Dear Clariana, I must wish a kiss,
And take my leave.

Cla. The Gods protect you ever.


Exeunt Jul. and Clar. Ter. The Ladies smile upon you.


Prin. How can they choose, when I prefer your love?


Ter. Why? Was it well received?


Prin. At first (like a strong ship that makes the waves
Rebound, and show their angry foam about
Her Ribs) she did repulse your love; whereat
I seemed a little to draw off, that with
A double force I might return to storm
Her resolution, as at last I did:
Leaving Loves softer Theme, to which her heart
Seemed an Antagonist, I had recourse
To what deceives the World, Hypocrisy;
Which I did cloth in such a pious Garb,
Religion might have smiled to have seen her self
So Ap'd: With pious tears I did bemoan
Her Fate, yet on my knees at the same time
Entreat her to embrace 't, assuring her
With a thousand imprecations, strengthened
By twice as many oaths, that she would be cause
(In her withstanding of her Destiny)
Of the whole ruin of her Fathers state,
Her Brothers life, incur the Peoples hate.

Ter. Excellent Hypocrite! That we two might
Incorporate, and overthrow the World
With Policy! Was not the Princess moved?

Prin. Beyond expression: startled in her thoughts,
Her Hate and Piety were so intermixed,
As barred all resolution: You she seemed
To hate with all the malice of a Woman;
Contemning your Alliance with a scorn
Might equal Cleopatra's, when Caesar thought
TO have led her a base Captive unto Rome,
TO adorn his Triumphs: Yet Religion,
Mixed with a zealous fear to offend the Gods,
Made her more apt to listen to my words,
Which her ears faster drunk then her confused
And much perplexed Imagination could
Digest, or indeed duly weigh. To tell
You all her Doubts, and how I did resolve them,
Too tedious were; suffice it that at last
She was convinced.

Ter. But by what happy means?
Let me know every circumstance, that
I may adore the brain which did contrive it.

Prin. When nothing could prevail, and I perceived
She was inclined with Conscience to dispense,
And hazard all I threatened, I took a
Pen, and straight drew a Scheme before her Eyes;
Whereby I seemed to calculate your Birth,
And soon convinced her too credulous faith,
You were a Prince led hither by the Stars,
For the accomplishment of the Gods Decrees;
Whereat she seemed transported in her soul,
And crediting my words, began to love.

Ter. You Have rendered me too happy: were my life
Consumed in the satisfaction of this service,
I should still die ungrateful.

Prin. This service, Sir, will scarce deserve your thanks;
Try me in something may be worth your love.

Ter. After this service past, what can thou do
May equally oblige me?

Prince. Sir, I can bring the Prince, the only man
That stands between you and your proudest hopes,
Into your power: the old King I look on
As a mere shadow: I know your interest.

Ter. The Devil has inspired him with my own thoughts,
Thou talk of blessings rather to be wished
Then hoped for, or effected.

Prince. Be not incredulous: my Art improved
By my great Zeal to serve you, will make me
Work greater Miracles.

Ter. Your courtesies confound me: I must crave
Some time to prize them as I ought: but if
I thrive in my ambitious hopes, you must
Divide the Empire.

Prince. Is your ambition there? You Are somewhat wide:
Aside. If all hit right, it is you that must divide,
But not my Crown: They that by crimes aspire,
Should be cut short, that they may grow no higher.

Ter. It shall be so. Come, Sir, let us to the King,
It Is much about the time he did appoint.
The Princes death we will contrive by the way:
Danger does threaten evils at a stay.

Exeunt. Scoena Quarta.
Livia, Juliana, Clariana, Lussurio, Maligno. Live. DEar Frangypane, how noble
was thy love
To die for me! what generous sparks lie hid
And smothered in extravagant Fancies?
Thy Noble death has gained more then thy life
Could ever purchase thee, my Love.

Jul. Prithee listen; for the Wench is run
Distracted sure, since Frangypane's death,
And so transported, that a Lord did die
For love of her: she is quite Platonic grown,
And doats upon his Ghost.

Clar. How Love does play with Mortals!


Live. Holy Soul, that gracest the Elysium shades
With thy blessed company, and rendrest us
Unhappy by thy absence, hear my Vow:
My Heart hereafter shall be ever thine,
And free from all Terrestrial Love, aspire
By thy example to become Divine,
And flee toward thee, because it can no higher.

Jul. How she is exalted!


Live. No Mortals touch shall ere pollute my lip,
Nor lustful gripe provoke a wanton smile,
Nor amorous fingers be allowed to skip
Into my Bosom, lest they should beguile
Thee of my love, and me of that same part
I Would wholly dedicate to thee, my heart.

Clar. She Is high-flown in love.


Jul. A true Platonic, a very Spirit in Flesh.


SONG. Livia. To love's a trifle: but to love like me,
Would pose Loves Deity.
She best on earth's esteemed to love,
Does constant'st to her object prove;
But I much higher move,
Loving an Object though it absent be:
In this who equals me?
But what talk I here of Equality?
As if each common man
Might vie with Frangypane.
Had other Lovers but a Saint like mine,
So worthy and divine,
Their Offering too would be as high
As mine unto his Sanity:
With what good justice can
I tax a want of love in others then;
Or my own Virtues raise,
From what is only due unto his praise?
I loved not's earth; nor is it I
Now love bis immortality,
But he that elevates my Soul so high.

Clar. Sure she is inspired.


Jul. With her deceased Lovers Genius.

Enter Lussurio, Maligno.
Clar. He spoke Raptures, and she sings them: but here Her living Lovers come;
shall's make some sport?


Jul. 'Twere pleasant sure to see them fight; they will snarl (they say) like
Dogs at a Country-wicket, and draw their swords, but it is to wound the Air: for
if one makes a pass, the other retires. Livia made me the prettieff relation!


Clar. They look indeed as if they were of the Peace.


Lus. To set a period to our fatal War,
Which might produce the shedding of much blood,
I am content.

Mal. And so am I: Him that she chooses, happy be his lot.


Jul. Livia, here are those will disturb your meditations.


Clar. The Wench is in beaven sure already;
Her thoughts are with Frangypane.

Mal. Do you begin.


Lus. The Princess is here; she will laugh at us.


Jul. Let me alone, I Will warrant you some mirth: Lussurio!


Lus. An' please your Highness.


Jul. You Are a diligent servant, we love you well; and having heard the love you
bear our Maid of Honor, resolve to recompense your merit, by making it a
Match. She is an Heiress, Sir.


Lus. Your Highness bounty so confounds me, I cannot express my thanks: my very
Soul's your slave.


Jul. Your modesty deserves our favor: Go, send that Fellow to us; I hear he
is a Pretender: We can distinguish merit.


Lus. I hope so, Madam: I Will be as observant as your Puppy-Dog.


Jul. Mark then my beck, when thus I hold my finger.
Cease, Livia: carry her to my Chapel,
Where you shall find a Priest in readiness.
To marry you.

Lus. Madam --


Jul. No more: call him to us.


Clar. What means your Highness?


Jul. To have this Fellow beaten. Livia's in her dumps; she will scratch his eyes
out: and how Malign will comport himself, is worth our expectation.


Mal. Lussurio, Madam, made me believe you would speak with me.


Jul. They say you are a Coward.


Mal. Your Highness may say your pleasure: but if there be any mortal flesh
that dare traduce me, the swallowing of my sword, though he digested it, should
not expiate the injury.


Jul. I Am glad you talk so valiantly; I ever had you in my good opinion.


Mal. You are pleased to favor your poor Vassal.


Jul. Could I but see one single proof of Valor,
One fighting Action to convince my faith,
My Livia should be yours: I love her well,
And would bestow her on a deserving Person,
Such I hope you are.

Mal. Oh that I had an opportunity!
My Valor like a flash of Lightning
Should quite consume my bold Antagonist.
The Princess gives the sign, Lussurio goes to snatch up Livia, who cuffs him:
he runs away: Maligno coming to her rescue, she snatches out his sword.
Jul. Now show your Valor.

To Maligno.
Live. Must you both affront me? though thy Companion's fled, I Will be revenged
on thee?


Mal. Oh good Madam! I came to rescue you.


Live. To abuse me, to disturb my peace.


Mal. Good Lady, suppress your fury: ask the Princess, I meant no harm.


Jul. He Is sufficiently frighted; I Will be his bail.


Live. For your sake I Will pardon him: his sword
I Will offer up at the Sepulcher of
My dead Lord for a Trophey.

Exit Mal. Jul. In memory of the conquest y' have obtained
Upon Maligno's hot affection.
Poor Wench! Time may recover her:
How prettily we entertain griefs!

Clar. The time had else seemed long before the Prince
Returned for the Kings Cabinet.

Jul. I hope in that disguise he will work his peace.
Enter Prince, Lussurio. But here he comes; with him, Lussurio:
He appears troubled, we had best withdraw:
I Will news will reach our ears too soon.

Clar. I fear so too: My panick thoughts of late
Hold strict intelligence with the Princes fate.

Exeunt. Scoena Quinta.
Prince, Lussurio, Terraefilius, Maligno. Prince. IT is but this, when I do
speak the word,
Do you appear, and like a statue stand
Before us, till I waft my Wand, and then
Make your Exit.

Lus. Must it be needs in Armor? I do not love that dreadful posture: If there
be a Looking-glass in the Room, I shall be afraid of my self: I had rather
appear like a Fury.

Prince. No other shape can pleasure my design,
Which is, to tell you true, (you hate Calisto,
And therefore with more confidence I trust you)
To put an abuse upon him.

Lus. Could this be done, I were too happy: for
Base Maligno, contrary to his Oath,
Has quite forsaken me, and cleaves unto
His party, in hopes of gaining Livia.

Prince. In that design I Will likewise cross his ends;
For I Will compound a potion by my art,
Which if but tasted by your Mistress once;
She Will dote on you with such a vehement love,
Her life will solely in your power be:
Then you shall see Calisto so much fooled.

Lus. Let him be hanged; I care not what he be:
Make but fair Livia mine, I Will worship night
In honor of your dark complexion.

Enter Ter. and Mal. Prince. Think her your own. Here comes Calisto with
Your Rival, I Will make them howl anon:
You know both time and place.

Lus. I do: I Will immediately make my self drunk,
To appear valiant in my martial Acoutrements.

Exit. Ter. Tell her y' are sent by the King with new Orders
To the General: I know she will send a Letter.

Mal. That Is not to be doubted, for she extremely loves him: but how can it
advance my love?


Ter. For that rely on me: do but this kindness,
And if I make not Livia thine,
I Will be thy bond-slave ever.

Mal. You are my confidence.


Ter. But when you have obtained the Letter, let me
See you before you begin your Journey.

Mal. I shall: Livia will sufficiently recompense all services.


Ter. Confide in me. This Plot was well designed:
For I shall court my Rival to his Grave;
And on the Pyram de of all his Joy,
By his own Kisses I shall him destroy.
But see where the Magician walks! His answers
To the King were so ambiguous, that
They breed distrust: But I Will his promise urge
To let me see the Prince, from whom just now
This Letter I received: but first I Will see
If he can tell the place of his abode

Prince. Aside What Is that he mutters to himself? his looks
Speak him displeased; the contents of that Letter
Might be worth my knowledge: but it is entombed.

Ter. You were very mystic in all you told
The King; your sense is so ambiguous,
'Twill time require to unriddle it:
The King is no way satisfied.

Prince. No matter, sir; I study not his favor:
His stars so threaten him, I dare not build
My Interest on his unstable fate:
On you my fortunes solely do depend;
Y' are Heavens Favorite, the Minion of
The Stars:
There Is not a Planet threatens your designs.

Ter. Be a true Prophet to me, and thou shall
Be canonized, and have Altars consecrated
To thy name. But I Have received unlucky news.

Prince. From the Prince?


Ter. Thou art an Oracle.


Prince. Never fear 't: come at the appointed hour
To my Apartment, you shall see his figure,
Which shall at large discover all his plots.

Ter. You promised me the substance; to transport
His person hither.

Prince. Had he been vicious, Sir, it might been done;
But he is so good, the holy Spirits have
Him in protection, and preserve him from
The force of Magic Charms: But this same spirit
Which I intend to raise, shall both resemble
The Prince in shape and mind, and so declare
Those secrets that may ruin him.

Ter. It is enough: I shall not fail my time;
Nor your Just Reward.

Prince. Your are too Munificent.


Exit Prince. Ter. My heart was never ungrateful: It is fit
That to your charms I use a Counter-spell.
You know too much of me and my designs
To live: befides, it is not safe to trust
A man with life, who retains the same power
To unthrone me, as to instal me King.
It Is a received Maxim amongst some,
To destroy those who have obliged them
Beyond their power to remunerate.
Sure it is a kind of gratitude, when Earth
Cannot reward their service, to send them
To Heaven for a recompense.
This Man cannot fadge amiss: for he is well
Known to the Devil, should he go to Hell.

Exit. ACTUS QUINTUS.
Scoena Prima.
Terraefilius, Prince, Juliana, Clariana. Ter. MY Cenius triumphs in the rare
events
Of my success: Fortune's the only Goddess 'Twas she
I adore; and well she merits it.
That from a Mendicant created me
The bosome-friend and counsel of a Prince;
Whom I did follow but to serve my self,
Or rather he served me: for my full will,
Like to a raging stream, bore all before it:
My counsel was his Guide, and I the Minion
Of his Soul. From this so happy estate,
Fortune advanced me to a great Kings ear;
Whence I did suck advantage to my self,
Leaving a poison to infect the State.
Fortune's in fine assistant to my Rise,
The Princes death is plotted in this Brain:
His Sisters Love entitles me the Heir
Unto this Kingdom: yet to make all sure,
I have dispatched Maligno to the Camp,
With Letters so exquisitely poisoned
By a Mountebank, Valerio dies in reading
Their contents, and I live unsuspected.
The Princess lines must cut his line of Life;
To him they will give a Grave, to me a Wife.
Enter Prince, Juliana, Clariana. But here comes my Familiar! how he works
For my advantage! I will stand aside.

Prince. I hope your Letters will so far prevail
Upon Valerio, that he will straight unite
His forces with the Duke, and both return
TO inform the King how much he is abused
By Calisto, and other Sycophants.

Jul. Let not your fancy nourish the least doubt:
Valerio's heart is so at my command,
I steer it as I please: continue you
Your wonted practice to amuse the Court,
And so avoid suspicion.

Prince. You are my dear Instructress.


Clar. Yonder Is Calisto: his jealous thoughts will put
A bad construction on your Complements.

Prince. It Is true; I saw him not: Sister, your feigned
Kindness must make amends for all.

Jul. I will endeavor to play the Hypocrite.


Ter. Brave active Slave! what way he makes for my Address! I Will advance
toward them: As I live, she smiles upon me. He that neglects so fair a
summons, deserves to perish in his hopes; and from the highest Pinnacle of
Fortune, fall to Destruction.


Prince. He advances: Now play your part.


Ter. Being emboldened, Madam, by your smiles,
I come to make a tender of my love,
To sacrifice unto those eyes, a heart
That bears no other figure then your form,
Nor craves no other Mistress then your self.
Accept it, Madam; and with it receive
All faith, all love, service and constancy
Your hopes can fancy, or your self desire.

Jul. So rich a gift no Princess should refuse*
Nor shall you find me obstinate: for when
I am confirmed your love is such as you
Deliver it, 'twill be no miracle
To gain upon me an exchange of hearts:
Till when, I shall suspend my thoughts.

Ter. You are a Mine of Goodness; and when my stars
Shall make me happy by enjoying you,
My faculties shall wholly be employed
In your advancement. No Kingdom shall lie
Within the prospect of your sight, which you
Can wish, and not command: This powerful Arm
(Strengthened by the Magic of your smiles)
Shall make our Neighb' ring perty Princes know,
At Juliana's Will they all must bow.

Jul. I doubt not, Sir, your Generosity;
But I am not ambitious: My thoughts
Never coveted another right: This Throne
May satisfy both me and you.

Exit with Prince, Clariana. Ter. She Is gone: but her last words are deeply here
Engraved. This Throne may satisfy both me
And you! Oh silver-sounding words! beyond
The Music of the Spears! A harmony
Beyond the Divine Notes of Orpheus!
He moved the savage Beasts and Trees to dance;
But her sweet Accents might inspire them with
Discoursive Souls, teach them Ambition first,
And then to sway the Earth. Me thinks I see
My self upon a Throne, and the admiring
Multitude envying at my fortune,
Yet doing homage to the thing they curse.
If in Idea it is so brave a thing
To Rule and Govern like a God on earth,
What Heaven then must the fruition be!
But I shall loose my self in idle dreams:
There Is one stroke more before I reach this pitch;
My Title must be dipped in the Prince his Blood:
Only his death makes my Pretention good.

Exit Scoena Secunda.
Hortensio, Maligno, Officers, Valerio, brought in a chair, Physician. Hor. THe
General's poisoned: it must be so:
Sudden Distempers that are natured;
Cannot produce in two minutes space such
Grievous symptoms.

Mal. You speak as if you did suspect the Princess.


Val. I broyl alive; Wildfire's in my scull;
I burn, I burn: Give me a Sea of Ice,
Crystal dissolved, A Dish of Virgins Tears
To quench the flames I feel.

Hor. Dear General, how did the evil seize you?


Val. I know not: sure it is some punishment
Inflicted by the Gods for Idolizing
Of these Lines, these so Divine Characters,
Which I no sooner did approach my Lips,
But my soul met them, and did thence convey
Into my soull this torment worse then Hell.

Hor. Let the Paper be examined, Sir;
It may contain some Hell-bred poison.

Val. No, no, it cannot; it from the Princess came:
Do not profane that sacred innocence.
Let me alone! why do you make me live
To add unto my torments? I Will speak no more:
Pray let me bury all my griefs in silence.

Hor. Sir, here is the Doctor.


Val. Death is the best Physician: Let me sleep:
A quiet Grave to ease me of this pain,
Were Paradise.

Physician. Take comfort, Sir: I have an Antidote
Which does by a Specific Quality
Resist all Poison.

Val. Can men take comfort in the midst of flames?
Bathe thy own body in a Cauldron of
Boiling Oil, and then preach comfort! Swallow
Molten Lead, and tell me then of comfort!
My torment's much more exquisite.

Mal. Alas, poor Gentleman! it grieves my heart
To see him thus.

Val. Who Is he that grieves? Oh let me hug him I
My very Embrace will straight dry up his Tears.

Hor. Is there no cure?

Physician. I fear there is none: The Poison is so deadly,
It has already seized his Vital parts.
Cannot you guess who did administer it?

Hor. Not with much certainty: on the receipt
Of that same Paper his disease began.

Physician. Might it not be procured to make essay
If it were Poisoned?

Hor. It came from the Princess; he will not part with it;
He storms and rages if we but suspect it:
How still he is! he sleeps sure.

Physician. I fear his last: mark, but how pale he looks!


Hor. He Is gone indeed! Farewell, thou Noble Soul!
Thou Mars of Arms! Beloved in War and Peace!
Amongst all Deaths Triumphs he shall never boast,
TO have graced Elyzium with a Nobler Ghost.

Physician. 'Twere fit enquiry were made about the Murder.


Hor. It Is very fit; and that we should secure
That Fellow who brought the Letter.

Physician. Upon a Dog I Will the experience make
Whether it be poisoned.

Hor. Good Doctor, have a care, and fold it up
At distance from your Nose: for that same Villain --

Mal. I fear you not: I have a Motto above your power, Innocence is my Defense.


Hor. And may that clear you: I seek not Blood, But Justice.


Mal. Unless he light upon the Name, I Am safe;
For that is only poisoned: I hope
Valerio has lickt the Venom off.

Hor. Captain, to your care I do commit
Maligno: see him safe, as you will answer't.
Next, let us convey the Body in; where, in
Martial Accourtrements, let it be exposed
To Public View, till every Soldier
Has dropped a tear: then it shall be interred
With all the great Solemnity of War:
In which, whilst living, he took such delight,
It Is just, that dead, he have a Soldiers right.
They bear him off.
Scoena Tertia.
Prince in Magical Robes, Lussurio in Armor, Terraefilius, King, Guards,
Juliana, Clariana. Prince. YOu know your Question; and being examined,
The Answer you must make.

Luf. In all I Am perfect.


Prince. Withdraw then; I hear him coming.
Enter Terraefilius. Your Lordship is most welcome.

Ter. My curiosity was such, I could not miss my time.


Prince. You Are indeed somewhat before your hour,
But not before I am prepared to serve you.
Twelve tedious hours are already spent
In Exorcisms, and enchanting Charms:
My Robes I Have thrice with Ceremony changed;
Every Circle of deep Magic traced:
I Have dived in Horours as profound as Hell;
Summoned to Council the Infernal Furies;
Seen Mysteries this Night would shake and chill
The blood of any common man to Ice,
And all to serve my Lord!

Ter. But, my best Genius, can thou perform?


Prince. Else I should curse my studies, and despise
My Art. In this Circle, my Lord, stand you
Secure, and neither move nor speak to what
You see: for then you will break my Covenant
With Hell, and ten thousand Furies with horror
Will upon you seize, and coss your Carcass
Upon the bosom of a Northern storm,
There to be ground to Atoms.

Ter. I shall be circumspect.


Prince. Observe your station then.

He wafts his Wand thrice. By Acheron, the River Styx,
And all the space that is betwixt
That and the bot Infernal Lake,
Where Cerberus his Sop does take;
Infernal Pluto keeps his Court,
And with fair Proserpine does sport;
I do conjure fierce Radamant,
Aecus, Minos, Hell's Pursuvant,
The compass of the earth to trace,
And bring the Prince unto this place
Within the twinkling of an eye.
A Man rises like a Spirit.
Spirit. His Virtue bars that liberty:
But if that thou no more wilt claim,
Then Hell promise'd: in Pluto's Name
It shall be done.

Prince. His shadow you will afford?


Spirit. You know the Devil never broke his word.
I Will send his shadow straight: waft thrice your Wand,
And what you wish shall be at your command.
The Spirit descends. Enter Lussurio in Armor.
Ter. Aside. A pretty Incantation, and in Verse:
If Ryme will do it, I Will see if I can pierce
This Aerie Prince: it looks as if 'twere he:
I Am sure that I should know that Armory.
Could I but hit him right! What, are you down?
Can Devils die? are Spirits mortal grown?
He kills Lussurio. The Prince throws off his Disguise.
Prince. No: there is one still lives to be revenged on thee.


Ter. The Prince! Who is it then I have slain?


Prince. Lussurio his shadow; for which I Will be revenged.
Will it not enter?
He makes a Pass at Terraefilius.
Ter. Thanks to my Privy Coat.
Are you so subtle, Prince? I Will try what
Proof you are.
He wounds the Prince.
Prince. Treason! Murder! Treason! Oh I am slain! On thee, bafe Slave, my
blood will still remain.

He falls.
Enter King and Guard. King. Our Guard, what Outcry's this of Treason?


Ter. It Is met, Sir, and destroyed. Finding the Prince.
Clad in this Moorish Garb for some design
Upon your sacred Life, I interposed
Between his fury and your danger, Sir.

Prince. Dear Father, hear me; and next lend belief
Unto my dying words: There Is not a smile
Within that Fellows face, which is not Traitor.

King. Merciful Gods, sear up my Aged Ears;
Put double Cataracts upon my Eyes,
That I may neither hear nor see a son
So treacherous.

Ter. I hope your Majesty 'll forgive my crime:
When your Life's in Question, I am not my self.

King. You merit rather a Reward:
That Traitor will find his in Hell.

Prince. That Villain cannot glory in my death;
His wounds were slight, your words rip up my heart.

King. See him secured, and safe kept: Caliste,
I do commit him to thy custody.

Prince. A Grave must shortly, Sir, my Prison be,
When Death shall purchase my souls liberty.
But you are too cruel to perplex me now,
Since all to dying men do peace allow.
Juliana and Clariana at the door.
Guard. You must not enter.


Clar. Must not! shall Clariana hear her Prince
Is slain, and stand disputing?

King. What noise is that without?


Guard. The Princess and the Dukes Daughter would have admittance.


King. Let them enter.

They enter: Clariana runs to the Prince.
Clar. Oh let me tear my flesh to bind those wounds!
Madam, the Prince is slain! Where Is his Murderer,
That I may shoot my eyes into his soul,
Like burning Beacons to torment it more,
Then if it were in Hell, and circled in
With Sulphur-flames might equalize his sin?

Prince. Weep not, Juliana, for a man so worthless;
IN the King my Fathers thoughts not worth a Tear.
Obedience should teach thee to rejoice,
Since the Kings peace is purchased by my blood:
Though blood of Peace an ill foundation be,
May his Peace spring from his sons Tragedy.
Clariana, I must breathe on thee a Parting
Kiss: Poor weeping Maid, too much beloved,
Too much unfortunate in being loved
By one that could not solemnize thy Rites.
May thou live happy in a second choice!
Whilst to my silent Grave I bear my love
And injuries. Commend me to the Duke:
Tell him, I grieve to leave on earth such an
Angel-soul; mine can no longer bide here.
Dies.
King. Look to the Lady there; she swoons: Daughter,
Methinks your love to us should rather teach you
To congratulate our safety, then wash
A Traitors Hearse with Tears.

Jul. He was my Brother, Sir; and Nature must
Resent so near a loss.

Ter. You had best take order for his Obsequies,
Lest that the Rhetoric of these Ladies tears
Excite compassion in the Multitude.

King. You of the Guard, convey the Body hence,
Whilst we withdraw to consult public safety.

Clar. Carry him where you please, I Will follow to His Grave.

They bear him off.
Jul. But first, 'twere fit we study on revenge:
Live but to finish that, we'll both prefer
Much before Life a Noble Sepulcher.

Exeunt Juliana and Clariana. King. Though he be dead, his Treasons still survive;
His Troops in being, and the Duke alive.

Ter. Those threaten little now the Prince is gone;
He was the Pillar they depended on:
Proclaim your pardon, and they soon will yield;
Yet some blood for example must be spilled.
Excess of mercy makes all Traitors bold:
Had Gods no Justice, Virtue would be cold.

King. We'll both employ: Our severe Justice shall
Upon the Duke and chief Commanders fall,
Whilst extended mercy does forgive
All ignorant crimes, and let the Army live.

Ter. Mercy so used, does no repentance breed;
For you destroy Rebellion in the seed.

Exeunt. Scoena Quarta.
Duke, Officers, Messengers. Duke, It Is strange we hear not of the Prince; he
has
I Am confid^^t received advice both of
Valerio's Death, and my approach to Naples.

1 Off. But, what is more wonderful, your Messenger Returns not!


Duke. That does distract me too: Me thinks he should
With some Advices re-dispatch him back.
We all are in a mist; and our design
(For want of prosecution) must needs give
Advantage to the Enemy: for soon
As Hortensio has notice of our March,
He Will rally up his forces, and pursue us.
From the Kings fury no less danger waits
On our March forward. Ruin will hem us in,
And pale Destruction like a hungry Grave,
Devour our Lives and Fortunes.

1 Off. Our case is hard indeed, to forsake hopes
Of safety for a certain ruin.

2 Off. Nay, certain safety: the resolution
Was too promptly made, and too soon executed.

Duke. You judge by the event: however 't succeed,
The stratagem was high, and the design.
Through-laid. We are not Gods, to mold our fate,
Or to foresee futurity of chance:
We but propose; it is they dispose of things;
They mold the Fortunes of the mightiest Kings.
What means that shout?
A shout within.
1 Off. It speaks the return, Sir, of your Messenger.


Enter Messenger. Duke. You are most welcome, because long expected.
Where are the Prince's Letters? It Is more then time
We knew his mind.

Mess. The Prince? Alas!


Duke. Why do thou stop, and wear upon thy looks
Distractions Livery?

Mess. Could you but read the Tragedy within,
You Would leave amazement, and transported be
To such a highth of wonder, 'twould change you
To a Statue; or like weeping Niobe,
From a Fountain-top force you to distill
A Sea of blood for tears.

Duke. For what most dire and fatal accident
Do thou prepare our ears? Is the Prince
Discovered, and in hold?

Mess. In hold indeed: he is Prisoner to Death.


Duke. To Death!
Cursed be the tongue which gave that language voice,
Cursed be the ears that did receive the sound,
And doubly cursed that guilty hand which durst
Commit so vile a Regicide.

1 Off. Cease, good my Lord, to be so far enraged;
Let us revenge before we grieve his death:
In his just Quarrel we'll all spend our breath.

Duke. Noble Lieutenant, thy advice does add
New vigor to my soul: My curses now
Shall change into revenge. The Gods knew well
How sweet that power was, therefore reserved
It wholly to themselves; yet daring men
(By petty passions moved) do often try
To rob the Gods of that felicity:
With how much justice may I then revenge
The Prince his Murder on that damned Slave,
Who durst in him give Virtue's self a Grave!

Mess. To set a sharper edge upon your swords,
Know, that his Murderer is high infavour
With the King, and that it is reported
The Princess marriage must reward the act,
With whom he is to reign (the old King being dead)
A Monarch here in Naples.

Duke. A King in Hell amongst the Purple flames!
He shall be rewarded: Phalaris Bull,
Or some more horrid Instrument of death,
Which may with lingering, yet excessive pain,
Drink by degrees his life, and force him curse
His soul to Hell for ease, shall be his recompense.

2 Off. But all this while his Name's to us unknown.


Duke. Let it be Murderer, or what it may,
My high revenge is levelled at his soul.

Mess. They call him Calisto; but neither know
From whence, nor what he is.

Duke. But I know where to send him. This Caliste
Must certainly be Terraefilius:
That Slave still wore a murdering heart beneath
A smiling face. But come, let us haste to Court:
If Blood be pastime there, I Will make them sport.
Exeunt.
Scoena Quinta.
Juliana, Clariana, Livia. Jul. THy grief to mine compared, is of so mean
A price, it loses all account.

Clar. I Have lost my Heart, my Lover, and my Prince.


Jul. And I my Love, Heart, Prince, and Brother too.
My dear Valerio's poisoned, yet I live.

Clar. Amintor murdered, and I only grieve.


Livia sings. My Love is dead, and my Heart is gone;
And yet I live,
And yet I grieve;
But Frangypane will return anon
From yonder cloud.

Jul. What a medley of sorrow's here?


Livia continues the Song. He Will rip his shroud,
And visit me again:
But I Will no longer be
Guilty of cruelty,
By which he once was slain.
If that you spy
An Arrow fly,
And wound his Noble Heart,
Oh do not cry,
Oh do not start,
It Is but a glance
Of this bright eye
That does advance
To visit his poor Heart.

Clar. Poor innocent Maid! with what distracted,
Yet passionate Notes she vents her griefs!
Were I distracted too, I might as she
Perhaps in Songs vent all my misery.

Jul. That wish would but our miseries augment:
For it would render us incapable
To revenge the deaths of those we grieve for.

Clar. I know it is ignoble: but where there is
A want of strength to bear a misery,
To Nature sure it is a charity
To wish our selves less sensible of grief.
I could afford to melt my soul in tears,
Distill my eyes like Marble in a sweat,
If 'twould renew my dear Amintor's life:
But such my misery is, the more I grieve,
I Have greater cause to grieve: Like damned fouls,
That suffered flames a hundred thousand years,
Perceive their sufferings of as great a length
When that time's finished, as when first begun:
So will the Prince his death appear to me,
And every day augment my misery.

Jul. Dry up those liquid sorrows: Join with me
In a Revenge may justify your love,
And set his bones at rest: Then we'll resolve
Like Roman Dames to meet our Loves in shades,
Which neither jealousy nor fate invades.

Clar. My Woman's strength will fail in the attempt:
It Is easier far for me to die my self,
Then own the cruelty to destroy another.
Yet Death, though gildedne'en so well, is still
Relisht by Nature as a bitter Pill.

Jul. Though Nature's weak, our loves may well supply
That poor defect, and teach us how to die;
And our Revenge so great a Justice is,
Nor gods nor men can say we do amiss.
He Will straight be here: come, come, you must resolve:
Here, take this Poniard: how you tremble at it!
Me thinks my Brothers death might fortify
Your Arm.

Clar. That fatal word adds Courage.


Jul. Why bravely said! Think who you do revenge;
Think how he loved, how innocent he died,
Then strike: Thou can not miss the Traitors heart.
I Will grave as many wounds upon his flesh,
As his vile murder made upon my heart;
And then the World and I may freely part.

Clar. I Will endeavor to follow your example:
So brave a Leader may well guide my hand
To all those Actions which my fears withstand:
But if my love I to your Precepts Join,
No Woman's Courage ought to equal mine.

Jul. How well that speech becomes my Clariana!
But since our Courage has attained this height,
We must devise the aptest means to perfect
Our Revenge.
Persuade thou Livia bind him to this chair;
Her known madness will make it appear a Jest,
Should he discover it.

Clar. But how to work her to it? Distracted Lovers
Are still obstinate.

Jul. Thou say true; 'twill be somewhat difficult:
My griefs have made me loose my brains.

Clar. What if we should persuade her that he did
Contrive the death of Frangypane?

Jul. 'Twill be excellent. Dear Clariana,
You Are for the inventive, I the active part;
Sure both together cannot miss his heart.
But silence now must make our counsels wise:
For see where comes the designed sacrifice!

Scoena Sexta.
Terraefilius, Juliona, Clariana, Livia. Ter. THe Prince his death was a
success beyond
All vulgar caresses of fate: I nickt
The wheel of fortune when I struck that stroke;
For his Disguise did undermine my Plots.

Jul. Surely he sees us not.

Clar. Good Madam, let us observe.

Ter. Poor shallow Prince! did think to cope with me,
Whom ragged fortunes had made politic,
And opportunity a Knave? I must
Confess thy counterplots were dangerous
To my fate: Had fortune meant me but half
A courtesy, that stratagem might have
Swallowed me and my designs in the
Deep gulf of ruin. But thanks my better stars,
My safety triumphs in thy death, which feeds
My ambition almost with certainty
Of that most glorious Prize she aimed at,
This Kingdom, and the Princess Love: stay there.
But what assurance have I of her love?
The Prince his word! A poor security!
A Reed I dare not rest on. This Letter
Writ from the King to endear me to her thoughts,
Is a foundation cannot fail my hopes:
Men born to Greatness, are but born to fall,
When brave ambition means to catch at all.
I Will boldly make a tender of my love;
And if refused, wed my revenge. -- She turns!

Jul. She Is rarely wrought! you know your Qu.


Ter. Madam!
My last Addresses from your smiles received
So kind a welcome, my heart dares not now
Doubt your love, since I bring the Authority
Both of a Fathers and a Monarchs hand
Gives her a Letter. To plead my interest, and implore your free
Consent to consummate my Vows.
Two chairs set out.
Jul. Pray, Sir, repose your self, whilst I have read
The Injunction of a Parent: you shall find
Me rational in my reply.
They both, sit down.
Ter. She Is kind beyond my hopes. Blessed Terraefilius!
The Prince his Policy has deceived himself,
Since from the Princess he has all concealed:
On some design his death cut off in the middle.
As I live she smiles; sure the contents do please.
As be discourses to himself, Livia binds him.
Ter. Pretty Innocence! Your Woman, Madam,
Has bound me to my good behavior.

Juliana and Clariana present ponyards to his breast. Jul. This shall set you
free: struggle not, nor use
Your voice: If you employ either, by my Brothers
Soul, I Will send yours to Hell immediately,
With all your fins upon you.

Ter. Dear Princess, your hand implies an action,
Your heart I hope's too soft to execute.
If It be a trial of my love you would make,
Give me the Poniard, and on your command
I Will rip my heart to let you see its truth.

Jul. Your love, base Slave, I scorn: It Is my revenge
(And for a Brothers death) I prosecute.

Ter. Hold! and do not on my innocence revenge
A crime I Am guiltless of.

Jul. Thou guiltless!

Clar. Thou innocent!


Ter. In thought as you: I knew him not when my
Unlucky and too fatal hand cut off
His blooming Youth. And might not this strong Arm
Be useful to the King, Madam, to you,
And to the Kingdoms safety, I Would cut it off:
So much I loath to think on the mistake!

Jul. Vile Hypocrite, we from the Prince his mouth
Do too much know ere to believe thy lies:
Ask briefly pardon of the Gods: We would
Not kill thy soul eternally.

Clar. Yet unprepared he sent the Prince to give
His last account.

Jul. He did, Clariana! This vile Traitor did it.
I joy to see thy spirit: but his soul
Was still so innocent, and held so small
Commerce with sin, we need not doubt his safety.

Clar. I look upon the malice that was high,
And gave no leisure for a penitent
Thought. Let Us strike!

Jul. How nobly shows this Courage!


Clar. Love and Revenge do fortify my Arm,
And from a timorous Virgin me transform
To a bold, yet just punisher of blood.
The Prince his blood in this same fellows guilt,
Appears as fresh as if 'twere newly built.

Jul. He weeps: how much he labors to seem good*


Clar. But tears are no sufficient wash for blood.

Jul. Had not thy words called from her drowsy Den
My just revenge, it had been drowned in pity.

Clar. Loose not that spirit, Madam, you have put
In me; that noble spirit now rebukes
Your too much Lenity. If a Brothers
Death be no ugly fuel for the fire
Of your Revenge to feed on, Valerio's
Will fan it to a flame.

Jul. How was my memory employed, that she
Forgot that Noble soul! Could Pity take
Up all the Lodgings of my thoughts? Vile Maid,
Where was thy love? and where was thy revenge?
Both in his silent Grave.

Ter. How they inflame each other to destroy me!
Guilt makes me dull, and Danger stupid,
Else I might mix some eloquence with tears
To mollify their hearts.

Jul. Is your peace made?


Ter. Oh stay!


Jul. I can defer no longer: Valerio's blood
Calls loud upon my soul for a revenge.

Clar. So does the Prince's death: Come, let us strike!
Both our concerns do spur us on alike.

Ter. Yet hold: though my innocence he a dumb
Advocate to your ears, yet let compassion
Mitigate your rage, or at least give me time
To vindicate my self.

Clar. Madam, let us hear him out.


Jul. No, Clariana, no; I Will be as deaf
As a Northern Wind the Mariners
Exclaims, to all he says. Were Angels sent
To vindicate his innocence, I Would judge
Them Devils by their lies: Let Us not defer,
Lest thou loose courage too, and at one time
Our Woman's strength forsake us both.

Clar. Fear not: my soul does want extention
To entertain my love and my revenge.

Jul. You saw my Brother bleed, he bled by him.


Clar. You heard Valerio di'd, he poisoned him.


Jul. And on his heart I will revenge it thus.
Strikes. Ha! will it not enter?

Clar. The Gods would have the Prince revenged first:
His Throat I hope's unarmed.
She wounds him.
Ter. That stroke was home indeed. Base Murtheress,
I wish my blood were poison for thy sake,
That every stain might make an ulc'rous sore,
And by degrees consume and rot your bones.

Jul. Base Slave, I Will stop your Throat.
Good Livia, stand aside.
Whilst she speaks to Livia, he catches her by the Gown.
Ter. Not yet; you are within my grasp.


Live. Nay, if you are good at that, I Will stand at distance.


Clar. Thy death shall set her free.


Live. Good Madam, one stroke for Frangypane.
I thank you heartily: 'twas a brave one!

Ter. My Death. Oh that my eyes had power to
Consume you all! or that my dying breath
Might a contagion breed throughout the earth!
It grieves me not so much I am to fall,
Though from the pinnacle of all my hopes,
As that my glories (by a female rage)
Are all eclipsed. Devil's revenge my death:
I can but curse you, and so yield my breath.

He dies. Jul. Thy curses will accompany thy soul.
Valerio, you are revenged.

Clar. The Prince may likewise rest in Peace.


Live. And so may Frangypane.

King, Duke, etc. within.
King. Break open the doors.


Jul. We are surpised; but Death shall
Finish all. --
She wounds her self.
Clar. Why did you strike before me?


Jul. That I may carry tidings to the Prince.
That you will follow.

Live. Commend my love likewise to Frangypane:
Tell him I Will grieve his death a score of years,
And then I Will visit him.

Jul. They bounce again: dispatch, dear Clariana.


Clar. Alas, my feeble arm its utmost courage showed,
In spilling boldly that base Traitors blood:
I dare not die.

Live. Nor I, if I should be hanged.


Jul. Then live here miserably, whilst I
Enjoy in the Elyzium shades my dear
Valerio's company. Farewell.

Clar. Nay, take me with you: for I feel desires
Strong enough to lead me to the Prince.
My courage ebbs and flows just as my love,
And fears do dictate, but love triumphs now.
She wounds her self.
Scoena Ultima.
King, Duke, Hortensio, Captains, etc. Duke. BE not so cruel to thy self.


Clar. You Are welcome; but too late.


Live. I Will take your counsel, Sir: I cannot abide
To have my love served up in blood.

Exit. Jul. Give me thy hand;
I Will guide thee in this shady Pilgrimage.

Duke. Great Sir, you see the shipwracks you have made;
Your Sons innocence you already know;
Your Daughters you never doubted, nor I mine.

King. I find, and see too much.

Goes to the Princess.
Duke. My dearest Clariana!


Clar. Grieve not for me: I find a peace in death
Beyond all earthly comforts. Farewell.
Dies.
Duke. She Is gone! for ever gone!

Weeps.
Jul. Adieu, dear Father. May your Throne be well
Secured by your Childrens blood! your Peace
Daily by Subjects Loyalty increase.

King. Thy wishes will be good for those succeed
Me in this fatal Throne: My heart does bleed
With such an inward grief for my crimes past,
Caused by suspicion, and my needless fears,
By baser Sycophants improved, I scarce
Can live to ask a Pardon, nor she to give't.
That crack was timely: in the other world
She dies. I will implore 't of both.
Dies.
Hor. Alas, poor King! grief cracked his aged heart.
My Lord, why do you waste your tears in a
Single sorrow, when a general grief
So much requires them?

Duke. What can be nearer then a Daughters death?


Hor. A Sovereigns and the Peoples safety.


Duke. The King dead!


Hor. Heart-broke with grief.


Duke. Then Nature must excuse me: Grief, employ
Thy power to distill my soul in tears
Upon this Prince's Hearse; whose much distrust
Did heap on woes to hasten him to dust.

Hor. Your sorrow's comely: but the public danger
(In my opinion) claims precedence.
These dire events to Naples and her Crown,
Should they arrive unto the public ear,
Ere you assert your right, or make your claim
(Which is undoubted) to this Realm, Faction
Might discompose the Public Peace,
And so our griefs and dangers both increase.

Duke. Advise us, dear Hortensio, now our friend:
Thy prompt compliance with us in revenge
Of Prince Amintors death, I never shall
Forget to own, or to neward.

Hor. The baseness of the Murder did compel
That seeming Treachery: but my revole
You know was grounded upon honest thoughts,
And that we both meant safety to the King.

Duke. Thou speak an Angel-truth. -- But to Our Right.


Hor. We all salute you King.


Capt. Sold. Long live Alphonso, King of us and Naples.


Duke. We heartily your Acclamations greet.
Let all these Princely bodies be exposed
To public grief for a convenient time,
And then interred with high solemnity.
As for that Caitiff Slave, whose impious crimes
All Presidents exceed; so let his Grave
Be in the bowels of devouring Wolves,
To whom let it be cast a prey, whilst we
Mutually grieve his great impiety.
Exeunt.
EPILOGUE.
VVIT's grown so poor, those Poets now excel
That in a Play express but one thing well:
If new, it is such a Miracle in Wit,
You ought admire, but not to censure it.
Yet Gallants, you do not consider this,
But boldly censure every thing amiss;
As if that Poets ought to have no fault,
When very Gods themselves do sometimes halt.
Troth you would do well, before you censure it,
To try your selves if you can better it:
Which if y' effect, your Work much better shames
Those you would condemn, then now your loud exclaims.
But this our Author knew when first he writ,
He did create you Judges of his Wit,
Without disputing of your learned skill;
His Doom's wholly depending on your Will.
Therefore proceed: whatever your sentence be,
'Twill but at worst complete his Tragedy.
But if in's favor you your Verdict give,
Loudly proclaim your Votes, and let it live.
FINIS.

