The Lady's Blush: Or, THE HISTORY OF SUSANNA, THE GREAT EXAMPLE OF Conjugal
Chastity.

An HEROIC POEM. By W. V.

Attentant forma celebreinque pudore Susannam
Injusti, quibus est facta repulsa, Senes:
Ira metusque fidem laesam testantur, at insons
Fatidici vatis solvitur ore nece.
LONDON: Printed by James Cotterel, for Robert Robinson, near Grays-Inne-gate
in Holborn. 1673.

To the AMOROUS READERS.
PRREFACES to Books are as Gentlemen-ushers to Ladies; when they have given a
short account of the person or Subject they introduce, your own prudence will
dictate to you, that your entertainment of them should be, in some measure,
answerable to their quality. But the Lady we here bring into your view being of
greater eminency then any other, as to the virtue for which her memory has
been celebrated through all ages, it is thought requisite, to do it with more
pomp and ceremony.

The Author of this Poem having spent some time in the perusal of the
Apocryphal part of the Holy Scriptures, reflected, that there were three
eminent virtues recommended to us in the persons and examples of three
remarkable Women. The first is Prudence, in those of Judith, a Woman, as to
Counsel and Cond^ct, in the greatest extremities of a tedious Siege, surpassing
the best Politicians of the Jewish Government; and as to Action, out-doing all
the Stratagems of the Inhabitants of the Hill-countries, to the admiration and
amazement of Posterity. The second is Fortitude, observable in the magnanimous
Matrone mentioned in the Maccabees, who, with undaunted courage, chose rather
to follow her seven sons through the gates of death, by a generous Martyrdom,
then violate the Law of her Country. The third, Continence, exemplifi'd in the
incomparable Susanna, for which she will be looked on by all subsequent
generations, as the great Example of Conjugal Chastity.

Our Author has thought fit to pitch upon this last for the Subject of his
Work; waving the first, as implying a wish of that which the world calls
Dissimulation for the more prosperous management of her design; and the
second, as being too great a precedent of Feminine courage, to be exposed to
the world, when those of that sex, being made Egyptians by the Public Faith
of the Covenanting Cause, were already over-forward to be personally engaged
against the late Royal Standard. For about that time do I conceive this Piece
to have been written; if not rather in the year -- Forty four, famous for the
Story of the Four-legg'd Elder.

History tells us of a Roman Lady, who, reflecting too seriously on a forced
enjoyment, whether confounded with shame at her not having made a greater
resistance, or the more to animate her Relations to revenge the violence,
dagger'd her self out of a loathed life. But as to our Susanna, what can be
imagined more nearly approaching Martyrdom it self, then for a young Lady, of
transcendent Beauty, to be brought to a public and shameful Execution,
surrounded with her disgraced and lamenting Relations, to avoid a pleasure she
had often tasted (as being a Wife) and might then have accepted, from persons
who managed the Government of her Nation, and had the title of Elders, not so
much upon the score of their Age, as that of their Authority? Could there be a
greater discovery of Resolution, then for a delicate person of that tender
Sex, to prefer Stoning in the open field, before the pressing solicitations
of two Elderly, yet not too far superannuated Gallants, in the shady solitude
of a Garden?

But never was so violent a temptation so bravely opposed, yet without any
other defensives, then those of a meek and innotent resistance. Let any but
imagine the horror it must have been to her, to be so strangely surpised in
that posture of Paradise; and what confusion of thoughts it must have raised in
her, to observe, in the Crystal Mirror of her Cistern, the representations of
two persons so little expected, and, ere she could lift up her eyes to look
about her, to find her self within their unwelcome embraces: Let any, I say,
but imagine these circumstances, and thence compute, what an incredible
presence of spirit what a recollection of virtuous and Matrimonial obligations
was requisite, to withstand the shock of so sudden an assault.

These reflections, I suppose, occasioned our Author's dressing up of this
History of Susanna into an Heroic Poem; which he might have much enlarged, had
he not thought it more convenient, to make it somewhat proportionate to the
Story it self, as it lies in Sacred Writ. Wherein, if I am not mistaken, he
has obliged several sorts of persons, as first, those who are mightily
affected with a Story put into Verse or fitted for public Action, when in dull
Prose it makes no impression at all upon them; and would rather see Susanna
represented with Scenes in the Theater, then hear of her exemplary Virtue and
deliverance in a Sermon at St. Paul's, before the whole Representative of the
City. To another sort especially the Sisterhood of the Nation, it may serve for
a smart reproach of their frailty, who, upon the very score of this Story, have
entertained such a pique against the Apocryphal Writings, that, of the many
hundreds of Thousands of Bibles, printed during the five fatal Olympiads of the
late Usurpation; I doubt the number of such as had those bound with the
Canonical, does not amount to the square root of the whole. In fine whoever are
concerned in the sacred bond of Matrimony, are accordingly concerned in the
strange accidents occurring in this Story; finding here how innocent Virtue was
miraculously rescued out of the jaws of death; and the guilty contrivers of
Susanna's shame brought to condign punishment; to be perpetual precedents, to
all such as shall presumptuously attempt the tasting of that fruit, which the
Laws of God and Man have forbidden them.

The Lady's Blush: OR, The HISTORY of SUSANNA.
SLeep on, perfuming Morn, let not thy smiles
With one Reflex gild the Molucca-Isles:
It Is time enough; on Tython's Saffron-bed
Repose the curls of thy refulgent head;
And let the Aethiopians Pearly Ore,
Sown by thy hand, lie on their Swarthy shore
A while ungather'd, that no Signal may
Alarm the nimble minutes of the Day
To harness Sol's fierce Steeds, lest while the Fates
Enforce a passage through th'East's Lattice-gates,
And send them panting up the Indian hill,
This monstrous change him with amazement fill,
To see, since he descended last t'allay
His flaming Temples in the Atlantic Sea,
Nature inverted, heat with cold thus fight
Within one body, as before rude Night
First spread its frozen arms to entertain
That warmth which after brooded on the Main;
And chill December quit his weeds of gray,
T'usurp the Robe and Diadem of May:
Chaste Groves polluted, where fair Daphne's hair
True concord holds with the affrighted Air,
And sacred streams complaining as they escape
From Springs attempted by the Elders rape;
So pure a Fountain, that the mighty Jove
Might thence make Hebe mix him Healths of love,
And Iris draw her Aromatic dews
Which on the Persian Vales she daily strews;
Whilst Justice with her mystic Scepter saves
Virtue, that is shipwrackt, from the raging waves.
The Scene's Judea, Babylon's the Stage
Of Jacob's toyling issue's pilgrimage,
VVhereon often acted was the Tragic story
Of Heavens Firstborn, Israel's expiring glory.
Backsliding Nation! yet still forward went
First unto Sin, then into Banishment.
Therefore it pleased the eternal power to raise
Assyria's Monarch, to proclaim his praise,
By sound of Ethnic Trumpets, too too shrill
Not to advance the great Commander's will
Against those Tribes which took Roboam's part,
And laid not the diviner threats to heart,
Till, fury answering folly, they did lie
Under the doom of God's enraged Eye,
In miserable thraldom, to bemoan
Judah's extinguished light in parts unknown.
Among the rest, Joakim, next of kin,
As well to Judah, as to Judah's sin,
His progress made; where, ere long seated, he
VVisely provideth for Captivity,
By loosing bonds with bonds. For Cupid drew
A golden Shaft armed with flames that flew
First to his bosom, then to one most rare
As ere perfumed the uncorrupted air.
She was Chelkiah's daughter, brought along,
At Babel's brooks to sing a Sion-song.
And though their mournful Harp was quite unstrung,
And tuneless on the Assyrian willows hung,
Yet Hymen took it down, and played so true,
That discontents fled like the morning-dew,
Or winged sleep, and darkness drew amain
Her sable Ensigns from the Shinar-plain,
By Dian's Torches chased, who led the way
Before this Couple to their Marriage-day,
And joined them hand in hand; so great a Prize
As she is, both Indies scarce can equalize.
Besides her Beauty, which was highly fair,
Her youth and comeliness beyond compare,
Greater perfections she yet owned, chaste, good,
And mild as Euphrates's Silver-flood,
Which, softly gliding where old Eden lies,
Seems here to court a better Paradise.
There was besides, wherewith this Bride was stored,
Another virtue yet, She feared the Lord;
And as she feared, she loved; no servile fear,
Such as base Slaves unto their Tyrants bear,
But like a Daugther, who with filial care
T'her Fathers just commands does give an ear,
Sh'observ'd her Maker; so it is hard to say
If Love or Fear most taught her to obey.
Thus was she by her righteous Parents bred,
And in the holy Laws of Moses read.
Who would not Solon or Lycurgus be,
To have their Laws confirmed by such as she?
Or what good Lawgiver could then repent
To choose, as he did, lasting Banishment?
Then Numa's labor surely vain had been
In his retirements to that Faery Queen;
When here is Egeria, this the substance whence
His frantic Raptures did at first commence;
Yet he mistook it, that the fate of Rome
Might still join hands with pre-ordained doom.
Susanna therefore in the Chaldean land
Does for the Jewish Nation's wonder stand,
Where like her Fathers parcht and in distress
Amongst scorching Sands in Paran's wilderness,
She served him that by a flaming light
His servants guided through the horrid night;
Though here confined, like Noah in the fold
Of damned wolves lost in the world of old;
Or Lot in Sodom, Daniel in the Den
Of Lions, milder then those cruel men;
Or as Ezekiel amongst the Scorpions, where
No holy Charm could make them lend an ear:
So she, where God's a stranger, 's always known
A Votary at his eternal Throne.
For Joakim's riches, none of all the East,
Nay wealthy Job cannot call himself the best;
Mighty in stock, and happier far in this,
Job's wanton Dinah never compared with his;
Nor churlish Nabal, though his flocks could bring
A widow's Dowry fit for Israel's King.
Moreo're, a House whose building stretched so wide,
As might compare with the Neronian pride;
No less a wonder then Rabyrus wrought,
When Stars and Poles idaea'd to his thought,
What work might take the proud Domitian,
Corinthian, Tuscane, or Ionian.
Besides a Garden, which the Curious will
Best see described by learned Bacon's Quill;
Or in a lesser Folio view the same
By the Muses sacred held to Danby's Name.
Hither therefore the scattered Jews refort,
In stead of Judah's, now to Joakim's Court,
As to an Emblem of their sad White Hall,
Because he had more honor then they all.
About this time two Judges chosen were
To stand at Helm, and the Republike steer,
Both sons of Belial, far more like to split
Poor Judah's tattered Bark, then manage it;
Of cursed Ahab's race, whose wickedness
Claims here in them by Metempsychosis.
Thus unto Wolves committed were the Sheep,
And over Lambs, two Lions sent'nel keep:
For such they were, as often the Lord foretold,
With (...) from the days of old,
Should cast up Babel's foam, men grave with crimes,
Who seem to govern, but pervert the times.
This place these Judges made their Rendezvous,
Where daily mustered the litigious Jews
Their forlorn troops, for Orders here to call,
As Ragged Regiments from a General;
Even those who Zealot-like at Law contend,
And counter by as with their dearest friend,
Though Bench and Ear corrupt: the Judges here
And Pleaders as in after-ages were,
Knaves, and the most part Fools, ere Dulman knew
Whether his Master could write false or true,
Or ever Sleep produced upon the Stage
That Lawyer Ignoramus with his Page.
The throng therefore of jarring Suitors gone,
And clouds of business chased by Noonday-sun,
Susanna, as the Seasoned heat required,
Into her husband's Garden often retired,
With trembling leaves to fan, and shades assuage
Th'hot entertainments of the Tropick's rage.
Mean while, stern Lust with eyes more subtle far
Then those pure Optics of the Eagles are,
Or Lynceus, whose perspicil, they say,
Could measure paces with swift-footed day,
Stirs up these purblinde Elders still to view
The usual walkings of this matchless Jew.
As Artists fingers busily convey
Notes to that Instrument whereon they play:
So every step of hers, as she did move,
Jars on the Frets of their exalted love,
But Discord raises with a murmuring tone,
Unheard by any save themselves alone,
Till what before did gently glow, now streams
Out in the atoms of devouring flames.
For suddenly, this gale of lust awoke
Hell's smothering embers wrapped in clouds of smoke,
And our choice pair obliquely turned their eye,
Looking asquint upon Eternity,
Lest that most simple undivided light,
Once breaking in, might their black souls affright,
As yet securely quiet and asleep,
While stubborn thoughts no watch at all will keep.
Howere they knew quite to desist was good;
But wickedness, swelled to so high a flood,
Broke down that saving rampart, till at length
Rebellion plumes it in her pride and strength:
Reason commands, what then shall Heaven say no?
Or Conscience check, when Nature bids men go?
Yet here a witness unperceived stood,
While thus they did consult with flesh and blood.
For as in Fields appointed foes display
Ensign against Ensign, till the doubtful day,
Swayed by Fates hand, unto one side does yield;
So now it fares in a Spiritual field.
The Battel's pitched, Colors on each side fly,
Upon the wing of hoped Victory;
Lance threatening lance, conjoined Bodies meet,
And one another with loud Volleys greet.
Both Flesh and Spirit grapple, parties made
Hence from a congress of the infernal shade.
On the other side, One, only, subtle, pure,
The adverse Phalanges able to endure.
These Elders then, who such brave Champions had,
(So potent was deceit) with joy grew mad
At the honor of their crime, and both apart
This dispute echoed from's redoubling heart.
It Is true, I Am great, and do the people awe
By Israel's spotless and impartial Law;
The Tribes committed are unto my hand,
As to a Shepherd in a Captive-land;
And if the Shepherd chance to go astray,
To Savage beasts my Sheep must be a prey:
Their lovely fleeces briers and thorns will tear,
When they, orewhelm'd with pensiveness and fear,
Without their Leader wander, whose disgrace
Advantage gets by the honor of his place.
Know it the people may, who often forsake
The paths of goodness for examples sake;
And great men's faults move in a Sphere so high,
As to be noted by each vulgar eye:
Just as from Conflagrations in the sky,
Star-blazing streams prodigiously do fly.
But yet my greatness a disguise will lend,
That safely I accomplish may my end.
Fond mortal! think thou Heavens clearer fight
Has now put on the mourning robe of night?
Can mists, or darkness, or ought interpose
Betwixt his eye that all things does disclose?
No, no, there is one with flames of fire that flies
Strictly t'avenge the world's impieties,
And by the blast of his consuming breath
Sure to repay sin, with its wages, Death.
Though it be so, my unconfined will
Is towering now upon too high a Quill
To mind such weak reclaims: I cannot stay,
For fierce desire, like to a raging Sea,
Bears me along; and though the best I love,
Depraved sense makes me the worst approve.
Let Bears and Tigers, all the Monsters that
First roared upon the Mountain Ararat,
(As Satan at the Sun-cloath'd woman hurled
The Lethe-vomits of his dreadful world)
Our Tribes pursue, then scatter and divide,
My headstrong passion will not be denied:
Destruction come, I Am satisfied if I
May satiate my lust, and after die.
Thus as Ripheus fell most good and true,
Scarce matched for virtue among the Trojan crew,
Because the Gods thought fit: so in this heat
Heavens powerful Spirit's pleased to retreat,
And this Triumvirate of darkness weilds
Its conquering Sword through the forsaken fields,
And reins once laid upon the stubborn neck
Of each proud Elder, not the sharpest check
Of Conscience might them stay, blindfold proceed,
As always those whom Hellish Princes lead.
Thus Virtue bleeding lay, successful Sin
Beats down the Bulwarks, lets the Victor in,
Who to complete his Triumph, strives t'unite
Those which did under his black Banner fight,
Unknown to one another; though both were
Wounded alike, yet neither durst declare.
So timorous guilt is, ere its branches shoot,
Having in the mind but newly taken root.
How many black conceits within them move
From day to day hatching lust-raging Love?
The object fair Susanna, whom to win,
These Sages walk their usual rounds in sin,
Contented with a bare reflex, till Chance
Conspired their hellish purpose to advance.
For being both departed at high Noon,
Each to his several habitation,
They wheeled about, turned by an unseen rein,
Which brought them to the self-same place again.
Even as a Needle touched by the Magnet-stone
Abhors all points of variation:
So these, impregnate by infernal fires,
No point inclined to but their base defires.
Therefore as rays that to one center tend,
Or different footsteps to th'same journeys end,
They meet from whence they went, (dissembling it,
And forced to leave their former counterfeit)
Each on the other gazed, their wrinkled veins
Swelled up with guilt, died in Vermilion-stains,
Exchanged red for white, and white for red,
More then a thousand tongues discovered,
Till each as in the Mirror of a Glass
Reflections darted to the others face,
And prologue thereunto was first to learn,
The certain cause of either's quick return.
So that at last they both revealed their lust,
And hudled up the thing 'twixt fit and just.
Both thus alleged: I thought at home to stay,
But there is no food my hunger can allay,
That longs much, since first I chanced to see
The golden fruit of one forbidden tree,
Near to this place, which flourishng does stand,
As if never planted by a mortal hand,
Or that its fruit was never ordained to grow
For the rude taste of worldlings here below.
It is the wondrows Spouse of Joakim's bed
That has m'unwary hopeless fancy fed
With new Idaea's; yet mean while I pine
For that which shuns these restless lips of mine.
Nor may ones thirst be quenched with that drink
Which touched once, forthwith away does shrink.
Observe the motions of this glorious Star,
Not such another's in our Hemisphere;
Nay, Venus, whom youth call the Queen of Love,
Does not with such a radiant luster move:
In short, those women came not near her, when
Angels of God were Sons-in-law to Men.
The thought of home therefore's abhorred, for Hell's
In every place but where Susanna dwells;
And th'entertainments of our Beldames breath
More dreadful are then shocks of sudden death,
Who with revengeful kisses daily strive
Kindly to bury us poor two alive.
But, doting Fools! they are mistaken, why?
Old Aeson's Bath proves now no Poetry:
Experience has confirmed it true and good
In The vigor of our metamorphos'd blood.
We Are young again, and, like the Lads of Greece,
We'll venture to surprise this Golden Fleece.
All Colchos cannot withstand, nor Dragons keep
Their dreadful guard, whilst charmed by us a sleep.
Yet, fair Laverna, this request fulfill,
That when all is done, we may seem righteous still.
Now was that time when the Nemaean beast
Stretched out his paws with rage on Cancer's breast,
Roused by the Delian God, roars out amain
Quite through the fields of the Celestial plain,
Whilst from his furious breath fierce flames are hurled,
With Thunders mixed upon the lower world,
And frozen Stars which court the Arctick Pole
In sweltring Thaws about their centres roll.
As then of old, the chaste Nymphs made their streams
A refuge from that Boy's misguided flames:
So here Susanna to the Spring retires,
To countermand the heat of July's fires,
I'th'Garden to her Husbands Palace nigh,
Where stood a Fountain that was never dry,
But like to those which Paradise once sed,
Sends fresh glories unto every Bed,
Two Maids attending only. Th'Elders had
Themselves before into this place conveyed,
Whey they lay hid like Serpents to deceive,
Taught by that Monster which so served Eve.
Ye lofty Powers! some reasons to us mind
Why Hell, the World, and Flesh are thus combined,
Within that place Cothurnick steps to tread,
Where Flora does her various beauties spread?
What is the cause that made them this devise?
Are Gardens Stages fit for Tragedies?
In such a place first was the Devil's Prize
God and the creature to make enemies.
Prodigious Garden, that could bear a weed
So full of poison, as all Adam's seed
Still c^ies, O wrerched man, what have thou done,
Thus to orewhelm us in perdition?
David did there, with an adulterous eye,
Bathsheba naked in the Fountain spy,
An eye with winged murder charged, which flew
As far as Rabbah, and V;riah slew.
A Garden 'twas wherein a painful flood
Sweat from our Savior like to drops of blood;
And in a Garden Judas him betrayed;
Where also was his righteous body laid.
Whilst thus the Elders and their Engines lie,
Not the least thought of sordid Jealousy
Disturbs Joakim's quiet, who affords
No small respect to these Judicial Lords,
Whom to mistrust were madness, their gray hairs
Being Antidote enough against such fears;
But rather thinks, These learned Sages will
Susanna with some virtuous precepts fill;
On whose each look an aged History sits,
The best improvement of all younger wits,
Whereby she may, or ere old age draws on,
The prospect have of a free Horizon,
Her understanding clearly so to view
Fore passed events, and judge what shall ensue:
Such guides I wish our Fathers had, perhaps
They never had longed for these accursed Grapes
That edge their childrens teeth, whose offspring we
The cause lament in our Captivity.
Thus Joakim's well-composed mind foresees
Not ought of the two Elders treacheries,
But, unsuspecting man, receives as friends
Those that disguised lusts with lawful ends;
Which freedom bound them to this fixed day,
Wherein they might his virtuous Spouse betray.
For being here, she thinks it fit to lave
Her wearied limbs in the refreshing wave;
So said unto her Maidens, Hence, be gone;
The place is private, leave me here alone:
Haste, balls perfumed, Sabaean Odours bring
Without delay, to wash me at the Spring.
Susanna then unveils her orient skin,
Like Eve's in Eden, ere imperious sin
First found an Apple, then a Leaf to hide
The spotted Beauty of her newborn pride,
Into the Fountain goes, whose amorous brims
Dropped tears for joy, to embrace such snowie limbs,
And curled in a wanton brayd, t'orecome
Love's fire concealed in its watery womb.
Had you but see^, when yet she was half-bare,
Part of her Mantle sporiing with the air,
The rest in folds about her middle born:
So sparkling Phlegon looks in the morn,
Whilst glorious cloud^ in glittering fleeces fly,
To interpose 'twixt it and humane eye.
But once aloft, and to th'Meridian fled,
His naked body on the hills does spread;
Such was she when those weeds or rags of clay
From her diviner flesh were cast away.
Ye fabulous Anoients! was not this same She
Your Aphrodite, descended of the Sea?
With Nymphs, not Neptune thus encompassed,
Whilst now Lucina brings the Spring to bed.
Yea sure the same, although your purblinde eyes
Mistook when she did from a Fountain rise.
And this the Piece, Apelles to pourtray
Durst not adventure hove one line a day.
Gleaned up from thousand Beauties that might give
The Painter fire to make his Picture live.
So rare th'Idaea seemed, such work there was
T'extract from mortals an immortal face.
Her Ivory-neck's like David's Tower of war,
Wherein so many conquering Bucklers are,
And Arrows numberless, and sure to hit
Unhappie Man that gazeth once at it.
Her Rosy Breasts like the two Indies stand,
A Globed Hemisphere on either hand;
The cause perhaps our Fathers first did call
East the right side of Earth's ever-rowling Ball;
And hither Merchants, laden with desire,
Hurry to quench the flames of fire with fire.
The other Regions which beneath those lay,
Are not unfitly termed Incognita,
Hid by the swelling water, which denies
Further pursuit to our discoveries.
Howere the Elders who stood watching here
None of the worst Geometricians were;
Like him, who having on Olympus found
Alcides foot imprinted on the ground,
Did thereupon his whole proportion guess,
And so engraved the big-bon'd Hercules:
These not unlike conclude, from what they saw,
An image they of th'unseen features draw,
And argue from the lesser; Vales close by
Must needs abound with more variety:
For when hills vaunt their fruitful pride, sure we
In lower parts shall richer pasture see.
Thus swelled with hope, they made out all their Sail,
And swiftly rid before a prosperous Gale;
Their Keel's the Flesh, the Devil Pilots it,
Like some grave Artist, whither he thinks fit:
Hell lends them Wind, Presumption plies the Oar,
To land it safely at Susanna's shore.
Not many leagues this well-mann'd Vessel flew,
Till now within its wished Harbors view,
When rapt with joy the goodly Steers-man cries,
Io, my Babes, lift up your aged eyes!
Behold your peace, rejoice, for yonder is
The Expected Port of all true happiness,
Where bliss more then eternal rests in store:
Go, and possess; what can be wisht-for more?
Hereat these Elders, though until this time
The Gout and Palsy troubled every limb,
Make shift to run; those who of late had gone
In Lordly Chairs to the Judicial Throne,
Now find their heels. Desire, as well as Fear,
Often wings the slowest feet, turns earth to air.
Love knows no pomp, but stoops to meanest things,
And levels Subjects with their Captive-Kings.
Even like two Eagles that are towering high
Within the Champian of the liquid sky,
No sooner do discern their harmless preys,
But th'on them with ne'r-failing talons seize:
So they by Lust's most hungry rage compelled,
Susanna in their eager gripings held.
She strives and cries: alas! what should she do?
One naked woman in the arms of two,
Not men, but monsters, such as Poets feign
The Cyclops were, that did in Aetna reign.
Think how Susanna blushed, looked pale, and then
A trembling fear, blushed, and looked pale again;
Whilst they: ' Fair creature, now behold the doors
' Are all made fast, you are now within our powers;
' Yet we entreat: consent, come, do n't deny;
' We Are smitten, Lady, and with you must lie;
' There Is none can see it, it is witness causes shame,
' Whilst unrevealed Ills are free from blame.
Susanna sighs, and strives, and cries again,
' O subtle Elders! O polluted men!
To which they: 'If thou't not, we Judges are,
' And against thy innocence will both declare,
' That, as we walked in this neighboring Grove,
' Thou play'dst the harlot with thy wanton Love.
' Therefore thy Maids away were sent, lest they
' Should notice take of thine Adultery.
A strange Dilemma put forth to perplex
The wavering judgment of that tender Sex.
Therefore Susanna: ' Heavens be my guide;
' I am betrayed, distressed on every side:
' If I consent, by Moses Law it is said,
' No wife shall climb up to another bed
' Unpunisht; which divine decree implies
' Death the reward of all Adulteries.
' But if refuse, y'already have designed
' What base return true Virtue's like to find!
' Howere I must not, dare not sin: your skill
' Extends no further then this life to kill;
' But God will me avenge, and one day plead
' My guiltless cause with vengeance on your head.
Thus as a Rock perceiving her unmoved,
The more she did refuse, the more they loved.
For threats prevailing not with her, they try
By speeches fair, and thus to her reply:
' Lady, such Coyness misbecomes your years;
' It Is time enough, when care has sown gray hairs,
' And plowed furrows on your aged head,
' Then to confine unto a husbands bed.
' You Are young, and handsome, of a comely feature;
' Can it be thoughtere God made such a creature
' For one man's sole embraces? why should Law
' Men more then other baser creatures awe?
' What though our Fathers Moses led? must he
' A pattern be to all posterity?
' Or if he must, what sin can you it call,
' To break one Law, when we often break them all?
' No, no; regard the days before Moses was;
' There were no sins, till he invented Laws.
' Can you suppose the Dest'nies ere withstood
' A free Community in what is good?
' Observe the Air, nothing more spotless is,
' Yet in a thousand thousand bosoms lies.
' You Are born not for your self; the Lord does hate
' Those that are backward to communicate;
' And rashness it is t'engross Heavens liberal store,
' Lest he who gave too much, should give no more.
' Nor be offended that old age has drawn
' A ghostly curtain o'r our youthful Lawn,
' Or think it strange that lusty blood remains
' Still in the chanel of our paler veins.
' It Is you that gave it life, the fault is yours;
' Do but consent, and then it shall be ours.
Yet she again (tears trickling down her face)
Reflecteth on their Honors, Charge and Place.
All Is labor lost. When they could not persuade,
A rash attempt they on her body made.
Whereat Susanna (for it was high time)
Cried out aloud, 'O Heaven avenge this crime!
And shrieked so, that the Palace did rebound
With dismal echoes of that dreadful sound.
The Servants all amazed run to and fro,
Distracted, ingorant which way to go.
By this the Elders therefore roared as high
Against Susanna: for those that were nigh
Such yells had never heard before; for there
Two throats appeared one open Sepulcher.
Her Servants then in a most frightful maze
Into the Garden rush at several ways;
But when they saw their beauteous Lady stand
Stark naked, and the Judges on each hand,
What numerous thoughts possess them! yea what shame!
While the lewd Elders do this scandal frame:
' Friends, wonder not, our clamor though so high,
' Had cause enough even for the stones to cry,
' Out of this Garden-wall, so to declare
' Your Lady's wickedness beyond compare,
' T'her Husbands shame, by being naught with one
' Young and spruce Gallant, who now hence is gone.
' For us to wink at such a fault, had bin
' Upon our own heads to pull down the sin.
The Servants, much astonished to hear
The Elders give her such a character,
Durst not their Lady's cause defend, though she
Never was before charged with unchastity,
And no such blemish was till then laid on
The candor of her Reputation.
By this report, Susanna's ill name's flown
In one small moment through all Babylon.
Fame's wings are long, and ever as it flies
New courage gains, and strangely multiplies.
How swiftly was the Persian once o'rthrown!
That loss from Greece unto Mycale blown
Even in a point of time. The Immortal Powers
Themselves confine not unto days or hours.
There Is sure some secret hand that does convey
With more then natural speed, an infamy.
This was Susanna's fate, in Virtue's place
Only succeed base titles of Disgrace;
Made Town-talk: What, is modest Susan, she,
Turned Harlot, taken in Adultery?
O wretched woman! infants yet unborn
This fact will rue, and for their mother mourn,
If she should escape with life; but it is unfit
The earth should bear so arch an Hypocrite.
Nay, old wives scarce with teeth to chew their bread,
The thing through streets and every corner spread:
' What think ye, Neighbors, of that youthful Bride
' In whom such holiness was thought to abide,
' To day the Strumpet played, and's apprehended:
' Is this that Virtue men so much commended?
' The world is surely changed; both young and fair
' Our selves were once, yet 'twas our constant care
' Our Husbands not to injure; now it is common:
' He wants not faith, that henceforth ere trusts woman.
What art thou; Lust? or where is thy black seat?
What Devilish power did such a fiend beget?
It Is thou that mov'st in hell through every part,
And (whilst Love binds the world that nothing start)
Confusion bring'st, and shatterest asunder
Its pleasant frame, to trembling Nature's wonder.
How is it that love so soon should hatred prove?
And fierce revenge possess the seat of love?
Or what unites such different extremes,
But that Revenge and Love are equal flames?
And Good and Bad often lie so close together,
That it is not easy to distinguish either.
Sin, when conceived, Lust for a parent has,
Lust the Grandsire unto that monster Death;
A wretched offspring by these Elders got
Upon Susanna, though they knew her not.
For night was come, and it they wholly spent
In thoughts of their inten ded Ravishment,
And Junctoes set consisting but of three,
Resolved before debate on Villainy.
' Mischief, said they, must in progression be;
' There Is no retrogradation in Villainy:
' Let Us then pursu't; he has but half a will
' To be unjust, who seems a fraid to kill;
' Nor knows he well a mischief how to cover,
' Who ere completed thinks fit to give over.
' Her life must pay for this disdain, else we
' Our selves of guilt shall scarce acquitted be.
Spotless Susanna! what misfortune's this,
Occasioned by these Elders wickedness?
Thus Joseph's Mistress would have slily brought
Him to th'embraces which to eschew he sought:
Or that brave Grecian boy, whose blood was spilt,
To expiate his lustful mothers guilt.
Sol had by this ran his nocturnal round
Over the utmost Antipodian ground,
And coming to Aurora's Rosy place,
From off the Ocean sends his smiling rays,
Whom to adore the mixed Heathen rise,
Devoutly ordering their Idolatries.
But woe is me! he did the summons give
Unto a Judgment, where for no Reprieve
Susanna hoped: O immortal Steeds,
Turn back for shame, be clad in mourning weeds;
Why should ye read in such resplendent glory
The fatal accents of a Jewish Story?
Your Maker's darling, one that is innocent,
Unto the place of Execution sent?
That day therefore a greater concourse met
At Joakim's house, where was the Judgment set;
These Elders Pres'dents, and if that wo'n't do,
They will be Judges and Accusers too.
O barbarous men! and more perverted Law!
Where none is found, will you there make a way?
Like Hannibal the horrid Alps climb ore,
And force a passage never known before?
And that pure Justice might attest the deed,
A Court is called to make good Naboth bleed.
These Elders then gravely began to call
For poor Susanna to the Judgment Hall:
' Go, bring her in; she folly did commit,
' Such as our Law by no means may acquit.
With Father, Mother, Kindred, and a Train
Of numerous Friends, piti'd Susanna came;
Where think what blubbered eyes, what dreadful grace
By this usurpt the splendor of her face.
And blame her not, when harmless soul she is come
From wicked hands to take her final doom.
Yet never theless her glorious beauty shone,
Like to the Studs of Ariadne's Crown;
Or as the Sun, after a latter rain,
Out of the clouds begins to peep again;
Wherefore these wicked Belials gave command
T'uncover her, that she might barefaced stand,
And with her Beauty feast their hungry eye,
Before the Sentence passed that she should die.
Corrupted Elders! what bewitched your mind?
Nay, though you saw her, what made you thus blind?
Mark but her Friends and Kindred that stand by,
Show me amongst them any cheek that is dry:
Behold the tears out of their pensive womb,
Themselves deliv'ring silent Suitors come
For Susan's life; see, see what trembling speed
Poor hearts they make for the innocent to plead.
Where are your Children, if you ere had one,
Suppose Susanna's, their Destruction.
But vilest wretches, 'cause you never had any,
Chelcias, though but one, yet has too many.
And could the Tempter (view her well, I pray)
Persuade? what Rhet'rick used he to betray
A matchless woman! O eternal Powers,
Can this be born with, and not flaming showers
With Sulphur mixed into their bosoms flow,
Who are contrivers of this Lady's woe?
She Is now Arraigned; th'Indictment being read
By th'Elders laying hands upon her head,
Amongst the people, whilst discons'late she
Weeping implores aid from Eternity,
Wherein she trusted, whose all-pow'rful King
Could easily save her, and deliverance bring.
The Elders thus: 'O sons of Jacob dear,
' To these Impleadings lend a gracious ear;
' Our Legislator of erelasting name,
' You know, did all our sacred Statutes frame;
' Which after were confirmed by Heavens broad Seal,
' That did each Ordinance to him reveal.
' Amongst the rest, if man or woman be
' Surprised in the act of Adultery,
' Both of them must adjudged be to die,
' That they, not we, may bear th'iniquity.
' This wicked woman, as we lately were
' In The Garden walking for to take the air,
' And chancing by great hap to look aside,
' With her adult rous mate by us was spied.
' But that to innocence she might pretend,
' Two Maids at first upon her did attend;
' Till Vice impatient grown, they did straightway
' By her commands, themselves from thence convey,
' And shut the doors; none but in private we
' The perpetration of the act could see.
' For then a young man, by appointment sure,
' Secretly lodged in the Grove's coverture,
' Draws near unto her, kindly does embrace;
' She likewise him; such willingness there was,
' Till close approaches (for we both it saw)
' Made them transgressors of that sacred Law.
' Then from a corner of the Garden, whence
' We closely standing saw this foul offense,
' Both of us made to the adult'rous pair,
' And came upon them ere they were aware;
' Them apprehended, but the sturdy knave
' Sprang from our feeble hands, and did us leave;
' And in such haste out of the Garden flew,
' As those whom guilt of Conscience does pursue:
' And she, though much entreated, ne'rtheless
' Will by no means th'Adult'rer's name confess.
' These things are true, which we here testify;
' Now judge, my Brethren, if sh'ought not to die.
A confused murmr from The Assembly brake,
Who thought all true which these two Elders spoke,
B'ing also backed with such Authority
As might by patent color o'r a lie.
They therefore soon believed, O foolish Jews!
Ever unbelieving, or too credulous!
Susanna's then condemned, false Judgment has,
By this, her sentenced to a shameful death.
She now no more appeals to flesh and blood;
No favor craves of men, nor yet withstood
Their wicked dealings by her just Replies,
But unto Heaven in suchlike language cries:
' O everlasting Power, to whom alone
' The thoughts of all men are entirely known,
' Things secret open, and events most clear
' Before their causes in the Embryo's were:
' O great Jehovah! whose admired eye
' Runs through the Circle of Eternity,
' Thou know, and none but thou, the wrong I bear
' From those that have polluted Moses Chair,
' Thy Law perverted, witness being given
' Against their Conscience, my poor self, and Heaven;
' Against me, that now must guiltless die, and shame
' To after-ages my disgrace proclaim,
' When all the Monument my life shall have,
' Will be the advantage of a scandal'd grave,
' O'rlaid with sland'rous Marble; woe is me!
' The fatal subject of this Tragedy,
' Contrived in darkness, by those wretched men,
' Who place the guiltless in the guilty's Scene.
This said, Susanna's Angel swiftly bears
Her prayers beyond the rolling spangled Spears,
And does them soon to the Almighty show,
Whilst all is secure and careless here below,
The Elders safe, Revenge its end attained,
Where Lust could not; Injustice also gained
A dreadful Goal; all things completely done
That might ascertain her confusion.
The Almighty Word then forthwith leapeth down
From the highest Spire of the Celestial Throne,
Like to a man of war, whose direful power
Commission has whole Kingdoms to devour,
With horror, death, and with amazement flies
Into the surprised Camp of Enemies:
So this descending with his great Commands,
At length within the Chaldee's Palace lands,
And finds out Daniel, one of great renown
With King and Princes all in Babylon;
An Hebrew Captive, young, but very wise,
And able to unfold hard Mysteries,
Though wrapped up secret in the eternal deep,
Where it is not fit for mortal men to peep.
This Word commanded him to undertake
Susanna's Cause, examination make
Who her Accusers are, and vindicate
The injured truth, before it be too late.
Hereat inflamed with zeal, this Youth forth fled
Amongst the Throng which woeful Susan led
To execution, with as eager haste
As even now rash Sentence on her passed.
Then with a loud voice cried, ' Sirs, O Sirs hear,
' From this just woman's blood I am most clear;
' Why, why so fast, ye heedless Brethren, why,
' To see Chelcia's virtuous daughter die?
This said, the over-hastie multitude
To Daniel turned: ' Youth from above endu'd
' With knowledge great, tell us thy meaning; we
' Would gladly be informed the truth by thee,
' If ought's amiss: just and transgressor too
' Cannot consist; the latter we do know
' Proved by sufficient Test, but do not see
' How virtuous wives commit Adultery.
' Our witness uncorrupted Judges were,
' We think it rashness to think they should err:
' Then, noble Youth, beloved of God and men,
' Show us this thing, and we will turn again.
By this therefore they had enclosed about
Daniel, to be resolved of their doubt,
Who with a comely grace in the midst does stand,
And gravely calls for Silence with his hand;
Which being made, ' Are ye such fools indeed,
' In weighty things to make such careless speed?
' Where life's concerned, what does of right belong
' Even Heathens know, thinking delays not long;
' And shall the Gentiles Moral righteousness
' Show Heav'n-taught Jews the way not to transgress,
' And yet unfollow'd be? For shame, my friends,
' See what dishonor all rash acts attends,
' Us odious renders in the sight of those
' Who neither God nor yet true Judgment knows,
' That thus, the truth unsearched, or the Cause,
' You are so forward t'execute our Laws,
' And upon Israel's daughter Sentence give,
' Who naught has done but that she still may live.
' Infernal Angels sometimes seem as bright
' As those blessed ones in unapproaching light;
' And Justice often in its full careers,
' The true complexion of Injustice bears.
' Return ye then unto the Judgment Seat;
' Examine well, for sure th'imposture's great;
' And witnesses more false then Hell have stood
' T'imbrue their hands in this chaste woman's blood.
The people then with one consent rejoice,
And shout aloud with a confused noise,
Saying, To the Tribunal let us return,
And try if these men have false witness born.
Think how perplexed the pensive Elders were,
'Twixt stings of Conscience, re-inforc'd with fear,
And Heavens revengeful hand, that thus had sent
Means unexpected for their punishment;
Whilst its Revenge does still in triumph ride
For Murder more then any sin beside.
No amorous blushes now, no lustful eyes;
To Cytherea no more Sacrifice:
But Reason's offered succors once-betray'd,
(Known too too well to those that are afraid)
Blood from the Circle to the Center flies,
And that which first does live with life supplies.
Hence came the Elders paleness, that wan fit
Which did on their cadav'rous temples sit,
Whereby to each indifferent person there
Their guilt appeared, ere to the place drawn near.
Thou sacred Conscience! O mysterious thing!
From what hid cause does thy bright essence spring?
And most unhappie he whom fear alone
Has strength to chain in desolation.
Fear, Mortal's bane, and this world's slavery,
That makes too pensive man not dare to die,
But slight his happiness which no where dwells
Within the concave of our earthly cells,
And forces silence where most need's to speak,
And courage stops when she her flight should take.
Such was our Elders fate; no word we hear
They said, till to the Court returned they were:
Then passion somewhat overcome, they mutter
These speeches as their stammering tongues could utter:
' Thou Princely Youth, admired for thy fame,
' Since first we to the Caldean Nation came,
' Great is thy wisdom, that all Asia know,
' That amongst the Heathen makes thee honored so,
' And does thy hand with such a Scepter fill,
' As shines no less then our dread Monarch's will,
' Who thinks the Gods do love thee, whilst such years
' To thy great gifts but small proportion bears:
' Come, and with us, thy Seniors, sit down,
' Since God does youth oft-times with knowledge crown,
' And turns Gray-hairs to Babes; come, let us see
' (If thou can show it) our iniquity.
' We both are Witnesses, th'Indictment's read;
' Then as truth shall appear thou may proceed.
VVhereat young Daniel to The Assembly said,
' Let these two Elders forthwith be conveyed
' To several distant places, not to speak
' T'each other whilst I shall enquiry make.
' Whom once examined, you will surely find
' This woman guiltless, and they both combined
' To second Lust with Murder, and disguise
' With show of Justice their lewd Villainies.
' Justice sometimes becomes that cooling shade
' Wherein Serpentine wickedness is laid.
The Elders are (to all the peoples wonder
At Daniel's strange proceeding) set asunder;
And Joakim's house did more with men abound
Then Dagon's, when from Gaza Sampson bound
Was brought, to make th'uncircumcised sport;
So great's the throng, so numerous the resort.
A sudden change and great, methinks, to see
Two Judges late, now Prisoners to be.
Such is the nature of polluting sin,
T'enslave those souls where once it enters in.
When Righteousness a Kingdom gives, no less
Is Bondage purchased by Wickedness.
Such was that grand Rebellion, those evils
That poisoned glorious Angels into Devils,
Till spirit'al pustules to appear began,
And Leprosy those Spirits overran,
That to the world's amazement their bright frame
Is grown as loathsome as their cursed name.
One Elder forth is called; observe his pace,
And read Guilt's crimson lines upon his face,
Drawn in a duskie Argent; he, whose pride
With murder joined, even now his God defied,
Arraigned stands before man, his junior too:
It Is VVisdom's privilege, and this Truth can do.
Wherefore our Princely youth unto him said,
' O thou in sin grown old! were not afraid
' False Judgment against this woman to declare,
' Whose spotless dealings so resplendent are,
' Adorned with Virtue, that renowned Gem
' Of Honor, and immortal Diadem?
' Was not, think thou, just Heaven's dreadful hand
' With vengeance armed, enough to countermand
' Such high presumption? O most foolish spite,
' That dares against the very Thunder fight!
' But it is decreed, thy sins hith'rto lain hid
' Now in their time should be discovered.
' Thus have you dealt with the poor innocent,
' And Malefactors freed from punishment;
' Regarding not that Greatness which does say,
' The guiltless soul thou by no means shall slay.
' Now therefore, since this woman thou did see,
' And took'st i'th'act, tell me, under what tree?
The Elder at this Question could not choose
Demurring, till th'enrag'd concourse of Jews
Most part Susanna favoring, now bethought
Themselves she might be to this Trial brought
Unjustly, and with a tumultuous cry,
Say, Answer Elder, or expect to die.
After some pause, astonished, he declared,
Under a Mastick they their pleasure shared.
Then Daniel smiling, ' Very well, replied;
' Against thy self, vile man, thus have thou ly'd:
' Behold, I see an Angel now receiving
' Command to take thee from among the living.
' But stand aside, -- And bring his fellow hither,
' That as two Brethren both may go together;
' VVhen't shall appear false witnesses own breath
' Themselves, not I, shall sentence unto death.
The other's brought, for whose true counterfeit
Unto the former we need not retreat,
Being much confounded and amazed to hear
The Court with Acclamations rend the air.
At last a silence made: ' O cursed breed
' Of Cham, says Daniel, not of Judah's seed!
' Could Beauty thus bewitch you? why then see
' Its full perfection, blessed Eternity;
' Thou should have looked thither, where thy fill
' No less were then to understand and will.
' So had thou been too high for Satan's lure,
' And all false joys beneath thee lain obscure.
' But Lust's still armed with most poisonous stings;
' And where it wounds, swift destruction brings.
' This has thine heart corrupted, and one stroke
' The slender clue of thy short Dest'ny broke.
' Thus Israel's daughter have you served, whilst she
' Stood fearful of big-look'd Authority,
' And gazing on your place, durst not deny
' The freedom of Adulterous company.
' But Judah's daughter, she, would not transgress;
' Her chaster soul abhorred your wickedness;
' Nor threats nor death prevailed which you conspired,
' For she refused to grant what Lust desired.
' O glorious woman! may this ever be
' A Jewel to adorn thy memory!
' But since thou saw her, to her charge have laid,
' That in the Garden she th'Adultress played,
' Under what tree? I pray declare it here,
' And thou thereby thine innocence shall clear.
Now comes the proof: many a doubtful thought
This perjured Elder to confusion brought,
Lest from the others answer he might vary,
Or for the right, light on the quite contrary:
Since the Almighty has one Truth disposed
To be unto lies numberless opposed.
Yet forced to speak after some short delay,
This desperate anxious speech t'himself did say:
' I am now straightned; hereon does depend
' The utmost trial of my fatal end:
' Come life or death, or hell or heaven, whether,
' Under an Holm tree they were naught together.
Then pious Daniel mildly to him said,
' Even now thou have thy cursed life betrayed;
' God's holy Angel has Commission ta'n
' Forthwith to cut thy wretched life in twain,
' And with a sword attends, this very hour,
' Fierce vengeance on thy sinful head to pour.
Convicted plainly thus the Elders stand,
And Susan's freed by holy Daniel's hand.
VVhereat the impatient Jewish concourse rise;
The Palace trembles at their thundering cries,
To God with praises first that still does save
Distressed sinners who his mercy crave;
Nor any forlorn creature will forsake,
That heaven does only his sure anchor make.
This godly heat howe'r soon had an end;
They all their fury against the Elders bend,
With such a rage as Nature does possess
(So violent 'twas) the whelp-rob'd Lioness;
That had not mighty Justice them reserved
Unto the shameful death by both deserved,
Their blood had doubtless washed the Judgement-floor,
And died its Marble in a Purple-gore.
But they who Innocence would have betrayed,
To public Execution are conveyed:
Nor is there Law more just, then when man shall
Perish by that he laid for others fall.
Thus did one day, e'r-blessed may it be,
The guilty punish, and the guiltless free.
Unpiti'd di'd these Elders, whose black soul
In hell about the fiery wheel may roll,
Whilst Susan, late in the period of her age,
Betakes her to a better Pilgrimage;
To see those Virtues in their native rays,
Which gave their follower here such lasting praise.
Behold her Parents, Kindred, Husband too,
(The mists exhaled of all former woe)
Observe them now, imagine with what cheer
They do congratulate their Susan dear,
From death to life restored, brought from the grave,
And, one foot in, snatched from the Stygian wave.
Then to complete their joy, with one accord,
For her deliverance they praise the Lord.
' O thou most worthy to be feared great God,
' Who rul'st the Nations with an Iron rod,
' But gently do thine own choice Israel bring,
' To be refreshed at thy mercy's spring;
' Our Fathers trust in thee was not mistaken,
' Nor were they in their greatest wants forsaken:
' Thou heard'st the groans of this thy servant, when
' She stood betrayed, condemned by wicked men,
' Who falssy charged her, though no stain was found
' Whereby thy faithful Handmaid to confound.
' Blessed, and for ever admired be thy Name;
' May worlds to come sing forth thy mighty fame,
' That to death's portal turnest man, and then
' Proclaim'st, Return again ye sons of men.
By this time Daniel's glory proudly ran
Like panting Phoebus to th'Meridian
Of Babylon's Court, where it still rising towers
Nearer and nearer to the eternal Bowers.
Divinest Youth! well worthy of a Throne
More glorious then ere earthly wight sat on,
And of a righteous Crown, whose guards shall be
Such mystic Gems as Susan's Chastity.
FINIS.

