The Unfortunate PHAETON, Or the Fall of AMBITION, An HEROIC POEM.

Written by a Person of Quality.

Licensed

January the 29th. 1685. R. P.



LONDON, Printed for S. Norris, and are to be Sold by the Booksellers of London
and Westminster, 1686.

The Unfortunate PHAETON, Or the Fall of AMBITION, etc.
THE Storm that Tossed the yielding Waves alay'd,
And Calmness over the Face of Nature spread;
With all the Charms of Peace I courted Rest,
Till kinder Fate had lodged it in my Breast;
Which made me stand as Shipwrack'd Saylors do,
On safeties Rock, and Conquered dangers view:
Revolving all degrees of thought that move
In Mortal minds, composed of fear and love:
Whilst wakeful Fancy, that no slumber knows
Unnumber'd things in their Idea shows;
Some bright, some dark, some less than others far,
As Shrubs to Cloud-invadeing Ceders are,
Or as the Globe to the first moveing Star.
Some seeming Pomp adorned, and some were meek
As Pilgrims, that Eternal Mansions seek.
Amongst the rest, and foremost of the Train,
Ambition stood, both Men and Angels Baen,
The great disturber of the World, yet stood
The courted shadow of a real good;
Delusion decked him out to that degree,
He Seemed the Counterfeit of Royalty:
An Air of Greatness gained the first surprise,
And short live'd favors darted from his Eyes,
Vain Glory and False Hope around him flew,
And Real Honor stood aloft in view;
But betwixt him and it by the smallest Thread,
A fatal Sword hung trembling over his Head,
And all his way with mighty Ruin spread;
Trophies of sad misfortunes on each Hand,
Proclaimed his Pajeant Glories could not stand;
This made me wonder how Mankind could be
Besoted into such Credulity;
How such Alurements could Entice the Great,
To cast themselves into the Arms of Fate,
And it is decrees seek to Anticipate.
As when a Vulter greedy of his Prey,
A sleeping Serpent strives to steal away,
But in that rash surprise he finds his own,
And by the waking Serpent is undone.
It Is strange that Man should in such folly fall,
Who is so proud of being Rational,
To Court a thing, which like Circean Charms,
The Reason into Monstrous shapes transforms,
To seek with toil, what no content can yield,
A Luscious Poison that has numbers killed.
What Mariner that Rides on Ruffl'd Waves,
Would choose to Sail where Barking Sylla Raves?
Or on Charibidis dreadful Shoals would stand,
Where scattered Ship-wracks spread the Bloody Sand,
When he on Halcion Seas might make his way,
Yet thus does he, Ambition leads Astray;
A Slave he is at that grand Destroyers will,
And what he bids him do, he must fulfill.
As when a headstrong Horse has got the Rein,
The Riders rule is lost, he storms in vain,
In vain he strives, the Creature will not obey,
But his at that time is his Horses way,
As Phaetons was, that needs would Guide the day:
The Young Man thought it was no more then Ride,
The Glory basl'd all his thoughts beside:
Paternal care and tenderness in vain
His mad Carreir endeavored to restrain;
Hot on his bold resolves to mount a Throne,
All Honors else to him but dimly Shone;
But what insu'd? A mighty Ruin: Why,
If Tales by true, he burnt the Earth and Sky,
His blazing Team too fiercly lead him on,
Till in that Mischief he was over-thrown:
The forked Thunder met him in his way,
And put a stop to the Vserpers sway:
Whilst from his burning Chair of State he is hurled,
A Blazing Commet to the Lower World:
The Loud-mouthed Thunder bid the Ruin cease,
And in Ambitions fall gave Nature peace.
So we of late, beheld the Mad-brain'd Crew,
Their hapless Phaeton by their Breath undoo:
Ambitions Poison Winged with fond Aplause,
The Headstrong Youth to certain Ruin draws:
A forfeit life restored, or favors great,
Such as upon the Smiles of Monarcks wait,
Had not the power to stay him from his fate.
How blind is Man, that sucks this Poison in,
It Is such a Vice, so dear a Darling Sin,
That Reason's forced to give the Monster way,
And suffer under it is Tyranick sway;
'Twas that made Caesar and great Pompy Jar,
Who scattered all the World with Civil War,
And on Aemathean Plains Writ large in Blood,
That in Ambition there can be no good:
It Is that which wounds the Soul and lets out Rest,
Raising a Civil War within the Breast,
And hurries all the Faculties about
In such Confusion, as when Troops in Rout
Are scattered by the fierce pursuing Foe,
Who fleshed with Slaughter can no pity show;
Or as a Sea provoked by Fighting Winds,
In Waves Tumultuous all her Water finds.
Yet with this Madness some were wondrous pleased,
They powerful Cordials scorned that would have eased,
And glori'd With such Phrenzie to be seized.
So a poor Lunatic of sense bereft,
Knows not in what a sad Estate he is left,
And one thing in that great distress may be
A Comfort, cause he knows not's Misery;
But in his hot-brained Fits himself deceives
With thoughts of greatness, which he then believes
Stands in his way, and that he has Command
As some great Monarch, over Sea and Land:
Thus Airey Pride the Madmen do Pursue,
And these ar'th'Dreams of the Ambitious too.
The Man that makes his Gold his God, we hate,
Or he that Kills his Neighbor for's Estate:
The Crafty underminer Men abhor,
And Wounds in Peace, are worse than Wounds in War;
Yet Soul-destroying Averice, Cruelty,
Fraud, Malice, all in Black Ambition ly:
As in Rebellions Hydra late appeared,
An Hydra which it is Heads but faintly reared;
Yet different ways to Mischief they inclined,
And studdy'd Ruin allways to Mankind.
Aspireing Thoughts, and hope of Gain were there,
Rapin and Burning Lust durst claim a share,
And Impious Sacrelidge with horrid hands,
Which Indians dread, and Africks swarthy bands:
A thing the wild Arabians allways fly,
And all the World that owns a Deity.
There, sweet Revenge was closely hugged, and all
We can the Spawn of Damned Ambition call:
Nay more, A challenge up to Heaven was sent,
As if they Gyant-like to storm it meant;
A Challenge or bold Claim, such as could never
Without Revenge pierce the Almighties Ear,
A bold Presumption, in so bad a Cause,
In Derogation to his Sacred Laws.
His Anger slept not, when their Wish was heard,
But in their Ruin, he his Justice cleared;
He, unto whom all darkness is as day,
Whose Eyes abstrusest things with ease survey,
Observed those Men, who durst have laid the Guilt
Of Blood, Ingloriously, they would have spilt,
To Heavens charge, and through the dismal Gloom,
Kind Providence discovered things to come,
The wakeful Genius of the Nations gave
A timely notice to the bold and brave,
And over-set the Fate that seemed to Lower,
By blasting quite Ambitions feeble Power.
Scarce had the Fallen Sun declyn'd the West,
Scarce India viewed it is Glory in the East,
And we Impatient, waited it is uprise,
To Deck with Infant Beams the darkened Skies.
No Silver Moon shot Pale Beams into Night,
Whose Lustur by the Shade was Vanquished quite,
But dimly shined the scattered Seeds of Light:
A sullen Silence over the Plain was spread,
Each drowsy Hill appeared to Nod it is Head,
All things were still, as Natures self were Dead.
When armed with Rage, the Mad-braind Rout came on,
Pushed by the forward Fates to be undone,
O'rewelm'd in sleep, they thought the Camp to find,
And easy Victory possessed each mind;
Soft were their steps, as those of Lovers are,
Who would be secret, and each shadow fear,
Who strangely startle at each Noise they hear,
The Managed Silence promised them success,
But he who never Rebellious Arms would bless,
Who never could be indus'd to Wink at Sin,
Let them perceive what Error they were in.
A Thirst of Glory conquered Somnus Charms,
And kept the wakeful Heroes at their Arms,
Ready to Cope, when Wars dread Front appeard,
And Rustic Clamor through the Gloom was heard.
All nimble in their Motion, Trained to do
The Mighty Work, that Fame had called 'em to.
Eagar to Act, and fearless of the Foe,
They counted their aproaching March too flow.
Glad were they when they saw that Heaven gave way
To their desires, and War in prospect lay,
Scarce for the Signal would their Courage stay,
But seemed uneasy, till their Arms had tried
The justice of their cause, and quel'd the Pride
Of those Aspirers, who with Gyant-might,
Thought to possess themselves of Heaven by Fight.
And now no more than Neptunes Tribute-stream,
With silent Silver, Interposed between.
To Pause they stand, not but each active Hand,
Waits to give Death upon the first Command:
And now loud shouts begin the Air to wound,
Th'Alarms beat, and all the Trumpets sound:
The noise of shouting Soldiers, pierce the Sky,
Above the stormy Clouds the Clamours fly,
Whilst Neighboring Caverns Echo back the sound,
And from the Hills the mingled Cries rebound.
Night vows no more, the Breathing Flame gives day,
And Winged with Fire, the Bolts of Thunder stray,
That scattered Ruin, in their Fatal way.
Whilst on the Plains, the scattered Rebels ly,
And their late Spoils, with dear Repentance buy,
The futal Flashes let them see their woe,
And many Deaths presage their overthrow;
The Blood that from a thousand Wounds was shed,
The Grass discolored with a duskie Red;
Yet prompted by Despair, they boldly stood,
And Deaths large Gaps with other Lives made good,
As knowing on that Cast their safety lay,
That Ruin followed, if they lost the day.
Nor was Young Phaeton wanting to express
His utmost Conduct, nor in danger less
Exposed himself, though against the Fates, in vain
He strove, for what he never must obtain.
Those Missile Arms, that Untrained Rusticks held,
Stood only Ciphers in the Bloody Field,
To give him in their Fall a full survey,
In how great breadths his hapless Ruin lay,
To let him see in his too late distress,
How Black Ambition had destroyed his Peace,
And how by his Disloyalty, he stood
The Curse of Ruined bad-men, and the Scorn o'th good,
The Rebel Horse by this time Ranged at large,
But found themselves too weak to stand the Charge,
Pale Fear had witherd all their strength, and drained
Them of that Vigor once in them remained;
As soon as e're some Wounded Horse had thrown
Their Riders, and their Bodies Trampled on,
The Horsemen left the Field, the Fight they shun,
Or turning Reins upon their Fellows, run.
Driven they were, thus Thunderstruck pursued,
And in a Trice quite broken and subdued:
When to the truly Loyal Heroes Aid,
With heavy pace the deep mouthed Cannons made,
And loud in Thunder, Slaughter did proclaim,
Whilst all the Field seemed one great Camp of flame,
And Clouds of Smoke, the Blushing Morn o're-spread,
Which now began to rise from Thetis Bed:
Loudly they spoke, and with outrageous Rore,
The yielding Air in parts unnumber'd Tore;
Whilst Iron Globes, that Mortal might cannot stay,
Through over thrown Ranks took their destroying way,
And moved with Whirl-winds-speed, no Arms could be
Against those destroyers, a security.
And now the Horse that had naught else to do,
Amongst the broken Ranks like Lightning flew,
So that the War to a sad Period drew:
For with the shade the Rebels lest the Field,
Blushing with the Blood of those that there were killed;
And with their Phaeton, whom they durst obey,
They met their Fates, though in another way.
Thus great Jehovah, great Deliverance wrought,
And bold Ambition to Destruction brought;
Thus failed it of it is much desired end,
In vain do Mortal men with Heaven contend,
Improsperous are their Plots and dark Designs,
He Thrives not, that against Heavens Decrees Combines,
But sinks into the Arms of foul Disgrace,
And Honors Image basely does deface;
He Robs himself of Rest, and Courts his Pain,
And swallows Gilded Poison, that is his Pain,
Of which fond Rashness, men too often complain:
Yet like the man, that in a tossing storm,
Puts up his Prayers, and vows he will reform,
Vows to forsake each Darling Vice, but when
The Winds are out of Breath, the Seas again
Assume their former Calmness, he forgets,
And little by his Obligation sets.
So we deceive our selves, till we are lost,
And sadly know what such neglect has cost;
Unvaluable Peace would men but prize,
In which for certain there no danger lies,
The World would all be turned to Paradise,
The Golden Age again would be restored,
Yet Virtue more than Gold would be adored;
But restless men this Theme can never please,
Who if they could, would scorn to live at ease,
But like Old Nerites, allways love to Rave,
And never be seen, but on a Tossing-Wave,
Much like that Indian Mouse, who to fulfill
The dire Revenge of it is Insatiate will,
The largest of all Creatures loves to kill;
Though by the Fall of that unwildy Beast,
It self to unavoided Death is pressed.
Or like the Serpent that through Fire will run,
The Antidote of Poisons force to shun.
Strange these may seem, but true too often they are found,
And in the Soul make an Inglorious Wound.
Disturb the frame of the little World, and bring
Ten thousand mischiefs, which they fiercely fling,
As Cursed Pandoras Box amongst men was hurled,
Frought with those Plagues that now Disease the World.
FINIS.

