The young Horseman OR, The honest plain-dealing CAVALIER.

Wherein is plainly demonstrated, by figures and otherwise, the Exercise and
Discipline of the horse, very useful for all those that desire the knowledge
of warlike Horse-man-ship.

By JOHN VERNON.

PSALM. 20.7. Some trust in Chariots, and some in Horses, but we will remember
the name of the Lord our God.

PRO. 21.31. The horse is prepared against the day of battle, but safety is of
the Lord.

To the courteous Reader, AND Desirous Practitioner, OF Martial Discipline.
Fellow Soldiers,
THe Wars being a matter that concerns a Soldiers life, it behooves every
Soldier to arm himself with the best advantage that he can: You know what
JOB says, skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life,
and a man in some kind becomes his own murderer, if he does not use the best
means he can to preserve his own life, as well as when he commits the act of
murder on himself. I have therefore thought fit (having some small experience
of my own) to give thee these few directions both how to Accoutre and how to
Annure thy self for the means of thy safety I have purposely omitted many
things I could have inserted, because I would not prove tedious and write a
tract larger then every ordinary Soldier might easily purchase with his money
(...) in his pocket to be his continual advisor, and prove no hinderance unto
him in the expedyating of his service, to this end I have but briefly touched
upon each particular that is material, and compared my own experience with the
judgment of those that have lately written of this subject, and have in some
places inserted the breviats of the notes in this tract. My request therefore
unto thee is to make a favorable construction of this my endeavor.

And I shall continue thine in what I am able, John Vernon.

Now if thou be a man that do intend to se^ forth thy self for this good
and warrantabl^ CAUSE, which now invites thee to use the most of thy might, let
these brief rules be thy direction.
FIrst make choice of a nimble and able Horse of a convenient Stature, of 15
handfuls high, sac^ colored, as black, brown, cheasnut, dun, bay, socet, fox,
Iron gray, Roe, and the like, for a white horse is not so necessary for thy
use, nor so convenient for thy safety, as when thou shall be commanded forth
on a party, in a dark night thou will the easilier be discerned by the Enemy,
so that if they chance to give fire on you, they will have the greater aim at
thee, in regard thou will be so visible a mark unto them, it is not save for a
Sentinel to have a white Horse in a pitched field, a file leader being mounted
on a white Horse is commonly aimed at by the Enemies Gunners or Musktiers, and
so sometimes becomes the overthrow of himself and the rest of the file, some
other reasons I could render, but I forbear, let not the neck of your spurs be
overlo^g, if they be they are subject in your close order when you troop on, to
^atch hold on your next right or left hand man's stirrup, and so by that means
be likely to unhorse you, or spraine your leg, let your sword be of a middle
length, sharp pointed and stiff, for there is no great advantage in the
length of swords on horsbacke, and a short sword (...) a better command then a
long, use a flask rather then a horn^ or cartheages for your charge is quicker
provided, and if you pro^^ed Cartheages, they are subject with the trotting of
your Horse to lose il the powder out of them, a Poll Axe is very nccessarie for
a ^rooper, for if you should chance to encounter a Troop of Cur^ssiers where
your sword can do no good but little execution, your ^oll axe may be an
advantage unto you to offend your enemy, and (...) by that means defend your
selves, provide for your Horse an iron or brass chain for false Reins covered
over with leather, for (...) your other Reins should chance to be cut, those
will then stand ^ou in good stead to gird your Horse withal, be always
careful to ^eep thy Arms fixed and clean, for by that means thou may chance
^o kill thy Enemy; and so preserve thy own life, but if thy arms be ^ot fixed,
and so thou missest firing thine enemy, may chance to kill thee before thou
shall be able to offend him, be always well provided of powder and shot, that
so thou may always be in a readiness either to pass upon duty, or go
upon service, which is the Character of a good Soldier, and this will work
for thy honor and good report, let thy Horse be well kept and well provendred,
that so he may be the abler instrumentally in time of danger to preserve thy
life when thou art in the midst of thine Enemies skirmaging, or if thou shall
be forced to retreat to carry thee off courageously, when thou encountrest thy
Enemy in the field, if thou be furnished with one Ca^bine and two Pistols,
fire thy Carbine, and one of thy Pistols at thine Enemies, but always reserve
one of thy Pistols ready charged, primed, stand and cocked in thy houlster, so
that if thou should be fo^ced to retreat, and thine Enemy pursue thee, thou
may be able to reward him with that Messenger in thy Houlster, and so thou
may happily kill him, and by that means save thine own life.

Now to show you the ordering and disciplining of a Regiment of Horse, it
behooves I should first acquaint you with the Commanders and Officers belonging
unto a Regiment of Horse, and these particular parts properly belonging unto
them: and first for the Colonel who is appointed Comander in Chief over his
own Regiment, he ought to be a Soldier of extraordinary experience, and
valor, as having the command of a little army, sometimes singled from the
greater; on him depends the good success of many brave designs and actions,
therefore he must be well skilled in inbattailing of the Cavalrie for sometimes
the good ordering of charging the Enemy, causes the victory, and the
contrary sometime causes the destruction of the whole body, he must take
particular notice of all the Captains under his command, which are most usually
five, and a Sergeant Major, he is likewise to take care that the Troop under
his command be well accommodated with good Equipage, as good and serviceable
Horse and Arms, and all other necessaries requisite or belonging unto the
Cavalrie, he is not to suffer his Captains to make Officers, nor to absent
themselves from their Troops without his leave. In the March his own Troop
marches first, and is first quartered, in time of fight his place is in the
Battalia, if there be only his own Regiment, or if he command in Chief, that
so he may be able to give order and command upon all occasions, he should not
resolve upon any Enterprise, but first advise with one or more of his
faithfullest and most experienced Captains.

The second Commander belonging unto a Regiment of Horse is, the Sergeant Major
whose Experience and Valor had need be answerable unto his place, which is of
great concernment, for he is most usually a man of the most practice in the
Regiment, in marching he ought to be well acquainted with the ways. that so he
may with best advantage encounter the Enemy, if it happens they met, if the
Regiment marches in high ways. In the Enemies Country or where the people do
most affect their Enemy: it is his duty in all places or fields convenient,
to cause all the Regiment to be drawn up into Battalia, which will both annew
the Soldiers to this kind of Exercise, and cause them to be more Expert and
Ready at all times to Encounter these Enemies, at this time, and so at all
other times in their marching, he should send forth Scouts before the Body of
the best and ablest Horse, with an able an expert Officer to discover, if happily
they may, where the Enemy is quartered, how the Country stands affected, and
if they can to take some of the Enemies Scouts or straggling Soldiers, that so
by fair promises of Reward or threatenings of great punishment you may get out
of them, how strong your Enemy is, how well provided of Ammunition, what
Enterprise he intends next, and the like, he must also if he can with secrecy
procure to have Spies, not only in the Enemies Army, but also upon their
Frontiers, that so you may have continual notice of the Enemies moving, and
which way and of all the Designs in hand, and the like, he is likewise to take
care that the Captains do not wrong their Soldiers, and that they keep the
Troops in a good state and well armed, and that themselves and their Officers
do frequently Exercise and Discipline their Troops, and cause them to observe
good order, it is his duty likewise when he has received the Word and Orders
how the Guard shall be commanded that night from the Colonel, the Corporals
reparing unto him to give out these Orders and Word unto them, and they to
acquaint the Pistolers Captains therewith.

The next Commander in a Regiment of Horse is a Captain, who should be a man of
Wsdome and Policy, as being one of the Colonels counsel, and well exercised in
Arms that so he may be the better able to Dicipline his own Troop, he has
need have good Experience and Valor, in regard that many times it happens,
that being at a distance from the gross body with his troop, he must without
order or counsel of others, sometimes when he shall see advantageable
occasions, execute service of great consequence* ^e should always in all things
show a good example to his soldiers, he must diligently and punctually observe
these orders which shall either be given or sent him from his superior
Officers, and be at the place at the appointed hour with his Troop, others
under his command on all occasions, he must be first on horse back ^s a good
example to his Soldiers, he must be careful to keep his own Troop find and
complete, he must endeavor to know every one of his soldiers by their names,
that so he may distinctly name them upon all occasions of employment, he must
never be daunted whatsoever, disadvantage befall him for fear of discouraging
his Soldiers, he must cherish his well deserving Soldiers, and cashiere the
contrary, it must be his care to have one or more of his Soldiers well
acquainted with the ways of that Country he marches in, to serve him as
Guides, to that end he must if he can get one or more of the Country
inhabitants to enter themselves as Soldiers under his command.

The Lieutenant of a Troop of horse ought to be a man of known experience,
nursed and well educated in Cavalrie, it properly belongs unto his care and
office to exercise and discipline the Troop in the Captains absence, he
commands the Troop, his name signifies so much in the French Lieutenant, that
is one which supplieth the place of another upon him, usually all difficulties
do rest, because oftimes the Troops are given unto young Gentlemen which want
experience, he must see that the Soldiers keep their horse and arms well, he
always marches in the Rear, causing the Soldiers to follow their Captain and
Colors; in time of fight his place is in the Rear with his sword drawn in
his hand, encouraging the Soldiers, and killing any that shall offer to fly
from their Colors or disband themselves, but if the Captain be absent, then
he shall take tht Captains place, appointing another able Officer in the
Rear, in the ordinary marching of the Troop, the Lieutenant must not take the
Captains place though he be absent, but the Cornet must lead the Troop, and the
Lieutenant must bring up the Rear, he must be able to write and read, because
he must keep a List of the Troopers names, and likewise be able himself to
read those Orders and Letters that shall be sent him from his Superior
Officers, and not communicating it to others, he must take notice of the
sufficiency of every soldier, and make use of them accordingly, when the
Troop goes to manage any Guard, the Lieutenant is to go a little before unto
that Lieutenant he is to relieve, and by him to acquaint himself of the place
for the Sentinels for day and night, and must himself place the Sentinels when
the Troop lodges in a Village, he must cause the Billits assigned to be
distributed before the Cornets lodging, so that in case of an Alarm, the
Soldiers may know where to repair to their Colors, when the Troop is to
march: he must be first on horseback, giving the soldiers a good example, he
must endeavor to acquaint himself with the ways of the Country, because he is
often sent forth upon exploits, when the Troop in marching is charged by the
Enemy, he must keep some distance behind, with some of the best mounted
Soldiers for a reserve, that so the first having done their duty, they may
second them, giving the other opportunity to resemble behind them, and time to
make ready again.

The Cornet must be a man of courage, who in the absence of the Captain and
Lieutenant commands the Troop, in the ordinary marching of the Troop, he
marches in the first division between the first and second squadron, the
Colors are then carried by his man. In the first rank of the second squadron
next the right hand man, but in fight the Cornet takes the Colors himself and
marches in the middle of the Front, when the Lord General passes by he is to
do oba^ience, by inclining the Cornet or Colors toward the ground.

The Quartermaster must be a soldier of good experience, as being many times
sent forth upon parties, and sometimes leads on the forlorn hope, he had need
be well acquainted with the ways, because he always goes before the Troop
to provide quarter for them, he is to take two or more of the nimblest mounted
Troopers along with him, and having provided quarter, sends them back to direct
the Troop to their quarters, there is likewise much fidelity required of them
that are Quartermasters, by reason that they distribute the word and the
billi^s in the absence of the Cornet and superior Officers; he commands the
troop, in the time of the troops ordinary marching, his place is in the second
division, between the second and third squadron.

The Corporals which are commonly three belonging unto a Troop of horse are
very useful, it is requisite they should have good experience in the Cavalry,
being commonly sent forth with a party of horse to scout, and scour the high
ways before the body, and to guard some passages of danger, and to assist the
Lieutenant in placing the Sentinels when the particular squadrons are to
perform that service; their places of marching is after this manner, the eldest
Corporal marches on the right hand of the Front, the second Corporal marches
on the right hand of the second squadron, the youngest Corporal marches on the
right hand of the last squadron.

The Trumpeters which are usual too belonging unto a Troop of horse, ought to
be men of a pregnant wit and very industrious, fit to deliver Embassages when
they are sent, they are to observe if they can have so much liberty the enemies
works and guards, and what they can further gather or espy in the enemies
quarters, and so report it unto his commander in chief; he must prescisely at
the time appointed him by his superiors, sound the Boutezselle, that is clap
on your saddles, the next is the Chevall, that is mount on horseback, the next
sound of the Trumpet is the standard, that is repair to your standard;
therefore it is requisite that the Troop be distinctly taught to know the
several sounds of the Trumpet, as when to saddle, when to mount, when to
repair to their standard; when to troop on, when to give the charge, when to
retreat, when to attend the watch, and the like. All which they must punctually
obey, as being the loud voice of the Commander, the Trumpeter must always have
his Trumpet with him, because it being the more ready to sound an Alarm when
occasion shall require the same. It is requisite for a Trooper to be of a sound
and active body, of a fitting age, as from twenty to forty years of age, of a
resolute spirit, as befitting a horseman, who is to meet the enemy and not to
stay his coming, he ought to be of an ingenious mind to learn the perfection
of a soldier, to ow obedience to his superior Officers, one that loves and
knows what belongs to a horse* he must be careful to keep his horse well,
and his arms fixed upon, which many times depends the safety of his life,
every horseman must wear a skarfe of his Generals Colors, and not leave it
off neither in his quarters nor out of his quarters, it being an ornament unto
him: besides it will cause him to forbear many unfitting actions, as being
thereby distinguished from the vulgar or common soldier, it is likewise a good
and visible mark in time of battle to know one another, but above all he must
have the true fear of God before his eyes, which will direct him in all his
actions to embrace virtue, and abhor vice.

The next thing we are to treat of is, the arming of the Cavalrie which is of
two sorts, chiefly defensive, and offensive. The arming of the Currasseer is
chiefly defensive, as with a close caske or head-peece, gorget, breast plate,
pistol proof, and placket to make it carbine-proofe. Poulderons, and
Vambraces, Gantlets, Tassets, Cassets, and Garderans, to arm him fitly down
to the knee before, and so lo as the calves behind with a Buffe Coat under
his arms, a good sword stiff and sharp pointed, two good firelocks, Pistols,
In hou^sters at his Saddle, with a good Poleaxe, a good strong horse of fifteen
handfuls high, his Saddle and Bitt must be strong and useful, he must wear a
Scarf on his Headpiece, he must have false Reins to his bridle made of an
Iron or brass chain, covered over with leather, that if his other Reins should
be cut, he may have them to guide his Horse with all as before.

The Harquebuses and Carbines arming is chiefly offensive, his defensive Arms,
as only an open Caske or Head-peece, a back and breast with buffe coat under his
arms; his offensive A^mes are a good Harquebus, a Carbine hanging on his right
side in a belt by a sweble, a flask and Carthareg case, and spannes, and good
fire-lock pistols in houlsters. At his saddle a good stiff sword sharp
pointed, and a good poll-axe in his hand, a good tall horse of fifteen
handfulls high, strong and nimble, with false raines to your bridle made of an
Iron Chain as the former. The Dragoones arming is only offensive, having a good
fire and cock musket something, a wider bore, then ordinary hanging in a belt by
a sweble at his side, with a good sword and ordinary horse, it being only to
expediate his march, for he must perform his service on foot, the ordinary
marching is usually ten a breast, and when they come in service, nine of them
alight casting the bridle over the next sidemans horse neck, and for one in
ten serves to keep their horses, the rest perform the service; it is a good
and special principle, to have our soldiers both horse and foot well chosen,
well armed, and well disciplined. The next thing we have to treat on, is to
teach the Cavalrie the use of the horse and arms, concerning your horse, you
must be careful to observe these few following directions, that is to have him
always ready at command, as to pace, trot, gallop, or run in full carreers,
also to advance, stop suddenly, retire and turn readily to either hand, to
teach him to turn readily, you must use him often to ride the Ring, and the
figure eight, first in the greater compass, and afterward in a lesser, by
degrees: first on his pace, then on his trot, and so to his gallop; and lastly,
in full careere, you may teach him this by using him unto your hand, leg, and
voice, for the using him unto your hand you must observe not to move your arm
at all, but your rist only; this is excellent for facings, as if you would have
him turn to the left, a little motion of the left little finger on that rain,
and a touch of the left leg not using the spur does it, if you would have him
face about to the left, you must use the same motion a little harder, for the
use of the leg if you would have him trot, you must move both your legs a
little forward if gallops move them more forward, and if you would have him run
in full careere, you must move them most of all forward, and your body a
little forward with them, it were good after ever motion to keep him a little
while in that motion, as when you bid him stand, to stand a while when you face
to either hand to stand in that posture, a while giving him sometimes as a
reward when he has well done, a piece of bread or the like: for the voice you
must use him to these words, as advance, hold, turn, stand, or the like, but it
were far better to use him chiefly to the motions of the hand and legs,
because the voice cannot always be heard as in the time of fight or the like,
now to teach him to go side-ways which is very useful for closing of your
Files, you must lay his provender at a distance from him in the Manger, keeping
him from turning his head toward it, you must use him to the smell of
Gunpowder, a sight of fire and armor, hearing of Drums and Trumpets, and
shouting of Guns but by degrees, when he is eating of his Oats you may fire a
little train of Gunpowder in the Manger, at a little distance from him, and so
nearer by degrees. In like manner you may fire a Pistol at a little distance
from him in the stable, and so nearer by degrees, and so likewise a Drum, or
Trumpet may be used to him in the stable, the Groom may sometimes dress him in
armor, using him sometimes to eat his Oats on the Drum head, In the fields
when you are on his back cause a Musket and your self to fire on each other
at a convenient distance, thereupon riding up unto him with speed, making a
sudden stand, also you may use to ride him up against a complete armor set on
a stack a purpose, that he may overthrow it, and so trample it under his feet,
so that by these means, the horse finding that he receives no harm, may
become bold to approach any object; you must use him to ride one Mountains and
on even ways, and to be exercised to leap, swim, run, and stop suddenly, and
the like.

The next thing in order to teach the Cavalier is the use of the Army, now,
for brevity sake I shall purposely omit the postures of the horseman, it being
of little use in service, and only acquaint you with those things that are
material.

Now if you use Cartrages, you shall find in your Crattreg case a turned
wooden pin which you must take, having cut lengths of white paper something
broader then the pin is in length, and roll the paper on the pin, then twist
one end of the paper, and fill it almost full of powder, then put the bullet on
the top of the powder, twisting that end also, then put it into your Carttreg
case, now when you come to lade your Carbine or Pistols with these Cartreges,
you must bite off that end of the paper where the powder is, pouring it into
your Carbine or Pistol, then put in that bullet, and some of that paper will
serve for a wad after it, and Ram home, but always observe that your bullet be
not too big, but that it may roll home to the Powder, for if there be any
distance between the bullet and the powder, it is likely to break the barrel
of your Carbine or Pistol: But if you use a flaske, which, in my judgment, is
far better then Carttreges, because that many times, the trotting of your horse
in long march, shakes out all the powder out of your Carttrages, and thereby
causes you to be unprovided for the sudden charge of the enemy, you must gage
your flaske, and so lade your Carbine or Pistol with powder and bullet as
before, but never prime before you have spand, and never span before you have
just need, because many times the firelock pistols will nor go off if they
have stood long spand. Now the quantity of powder usually required, for the
lading of either Carbine or Pistol is half the weight of the bullet, but to
avoid the carriage of either Cartrage case or flaske, there is a new invented
spanner which contains some six charges with priming powder, which is more
many times then is used in our skirmiges.

The next thing in order is to show you the exercise of the horse, in their
motions, wherein is to be understood the true distance between Horse and
Horse, which is to be six foot at their open order, and three foot at their
close order, the distance being taken from the head and tail of the Horses; in
the File and the like distance, in rank now the Motions for the Cavalrie are of
four kinds, as Facings, Doublings, Countermarchings, and Wheelings: the use of
Facings is to make the Troop perfect, to be suddenly prepared for a Charge on
either Flank or Rear, Doublings of Ranks or by half Files, or by Bringers up,
serves to strengthen the Front, Doubling the Files serves to strengthen the
Flanks, Countermarching serves to reduce the File-leaders into the place of
the Bringers up, that so the best men may be ready to receive the charge of the
Enemy in the Rear: the use of Wheelings is to bring the Front which commonly
consists of best and ablest men to receive the charge of the Enemy in the
Rear, the use of Wheelings is to bring the Front, which commonly consists of
best and ablest men to receive the Charge of the Enemy on either Flank or
Rear, and also unexpected to Charge the Enemy on either Flank or Rear, these
motions for the more easier apprehending of them as represented in Figures by a
Troop of Horse consisting of 72 Horsemen, the Fileleaders and Bringers up are
distinguished by a different Letter, but because it may be profitable unto
some, I shall first give you the proper words of Command together that belong
unto the Excercising of a Troop of Horse, and afterward insert the Figures with
the words of Command, and the Reasons of a very Motion.

First, march into the field four in Rank when you come into the Field command
to double their Rank, which make eight in Rank, then command to open to the
right and left, as they they march to their open Order of six foot distance,
then command to stand and silently hearken unto the word of Command.

1
To the right hand face,
To the left hand as you were.
2
To the left hand face,
To the right hand as you were.
Silence, and even your Ranks.
3
To the right hand about face,
To the left hand about as you were.
4
To the left hand about face,
To the right hand about as you were.
Silence, and straighten your Files.
5
Ranks to the right hand double,
Ranks to the left hand as you were.
6
Ranks to the left hand double,
Ranks to the right hand as you were.
Silence, and even your Ranks.
7
Files to the right hand double,
Files to the left hand as you were.
8
Files to the left hand double,
Files to the right hand as you were.
Silence, and straighten your Files.
9
Files to right and left outward double,
Files to right and left as you were.
10
Files to the right and left inward double,
Files to the right and left as you were.
11
Half Files to the right hand double the Front
Half Files to the left hand as you were.
12
Half Files to the left hand double the Front,
Half Files to the right hand as you were.
Gentlemen take notice of this Rule,
Always observe your right hand man,
And your leader.
13
Bringers up to the right hand double the Front,
Bringers up to the right hand as you were.
14
Bringers up to the left hand double the Front,
Bringers up to the right hand as you were.
Silence, and even your Ranks.
15
Files to the right hand countermarch,
Files to the left hand as you were.
16
Files to the left hand countermarch,
Files to the right hand as you were.
Silence, and straighten your Files.
Gentlemen always in your countermarches observe this rule, to come up to your
Leaders ground, before you wheel.
Silence, and observe the word of command.
17
Files close to the right and left to your close order.
18
Ranks close forwards to your close order.
19
Half Files to the right and left double the Front by division.
Half Files to the right and left as you were.
20
Half Files to the left hand, double the Front entire,
Half Files to the right hand as you were.
Silence.
21
Close your Files with your right knee fast locked,
Under your right hand man's left hamme.
Silence.
22
To the right hand wheel close your Files to the
Right hand men move easily, and let
Your left hand men come about
To the left hand wheel close your Files to the right,
23
Left hand men move easily, and let your
Right hand men come about:
Troop on and close your Files.
24
Ranks, File, Rank: as you were.
March e^sily, Troop on, Stand.
Now when the Troop lies in Garrison or continues long in any Town, it should
be their constant course if neither they nor their horses, be overburthened
with going forth upon parties to exercise twice a week at the least, I shall
therefore now according to my promise, give you a plain demonstration by
Figures, with the reasons of each motion, of the manner of exercising the
Horse, as for the common marching of a Troop through a Town or high way, or
straight passage or the like: the first Figure shows how, the second Figure
shows the manner of their marching when they come into an open Field or
Common, or the like convenient place, when the Troop is commanded forth to
exercise marching into the field after that manner, as is demonstrated by the
two former Figures, when they come into the field, the Officers are to march
forth from between the Divisions, then they are to close the Divisions and
stand at their open order of six foot distance as is represented by the third
Figure.

It is proper in all commands to begin with the right first, which is presented
by this fourth Figure, the first command in Facings is to the right hand face,
which serves to receive the Charge of the Enemy coming on one the right
Flank, the Command to Reduc^ them is to the left hand as you were*

Fig. 1.


Fig. 2.


If any shall seem to remain unsatisfied in the placing of my Officers, as it
seems some already have, I shall presume to render them these reasons for it,
submitting my self unto the judgment of the learned.

1 Each Officer in these figures, assumeth no other then their proper places of
honor or dignity, peculiar unto each of them.

2 Each Corporal is therefore appointed to march on the right of his
particular Squadron, that they might with the more facility sometimes suffering
the Troop to advance, discern any disorder or disproportion of the troops
marching, and thereby the eas^ier cause them to march in good order.

3 It has been the most ancient and modern custom of the Netherlands thus to
place the Quartermaster as in this figure, during the time of his residing with
the Troop, and then in his absence the youngest Corporal assumeth the place as
substitute.

Fig 3


Fig 4.


Fig. 5.


The next command is to the left hand face which is here presented by this fifth
Figure, and differs nothing from the 4 Figure, but by the hand being useful,
as the former to reduce them, the command is to the right hand as you were.

Fig. 6.


Now if the enemy come on the Reere, som^^thing inclining to the Right, you
are to co^^mand to the right hand about face, or if the ^^nemie come on the
Reere, something inclini^^ to the left, you are to command to the left (...)
about face, which is both demonstrated by the sixth figure, to reduce them, you
are to command to the right or left as you were. Alway^ note this, that when
they perform any motion to the right, you must reduce them by the lef^ or to
the left, you must reduce them by the right, reducing them always by the
contrary hand they perfor^med that motion by.

Fig. 7.


Rank to the right hand double to perform this Motion, every ^n Rank passes
into the odd upon the right hand of his Leader, ^he second Rank into the
first, and so all the rest successively, as ^his seventh Figure is plainly
demonstrated to reduce them, the per word of Command is Ranks to the left hand
as you were, (...) may be done the best way for the Horse, by causing those
(...) that doubled to stand, and those that stood to advance to the ^^per place
and distance: this Motion and likewise all the rest con^^^ning doubling of
Ranks, doubling by half Files, and doubling Bringers up, is useful for the
strengthening of the Front: now ^^cause this Troop consists of 72 Horsemen,
which is an equal ^^mber to be divided into three equal Squadrons, of 24 men
a (...), there will remain in all these doublings of Ranks on odd (...) in the
Reere, which always is to stand in their proper places, (...) this Figure
shows; you may observe also the places from ^^ich, the way by which those
Ranks that double, do advance by (...) round oes, and small pricks.

^^g. 8.


This Motion differs nothing from the former, but by the do^^bling one the
contary hand, being commanded, Ranks to the (...) hand double, and is useful
as the former, the proper word of command to reduce them is Ranks to the right
hand as you were, the eighth Figure plainly shows the manner how to perform
it.

Fig. 9.


Doubling of Files is useful for the strenthening of the Flanks the first
Command by way of Exercise, in doubling of Files (...) Files to the right hand
double, which is plainly demonstrated by this ninth Figure to reduce them: the
Command is Files to the lef^ hand as you were, note this that (...) man that
moves must giv^ place to him that stands.

^ig. 10.


This motion differs nothing from the former, but by the doubling to the
contrary hand, it being of the same use as the other, the proper word of
Command is Files to the left hand Double: and to Reduce them, the Command is
Files to the right hand as you were, and a plain description how to perform
this Motion is seen by this tenth Figure, every even number passes into the
odd as the eighth into the seventh, the sixth into the fifth, and so all the
rest successively.

Fig. 11.


This motion is very useful for the avoiding of Canon-shot, or sometimes for
the suffering of the enemy, when he charges with full career to pass in
between, and so h^ve you the greater advantage of the enemy, it is performed
by commanding, files to the right and left outward double, to reduce them the
command is, files to the right and left as you were: The speculation of this 11
figure will show you the usefulness of this motion, and likewise how to
perform it.

Fig. 12.


This motion is useful for the drawing of the Troop into a closer sentor then
the former, and is performed by commanding, files to the right and left inwards
double; to reduce them, the command is, files to the right and left as you
were, let this 12 figure be your guide, for the attaining of the usefulness and
manner of performing of this motion.

Fig. 13.


This motion, as has been formerly shown, is useful for the strengthening of
the Front, but performed differently from the o^ther, the proper word of
command is, half files to the ri^^t han^ double the front, to reduce them, the
command is, half files to the left hand as you were, The best way to perform
it for the hor^^ is, as has been formerly shown, to command those half fil^^
that stood to advance, and those that advanced to stand, this (...) teenth
figure will show you how to perform it.

Fig. 14.


The difference betwenne this and the former motion is only by advansing on the
contrary hand, the command being half files to the left hand double the front,
it being of the like use as the former: to reduce them, the word is, half
files to the right hand as you were, all which is plainly shown by this 14
figure.

Fig. 15.


This motion is of the same use as the former, but performed differently from
it, here the bringers up advance into the front, and the next rank after them,
and so all the rest successively as the reere rank figure one, into the front
rank, figure one, and so likewise all the rest, The command being, bringers up
to the right hand double the front, reducing them as is formerly shown, this 15
figure plainly demonstrates the manner how to perform it.

Fig. 16.


This motion and the former is of one use, all the difference being, the
advancing on the contrary hand, being commanded, bringers up to the left hand,
double the Front, reduceing them as before, let this 16 figure be your guide,

Fig. 17.


The use of countermarching as has been shown before is, (...) the sudden
reducing of the file-leaders, into the place of the bringers up, so that by
that means, the best and ablest men, which ought to be frontiers, may be ready
to receive the charge of the enemy in the reere, the proper command being
files to the right hand countermarch, as is plainly demonstrated by this 17
figure, to reduce them, the command is, files to the left hand countermarch as
you were.

^ig. 18.


he difference of this motion from the former, as has been shown in all, the
left hand motions is only changeing of hands, being of the same use as the
former, the manner of performing it is described by this 18 figure, the command
being files to the left hand countermarch, reducing them by the right, into
their proper places as before.

Fig. 19.


This motion is useful for the drawing of the files into their close Order,
every man's right knee being close locked under his right-hand-mans left ham,
the command is, files to the right and left close inwards to your close Order,
you may see the manner of performing it by this 19. figure.

Fig. 20


This motion is useful for the drawing up of the Ranks into their close Order,
the command being, Ranks close forward to your close Order, as is demonstrated
by this 20 figure,

Fig. 21.


These two motions differ from any of the former, and is useful for the
drawing up of the Troop into the lesser batalia of 16, for there is the
battalia consisting of 24 and three deep, now when it shall fall out that this
Troop shall be just in the midst between other two Troops, it may be useful to
draw them up on either flank, as this 21 figure shows; how, the command
being, half files to the right and left, double the front by division, and it
may be performed by commanding, rear half files to the right and left face
outward, the^ command, rear half files, march clear of either flank, then
command, rear half files advance even with the front; to reduce them, command,
Rear half files, to the right and left as you were.

Fig. 22.


This motion differs from the former, but is of the same use: now if it shall
fall out that this Troop shall be placed on the left wing of the gross body,
or that there be a scarcity of ground on the right flank, it will be proper
to command half files to the left hand double the front entire, the manner of
performing it being plainly shown by this 22 figure, and it may be performed
after the same manner as the former, you may reduce them the best way by
commanding, front half files march off, and rear half files, fall into your
places.

Fig. 23.


The use of wheeling, as has been formerly shown* is for the spedy bringing of
the front, which should always consist of the ablest soldiers to receive the
charge of the enemy on either flank, or else suddenly to give the charge to
the enemy on the Rear, this motion is performed by commanding to the right
hand wheel, and close your files to the left, right-hand-men move easily, and
let your left-hand-men come about, all which is plainly demonstrated by this 23
figure.

Fig. 24


Now if it shall happen that the enemy shall come on the left, it will be
proper to command to the left hand wheel, and close your files to the right,
left hand men move easily, and let your right hand men come about, this 24
figure shows the manner how to perform it.

The (...) motion which may ^ometimes prove very useful, ^as the commander
shall see fit occasion is to command Ranks, File; which is performed after this
manner, when the Troop is wheeling, command to Troop on, then suddenly command
Ranks file, that is* the right hand man of the Troop marches off, his next
left hand man marches after him, and so all the rest of the Troop successively,
the whole Troop making but one entire file, to reduce them command Ranks as
you were. This motion is useful to fire all at once on a company of foot, but
it must be performed with much speed and agility.

The last motion is to draw up into batalia, now it is to be supposed that the
Troop stands in its marching posture, with each Officer in his particular
place, as in the first figure, and coming into a convenient field or place, you
are to command them to double their Ranks, which is answerable to figure 2,
then command the second Corporal to advance into the front with the second
squadren, which makes 16 in front, then command the youngest Cotporall to
advance into the Front with the youngest Squadren, which makes a fair front in
Batalia of 24 men and 3 deep, besides the Cornet and three Corporals, to
reduce them the command is, March off eldest Squadren. Every Troop of horse
must be furnished with a Captain, a Lieutenant, a Cornet, a Quartermaster,
three Corporals, two Trumpeters, a Clarke, a sadler, a Surgeon, and a
Farriar.

The next thing we are to treat of is, the order of a horse Regiments marching;
which is after this manner, the Colonels Troop marches first, next them marches
the eldest Captains Troop, and so all the rest of the Troops in their degree,
the Serjetnt Major with his Troop brings up the Reere, The Harquebuier and
Carabiner in their ordinary marching, is to carry their Carabines hanging at
their backs, in a belt by their right side, as has been shown before: but when
the Troop marches through a Town or City, they must order their Carbines upon
their right thigh.

In the day marches there ought to be a convenient distance between Troop and
Troop, but in the night, they ought to march near together, behaving themselves
very silently (In all convenient places as they march) the Sergeant Major ought
to cause all the Troops to be drawn up into Battalia, and likewise at the same
time, and at other times of there marching to send forth Scouts before the
body, and those of the nimblest horse to discover if happily they may either the
Enemies Quarters, the scituaion of the Country and ways whether straight or
open passages either over Bridges, or else through narrow Lanes, or the like,
for the more convenient marching of the Wagons or other baggage, which must be
so little as may conveniently serve turn: the Wagons must not march amongst
the Troops, but in a convenient place by themselves, being always guarded with
a Squadron of horse (if the Enemy be on your Front, the Wagons must march in
the Reere. It is likewise requisite to have good and able Guides that are well
acquainted with the Country wherein you march, which you may take up of that
Country Inhabitants; and if you can entertain them into pay as Soldiers under
your command, if not for the better preventing of their running away, which
they will oftentimes do, if they may have opportunity, are to ride between two
Troopers of fidelity and trust, (when the body is to march over a Bridge or
narrow passage, the first Troop being passed over is to make alto, that is
stand, leaving a Soldier on the Bridge or passage, that may give notice to the
Commander and Leader in the Front, when the Reere of the whole body is passed
over. When the body is within some four or six miles of the place where they
should be quartered that night all the Quartermasters of the Regiment are to
march speedily before the body to provide Quarter for all there Regiment, each
Quartermaster taking with him three or four of the nimblest horst troopers in
his own troop, who are to be sent back again when the Quarters are made, to
conduct each troop to its Quarters. The Colonels troop ^s first to be provided
of Quarter, then the Sergeant Major next, and so all the rest of the Troops in
their degrees.

When the Troops come to the place where they should be quartered, the
Quartermasters are to cause each Troop to march alto, before their particular
Cornets lodging, and there to deliver out to each Corporal each Squadrons
billets, so that the Troop may the better know if occasion happen of an Alarm,
and the like whereto repaired to their Standard or Colors. It is likewise very
requisite that the Quarters be very well and sufficiently guarded, and that the
Sentinels be placed in the most convenient places or passages, the Officer
shall think most advantageous for that purpose.

Now because it may prove sometimes very advantageous to take some of the
Enemies Scouts, or straggling Soldiers for the better gaining Intelligence* a
cunning stratagem might be very useful for this purpose, which may be
performed after this manner or the like, an Officer of good experience may be
sent forth with a p^r^i^ of some twenty of the best and nimblest mounted
Soldiers wi^h one Trumpetter, who are in the day time to repair unto some
Wood near the Enemies Quarter, placing some Sentinels on Trees, and endeavor
to take if happily they can some of the Enemies straggling or disbauded soldiers,
and in the night to approach the enemies sentinels surprising one or more of
them (now because it may so fall out that after the taking of a Sentinel or
the like, the Troop may be charged by the Enemy, the Officer is to leave some
four of these twenty with the Trumpetter near the aforesaid Wood, who are to
have the nimblest horses: giving them order, that when they shall, see the
other sixteen coming charged by the Enemy, they show themselves to the Enemy,
and that the Trumpetter shall then sound: now the Enemy preserving this usually
will make a stand for fear of some Ambuscado, which will give the more
opportunity for the sixteen to further their retreat, the other four with the
Trumpetter may afterward safely retreat, either severally or together, by
reason of the speed of their Horses. A Quartermaster usually performs this
service after he has provided Quarter, having well refreshed both themselves
and there hor^es; that assist him in this stratagem.

If the Cavalrie lodges or incampeth in the fields, there must be special
care taken that it be in a convenient place for water, and under some shelter,
(for one cold or rainy night does more hurt unto the horses then any other
thing, and now if it so happen, (as it (...) sometimes) that the Cavalrey come
late to their Quarters, so that conv^^^ent places for the Sentinels cannot be
made choice of some Commanders will cause the Boutezelle to be sounded at
midnight, an^ s^metimes make false Alarmes, as though the enemy (...) to keep
their Soldiers waking, but the often using of, (...) ^^^^diers to this proves
very evil (causing them to be secure an^ careless) it were far better in
such a case to cause all the troops after two or three hours refreshment to
go forth into the Champaig^e, every Trooper taking with him some Oats and
other refreshment both for himself and his horse, placing the Corpse de Guard
where it shall be thought fitting (but if the weather be rainie and
tempestuous, which requires the Cavalrie to be under some shelter) every
Officer by turns shall visit the houses where the troops are quartered, causing
them to saddle their horses, calling and Knocking aloud: and so by that means
keeping them waking and in readiness, if that the Enemy shall chance to give
an Alarm.

Sentinels are used for no other purpose but to give the rest of the body the
more opportunity to provide themselves, when the enemy shall make any approach,
and are usually placed two together, the one standing whilst the other goes and
acquaints the Corpse de Guard of all the Occurrences that they shall discern:
the Cavalrie never performs this service, but when the whole body is in the
field, and are for the most part placed at a great distance from the body, as
the Officer shall think fit near the meeting of diverse high ways, or the like.
And in unwalled Towns when there is no Infantrie there, but if there be
Infantrie there, they are to perform this service.

In the day time, they are to be placed on high hills, that are most co^venient
to descry all the Country round: In the night they are to be placed in the
Valleys or lower ground, being convenient for the discerning of any approches
from the Hills, they are not to stir from their places where they are set,
although invited by any opportunity of advantage, as they may conjecture,
which are sometimes stratagems of the Enemy on purpose to surprise them, till
the Officer that placed them come, or cause them to be relieved on pain of
death, because that many times the suprizall of the Sentinels proves the defeat
of the whole body, they are silently but vigilantly to observe all fires, or
the more then ordinary barking of Dogs, or firing of pieces, or trampling of
Horses, or hearing of voices or the like, all which they are to give speedy
notice of unto the Commander in Chief, in the Corpse de Guard, No Sentinel is
to alight off his Horse unless it be for natural necessity, and then but on
at once. The Round ought to be gone four times in a night, who are to see that
the Sentinels be vigilant and watchful, if the Sentinels be placed in the
fields or Champagne: four of the Round ought to be sent twice so far beyond
the Sentinels, as the Sentinels are from thee. Corpse de Guard for to discry all
Occurrences as before.

If the body lie encamped or in Garrison, or near the Enemies Quarters, the
placing of Sentinels will not be sufficient, but you must also send forth
Scouts to the number of twelve or more, who are all to be very well horsed and
commanded by an able Soldier, they are very silently to advance toward the
Enemies Quarters, some three or four hours march by several high ways four
or five to a way as occasion shall require, they ought not to alight upon any
occasion whatsoever, but to listen if they can hear any noise or rumor, or
the trampling of horses, or the like, which if they can descry not being
discerned themselves, shall send word s^cretly by one of the Soldiers to their
Quarters of the Enemies approach, afterward sending a second to confirm the
mess^ge of the f^^st, and so by little and little retreating themselves, but if
they be discried by the Enemy, and that the Enemy consists of a great body:
the Officer that commands in chief shall cause some house to be set on fire
near his Quarters, they of the Quarter knowing before the reason, that it is to
give notice of the Enemies near approach and great number, and coming within
hearing of Carbine shot, shall case some three or four Carbines to be
discharged, to gi^e them in the Quarter, the more opportunity to provide for
the Enemy, b^t if it fall out that your Scouts or discoveries abroad, or your
Sentinels at home be so hard charged by the Enemy, that they have no
opportunity to send word, but that the Enemy will enter the Quarter with them,
the said Scouts and Sentinels shall enter the Quarters by unusual ways, which
will give the Enemy occasion of suspense not knowing whether they may be drawn
into some unexpected great danger, and by firing of their Carbines with loud
cryings out arm, arm, cause the body to be the more active, and speedilie^ to
provide for the ch^rge of the Enemy. It is the policy of an enemy many times
to give false alarms for two reasons, first, to weary out your men by
continual night watches: and secondly, to cause your men by continual false
alarms to grow secure and careless, that so by that means they may have the
greater advantage by coming on them unawares, therefore it should be the
wisdom of the Commanders to give the alarm secretly without noise from one to
another, that so the Enemy may not boast of his putting you to trouble, but
only weary out himself. The fittest place for the Cavalrie to lie in Garrison,
is in the Frontier Towns toward the Enemy, that thereby the incursions of the
Enemy may be hindered, and your own friend the better secured, besides it gives
courage to brave sou^diers to be thus quartered, it were very good to appoint
them ordinary settled Garrisons, that so they may when occasion shall require,
leave their baggage behind them, and go into the field with less encumbrance,
and likewise be better acquainted with the Country and ways therebouts, at the
opening of the gates. Each morning it were fit that the horsemen should be sent
forth to discover round about whether the Enemy has planted any Embuscadoe
near, and for the better securing of those Scouts that shall be sen^ forth,
some pieces of Ordnance ought always to be kept ready at the Gates or other
places that may command round about. There ought none to be suffered to go
forth of the gates till the Scouts shall return, sometimes the enemy in
policy to invite you forth of your Garrison, having planted several
Emb^shcadoes, or other the like disadvanageable stratagems, will send forth a
party of horse near your Quarters to surprise ca^tail or the like, by that
means to draw you forth to regain this boo^y* therefore there must be great and
c^^tilus diligence used for this purpose, i^ your scouts sent forth and
returned, having not met with any of the country people, it is a sign that
the enemy has planted some Emb^shcadoe not far off; but if the Scouts do not
return at th usual time, it is an argument that they are su^prised by the
enemies ambushcadoe or the like.

It is necssary for a politic Commander, for the better atchieving of many
worthy designs to accommodate himself with several trusty spies; who faining
discontent for want of pay or the like, are to enter themselves in the enemies
service of the Cavalerie, who for the most part are best acquainted with the
sudain designs of the enemy, and to agree with these spies of the place under
what tree or the like; where they may convey their letters of intelligence,
giving them order when their advice is of greatest importance to come
themselves, these spies ought to be trusty, witty, and well rewarded, which
will cause them to expose themselves unto all hazards and dangers to give
intelligence.

The next thing considerable is the embatteling of a Regiment of horse, which
is to be considered two ways, that is, first by way of offense to assail a
Quarter, or to give the charge in fight: Secondly by way of defense, meeting
the enemy in marching or the like ordering of the Troops in battalia by single
combat, or else united in a gross body together. The best and most
advantageable way for the surprising of a Quarter, is to be secretly and
suddenly assailed, which may be performed after this manner, or the like. The
Regiment of horse consisting for the most part of seven Troops, who are to be
divided severally, the first Troop marching secretly without any forerunner,
coming near the enemies Quarters, and perceiving themselves to be discovered by
the enemies Sentinels shall suddenly without losing any time charge the
Sentinels, and enter the Quarters with them immediately surprising the Corpse de
guard, the second Troop immediately following, shall possess themselves of the
Alarm place, the third Troop shall strait ways possess themselves of the
Market place, the fourth Troop shall with speed run throvgh each street,
keeping the soldiers, in and thereby hinder them from mounting on horseback,
or uniting of themselves together, the fist Troop being entered, and hearing
where the greatest noise is, shall immediately repair thither and alight*
entering the houses, either put to the sword or take prisoners all whom they
shall find to be enemies. The rest of the body may place themselves in the most
convenient places on either side of the Town, for the better surprising of
those Soldiers that shall endeavor to escape through the gardens or other
back ways, by reason of the horses running through the Streets within the
Town, hindering them either to mount on horseback, or unite themselves
together. Now although your enemy consists of twice so much strength as your
selves, which sometimes will cause them to be the more secure and negligent in
their watches, yet will they not be able by reason of this secret and sudden
surprise to stand against you.

The next thing considerable is, to charge the enemy in the field in a united
or gross body, or else by single Troops, In fighting with the enemy in a
pitched field, with all your Forces united into one entire body, these things
are considerable, as the place, whether it be hilly or lev^l, as also that
there be sufficient rome behind you for a retreating place, so that you be not
straightened of ground, which many times proves a great disadvantage, likewise
you must always appoint troops of Reserve, which are not by any means to engage
themselves in fight till the first Troops have given the charge, and are
reasembled behind them to make ready again for the second charge, your
Curriassers if you have any are fit for Troops of reserve which gives a great
deal of courage unto the other Cavalrie, this must always be observed either in
gross bodies or in single Troops.

In gross bodies if you have field room enough, all the Troops are to be drawn
up into battalia, each being not above three deep, likewise each troop must be
at least a hundred paces distance behind each other for the better avoiding of
disorder, those troops that are to give the first charge being drawn up into
battle as before, are to be at their close order, every left hand man's right
knee must be close locked under his right hand man's left ha^^, as has bin
shown before. In this order they are to advance toward the Enemy with an easy
pace, firing their Carbines at a convenient distance, always aiming at their
Enemies breast or lower, because that powder is of an elevating nature, then
drawing near the Enemy, they are with their right hands to take forth one of
their Pistols out of their houlsters, and holding the lock up are most firing
as before, always reserving on Pistol ready charged, spann'd and primed in
your houlsters, in case of a retreat as I have shown before, having thus fired
the troops are to charge the Enemy in a full career, but in good order with
their swords fastened with a Riband or the like unto their wrists, for fear of
losing out of their hand, if they should chance to miss their blow, placing
the pomel^ on their thigh, keeping still in their close order, close locked as
before. Each single Troop or party meeting an equal number of the Enemy, are
to use the ^ame method and order as before, always appointing some of their
horse for a party of Reserve for the use as before, but if the Enemy exceed in
strength, and you also being not far from your gross body, it will ^e both
save and honorable to retreat, but if it be a great distance from your gross
body, you must then resolve to charge the enemy with good courage courageous
actions being oftentimes seconded with good success. If one single Troop met
another, your Enemy charging you in full career, you are suddenly to divide
your Troop in the middle: on Flank from the other, and so the Enemy being in
his full career, must either pass through and effect little, or else stopping
suddenly disorder his Troops, and thereby give you a fit occasion to wheel both
your Flanks inward, to charge him in the Rear. In full career, and then in all
probability, you will utterly ^out him. If one sing^e Troop and the like are
to encounter one Company of Foot, the p^ace of encounter is chiefly to be
marked, that is, that it be Champaigne ground, clear of Trees, Hedges, Ditches
or the like, and that there be room enough for the ^ncounter, or else the
Cavalrie are by no means to encounter the Infantrie, now if the foot be drawn
up into complete order, it will be very necessary for the Cavalry to have some
pretty stratageme, in the charging of the Foot: or else it will be very
difficult rou^ing of the foot, which may be performed after this manner or the
like, you are to divide your Troop or party into three Squadrons, each
Squadron having an able soldier to lead them, who are to charge in full career
all at one instant upon the Front Rear and Flank of the Foot. The Officer that
leads on the Squadron, that charges the Front; is to charg as the others in full
career, til he comes close unto the Pikes heads, and then suddenly stopping is
suddenly to command with an elevated voice, close your file or the like, which
sudden command being loud will sometimes cause those Pikes that stand charged
against the other two Squadrons, either in the Flank or Rear, to extend their
bodies toward the Front, which will give a fit advantage unto one of the
Squadrons to slip in between, and so make way for the other two Squadrons to
charge in, and utterly rout the Front, but you must always observe that this
stratagem must always be p^rformed suddenly and altogether as at one entire
motion. Thus having shown what an ordinary horsman needs to know, for I will
not presume to instruct Commanders, though there be some that make great brags
need instructions in martial Discipline, but I shall forbear to be larger for
the Reasons I have already shown.

FNIS.
An Appendix.
COurteous Friend,
Whosoever thou art, unto whose view these my unpolisht lines of young
Horsmanship shall come, let me beg this favor at thy hand, that thou make the
most favorable construstruction of those things which thou shall suppose,
although weakly to be erronius in this ensuing Tract, and if there be any that
shall prove positive errors, impute it rather to the unskilfulnesse of me the
unworthy Author, then unto the unwillingnesse of him whose only aim for the
public good has invited, to set forth this ensuing Discourse of Horsmanship.

I am very unwilling to be of the judgment of those men, whose pri^ate
positions themselves esteem to be infallible or unerring, but my self, shall
rather desire to submit unto the judgment of the judicious, I have for the most
part tendered a reason of each particular throughout the whole Tract if then
they shall seem empty and of no value, unto them who have bee^ more anciently
educated or longer inured unto the Discipline of Foreign States then my self.
I shall presume also to entreat this favor at their hands, that they would in
love as aiming at the public good, subscribe their contradictory Reasons,
which if authentic, I shall be willing to acknowledge mine error, and crave
their pardon, if not, let me friendly prevail withal men, who are inclinable
to find faults, though very unwilling to amend what is amiss, to suspend
their censure of him, who had rather be profitable to the State, then injurious
to any.

Thy loving Friend, JOHN VERNON.

THE AUTHORS APOLOGY.
Kind Reader,
I am forced to acquaint thee with one thing more, which is, that having passed
the copy out of my hand, the Printer without my privity, caused the
impressions of the several figures inserted, to be cut in wood, my self
having no knowledge thereof, was thereby disinabled of the giving directions
for their better, and more sircumspect cutting.

In the curious survey of these figures, thou may, find many mistakes, as in
the 3, 4, 5, 6. figures, not placed at their open Orders as they should have
been, in the doubling of Ranks by half files, or by bringers up, the file
leaders and bringers up should have been distinguished, by these two different
letters. (h^^) or the like, as I have leneally incerted in the copy. In the 14
figure, the omitting of the figures on the right flank, as in figure the 13,
the misplacing of the Rear piece in fig. 18. turning the heads of the a^hes the
contrary way (^) and some other mistakes both in the copy and figures, weich I
was not able to correct, by reason that the whole number of shects were printed
off before I had a view of them. All which mistakes, both in the copy and
figures, I humbly entreat thee to correct with thy pen as thou shall come at
them, supplying each defect by thine own industery, and thou shall always
command me, to the utmost of my power, to serve thee in what I am able.

Thine, John Vernon.

ERRATA.
To the Reader, line 22 for lately read largely l. 23 for the r. there. Page 1.
l. 4. for socet, fox, roe, r. sorell, Rone. l. 14 for the, r. that, p. 2. l. 1.
put in at. l. 6, put out no good. l, 8. for selves, r. self l. 11 for gird, r.
guide. l. 16. for shot r. ball, l. 26^ for stand, r spand. l. 27. for foced, r.
forced, l. 32 for behooves, r. behooves, l. 33 for these r. their. p. 3. l, 1
for p^rts, r. places. l. 27 put in the. l. 31 for annew, r. annuer. l, 32 put
in the, l. 33. for these r. there. p. 4. l. 18 for these r. those. l. 19 for
the Pistolers, r. their particuiar. l. 29. for these r. those, l. 31 put in
and. p. 5, l. 31 for conmmunicating r. communicate^ p. 6 l. 1. for place r.
places. l. 12. for resemble, r. reassemble. p. 7. l. 6. for the r. there. l.
26. for loud r. louder. l. 27. for it r. of its p. 8. l. 8. put in by. l. 16.
for cassets r. cussets. l. 17. for calves r. R^yns. l. 25. for har qubeses. r.
harbuy^sers. l. 26. for as r. arc, l. 27. put in A, l. 28. put in or, l. 29 put
out and. l. 29. for and spans, r. spanner, l. 29. ^ut in to. l. 34 for and cock
r. lock. p. 9. l. 3 for the r. there, l. 6. for for r. so. l. 10. for the, r.
there, l. 16. for the r. a. l. 29. for ever. r. every. p. 10. l. 14. for
Mu^qu^t r. musuetteir, l. 22. for the r. there. l. 23. for Army r. Arms, p
11. l. 1 for that r. the. l. 19. for our, r. one, l. 33 put out the use of
wheeling, two lines unto the word Reere, p. 12. l. 2. put in the, l. 5. for as
r. are. p. 13. l 6.7 put in the, l^ 18. for right r. left, p. 14. l. 5. put in
left. p. 15. l. 3, for render r. tender. p. 17. l. 1. for further, r.
something, p. 20 l. 2, for and r it. l 5 put out and*




