Behold this Publican, in the Temple praying;
Placed in the front, as of our book beginner:
The form of whose devotio^ was this saying,
O Lord be merciful to me a sinner.
God heard his suit; though short, it is not denied:
He came a sinner, but went justified.
Penitent publican at prayer in entrance to a church Private DEVOTIONS
Lord (...) merciful to me a (...)

London Printed for Geo: Badger and are to be sold at his shopp at St
Dunstons-Churchyard in fleetstreet (...)



PRIVATE DEVOTIONS, Digested into SIX LETANIES; I. Of Confession. II. Of
Deprecation. III. Of Supplication. IV. Of Thanksgiving. V. Of Intercession. VI.
For the Sick.


With Directions and Prayers For the Lords Day. Sacrament. day of Death.
Judgment.



And two daily Prayers, One for the Morning. Another for the Evening.


The thirteenth Edition.

London, Printed for H. Moseley at the Princes Arms in S. Paul's Church yard,
1654.

To the right Honorable, THOMAS Lo: COVENTRY, Baron of Ailesborough, and Lord
Keeper of the great Seal of England, etc.
My good Lord,
THe Law permitted a man that was not able to bring a lamb to the Altar, to
offer a pair of Turtle Doves, or two young Pigeons.

The Gospel commends Charity in a cup of cold water; and magnifies the devotion
and affection of the widow that cast in 2 mites into the Treasury.

I must ever acknowledge, that mine obligation to your Lordship might challenge
a volume; but wanting that, I have presumed to present you with this Manual,
and Enchiridion of private Devotions, the love and exercise whereof has
advanced your Lordship to public honor. It is but a little one, yet since it
was first presented to your hands, it has so thriven by your Lordships
patronage, that it has had many Editions and Additions. And I am glad of it,
for the bigger it grows, the better proportion it will carry with his service
that is

ever devoted to Your Lop in all Duty, Henry Valentine.

ORATION
Deo Sacrificium. Oranti subsidium. Daemonibus flagellum.
That is, PRAYER IS a Sacrifice to God. Succor to the soul. Scourge to the
devil.


Prayer is Clavis Diei. Sera Noctis.


1 A Key to open the Morning.

My voice shall thou hear in the morning.

O Lord, in the Morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up.
Psalm. 5.3.

Unto thee have I cried, o Lord, and in the Morning shall my prayer prevent
thee. Psalm. 81.13.

2 A lock to shut up the Evening.

At Evening will I pray, and cry aloud, and he shall hear my voice. Psa. 55.17.

Let my prayer be set forth before thee as Incense: and the lifting up of mine
hands as the evening sacrifice. Ps. 141.2.

Morning and Evening.

Aaron shall burn sweet incense every morning. And when he lights the Lamps
at Even, he shall burn sweet incense. Exodus 30.7, 8.

In the Morning sow thy seed, and in the Evening withold not thine hand: for
thou know not whether shall prosper, either this or that, or whether they
both shall be alike good. Ecc. 11.6.

I. CONFESSION OF SINS.
COnfession is a branch of prayer, which searches out our sins, and discloses
and spreads them open before the Lord, as Hezekiah did those letters which he
received from the King of Assyria: or as Josuah opened the cave of Makkedah,
and brought out the five Kings that were there hidden; so this opens the heart
and brings out our hidden and bosom sins to light and execution. And as the
opening of a vein rectifies the distempers of the body, so this cures the
maladies of the soul: for if we confess our sins, God is faithful and just
to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. In a word,
it is commanded by God, and practiced by the Saints, and Solomon makes it the
character of a righteous man, to accuse himself in the beginning of his prayer.
A man dreams when he is asleep, but cannot declare his dream till he awake.
Confession is a sign that we are awakned from the sleep of sin by the grace of
God.

I said, I will confess my transgressions to the Lord, and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin. Psalm. 32.5.

I have not covered my transgressions as Adam; by hiding mine iniquity in my
bosom. Job 31.33.

But I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me. Psalm. 51.3.

THE LETANY of Confession.
BEhold, I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin has my mother conceived me.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

When I was a child I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I thought
as a child, and as yet have not put away childish things from me.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

When I grew up, the lusts of the flesh grew too strong for me, they fought
against me, and prevailed; the cares of the world distracted me, the pleasures
of the world deceived me, the pride of life swelled me, desire of revenge
inflamed me, and sin reigned in my mortal body.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have given up the members of my body as weapons of sin, and instruments of
unrighteousness: my head to imagine mischief, my hands to work wickedness, my
tongue to swearing and blasphemy, my ears to filthy and corrupt communication,
my eyes to behold vanity, my feet to stand in the way of sinners, and to walk
in the counsel of the ungodly; so that from the crown of the head, to the sole
of the foot, there is no sound part in me.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have either omitted good duties, or done them slightly and wearily: I have
neglected the time of my visitation, I have not known in my day the things that
belong to my peace.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have offended thee, and trespassed my neighbor by my improvidence and
rashness, by my anger and intemperate speech; by my wilfulness, envy, malice
and uncharitableness.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have sinned in all them whom I have corrupted by my words, counsel, or
example: in all them whom I should have reproved, whom I might have reformed,
and did not.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have sinned in neglecting opportunities to visit the house and table of the
Lord, in unworthy and unprepared resort thither, in wandering and idle thoughts
there, either diverting me from the work of thy holy worship, or distracting me
in it.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have sinned in unreverent and unprofitable hearing thy Word, in cold and
careless invocation of thy Name, without zeal and holy affection, which turned
my prayers into sin.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have sinned by unthankful passing over thy many good favors, by slighting
them with an unhearty commemoration, so that my sacrifice of praise became the
sacrifice of fools.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have broken all my vows and purposes, I have not kept my solemn promises of
forsaking my sin, and amending my life.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have delaied my repentance, I have resisted the checks of mine own
conscience, I have quenched the motions of thy Spirit, I have put off the good
works, whereby I might have glorified thee, bettered my self, and benefited my
neighbor.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have corrupted the best of my thoughts, words, works, and ways, by
cherishing the corruptions of mine own nature, by entertaining the secret
temptations of Satan, and the open inticements of the wicked world.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have been an evil husband of the talent of grace which was committed to my
improvement; I have been an unthrift of that time which was lent me for
repentance, and the work of my salvation.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have belied my corrupt heart with fair semblances of goodness, and have
hypocritically deceived the good opinion of charity which believes the best; I
have boasted in the praise that I deserved not, to thy offense, who requirest
truth in the inward parts.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have overweened the measure of grace in my self, and corrupted it with my
pride: I have undervalued the goodness of my neighbor, and either have
lessened it with abatements, or depraved it with unjust imputations.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have heard and seen thee my God dishonored, my neighbor traduced and
wronged, and I have done right to neither: but either for fear of offense, for
partial affection, for base flattery, or ungodly modesty, or for uncharitable
envy I have forborne to arise in their just defense.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have not always sought the outward blessings of life by good means,
sanctified by prayer: I have not always received them with thanksgiving and
contentedness: I have not always used them with sobriety, nor dispensed the
over-measure with the piety and charity that I ought.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have not used my lawful pleasures so seasonably, so moderately, so
religiously, so thankfully as I ought, but I have offended thee my God in my
mirth.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have not sought peace with all men, nor always embraced it when it has been
offered: I have not loved mine enemy, nor blessed him that cursed me, nor done
good to him that meant or did me hurt: I have not given him such pardon as I
begged from thee for my self.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have sinned in vain thoughts, in vast desires, in ungodly hopes, in
unchaste dreams, in secret covetings of the goods or delights of my neighbor.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have sinned in the unconscionable practice of these sins without remorse or
repentance, or if any good motions of thy Spirit have bred in me a godly sorrow
for them, the next temptation has either replased me into the old, or
implunged me in some new sin.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have hid some of these sins as Adam, some of them I have excused with
pretenses, some I have denied against the testimony of my accusing conscience,
some I have wickedly maintained, none I have thoroughly repented and amended.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have committed many secret sins that I have not been aware of: I have sinned
in the best of my works, and intentions of piety and charity, even when I most
labored to do thee service.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

I have sinned all these ways, and done many evils that I have forgotten, many
that I have past over without consideration and repentance: and now what shall
I do to thee, O thou preserver of men, and Judge of the whole world?

Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

Have mercy upon me O Lord, according to thy loving kindness, according to the
multitude of thy tender compassions blot out all my offenses. Amen. Amen.

And that for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose most blessed name and words, we
conclude these our imperfect prayers, saying as he himself has taught us:

OUR Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Morning Prayer.
OLord our heavenly Father, almighty and everlasting God, which have safely
brought us to the beginning of this day, defend us in the same with thy mighty
power, and grant that this day we fall into no sin, neither run into any kind
of danger, but that all our doings may be ordered by thy governance, to do
always that is righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
LIghten our darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy great mercy defend
us from all perils and dangers of this night, for the love of thy only Son our
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost, be with us all evermore. Amen.

II. DEPRECATION.
DEprecation is a branch of prayer directed to God, either for the aversion and
prevention of an evil before it comes, or for the removing and taking it away
when it is come. And the evil which we deprecate may be either the evil of sin,
or the evil of punishment. When we either feel or fear an evil, we must not
with Eliah or Jonah sit down, and in a sullen humor wish our selves out of the
world, but we must pray as Christ did for his Disciples, Joh. 17.15. not that
he would take us out of the world, but that he would keep us from the evil. And
so doing, we have Gods promise not to be tempted above our strength. For either
he will abate the cross, or increase our strength to bear it; either he will
remove the temptation, or give us his grace, which is sufficient for us.

Deliver us from evil Luke 11.4.

Deliver me from all my transgressions.

Make me not the reproach of the foolish. Psalm. 39.

Remove thy stroke from me.

Deliver my soul from the sword: my darling from the dog.

Save me from the Lions mouth, from the horns of the Unicorns. Psalm. 22.20, 21.

THE LETANY of Deprecation.
FRom all the sins that I have done, and from all that I would have done, if
thy grace had not prevented and restrained me,

Good Lord deliver me.

From my close and bosom sins, and from those sins to which I am inclined by
nature, or enticed by company, or allured by pleasure and profit, or drawn by
the example of this evil world,

Good Lord deliver me.

From all the sins that I have felt in my conscience, and confessed with my
mouth, and bewailed with my heart, and begged pardon of thee with my tongue,

Good Lord deliver me.

From all the secret and unknown sins which my conscience has not felt, nor my
mouth confessed, nor my heart bewailed, nor my tongue begged pardon,

Good Lord deliver me.

From the whole corruption of my nature; from all the temptations of the Devil,
from the allurements of the world, from the lusts of the flesh and eyes,

Good Lord deliver me.

From all vanity of mind, dullness of understanding, perverseness of will,
crookedness of affections, deadness and hardness of heart, and from a benumbed,
blinded, or seared conscience,

Good Lord deliver me.

From all wandering imaginations, from all looseness of desires, from all
transgressions of thy holy and just commandments, and from the first motions to
any sin against thee or my neighbor,

Good Lord deliver me.

From relapsing into the sins that I have repented, from turning thy grace into
wantonness, from treading under foot the blood of thy covenant, from neglect
and contempt of the means of salvation,

Good Lord deliver me.

From all schism and heresy, from infidelity and apostasy, and from the sin
against the holy Ghost,

Good Lord deliver me.

From famine and scarcity, from plague and pestilence, and from all other thy
sore and heavy judgments, at this time and ever hereafter,

Good Lord deliver me.

From poverty and extreme necessity, from sickness and diseases in my body,
from grief and vexation of mind, from loss of liberty, goods, or friends, from
blemish and sca^dal of my good name

Good Lord deliver me.

From giving offense unadvisedly, and from taking offense unjustly,

Good Lord deliver me.

From thy wrath and indignation, from final despair of thy grace and pardon,
and from sudden death,

Good Lord deliver me.

From the sentence of condemnation, from the Lake of brimstone, from the chains
of everlasting darkness, from the worm that dies not, and the fire that shall
never be quenched,

Good Lord deliver me.

O Lord I beseech thee deliver my soul. Psalm. 116.4. Amen. Amen.

And that for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose most blessed name and words we
conclude these our imperfect prayers, saying as he himself has taught us:

OUR Father which art in heaven, etc.

Morning Prayer.
O Lord our heavenly Father, almighty and everlasting God, which have safely
brought us to the beginning of this day, defend us in the same with thy mighty
power, and grant that this day we fall into no sin, neither run into any kind
of danger, but that all our doings may be ordered by thy governance, to do
always that is righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
LIghten our darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy great mercy defend
us from all perils and dangers of this night, for the love of thy only Son our
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

THE grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost, be with us all evermore. Amen.

III. SUPPLICATION.
SUpplication is another branch of prayer, whereby we entreat of God that he
would give us such blessings as we want, or continue and enlarge such blessings
as we have received. And these blessings are either corporal or spiritual,
temporal or eternal. For such blessings as are spiritual and accompany
salvation, pray for them in the first place; First seek the Kingdom of God and
the righteuosness thereof; and we may pray for them absolutely: for the other
we must pray conditionally, with a reference and submission of our will to Gods
will, who best knows what is good for us. Not my will, but thine be done. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

O Thou that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come, Psalm. 65.2.

Lord hear my voice, let thine ears be attentive to my supplications. Psalm.
130.2.

Behold now that I have taken upon me to speak to the Lord, who am but dust and
ashes: O let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak.

THE LETANY of Supplication.
THat it may pleafe thee to fill mine heart and my mouth with thy praise all my
life long, for all thy faithfulness, and truth, and loving kindness showed to
me in the land of the living.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to give me a clear judgment to see my sins, holy
affections to hate and abhor them, true repentance to bewail and forsake
them, with a steadfast purpose and resolution against them for the time to come.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to wash me throwly from mine iniquities, and to
cleanse me from my sins, that I may be whiter then snow.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to apply to my conscience the obedience of the life,
and the sacrifice of the death of Jesus Christ for the assurance of thy favor,
and my pardon.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to create in me a clean heart, to renew a right spirit
within me, to give me truth in my inward parts, and to establish me with thy
free Spirit.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to give me such graces as I want, and to increase
those which I have, that I may grow from strength to strength, till I become a
perfect man.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to make me an instrument of thy glory, and to direct
all my thoughts, words, and works, for the enlargement and advancement of thy
Kingdom.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to establish in me the Kingdom of thy power to rule
and awe me; and the Kingdom of thy grace to sanctify me to the knowledge,
love, and obedience of thy will.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to enable me to do thy will with cheerfulness and
alacrity, with perseverance and constancy, as thy blessed Angels and Saints in
heaven do it.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to open thy full hand, and to bestow upon me the
necessaries of this life, and the fruits of the earth in due season, with the
continuance of health, liberty and peace.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to give me thy blessing with them: that I may use them
wisely, soberly, justly, charitably, thankfully, and contentedly.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless me in all the works of my calling with grace
and strength, to obtain, to keep, and to use a good conscience toward thee and
my neighbors to my lives end.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to sanctify my life, to sweeten my death, and to
raise up my body in the day of the Lo: Jesus.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

Finally, that it may please thee to give me my masters joy, my fathers
inheritance, the Crown of righteousness, the glory of the new Jerusalem, and to
satisfy me with that fullness of joy which is in thy presence.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

O Lord hear my prayer, and let my cry come unto thee. Amen. Amen.

And that for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose most blessed name and words, we
conclude these our imperfect prayers, saying as he himself has taught us:

Our Father which art art in heaven, etc.

Morning Prayer.
O Lord our heavenly Father, almighty and everlasting God, which have safely
brought us to the beginning of this day, defend us in the same with thy mighty
power, and grant that this day we fall into no sin, neither run into any kind
of danger, but that all our doings may be ordered by thy governance, to do
always that is righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
LIghten our darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy great mercy defend
us from all perils and dangers of this night, for the love of thy only Son our
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

THE grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost, be with us all evermore. Amen.

IV. THANKSGIVING.
Thanksgiving is a branch of prayer, which, like the Leper in the Gospel,
turns back to God with a confession and ^^^^^tiation of what (...) has done
for (...). And it is so necessary and ess^^tiall a part of Gods wo^ship, that
it is the very condition of the obligation, wherein God has bound himself by
his promise to hear us. Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver
thee, and thou shall praise me, Psalm. 50.15. so that if we praise him not, we
break the Covenant, and are usurpers upon all his blessings and deliverances.

Thy loving kindness is better then life: therefore my lips shall praise thee,
Psalm. 63.3, 4.

Thus will I magnify thee al my life; and lift up my hands in thy Name.

Seven times a day do I praise thee, Ps. 119.164.

My mouth shall show forth thy righteousness and thy salvation all the day
long: for I know no end thereof, Ps. 71.15.

While I live I will praise the Lord, I will sing praises to my God while I
have any being, Psalm. 146.2.

Bless the Lord, O my soul; and forget not all his benefits, Psalm. 103.2

O Lord open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise, Psalm.
51.15.

THE LETANY of Thanksgiving.
FOR the grace of Election, by which I was chosen according to the good
pleasure of thy will

My soul does magnify thee O Lord.

For the grace of Creation, by which I was made after thine image in
righteousness and holiness,

My soul does magnify thee O Lord.

For the grace of Redemption, by which I was recovered from the guilt and
dominion of sin, from the power of Satan, and the second death,

My soul does magnify thee O Lord.

For the grace of Vocation, wrought in me by the inward working of thy Spirit,
and the outward ministry of thy holy Word and Sacraments,

My soul does magnify thee O Lord.

For the grace of Justification, whereby I am clothed with the righteousness of
Christ Jesus

My soul does magnify thee O Lord.

For my measure of Sanctification, by which I am made a new Creature

My soul does magnify thee O Lord.

For my formation in the womb, my birth, my baptism, the illumination of my
understanding, the correction of my will, and all the spiritual graces received
from thee

My soul does magnify thee O Lord.

For the liberty of thy Word and Sacraments, for thy sanctuary and solemn
assemblies, and for thy gracious presence with us in them

My soul does magnify thee O Lord.

For thy constant providence in supplying my necessities, and defending me from
dangers

My soul does magnify thee O Lord.

For my good parents, my education, my health liberty, and peace, for the
comfort of my friends, for my daily bread, and for all thy temporal blessings

My soul does magnify thee O Lord.

For thy prevention of evils, subvention in evils, and deliverance from evil

My soul does magnify thee O Lord.

For thy patience in forbearing, for thy mercy in forgiving, for thy bounty in
giving, even when I sinned against thee with a high hand

My soul does magnify thee O Lord.

For my life, and the season given me for repentance and good works, and for
thy holy means of grace and salvation

My soul does magnify thee O Lord.

For the checks of mine own conscience, for the instruction of thy word, for
the motions of thy good Spirit which have either restrained me from sin, or
caused me to repent of it

My soul does magnify thee O Lord.

For thy fatherly corrections by some spiritual conflicts with Satan, by
diseases, or hurts in my body, by griefs of mind, loss of goods, molestation
of injuries, discomforts for, or from those to whom natural, civil, or
Christian acquaintance had indeared me

My soul does magnify thee O Lord.

For all the holy Patriarchs and Prophets for the ever blessed Mother of our
Lord, for all the holy Apostles and Evangelists, for all the godly Bishops and
Pastors of the Church, for all the noble Army of Martyrs, and Confessors, and
for all the faithful that have lived and died in the Lord

My soul does magnify thee O Lord.

For the happy translation of all Saints departed in peace, from this vale of
tears to the inheritance of the just

My soul does magnify thee O Lord.

For thine holy Angels; and the charge which thou have given them to minister
unto us, to pitch their tents about us, to keep us in all our ways, and to
convey our souls into Abraham's bosom,

My soul does magnify thee O Lord.

For Jesus Christ the author and finisher of our faith, and the fountain and
foundation of all these favors;

For his conception and birth;

For his circumcision and baptism;

For his fasting and temptation;

For his doctrine and miracles;

For his agony and bloody sweat;

For his cross and passion;

For his death and burial;

For his victorious descension into hell;

For his glorious resurrection and ascension into heaven;

For his sitting at the right hand of God to make intercession always for us;

For his sending the holy Ghost to a bide with his Church for ever, and for his
being with us to the end of the world

My soul does magnify thee O Lord.

For thy blessed Spirit the enlightner of my understanding, the sanctifier of
my will, the helper of my infirmities, the comforter of my conscience, the
pledge and witness of my adoption, and the seal of my salvation

My soul does magnify thee O Lord.

For all my personal and particular deliverances; for the religion, peace,
plenty, strength, and honor of the State wherein I live; for saving it all
times, especially from the Spanish invasion, and the Popish powder treason

My soul does magnify thee O Lord.

For all the secret favors which thou have done for us, for all the mercies
which we have received from thee, and are slipped out of our remembrance, and for
all the goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee, and love thy
coming

My soul does magnify thee O Lord.

What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits toward me?

I will take the cup of salvation and call upon the Name of the Lord, Psalm.
116.12.

I will sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever: with my mouth will I make
known thy faithfulness to all generations, Ps. 89.1.

Let them that fear the Lord, say always, The Lord be praised.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end.

Amen. Amen.

And that for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose most blessed name and words we
conclude these our imperfect prayers, saying as he himself has taught us:

OUR Father which art in heaven, etc.

Morning Prayer.
OLord our heavenly Father, almighty and everlasting God, which have safely
brought us to the beginning of this day, defend us in the same with thy mighty
power, and grant that this day we fall into no sin, neither run into any kind
of danger, but that all our doings may be ordered by thy governance, to do
always that is righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
LIghten our darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy great mercy defend
us from all perils and dangers of this night, for the love of thy only Son our
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost, be with us all evermore. Amen.

V. INTERCESSION.
Intercession is abranch of prayer, extending and enlarging our desires for
others: as we see in Abraham, who interceded for Sodom, and Mases for Israel,
and Samuel for Saul. And this duty is very acceptable to God for necessity
constrains us to pray for our selves, but charity moves us to become
petitioners for others. And the prayer of charity is more acceptable to God,
then the prayer of necessity. Again, it is very profitable for us; for though
our prayers should not profit them, yet they will profit us; for they shall be
turned into our own bosoms, Psalm. 35.13.

Si pro te tantum roges, pro te tantum rogabis: Si autem pro omnibus roges, pro
te omnes rog abunt. Amb. l. 1. de Cain, etc. cap. 1.

I exhort therefore that first of all supplication, prayers, intercessions, and
giving of thanks be made for all men; for this is good and acceptable in the
sight of God our Savior, 1 Timothy 2.1, 3.

And pray always with all manner of prayer and supplication in the spirit: and
watch thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all Saints. And for
me, that utterance may be given unto me, that I may open my mouth boldly to
publish the secret of the Gospel. Ephesians. 6.18, 19.

Is any sick among you? let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them
pray over him. And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall
raise him up, and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him,
James 5.14, 15.

But as for me, when they were sick my clothing was sackcloth: I humbled my
soul with fasting, and my prayer returned into mine own bosom, Psalm. 35.13.

Peter was kept in prison, but earnest prayer was made of the Church for him,
Acts 12.5.

Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee, Psalm.
122.6.

THE LETANY of Intercession.
THat it may please thee to bless thy Church militant here on earth, to
preserve the purity of doctrine, the due administration of the Sacraments, and
the preaching of thy Word, that the gates of hell may not prevail against it.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to purge it from schism and heresy, and to reconcile
all unhappy differences, that we may keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond
of peace.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to fence it about with the wall of thy providence, to
infatuate the counsel, and to disperse the powers and projects of all those
that wish evil unto Sion.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless that part of thy Church wherein thou have
planted me, and to whose breasts thou have applied me, with peace and plenty,
with a free exercise, and reverent esteem of all thine ordinances.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless our gracious King Charles, our royal Queen
Mary, our hopeful Prince Charles, and all others that are derived from that
same sacred stock, or ingraffed into it.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless the government and preaching of the Clergy,
make them painful in their Ministry, and exemplary in their lives, that they
may save themselves and those that hear them.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless the Council with wisdom, the Judges with
integrity, the Magistrates with courage, the people with obedience, and our
Armies with strength and victory.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless all schools and seminaries of learning and
religion; especially the two Universities of this Land.

I beseech thee to he are me good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless all those that are near and dear unto me by
the bond of nature, or Christian acquaintance.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless all those that have been instruments of my
good, and are yet living: Such as have educated and instructed me: Such as have
counseled and advised me: Such as have clothed and fed me: such as have
reproved and corrected me when I sinned.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to remember the reformed Churches beyond the seas, to
repair the ruins and desolations which her enemies have made in her, to reduce
such as are banished, to enlarge such as are imprisoned, to relieve such as are
impoverished, and to comfort such as are persecuted for the testimony of a good
conscience, and the truth of thy Gospel.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to raise up such as are dejected with the guilt of
their own consciences, with the horror of their fins, with the apprehension of
thy wrath, with the weakness of their graces, or jealousies of thy mercy, and
to say to their souls, that thou art their salvation.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to prosper and assist all those that jeopard their
lives for the maintenance of the Gospel, go forth with their Armies, cover
their heads in the day of battle, and bring them home with honor and victory.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless all women with child with safe deliverance,
all young children with a godly and religious education, the Seaman with a
prosperous voyage, the Husbandman with a plentiful harvest, the captive with
patience and deliverance, and all prisoners with repentance and amendment.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to instruct the ignorant, to convert the obstinate, to
confirm the righteous, to comfort the distressed, to bind up the
brokenhearted, to rectify those that err, and to reduce them that wander,
into the right way.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to remember thine ancient people the Jews, to open
their eyes that they may see him whom they have pierced, and believe in him.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee in thy good time to bring in the fullness of the
Gentiles, and to reveal the glorious light of thy Gospel to such as yet sit in
darkness and in the shadow of death.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to forgive those that persecute and speak evil of me,
those that injure and molest me, those that slander and traduce me, and to
soften the hearts of all those that are mine enemies.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

O Lord hear my prayers for my self: O Lord hear my prayers for others: O Lord
hear the prayers of thy Son Jesus Christ for us all, who sits at thy right hand
making intercession for us, and has taught me to come to thee in this most
perfect and absolute form of prayer:

OUR Father which art in heaven, etc.

Morning Prayer.
O Lord our heavenly Father, almighty and everlasting God, which have safely
brought us to the beginning of this day, defend us in the same with thy mighty
power, and grant that this day we fall into no sin, neither run into any kind
of danger, but that all our doings may be ordered by thy governance, to do
always that is righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
LIghten our darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy great mercy defend
us from all perils and dangers of this night, for the love of thy only Son our
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

THE grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost be with us all evermore. Amen.

A peculiar Letany to be used by, or for sick persons; Collected out of
several places and passages of holy Scripture.
IN those days was Hezekiah sick unto death.

Then turned he his face unto the wall, and prayed unto the Lord.

And Hezekiah wept sore. And the Lord said, Behold, I will add unto thy days
fifteen years, Isaiah 38.1, 2, 3.

THE LETANY.
O God the Father of heaven, whose property it is to kill and to make alive, to
wound and to heal, to bring down to the grave, and to raise up again,

Have mercy upon me.

Thou who did heal Naaman of his leprosy, David of his noisome disease, Job
of his ulcers, Hezekiah of his desperate sickness,

Have mercy upon me.

O Christ the Son of God, who made the blind to see, the dumb to speak, the
deaf to hear, and the lame to walk,

Have mercy upon me.

Thou who did cure Peter's wives mother of her fever, the Centurions servant
of his palsy, the ten Lepers of their leprosy, and did help such as were
possessed with Devils,

Have mercy upon me.

Thou who did cure her that was diseased with an issue of blood twelve years,
and her that was bowed together eighteen years, and him at the pool of Bethesda
that had an infirmity thirty and eight years,

Have mercy upon me.

Thou who did restore to life the daughter of Jairus, and the widows son, and
raised up Lazarus out of his grave,

Have mercy upon me.

Thou who did bear our sicknesses and sorrows, thou who have styled thy self
the Physician of the sick, thou who have called all such as are weary and heavy
laden to come unto thee, promising them ease and refreshment,

Have mercy upon me.

By thy fasting and watching, by thine hunger and thirst, by thy grief and
sadness, by thy agony and bloody sweat, by thy cries and tears, by thy Cross
and Passion,

Have mercy upon me.

That it may please thee, who did cure many diseases by Peter's shadow, many
sicknesses by Paul's handkerchief, the eyes of the blind with clay and spittle,
the leprosy of Naaman with the water of Jordan, and raisedst up the dead by
the bones of thy Prophet; to bless all those means that are or shall be used
for my recovery.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to give me grace to submit my self wholly to thy will;
to take thy visitation with patience and thankfulness, and to drink of this
bitter cup without murmuring or repining.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to streng then me against all the temptations of the
devil, to succor me in all the agonies and conflicts of mine own conscience,
and to lay no more upon me then thou shall enable me to bear.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee to continue unto me my memory and understanding, my
speech and senses, the comforts and graces of thy holy Spirit, that I fall not
away from thee.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee, if it be thy will, to give me a longer time of
repentance, to rescue me from the gates of the grave, to spare me a little
before I go hence, and be no more seen, that I may still praise thee in the
land of the living.

I beseech the to hear me good Lord.

That it may please thee, if thou have appointed me for death, to fit and
prepare me for it; to strengthen my faith, to pardon and forgive me all my
sins, and to assure me of my salvation, that I may render up my soul with
comfort and cheerfulness.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

Finally, that it may please thee when I have rendered it up, to receive it into
thy hands, to deliver me from the pangs of everlasting death, and to set open
unto me the gates of everlasting life.

I beseech thee to hear me good Lord.

Psalm. 6.2, 4, 5.

Have mercy upon me O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord heal me, for my bones are
vexed.

Return O Lord, deliver my soul, O save me for thy mercies sake.

For in death there is no remembrance of thee: and who shall give thee thanks
in the pit?

Psalm. 38.

Thine arrows stick fast in me: and thy hand presses me sore, ver. 2.

There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger; neither is there
any rest in my bones, because of my sin, ver. 3.

For mine iniquities are gone over my head, as an heavy burded they are too
heavy for me: ver. 4.

My wounds stink, and are corrupt, because of my foolishness, ver. 5.

I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly: I go mourning all the day long, ver. 6.

My loins are filled with a loathsome disease, and there is no soundness in my
flesh, ver. 7.

I am feeble and sore broken, I have rored by reason of the disquietness of my
heart, ver. 8.

Lord, all my desire is before thee, and my groaning is not hid from thee, ver.
9.

Forsake me not O Lord, O my God be not far from me, ver. 21.

Make haste to help me, O Lord my salvation, ver. 22.

DIRECTIONS for the Lords Day.
HE that would spend a Sunday well, (living where he has the liberty of Gods
house and Ordinances) must do something before Church, something at Church,
something after Church.

Before Church.
1. So soon as we awake, we should have our hearts affected with the majesty
and solemnity of the day, putting a difference betwixt it and others,
considering that it is The Lords day. An holy day. An honorable day.


Great is the honor of this day above others.

God the Father honored it.

On this day he formed the elements of the world.

On this day he created the Angels.

On this day he first rained Manna upon the Israelites.

God the Son honored it with his glorious resurrection, with his gracious
apparitions after he was risen. For

On this day he appeared to the two Mary's that came to the Sepulcher, Matthew.
28.1, 9.

On this day he appeared to his Disciples assembled together, Thomas then not
being present, John 20.19.

On this day he appeared again to his Disciples, Thomas being with them, Joh.
20.26.

On this day S. John saw him walking in the midst of the seven golden
Candlesticks, Rev. 1.10, 13.

God the holy Ghost honored it.

On this day he descended upon the Apostles in a golden shower of all spiritual
gifts and graces. Since which time, The Church has honored it, and made it
the day of their solemn Assemblies, Acts 20.7.

What God and his Church has thus honored, that do not thou profane.

Secondly, we must lay aside the cares of the world, and the works of our
ordinary callings, leaving them behind us, as Abraham did his servants when he
went to offer his sacrifice upon Mount Moriah.

Thirdly, we must cleanse our selves by confession and repentance, for
otherwise our prayers in the Church will not be acceptable to God, nor his
ordinances profitable to us.

Will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense
unto Baal, and walk after other gods, whom ye know not, and come and stand
before me in this house? Jer. 7.9, 10.

Shall I be enquired of by you, o house of Israel? As I live, says the Lord, I
will not be enquired of by you, Ezekiel. 20.31.

God hears not sinners: but if any man be a worshipper of him, and does his
will, him he hears, John 9.31.

The Lord had respect unto Abel, and his offering: But unto Cain and his
offering he had not respect, Genesis 4.4, 5.

I will wash my hands in innocence, and so will I compass thine Altar, Psalm.
26.6.

Hence was it that the Jews writ over the doors of their Synagogues this saying
of David, This is the gate of the Lord, the righteous shall enter into it,
Psalm. 118.20.

And now being thus qualified and prepared, go unto the house of God, and in
the way meditate of some of these sentences:

One thing I have desired of the Lord that I will seek after: that I may dwell
in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the
Lord, and to enquire in his Temple Psalm. 27.4.

I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go up unto the house of the Lord,
Psalm. 122.1.

We will go unto his Tabernacles, we will worship at his footstool, Psalm. 132.7.

My soul longs, yea even faints for the courts of the Lord, Psalm. 84.2.

A short morning Prayer for the Sunday.
O Most glorious, and immortal God, the eye of whose providence does never
slumber, I yield thee humble and hearty thanks that thou have preserved me from
the perils of the night past, and brought me safe to the light of this day, and
the comforts thereof. It is a day holy and honorable, a day which is
consecrated to thine own service, and set apart for thine own honor: Let my
heart therefore, gracious God, be so affected with the glory and majesty of it,
that I may not do mine own works, nor seek mine own pleasure, nor speak mine
own words; but may wait upon thee in the use of thine ordinances, and discharge
those weighty duties which thou requirest of me.

Now forasmuch as thou art a God of pure eyes, and wilt be sanctified in all
those that draw near unto thee, a God who regardest not the sacrifice of fools,
nor hear sinners though they tread in thy courts, and call upon thee in the
House of prayer; I beseech thee to pard on and forgive me all my sins, remove
them out of thy presence, as far as the East is from the West: accept of me in
the death and passion of thy Son Jesus Christ, that when I shall come into thy
Temple, to compass thine Altar, my prayer may come up before thee as incense,
and the lifting up of my hands as the evening sacrifice. And as I desire that
thou would hear me calling upon thee in my prayers, so give me grace to hear
thee calling upon me in thy word. It is the word of truth, of wisdom, of
righteousness, of reconciliation, and that Word which is able to save my soul
in the day of the Lord Jesus; grant therefore that I may hear it with
reverence, receive it with meekness, and mingle it with faith, that it may
accomplish in me that good work for which thou have sent it.

And that this day may be every where a day of holiness unto thee; sanctify,
and prepare the hearts of all thy people for thy service, fill the places of
thy worship with thy glory, be present with the assemblies of thy Saints, open
the mouths of thy Ministers, and second the ministry of thy word by the
efficacy of thy Spirit, that it may be powerful to the casting down of the
strong holds of sin, and Satan, to the advancing and enlarging of thy Kingdom,
to the edifying and building up of thy body the Church, and to the perfecting
of thy Saints, till we all come to the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge
of the Son of God, to a perfect man: Thou o God who art able to do exceeding
abundantly for us, above all that we can ask or think, hear me, and answer me,
even for the sake of thy dear Son Jesus Christ: to whom, with the Father, and
the blessed Spirit, be ascribed and given all power, praise, might, majesty and
dominion now and evermore. Amen.

At Church.
COnsider first the place where thou art; it is The gate of heaven
Holy ground
The house of God
Josh. 5.15. Genesis 28.17.

O how amiable are thy tabernacles, o Lord of Hosts! A day in thy Courts is
better then a thousand. Blessed are they that may dwell in thy house, Ps. 84.1,
4, 10.

Then be careful to discharge those duties which God there requires of thee,
and they ordinarily are two; 1. Prayer. 2. Hearing the Word.


In prayer, first look to the devotion of thy soul. It must be the lifting up
of the soul, Psalm. 25.1.

The pouring out of the soul, 1 Samuel 1.15.

A strong crying, Heb. 5.7.

A wrestling with God. Hos. 12.4.

Without this thy prayer will be but babbling, Mat. 6.7.

The howling of a dog, or wolf, Hos. 7.14.

A bell without a clapper.

A pile of wood without fire.

A bullet without powder.

A bird without wings. A cloud without water. A tinkling cymball.

The Jews writ this sentence also over the doors of their Synagogues, and
Oratories, Prayer without intention, is as the body without the soul.

Then in the next place, look to the reverence of thy body.

God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the Saints: and to be had in
reverence of all them that are about him, Psalm. 89.7.

Uncover thy head.

The four and twenty Elders fell down before him that sat on the throne,
casting their crowns from their heads. Rev. 4.10.

Bend thy knee.

O come let us worship and bow down: let us kneel before the Lord our Maker.
Psalm. 95.6.

The other duty is the hearing of the word read and preached, which requires of
us,

First, attention.

Speak Lord, for thy servant hears, 1 Samuel 3.10.

Hearken O daughter and consider, and incline thine ear, Psalm. 45.10.

I will hear what God the Lord will speak unto me, Psalm. 85.8.

The Lord opened the heart of Lydia, that she attended unto the things that
were spoken by Paul, Acts 16.14.

He that has an ear let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches,
Rev. 2.11. My sheep hear my voice, John 10.27.

And for this end we must consider it is The word of God, 1 These. 2.13. The
word of Grace, Act. 14.3. The word of truth, John 17.17. The word of
reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19. The word of righteousness, Heb. 5.13. The word of
faih, Romans 10.8. The word of etenal life, John 9.68.


That it is Good seed, Mark 4.


Sincere milk, 1. Pet. 2.2. Strong meat, Heb. 5.14.

That it is

A wholesome word, 2 Timothy 6.3.

A lively word, Heb. 4.12.

A good word, Heb. 6.5.

That it is

Better then thousands of gold and silver. Psalm. 119.72.

Sweeter then the honey, and the honey comb. Psalm. 19.10.

And all this, because it is that word which is able to save our souls. Jam.
1.21.

Secondly, the hearing of the Word requires retention as well as attention.

Therefore ye shall lay up these my words in your heart, and in your soul,
Deuteronomy. 11.18.

Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not sin against thee, Psalm.
119.11.

Mary kept all these sayings in her heart. Luke 2.51.

And lastly, people must be here admonished not to depart from the Church till
the Minister has pronounced the blessing.

All the people departed every man to his house, 1 Chronicles. 16.42.

But it was after David had made an end of offering the burnt offerings and the
peace offerings, and had blessed the people in the name of the Lord, ver. 2.

Surely there is something in the blessing of the Minister. Then the Priests
and the Levites arose, and blessed the people: and their voice was heard, and
their prayer came up to his holy dwelling place, even unto heaven, 2 Chronicles.
30.37.

Leave not then thine Angel, till he has given thee a blessing.

AFTER CHURCH.
AND now being come home, it is thy duty yet further,

1. To meditate upon such things as have been taught thee.

His delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in that Law does he meditate day
and night, Psalm. 1.2.

O how I love thy Law! it is my meditation all the day, Psalm. 119.97.

I have more understanding then all my teachers: for thy Testimonies are my
Meditation, verse. 99.

My meditation of him shall be sweet, Ps. 104.34.

My heart was hot within me, while I was musing, the fire burned. Psalm. 39.3.

The beasts that chewed not the cud were unclean.

Secondly, thou must praise God for so much of the means as he was pleased to
afford thee that day.

Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things, Ephesians. 1.3.

As the liberty of his house;

The comfort of his Day;

The communion of his Saints;

The instruction of his Word;

The dispensation of his Sacraments;

The gifts of his Ministers.

Thirdly, we must pray for a blessing upon the means of our salvation.

He only it is that can put his Law in our inward parts and write it in our
hearts, Jer. 31.33.

Paul may plant, and Apollos water; but God gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3.6.

The excellency of the power is of God, and not of us, 2 Cor. 4.7.

Lastly, teach it thy family.

You shall teach them your children, talking of them when thou fittest in thine
house, and when thou walk by the way, when thou lie down, and when thou
risest up, Deuteronomy. 11.19.

I know him, that he will command his children and his household after him, to
keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment, Jer. 18.16.

I and my house will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15.

If thou do thus sanctify this Day of rest here, thou shall celebrate an
everlasting rest and Sabbath hereafter.

All manner of persons within the Church of England shall from henceforth
celebrate and keep the Lords day, commonly called Sunday, and other holy days,
according to Gods holy will and pleasure, and the orders of the Church of
England prescribed in that behalf; that is, in hearing the word of God read and
taught, in private and public prayers, in acknowledging their offenses to God,
and amendment of the same; in reconciling themselves charitably to their
neighbors, where displeasure has been; in oftentimes receiving the communion
of the body and blood of Christ; in visiting of the poor and sick, using all
good and sober conversation. Canon 13. of those 1603.

A short Evening Prayer for the Lords day.
O Most glorious God, and in Jesus Christ my merciful and loving Father: I
confess, and acknowledge those many weaknesses and imperfections which have
passed from me in the performance of the duties of this day. I have called upon
thee for the pardon and forgiveness of my sins, but so coldly and carelessy,
that my very prayers are become sins, and stand in need of pardon.

I have heard thy holy Word, but with such deadness, and distraction of
spirit, that I have been a very unprofitable and forgetful hearer. So that O
Lord, though I have done thy work, yet I have done it so negligently, that I
may rather expect a curse then a blessing from thee.

But O God, who art rich in mercy and plenteous in redemption; mark not what
amiss has passed from me, remember that I am but dust; pardon, and pass by
all my sins, negligences and ignorances, look not upon the weakness of my
flesh, but upon the willingness of my spirit, and so cover all my imperfections
with the perfect and absolute obedience of thy dear Son, that those Sacrifices
which I have offered up unto thee this day, may be accepted, in, and for that
sacrifice which Christ Jesus offered up upon the cross for me.

And as I desire that my sacrifices may be pleasing to thee, so let thine
ordinances be profitable to me. And as thou have this day sown my heart with
the precious seed of thy Word, so let neither the fowls of the air devour it,
nor the cares of the world choke it, but let the gracious rain of thy blessing
come often upon it, that it may bring forth in me the fruits of repentance and
amendment of life.

And forasmuch as thy Word is an unvaluable and inestimable treasure, better
then thousands of gold and silver, sweeter also then the honey and the honey
comb; blessed Lord God be pleased still to continue it to our Land and Nation,
let not our crying sins of unthankfulness, impenitency, hardness of heart, and
unfruitfulnesse under so great means of grace, cause thee to remove thy
candlestick, or to quench the light of our Israel. Inlighten also with the
beams of thy Gospel those nations which yet sit in darkness and in the shadow
of death: add unto thy Church daily such as shall be saved, that so these
sinful days being shortened, and the number of thine elect accomplished, we may
celebrate that eternal rest and Sabbath of our souls with thee in thy Kingdom.

Bless O Lord all the people of this land, from the highest to the lowest; our
King and Queen, our Prince, and the rest of the royal stock; our Ministers and
Magistrates, thy whole Church, and every member of it, in what place or case
soever: and prosper all designs and enterprises that are undertaken for the
advancement of the Gospel, and the enlargement of thy Kingdom.

Finally, O Lord, as thou have been good to me in the passages of this day,
refreshing my body with thy good creatures, and my soul with the spiritual
rest of this holy Day: so continue thy goodness to me this night, receive me
into the arms of thy providence, cover me with the feathers of thy wings, that
I may lay me down in peace, and take my rest, that being awakened to the
comforts of the next day, my mouth may be filled with thy praises; and I may
do thee service in the duties of that calling wherein thou have placed and
disposed of me: that so thy good blessing may be still upon me; and thou may
never be weary to do me good: all this, and what else thou know needful
and expedient for me, I beg in the name, merits, mediation, and words of thy
Son Christ Jesus, saying as he himself has taught me:

Our Father, which art in heaven, etc.

Directions for the due receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
WE may not presume to come to the Lords Table without a due and serious
preparation.

That which is holy must not be given to Dogs: neither must pearls be cast
before swine, Mat. 7.6.

Josiah charged the Levites to prepare themselves, and to pray for their
brethren, and so to kill the passover, 2 Chr. 35.4, 6.

The neglect of preparation is very dangerous.

After the sop Satan enters into Judas, John 13.27.

Whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily,
shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.27.

He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation unto
himself, 1 Cor. 11.29.

For this cause many are weak, and sickly among you, and many sleep, 1 Cor.
11.30.

Now this preparation consists principally in five things.

The first is a self-examination.

Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of
that cup.

1 Cor. 11.28.

The thing chiefly to be examined, is sin:

1. In thought:

The thoughts of our hearts are only evil, and that continually, Gen 6.5

Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, Mat. 15.19.

2. In word.

Idle words.

I say unto you, that of every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give
account thereof at the day of judgment, Mat. 12.36.

Filthy and immodest words.

Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, Ephesians. 4.22.

Angry and rash words;

As calling our borther Raca, or Thou fool, Mat. 5.29.

False and untrue words, as lies, slanders, defamations etc.

Whosoever loves, or makes a lie, is shut out of the new Jerusalem, Rev.
22.15.

Profane and impious words. Against GOD oaths and blasphemies.

Let your communication be yea, yea; nay nay; for whatsoever is more then these
comes of evil, Mat. 5.37.

Against our selves or others, as curses, imprecations, etc.

As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him.

As he clothed himself with cursing, like as with a garment: so let it come
into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones, Psalm. 109.18.19.

3. In deed.

This is either of

Omission, or

Commission.

Both are pointed at in that sentence of the Apostle:

The good which I would do, I do not:

But the evil which I would not do, that I do, Romans 7.19.

Thus you have the thing to be examined.

Now the rule of this examination must be the Law of God.

For by the Law is the knowledge of sin, Romans 3.20.

I had not known sin, but by the Law, Romans 7.7.

Hence it is that our Church (which has disposed all things wisely, and
sweetly in the Liturgy) has appointed the commandments to be read before the
admimstration of this Sacrament, that men might see their sins in the glass of
Gods Law.

The second thing required of a worthy receiver is Repentance and Contrition.

The Paschall Lamb was to be eaten with sour herbs.

And Christ our Passover must be received with a broken and a contrite spirit.

With a bitter soul.

With a weeping eye.

This bread must be eaten with the sweat of our brows, i.e. our tears.

And I may say of the wine in this Sacrament, as the Mother of Solomon said
unto him, Prove. 31.6.

Give this wine unto such as be of heavy hearts. And though in the sense of
our own unworthiness we may cry out with Paul, Who is fit for these things?

Yet we may comfort our selves with that of the Psalmist;

A broken and a contrite heart O God thou will not despise, Ps. 51.

The third thing required of a Comunicant, is Faith.

He must believe, that Jesus Christ is the Messiah, and Savior of the world.

He must believe, that he was crucified, and shed his blood.

He must believe, that the merits of his cross and passion are able to save
sinners.

He must believe; that these merits are conveyed to him in this Sacrament being
rightly administered, and duly received: For what was bequeathed in the
Testament, is dispensed in the Sacraments.

This faith is the wedding garment: he that intruded to the feast without it,
was bound hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness, Mat. 22

Fourthly, there is required a steadfast purpose and settled resolution against
sin for the trme to come.

The Church in the administration of this Sacrament calls such only, as intend
to lead a new life, to follow the Commandments of God, to walk from
thenceforth in his holy ways.

The Paschall Lamb was to be eaten by such only as were circumcised.

The Manna was to be put into a pot of pure gold. The body of Christ crucified
was wrapped in fine linen, and laid in a new Spulchre.

Sorrow for sin without resolution of amendment, is like the pumping in a Ship
without stopping the leak that lets in the water.

In the Law, if a man held the unclean thing still in his hand, he was unclean,
though he washed his hand never so often.

Fifthly, there is required Charity with all men.

The Paschall Lamb was to be eaten without leaven.

The Serpent disgorges his poison, when he coms to drink: Be as wise as
Serpents.

Let us keep the feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice,
1 Cor. 5.8.

If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother
has ought against thee:

Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to
thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift, Mat. 5.23, 24.

The three wise men went first to Jerusalem, and then to Bethlehem; first to
the vision of peace, then to the house of bread.

The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of
Christ?

The bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ?

For we being many, are one bread, and one body, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17.

The signs of bread and wine used in the Sacrament may teach us love and
charity.

Many grains are kneaded together into one loaf.

Many grapes are pressed together in one cup.

If thus thou have made thy peace with God, and the world, draw near, Taste and
see how sweet the Lord is, Psalm. 34.8.

Eat O friend, drink, yea drink abundantly, O beloved, Cant. 5.1.

A short Prayer before we receive the Sacrament.
O Most gracious and merciful Lord God, thou have called all those that are
weary and heavy laden with the burden of their sins to come unto thee, and
have promised that thou will ease and refresh them; thou have invited all those
that hunger and thirst after thy Kingdom, and the righteousness thereof, to
come to thy Table, to taste of thy Supper, and have promised that thou will
satisfy them.

In affiance therefore of these promises, I come to thee blessed Lord Jesus,
beseeching thee to ease me to refresh me, to satisfy me with thy mercy, for my
soul hungers and thirsts after thee, and thy salvation.

I confess and acknowledge that my daily sins have made me unworthy of my
daily bread; much more of this Manna, this bread of life, which came down from
heaven.

I confess also that I am not prepared according to the preparation of thy
Sanctuary; yet for as much as I have this day set my heart to seek thee, thou O
good God be merciful unto me.

And though I cannot bring with me a clean heart (for who can say his heart is
clean?) yet behold O Lord, I bring with me a contrite heart and a broken
spirit, despise not O God this sacrifice. As for the sins that I have
committed against thee, bind them up into one bundle, and cast them into the
bottomless sea of thy mercy, bury them in the wounds, and wash them away in
the blood of that immaculate Lamb Christ Jesus; and for the time to come so
sprinkle my conscience with the same blood, that being cleansed from dead works
I may serve thee the living God in righteousness and true holiness all the days
of my life. That so this blessed Sacrament may be a means to quiet my
conscience, to increase my faith, to inflame my charity, to amend my life, to
save my soul, and to assure me that I am in the number of those blessed ones,
who shall eat at thy table, and be called to the marriage supper of the Lamb.

Grant this O Lord for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose name and words I
conclude these my imperfect prayers, saying as he himself has taught me, Our
Father, etc.

At the receiving of this Sacrament.
IN the receiving of the Lords Supper many particulars would rather distract
us, then direct us; these few I suppose most considerable.

First, let thine eyes be upon the actions of the Minister, observe the
breaking of the bread, and the pouring out of the wine.

The breaking of the bread will mind thee how the body of Christ was bruised
and broken.

The pouring out of the wine will remember thee of the shedding of his blood.

It was shed for thee:

When he was circumcised.

When he was scourged.

When he sweat in the garden.

When he was crowned with thorns.

But especially, to which this Sacrament has immediate relation,

When he was nailed to the cross.

When his fide was pierced.

The blood of Christ cleanses us from all sins, 1 John 1.17.

It speaks better things then the blood of Abel, Heb. 12.24.

It is precious blood, 1 Pet. 1.19. And all this because it is the blood of
God, Acts 20.28.

Secondly, discern the Lords body, 1 Cor. 11.29.

We must consider the consecrated bread, not as the bread of the Lord, but as
that bread which is the Lord.

Not as our common, ordinary, and daily bread, but as the body of Christ
sacramentally.

We must consider the wine, not as the blood of the grape, but as the blood of
Christ in a true, yet sacramental manner.

Christ is truly present in the Sacrament; it is the eating of his flesh, and
the drinking of his blood, John 6.56.

Not naturally, and corporally.

This is an hard saying, who can hear it? Joh. 6.60.

The flesh profits nothing, the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit,
and life, Joh. 6.63.

Thirdly, receive it kneeling.

This gesture is most suitable.

It signifies an humble and grateful acknowledgement of those benefits we
receive in this Sacrament.

Again, the Minister when he gives, and we when we receive, join together in a
short, but sweet prayer.

The body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for thee, etc.

The blood of our Lord Jesus Christ which was shed for thee, etc.

No gesture so suitable for prayer as kneeling.

Again, it is appointed and ordered by the Church.

Let all things be done decently, and in order, 1 Cor. 14.40.

Though I be absent from you in the flesh, yet am I present with you in the
spirit, joying, and beholding your order, Col. 2.5.

After the receiving of this Sacrament.
WHen thou have been partaker of the Lords Supper;

First of all give thanks.

It is a duty which we owe for our ordinary suppers.

It was called the Eucharist, from this duty of thanksgiving.

It is the cup of blessing.

God blesses us, and we must bless God.

God gives us the cup of salvation, and we must take the cup of thanksgiving.

The Disciples when they had received it, sang an Hymn.

And an Hymn is a song of praise and blessing, Mat. 29.30.

Express thy thankfulness, in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs;
publicly in the congregation, privately in thine own family.

Psalms fit for this, are Psalm. 8. Psalm. 23. Psalm. 66. Psalm. 103. etc.

Secondly, as there must be thanksgiving to God; so there must be almsgiving to
the poor.

It was a custom in the Primitive Church, and is still continued in many
places, to have gatherings, and collections for the poor at the administration
of this Sacrament.

David's servants told Nabal that they came to him in a good day, for it was a
day of feasting, 1 Samuel 25.8.

This is a day of feasting to thee; Let it not be a day of fasting to thy poor
brethren.

God has fed thee with the bread of life, and can thou deny the crumbs of
bread that fall from thy table?

He has refreshed thee with the blood of his Son, with the wine of his
sanctuary, and can thou deny the drink of thy buttery, or a cup of cold water?

Give cheerfully.

God loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9.6,

Give liberally.

Consider how great a gift God has this day bestowed upon thee: His Son. His
begotten Son. His only begotten Son. His beloved Son. His dear Son, Col. 1.13.


Thirdly, take heed thou relapse not into thy old sins.

I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? Cant. 5.3.

If after we have escaped the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, we be again entangled therein and overcome;

If with the Dog we return to our own vomit again: or with the Sow that was
washed, to our wallowing in the mire;

The latter end will be worse with us then the beginning, 2 Pet. 2.20, 22

Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has
trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the Covenant
wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite unto the
spirit of grace? Heb. 10.29.

When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he says, I will return into my
house from whence I came out, and when he is come he finds it empty, swept,
and garnished. Then goes he, and takes with him seven other spirits more
wicked then himself, and they enter in, and dwell there. And the last estate of
that man is worse then the first, Mat. 12.43, 44, 45.

He that washes himself after the touching of a dead body, if he touch it
again, what avails his washing? Ecclus 34.25.

A short prayer after the receiving of this Sacrament.
O Most gracious God from whose bounty every good and perfect gift is derived,
I, and all that is within me, praise and magnify thy holy name for all the
mercies and favors which from time to time thou have bestowed upon me.

Especially I thank thee for thy Son Jesus Christ the fountain and foundation
of all blessings; that thou have sent him into the world to take our nature
upon him, and to die for us; and that thou have fed me who am unworthy of the
least of thy favors, with the precious merits of his death and passion.
Blessed Lord God, thou have been pleased this day to set thy seal to the pardon
and forgiveness of all my sins, oh let me not tear it off again by
unthankfulness, or relapsing into my old sins, from which thou have purged
me, lest my last end be worse then my beginning. But when hereafter I shall be
tempted by the devil, allured by the world, or provoked by mine own flesh, lay
before mine eyes by thy remembering Spirit how dear the expiation of my sins
cost my Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, even the effusion of his most precious
and sacred blood; that in the contemplation of his death, and application of
his most bitter passion, I may die daily unto sin, and so show the Lords death
till he come; That when he shall come, and bring his reward with him, I may
receive that crown of righteousness which he has purchased and prepared for
all those that love and expect the day of his appearing, with the precious
price of his incorruptible blood.

And whereas I have this day renewed my covenant with thee my God, in vows, and
purposes of better obedience, assist me by thy grace, and strengthen me by thy
power, that I may pay the vows which I have made unto thee; and that by virtue
of thy heavenly nourishment, I may grow up in grace and godliness, till at last
I come to be a perfect man in Christ Jesus, in whose most blessed name and
words, I conclude these my imperfect prayers, saying as he himself has taught
me:

O our Father, etc.

EVERY DAYS Considerations.
Consider 1. What good thou have done 2. What good thou daily do. 3. What
thou shall do hereafter.


Consider these in The Morning when thou risest. The Day when thou walk. The
Night when thou wakest.


These Considerations well meditated on, will the better prepare thee for these
ensuing meditations of Death.

SECTION I. Meditations of Death.
THE life of a Christian is or should be a continual meditation of death.

The flight of a Bird is directed by her train, the course of a ship is steered
by the helm, so is the life of a man ordered by the serious apprehension of his
last end.

The first man was called Adam, which signifies a piece of red earth.

He was clothed in the skins of dead beasts.

He was adjudged to the earth, to dig, and delve in it. God would have his
name, his garments, his imploiment continual remembrancers of his grave, and
monitors of his mortality. It is reported by the Ancient Fathers, that the
people of God used the 90. Psalm in form of a daily prayer.

In which Psalm there is a long acknowledgment of the shortness of our lives:
and this petition to God:

So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom, ver.
12.

Oh that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider
their later end. Deuteronomy. 32.29.

Whatsoever thou take in hand, remember the end, and thou shall never do
amiss, Eccles. 7.36.

CAP. I. That the meditation of death is profitable against pride.
NEbuchadnezzars Image had a head of gold, breast and arms of silver, belly and
thighs of brass, but feet of clay.

Whatsoever thy wealth, wisdom, birth, beauty, state or strength be, thy
foundation is in the dust, Job. 4.19.

There is a great difference betwixt a Cedar and a shrub; a Vine and a bramble,
so long as both grow: but cut them down, and burn them, and there will be no
difference in their ashes.

Chess-men are distinguished upon the board whilst the game is playing, but
being done, they are tumbled into a bag without order.

In this life some are set upon the throne: others are grinding at the mill.

Some are clothed in purple, and fare deliciously every day: others lie at the
gates and have not so much as the crumbs of their Tables.

But in the grave rich and poor meet together, and the ulcers of Lazarus will
make as good dust as the paint of Jezabel.

Saul being anointed King over Israel, was appointed to go to Rachels
sepulcher: that the sight of a Sepulcher might allay the haughtiness of his
new honor, 1 Samuel 10.2.

Kings must pile up gaeir Crowns at the thtes of the grave, and lay down their
Scepters at the feet of death.

The daughters of Jerusalem, which are haughty, walking with stretched forth
necks, and wanton eyes, mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their
feet, must drop into the grave, where in stead of sweet smells there shall be
stink: and in stead of well set hair, baldness, Isa. 3.16, 24.

They that glory in their Ancestors, in the nobleness of their birth, and
blood, must make their bed in the dark, and acknowledge corruption for their
father, and the Worm for their mother and sister, Job 17.14.

I have said, Ye are gods, and all of you are children of the most high: but ye
shall die like men, Psalm. 82.6, 7.

Why then art thou proud, O Dust and Ashes!

Nulla discretio inter cadavera mortuorum, nisi quod gravius foetent divitum
corpora distenta luxuria. Amb. Hexam. l. 6. c. 8. CAP. II. It is profitable
against covetousness.
THe rich man in the Gospel when he had built his barns, and inned his harvest,
was called away and carries nothing with him of all the store he had provided,
Luke 12.

The Spider spins out her own bowels, to make a Cobweb, and presently a maid
comes with a broom and sweeps it down.

Horses at night are unladen of their burdens, and turned into a dirty Stable
with a galled back: So are rich men into the grave, and for the most part with
a galled conscience.

A Mill wears it self with grinding, and though it turn about continually, yet
it removes not out of its place.

It is but in vain for men to rise up early, and to sit up late, and to eat the
bread of carefulness. For naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall
I return thither, Job 1.21.

I hated all the labor which I had taken under the Sun, because I should leave
it unto the man that shall be after me; And who knows whether he shall be a
wise man or a fool? Yet shall he have rule over all my labor wherein I have
labored, and wherein I have showed my self wise under the Sun. This is also
vanity, Ec. 2.18, 19

Surely every man walks in a vain show, surely they are disquieted in vain:
he heapeth up riches, and knows not who shall gather the^, Ps. 39.6.

We brought nothing with us into this world, and it is certain we can carry
nothing out of it, 1 Timothy 6.7.

Why then art thou coveteous O Dust and Ashes!

Facile contemnit omnia, qui se semper cogitat moriturum, Jeron. in Ep. ad
Paulin. CAP. III. It is profitable against Lust.
THe Prodigal seeing many spectacles of mortality by reason of the great
famine, leaves his concubines, and riotous living, and returns again to his
Father, Luke 15.

One going to the stews meets by the way a dead corpse carried to the grave: the
sight whereof made such an impression in him, that he goes back again; and ever
after lived chaste and continent.

Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies, that ye should obey it in the
lusts thereof, Romans 6.12.

I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts which war
against the soul, 1 Pet. 2.11.

The argument used by these Apostles to beat down in us the lust of sin, and
the sin of lust, is the mortality of our bodies.

Why then art thou lustful, o Dust and Ashes!

Thus we see that the meditation of death is a soverein antidote against all
the evil that is in the world. For all that is in the world, is either the
lust of the flesh, or the lust of the eyes, or the pride of life, 1 John 2.19

Nil sic revocat a peccato, quam frequens morti's meditatio. Aug. SECTION II.
THere is nothing more certain then death, yet nothing more uncertain in the
circumstances of it. Certain it is we must all die, but where, when, or how we
shall die, of all things is most uncertain.

CAP. I. Death is certain.
ABraham the Father of the faithful, and the friend of God, died.

Jacob wrestled with an Angel, and prevailed, yet death was too hard for him.

David was a man after Gods own heart, one that triumphed over ten thousand
Philistims, yet death triumphed over him.

Solomon knew the virtues of all plants from the Cedar in Libanus to the
hyssope upon the wall, yet no plant had this virtue to make him immortal.

The fathers have eaten Manna, and are dead.

There is but one way into the world, but there are a thousand out of it.

Man when he comes into the world, is like an hour-glasse new turned up, which
never ceases running till it be all out.

Like Peter and John, we run who shall first come at the Sepulcher, John 20.4.

And they that are there already, rot and crumble away to make room for us
that must come after them.

Dust thou art, and to dust shall thou return, Genesis 3.19.

What man is he that lives, and shall not see death? Psalm. 89.48.

The dust shall return to the earth as it was: and the spirit shall return unto
God that gave it, Eccles. 12.7.

It is appointed for all men once to die. Heb. 9.27.

We must needs die, and are as water spilt upon the ground, which cannot be
gathered up again, 2 Samuel 14.14.

CAP. II. The time uncertain.
AN infant in the womb knows not the time when he shall come into the world;
and being come, knows not the time when he shall go out of it.

The rich man promised himself many years, but fool that he was, that night his
soul was fetched from him, Lu. 12.

Behold now I am old and know not the day of my death, Genesis 27.2.

One dies in his full strength, when his breasts are full of milk, and his
bones are moistened with marrow, another dies in the bitterness of his soul,
Job 21.23, 24.

Man also knows not his time; as the fishes that are taken in an evil net,
and as the birds that are caught in the snare; so are the sons of men snared in
an evil time; when it falls suddenly upon them, Eccles. 9.12.

God would have us ignorant of the last day, that we might be ready every day.

Take ye heed watch and pray, for ye know notwhen the time is, Mark 13.33.

To defer repentance then till to morrow, is very dangerous. God has
promised thee pardon if thou do repent to day: but if thou do not repent,
he has not promised that thou shall live till to morrow.

Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou know not what a day may bring
forth, Prove. 27.1.

If not an end of thy sins, it may be an end of thy life.

If it bring not forth conversion, it may bring forth confusion.

Go to now, ye that say, To day, or to morrow we will do thus or thus: whereas
ye know not what shall be on the morrow: for what is your life? It is even a
vapor which appears for a little time, and then vanishes away, I am. 4.13,
14

Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might: for there is no
work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither thou go,
Eccles. 9.10.

We are but tenants at will, and we know not how soon our great Landlord may
discharge us.

Do therefore as the wise Steward, before thou be turned out of this house,
make sure of another, Luke 16.4.

CAP. III. The place uncertain.
DEath surprised Abel when he was walking in the field, Genesis 4.8.

Eli when he was sitting at his door, 1 Samuel 4.18.

Jobs children at a feast, Job 1.19.

Eglon in his summer parlour, Judge. 3.20.

Zacharias betwixt the Temple and the Altar, Mat. 23.35.

Senacherib in the house of Nisroch his god, Isa. 37.38.

Ishbosheth whilst he slept in his bedchamber, 2 Samuel 4.7.

The Philistims whilst they were sporting in the Theater, Judge. 16.30.

Herod whilst he fate upon his throne, Act. 12.23.

Expect that therefore in every place, which in every place expects thee.

And let not the place of thy death trouble thee; for the earth is the Lords,
and the fullness thereof.

CAP. IV. The manner uncertain.
THere is a natural death, when a man dies as a lamp goes out, because there
is no more oil to feed it: And there is a violent death, when the soul is
thrust out of doors, and the lamp of life not burnt, but blown out.

There is a timely death, when a man comes to his grave in his full age, as a
shock of corn comes in, in his season, Job 5.26

And there is an untimely death, when a man is cropped as an ear of corn before
it be white unto the harvest.

There is a lingering death, when the soul is besieged with sickness, and as
it were starved and tired out of her habitation.

And there is a sudden death, which strikes without giving warning.

There is a quiet death, a departing in peace, when the soul does as it were
steal out of the body unperceived.

And there is a death, accompanied with raving madness, and distemperature.
Now who knows which of these deaths are appointed for him?

Josiah dies by the hurt of an arrow, 2 Chr. 35.23.

A Prophet of God by the teeth of a Lion, 1 Kings 13.24.

Abimelech by the fall of a stone, Judges 9.53.

Jezabel is eaten up of dogs, 2 Kings 9.36.

Two Captains with their fifties are consumed by fire from Heaven, 2 Kings 1.14.

There are ten thousand diseases in the world, and no man in his health knows
which shall make an end of him. For unto God the Lord belong the issues of
death, Psalm. 68.20.

SECTION III.
NOW because Death is the King of terrors, and of all terrible things the most
terrible, so that the very thought and remembrance of it is as bitter to flesh
and blood, as the waters of Marah, I thought good to cast in these Meditations
to sweeten it.

CAP. I. Death is a sleep.
SLeep is nothing else but a short death; and death, what is it but a long
sleep?

Hence antiquity made these two brethen.

Lazarus our friend sleeps, John 11.11.

And when Stephen had said thus, he fell asleep, Acts 7.60.

Brethren, I would not have you ignorant concerning them that are asleep, 1
These. 4.13.

The places appointed for burial were called Coemeteries, that is, sleeping
places.

Now the sleep of a laboring man is sweet, Eccles. 5.12.

Lord, if he sleep he shall do well, Joh. 11.12.

Hence also is it that our graves are called onr beds.

They shall rest in their beds, every one walking in his uprightness, Isa.
57.2.

Jobs bed was full of tossings to and fro, Job 7.4.

David's bed was watered with tears. Ps. 6.6.

Nebuchadnezzars bed affrighted him with troublesome thoughts, fearful
dreams, and strange visions, Dan. 4.5.

But this bed in the Hebrew tongue is called Dumah, because it is a place of
rest, and silence.

I will lay me down in peace and take my rest, Psalm. 4.8.

In vita vigilant justi, ideo in morte dicuntur dormire. Aug. CAP. II. Death
has no sting.
Dogs that have no teeth may bark at us, but they cannot bite us.

Serpents that have no stings, may hiss at us, but cannot hurt us.

Bees, they say, when they have lost their stings, become droans ever after.

Death lost her sting in the side of our Savior, and though it still leap upon
us, we may shake it off as Paul did the viper, without hurt.

Behold, I give you power to tread on Serpents, and Scorpions, and over all the
power of the enemy, and nothing shall by any means hurt you, Luke 10.19.

Death is swallowed up in victory: O death where is thy sting?

Thanks be unto God who has given us victory through Jesus Christ our Lord, 1
Cor. 15.55, 56.

CAP. III. Death is good for us.
WE may say of death as David did of Ahimaaz, He is a good man, and brings
good tidings, 2 Samuel 18.27.

First, the death of the body frees us from the body of death, the Law of the
members, the prick in the flesh, the relics of corruption.

The good which I would do, I cannot do; and the evil which I would not do,
that do I, Romans 7.19.

I see a law in my members warring against the law in my mind, Romans 7.23.

This makes every child of God cry out, O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me?

Why, Death does it, for he that is dead is freed from sin, Romans 6.7.

Secondly, it frees us from the miseries and encumbrances of this life.

So many are the miseries and calamities of this life, that were it not for the
hope of heaven, it would not be much better then hell.

Crosses come as thick upon us, as Jobs messengers.

The life of man is a winters day, very short, and very cloudy.

Few and evil have the days of my life been, Genesis 47.9.

Man that is born of a woman is of few days and full of trouble; few are our
days, but many our troubles, Job 14.1.

The day of death is the year of Jubilee, and frees us of all these evils.

There the wicked cease from troubling: and there the weary be at rest.

There the Prisoners rest together, and hear not the voice of the oppressor.

The small and great are there: and the servant is free from his master, Job
3.17, 18, 19.

Hence the Heathen said, it was the best thing not to be born at all, and the
next to that was to die quickly.

It was the custom of many nations to weep at the birth of their friends, and
to rejoice at their burials; and not unwisely, says Ambros. in orat. de fide
resurr.

Lastly, death (like the Angel) plucks us out of Sodom, and conducts us to
Zoar, a city of refuge and safety.

It translates us out of a prison, to a Palace; from a vale of misery, to a
kingdom of glory; from Leeks and Onions, to Rivers of Milk and Honey.

From the Tents of Kedar, and Tabernacles of the wicked, to mount Sion, the
city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, to an innumerable company of
Angels, to the general Assembly, and Church of the first born which are
enrolled in heaven, to God the Judge of all, to the spirits of just men made
perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new Testament, Heb. 12.22, 23.

Death is like the common gate of a city, through which the Malefactor passes to
execution, but the honest Citizen to his recreation.

We know that if the earthly house of this tabernacle be dissolved, we have a
building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens, 2 Cor.
5.1.

Where God shall wipe away all tears from our eyes: and there shall be no more
death, nor sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain, Rev. 21.4.

These things considered, we may with Solomon praise the dead, that are already
dead, more then the living that are yet alive, Eccles. 4.2.

And say with S. Paul, To me to live is Christ, and to die is gain, Phil. 1.21.

CAP. IV. There shall be a Resurrection.
IT troubles us not to see the Sun set, because we know it will rise again the
next morning. God restored to Job every thing double but his children: they
were not amissi, but praemissi: not lost, but laid up, and then shall be a day
of restitution.

Though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see
God: whom I shall see for my self and mine eyes shall behold, and not another,
though my reins be consumed in me, Job 19.26, 27.

Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise: awake
and sing ye that dwell in the dust; for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and
the Earth shall cast out her dead, Isa. 26.19.

So then, death is but a Parenthesis, and the soul and body, though disjoined
by it, will meet again together.

Nay the body shall not only arise, but it fares with the body as with old
houses, which being pulled down, new ones are erected in their rooms better and
more stately then the former.

It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption.

It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory.

It is sown in weakness, it is raised in power.

It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43.

Thus death like a rare Alchy mist, dissolves the base metal of our bodies, and
converts it to a purer substance.

The body when it rots in the grave, is as linen worn to rags, and cast upon
the dunghill: but at the resurrection it is like those Rags gathered up, and
made into paper, which many times becomes gilt, and capable of noble and divine
impressions.

The fire burnt the bands of the three children, but sindged not so much as a
hair of their heads, Dan. 3.27.

Death looses us from the bands of our sins, but shall not cozen us of a nail
of the hand, or an hair of the head, for all our hairs are numbered.

CAP. V. The goodness of God.
SAint Ambrose being asked by his friends whether he was not afraid to die,
answered he was not, because he had a good Lord. What time I am afraid, I will
trust in thee, Psalm. 56.3.

Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil,
for thou art with me, Psalm. 23.4.

Into thy hands I commit my spirit, for thou have redeemed it, o Lord God of
truth, Psalm. 31.5.

He that has created our souls after his own Image, and redeemed them with his
own blood, will not refuse them when they are commended and given up unto him.

When Stephen was giving up the ghost, he saw the heavens opened, and the Son
of man standing at the right hand of God, Acts 7.56.

Christ who sits at the right hand of God, was then said to stand, to show how
ready he is to receive the souls of his servants.

These considerations being applied, and wrought well upon our hearts, will
make us cry out with David, Oh when shall I come and appear before him! Psalm.
42.2.

O that I had wings like a dove, that I might fly hence and be at rest, Psalm.
55.6.

Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar, Psalm.
120.5.

With old Simeon, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace according
to thy word, Lu. 2.29.

With Paul, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, Phil. 1.23.

With Saint John, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Rev. 22.20.

SECTION IV.
EVery man desires with Balaam, that he may dye the death of the righteous, and
that his last end may be like his: and I cannot blame them. For to die well is
a point of the greatest consequence in the world, because eternity depends upon
it. And as the tree falls so it must ly, whether it be to the North of Gods
judgment, or to the South of his mercy, Eccles. 11.3.

Now this work of dying well, cannot be done extempore, I have therefore in the
last place contracted the art of dying well into a few precepts.

CAP. I. Live well.
TO live well is to fear God, and to keep his Commandments, Eccles. 12.13.

To love God and our neighbor, Mat. 22.37.

To deny all ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously,
and godly in this present world, Tit. 2.12.

To do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with our God, Micah 6.8.

To repent of our sins, to believe in Christ, to keep his Commandments. Who so
does these things shall never fall, Psalm. 15.5.

A fair day may have a foul evening: but a good life cannot have a bad death.

Such as the premises are, such will be the conclusion.

It is said of Moses, that he died according to the word of the Lord, or at the
mouth of the Lord, for the Hebrew will bear this reading: and the Chaldee
paraphrases it, He died at a kiss of the Lords mouth: God kisses the righteous
in their deaths, and as it were sucks in those souls which he breathed into
them, Deuteronomy. 34.5.

Old Hilarion when he lay a dying, bespake his soul in this manner. Get thee
out of me, O my soul, get thee out of me: why fear thou, that have served
God almost this seventy years? Jerome in vita Hilarionis.

Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is
peace, Psalm. 37.37.

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints, Ps. 116.15.

Blessed are they that die in the Lord, for they rest from their labors, and
their works follow them, Rev. 14.13.

CAP. II. Particular directions.
IN the time of thy sickness, with Ezekiah call thy self to an account for all
thy sins, mourn for them, in the bitterness of thy soul confess them to God,
and ask forgiveness.

2. Send for thy Minister. To whom, if need be, make a special confession, and
take along with thee the benefit of his absolution; Whose soever sins ye remit
they are remitted unto them: and whose soever sins ye retain, they are
retained, John 20.23.

If I forgave any thing to whom I forgave it, I forgave it in the person of
Christ, 2 Cor. 2.10.

Secondly, let thy Minister pray over thee: Is any sick among you? let him call
for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him.

If he has committed sins, they shall be forgiven him, Jam. 5.14, 15.

Thirdly, let him give thee the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

This is the best viaticum, and provision for so long a journey.

I may say to thee as the Angel to Eliah, Arise and eat, for the journey is too
great for thee.

And if with Eliah, thou do eat and drink, thou may travel in the strength
of this meat to Horeb the mount of God, 1 Kings 19.7, 8.

This is the bread that came down from Heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and
not die.

Who so eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will
raise him up at the last day, Joh. 6.51, 54.

V. Eusebius. hist. l. 5. c. 45.3. Set thine house in order, 2 Kings 20.1.

This will not make thee die more quickly, but more quietly.

4. Remember the poor. When we have been kindly entertained at a friends
house, it is good manners to give the servants something when we go away.

Blessed is he that considers the poor, the Lord will deliver him in the
time of trouble.

The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing: and will make all
his bed in his sickness, Psalm. 41.1, 3.

5. If thou be a father or mother of children, call them before thee, and
bless them.

So did Jacob when he departed, Genesis 49.1.

6. Make restitution (if thou be able) to such as thou have wronged, and
defrauded.

Without restitution there is no remission.

Enquire with Samuel whose ox thou have taken, or whose ass thou have taken,
whom thou have defrauded, whom thou have oppressed, or of whose hand thou have
received a bribe, and restore it.

Send for them who have offended thee, and forgive them: and for those whom
thou have offended, and ask forgiveness.

Lastly, resign, and give over thy self to God.

Behold, here I am, let the Lord do to me, as seems good to him, 1 Samuel 15.26.

Not my will, but thine be done. And if thus thou be prepared at the day of
death, oh well is thee, and happy shall thou be, Psalm 128.2.

Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find thus doing,
thus dying, Mat. 24.46.

A short prayer for a happy departure.
O Most glorious Lord, the GOD of the spirits of all flesh, in whose hands are
the times of all men, and the keys of the Grave, I most meekly beseech thee of
thy goodness, to pardon and forgive me all my sins, and to make me ever
mindful of my mortality.

Lay often before mine eyes by thy remembering spirit, that the days of my
pilgrimage are but few and evil; that I have here no abiding and continuing
City; that all flesh, and the goodlinesse thereof is but a flower that fades,
and a shadow that vanishes away, that so numbering my days, I may apply my
heart to wisdom, and with the wise Virgins provide Oil in my Lamp, and make
my calling and election sure, before I go hence, and be no more seen. And when
it shall please thee to cast me upon the bed of sickness, and to compass me
about with the sorrows of the grave, I beseech thee for thy names sake, for thy
mercies sake, for thy Son Jesus Christ his sake, not to be far from me in that
needful time of trouble, when I shall find heaviness in my flesh, and there
be none to deliver me.

But draw near unto my soul, and be about my bed to pardon my sins, to pacify
my conscience, to strengthen my faith, to mitigate my pains, and to receive my
soul, when it shall be commended unto thee.

Receive it O God the Father, for thou have created it. Receive it O God the
Son, for thou have redeemed it. Receive it O God the Holy Ghost, for thou have
sanctified it. Receive it o holy, blessed and glorious Trinity, that being
translated out of this vale of misery, it may reign with thee, one everliving
and immortal God, in the Kingdom of Glory, world without end: Amen.

SECTION I. Of the day of Judgment.
CHristian Reader, let my Meditations now pass, as thou thy self must, from
the day of death to the day of Judgment. For it is appointed for all men once
to die, and after that to come to judgment, Heb. 9.27.

CAP. I. There shall be a day of Judgment.
IT is an Article of our faith, that CHRIST who n^w sits at the right hand of
his Father, shall come from thence to judge the quick and the dead.

Enoch the seventh from Adam prophesied of it, saying, Behold, the Lord comes
with ten thousand of his Saints;

To execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly of all
their ungodly deeds which they have committed, and of all their hard speeches
which ungodly sinners have spoken against him, Jude 14, 15.

God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it
be good, or whether it be evil, Eccles. 12.14.

I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God.

The Sea gave up the dead which were in it: and death and hell delivered up the
dead which were in them: and they were judged every man according to his works,
Rev. 20.13.

It is very observable, that all other Articles of the Creed have been opposed
by Heretics either in whole, or in part; but no Heretic denied a day of
judgment. Vide Danaeum in his Cat. of heresies against the Creed.

In this world, Solomon says, no man can know love or hatred by all that is
before them. For all things come alike to all: there is one event to the
righteous and to the wicked, to the good and to the clean, and to the unclean:
to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not; as is the good, so is
the sinner; and he that swears, as he that fears an oath, Eccles. 9.1, 2.

Now shall not the Judge of all the world do right? Genesis 18.25.

There must be a day wherein the wicked shall be punished, and the virtuous
rewarded.

A day wherein God will put a difference betwixt an Israelite, and an
Egyptian; betwixt a Sheep and a Goat; betwixt wheat and tares.

There shall be a day when I will make up my Jewels, and I will spare them as a
man spares his own son that serves him.

Then shall ye return, and discern between the righteous and the wicked,
between him that serves God, and him that serves him not, Mal. 3.17, 18.

I confess the wicked are sometimes punished in this world, to assure us there
is a God; yet it is but sometimes, to assure us there is a day of judgment.

Verily there is a reward for the righteous: verily there is a God that judges
the earth, Psalm. 58.11.

CAP. II. An Objection answered.
IT is certain that the soul so soon as it is separated from the body, is
presented to God, and receives an irrevocable doom, either of woe, or weal.

The rich man died and presently was in hell in torments, the beggar died and
was immediately carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom. Luke 16.22, 23.

So that it may be demanded; What need is there of a general day of judgment,
seeing every man is judged at the day of his death?

Answ. 1.
Every man consists of a Soul, and a Body.

The Soul is judged at the day of death, the Body also at the day of judgment.

For as these two do either sin together, or serve God together; so they shall
either burn together, or reign together.

Every man must receive the things done in his Body, according to that he has
done, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10.

Yet because the Soul may, and often does sin, or serve God without the Body,
it may in the state of separation be either punished or rewarded, though the
Body rest in the grave.

Answ. 2.
There must be a general Judgment, for the manifestation of Gods Justice.

God disposes of every man at the day of his death, and that according to the
rule of Justice; yet that which he did in secret, he will do in the view of
the whole world, that so the general Assembly of men and Angels may give this
testimony and applause of his just proceedings:

Righteous art thou, O Lord, and righteous are thy judgments. Psalm. 119.137.
Answ. 3.
There must be a judgment besides that at the day of death, because men after
they be dead, may be Instruments, and occasions either of vice or virtue, of
sin or the service of God.

The Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and Fathers of the Church are
dead and gone: yet still they do good in the Church of God by their godly
examples, and holy writings.

Jeroboam, Machiavel, Marcion, all Heriticks, and profane persons die, yet
they poison the air with ill example, wicked books, divelish principles, and
after their death infect posterity for many generations.

Their word eats as does a canker, or gangrene, 2 Timothy 2.17.

Hence it is, that as there is a particular Judgment to reward the good, or
punish the evil they have done themselves in their life time; so there shall be
a general Judgment to reward, or punish them for that, which after their death
they have occasioned to be done by others.

V.S. Basil. in l. de vera virginit.

CAP. III. The Names given to this Day.
THis day is called in the Scripture, The day of the Lord.

Alas, for the day: for the day of the Lord is at hand. Joel 1.15.

Your selves know perfectly, that the day of the Lord so comes as a thief in
the night, 1 These. 5.2.

Looking for and hastening unto the coming of the day of GOD, 2 Pet. 3.12.

This life is called Our Day.

O Jerusalem; if thou had known, at least in this Thy day, the things that
belong to thy peace, Luke 19.42.

For we think our own thoughts, and speak our own words, and do our own
pleasure.

But that shall be the Lords day; for the lofty looks of man shall be humbled,
and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and the Lord alone shall be
exalted in that day, Isa. 2.11.

Secondly, it is called a Day of Revelation, or Opening, Romans 2.5.

Never was there such an opening, as will be at that day.

The heavens shall be opened, and those everlasting doors shall be lift up,
that the King of glory may go forth with his Angels to judge the world, and
return back again with his Saints, when he has judged it.

The Earth shall be opened, for the stone shall be rolled from the mouth of
every Sepulcher, and the graves shall give up their dead.

The Books shall be opened.

I saw the dead, small and great, stand before the Lord, and the books were
opened: and another book was opened which was the book of life; and the dead
were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to
their works, Rev. 20.12.

The secrets of all hearts shall be opened.

There is nothing hid that shall not be manifested; neither any thing kept
secret that shall not come abroad, Mar. 4.22.

In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according
to my Gospel, Romans 2.16.

Hell shall be opened to receive those wretches, to whom it shall be said, Go
ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.

Thirdly, it is called a Day of refreshing. Repent ye therefore, and be
converted, that your sins may be blotted out when the times of refreshing shall
come from the presence of the Lord, Acts 3.19.

What a refreshing will it be, when our rotten, and worm-eaten carcasses shall
rise up in honor and in incorruption, as flowers after a long winter?

What a refreshing will it be, when these two ancient friends, the soul and the
body, after so long a separation shall embrace, and kiss each other?

What a refreshing will it be to see the Devil our worst enemy, and Death our
last enemy, cast into the lake of fire?

What a refreshing will it be to see Jesus Christ the Savior of the world, and
the head of his Church, come in his glory, attended with an innumerable company
of Angels?

What a refreshing will it be, to hear those sweet sentences of absolution?

Well done, good and faithful servant, enter thou into thy Masters joy.

Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you.

Fourthly, in respect of the wicked, it is called a day of wrath. After thy
hardness, and impenitent heart, thou treasurest up for thy self wrath against
the day of wrath, Romans 2.5.

As also a day of darkness and gloominesse, a day of clouds, and of thick
darkness, Joel 2.2.

The Sun is pleasing to a good eye, but offensive to an eye that is ill
affected.

The day of judgment is a bath of refreshing to the godly, but a burning Oven
to the wicked:

Behold the day comes that shall burn as an Oven, and all the proud, yea, and
all that do wickedly, shall be stubble, Mal. 4.1.

Fifthly, it is called a great day. The Angels which kept not their first
estate, but left their own habitation, he has reserved in everlasting chains
of darkness, unto the judgment of the Great day. Jude 6.

The Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood, before that
great and notable day of the Lord come, Acts 2.20.

It is a great day indeed, since so many great and notable things shall be done
in it.

For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of
the Archangel, 1 These. 4.16.

And he shall send his Angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall
gather together the Elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven, unto the
other, Mat. 24.31.

And then the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements
shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein
shall be burnt up, 2 Pet. 3.10.

How great a day must that needs be, wherein the accounts and reckonings of all
Days must be audited and cast up?

Lastly, it is commonly and usually called the Day of Judgment, for it is the
general Assise wherein every man must be arraigned, and hold up his hand at
the bar.

Both old men and maidens: young men and children.

Kings of the earth, and all people: Princes, and all Judges of the earth.

SECTION II.
THus having seen that there shall be not only a particular, but a general
judgment also, let us in the next place inquire who and what manner of Judge he
is, who shall pronounce the sentence of life, or death upon us.

CAP. I. Christ is the Judge.
IT is true that the whole Trinity shall judge us: for so great an action
cannot pass without the consent and authority of the three Persons.

Yet it is ascribed to Christ in respect of immediate execution.

He shall appear visibly in his humane nature, and give the sentence.

The Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son, John
5.22.

He has appointed a day wherein he will judge the world in righteousness, by
that man whom he has ordained, Acts 7.31.

We shall all stand before the Judgment seat of Christ, Romans 14.10.

So that where Christ says, he came not to judge the world, Joh. 12.47.
understand it of his first, not of his second coming.

Fit it is that Christ should judge the world who was judged by it: that so once
in this world, he may show his power, and Majesty, in the sight of all his
creatures, especially of Pontius Pilate, Annas, Caiaphas, and the Jews, who
condemned and crucified him.

They shall look upon me whom they have pierced, Zach. 12.10.

Fit it is, that Men should be judged by one that is a Man.

The comfort that we have against the terrors of this day is, that we shall be
judged by the Man Christ Jesus.

One man is a God unto another. Fear not, I am your brother Joseph.

CAP. II. Christ a severe Judge.
CHrist in his first coming was a Lamb, but in his second he shall be a Lion.

His fan is in his hand; and he will throng hly purge his floor, and gather his
wheat into his garner, but will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire, Mat.
3.12.

Hence it is that the very best of the Saints tremble at the apprehension of
this day.

David was a man after Gods own heart: yet,

My flesh trembles for fear of thee: I am afraid of thy judgments, Psalm.
119.120.

Enter not into judgment with thy servant, o Lord, for in thy sight shall no
man living be justified, Psalm. 143.2.

Job was a man eminent for all graces: yet he stood amazed at the consideration
of this Judge.

Whom though I were righteous, I would not answer: but I would make
supplication to my Judge, Job 9.15.

What shall I do when God rises up? and when he visits, what shall I answer
him? Job 31.14.

Paul was a chosen vessel, one that knew nothing by himself yet says he, I am
not thereby justified, for it is the Lord that judges me. And the Lord judges
not as a man judges, 1 Cor. 4.4.

S. Jerome confesses that his whole body trembled so often as he thought upon
this day.

The righteous shall scarcely be saved, 1 Pet. 4.18.

Many there are who pass current in the judgment of the world; who when they
shall be weighed in Christ's balances will be found too light. Good reason then
has every man to pray as the Church teaches him; In the day of Judgment good
Lord deliver me.

CAP. III. Christ an upright Judge.
HE shall judge the world in righteousness: he shall minister judgment to the
people in uprighteness, Psalm. 9.8.

The Lord comes to judge the earth: with righteousness shall he judge the
world, and the people with equity, Psalm. 98.9.

Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord
the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, 2 Timothy 4.8.

The Judges of the earth may absolve the guilty, and condemn the innocent,
being corrupted By fear:

Pilate for the fear of Caesar condemned Christ, whom the testimony of his own
conscience pronounced innocent.

But this judge cannot be thus corrupted: for,

Whom shall he fear, that is omnipotent? or of whom shall he be afraid, that
shall come with great power and glory? Mar. 14.26.

Or they may be corrupted with their own affection of love, or hatred. Herod
adjudges John Baptist to death, for the love of Herodias daughter.

Joseph's brethren cast him into the pit because they hated him, Ge. 37.4.

But this Judge cannot be thus corrupted: for,

He is no accepter of persons, Acts 10.34.

He shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, but with righteousness shall
he judge his people, Isa. 11.3, 4.

He will render to every man according to his deeds, whether Jew or Gentile,
Romans 2.6.9.

Or they may be corrupted with bribes: Jethro well advised Moses to choose such
men for Judges as hated covetousness, Exodus 18.21.

Thou shall not wrest judgment, thou shall not respect persons, neither take a
gift: for a gift does blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the
righteous, Deuteronomy. 16.19.

Christ our Judge cannot be so corrupted.

If he would take a bribe, thou shall have none to give him at that day.

But if thou could give him the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of
them, he would refuse; for he is the Lord of lords, a great God, a mighty, and
a terrible, which regards not persons, nor takes reward, Deuteronomy. 10.17.

A good conscience will do us more good then, then a full purse.

Riches profit not in the day of wrath, but righteousness delivers from
death, Prove. 11.4.

CAP. IV. Christ an All knowing Judge.
AS his uprightness is such that he cannot be corrupted, so his knowledge is
such that he cannot be deceived.

He shall not reprove after the hearing of his ears, Isa. 11.3.

He shall not judge us according to the report and testimony of others which is
uncertain, but according to his own intuitive knowledge, which is infallible.

Come and see a man which told me all the things that ever I did: Is not this
the Christ? John 4.29.

Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight: but all
things are naked, and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do, Heb
4.13.

The word in the Original imports such an openness, as when the skin is pulled
off, and the back chined down, so that the very entrails, and most secret
passages of nature may be discerned.

These things have thou done, and I kept silence, thou thoughtest I was
altogether such a one as thy self, but I will reprove thee, and set them in
order before thine eyes, Psalm. 50.21.

Hence it is that he is said to keep a book of remembrance by him, Mal. 3.16.

Some sins are said to be secret in respect of him that commits them. Who can
understand his errors?

Cleanse thou me from my secret faults, Ps. 19.12

Or in respect of the world. The Adulterer eats his pleasant bread in secret,
Prove. 9.17.

But no sins are secret in respect of God: for,

He sets our iniquities before him: even our secret sins in the sight of his
countenance, Psalm. 90.8.

At that day then in vain will it be for us to deny the fact, or to excuse it,
or to shift and transfer it from one to another: for,

The Lord sees not as man sees, 1 Samuel 16.7.

CAP. V. Christ is an inexorable Judge.
AS this Judge cannot be corrupted, nor deceived; so neither can he be
entreated: Now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2.

Seek the Lord whilst he may be found, call upon him whilst he is near, Isa.
55.6.

That is a time of judgment, and though we cry as loud as thunder, he will not
hear us, though we cut our selves with lancers, as Baals Priests, till the
blood gush out, he will not regard us.

Will God hear his cry when trouble comes upon him? Job 27.9.

Because I have called and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man
regarded:

I also will laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear comes.

Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer: they shall seek me early,
but they shall not find me, Prove. 1.24, 26, 28.

The foolish Virgins knock at the door of mercy, but it is shut against them,
Mat. 25.11.

Then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: depart from me ye that work
iniquity, Mat. 7.23.

SECTION III.
HAving now seen who, and what manner of Judge thou shall have, suppose him now
set upon the judgment seat attended with his glorious Angels, and calling thee
up to answer these Interrogatories.

CAP. I. Who art thou?
TO this thy answer will be that thou art a Man.

Christ will reply unto thee, If a man, show me my Image wherein I created thee.

Caesar's penny was known by Caesar's Image, and superscription.

When Jacob saw the coat of his son Joseph, It is my sons coat, says he, but an
evil beast has devoured him, Genesis 37.33.

So Christ will say to us at the day of judgment, This is the face and figure
of a man, but an evil beast has devoured my Image.

The Drunkard has lost the Image of God, and laid a swine in the room of it.

The Covetous has lost the Image of God, and laid a ravenous wolf in the room
of it.

The Adulterer has lost the Image of God, and laid a goat or an horse in the
room of it.

The crafty and contentious person, has lost the Image of God, and laid a fox
and a dog in the room of it.

They have corrupted themselves, and their spot is not the spot of his
children, Deuteronomy. 32.5.

Man that is in honor and understands not, may be compared to the beasts
that perish, Psalm. 49.20.

And no beast shall enter into the new Jerusalem: for

Without are dogs, Rev. 22.15.

CAP. II. Of what Religion.
The next Interrogatory will be, Of what Religion art thou?
TO pass by Turks, Jews, Infidels, thy answer will be, I am a Christian.

Jacob professes to his Father, that he was his very son Esau, and yet was not.

The Church of Sardis had a name to be alive, yet was dead, Rev. 3.1.

Many shall say at that day, Lord, Lord, we have been baptized in thy Name, we
have called upon thy Name, we have prophesied in thy Name, who notwithstanding
are workers of iniquity.

A Christian is a name of Duty, as well as of Dignity.

You are my Friends if you do whatsoever I command you, Ioh. 15.14

By this shall all men know that you are my Disciples, if ye love one another,
John 13.35.

As many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, Gal.
3.27.

They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the affections and
lusts, Gal. 5.24.

Art thou a Christian, who have taken the members of Christ and made them the
members of an harlot? 1 Cor. 6.15.

Art thou a Christian, who have seen Christ naked, and have not clothed him:
hungry, and have not fed him: thirsty, and have given him no drink: sick, and
in prison, and have not visited him.

In a word, art thou a Christian that have lived in the practice of gross and
known sins?

What Communion is there betwixt Christ and Belial, betwixt light and
darkness, betwixt righteousness and unrighteousness? 2 Cor. 6.15.

The Jews boasted they were the children of Abraham, but Christ tells them they
were the children of the Devil, because they did his works, John 8.44.

If thou be not a true, but a titular Christian, having a form of
godliness, but not the power of it, thy judgment will be more heavy, and
intolerable, then that of Turks and Infidels.

The Servant that knows his Masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with
many stripes.

Unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be required, Luke 12.47, 48.

Verily I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah at
the day of judgment, then for you, Mat. 10.15.

It had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, then
after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto
them, 2 Pet. 2.21.

I therefore beseech you to walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are
called, Ephesians. 4.1.

And let every one that names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy
2.19.

And let us pray as our Church teaches us in the Collect for the third Sunday
after Easter:

ALmighty God, etc. Grant unto all them that be admitted into the fellowship of
Christ's Religion, that they may eschew those things that be contrary to their
profession, and follow all such things as be agreeable to the same, through our
Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

CAP. III. Of what Profession.
THe next Interrogatory will be the same that the Mariners put to Jonas.

What is thine occupation? Jonah 1.8.

Art thou a Magistrate? Supreme, an Emperor, King etc. or subordinate, an
inferior officer, Governor? 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.

Thou shall be examined;

First, if thou have maintained Gods true Religion, and been a nursing Father
to the Church, Isa. 49.23.

If thou have rooted out Heresy, Idolatry, superstition, 1 King. 15.12.

If thou have provided Ministers to instruct the people, and maintenance for
those Ministers.

Jehoshaphat sent the Priests, and Levites, and the Book of the Law of the Lord
with them, and they went about throughout all the Cities of Judah, and taught
the people, 2 Chronicles. 17.9.

Hezekiah commanded the people that dwelt in Jerusalem, to give the portion of
the Priests, and the Levites, that they might be encouraged in the Law of the
Lord, 2 Chronicles. 31.4.

If thou have built, and repaired the house of God, and places of his worship,
as did Solomon, Josiah.

Secondly, if thou have been an example of virtue and godliness to thy people.

David himself dances before the Ark, and the house of Israel follow him, 2 Samuel 6.14.

The King of Ninivie was the first that humbled himself in sackcloth and ashes,
and then the inhabitants of the City did likewise.

Examples of great personages have a strong influence, nay, as it were a
violence upon inferiors.

Caesar filled the Empire with Soldiers, Augustus, with Scholars, etc.

Thirdly, if they have provided good Laws, and executed them, that such as live
under them may be godly and quietly governed.

Good Laws are such as are agreeable to the Law of Nature, and the word of God.

And they are then executed, when great flies are taken as well as small ones.

Fourthly, if thou have punished the wicked, and cherished the good.

Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with
me; he that walks in a perfect way, shall be my servant:

But I will early destroy all the wicked of the Land, that I may cut off all
wicked doers from the City of God, Psalm. 101.6, 8.

Kings and Governors are sent by God for the punishment of evil doers, and for
the praise of them that do well, 1 Pet. 2.14.

It cannot be well then if Crows be pardoned and Pigeons punished.

Fifthly, if thou have heard the cries of the poor, received their petitions,
redressed their wrongs.

Defend the poor and fatherless: do justice to the afflicted and needy.

Deliver the poor, and needy: rid them out of the hand of the wicked, Psalm.
82.3, 4.

Be wise now therefore O ye kings: be instructed ye that are Judges of the
earth, Psalm. 2.10.

Remember there will be Deus and dies ultionis, A God, and a day of vengeance.

But art thou a Minister?
Thou shall be examined,

First, if thou did enter in at the door, or climb in at the window; if thou
were called of God, or intrudest thy self.

A man may know if he be called of God, by those talents which are committed to
him.

It is required that every Minister have scientiam competentem, if not
eminentem; that is, competent, though not eminent knowledge.

For the Priests lips must keep knowledge, and the people must seek it at his
lips, Mal. 2.7.

Secondly, if thou have taught and instructed the people committed to thee.

Feed my sheep, John 21.16.

I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God.

Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock, over the which the
Lord has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own Blood, Acts 20.27, 28.

It is required of a Minister that he be didaktik, apt and able to teach, 2 Timothy 2.24.

He that is ignorant and cannot teach, is a dumb dog.

He that can and will not, is a dumb Devil, (unless lawfully detained.)

Where no vision is there the people perish, Prove. 29.18.

His blood will I require at thy hand, Ezekiel. 33.6.

Who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his Lord has made ruler over
all his household to give them meat in due season?

Blessed is that servant whom his Lord, when he comes shall find so doing,
Mat. 24.45, 46.

Thirdly, if thy life has agreed with thy Doctrine.

He that was misshapen, or had any blemish, might not come nigh to offer the
offerings of the Lord, Lev. 21.21.

Moses when he blesses the tribe of Levi, desires of God, that his Thummim and
Urim might be with his Holy One, i.e. integrity of life, as well as the light
of Learning, Deuteronomy. 33.8.

It is said of Christ, that he was a Prophet mighty in deed and word, before
God, and all the people, Luke 24.19.

Thou that teach another, teach thou not thy self? thou that preachest a
man should not steal, do thou steal?

Thou that say, a man should not commit adultery, do thou commit adultery?
thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit sacriledg? Romans 2.21, 22.

Be thou an example of the believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in
purity, in spirit, in faith, 1 Timothy 4.12.

Or, art thou an Officer?
Thou shall be examined,

If thou have not exacted more then was appointed for thee, Luke 3.13.

If thou have not dealt with the poor, as the servants of Elies sons did,

If thou will not give it me, I will take it by force, 1 Samuel 2.16.

Or, art thou a Soldier?
Thou shall be examined,

If thou have done violence to no man:

If thou have not accused any falsely:

If thou have been content with thy wages, Luke 3.14.

Or, art thou a tradesman?
Thou shall be examined,

If thou have not used false weights, deceitful balances, unjust measures;
all which are an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 20.10.

If thou have not sometimes taken the name of God in vain, to obtrude a bad
commodity upon thy neighbor: and sic de caeteris.

I may now say of our Judge, as Jacobs sons said of the Governor of Egypt:

The man asked us straightly of our state, Genesis 43.7.

SECTION IV.
WE have now seen how Christ will proceed with us in the day Judgment, let us
in the next place consider that final and irrevocable Sentence which shall pass
upon us, and it is either the Sentence of Absolution, or Condemnation

The sentence of Absolution.
THe sentence of Absolution shall be pronounced in these words:

Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world, Mat 25.34. In which sentence there is not a word, a
syllable, a letter, but is music to the care, honey to the mouth, and a Jubilee
to the heart.

How will our ears be ravished, and our hearts dance within us, to hear Christ
pronounce us the blessed ones of his Father.

To hear that sweet call and invitation, Come ye.

To hear the glory of that inheritance, to which we must come; A Kingdom, The
Kingdom, Prepared for us of old.


Blessed are the people that shall hear this joyful sound, Psalm. 89.15.

CAP. II. The sentence of Absolution shall be first pronounced.
THE good Servant was rewarded and admitted into his Masters joy: and then the
evil and unprofitable servant was punished and cast into utter darkness, Mat.
25.

They on the right hand are called to a kingdom: and then they on the left are
cast into fire, Mat. 25.

God will not cast the wicked into hell, till they have seen something of the
happiness of the Saints, which increases their grief and torment.

The wicked shall see it, and be grieved, he shall gnash with his teeth, and
melt away, Psalm. 112.10.

Or, else, it may be, Christ begins with the sentence of Absolution, to show
that he had rather save us, then damn us.

He is slow to anger, Psalm. 103.8.

A God that delights not in the death of a sinner.

His own nature inclines him to save us, our sins urge and provoke him to damn
us.

Therefore if he must punish, he comes as it were unwillingly to it, and
reserves it for the last place.

CAP. III. The sentence of condemnation.
THe sentence of Condemnation shall be denounced in these words:

Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil, and
his angels, Mat. 25.41. Not a word in this sentence, but is a wound; not a
syllable, but is a sword piercing the heart; not a letter, but is as loud and
terrible as a clap of thunder.

How shall the loins of the wicked tremble, and their joints be loosed, and
their knees knock together, to hear Christ pronounce them cursed?

Cursed, because of the punishment of loss, Depart ye.

There is their banishment, and exclusion from him, who is the fountain of
life, the light of glory, and in whose presence there is fullness of joy.

Cursed because of the punishment of Sense.

Depart ye into fire, there is the extremity.

Into fire everlasting. there is the eternity.

Prepared for the Devil and his Angels, there is their Company.

Immediately after these sentences are pronounced, shall follow execution.

The wicked shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the righteous into
life eternal, Mat. 25.46.

SECTION V.
IT remains now in the last place to view the use and influence which the
consideration of this great day of the Lord ought to have upon our affections.
It is matter of terror to some, of comfort to others, but of instruction to
all.

CAP. I. Terror to the wicked.
AS Paul reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come, Felix
trembled, Acts 24.25.

The Jews fell backward when they came to apprehend Christ in the days of his
humility: how then shall they stand before him when he shall come in glory and
majesty?

How terrible must this day needs be: when,

The mountains shall quake at him, and the hills melt, and the earth be burnt
up at his presence, yea the world, and all that dwell therein?

Who can stand before his indignation? and who can abide the fierceness of his
anger? his fury is poured out like fire, and the rocks are thrown down by him,
Nah. 1.5, 6.

What a hard distress shall the wicked be in, when they shall have

On one side their sins accusing.

On the other the justice of God terrifying.

The gulf of hell gaping under them.

An angry Judge frowning over them.

Within them a conscience stinging.

Without them the world burning? Anselme.

Surely the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the
chief Captains, and the mighty men, and every bondsman, and every free man,
shall hide themselves in the dens and in the rocks of the mountains; and shall
say to the mountains, and rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the face of him
that sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb.

For the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand? Rev.
6.15, 16, 17.

Rejoice o young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of
thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine own heart, and in the sight of thine
eyes: but know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee to judgment,
Eccles. 11.9.

O consider this, you that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be
none to deliver you, Psalm. 50.22.

Knowing the terrors of the Lord, we persuade men, 2 Cor. 5.11.

CAP. II. Comfort to the godly.
THen shall they see the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and great
glory.

And when these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up your
heads, for your redemption draws nigh, Luke 21.27, 28.

The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout; with the voice of the
Archangell, and with the trump of God, etc.

Wherefore comfort ye one another with these words, 1 These. 4.16, 17.

When Christ ascended, the Angels comforted the Disciples in this manner:

This same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like
manner as ye have seen him go into heaven, Acts 1.11.

Hence it is, that the righteous are said to love the day of his appearing, for
then they shall receive a crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.8.

The Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he knows them
that trust in him, Nahum 1.7.

But of this we have heard before, where this day in respect of the godly is
called a day of refreshing and redemption.

CAP. III. Instruction to all.
IF it be thus, what manner of men ought we to be in all holy conversation on
and godliness? 2 Pet. 3.11.

That which raised up the soul of S. Jerome to such a pitch of devotion, was
the continual meditation of this day.

Whether I eat or drink, or whatsoever I do, me thinks I hear the last trump
sounding in my ears, Arise ye dead, and come to judgment.

We must give an account not only for our presumptuous sins, but for our
smallest sins.

I say unto you, That of every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give
account thereof at the day of judgment, Mat. 12.36.

We shall reckon not only for our own sins, but for the sins of others, which
we have occasioned by our command, company, counsel, or ill example.

We shall reckon for the talents of grace and nature: and for the precious time
afforded to us.

Hear the end of all, fear God, and keep his Commandments, for God will bring
every work into Judgment, Eccles. 12.13, 14.

Abound in the works of mercy and charity, for according to them we shall be
judged, Mat. 25. Judge your selves here, and you shall not be judged hereafter,
1 Cor. 11.31.

As for the time when, or the place where the Judgment seat of Christ shall be
erected,

O my soul enter not into these secrets.

Such knowledge is too wonderful for thee.

Secret things belong to the Lord our God, and revealed things to us and our
children.

A short Prayer for the day of Judgment.
O Most blessed Lord Jesus, who now sit at the right hand of God the
Father, and from thence shall come to judge both the quick and the dead, in
power and great glory; I confess and acknowledge, that such is the heinousness
of my sins, the guiltiness of my Conscience, and the dreadfulness of that day,
that my very flesh trembles, and my heart melts within me, when I consider
that I must appear before the tribunal of thy just Judgment to give an account
of whatsoever I have done in the flesh, whether good or evil. I know o Lord,
that if thou shall enter into Judgment with me, I cannot be justified in thy
sight: and if thou shall be extreme to mark what amiss has passed from me, I
shall not be able to answer thee one for a thousand.

I appeal therefore, from the bar of thy justice, to the bowels of thy mercy,
beseeching thee in that day to deal with the soul of thy servant, not as a
severe Judge, but as a merciful Jesus.

It will be O Lord a day of wrath, but gather me under the shadow of thy wings,
until the indignation be past over.

It will be a day of darkness, and of gloominesse: but lift thou up the light
of thy countenance upon me, and I shall be saved.

It will be a day of Judgment; but in that day by thine agony and bloody
passion, and by whatsoever thou have done, or suffered for me, good Lord
deliver me.

And to this end, I beseech thee give me grace to live soberly, righteously,
and godly in this present world; to keep a good conscience void of offense
toward thee my God, and toward all men; to abound always in the works of
charity, and mercy; and to judge and condemn my self here, that I may not be
condemned hereafter. That so whenever this day shall seize upon me, I may not
be bound up with the bundle of tares which shall be cast into unquenchable
fire, but gathered with the wheat into thy garners, and set with the sheep upon
thy right hand, and called in the number of those blessed ones to inherit a
Kingdom, and that Crown of righteousness which thou have purchased, and
prepared for all those that love and expect that day of thy appearing. Now unto
thee o Christ, together with thy Father, and thy blessed Spirit, be ascribed
all power, and praise, dignity and dominion now and for ever. Amen.

A PRAYER FOR the Morning.
OEternall and most glorious Lord God, and in Jesus Christ our merciful and
loving Father, we thine unworthy creatures sinful dust and ashes, are here in
all humility of souls and bodies prostrate at the lowest footstool of thy
glorious Majesty: beseeching thee to bow down thine ears unto our prayers, and
to open thine eyes upon our supplication; who from the ground and bottom of our
hearts, do acknowledge and confess that we have been unprofitable servants,
prodigal children, and bad stewards of that time which thou have afforded us
for repentance and good works, and of those talents which thou have committed
to our improvement.

If we put our hands into our bosoms, we must needs draw them out all leprous.
For we are the brood of rebellious and disobedient Parents: our hearts are
cages of unclean birds, of noisome lusts; and the thoughts thereof have been
evil, and only evil, and that continually.

And if o Lord we look forth unto the actions of our lives, there is no sin
which we have not committed, no commandment which we have not broken. These eyes
which now look up unto heaven, have beheld vanity; these tongues which now call
upon thee, have blasphemed thee; and these hands which we now lift up unto
thee, have been many times lift up against thee, and thy Statutes. So that we
have made our selves unworthy of the least of thy mercies, but worthy of the
greatest of thy judgments. But deal not with us after our sins, neither reward
us according to our iniquities.

Spare us good Lord, spare thy people, whom thou have created after thine own
Image, and redeemed with thine own Blood. And according to the multitude of thy
tender compassions which have ever been of old to us, blot out the multitude of
our transgressions. Pardon our sins and receive us again unto thy favor, for
his sake and sufferings, who has satisfied thy Justice to the utmost farthing.

And for the short residue and remainder of our days, give us grace to
consecrate it to thy service, to redeem that time which we cannot recall, and
to make our calling and election sure before we go hence, and be no more seen.

And because the corruptions of our nature are too many, and too strong for us,
and the Devil like a roaring Lion goes about continually to devour us; leave us
not to our selves, but assist us by thy grace, perfect thy strength in our
weakness, and preserve both our bodies and souls spotless, and unblameable,
that when we shall have finished our course, and run the race of our natural
Pilgrimage, we may receive that crown of righteousness, which thou the
righteous and just Judge have laid up for all them that love and expect the day
of thy appearing.

And together with us we entreat thee for a blessing upon our King, Queen,
Prince, and the rest of the Royal Progeny: upon our Counselors, Ministers and
Magistrates: upon our friends, kindred, and acquaintance: upon the whole Church,
and every afflicted member of it.

And accept of our morning sacrifice of praise, and thanksgiving for all the
mercies and favors, comforts and deliverances which from time to time thou
have afforded, and continued to us: We thank thee for thy last mercy in
preserving us from the dangers of this night past, for refreshing our bodies
with seasonable rest, and bringing us safe to the beginning of this day.

Lord, what is man that thou art so mindful of him, or the Son of man that
thou should thus visit, and remember him? Give us grace, O Lord, to remember
thee, and to be mindful of thy mercies, that we may praise thee for all the
truth and faithfulness which thou show to us in the land of the living;
that as thou have brought us to the comforts of this day, so thou may go
along with us in the same, to enable us for the duties of those callings
wherein we are placed, and to deliver us from those dangers to which we are
exposed, even for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose most blessed name and words
we conclude these our weak, and imperfect prayers, saying as he himself has
taught us in his holy Gospel.

O our Father, etc.

A PRAYER FOR the Evening.
O Most glorious and ever living LORD God, which inhabitest eternity, and
dwell in that light which no mortal eye can attain unto; the God in whom we
live, and move, and have our being; we thine unworthy servants do here in all
lowliness and humility, present our persons and prayers before thy divine
Majesty: confessing and acknowledging that we were conceived in sin, and
brought forth in iniquity; and, as if that had been but a small matter, we have
heaped up our actual transgressions as the sand upon the Sea shore, and as the
stars in the firmament for number. We have broken thy Commandments, we have
profaned thy Sabbaths, we have dishonored thy name, we have abused thy
creatures, we have neglected the day of our visitation, and turned thy grace
into wantonness, whereby we have most justly provoked thy wrath, and
everlasting displeasure, we have wounded our own consciences, weakened our
assurance of salvation, and grieved thy good Spirit, which seals us up unto
the day of our redemption.

And now Lord, if thou should deal with us after our deservings, thou
might pour upon us the deluge of thy wrath and fury to sweep us out of the
land of the living, into that place of torment prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. But thou have revealed thy self unto the sons of men to be the Lord,
the Lord, merciful and gracious, long suffering, and of great goodness, one
that pardons sin, and passes by the transgressions of thy people: this is thy
name for ever, and thy memorial throughout all generations.

We appeal therefore from thee, unto thee, from the barof thy Justice, to the
bowels of thy mercy, beseeching thee even for Jesus Christ his sake to be
merciful unto us in the free pardon and forgiveness of all the sins that ever
we have committed against thee. Accept of his obedience for our disobedience,
of his righteousness for our unrighteousness, of his sufferings for all our
sins; wash them away in his blood, nail them to his Cross, hide them in his
wounds, and bury them in his grave, that they may never rise up for our
confusion here, or condemnation hereafter.

And as we desire thee to be unto as a father of mercy, so be unto us a GOD of
consolation, speak peace unto our souls and consciences, and say unto us that
thou art the God of our salvation.

And for the time to come, give us grace to die daily unto sin by virtue of thy
Sons death, and to rise up to newness of life, by the power of his
resurrection; wean our hearts, and take off our affections from the things of
this world, which endure but for a season, and raise them up unto those things
which are at thy right hand for evermore. Inlighten the darkness of our
understandings, subdue the stubborness of our wills, rectify the disorder of
our affections, and bring into obedience whatsoever exalts it self against
thy will, that at last we may come to be such as thou would have us.

Deliver us o God from the temptations of the devil, from the allurements of
the world, from the lusts of the flesh, and from the evil example of this
crooked and perverse generation wherein we live, that we may run the race of
thy commandments without turning to the right hand or to the left.

And forasmuch as the days of our pilgrimage are but few and evil, and these
earthly tabernacles of our bodies must be dissolved, give us grace to pass the
time of our dwelling in thy fear, that we may depart hence in thy favor,
whenever, wheresoever, or howsoever it shall please thee to call for us.

And we entreat thee yet further to continue and enlarge thy blessings upon the
Church, and Land wherein we live, upon the person and government of our King,
upon the deliberations of his Council, upon the patience and long suffering of
all those who are afflicted with any cross or calamity: and because they are
unworthy to receive new blessings that are not thankful for those they have
already received; we bless and praise thee for all the mercies and favors
which thou have afforded us for our souls, or bodies; for this life or a
better. We thank thee for our election, creation, vocation, justification,
sanctification in some measure, and assured hope of glorification with thee in
thy Kingdom. We thank thee for the peace of our Church, for the health of our
bodies, for the plenty of our estates, and for the prosperity of our families.

And now, holy Father, seeing the night is upon us, and we are ready to take
our rest, into thy hands we commit our souls and bodies, and all that we have,
beseeching thee which art the Keeper of Israel, that neither sleeps, nor
slumbreth, to take care for us; for if thou protect us not, Satan will devour
us, yea we shall sleep a perpetual sleep, and never rise up to praise thee. We
pray thee therefore be good to us this night, defend us from danger, refresh us
with comfortable rest, and raise us up to glorify thee in the duties of the
day following, that thou may still be our God, and we thy people. Hear us and
graciously answer us in these our requests, and what else thou know needful
and expedient for us, and that for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose most blessed
name, and words, we conclude these our imperfect prayers, saying as he himself
has taught us: Our Father etc.

When thou art in bed commend thy self to God in the words of David:

I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest, for thou only, O Lord, make
me to dwell in safety, Psalm. 4.8.

Consider, and hear me O Lord my God, lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep the
sleep of death, Psalm. 13.3.

So when thou lie down, thou shall not be afraid: yea thou shall lie down,
and thy sleep shall be sweet, Prove. 3.24.

Grace before meat.
GOod Lord pardon and forgive us all our sins, which make us unworthy of all
thy mercies, bless these thy creatures to the use of our bodies, bless our
bodies to the use of our souls, and bless both our bodies and souls to thy
service, for Christ his sake. Amen.

Grace after meat.
THou O God which have created us by thy power, preserved us by thy providence,
redeemed us by thy blood, and at this time fed us by thy good creatures, be
blessed and praised now and evermore. Amen.

THE END.
London printed by Tho. Maxey for George Badger, and are to be sold at his Shop
in S. Dunstans Churchyard in Fleetstreet.


