VERE'S COMMENTARIES.

Brave Vere! who have by deeds of arms made good
What thou had promised by birth and blood;
Whose courage never turned edge, being backed with wise
And sober reason, sharpened with advise.
Look (Reader) how from Neuport hills he throws
Himself a thunderbolt amongst his foes;
And what his Sword indicted, that his Pen
With like success does here fight over again:
What Mars performed Mercury does tell;
None e're but Caesar fought and wrote so well.
Why may not then his Book this title carry,
The second part of Cesar's Commentary?
VERY SCIPIADae duo fulmina belli.
FRANCISCO VERO, Equiti Aurato, Galfredi F. Ioannis Cunitis Oxoniae Nepoti*
Brieliae et Portsmuthae Praefecto, Anglicarum copiarum in Belgio Ductori Summo;
ELIZABETHA uxor viro Charissimo, quocum Conjunctissime vixit, hoc Supremuni
amoris et fidei Conjugalis monumentum maestissima et cum Lacrymis Geme. Posuit.
Obijt XXVIII Di(...) Salutis MDCVIII et anno AEtatis Suae LIIII


Sr Francis Vere


THE COMMENTARIES OF Sr. FRANCIS VERE, Being Diverse pieces of service, wherein
he had command, written by himself in way of Commentary.

Published by William Dillingham, D. D.

Vt VERUS in suis Commentariis prodidit.
Camd. Annal. Mihi sufficit haec summatim e VERY Commentario annotasse.
Idem Ibid. CAMBRIDGE: Printed by John Field, Printer to the famous University.
Anno Dom. MDCLVII.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL HORACE TOWNSHEND, BARONET.
Right Worshipful,
I Here present you with the Works, that is, with the actions and writings of
your great Uncle, Sir Francis Vere; unto which as you have a right by blood,
common to some others with you; so have you also right by purchase, proper and
peculiar to your self alone, having freely contributed to adorn the Impression,
wherein you have consulted as the Readers delight and satisfaction, so the
honor and reputation of your family. I have read of one, that used to wear his
fathers picture always about him, that by often looking thereon he might be
reminded to imitate his virtues, and to admit of nothing unworthy the memory of
such an Ancestour; Now Sir, I think you shall not need any other monitour then
your own name, if but as often as you write it, or hear it spoken, you recall
into your thoughts those your Progenitors, who contributed to it; your
Honored father, Sir Roger Townshend, and your Grandfather the truly Honorable
and valiant the Lord Vere of Tilbury, men famous in their generations for
owning religion, not only by profession, but also by the practice and
patronage of it; whose virtues while you shall make the pattern of your
imitation, you will increase in favor with God and men, and answer the just
expectations of your country. And that you may so do it is the earnest desire,
and hearty prayer of

Sir, Your respectfull friend, and humble servant, William Dillingham.

To the ingenuous Reader.
ALthough this book can neither need nor admit of any letters recommendatory
from so mean a hand, yet I thought it not incongruous to give thee some account
of it, especially coming forth so many years after the Authors death.

Know then, that some years since it was my good hap to meet with a copy of it
in a library of a friend, which had been either transcribed from, or at least
compared with another in the owning and possession of Major General Skippon,
which I had no sooner looked into, but I found my self led on with exceeding
delight to the perusal of it. The gallantry of the Action, the modesty of the
Author, and the becomingness of the style did much affect me; and I soon
resolved that such a treasure could not without ingratitude to the Author and
his Noble Family, nor without a manifest injury to the repute of our English
Nation, yea and unto truth it self, be any longer concealed in obscurity.

Whereupon I engaged my best endeavors to bring it into the public view; but
finding some imperfections and doubtful places in that copy, I gave my self to
further inquiry after some other copies, supposing it very improbable that they
should all stumble at the same stone. And so I was favored with another copy
out of the increasing Library of the Right Honorable the Earl of Westmorland,
which had been transcribed immediately from the Authors own; another the
Honorable the Lord Fairfax was pleased to afford me the perusal of; but that
which was instar omnium was the original it self, written by the Authors own
hand, being the goods and treasure of the Right Honorable Earl of Clare; but
at present (through his favor) in my possession. These (Reader) are the
Personages, whose favor herein I am, even upon thy account, obliged here to
remember and acknowledge.

I have subjoyned Sir John Ogles account of the last charge at Neuport-battel;
whom I suppose our Author himself would have allowed, being his
Lieutenant Colonel, to bring up the reere. I have also inserted his account of
the Parley at the siege of Ostend, both communicated to me by the same friendly
hand, that first lent me the copy of Sir Francis Vere. And for thy further
satisfaction, I have adventured to continue the story of that siege, from the
time that our Author put up his pen, to the time that he put up his sword
there, having first by his example taught others the way how to defend the
town. Last of all, at the end of the book thou will meet with the History of
Neuport-battel, written some time since in Latin by an elegant and learned
pen; which, for the consanguinity of it, is here subjoyned. But if any shall
take upon them to censure him, as having translated Sir Francis Vere, without
acknowledging of him for the Author; I have this to answer on his behalf, viz.
that as he does no where deny his translating of him, so that he did conceal
it, we may very well impute it to the desire he had, both to afford Sir Francis
Vere a more ample and advantageous character, then his own modesty would permit
him to assume unto himself; and also to give in his testimony unto the truth,
in a matter which others his countrymen had with too much partiality related.
And this also let me further add, that whether he did translate it or not; yet
this, I suppose, will not be questioned, that very few Authors, either ancient
or modern, have in so narrow a compass so highly deserved of the learned and
ingenious Reader, as he has done.

I will not here mention any thing concerning our Authors life or extraction;
the one whereof is sufficiently known; and for the other I shall content my
self with what Sir Robert Naunton has briefly written of him, which I have
printed here before the Book; which is all but a larger Commentary upon that
which he has there delivered. Only give me leave to be-moan a little our own
loss, and the Authors unhappiness in this, That his Noble Brother having been
in courage equal, and in hazards undivided, should leave him here to go alone.
For, as he must be allowed a great share in these actions recorded by his
Brother, so were his own services afterward, when General of the English, so
eminent and considerable, that they might easily have furnished another
Commentary, had not his own exceeding modesty proved a stepmother to his
deserved praises. He was a religious, wise, and valiant Commander, and (that
which quartered him in the bosom of the Prince of Orange) he was always
succesfull in his enterprises; sometimes to the admiration both of friends and
enemies. Take an instance or two. When he took Scluys, there was one strong
hold first to be taken, which he found some difficulty to overcome, and that
was the opinion of his friends of the impossibility of the enterprise. And for
his enemies, Spinola himself (were he now alive) would, I question not, do him
the right, which he did him in his lifetime, and bear witness of his gallant
retreat with four thousand men from between his very fingers, when with three
times that number he had grasped up the Prince and his men against the
Seashore.

And because the proficiencie of the Scholars was ever accounted a good
argument of their Masters ability; I shall make bold (with their leaves) here
to give you a list of some of his. Henry Earl of Oxford. Thomas Lord Fairfax.
S. Edward Vere, Lieut. Col. S. Sim. Harcourt, Ser. Maj. S. Thom. Dutton,
Captain. S. Henry Paiton, Captain. S. John Buroughs, Capt. S. Thomas Gates,
Captain. S. John Conyers, Captain. S. Thomas Gale, Captain. S. William
Lovelace, Cap. S. Rob. Carey, Captain. S. Jacob Ashley, Captain. S. Tho.
Conway, Capt. S. John Burlacy, Captain. S. Tho. Win, Captain. S. Ger.
Herbert, Captain. S. Edw. Harwood, Capt. S. Mich. Everid, Captain.
Besides diverse others, whose effigies do at once both guard and adorn
Kirby-hall in Essex; where the truly religious and Honorable the Lady Vere
does still survive, kept alive thus long by special providence, that the
present age might more then read and remember what was true Godliness in eighty
eight. And as for her Lord and Husband, who died long since, though he left no
heir Male behind him to bear his name, yet has he distributed his blood to run
in the veins of many Honorable and Worshipful families in England: for his
daughters were, The Right Honorable, Honorable and virtuous; The Countess of
Clare; The Lady Townshend, now Countess of Westmorland; The Lady Paulet; The
Lady Fairfax; and Mistress Worstenholme. Whose pardon I crave for making so bold
with their names, but my hope is they will be willing to become witnesses unto
their Uncles book (though a warlike birth) and to let their names midwife it
into the world. Thus (Reader) have I given thee a brief account of this piece,
and so recommend me to Sir Francis Vere.

In the mapp of the Low Countries the graver has set the Fort of Mardyck on
the wrong side of Dunkerk. In the Epistle to the Reader an. 8. read in the.
W. D.
Sir Robert Naunton in his Fragmenta Regalia, p. 41.
VERE.
Sir Francis Vere was of that ancient, and of the most noble extract of the
Earls of Oxford, and it may be a question whether the Nobility of his House, or
the Honor of his achievements might most commend him; but that we have an
authentic rule: Nam genus, and proavos, and quae non fecimus ipst,
Vix ea nostra voco, etc.
For though he was an Honorable slip of that ancient tree of Nobility, which
was no disadvantage to his virtue, yet he brought more glory to the name of
Vere, then he took blood from the family.

He was amongst all the Queens Swordmen inferior unto none, but superior to
many; of whom it may be said, To speak much of him were the way to leave out
somewhat that might add to his praise, and to forget more that would make to
his honor.

I find not that he came much to the Court, for he lived almost perpetually in
the Camp; but when he did, none had more of the Queens favor, and none less
envied; for he seldom troubled it with the noise and alarms of supplications,
his way was another sort of undermining.

They report that the Queen, as she loved Martial men, would court this
Gentleman as soon as he appeared in her presence, and surely he was a soldier
of great worth and Command, thirty years in the service of the States, and
twenty years over the English in chief, as the Queens General. And he that had
seen the battle at Neuport, might there best have taken him, and his Noble
brother, the Lord of Tilbury, to the life.

The Contents.
BOmmeler-Waert Page 1. The relief of Rhinbergh p. 3. The second relieving of
Rhinbergh p. 4. The relieving the Castle of Litken-hooven p. 10. The surprise
of Zutphen-Sconse p. 17. The siege of Deventer p. 18. The defeat given the Duke
of Parma at Knodsenburgh-Fort p. 20. The Calis-Journey p. 24. The Island-voyage
p. 45. The Government of the Briel p. 68. The Action at Turn-hoult p. 72. The
battle at Neuport p. 81. Sir John Ogles account of the last charge there p.
106. Clement Edmonds Observation p. 112.
The siege of Ostend p. 118. The continuation of it p. 131.
Praelium Nuportanum, per Is. Dorislaum p. 179.
The effigies of S. Fr. Vere, and then that of the Lord Vere before the
Title Page. S. Fr. Veres Monument, next after the Epistle to the Reader. The
mapp of the Seacoasts, and then that of the Low Countries, page 1. The mapp of
Cadiz, and the Islands Azores, p. 24. The Action at Turn-hoult, p. 72. The
Battle at Neuport, p. 80. The effigies of S. John Ogle, p. 106. The mapp of
Ostend, p. 118.
ERRATA.
Page 27. line 8. dele, in the. p. 32. lin. last, put the parenthesis after
Caletta. page 132. lin. 22. for spilt, read split. p. 147. l. 16. r. among the
rest came that.

A MAP OF THE SEA COASTS.


A MAP OF THE LOW COUNTRIES.


Sr HOR(...)E since Baron of Tilbury.


THE COMMENTARIES OF Sr. FRANCIS VERE.
BOMMELER-WAERT.
IN the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred eighty and nine, the Count
Charles Mansfeldt having passed with part of his army into the Bommeler-Waert,
(the rest lying in Brabant over against the island of Voorn) prepared both
troops to pass into the said island with great store of flat-bottomed boats,
his artillery being placed to the best advantage to favor the enterprise.

The Count Maurice had to impeach him not above eight hundred men, the whole
force that he was then able to gather together not being above fifteen hundred
men, whereof the most were dispersed along the river of Wael, fronting the
Bommeler-Waert, to impeach the enemies passage into the Betowe: Of these eight
hundred men six hundred were English, of which my self had the command.

These seemed small forces to resist the enemy, who was then reckoned about
twelve thousand men; and therefore the Count Maurice and the Count Hollock, one
day doing me the honor to come to my quarter, put it in deliberation, whether
it were not best to abandon the place: whereunto when others inclined, my
opinion was, That in regard of the importance of the place, and for the
reputation of the Count Maurice (this being the first enterprise wherein he
commanded in person as chief) it could not be abandoned (but with much
reproach) without the knowledge and order of the States General: and that
therefore they were first to be informed in what state things stood; I
undertaking in the mean time the defense of the place. Which counsel was
followed, and I used such industry both in the intrenching of the island, and
planting artillery, that the enemy in the end desisted from the enterprise.

The relief of RHINBERGH.
IN the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred eighty nine, the town of
Bergh upon the Rhyne being besieged by the Marquess of Warrenbon, and
distressed for want of victuals, I was sent to the Count Meurs, governor of
Gelderland, by the States, with nine companies of English.

At my coming to Arnheim, where he lay in a storehouse of munitions, in giving
order for things necessary for his expedition, the powder was set on fire, and
he so sorely burnt, that he died within few days after.

The States of that province called me before them, told me in what extremity
the town was, the importance of the place, and facility in succouring it,
desiring me to proceed in the enterprise; which I did willingly assent unto,
and they appointed seven companies of their own nation to join with me, which
were to be left in Bergh in lieu of so many other companies to be drawn out
thence.

To the Count Oversteyn (a young Gentleman, and then without any charge, as a
kinsman and follower of the Count of Meurs) they gave the command of twelve
companies of horse. With these troops we passed to the fort Caleti, made by
Skink over against Rees, where finding the carriages appointed for that purpose
ready laden with provisions, we marched toward Bergh, taking our way through a
heathy and open country, and so with diligence surprising the enemy, who lay
dispersed in their forts about the town, in full view of them put our
provisions into the town, and so returned to the said fort by Rees, the same
way we had gone.

The second relieving of RHINBERGH.
AFter some days refreshing, it was thought good by the States (new provision
of victuals being made) who in the mean time had advice how things had passed,
that we should with all speed put in more provisions, being advertized that the
enemy gathered great forces in Brabant, under the conduct of the Count
Mansfeldt, for the straight besieging of the Town; which made us hasten, and
withal take the ordinary and ready way near the Rhine-side: but because it was
shorter, and not so open as the other, and so more dangerous, if perchance the
enemy with his full power should encounter us; and because there were upon it
certain small redoubts held by the enemy, we took along with us two small
fieldpieces.

When we came within two English miles of Bergh, at a castle called Loo, which
stands on the side of a thick wood within musket shot of the way, we were to
take through the said wood, being very narrow and hemmed in on both sides with
exceeding thick underwoods, such (as I guess) as those dangerous places of
Ireland, the enemy from the castle first showed themselves, and then came out
toward the place along the skirt of the wood, to gall our men and horses in
their passage, with such bravery, as I might well perceive they were not of the
ordinary garrison.

I first sent out some few shot to beat them back, giving order to our
vantguard in the mean time to enter the passage, and the Dutch footmen to
follow them, and the horsemen, and carriages, with orders to pass with all
diligence to the other side of the place, and then to make a stand until the
rest of the troops were come up to them, keeping with my self (who stayed in
the rereward) fifty horse and six trumpeters, and all the English foot. In the
mean time, the enemy seconded their troops of shot with to the number of four
or five hundred, in so much as I was forced to turn upon greater numbers, with
resolution to beat them home to their castle, which was so thoroughly performed,
that afterward they gave us leave to pass more quietly.

When the rest of the troops were passed, I made the English enter the
straight, who were divided into two troops, of which I took an hundred men,
with six drums, placing them in the rereward of all (my self with the fifty
horse marching betwixt them and the rest of the English footmen). This straight
is about a quarter of an English mile long, and has about the middle of it
another way, which comes into it from Alpen a small town not far off.

When we were past this cross way, we might hear a great shout of men's voices
redoubled twice or thrice, as the Spanish manner is when they go to charge; but
by reason of the narrowness and crookedness of the place, had no sight of
them. I presently caused the troops to march faster, and withal gave order to
the trumpeters and drums that were with me to stand and sound a charge;
whereupon there grew a great stillness amongst the enemy, who (as I afterward
understood by themselves) made a stand expecting to be charged.

In the mean time we went as fast from them as we could, till we had gotten the
plain; then having rid to the head of the troops, who were then in their long
and single orders; and giving directions for the embatteling of them, and
turning their faces toward the straight, and the mouths of the pieces also,
and so riding along the troops of English toward the place, I might see from
the plain (which was somewhat high raised over the woods, which were not tall)
the enemy coming in great haste over a bridge some eight score within the
straight with ensigns displayed, very thick thronged together, and in a trice
they showed themselves in the mouth of the straight. My hindermost troops which
were then near the straight were yet in their long order, and with the
suddenness of the sight somewhat amazed, in so much that a captain well
reputed, and that the very same day had behaved himself very valiantly, though
he saw me directing as became me, often asked what he should do; till shortly
and roughly as his importunity and the time required, I told him that I was
never less to seek; that he therefore should go to his place, and do as I had
commanded, till further order: and so doubting the enemy would get the plain,
before my troops would be thoroughly ordered to go against them, I took some of
the hinder ranks of the pikes, and some shot, with which I made out to the
streights mouth a great pace, vvilling the rest to follovv: vvhereupon the
enemy made a stand, as it were doubtful to come on; and so I came presently
to the push of pike with them.

Where at the first encounter my horse being slain under me with the blovv of
a pike, and falling on me, so as I could not suddenly rise, I lay as betwixt
both troops, till our men had made the enemy give back, receiving a hurt in my
leg, and diverse thrusts with pikes through my garments.

It was very hard fought on both sides, till our shot spreading themselves
along the skirt of the vvood (as I had before directed) flanked and sore galled
the enemy, so that they could no longer endure, but were forced to give back;
which they did without any great disorder in troop, and as they were hard
follovved by our men, turned and made head manfully, which they did four
several times before they broke, and at last they flang away their arms, and
scattered asunder, thrusting themselves into the thickets; for backvvards they
could not flee, the way being stopped by their own men.

I commanded our men not to disband, but pursue them; and passing forward
easily discomfited the five hundred horsemen, who presently left their horses,
and fled into the bushes; amongst whom it was said the Marquess of Warrenbon
was in person: for the horse he was mounted on was then taken amongst the rest.

The horsemen who fled into the thicks we followed not, but went on the straight
way till we encountered with the twenty four companies of Neopolitans, who
discouraged with our success, made no great resistance. We took eighteen of
their ensigns, and made a great slaughter of their men, till we had recovered
the bridge before mentioned of them. My troop being small of it self, made
less by this fight, and lesser by the covetousness of the soldier, (whereof
a good part could no longer be kept from rifling of the enemy, and taking
horses,) I thought good not to pursue the enemy further then the said bridge;
where having made a stand till our men had taken the full spoil of all behind
us, the enemy not once so much as showing himself, and night growing on, I made
my retreat, and two hours after sunset came with the troops into the town of
Bergh.

This fight was begun and ended with one of the two English troops, which could
not exceed four hundred men: the other, which Sir Oliver Lambert led, only
following, and showing it self in good order, and ready if occasion required:
the Netherlanders remaining in the plain with the horsemen and the Count
Overstein.

The enemy lost about eight hundred men, and by an Italian Lieutenant of
horsemen (who was the only man taken alive) I understood that the Count
Mansfeldt was newly before this encounter arrived, and had joined this forces
with those of the Marquess of Warrenbon, in which were all the Spanish
regiments, making two hundred and twenty ensigns, besides other forces; so as
the whole strength was supposed thirteen or fourteen thousand foot, and twelve
hundred horse, of their oldest and best soldiers. They had intelligence of our
coming, but expected us the way we had taken before, and made all speed to
impeach us by cutting off this passage, sending those harquebuizers we first
met with by the castle, to entertain us in skirmish.

Presently upon my coming to Bergh, though in great pain with my wound, we fell
to deliberation what was to be done: we knew the enemies strength, and the
danger we were to abide in returning; and to stay in the town, were to hasten
the loss of it, by eating the provisions we had brought: of the two we chose
rather to return; and so giving order for the change of the garrison, and
refreshing our men, and bestowing those who were hurt on the empty carriages,
by the break of day the morning being very foggy and mistie, we set forward in
as secret manner as we could, taking the opener and broader way, without sight
of any enemy, till about noon that some troops of horse discovered themselves a
far off upon a very spacious heath, and gave us only the looking on, so that
without any impeachment we arrived that night at the fort before Rees.

The relieving of the Castle of LITKENHOOVEN.
IN the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred and ninety, the castle of
Litkenhooven in the fort of Recklinchusen, in which there was a garrison of the
States soldiers, being besieged by the people of that country, aided with
some good number of the Duke of Cleves, the Bishops of Colen, and Patebournes
soldiers, which they call Hanniveers; The States gave me order with some
companies of English foot, to the number of seven or eight hundred, and five
hundred horse, to go to the relief of the said castle; which I accepted, and
marching with all possible speed, in good hope to have surprised them at
unawares, and arriving there one morning by break of day, I found that the
chief troop was dislodged, and that they had wrought hard upon a fort before
the entry of the castle, in which they had left good store of men.

I did expect to have found them without any intrenchment, and therefore had
brought no provision of artillery or scaling ladders, without the which it
seemed very dangerous and difficult to carry it by assault, being reared of a
good height with earth, and then with gabions set thereupon of six foot high,
made almost unmountable: And to besiege them I had no provision of victuals, so
that I was to return without making of any attempt, or to attempt in a manner
against reason; which notwithstanding I resolved to adventure.

And therefore dividing the English troop into eight parts, I conveyed them as
secretly as I could, so as two of these troops might readily assault every
corner of the said fort, being a square of four small bulwarks; but with a
distance betwixt the two troops, to give on each corner with a signal of
drums, at which the first four troops should go to the assault; and another
signal to the other four troops to second, if need required.

Whilst this was in doing, I sent a drum to summon them of the fort to yield,
who sent me word, they would first see my artillery. I saw by their fashion
there was no good to be done by entreaty; yet to amuse them, I sent them word
the artillery was not yet arrived: if they made me stay the coming of it, I
would give them no conditions: they answered, that I should do my worst.

At the very instant of my drums return, I gave the signal, and the troops
speedily gave upon the fort, as I had appointed them: though they did their
utmost endeavors, they did find more resistance then they were able to
overcome; nevertheless I gave them no second till I might perceive those
within had spent their ready powder in their furnitures; at what time I gave
the second signal, which was well and willingly obeyed, and gave such courage
to the first troops, that the assault was more eager on all hands, in so much
that one soldier helping another, some got to the top of the rampires; at
which the enemy gave back, so as the way became more easy for others to climb
to the top, and so finally the place was forced, and all the men put to the
sword, being in number three hundred and fifty, all chosen men, with the loss
and hurting of about fourscore of my men.

The place thus succored, and my men refreshed for some few days, I returned
homewards, and found in my way that Burick a small town of Cleve, and a little
fort on that side the Rhyne, were in the mean time surprised.

The enemy then held a royal fort not far from Wesel, which served to favor
the passage of his forces over the Rhyne. This place I understood by those of
Wesel to be slenderly provided of victuals, so as they had but to serve them
from hand to mouth out of the town, and that their store of powder was very
small. I knew the service would be acceptable to the States, if I could take
that piece from the enemy, and therefore resolved to do what lay in me: and
first appointed a guard of horse and foot to hinder their recourse to the town
for their provisions.

Then passing into the town of Burick, with such stuff as I could get on a
sudden, and such workmen, I began to make ladders; so as the night following I
had forty ladders in readiness, upon which two men might go in front: for I
being so weak, and the enemy having the alarm of my being abroad, I was to
expect their coming; so as it was not for me to linger upon the starving those
of the fort. With this provision I resolved to give a scalado to the fort,
which as it was high or rampire, so had it neither water in the ditch, nor
pallisado to hinder us.

The fort was spacious, capable of fifteen hundred men, and had four very
royal bulwarks, upon one of which I purposed to give an attempt, and only
false alarms on the other quarters of the fort; and to this end for avoiding
confusion, both in the carriage, rearing, planting, and scaling, as also for
the more speedy and round excution, I appointed eight men to every ladder to
bear, plant, and mount the same, whereof four were shot and four pikes; one of
either sort to mount a front. And being come near the fort in a place
convenient to range the men, they were divided into two parts, and ranged a
front, with commandment upon a signal given, the one half to give upon one
face of the bulwark, the other upon the other, which they did accordingly, and
gave a furious attempt, mounting the ladders and fighting at the top of them,
the enemy being ready to receive us; but by reason many of the ladders which
were made (as I have said) in haste, and of such stuff as could be gotten on a
sudden, were not of sufficient strength, but broke with the weight and stirring
of the men, seeing no likelihood to prevail, and the day now growing on, I
caused our men to retire, and to bring away with them their ladders that were
whole, with no great harm to our men, by reason the enemy being diverted by
the false alarms did not flank us, neither if they had played from the flanks
with small shot, could they have done any great hurt by reason of the distance;
the most hurt we had was with blows on the head from the place we attempted,
both with weapons and stones; for the journey being long, to ease the soldiers
they brought forth no morrians.

I therefore purposing not to give over this enterprise, provided head-pieces
for them in the town of Wesell, and used such diligence that before the next
morning I was again furnished with ladders, and in greater number: for I had
persuaded the horsemen that were well armed for the purpose, with their pistols
to take some ladders also, and be ready to give the scalado in the same manner,
but somewhat later, for even then day began to break, which not giving us time
to persevere in the attempt, was the only hindrance of our victory: for our
shot having order when they came to the top of the ladders not to enter, but
taking the top of the wall for a breast, and safeguard, to shoot at the enemy
fighting at the work-side, and standing in the hollow of the bulwark, till the
same were cleared of defendants for to enter more assuredly; which manner of
assaulting, though it be not ordinary, yet well considered is of wonderful
advantage: for having the outside of both the faces of the bulwark not flanked
(as I said before) on their backs, (which in the darkness of the night, and for
the alarms given on the other parts they could not see nor intend) and in this
manner having galled and driven many of the enemy from the wall, and being in a
manner ready to enter, day came upon us, and the enemy having discovered us
from the other flanks, turned both small and great shot against us, so as we
were forced to retire, carrying our ladders with us, with less loss then the
day before in the fight, though more in the retreit by reason of the day light.

The same day I provided more ladders, purposing the next morning to try
fortune again, when in the evening the Governor of the fort by a drum wrote me
a letter, complaining that against the ordinary proceedings of men of war, I
assaulted before I summoned; and the drum in mine ear told me, that if I would
but do them the honor to show them any piece of ordnance, I should quickly
have the fort. By which drawing of theirs I perceived they were in fear, and in
discretion thought it meeter to make my advantage thereof by drawing them to
yield, then to despair them to my greater loss, by further attempting to
carry them by force; and so taking a piece out of the town of Burick, I
planted the same before morning, and by break of day sent a trumpet to summon
them to yield, which they did assent unto, so they might pass away with their
arms, which I granted, and so they came forth the same morning two companies of
Almains, and two half companies of Italians, near as strong in number as those
that attempted them: for besides the English I used none, but some few horsemen:
most of their officers were hurt and slain, and of the soldiers more then of
mine.

This is true, and therefore let it be thought that howsoever this attempt may
seem rash with the ordinary proceedings of other captains, yet notwithstanding
I was confident upon a certain and infallible discourse of reason.

In the place I found four double Cannons, with pretty store of ammunition and
victuals. The same night I and the troops were countermanded by the States, but
I left the place with some guard and better store of necessaries before my
departure.

The surprise of ZVTPHEN sconce.
IN the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred ninety one, I lying then at
Deesburgh with the English forces, the Count Maurice wrote unto me, that by a
certain day he would be with his forces before Zutphen to besiege the same,
willing me the night before with my troops of horse and foot of that country
to beset the town on the same side of the river it stands.

On the same those of the town held a fort, which made my Lord of Leycester
loose many men and much time before he could get it. This fort I thought
necessary to take from the enemy before he had knowledge of our purpose to
besiege him, and because I wanted force to work it by open means, I put this
slight following in practice.

I chose a good number of lusty and hardy young Soldiers, the most of which I
apparelled like the country women of those parts, the rest like the men, gave
to some baskets, to other packs, and such burdens as the people usually carry
to the market, with pistols, and short swords, and daggers, under their
garments, willing them by two or three in a company, by break of day to be at
the ferry of Zutphen, which is just against the fort, as if they stayed for the
passage boat of the town; and bad them to sit and rest themselves in the mean
time as near the gate of the fort as they could for avoiding suspicion, and to
seize upon the same as soon as it was opened. Which took so good effect, that
they possessed the entry of the fort, and held the same till an officer with
two hundred soldiers (who was laid in a covert not far off,) came to their
seconds, and so became fully Master of the place. By which means the siege of
the town afterward proved the shorter.

The siege of DEVENTER.
IN the siege of Deventer, by reason of the shortness of a bridge of boats
laid over the ditch for our men to go to the assault, the troops could not so
roundly pass as had been requisite, and so were forced to retire with no small
loss.

The Count Maurice was so discouraged that he purposed that night to have
withdrawn his Ordnance. I desired that he would have patience till the next
day, and resolve in the morning to begin the battery again for five or six
volleys, and then to summon them, assuring him that I would guard the bridge
that night, if the enemy should attempt to burn it, as they did, though in vain.

The Count Maurice liked well of the advice, and it had good success; for upon
the summons they yielded. Their town had no flank on that part; the wall, which
was of brick without any Rampire, was in a manner rased to the foundation, the
town so close behind it that they could not make any new defenses; which as
they might be just causes of discouragement to the besieged, so they made me
confident that with this show of perseverance they would yield.

The Count Herman of Bergh, who commanded the town was sore bruised with a
Cannon. There marched of the enemy out with him seven or eight hundred able
men, amongst which was an English Gentleman, whom for his using unreverent and
slanderous speeches of her Majesty I had long held in prison, out of which he
had during that siege made an escape; he was excepted in the composition, taken
from them, and executed, as he well deserved, not for his first but second
offense.

The defeat given to the Duke of Parma at KNODSENBVRGHFORT.
IN the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred ninety one whilst the
Count Maurice was busied in Friezland, and with good success took many forts,
as Delfziel, and others about Groninghen; The Duke of Parma passed with his
army into the Betow, and besieged the fort on that side the river upon the
ferry to Nimmeghen. Whereupon the States countermanded the Count Maurice with
their forces; who being come to Arnheim encamped in the Betow right over
against that Town.

The Duke still continuing his siege, the States (who were then present at
Arnheim) desirous to hinder his purpose, if it were possible, in their assembly
(to which I was called with the Count Maurice) propounded the matter, and
insisted to have something exploited, though we laid before them the advantage
the enemy had of us in the number of his men, the strength of his encamping, as
well by the site of the country, as intrenchments; so as much time was spent,
and the council dissolved without resolution upon any special enterprise;
albeit in general the Count Maurice and the men of war agreed to do their
utmost endeavor for the annoying and hindering of the enemy.

I had observed by the enemies daily coming with good troops of horse and
forcing of our scouts, that they were likely to bite at any bait that were
cunningly laid for them, and therefore having informed my self of the ways and
passages to their army, and projected with my self a probable plot to do some
good on them, I brake the same to the Count Maurice, who liked my devise well,
and recommended to me the execution thereof, giving me the troops I demanded,
which were one thousand two hundred foot and five hundred horse.

The distance betwixt the two armies was about four or five English miles, to
the which there lay two ready ways, serving for the intercourse betwixt
Arnheim and Nimmeghen; the one a dike or cawsey, which was narrower and most
used in winter by reason of the lowness and myrinesse of the country; the
other larger: both hemd with overgrown woods and deep ditches.

Near half a mile from the quarter, this cawsey was to be passed to come to the
other way, which led to the main quarter of the enemy where most of his horse
lay. About two thirds of the way from our camp there was a bridge, to this
bridge I marched early in the morning sending forthwith toward the enemies
camp two hundred light and well mounted horse with order to beat the guards of
the enemies horse even to their very quarter and guards of foot, to take such
spoil and prisoners as lay ready in their way, and so to make their retreat, if
they were followed, more speedily; otherwise, an ordinary marching pace. In the
mean time I divided my footmen into two parts, whereof one I laid near the
hither side of the bridge, in a place very covert: the other a quarter of a
mile behind, and in the rereward of them the rest of my horse. If the enemy
came in the tail of our horse, whom for that purpose I had appointed (as before
said) to come more leasurely, that the enemy might have time to get to horse; I
knew they could bring no footmen, and therefore was resolved to receive betwixt
my troops of foot all the horsemen they could send; But if they pursued not our
men in the heat, I judged they would either come with good numbers of both
kind of men ordered, or not at all: and if they came with good advice, that
they would rather seek to cut off my passage near home by taking the cawsey and
higher way, then to follow me directly.

For the better preventing whereof the Count Maurice himself with a choice part
of the horse and foot of the army, was to attend at the cross way to favor my
retreat. My hors-men about noon gave the enemy the alarm, and according to
their directions made their retreat no enemy appearing, whereupon I also
retired with the rest of the troop till I came to the cross way; where I found
the Count Maurice with his troops. In the head of which toward the way of the
cawsey, with some distance betwixt his troops and mine, I made a stand in a
little-field by the side of the way where they were at covert.

We had not been here half an hour, but our scouts brought word the enemy was
at hand; which the Count Maurice's horsemen hearing, without any order, as
every one could get foremost, to the number of seven or eight hundred they made
withal speed toward the enemy. I presumed and said they would return faster
and in more disorder, as it fell out; for the enemy coming as fast toward
them, but in better order, put them presently in rout, and the greater the
number was, the more was the amazement and confusion. Thus they passed by us
with the enemy at their heels laying on them.

I knew not what other troops they had at hand, nor what discouragement this
sight might put into the minds of our men, and therefore whereas I purposed to
have let the enemy pass, if this unlooked for disorder had not happened
amongst our horsemen, I showed my troops on their flanks and galled them both
with shot and pikes; so that they not only left pursuing their chase, but
turned their backs. Which our horsemen perceiving, followed, and thus revenged
themselves to the full, for they never gave over until they had wholly
defeated the troop, which was of eight hundred horse, of which they brought
betwixt two and three hundred prisoners, whereof diverse were Captains, as Don
Alphonso d' Aualos, Fradill^, and others; with diverse Cornets and about five
hundred horses.

This defeat so troubled the Duke of Parma, that being so forward on his siege,
and having filled part of the ditch of the fort, he retired his army thence,
and passed the river of Wael a little above Nimmeghen with more dishonor then
in any action that he had undertaken in these wars.

The Calis-journey.
IN the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred ninety six I was sent for
into England at that time when the journey to the coast of Spain was resolved
on, (which because of the taking of Calis was after commonly called the
Calis-journey) and returned speedily into the Low Countries with letters of
credence to the States from her Majesty, to acquaint them with her Majesty's
purpose, and to hasten the preparation of the shipping they had already
promised to attend her Majesty's fleet in those seas: withal to let them know
her Majesty's desire to have two thousand of her own subjects, as well of those
in their pay, as her own, to be employed in that action, and to be conducted by
me to the Earl of Essex, and the Lord Admiral of England, Generals of that
action by joint commission.

Whereunto the States assented, and I (according to my instructions given me in
that behalf) by the time appointed shipped and transported to the Rendezvous;
which was assigned me before Bulleyn on the coast of France; by reason that
Calais in France was then besieged by the Cardinal Albertus. upon that
occasion it was resolved to have employed this army for the succor and relief
thereof, but coming into that road I found no shipping of ours, and
understanding that Calais was yielded the day before, I crossed the sea to
Dover, where I found the whole fleet and the Generals, who received me with
much joy and favor, being then (though far unworthy of so weighty a charge)
chosen to supply the place of Lieutenant General of the army by the name and
title of Lord Marshall.

The fleet set sail shortly after, and my Lord of Essex leaving his own ship
imbarqued himself in the Rainbow with my self and some few of his ordinary
attendant servants, of purpose (as I suppose) to confer with me at the full
and at ease of his journey. After two days sailing his Lordship landed at
Beachim near Rye, with diverse other Noblemen, that he had attending him so far
on his journey. He took me along with him to the Court, and thence dispatched
me to Plymmouth, whither most of the Landforces were to march, to see them
lodged, provided of necessaries, and trained, and ordered, which I did
accordingly, to the great contentment of the Generals, when at their coming
they saw the readiness of the men, which were then exercised before them.

During this stay of the army about Plymmouth (which by reason of the
contrariety of wind was near a month) it pleased my Lord of Essex to give me
much countenance and to have me always near him, which drew upon me no small
envy, in so much as some open jarres fell out betwixt Sir Walter Raleigh then
Rear-admirall of the navy, and Sir Conniers Clifford Sergeant-major-generall
of the army, and my self; which the General qualified for the time, and
ordered that in all meetings at Land I should have the precedence of Sir Walter
Raleigh, and he of me at Sea. Sir Conniers Clifford, though there were grudging
there could be no competition, yet being a man of a haughty stomach, and not
of the greatest government or experience in Martial discipline, lest ignorance
or will might mislead him in the execution of his office, and to give a rule to
the rest of the high officers (which were chosen rather for favor then for
long continuance in service) to the better directing of them in their duties,
as also for the more readiness in the General himself to judge and
distinguish upon all occasions of controversy; I propounded to my Lord of
Essex as a thing most necessary, the setting down in writing, what belonged
properly to every office in the field; which motion his Lordship liked well,
and at several times in the morning his Lordship and my self together, he with
his own hand wrote what my industry and experience had made me able to
deliver, which was afterward copied, and delivered severally to the officers,
and took so good effect that no question arose in that behalf during the
journey.

The wind serving and the troop shipped I imbarqued in the foresaid Rainbow as
Vice Admiral of my Lord of Essex his squadron. The one and twentieth day after
(being, as I take it, the first of July) the fleet arrived early in the in the
morning before Calis-Malis, and shortly after came to an anchor, as near the
Caletta as the depth would suffer us.

In the mouth of the Bay, thwart of the rocks called Los puercos, there lay to
our judgment forty or fifty tall ships, whereof were four of the kings
greatest and warlikest Gallions, eighteen Merchant ships of the West-Indian
fleet outward bounden, and richly laden, the rest private Merchants.

Because it was thought these could not escape us in putting to fea, the first
project of landing our men in the Caletta went on, and so the troops appointed
for that purpose were imbarqued in our barges and long boats: But the wind
blowing hard, the landing was thought too dangerous, the rather for that the
enemy showed themselves on the shore with good troops of horse and foot.
Notwithstanding in hope the weather would calm, the men were still kept in the
boats at the ships sterns.

This day the Generals met not together, but the Lord Admiral had most of the
sea officers aboard with him, as the Lord of Essex had those for land service,
and Sir Walter Raleigh was sent to and fro betwixt them with messages, so that
in the end it was resolved and agreed upon to put, the next tide, into the Bay,
and, after the defeating of the enemies fleet, to land our men betwixt the town
and Puntal, without setting down any more particular directions for the
execution thereof. I then told my Lord of Essex that mine was a floaty ship and
well appointed for that service; that therefore, if his Lordship pleased, I was
desirous to put in before his Lordship and the other ships of greater burden,
to which his Lordship answered suddenly that in any case I should not go in
before him.

With this I and the rest of the officers went to our ships to prepare our
selves; I took my company of soldiers out of the boats into my ship, for their
more safety, and better strengthening of my ship. And because we anchored more
to the North of the fleet, more a stern and to the Leeward of the fleet, as the
wind then blew, then any other ship; I thought to recover these disadvantages
by a speedier loosing of my anchor then the rest. And therefore, not attending
the Generals signal and warning, so soon as the tide began to favor my
purpose, I fell to weighing my anchor. But the wind was so great and the billow
so high that the Cap-stain being too strong for my men, cast them against the
ships side and spoiled many of them; so that after many attempts to wind up the
anchor I was forced to cut Cable in the haulse. When I was under sail, I plied
only to windward, lying off and on from the mouth of the Bay to the sea, which
lies near hand East and West, by that means gathering nearer to the fleet. The
Lord Thomas Howard Vice Admiral of the fleet with some few other ships set
sail also beating off and on before the mouth of the Bay; but the General and
the most of the fleet kept their anchors still.

The tide being far spent (loath to be driven again to the Leeward of the fleet,
and to endanger another Cable, and perchance the ship it self upon that shore,
which was flat and near, and the benefit of entering the Bay with the first,
which was not the least consideration) I resolved to put into the mouth of the
Bay, as near the enemies fleet as I could, without engaging fight, and there to
cast anchor by them; which I did accordingly; so as they made a shot or two at
me; but since I made no answer, they left shooting. I was no sooner come to
anchor, but the Generals set sail, and the rest of the fleet, and bare
directly toward me, where they also anchored.

It was now late e're the flag of Council was showen in my Lord Admiralls ship,
whither my Lord of Essex and the rest of the officers repaired, and there it
was resolved, the next morning with the tide to enter the Bay, and board the
Spanish ships, if they abode it, and ships of ours were appointed to begin this
service, some to keep the channel and midst of the Bay, and others more floaty
to bear nearer the town to intercept the shipping that should retire that way,
and hinder the Galleys from beating of the flanks of our great ships.

I was not allotted with my ship to any special service or attendance, my
desire was great (having till that time been a stranger to actions at sea) to
appear willing to embrace the occasions that offered themselves, and therefore
wound my ship up to her anchor, to be the more ready to set sail in the morning
with the beginning of the flood.

The Spanish ships set sail and made to the bottom of the Bay rather driving
then sailing, our ships following as fast as they could. As the Spanish ships
loosed from their anchors and made from us, their Galleys seventeen in number
under the favor of the town made toward us ranged in good order. My ship (as
before said) was floaty, and stored with good Ordnance, and proper for that
service, which made me hasten toward them, without staying for any company.
And indeed my readiness was such, by reason of my riding with my anchor a
pike, that no other ship could come near me by a great distance, so as I
entered fight with them alone, making still toward them upon one board, and so
galled them with my Ordnance, (which was Cannon and demi-Cannon) that they gave
back, keeping still in order, and in fight with me, drawing as near the town as
they could, and with purpose (as I thought) as our ships thrust further into
the Bay, to have fallen upon our smaller ships in the tail of the whole fleet,
and having made a hand with them, so to have put to the sea-ward of us the
better to annoy us, and save themselves from being locked up. Wherein to
prevent them I made toward the shore, still sounding with our leads, till the
Ordnance of the town might reach me, and I the shore with mine; in so much as I
put them from under the town, and took certain ships, which rode there at
anchor forsaken of their men, and followed them continuing fight till they came
under the fort of the Puntal; where thwart the bottom of the Bay (which was
not broad) lay their four great ships with a pretty distance betwixt them, and
by spreading the breadth of the Channel came to an anchor and were now in hot
fight of Ordnance with our fleet.

I was nearer Puntal and the shore of Calis by much then any ship of the fleet,
and further advanced into the Bay, so that now growing within shot of the fort,
which lay on my right hand, and in like distance to the Gallions on the left
hand, and having the Galleys a head me, betwixt them both was plied with shot
on all sides very roundly, yet I resolved to go on, knowing I had good seconds,
and that many hands would make light work. But my company either wiser, or more
afraid then my self on a sudden unlookt for of me let fall the anchor, and by
no means would be commanded or entreated to weigh it again.

In the mean time Sir Walter Raleigh came upon my left side with his ship; and
very little a head me cast his anchor; as did also the Generals, and as many
of the fleet as the Channel would bear, so as the shooting of Ordnance was
great, and they held us good talk by reason their ships lay thwart with their
broad sides toward us, and most of us right a head, that we could use but our
chasing pieces. I sent my boat aboard Sir Walter Raleigh to fasten an haulse to
wind my ship, which was loosed soon after my boat was put off.

About me the Gallions let slip Cable in the haulse, and with their top sails
wended and drew toward the shore on the left hand of the Bay; and the Indian
fleet with the rest of the shipping did the like, more within the Bay. It was
no following of them with our great ships, and therefore I went aboard my Lord
of Essex, whose ship lay toward that side of the Channel, to see what further
order would be given.

At my coming aboard, the Gallions were run on ground near the shore, and their
men some swimming, others in their boats began to forsake their ships. I was
then bold to say to my Lord of Essex that it was high time to send his small
shipping to board them, for otherwise they would be fired by their own men;
which his Lordship found reasonable, and presently sent his directions
accordingly, and in the mean time sent Sir William Constable with some long
boats full of soldiers (which his Lordship had towed at his stern since the
first imbarquing) to have landed in the Caletta. But, notwithstanding he made
all haste possible, before he could get to the Gallions, two of them were set
on fire, and the other two by this means saved and taken utterly forsaken of
their men, who retired through the fennes to porto Saint Maria.

The Spanish fleet thus set on ground, the prosecution of that victory was
committed to, and willingly undertaken with the sea-forces, by a principal
officer of the fleet.

And because longer delay would increase the difficulty of landing our forces
by the resort of more people to Calis, it was resolved forthwith to attempt the
putting of our men on shore, and to that end, commandment was given that all
the men appointed for that purpose should be imbarqued in the long boats, and
that my Lord of Essex should first land with those men which could be
disembarqued, and then my Lord Admiral to second, and repair to the General;
who the better to be known would put out his flag in his boat. The troops that
were first to land, were the regiments of the Generals, my own, that of Sir
Christopher Blunt, Sir Thomas Gerrard, and Sir Conniers Clifford.

On the right hand in an even front, with a competent distance betwixt the
boats were ranged the two regiments first named, the other three on the left,
so that every regiment and company of men were sorted together with their
Colonels and chief officers in nimble pinnaces, some in the head of the boats,
some at stern to keep good order; the General himself with his boat, in which
it pleased him to have me attend him, and some other boats full of
Gentlemen-adventurers and choice men to attend his person, rowed a pretty
distance before the rest; whom, at a signal given with a drum from his boat,
the rest were to follow according to the measure and time of the sound of the
said drum, which they were to observe in the deeping of their oars; and to that
end there was a general silence, as well of warlike instruments as otherwise.
Which order being duly followed, the troops came all together to the shore
betwixt Puntall and Calis, and were landed, and several regiments imbattelled
at an instant, without any encounter at all; the Spaniards, who all the day
before had showed themselves with troops of horse and foot on that part, as
resolved to impeach our landing, being clean retired toward the town. The
number of the first disembarquing was not fully two thousand men; for diverse
companies of those regiments that had put themselves into their ships again,
could not be suddenly ready, by reason the boats to land them belonged to other
great ships.

Calis on that side was walled as it were in a right line thwart the land, so
as the sea on both sides did beat on the foot of the wall; which strength
together with the populousness of the town (in which besides the great
concourse of Gentlemen and others upon the discovery of our fleet and alarm of
our Ordnance; there was an ordinary Garrison of soldiers) had taken from us
all thought of forcing it without battery; and therefore being landed we
advanced with the troops to find a convenient place to encamp till my Lord
Admiral with the rest of the forces and the Ordnance were landed.

Being advanced with the troops half the breadth of the neck of the land, which
in that place is about half a mile over, we might perceive that all along the
seashore on the other side of this neck of land men on hors-back and foot
repaired to the town; which intercourse it was thought necessary to cut off.
And therefore because the greatest forces of the enemies were to come from the
land, it was resolved on to lodge the better part of the army in the narrowest
of the neck, which near Puntall is not broader then an ordinary
harque-bush-shot.

To which straight Sir Conniers Clifford was sent with three regiments, viz.
his own, Sir Christopher Blunts, and Sir Thomas Gerrards, there to make a
stand, to impeach the Spaniards from coming to the town, till he received
further order for the quartering and lodging of his men. Which done, the Lord
General with the other two regiments, and his company of adventurers (which
was of about two hundred and fifty worthy Gentlemen) in all not fully a
thousand men, advanced nearer the town, the better to discover the whole ground
before it. And as we approached a far off, we might perceive the enemy standing
in battle under the favor of the town, with cornets and ensigns displayed,
thrusting out some loose horse and foot toward us, as it were to procure a
skirmish.

I, marking their fashion, conceived hope of a speedier gaining the town then
we intended, and were then about; and said to his Lordship, at whose elbow I
attended, that those men he saw standing in battle before the town would show,
and make the way for us into the town that night, if they were well handled;
and at the instant I propounded the means, which was to carry our troops as
near and covertly as might be, toward the town, and to see by some attempt if
we could draw them to fight further from the town, that we might send them back
with confusion and disorder, and so have the cutting them in pieces in the
town-ditch, or enter it by the same way they did.

His Lordship liked the project, and left the handling thereof to me, I
presently caused the troop to march toward the other side of the neck of land,
because the ordinary and ready way to the town lay on that side low and inbayd
to the foot of the hilly downs, so as troops might march very closely from the
view of the town. Then I chose out two hundred men, which were committed to the
conduct of Sir John Wingfield, a right valiant Knight, with order that he
should march on roundly to the enemy where they stood in battle, and to charge
and drive to their battles the skirmishers: but if the enemy in gross proffered
a charge, he should make an hasty and fearful retreat (to their judgment) the
way he had gone, till he met with his seconds that followed him, and then to
turn short, and with the greatest speed and fury he could to charge the enemy.

The seconds were of three hundred men, led (as I remember) by Sir Matthew
Morgan, who were to follow the first troop a good distance, and so as both of
them till the enemy were engaged might not at once appear to them, and to
advance with all diligence, when the troop before them did retire, to meet
them, charge the enemy, enter the town with them peslemesle. With the rest of
the forces his Lordship and I followed.

The place served well for our purpose, being covert and of no advantage for
their horsemen, and the directions were so well observed, that the enemy was
engaged in following our first troop before they discovered the rest; and so in
hope and assurance of victory, being beyond expectation lively encountered,
they fled in disorder toward the town, so nearly followed of our men, that
most of the horsemen forsook their horses, and saved themselves; some by the
gates, others clambering over the walls, as did also their footmen, our men
following them at the heels to the very gate, which they found shut against
them, and men standing over it and upon the walls to resist us.

The ditch was very hollow but dry, out of which was raised a massy rampire,
with two round half bulwarks; the one toward the one sea, the other toward
the other, for height and thickness in their perfection, but not steeped and
scarped: so as it was very mountable, lying close to the old wall of the town,
which somewhat overtopped it no higher then in many places a man might reach
with his hand.

To the top of this rampire our men climbed, who, being for the most part old
and experienced soldiers, of the Bands I brought out of the Low Countries,
boldly attempted to climb the wall, from which they beat with their shot the
defendants, wanting no encouragements that good example of the chiefs could
give them, the General himself being as forward as any.

Whilst it was hard stroven and fought on that side, I sent a Captain and
Countryman of mine called Upsher with some few men along the ditch, to see
what guard was held along the wall toward the Bay-ward, and whether any easier
entrance might be made that way or no, willing him to bring or send me word,
which he did accordingly, though the messenger came not to me. He found so
slender a guard that he entered the town with those few men he had, which the
enemy perceiving fled from the walls, and our men entered as fast on the other
side.

My Lord of Essex was one of the first that got over the walls, followed by the
soldiers, as the place would give them leave; and such was their fury being
once entered, that as they got in scatteringly so they hasted toward the town
without gathering any strong and orderly body of men, as in such case is
requisite, or once endeavoring to open the gate for more convenient entry for
the rest of the troops. I therefore, foreseeing what might ensue of this
confusion, held the third body of the men together, and with much ado brake
open the gate, by which I entered the town; and so keeping the way that leads
from the gate toward the town, joined to my foot those men I met withal
scattered here and there.

Not far from the Marketplace I found my Lord of Essex at a stand with
forty or fifty men, whence I might see some few of the enemy in the
Marketplace, which made me advance toward them without attending any
commandment; who upon my approaching, retired themselves into the Townhouse,
whither I pursued them, broke open the gates, and after good resistance made by
the Spaniards in the upper rooms of the house, became Master of it; in which I
left a guard and went down into the Marketplace, and found my Lord of Essex at
the Town-house-door. I humbly entreated his Lordship to make that place good,
and give me leave to scour, and assure the rest of the town, which I did
accordingly. And though I was but slackly and slenderly followed, by reason of
our men's greediness of spoil, yet such Spaniards as I found making head and
coming toward the Marketplace, I drove back into the Fort Saint Philip, and
the Abbey of Saint Francis. Those of the Abbey yielded, to the number of two
hundred Gentlemen and others; and being disarmed were put into a Chapel, and
there left guarded. Those of Saint Philip (it being now in the evening) cried
to us that in the morning they would render the place. Before which also having
put a guard, and understanding by some prisoners that there was no other place
of any strength but the old town near the Marketplace, I repaired to my Lord
of Essex, whom I found in the Marketplace, and my Lord Admiral with him. And
after I had made report on what terms things stood, where I had been; I went to
the said old town to visit the guards which were commanded by Sir Edward Conway
with part of the forces landed with my Lord Admiral, and from thence to that
part of the town where we entered. And thus all things in good assurance,
returned to the marketplace, where the rest of the forces were, being held
together to be readily employed upon all occasions. Their Lordships went up to
the Townhouse, and there gave God thanks for the victory; and afterward all
wounded and bloody as he was, yet undressed, gave the honor of Knighthood to
Sir Samuel Bagnall, for his especial merit and valor in that days service.

The loss was not very great on either side; for as the Spanish troops that
stood ordered without the walls got into the town confusedly and disorderly
before we could mingle with them; so every one as he was counseled by fear or
courage provided for his own safety; the most flying to the old town and
Castle. Those that made head after the first entrance, being scattered here and
there, our men as they followed with more courage then order, so encountered
them in the like scattering manner falling straight to hand-strokes, so as it
seemed rather an inward tumult and town-fray then a fight of so mighty nations.

The next day the old town and the Fort of Saint Philip were delivered unto us,
and the people that were in them, except some principal prisoners, were
suffered to depart, with great courtesy showed, especially to the women of
better sort. There went out of the town Gentlemen and others likely men to bear
arms, betwixt four and five thousand, the brunt of this exploit was born with
less then a thousand men. We could have no help of Sir Conniers Clifford, who
mistaking his directions went with his troops to the bridge called Punto Zuarro
about three leagues distance. And my Lord Admiral, notwithstanding his Lordsh.
used all possible diligence in the landing his men, arrived not till we were in
a manner full Masters of the town. It was long disputed whether the town should
be held or no. I offered with four thousand men to defend it till her Majesty's
pleasure might be known. My Lord of Essex seemed to affect to remain there in
person, which the rest of the Council would not assent unto, but rather to
abandon and set it on fire; which we did about fourteen days after the taking
of it. I got there three prisoners worth ten thousand ducats, one of which was
a Churchman and president of the contractation of the Indies. The other two
were ancient Knights, called Don Pedro de Herera, and Don Gieronymo de Auallos.

In the mean time, whether of design and set purpose, or negligence, the
Indian fleet being left unseized on by those who had undertaken it, some of
the prisoners of the town dealt with the Generals to have those ships and
their lading set at ransom; vvhereupon they had with the Generals conference
diverse times, till the said ships were set on fire by the Spaniards
themselves, in which was lost by their own confession to the worth of twelve
millions of merchandise.

The troops being imbarqued, the Generals met and consulted upon their next
exploit, it was long insisted on to put to sea, and lie to intercept the
West-Indian fleet, which commonly at that time of the year arriveth upon the
coast of Spain. But the scarceness of our victuals overthrew that purpose, and
resolution was taken to sail toward England, and on our way to visit the ports
of that Coast, and so spoil and destroy the shipping. And so first we made
toward Faroll a good town and Bishops-see of Portingall, to which by water
there was no safe entrance for our shipping, the town lying better then a
league from the sea, served with a narrow creek through a low and marish
bottom.

For the destroying of such shipping as might be in this creek, as also for the
wasting the Country adjoining, and the town it self (which though it were
great and populous, was unfensed with walls) it was thought meet to land the
forces in a Bay, some three leagues distant from the town, and so to march
thither; which was done, the town forsaken by the inhabitants, taken by us, our
men sent into the Country brought good store of provisions for the refreshing
of the army; the artillery we found, conveyed into our ships, we after five or
six days stay returned to our ships the way we came. The regiments embattelled
and marching at large in a triple front in right good order, which was so much
the more strange and commendable, the men for the most part being new, and once
ranged, having little further help of directions from the high officers, which
were all unmounted, and for the great heat not able to perform on foot the
ordinary service in such cases belonging to their charges.

The troops imbarqued we made toward the Groyne and looked into the Bay; but
the wind blowing from the sea, it was thought dangerous to put in, and
therefore (victuals daily growing more scant, so that in some ships there was
already extreme want) it was resolved to hasten to our Coast, and so about the
midst of August we arrived in the Dovvns near Sandwich, my Lord of Essex,
having taken land in the West parts to be with more speed at the Court, left
order with me for the dissolving the landforces and shipping, and sending back
of the English forces into the Low Countries.

At this parting there arose much strife betwixt the mariners and the soldiers
about the dividing of the spoil, for the mariners envying and repining at the
soldiers, who as it fell out had gotten most, purloyned and detained their
chests and packs of baggage perforce; in so much as to satisfy the soldiers I
went aboard my Lord Admiral to desire his Lordship of redress, who promised
to take order therein, but some other principal officers of the fleet showing
themselves more partial, asked me whether the poor mariners should have
nothing, to which I answered there was no reason they should pill the poor
soldiers who had fought and ventured for that little they had, and that the
mariners hope, having so rich a booty as the Indian fleet at their mercy, was
more to be desired then the trash the landmen had gotten; so as they had none
to blame for their poverty but their officers, and their bad fortune: this
answer was taken to the heart, and is not forgotten to this hour: of which I
feel the smart. The troops, dissolved I went to Court and there attended the
most part of that winter.

The Island voyage.
IN the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred ninety seven, being the
next year after the journey of Calis, another journey was made by the Earl of
Essex to the coast of Spain, and the Islands with a royal navy, as well of
her Majesty's own shipping, as of her best Merchants, to which also was joined
a good number of the States ships, in all about one hundred and forty, with an
army of seven or eight thousand Land-men, as well voluntary as pressed; commonly
called the Island voyage.

To which I was called by her Majesty's commandment to attend his Lordship; as
also to deal with the States, that besides the shipping which they were to send
with her Majesty's fleet by virtue of the contract, they would suffer a
thousand of her subjects in their pay, to be transported by me to her said
General, and fleet for that service. Which having obtained I hastened into
England, and found my Lord of Essex at Sandwich, and his fleet in readiness
anchored in the Downs. It was early in the morning, and his Lordship in bed
when I was brought to him, he welcomed me with much demonstration of favor,
and with many circumstances of words.

First he told me my Lord Mountjoy was to go his Lieutenant General, not of
his own choice but thrust upon him by the Queen, before me in place, yet that I
should retain my former office of Lord Marshall; which as it had been ever in
English armies next the General in authority; so he would lay wholly the
execution of that office upon me; and as for the Lieutenant General, as he had
a title without an office, so the honor must fall in effect upon them that did
the service. With much more speech to this purpose, all tending to persuade me
that it was not by his working, and to take away the discouragement I might
conceive of it.

I answered that I had partly understood before my coming out of the
Low Countries, my Lord Mountjoys going Lieutenant General, so that I had
forethought and resolved what to do. For though I was sensible as became me,
who saw no cause in my self, of this recuilment and disgrace, yet my affections
having been always subject to the rules of obedience, since it was my Princes
action, and that it could not be but that my Lord Mountjoy was placed with her
Majesty's consent, my sincerity would not give me leave to absent my self, and
color my stay from this action with any feigned excuse; but counseled me to
come over, both to obey my Lord Mountjoy, and respect him as his place (which I
had always much honored) required, much more his Lordship, which was General
to us both; though I was not so ignorant of his Lordships power, as to doubt
that my Lord Mountjoy, or any subject of England could be thrust upon him
without his desire and procurement. That therefore, as I had good cause to
judge that his Lordship had withdrawn much of his favor from me, so I humbly
desired his Lordship that as by a retrenchment of the condition I was to hold
in this journey, I held it rather a resignment to his Lordship again of the
honor he had given me the last year, so far as concerned my particular
respect to his Lordship unsought for of me, then a service to him; so hereafter
he would be pleased not to use me at all in any action, wherein he was to go
chief: he would seem to take these speeches of mine as proceeding rather of a
passionate coffeehouse, then of a resolution framed in cold blood, and that
it would in time be digested, and so without any sharpness on his part, the
matter rested.

The purpose and design of this journey was to destroy the fleet that lay in
Faroll by the Groyne and upon the rest of the Spanish coasts; and to that end
to land our forces if we saw cause; as also to intercept the Indian fleet. Part
of our landforces were shipped at the Downs, we did put into Weymouth to
receive those which were to meet us there. In that place the General called my
self and Sir Walter Raleigh before him, and for that he thought there remained
some grudge of the last years falling out, would needs have us shake hands,
which we did both, the willinglier because there had nothing passed betwixt us
that might blemish reputation.

From thence we went to Plymmouth, and so toward Spain. Where in the height of
six or seven and forty degrees we were encountered with a storm, against which
the whole navy strove obstinately, till the greater part of the ships were
distressed; amongst which the Generals, mine, and Sir Walter Raleighs, and Sir
George Caryes; my main mast being in the partners rent to the very spindell,
which was eleven inches deep; in so much as to avoid the endangering of the
ship, the Captain and Master were earnest with me to have cast it overboard,
which I would not assent unto, but setting men to work brought it standing to
Plymmouth, and there strengthened it, so that it served the rest of the voyage.
The Lord Thomas Howard Vice Admiral with some few ships got within sight of
the North-Cape, where having plied off and on three or four days doubting that
the rest of the fleet was put back, because it appeared not, he returned also
to our Coast.

Our stay at Plymmouth was about a month, more through want of wind then
unwillingnesse or unreadinesse of our ships; which with all diligence were
repaired. In the mean time our victuals consuming, it was debated in Council,
whether the journey could be performed or no without a further supply of
victuals. It was judged extreme dangerous, and on the other side as difficult
to supply the army with victuals, which being to come from London and the
East-parts of the Realm, and be brought up at adventure, (there being no
sufficient store in readiness) would hardly be ministered unto us so fast as we
should consume them. And therefore it was first resolved to discharge all the
landforces saving those thousand I brought out of the Low Countries with the
shipping they were imbarqued in. Then it was further debated in Council, how to
employ the fleet, the purpose of landing the army at the Groyne being dissolved.

A West-Indian voyage was propounded, whereupon every one in particular being
to give his advise, it was assented to by them all, only my self was of opinion
it could not stand with the honor, profit, and safety of her Majesty and the
State; the fleet being so slenderly provided of forces and provisions, that
nothing could be exploited there, answerable to the expectation would be
generally conceived; and yet in the mean time through the want of her Majesty's
Royal navy, and other principal shipping of the Realm, with the choice
Commanders both for sea and land, the State might be endangered by an attempt
made by the Spaniards upon our own coast; whom we certainly knew to have then
in readiness a great power of sea and landforces in the North-parts of Spain.

Things thus handled, the Lord General posted to the Court. After his return
no more speech was had of the Indian voyage, but a resolution taken to attempt
the firing of the fleet at Faroll, and on the rest of the coast of Spain, and
to intercept the Indian fleet, as in our discretions we should think fittest,
either when we came upon the coast of Spain, or by going to the Islands. With
this resolution we set forwards directing our course to the North-Cape with
reasonable wind and weather, yet the fleet scattered, for in a manner all the
squadron of Sir Walter Raleigh, and some ships of the other squadrons followed
him, who for a misfortune in his main-yard kept more to seaward.

The Lord General, whilst he and the rest of the fleet lay off and on before
the Cape attending Sir Walter Raleighs coming (who with some special ships had
undertaken this exploit of firing the fleet) suddenly laid his ship by the lee;
which because it was his order when he would speak with other ships, I made to
him to know his Lordships pleasure. He spoke to me from the poupe, saying I
should attend and have an eye to his ship, in which at that instant there was
an extreme and dangerous leak, though he would not have me nor any other of the
fleet know it. Which leak being stopped he directed his course along the coast
Southward, and about ten leagues from the Groyne called a Council, in which it
was resolved to give over the enterprise of Faroll; which as it was difficult
to have been executed on a sudden, so now that we had been seen by the country
it was held impossible; and not to linger upon the coast of Spain but to go
directly to the Islands, the time of the year now growing on that the Indian
fleet usually returned.

And to advertise Sir Walter Raleigh diverse pinnaces were sent out, that till
such a day, the wind and weather serving, the General would stay for him in
such a certain height, and thence would make directly for the Azores. At this
Council his Lordship made a dispatch for England. I do not well remember where
Sir Walter Raleigh and the rest of the fleet met us, but as I take it about
Flores and Corvo the westerliest Islands of the Azores, where we arrived in
seven or eight days after we had put from the coast of Spain.

We stayed there some few days and took in some refreshing of water and
victuals such as they could yield, which being not so well able to supply us as
the other Islands, it was resolved in Council to put back to them, and the
squadrons for the more commodity of the fleet appointed unto several Islands.
The General with his squadron was to go to Fayall; the Lord Thomas with his
squadron, and I with my ship were to go to Graciosa; and Sir Walter Raleigh
with his either to Pico or Saint George: but Sir Walter Raleigh (whether of set
purpose, or by mistake I leave others to judge) making with his squadron more
haste then the rest of the fleet, came to Fayall before us, landed his men, and
received some loss by the Spaniards that kept the top of the hill, which
commanded both the haven and the town. The General with the rest of the fleet
came to an anchor before the Island, and hearing of Sir Walter Raleighs landing
and loss, was highly displeased, as he had cause; it being directly and
expressly forbidden upon pain of death to land forces, without order from the
General, and there wanted not about my Lord that the more to incense him
aggravated the matter: seeing the Spanish ensign upon the hill, his Lordship
prepared to land with all haste, and so about an hour before sunset came into
the town.

A competent number of men were given to Sir Oliver Lambert to guard the
passages, and then it was consulted how to go on with the enterprise of forcing
them. They were entrenched on the top of the hill to the number of two hundred,
which was so steep, that it seemed artillery could not be drawn toward the
said trench.

The night growing on I desired his Lordship to give me leave to go up to
discover the place, which his Lordship assented unto; and so taking two hundred
soldiers I set forward, the young Earl of Rutland, Sir Thomas German, and
diverse other Gentlemen-adventurers accompanying me. At our coming to the top
of the hill finding no watch in their trenches, we entered them, and possessed
the hill; where we found some of our men slain by the Spaniard. The hill was
abandoned, as we supposed, in the beginning of the night, unseen or
undiscovered of us, or those that were placed at the foot of the hill; we were
all very sorry they so escaped; as was also the Lord General, for there was no
following or pursuing them in that mountainous Island.

The Captain and Officers that landed with Sir Walter Raleigh were presently
committed, and before our departure thence Sir Walter Raleigh was called to
answer for himself in a full assembly of the chief Officers both by sea and
land, in the Generals presence. Where, every one being to deliver his opinion
of the crime, it was grievously aggravated by the most: for my part, no man
showed less spleen against him then my self. The Generals goodness would not
suffer him to take any extreme course, but with a wise and noble admonition
forgave the offense; and set also at liberty the Captains that had been
committed.

After the fleet had taken the refreshing that Island could afford, which was
in some good measure, we put from thence, and for three days were plying off
and on betwixt Graciosa and the Island of Tercera, the ordinary way of the
Indian fleet; and in the mean time certain were sent a shore by the General at
Graciosa, to draw from the Inhabitants some portion of money and provisions to
redeem them from spoiling. They brought word to the General in the afternoon
that from the Island a great ship was discovered on the road-way from the
Indies, but they being sent again with some other to make a full discovery, at
their return, which was sudden, it was found to be but a pinnace. I must
confess, in this point I may be ignorant of some particulars, because things
were not done, as they were wont, by Council, or, if they were, it was but of
some few, to which I was not called. But in all likelihood there was wilful
mistaking in some to hinder us of that rich prey, which God had sent as it were
into our mouths.

Howsoever it was, that same night, when it was dark, the General with the
fleet altered their course, and bare directly with the Island of Saint Michael,
as it was given out, to water. A pinnace coming to me in the Lord Generals
name told me it was his pleasure my ship and Dread-nought (in which Sir
Nicholas Parker was) should beat off and on betwixt the Islands of Saint George
and Graciosa, for that the Indian fleet was expected. The Rainbow, in which was
Sir William Monson, and the Girland my Lord of Southamptons ship, were to lie
by the like order on the North-part of Graciosa: willing us if we discovered
any fleet to follow them, and to shoot off now and then a piece of Ordnance,
which should serve for a signal to the rest of the fleet.

This order, as I take it, was delivered us about ten of the clock at night.
About midnight, or one of the clock, those of our ship might hear shooting,
according to this direction, rather in a manner of a signal then a fight,
toward that part of the Island, where the other two ships were to guard; which,
as we after understood, was from the Rainbow, which fell in the midst of the
Indian fleet; whom in their long boat they hailed, and by the Spaniards own
mouths knew whence they were; who held them in scorn, and in a great bravery
told them what they were laden withal. The wind was very small, so as it
scarce stirred our ship, but we directed our course as directly to the sound of
the Ordnance as we could, and so continued all night; the morning was very
foggy and misty, so as we could not discover far, but still we might hear
shooting of Ordnance, when we listened for it.

About eight or nine of the clock before noon it began to clear, and then we
might see (as we judged) some five or six leagues off a fleet of twenty sails
which was much about half way betwixt us and Tercera. The wind began a little
to strengthen, and we to wet our sails to improve the force of it, and somewhat
we got nearer the Spanish fleet, more through their stay to gather themselves
together, then our own good footmanship* All this while the Rainbow and the
Girland followed the fleet so near, that they might to our judgments at
pleasure have engaged them to fight. But their fleet being of eight good
Gallions of the Kings, the rest merchants of good force, though the booty were
of great inticement, it might justly seem hard to them to come by it; and so
they only waited on them, attending greater strength, or to gather up such as
straggled from the rest.

The Girland overtook a little friggot of the Kings laden only with Cochinell,
which she spoiled, and I found abandoned and ready to sink: yet those of my
ship took out of her certain small brazen pieces.

The Indian fleet keeping together in good order sailed still before us about
two leagues, and so was got into the haven of Tercera, into the which they
towed their ships with the help of those of the Island, before we could come up
to them. It was evening when we came thither, and the wind from the land so, as
with our ships there was no entering. It pleased my Lord of Southampton and the
rest of the Captains to come aboard me, where it was resolved to get as near
the mouth of the haven as we could with our ships, and to man our boats well,
with direction in as secret manner as they could to enter the haven, and to
attempt the cutting of the Cables of the next ships; by which means the wind,
as is aforesaid, blowing from the land, might drive them upon us. This though
it were a dangerous and desperate enterprise, was undertaken, but being
discovered the boats returned without giving any further attempt.

The same night we dispatched a small pinnace of an adventurer to Saint
Michael, to give the Lord General advise where he should find the Indian
fleet, and us to guard them from coming out. For we had determined to attend
his Lordships coming before the said haven, which I accordingly performed with
my ship; though forsaken of the rest the very same night, I know not whether
for want of fresh water, or what other occasion. Three or four days after, his
Lordship came with the fleet, who sending into the haven two nimble pinnaces to
view how the fleet lay, upon report that they were drawn so far into the haven,
and so well defended from the land with artillery that no attempt could be made
on them without extreme hazard, and the wind blowing still from the land that
no devise of fire could work any good effect, and all provisions growing scant
in the fleet, especially fresh water, his Lordship gave over that enterprise,
and put with the whole fleet from thence to Saint Michael.

The General had resolved to land in this Island, and therefore called a
Council to advise on the manner; in which it was concluded that the greatest
part of the fleet should remain before Saint Michael, to amuse the enemy, and
that the soldiers in the beginning of the evening should be imbarqued in the
least vessels, taking with us the Barges and long boats, and so in the night
make toward villa Franca, which was some four or five leagues off. His
Lordship and the rest of the chief officers of the landforces imbarquing with
him in a small ship, left the sea officers before Saint Michael. The next day
about evening we were come near villa Franca; I moved his Lordship to give me
leave in a boat to discover the shore, and best landing-place, whilst his
Lordship gave order for the imbarquing the men into the other boats, which his
Lordship granted, and I performed accordingly. So as in due time his Lordship
was advertised of it to his contentment, and proceeded to the landing of his
forces upon the sandy shore before the town; where I could discover none to
give impeachment, but a few straggling fellows, which now and then gave a shot.
His Lordship (as his fashion was) would be of the first to land, and I that had
learned me of his disposition, took upon me the care of sending the boats after
him. The seege was such that few of the men landed with their furniture dry.
His Lordship himself took great pains to put his men in order, and (for that I
perceived he took delight to do all) in good manners and respect I gave the
looking on.

In the mean time some that were sent toward the town to discover, gave the
alarm that the enemy were at hand: and I told his Lordship it were good to send
presently some good troop to possess the town of villa Franca before the enemy
got thither. His Lordship willed me to take with me two hundred men and to do
with them what I thought good my self. I took so many of those men that were
readiest, and bad them follow me, amongst which were some Gentlemen of good
account; as Sir John Scot, Sir William Evers, which accompanied me. I went
directly to the town, which I found abandoned, and leaving some guard in the
Church, which stood upon the Marketplace, I passed somewhat further toward
Saint Michael: but neither seeing nor hearing news of any enemy thereabouts I
returned to the town, to which his Lordship was come with the rest of the army,
making in all about two thousand, soldiers, adventurers, officers, and their
trains; all which were orderly quartered in the town, where we found good store
of wheat.

His Lordship having thus gotten landing advised with his Council, whether it
were better to march to Saint Michael and spoil that town and water the fleet
there, or to send for the rest of the fleet. The difficulties in going to Saint
Michael were the roughness and unevenness of the way, being for the most part
over stony hills, in which a few men well placed might resist and impeach the
passage to many; that the people and goods of the town would be withdrawn into
the Castle, which was held by a Garrison of Spaniards, not to be forced without
battery and much loss of men and time; that till it were gotten, there were no
watering in that part, and our general necessity could endure no delay; it
was therefore resolved to send for the fleet to villa Franca. In the mean time
nevvs came from the fleet that a West-Indian Carrack, and a ship were come
into Saint Michael, and rode near the Castle. His Lordship presently determined
to go thither himself for the better ordering of things, took my Lord of
Mountjoy with him, and by an especial Commission under his hand committed to
my command the land and sea-forces at villa Franca. Before his Lordship could
arrive at Saint Michael the Carrack had run her self on ground under the
Castle, and the other ship, which was not great, laden with sugar and Brasil
commodities, taken by Sir Walter Raleigh. The third day his Lordship returned
with the fleet to villa Franca, and gave order presently to fall a watering.
There was plenty of water, but the shipping it into boats was tedious and
troublesome, for by reason of the greatness of the seege we were fain by
vvading and svvimming to thrust the barrells into the sea where the boats
floated. This made the work the longer. In the mean time our victuals
consumed, and grew low, though we got some little refreshing from the land,
which made us content our selves with the less water.

After some four or five days watering his Lordship gave order to imbarque the
army; which he began early in the morning, and continued all the day, for the
seege going high, the boats took in their men at a place where but one boat
could lie on at once; which together with the distance to the shipping made the
less riddance, and dispatch. His Lordship for the better expedition was most
of the time at the waters side, sending still to me for men from the town, as
he was ready to imbarque them.

About five of the clock in the afternoon the sentinels that stood on the top
of the steeple discerned troops of men on the way toward Saint Michael.

I sent up to the steeple Sir William Constable and some other Gentlemen then
about me, to see what they could discern, who all agreed that they saw troops,
and as they guessed some Ensigns. I willed Sir William Constable to hasten to
his Lordship and tell him what he had seen. I had yet remaining with me about
five hundred soldiers, of these I sent out sixty, whereof thirty shot were to
go as covertly as they could to a Chapel, a great musketshot from the town on
the way the enemy was discovered, with order upon the enemies approach to give
their volley, and suddenly and in haste to retire to the other thirty that were
placed half way betwixt them and the town; and then all together in as much
haste and show of fear as they could to come to the town, where I stood ready
with the rest of the men in three troops to receive them, and repulse, and
chase those that should follow them.

This order given, my Lord of Essex with the Earl of Southampton and some other
Lords and Gentlemen came to the Marketplace, where he found me with the
troops. His Lordship enquired of me what I had seen, I said I had seen no
enemy, but what others had seen his Lordship had heard by their own report, and
might, if it pleased his Lordship, send to see if the sentinel continued to
affirm the same. His Lordship made no answer, but called for Tobacco, seeming
to give but small credit to this alarm, and so on horseback with those Noblemen
and Gentlemen on foot beside him took Tobacco, whilst I was telling his
Lordship of the men I had sent forth, and order I had given them. Within some
quarter of an hour we might hear a good round volley of shot betwixt the thirty
men I had sent to the Chapel and the enemy, which made his Lordship cast his
pipe from him, and listen to the shooting which continued.

I told his Lordship it were good to advance with the troops to that side of
the town where the skirmish was, to receive our men, which his Lordship liked
well, and so went a good round pace expecting to encounter our men; who
unadvisedly in lieu of retiring in disorder, maintained the place, which the
enemy perceiving and supposing some greater troop to be at hand to second, held
aloof with his main force (for the highway to the town lay by the Chapel, and
no other passage for a troop, by reason of the strong fence and enclosure of
the fields) but sent out light men to skirmish. Thus perceiving that our men
held their ground we stayed our troops in covert in the end of two lanes
leading directly to the highway. Those of the Island (as we were certainly
informed) could make three thousand fighting men well armed and appointed,
besides the ordinary Garrison of the Spaniards.

Of that number we supposed them, because they had sufficient time to gather
their strength together, and for that they came to seek us; and therefore as on
the one side we were loath to discover our small number to them, unless they
provoked us by some notable disorder or necessity, in the defense of our
selves; so we thought it not good to lessen our men by imbarquing of men, till
the night was come, that silence and darkness might cover our retreat. And for
these reasons I opposed their heat that propounded to charge the enemy, and
their haste that would needs have the men shipped without delay.

In the beginning of the evening, which ended the skirmish, keeping our
sentinels in the view of the enemy, his Lordship began to imbarque some troops,
and so continued till about midnight that the last troop was put into the boat,
his Lordship seeing all imbarqued before he went aboard, but those forelorn men
which made the last retreat, which were committed to Sir Charles Percy; with
whom I imbarqued without any impeachment of the enemy, or show to have
discovered our departure.

His Lordship made the young Noblemen and some other principal Gentlemen
Knights, as Sir William Evers, Sir Henry Dockwray, Sir William Brown, and a
Dutch Gentleman that accompanied me that voyage in my ship.

We were no sooner aboard, but that the wind blew a stiff gale, so as some were
fain to forsake their anchors, and with this wind we put for England, which
continuing vehement drove us to the leeward of our course toward the coast of
Ireland. I got in my ship an extreme leak, which kept both my pumps going
without intermission many days and nights before I got to harbor; wherewith
my company were much wearied and discouraged even to despair; which made me
keep aloof from the other ships, lest the hope of their own safety might make
them neglect that of the ship.

The fleet kept no order at all, but every ship made the best haste home they
could, which as it might have proved dangerous, if the Spanish fleet which was
then bound for our coast, had not been scattered by the same weather; so it was
in some sort profitable to us; for some of our smaller shipping which were
driven most leeward toward the coast of Ireland met with two or three of the
Spanish ships, full of soldiers, which they took, by which we not only
understood at our coming to Plymmouth their purpose to have landed at Falmouth
with ten thousand men, but saw the instructions and orders of the sea fights,
if they had met with us, which was so full of perfection, that I have ever
since redoubted their sufficiency in sea Cases.

The fleet arriving thus weather-beaten at Plymmouth, his Lordship posted to
the Court, leaving my Lord Thomas now Earl of Suffolk, my Lord Mountjoy and the
rest of the Officers there; and shortly came provision of money with Commission
to the said Lords, Sir Walter Raleigh, and my self to see the same issued, and
distributed by common advise, for the repairing, victualling, and sending about
the fleet to Chattham, and entertaining of the thousand men I had brought out
of the Low Countries, which were then disposed along the coast of Cornwall, and
after sent into Ireland.

Which business dispatched I passed by post to London, and near
Mary-bone-parke I met with Sir William Russell in his coach, who being my
honorable friend then newly returned from Ireland, where he had been Deputy, I
lighted to salute him with much duty and affection, who stepping out of his
coach received me with the like favor; with whom whilst I stood bare-headed
being in a sweat I got cold, which held me so extremely that for three weeks
after I could not stir out of my lodging.

I understood my Lord of Essex was at his house at Wanstead in great
coffeehouse, to whose Lordship I gave presently knowledge of my arrival; as
also that I would forbear to attend his Lordship til I had been at Court; which
then I hoped would have been sooner then it fell out my sickness would permit.
For I supposed at my coming to Court, her Majesty, after her most gracious
manner, would talk and question with me concerning the late journey, and though
it pleased her always to give credit to the reports I made (which I never
blemished with falsehood for any respect whatsoever) yet I thought this
forbearance to see my Lord would make my speech work more effectually.

So soon then as I was able to go abroad, I went to the Court, which was then
at Whitehall; and because I would use no bodies help to give me access to her
Majesty, as also that I desired to be heard more publicly, I resolved to show
my self to her Majesty when she came into the garden; where so soon as she set
her gracious eye upon me, she called me to her and questioned with me
concerning the journey, seeming greatly incensed against my Lord of Essex,
laying the whole blame of the evil success of the journey on his Lordship,
both for the not burning and spoiling of the fleet at Faroll, and missing the
Indian fleet. Wherein with the truth I boldly justified his Lordship with such
earnestness, that my voice growing shrill the standers by, which were many,
might hear, (for her Majesty then walked) laying the blame freely upon them
that deserved it. And some there present being called to confront me, were
forced to confess the contrary of that they had delivered to her Majesty,
insomuch that I answered all objections against the Earl, wherewith her Majesty
well quieted and satisfied sat her down in the end of the walk, and calling me
to her fell into more particular discourse of his Lordships humors and
ambition; all which she pleased then to construe so graciously that before she
left me she fell into much commendation of him, who very shortly after came to
the Court.

This office I performed to his Lordship to the grieving and bitter incensing
of the contrary party against me, when notwithstanding I had discovered (as is
aforesaid) in my recuilment his Lordships coldness of affection to me, and had
plainly told my Lord himself mine own resolution, in which I still persisted,
not to follow his Lordship any more in the wars, yet to make as full return
as I could for the good favor the world supposed his Lordship bare me, fearing
more to incur the opinion of ingratitude then the malice of any enemies, how
great soever, which the delivery of truth could procure me.

The Government of the BRIELL.
I Stayed the winter following in England, in which time my Lord Sheffeild
making resignation of his Government of the Briell into her Majesty's hands, I
was advised and encouraged by my good friends to make means to her Majesty for
that charge; which it was long before I could hearken unto, having no friends
to rely on. For, as I had good cause to doubt my Lord of Essex would not
further me in that suit, so I was as loath to have any thing by his means in the
terms I then stood in with his Lordship; mush less by any other persons that
were known his opposers.

Being still urged to undertake the suit, I began at length to take some better
liking of it, and to guess there was some further meaning in it, and therefore
I answered, that if I were assured that Master Secretary would not cross me, I
would undertake the matter, whereof having some hope given me, I took occasion
one day in the chamber of presence to tell his Lordship as much, who answered
me, that as he would be no mover or recommender of suits for me or any other,
so he would not cross me. I desired his Lordship of no further favor then
might be looked for from a man in his place for public respects. And hereupon I
resolved to have her Majesty moved, which Sir Fulk Grevill performed
effectually: her Majesty, as her manner was, fell to objecting, That I served
the States, and that those two charges could not well stand together.

My Lord of Essex was before this gone from Court discontented because of the
difficulty he found in obtaining the Earl-Marshalship of England; I went
therefore to Wanstead to his Lordship in good manners to acquaint him with what
I had done, who rather discouraged me then otherwise in the pursuit.
Notwithstanding I waited and followed my business hard, and one evening in the
garden moved her Majesty my self, who alleging, as before she had done to Sir
Fulk Grevill, That it could not stand with her service, that both those places
should go together; I told her Majesty that I was willing (if there were no
remedy) rather to forsake the States service then miss the place I was a
suitor to her Majesty for, in hers; and so for that time her Majesty left me
without any discouragement. The Earl of Sussex was my only competitour, and
for him my Lord North professed to stand earnestly, who (as soon as I was risen
from my knees) told me that such places as I was now a suitor for were wonted
to be granted only to Noblemen. I answered there were none ennobled but by the
favor of the Prince, and the same way I took.

About this time her Majesty being in hand with the States to make a
transaction from the old treaty to the new (in which the States were to take
upon them the payment to her Majesty yearly so much money as would pay the
ordinary Garrison of the cautionary towns) it fell in deliberation what numbers
were competent for the guard of the said towns, wherein before my Lords would
resolve, they were pleased to call before them my Lord Sidney and my self, to
hear our opinions, addressing their speech concerning the Briell to me,
whereunto I made such answer as I thought fit; not partially, as one that
pretended to have interest in that Government, but as I thought meet for her
Majesty's service.

And hereupon Master Secretary took occasion merrily to say to my Lords, that
they might see what difference there was betwixt the care of Sir Francis Vere,
a neutrall man, and that of my Lord Sidney, that spoke for his own Government:
but says his Lordship, he will repent it when he is Governor, and then told
their Lordships I was suitor for the place, and that I should have for it his
best furtherance. My Lords gave a very favorable applause to Master
Secretaries resolution, and severally blamed me, that I had not acquainted them
with my suite, and taken the furtherance they willingly would have given me. It
is true, I never made any body acquainted with my suit but Sir Fulk Grevill and
Master Secretary. From thence forward I addressed my self more freely to Master
Secretary, and conceived by his fashion an assurance of good issue, though I
had not a final dispatch in two months after.

In the mean time my Lord Sidney and my Lord Gray were laboring to succeed me
in the States service; my Lord of Essex had promised his assistance to my Lord
Sidney, insomuch as when I told him at his coming to the Court in what
forwardness I was for the Briell, and danger to lose my other charge, and who
were Competitours to succeed me, he plainly said that he had given my Lord
Sidney his promise to procure him a Regiment in the States service. I answered,
that the command of the Nation belonged to me by Commission; that there was as
little reason for my Lord to be under my authority as for me to yield my
authority to him; that in respect of his Government he was as incapable of that
charge as my self. By this again I found his Lordships care to hold me back,
notwithstanding my Lord Sidney had soon made an end of his suit. But my Lord
Gray stuck longer to it, and was earnester, insomuch as there passed speeches
in heat betwixt him and me, and yet in the end such was the favor of the
Prince, that I enjoyed both the one and the other charge.

In the same year one thousand five hundred ninety seven, about the latter end
of September, I passed into the Low Countries, took and gave the oaths that are
usual betwixt those of Holland the Governor and Townsmen of the Briell, and
so was established in that Government.

The action at TVRNHOVLT.
THat winter (one thousand five hundred ninety and seven) the enemy lying at
Turnhoult, an open village, with four thousand foot, and six hundred horse; one
day amongst other speeches I said to Mounsieur Barnevelt, that they did but
tempt us to beat them; which it seems he marked, for shortly after the States
resolved to make an attempt on them, and gave order to the Count Maurice to
that end to gather his forces together, which at one instant shipped from their
several garrisons, arrived with great secrecy at Gertrudenberg, in all to the
number of six thousand foot and one thousand horse, whereof some two hundred
came from Flushing with Sr Robert Sidney; which troop because he desired should
march with the rest of the English, in the love and respect I professed and
truly bare to him, I made offer to him to command one of the two troops the
English forces were then divided into, which he refused not.

That evening was spent in consulting and ordering of things. In the morning by
break of day the troops began to march, and continued till two hours within
night, and there rested within a league of Turnhoult. There we understood by
our espiall, that the enemy lay still without any manner of intrenchment,
having as yet no intelligence of us. A good part of that night was spent also
in debating of THE ACTION NEAR TVRNHOVLT.
matters. In the end it was resolved, if the enemy abode our coming in the
village, with our Cannon to batter them, and so to dislodge them, or with our
troops to force the place upon them. The vanguard was given to the English
troops, with the Count Maurice his guard, and some other selected companies of
the Dutch, which the Count kept ordinarily in the vanguard.

The night was very cold, insomuch as the Count Maurice himself going up and
down the quarter, with straw and such other blazing stuff made fires in some
places with his own hands by the corps-du-guard. Sir Robert Sidney and I got us
into a barn thronged with soldiers to rest, because there was no sleeping by
the Count Maurice, who was disposed to watch, whence I was also called to
attend him. In the morning we set forward, and by break of day came within a
faulcon-shot of Turnhoult, where the troops were put in battle; whence sending
some light horse toward the town to discover, word was brought that the enemy
had caused his baggage to march all night, and that now the rereward of their
troops were going out of the town; whereupon the Count Maurice caused our
vanguard to advance to the town, with which he marched.

By that time we were come to the town, the enemy was clear gone out of it, and
some musket shot off, on the way to Herentalls beyond a narrow bridge, over
which one man could only go in front, they made a stand with some of their
men, and galled our scouts, which followed on the track. The Count Maurice made
a halt half way betwixt the bridge and the town, where I offered to beat the
enemy from this passage, if he would give me some men, alleging that this was
only a show of the enemy to amuse us, whilst he withdrew the body of his
forces; and therefore this required a speedy execution.

Hereupon he appointed me two hundred musketeers of his own guard, and the
other Dutch companies, with Officers to receive my commandments, saying, that
he would second me according as occasion should serve: with which I went
directly toward this bridge, near which I found the Count Hollock, who that
journey commanded the horse. He told me of an easier passage over that water,
and offered me guides; but the distance agreed not with the necessity of the
haste, and therefore I excused my self of altering my way, which he took in
very ill part, insomuch as not long after he wrote unto me a letter of
expostulation, as if I had failed in the acknowledgment of his authority, which
he pretended by an ancient Commission to be Lieutenant-Generall of Holland; and
consequently of all the forces; which I answered in good and fitting terms to
his contentment. And so placing my men in the best places of advantage to
command the bridge, I made them play at the enemy, who soon forsook the bridge
being so narrow as aforesaid, and of a good length. I durst not adventure at
the first to pass my men over it, the rather for that the country on the
other side was very thick of wood: but after a little pause, I thrust over some
few foot, and by a foard adjoining, (though very deep and difficult) I sent
some few horse to discover what the enemy did, and causing mine own horse to
be led through the said foard, went my self over the bridge, from which some
half a harquebush-shot I found a small fort of pretty defense abandoned; into
which I put my footmen which were first passed, and sent for the rest to come
with all diligence.

In the mean time taking my horse, I rode with some few, officers and others
after the enemy, whom we soon espied some whiles marching, otherwhile standing
as if they had met with some impediment before them: which we thought was
caused by the number of their carriages.

The way they marched was through a lane of good breadth, hemmed in with thick
underwoods on both sides, fit as I thought to cover the smalnesse of the number
of my men. Whereupon, as also on the opinion the enemy might justly conceive
that the rest of our troops followed at hand, I took the boldness and
assurance to follow them with those two hundred musketeers, which I put into
the skirts of the vvood. So as betwixt them and the high-vvay in which the
enemy marched, there was a vvell-grovvn hedge. My self, with about some
fifteen or sixteen horsemen of mine own followers and servants, kept the
high-vvay, advancing toward the enemy: giving in the mean time the Count
Maurice advise what I savv, what I did, and what an assured victory he had
in his hands, if he would advance the troops.

I was not gone two musket shot from this fort, but some choice men of the
enemy, whom they had appointed to make the retreat, discharged on us, and our
men again ansvvered them, and pressing upon them put them nearer to their
hindermost body of pikes, under the favor of which they and such as from time
to time were sent to refresh them, maintained skirmish with us. When they
marched, I follovved; when they stood, I stayed, and standing or marching I
kept within reach, for the most part, of their body of pikes; so as I slew and
galled many of them, and in this manner held them play at the least four hours,
till I came to an open heath, which was from the bridge about some five or six
English miles, sending in the mean time messenger upon messenger to the Count
Maurice and the Count Hollock for more troops. And it pleased Sir Robert Sidney
himself, who also came up to me, and looked on the enemy, when he saw the fair
occasion, to ride back to procure more forces. But all this while none came,
not so much as any principal officer of the army, to see what I did.

On the left hand of this heath (which is little less then three miles over)
were woods and enclosed fields, coasting the way the enemy was to take, in
distance some musket shot and a half. Along these I caused my musketeers to
advance, and, as they could, from the skirts of the heath to play upon the
enemy, which was more to show them and our men that were behind by hearing the
shot, that we had not forsaken the enemy, then for any great hurt we could do
them. My self, with some thirty or forty horse, that were come up to me to see
the sport, following them aloof off.

The enemy seeing no gross troop to follow them, began to take heart, put
themselves into order in four battalions; their horsemen on their wings
advancing their way easily. When we had in this manner passed half the heath,
our horsemen in sixteen troops (for they were so many) began to appear behind
us at the entry of the heath, not the way we had passed, but more to the right
hand, coasting the skirts of the heath a good round pace. This sight made the
enemy mend his pace, and gave us more courage to follow them, so as now we
omitted no endeavor which might hinder their way, falling again into skirmish
with them. For they fearing more those that they saw afar off, then us that
followed them at their heels, (being a contemptible number to them that might
see us and tell us) mended still their pace: I therefore sent messengers to
those horsemen (for of our footmen there was no help to be expected) to tell
them, that if they came not with all speed possible, the enemy would get into
the straight and fast country, in which there could be no good done on them.

They were not above two musket shot from the mouth of the straight, when the
Count Maurice with six companies of horse came near unto us that followed the
enemy in the tail. The other horsemen, because they fetched a greater compass,
and came more upon the front and right flank of the enemy, were further off. I
sent to the Count to desire him to give me those horsemen. And in the mean time
to give the enemy some stay, I made a round proffer to charge the rereward,
under the countenance of that second, with those horse and foot I had: which
took good effect; for they knowing no other but that all the troops were also
ready to charge, made a stand, and seeing our horsemen on the right wing to grow
somewhat near, put themselves into a stronger order. My messenger returning
from the Count Maurice, told me he would speak with me; to whom I made haste,
and as the time required, in few words having delivered my mind, he gave me
three companies of horse to use as I should see cause; with which I went on the
spur; for the enemy was now marching again, and was come even into the entry
of the straight.

The other horsemen with the Count Hollock, seeing me go to charge, did the like
also; so that much about one instant he charged on the right corner of their
front, and on their right flank, and I with my troops on the rereward and left
flank, so roundly, that their shot after the first volley shifted for
themselves, (for their pikes being ranged in four battles, stood one in the
tail of another, not well ordered, as in that case they should have been, to
succor their shot, and abide the charge of the horsemen) and so charged their
pikes, not breaking through them at the first push (as it was anciently used by
the men of arms with their barded horses) but as the long pistols delivered at
hand, had made the ranks thin; so thereupon the rest of the horse got within
them, so as indeed it was a victory obtained without fight. For till they were
utterly broken and scattered (which was after a short time) few or none died by
handy-strokes. The footmen defeated, our horsemen disordered (as they had been
in the charge and execution) followed the chase of their horsemen and baggage,
which took the way of Herentalls.

I foresaw that the enemies horse, that had withdrawn themselves in good
order, and untouched of us at the beginning of the fight, would soon put to
rout those disordered men, and therefore made all the haste that I could to the
mouth of the straight there to stay them. Where finding the Count Hollock, I
told him he should do well to suffer no more to pass; so riding forward on the
other end of the straight where it opened on a champain, I overtook Sir
Nicholas Parker, who commanded the three companies of English horse under me,
who had some thirty soldiers with the three Cornets; with these I stayed on a
green plot just in the mouth of the straight, having on either hand a road
washy way, with purpose to gather unto me those that came after me, and relieve
our men, if the enemy chased them.

I had no sooner placed the troop, but I might see our men come back as fast
and as disordered as they went out, passing the straight on either hand of me,
not to be stayed for any entreaty. The most of our men passed, and the enemy
approaching, Sir Nicholas Parker asked me what I meant to do; I told him,
attend the enemy with our troop there. Then (says he) you must be gone with
the rest; and so almost with the latest, the enemy being upon us, I followed
his counsel, and so all of us great and small were chased through the straight
again; where our troops gathering head, and our foot appearing we held good;
and the enemy without any further attempt made his retreat. There were taken
between forty and fifty ensigns, and slain and taken of the enemy near three
thousand; and their General Signieur de Ballancy, and Count de Warras died on
the place.

This exploit thus happily achieved, the Count Maurice with the army returned
that evening to Turnhoult, where the castle held by some of the enemy yielded,
and the next day marched toward Gertrudenberg. And I to THE BATTLE AT NEVPORT.
A.D. 1600.
accompany Sir Robert Sidney, who took the next way to his Government, went
with him to William-Stadt; where I did on my part truly and sincerely touching
the other circumstances of the service, and very friendly when I made mention
of him, and gave him my letters to read, and to one of his Captains to deliver
in England; but my letters were held back, and his delivered, that were far
more partially written: which art of doubleness changed the love I had so long
born him into a deep dislike, that could not be soon digested.

The Battle at NEWPORT.
IN the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred, the enemies forces being
weak and in mutinies, and his affairs in disorder, the States resolved to make
an offensive war in Flanders, as the fittest place to annoy the enemy most,
and to secure their own State, if they could recover the Coast-towns, which was
the scope of their enterprise. As this action was of great importance, so were
the meetings and consultations about it many. To which (though unworthy) my
self was called; where amongst other things the facility of the execution
coming in question, it was by most affirmed that the enemy was not able nor
durst adventure to meet us in the field, which I not only opposed in opinion,
but more particularly made it appear that within fourteen days after our
landing in Flanders they might and would be with us to offer us fight, as
afterward it fell precisely out.

The army imbarqued with purpose to have landed at Ostend; but finding the wind
contrary, when we came into Zeland, upon a new consultation it was resolved to
disembarque upon the coast of Flanders lying on the river of Skelde: and
accordingly by a small fort called the Philippines, we ran our vessels (which
were flat bottomed after the manner of that country) aground at a high water,
which, the ebb coming, lay on dry ground, and so with much ease and readiness
we landed both horse and foot. Our army consisted of about twelve thousand
footmen and three thousand horse; and was divided into three parts, committed to
several Commanders, viz. the Count Ernest of Nassaw, the Count Solmes, and my
self; my troop consisting of one thousand six hundred English men, and two
thousand five hundred Frisons, and ten Cornets of horse: with which troop I
took my turn of vanguard, battle, and rereward, as it fell out. We marched
through the country to Eckelo, and Bruges, and so to Oldenburgh a fort of the
enemies not far from Ostend, which the enemy had abandoned, as also some
other of less strength; by which means the passage to Ostend was open and free.

The army encamped and rested there two or three days to refresh us with
victuals, especially drink, whereof the army had suffered great want; the water
of the country we had passed being for the most part very troubled and
moorish. It was again consulted where the army should be first employed, either
in taking the forts the enemy held in the low and broken grounds about Ostend,
or in the siege of Newport: the latter being resolved on, the States, who had
all this while marched and abode with the army, departed to Ostend as the
fittest place to reside in. And the Count Solmes with his part of the army was
sent the direct way to Ostend, to take in the fort Albertus; and open the
passage betwixt that town and Newport. The Count Maurice with the rest of the
army leaving the fort of Oldenburgh and the others, which the enemy had
forsaken, well guarded, (as was behoovefull, because without forcing them the
enemy could not come to us but by fetching a great compass) marched by
Hemskerk toward a fort called the Damme upon the river that goes to Newport;
but finding the country weak and moorish, and not able to bear the weight of
our carriages and artillery, returned to a small village not far from
Hemskerk and lodged there.

Thence we crossed through the meadows toward the seaside, filling many
ditches, and laying bridges to pass the waters, whereof, that country is
full. And so with much ado we got to the Downs by the seaside, and encamped
about some Cannon-shot from the fort Albertus, which was before rendered to the
Count Solmes. In the morning early we marched upon the sea-sands toward
Newport, and at the ebb waded the river on that side that makes the haven of
that town; and so encamped, and spent two or three days in quartering and
intrenching our selves in places of best advantage for our own safety, and the
besieging of the town; laying a stonebridge over the narrowest of the haven for
our carriages and troops to pass to and fro at all times, if occasion required.

In the mean time the Count was advertised from those of Ostend and those of
Oldenburgh, that the enemy with good troops of horse and foot were come and
lodged near the fort; whereupon consulting, the opinions were diverse, the most
agreeing that it was only a bravado made of Rivas, who before, we had heard,
had gathered between three and four thousand men together near the Sluys, to
divert us from our enterprise; and that upon our remove toward him he would
make his retreat to the Sluys again.

But this falling out jump with the calculation I had before made, I insisted
that it was the gross of their army, and that it was needful for us without
delay to march thither with our army also, lest that fort and the rest fell
into the enemies hands, who might then come and lodge at our backs, and cut off
the passage to Ostend, to the extreme annoyance of the army: that in using
diligence to prevent the enemie's taking these forts we might at once block up
and besiege those the enemy held on the low and drowned lands, which enterprise
had been in question, and debated as of equal importance with that of Newport.
Notwithstanding that my reasons seemed well grounded, the Count Maurice was, as
he is naturally, slow in resolving, so as for that time no other thing was done.

The same night came messenger upon messenger, first that the enemy had Cannon,
then that they of the fort were summoned in the Archdukes name; after, that it
was yielded upon conditions. And thrice that night was I called from my rest
upon these several alarms, which confirmed me in my former opinion, upon which
I still insisted, with this change, that, whereas my first purpose was to stop
the enemies passage under the savor of those forts, now, that occasion lost,
we were to march to the hither mouth of the passage our selves had made through
the low grounds, and to occupy the same; which was the shortest and readiest
way the enemy had to the Downs and seaside.

The Count Maurice liked it well and resolved to send forthwith the Count
Ernest with two thousand five hundred footmen and five hundred horsemen, with
some artillery also and provision to entrench upon the same passage, saying he
would follow and second them with the rest of the army in due season; which
course I could not approve nor allow of, showing my reasons how this dividing
of forces might endanger the whole; for I knew the enemy would in all
likelihood use all possible diligence to get through this passage, and might
well do it with his vanguard, and part of his forces before the arrival of
these men; which being so few in number would not be able to make resistance;
whereas our whole army marching, if the enemy had been fully passed the low
grounds, we had our forces united to give them battle, according to the
resolution taken, if he sought us or came in our way: if part of his army were
only passed, which was the likeliest, (the shortness of time, the hinderance
of the night, and the narrowness of the way considered) then we had undoubted
victory: if we were there before him, the passage was ours.

About midnight the Count had his dispatch and order to take of those troops
that were with the Count Solmes as readiest for that service. The rest of the
army was commanded to march down to the havens side, by the break of day to
pass with the first ebb. It was my turn then to have the vanguard, which made
me careful not to be wanting in my duty, so as in due time my troop was at the
place appointed. And because the water was not yet passable; I went my self to
the Count Maurice to know his further pleasure, whom I found by the bridge with
most of the chief officers of the army: whither not long after news was brought
unto him, that the enemy was passed the Downs and marching toward us, which
struck him into a dump. I told him that all possible speed must be used to
pass the forces before the enemy was possessed of the other side of the haven:
that therefore I would go to my troop to take the first opportunity of the
tide, desiring him to give me his further order what I was to do, when I had
passed the haven: he willed me to do in all things as I saw cause my self,
calling to him the Count Lodwick of Nassaw, who then commanded the horse as
General, he bad him go along with me, and follow my directions. So I left the
Count Maurice and went to my troop, and so soon as the tide served, I passed my
men as they stood in their battalions. The soldiers would have stripped
themselves to have kept their clothes dry, as I had willed them when I crossed
the haven first; but then I thought it not expedient the enemy being so near at
hand. And therefore willed them to keep on their clothes and not to care for
the wetting of them, for they should either need none, or have better and dryer
clothes to sleep in that night.

When the troop of the vanguard was passed, I left the footmen standing ranged
in their order betwixt the Downs or sand-hills and the sea, and with the horse
advanced toward the enemy, (whom we might discover afar off coming toward us
by the seaside) not to engage a skirmish or fight, but to choose a fit place
to attend them in, which was now the only advantage we could by industry get
of the enemy; for by the situation of the country that skill and dexterity we
presumed to excel our enemies in, which was the apt and agile motions of our
battalions, was utterly taken from us. For the space betwixt the sea and the
sand-hills or Downs, was commanded by the said hills, which are of many heads
reared, and commanding one another, containing so much breadth in most places
that our troops could not occupy the whole, and every where so confusedly packt
together, so brokenly and steeply, that the troops could neither well discern
what was done a stones-cast before them, nor advance forward in any order to
second, if need were. And on the other side of the Downs toward the firm land,
if the whole breadth were not possessed, the enemy might pass to the haven of
Newport, where our bridge and most of our shipping yet lay on the dry ground,
and spoil and burn them in our view. All which inconveniences I was to prevent.

Finding therefore a place where the hills and Downs stood in a manner divided
with a hollow bottom, the bottom narrower and the hills higher to the seaside
and North then toward the inland and South, which ran clean thwart from the
sea-sand to the inland, the Downs also there being of no great breadth so that
we might conveniently occupy them with our front; and command as well the
seashore as the way that lay betwixt the low inland and the foot of the
Downs. In that place on the hither side of that bottom, I resolved to attend
the enemy, and therefore having caused my troop to advance, I drew from the
whole vanguard about one thousand men, viz. two hundred and fifty Englishmen,
the Count Maurice his guard, and of such other companies as usually marched
with it two hundred and fifty, and of the Frisons five hundred, which were all
musketeers, the other two troops consisting of shot and pikes. The English and
fifty of the Counts guard I placed on the top of a hill that lay more advanced
then the rest, which being steep and sandy was not easily to be mounted, and in
the top so hollow that the men lay covered from the hills on the other side,
and might fight from it as from a parapett.

Just behind this hill, about one hundred paces was another far more high, on
the top of which also I placed the other two hundred men of the troop of the
guard, on which also, with a little labor of the soldier, they lay at good
covert.

These two hills were joined together with a ridge somewhat lower then the
foremost hill, which end-wise lay East and West, and broad-wise looked toward
the South, or inland, and commanded all the ground passable; on the outside
very steep, loose, sandy, and ill to be mounted, within hollow, in which I
placed the five hundred Frison-muskettiers, giving charge to the Officers to
bestow their shot only to the Southward, when time should serve; which was
directly on our right side and flank, as we then stood turned toward the enemy.

Betwixt those two hills, on the left hand or flank looking toward the sea, I
placed in covert (in places for the purpose so near the seasand, that they
might with ease and good order in an instant break into it) two of the four
troops of the English, making about seven hundred men ranged with their faces
to the Northvvard, looking directly from our left flank. If the enemy
adventured to pass by us to the other troops, I meant to leave them in his
eye. Upon the sands more Easterly then the inmost of the two hills, I ranged in
a front with a space betwixt them, the other two troops of the English, and a
pretty distance behind them more to the seaward, the Frisons in four
battalions, two in front, with a space to receive betwixt them one of the other
two battalions that stood behind them, the files and spaces betwixt the troops
as close as might be conveniently, to leave the more space for the ranging the
other troops, with a competent distance betwixt each troop, so as one troop
shadowed not another, but all might be in the enemies eye at one instant. And
thus the vanguard occupied about one third part of the downs, leaving the rest
to be manned as occasion should serve by the other troops: and on the left hand
uttermost to the sea, and more advanced, I placed the horsemen.

I had scarce done this work, when the Count Maurice with the chief Commanders
of the army came to the head of my troops, where on hors-back and in the
hearing of all standers by, which were many, he put in deliberation whether he
should advance with his army toward the enemy, or abide their coming. Those
that spoke (as in such cases most men will not seem fearful) counseled to
march forward, for that they thought it would daunt the enemy, and make the
victory the more easy, whereas in attending him he would gather courage out of
the opinion of our fear, or take the opportunity of our stay to fortify upon
the passage to Ostend, to cut off our victuals and retreat.

I alleged that their army that had been gathered in haste, brought into a
country where they intended no such war, could neither have provision of
victuals with them for any time, nor any magazines in those parts to furnish
them, nor other store in that wasted country, and in that latter end of the
year to be expected; so as fear there was none that they should seat themselves
there to starve us, that had store of victuals in our shipping, and the sea
open to supply us with all sailing winds. And as for the vain courage they
should get by our supposed fear, (after so long a march with climbing up and
down those steep sandy hills in the extremity of heat, wearied and spent
before they could come to us, and then finding us fresh and lusty, and ready to
receive them in our strength of advantage) it would turn to their greater
confusion and terror.

They persisted, and, as it were, with one voice opposed, so as in the end I
was moved to say, that all the world could not make me change my counsel. The
Count Maurice was pleased to like of it, resolving not to pass any further
toward the enemy, and for the ordering of things, reposed so much trust in me,
as that he believed they were well, without viewing the places or examining the
reasons of my doings; but returned to give order to the rest of the army, which
as the water ebbed he enlarged to the sea-ward, next the which the horsemen were
placed, and six piece of Ordnance advanced into the head of the vanguard.

In this order we stayed, and the enemy, though still in the eye, moved not
forward for the space of two hours; and then, rather turning from us then
advancing, they crossed the downs, and rested other two hours at the foot of
them toward the land; which confirmed their opinions that held he would lodge.
But we found reasons out of all their proceedings to keep us from wavering. For
it was probable to us, that the enemy over-wearied and tired with that night
and days travel, and seeing us passed the haven of Newport, (wherein to have
hindered and prevented us was the greatest cause of his haste) whilst he saw
us stirring and ordering our selves, might hope that we that were fresh, now
passed and engaged to fight, would advance, the rather to have the help of our
troops with the Count Ernest, if perchance he were retired to Ostend, which,
the nearer the fight were to that place, might be of most use to us; or else if
we had heard of their defeat, we would be drawn on with revenge: But when
they savv that we held our place not moving forvvard, being out of that hope,
and not provided to make any long stay, for the reasons before mentioned, they
might resolve to refresh themselves, and then to advance toward us; for which
that side was more convenient then the bare sea-sands. Withal we considered,
that their chief trust resting in their footmen, (which were old trained
soldiers, and to that day unfoiled in the field) they would the rather attend
the growing of the tide, (which was then at the lowest) that the scope of the
sands might be less spacious and serviceable for horsemen.

About half-floud they crossed again the downs to the sea-sands, and marched
forward, sending some light-horsmen far before the troop, one of which (as we
supposed) suffered himself to be taken, who being brought to the Count Maurice,
told him aloud that Count Ernest was defeated, and that he should presently
have battle, augmenting the number, bravery and resolution of their men. The
loss of our men we understood before, and therefore were careful to have few
present at the hearing of the prisoner; whose mouth being stopped by the Count
Maurice his order, the rest that heard it bewrayed it either in word or
countenance to the soldier.

The enemy growing nearer and nearer, and their horsemen coming in the head of
their troops, in a competent distance to have been drawn to a fight, I would
very willingly have advanced the horsemen of the vanguard near to them, and
with some choice and vvelmounted men have beaten in their carabins and
skirmishers to their gross; with purpose if they had been charged again, to
have retired in haste with the said vanguard of horse betwixt the sea and the
vanguard of foot, and having drawn them from their foot under the mercy of our
Ordnance, and engaged to the rest of our horse, to have charged and followed
them resolutely. This advise could not savor to that young Nobleman, that was
not well pleased with the power the Count Maurice had given me over his charge;
and therefore was not by him put into execution; who chose rather as the enemy
advanced leasurely, so he in like sort to recuil toward the foot.

This counsel of mine taking no better effect, and their horsemen now come
within reach of our Cannon, I made the motion to have them discharged, which
was well liked, and so well plied, that we made them scatter their troops, and
in disorder fly for safety into the downs; which had doubtless given us the
victory without more ado, if our horsemen had been ready and willing to have
taken the benefit of that occasion. Their footmen out of our reach kept on
their way along the sands; and the sooner to requite us, advanced their
Ordnance a good distance before them, and shot roundly at us, and did some hurt.

The water now grew very high, so as both we and they were forced to streighten
our front; and the enemy, whether of purpose (as aforesaid) to fight with more
advantage (as he took it) with his foot in the downs, or to avoid the shot of
our Ordnance (for he could not be so careless as to be surprised with the
tide, and so driven to this sudden change) put all his forces, as well horse as
foot, into the downs; which his horse crossed to the green way betwixt the
low-lands and the downs.

All our horsemen stood with our rereward, hereupon our vanguard altering
order, our battle and rereward passed into the downs, and in the same distances
backward, and sidewise as they had been on the sands, on my left hand before,
ranged themselves: so as the front of the three bodies of foot filled the
breadth of the downs, all the horsemen being placed on the green way betwixt the
low-land and the foot of the downs, not in any large front, but one in the tail
of another, as the narrowness of the passage enforced. I found a fit place on
the top of a hill, from whence the green way on the inside of the downs might
be commanded with Ordnance, on which by the Count Maurice his order two
demi-Cannons were presently mounted.

The enemy growing very near, I told the Count it was time for me to go to my
charge, asking him whether he would command me any more service, he said, no,
but to do as I saw cause, willing us the Chiefs that stood about him, to advise
him in what part of the army he should be personally; whereunto we all
answered, that for many reasons he was to keep in the rereward of all: which he
yielded unto. So I went to the vanguard, and after I had viewed the readiness
and order of the several troops, the enemy now appearing at hand, I (the
better to discover their proceedings, and for the readier direction upon all
occasions, as also with my presence to encourage our men in the abiding of the
first brunt) took my place in the top of the foremost hill before mentioned;
where I resolved to abide the issue of that days service, as well because the
advantages of the ground we had chosen were to stand upon the defense, as also
for that in that uneven ground, to stir from place to place, as is usual and
necessary in the execution and performance of the office of a Captain, where
the country is open and plain, I should not only have lost the view of the
enemy, upon whose motions in such cases our counsels of execution depend, but
of my troops, and they of me, which must needs have caused many unreasonable
and confused commandments.

The enemies forelorn-hope of harquebuziers, having gotten the tops of the
hills, and places of most advantage on the other side of this bottom before
mentioned, began from thence to shoot at us, whilst their vanguard approached;
which now growing near at hand, five hundred Spanish, pikes and shot mingled
without ensigns or precise order, gave upon the place where my self was, and
very obstinately for the space of a great half-hour labored to enter and force
it, favored with more store of shot from the tops of their hills, the gross
of their vanguard standing in some covert from the shot with me, on the other
side of the bottom.

In the mean time the vanguard of their horse advanced along the green way so
often mentioned, betwixt the low-inland and the Downs toward our horse, that
stood more backward against the flank of our battle. Our two pieces of Ordnance
were discharged from the top of the hill to good effect, and well plied; and
when they came nearer and thwart our right flank, the five hundred
Frison-muskettiers, who (as I have before said) were only destined to bestow
their shot that way, did their part, and so galled them that upon the first
proffer of a charge, which our horsemen made, they were put to a disordered
retreat, even to their troops of foot, our horsemen following them in the tail,
who were fain there to give them over.

At the same instant I gave order that a hundred men should be sent from the
foremost troop of foot I had laid (as aforesaid) in the Downs, to have given
upon the left flank of the enemy, if he attempted to pass by us upon the
sands, and as covertly as they could to approach and give upon the right flank
of those that were in fight with me. When they were come up and at hands with
the enemy, I sent from the hill where I was, by a hollow descent some sixty men
to charge them in front, which amazed the enemy, and put them to run, our men
chasing and killing them till they had passed the bottom and came to the gross
of their vanguard; from which were disbanded anew the like number as before,
who followed our men, and seized on some heights that were in the bottom
somewhat near us, covering their pikes under the shadow of the hills, and
playing with the shot from the tops upon our disbanded and skirmishing men.

I sent to drive them from thence (being loath they should gain ground upon us)
one of the same troops from whence I had drawn the hundred men before
mentioned, with order only to make that place good. This was a bloody morsel
that we strave for, for whilst our men and theirs were not covered with the
hanging of the hills, as they advanced or were chased, they lay open to the
shot, not only of those that were possessed of those little hills, but of the
other higher, which poured in greater tempests upon them, so as the soldiers
that I sent, hasted as for their safety to get the ( --) side of the hill, and
the enemy for like respect abode their coming with resolution; so as in an
instant, as the hill was round and mountable, the men came to handy-blows upon
the whole semicircle of it, with much slaughter on both sides, till in the end
the enemy was forced to retire.

In the mean time the battle of the enemies foot were come up to the gross of
the vanguard, which as it had taken the right hand of the Downs, so the battle
with some distance betwixt them, though even in front, having been well
welcomed with our shot from the tops of the hills, stayed in as good covert as
the place would afford, sending fresh men to beat ours from those grounds of
advantage in the bottom; so as ours beginning to give back I sent a new supply
to make good the place in this bottom, sometimes getting and sometimes losing
ground.

The fight was still maintained with new supplies on both sides, wherein I
persevered, though with loss of men, because the advantage the ground gave me
to beat as well upon their gross as their loose fighting men, made the loss
far greater on their side, my design being to engage their whole force upon
my handful of men, which I employed sparingly and by piecemeal, and so to
spend and waste the enemy that they should not be able to abide the sight of
our other troops when they advanced.

The horsemen of their battle and ours encountered, but somewhat more advanced
toward the enemy, our men having gotten courage with the first success: so as
our forementioned Frison-muskettiers could not so well favor them, but our
horsemen being put to retreat, the enemy in the pursuit being saluted by them
were stopped and drew back.

Their rereward now come up even with the other two bodies (for so I term them
because their ensigns remained together, though most of the men were drawn
from them and in fight, and the ensigns barely attended) advanced on the left
hand of the battle, and spreading the breadth of the Downs they were to my
troop rather on the corner of the right flank then a front; and our battle and
rereward (upon which they directly fronted) a musket shot behind my troop,
toward which it seemed they intended to advance.

First we gave as much to them as we could spare from our hills, but when they
began to open upon my Frison-muskettiers, which (as before is said) could only
bestow their shot on our rigthtflank, and till that time had done no service
but against their horse, they were exceedingly galled, so as they staid
suddenly, and amazed, or ashamed to go back seeing none to chase them, in a
bottom of some small covert, bestowed themselves; sending out some skirmishers
along the Southermost part of the Downs, against which some loose men were sent
from our bodies: but our musketeers that shot standing, and without fear from
their rests, galled them most. The horsemen of the rereward showed themselves on
both sides, and some little bickering there was, and so they retired out of the
footmens reach.

This was a strange and unusual fight, for whereas most commonly in battles
the success of the foot depends upon that of the horse, here it was clean
contrary; for so long as the foot held good, the horse could not be beaten out
of the field, though, as it fell out, they might be chased to them.

All this while the fight continued without intermission hotter and hotter
betwixt the other two troops of the enemies and me, both of us sending fresh
supplies, as occasion required, to sustain the fight. Insomuch as the whole
troops of the English were engaged to a hand-fight in the foresaid bottom,
saving those few that were placed on the hills; and on the enemies part also
few were idle.

And now I saw was the time to give the enemy a deadly blow, his grosses being
disbanded as well in occupying places of height and advantage to annoy us, as
by those that were sent to dispute the places in question. For their only
strength now consisted in their loose men, which any few horse charging on a
sudden in that bottom would have put to flight, and being followed pesle-mesle
with our foot would never have had means to have rallied and gathered
themselves together again. On the other side, I knew that without further
succors their numbers would weary and eat us up in the end. I therefore at
once sent to the Frison-footmen of the vanguard to advance, and to the Count
Maurice to tell him how things stood, and to desire him to send me part of the
horse of the battle; and because I saw the enemy press and gain upon our men
more and more, I sent again messenger upon messenger.

In the mean time, to give our men the more courage, I went into the bottom
amongst them, where riding up and down I was in their eyes both doing the
office of a Captain and soldier, and with much ado we entertained the fight,
though the enemy encroached and got upon us.

At my first coming I got one shot through my leg, and a quarter of an hour
after another through the same thigh, which I then neither complained nor
bragged of, nor so much as thought of any Surgeon; for I knew if I left the
place my men would instantly quail. I therefore chose (not having been used to
have my troops foiled) to try the uttermost rather then to show them the way to
flee, hoping still for the coming of the Frisons and the horse I sent for. But
their haste was so small that my men overlaid with number forsook the place,
notwithstanding my best endeavor to stay them hasting along the sands toward
our Cannon, the enemy following them hard.

I was forced seeing them all going, to go for company, with the last, uneasily
and unwillingly (God knows) and in the way my horse fell dead under me, and
upon me that I could not stir: I had neither Officer, Gentleman, nor servant
about me to give me help. Sir Robert Drury by chance came, and a Gentleman,
being a servant of his called Higham, drew me from under the horse and set me
up behind his Master; which help came very seasonably, for the enemy being
near at hand, when I fell, by this means I was saved out of their clutches.

Thus I rode to the Ordnance, where I found my brother Horace and the most of
the officers that were living with some three hundred foot. I made them stand
from before the Ordnance, and willed the Cannoniers to discharge upon the enemy
that now swarmed upon the sands, and at the same instant, my own company of
horse and Captain Balls coming thither, I willed them to go to the charge, and
my brother with the foot to advance and second them home. This small number of
horse and foot made an exceeding great change on a sudden, for the enemy in
hope of victory followed hard, and being upon the sands, where horse might
serve upon them, were soon routed, most cut in pieces, they rest saving
themselves by flight, as they could, in the downs, our men both horse and foot
followed them.

Their battles, where their ensigns remained, began to stir and rouse
themselves, rather for defense then to revenge their follows, for they
advanced not.

Our men from the top of the hills, who had kept their places from the
beginning, having by this means a fair mark plied them with shot: our English
soldiers on all hands with new courage resorted to the fight, and finding
these battles very small and thin by reason of the men they had sent to supply
the fight, especially of shot, which in these uneven places were of most
service, pelted them with our shot and pressing upon them made them recuile.
The Count Maurice seeing things on these terms, caused the battle to advance,
and his horsemen to make a proffer upon the enemies; upon which sight without
attending any strokes the enemy routed and was chased out of the field.

In this last charge I followed not, for seeing the success upon the sands,
and knowing that my directions in the prosecution of the victory would be
executed, I could easily judge that the work of that day was at an end. And
therefore began to care and provide for my self, who all this while having been
undressed, the blood leaking from me at four holes, together with a dangerous
disease that had long held me, had made me extreme weak and faint.

The enemy lost above one hundred and twenty ensigns, most of his foot slain,
not many of his horse lost. On our side in a manner the whole loss fell upon
English, of which near eight hundred were hurt and slain, eight Captains slain,
the rest all but two hurt, and most of my inferior Officers hurt and slain. In
the rest of the army there was no loss at all to speak of, especially amongst
the foot.

I dare not take the whole honor of the victory to the poor English troop of
one thousand six hundred men, but leave it to be judged by those that may give
their censure with less suspicion of partiality. I will only affirm that they
left nothing for the rest of the army to do, but to follow the chase, and that
it has not been heard of that by so small a number, in a ground so indifferent
(whereof the only advantage was the choice and use of the same) without help
of spade or other instrument or engine of fortifying, so great and so
victorious an army, as the Archdukes, had been so long wrastled withal, and so
far spent. Yet this victory had been as assured with less loss and touch of
reproach (if to give ground to a stronger may be subject to a disgraceful
imputation) had the succors of horse or the foot I called for come sooner to
us, wherein I will charge and accuse none, but the messengers of their
slacknesse.

An Account of the last charge at NEWPORT-battel, by Sir John Ogle.
THe English, who (as that great Captain Sir Francis Vere well notes) had born
the burden of the day, over-laid with numbers, and wearied with fight (their
succor not coming to them in time) were forced to retire themselves in such
order as they could from the downs to the strand, where meeting (but too late)
with the Frisons, they (like good-fellows) to keep us company, turned all
fairly back again with us, and so we both marched away together in one confused
troop. Some loose horsemen of the enemies came up close to us, and killed of our
men, thrusting diverse of them with their rapiers under their armor in at their
backs. Their foot followed leasurely and were aloof, as not knowing how
suddenly we might turn and make head again; for our men kept both their arms,
and in troop; which Sir Francis Vere, upon occasion given by some speeches of
mine, noted to me for a good sign: neither was our retreat, or the enemies
pursuit of any extraordinary swift pace, as easily may be gathered by the
considerations both of their and our motions: for we had the leisure (though, I
confess, not without danger) to pluck our Captain from under his horse, and
mount him again behind another, as himself has told in his own relation;
wherein I cannot but wonder that it pleased him not to make mention of me, as
well as Higham, since his blood (which remained on my clothes so long after as
I thought fit to wear them) witnessed clearly, that I could not be far from
him, Sr. JOHN OGLE Lieutenant Colonel to Sr. Francis Vere.
when that office, that came so seasonable and in so good a time, as he says,
was performed unto him.

In this retreat of ours there wanted no persuasions, as well by Sir Francis
Vere himself, as some others* to move our men to stand and turn; for we saw a
kind of faintness and irresolution even in those that pursued us nearest. And
it is certain (if we may call any thing certain whose effects we have not yet
seen) that if then we had turned and stood, we had prevented that storm of
fortune, wherein we were after threatened, at least we had saved many of our
men's lives. But such apprehensions of fear and amazement had laid hold of their
spirits, as no persuasion of reason could (for that time) get any place with
them. Sir Francis Vere with his troop formerly mentioned, took his way toward
the Cannons along the sands, where he by his Surgeon, they by their fellows
might hope for succor: I being faint and weary through heat and much stirring,
took some few with me, and crossed into the downs, there awhile to rest me,
till I should see how the succeeding events would teach me to dispose of my
self, either by direction or adventure.

I was no sooner come thither, but I met with Captain Fairfax and young Mr.
Gilbert, who soon after was slain near unto us: there we consulted what we
should do, but the time and place affording no long deliberation, taught us to
resolve, that the best expedient for our safety was, to endeavor the speedy
increase of our little number which we had with us, (I think they were thirty
men:) having brought which to a reasonable competency, our further purpose was
to give a charge, when we should find it most expedient, that so (with our
honors) we might put an end to those uncertainties the fortune of that day had
(to our judgments) then thrown upon us.

It was not very long ere that our little body was multiplied to better then an
hundred men; for the loose and scattered begun of themselves without labor to
rally unto us; so much prevails union even in a little body: for whilst to it
the broken and disbanded ones do willingly offer themselves for safety and
protection, they themselves by adding of strength to that body, not only
increase the number thereof; but do give and take the greater security to
themselves and others.

We were all this while within less then musket shot of a gross of the enemy,
which stood in a hollow or bottom within the downs, the hills about it giving
good shelter against the drops of our shot, (for the showers of them, as also
of the enemies, were spent and fallen before) but neither were they so high,
nor so steep, that they could forbid entry and commodions passage of charging
either to our horse or foot.

This gross had not many wanting of two thousand men in it, and spying (as it
should seem) our little handful (which at the first they might peradventure
neglect or contemn, in regard it was so small a number) now begin to gather
some bulk and strength, thought it not unfit to prevent a further growth; and
to this end sent out an hundred and fifty men with colors (closely and as
covertly as they could) along the skirt of the downs next the inland and
Southward, with purpose to charge on the flank or back of us; which they might
very conveniently do as we then stood.

These men were advanced very nigh us ere we descried them, when (lo) just upon
the time of their discovery, and our men ready to fall upon them, comes Sir
Horace Vere on horsback from the strand (it should seem from the pursuit of the
enemy, whom the horse had scattered, mentioned by his brother Sir Francis Vere)
and with a troop of some two hundred men, marched along the downs toward us.
In this troop there were with him Captain Sutton, his own Lieutenant-Colonell
Lowel that commanded Sir Francis Vere's foot-company, and some Lieutenants;
Morgan also came to us about the time that Fairfax and I joined unto him, and
these were the officers that were afoot in the last charge. The disbanded
troops of the enemy seeing us strengthened with such supplies, thought it their
fittest course to hasten them the same way they came forth toward us. Captain
Fairfax and I would have charged, but Sir Horace Vere willed us to join our
troops with his, and said we should go together and give one a good charge for
all upon that great troop, which we saw stood firm before us. We had now with
us (our troops being joined) about some five ensigns, amongst which was mine
own, which after was lost in the charge, but recovered again by my officer.

The vigilant and judicious eye of Prince Maurice his Excellency was (it should
seem) upon our actions and motions all this while, for (as I have been
informed) he seeing us make head, said to those that stood about him, Voyez
Voyez Les Anglois, qui tournent a la charge, and thereupon gave present order
to Dubois (then Commissary-generall for the Cavallierie) to advance some of the
horse to be ready to attend and fortify the events that might happen upon this
growing charge. This I have not of knowledge, but from such hands, as it were
ill beseeming me, or any man to question the credit of one of that rank,
quality, and reputation. Our troop now, and the disbanded troop of the enemies
marched both toward this gross, almost with equal pace, saving that their
haste was a little greater, according to the proportion of their danger, if
they had fallen into our clutches (being then much too strong for them) ere
they recovered the shelter of their own gross; yet such haste they could not
make, but that we were with them before they had wholly cast themselves into
their friends arms, who opening to receive them facilitated not a little of our
charge the passage, who then fell in pesle-mesle together amongst them.

Much about this time came in the horse, namely, the troops of Vere, Cecill and
Ball, who rushing in with violence amongst them so confounded and amazed t^em,
that they were presently broken and disjoynted, which being done, the slaughter
was great to them on their side, as the execution easy to us on ours. This
rupture also of theirs was not a little furthered by the Archdukes own troop of
Harquebusiers, which having advanced somewhat before this gross, on the skirt
which lay betwixt the inland and the higher downs, was so encountered by Cecil
and his troop, (who had as then received order by Dubois from his Excellency to
charge) that they were forced with confusion to seek succor amongst their
foot; Cecil following them in close at their backs, Vere and Ball (as I take
it) charged at the front by us, having crossed into the downs from the sands
and North-side toward the sea. It should seem that having broken and scattered
the enemy, who (as Sir Francis Vere himself relates) were by them driven into
the Downs, and seeing Sir Horace Vere also to have taken his way thither, they
thought it perhaps convenient to hover thereabouts, and to hold an eye upon
ours and the enemies actions, the rather because they might discern Sir Horace
Vere now making a new head, and so seeing us charge, charged also with us,
which was not disagreeable to their first directions given and mentioned by Sir
Francis Vere.

And this (by all probable conjecture) must also be the cause why Sir Francis
Vere in his discourse makes no mention of Sir Edward Cecil; for he not having
his direction from him to charge, but from his Excellency (as himself has told
me) Sir Francis Vere being ignorant thereof, and himself likewise not at the
charge in person, whereby he might take notice of any man's presence, would not
(as appears) expose himself to interpretations, by making any further relation
touching particulars, then what might receive credit, either from his own eyes,
or commandments. This charge (through the hand and favor of God) gave us the
day; what followed is before already set down by that great and worthy Captain
Sir Francis Vere.

CLement Edmonds, that learned and judicious Remembrancer of the City of
London, in an observation of his on the sixth book of Cesars Commentary, making
it his design to draw the exact effigies of a good General, though he could
not be far to seek for an exemplar, while he had Caesar so nigh him; yet found
reason to borrow the best lineaments of his piece out of the actions of Sir
Francis Vere. And to say truth, the whole picture there drawn is so like him,
that it does most lively represent him with at least a three-quarter-face;
which is more then the painter (it seems) could do. And lest you should any
longer doubt whether it be his picture, you shall find his very Motto
expressed in it: But because it casts so strong a reflection upon this battle
of Newport (without reference to which Sir Robert Naunton thought neither he
nor his Noble Brother could be taken to the life) I have thought good here to
give the Reader a copy of it. I Have already handled this practice of a
pretended fear, which the History does so often recommend to our consideration,
and have showed the inconvenience of over-light credulity, leading such easy
weeners to a disappointment of their hopes, and consequently to the hazard of
their fortune. I will now proceed to that which is further implied in this
relation, and respects the chiefest duty of a chief Commander: and that is,
what specially is required of a General in the carriage and direction of a
battle. Concerning which point, as there is nothing more material to the
effecting of any business then opportunity of time, conveniencie of place, and
an orderly disposition of the MEANS according to TIME and Place: so in question
of encounter or waging battle, the duty of a Leader may be included in these
three circumstances. Concerning the quality of the place, as the chiefest and
first respected in the choice of a judicious directour, the whole scope of the
Roman discipline, from the time of their first Kings even to the last of their
Emperors, did always aim at the advantage of place, as a necessary help for
the obtaining of victory: which I have already noted in the Helvetian action.
Yet forasmuch as the wisdom and experience of those times did deem it a
circumstance of such importance, give me leave once again to enforce the use
thereof by these examples. Habetis milites (says Labienus in this place) quam
petiistis facultatem, hostem iniquo atque impedito loco tenetis, praestate
eandem nobis ducibus virtutem, quam saepenumero Imperatori praestitistis: Ye
have, fellow soldiers, that opportunity which ye desired, etc. Whereby he
clears himself of all imputation of ill direction, as having performed the
uttermost duty of a Commander, and given such helps by the advantage of the
place as are requisite to an easy victory, leaving the rest to the execution
of the soldiers. Caesar at the loss he received at Dirrachium cleared himself
to his soldiers in this sort: Quod esset acceptum detrimenti, cuivis potius
quam suae culpae debere tribui, locum securum ad dimicandum dedisse, etc. The
damage that was received was to be attributed to any body rather then him, he
had chosen them a safe place of fighting, etc. And as it follows in the
seventh Commentary, being imbattelled upon the side of a hill right over
against the army of the Galls, which stood likewise in a readiness to
entertain the Roman valor, he would not suffer his men to hazard themselves
in the passage of a bogge of fifty foot in breadth lying between both the
armies, but rather persuaded his soldiers, disdaining the confrontment of the
enemy, to endure their contumely, rather then to buy a victory with the danger
of so many worthy men, and patiently to attend some further opportunity. Which
passage of Caesar, even in the said terms as it is there related, was urged to
good purpose by Sir Francis Vere in the year one thousand six hundred at a
consultation before the battle of Newport. For the army of the Netherlanders
being possessed of the Downs, which are small swelling hills rising unevenly along
the seashore upon the coast of Flanders, and the enemy making a stand upon the
sands at the foot of those hills, and so cutting off the passage to Ostend, it
was disputed by the Commanders, whether they should leave the Downs, and go
charge the enemy where he stood imbattelled upon the sands, or attend him in
the fastness of the Downs whereof they were possessed. The whole Council of war
were earnestly bent to forsake the Downs, and to hazard the fight on equal
terms, as impatient that their passage and retreat to Ostend should be cut off.
But Sir Francis Vere well knowing how much it imported the business of that
day to hold a place of such gain and advantage, persuaded Count Maurice by many
reasons, and specially by this of Caesar, which I last alleged, not to forgo
the help of the Downs, but to expect the enemy in that place, and so make use
of that benefit upon the first encounter, rather then to adventure the success
of the battle in worse terms, in hope of clearing the passage: and showing also
many probable conjectures, that the enemy would not continue long in that
gaze. Wherein as his opinion then prevailed, so all that were present were
eyewitnesses both of the truth of his conjecture, and the soundness of his
judgment. For the enemy within a while after coming on to charge the troops of
the States, was received with such a counterbuff from the hills, and were
violently beaten back in such rude manner, as our men had the execution of them
for the space of a quarter of a mile or more, which was no small advantage to
the fortune of that day. Touching the opportunity of time, which Pindarus
calls the Mother of worthy exploits, and oftentimes depends upon the
circumstance of place, a General ought carefully to advise that he neither
precipitate nor foreslow the occasion, which is well expressed in this
particular service of Labienus. For where his purpose was to draw the enemy
over a river that had steep and uneasy banks, and thereby of a hard and
difficult passage* he would not show his resolution until he had drawn them all
over the river: for he was well assured that the Roman legions would so charge
the enemy upon their first encounter with the unresistable weight of their
piles, that in their giving back they could not escape the danger of the river.
And therefore to make the victory more absolute and complete, he suffered them
all to come over the water, that all might be endangered in their passage back
again. And this is the benefit which opportunity brings, which is the rather
to be attended with all carfulness, forasmuch as Non saepe, ac diu, eadem
occasio est, a man has neither often nor long the same opportunity.

Concerning the last circumstance, of the apt and fit disposition of the forces
according to Time and Place, which is necessarily required in the duty of a
General; it is referred to this end only, that they may be ranged in such
manner, that as one man is assistant to another in their several files and
ranks, so one troop may be in subsidiis, assistant to another, to the end that
no part may stand naked, or fall in the singleness of its own strength, but
that one may second another from the first to the last. C. Sempronius a Roman
Consul having fought unadvisedly, and received an overthow, Julius the Tribune
of the people caused Tempanius a horsman that was present at the battle to be
called, and as Livie reports it, Coram eis, Sexte Tempani, inquit,
arbitrerisne C. Sempronium Consulem, aut in tempore pugnam iniisse, aut
firmasse subsidiis aciem? he said thus before them, Sextus Tempanius, do you
believe that C. Sempronius the Consul chose a good time to fight, or that he
took order for assistant supplies to his army? for Livie says, he fought
incaute inconsulteque, non subsidiis firmata acie, non equite apt Iocato,
heedlessely and without good advice, neither strengthening his army with
supplies, nor well placing his cavalry. And of these three circumstances
consists the duty and office of a General, touching the direction of a
battle; wherein whosoever fails, does hazard the prerogative of his command
over that army which he leads, according to that of Caesar in the first of his
Commentaries, Se scire, quibuscunque exercitus dicto audiens non fuerit, aut
male re gesta fortunam defuisse, aut aliquo facinore comperto, avaritiae esse
convictum, that he knew well, whenever an army refused to be obedient to
their Commander, it was either because upon some ill success they saw he was
unfortunate, or that by the discovery of some notorious matter they found him
convict of avarice. Which Caesar himself needed not to fear, if we may believe
Plutarch, who writes, that he was endowed by nature with an excellent
promptitude and aptness to take opportunity in any business.

And in the next Observation he adds;

-- I will content my self with a practice of our time at the battle of
Newport, where after diverse retreats pursuits, either side chasing the other,
as it were by turn and mutual appointment, and as it often falls out in such
confrontments: At last commandment was given to the English to make head again;
and after some pause to charge the enemy with a shout: which being accordingly
performed, a man might have seen the enemy startle before they came to the
stroke; and being charged home, were so routed, that they made not head again
that day. --

The siege of OSTEND.
IN the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred and one. The States resolving
to send their army into Flanders, or a good part thereof, to take those forts
the enemy held about Ostend, and by that means to open the passage into that
Country for the greater annoyance thereof, made choice of my self, (though
far unfit and unworthy of so great a charge) to command the said forces as
General. Of which intent I had first but only an inkling given me, and was by
some principal persons of the State encouraged to accept the same, and to take
upon me a journey into England to inform her Majesty of that purpose, and, with
all the necessary circumstances, to frame her liking to the enterprise, and to
induce her to the yielding of the succors of three thousand bodies of her
subjects to be levied, transported and paid at their own charge, and to be in
the Low Countries by the tenth of May, with these special instructions for the
manner of the enterprise.

That for the better diversion of the enemies forces from the quarter of
Flanders, the Count Maurice should with the first season of the year march
toward Bergh upon Rhine and to make show as if he would, but not to engage his
forces in the siege of that town, no otherwise but that a good part thereof,
especially the English might be sent toward Ostend upon the first summons.
Which together with two thousand soldiers to be levied out of the Garrisons of
Holland and Zeland, and the three thousand they made account of out of England,
should on a sudden be transported into Flanders for the said enterprise.

With this errand I passed into England, delivered the whole plot to her
Majesty, who liked and allowed thereof, and with some difficulty (as her manner
was) granted the men to be levied and transported in ten days warning, for so
the States desired, lest the overtimely stirring of them before their other
troops were landed in Flanders, might give the enemy an alarm, to the
difficulting of the enterprise; willing me (the grant obtained) to hasten over.

Before my coming into the Low Countries, the Count Maurice was marched toward
Bergh, and the enemy, that had long threatened to besiege Ostend, with a good
part of his forces was set down before that town; so that it was now question
rather of defending then of gaining more footing in that quarter. The States
therefore dealt with me to take upon me the charge of the place, for which they
gave me Commission, not as Governor, but as General of the army employed in
and about Ostend, with very ample power, as aforesaid, whereof I accepted. And
they forthwith gave order to the Count Maurice, to send into Holland the twenty
English companies he then had in the army; with which troop I was to go into
Ostend.

At the first he made some difficulty to send any, having engaged himself in
the siege of Bergh, his works for the defense of the quarter not finished, and
the enemy gathering head in Brabant to succor and relieve that town; in the
end with importunity he sent eight companies, with which my brother came. With
these, being by the States put in good hope, the rest should follow, and that I
should be liberally supplied with forces, ammunition, and all necessaries for
such a service* I went into the town, and landed (as I take it) the eleventh of
July one thousand six hundred and one, on the sands against the middle of the
old town. The enemy commanded the haven, so as there was no entering by it, and
then the use of the Geule was not known; and this place I landed at was to be
subject to their Ordnance; and the seege of the sea such, that no shipping
could lie there unbroken.

At my landing Monsieur Vandernood Governor gave me the keys. In the town I
found about thirty companies of Netherlanders, which made sixteen or seventeen
hundred newly divided into two Regiments, whereof Monsieur Vandernood had the
one, and Monsieur de Utenburgh had the other, and my eight companies might make
eight hundred men.

The enemy had thirty pieces of Cannon placed on the West Side, the most within
a harquebuse-shot of the town; and six on the East Side, with which they shot
much into the town, and did great harm to the buildings and men. Their army
judged at twelve thousand men. The three parts on the West Side quartered near
Albertus, a great Cannon-shot from the town, commanded by the Archduke himself.
The other part upon the top of the Downs on the East Side next the Geule.

Those of the town before my entrance had made a sally on the West-approaches,
from which they were repulsed with the loss of three hundred men slain and
hurt. The town to the land was well flanked and high rampierd, but with a sandy
and mouldred earth. The old town (supposed free from battery) was rather strong
against sudden attempts by Palisadoes and such helps, then by rampire and
flanks, to abide the fury of the Ordnance, and force of approach; which
notwithstanding was held the strongest part of the town, as well for the
reasons abovesaid, as for that it was hemmed in on the one side with the Geule
not passable, and on the other with the haven, which was passable only some
four hours in a tide. The rest of the town besides the ditch (which was broad
and deep) of water, was environed with a royal counterscarp, with ravelines of
good capacity and defense against the Cannon, covering all the bulwarks of all
the town, but that, which they called the Peckell or East-bulwark, which needed
not that help, as lying directly upon the Geule and not to be assailed by any
approach.

Upon the South, South-east and South-west of the town there is a plot of
ground in the manner of an Island, environed on the East Side with the Geule,
to the Southward with a chanel that runs into the Geule from the said Geule
directly Westward into the river, that in former times passed through the old
haven, and now had his course in the furthest place from the town, not in
distance above a harquebuse-shot, to the Westward by the old chanel of the said
river, by which it passed into the haven, which was now separated from the
ditch of the counterscarp by a low dam near the Poulder-bulwark.

This plot of ground (covering the town from the said bulwark to the
Spanish-bulwark which lies upon the Geule) had upon the South-west angle
(which is where the chanel from the Geule mingleth with that of the river to
the haven) a little redoubt open behind, and of no force to resist the Cannon.
To the Southward of this Poulder-bulwark the country is broken with many
creeks, not passable nor habitable for an army but by forced means, in
spring-tides for the most part overflown; on the West Side the ground for a
harquebuse-shot from the river that runs due West from the said Poulder lay
low, and subject to the like overflowing at the spring-tides; but all the
waters more passable having fewer and shallower creeks. From this bottom the
ground toward the Downs goes higher. Betwixt these West-Downs, which near the
town are more low and level then the East, and the Porc-espic (which is a
raveline in the counterscarp that closes the new town on that side by which
the old haven passes into the town) there lies a Down on which the haven
beats on the one side, and the water of the ditch of the counterscarp on the
other, being the only place about that town by which an approach might be made
on firm ground to the wall of the town, and therefore was held the most weak
and dangerous place. But the cutting of the foresaid Damme and letting the
seawater into the ditch of the counterscarp was held a sure and sufficient
means to prevent the enemy on that side, so as indeed nothing was so much to be
doubted as the enemies passing into this piece of ground before mentioned,
called the Poulder: by which means he might, notwithstanding our best
endeavor, in short time drain the ditches of the counterscarp, and the
town-ditch, and so make his way to the rampire.

My first care therefore was to fortify and secure the said Poulder against
the enemy, and to make a safe place for our shipping to unlade such provisions
and commodities as from time to time should be brought unto us: which I readily
and easily performed by opening a passage in the counterscarp near the West-
Poulder of the Spanish-raveline, by which means the water from the Geule flowed
into the town-ditch, in which, with their masts stricken down, I have often
seen above one hundred vessels lie safe from the annoyance of the enemies great
shot: which haven through the entry grew more dangerous by the enemies
approaches, which in process of time they with much cost, labor, and art
advanced; for it lay within the high water-mark, (on which they raised new
batteries) and was used during the siege as the better inlet. Albeit after to
avoid the great harm the enemy did to our shipping at their going out, I made
another cut betwixt the East-raveline and the mount called the Moses-table,
looking Northward and directly into the sea, which served the turn and saved
many ships.

When my twelve companies, which I expected from Bergh, were arrived, I began
one night to entrench a piece of ground higher and firmer then the rest about
it, lying nearer to the low Damme before mentioned, which separated the river
that by the old chanel had passed into the haven from the ditch of the
counterscarp: which piece of ground (stretched out in the form of a Geometrical
oblique or oblong) toward the West had a watered ditch, such as in those parts
they use for enclosures, and the whole plot of continent sufficient to receive
eight or nine hundred men.

This field I entrenched taking the water-ditch to advantage, without giving it
any other form usual in fortifications (so, as for the form and seat it was
called the West-square) because the Westermost face of it was well flanked from
the West-bulwark, and the West-raveline; and the face South-west from the angle
of the Poulder, where the chanel of the Geule and the chanel of the old haven
meet, but chiefly to hold as much room as I could. For I expecting large
numbers of men, doubted more I should want means in that town hemmed in with so
many waters and ditches, to sally and use them abroad as occasion should
require (for which purpose this place served fitly) then bodies to guard that
which I entrenched. The morning after I had begun this work, the enemy turned
diverse pieces from the top of the Downs upon it; which, notwithstanding my
best industry, did much hurt amongst my men, till the work was raised and
thickened.

This plot put in reasonable defense and part of the supplies of the men
granted by her Majesty now arrived, I began to cast up a redoubt upon the like
piece of ground for firmness, but not fully half so big as the former, lying
about half a harquebuse-shot Southwest from the angle of the Poulder close to
the river that passes from the said angle Westward, which served well to
covert the Poulder on that side, and to flank the West-face and South-flank of
the West-square.

The Poulder thus assured from sudden attempts, I began to raise in the said
Poulder a rampire to resist the Cannon on the inside of the old chanel from
the ditch of the Poulder-ravelin of the counterscarp to the angle aforesaid of
the Poulder, which broad-wayes lay due West, and end-ways North and South, and
the redoubt upon the said angle I raised of a good height, and Cannon-proof, in
the form of a Cavallier to command over the said rampire of the Poulder. All
this while the enemy lying still without making any approaches or
intrenchments, or attempting to hinder my works otherwise then by his
Cannon-shot, of which he was no niggard.

Having, as I supposed, in this manner well provided for the safe defense of
that quarter, I was desirous to draw some of the enemies from the sand-hils to
dwell by us in that low watery ground to the South-west and South of the river
that runs from the West to the Poulder, which I knew would cause great
expense, great labor, and much loss and consumption of men, on which, besides
the plots of ground I had taken, no trench, nor approach, nor lodging could be
had, but such as was forced; only about a harquebuse-shot Westward from my
redoubt on that side, and upon the same river was a pretty round height of
ground on which sometimes they of the town of Ostend had held a redoubt to the
South-west and South, environed with a plashie moor, into which by the creeks
the water flowed, so as the greatest part of the tide it was not passable. From
this plot of ground I could discover the back of their approaches on the Downs,
and from it with Cannon could annoy them as well there, as in their shipping and
boats, by which their army was supplied from Bruges and other ports of the
country.

If they suffered me to take this height and fortify it, I had gotten two
special advantages, the annoying of them, and the securing of my works on that
side, which after I might have maintained with fewer men; if I were impeached
by their sudden planting of Ordnance and batteries, I knew they would possess
the ground and piecemeal engage themselves more and more in those drowned
lands, which was the other of my drifts.

This piece of ground to move and provoke them the more, upon St. Iacques day
(being the Saint the Spaniards as their Patron do most superstitiously
reverence) in the forenoone I first sent as it were to view and discover, and
anon after I sent for men and set them on work and drew down in a readiness
under the favor of my outermost redoubt, two hundred soldiers to make head,
if the enemy came down to the other side of the river to hinder my workmen with
his shot.

The enemy no sooner perceived my men to work, but he turned certain pieces of
Ordnance upon them from the Downs, and shot at us, as did also those of the
fort of Grootendorst. But being far of, the plot small and the men observing
the shot, bowing their bodies in the hollownesse of the old trench, did little
harm.

Their footmen in a great rage, as it seemed to me, of themselves kindled with
zeal without direction or order from their Chiefs, came down toward the river
side amain; not armed men in battle and troops, but shot scatteringly as every
one could first and readiliest take his furniture, others with faggots in their
hands, (whereof they had store in their approaches) began here and there in
confused manner to raise a trench from the Downs to the river; (for other
trench and covert they had none) so as they were a fair mark for our artillery
from the town, and our musketeers from the West-square, and the South-west
redoubt, which spared no powder: Besides, the two hundred musketeers I had
placed with me under the favor of small banks on the edge of the river, held
them back when they came nearer hand; so as after much shooting and hurt done
(the most of the day being spent) they gave over molesting us. And that night I
put the place into so good defense against the attempts of handy-strokes, that
I left a guard in it, and workmen to add more strength to it.

In the morning betimes the enemy began to batter it with two Cannons, which
the same night they had planted on a little height of ground on the other side
of the plash directly West, and about the fourth part of the way to their fort
called Grootendorst, from whence they also shot with a couple of demiculvering,
and thus they continued the whole day, insomuch as our new work to them-ward
was laid flat, and our men forced for safeguard to make hollow trenches in the
said redoubt. About an hour before sunset troops were seen to march from
Albertus toward Grootendorst, which I gathered was to make an attempt upon the
said redoubt in the beginning of the evening before the breach could be
repaired, for which purpose the water being ebbed the time served very fitly.

I saw by their earnest proceeding that there was no striving to keep and
maintain that plot, and therefore resolved to give way, but so as I would seem
to be forced from the place. And therefore as I did set men on work in the
beginning of the evening to repair the breach to have confirmed the enemy (if
he had forborne his attempt that night) in the opinion that I would maintain the
place: so I gave order to the Officer I left in it with some eighty men to hold
good watch on the side of the plash, if the enemy attempted to pass, to show
himself on the brink of the said-plash with his shot, and discharge upon them,
leaving his pikes by the fort, with order if they advanced to make his retreat
to the South-west redoubt, and there to hold good. Which directions were not
well observed, for the Officer forthwith when he had sight of the enemies
approach, (which was about two hours within night) leaving his pikes in the
redoubt, he with the shot made for the plash-side and discharged at the enemy,
who being strong in number and resolved, continued their way, the Officer still
retiring hard to the redoubt and skirmishing with him, as if his purpose had
been rather to have drawn the enemy into some danger, then to save himself and
his troop by a timely retreat. Which is an error that many in like cases fall
into, to their utter destruction; when fear to have their valor called in
question, makes them against all reason fight against a stronger enemy, and
engage themselves, where they have neither purpose nor hope to obtain the
victory.

Those of the redoubt staid the return of their men, whom the enemy pursued so
hard, after he had gotten footing in the firm ground, that they both at an
instant came to the redoubt, and by the way of the breach (which yet lay open)
entered and overthrew soon our men, who so taken at unawares, thought it safer
to fight then to run away: others they overtook before they could get over the
Palisadoes on the other side of the redoubt, so as most of our pike-men were
lost, but few or none of the shot, who helped with the darkness of the night
and their good diligence escaped.

Upon the alarm having given order for some troops to follow, I hasted to the
South-west redoubt, near which I met with these scattered men, which I stayed
and took with me into the said redoubt; to which the enemy even now approached
following their fortune, and hoping of like success, and on the other side of
the river toward the Northward from under the favor of the bank, to which of
purpose they had also drawn musketeers to flank and beat in the back our men,
as they should show themselves to resist the attempt of their men on the other
side of the water, so as of the supplies that came from the town, I reinforced
the guard of the said redoubt, by which means as also the difficulty they found
in passing their gross over the creeks, with some loss to us, yet much more
to them, they retired to the redoubt they had gotten.

A Continuation of the siege of OSTEND.
HEre ends, or rather, here breaks off Sir Francis Vere his Commentary; for
he continued in his government of Ostend for many months after; but whether it
was because he thought it needless to give the world any further account of
it, who were all by this time become, as it were, spectatours and eie-witnesses
of what he did; or whether he thought that it being so well known to many, some
other would carry on the relation, if the world should think it needful; or
what ever else the reason was, I do not find that his pen ever went any
further: yet because there were many things afterward performed by him worthy
of observation, and because the Reader may perhaps have a Curiosity to see the
end of the story, I shall here presume to subjoyn a brief account of the chief
passages in the sequel of that action, according to what I have met with
recorded by others to my hand; that so we may bring off Sir Francis Vere with
honor from so great an engagement, and deliver him safe from the exceeding
hazard of that employment; and this the rather, because I think this was the
last action of consequence wherein he was imbarqued.

General Vere had no sooner taken a sure footing to himself, and fitted the
scene whereon the bloody tragedy was afterward to be acted, but he gave a
pledge of his resolution to abide by it, refusing to quit his lodgings,
notwithstanding that the enemies Cannon had pierced them through with many a
shot, and quite battered down a little tower belonging to them. But though his
enemies Cannon could not enforce him to abandon so much as his own lodging, yet
did his own by shrewd mishap constrain him to withdraw himself for a time out
of the town; for on the fourteenth of August being wounded in the head with the
blow of a Cannon that spilt in the discharging, he removed into Zeland to be
cured of his hurt. The enemy having gotten intelligence hereof made no small
expressions of joy and triumph, discharging many a peal of Cannon, whereby if
they hoped to fill the hearts of the besieged with terror and consternation
and to beat them from their former resolution, they were very much mistaken;
for the brave English soldiers observing what storms of great shot came daily
rolling into the town (the besiegers having already discharged little less
then thirty five thousand Cannon-shot against it) and perceiving by the story,
that all the houses were like ere long to be beaten about their ears, and so
were likelier to endanger them by their fall, then any way to secure and
protect them from the fury of the enemies artillery; they advised themselves to
take this course. There was a green plot of ground in the town commonly used
for the marketplace, which was something higher then the rest of the streets;
here did they earth themselves digging it hollow, and fitting themselves with
cabbins and lodgings within the ground. The like did they by another void piece
of ground upon the South-West; whereby as they thought themselves secure from
the enemies battery (being confident they would not shoot mattocks and
pickaxes) so did they sufficiently testify their own resolution rather to
interre themselves in the graves which they had dug, then to quit their
possession of the place unto the enemy.

Hereupon the besiegers shifted sails and suiting their counsels to the
disposition of the English soldiers, who are sooner won by fair means then by
foul, shot arrows with letters into the English quarters, promising ten stivers
a day to such as would serve the Archduke against the town, but these offers
were slighted by the English, who hated falsnesse as much as they contemned
dangers; and this devise was looked upon by those of the town as the product of
languishing counsels, which having already spent all their powder came a
begging for the conclusion.

And, if the Archduke had then given over the siege, I question not but the
world would generally have excused him: for what should he do? he had made his
approaches as near unto Sand-hill, as was possible for the haven; which was the
most probable place of doing any good upon the town, and therefore he had ever
since the beginning of the siege bent the most of his great shot upon it, if it
were possible to have made a breach, but all had hitherto produced no other
effect then the fortifying of the Sand-hill bulwark in stead of beating it
down; for by this time it was so thick stuck with bullets, that the Ordnance
could scarcely shoot without a tautologie and hitting its former bullets, which
like an iron wall made the later fly in pieces up into the air: Yea, the
bullets in it were so many, that they left not room to drive in Palisadoes,
though pointed with iron, and some there were that would have undertaken to
make the bulwark new, if they might have had the bullets for their pains.
Besides when ever they meant to assault it, they must resolve to force seven
Palisadoes made of great piles within the haven, before they could come to the
foot of the bulwark, and if they were not intercepted by the springing of a
mine or two, yet was the bulwark it self unmountable by armed men; and they
might easily have been conceived to have gotten intelligence that there were
thirteen Cannon in the counterscarp and other convenient places charged with
chained shot and rusty iron to scowre Sand-hill, if need should require.
Besides all this, all was to be done at a running-pull, for when the coming in
of the tide should sound a retreat, off they must or be utterly lost; and they
easily saw that the musketeers in the halfmoon of the counterscarp were like
to give them such a welcome, as would make many of them forget to return again
unto the camp.

Notwithstanding all these great difficulties, no advice of the old Captains
could prevail against the obstinacy of the States of Flanders, who to keep life
in the siege, spared not to undertake the payment of a million of crowns to the
Archduke, rather then he should draw off from the town. So that he took up a
resolution not to stir; and (as his fugitives reported) once he swore, that
he would not rise from the table at which he sat, before they of the town were
made to serve him; but then they on the other side laid a wager they would give
it him so hot, that it should burn his fingers.

Not long after the Lord of Chastillon met with an unhappy mischance; for,
being upon the high bulwark of Sand-hill with Colonel Utenbruch and other
Gentlemen, and men of Command, he had his head struck off with a Cannon-shot
above the teeth, and his brains dashed upon the Colonels left cheek. Which
possibly might receive its direction from the self-same hand that did more then
once during this siege shoot a bullet into the mouth of a charged Cannon, which
because it would not be too long indebted for such a courtesy, taking fire
with the blow, returned the bullet instantly back again attended with another
of its own. As good a marks-man was he (if he did it of design) who, when a
soldier of the town having bought a loaf of bread was holding it up in a
boasting way, with a shot took away the uppermost half, leaving the other in
the soldiers hand, who finding that he had received no hurt, said it was a
fair-conditioned bullet, for it had left him the better half behind; however,
I believe he would rather have been contented with the lesser half, then run
the hazard of dividing again.

On the nineteenth of September General Vere being cured of his hurt returned
from Zeland into the town, where he found two thousand English, and twenty
ensigns of French, Walloons, Scotch and Frisons, that had arrived in his
absence. Soon after his arrival he took care for the thickning and
strengthening of diverse of the works, and uniting of those outworks on the
South and West, the better thereby to secure their relief and preserve them
from the injury of the waters in the winter season. Which, the enemy
perceiving, and that the town grew daily stronger and stronger, resolved to
attempt it by treachery, taking the old verse for their warrant, -dolus an
virtus quis in host requirat? To that purpose an English man named N. Conisby
(as the French diary relates) who had served them long in the quality of a
Captain of foot in their army; returned through France into England, where he
prevailed so much by means of his friends, that he obtained letters of
recommendation to Sir Francis Vere, unto whom presenting himself he desired to
be admitted one of his Company, which the Genenerall could not refuse, he being
a Gentleman and so effectually recommended.

This traitor having thus scrued himself into Ostend, quickly began his
practice, for he received letters and other things weekly from the enemy,
giving them intelligence of all that passed within the town, and of the best
means to annoy it; managing his practices and projects according to the
instructions which he received from them. For the better conveyance of his
letters to the enemy, he carried the^ into a broken boat (which in the
beginning of the siege had been sunk by the enemy, and lay upon the dry ground
betwixt the town and the camp) under the color of gratifying nature; and there
disposed them in a place appointed, whence the enemy fetched them by night with
the help of a little boat, and upon certain days brought him answers, and
sometimes money for his reward, which he failed not to fetch at the place
appointed. When he was discovered, he had drawn four men into his conspiracy;
among others a Sergeant who was the means of revealing it. This Sergeant coming
out of prison (where his Captain had caused him to be laid some days in irons)
being all malecontent chanced to meet with Conisby, who told him he was glad to
see him out of prison, withal asking him the reason of his so great and
grievous punishment, to whom the Sergeant (railing upon his Captain) swear
earnestly that he would be revenged for the wrong he had received, though it
cost him his life. Conisby, supposing he had found a man fit for his purpose,
told him he might easily find the means to be revenged, without losing his
life, and with his own profit and advancement, and that if he would follow his
counsel he should want no money. The Sergeant began to listen to his words, and
seemed inclinable enough to so advantageous a design, and ready to follow his
advice. Whereupon Conisby (having first made him swear secrecy) discovered
himself to him; and presently asked him if he had the resolution to set fire on
one of the Magazines, for which purpose himself had prepared a certain
invention of powder, lead, and match; this the Sergeant undertook to perform,
which he said could not be difficult for him to do, being often sent to fetch
powder for the soldiers. Conisby assured him that he had practiced more
associates, and that when he should have made the number up twenty, he would
then put the design in execution, which was, that one of the Magazines being
set on fire, he would so work it as to have the guard of a sluice in a bulwark
near the enemy, who should then give on and be admitted into the town. The
Sergeant seemed to hug the device, demanding only of Conisby some assurance
under his hand that he should have his recompense, when the work should be
performed; which having once obtained, away he goes to the General, and
discovers the practice to him, whereupon Conisby being apprehended, and put to
the rack confessed all, and that he came to Ostend with that purpose and
intent, as also what instructions and promises he had received, and what
accomplices he had made; who were likewise apprehended and put in prison. This
plot failing, the enemies only hope of taking the town was by stopping up the
haven, and so hindering the coming in of supplies; to this purpose, the old
haven on the West of the town having been made dangerous and useless, and the
defendants constrained to make a new one out of the Geule on the East Side, the
enemy had now so streightened this also by their float of great planks bearing
Ordnance on the Geule, that they of the town were fain to make a second new
haven against the midst of the old town; by which means the enemies designs
were eluded, and the ships of supplies admitted into the town at pleasure.

This dangerous thrust being so handsomely put by, the enemy had no other play
left him but to storm, which he resolved upon, and prepared himself
accordingly. But in the mean while it will not be amiss to take notice of a
passage which happened in the town. A French Gentleman disobeying his Sergeant,
and thereupon causing a great tumult, was committed to prison, and eight days
after, condemned by a Council of War to be shot to death; but because he was
descended of a good House, all the French Captains interposed their earnest
entreaties to General Vere, and begged his life; which was granted, upon
condition that he should ask the Sergeant forgiveness; this when he could not
by any means, or persuasion be brought unto, he had eight days respite granted
him to resolve himself; which being past, and he continuing still as obstinate
as ever, he was brought forth unto the place of execution, and tied to a stake;
but when once he saw the Harquebusiers ready to discharge, he began to be
apprehensive of the horror of death, entreating that he might be unbound, and
promising to perform the sentence, and ask the Sergeant forgiveness* which he
forthwith did, and thereupon was released. So much easier is it for pride and
rashness to commit a fault, then heartily to acknowledge it. A truer courage
was that of another in the town during the siege. An English Gentleman of about
three and twenty years of age, in a sally forth had one of his arms shot off
with a Cannon, which taking up he brought back with him into the town unto the
Surgeon, and coming into his lodging showed it, saying, Behold the arm which
but at dinner did help its fellow. This he did and endured without the least
fainting, or so much as reposing upon his bed.

Not long after on the fourth of December early in the morning, the besiegers
gave a fierce and sharp assault upon the English trenches; which take in the
words of one present at it.

SIr FRANCIS VERE having been abroad the most part of that night, was laid down
to take his rest; but hearing the alarm that the English trenches were
assaulted, and knowing of how great import that work was for the defense of the
town, pulling on his stockins, with his sword in his hand, he ran in all haste
unbraced with some soldiers and Captain Couldwell, and my self into the work;
where he found his own company at push of pike upon a turnpike with the enemy,
(who crying in French, Entrez, entrez, advancez, advancez, strove to enter that
way, and sought to over-turn the turn-pike with their pikes) and some of his
Gentlemen, among the rest Lieutenant Colonel Proud (who was afterward slain at
Maestricht) slashing off the heads of their pikes, which he took notice of, and
shortly after made him a Lieutenant. The enemy being repulsed and beaten off,
Sir Francis Vere (to the end our men might give fire the better upon them from
the town* and bulwarks which flanked this work, both with our Ordnance and sin
all shot) commanded the soldiers to take some straw from the huts within the
work, and making wisps of it, to set it on fire upon the parapet of the work,
and upon the heads of their pikes, by which light the enemies were discovered,
so that our men gave fire bravely upon them from the town and the work, and
shot into their battalions, which had fallen on, and their men that were
carrying off their dead; so that upon this attempt the enemy lost a matter of
five hundred men, which lay under our work, and between their trenches. The
enemy being retreated into his works, Sir Francis Vere called me to him, and
said, Boy, come now pull up my stockins, and tie my points; and so, returned
home again to his rest.

The next remarkable in the series of this famous siege was that memorable
Treaty, which General Vere entertained with the Archduke; which I know none
better able to give an account of, then Sir John Ogle, who had much at stake in
the business, and was well acquainted with the several passages thereof: of
which he has left behind him this following account.

Sir Francis Vere his parlie at Ostend, written by Sir John Ogle there present.
AFter the battle of Newport, the Archduke Albert desirous to clear Flanders,
in the year following sat down with his army before Ostend, unto which the
Lords the States sent Sir Francis Vere, their General to defend it. He having
good numbers of men, thought it most serviceable for the States to employ them
so, as he might keep the enemy at armsend, and a fair distance from the town.
To this purpose he possessed himself of several advantageous pieces of ground,
fortifying upon them so well as the time would give him leave; but they were
morsels as well for the enemies tooth as his, and therefore cost both bickering
and blood on both sides, till at the last, (what with numbers, artillery, and
better commodity of access) he was forced to quit the most of them, and that
ere he brought them to any perfection of strength, whereby to make any
resistance.

Such as were nearest the town, and under the succor of his own power, (as the
three Quarriers (or squares) with some few others) he kept and maintained as
long as he stayed there; yet when by protract of time, and casualties of war,
he found his numbers wasted, and himself (the enemy creeping upon him) so
straightened as he was thrust merely upon the defense, he saw he was not in his
proper element, nor indeed was he: for the truth is, his virtues (being great,
strong, and active) required more elbow-room, having their best luster, where
they had the largest foil to set them off. The works of Battle, Invasion, and
the like, were the proper objects of his spirit. The limits of Ostend were much
too narrow for him, yet did he there many things worth the observation and
reputation of so great a Captain as he was. Amongst the rest, that of his
Parley was of most eminent note; and as most noted, so most and worst censured,
and that as well by sword as gown-men; yea, his judgment (which even by his
enemies has often been confessed to be one of the most able that ever our
Nation delivered to the world in matters of his profession) was in this action
taxed (and that in print too) for his manner of carriage in this business.

Now because I was in some sort the only instrument he used in the mannaging
thereof, and best acquainted with all passages, I have (for the love I owe to
truth, and his memory) thought good to set down in writing, what I have
heretofore delivered (by their commandments) to the Lords the States-Generall
in their Council Chamger, as also sometime after that to the Prince Maurice of
Nassau and the Earl William his cosen, concerning this matter.

Yet ere I come to the relation, it shall not be amiss to wipe away two main
aspersions which I have often met withal by way of objection, and are as well
in every man's mouth as in Emmanuel of Metteren his book.

The first (and that is the word) it lucked well, judging the fact by the
event, but reservedly condemning the purpose, for had not the shipping come
(say they) as it did, what would have become of the town, he would have given
it up. Colonel Utenhoven a man of note, and yet living, one of their own
Nation, a Governor of a Town, knows better, and the following Treatise shall
also make it appear otherwise, and that he had not the least thought of
rendering the town, though succor had not come to him at all; this point
therefore shall here need no further enlargement.

The second is, That he might have carried the matter otherwise, and have drawn
less jealousy upon himself, by acquainting the Captains with it sooner,
considering it was done without the privity of the Lords the States, nor was it
fitting to bring an enemy through such secret passages.

This at the first view seems to say somewhat, as borrowing strength from the
common proceedings in other ordinary Governors; who, upon the point as well of
Parley as Article, ere they enter into either with an enemy, consult first (as
it is fit) with the Captains of the Garrisons, and this (it seems) was likewise
expected here; But upon what reasons? was he such a Governor? he was a
General, he had Governors under him. Did he intend (as commonly others do) to
deliver the Town? he meant nothing less, as is partly before, and shall be
hereafter largely proved. What account did the States ever require of him? what
disgrace was there given him more then a free acknowledgement of his singular
carriage and judgment in the mannaging of a business of so great importance?

True it is, there was at first a kind of staggering amongst the best, which
the mist of some partial information from some male volent person in Ostend
had brought them to; but this was soon cleared, first by his own letters in
brief, and after by me more at large, if not to the most of them, yet I dare
say to the most discreet and judicious amongst them.

But let us now see whether it had been either necessary or convenient that the
secret of this stratageme should have been revealed sooner, either to the Lords
the States, or Captains of the Garrison. To me it seems, that it had been to
the States preposterous, to the Captains dangerous, nay more, repugnant to
sense and common reason, and that for these reasons following.

The project it self was but an Embryo, and had been a mere abortive, had he
delivered himself of it before the attempt of the enemy: for from thence it
must receive both form and being, now that was uncertain and unknown unto him,
especially the time; he could therefore have no certain, befitting subject to
write to the Lords the States of this matter, till the deed were done, and the
project put in practice; which so soon as it was, be presently dispatched a
messenger, giving them a due account of the cause of his proceedings, and that
to their contentment.

It was a stratageme whose power and virtue confisted wholly in secrecy, it was
also a thread, whereon hung no less then the States Town, his own honor, and
the lives of all them that were with him, and therefore in reason did not admit
the least communication: for the best pledge you can have of a man's secrecy,
is not to open your thoughts unto him.

Lastly, if he would have forgot himself so much as to have committed a secret
to the trust of many, could he yet promise himself that he should not meet with
opposition? would they instantly have been all of his mind? would no man
suspect the handling? Why did they then after? and that when it was consummated
and finished. I have heard Colonel Utenhoven say, That if the General should
have made the proposition, he had broken the enterprise; and he knew best the
Captains inclinations, for he was the mouth betwixt the General and them, to
clear those jealousies he saw them apprehend in him. It was therefore the
safest and best way that could be taken, to set this business abroach rather
without their knowledge, then flatly against it, and to hazard the
interpretation of the action, rather then the action it self.

Besides, who ever yet knew the General Vere so simple or so weak, as to avoid
military forms, where they were necessary or expedient? Wanted he judgment?
his enemies will not say it. Had he not will? he had too many of them too great
to lay open himself to their malice; he was a better mannager of his
reputation, then to give them so palpable, so gross an advantage to build
their scandal on. It was the public service and his own judgment that led him
into this course, wherein if there were any danger for his part, it lay on my
head, which he ventured for the safety of all.

It seems then that as it was not necessary, so had it been exceedingly
inconvenient, that the book of this secret should have been sooner unclasped,
before it was set on foot, or to the Lords the States, before it was
accomplished.

I come now to the relation, leaving the branch in the objection, touching the
bringing in of the enemy, as not worthy to receive an answer. About the
twelfth of November it began to freez exceedingly, the wind being North-west,
where it remained till Christmasse or after, blowing for the most a stiff gale,
often high and stormy: in this time no shipping came unto us, or succors out
of Holland or Zeland, nor could they for the wind; nor had we any for some few
weeks after. Our men, munition, and materials wasted daily, the sea and our
enemy grew both upon us.

At the springtide we looked still when that would decide the question
touching the town betwixt us and our adversaries, so exceeding high it was, and
swelling through the continuance of the North-west wind, which beat flat upon
us, and brought extraordinary store of waters from the Ocean into those narrow
parts. Hands we could set very few to work, our places of guard were so many,
our numbers so small, and those over-watched. Two thousand and an hundred men
was our strength, the convenient competency for the town was at least four
thousand: for workmen our need was more then ever; for the whole town with the
new forts therein lately begun by the General (who foresaw the storm) lay
more then half-open, insomuch that in diverse places with little labor both
horse and foot might enter. The North-west raveline (our Champion against the
sea) was almost worn away. The Porcupine (or Porc-espic) not well defensible.
At all these places could the enemy come to push of pike with us, when they
list, at low water.

This was our condition, neither was the enemy ignorant thereof, nor unmindfull
to lay hold on his advantage, preparing all things from all parts fitting for
the advancement of his purpose; that was to assault the town. Our General saw
their provision and power, and his own weakness; but could prevent none of
them otherwise then by practice, his industry slept not, his vigilance appeared
by his daily and nightly rounds he made about the town and works, his courage
was the highest, when his forces lowest; for even then he manifestly made it
known so much, that of his store he furnished plenty to others.

One day going about the walls, he began to discourse of our being pressed, and
said, He cared not what the enemy could attempt upon him; he was in one of the
strongest quarters of the town when he spoke this, and not unwilling that such
as of themselves saw it not, should be kept ignorant of the danger that hung
over their heads. The Captains and the Officers he commended for their care and
industry in their watch and guard, more to stir them up unto it, then really to
congratulate that virtue in them he said, A Captain could receive no greater
blow in his reputation; then to be surprised; diverse other speeches he used
tending to encouragement, dissuading from security, and often amongst them
interlaced the strength of the town.

I, at the first perceiving not his mask, began to put him in mind of some of
the former particulars, the whole towns weakness, and the Archdukes
opportunity; but he told me quickly by his eye, he would not have their
strength touched in such an audience; so slighting my speeches, he continued
his pace, and a la volee his discourse till he came to his lodging, there he
called to me alone, and brake to me in these terms.

I perceive you are not ignorant of our estate, and therefore I will be more
open and free with you; What think you? are we not in a fine taking here, ha? I
will tell you, Captain Ogle, there was never man of my fortunes and reputation
(both which have been cleared hitherto) plunged in greater extremity then I am
now: here we discoursed of our condition before mentioned, whereupon he
inferred, That he was like a man that had both courage and judgment to defend
himself, and yet must sit with his hands bound, whilst boys and devils come
and box him about the ears. Yet this I will tell you too (said he) rather then
you shall ever see the name of Francis Vere subscribed in the delivery of a
town committed to his custody, or his hand to the least article of treaty
(though with the Archdukes own person) had I a thousand lives I would first
bury them all in the rampire; yet in the mean while judge you of the quality
of this our being. I told him, that I thought if he were in his former liberty,
he would bethink himself ere he suffered himself to be penned up in such a cage
again: he made no reply, but addressed himself to his business, and I to mine.
What his thoughts now were, I will not enter into, unless I had more strength
to reach them. Sure I am they wanted no stuff to work on: for the bone he had
to gnaw upon, required as good teeth as any were in Hannibals head to break it,
and had not his been such, all the hands we had there could not have plucked it
out of our own throats.

Not long after this the General calls a Council of the Colonels and chief
Officers; there he propounded these two points; First, whether with the numbers
formerly mentioned we could in time of assault sufficiently furnish all parts.
Secondly, or if not, whether in such an extremity we ought not to borrow the
troops employed for the guard of the Quarriers to the preservation of the town.

This was more to sound our judgments, then of any necessity, for him to seek
allowance of his actions from them: for Generals use not to ask leave of their
Captains to dispose of their guards, what they are to quit, and what they are
to keep.

Our numbers they confessed were too few, yet must the Quarriers at no hand be
abandoned; but how to hold them sufficiently, and to provide for those places,
on which the fury of the storm was like to pour it self forth, no man gave
expedient. The voices were severally collected, and when it came to me, I said,
That seeing our case stands as it does, our breaches many and great, our
numbers few to defend them, my opinion was, that when we should see the cloud
coming, we quit the Quarriers: for I know they were ordained for the custody,
not to endanger the loss of the town; that of inconveniences the least must
ever be chosen; that it were ill-husbandry to hazard the principal to save
the interest, and as little discretion to let the fire run on to burn the
palace, whilst we are busy preserving the lodge.

The two Colonels ( Roone and Sir Horace Vere) who spoke after me (for the
chief speak last) were of the same mind, differing only in some
circumstances, not in substance of opinion. That the other were so scrupulous
in this point, is to be thought proceeded rather from ignorance of our estate
and danger, or else an apprehension grounded upon common opinions, which was,
lose the Quarriers, lose the town; or (it may be) the fear of the
interpretation that the Lords the States would make of such an advise; and that
fear was likely to be the greater, because perhaps they were not furnished with
strength of reason to maintain their opinion, or else they might find it
fittest to lay the burden on his shoulders that was best able to bear it (the
General himself). After this council there passed some few days till it was
near Christmasse. The Archduke was himself in person in the camp, the assault
resolved on, and the time, the preparations brought down to the approaches, and
the army, they only stayed for low water to give on.

Here began the Generals project to receive being, till now it had none;
neither was it now time to call the Captains to a new council, either to
require their advice, or to tell them his own. He had his head and his hands
full; ours had not aked now, had not his waked then more for our safeties, then
ours could do for our own. He bestirred him on all sides, his powers were quick
and strong within him, and those without he disposed of thus. His troops he
placed most on Sand-hill, Porcupine (or Porc-espic), the North-east Raveline,
the forts and curtain of the old town: these were the breaches, the other
guards were all furnished as was then fitting according to our numbers.

The Quarriers held their men till a Parley was commenced, and by it they
secured. The False-bray was abandoned by order, as not tenable in time of
assault, the Cannon in it dismounted, lest it should be spoiled by our own in
Helmont which flanked it, and the whole face of Sand-hil. This False-bray was
that dangerous passage mentioned in the objection going before, which I thought
to have passed over, but am since otherwise advised. It lay at the foot of
Sand-hil, in the eye of the enemy, and was therefore as well known to them as
to our selves and so was the way to it, for they saw daily our entry to the
guard to be through a covert-gallery, forced through the bottom of the said
hill: it was so narrow that two men armed were the most could pass in front;
when you were come out of it, you were presently at the havens side, and the
new town, without discovering any guard, passage, or place of importance, such
as might any ways give the least advantage to an enemies observation; and was
(in truth) in nothing else secret, but that it was covered overhead from the
eye of the heavens, otherwise there was no passage about the whole town less
prejudicial then that. There is a bolt of the same quiver likewise fallen into
Emmanuel de Metterens book. There the Generals judgment is (forsooth)
controlled* and by the providence of Captain Sinklyer, and some others (as they
think) much bettered. The General all there is said to have neglected the
False-bray, and that in a time when it was needful to have defended it; but
Captain Sinklyer with other Captains provided for it. But how provided for it?
Sinklyer with six musketeers undertook it; the Captains promised him two
Companies to second him, the place could contain one good one. But why
musketeers alone, and not pikes? since they would make it good, why but six,
and that against the fury of an army? what knowledge would they teach our
Cannons to spare the Scots, and kill the Spaniards being joined pesle-mesle? It
is ridiculous. Captain Sinklyer, if he lived, would be angry to have his
judgment thus wronged, and printed so small, as to undertake the defense of
the False-bray, when the Bulwark it self was assaultable. But I leave these
poor detractions that bewray only the detractours weakness; and so return to
the matter.

On the two Bulwarks formerly mentioned ( Helmont and Sand hill) with the mount
Flamingburgh, he placed store of Artillery and Mortar, the Mortars most of all
at Helmont, and much Ordnance; for that (as I said before) scowred the avenue
of the enemies coming upon the Sand-hil, and the old town.

When he had thus ordered his affairs for defense, he began to betake him to
his stratageme (which indeed was our best shelter against that storm). He sent
Captain Lewis Courtier (who spoke good Spanish) into the Porcupine (or
Porc-espic) the nearest place of guard to the enemy, with order to desire
speech with some of them, he called twice or thrice, or more, but none answered
him, so he effected nothing. The General displeased thereat, sent me to the
place on the same errand. I called, but no man answered; beat a drum, but they
would not hear; upon that I returned to the General, and told him they
expected form; if he would speak with any of them, I must go without the limits
of our works* he desired it, but fearing they would shoot at me; I put it to an
adventure.

Coming to the havens-side, I caused the drummer to beat, and at the second
call one answered me. After a little stay, the Governor of Sluys (Mattheo
Cerano) came to me* each made his quality known to the other, I my errand to
him, that the General Vere desired to have some qualified person of theirs
sent into the town to speak with him; he this to the Archduke: I attended his
return, which was speedy, and with acceptance; he told me of his affection to
our Nation, bred and nourished through the good correspondency and
neighborhood betwixt the Lord Governor of Flushing, Sir Robert Sidney, and
him. He would take it as a courtesy that the General Vere would nominate and
desire him of the Archduke to be employed in this business. This was
performed, and at our next meeting agreed, that I should be a pledge for him,
that each should bring a companion with him, that he with his should have
General Veres; I and mine Don Augustinoes word for our safety; that during the
Treaty no hostility should be used on land; that against low water we should
find our selves there again at the same place. This done, we parted each to
his home.

I told the General what had passed, he persuaded (and that earnestly) with
the Netherlandish, French, and Captains of other Nations, to have some one of
them accompany me in this action; the rather to avoid that interpretation which
he foresaw would follow being managed by him and his English only; but they
all refused, notwithstanding he assured several of them, his purpose was no
other then to gain time, where my self can testify, that coming to him almost
at low water to know his further pleasure, I found him very earnest in
persuading with an old Captain called Nicolas de Leur, to whom I heard him say,
Je vous asseure n'est que pour gaigner temps. I was not then so good a
Frenchman as that I durst say I well understood him, neither the purpose he had
with him; since I have learned both better. This man refused as well as the
rest, whereupon the General in a choler, willed to take with me whom I would
my self, for he would appoint none. I took my old companion, and then familiar
friend, Captain Fairfax. Cerano and Ottanes were then at the waterside, when
we came; Simon Anthonio and Gamboletti, both Colonels or Maistros del campo
brought them over on horsback to us; on the other side, Don Juan de Pantochi
Ajudante received us, and Don Augustino de Mexia at the battery; behind which
was the army ranged ready for the assault.

These two brought us to the Archduke, who was then come to the approaches, and
accompanied as became so great a Prince; we performed those respects were
fitting, he vouchsafed us the honor to move his hat, and being informed by one
Hugh Owen (an Englishman, but a fugitive) of our names and families, as also
that I could speak Spanish; he conjured me as I was a Gentleman, to tell him
if there were any deceit in this handling or no; I told him, if there were it
was more then I knew: for with my knowledge I would not be used as an
instrument in a work of that nature: he asked me then what instructions I had;
I told him, none; for we were come hither only as pledges to assure the return
of them, to whom he had given his instructions; he asked me again, whether I
thought the General meant sincerely, or not; I told him, that I was altogether
unacquainted with his purpose, but for any thing I knew, he did. Upon this we
were dismissed, and by Don Augustino (whom Don Juan de Pantochi ever attended)
brought to his lodging, and there honorably and kindly entertained, and
visited by most of the Chiefs in the army, and also by some Ecclesiastical
persons.

There came an advertisement from the approaches of working in the town, this
was occasioned by noise of knocking in (as they thought) Palizadoes. To give
order to the contrary, we were after carried on horsback thither; we having
received answer, that it was only a cabin of planks set up to keep beer in,
the noise of that work, and their suspicion ceased together, yet we stayed some
few hours at Gamboletti the Italian Colonels guard, who at that time had the
point, and Conde Theodoro Trivulci, and some other of the Cavalry accompanied
us some hours; after which we returned to the camp, and to Don Augustino, and
our rest. In the morning we found our lodging environed with a strong guard,
and understood of the discontentments of Cerano and Ottanes being returned, and
how they had not any speech with the General. This startled me and Fairfax,
who dreamt of no such matter, nor of any such manner of proceedings: Fairfax
thought I had some secret instructions in particular, and desired me to tell
what the Fox meant to do; I told him (and it was truth) I knew as little as he;
but calling then to mind the discourse he had in his lodging, and mentioned
formerly in this, and comparing it with the action, I said to Fairfax, that I
verily believed that he meant to put a trick upon them; but (quoth he) the
trick is put upon us, me thinks, for we are prisoners, and in their power* they
at liberty, and our judges.

Don Augustino coming to us gave an end to this discourse; and beginning
another with me apart in his own chamber, where, with a grave and settled
countenance, he told me of the Commissioners return, their entertainments and
discontentments, as also the Archdukes toward me, for abusing him, and
especially he urged these two points, That I told Cerano that the General
desired speech with some from his Highness, which seemed not to be so, for he
flatly refused it: That I had said to his Highness himself, that I was not an
instrument of deceit, which also appeared otherwise, and would not (I must
account) be so slightly passed over: hereunto I answered, That the
Commissioners are returned without speech with the General is as strange to
me, as unexpected of them; and I am the more sensible of this discourtesie
toward them through the kind usage I receive here of you; but as I am not of
counsel in this manner of proceedings, so I know as little how to help it, as I
can reach the drift. Touching the other point of his Highness displeasure
toward me, I hope so noble a Prince will admit no other impression of my
person or actions, then the integrity of both shall fairly deliver him: for if
I have deceived him, it is more then probable I am deceived my self; nor do I
believe that his Highness nor any of you judge me so flat, or so stupid, as
upon knowledge of such a purpose, in irritating his Highness, I would deliver
my self and friend as sacrifices to make another man's atonement. It is certain
then, if the General has fraud in this action, he borrows our persons, not
our consents to work it by; which though you have now in your power, yet will I
not fear the least ill measure, so long as I have the word of Don Augustino for
my safety. The noble Gentleman moved with my confidence, took me in his arms,
assured me it again, as also any courtesy else during my stay there, and was
indeed as good as his word.

This thus passed, he told me he would relate faithfully to the Archduke what I
had said; but yet ere he went, desired to know of me what I thought was to be
further done; I told him, it could not be but there must be a mistaking on the
one side or the other, that therefore to clear all doubts, I held it expedient
for me to write to the General to let him know our present condition, his
Highness coffeehouse upon this manner of proceeding, the danger he exposed
us unto, and to understand his further purpose for our enlargement. This answer
he carried presently to his Highness, and was interpreted by Owen, then sent
by a messenger into the town; and thus was this rub removed, the Commissioners
required and sent in, and the Parley brought upon the former foot again.

The General was not a little glad of their return, for it redeemed the fear
he had of ours, who (as Captain Charles Rassart told me after) was not a little
perplexed for me; he would often say, What shall I do for my
Lieutenant Colonel, and wished he had me back again, though he paid my ransom
five times over: he would sometimes comfort himself with hope of their civility
and my demeanor: fearing the worst, he said, I could not suffer better then
for the public cause.

The reason he hazzarded us, and handled them, was to gain so much more time,
for that was precious to him for the advancement of his works in the old town,
to which through the benefit of this occasion of cessation of hostility, he had
now drawn most of the hands could labor, giving them shades to work, and order
to have their weapons by them ready upon occasion to fight: he handled the
matter so, that ere the Commissioners returned again, the old town and works
were stronger by a thousand men. He could not have done this (at least so
conveniently) had he begun conference with them at their first entry, nor
avoided that first conference, had he stayed them in the town, at least (every
man has his own ways) he understood it so, and it was a sure and safe course
for him and his designs: for causing Edward Goldwell, (a Gentleman that then
waited on him in his chamber) to make an alarm at their entry, he pretended
thereupon treachery on their part, and made it the cause, why he would neither
let them stay in the town, nor return the way they came. This bred disputes,
and messengers passed to and fro betwixt them and the General. In the mean
time the flood came in, and the water waxed so high that there was no passage
that way without a boat; whereof there was none on that side of the town, nor
any brought, for that had been to cross his own purpose. The Commissioners
desired earnestly to be suffered to stay, though it were upon the worst guard
of the town; but it was denied: for he must rid himself of them, he could not
do his business so well, if their eyes and ears were so near him; he sent them
therefore to their friends on the East Side, forecasting wisely, that ere they
could come there, and thence by the South to the West Side again, there to have
admittance to his Highness, and there to have the matter debated in Council,
he should not only gain the whole winter-night, but most part of the next day
for his advantage, which fell out according to that calculation, and beyond his
expectation that it continued longer.

At the Commissioners return, his later entertainment to them was better then
the first; he feasted with them, drank and discoursed with them, but came to no
direct overture of article, though they much pressed him; that part of the day
and the whole night was so spent, and in sleep. The like had we in the camp,
except drinking, whereof there was no excess, but of good cheer and courtesy
abundance. In the morning were discovered five ships out of Zeland riding in
the rode, they brought four hundred men, and some materials for the sea-works;
the men were landed on the strand with long boats and shallops; the enemy shot
at them with their artillery; but did no hurt.

The pretext of succor from the States the General took to break off the
Treaty, which he had not yet really entered into. The Commissioners were on both
sides discharged in this order. Cerano came first into the army, it was my
right to have gone for him, but I sent Captain Fairfax at the earnest entreaty
of Don Juan de Pantochi and some others, who said, they desired my stay, only
to have my company so much the longer, making me believe it was agreeable to
them, the rather for that I spoke their Language; I was the more willing to
yield, because I would not leave any other impression then that I saw they had
received of my integrity in this negotiation: Fairfax being in the town,
Ottanes made not long stay, nor I after him.

The General was not pleased that I stayed out of my turn; but when I gave him
my reasons for it, he seemed to be well contented.

General Vere having now received part of the long-expected supplies, together
with the assurance of more at hand, straitway broke off the Treaty; which,
though ending somewhat abruptly, had (it seems) finished the part which was by
him allotted it; whereupon he sent the Archduke this following acquittance.

WE have heretofore held it necessary for certain reasons to treat with the
Deputies which had authority from your Highness; but whilst we were about to
conclude upon the Conditions and Articles, there are arrived certain of our
ships of War, by whom we have received part of that which we had need of; so
that we cannot with our Honor and Oath continue the Treaty, nor proceed in it;
which we hope that your Highness will not take in ill part; and that
nevertheless, when your power shall reduce us to the like estate, you will not
refuse as a most generous Prince to vouchsafe us again a gentle audience.

From our Town of Ostend, the 25 of December, 1601. Signed, FRANCIS VERE.


NOw whosoever shall but consider how many and how great difficulties the
Archduke had struggled with to maintain the siege; how highly concerned he was
in point of honor, and how eagerly engaged in his affections; and what assured
hopes he had of taking the town; will easily conceive that he must needs find
himself much discomposed at so unexpected a disappointment. He had already
taken it with his eyes; and, as if he had bound the Leviathan for his maidens
to sport withal, under the assurance of the truce he walked the Infanta before
the town with twenty Ladies and Gentlewomen in her train; as it were valiantly
to stroke this wild beast, which he had now laid fast in the toiles; and to
look upon the outside of the town before they entered into it. Now to have his
hopes thus blown up; and to be thrown from the top of so much confidence!
wonder not if we find him much enraged at it, and what can we now expect, but
that he should let fly his rage in a sudden and furious assault upon the town?
especially considering that before the treaty began, all things were in
readiness for such a purpose. But whether it were that the treaty had unbended
the soldiers resolution, or the unexpected breaking off stouned the Archdukes
counsels, or whether his men were discouraged at their enemies increased
strength, or whatsoever the cause was, certain it is, that there was no
considerable assault made upon the town for many days after.

And we have cause to believe that General Vere, was never a whit sorry for
it, who had by this means opportunity (though no leisure) to repair his works;
wherein he employed above twelve hundred men for at least eight days together;
during which time he stood in guard in person at the time of low water in the
night, (being the time of the greatest danger) which conduced much to the
encouragement of his men; and having received intelligence by his scouts of the
enemies preparations and resolutions within few days to give them a general
assault, he was careful to man the chief places Helmont, Sand-hill, and the
rest; and to furnish them with Cannon and stones, and what else might be
useful for their defenses.

Mean while the besiegers spared no powder, but let fly at the ships, which
notwithstanding daily and nightly went into the town; and many a bullet was
interchanged between the town and the camp; who lay all this while pelting at
one another, some small hurts on both sides being given and received.

But the seventh of January was the day designed by the besiegers, wherein to
attempt something extraordinary.

All day long without intermission did the Archduke batter the bulwark of
Sand-hill, Helmont, Porc-espic, and other places near adjoining, with eighteen
Cannon from two of his batteries, the one at the foot of the downs upon the
Catteys, and the other on the South Side thereof; from whence were discharged
(which the Cannoniers counted) above two thousand shot on that side the town,
all the bullets weighing forty, and forty six pounds a piece.

After I was thus far engaged I happily met with an account of this bloody
assault, by Henry Hexham, who was present at it; to him therefore I shall
willingly resign the story.

HIs Highness, the Archduke, then seeing himself thus deluded by General Vere
his Parley, was much vexed thereat, and very angry with the chief of his
Council of War, who had diverted him from giving the assault upon that day when
the Parley was called for; insomuch that some of them, for two or three days
after (as it was credibly reported) durst not look him in the face; others, to
please him, persuaded him to give an assault upon the town. Hereupon his
Highness took a resolution to revenge himself of those within the town;
saying, He would put them all to the sword; his Commanders and soldiers taking
likewise an oath, that if they entered, they would not spare man, woman, nor
child in it. Till that the enemy had shot upon and into the town, above an
hundred sixty three thousand two hundred Cannon-shot, to beat it about our
ears, scarce leaving a whole house standing; but now to pour out his wrath and
fury more upon us, on the seventh of January abovesaid, very early in the
morning he began with eighteen pieces of Cannon and half Cannon carrying
bullets of forty and forty eight pounds a piece, from their pile-battery, and
that which stood under their Cattey upon the foot of the Downs, to batter
Sand-hil, the Porc-espic, and Helmont, and that day till evening he shot upon
Sand-hil, and the curtain of the old town above two and twenty hundred
Cannon-shot; insomuch that it might rather have been called Yron-hil then
Sand-hil: for it stuck so full of bullets, that many of them tumbled down into
the False-bray, and others, striking on their own bullets, breaking in pieces
flew up into the air as high as a steeple.

During this furious battery, the enemy all the day long made great
preparations to assault us against night; and to that end brought down scaling
ladders, great store of ammunition, hand-granadoes, and diverse other
instruments and materials of war fitting thereunto; and withal toward evening
drew down his army, and ordered his men in this manner.

Count Farneze an Italian should first give on with two thousand Italians and
Spaniards upon Sand-hil, the breach, and the curtain of the old town; the
Governor of Dixmunde with two thousand Spaniards and other Nations upon the
Porc-espic and Helmont. Another Captain with five hundred men to fall on upon
the West-raveline, and another Captain with five hundred men more upon the
South-quarriers, and the Spanish Serjeant-major-generall, which was an hostage
in Ostend, upon the West-quarriers, making in all eight thousand men to assault
the West Side; and the Count of Bucquoy was to have assaulted the East Side,
the East-raveline, and the new haven, as a second for them which fell on upon
Sand-hil, and the old town on the West Side: and thus their men, time, and
place was ordered.

General Vere knowing the enemies intent, that he would assault us at a
low water, slept not, but was exceeding careful and vigilant all the day, to
prepare things necessary to defend the town, and with-stand the enemy. And
because there were no Sparrs, Beams, and Palizadoes in the magazine, he caused
diverse houses that were shot, to be pulled down, and taking the Beams and
Sparrs from off them, he made the carpenters make Palizadoes and Stockadoes of
them: and at a high water shut the West-sluces, and engrossed as much water as
possibly he could into the old and new town. And toward evening drew all the
men in the town, that were able to fight, into arms, and disposed of them, as
follows.

To maintain Sand-hil, and defend the breach, he placed his brother Sir Horace
Vere, and Sir Charles Fairfax with twelve weak companies, whereof some were not
above ten or twelve men strong, giving them double arms, a pike and a musket,
and good store of ammunition.

Upon the curtain of the old town, between Sand-hil and a redoubt called
Schottenburch, a most dangerous place, which he feared most, being torn and
beaten down with the sea and the enemies Cannon, Sir Francis Vere stood himself
with Captain Zeglin, with six weak companies to help to defend it.

Within the redoubt of Schottenburch it self, he appointed Captain Utenhoven,
and Captain Haughton with their two companies.

From Schottenburch along the curtain to the old Church, which the enemy had
shot down, he placed Colonel Lone with three hundred Zelanders, that came into
the town the day the Parley brake off.

From the old Church along the curtain and the flanks to the North-part,
Captain Zithan commanded over six weak companies.

Upon the Redoubt called Moses-table was Captain Montesquir de Roques (a worthy
French Captain, whom Sir Francis Vere loved entirely for the worth and valor
that was in him) with two French companies.

For the guarding of the North-raveline, he appointed Captain Charles Rassart
with four weak companies: the rest of the curtain (by reason of the flanks upon
the cut of the new haven, being reasonable well defended) were left unmanned.

Upon the curtain of the new town under Flaming-burgh, were placed five weak
companies to second Moses-table, if need did require.

Upon Flaming-burgh, two whole cannon and two fieldpieces were planted to
scowre the old town.

Upon the West-raveline two companies were likewise placed, and a whole cannon,
and two half-cannons planted upon it.

For the defending of the Porc-espic, a place of great importance, lying under
Helmont, Sir Francis Vere placed four of the strongest companies that could be
found in the town.

Upon the bulwark called Helmont, which flanked directly the breach and
Sand-hil, and scowred along the strand between the enemies pile-battery, the
old-haven over which they were to pass to come to Sand-hil, and the curtain of
the old-town, which also did help to defend the Porc-espic, he placed ten weak
companies, whereof the Generals company was one; and had upon it nine brass
and iron pieces, laden with chained-bullets, boxes with musket-bullets, and
cartridge-shot. These ten companies were kept as a reserve, to be employed as a
second where most occasion required, and were commanded by Captain Metkirck and
Serjeant-major- Carpenter.

The rest of the bulwarks, rampires, and the counterscarp about the town, were
but slightly manned with a few men, in regard the enemy could come to attempt
none of the^, till he became master of the former. Here you see a great many
companies thus disposed of; but all, or the most of them, were exceeding weak,
and some of them not above seven or eight men strong, which in all could not
make above twelve hundred able fighting-men, to resist an army of ten thousand
men* that stood ready to assault them.

The Ordnance and other instruments and materials of war the General
disposed of in this sort; upon the casement of the West-bulwark he planted two
whole and two half-Cannons, which flanked Helmont and the Porc-espic, and
scowred along the old-haven, down as far as the Ton-beacon, beyond their
pile-battery, next to that place where they were to pass over the haven at a
low water. These Ordnance were likewise charged with musket-bullets,
chained-bullets, and yron-bullets.

Upon all these batteries, especially those which flanked the breach, and
played directly upon the strand, Sir Francis Vere disposed of the best
Cannoniers in the town; among the rest an Englishman called Francis the Gurmer,
an excellent Cannonier, which had been the death of many a Spaniard. And
because they should be sure to take their mark right upon their cog, before it
grew dark he commanded them to let fly two or three Cannon-bullets upon the
strand, and toward the new haven, to see for a trial where their bullets
fell, that they might find their ground the better in the night, when the
enemy was to fall on.

Moreover, upon the top of the breach, and along the curtain of the old town
were set firkins of ashes to be tumbled down the wall upon the enemy to blind
them; also little firkins with frize-ruyters, or quadrant tenter-nails, three
sticking in the ground, and one upright; which were likewise to be cast down
the rampire to prick them, when they sought to enter. Then many great heaps of
stones, and brick-bats, which the soldiers brought from the old Church they
had shot down, to throw amongst them: then we had ropes of pitch, hoops bound
about with squibs and fireworks to throw among them; great store of
hand-granadoes, and clubs, which we called Hercules-clubs, with heavy heads of
wood, and nails driven into the squares of them. These and some others (because
the enemy had sworn all our deaths) the General provided to entertain and
welcome them.

When it began to grow darkish, a little before low water, in the interim while
the enemy was a cooling of his Ordnance, which had played all the day long upon
the breach and the old town, the General taking advantage of this precious
time, commanded Captain Dexter and Captain Clark with some fifty stout
workmen, who had a rose-noble apiece for a quarter of an hours work, to get up
to the top of the breach, which the enemies cannon had made very mountable, and
then with all expedition to cast up a small breast-work, and drive in as many
Palizadoes as possibly they could, that his brother Sir Horace Vere, and the
rest of the Captains and soldiers which he commanded, might have some little
shelter, the better to defend the breach, and repulse the enemy when he
strived to enter: which (blessed be God) with the loss of a few men they
performed.

This being done, Sir Francis Vere went through the sally-port down into the
False-bray, and it being twilight, called for an old soldier, a Gentleman of
his company, to go out Sentinel-perdu, and to creep out to the strand between
two gabions, giving him express command, that if he saw an enemy, he should
come in unto him silently, without giving any alarm at all. He crept upon his
belly as far as he could, and at last discovered Count Farneze, above
mentioned, wading and putting over the old-haven above their pile-battery, with
his two thousand Italians, which were to fall on first; and as they waded over,
he drew them up into battalions and divisions; which this Gentleman having
discovered, came in silently to Sir Francis Vere (as he had commanded him), who
asked him, What news? My Lord (said he) I smell good store of gold chains,
buff-jerkins, Spanish-cassocks, and Spanish-blades. Ha, (says Sir Francis
Vere) say thou me so? I hope thou shall have some of them anon; and giving
him a piece of gold, he went up again through the sally-port to the top of
Sand-hil, where he gave express order to Serjeant-major Carpenter to go to
Helmont, and every man to his charge, and not to take any alarm, or shoot off
either cannon or musket shot till he himself gave the signal; and then to give
fire both with the Ordnance and small shot, as fast as ever they could charge
and discharge.

When the enemy had put over his two thousand Italians, he had also a signal
to give notice thereof to the Count of Bucquoy, that they were ready to fall
on, whose signal was the shot of a cannon from their pile-battery, with a
hollow-holed bullet into the sea toward his quarter, which made a humming
noise.

When General Vere had got them under the swoop of his cannon and small-shot,
he powered a volley of cannon and musket shot upon them, raking through their
battalions, and making lanes amongst them upon the bare strand; which did so
amaze and startle them, that they were at a nonplus, whether they should fall
on, or retreat back again; yet at last taking courage, and tumbling over their
dead bodies, they rallyed themselves, and came under the foot of Sand-hil, and
along the foot of the curtain of the old town, to the very piles that were
struck under the wall; where they began to make ready to send us a volley.
Which Sir Francis Vere seeing that they were a presenting, and ready to give
fire upon us, (because indeed all the breast-work and parapet was beaten down
flat to the rampire that day with their Ordnance) and we standing open to the
enemies shot; commanded all the soldiers to fall flat down upon the ground,
while the enemies shot flew like a shower of hail over their heads; which for
the reasons abovesaid, saved a great many men's lives.

This being done, our men rising saw the enemy hast^ng to come up to the
breach, and mounting up the wall of the old town. Sir Francis Vere flourishing
his sword, called to them in Spanish and Italian vienneza, causing the
soldiers as they climbed up, to cast and tumble down among them the firkins of
ashes, the barrels of Frize-ruyters, the hoops, stones, and brick-bats, which
were provided for them.

The alarm being given, it was admirable to see with what courage and
resolution our men fought; yea, the Lord did as it were infuse fresh courage
and strength into a company of poor snakes and sick soldiers; which come
running out of their huts up to the wall to fight their shares; and the women
with their laps full of powder to supply them, when they had shot away all
their ammunition.

Now were the walls of Ostend all on a light fire, and our Ordnance thundering
upon them from our bulwarks; now was there a lamentable cry of dying men among
them: for they could no sooner come up to the top of the breach to enter it, or
peep up between Sand-hil and Schottenburch, but they were either knocked on the
head with the stocks of our muskets, our Hercules-clubs, or run through with
our pikes and swords. Twice or thrice when they strived to enter, they were
beaten off, and could get no advantage upon us.

The fight upon the breach and the old town continued hotter and hotter for the
space of above an hour, the enemy falling on at the same instant upon the
Porc-espic, Helmont, the West-raveline, and Quarriers, were so bravely
repulsed, that they could not enter a man.

The enemy fainting, and having had his belly full, those on the West Side heat
a doleful retreat, while the Lord of Hosts ended our dispute for the town,
crowned us with victory, and the roaring noise of our Cannon, rending the air,
and rolling along the superficies of the water, the wind being South, and with
us, carried that night the news thereof to our friends in England and Holland.

General Vere perceiving the enemy to fall off, commanded me to run as fast as
ever I could to Serjeant-major Carpenter, and the Auditour Fleming, who were
upon Helmont, that they should presently open the West-slute, out of which
there ran such a stream and torrent down through the chanel of the West-haven,
that upon their retreat it carried away many of their sound and hurt men into
the sea; and besides, our men fell down our walls after them, slew a great many
of their men as they retreated, and took some prisoners, pillaged and stripped a
great many, and brought in gold-chains, Spanish-pistols, buff-jerkins,
Spanish-cassocks, blades, swords, and targets; among the rest one, wherein was
enammeled in gold the seven Worthies, worth seven or eight hundred gilders; and
among the rest, that soldier, which Sir Francis Vere had sent out to discover,
with as much booty as ever he could lug, saying, That Sir Francis Vere was now
as good as his word.

Under Sand-hil, and all along the walls of the old town, the Porc-espic and
West-raveline, lay whole heaps of dead carcases, forty or fifty upon a heap,
stark naked, goodly young men, Spaniards and Italians: among which, some
(besides other marks to know them by) had their beards clean shaven off. There
lay also upon the sand some dead horse, with baskets of hand-granadoes; they
left also behind them their scaling-ladders, great store of spades, and
showels, bills, hatchets, and axes, with other materials.

Here the French diary adds, that those who gave the assault upon the old town,
were furnished with two or three days victuals, which they had brought in
sacks, intending to have entrenched themselves, and maintained the place
against the besieged; if their enterprise had succeeded. Also, that among the
heaps of the slain was found in man's apparel the body of a young Spanish woman
near unto Sand-hill, who (as was conjectured by her wounds) had been slain in
the assault, having under her apparel a chain of gold set with precious
stones, besides other jewels and silver. And that during this assault the
Archduke disposed of himself behind the battery of the Catteys, and the
Infanta remained at the fort Isabella.

Upon the East Side also they stood in three great battalions before the town
upon the Gullet, but the tide coming in, they came too late; so that they could
not second those on the West Side, and fall on where they were appointed; to
wit, upon our new haven, which lay upon the North-east-side of the town. For
the water beginning to rise, it did amaze the soldiers, and they feared, if
they stayed any longer, they could not be relieved by their fellows; howsoever
for their honors they would do something, and resolved to give on upon our
Spanish half moon, which lay over the Gullet on the South-east part of the
town. But a soldier of ours falling out of it (a police of Sir Francis Vere)
disappointed this design, and yielded himself prisoner unto them; telling them
that there were but forty soldiers in the half moon, and offered to lead them
to it; which he did, and they took it easily.

For General Vere (with great judgment) had left it thus ill manned, to draw
the enemy on the East Side thither, to separate them from their fellows on the
West Side, to make them lose time; contenting himself to guard the places of
most importance, assuring himself that he should soon recover the other at his
pleasure.

The Archdukes men having thus taken the half moon, and being many therein,
they began with spades, shovels, pick-axes, and other instruments, to turn it
up against the town. But all prevailed not, for it lay open toward the town,
and those of the town began to shoot at them from the South and
Spanish-bulwarks, both with Cannon and musket shot, with such fury, as they
slew many of them; and withal seeing the tide come in more and more, they
began to faint: whereupon General Vere sent Captain Day with some troops to
beat them out of it, who with great courage chased them out of it, with the
effusion of much blood: for the next day they told three hundred men slain in
the half moon, besides those that were drowned and hurt.

In this general assault, which on both sides of the town continued above two
hours upon all the places abovementioned, the Archduke (besides some that
were carried into the sea) lost above two thousand men. Among the which there
were a great number of Noblemen, Chiefs, and Commanders. Amongst the rest, the
Count d' Imbero, an Italian, who offered as much gold as he did weigh for his
ransom, and yet he was slain by a private soldier; Don Durango Maistro del
campo, or Colonel; Don Alvares Suares Knight of the Order of Saint Jaques;
Simon Anthonio Colonel; the Serjeant-major-Generall, who had been hostage in
Ostend on the twenty fourth and twenty fifth of December 1601. and the
Lieutenant-Governour of Antwerp, with diverse others.

On our side there were slain between thirty and forty soldiers, and about an
hundred hurt. The men of command slain were Captain Haughton, Captain Nicolas
vanden Lier, a Lieutenant of the new Geux, two English Lieutenants, an Ancient,
and Captain Haughtons two Sergeants, and Master Tedcastle, Gentleman of Sir
Francis Veres horse, who was slain between Sir Francis Vere and my self, (his
Page) with two musket-bullets chained together; and calling to me, bad me pull
off his gold ring from off his little finger, and send it to his sister as a
token of his last goodnight, and so commending his spirit into the hands of
the Lord, died. Sir Horace Vere was likewise hurt in the leg, with a splinter
that flew from a Palizado. And thus much briefly of the assault, and the
repulse they received in Ostend, that day and night, in memory of the heroic
actions of Sir Francis Vere (of famous memory) my old Master.

After this bloody shower was once over, the weather cleared up into its usual
temper, and so continued, not without good store of artificial ^hunder and
lightning on both sides daily, but without any remarkable alteration until the
seventh of March then next ensuing, which was in the year one thousand six
hundred and two. Then did General Vere, having lately repaired the Poulder and
West-square, resign up his Government of Ostend unto others appointed by the
States to succeed him; having valiantly defended it for above eight months
against all the Archdukes power, and leaving it much better able to defend it
self, then it was at his first coming thither. So the same night both he and
his brother, Sir Horatio Vere, imbarqued themselves, having sent away their
horses and baggage before them; and both carrying with them, and leaving
behind them the marks of true honor and renown.

FINIS.
PRAELIUM NUPORTANUM Rerum fide tradebat IS. DORISLAUS. J. C.
SAeviebat adhuc inter liberos victosque Belgas civil Bellum, 1600.
avidum sanguinis, pecuniae prodigum, raptis per mutuas clades tot fortibus
animis, and egestis in terrae punctum veteris simul and novi orbis immensis
opibus; cum, aerarii and stipendiorum inopia, Hispanicas legiones Seditio
incessit. Vetus illa militia malum, initio statim secularis anni in rabiem
proruperat; orto a vexillariis per Brabantiam praesidia agitantibus initio, and
tractis pari vel necessitate, vel praedandi lubidine Walonum Germanorum que
numeris, qui Crevekeuram, and ad Mosae Vahalis que confluentes S. Andreae
munimentum insidebant. Exciverat ea res solito maturius, and vergente adhuc
hyeme, Mauritium Orangii Principem, properum gnarumque occasionis. Et ille
quidem, non territis magis quam emptis seditiosorum animis, acceptisque in
deditionem munimentis, clara in praesens victoria, and in posterum usui, adulto
jam vere, Hagam reversus est. Sustulerant animos hoc successu liberi Belgae;
and in Ordinum Conventu disserebatur, Instandum coeptis and famae, dum fluxa
aerarii and militum fide, vis dolusque adversum discordes and iratos ex aequo
valerent: Hispaniae Regem, imminutis ob praeclusa commercia vectigalium
fructubus, attenuato Indiarum proventu, effusis priori anno in classem rursus
Angliae minacem and irritam opibus, laesaque apud Italos fide, non sufficere
necessitatibus belli: Archiducem Albertum, primo statim in Belgium ingressu,
Imperii primordia Tributis and odiis oneravisse: ab ipsis provinciis jampridem
bello attritis, equitum peditumque vim, damna and injurias aegre tolerari:
Quare si acrius ipsi incubuerint, externo simul impulsu, and interno motu
ruiturum hostem. Multo haec inter proceres adsensu celebrabantur; and plerique
sumptuum and pecuniae parci, verbis egregii and pene nimii erant. Sed Hollandi,
in quos tota impendiorum moles inclinaverat, vary disserebant, de magnitudine
aeris alieni, inopia quaestuum, and immensis civium oneribus; desolari urbes
dilapsu opisicum, mercatores exhaustos; vires animamque Reipublicae elidi
praedationibus Dunkerkanorum: abnuebantque ulteriores in aestatem sumptus,
praeterquam pacando mari, and rapiendae praedantium sedi. In idem Zelandi, and
acrius pertendebant, quanto gravioribus ob viciniam damnis afflictabantur.
Destinatio haec praepotentium Provinciarum specie and usu omnibus magnifica,
sed aspera inceptu, perfectu ardua prudentibus videbatur: ea pars, quo
suspectior sollicitis, Principi placebat; cujus pulcherrimum animum difficultas
operis, and patrandi per id belli gloria exstimulaverant. Veruntamen cunctator
natura, cautis potius quam acribus consiliis summam expeditionis tractabat,
quae crebra cum rerum bellique prudentibus habebantur. Ibi maturissimus quisque
oportunitates Ostendae loqui, quae praesidiis and ditione Ordinum in ora
Flandriae tenebatur: illac invehi Oceano exercitum, and inde planitie littoris
praeter Nuportum sub Dunkerkam duci in promptu esse; subfecutura class cum
Tormentis and annona militari; impulso simul terra, simul mari bello.
Instantior aliis securitatis cura; nec imperatorium rebantur, ante captam
Nuportum, Dunkerkam aggredi: ubi tergo consuluerint, haud magna mole expugnari
urbem, neque situ, neque manu validam, fluxis aevo and incuria munimentis.
Praecipuum fiduciae alimentum erat Seditio Hispanorum, praepeditura subsidium
obsessis; and si forte motus consederint, impar equitatu and minor hostis non
ausurus novissimum discrimen. Aderat consilio Franciscus Verius; quo nemo illa
tempestate reimilitaris callidior habebatur ille multo usu fui and hostium
gnarus, pares and audentes pugnae Alberti copias, incessurasque praelio intra
quartum and decimum a Mauritii in Flandriam appulsu diem, praesagus loquebatur.
Erantque nonnulli consiliantium, quibus tuta magis cum ratione quam prospera ex
casu placebant: hi modestius disserebant. Bellum suscipi avio itinere, hostili
littore, inter incerta ventorum and maris: seditiosos ad obsequium flecti
ingentibus promissis, and quantulacunque stipendiorum portione: imo ruituros
ultro, ut asserta in hostem capitali urbe, uberrimos Flandriae agros and opes
excusatius rapiant in praemium and praedam: and, si rem dari in casum oporteat,
frustra equitem jactari, meliori hostium pedite, in quo praecipuum robur:
modicum victoriae pretium esse commercii securitatem, subacta urbe insidiatrice
maris and raptubus infami: at fuso exercitu, cladem immensam, and nihil
reliquum victis, uno praelii turbine, mari, commercio, liberate and patria
excussis. Inexcusatum viris tot per annos belli sapientiam professis praeceps
consilium: haesuramque temeritatis infamiam, tunc quoque cum pericula
effugissent. Salutaria haec, sed injucunda; flagrantibus Hollandorum animis in
Dunkerkam, exitiabilem mercaturae, and publicis aerarii fructubus gravem. Ita
victis tandem plurium consensu nolentibus, in Flandriam decernitur exercitus;
ingentibus animis, nec minori paratu: mill navium classis in peditem
equitemque distributa; curruum and Tormentorum ingens numerus; annonae permagna
vis. Placebatque consilium, ne spatiis itinerum attereretur exercitus,
impositos navibus militem, equos, commeatum, and extra fluminum ora in Oceanum
evectos, exponere in portu Ostendae, ad usum belli terra marique oportunae. Sed
been consultis, classique jam inter Zelandiae aestuaria allabenti fortuna
ventique reflabant; cedente in Austrum coelo enavigantibus adversum. Quare, cum
prima non provenissent, quod e praesentibus uberrimum erat, subducta fuit
classis ad illam Flandriae oram, quam a Zelandia Scaldis, jam fluvii and maris
ambiguus, abscindit. Ibi juxta Castellum, cui vocabulum Philippina, incitante
sese aestu, naves in vadum adactae, quae, relabente pelago, in udi mollisque
soli crepidine, utpote lata alvo, and pandis more gentico carinis, sine noxa
sidebant; adeo ut horarum quinque spatio tota belli moles haud sane gravi
labor in terram redderetur. Ipsa specie exscendentis exercitus territi hosts,
qui Philippinam insederant, sese dediderunt. Tum lustratae copiae equitum
peditumque: illae ter, hae duodecim millium; dispertitaeque in tres manus,
viribus and dignitate pares; alternante inter duces, more militiae, frontis and
tergi vice. Harum unam ducebat Ernestus, comes Nassavius, vir belli egregius;
and cui nunquam ratio, nonnunquam fortuna defuit: altera Everardo habebatur
Comiti Solmensi, clara and veteri per Germania^ nobilitate: tertiam regebat
Franciscus Verius, domi egregiis natalibus, foris ingentibus ausis factisque
celebratus. Consultor omnibus and author aderat praeeratque Mauricius
Orangianus, columen partium. Modicis deinde itineribus, per depressum Flandriae
agrum, prope Ekeloam and Brugas inclytam olim opibus and mercimoniis advenarum,
transductus exercitus apud Oldenburgum, quarto ab Ostenda milliari, aestu
sitique perustus conaedit: flagrantissimis quippe solibus, ardente Junio, iter
fecerant; and omnis illo tractu aqua turbida, and uligine decolor est, potuque
nocens. Aperuerat hoc Castellum defessis hostium fuga, simulque viam quae
Ostendam pertingit: unde cibariorum and cerevisiae affluenti copia toto sese
triduo miles refecit. Ibi consultatum inter militiae proceres, ecquo primum
molimine famam auspicarentur and bellum. Id maxim ambigebatur, utrum ad decus
usumve potius foret; oppugnatamne Nuportum hosti eripere; an vero exuere eundem
Castellis, quae fallaces inter and humentes campos veluti claustra Ostendae
insidebat. Nuporti obsidio primo pluribus; mox omnibus placuit. Tum primores
Ordinum, comites itineris and consilium ducibus additi, Ostendam concessere,
tutam mari, viris, murisque urbem; ut exempti dubiis belli, summae rerum
servarentur: unaque Solmensis sua cum manu, qua brevissimum iter, Ostendam
praemissus, ut capto Castello, cui nomen Albertus, viam, quae ab Ostenda
Nuportum ducit, incursu and periculis hostium exsolveret. Et huic quidem sua
vis and praesidii metus facilem victoriam dedere. Exinde Mauritius motis ab
Oldenburgo castris, per interiora Flandriae Nuportum versus ducebat exercitum;
rapturus in transitu Dammam, Castellum ignobile quidem, sed accumbens flumini,
quod praetervehens Nuportum sorbetur mari. At Oldenburgum and vicinas arces,
vacuas metu and fuga hostium, suis ipse militibus discedens firmaverat; nam
operibus munitae erant; ut hostem si forte excitum, illo viae compendio
praecluderet, objectaretque labori and casubus, per longinquos circuitus
Nuporto obsessae subventurum. Ceterum proficiscentes jam copias putris soli
labes, and curruum Tormentorumque ponderi subsidens humus ab itinere destinato
avertit: igitur, cum in tenui viculo prope Hemskerkam pernoctavisset exercitus,
flexo in dextram and maritima itinere, per laeta and pinguia pascuorum viam
moliebantur versus planitiem littoris; oppletis passim, dum incedunt,
humilioribus fossis; and latioribus alveis, aut quibus altior gurges est, ponte
junctis; non enim alia incilibus dissectior and foecundior aquarum regio est.
Ita tandem perventum ad colles littori praetextos; castraque posita prope
munimentum, quod captum ante Solmensi memoravimus. Prima statim luce fulsere
signa in planitie littorea; laetoque and composito agmine Nuportum ductae
legiones; fluviumque, quo littus diffinditur, sidente aestu, vado transiere.
Ardebat interim Hispanorum Seditio, flagrantissima vi illorum, qui, occupatis
Diesta Brabantiae and conterminis Hanonniae, terrore and minis pecuniam and
spolia civium, velut ex host praedam, convectabant. Hi pernicie and lue
exempli integros quoque traxerant; egressosque ab Archiduce Legatos, hos irrisu
and ludibrio, alios impulsu and verberibus proturbaverant; donec Isabella
Infans Hispaniae, Alberto nupta, timens dotali Belgio, ire Ipsa and opponere
sanguinis Majestatem furentibus non muliebriter constituit; ingens animi
Heroina; and virilibus sub patre Philippo curis supra faeminam exercita. Illa
per decus Hispani nominis and ante-actae militiae obtestabatur, ne se, ne
maritum, hosti inultos Flandriae agros rapienti in praedam relinquerent;
admonebatque milites optatae and elusae toties pugnae; nunc montibus, mari,
armis cinctum hostem: nec ullum deprensis iter, nisi quod ferro aperiant:
irent, properarent culpam in decus vertere; imponerentque triginta and quatuor
annis magnum diem* sed finis sermonum in promisso mercedis and praemiorum;
idque datis obsidibus firmabatur: tum preces valuere. Reversos ad obsequium
cupido involat eundi in hostem, piaculum furoris: secutusque ardorem militum
Albertus* quantum in praesidiis copiarum est, sub signis educit: undecim millia
peditum, equites mill and quadringentos, veteranum militem and expertae
virtutis: rapiebatque exercitum adeo citus and praeceps, ut famam sui
praeveniret: vir acer bello, and quantam modestiae famam in purpura, tantam
militia vigoris laudem apud posteros meritus. At securus hostium Orangianus
exercitus loca castris apud Nuportum ceperat, tuta oppugnaturis, arctatura
obsessos, dispertitaque munia circummoenientibus: premendarum urbium artifice
Mauritii ingenio. Jamque classis, dives annonae, cum omni instrumento militari
appulerat: pontemque contextu navium classiarii inceperant sternendo fluvio qua
is coit arctior; ut castra and tendens in illis cis ultraque miles, viribus and
usu promptius miscerentur: cum, quarto quo haec properantur die, trepidi ab
Ostenda nuncii attulere, hostem virium famaque ingentem prope Oldenburgum
consedisse. Sane Rivasius, Hispanus, multis stipendiis et belli gnarus,
ostentandis circa Slusam copiis, and rumore supra verum auctis, Nuporti
obsidione avertere Mauritium, jam ante agitaverat. Quare, vocato concilio, cum
plerique notam Rivasii jactantiam spernerent, simulatione virium illudentis
timori praesidiorum; Verius semper magna belli, mox ingens pars praelii, memor
augurii, and tenax prioris sententiae, contra disserebat: Haud dubie ingruere
hostem cum robore exercitus and praelio incedere; quare repentino discrimini
unum esse remedium, si, relicta Nuporto, tota belli mole protinus occurrant,
antequam vel minando exterritis, vel vi obtritis Oldenburgi and Snaeskerkae
praesidiis, perruptoque itineris obice, medium se Ostendam inter and Nuportum
hostis objiciat; posse, si universi festinaverint, simul praesidiis suis reddi
salutem, and hostium Castellis, inter mersa and uliginosa camporum, claudi
aditum exitumque: pretium laboris haud inglorium; and paulo ante capturae
Nuporti a prudentibus aequatum. Haec quidem haud frustra moneri Mauritius
fatebatur; sed cunctator natura, dum percoquit consilium, corrupit. Sub noctem,
acrioribus, and alium alio urgentibus nuntiis adferebatur; hosti magnum and
infestum agmen esse, instructumque Tormentis: mox, militi in Oldenburgi
praesidium agitanti ab Archiducis Alberti foecialibus minaciter imperatam
deditionem; neque post multo, impares tutelae sui imminentem perniciem
tempestiva deditione praevenisse. Nox ducibus inquies erat and pervigil,
turbidis nuntiorum rumoribus, et expendente rursus belli consilia Principe.
Igitur Verius, quoniam prima consiliorum frustra ceciderant, perruptis
munimentis, inter quae sisti hostem speraverat, hortari, orare, ut motis
confestim castris, arriperent insiderentque citeriorem illius itineris exitum,
quod per depressa pascuorum et humida paludum, ab Hemskerka adusque colles
littoreos, obrutis fossis, jactuque pontium sibi transituris constraverant: non
enim alium hosti in littus aditum esse, nisi flexu, et per avia circumerranti.
Hactenus Verianae sententiae Mauritius accesserat, ut Ernestum Nassavium cum
underviginti peditum signis, equitibus quingentis, Tormentis duobus, et cetero
paratu militari, jusserit praemitti, fauces itineris immuniturum; ipse cum
reliqui exercitus viribus, ubi res posceret, adfuturus. At Verius carpi vires
and dispergi copias abnuebat; saepe omnes vinci, pugnantibus singulis: fas enim
credi* hostem, occasionum haud segnem, cum milite primi agminis ante erupturum
ex anguistiis, quam illae occupari possint ab Ernestianis; quos, numero et
viribus impares, objici veterano exercitui, et successubus feroci: enimvero
motis simul omnibus copiis, parem sore cum host congressum; et locis aequis
aequam fortunam, si totus transierit: at si modo partem sui explicuisset e
faucibus transitus; uti angustiae viarum et temporis, incertaque noctis
persuadebant, in promptu victoriam: quod si citi, et omnes, hosti praevertant,
itineris et belli arbitrium, occupantium fore. Jam adulta nox erat, cum
acceptis, uti jussum fuerat, Solmensibus copiis, quae metatae ultra fluvium
expeditioni promptiores erant, Ernestus digreditur. Sequebantur ducem signa
Scotorum duodecim: Zelandi centuriis septem; quinque equitum turmae: lectus
miles; et fide meliori quam fortuna. Vixdum orto die aggerem viae ingressis,
adventare hostem exploratores nuntiavere. Interfluebat in medio rivus, quem
ponte Mauritius junxerat; hunc pariter and viam hosti auferre, immissis ocyus
equitibus Ernestus jubet; nam limosa circum loca, aut paludibus incerta erant.
Sed invecti non minore impetu Hispani pontem anteceperant. Hoc irrito conatu,
arma corporaque hosti objiciunt; structa acie in viae angustiis; nulla quidem
boni spe, sed aemulatione obsequii, and cura decori exitus. Irrupit hostis
ferox and iratus; totaque exercitus mole incubuit: at illi, numero fatoque
dispares, firmati inter se, densis ordinibus excipere impetum, obniti
prementibus, and inquietare victoriam. Obruti adversis, and salva virtutis fama
cecidere omnes contrariis vulneribus, versi in hostem: adjacentibus prope
fractis hastilibus, and infelicibus armis. Hoc pedites fato finivere. At
Ernestum Edmundiumque Scotorum Tribunum, pernix equorum virtus Ostendam
intulit: subsecuto omni fere equitatu, cui vitae major quam gloriae cupido. Ibi
atroci nuntio perculsi Ordines, and ad preces ac supplicia versi nimias spes
and praeceps consilium execrabantur. Verum Archidux Albertus, blandiente
coeptis fortuna, cumulos super and recentia caede vestigia evectus properabat
in littus: ipse praelii avidus, and seditiosorum maxim vocibus instinctus,
qui, rapturi imperium ni ducerentur, occupari Orangianos in transitu fluminis,
and extingui reliqua belli postulabant. Ceterum, digrediente e castris Ernesto,
imperatum ceteris ducibus fuerat, ut, albente statim coelo, sua quisque signa
ad ripam fluvii sisterent, alveum transitura simul ac aestus detumuisset. Quare
curam ducum studia militum aequaverant, dubia adhuc luce, compositis ordinibus
flumini adstantium. Ibi, dum opperiuntur donec sese aestus evolveret,
Mauritium, haud procul a cepto ponte, procerum corona circundatum, nuntius
perculit de clade Ernesti; hostemque, jam transitis collibus, infesto agmine
appropinquare in littore. Substitit Princeps defixus illaetabili imagine, and
magnae cogitationis manifestus: obversante scilicet ingentis diei specie, qua
libertatem, decus, opes, spem Reipublicae novissimam, in paucorum manubus and
armis fortuna collocaverat. Sed diu bello exercitus, and tristium laetorumque
sciens, nihil infracto animo unum gliscentibus periculis remedium docet, si,
transmisso statim exercitu, ulteriorem ripam hosti praeripiant; ni
festinaverint, deprensis clausisque inulto sanguine pereundum. Ordo ducendi
agminis illo die ad Verium, ritu militiae, redierat. Hunc, prioris gloriae
virtutisque admonitum, ire propere, and agmen suum transmittere, unaque
Ludovicum Nassavium, qui equitatui praeerat, promptum ausis and laudi juvenem,
transgredi jubet: ut, imminente fortuna certaminis, maturo annis and spectato
bellis rectore uteretur. Neque certis tamen mandaris Verium Mauritius
instruxerat, pro re, loco, tempore, suoque belli usu, consulturum: tanta
virtutis and fidei opinione erat. Neque Verio cessatum, quin altiores adhuc
inter undas agmen suum transduceret, per catervas and cuneos praelio
compositum; adeo propere, ut militi tegmina detracturo, ne marina
immadescerent, tantillum morae negaverit; addito, propinquis hostibus, inanem
esse vestimenti curam* Suum enim cuique vel supervacuum ante noctem, vel siccum
and opulentius praedae and usui futurum. Ita traductos equitem peditemque: hos
Oceanum inter and colles subsistere jubet in aequore littoris, illos correpto
spatio propius invehit in hostem (eminus adhuc, tamen, ut cerni possit,
incedentem in littore), non quidem irritando praelio; sed legendo, si qua
possit, aequiori loco, in quo impetum adventantium hostium exciperet
sustentaretque: unum hoc etenim arti Imperatoriae reliquum fortuna fecerat. Nam
lubricum illum and versatilem in omnes flexus cohortium motum, quo Mauritiana
militia praepollere Hispanicae credebatur, inutilem fecerant Genius situsque
regionis. Omnis enim exporrecta secundum mare planities, imminentium collium
jugis obnoxia premitur: and ipsa collium temere disjecta congeries, praeruptis
undique tumulis and obliquo glomeratu inter se transversis exsurgit, ut inter
anfractus nec oculis provideri, nec manu succurri laborantibus possit:
plurimaque sui part id latitudini spatium est, cui explendae insidendaeque
impar esset Mauritianus exercitus. Unde periculum erat, ne introrsum, and qua
tumor collium subsidit, per incustodita transgressus hostis haerentem vadis in
navali Nuportano classem incendio popularetur. Nam ad Meridiem, inter ima
collium and impervia pascuorum, laeve virentis campi dorsum porrigitur equiti
peditique firmu^ juxta and inoffensum. Huic obviam discrimini Verius ibat, cum,
quatuor a Nuporto passuum millibus, advertit inter colles locum, ubi tumulorum
fastigia celsius in Septentriones, in Meridiem lenius efferuntur; simulque
universam collium molem, transverso cavae vallis interjectu diductam penitus
abscindi: castigatiori ibidem latitudinis spatio, and cui occupandae non
impares copiae, hinc introrsus and per campi dorsum, inde planitie littoris
transiturum hostem infestis superne telis incessiturae. Hac regione, oportunis
citra vallim, quam memoravi, collium tumulis, expectare hostem and fortunam
praelii constituit. Igitur ex agmine suo jam procedere jusso mill virorum
robora excerpsit: Praetorianos Mauritii ducentos and quinquaginta; hastatos
sclopetariosque: Anglos paribus numero and armis: Frisios duplice numero; sed
omnes sclopetarios. Et Anglos quidem, admistis quinquaginta Praetorianis,
summitati collis imposuit, qui in sinum memoratae convallis projectior ceteris
excurrit, praeceps, abruptus, and ob mollitiem arenae adscensu arduus, ac
vertice in tantam cavitatem depresso, ut miles ab collium adversorum ictubus
tutus, e margin and labris tumuli, tanquam e vallo and lorica, propugnaret.
Pone hunc collem passuum ducentorum intervallo insurgit alter, praecelso and
insigni fastigio: illum insidere reliquos Praetorianos jubet, suopte ingenio
juxta validum, and addito levi manuum opere, haud minus tutum: connectit
utrumque velut aggestus arenae perpetuus, paris naturae, sed depressiori
fastigio, qui rectus ad orientem Solemn, latere in Austrum obtenditur;
subjacente intra vim and jactum telorum omni campo, quem inter infida pascuorum
and collium radices pervium memoravi. Hujus insessum and tutelam Frisiis
attribuit; jussis, ubi res ad manus venisset, tela sua and vulnera in Meridie^
spargere; quae tum coeli regio dextra erat in hostem obversis. Sed ab aggestus
hujus, quem diximus, sinistra, qua Oceanum spectat, inter praerupta and confusa
collium, locis natura tutis munitisque, Anglos collocat septingentos, vultu and
armis versos in Boream, and in vicinam subjecta^que littoris planitiem,
integris ordinibus, ubi usus posceret, facile prorupturos: hos tela sua and
fulgura vibrare in oculos and ora hostium jusserat, si forte transitum in
littore molirentur. Secundum hos in ipsa planitie, quam verberat Oceanus, sed
paulo in Ortum productius, quicquid reliquum Anglorum, and erant admodum
sexcenti, explicuit gemino agmine, and aequis frontibus. Modico post Anglos
intervallo, et propiores mari, bis mill Frisii, quatuor agminibus, sed binis
in frontem, astitere. Densatis arctatisque manipulorum ordinibus, ipsa agmina
patentioribus spatiis discreverat, ut postremorum inter primos facili receptu,
viribus and audacia mutuis singuli augerentur; and interim non obumbrantibus
alias aliis, universae simul copiae, majore specie sui, hostium oculos
implerent. Equites, signis december, Oceano proximi, and omnium in Orientem primi,
nudatam aestu arenam tenuere. Vixdum primoren aciem Verius instruxerat, cum
Mauritius, comitante tota Procerum manu, ante prima signa equo advectus,
tractare palam coepit consilia viasque praelii: circumfusos militiae Principes
percunctatus, number illis in vestigiis opperiri hostem, an ire cominus and ultro
lacessere, constantius foret. Nihil aeque indecorum viris militaribus quam
argui timoris. Igitur, abrupta consultandi mora, Duces certatim proclamant,
Capienda arma, ducendum in hostem, non impetu modo, sed ratione: Minorem
scilicet hostibus animum fore, quo majorem ipsi praetulerint; audacia
conciliari fortunam; and siquae speciosius jactat militaris facundia: at
cunctari, and summae rei discrimen trahere, propius formidinem esse, cujus
opinione vel aliturum hostem fiduciam sui, vel usurum mora cunctantium ad usum
belli; intercepto interim castris limite qui Ostendam ducit; unde arcti and
infesti undique commeatus; inexplicabilis receptus. Ad ea Verius multa militari
prudentia disserebat: Hostem, improviso tumultu excitum, inopem esse copiarum;
aestate jam praecipiti, inanibus horreis, and attrita regione: Quare frustra
timeri, ut positis ibi castris subsidat, moliturus famem exercitui, cui
congesta in naves cibaria et apertus subvectioni Oceanus: Nec vereri se vanam
illam fiduciam et cito defluxuram, ubi post tanta itinerum spatia, perusti
Solis ardoribus, et attriti inter collium arenas vestigiis infidas et arduas
adscensu, fessi cum integris, turbati cum compositis congressi, non loco minus
quam virtute pellerentur. Ipsos satis cito victuros, ubi provisum foret ne
vincerentur. At Duces eo pervicacius consilium suum amplexi, clamore jam et
strepitu Verium obturbabant: nec sequius ille, animo, voce, and oculis ardens,
suis se sententia aut loco motum iri negabat, non si totius orbis impulsu
urgeretur; donec animorum sententiarumque discordiam, approbato Verii consilio,
Mauritius composuio: statimque ad ordinandas ceteras acies, quae jam fluvium
transierant, revectus est: and illis quidem, resorbente aestu prout arenae
nudaverant, expansis in littore, suum cuique agmini equitem affudit a cornu
sinistro, quod Oceano proximum. At sex Tormenta in frontem Veriani agminis
promoveri jussit; ingenti mox ad victoriam adjumento. Sic instructi intentique
hostem eminus adstantem opperiebantur. At ille, cum duabus horis loco non
movisset, devius tandem a littore, collium impedita transverso itineris flexu
pertransiit; ad quorum radices, ubi in campos desinunt, pares iterum horas
refovendo militi absumpsit. Unde opinio rumorque invaluit; hostem obsepiendo
itineri castra in medio positurum: sed apud gnaros militiae, and consilia
hostium ex rerum actu rimantes, inania rumorum rationibus revincebantur. Ideo
scilicet festinatum hosti, ut ipsos vel transitu fluminis praecluderet, vel
impeditos in transitu aggrederetur: tantae spei irritum, and nocturno praelio
et matutino itinere fessum substitisse in littore; haud absurd opinantem,
ipsos (quibus in loco necessitas, una salus in armis) ultro incubituros; primum
spe propioris ab Ernesto auxilii, si forte copias Ostendam receperit; mox
cupidine ultionis, si cladem nuntii patefecerint: Nunc comperta ipsorum loco se
tenentium constantia, and urgente annonae penuria rem da^e in casum,
praetulisse squalori littoris commoditatem camporum, ad requiem militis: simul
expectare, donec adlabente pelago, et stagnantibus vadis corripiatur planities,
ne veteranus pedes, et nulla praeliorum fortuna attritus, patentibus locis
equestri procella ^underetur. His rerum argumentis et sententiam et locum
prudentes tuebantur. Medio fere intumescentis Oceani aestu, hostium copiae,
transmissis iterum collibus regressae in littus, incedebant praelio;
praecurrentibus haud modico ante aciem intervallo aliquot levis armaturae
equitibus, quorum unus sponte tuens et praefestinans capi, protractusque ad
Mauritium, clara voce, Ernesti cladem, imminens praelium, robur et virtutem
Hispanorum, et cuncta in majus extollebat. Et quanquam, Mauritii jussu, os
declamanti clauderetur, proximi ramen militum quae tristia acceperant, cumulata
moerore in vicinos, et illi rursus in alios, vel voce, vel vultu enuntiabant.
At Princeps pugnandi certus, and tumente jam aestu, enavigare classem jubet,
quo, sublata spe fugae, manus and arma miles respiceres, and in illis omnia.
Aderat illi frater Henricus Fredericus prima juventa: hunc monuit, ut ascensa
navi, si quid tristius fata pararen (...)impetu velitantes hostium Carabinarios
retro impingeret in agmen turmarum, and nusas rursus instantesque turmas,
sponte refugus eliceret sub ictum. Tormentorum, ut pilis disjectae perculsaeque
tota protinus equitum vi protererentur. Verum Ludovicus Nassavius dignationis
anxius, aspernatus rectorem and consilium, nullo adfultu impertuque in hostem
invehi; sed turmis lent ingruentibus cedere paulatim, and referri in suos. Cum
acriter consultis exsecutio deesser; and non ita procul abessent hostium
turmae; librari Tormenta Verius jubet: nec irritis libratorum ictubus mortes
and vulnera toto agmine sparguntur: unde obliti dedecoris equites, trepida
fuga, et solutis ordinibus, vicinorum collium latebris se tuebantur: quae res
maturam and incruentam victoriam Nassavianis equitibus praebuisset, si prompti
and alacres, fractis and obtritis hostium turmis, nudatas equitum praesidio
legiones perrupissent Aemulatione, and occulta invidia, pulcherrimi facinoris
occasio defluxit. At pedites hostium extra vim casumque fulminum, nihil labante
fiducia, and continuato per littus itinere, Tormentis ante aciem longius
evectis, cladem illatam non vanis ignibus ulciscebantur. Dum haec geruntur,
adcreverant undae, magnaque sui part stagnabat planities; adeo ut utriusque
exercitus miles arctioribus manipulatim ordinibus illigaretur. At hostis,
inopino flexu avertens a littore, cum omnibus copiis in edita collium
enitebatur: sive consilium id fuit; ut equite minor, peditum robore inter
impedita valeret; sive metus intonantium in littore Tormentorum; certe non adeo
maris ignarus erat, ut, improvisa aestuum vice, destinatione sua excuteretur.
Unde sicut agminum, ita novae consiliorum formae oriebantur. Et hostium quidem
equitatus, transverso per colles itinere evectus, virenti illa, quam supra
memoravi, inter infida camporum, tumulorumque arenas, planitie substitit. In
Mauritiano exercitu prima acies, mutatis leviter ordinibus, locis penitus
iisdem inhaerebat: at secunduam postremamque e littore in colles subductas,
paribus a latere and tergo intervallis cura Ducum discreverat, quibus antea in
littore distinctae steterant; ita ut trium acierum frontibus omnis collium
latitudo expleretur: equites, eadem illa planitie turmis hostilibus oppositi,
tenui agmine, pro loci angustiis, exporrigebantur. Composito jam pugnae
exercitu, Tormenta duo, monstrante Verio, and Mauritio jubente, in fastigium
tumuli subvecta sunt; quorum telis omnis illa planities, quam equitatus
occupaverat, superne infestaretur. Sic omnibus ad novissimum casum paratis,
digressuri ad sua quisque munia Duces, gravibus sane Mauritii animum argumentis
pervicerunt, ut postremam Ipse aciem praesens curaret; minoribus periculis non
immixtus, majoribus non defuturus. Verius ad primam advectus, ubi alacrem
instinctumque militem videt; in vertice collis, quem prominere prae ceteris in
vallem, and insessum Anglis Praetorianisque supra retuli, velut in specula
constitit; arduus, and vago in subjecta prospectu; unde and hostem observaret
and regeret suos. Elegerat hunc, ut defensantibus oportunum and irrupturis
iniquum, in quo cum fato diei transigeret: et quamvis ratio praelii frequentem
tota acie Ducem posceret, qui promptos laud, labantes open, dubios exemplo
firmaret, prohibebat tamen ratio situsque loci, inaequali regione, ubi inter
obliquos and implicatos collium anfractus, nec ipse visu hostem, nec illius
imperium miles vel oculis vel auribus assequerentur. Jam praecurrentes a
principiis hostium sclopetarii, quos vitae prodigos and obvios morti, militari
vocabulo Perditos vocant, occupatis collium valli imminentium superciliis,
Verii milite^ glandium conjectu lacessere, dum prima suorum acies adventaret:
qua adpropinquante, quingenti numero Hispani, non tam hastis sclopisque quam
virtute and animis armati, nullo praelato vexillo, neque certo imperio, laeti
periculis, and decoris avidi, impetu in ardua facto, quanquam gravibus superne
ictubus afflictarentur, perrumpere Verii collem insigni patientia vulnerum
annitebantur. Eodemque momento primae aciei eques per planiti^m erupit in
Mauritianos; quos sollers Ducum cura a latere medii agminis retrorsum
instruxerat. Statim fulminantibus e vertice tumuli Tormentis, promptissimi
quique proruebantur; reliqui praeter latus Veriani agminis progressi, a
quingentis illis, quos supra memoravi, Frisiis in Meridiem collineantibus, tam
infesta scloporum grandine verberabantur, ut perculsi turbatique post primum
Mauritianorum impetum, foeda retro fuga in peditum agmen impingerentur. Ibi
fugae temperatum and caedi. Majoribus animis pedites collem aggressi fatum
provocabant and gloriam; adjuti firmatique creberrima vi telorum, quibus prima
Hispanorum acies suis e fastigiis Veriani collis propugnatores superurgebat. At
Verius, incrudescente ferocia hostium, ex Anglis septingentis, quos in Boream
obversos, proximis littori jugis arcendo illac hosti locaverat, centum signi
unius milites accersiri jubet, occultis inter prominentia collium gressubus,
repentino impetu in latus oppugnantium incursaturos. Illi cum impigre
paruissent imperio, majoremque quam pro numero terrorem inferrent, Verius e
summo vertice, per obtectum cavumque collis descensum, sexaginta subsignanos in
frontem praeliantium demisit. Obstupefecit hostem ruentium alacritas; pulsisque
gradu, et protinus in fugam, Verianus miles tota valle inhaerebat, multa
pernicie, donec aciei primae suffugio protegerentur. Inde novus iterum globus
integri militis, neque numero, nec animis, nec impetu minor, suis quisque
signis and ordinibus soluti, aemulatione gloriae proruunt, protruduntque
Verianos, quorum acerrimus quisque sequentium, ve^^a pugnae fortuna, fugae
ultimus erat. Surgebant in ipsa valle aliquot colliculi, modico tumore: hos
Hispani, dum cedentibus instant, arripiunt, ingenti locorum oportunitate;
obtectis dejectu laterum hastatis, and erectis in vertices sclopetariis; unde
acrior propiorque vis glandium in velitantes Verii vexillarios ingruebat. Ipse
terram suis eripi flagitii ratus, centenos iterum ex Anglis custodibus
littoris, excitos and permistos ceteris, ire ocyus, and deturbare tumulis
hostem jubet. Praelium ibi atrox, varium, anceps; his, rursus illis;
exitiabile. Modo glandibus, volatili malo, saepe collato gradu, manubus,
corpore, armis annixi implexique, sternebant and sternebantur; a front, a
tergo; cominus, eminus; sed certior eminus pernicies: patenti quippe valle; nec
colliculorum modo, ad quos pugna exarserat, sed insessorum utrinque collium
ignibus and procellis telorum infesta. Unde missus hinc inde in subsidium
miles, festinato per valle^ cursu, ruere in latera tumulorum, ubi a longinquis
and inultis ictubus tuti, honesta morte non inglorii caderent. Neque segnius
qui tumulos insederant, impellere scandentes, detrudere obvios, ferire sclopis,
fodere pugionibus: utrinque pudor, utrinque gloria: utrobique vulnera, sanguis,
caedes, stragesque, varia pereuntium forma, and omni imagine mortium; donec,
obstinatis inter se Verianis, labantes Hispanorum copiae tumulis
proturbarentur. Dum in valle mutuis invicem cladibus inter primanos saevitur:
media hostium acies per arduum progressa ad primam propinquaverat, eodemque,
quo prima, positu, in dextra collium ad sinistram primae, levi intervallo, and
adaequata ambarum front, constitit: primum apertior, mox adversorum collium
telis percussa, cautius, and flexis aut prominentibus jugis obumbrata magis
quam obtecta. Ex hac, foeta viris animisque, rursus in vallem, and insedentes
Verianos promptissimi ruebant: plerique militiae veteres, and clari bello,
aucta stipendia and sua quisque decora praeferentes. Neque Verius cessabat suis
cursu pugnaque fessis, and recentium robore impetuque inclinantibus, and
impulsis, integros submittere, quorum virtute instauratum denuo praelium, and
aequata pugna est. Sic alternante, prout subsidia invaluerant, successu; hi,
rursus illi, pellebant et pellebantur; dato haustoque non modico sanguine. Par
utrinque studium rapiendae vallis, and in tuenda non impar virtus and
pertinacia: sola collium oportunitas, provisu ducis, Verianis aequior erat,
stabili gradu and tanquam e vallo vulnera dirigentibus in hostem, male tectum
in collibus, in valle apertum: unde crebrior in illum caedes, clades damnosior:
and obstinaverat animo Verius, in se and primam aciem, quamvis diuturnitate
pugnae exhaustam and infrequentem, totam Hispani exercitus molem avertere; ut,
attrito carptim hostium robore, segnis postea and imbellior numerus, pulsu
impetuque recentium exterriti, a media et postrema Mauritianorum acie perrupti
obtererentur. Non improspere interim, aciei mediae proprius eques suo in campo
ruebat in Mauritianos; qui successu prioris pugnae feroces, avidius quam
consultius, extra cohortis Frisiae tutelam proruperant: sed illa labantibus et
retro versis, contra vim clademque, conjectis desuper in sequentes telis,
munimento fuit: Ita impetus stetit, et manubus aequis abscessum. At postrema
hostium acies ad sinistram collium provecta, impetu et specie ferebatur
incubiturae in mediam ultimamque Mauritianorum; quae intra conjectum teli pone
Verianum agmen instructae, and nulla adhuc hostium vi lacessitae fuerant: sed
hi praetervecti dextrum cornu Verianae manus, ubi intectum latus Frisiis, inter
oportuna tumulorum collineantibus, aperuerant, atroci and improvisa telorum
tempestate consternabantur; defixisque pudore simul and metu, neque gradum
infer, neque fugam consciscere in promptu fuit; donec in vallem vicinam inter
inaequales arenarum adgestus sinuatam descenderent. His erga parts meritis
Frisii, diu hostium equiti, nunc peditum agmini graves, diem and nomen
decoravere. Sed e valle rursum, acerrimus quisque, and animo vel robore
validus, effundebantur; soluti signis, sparsi conglobative, hostis laudisque
cupidine, Australia collium armis and tumultu permiscebant: cum his pugnam and
arma per montosa spargentibus, lecta toto Mauritiano exercitu virorum robora,
aequa virtute, sed iniquis hosti locis, certabant; in quem ex edito et occulto
collium, praegrandibus scloporum tubis, tela and caedes inulta ingerebantur.
Minus acri discrimine equites novissimi agminis, and parciori sanguine, fortuna
collidebat: ostentatae enim hinc inde turmae, post brevem impetum, extra teli
hostilis adjectum sub praesidia suorum revehebantur; diversa omnium, quae fere
accidunt, praeliorum facie: Nam cum pleraeque peditum fortunae equestrium
pugnarum fato temperentur; hic e contra, spes and equitum virtus vi and
oportunitate peditum nitebantur: nec exui campis fugarive eques poterat, quoad
potens collium peditatus, armis and loco praepollebat; tutela pulsis, and
prementibus infestus. Interim nihil remisso ad tumulos ardore pugnae; primani
secundanique hostium and Verianus miles, ferali invicem laniena, multa cum
strage implicabantur. Haerebatque vir viro, and pede pes; nulloque missilibus
spatio, gladiorum and hastarum mucronibus vita and sanguis praeliantium
hauriebantur: adfluentibus hinc inde auxiliis, vel spe, vel metu, indomabili
pertinacia; donec universa Anglorum cohors, praeter paucos qui summa collium
insederant, discrimini immisceretur. Nec sane multi apud hostium acies laborum
periculorumque exsortes supererant; nomen magis legionum quam robur: abductis
cohortium viribus, et oportuna collium, vel caesorum apud tumulos vestigia
occupantibus. Solus hostium eques composito agmine, et frequens apud signa
erat: in illo, integris adhuc ordinibus, unicum robur, sed impar, et cito
defluxurum in fugam, ubi nudi suorum praesidio peditum, ab equite Mauritiano,
recentium legionum peditibus immisto, impellerentur. Itaque Verius, patefactam
in hostem ratus occasionem novissimi casus, simulque reputans militem suum
numero minorem, ni validioribus subsidiis firmetur, superante ex adverso
multitudine, vel vi hostium, vel sua lassitudine periturum, pernicibus nuntiis
Frisios aciei primae pedites, quos in littore instructos supra retuli, acciri
jubet; simul Mauritio, quo suae, quo res hostium loco sint, exponi; additis
precibus, submitteret propere secundi agminis equitem; eriperetque devotam
morti legionem. Ac prout hosti perculsos prementi ferocia, ita nunciorum
auxilia implorantium preces, acrius intendebantur. Ipse periculo suorum,
summaeque rei percussus, relicto colle, quem institerat, descendit in vallem,
praelioque eques occurrit: statim advecto crus glande trajicitur; nihil vulnere
territus, huc and illuc volitans, ferire hostem, hortari suos, firmare animos,
minuendo metu, accendenda spe, and omnibus belli incitamentis. Ita ruenti, and
aegre sustemanti aciem, missile rursus plumbum graviori vulnere femur
transadigit: sed ille supremi discriminis anxius, sui incuriosus, nec
ostentationem vulneribus neque fomenta adhibuit; certus non excedere praelio,
ne fracti pugnantium animi hoc velut omine consternarentur: Et sane tot annorum
stipendiis, tam dura and exercita militia, Neque Ducem militis, neque milites
Ducis unquam poenituerat. Igitur durare in vim extremam constituit; and si
fortuna contra daret, receptum non minus quam arma temperare consiliis and
exemplo; adversa tolerans spe subsidiorum, quae tot nuntiis exciverat. Sed
illis ad pugnam inpromptis, certe non satis properantibus, Verianus miles,
numeris obrutus, misceri primo and turbari, tum refer pedem, cedere loco, mox
turbine irruentium impelli* Nullum in illa trepidatione Verius Ducis officium,
militisve omisit. Increpare paventes, retinere dubios; retrahere fugientes;
consilio, manu, voce, insignis hosti, conspicuus suis contra fortunam obniti:
sed impe^u turbatorum abreptus propulsusque cessit ad extremum ingruenti
tempestati, ultimus and invitus. Cedentibus spes novissima erat in praesidio
Tormentorum; itaque eluctati altinudinem arenae inter collium salebras; illuc
non effuso quidem, intento tamen per plana littoris gradii se recipiebant:
impigro ad sequendum hostium equite* et tergis gravi. In littore obvias habuere
Frisiorum cohortes, serum et i^^ne auxilium; quae neque turbatis constantiam
addidere, et alieni pavioris contactu in fugam auferebantur. At Verii cedentis
equut pluribus in pugna vulneribus suffossus, multa tandem morte procumbens,
pondere herum and toto cadavere implicuitineque militum quis neque famulorum
praesto erat ferendae opi; and prope hostis aberat ferocia ardens and successu.
Insignem dies illa virum vidit Thomain Highamium; domo non obscurum; sed civis
Ducisque servati gloria nobilem; is e familia Roberti Drurii equitis Angli, and
inter palantes Domino suo comes, simul equo and hosti incumbentibus subreptum
Ducem imposuit in tergum equi, quo Drurius vehebatur. Sic advectus sub Tormenta
Verius, fratrem ibi reperie Horatium non indecorem fratri, and multis in bello
Belgico palmis saepe memorandum. Adstabant cum illo centuriones Angli lanienae
superstites, and accisae reliquiae pedites trecenti lo^o certe, nondum spe and
animis excussi; ^rma quippe, suprema victis solati^, (...) Hos immoto gradu
consistere p^o Tormentis; and ipsa in hostem toto ^am ^ittore ^olita^* tem
explodi Verius jubet. Veoterat huo for^^^a ferme eodem momen^o duas equi^^m
^urmas* quarum una proprius Verii miles; al^eram Balenius decurio praesens
regebat, acer and clarus militia: his imperat prorumpere in hostem pilarum
turbine ^^^onirum* misso statim fratre, qui equestrem impe^um, pedestri
impressione subsequeretur. Redierat jam fortuna virtusque victis; tantaque vi
pedi^um equitumque manus, numero exigua, animas ingens, incubuit in hostem; ut
quanto ferocius ille fiducia victoriae accurrerat, tanto acrius pulsus in fugam
disjiceretur: Ingens ibi strages, and plurimum sanguinis, persultante planitiem
equite, and ardente in caedem; haerentesque fugacium tergis victores in
fuffugia collium irrupere; planaque and edita pari terrore and exitio
permiscebant. At hostium acies, quae sub signis vexillisque summa collium,
expertes praelii, insederant, admonitae periculis excitabantur: nec ulturorum
commilitones ille motus erat; sed consulentium fibi; debantque se incautos and
indefensos telis Verianorum, qui fastigiis suis immoti, in hostem apertum and
expofitum atroci procella detonabant. Simul ceteri Anglorum, exciti prospero
clamore, and insigni ferocia victoriae se miscentes, incursabant nutantes
hostium acies impellebantque, fulgentes quidem signis, sed nudatas and
infrequentes milite, abducto jam ante and attrito in subsidia pugnae
sclopetariorum robore, quorum locis inaequalibus praecipuus usus est. Inclinata
demum spe hostium se^cundam aciem, equitem juxta peditemque, in consternatos
invehi Mauritius jubet. At hostis fugam circumspectans, pulsu, sonituque, and
nube ipsa invadentium superfundebatur. Tum vero atrox ubique spectaculum;
fugere, capi, vulnerare, trucidari: passim arma and corpora, and laceri artus,
and cruenta humus. Fortissimus quisque ex Hispanis, quantum peditum erat,
funduntur. Rapta signa vexillaque centum and viginti, modico equitum sanguine.
Apud Mauritianos dispari fato, cruentati equites: duae peditum acies prope
illaesae. Asperrima Anglorum fortuna fuit, octingenti milites in pugna occisi;
trucidati octo Centuriones, reliqui, duobus exceptis, vulnerati: Et fere nemo
in illis cohortibus, vel ordine, vel animo ante vulgus fuit, quem non dies ista
sicuti virtute, sic test virtutis vulnere insigniverit.

FINIS.
Add this, Page 161. after line 21.

Concerning what was done within the town during the Treaty, Henry Hexham gives
us this further account upon his own knowledge. THe next day toward evening
the enemies Commissioners, Cerano and Ottanes, returned again: General Vere
his last entertainment of them was better then his first; for he then feasted
them, made them the best cheer he could, drank many healths, as the Queen of
England's, the King of Spain's, the Archduke's, Prince Maurice's, and diverse
others, and discoursed with them at the table before his brother Sir Horace
Vere, and the chief Officers of the town, whom he had invited to keep them
company; and having drunk freely led them into his own chamber, and laid them
in his own bed to take their rests.

The Commissioners going to bed, the General took his leave of them, and
presently after went to the old town, where he found Captain Dexter, and
Captain Clark with their men silently at work, and having been with them an
hour or two to give them directions what they should do, returning to his
lodging, he laid him down upon his quilt, and gave me charge, that an hour
before day I should go to Ralph Dexter and command him from him, not to draw
off his men till the dawning of the day, but that they should follow their work
lustily. And coming to him at the time appointed, according to my Lords
command, after the break of day we looked out toward the sea, and espied five
men of War come out of Zeland, riding in the rode, which had brought four
hundred men, and some materials for the sea-works; and coming home, I wakened
my Master, and told him the first news of it. He presently sent for the Captain
of the shallops and long-boats, which lancing out landed them on the strand, by
our new middle-haven: and notwithstanding the enemy shot mightily upon them
with their Cannon from their four batteries on the East and West Side to sink
them, and hinder their landing, yet did they no other harm, but only hurt
three Mariners.

These pieces of Ordnance rouzed Cerano from his naked bed, who knocking asked
me, what was the reason of this shooting: I answered him in French, Il y avoit
quelque gens d' Arms des nostres entres dans la ville; whereat he was much
amazed, and would hardly give credit to it, till Captain Potley, who came with
these ships, and whom he knew well, was brought before him, and assured him it
was so.

FINIS.

