Coleman-street Conclave Visited. AND, That Grand Impostor, the Schismatics
Cheater in Chief (who has, long, slily lurked therein) truly and duly
discovered.

Containing a most palpable and plain Display of Mr. John Goodwin's
Self-conviction ( under his own Handwriting) and of the notorious Heresies,
Errors, Malice, Pride, and Hypocrisy of this most huge Garagantua, in falsely
pretended Piety; to the lamentable misleading of his too-too credulous
Soul-murthered Proselytes of Coleman-steet and elsewhere.

Collected, principally, out of his own big-bragadochio and Wavelike-swelling
and Swaggering Writings, full-fraught with Six-footed Terms, and flashie
Rhetorical Phrases, far more than Solid and Sacred Truths. And may fitly serve
(if it be the Lords will) like Belshazzars Handwriting, on the Wall of his
Conscience, to strike terror and shame into his own Soul, and shameless Face;
And to un-deceive his most miserably cheated and enchanted, or bewitched,
Followers.

By JOHN VICARS.

Genes. 34.31. Should He deal with our Brethren, as with Varlets? or vile Men?

1 Samuel 17.29. What (therefore) have I, now, done? Is there not a Cause?

Pro. 19.25. Smite a Scorner, and the Simple will beware.

Psalm. 120.3, 4. What shall be given to thee, or, what shall be done unto thee,
O, thou false Tongue? Sharp arrows of the mighty, with fierce coals of Juniper.

Psalm. 139.21, 22. Do I not hate them, O Lord, that hate Thee (and thy Truth?)
and am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee? I hate them with a
perfect hatred, yea, I count them my very enemies.

London: Printed for Nathanael Webb, and William Grantham, at the Greyhound in
Paul's Churchyard, 1648.

To the READER.
CHristian Reader, (whither Presbyterian, Prelaticall, or Independent) I have
thought fit, briefly, to premise unto thee three or four Considerations, both
for Thy better satisfaction, and the clearing of mine-own integrity and
ingenuity, as also by way of anticipation of some objections which perhaps may
arise in thee touching the manner of my penning and publishing of this ensuing
Treatise. viz: That, whereas, first of all, it may, peradventure, be imputed
unto me for levity or indecencie, in thus prefixing Mr. Goodwin's picture to
this my Treatise: I answer, in brief (though I could say much more in
justification of what I have, herein, done) That when I considered the
excessive Pride of the man, to be so shamelessely ( Narcissus-like) in love
with his own picture, as to have it (or to suffer it to be) prefixed before, at
least, three or four of his formerly published heretical and most poisonous
Pamphlets, I therefore resolved so far to indulge his own humor and tumor of
Pride, as to set him forth in his proper posture, with an Ecce Homo-, Here Is the
man, That is the Patron of Heresy, and Shame of Divinity. As for the Emblem
over his head, of the Winde-Mill and Weathercock; Certainly, it is no more than
his Vanity and Vitiosity of mind have justly merited, which is continually
Coining and Contriving, in his busie-brain and hereticall-heart, one
blasphemous Error or another (Still) to pollute and poison the Souls of his
miserably Seduced Proselytes. For the Motto out of his mouth, It Is but his own
fraudulent and fallacious Engine, whereby he (Still) hopes to help himself, at
a dead lift, when he is closly put to it; Namely, to print and protest to his
Proselytes, That he (Poor innocent Man) is evermore (herein) unhappy, to be
continually mistaken in what he writes or Speaks, and to have his words daily
wrested, and taken always in the worst Sense: By that Motto, therefore, I
thought fit to mind him of his own Machivillian-Machination, wherewith he
familiarly abuses his too credulus Coleman-street Companions. As for
Moro-Mastix, A whip for a Fool, (which, you see, He scornfully puts away with
his hand, as a too-stinging Noli me tangere); it is but in a just requital of
his most heretical Hagio-Mastix, his lashing and lying against Truth and her
pious Presbyterian Servants. And, as for that notorious lying-Elogie, penned by
(it seems) one of his prime and most precious Proselytes, under his picture; I
was (I confess) so transported (at the first sight thereof) with holy
indignation against it, that I could not forbear to retort those blasphemous
untruths into the teeth of the Malepart Master and his daubing-Disciple; and to
let the world see (more truly) the insolent Arrogancy of the One, and the
lying-Vanity of the Other. And whereas, yet again; it is like it will be
objected by Some; That surely, notwithstanding all you have hitherto said; yet
this making his picture, especially in such a posture, will but exasperate and
provoke more and more wrath and discontent, both in their writing and speaking
against us for it. To which I answer; Truly, my Brethren, in my judgment, It
is most fit it should do so, yea, and vex, and sting them to the very quick:
You know (Dear Friends) who it was that said. Number. 25.17, 18.
Vex the Midianites and smite them. And why must this be so? The Lord himself
gives the answer and reason. Because they vex you with their wiles, and gull
and beguile you. And, I beseech you, tell me; what have we gotten, all this
while, by our so tender handling these angry-Nettles? Have they not, thereby,
stung us the more foundly? Whereas, had we, at the first, handled these
thistles, brambles and briars (like the plain Plowman) with roughly-grasping
hedging-cuffs of just and lawful severity; We had (I doubt not) long ere
this, made them bend and bow: Whereas, now, by most unseemly and sinful
sufferance, they are become unto us (like Isreal's Canaanites) thorns in our
eyes and goads to our sides, to prick and spoil us, if the Lord, in mercy,
prevent it not. But, whereas, in the last place, it is more than probable, that
Some (yea, many) will be too apt to tax me with too-much rigidnesse and
austerity of my Style, in writing too- roughly and bitterly against him: To
these I reply, That I cannot but wonder, that any (especially Independents)
should, herein, reprove or reprehend me, since, even this their great pretended
Master of Moderation, himself, does so frequently and familiarly use this
manner of writing, even as if it were connative and genuine unto him; yea, in
his most impious answer to ever to be honored Mr. Edwards his famous
Antapologia, he has written a piece of a Treatise in justification of this
manner of writing: But, what need I? (nay, I even disdain) his pattern or
practice (as it is his) to apologize for me, herein? Since the whole-stream and
Current of the Sacred Scripture, it Self (whose Copy to write by, cannot but
be, above all, most Comely and Canonical) does so amply authorize, and so
abundantly justify this manner of writing (which the world calls rough and
rigid) in a narrative or historical way of most sharply reproving the Works
and obstinate Workers of iniquity, impiety, and blasphemy against precious and
unspotted Truth; yea, and that, with such ironicall-jeerings and scoffings of
them, such bitter and biting taunts and terms (with holy reverence to Gods
word be it spoken) most justly cast upon them, as it is hardly possible for any
other pen to do more, or more sharply or cuttingly, as the Apostle Paul
pertinently expresses it. Titus. 1.13. And, truly, my Christian Brethren, if
ever any incorrigible-Worker of iniquity, any bold and blasphemous- Heretic
(together with his brother Paul Best) in this our age, deserved to be soundly
and severely lasht (even by that most just law of Like for Like, Judge. 1.5.
and, by that right rule of wise King Solomon, of answering a fool according to
his folly. Pro. 26.5.) then, certainly, this proud, this presumptuous Fool most
worthily meriteth to be met with all, and measured by his own bushel (as, I
hope, ere long, he will, by a far better and abler pen than mine is) and to be
most soundly and severly whipped and scourged, that, if it be possible, he may
become sound in the faith; which, the Lord, knows, is my souls desire for him.
These things, good Reader, I have, here, thought fit, I say, to premise to
thee; thus (if it may be) to take off all unjust prejudice from thee touching
my self, and my manner of writing, in this ensuing Treatise; Wherein, if I may
prevail with thee, and obtain acceptance of ^y poor labors from thee, I have
all I expect, and shall bless God for it; If not, I will not (yet) be daunted
nor disheartened in so warrantable a work and way: But, however, shall (by Gods
gracious assistance) in all Christian Charity to thee, and godly resolution in
my self, rest,

Thine, in the Truth, as it is in Jesus, to serve and love thee, J. VICARS.

A Postscript to the Reader.
Courteous Reader:
PRovidence having occasionally brought this ensuing Letter of my very
Venerable, Learned, and Religious friend unto my hands, and, It in no little
measure concerning, Me, and this my Treatise (though not in a positive
approbation or allowance of it, as not being by him perused, by reason of his
bodily infirmity: yet in respect of his fair and freindly esteem, opinion, and
persuasion of me, Its unworthy Author, and of my former Labors heretofore seen
and esteemed by him; viz. my Parliamentary Chronicle, my Schismatic sifted,
and others of these Kinds: And especially considering that this Reverend and
Religious Gentleman, does in this his Letter, manifest and declare (like an
impregnable and immovable Rock) his Christian courage and constancy, his
faithfulness and fervor to hate and oppose all the illegitimate and spurious
Errors and Heresies, of these backsliding and apostatizing times) I therefore
have made humbly bold (as conceiving, it not a little concerned his own ever
most duly deserved honor) thus to make it public to the World, that all may
see, that (blessed be our God) Truth wants not valiant Champions to vindicate
her pure and spotless honor, if occasion be offered, which Letter (in brief)
is as follows.


To my much esteemed friend Master John Vicars.
My worthy friend,
IT is my Loss as well as Grief, that I am not able to peruse your Manuscript;
Surely, I should have found in it, that Zeal and Wisdom, that Quickness and
Meekness, that Conviction and Cleernesse, that Piety and Reason, that candid
ingenuity in relating, and that solid modesty in confuting, which would have
well become your self, advanced Truth, and have enervated specious Errors.
But I am not well, and have been enforced (lately) to omit preaching in my
place, and am still indisposed to study, pray for me. Get the view to be
supplied by a better eye, and be confident that I join with you and all good
men, for the Truth of Christ against all Heresies and Blasphemies.

Feb. 29. 1647. Sir, Your truly assured friend is, Obadiah Sedgewick.


A pertinent Parallel and Premonition to all pious Presbyterians, touching a
very great and Common mistake among the most and best of them; viz: That We and
the Independents differ not in any Fundamentalls, but only in matters of
Discipline or Church Government: Whereas, the contrary is, here, most
unquestionably proved. Viz: That they are most obstinate Rebels, both in
Opinion and Practice, and perfidious Violaters of such a main and principal
Foundation as will inevitably ruinate all other Fundamentals of true Religion,
if allowed unto them.

The voice of Korah, Dathan and Abiram, against Moses and Aaron. Number. 16.1, 2,
3.
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram rose up before Moses and Aaron, with certain of the
Children of Israel, 250 Princes of the Assembly, famous in the Congregation,
men of renown. And they gathered themselves together against Moses and Aaron,
and said unto them: Ye take too much upon you, Seeing all the Congregation of
the Lord are holy every one of them; and the Lord is among them. Wherefore
(then) lift ye up your-selves above the Congregation of the Lord?

The Voice of Independents, Anabaptists and other Sectaries against the
Parliament and Assembly.
Our Independents, Anabaptists, Antinomians, and suchlike Children of Error
and Schism, Men (I confess) famous in their generation, many of them, for
Parts and Gifts, have gathered themselves together, in private Conventicles,
yea, and in public Assemblies too, against our Parliament and Assembly of
Divines, and say seditiously unto them and of them, in their Pulpits and
Pamphlets; Ye take too much upon you, in going about to Conjure all our
Religion and Worship of God, into your Parliament and the Synodicall Circle of
the Assembly, Seeing that all our Congregations are made up, only, of holy
Saints, and a Godly Party, even every one of them. Wherefore (then) lift ye up
your-selves above us, the Congregations of the Lord? and go about to prescribe
unto us Rules and Laws how and where we should worship God? And (thus) make
your-selves Lords and Kings over our Consciences, and over the Congregations of
the Lord, since none on Earth, but only King Jesus in heaven, has any thing
to do with us, either in conscience or practice, as touching Religion and
Worship, but we, and all else are therein (being all of us Saints and
holy-ones) to be tolerated and left to the liberty and freedom of ours and
their own consciences, without any restraint or the least thought of intended
coercive power of any civil Magistrate on earth whatsoever.

Now then, good Reader, and you especially my dear Presbyterian brethren, let
me beseech you, in the bowels of the Lord Jesus (for the honor of our God, and
the helping forward of the propagation of the true Reformed Religion, according
to our sacred Covenant) sadly and seriously to consider (from this present
Parallel, so appositely answerable one part to the other) that the difference
and division of all sorts of Sectaries from us, is (in them) First, no less
than heinous Rebellion in opposing, and (as the Apostle Jude says, ver. 8.)
despising Dominions, and speaking evil of those dignities which God himself
has set-up and ordained, yea such Rebellion, as the Lord, ye know, in that 16
of Numbers most severely punished with a most unparalleld confusion; and
therefore I beseech you not to extenuate and mince (as too many of us now
adays do) the sad and bad, and very wide breach, which is most unhappily and
most unholily made by the Independents, and all other Sectaries; by saying that
our difference is not in fundamentals, but only in point of Church discipline
or Government, as if that (if it were no more) were a slight thing, and not so
worthy our zealous opposing and blaming of them even therein; Whereas (besides
that, ye see what a high and heinous Rebellion it is against the Lord, and
against his Vicegerents here on earth) ye ought most seriously to lay to
heart, that without Church Discipline (which is the hedge, pale, and strong
wall of Religion) in what a desperate danger of utter destroying is Gods
Garden, the Church, most rarely and richly adorned with all sorts of sweet and
odoriferous flowers, wholesome herbs, and soul-preserving plants, if you take
away the pale or fence thereof, and lay and leave it open, that so wild and
vile Boars and Beasts of all sorts, I mean, Independents, Anabaptists, Prelates
and Papists, may most easily rush in and root-up all those sweet and fragrant
flowers and precious plants? But withal, I may most faithfully and firmly
avouch and aver it, that the difference is yet far greater and more grievous
between us Presbyterians and even those whom we mincingly call mere or pure
Independents, and that in a grand fundamental, yea such a fundamental, as is
and will be the main means of total and terrible, not only shaking, but
shattering in pieces, and utter ruining of all fundamentals in the true
Religion, and of making that breach of all breaches, the destruction of all
Religion, even so as may by no means be admitted or endured (unless we are
resolved to drive away God and all other Good from us, and that without remedy
or recovery) I mean, accursed and intolerable Toleration, of all opinions and
practices (which, if permitted to them, I see no reason, but must be permitted
to All, and so, a universal Toleration) which most, if not all Independents
claim to themselves; and so, an epidemical Libertinisme, or Liberty of
Conscience as they call it. In this respect also-, therefore, I say, and hold
that all sorts of Independents among us, (separating themselves into their
private Conventicles, and unwarranted Church Way, as they call it, against all
Authority and Power of the King and Parliament, the unquestionable Sovereigne
and Supreme Magistracy, ordained by God himself; and in resisting whose
Ordinance, they apparently oppose and resist, even the Lord God of Heaven,
Himself; are not, by any means to be admitted or permitted amongst us, neither
is their Separation or Division from us to be so extenuated or so minced by us,
as to give any the least allowance to them in their open rebellious ways of
worshipping God, where, when, and how they please, Since, especially, as here
you have most evidently and undeniably seen (by that foresaid most apposite and
pertinent Parallel) their Sin (herein) being no less than open and odious
Rebellion (which is the sin of Witchcraft) against Gods righteous Authority
here on earth, notwithstanding their plausible pretenses (as, here, those
Rebels, did) of Saint-ship, (forsooth) piety and holiness in everyone of them,
though most falsely, in their (thus) most directly rising up against Moses and
Aaron, as our Independents do (now adays) against the most just and righteous
Authority of Parliament, and their power, in constituting, under them for their
assistance, in matters of Religion, the Synod or Assembly of Divines at
Westminster, even as the Lord appointed and constituted Aaron under Moses in
holy things. Which serious Premonition and Consideration, I beseech the Lord,
in the riches of his grace, and in the multitudes of his mercies to poor,
unworthy and almost quite dilacerated (because Apostatized) England, to lay,
sadly and seriously to the hearts of All, both in Parliament, Assembly, City,
and Country, to make them, thereupon, more zealous for the Lord, and his most
righteous Cause, even a long and most longed-for thorough-Reformation,
according to our most Solemn and sacred Covenant. Amen and Amen.

J. VICARS.

Coleman-street Conclave Visited.
NOt without exceeding just and most important cause did the Lord Jesus Christ
himself, the Fountain and Foundation of Truth, yea, Truth itself, (by way of
Premonition, Caution, and heavenly Counsel) tell us before hand: That in these
latter days, false-Christs and false-Prophets would arise amongst us; saying,
Lo, here is Christ, Mat. 24.23, 24.25, 26.
or, Lo, there he is. And shall with lies, and deceiveable signs and wonders
of pretended parts and piety, so craftily carry themselves, Mat. 13.21, 22
that (if it were possible) they shall deceive the very elect children of God.
Behold (says our Savior) I have told you of this before. Wherefore if they
shall say unto you (see, here, how our Savior ingeminates the caution, as a
thing of serious consideration) Behold, he is in the desert, go not forth;
behold, he is in the secret chambers, (mark here also, how near our Savior
comes to our Sectaries practices, and rebellious Church-ways, as they call
them, now adays; or, he is in shops, barns, and such like private Conventicles)
believe it not. And, as the Apostle Paul says, so cunningly and craftily will
they outwardly appear (in white, innocent, and silly lamb-skins) as, 2 Cor. 11,
13, 14.
thereby to transform themselves into the Apostles of Christ. And no marvel
(says he) for, even Satan can transform himself into an Angel of light. And,
therefore, one, very wittily, and most worthily distinguishes these close
Hypocrites from openly profane men, Black Devils and White-Devils.
and loose livers, into Black-Devils and White-Devils; John 6 70.
And our blessed Savior himself confirms the truth of this distinction, Have
not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a Devil? even Judas Iscariot, that
sheepskin-Devill, who, so craftily and demurely demeaned himself in an outward
show of parts and piety, as that none of the honest and true hearted Disciples
could discover him to be so, but thought him as honest and holy a man, as the
best of them all; till Christ discovered and uncased him, and his own close
sin, at last, found him out, and showed him to them all to be a grand
Hypocrite, indeed. White-Devils the most dangerous Deceivers and
Soul-destroyers.
And therefore truly these White-Devils are so much the more desperate and
dangerous destroyers of men's souls, by howmuch the more slily and
insinuatingly, they (with serpents subtilty) insensibly creep into their
bosoms and souls, and so most devilishly undo them. Wherefore, the Lord
Christ told the Pharisees, especially, among the Jews, John 8.44.
That they were of their father the Devil, and that they did his works, he was
a liar and a murderer from the beginning; yea, and the Father of lies. And so,
indeed, are all his hypocritical Schismatic sons, young White-Devils from
their Grand-sire Satan, that old White-Devill; even such as cannot abide the
Truth, no, nor abide in the Truth; but, by lying Errors, Heresies, and most
damnable Opinions, become (like Satan himself) murderers of men's most
precious souls. And, have we not, here, now, found out a White-Devill, indeed,
a Pharisaicall Hypocrite in grain, Mr. John Goodwin, a most notorious
White-Devil, indeed, and a Grand Impostor.
a Grand Impostor, to purpose? I mean Mr. John Goodwin, that couzening
Cajaphas, and monstrous Metropolitan of Coleman-street Conclave, a most sly and
subtle Deceiver, and desperate Murderer of men's and women's precious souls, by
his intolerable Pride, Self seeking Singularity, and plausible Popularity; but,
all of them nauseously stinking most strongly in the intrals and reality of
them, of the filthy snufs of rotten Pelagianisme, Socinianisme, Arminianisme,
and almost of all sorts of Sects and Schisms, and most dangerous and damnable
Opinions: But yet, all of them, so confidently and craftily gilded-over with
specious shows and deep pretenses of piety, and protestations of singleness of
heart and sincerity, and with such studied terms and rhetorical phrases of
artificial Sophistry, (wherein, Prolicit ampullas and Sesquipedalia verba.
he is one of Satan's most exquisitely documented Disciples) and interlaced or
interlarded with such bumbasted six-footed, enchanting terms, and deep
dissembled flourishes, vows, and attestations of God, Horat. de art Poetica.
Angels and men, of nothing but simplicity of spirit, and Saint-like
Sanctimonie in this good man; thus to puzle men's understandings, and to dazzle
their eyes, and delude the judgments, even, oftentimes, of deeply discerning
spirits, who, on a sudden, peruse his works or writings, until the file of
second thoughts, and more serious consideration (by the help of Gods grace)
comes upon them; and then they most palpably appear in their connative colors,
and smell most unsavourily of abominable Collusions, dangerous and damnable
Heresies, Schisms and Blasphemies. And thus for these many years, he has most
boldly gone on to deceive the world, but especially his own miserable soul,
and cauterized conscience; and is now become like the Smiths anvill, or a
Nethermilstone, more and more obdurate, M. Goodwin like the Smiths anvill, or a
nethermilstone.
and inpenetrably hardened by often hammering and hatching his notorious Errors
and Blasphemies, even to this very day, in flatly denying Scripture
fundamentals, as, Gods eternal decree of predestination to reprobation; yea,
the translated Scriptures, and Originals too, to be the ground of our faith. In
justifying man's free will to supernatural good; Universal redemption of all
both good and bad; Man's natural reason to be the ground of faith; M. Goodwins
damnable heresies, briefly mentioned.
And his natural abilities to improve gifts of nature, and moral endowments,
so, as to merit salvation. And such like most detestable and damnable Pelagean,
Arminian, Papisticall and Socinian Heresies. And withal, he has gotten one
most notorious cheating Engine to help himself (as he hopes) at a dead lift,
and to harden himself in these his wickednesses and deceivable practices, the
smoothlyer to cheat his pitifully puzzled Proselytes (beside the lying and
flattering Encomtums and Elogies most unjustly bedawbing him over, even by
these his own bewitched Sycophanticall Followers, who magnify and elevate to
the clouds, his falsely pretended Piety and precious Parts, gifts and graces
(forsooth) Namely, That, when he is put, clostly, to it, by any of his solid
sound and learned Opposites and Antagonists, M. Goodwins grand-Engine to cheat
All that will believe him.
about these or any other his damnable Opinions: He most dissemblingly and
deceitfully professes and protests to his Proselytes, and those that will
believe him: That (Goodman) it is his great Unhappiness to be, still, mistaken
both in his preaching and writings. And, this base and beggarly put-off is
also, by him, most bouldly backed with that Scripture; Every day they wrest my
words and all their thoughts are against me for evil. Psalm. 56.5.
And this he has done in print, in the front of his Pamphlets, Calumny
arreigned and cast; Hagio-Mastix, and others, whereas the Lord of heaven knows,
and all that read impartially can truly testify, He does but cry whore first,
as the Proverb is; he himself being the most egregious Liar and Slanderer; as
anon in its more proper place, you shall see most truly and punctually proved
under his own hand. And thus most audaciously, and with a brazen face, and (as
the Prophet says) even with a Whores forehead, Jer. 3.3.
he denies and disclaims his own bastardly brats, his wicked holding or
maintaining of any such dogmaticall and dangerous tenets, or ever having
preached or written any such impious or damnable heresies and destructive
opinions, as are above, or besides, or contrary to Gods written Word; yea,
though we have his own words under his own hand writing, or printed Pamphlets,
most evidently and undenyably testifying the truth of what we object against
him; as if, because he is wilfully blind himself, he could as easily or
forcibly blind our eyes and stop our mouths, and befool our judgments, that
we should neither be able to see, or say, or believe the visible and undeniable
evidences we hear and see, read and have in his words and writings against
him, which is such intolerable and unparalled impudency, as has hardly been
heard or found in any Heretics, or Schismatics, before and besides him. But
now to come to the matter, which I mainly intend in this little Treatise of the
discovery of his most false and fallacious double-dealing with God and the
world, and his bold and blasphemous opinions and errors frequently and most
confidently brewed and broached by this Arts-Master, or Arch-Master of
Impudency and impiety, who yet most lyingly protests and professes the
contrary, and that he (Good man) does all in the * integrity and sincerity of
his soul. I having lately read (as oftentimes I, Simulata pietas est duplex,
im^ Diabolica iniquitas.
heretofore, have done, many of Mr. John Goodwins other Works) a pretended rare
Masterpiece of his, now lately printed and published, entitled, The Authority
of Divine Scriptures Asserted, gaudily garnished and pranked up with a
flourishing Frontespiece, The Authority of Divine Scriptures asserted.
and big-promising Title, and his Picture (forsooth) bravely set out by the
side of it (like a Vimners brave Bush at the Tavern door) to grace (or rather
disgrace) the porch of that stately structure, and underneath it, some of Mr.
Daniel, Taylers, most abusive and flattering poetry, or Encomiastick lying
lines besmearing it. And (as my custom is, in reading any men's labors) I
first reading his Epistles, and after them, the ensuing Subject or Matter of
his book, whereas, I most seriously expected to have met with an ingenuous and
just recantation of his wicked and blasphemous dealings with the
Translated-Scriptures, yea and the Originalls too, in his Hagio-Mastix,
Hagio-Mastix.
I contrary wise encountered a second scelerous encounter of his, against the
said sacred Scriptures, and a strong and strenuously struggling endeavor in
him, most superciliously and proudly to maintain yea and magnify what he had
formerly said and held in his foresaid hellish Hagio-Mastix, pretending (in
this second assault) only the use of his forementioned old Engine, viz: how He
(good man) was miserably mistaken in his meaning and managing of that
business; and now, in this last book, most persidiously and proudly pretending
an Asserting of the Authority of the translated Scriptures, whereas he falls a
fresh into a swaggering humor of saucily tampering with, and temerariously
contaminating of the Sacred Scriptures with his pernicious and polluted pen,
even as desperately and deceiveably as he did before; and, as he had formerly
done, in a deluding half sheet of paper, M. Goodwins Candle to the Sun.
which he called A Candle to the Sun. Which he printed and published
immediately after the just hve and cry of Gods people against his felonious
Hagio-Mastix, as if he would have made us believe that he would have stopped that
sacrilegious Theif for us, which, indeed was most worthy to have been
apprehended and severely punished by the hangman; But he did but therewith also
more and more abuse us, by his, thus, juggling with us. But, because, I know,
that Dolosus versatur in generalibus, and that therefore it is not so fair play
to deal too long in generals, I will now, therefore, briefly and truly come
to particulars; and first will show the Reader the double-dealing of this
notorious white-Deuills most deceiptfull heart, and tongue and pen (for they
all go together, as our Savior himself says; Mat. 12.34.
Out of the abundance of the heart the tongue speaks) out of what I have
seriously observed, even to admiration and amazement, in his Dedicatory Epistle
of that foresaid book, to the Parliament; wherein, first, Divine Authority of
the Scriptures asserted, Epist. to the Parlc.
I shall take notice (though it comes not first in order or place of his other
sawning expressions therein, yet because it so peculiarly concerns the
Parliament and his vapouring love thereof and respect thereunto) of his most
false and fallacious juggling and dissembling with Both those Houses, professing
such obedience to their authority, and reverend assent and respect to their
weighty employments; whereof and unto whom he uses these words. Page 2. line
21. and p. 4. l. 14.
I am not conscious to myself of any refusal of subjection to any just law or
imposition of men. And again; I reverence the great concernments of the
Kingdom (and I hope Religion and Reformation are two of the greatest of them
all) in your hands, wherein, from the beginning, I have served you with all
faithfulness and simplicity of heart, hithereto. Now, then, whither Mr.
Goodwin be a fair-dealing honestman; or, does not her play the notorious
juggling Jesuit with Equivocations, The first trial of M. Goodwins honesty; and
discovery of his notorious juggling and hypocrisy.
and mental reservation's with the Parliamet, and in all these expressions
show himself a notorious liar and abominable dissembler, let any discreet and
impartial man judge. For, what greater rebellion and disobedience, or refusal
of subjection to the Parliaments most just ordinances or impositions can there
be, than, that now, when as they are, and long have been, about the work of
Reformation in matters of Religion and Church Government, wherein they have
fixedly resolved to setle the Presbyterian-way, for Mr. J.G. (with others his
Schismatic Companions, and brothers in iniquity) of his own giddy head and
head strong humor, not only without, but contrary unto
Parliamentary-authority; or any other lawful power given unto him, to set up a
Church Way of his own, and most rebelliously and Schismatically; with unbending
boldness and obstinacy, to this very day to persist in it? Again, How has
this obedient Gentleman scoffed and jeered at, yea, reviled and abused the
Ordinances of Parliament, especially, that, about the preventing and
restraining of the spreading of Heresies, Errors, and blasphemous opinions, in
an anonimous Pamphlet containing 38 Queries against that Ordinance, which was
printed by one Symmons for Overton (two of Master Goodwins prime and most
pernicious Pandours to all his printed and published spurious Brats, Anno 1646)
and Master J. G. being indubitably believed, yea assured to be the bold
broacher and impious Author of those blasphemous Queries. Together with his 12
subtle and most deceiveable Cautions, full fraught with sly insinuations, and
most abusive expressions against the work and way of Reformation, intended by
the Parliament; These 12 Cautions also being printed by, and for these two
foresaid base Brokers, who, for filthy lucre, set forth all, or most of his
bold botcheries and blasphemies. Thus you see how obedient Master Goodwin is
and has been to yield subjection to the just and lawful impositions of men in
lawful, yea supreme authority, in his practices thus far. And now let us see
how he reverenceth them in their great concernments of the Kingdom, and with
what faithfulness and simplicity of heart this good and meek-minded man has
observed and respected the Parliament in his judgment and reverend opinion of
them; And this cannot be better seen and shown than under his own hand writing
(herein also) in his proud and pernicitus piece, entitled, Innocencies
Triumph, and in his lavish and licentious preaching in Coleman-street, where
also he has notoriously endeavored to blend and blemish (if not quite
extinguish, as much as in him was,) the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of
Parliaments; printing and professing, That the generality and promiscuous
multitude of the World, who have aright in nominating persons to Parliamentary
trust and power, are but a secular root, out of which (the Independents
conceive, and Master J. G. with them, Mr. John Goodwins radical reverence
unto, and pious Opinion of the Parl^.
that) there is an impossibility that a spiritual extraction should be made;
and that a man may as well bring a clean thing out of an unclean (in Jobs
expression) as make a spiritual extraction out of this secular-root which has
no authority (no authority, mark his words) from Christ to nominate or appoint
who shall order the affairs of Christ's Kingdom, or institute the government of
his Church, etc. Thus, Mr. Goodwin, in sum, insinuating, that, on this ground,
the Parliament has no authority or power to enact Laws or Statutes in matters
of Religion, etc. as learned, religious, and ever to be honored Master Prin,
in his Truth triumphing over Falsehood, and Antiquity over Novelty, p. 106, 107,
108 etc.
excellent answer to Mr. J. G. has at large related, and judiciously and truly
dilated to Mr. Goodwins eternal shame (if, at least, he had any in him, for he
outfaceth all, with most bold lying, and subtle denying All, as if he (poor
man) were still mistaken, and misinterpreted, in all he speaks or writes, yea,
notwithstanding that Mr. Prin affirms (and I am most confident his testimony is
true) that Mr. Goodwin voluntarily confessed these things before the
Parliaments Committee) and for which his so unsufferably, audacious, Oportet
mendacem es^e memorem and audatem.
and presumptuous affronting and undermining the Parliaments undoubted
privileges, he was most worthily sequestered from his living in Coleman-street,
and should have been farther proceeded against to imprisonment, etc. had he not
been favored by some, far more than he deserved. Yea, and as Mr. Prin
testifies in that foresaid place, this most notorious Liar, who (as you heard
before) did pretend such reverence and obsequious observance to the great
concernments of the Kingdom in the Parliaments hands, and who (in this his
the other days Epistle to the Lords and Commons in Parliament, professed, like an
immarbled Dissembler that he had from the beginning, thitherto, served them
with all faithfulness and simplicity of heart) did in a most daring manner,
even whilst he was under examination, most boldly preach over the same things,
in substance, again, in his pulpit, on a solemn Fast day, and published them
with additions, in two several printed Pamphlets; yea, and after his censure
for this his foul delinquencie and obstinate insolency, he did once more in a
higher strain than before, (like an incorrigible Delinquent or Malignant
indeed) preach these notorious slanders against the Parliament; showing
himself most palpably a man most desperately despising Government 1 Pet. 2.10.
and 1 Timothy 3.2, 4, 5
(at least any Government that the Parliament should establish, not suitable to
his fancy) stiffly self wild, and boldly speaking evil of dignities,
notwithstanding those his most false and fallacious brags and boastings of
himself, like a proud Pharisee, indeed, to the contrary.

Again, this notorious White-Devill or fly Hypocrite, and most arrogant
Pharisaicall justiciary of himself, in the foresaid Epistle to the Lords and
Commons in Parliament, 2 The second trial. Epistle to the Lords and Commons,
page 1. l. 25. and page 2. l. 5.
has these words. I speak the truth, and lie not to your honors; It is more
easy to me to suffer than to complain. And so tender am I of the reputation of
those that have mistaken me (to qualify a hard action with a soft expression)
that I can hardly desire a perusal of my vindication, lest thereby, they also
may possibly suffer. And again, (for these his expressions are all of them to
render himself a most mild, patient, tenderhearted Saint, to All, in All,
that is done unto him, or said or written against him.) I am not conscious to
my self of the least wrong I have ever done (mark these words, good Reader, I
beseech thee) either to man, Page 2. l, 21. M. Goodwins big boast of his own
innocence and meeknes of Spirit.
woman, or child, in word or deed. Now, how honestly, holily, and uprightly,
he has dealt in all these, let these following particulars (faithfully taken
out of his own writings and expressions, extant in print under his own hand,
which I will but briefly touch upon) abundantly manifest and declare to God and
Men. And first, I shall pray the honest and religious Reader to take notice how
Mr. Goodwin has made good these his so seeming serious protestations of his
piety and probity, his mildness and sweetness of spirit, in his answering of
reverend, religious, and learned Master George Walker, a most eminent and
ancient Minister of Gods Word in London; who had, formerly, most soundly,
gravely, and godlily convinced him to be a notorious Socinian, Pelagian, and
Arminian: To whom, in his bold reply thereunto, Mr. Goodwin uses these words,
and most uncivil and unseemly terms. That Mr. Walker a Minister of Jesus
Christ, should transform himself into the likeness of an Angel of darkness,
and besmear the brightness of his face with the grease and soot of hell, 1 M.
Goodwins meek spirit to reverend M. Walker.
is the most unnatural and unreasonable Netamorphosis that ever was heard of.
Again, five sober words (of Mr. Walkers) would have gone farther with me, (and
see here what sober words this molde-man himself uses to a grave and godly
Minister) than a thousand crackers, or the raging reasonlesse roaring of ten
thousand Beelzebubs. Again, I regard no more, the rage or rubbidge of any man's
tongue (though, in many degrees of outward greatness and power, Mr. Walkers
superiors) than I do the dung that passes from him; therefore Mr. Walker
might have kept his Earthquakes, and Whirlwinds, and fires, M. Ricrafts Nosegay
of such rank smelling flowers as grow in M. ^. Goodwins garden, p. 6.7.
and have sold them for bug-bears to scare children. And again, a heap of Mr.
Walkers errors, absurdittes false and forged cavillations whereby he has laid
a new dunghill before my door. These with very many more such like (yea and
worse if it were possible) most base, sordid, and scurrillous expressions, has
Mr. Goodwin, that meek man used against that godly, grave, and faithful
servant of the Lord, as may, more at large be seen in Mr. Ricrafts Nosegay
collected together; or in Mr. Goodwins own answer, which here for brevities
sake I omit to recite. And thus you see whither this man speaks the truth and
lies not, and is so moderate, temperate, 2 M. Goodwins meek spirit toward ever
to be honored M. Prynne.
and tenderly affected, touching the reputation of other men, as before he most
falsely bragged and boasted of? But, Secondly, see again I pray you, what a
patient, and easie-sufferer of the (pretended) indignities done unto him by
others, this man is, as he would make the Parliament, and all people else
believe, in his most base and abusive dealing with ever to be honored,
learned, and religious Mr. Prin, Calumny arraigned and cast.
in his Book entitled, Calumny arraigned (to omit his false and foul-mouthed
standers of this said Gentleman, in his other book also most falsely entitled,
Innocence and Truth, triumphing together, which I my self (I think) did
pretty well tell him of, not long since, in my Letter, to him) which was
immediately after printed, but, Innocence and Truth-triumphing together.
God knows, unknown to me, till it was printed) wherein how remarkably he has
given himself, and his own conscience the lie, by that most dissembling and
lying vapor of his innocence in his Epistle to the Parliament, from having
done the least wrong to man, woman, or child, by word or deed, and how apt he
is qualify a hard action with a soft expression, yea, and how tender he is of
other men's reputations; That most slanderous and scurrillous pamphlet of his
(without any other witness) will most abundantly testify against him, even
under his own handwriting, to his indelible shame, and everlasting infamy,
considering these his loud and proud boastings of innocence therein. In which
his said most scurrillous pamphlet, called Calumny arraigned and cast, he
deals just like a Theif. who being pursued with a hue and cry, stop theif,
stop theif, he runs before and cries aloud, stop theif, stop theif, whereas he
is the theif himself: just so, crafty Mr. Goodwin runs fast before, and with a
full mouth, yea, a foul mouth, cries out, Calumny arraigned, Calumny
arraigned, whereas himself is the grand Calumniator and slanderer indeed. And
that the Reader may take the more serious notice of his most vile and abusive
dealing with Mr. Prin, in that his Calumny arraigned and cast, and may see,
and know, also what wicked use is made of that his Book, by others that are
the Malignant enemies of Truth, and of a sound Reformation, against Mr. Prin
(just, it seems, as Mr. John Goodwin in his heart desired, though his lying
tongue, has in his foresaid Epistle to the Parliament, pretended and protested
the contrary) know, good Reader, That one Symmons a most desperate Prelaticall
Priest, in a late printed and published Treatise of his, which (without shame
or honesty) he calls A Vindication of King Charles; Vindication of K. Charles,
p. 129.
being, it seems, very angry with Mr. Prin, for writing a famous History of the
infamous lives of the Arch-Prelates and Bishops of England, with a most
vindicative spirit, took occasion from Mr. Goodwins most lying and slanderous
pen, in that his said Calumny ar. p. 12, 13, 14, etc.
Calumny arraigned and cast, most vilely to rail and be revenged on Mr. Prin,
only with Mr. Goodwins pen, and most wicked reviling phrases and lewd language,
of that base book of his, in the page mentioned in the margin before, calling
Mr. Prins style, or manner of writing, The Dialect of Dragons, and telling his
Readers, that Mr. Goodwin solemnly protested (as there indeed he does) that he
could hardly refrain from taking a solemn Vow and Protestation in the sight of
God, Angels, and Men, never more to have to do with Mr. Prin in word or deed,
until he were turned Christian. M. Goodwins most unchristian Charity toward
Mr. Prin.
(See here good Reader, and admire the most merciless, and wicked uncharitable
charity of this notorious dissembling Saint, in pretended meekness and
innocence, thus to un-christian such a truly religious Gentleman, and to make
a Turk or Infidel of him! Tantaene animis coelestibus irae! These, together
with many other such like rotten rubbish of his rancorous pen, did that
Prelaticall Priest cite and reciteout of Mr. Goodwins said base Book, too
tedious and irksome here to relate, thus to abase and abuse that most pious and
precious Gentleman Mr. Prin. And, tell me, now good Reader, is not this a
temperate, moderate, and meek spirited Saint, thus to abse a man far more
righteous than himself? a man whom God himself has most highly honored, not
only to believe, but gloriously also to suffer, and bear about with him on his
body, the most honorable marks of martyrdom. for the truths of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and yet this Mr. Goodwin, (most like an impudent and notorious
Whetstone-lyer, and prodigious hypocrite) to protest he never knew, or was not
conscious to himself (ah brawney and cauterized conscience) that he had ever
wronged man, woman, or child; and how tender he (good man) was of the
reputation of his mistakers, lest they also might suffer therein by his means.
O egregious dissimulation, of as unparalled an Impester, I think, as ever
was read or heard of! But now to proceed; Thirdly, to instance no more, as I
might many others, 3 M. Goodwins meekness, and tender-heartedness toward
reverend and religious Mr. Edwards.
(even any that have written against him, or made any sound or solid
discoveries of him and his rotten heretical heart, and, who, to purpose have
pinched his sore, and gangrened gall'd-back) How most abominably and basely,
unscholarly, yea, unchristianly has he also abused learned, religious, pious,
and painful M. Edwards, of honorable memory, both in his most scurrillous
Cretensis and also in his as weak as wicked-work and lying lines, in answer to
M. Edwards his elaborate and learned Schismatick-stinging Antapologia; in both
which base books, Cretensis. Reply to Mr. Edwards his Antapelogia.
and most paultry pamphlets of his, because he was utterly unable to refute Mr.
Edwards his invincible truths, against him and his Schismatic crew, with
strong and convincing arguments: O! with what base and bitter terms, he falls a
railing, calumniating, and slandering of Mr. Edwards, his person and parts?
just like a Billings-gate-brawler, or, a Turn-again-lain-Scold, most falsely (as
all ingenuous and judicious Scholars know) and maliciously slandering this
learned and religious Gentleman, and solid Divine, with familiar nonsense in
his writings, want of Grammar-learning, yea of ability to write true-English,
and most shamelesly calling and counting him, a man totally void of wit or
understandeng, grace, goodness, and honesty, in such an uncivil and even
brutish manner, as if he himself, indeed, had dofft and quite thrown away all
conscience, Religion, and honesty, yea even humanity, it self, or manly nature
and nurture, and were fallen out of his wits and stark-mad, and all because
worthy Mr. Edwards, had like a faithful Physician and skillful Chyrurgeon or
exact Anatomist, The true cause of M. I. Goodwins rage and rancor against M.
Edwards.
curiously cut out, and launched to the quick, and found and laid open to the
eyes and understandings of all impartial and unprejudiced Ones, the most
noisome and odious Leprosy of Mr. Goodwins pestilent and pernicious rotten
heart (both in Mr. Edwards his famous Antapologia, and in all the three parts
of his gallant Gangrena) to Mr. Goodwins eternal indelible shame and deserved
infamy, with all truly religious, judicious, and ingenuous, both Scholars and
Christians; but, the particularizing of all which Mr. Goodwins most base and
unworthy dealing with M. Edwards (as, is above only most briefly touched) I
have here purposely omitted to avoid prolixity, the rather because both those
Mr. Goodwins base books, and most paultry pamphlets were so lately written, and
those his abominable abuses therein scattered and bespattered are so fresh, or,
rather stalely-stinking, I doubt not, in most men's memories.. And thus, as you
see, has this monstrous and most malignant Rabsheca railed on, and reviled
these faithful servants of the Lord (notwithstanding, yea, most contrary to
his foresaid most false and fallacious profession of such a tender temper
toward the reputation of other men, and of being so fair and facile a sufferer
of (pretended) wrong done unto him, rather than a doer of wrong to man, woman,
or child, in word or deed) And thus most like a mad man and one directly out of
his wits, or like a swaggering Swashbuckler, crossed in his humor, has Mr.
Goodwin, without fear, wit, or honesty, with his most licentious and pernicious
pen, even most stupendiously abused such eminent and excellent, religious,
grave and godly Gentlemen, as I may confidently avouch, and easily justify,
have more true piety, honesty, conscience, and constancy, (in holy things) in
either of their little fingers, than this puffie-Puck-fiste, Mr. John Goodwin,
has in all his fat-fed body, hollow heart and all. And now in the fourth and
last place, (though when I wrote the third instance immediately before this, I
intended no more instances for the proof of this second trial of Mr. Goodwins
honesty, or rather the discovery of his notorious hypocrisy,, yet) there now,
about this time, coming forth in print, another most paultry pamphlet of this
our unblushing Cheater, and bouldest Champion for Schism and Heresy,
entitled Sion College Visited, 4 Mr. Goodwins tender-heartedness and meekness
of spirit toward the reverend and religious Ministers of London.
(whereas he might have been better busied in having been (as he is) a vicious
Visitor of his own Coleman-s^reet Conclave) and finding it so full of filthy
weeds, of slander and calumny against all the Religious and reverend
Subscribers of a book of those our famous and faithful London Ministers,
entitled, A Testimony of the truth of Jesus Christ, etc. and too easily
observing (the Lord knows with grief of heart) that M. I G. had therein also
most foully and falsely abused All of them, being about 52 in number, (at its
first impression) with most scandalous terms and jeers; and all because they
also had so nearly touched his copyhold of Heresy, and stung the gaul'd back
and cauterized conscience of this most impious Impostor, and scelerous
Schismatic; I, hence, therefore, perceived what store of matter he had
administered more and more to show and set forth his abominable hypocrisy and
dissimulation, both with God and men; as, briefly, thus it shall now, most
plainly appear. Whereas this notorious Dissembler had, as I mentioned before,
most proudly, falsely, and fallaciously, protested and boasted, In his Epistle
to the Lords and Commons in Parliament aforesaid, How tender he was of the
reputation of those that had mistaken him in his words, or writings, as to
qualify their hard actions with his soft expressions, lest they might possibly
suffer by ought he should write in his own vindication: professing also that he
was not conscious to himself of the least wrong done by him to man, woman or
child, in word or deed. See now, good Reader, how he has performed those
protestations of his, even the clean contrary way, (just as he did with those
other three most eminent, and well deserving Gentlemen aforesaid) to all those
religious and reverend Ministers of London, the grave and godly Subscribers of
the Testimony, aforesaid, In which discovery I will be as brief as may be, and
most faithful (by Gods grace) in the relating of some of the most slanderous
terms, and impious scoffs and jeers, put upon those grave and godly
Subscribers. In the very Title page of his Vicious visitation of Sion College,
he scornfully terms the Ministers Testimony; a Pamphlet pretended to be written
by the Ministers of Christ in London Province, and in the same page he most
falsely charges all the 52 Ministers with indirect and unchristian dealing. In
the first page of the book it self, at line 8, he most proudly claims Dan.
5.19. The fair flowers of M. Goodwins garden, or rather, the stinking weeds
growing on the dunghill of his Syon-Col. Visitation.
Nebuchadnezars prerogative (to retort, here, his own words most justly upon
himself) over all the 52 servants of God, To slay whom he will, and whom he
will to keep alive. To Saint his own Disciples, and make Scythians of the most
pious Presbyterians, that stand in his way and oppose his most wicked and
odious opinions, and thus, as he did, before, most abusively un-christian Mr.
Prin, so here he does most barbarously Antichristian, at once, all those 52
most learned grave and godly Ministers that have faithfully attested against
him. And in the same first page, he calls the said reverend Ministers religious
Testimony to the Truth of Christ Jesus, in most inferior contempt and scorn. A
few papers lately come out of the Press, calling themselve; A Testimony, etc.
and there also taxes them with impudency and boldness. Page the third, he
jeers the Ministers in these words, That those learned and pious men had so
forgotten themselves in the body of their book, as to break the head and
Title of it. Page 4. he tells the Ministers, they have as imperiously sentenced
Errors and Heresies, as if the Chair of Papal infallibility were, of late,
translated from Rome to Sion College. And in the very last line of this page,
he tells a downright lie of the Ministers concerning the Covenant. And in the
fifth page, he jeers them with merely and proudly tantologicall emptynes; and
in the same page, slanders and jeers them about the Parliaments tolerating of
Errors and Heresies. Page 6. He tells them they have prefixed a single-coloured
Title, to a partie-coloured book. Page 9. He most notoriously jeers the
Ministers, thus, 52 Church men in Conjunction with 60 Church livings. And in
the same page, most wickedly belies and slanders them. Page, 11, He calls them
dissemblers, shameless prevaricators, unconscionable dealers, and wicked men,
whose hearts did not smite them, though they had (unjustly) drawn up a bloody
charge against him. Page 16, He slanders the London Ministers (and excepts not
one of them, all along) with dissimulation and partial connivence where they
please, and charges them all with most unworthy, and contra-conscientious
defaming of men; jeering them with their double diligence, together with the
help of an evil eye. And page 18, in one and the same line, calls all the
London Ministers, Lions, and his brethren too; Then it seems he is a brother of
Lions by his own confession. Page 19, He slanders them to be stigmatizers of
Gods Truth, with the odious names of infamous and pernicious Errors and
Heresies; and most wickedly tells them, that he finds the best of them all no
better than briars, to their deep shame and confusion of faces. And page 24, He
most jeeringly tells the Reader, he is arraigned at the Tribunal of Synon
College (mark the jeer) for an Heretic; and, hopes to help this lame dog over
the style, by a note in the marg. as he (he says) was informed. These good
Reader, and such like, are the fairest flowers in that Mr. Goodwins garden, or
rather, the most stinking weeds on his Sion College Visiting dunghill; And at
the conclusion of all, on the back side of his Book, or paultrey pamphlet, he
thinks to put off the Reader with two or three lines of litterall or verbal
faults, or, errata pusilla, whereas, from the Title page to the last line of
the pamphlet, it is full fraught and all over staind and bespotted with, little,
or nothing else than gross and base abuses, or, ingentia menda and mendacia.
And, are these the fruits and effects of this pious and patient Gentleman's
professions and protestations, of such a tender temper, and soft expressions,
to qualify hard actions, lest he harm the reputation of his Antagonists. O
intolerable juggling and dissimulation! O abominable, and even formidable
white-Devill, indeed, thus to hope to gull and beguile the world with such
gilded pills of hypocrisy, and mischievous conzening! We have an old adagie; Ne
Hercules adversus duos.
Ne Hercules adversus duos. But this great Goliath scorning a single-duell with
a little David, as Mr. Walker, Mr. Prin, or Mr. Edwards, must boldly and
blasphemously bicker with the whole Army of the Lords Prophets, 50, or 100 at
once, are nothing for this Garagantua to encounter and scuffle with. Nay, in
his pride and cruelty to those 52 reverend Ministers, that dare oppose his
pernicious lying ways, he fears not, M. Goodwin fitly compared to Nero.
and cares not to imitate, yea transcend, bloody Nero, that Roman Tyrant, who
wished that all Rome had but one head, that he might smite it off at one blow:
Nero's was but a wish, but M. John Goodwins a real wicked act, who (as much as
in him was) set all the heads of the reverend London Ministers precious
reputation, upon the shoulder of his pernicious pamphlet, and with the sword of
his lies and slanders, smites and strives to cut them all off at one blow of
his scandalous Calumniations. And therefore to close up this passage, and to
pass to the rest that follows, I will here make bold to make use of Mr.
Goodwins own terms in his vile Visitation of Sion College, page 22, and retort
his own Rhetoric into his own face, in these words, with a little addition:
Let the Sun of Christian ingenuity be ashamed, and the Moon of humane candor be
abashed; for, (questionless) such a sly and subtle Sophister, such a gross
and grand impostor, such a bold and un-blushing blasphemer, has not been found
or heard of among the sons of nature, or of God, for many Generations. O what a
loss has the Church of Rome sustained that Mr. John Goodwin turned not
Jesuit all this while! certainly had it been so (but, God be praised, it is
not so, 3 The third trial of M. Goodwins pure Piety.
I think, yet, somewhat fear it) o what a fruitful servant would he have been
to have purloyned Proselites to that Antichristian Synagogue! But now to
proceed to a third trial of this impious and and impudent Impostors integrity
and simplicity of heart, in the things which more immediately concern God and
true godliness.

Again, in the Third place, In that foresaid Epistle of his to the Lords and
Commons in Parliament, before his said Authority of Scriptures asserted, p. 3.
l. 6. and p. 4. l. 3.
Book, I could nor, but, even with astonishment of Spirit, take notice of
another notorious vapouring profession of his, backed and bound up with an
attestation to heaven, even of God himself to bear record of those things he
now speaks, which the Lord knows (in him) are apparent untruths, yea,
downright lies; His words are these. Hear o Heavens, and give care, o earth: o
what a child has the Lord brought up, thus, to rebel, and dissemble with him!
Isay 1.2.
I call God for a Record upon my soul, that I have not the least touch of a
desire to be wise, in the things of God, either above or besides what is
written in the Book of God. And again. For my self, my love is such to the
precious souls of men, that I cannot, knowingly, suffer any suspicious
Doctrine, or loose opinion, in the things of God, to pass through the World,
near unto me, unexamined; especially, when any considerable number of men are
like to suffer. Mark, good Christian Reader, these words of Mr. John Goodwins,
yea, mark and tremble at them, as most justly thou may, that a man should
thus fearfully turn Atheist, so boldly to dare to call God, on his soul, to
witness such a horrid and hideous lie against himself, as, I shall, ere I have
done with this passage, (to my souls-sorrow, for his sake; and to his own just
shame) make it most evident and apparent to God and all men, that read and
hear it. And though I might, here, lanch out into an Ocean of notable
discoveries of his deceive ableness in this particular; yet, I will confine my
self to as succinct a relation of instances herein, as with all possible
convenience I may; and by Gods assistance, but briefly touch some few
discoveries of foul and fearful contradictions of this his proud and
perjurious Protestation, most wickedly giving himself the lie, and laying him
open and naked to be a most hateful Hypocrite and unsufferable Dissembler.
And, first, I shall touch upon his notorious juggling and subtle insinuation
for the scelerous and Serpentine working and winding in of a Toleration of all
Opinions among us, which you may find in his Printed and publishd Theomachia,
a Sermon preached by him to his Colemanstreet Proselytes; In which Printed
piece of his, in the Epistle to the Reader, and page 11.33. and 44. to 52. (as
worthy Mr. Prin, 1 M.I. Goodwins fly insinuation of a Toleration of all
opinions by that engine of h^s, his Theomachia
in his Animadversions on that Sermon, most judiciously and soundly observes,
he has most injuriously raised unjust jealousies on the Venerable Assembly of
Divines at Westminster, viz. That they in their sitting and consulting, there,
about the settling of Church Government, do but increase our misery and
bondage, reject the truth, conjure all men's gifts and parts into their
Synodicall-Circle (as there he contemptuously calls it) and that the joy of our
faith will be decreased, and evil increased by them, etc. And, then, in the
body of the Sermon, he struggles, and endeavors to maintain (from Gamaliel,
whose words, Act. 5. (though Gamaliel himself (as Mr. Prin excellently notes)
was no Apostle, no, nor Christian neither, yet) Mr. Goodwin makes to be his
Text to that Sermon, as if they were as true as Gospel, although it is
exceeding clear from ver. 38, 39. that Gamaliel himself, in those words,
doubted of the truth even of the Gospel it self, yet) thence, I say, Mr.
Goodwin strives to mayntain, That Toleration of all Religions and Opinions
whatsoever, is most just and lawful, and in his Theomachia uses these words
following in justification thereof; viz: That it is the greatest impudence (or
folly) under heaven, for any, whomsoever, to appear, to oppose or lift up a
hand or thought against any way, doctrine, or practice whatsoever (mark good
Reader, his presumptuous expressions) clayming or pretending, Toleration of al
religions justified by Mr. John Goodwin, from Gamaliels words, Acts 5. In his
Theomachia, p. 18.22, and 52, and elsewhere in that said Pamphlet.
its original from God (which claim or pretense as Mr. Goodwin will have it,
all Heretics and Schismatics do most stoutly and stiffly urge and lay hold on,
for the justification of all their Heresies, Errors, Schisms, and Sects
whatsoever, be they ever so detestable, damnable, and pernicious) till men have
security upon security (to use his own words) evidence upon evidence, yea, all
the security that men in an ordinary way, are capable of, and foundations as
clear as the noonday that such ways or doctrines and practices are only
pretenses: And, that we ought not to act to the value of one hair of our
heads against them, until we see their condemnation written with a beam of the
Sun by the finger of God himself. A brave piece of pernicious Doctrine, indeed,
for Mr. John Goodwin, and all other his brother-hereticks to run headlong to
Hell without control, if it were as easily granted, as it is here most boldly,
Syon-Colledge Visited, r. 29.
but abominably claymed, and that, but from a heathenish authority. And yet
notwithstanding this so plain and evident demonstration of Mr. Goodwins eager
and urgent (though as craftily as can be) desire to advance this wicked work of
Toleration of all Religions and Opinions, yet, in his last and late published
Pamphlet, called Syon-Colledge Visited; he most deceitfully and audaciously
protests against the allowance of this or any other wicked or dangerous
opinion, most impiously calling God to witness the same, though we have so
many clouds of Witnesses to the contrary against him; And in these words he
boldly breaks forth. I here solemnly profess in the sight of God, Angels and
Men, that whosoever they are that bear the Errors and wicked Opinions of the
times, as a burden of sorrow upon their hearts and souls, I bear my part and
share with them. Nor do I believe (says he) that any of the London Ministers,
who seek to render me the hatred of men, by the imputation of Delinquency in
the contrary, have run either faster or farther, in the way of God for the
pulling up of those noisome weeds out of the fields of Christ among us, than I
have done. And again, a little after, in the foresaid page, he, thus, goes on;
I have again and again in several of my Writings (I, indeed, Sir, if we had
you not fast in your own Writings to testify against you, you would, I see,
baffle and abuse us all to the purpose, who thus, dare deny these things,
notwithstanding that we have your own hand-writings to dash you in the face of
your bold denyals) declared my sense (and juglingly too, yet plain enough to
discover your naughty heart) and judgment to be, that no error whatsoever
ought to be tolerated; but that every error sufficiently detected, (I here is
the depth of the Deceit indeed) and evicted, ought to be proceeded against,
etc. and then at last, he gives you, forsooth, two Expositions of the height
of these his juggling interposals, viz: 1, lest intending to crucify thieves,
we crucify Christ; therefore if they do but only pretend Christ (as all
Heretics do) you must not once dare so much as to touch them. 2 Lest we make
thieves of those who err of infirmity like men; therefore hold they ever so
dangerous or damnable opinions, and be ever so long or desperately hardened in
them, and obstinately maintained by them, and are not, and will not be
convinced of them; yet this must be accounted infirmity in them, and till God
himself from heaven writes the foulness of their fact on their forehead, that
he that runs may read it, we must not dare to touch them for it, and this is
the most deceiveable sense of this Religious Gentlemen's pleading against a
Toleration, even as you have seen and read from his own handwriting. See
therefore, from hence, good Reader, and be astonished at the extreme
wickedness, and most audacious deceiveablenesse of this man's heart, which, as
the Prophet says, is desperately wicked, Jer. 17.9.
that (thus) strugles to be wise (contrary to his own words before) above and
besides the written word of God, in the things of God, whereof, I suppose, ye
will all grant) this is one, and a most essential one to. Secondly, 2 M. John
Goodwin maintains man's free will to supernatural good.
Mr. J. G. (in his brave book, so beautified, as aforesaid, with his paultry
picture (for sooth) at the portall or front, and with the addition of Don
Taylers most false and flattering verses) most impiously endeovours to justify
That a natural man has free will and power to do supernatural good, The
divine Authority of Scriptures asserted, p. 168, 169.
as our famous and faithful, loyal, learned, and religious London Ministers
have in their late most excellent and zealous Testimony of the Truth of Jesus
Christ, their great Lord and Master, discovered out of Mr. Goodwins foresaid
Divine Authority of Scripture Asserted, where he has these very words. That if
God should deprive men of all ability and power to repent and believe, and yet
should still move, persuade, and beseech them with pathetic allnesse of
affection, wherein he expresses himself in the Scriptures, even to those that
perish, as well as to those that are saved; This would seem very hard yea,
harder than injustice it self, but this (says Mr. J. G.) is not so. A
palpable lie against God and his Word, for the Lord very frequently and
earnestly (as M. G. himself, before, confesses, commands and urges that to be
done by man (and that most justly) though man has no ability to do the thing
commanded, nor is God bound to bestow ability on him thereunto, he having once
had it, but most wilfully lost it; and then he there adds a most false and
lying simile or example, to confirm his foresaid bold and blasphemous Charge
thus laid on God, Here, Mr. I. Goodwin most blasphemously belies the Lord God,
in this Simile, and like a Dunce in Divinity) misstaking the thing attributes
that to God which man absolutely did to himself. And so he deals with God
again. P. 202. l 6. etc. Ibid. p. 200.
viz. If a King (says he) cutting off a man's legs, yea, though in a way of
justice, and then commanding him, yea, and urgently persuading him with
heart-melting expressions of love, and bowels of tender mercy, to run a race
with one that has his legs and limbs and is swift of foot, and to come as soon
to the Goal, as he that so runs with him; this were (says M. Goodwin) a bloody
carriage in the King, and savouring of unmanly insolency over the poor wretch
in his misery, etc. And so, he applies all this to God, and insinuatingly and
most blasphemously makes God the Author of man's infidelity and impossibility
of doing Gods will. Mavelous strange it is, me thinks, and I cannot but
wonder what was become of Mr. John Goodwins Divinity, when he wrote this, thus
to slander God with cutting off man's legs, whereas it is well known to all that
rightly know Gods Word, that God gave man perfect legs and limbs, but man only
cut off his own legs himself, and so made himself wickedly and wilfully unable
to do Gods will. Ibid. p. 202.
Again, this wretched Truth-wresting man says; That if God should not make men
capable of believing, that is, should not endue them with such principles and
abilities of reason and understanding, as by the diligent improvement thereof,
they might come to be willing and ready to receive grace upon their repentance
and believing in God; wicked men would (and might) have their mouths upon
against Gods dealing with them, and be furnished with just excuses for
themselves: Thus, still, either making God a cruel Master, or a false
Impostor, yea, and he is not ashamed, or afraid (as our loyal, learned, and
religious Divines have noted in their excellent Book entitled, A Testimony,
etc. page 13.) most falsely, and blasphemously, to make the blessed Apostles,
Paul, and Peter, to be asserters, countenancers, and maintainers of this
Arminian Doctrine of Free will; saying, assuredly they are so, (but tells us not
where we may see it is so) and that, therefore, the false Doctrine of free
will, ought not to suffer any dispuragment for being found among the tenets of
Arminius. And is not Mr. Goodwin (think thou, good Christian Reader) most
blasphemously saucie with the sacred things of God in this particular also,
Above and besides you, most cross and contrary to the written Word of God?
Again, in the third place, Mr. Goodwin (as out learned and religious London
Divines have farther discovered in their excellent Testimony to the Truth of
Christ) in his foresaid, Testim. p. 14, 15.
Divine Authority of the Scriptures asserted, 3 M. I. Goodwins dangerous
opinion concerning the nature and ground of Faith. The Divine Authority of
Scriptures asserted, p. 182. and 189.
has these most dangerous words, and therein holds a most pernicious opinion
against the true nature and ground of faith, viz. That those that are without
the Gospel written or preached upon such terms, as we daily have it among us,
have sufficient means (if not large and plentiful) for believing, namely, they
who only have the heavens, the Sun, Moon and Stars, and Gods goodness in
governing the World (thus only) to preach the Gospel unto them, That is to say,
Heathen Philosophers, Turks, infidels, and such like, who never heard otherwise
of Christ) they also have reason sufficient (if not in abundance) to think the
same thought, and to judge the same judgment, even with us who have the letter
of the Gospel, in the point in hand, that is, to believe the Gospel as well as
we, even by the preaching of those Apostles, (these are Mr. Goodwins own words)
the Sun, Moon, and stars, Gods patience, goodness, and bounty on governing the
world, etc. And that it is clear from the Scriptures, that all the world, even
heathens, and unbeleevers, who have not the letter of the Gospel, have
sufficient means of believing, That God is, and that he is a rewarder of them
that diligently seek him which (says M. Goodwin; and here is the marrow of the
business) is all the faith which the Apostle makes simply necessary to bring
man into Gods love and favor; yea, and to prevent the wrath and indignation of
God which is to come. And if this be so, (as it is most false, and unfound, to
say and hold, the Scriptures being most plentifully against it) then, what need
of Christ? without particular applicatory faith in whom, and in whose
righteousness imputed to us, it is impossible to please God; and out of whom,
all the most glorious and glittering works of civil and moral righteousness
of the most famous moral Philosophers, and heathens in the world (and,
farther, they did not, they could not go) were but as St. Augustine says,
splendida peccata, specious, gay, and gaudy sins: yea, and without whom, Isaiah
64.6.
as the holy Apostle says, All our righneousnesses are but as filthy clothes,
and menstruous rags. No marvel then, if this brazen-faced man, Mr. Goodwin, be
yet more hold with God, and the holy things of God, both above and beyond the
written Word of God, and dares thus to jest with such sharp edged tools, and
thus to tamper and tincle by his subtle and Satanicall sophystry, with that
most excellent grace of faith, in preaching publicly, in his seditious
Conclave, or Conventicle in Coleman-street; That man's own reason must be the
ground and foundation of faith; Faith must be grounded upon man's reason; says
Mr. Goodwin.
yea, and that God did not care for that faith which was not (thus) bottomed
and founded. This he both preached, and stoutly strugled to maintain in diverse
Sermons, as aforesaid, and this was assured and testified to me by a very
honest, intelligent, and religious friend of mine, who purposely went to hear
him on this subject, and the truth whereof was afterward seconded, and
confirmed unto me by the testimony of Mr. William Greenhill, preacher at
Stepney, who himself told me (upon occasion of conference with him about these
things) that he himself heard Mr. J. G. deliver this lying Doctrine, and said
unto me, that it grieved him very much to have heard him deliver such a
dangerous point, with such boldness and confidence as Mr. Goodwin did. Nay,
more, my old loving, and well beloved friend, Mr. Henry Burton, lately
deceased, told me, and my wife, at mine own house, in the presence and hearing
also of Mr. Burtons own wife, and of one M. Carter, once a Perfumes of gloves
in London, but now an Officer in Sir Thomas Fairfax Army, That Mr. John Goodwin
had publicly delivered, both in preaching, and (as I remember) in print also,
a most wicked and damnable doctrine (to use Mr. Burtons own words) touching
justifying faith by Christ's righteousness imputed unto us which he directly
denied, and from which he most audaciously detracted; Justifying faith by
Christ's righteousness imputed to us, denied by M. Goodwin.
and Mr. Burton vowed most seriously before us all, that he also would
publicly preach against M. Goodwin touching this point, notwithstanding that
the said Mr. Carter came to my house, with Master and Mistress Burton, at that
same time, purposely to entreat, and, as he did, earnestly to persuade and
beseech Mr. Burton, that, by any means, he would not clash with his brother
Goodwin in a public contestation in the pulpit, urging what a prejudice it
would be to the (Independent) cause, if Mr. Burton should do so, and what
pity it was, that two such ancient and eminent brethren should, thus, fall
foul upon one another: But yet for all this, Mr. Burton protested most
vehemently, and earnestly, that he would not be dissuaded nor diverted from his
said resolution; M. H. B. Protested against Mr John Goodwin touching this point
of justifying faith.
and yet (notwithstanding this huge seeming hubbub and noise herein) about a
quarter of a year after, Mr. Burton coming again to my house, together with his
wife, add I demanding a freindly reason why, in all that time, he had not
performed his so serious promise and protestation of preaching against Mr.
Goodwin, as aforesaid; Mr. Burton told me, That in that interim, his brother
Goodwin (the Lord knows I speak nothing but the truth, and use his own words to
me) and he had met together, and that Mr. Goodwin had promised him seriously to
recant what he, therein, had delivered, and to give public satisfaction to the
world about the same, and that for this cause only he had desisted from his
purpose aforesaid. But no such matter was ever done by Mr. Goodwin, neither
could I (nor I think, any else that knew Mr. Goadwins pride and high spirit)
ever believe he had so much honesty, humility, or selfe-denyall, to do any
such thing. But, however it was, here was notable double dealing somwhere, I
forbear to judge or say where. And about this very point, had my learned grave
and godly friend, Mr. Walker, a notable bickering to the purpose with Mr.
Goodwin, and gave him a sore and sure foil therein, which (it seemed) was one
of the greatest causes of Master Goodwins most irreligious and irrational
false and foul-mouthed dealing with that reverend Gentleman, as was
forementioned. And yet, this wretched man (this is one of his sore
wretchednesses and miseries, indeed) has diverse times since, and now more
lately in his most mischievous and horribly lying paultry Pamphlet, M.I.G.
proved a most impudent Liar for the whetstone.
entitled, Syon College Visited, (not out of any self-denial, I believe,
but, for very shame, utterly denied that ever he printed or preached any such
doctrine, but, rather, the contrary orthodox truth therein, and (as if this man
were given over to a reprobate sense and benumbed stupidity of soul and
conscience, to lie for the Whetstone, as our Proverb is) that he never held
the ^^ credere, to be the faith that saves us; and thus he plays in and out,
and at bo-peep, fast and loose with Gods people, and Gods most ^oly things
without shame or honesty, when he is narrowly sifted and closely put to it. And
now tell me, good Christian, and impartial Reader, if this be not strange love
to the precious souls of his soul-murthered Proselytes, who hold all these
opinions most stiffly, with himself; yet so tender is he, as he pretends, as
not to suffer any suspicious doctrine, or loose opinion, in the things of God,
to pass by him unexamined, to the prejudice of any: Or, rather, Is not Mr.
John Goodwin a most notorious and nefarious liar and dissembler herein also?
And, as a yet farther (out most false, godless and ungrounded) testimony of
his large (indeed too large) love to the souls of all men and women in the
World, without exception, both good and bad; He presumptuously preaches (or
rather prateth) with undaunted confidence and a most cankered conscience, That
most wicked-opinion and false doctrine of Universall-Redemption;
Universall-Redemption taught and maintained by M. Goodwin, in his Conclave in
Coleman-street.
upon occasion of delivering which doctrine, he neither shames nor trembles
blasphemously to call and count God an Impostor or Deceiver; as I was most
credibly informed by a very judicious and truly religious friend of mine, who
purposely went to hear him on that point; and the truth whereof, I need not
much struggle to justify, he having printed no less in his Divine Authority
of Scriptures asserted. Yea, Mr. Goodwin accounts those to be Saints, and says
they are holy and heavenly men, who deny that there is one God in three
Persons; and this he has a vouched in a serious assertion of his, under his
own hand, in his Hagio-Mastix; Take his own words (good Reader) and then thou will the more clearly judge of his most bold and blasphemous juggling and
cheating, in this particular. And though for my self (says Mr. Goodwin, here)
I can and do without scruple, subscribe to the truth of this Doctrine, yea, and
am ready, God assisting, to dye (observe this proud Cheaters words) for it;
viz: That God is one in three Persons. Yet, I know some who deny it, whom,
notwithstanding this Denial, I know also, in part, by mine own experience and
acquaintance, but more fully by the testimony of others (worthy credit in as
great a matter as this (see here how this most wretched man seems to undervalue
this tenet, in as great a matter, as this, say he, as if this were but a small
matter which him) to be of exe^plary life, fruitful in good works, holy, heavenly
Christian in all their conversation, as far as men are able to judge and
liscern; shall we (then) say (says this Orthodox man of Coleman- street) that
such men as these hold not the foundation of Religion? (as if this were no
foundation of Christian Religion; whereas it is plainly affirmed to be one, by
the blessed Apostle S. John the Evangelist in these words. There are three that
bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these
three are One. See here, what a wicked man is this, 1 John 5.7.
to justify them for sound, that deny this! and so he goes on to jeere those
our Presbyterian Brethren, that reprove such denyals, thus.) But it is none of
the least or lowest of our Classick Intrusions (mark his jeers) to umpire among
the Stars (I mean the doctrine of Christian Religion) and to determine
positively, and above all possibility of mistake, which are of the first, which
are of the second, which of the third magnitude, and withal, to call them All
by their names, as if they knew them as exactly as he that made them. And is
not here a most bold blasphemer, and a most andacious dissembler, and out-facer
of God and men? Nay more, this notorious heretical man, is so impious and bold
(notwithstanding all his deceiveable boastings, what an Syon-Colledge Visited,
p. 23.
Enemy he is to all Errors and Heresies, yea most shamefully and audaciously,
calling God, Angels, Predestination unto reprobation of the wicked utterly
denied by Mr. I. Goodwin.
and men to the witness thereof) as flatly and peremptorily to deny and
utterly to overthrow (as much as in his rotten heart consists) another main
pillar, and most essential fundamental point of Christian Religion (just like
his father Arminius) and teaches his Disciples stiffly and stubbornly to deny
it also, viz. Synod of Dort, c. 1. Artic. 6. p. 5
Gods eternal decree of Predestination unto Reprobation, of all wicked and
unbeleeving ones, notwithstanding that the whole famous Synod of Dort and Arles
asserted, but especially, the holy Scriptures themselves, do most evidently
confirm the infallible truth thereof. And therefore, what a most unblushing
cheater, and intolerable obdurate liar is this? thus to dare, in the face of
God, Angels and men, to protest himself to be so sound and orthodox, such a
mourker for, and hater of Errors and Heresies, who flatly denies such a main
and principal fundamental point of Christian Religion, as Predestination.
Truly, good Reader, I might most justly deny to have any thing to do with such
an one as Contra negantem, principia, non est disput andum.
denies grounds and principles of faith and Religion. I will therefore herein
plead for my self, in meddling thus much with this wretched man M. J. Goodwin,
as the holy Prophet Elisha did, for himself, in another case, in these his
words. And Elisha said, As the Lord of Hosts lives, 2 Kings 3.14.
before whom I stand, surely, were it not that I regard the presence of
Jehosaphat the King of Judah, I would not look toward thee (meaning wicked
Jehoram) nor see thee: so truly say I, I profess sincerely, were it not that I
regard the sacred presence of precious Truth, the blessed Son of the great Lord
and King of heaven and earth; As mean and unworthy a poor-servant of the Lord
as I am, I would disdain to have any thing to do, in the least measure, with
such a degenerous, and ignoble, and abominable Deceiver, as Mr. John Goodwin
is: but I say, for precious Truths sake, and for Sions sake I could not hold my
peace, nor withhold my zealous pen. Again, 4
in the 4th. place, to show that this good man is most tenderly affected with
love to the precious souls of men (yea, and he calls God, upon his soul to
record therein, M. I. Goodwin abuses the Authority of Sacred Scriptures in his
Hagio-mastix. Sect. 28. p. 57.
o transcendent boldness and impiety!) that he has not the least touch of
desire to be wise in the things of God, either above or besides the written
Word of God; This most egregiously unblushing deceiver having heretofore most
abominably abused the Authority of the sacred Scriptures (and let him timely
take heed, lest for this, and the rest of his abuses of Gods Word, for the
upholding of his damnable opinions, that most fearful curse of God fall upon
him, which the Lord himself has denounced against those that add unto, or
diminish from his holy Word, or wrest it to their own wicked wills, Deuteronomy. 4, 12.
even the severe infliction of all the curses and plagues that are written in
the Book of God, Revel. 22.18, 19.
and to have his name blotted out of the Book of life) in his most bold and
blasphemous book entitled Hagio-Mastix; which book (as is worthily noted by
our learned and religious London Ministers, in their most excellent Testimony)
has these words, A Testimony to the Truth of Jesus Christ. p. 5.
and this positive assertion, under Mr. John Goodwins own hand writing That it
is no foundation of Christian Religion to believe that the English Scriptures,
or that Book, or rather Volume of books, called the Bible, translated out of
the Original Hebrew and Greek Copies, into the English Tongue, are the Word of
God. A horrid and hellish indignity offered to God in his Word, and a most
intolerable and accursed injury offered to all Gods English people, to ruinate
(as much as in him is) the ground of their faith and salvation. Now hereupon M.
Goodwin having been by diverse godly Christians, with Divines and others, much
reproved for it, and as diligent endeavors, as could be, made by some
faithful and zealous Christians in London, and particularly by one Mr. Thomas
Underhill, M. Goodwin complained of to the Parliament, about his Hagio-Mastix.
an honest and Religious Citizen and Stationer, who endeavored to have him and
his blasphemous Book to be called into question, and him severely to be
punished, (as justly he deserved) by the Parliament, though all in vain (such
potent props have these irreligious and rotten builders procured in Parliament,
both against Gods and man's Laws, and all justice, both Divine and Civil)
hereupon Mr. Goodwin begins to sweat and swagger, and (being rubbed upon his
galled back) to kick and winch most notoriously in print. And first, most
furiously (and therefore nonsensically) thrusts forth a little more foam and
froth of his madbrain, in half a sheet of paper, which, he most vainly and
slashily called A Candle to the Sun, hoping (but in vain) therewith, A Candle
to the Sun.
for the present, to have stopped the mouths, blinded the eyes, and stifled the
judgments of men; but indeed, thereby making the matter as bad or worse than
it was before. Whereupon, hearing himself most justly, still cried out on,
both in public and private, for that his most irreligious slandering of Gods
sacred Word, and most wickedly invalidating the divine authority of it
(especially in such a time, when most impious and audacious Anti-Scrip^urists
rose up among us, boldly and blasphemously denying the Sacred Scriptures to be
the Word of God.) At last (the Lord, it seems, suffering him still to run
himself out of breath, in his accustomed blasphemies, and damnable Errors; as
a just punishment of adding one accursed error to another, even unto his
eternal perdition (if not timely and truly repented and recanted) he sets
forth another hugely blustering book or rather paultry and pernicious Pamphlet,
which like a most intolerable cheater and dissembler, he calls or entitles, The
Divine Authority of the sacred Scriptures asserted: Wherein I for my part (and
I believe others also) expected, and verily hoped (but yet with no little
reluctation of spirit, fearing the contrary) he would now have proved so
ingenuous as to have honestly and humbly denied himself, and recanted his
former foul error in his Hagio-mastix; but perusing the Book (as I did, I
confess, with no little sorrow and indignation at what I read and found
therein, in his discourse of the main business) I found him strongly begin to
struggle (like a Wasp or Hornet overwhelmed in a honey-pot) to maintain and
justify Authority of sacred Scriptures asserted, p. 2.7. l. 21.
(to his just shame and confusion of face, if possibly it could be) whatsoever
he had formerly written in his hateful Hagio-mastix; accounting us all either
fools or franticks, that had so opposed, that, his pious piece, forsooth, and
single simplicity in all he had delivered therein; yea calling us, in a most
jeering malicious manner, Plowers who had made long furrows by our unjust
accusations, upon his back; Ibid p. 7. l. 19.
and thus proceeds from page 13 to page 17. where he has these words. That
notwithstanding that he had the bush of abundant authority at his back (like
the man in the Moon) yet he, good man, was abused with shameless outcries,
both to Magistrates and people, as if he were one of strange opinions, an
asserter of dangerous Doctrines, and a spreader of I know not what absurd (he
might have said, and justly too, of damnable) Errors and Heresies. And so he
runs on, like a subtle (I had almost said a Satanical) Sophister, with seven
positions or conclusions, to prove this main matter, and impious position
(which here he seems stiffly to deny; and which, our learned and religious
London Divines have truly cited out of his own foresaid Pamphlet page 18. l.
36.) viz. Testimony to the Truth of Jesus Christ, etc. p. 5.
That, questionless (mark his impudent confidence) no writing whatsoever,
whether Translation or Original, are the foundation of Christian Religion. And
yet page 13. himself confesses, So, Hagio-mastix, p. 35, 36.
That the Scriptures translated (as touching the matter, substance, and things
generally contained in all the Books called Canonical, (and who ever took them
to be the word of God otherwise?) are of Divine authority, and the
unquestionable Word of God. And then comes with this juggling distinction
(thinking to cheat others as himself) viz. Sensu suno, forsooth, and then,
also sensu insano (which must and does follow in this his own sense) he denies
the authority of the Scriptures, M. I. Goodwins Sensus sanus and insanus, to
know the Scriptures, discovering his gross folly and fraud, thereby.
as afterward you shall see more clearly. O what a most strangely impudent
graceless jugler, and wicked wrangler with the Truths of God is this? And so,
at last, in his seventh Position, or Conclusion against Gods Word translated,
(hoping to help his own lame dog over the style, as our Proverb is) he most
sottishly and foolishly concludes, (o the wisdom that is from above, how it
confounds and ensnares the wisdom of the carnally wise! and enforces them to
confess the Truth even against their wills and purposes, Magna est veritas and
valebit. Authority of the Scriptures etc. p. 17.
and catches the crafty in their own wiliness) he concludes I say; That the
true and proper foundation of Christian Religion is not ink and paper (see
here the folly and madness of this man) not any book or books, not any writing
or writings, whether Translations or Originalls; But that substance or matter,
those gracious Counsels of God concerning the salvation of the World (of
Believers, not of All, Good, and Bad, as John Goodwin holds) by Jesus Christ,
represented and declared, both in Translations and Originalls, are indeed, the
Word of God, and foundation of our Faith and Religion. See, here (then) good
Christian Reader, what an abominable dissembler and juggling Impostor, is here
discovered out of his own words, thus strangely to say and un-say; Before to
make it out of question, (as our learned and religious London Divines testify
from his own words) That no writings whatsoever, whether Translations or
Originals, are the foundation of Christian Religion; And here again; That both
Translations and Originals, are the foundation of our Faith and Salvation.
Only, we must, I say, take his lame and beggarly distinction, of sensu sano
and insano; his denial to be the ink and paper, the bare book and books
written, without the Sense and substance of the holy and divine matter in them
contained, and most necessarily comprehended and intended, which I wonder what
Sot, but Mr. Goodwin himself, otherwise takes it? And yet, this I will not be
ashamed nor afraid to affirm (notwithstanding the subtle and sly distinctions
of this juggling John) That even the Scriptures or Translations written with
ink and pen, the book or books called Canonical (to say no more) are the
unquestionable Word of God, and foundation of our faith and Religion;
otherwise, why did out blessed Savior himself ask his Disciples and the rest
of the Jews, continually, as in that most pertinent place of the Evangelist.
Jesus said unto the young man that desired to know the way to eternal life.
Luke 10.26. Mat. 4.6, 7, 10. John 5.39. and 7.52.
What is written in the Book of the Law? How read thou? And frequently also,
It is written, It is written: And so, Search the Scriptures, that is, the
written Scriptures. O then the undaunted and deceiveable impudency of this
heart-hardned Hypocrite, this wicked White-Devill, indeed, that thus swaggers
against the very written Word of Truth, with his base and blasphemous
distinctions, and impious exceptions and evasions therein. And then also, he
most basely and abusively wrangles with our avouching that the Scriptures
Translated or Originals, Syril College Visited. p. 2. 1 Cor. 3.11.
are the foundation of our faith and Religion; and thereupon tells us, that thus
we go about to build upon two foundations, and then quotes that of the Apostle
to the Corinths, Other foundation can no man Lay, than that is laid, which is
Jesus Christ, and so goes jeeringly on (just, still, like himself) except
(says he) Jesus Christ be transubstantiated into ink and paper; and so, most
wickedly, and blasphemously concludes, That no kinds of books or writings
whatsoever, either Translations or Originals, (these are his own Words) can be,
in the Apostles sense, any foundation of Christian Religion. O intolerable
deceiver, and abominable abuser of the Word of Truth. And thus he most
impiously and impudently goes about to make Christ and his written Word two
opposite and distinct things, and two material and contradictory confounding
foundations, whereas this assertion of his is false, Ephesians. 2.20.
and a lying one: for, does not the same Apostle Paul, most clearly and plainly
say? Ye are built upon the foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets, (which
must needs be the Scriptures written, Translations and Originals, how else
should we come to know and believe them?) Jesus Christ himself being the
chief corner stone. See, here, now, then, are not the written Scriptures
called and counted most plainly, by the Apostle, the very foundation? Yea, and
the same holy Apostle goes farther, and says thus of the Scripture written by
himself. 1 Cor. 3.10.
According to the grace of God which is given unto me, as a wise Master builder
(mark these words) I have laid the foundation (as a rule for others) and
others build thereon. See then, o thou false tongued, and
rotten-wrangling-hearted Mr. John Goodwin, does not the Apostle plainly, here,
profess himself even a Master Builder, and to have laid the very declarative
foundation, not the super-structure, as thou most lyingly say? But the
super-structure is built upon this his foundation, by other men, as there thou
see the Apostle himself says, but, which thou only most boldly and
blasphemously deniest. And thou thy self have (thus) built hay and stubble
upon this faithful foundation of the Apostle, for the fire of Gods wrath to
burn up, in his day of reckoning and trial. And where, now, then, is thy
impious and brazen faced lying jeer? most falsely put upon the learned and
religious Subscribers of the Province of London, who, thou most slanderously
say, call and count thy denial of the super-structure, only, to be the
foundation, an infamous and pernicious Error against the Scriptures? And is
not this M. I. Goodwins bold and base abusing of the sacred, Scriptures clearly
discovered. Jer. 50.38.
madman in Errors and heresy, this desperate heretical jugler (think you)
quite and absolutely out of his wits, and stark drunk with heresy, thus to
bluster with, and thus to abase and abuse the sacred Scriptures of God, and his
grave and gracious Ministers thereof, yea, and all us English Christians also
therein, so as to make us believe, that we are so silly and simple, as to hold
and believe, that the bare or mere ink and paper, the written or translated
book or books, the words or terms (and he might as well have added the very
falsities and errata in the translating or printing of some words in the Bible)
so barely and simply considered and separated from the substance, sense and
matter of the whole frame of Gods counsels and contrivements, for the salvation
of man by Jesus Christ, therein contained and promulgated to the world, are the
Word of God, and the foundation of our faith and Christian Religion? M. I.
Goodwins most desperate dissimulation, with God and men.
and that (as you heard before) the Sacred Scriptures Originals Translations,
or written, are but a superstructure, not the very foundation of our faith and
Religion? If this, then, be not blasphemous malice or mischief, or (at best)
palpable pride, to show his flashie and frothy wit, or down right heretical
rottenness of heart, against the Truth, in this wretched man, I know not what
is; Thus, contrary to his own words before mentioned (yea, and to which, he
most desperately and audaciously calls God to record upon his soul) That he has
not the least touch of desire to be wise in the things of God, either above or
besides what is written in the Book of God. Let God and man judge in this case,
whether this man be sober or mad, in the things of God. Certainly, if I be not
mightily mistaken, this ungodly man has most exactly acquired, and gotten the
Jesuits gin to cheat and coozen poor credulous souls (only turning the terms a
little) Theirs was, M. I. Goodwin, is expert at the Jesuits gin, mutatis solum
modo terminis.
Si, non Cast, tamen Caute, and his is, Si, non Vere, tamen Vafre. If not
Conscienteously, yet as craftily as may be. And, thus, he can make, even the
sacred Scriptures themselves, to speak what language he lists, to be
Orthodox, or Heterodox, true or false, valid, or invalid, even as he will, and
where, and when he will.

M. I. Goodwins proud and vainglorious boasting of his most miserably misled
Proselytes.
And, Goodwins foresaid paultry and pernicious pamphlet, which he falsely and
fraudulently calls, The Divine Authority of Scriptures asserted; I could not
but with deep admiration take notice of another passage in his Epistle to the
besotted Coleman- street Conclave sons and daughters of this their glastly
Ghostly-father of Error and Heresy; in which Epistle, Epistle to his besotted
Sons and Daughters of Coleman-street Conclave, p. 3. l. 6. and 20, 21.
in the page, and lines noted in the margin, he has these words. I shall
endeavor to leave as much of my spirit with you, as I know how, when my bodily
presence shall be otherwise disposed of. And, again; You are (says Mr.
Goodwin) my present joy, and will be (I hope) my future crown. Now, in
reference to these proud and supercilious self-stated expressions of this their
holy-hearted Master, John Goodwin (who, it seems, has a monstrous conceit of
his own spirit, that (living or dead) he would gladly hae it, by a Pythagorean
transmigration, to come tumbling into the breasts of his beloved (or rather
bewitched) Proselytes, M. Quarterman one of M. Goodwins Disciples, his most
blasphemous and atheistical speeches and opinion touching the sacred
Scriptures.
I shall, here, therefore, give the Reader a remarkable testimony of the fruits
and effects of the precious spirit, and deceitful desire of this heretical
Doctor of damnable Opinions; in one of his tall. grown Disciples, and dear
sons of his Coleman-street Conclave, vi^: bold and blustering Mr. Quarterman of
Southwark lately deceased; who, since the printing and publication of Mr.
Goodwins hateful Hagio-Mastix, had, it seems, sucked no little soul-murthering
poison from it and his other impious printing and preaching on the
falsly-pretended asserting (but, indeed assaulting) of the Divine Authority of
the Scriptures; Insomuch that this foresaid wretched atheistical fellow, M.
Quarterman, in the month of February last, 1647, being in company with one Mr.
Bisco, an Independent Minister, in the Parish or Precinct of Thomas in
Southwark, the said Mr. Bisco and he had private conference about the
Scriptures, wherein, Quarterman took occasion to tell Mr. Bisco, that, indeed,
heretofore, still before his reading of the Scriptures he used to put off his
hat, but of late he would not, holding it mere Idolatry and Superstition: Why,
says Mr. Bisco, do you not hold the Scriptures to be holy and worthy to be
reverently and religiously used and read, or words to this effect? No, replied
Quarterman, I hold and believe, That there is no more holiness in them than is
in a Dogs-tayle. Hereupon, Mr. Bisco began to be much grieved and moved,
professing that he feared lest the house would presently fall on their heads,
and very sharply reproved him for those words, but Quarterman (according to his
accustomed bold and insolent manner of carriage) was as angry and testy as Mr.
Bisco could be, and gave out among his neighbors and acquaintances of his one
Schismatic condition, that Mr. Bisco was a very frowards and passionate man,
and had used him thus and thus, upon such an occasion; whereof Mr. Bisco
understanding, on the Wednesday following (a day, of their accustomed
set-meeting in their Church Way, as they call it) Mr. Bisco took occasion, in
the presence and audience of about twenty or thirty of them, then met together,
in a sad and patheticall manner, to acquaint his Congregation ( Quarterman also
himself being then and there present among them) to tell them the cause of his
just displeasure at Mr. Quartermans wicked words against the Scriptures;
whereupon Quarterman, again, most blasphemously brake out into these, or the
like words; That he would maintain and justify, there was no more holiness
in the Scriptures than was in 20, in a 100 Dogs-tayls. And within a day or two
after, speaking with a neighbor of his about these passages, and his said
neighbor reproving him, he replied again, There was n more holiness in the
Scriptures than was in his Cats tail. All this (besides the substance of it
testified by many others) I received from the mouth of one of Mr. Biscoes
Congregation, who was present, on that Wednesday, in the Assembly when
Quarterman spoke the words, and stood close by his ^lbow and perfectly heard
him, and the same party told me, that on the very same day seven-night
following, Quarterman without any the least sign of repentance for what he had
said, departed this life. And, another friend of mine speaking with one of Mr.
Goodwins Congregation about these words on Quarterman, and telling him that
that marvelled they did not excommunicate him out of their Church, the said
party answered him, that indeed they did intend it, but that he dyed before
they could do it. And thus, good Reader, thou feast what a spirit of bold and
blasphemous Atheism this proud Priest of Coleman-street had most fearfully
transmigrated into the breast of this wicked blasphemer, one of his dear
Disciples, (according to that old adagie, Malus Corvus, malum Ovum.
Malus Corvus, malum Ovum, an evil Bird, an evil Egg) and what a present joy
and future Crown, such desperate Disciples are like to prove to this their
heretical Master, and most poysonfull Pastor. Again, I could not but take
special notice of one more most notoriously false and fallacious expression of
his, in the Epistle to his (more deluded, than) beloved Proselytes of
Goose-Alley, alias, Swan-Alley, in Coleman- street, wherein, among diverse other
most fawning and flattering expressions to befool their miserably blind folded
eyes, and bewitched souls and understanding into a fools paradise, he has
these words. Epistle to his besotted and poisoned Proselytes, p. 3. l. 24 and
p. 4. l. 2.
You have not suffered your minds to be corrupted from the simplicity of the
Gospel, nor your selves to be baptized into any other Spirit than that which
speaks (...), 1. expressly in the Scriptures, etc. Again, You have kept your
selves out of the dint of that sore judgment of God, which the Scripture
calls; A delivering up unto an unjudicious mind; together with a great deal
more of such like notorious lying, and deluding stuff, in those three or four
pages of that Epistle. Now were it not that this deceitful man, proudly prizes
all his Geese to be Swans, and most besottedly thinks, like the Ape, his own
brats fairest, He, most falsely, admiring them, and they most flatteringly
adoring him, as not very long since, diverse of his Disciples did (upon occasion
of his Hagio-Mastix, being reproved and reprehended by Gods people) setting out
a whole Treatise in intolerable commendation of this abominable deceiver, as if
he had been the most Scraphicall and superexcellent Saint that ever earth
produced, and without any shame or honesty, subscribing their names unto it,
Audacter jurantes in verba Magistri; he saying, and they swearing to what he
says, and thus both of them, interchangeably triumphing, and trumpeting out
highest Eucomiums, elegantest Elogies, Sic mulus ^^^lum scabie.
and proud Panegericks of one another most ignoble names and shames, whereas,
all this while, they and their most audacious Master, like Korab, Dathau, and
Abiram, are but notorious obstinate Rebels, and run on in a bold rebellious
course of resisting the supreme authority of the Kingdom, and insolently
despise all Dignities and Dominions, which their fanaticall and schismatic
spirits have not set up, and cannot pull down, as they Impiously desire. And,
thus, here is the good Prophets proverb, indeed, most rightly fulfilled, Like
people, like Priest. Were it not thus, I say, Hosea, 4.14.
how durst this man of impudence, thus boldly and unblestringly boast and brag
that his Coleman-street jingling Cockleshels are such precious pearls, such
solid and dainty Disciples, as will not suffer their minds to be corrupted
from the simplicity of the Gospel, and that have kept themselves (o
braveselfe-bottom'd ones) out of the dint of that sore judgment of Gods
fearful delivering up to an un-judicious or unsound mind, or of Gods just
sending them strong delusione to believe a lie, yea, a very many lies, vented
and invented, by their most deceitful Master, whereas the Lord of heaven
knows, and all truly godly over the whole City, yea and Country too (whose
eyes the Lord has opened and anointed with eye salve of truth and singleness
of spirit) do, alas, most evidently see the clean contrary, both in him, and
his miserably blindfolded foolish Proselites, who are all of them (for the most
part) most deeply dyed, even in grain, with all the foul and filthy Spots,
(which are not the spots of Gods children, but) of all the dangerous and most
damnable, heresies, errors, and most wicked opinions, before recited and
demonstrated to be the deeply imprinted and impressed stains of their great
High Priest, their grand Cajaphas, Mr. John Goodwin, after whose pernicious
pipe, they dance most delightfully? yea, and I say again how dares this even
Whetssone Liar, so audaciously lie, even in the face of God and men, in saying
that his Proselytes of Coleman-street, suffer not themselves to be corrupted
from the simplicity of the Gospel, nor to be baptized into any other spirit
than that which speaks, (...), expressly the Scripture language; Whereas this
grand Metrapolitan of Coleman-street, under a false color of gifted men, M.I.
Goodwins the great Metrapolitan of Coleman-street Conclave.
forsooth, suffers diverse of his Disciples, and especially, one of his prime
Proselytes, one Mr. Tailor, a Mercer in Paternoster-row, and other such like
Mechanical daubers with untempered mortar (whom he their great Master of
misrule has some other serious avocations, some jeering and quibling paultrie
pamphlet to publish, and thereby ( sede vacant) in a ministerial manner, to
officiate and preach to his people; And this foresaid most tenderhearted Hen,
must cluck his pretty chickens under his wings, must gather together his
hee-Saints, and shee-Saints of Coleman-street, and all, this above and besides,
yea, and most contrary to that Spirit which speaks, Romans 10.15.
(...), express Scripture Language, which says most directly, and clean
against their practice; How shall they preach except they be sent? And again,
No man takes this honor to himself, Heb. 5.4.
but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. Jerem. 14.14.
And therefore o how near do they come to that condemnation or accusation of
the Lord God himself by the holy Prophet Jeremie. The Prophets prophecy lies
in my name; I sent them not, neither have I commanded them, neither spoke I to
them; they prophecy to you a false vision, (false new lights) and divination,
and a thing of naught, and the deceit of their own hearts. See here, good
Reader, Mr. Goodwin, and his deceiving and deceived Disciples condition, Jerem.
23.21.
most exactly, and, even, ad amuss^^, deciphred to us. And again, The same
Prophet says most appositely to our present purpose, I have not sent these
Prophets, yet they ran; I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesied. Thus, I
say, how near they come to this most just and severe accusation of the Lord
himself to be called and counted pseudo-Apostles, and false Prophets; and how
far both Mr. Goodwin himself, their great Master, and his scandalous Scholars
of Coleman-street, are from that false and flattering Encomium which he most
daringly and deceitfully attributes to them, of Not suffering themselves to be
corrupted from the simplicity of the Gospel, not to be baptized into any other
spirit than that which speaks, (...), 1. c. expressly the Scripture language.
And so, consequently, what a most notorious liar and cheater of his
soul-murthered poor proselytes, Mr. John Goodwin is, All that have impartial
and unprejudiced eyes of understanding, and which look not with Master Goodwins
false and fallacious spectacles, may, by Gods mercy, most easily see and
discover. But, whereas, there is no doubt, An Objection, in justification of
the preaching of gifted men.
they will here object for themselves, that they conceive and believe gifts and
able parts in men, of what rank or condition soever they be, are (together with
their great Master and Metrapolitan Mr. Goodwins, and his holy Conclaves
chamber-call, or authority) to be a very sufficient call for them to preach and
exercise their parts and gifts, even in a Ministerial way, and that they have
the bush of Scripture-authority at their backs (to use Mr. Goodwins own fine
phrase) to uphold and maintain them therein: Answer.
I shall give no other answer to this most false and frivolous Objection, than
to desire any impartial and judicious Christian, to read that excellent
Treatise, now lately come forth, entitled Church Members set in joint, by one
Filodexter Transilvanus, and he shall therein, by Gods grace, receive abundance
of most solid satisfaction and confutation of Mr. Goodwins, and his couzened,
and couzening companions irreligious sauciness with Holy-Things in this way.
And I shall here only give the Reader (as a small sip and taste of what he may
more fully drink with a full draught, out of the work it self, not as any
digression, but, as a most pertinent addition to the truth of what I said
before) one excellent passage; Church Members set in joint. p. 13.
which I have purposely extracted out of that foresaid Treatise, for the
Readers better present satisfaction which is this. One Chillenden, the Authors
Antagonist, a notable Schismatic, makes this objection in that foresaid place.
Talents must not be hid in a napkin, What then? (answers the Author) Therefore
you would have every man improve his Talent in a disorderly way. This is fine
reasoning. Peradventure a Subject in some Kingdom may be everyway better
qualified for the well manageing of the Scepter than the King himself, may
that gifted man, therefore take upon him to dethrone his lawful King, or, to
rule in equal power and authority with him in his Kingdom? A woman also may
possibly have more wisdom and fluencie of tongue and parts, than her husband
in the family, or more knowledge and grace than a Minister in the Church: may
she therefore usurp authority over her husband in the family, or over the
Pastor in the Church? The truth is, this excellent Sciptore-principle
(miserably perverted by self-willed Schismatics) has been the dark collar
wherein that powder has been hid, which has almost blown up all Government,
both in the Church, State, and Army, and hurld all things into a black, and
undigested chaos of confusion, all over the Kingdom, both in City and Country.
And it is a most deplorable and sad sight to see that such as pretend to
Religion and the fear of God, should border so near upon the Spirit of Korah,
Dathan and Abiram, as to be of the same mind, and to speak the very same
language with them; Thus this excellent Author. Of which said most pertinent
allusion to Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, I have, I hope, in the beginning of this
my present Treatise, as a Preface unto it, made a pertinent parallel, fit, I
think, to be seriously noted and observed.

Thus, good Reader, thou have seen a small parcel of the most unparalleled and
unpattern'd unblushing impudency, and deceiveable impiety of this most hateful
Grand Impostor, and Schismatics Cheater in Chief, the mischievous immoderate
Moderator of the accursed Conclave of Coleman- street, Master John Goodwin, and
the most of all these forementioned dreadful discoveries undeniable, under his
own handwriting, against him; To whom, now, I beseech thee, say (Good Reader)
may not the Lord, the great and terrible God, the only dreadful Searcher of
the hearts and veins of all men, say and speak in his just displeasure, even
as he did to the wicked and deceitful Trayn, by holy David. These things have
thou done, Psalm. 50.21.
and I kept silence, and therefore thou thoughtest I was altogether such an one
as thy self: But, I will reprove thee, and (in my due time) set them in order,
before thine eyes. O, Mr. Goodwin, you that, thus, forget what a wise, all
seeing and dreadful God you have to deal with, in whose presence you have done
all these things, like Nimrod that mighty Hunter before the Lord, Genesis 10.9.
to Gods great dishonor and the intolerable abuse of your Brethren; O consider
these things, I beseech you (and the Lord give you grace and space so to do)
lest he tear you in pieces, Gal. 6.7.
when there is no hope of help, or deliverance, for you. Sir, be not deceived,
God is not, cannot be mocked; whatsoever you sow, that you shall reap; for,
unquestionably, Good counsel to M. I. Goodwin, if he be not, by hardness of
heart and pride of spirit, incapable of it.
all things are naked and lie wide open unto the eyes of him with whom you have
to do; And the subtilest Politician that ever was in the World has ever had,
to Gods all-seeing eyes, Corpus fenestratum, a heart and breast full of windows
to discover most easily the Abditissima and penetralia Pectoris, the most
intimate and deepest designs, even of Machiavils heart himself. Think not then
(I pray Sir) in the pride of your heart and accustomed stubbornness of your
perverse spirit, That you can dance naked in a Net, and no man discover your
nakedness? and that, because you will not, therefore we cannot see your
juggling and double-dealing with God and men: And be not herein, like a little
foolish child (as in truth, you hitherto have been all along) who because he
blindes his own eyes, thinks no body else sees him. But, believe it, Sir, if
you will, still, harden your heart, and pride your self in these your pestilent
and pernicious deceiveable dealings, by your adulterate errors and spurious
opinions, to infatuate, yea, fascinate and bewitch others and your self, and
will not see these your most scelerous and sacrilegious sins, and foul
enormities, by the light of Gods Word and Christian counsel, you will, one
day, (if not timely and truly repented and prevented) see them, and smart for
them, and be made everlastingly miserable by them, by the flaming light of
hel-fire.

And, now, to conclude, with a word to my moderate Presbyterian Brethren; If
any Eliab, or Christian Elder Brother, whosoever, shall (as He did unjustly and
unkindly blame his blessed younger brother David) check this my cordial zeal
and unfeigned fervor (the Lord knows) for God, and his most pure and precious
Truth, 1 Samuel 17.28.
because I saw my most dearly beloved Presbyterian Brethren, both of the
Ministry and others, most basely abused and scandalized and scorned by this
ungodly great Goliath, for his big blustering pretended parts and gifts (mainly,
if not merely) of subtle sophistry and intolerable impudency, I mean, Master
John Goodwin, who, thus, continues still, most boldly to out-brave and proudly
to oppose and defy or defile those Scripture Truths, and all Truths faithful
Champions, who, necessitously, and as they are justly bound, do oppugn him
therein; And if they shall (which, God forbid) unjustly and unkindly count it
pride or arrogance, or any other naughtiness of heart in me, that I, a poor,
mean, and despicable younger brother, in parts and gifts, in comparison of him,
and thousands others of my Presbyterian Brethren, have thus taken upon me to
encounter this great Goliath, this huge Garagantua, in merely pretended piety,
and this hungry Helluo Errorum, this greedy Heliogabolus, and desperate
devourer, and smooth digester of all kind (almost) of horrid heresies, who
has so scornfully and contumeliously, all along defied the Presbyterian
Army-royall of the living God? to any such I will only answer for my self (now
at the last, as I briefly did at the first, in my Title Page) in holy David's
fervency, honesty, humility and brevity; What have I, now, done? Is there not a
cause? Should I suffer such a wretched proud man to deal with my reverend,
religious, grave and godly Presbyterian Brethren, as with Varlets or vile men?
to ravish them of their reputation, their precious good name, for piety,
probity, and sound learning? No, truly, my dear Brethren, For Syons sake, the
Lord knows, I could not hold my peace, nor withold my pen; for precious
Truths sake, and her faithful servants sakes (whom I saw and observed to be
continually so baffled with, and so grossly abused by this bold and unblushing
Mountebanke) I could not let him alone. And, because I have very good reason
confidently to believe that hereby I have mightily molested a humming
Hornets-nest, I, therefore, undauntedly resolved, by the grace of my God, to
prepare my back for the smiters, and my cheeks for them, Isa. 50.6, 7.
that, I doubted not, would endeavor to pluck off the hair (of my honest
actions and intentions, if they could) and not to hide my face from their
shameless spitting of calumny and slander upon it. For, I know the Lord my God
will help me, therefore shall I not be confounded; and therefore have I set my
face like a flint, and know that I need not be ashamed of what I have, herein,
done. All, therefore, good Christian Reader, which I desire of thee is that
thou will, with Christian candor and ingenuity, accept my plain dealing labors
herein, and courteously overlook and passe-by my humane infirmities, and pray
for the weak and unworthy Author, who in the Lord desires to love and serve
thee. J.V.

FINIS.
Trin-Uni Deo sit omnis Honor and Gloria.

