THE Complete SCHOLAR; OR, A Relation of the Life, and Latter-End especially,
of CALEB VERNON; Who dyed in the Lord on the 29th of of the ninth month, 1665.
Aged twelve years and six months. Commending to Youth the most Excellent
Knowledge of CHRIST JESUS the Lord.

Psalm. 34. 11. Come ye Children, hearken to me, I will teach you the fear of
the Lord. Phil. 3. 8. Yea doubtless, and I account all things but loss for the
Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. Psalm. 8. 2. Out of the
mouth of Babes and Sucklings have thou ordained strength, because of thine
Enemies, that thou may still the Enemy and the Avenger. London, Printed for
the Author, 1666.

The PREFACE to Parents of Children.
Tender Parents,
AFter the death of my late dear and precious little one, I looked into what he
had left, and found a little Legacy of Grace from God for you and yours, left
by him (besides what was lost through the too great carelessness of such as were
about him in his sickness) but these relics at last were faithfully set down
for you and yours in writing from his mouth, which being of value in my
conscience (and those. I converse with, who were Witnesses thereof) I durst not
detain, (whoever are so full as to despise them) hoping the distribution hereof
will be to the refreshment of every hungry soul.

I intended at first to have sent them with an Epistle directed to your
Children themselves, and to his School-fellows especially, (who commend his
harmless conversation amongst them before his effectual calling of God in
Christ Jesus, had so overlaid through Grace all those endowments, begetting
deep abasements for School-slightiness amongst the most sober sort, to his
becoming wholly (as it were) another new creature since their acquaintance with
him:) But upon more serious consideration of the trust committed to me, knowing
I must be accountable; I have for my own security and clearing (as Paul, Acts
20. 26, 27.) thought it meet to commend it to your managing and improvement
faithfully toward their eternal good estate, praying you to discharge your
trust herein, on the behalf of your little ones, and see that none of them play
it away (by means of your slightiness) lest you weep with them at the last,
knowing that you also must give an account of this and them to God, as
committed to your charge: And I beseech you beware, that herein, neither love
to this World (nor any thing in this World, either the riches, or honor, or
wisdom, etc. thereof) nor any weakness in the ensuing Treatise (either in the
esteem of that wisdom in You, or real shortness in the Publisher thereof) may
make you afraid your Children should follow God so fully after the example
herein, lest it come against you, as the Lord has said, the Queen of the South
and Men of Nineveh shall, against some too like this Generation.

How far it may concern your selves to become as little children (in the sense
of 1 Cor. 14. 20 and Mat. 18. 3.) like the little subject of th^^ discourse, I
leave to your consciences who sha^^ vouchsafe to read it over humbly, and
weigh it uprightly in the wisdom which is from above; but sure I am such bowels
of mercy to your poor Children, as be get most solicitude for the souls of
them which remain from the Pestilence, before the woeful day come, will prove
most profitable, when all earthly promotions will stand them in no stead, but
may be bewailed to have hurt the possessors of them: Beware therefore lest your
want of wisdom herein expose your tender vessels, newly lanched into the sea of
this sinful world, and richly laden with variety of Natures endowments, to
miscarriage in their great voyage Heaven-wards, for want of your skilful
steerage of them amongst those Rocks and Sands, on which so many have suffered
shipwreck to their utter undoing, through their over-bold adventure thereby,
against such fair warnings, as Prove. 4. 14, 15. Luke 8. 14. 1 John 2. 15, 16.
Isa. 5. 12. I will therefore only set up a Sea-mark to warn you of four or five
(least seen through self-love) on which multitudes have early been split and
bulged, fulfilling the Word of the Lord, 1 Timothy 6. 9. But they that will be
rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts,
which drown men in destruction and perdition.

Toward which those Parents prove unhappy Pilots who are,

1. Inordinately fond of Children in minority. 2. Vainly inconsiderate in the
Schooling of them. 3. Unconscionably worldly in disposing them to outward
Callings. 4. Earthly-minded or ambitious in bestowing them in Marriages. 5.
Negligent in Family-duty, or of ill conversation in the use thereof, to the
stumbling their Children by bad example.
Indeed most of these have been the sin and shame of Professing-Parents, and
the spoil of their poor Childrens souls; and my hope of good times lies much in
the expectation of a Spirit of Holiness upon Children, to give them escape from
the sin of their fathers, few of whom I fear will live to inherit the Good they
look for, through such spoil this world has made in their spirit, as declares
too plainly they have supposed, as 1 Timothy 6. 5. that, Gain is Godliness,
whatever they say or profess to the contrary; And the most reformed Fathers
will humbly accept it as great favor from the Lord, (after such provocation)
if they find Grace, in return to the Prayer, Psalm. 90. 16. and the fulfilling
Psalm. 45. 16. Instead of thy fathers shall be thy children, etc. O therefore
that Children may enter into more peculiar obligation to Christ as the Lord,
with heartiest Hosanna's in the highest, in sense of being redeemed, (in this
evil-day) as the Scriptures speak, from the vain conversation received by
tradition from their Parents, 1 Pet. 1. 18. and follow Christ soveraignly, Rev.
1. 4. Learning of him, in all their subjection to Parents, the holy limits laid
down, Ephesians. 6. 1. that they obey always only in the Lord; that is, as they
command according to Christ, whom all are to hear in the highest, Mat. 17. 5.
as they would walk well-pleasing to God; for I fear many Parents who make great
profession, are grown very vain, first, toward Children in minority, so fondly
affecting them to their hurt, as if (with all their baubles) they were made to
be but Apes and Baubles to Childish Parents for their present pleasure, instead
of discharging faithfully their great trust for their immortal souls in their
minority, by wisely nurturing them in the fear of the Lord, timely inclining
their tender years toward God, as they would not make themselves sport so long
and so far, with the first fruits of their Childrens folly in the witty office
of stubborn natures wilfulness and sinful speech, as by delight therein to
expose the Child to such self-willedness, that at last through the Parents
fondness they cannot endure the Child should undergo a moments smart (though
never so necessary) to preserve either body or spirit from sickness or sin.

For hence the discerning Child perhaps is fitted (through Satan) more early
for such Companions abroad, as were MEETING-MOCKERS, and smarted together at
Bethel of old, under the great Fathers displeasure, for want of timely
discharge of earthly Parents duty toward restraining them, 2 King. 2. 23, 24.

Yea, though they may be restrained from this, (through their Parents
profession) yet other inordinate affection in neglect of the Lord does often
fulfill the threatening, Ezekiel. 24. 25. (against Professors fondness) in the lives
of their little ones. Let not tender Parents therefore look lightly over such
Scriptures as these, Prove. 22. 6. 15. and chapter 29. 15, 19. and chapter 23. 13, 14.
Ephesians. 6. 4.

But if Children be wisely steered by tender Parents through this danger in
minority, and grow up soberly by degrees under their care, and now fit for
School, how vainly inconsiderate Parents become, what they learn there, or by
whom they are taught, that word, Luke 16. 8. in this may be for a Lamentation:
How do the Children of this world grow stricter in their care, lest their
Children at Schools should unawares learn the excellent knowledge of Christ,
than Professors are, lest their Children at School should learn the vileness of
this world.

O the heart-greived complaint of this Scholar (on his sickbed) over
School-pastimes, choking for a season his first serious convictions, wherein
yet he was not long, nor at large, nor an associat ever with any deboist, but
with the most sober youths.

And what tender sense had he before his sickness of the Name of God
blasphemed, in the continued upholding and preferring of Heathen Authors (by
Christian Schoolmasters) wherein Heaven and Hell are turned into fictions, to
the hazarding Professors Children to settled Atheism, or unsettled profession of
Christ, the Eternal Judgment and Glory to come; but how did the soul of this
little one (in need of favor, and dread of wrath, in hopes toward Heaven and
fear of Hell) tremble hereat? I desire to remember, with selfabasement, and
exceeding joy for the Angel of the Covenant, who met with him, saying, This is
the Way, walk in it.

But how (alas) are our Daughters also brought up by professing-Parents, as if
they would have them attain the cursed commendation of Herodias Daughter, Mat.
14. 6. rather than in the education and adorning, Psalm. 45. 13, 14. become
truly lovely to Christ, v. 10. How many, O how many, like Micha's Mother, Judge.
17. 4. are at greatest cost for snares to their Childrens souls! How did the
pride of our new-blown Gentry (under great profession) bud and blossom in the
vanities foregoing, before their fall, as before Isreal's, Ezekiel. 7. 10. and it
were to be wished that abused fullness were not lusted after again by any
already under smart for it, unsensible of their sin.

But if Children die in the midst of these delights (or the Plague take them in
paths so contrary to the expectation of the Lord, Isa. 22. 13, 14.) then how
few Parents (thus preparing them for spoil before) speak a word of their
singing, dancing, stately tripping, mantling and mincing seize, or any of
that vain tribe of their trinkets and trumperies, recounted by the Spirit more
particularly, Isa. 3. 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. about the most modish uses
whereof perhaps yet they spent more circumspection, and anger at their
Childrens dullness, than about their sin and soul-neglects to the last; When
conscience also upbraiding the visited Children in the words of Romans 6. 21.
What profit had you then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? for the
end of those things is death: Then perhaps they too late begin to teach the
Child untimely to take up some words of God, or Christ, or Heaven, or Faith, or
Repentance, (little thought of before) and to apply a promise out of the path,
to uphold them in hopes of rest from Him whom they rejected for rule, whilst
they could enjoy their vanity, and flatter themselves in the Child's good estate
(though never so doubtful) especially having the approbation of any easy
Prophet they have set up for themselves, as Ezekiel. 44. 8. in the case.

But why? Parents, why? is not that Learning on which only you dare lay stress
in Plagues and in death (which is so certain to you and your children, yet in a
time so uncertain both to you and them) preferred in life, as the great Lesson
commended and commanded by the Master, Mat. 6. 33. chap. 11. 29. who must judge
us at the last day according to what he has taught us, and we may not so
easily trifle away, Joh. 12. 48. Be considerate then Parents in your Childrens
Schooling, lest the door should be shut, and they as the foolish Virgins (when
they can be vain no longer) are willing to learn what may be hid from their
eyes.

But if Shipwreck be not in this danger neither, a Rock is in sight, and Sands
about it, that split or suck up many a stately Vessel that saileth too nigh,
and that is called a CALLING (though the High Calling of God in Christ Jesus
the Scripture more calls so, is seldom so called now by Professors) and in this
how unconscionable are Parents in the dispose of their Children to their
undoing! for how little are they bounded by such Commands and Counsel in the
case; as Titus 3. 14. 1 Cor. 7. 24. How few Children therefore abide with God
in their outward Calling, and how many with the World, the Flesh and the Devil,
either in the dishonest nature thereof, or sinful entrances thereinto, vile
customs therein, or to effect their freedom (so called, though the very
servants of corruption) therefore, which yet if never so honest in all should
be minded, to the neglecting the Invitation of the Gospel to Christ becomes as
pernicious as open profaneness; wherefore he complains of souls so swallowed up
in the most lawful outward callings, as the Epidemical means of perdition,
Luke 14. 18. Mat. 22. 5.

How many poor Children herein are, instead of being (as Samuel) lent to the
Lord, sold to the world by their parents as long as they live, deferring
soul-concernment till death, when they lament too late they had not such a
Mother as Samuel and Timothy had in their youth, and mourn at the last, as
Eccl. 12. 1. wishing in the day of wrath (when riches profit not) that their
Parents had less indulged their bodies for a moment, and more their immortal
souls.

Yet Fourthly; If this be escaped, the earthly mind and ambition of Parents in
marriage adds a multiplying Cipher; as after Ahabs sin, so obnoxious before, 1
Kings 16. 31. and a Sydonian with silver, is now far more esteemed than a
daughter of Sion without it, or with little less; as if the half Language of
Ashdod already, were intended to be perfected, rather than our posterities more
compleatness in Christ. O shameful Professors! How unlike Rebecca are you
herein, Genesis 27. 46. Surely Smithfield would better become such your
Marriage-Markets, than a Congregation of Christ: How few hereby find a Wife, as
Solomon speaks, Prove. 18. 22. (that is, to the end God instituted them) but
seeking money (as a HELP-MEET to them) get a Woman with the World, and the
Devil with her unawares (as Eve, when the mouth of the Deceiver) to a bitter
day, perhaps a Saphira helping (by hypocrisy) to save their earthly Estates,
and lose their Souls. Herein Parents add to their prayer for Childrens
Conversion, their pains to effect their Perdition; as one that prays a fire
may go out, adding fuel thereto, so are these provisions for Lust under prayer
for Life. Did not Solomon King of Israel sin by these things? yet among many
Nations, was there no King like him, who was beloved of his God, and God made
him King over all Israel, Neh. 13. 26. Nevertheless, even him did
outlandish-women cause to sin.

But lastly, How does neglect of Parents instruction of families, or ill
example therein before their Childden, either in pride, covetousness, wrath,
lightness, or other ill carriage (unbecoming profession in Parents) expose
their observant Children, and make fruitless and frivolous their performances
amongst them, when they shall discern them to fulfill Tit. 1. 16. before them;
Beware therefore of this above all, that you lay not a stumbling example before
them, but that in simplicity and godly sincerity you show them your good
conversation in Christ, filling up faithfully every relation in secret
(according to your open profession) that they be not stumbled by finding the
contrary: for O the wound which Christ an^ Truth and souls have received by
eminent l^^ gifted Professors of contrary conversations! (...) little have
either the lusts or Inhabitants (...) world fallen before them! How would
Abraham be ashamed of such Children, who so have shamed their profession in
their opportunities, Heb. 11. 15. wherein else they might have shined to the
conviction and conversion of many, Mat. 5. 16. 1 Pet. 3. 16.

O tender Parents, for the Lords sake then, and for the sake of the souls
under your charge, pray for your own return to the attaining again the holy
Examples of Fathers in Christ, that they who dwell under your shadow, may
revive as the Corn, and grow as the Vine, the sent whereof shall be as the Wine
of Lebanon, Hos. 14. 7. That your Children and Servants may bless you in the
name of the Lord; and add not to their corrupt Nature any of these hazards
aforesaid, under your education, in the sense whereof, and how many poor
Children lately may have been carried Christless thither, and like sheep laid
into the grave (whose Parents thought it time enough perhaps to teach them
soul-concernments at leisure) this earnest of encouragement to poor endeavors
for the souls of Children, is published in love, which its hoped by your
acceptance and help may provoke very many to the salvation of souls. And a
special double Note is placed in the Margent, pointing to the sickbed
lamentation of ^^^s little one for the loss of first convictions in (...) most
harmless manner of trifling away his (...) (with his most innocent
School-fellows) choking for a season the tender Seed in his soul, the reviving
whereof (by especial grace, in an acceptable season) stood him in so much stead
(as you will see) in the face of Death and Judgment, whereunto none of his
great natural parts nor School-attainments durst approach: Be pleased to peruse
it therefore, and improve it unto the most special care of your Childrens
eternal welfare, and pursue your frequent prayers for their conversion in the
paths thereof, so, as by all means to promote (and by no means to betray) your
prayers, that the account of them may not be with grief, but joy; which is the
earnest prayer indeed of

Your and your Childrens welwisher in the Gospel of Christ, I. V.

In Commemoration of our Friend and School-fellow, the truly virtuous and
Religious Youth, CALEB VERNON.
An ELEGY.
CALEB! Ah peerless Caleb, art thou dead?
No, no thou art not, but thy soul is fled
To Heaven, thy better part shall never dye
But shall survive, yes and thy memory
Shall ever live; and though thy life expire,
Yet shall all those that knew thee, thee admire,
And honor thy remembrance. Worthy youth
Whose chiefest love was Piety and Truth;
Who tho so young and tender, yet did chase
Away the thoughts of sin, and did embrace
Sincerity, and with an upright heart
Did Gods Commands, to choose the better part.
A second Timothy I well may style thee,
Of which true title none can ere beguile thee:
Which thou deserve, and have an ample share
In his perfections, although so rare.
In The Scriptures from a child he knowledge had,
And stuck close to the good, shuning the bad;
Even so did thou, whose chief and sole delight
Was for to serve the Lord thy God, in spite
Of all the opposition which was made
By Satan's instruments, to make to fade
Thy hot love toward thy Lord, and fervent zeal
Unto good works, which no vain thing could steal.
He in the graces of his Parents dear,
Enjoyed a very large and ample share.
So thou the virtues of thy Father, and
Thy gracious mother, at the second hand
Deriv'st: A rare example he did prove,
Others for to provoke his God to love.
So thou a holy pattern did appear,
Although so young, while that thou live here.
And though thou art dead, thy soul does sore on high
Death where is thy sting? Grave where is thy victory?
Caleb! blessed Child! the Victory is thine,
Who like an other Sun in Heaven do shine.
O Child, beloved of God, admired of men,
For all thy virtues and thy graces! when
Shall we again thy like behold, whose Spirit
A beauteous Crown of Glory do inherit.
O wonder of our iron age! wh'ast left,
Something of which the world cannot be bereft
Let us lament our loss, whilst he above
Sings holy praises to the God of Love.
W. D.

Another.
AH cruel Death, that no one do regard,
But unto all entreaties still art hard:
It is thy sting that makes so many grieve,
'Cause mortals of their lives thou do bereave.
It is thy deadly Spear that does divide
Poor Children from their Parents, thou do guide
Thy piercing Iavlin to the mortals heart,
Thou strik'st even Youth it self by thy keen Dart.
Could thou not stop thy hand, O greedy Death,
But with thy mighty stroke must stop his breath,
Who in his youthful days did flourish much!
O Death, why did thou rob the world of such
A Jewel? which with few I might compare,
One that in time might been the Son and Heir
Of Learning; one beyond his age endu'd,
Wisdom and Virtue were by him pursued.
O Death, could thou not execute thy rage
On other men that feeble be with age;
Or on some other youth, in whom such rare
And virtuous qualities did not appear?
But must so soon deprive us of a Jewel,
Oh envious Death! What is it makes thee so cruel?
Such a most precious Iem all ought to prize,
I Am sure they do who are virtuous and wise.
We mourn, He does rejoice; Ours is the loss,
His is the gain, He Is free from every cross.
S. D.

Another.
I.
WHat naught but grief! what naught but floods of tears?
Pray tell me why
This common Desolation appears?
That also I
May spend a tear. I hear with these mine ears
A sad reply.
Weep Rocks, weep Mountains, for all joys are fled,
The finest Flower in the Field is dead.
II.
It Is true we all must die, but paled death
With his sharp claws
Has put a period to my dear friends breath,
But for what caus^
He in his youthful sides his Sith did sheath
I yet must pause
Weep Rocks, weep Mountains, for all joy is fled,
The finest flower in the field is dead.
III.
Me thinks sweet Philomel begins to sing
Her mournful not^
And pressed with sorrow hangs her little wing,
Whilst that her thro^^
Proclaims her sorrow, look how every thing
With grief is smo^^
Weep Rocks, etc.
IV.
When ere his person came into my sight,
Me thought my eye
Was ravished with a sudden sweet delight,
His modesty
Was a fit copy any one might write
After him by.
But weep O Rocks for all our joys are ^led,
The finest Flower in the Field is dead.
V.
Me thinks the new-blown flowers hang their head
And often bemoan
Their hapless lot, because their Friend is dead,
They deeply groan
And sigh, the sight of which might draw indeed
Tears from a stone.
Weep Rocks, etc.
VI.
Learning and Piety, Virtue and Wit,
His portion was,
Learning he had beyond his years, but yet
Alas, alas,
Deformed Death no notice took of it,
But cracked his glass.
Weep Rocks, etc.
VII.
He saw the vanity of earthly things,
Therefore made haste,
Unto the Kingdom of the King of kings,
That he might taste
The blessed joys that Heaven with it brings,
That naught can blast.
Weep Rocks, etc.
N. P.

An ACROSTICK.
CAleb has now attained the promised Land,
After his journey through the Wilderness
Living he tasted of its Clusters, and
Espied its beauty, which tongue cannot express
Blessed soul! he rests now after much distress.
Val'rous though small he was, for he hid find
Entrance, tho death did at the entrance stand
Resisting him, his God strengthened his mind,
Now he is victorious and enjoys the Land.
Ocoward Death! thou set'st upon a Child,
Nor could thou conquer, but by it wast foy'd.
S. P.

ANAGRAM.
CALEB VERNON.
Once Venerable.
ALL earthly glory posts away with speed,
What Once was Venerable now is dead.
W. D.
CALEB VERNON.
Cure! None able.
ALL help in Man is vain, where shall I flee?
Who Will Cure? None able. Lord I flee to thee.
S. P.
CALEB VERNON.
No Rule can be.
DEath varies often, No certain Rule can be;
He strikes Old Age, Youth, Manhood, Infancy.
S. P.
EPITAPH.
HE is interred whose soul (now fled away)
Once took a Lease of this small house of clay.
She had not long her house inhabited
Before she was to her Redeemer wed;
She brought forth Children (who do now inherit
Her Husbands wealth) the graces of the Spirit.
When as she saw her family increase,
She did repent that she had tan'e a Lease,
House-room was scant, therefore she sought about
To find a larger habitation out.
Her Husband did a Mansion prepare,
An heavenly Mansion, very large and fair.
Thither she did her household goods remove,
And now she is left this House and dwells above.
She with her Cottage twelve years was content,
And now, tho worms dwell in it, does not lament.
S. P.

Job 19. 25, 26, 27. For I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall
stand at the latter day upon the Earth. And though after my skin worms destroy
this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God; whom I shall see for myself, and
mine eyes shall behold, and not another, though my reins be consumed within me.
THE Life and latter End OF Caleb Vernon.
CALEB was born in the Inns at Dublin in Ireland, Why called Caleb.
Anno 1653. and called by that name by agreement betwixt his Parents seriously,
with desire he might follow God fully; being both then very sensible of
Professors defection. This Child was brought up with them at least six years,
before he was sent to School; he was of very great capacity but exceeding
shame-fac'd, and small of stature, and so timorous, that his His aptness at 4
and 6 years old; and observance of parents.
Parents could scarce trust him abroad out of their sight. Howbeit he profited
so under their care, as to read the Bible distinctly at Four years old, and by
six became very apt in places of Scripture, the Theory thereof, and moral
regard thereunto; exactly observant of his Parents, with ambition to serve and
please them in love. He had his share early in afflictions, for being put to
School when he was but seven years old, at Hillington he deeply resented the
troubles on many good people, at that time; and being visited with a violent
Ague there he began first to have a deep sense of death, questioning whether
His first sickbed convictions at 7 years old.
he should be saved, but recovering that sickness, came to see his Father then
prisoner in New gate, for the worship of God, according to the Gospel of
Christ, and sick at the same time, which was thought to affect the Child,
together with the fears of Soldiers in the way, that the night he arrived at
London he fell sick again, in which sickness further convictions of his undone
condition by nature seized more on him, and his elder Brother who then fell
sick also, but both of them with their Father recovering, went to the waters at
Epsam, where his Father (finding his practice in Physic as much as he desired
to be employed in, the Lord taking away his youngest Son there) was disposed to
retirement, and abode there all the Summer, after a short time, sent him with
his brother again to School, taking for the ^est of his family Lodgings at Ewel
all Winter, supposing he might be less ob^oxious His Fathers way to avoid
affliction, brings him and his family thereinto, and how.
than at popular Meetings in London, and lived there in his practice peaceably.

A Schoolmaster coming to live in that Village, he brought his Sons thither
also, determining to settle there for his Life, and to that end bought a piece
of Ground with intention to plant it, and build; which when a malicious
Chyrurgion (too notorious for all open profaneness) observed to impair his
Practice, he secretly (with his Father-in-Law, and Allies of debauched
dispositions) by slanders of many sorts to the Justices, sought his
disturbance. Whereupon the said Vernon being civilly sent for by the Justices,
repaired to some of the chief and gave so good satisfaction of his peaceable
deportment in his calling, and the falsehood of their various reports, as he
received an ingenious account of the slanderers and forgers of them, with
assurance of safety in the like case if attempted for the future; which was his
encouragement to go on in building for the convenience of his Family there.

And though this confederacy in vain attempted his disturbance with the Bishop
and Justices for near two years more, yet at last prevailed by slanders to be
countenanced; so by another in arms (who took not such notice of the private
malignity under pretense of Loyalty) that the Chyrurgeon was encouraged as one
of the chief in ransacking the said Vernons House and Closet (which he had
stored with Medicine for his Apothecary) at pleasure, with violence and
dis-ingenuity Ca^ebs early share in unreasonable afflictions under natural
fearfulness before.
incredible (upon pretense of Arms where never was any) and bruitishly
frequented the house as he pleased, sometimes in company, sometimes alone in
his drink, venting his threats very absurdly, to the great terror of the poor
family.

The said Child being timorous (and under a fit of sickness also at Ewel with
more deep sense of sin) having thus early (to his care about his eternal
estate) the additional fears of unreasonable men, so frequently, was so exposed
(though naturally Inward and outward trobles together carry him to prayer and
christian correspondency.
very cheerful) that his Father was enforced to remove the Family from thence
to Newington, with respect to their Schooling, leaving them himself some weeks
before.

The Child began therefore, when his Father through these troubles left Ewel,
^^rst in good earnest to approach to his ^eavenly father in private, and to
begin a ^orrespondency with his good friend Mr. R. D. in London, wherein were
Christian expressions in such wisdom and knowledge, as made his friend
question (being the first he had written) whether they could come from one so
young, being then ^ut Ten years old; whereupon the said Mr. D. sent to him as
follows.

Dear Caleb,
I Received thine without date, but not without serious desire of the best
things, and of ^hy beginning to be instructed in them, which made thy Letter
very acceptable and welcome to me, being willing to hope that what comes under
thy hand is not only notions in thy head, but something of Truth in thy heart,
which The wisdom of his first Letter at 10 years old admired by his friend.
I desire may be more and more really wrought in thee. Thy Lines savor of an
honest heart, and seem to come from an older head than thy own; yet being
informed, from such as I can credit, that it was thy own writing, I shall make
no further inquiry than to have it confirmed from thy self, in thy next to me,
whether indeed thou had not privately the help of any other, before the
writing of thine above mentioned unto me. It is a large desire ex^ressed in
thine to be filled with the Love of God, and my hearts desire for thee is, Th^^
the Lord will fulfill that Petition for thee, t^gether with that mentioned,
Ephesians. 3. 1^ 17, 18, 19. Which I desire thou may o^ ten peruse, ponder and
be helped to pr^ in the same Spirit of Truth. The co^ing of Christ is hastening
indeed as t^^ Letter expresses, It Is but a little whi^^ and he that shall come
will come and will not tarry, Heb. 10. 3^* And it is a question worth all our
inquir^ who may abide the day of his coming, Mal. 3^ 12. Many there are that
shall not, and fe^ there are that will be found blameless, a^^ harmless without
rebuke, at that day, which yet is and shall be the portion of some, Phil. 2^
15, 16. I shall at present only desire thy answer unto two or three brief
Questions following.

First, What thou do understand by the coming of Christ?

Secondly, What thou understandest b^ his judging the Earth?

Thirdly, What it is to be an outsid^ Professor?

Fourthly, What the Traditions of me^ are?

Fifthly, Whither the answer thou shall return to the abovesaid questions be
the own apprehensions without any help from others?

A true and plain answer to these things will be a further satisfaction about
thy last Letter, and I hope no disadvantage to thee, ^ho by the serious
thoughts of these things may be brought to a better understanding ^n them.
Thus with my dear love to thee and ^hy brother J. V. and Cousin Deborah, and
^ll the rest, desiring you may be all taught and ^nstructed in the truths of
Christ, as they are ^n him, whom to know aright is eternal life, John 17. I
remain,

Thy assured Friend that desires thy Spiritual and temporal welfare, R. D.
London the 6th. of the 3d Month. 63.

And in Answer received this following, which he wrote immediately without
study or prompting.

Ewell May 12 1663. Dear Sir,
I Received your kind Letter, wherein you have desired me to write unto you an
Answer to some certain Questions which you have hinted in your Letter, which I
shall answer as (I hope) the Spirit of Grace shall declare to me; for I know
and am assured that the Lord will declare his Spirit unto them that truly love
him; which indeed I may truly say, I have not done, but have erred His second
Letter at large in answer to his friend
against his word, for which I have great cause to mourn for, but I hope he may
be my God, who will be a God to them that truly seek after him in Spirit and in
Truth, who did put them words into my mouth which you desired me to send you
word of, and no body else* But as for the coming of Christ, I understand it to
be two diverse ways, First, His coming in the hearts of his People, to purge
and purify them. Secondly, His coming o^ Earth when he shall set his People at
liberty and shall destroy all Kingdoms that will n^^ obey him, and he shall
set up himself a Kingdom, Dan. 2. 44. And by his Iudgin^ the Earth I
understand, when all both quic^ and dead shall stand before his presence, when
he shall sever the bad from the good, and sha^^ say to them on his right hand,
COME Y^ BLESSED OF MY FATHER; But unto them on his left hand, GO YE CURSED into
Hell fire, prepared for the Devil and his angels. And to be an outsid^
Professor, I understand it to be one, who make a show of Christ, but they be
not so in their hearts. And I understand the Traditions ^^ men, to be their
following after the Lusts of the Devil rather than the Commands of God. Which
things I have not been told of. I would desire you to excuse me for not dating
my Letter, and desire you would write unto me to unfold them to me more than I
can do, which I hope may be made of use unto my soul: So I remain,

Your much obliged Friend, CALEB VERNON.


ANd being removed to Newington (and now no more exposed to such private
hostility) he went more cheerfully to School, and profited exceedingly in the
Latin tongue, making entrance also into the Greek that Summer; but finding
the opportunity of hearing the Word there uncertain in the Winter, for the sake
of it, and his Fathers employment in London, the Family was removed thither,
where he was improved without more intermission, to great proficiency in the
Greek and Latin, so as both his able Teachers, as all with whom he was, have
said, they never had any more apt of his age, nor did any with whom he was see
cause to use correction unto him, who yet to his Parents trouble had lost much
time by such removes, and amongst more civil Schoolfellows (having always
averseness to play with profane) grew too secure.

But when the Child Caleb was as a tender Being at peace amongst civil
Schoolfellows he was less serious, but revived under the Word at London.
Scrupled Heathen School Authors seriously.
plant now again more frequently watered with the living streams of the word of
grace, by grace yet in London, he grew very considerate in his goings, and of
his own accord so hesitated at the fictions he met with in the Heathen Authors
at School (especially about God, and Heaven, and Hell, etc. which were now on
his mind) that though he dearly loved and highly reverenced his Master, he did
very humbly acquaint his Father with his scruple herein, and found favor to
have it much removed to his satisfaction and encouragement to further
proficiency in Learning, which was his delight.

Howbeit, sometime after being employed in an English Poetical Exercise on a
solemn Subject, wherein he seriously used Scripture language pertinently; hi^
Love to Scripture allays his love to School, and why.
learned Master (he said) observed to him he should not be so Scriptural, but
would have him alter it for a more Poetical dialect; whereupon indeed the Child
(as it were astonished and discouraged thereat) of his own accord so abated his
delight in Learning, that he went to School then as under some load, which had
been as his pastime or delight before.

Hence did he earnestly entreat his Father he might be brought up with him in
his own calling, for which he had Learning enough, to which he was very
enclinable, and in which he expressed great aptness with delight, more than to
play, upon all idle times. But being returned to School for a season, to attain
the Hebrew reading, into which he was entering, it pleased God to visit him with
sickness, to perfect his compleature for his Bridegroom, as follows.

Being visited, through surfeit by heat, with a Fever and Plurisie near unto
death, in London, he had then a more effectual awakning toward Eternal Life,
in such lively conviction, self -- abasement and savor, as made some about him
More sick bed convictions and the effects.
admire the grace in which he spoke, both of God and unto him, by Christ Jesus
fervently; and his holy behavior (being much in deep abasement when he was
left alone) which increased savourly in him in the Country, especially upon
every solemn opportunity in the Word and Prayer with the Family; for finding
some recovery at last in London, but very low, lean and consumptive (the
weather and Sickness beginning to be very hot there) he was carried into the
Country to a Garden House in Battersey, where his Father fairly acquainted his
Landlord with his judgment in Religion, and troubles therefore, and his
determination yet to maintain meetings in the true Worship of God with his
Family and Acquaintance where ever he came, which was not only agreed unto, but
encouraged by the said Landlord, who with his Wife and ancient Father carried
it with all seeming respect insomuch as (the place also agreeing with them)
they were near agreement for a term of years, but in the mean time the said
Landlord, privately boasted, that he had Providence preventing Country settling
again.
been at Ewel, and had been prompted to give the said Vernon, etc. disturbance
(which yet he said he would not molest for all this world) which saying of his
being frequently repeated, caused some demu^ in the said Vernons settlement
there, ye^ he came (as he could be spared from hi^ Patients in London) as at
former time^ to his Children, but fearing the wea^ Child might be under the
influence thereof, he was seriously consulted, who desired earnestly to come to
London for the His desire of return to London, and why.
sake of the precious Word (though the Plague was not much abated there) rather
than expose his Father to come thither so often, or be absent from him, or engage
his Father into any other parts, having many sick under his Care; yea he was
much more set on being at London, that he might sympathize, as he said, with
the sufferings of the Lords poor visited People there.

Hereupon (finding also his strength came not forwards toward the end of the
Summer) they were again brought into London. Now it pleased God that the honest
Waterman that brought the Children to London, and the Servant that brought this
Child (being not able to go) in his Afflicting Providence work still for true
good to him.
arms to his Lodging, immediately fell sick and died of the Pestilence, which
aded to the serious mind of the Child, though yet he would not endure to hear
it called Melancholy, conducing much to his inward rooting in that which could
not be shaken.

The first Lesson from the Scriptures in the Family was from Eccles. 9. 10.
Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might; for there is no work,
nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go. From
which such grace, was through the Lords goodness granted to him, that he
received more powerful instruction from it, with great thanksgiving for it, as
that which had much helped and refreshed him, though his Sister and Brother
especially (in addition to former grace to them) were awakened thereby with
trembling, and in a few days after turned to the Lord with full purpose The
quickening effect of applying family instruction more particularly.
of heart, being further helped, by being called upon to call on the Name of
the Lord at their meat, which they had not formerly done, and were afraid to do
formally; so also did Caleb refuse to do it publicly then, fearing, he said,
he could not perform it acceptably: but immediately his heart smote him, and in
much humility voluntarily offered to do it as well as he could the next season,
arguing with himself, that it belonged to the Adoption to cry Abba, Father, and
to a Christian not to be ashamed of Christ.

This motion proved also to the great humbling of the other two, and wrought
mightily to self-abasement, in serious sense also, that the first fruit of true
Conversion was to call on the Lord in truth and not to be ashamed to confess
him and it was soon after manifested, that they had through Grace received the
Spirit of Adoption from him, and were helped to witness unto him, unto their
admission into his house with joy.

Caleb then craved a little Closet for himself, that he might seek the Lord in
secret more seriously; which was to his great satisfaction prepared, but by
daily decay to his outward, grew more sensible now of the Winter approaching,
but the Springtime to his inward-man was daily made manifest; God was pleased
to make his weak Bed his Closet, and the wearisome nights his seasons of much
serious consideration, brought to light daily in plenty of wisdom, employing
true turning to God most apparently, not recorded till the visible decay also
of his weak outward tabernacle, daily made us fear it was the anointing with
fresh Oil for his Burial: And then his Mother (admiring the Wisdom The motives
to his Mothers writing his sayings at last.
by which he spoke) was minded to gather up what fragments she could in writing
(without his observing it) as he daily dropped them in season with favor,
declaring him to be wholly a new man to the Lord, on whom he now began more to
see he believed to his support (though his seeming reserved and drooping
posture (after his first days rejoicing to see his Parents in London) he would
not own to be melancholy, but solemn meditation about his eternal estate, with
hope and some joy (yet mixed at first with more fears and doubtings;) nor could
any thing allure him into the Country again, though his Father offered his
company (the Plague and number of his Patients beginning to abate) because he
prized (he said) the opportunities of the Word in Soul-instruction preferred
before health or life, and the fruit which followed
London above life, or hopes of more health elsewhere, saying sometimes with
ardency, A day in thy Courts is better than a thousand elsewhere. And thus
began, first, to open himself to his Mother:

Mother, I now begin to see the vanity of all things in this life, and it is a
troublesome world; if I were assured of the Love of God, I would choose rather
to dye than live.

And having intermitting fits, with wearisom restless nights, he said to his
Mother about the beginning of the ninth month, in the morning, with joy;
Mother, I have seen the Face of God, and God has as it were taken me into his
Arms this night, and assured me of his Love; mentioning these Scriptures
following as his refreshment: And him that comes to me John 6.
I will in no-wise cast out. And, why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why
art thou disquieted Psa. 42. 5*
within me? hope thou in God, etc. Cease ye from man whose breath is in his
nostrils; Isa. 2.
saying, God had showed him he might not trust to man for his healing, but look
unto and trust in him; and whereas (said he) I was before very restless, that I
Grace gives ease and begets abaseme^t.
could not lie still in one place, yet afterward I was at great ease, and
could lie very quiet though I had no sleep. Then cried he out of his vileness
also, most humbly, and said, I see now how I was by nature plunged in sin and
iniquity, but my Lord Jesus Christ (which he uttered ardently) has been a
ransom for me: and spoke particularly of the vanity of his mind before his
sickness, and blessed the Lord for his Visitation. In the midst of one fit he
spoke affectionately; This is my comfort in my affliction, Psalm. 119.
Thy Word has quickened me.

Upon the fifth of the ninth month he had many fainting fits, but his faith and
hope was so maintained in the midst of them, that he said joyfully, Mother, My
flesh and my heart fails me, but God is ^he strength of my life, and my
portion for ^ver; joying in God, as his God, in va^iety of pithy expressions,
saying, How ^ad would it be with me now if God were not any God?

On the 7th of the ninth month his fit came as formerly, which at first was
grievous, causing him to cry out once, What shall I do? but he checked himself
presently and said, Why? I know God will help me, and I will trust in him;
admiring much his goodness to him. His Mother leaving him to lie quiet, sent
the Maid, but he desired to be left alone: and sometime after sending to him
again, he sent his Mother word, he was very sick, but God made it easy to him;
and when his Mother came, he told her he was made so joyful through the light
of Gods countenance, that though he was very weak as ever he was in his body,
yet he could lie still, and magnified the Lord greatly for his Grace in choosing
him, who was (he said) so very vile by nature; And now, Mother Solitary seasons
sweet, and slavish fear subdued.
(says he) God has taken away all my slavis^ fear; and whereas it was so with
me that I could not endure to be in a room by my self* now I care not how much
I am alone. He di^ particularly complain then of a frothy frame before his
Visitation, blessing the Lord again for bringing this Sickness upon him,
saying, For these light affliction^ 2 Cor. 4. 17.
which are but for a moment, work for me ^^ far more exceeding and eternal
weight ^^ Glory: and mentioned the words also i^ Rev. 7. 14. These are they
which came o^ of great tribulation, washing their robes in the blood of the
Lamb. He said, one sin of Little sins lie heavy on a sincere soul.
his at Ewel had often lain heavy upon his heart, namely his disobedience to
his Mother once, not going to bed when she had commanded it. She told him, she
hoped God had pardoned it and all other his sins in Christ, by whose Blood all
was done away, and she had both forgiven it him, and had forgotten it; which
much satisfied him, saying, he hoped God would set him on the Rock that was
higher than he; and if he pleased to spare him, he desired to be found obedient
to him, and desired to be joined to his People, asking his Mother if I. S. (who
had proposed himself, and he knew was suspended for further trial) came
forward, saying, It would be a sad thing if he should go backward in the things
of God. And then much admired the goodness of God to him, saying, How good is
it to have an Interest in Christ now! and how miserable is the contrary in such
a condition as I am in! and was much taken up with the consideration of
Eternity, so that his Mother marvelled at his sweet discourse at this time, and
thought his face even shined with the Great refreshment by Grace.
Grace of God that was on him: he continued in a very heavenly frame of heart
to the time of her going to bed; and desiring to restrain him from talking
more, having had little rest: he answered, that talk about common things he
found hurtful to him, and he wanted breath quickly; but to speak of the things
of God was not wearisome but refreshing.

And the Maid of a worthy Acquaintance in Prison coming to see him, he sent her
Master word, he loved him as he His encouragement to an honest prisoner.
was the Lord's Prisoner; and he was sure God would deliver his Prisoners.
Being asked how he knew that? he said he had his Word for it, which said, that
he would bring them from the East, and from the West, from the North, and from
all places whither they had been carried away captive; and he was sure not a
tittle of his Word should fail till all was fulfilled; And that the enemies of
the Lord he was sure should be destroyed, for the Word of the Lord had said it;
repeating then some words of the 47th of Isa. to prove it, and desired the Maid
to tell her Master also, that he was in the place where God would have him to
be, and desired him to stand fast in the Lord, and not give way to the
Adversary; and desire her Mistress to be content, and not to faint, but consider
that God was able to make up all her Husbands losses unto her.

His Father making ready two Larks for him, he solemnly invited his Father,
Mother, His lovefeast and entertain meant of friends.
Brother, Sister and Cousin to sup with him, asking his Father, whether it was
not Levi that made a Feast to invite his Kindred unto Christ, when he was
converted? and did in a gracious manner before them give thanks to the Lord,
both before and after, in very heavenly and savoury expressions. His Father
then conversed with him about the time and extent of his conviction of sin; he
said he thought that work was never through till the time of this last coming
to London; though he had prayed diverse times before, yet he thought it was not
so right; but since by his Fathers speaking to him and praying with him of
^ate, he was thoroughly convinced of his ^ndone estate by Nature, and upheld
much by that word, in John 6. 37. And ^im that comes to me I will in no-wise
cast ^ut: and that, Mat. 11. 28. Come unto me ^ll ye that are weary and heavy
laden, and ^ will give you rest. Also from Psalm.

And sinners shall be converted unto thee; ^bserving that God had mercy for
such as ^ad been transgressors and sinners. Thence^orth he continued daily
blessing the Lord from day to day for his goodness, but through his Mothers
occasions many pertinent passages were omitted. He did often this week speak
also of his faith in, and desire of the Ordinances of Baptism and
Church Fellowship, as his duty, wishing earnestly he might be baptized and His
desire of obedience.
joined to the Lord's Fold. His eldest Sister, and Brother also, about this
time propounded themselves, and were accepted upon a satisfactory Confession of
their Faith, in that Church were Caleb longed to come, lamenting that none
would take him up, being persuaded that he had His importunity to confess to
Christ after he believed.
strength to go to them, to witness to the Lord in his Congregation (though he
could not sit up an hour for several days before:) but seeing that denied him,
he prevailed with his Father to propose to the Congregation, that some might be
employed to hear him then in bed; and about twelve faithful Brethren being
nominated, and a liberty left unto others, (not being too many to anoy the room
by reason of his weakness) his Mother went up to see him before, to whom he
said earnestly, Mother I pray you do not hinder me, for I know God will be with
me, and enable me to be baptized; and I do not think I shall be the worse, but
rather better in my body; for I am assured God will not suffer any to receive
hurt in doing what he hat^ commanded them; but however, if I should die in it,
I would not omit it, for I would do what I could. And coming up to him again
(before the Friends appointed were come) he said, Mother, I think I have seen a
Vision since you went, and God has exceedingly comforted me, and given in such
strength, that if the Maid would have suffered me to rise, I am persuaded I
could have come to the Congregation my self; and expressed much longing for their
coming to him, who were appointed; soon after above twenty came to him, to whom
he affectionately complained, and to his Father, His complaint and impatience.
that no body would help him up to come unto them, being persuaded of more
strength for that, than for common occasions; and being set up in his Bed,
though before his sickness the greatest contest with him, (both by Parents,
Masters and Friends) was his shamefac'tness that he could scarce speak to a
man; he was in this (under much holy modesty) very undanted, not caring who or
how many heard him, and uttered himself to the Company (Candles being set on
the bed, and they round about him) after this manner following.

God speaks once, yea twice, yet man regards it not: Thus it has been with
me in two sicknesses; God spoke to me first in His Confession of Faith.
my sickness in London, about five years ago, and afterward at Ewel about two
years ago, when I grew serious, and it stayed with me for some time, and I
betook my self to Prayer in private, and think I had some Communion with God
therein.

But after I came to Newington and went
to School, I fell into company, and did
again lose those Convictions, falling to play among my School-fellows, as if
those convictions had never been, and now you see that made good in Job, The
bones that were not seen stand out. Since which time God has more than ever
set me into a serious consideration of my condition, which began when I was in
London at my Fathers house, before I went into the Country, but I had not so
much the savor of it after in the Country, though I was not there without
thoughts of it, and think I had some communion with God there, yet I lost much
of that time; but since I came again to London, things were more powerfully
revived upon my soul, and when I heard that word from my Father, speaking from
that Scripture, What thou find in thy hand to do, do it with all thy might,
etc. It did afresh set me into a pursuit after God, and I have been seeking
after him, and desire to follow him fully (here he made a stand)* It was then
asked him what he had to make out to us, that were to judge of his true faith
in Jesus Christ, that might fit him for the Lords Ordinances? He said, God had
said to him, He that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out. But it was
asked what he intended by coming? He said, to Christ by believing. He was
asked how he would come, and what need he saw of Christ? He answered, He knew
he was lost and undone by nature; that Scripture had been much upon his heart,
Ephesians. 2. And are by nature the Children of wrath as well as others, and that in
Adam all dyed. And that word, I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance; and he had been sensible of Psalm. 51. 13.
this. And that word in the Psalms had been of great use to him, And sinners
shall be converted unto thee. If sinners shall be converted (said he) there is
hope for such a one as I, and it is my encouragement to expect good from God.
Then it was asked him what sin he was sensible of, that he should make use of
that word, sinners should be converted unto thee? His answer was, HE SAW HE WAS
A SINNER IN ADAM BEFORE, AND HAD SPENT HIS TIME VERY CHILDISHLY,
AND PLAYED AWAY HIS CONVICTIONS, And had been frothy, which was his great sin.
Then it was asked what he did when he saw himself such a sinner? He said he
applied to God by prayer (as well as he could) as a poor soul that needed
Christ. It was asked then, what was the effect of that? He said, God did
relieve him and direct to Christ. Then it was asked, how long he was under the
sense of his sin, before he received this satisfaction in Christ. He answered,
he had some comfort in his Fathers house in London, when he lay sick before he
went into the Country, but he thought he lost much by being in the Country; but
being more serious in his mind since he came last up to London, considering
also what is said in Job 33. 21. The first Scripture that relieved him in his
distressed condition was, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden,
and I will give you rest. And afterward he laid hold on that word, He that
comes to me I will in no wise cast out. Also two other words that had been of
use to him for the confirmation of his hope in God. One was in Isaiah, I am he
that blotteth out thy transgressions for my name sake, I will not remember thy
sins. And that in the 73 Psalm. My heart and my flesh fails, but the Lord is
the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. And another in the 119 Psalm.
This is my comfort in my affliction, for thy word has quickened me. Then he was
asked how or to what extent he had received Christ? He answered, as King,
Priest and Prophet. Then it was asked, what he had and expected by Christ as a
Priest? He said, he had been an acceptable Sacrifice for him, and interceded
for him. Then it was asked, what he expected from him as King? he said, to rule
him and defend him. Then it was asked, if he would be subject to him in all
things? He answered, Yes, he desired to be so, for he was sure it was his
reasonable service. He was asked, what he expected as a Prophet? He answered,
That he should instruct and guide him, and none else. Then it was asked to what
end he tendered his Faith to the Brethren? He answered that he might be baptized
and joined to Christ's fold. Then he was asked what light he had in Baptism? He
answered, that that Scripture had been of use to him, He that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved. Besides Christ's example as a pattern to us; and
Philip and the Eunuch, instancing that in particular. If thou believe with
all thy heart thou may. Besides he mentioned the case of the Jayler. Then he
was asked, how he could adventure on such a work in such a condition? He said,
he would trust God, and do what he could* Then it was said, it may be he might
di^ in the water, what if he should die? He cheerfully then said, Why Death is
mine, if I die in it, and it is the work of God, and then it will be known that
Christ has some that will follow him in difficulties. But his Father replied,
though Child, it be so easy to you, it will be a trouble to us, we cannot so
easily part with you. Why Father (said he) If I should die, God can make it up
to you, and I shall go to Heaven. His Father then told him the Lord would
accept a man according to what he has, and not according to what* he has not.
He said he was sure he had strengt^ to be baptized, and God would give hi^
more. His Father told him, that the sam^ Promise that was made to them that
prayed in the Temple, when God gave the^ ability to be there, was made to them
th^^ had respect thereto when his hand hindered. And that which might justify
Timothy, being a member, to be absent* Miletum, when he was sick, might excus^
one from coming in being sick and unable to do what he would, wherein God would
accept the will for the deed. To which he readily answered. But indeed Father I
know I have strength, and could have come down to day if any one would have
taken me up, and God will give me more strength. It was asked him, what he
proposed by Baptism? He answered, I would obey all the Commandments of Christ,
repeating that Scripture, Repent and be baptized every one of you, in the Name
of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins. Then it was asked him, do you expect
righteousness by Baptism? O no, said he. Then it was queried, what he intended
by his being baptized? He said, to put on Christ and be obedient to him in all
things: He spoke also of being buried with Christ in Baptism, as dying to sin
and his own righteousness, etc.

Then was inquiry made into his conversation, and he had not been known ever
His former Conversation
to be addicted to any sort of vice, and seldom to play, being ever delighted
in Learning and Knowledge (and on idle days pleased greatly to be employed
under his Father;) only the Maid thought that at Newington (when he was at
School freed from his troubles at Ewel) about the time he complains of himself,
he was one time apt to be frothy in play, and sometimes to speak rashly, but
never knew any intention to lie, or that he purposly made a lie at any time;
but she was grieved more at his lightness for a little time there, than ever
before or since his coming from thence, and that he had often lamented it to
her himself.

Satisfaction being then declared by all that heard (in the point of his Faith)
it was agreed to spread the difficult case of his Baptism before the Lord in
solemn Prayer.

The next day, being the 13th day of the ninth month, in the morning, he said
His pursuit of convictions.
he was something better, and God had more strengthened him in order to doing
his duty; and once said, God bid him go forward; and though he seemed very
weak, yet he desired to be taken and laid in the bed, where prayer was to be
made all that day, and he attended with great reverence, bearing his fit with
great patience then: and usually indeed when he His patients and support.
was sickest in body, he would forget the sense of it, by remembering how well
he was made in his soul; admiring much that God was his God. Before the end of
the day he was carried back to his own Bed for repose, and his Father going to
him at night, he said, Father, pray you have His inquiry after prayer.
you come to any conclusion to day about my being baptized? which put his
Father (being yet doubtful, and thinking his weakness would quiet him therein)
to some strait what to answer, seeing his earnest expectation (having omitted
that day to debate it after Prayer) but (fearing to discourage him) instantly
replied, Child, we have not been, nor are not without serious thoughts of it,
and some do more incline to it, and we shall yet consult it seriously, if you
cannot be satisfied to defer He cannot be satisfied to defer obedience after
Conviction.
it. I pray you Father do (says he) for indeed I cannot be satisfied, and I
would fain be in Christ's Fold.

The next day, being the fourteenth, he seemed much weaker, but still minded
this (as his duty) with great desire to be doing it: but (having not been up in
many days before, but as aforesaid, from one Bed into another) his Father
asked him, how he could thiuk to go about such a work, seeing he was not able
to be got up out of his bed for a moment (his thigh His thigh measured, not
full 4. inches about.
being then not full four inches about) and he not being able to endure so much
as a Doub^et or Gown upon him, his bones were so bare. He answered very
cheerfully, He did believe God would help him Cheerfully shows all his
strength to prevail with his father that he might be obedient.
to rise to do that his work, and give him strength; and he had some already,
so that he was able to rise now, if his Father would have him. To which his
Father (thinking it might convince or refresh him) consented, and he was taken
up in warm Blankets, and sat by his Father on Pillows upright, well nigh two
hours; in which time he had very gracious converse, and with cheerfulness said,
Father, Boasts in God, admired grace for temporal and eternal mercy.
the Lord is my strength, of whom should I be afraid? Indeed you are my dear
Father, but I have a dearer Father in Heaven. How great mercy have I that I
should have such a tender Father in Earth, and in Heaven also! And seeing his
little Sister by him (of five years old, which the rest used to call Mother) he
said to her affectionately, Nancy, the Lord make you a Mother in Israel; His
holy converse.
O how do I long to see Christ formed in you! And looking to his Father, he
said, Why indeed, Father, she had many very good expressions in the Country,
and would say to the Maid in a morning, What mercy is it that we are alive, and
so many thousands taken away at London, and so many little Children. Then
speaking of the Adversaries to the People of God, he said, their time is but
short: And being asked, how he knew that? said, the Word of God says it,
mentioning that Scripture, Rev. 12. The Devil is come down with great wrath,
because he knows he has but a short time. Two Larks being roasted for Supper
His usual meal, and cheerful frame thereat.
(whereof he used to eat but a leg and a wing at the most) He did then very
fervently give thanks unto God with highest praise for that meat that endures
to eternal life, and humble thanks for his daily support, and mercies of every
sort, with great enlargement both for his work before him, and in praise for
what had been wrought for him and in him: and when he found he had sat up to
his full strength, went to his bed blessing the Lord, depending upon his Father
to come the next day to some conclusion about his further obedience.

On the fifteenth day his Father went into the Country, and meeting with some
Christian Friends, improved that opportunity for their earnest advice, with
prayer setting forth his great strait in the Friends advise his baptism.
case; and taking their answer one by one, upon what they had heard, both for
and against it, they unanimously advised the answering his desire therein,
leaving the issue unto the Lord, whose Wisdom they judged had engaged the Child
herein, beyond any reasonable objection that could be brought to oppose it;
only one of them desired that if he could be taken off by the persuasion of his
Father he might; but the most of them (as his father had done) having used all
Arguments they could to him before, declared they durst not further object. His
Father observing he had had nothing of it from man, but the contrary, and not
expecting his life ordinarily a day, and observing the Child's oppression
Considerations of his fathers consent.
also through delay herein, and chief revivings were always in the hopes of
obedience, (without vanity) counting of the worst, and exploding any thought of
righteousness or expectation of certain healing by it, yet expressing he could
not dye so comfortably in the neglect of it, and often saying, he would do what
he could, and was persuaded God would enable him that he should not be the
worse for it. His Father after many days revolving it in his mind, (the Child
being but too dear unto him) did yield his judgment also, to trust God with the
issue.

And then employed one to search diligently for an House near a River, where it
might most conveniently the next day be performed: but as he returned home,
calling on a Christian Friend, (whose employment in Physic was to be
respected) and finding him of opinion he could not Further objection. His
impatience to obey.
be carried thither alive, and sensible of the great reproach that would follow
if he dyed in the attempt, it so far renewed his thoughtfulness, as to entreat
that Friend to try if he could persuade the Child to defer it; and his Father
then going before unto him, found he had been weaker that day, yet still more
impatient to perform this, as his duty, before he dyed; having much longed for
his Fathers return, saying often, O that I might see my dear Father! When will
my Father come? And upon the coming of any up stairs, Methinks I hear the feet
of my Father: which was much his frame in his absence at any time, but now much
more by expecting resolution herein.

His Father coming, he soon sollicitously enquired for his consent, and
acquainting him with the concurrence of some friends to countenance it, he
rejoiced greatly; and smiling upon his Mother, he said with great ardency and
strength, Mother, His joy in consent.
to morrow I shall go abroad now to the glory of God, and I know he will
strengthen me. But his Father telling him, that a worthy Friend yet dissented,
who would come presently to confer with him: he abated his rejoicing, but
readily consented His joy abated, but the Objecter admitted
he should come, and was impatient till he came. The Friend being come, expressed
his joy in his faith, but gave the very reasons he had often heard from his
Father and others, why one so weak should be satisfied to forbear; and added,
that it was said, all Judea went out to be baptized, but he never heard that
any were carried out. Caleb replied, That Christ bid his Disciples go and teach
all Nations, baptizing them; but never said, if they be sick and weak do not
baptize them. And persisted in his persuasion of Gods assistance, although a
good Gentlewoman then also sought to diswade him; but after several speeches to
him, which seemed to weary him, he looked about him upon the Company, and
seemed to suspect they spoke but the mind of his father and others there
silent, on which he lay down as weary and discouraged, and said (even weeping)
Well, if my Father would not have me, I will not; explaining His great
discouragement
himself, if he was not thought a fit subject. The friend seeing his
countenance so changed, and supposing he grew weak beyond capacity of
performing it, (the present day also being tempestuous, and like to be so the
day following) said unto him, Well I see I trouble you, I shall say no more to
discourage you, but rest upon it and see to morrow if it be such weather, and
you find you have no strength to go you will be satisfied. To which he
replied, Yes, if I have not His confidence.
strength; but I know God will give me strength. His Father observing his great
dejection, added, It may be, Child, you think he spoke in our name, and you may
think we design to put thee off; but he only speaks his own mind in true love
to thee and the Lord, as we did, and it is now left to a good issue, as you
shall find your strength and the season to morrow, therefore if thou will, in a
few words commit it unto God. The Friend said, It may be he is too much spent:
but he accepted of the motion of his Father, and sitting up again, prayed very
pertinently to His prayer on the occasion.
the occasion, beseeching the Lord to strengthen him, his poor unworthy
Servant, in his Will, to his Honor, and help him against all the temptations
of Satan; praying for Sion, the reviving the Cause of the Lord, and helping
those who prosest him to maintain a good profession to his Honor; and if it
were his Will to give him a Good Day to morrow to witness to him, and order it
for his glory. At which the friend and all the company were well contented as a
good conclusion of it.

The night continued tempestuous, and he called often betwixt his slumbers to
know what weather? and the answer still seemed to daunt him; but the morning
appearing calm and Sunshine beyond any Weather favoreth.
day long before, confirmed him, and he was willing to rise often, as impatient
to go; but being deferred till noon, and finding his body but weak, he desired
not to rise till the very instant of going, but would not yet be withheld by
his weakness, saying, I will lie still that I may have strength to serve God.
One in his hearing, saying, The place for his Baptizing was very dangerous,
where an Aunt of hers was stoned by the Soldiers upon the like occasion; it
nothing terrified nor discomposed him, yet did not he manifest any vanity in
his strength, but behaved it as one fully resolved to obey to the uttermost,
His undauntedness with humility.
waiting on the Lord, composed for assistance, with his mind very humbly and
unmovedly set upon his will.

The Coach of a certain friend being lent him, and two other hired for the
company, some other friends going on foot; there was one went by to help in any
occasion of fainting expected; and he, with his Father, Mother and Gentlewoman,
(who the night before endeavored to dissuade) and his Brother who was to be
baptized with him, went in that Coach, where pillows were appointed for his
ease on the laps of two of them, but in stead of ^ying down, or being weary, he
desired to His extraordinary assistance and thankful observance.
sit up, and sat upright all the way cheerfully; and as soon as he came out of
the Gate, said heartily, Father, me thinks I begin to be very hungry, I would I
had something to eat; His Father said, there was Cordial, or Sack, or
Hartshorn-Jelly; but he refused those, and desired some bread if it could be
got, which he had not eaten of a month before. And a roll being obtained, he
ate heartily and drank after it, calling for more of it again by the way, and
found himself much strengthened, for which he praised God, as for fitness to
serve him fulfilling his hope.

His fit came not that day visibly as it had done for many before, but being
come to the place, as he sat by the fire, much company coming, his Father
whilst he was making ready spoke to them from Acts 21. 14. And when he would
not be persuaded, we ceased, saying, THE WILL OF THE LORD BE DONE. Giving a The
preparation.
brief account of the occasion, with the Objestions, and the Answers, and
Conclusion thereupon. Then desired now to witness to it as the will of God,
shewin the Commands for it, Signification of i^ and Ends that should be
proposed in it desiring they might be in them, and tha^* Presence which might
make it to both hi^ Sons the Communion of the Death and Resurrection of Christ,
to such a putting him on (in the virtue of all his Offices) as might manifest
their being as i^ were thenceforth new-died with, o^ tinged into Christ, to
their savor o^ him in all things, in newness of Nature and Life. And then
being carried down^ the Administrator (being ready) received him into his Arms,
but feeling him so light (and such a parcel of dry bones indeed) it tried his
faith unto some holy trembling; to whom the Child said, I am His grace in and
after the ordinance
not afraid; and was very conveniently and speedily baptized, his Father
standing ready with a warm Blanket to receive him, beheld him (going back) as
of a well pleased and indeed shining countenance, saying as soon as he could
speak, I am very well Father. And being laid dry on a bed, but his breath very
short through disturbance, in changing the clothes, he desired to lie a little
season, being very cold, and it seems had a little spice of a cold fit, which
began before whilst he was making ready (though his Father heard not of it till
after) and indeed a sentence of An humbling sentence of death.
death seemed to be upon him in his Fathers esteem, who whilst thanksgiving
was returned by the brother who baptized him, spoke often to the Child softly
to ask how he did, who said, I can scarce take my breath it is so short, but I
shall be better after I have lain a little; and in half an hour or thereabouts
sat up cheerfully, and himself His eminent reviving and reverent public
thanksgiving and prayer.
returned public praise solemnly before them all, for the assistance of such
dry bones in his service; alluding to the dry bones of Israel. Prayed likewise
earnestly for Zion, desiring the repairing her desolate and waste places, and
earnestly for their standing fast, who had put on Christ that day, or lately,
that they might never bring dishonor upon such a holy profession.

And being again in the Coach, seeing His joy in Gods assistance and experience
of ^^ when he could* not express it.
an old Friend there present, called to him, and entreated him to serve the
Lord: And being on his way, rejoiced in the goodness of the Lord that had
carried him (according as he believed) through his will. And now Father, it
will be seen, said he, that God is greater than man. And by the way home called
for warm Ale at an Inn, and continued better than in many days before,
acquainting his Father and Mother, That he had very great joy in Communion with
God coming up out of the Water, when he could not express it, his breath
failing through some water that went into his mouth (which he merrily said, he
had forgot to shut) and being come home, and laid in his bed, after a little
quiet he appeared more lively than before (nor had he any longer any cold or
hot fit that day, which had not missed to hold him several hours for many days
before;) and said then again to some friends, whom he desired might sup in his
room. Now I hope Mr. B. (meaning the friend who last dissented) will be His
hope on the behalf of God for the friend who last objected.
convinced that the power of God is greater than the wisdom of man, saying, he
was never so well in his life (viz.) in his soul, and better in his body than
before he was Baptized. He then desired he mightly with his dear Father and
Mother that night. And did acquaint them again, He thought he saw the glory of
God when he came up out of the Water, and was very sweetly refreshed though he
was not able to express it.

The next day, being before appointed for Thanksgiving in the Congregation,
upon the choice accounts of healing above fifty of them of the Pestilence, and
adding lately toward the repair of the Breach upon them (by the death of
twenty eight) above twenty, such as is hoped shall be saved, and that some of
them saw of their Children, through grace, walking in the Truth (then which, a
great Apostle 2 John 4. 3 John 4.
had no greater joy) His Father went to attend the Lord in his Courts on that
day, intending to revive the Lords afflicted Remnant with the account of this
gracious addition to their causes of Joy; but his Mother stayed with him; on
which day, it pleased God for the humbling of Another humbling providence, in
his renew ed weakness.
them and his people (who might else perhaps have been subject to have been
lifted up) to renew a fresh sentence of death upon him, by general
indisposedness, and subjectness to fainting, so that his Mother feared his
dissolution that day; she thought ^e appeared weak in the morning after his
Father was risen, and asked whether he should stay with him? he said, No
Mother, I had rather he should go about the work of the Lord; and he desired
his Father that he might be prayed for, that as he had put on Christ, so he
might grow up in him among his People. But after his Father was gone, he lay in
the forenoon as if he had ^een dying, and the Friend Mr. B. afore^aid coming
in, told his Mother he thought he was drawing on, and that there would be
little alteration seen in him till he died. She desired to know what she should
give him? He said if he were his own, he should give him nothing more; but
about noon he was again suddenly revived, to the great admiration and
refreshment of his Mother, to whom he said he was now pretty well, but troubled
with shortness of breath, and desired to dine with her and his sisters, and
then did eat more with them, with cheerfulness, then he had done at once many
days before. He took then occasion to say to her, He had resigned himself to
the Lord, His tender care of the Name of God, and his Parents, if he should die
so soon after Baptism.
and Life or Death was alike to him, but my greatest trouble, if I should die
now (said he) is, the scandal that, I am afraid, will be cast upon my Father
and Mother, by the world, which, he said, did lie in wickedness, who would say,
they had killed me by suffering me to be Baptized; whereas I am not the worse,
and I know if I die now, I should have died if I had not been Baptized, and
afterward he said, I am willing to live if it please the Lord that I might
serve him among his people. But had afterward several faintings that day, and
spoke little; but toward the Evening enquired for his Father, who had occasion
to stay later than he intended, hearing he was better than when he left him, by
a Messenger he sent, who received the account of his cheerful condition about
noon, but not the alteration. But calling upon the Friend aforesaid, who had
seen him in the Morning, was acquainted with his opinion, he was drawing near
his end, when at he hasted to him, and found him very low indeed and cold, and
understanding his Mother had omitted (upon the advice of the friend) to use any
thing, being tender of disturbing him, his Father (a little grieved thereat)
applied to his Lips and palms of his Hands, the refreshing he used to be
relieved with, and inwardly a little of his usual inoffensive revivers in a
small quantity, and caused cherishing fumes to simper on coals in his Chamber,
which with the Lords blessing (together with the content of his Fathers
company) greatly restored him, and he was cheerful and disposed to converse.
His Father asked him then whether he was not sorry he had been baptized now? He
His stedfastness under weakness
answered no, he would not but have been baptized for all this world, and said
he was sure he had got no hurt by it, but told his Father he had been very ill
that day. And when he could scarce speak, he was so weak, he heard his Sister
Nancy say, Who shall have Calebs Bird when he is dead? But, said he, Father, I
shall not think of dying yet, but if I do, I will give it to my Sister Betty,
who has none, for Nancy has one already. His Father asked him, whether he
thought he His familiarity with death by Grace.
should live then? I know not, Father (said he) for I have resigned my self to
God, but he is able to recover me. His Father having prayed once with him
before, he desired him again at parting to recommend him to the Lord, and he
left him cheerful: He had but little rest, (...); and in the morning said to
his Mother, I have been dying twicc this night; and to his Sister, Tell my
Father I live still; who when he came to him, found him in a sweet composed
frame, and disposed to converse, saying, His pity for the World, and disesteem
of their glory.
Father, how does the World lie in wickedness! And now Wisdom calls to her
Children, How long ye simple ones will you love simplicity, and fools hate
knowledge? And speaking another time of the joy of the Wicked, he said, there
will be shameful spuing upon all their glory.

His Father having occasion to write in the room, did not presently entertain
discourse with him, but after some time of His modest bespeaking holy converse
to express his sense of mercy with joyfulness.
silence, he said, Father will it not disturb you to talk with me? He said, No
Child, I will come to thee. Then he said, Father, I find my self greatly
comforted in God; I was once without him, and now see what it was if God should
have cut the thread of my life: and now I wish I might warn others, and do good
whilst I live. His Father breakfasting with him, he did in a very lively sort
enlarge upon the sure mercies of God to his soul, praising him much for his
goodness in enabling him to do his Will, and for his Parents tenderness to him,
begging the Lord would not suffer it to go unrewarded; and that if it might
please him to spare his life, he might be helped to acknowledge it; and praised
God, that he should have a tender Father in Heaven, and tender Parents on Earth
too, in such a condition.

That day he gave all his toys to his He puts away childish things.
little Sisters, saying, if he should live he hoped he should never mind such
things. His Father told him, the Congregation had condescended to appoint a
Church-meeting with him that evening, that he might have the privilege of the
Lord's Supper, wherein to the eye of Faith Christ would be evidently set forth,
crucified before him, for his consolation; which he accepted thankfully, and
said he would lie still to preserve his strength thereunto: and when the time
came his father spoke briefly from John 10. I am the door; by me if any man
enter in he shall be saved. He attended Paproacheth reverently to the Lords
Supper.
with very great diligence, and partook with great reverence, sitting up in his
bed to attend, and afterward humbly desired thanks might be returned to the
Congregation for their love and care herein.

The next day, being the first day of the week, his Father tarried at home with
him, and enlarged upon the latter part of these words, ( viz.) And shall go in
and out, and find pasture: setting forth in more variety what a soul (entering
in by Christ as the door, and going out of himself, the World, etc.) found in
God to feed upon, especially upon the new Covenant in Christ's Blood: and in
the end he said, God has comforted me greatly with what His comfort increases
in the Word and Prayr.
has been now spoke; And going to rest cheerfully, entreated that company
might not have recourse to him, saying, he would keep his strength now for the
next day, to enjoy the benefit of some Friends who intended Prayer in his
Chamber; and he had a good night.

On the twentieth he was comfortable in the morning, and brake fast cheerfully
with his Father and a Friend, returning thanks very graciously, and then
reverently attended in Prayer the most of that day, being filled with the sense
of the love of God, and saying sometimes to his Mother fervently, God loves me
Mother, and sometimes I love the Lord. But in the afternoon the Friends retired
into another room, that he might take rest, but his little Sisters remaining in
that room, he called to the eldest of them (being seven years old) and said
unto her, Mary, His seasonable and serious Questions to his sister, and the
success through Grace.
come hither, have you got any good by being prayed for to day? observing to
her she had been particularly mentioned in prayer. She answered, I hope I have.
Said he, Mary, if you should dye now, what do you think would become of you?
She said, I do not know. He replied, it is your great concern to follow God
that so you may know, with many other words enforcing it: and it is observable,
that from that time she has
been serious so as never before, and pondred his sayings in her heart.

At night his Father supped with him upon a small Bird, and afterward he
returned thanks; a Physician coming in whilst he was speaking, and looking in
at the Beds feet with his hat on, he enlarged his desires, that God would
strengthen him His prayer after meat.
his poor creature, that he might never be ashamed to confess him before men,
who-ever they were; and desired his Parents might be helped to resign him up to
God, and that he might always have refuge for rest unto Christ; being earnest
for Sion, with sense of her low estate, (as he was almost in every prayer:) and
that night he rested well. Some Friends had thoughts on the advice Iam. 5. 14.
compared with Mark 6. 13. wherewith his Father acquainted him, and he desired
time seriously to consider of it; and the next day, being the 21 of the ninth
month, he seemed yet more hopeful, and then desired a days time longer to
weigh it; but being told, a Friend that might be concerned about it, would not
be in Town after that day, he then gave his thoughts by way of Query His answer
about Jam. 5. 14. being doubtful therein.
humbly, Whether it should be administered when one was mending before? being
careful lest it should reflect on so solemn an Appointment; for he felt himself
now mending, and therefore had the less clearness therein, but if he grew
worse, he should have further thoughts of it. And after he invited that Friend
and his Father to Breakfast, when he prayed and praised God, to the great
refreshment of their souls.

His Mother being gone down with his Father, and he feeling some weakness,
desired then to rest; but noise being made among the little ones, to his
disturbance, and his Mother coming up heard, him speak to the Maid and them
with some How he expressed his provocation:
trouble, in these words; The Word of the Lord says, To him that is in
affliction pity should be showed by his Friends; but you take the ready way to
hurt me: It is well for me I have such a tender Father and Mother, or else it
might be worse; and complained a little of them to his Mother, (which he never
did before) and said, his strength failed him, but God would never fail him.
His Mother reproving the disturbers, left him to rest, which he did; but
awakening toward night, expressed Admires Grace, and signifies his Assurance.
much admiration at the goodness of God to such an one as he, and said his
bodily strength was little, he was upon the brink of the grave, and his breath
almost gone if he spoke but a little; but he knew if he should die, he should
be received into the Arms of the Lord. And after a little time grew pretty
cheerful, and desiring to sit up in His reconcilement and entertain meant of
those he had repro ved for molesting him.
his bed, called his Cousin and little Sisters about him (who had partly
occasioned the noise of his disturbance) and with his own hand cut out some of
his Jelly and gave unto them, intending himself to sup with his Father, but he
being prevented of coming up to him, he gave some of his small Bird also to
them all, and then spoke to them (when they had supped) in these words: O the
sweetness of the Love of God The 2d course for their souls.
did you experience it as I do, you would esteem it more than all the pleasures
you can enjoy. And with vehemence (to his Mother, Servants, Cousins and Sisters
admiration) said further, O my dear Sisters, I long to see you converted! O the
damned in Hell! how would they improve it, but it is too late: O therefore
whilst you have time, before the evil
day comes, take hold of the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, and make sure of
the Love of God: What will you do upon a sick bed without it? O my dear
Sisters! my bowels yern for you: I hope I am sure of the Love of God; The sweet
fruit of his own assurance humbly brought forth, to encourage them to feed.
and if I dye this night, I shall go to the Lord, and be with him for ever. O
that you knew the sweetness of the Love of God as I do! Christ will make you
rare without compare. And now I call to mind some of Mr. Chares Verses, says
he, (whereof having many more in his memory, he repeated to them these)

If comeliness I want,
His Beauty I may have, His whole some melody at the end.

I shall be fair beyond compare,
Though cripled to my grave.
And if above it all
To Christ I married be,
My living Springs, O King of Kings,
Will still run fresh in thee.
His Mother then said, And do you remember, Child, what he says of young
^saacs? Yea, Mother, said he; and then ^urther repeated some of these
concern^ng youth.

Young Isaacks who lift up their eyes,
And meditate in fields;
Young Jacobs who the Blessing prize
This Age but seldom yields.
Few Samuels leaving youthful plays,
To Temple-work resigned;
Few do as these, in youthful days
Their great Creator mind.
How precious Obadiahs be!
That feared God in youth:
How seldom Timothy's we see,
Versed in the Word of Truth!
Few Babes and Sucklings publish praise,
The Avengers rage to bind!
O then in these your youthful days
Your great Creator mind.
Few tenderhearted Youths, as was
Josiah Iudahs King;
Hosannah in the highest alas
How seldom Children sing!
Youths rarely ask for Zions ways,
They Had rather pleasure find;
But O in these your youthful days,
Your great Creator mind.
What Children Pulse and Water choose
Continually to eat,
Rather than Conscience should accuse
For tasting Royal meat?
Should you not bow a King to please,
Though tortures were behind?
Oh then in these your youthful days
Your great Creator mind.
Much more with affection and fervency he uttered to them, and then (being
weary) he lay down to rest, and said, Oh Mother, slighty Convictions are
dangerous; temptations lead to sin, and sin bereaves of all good. And to the
Maid (who had kept him from his Cradle, and instructed him till he came to his
Latin tongue) HONOR, I hope God will work a work of Grace in you, and make
you that you shall not be ashamed to confess him; and then blessed the Lord for
his own mercy in his Parents, with many endeared expressions His gracious
farwell at parting with his Guests.
(especially for their care of his soul:) afterward said unto them all, The
Lord keep you, I desire that the Lord may keep you all. And his Mother staying
by him, he said, Mother, I love your company dearly, and so speedily fell
asleep, and slept comfortably the greatest part of that night.

The two and twentieth day he brakefast with his Father, and (as their manner
was of late) one of them began, and the other ended with blessing the Lord;
wherein he very thankfully owned his great supports from God, and ardently
desired if it pleased the Lord to spare him, it might be to serve him
faithfully in his Generation. That day he was persuaded to rise a little in
Blankets, whilst his Bed was made, when be said, I feel to my self like a piece
of earth, When he was weak then he was strong*
I am as nothing; and admired greatly the power of God keeping him alive. Being
laid again in his bed, he said. I feel my self very weak, but I am kept alive
by the mighty power of God; saying, Father, God is very good to me indeed: the
Lord loves me I am sure. And to his Mother, Oh how am I refreshed, but if God
were not my God, what should I do now. His Mother asking him how he had done to
day, he said, Indeed Mother I have been supported very much to day; Oh this is
a troublesome world, a vain world, nothing the eye beholds can stand us in
stead; I can now triumph over death, God has enabled me; I would not now be
without what now I enjoy for all the world. Mentioning that Scripture, Greater
love can no man show, than for a man to lay down his Life for his Friend, etc.
And that, blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, they rest from their
labors, etc. And expressing his affection to his Parents (which he did often)
he asked his Father affectionately; the meaning of that Scripture, But for a
good man, one would even dare to die; and so applied to sleep in much peace and
joy.

The twenty third day he complained of some weakness in his body, but said, He
was strong in God, but desired some living creature might stand on the bed by
him, to prevent Melancholy thoughts, when he could not rest, being asked,
what? He said, a young Lamb, Pigeon, Rabbit or any His hancor after a living
Creature and why.
thing; but a Squerril being named, (hoping it might easily be procured) he was
earnest for that, having, he said, never seen any but once in the field. Some
were immediately employed to procure one (at any rate) but all failed, and his
mind seemed to run so much that day, and the next upon it; that his Father
said, why do thou so much desire it? He said, I find my self inclining to
melancholy, and I think such a thing would be pretty company for me, and
therein I may see the workmanship of God, but I trust nothing shall evermore
take off my heart from God.

At breakfast with his Father he had savoury discourse, some of which his
Father set down, when he went out from him in his own words, whilst they were
in memory His disposition suitable to true resignation.
( viz.) Oh Father, God greatly supports me, I would not be without the love of
God now for all this world; if I die now I hope I shall meet with you in
Heaven, which is best of all. His Father said, Do thou think thou shall die?
He answered, I cannot tell Father, but I expect it, for I have resigned my self
to God. His eldest Sister coming to him, he said, God has done for us, what
man could not do, (with his eyes lifted up with holy admiration) saying also,
Oh how said is it with those that have not God. That day being taken up a
little, to have his bed made, and finding it troublesome (all his bones being
sharp as if they would pierce his skin, having no flesh to interpose in any
part) he uttered a word savouring of more weariness and A little impatience
begetting speedy and deep abasment through grace.
impatience than any before, namely, It is better for me now to dye than to
live. His Father said, nay Child, be not weary of ^he Lords hand, who has done
so great things for you. He accepted the Exhor^ation, so as to be presently
abased for it, and did then (upon occasion of taking refreshment) solemnly pray
for pardon o^ the rash word he had spoken (as he called it) humbly begging more
patience that h^ might be kept from repining; and owning the great goodness of
the Lord to him his poo^ unworthy servant.

Being laid in Bed and asked how he did* he said, His Bones were sore, and he
w^^ weak in his outward man, but strong in God* and indeed he very seldom
complained o^ sighed. And when at any time his Father His usual ease in pain.
did remember him what God ha^ done for his soul, he presently forgot hi^ pain,
and was refreshed with very sensible acknowledgement of the favor o^ God; so
that sometimes when he would say his Bones were sore, his Father would reply, I
Child but your soul is not; t^ which he would say, No Father, God ^^ very good
to me, and dwelt so thereon as t^ forget pain. And speaking of the Lov^ of God,
would say often cheerfully, now ^^ experience it: He had a pretty good night*

The 24th day in the morning he wa^ pretty cheerful, and breakefast with his
Father, but eating little, he said, I do n^^ live by bread only. His Mother
asking hi^ consent to go abroad, he was very desirous of her stay with him, but
when ^^ heard it was for prayer, he did more freely part with her. His Father
sitting in the Room, he said, Father, God has settled my mind greatly this day,
and I have nothing His settled mind in supposing dissolution.
^ow to hinder my joy in Christ Jesus. But Father (said he) Though God has
sweetened death to them that he loves, yet do not you think that death is
troublesome? His Father replied, Yes Child, a little to the flesh: to which he
answered cheerfully, Yea Father, and was no more solicitous. He was willing in
the Evening some Christians might meet in his Room, and (finding himself weak)
desired them to pray for him; being asked what, he desired, he said, That he
might live in Gods sight. His Father asked him, if he did still free^y resign
up himself to the Lords dispose ^or Life or Death? he answered cheerfully, Yea
Father. His Father further asked him if he had met with any assault against
^^t? he answered, No, he had not: But shortly after he had a faint fit, in
which he called to his Father to come quickly to him, and strove under
short^ess of breath; but as soon as he could ut^er himself, He admired God as
his God, who had dealt wonderfully with him; and said, He would trust in him.
Again repeating, Psalm. 73. 26. My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the
strength of my heart and my portion for ever. And being laid to rest by his
Mother, he said, Good night Mother, I will go to sleep in Jesus.

The twenty fifth, having had little res^ in the night, he was weaker, and
without appetite to any thing, yet desired to ea^ something with his Father;
and because he liked nothing but flesh, a Partridge was made ready, but when he
sat up to eat, was seized with a violent tediou^ fit of Coughing, which
wearied him, and disposed him to rest, laboring long under Sudainly grows
weaker, yet strong in God.
shortness of breath, making him sig^^ (which he used not to do) but being
asked often how he did? still answered Weak, or very weak in body, but strong
i^ God. He was averse to taking any thing but his Father desiring him sometimes
t^ take some pectoral refreshing, he would say, Yea, dear Father, I will never
be disobedient to you, nor my dear Mother (having indeed delighted to serve and
please the^ before play at any time.)

At night he desired to sup with his Father, but finding his stomach fail, he
asked, If he might not have a Sillabub; which was speedily made, and he drank
of ^ warm to his relief, and his Father sat u^ with him late, but having (at
twice) too easily obtained some of the cold curd which he hankred after, (when
his Father was gone to bed) it fell out that night An humbling providence by
the hand of one who dearly loved him.
proved very restless, and worse than any to him before; at which his Father
being grieved, next morning (especially with the Maid that gave it) he observed
it to his very great grief at himself for taking it; which his Father earnestly
endeavored to assuage, Expressing that it was not any thoughts of his
disobedience that troubled him in the least, for he had been a pattern in
dutifulness, but he was grieved that any thing should be hurtfully applied to
him, so very low before; not (said he) but that others in Consumptions please
themselves more in hankering after many things hurtful to them, but that he
longed his precious Tabernacle, redeemed of the Lord, (and so resigned to, and
supported by him) might not by any means be exposed (through the indiscretion
of any) under his care; but expressed his hope, that if he would try to get rest,
it would do him no hurt. At which he seemed to be quieted, and then his Father
did, by his free consent (after short prayer with him, and affectionate
expression of love to him)* go abroad, and retu^^ing sooner then he intended,
found the poor Child in his absence had been an hour much lamenting himself, as
having been disobedient to his dear Father, disturbing himself greatly, that he
should desire and take what he knew his Father (considering the toughness of
his phlegm, and weakness of his stomach) durst not allow him; and An hour of
temptation.
in this molestation of his mind, Satan came to discontent him, and cast in his
fiery assault, causing him to say to his Mother, Mother, will God charge the
Temptation of the Devil upon me? She answered, No, being not consented unto,
they were not his sin, nor would they be charged upon him; and asked him what
temptation he had had? He said, To curse God and die; but said he, I have
resisted it. But lamented his disobedience, saying, He thought it would grieve
him whilst he lived. A good providence to his and his Parents great satisfaction
His Mother sought much to satisfy him, hut he was never so molested before,
aggravating it against himself, as it had been against his Father, so careful
of him. But when he heard his Father was come so soon again (through violence)
unexpectedly, he was very glad, and in haste to see him, at whose coming up he
mentioned it again as his sin and trouble; but having further full testimony of
his Fathers true freedom from either displeasure to the Maid, or grief more
about it, he was very much eased, and fell into cheerful discourses, but often
coveted and pleased himself in his Father's expressions of affection to him;
however he had but a weak day, and the next night also very restless and faint,
but still acknowledged very sensibly the great goodness and mercy of God, as
his God.

On the 27th, in the morning, he was His fresh* revivings and humble desire for
life to gracious ends.
yet more revived, and did eat again with his Father, and then prayed after a
holy sort, resigning himself to God, yet desiring with submission, he might
live, and warn others to serve him; but however, that he might follow God fully
so long as he lived; and was very thankful for his supports, which he desired
humbly might be continued, especially to his soul, to the praise of the Lord.
But about three he had another violent and tedious fit of coughing, which Great
patience.
even spent him, under which he expressed admirable patience and great
satisfaction in the Love of God, saying often (as his cough would admit him)
the Lord loves me, and sometime added, I am sure: but his Cough being over, he
applied to slumber, therein groaning much, but in intervals he said
affectionately, Father, you be my dear Father. His Father asking him how he
did? he said, Very ill, Father, indeed in my body, but well in God. His Father
said, Will you have a little Cordial, Child? he said, No, I thank you, Father,
God is my Cordial. About eight at night His great Cordial.
he had a very faint fit, his Mother asked then, how his faith in God was? he
answered, Strong, I hope, and desired his Father to pray for him; after which
he seemed to get a little strength, but had a very bad night again.

The 28th day in the morning he was weak, and not willing to eat as formerly,
but desiring to lie still and endeavor sleep, rested a little; and being
relieved, he was willing to have his head shaved again, (by which he formerly
found benefit) which was done without much trouble to him, to his satisfaction;
and then desiring rest, his Father sat by him till it was late, and left him
better than in two days before: after some slumber (expressing his dear love
to his Father) he desired the Maid that lay with him, might be hastened to bed,
when he said to her, let us sleep together, but could not rest till about two
in the morning, and then slept quietly about an hour, and awakened, as it were
refreshed, saying to her cheerfully, now we have slept together indeed; but
instantly a fit of coughing came on him, whereat he said (which he never His
notice of death after refreshing rest, and his behavior in time of departure
particularly.
had done before) Now I think I shall die: she said, No Child, I hope not yet:
he answered, Yes, I am going; upon which he consented his Father might be
called up: who coming instantly to him, about three in the morning, he said,
Father, God be with you, I am going now. His Father (supposing tough phlegm
arising almost choked him, and slipped back) made as if he would be giving
something to help; which he perceiving, earnestly said, Oh pray Father, do not
give me any thing; for indeed, Father, I cannot take any thing but it will stop
my passage. The Maid said, he tried, and could get nothing down, which he
confirmed: his Father being not able to refrain (seeing his alteration in
countenance, and violent labor by cough) gushed out into tears, which the
Child seeing, cried out also, and (looking toward him) said earnestly (with
weeping) Pray Father do not weep, but pray for me, I long to be with God; and
desiring again his Father might pray with him, he applied to it briefly (in too
much trouble;) the Child strove much to refrain coughing, laid himself back a
little, looked up, and seemed to join fervently; his Mother being also then
called, came in quickly, to whom he said, (looking upon her when even spent)
Farewell, dear Mother, now I am going; and to a Friend coming in, Farewell, dear
Sir: and the phlegm (as it was thought) coming up into his mouth, but carried
back again through the length and toughness thereof: his Father (contented with
his Mother and the Friend's talking comfortably unto him) was in great care for
him, and (unwilling to give the Oil of Almonds and Syrups at hand, through his
aversness to it) ran down for something inoffensive for his relief, and coming
up instantly, saw him thrusting, first, his finger, and then his whole hand
into his mouth, to catch the phlegm, and (hearing or seeing his Father coming)
cried, quickly (as if he expected to take something) O Father, what shall I do!
but immediately (as his Father came to him) lay back, and looking up, said,
God, God, endeavoring to have uttered more; but (without groan) his breath
failing (as if choked with phlegm) he seemed as by consent, to yield up the
Spirit, leaving to the last a very living evidence of the His Parents evidence
upon their experienc of him.
most general change and lively turning to God wholly that his Parents have
experienced, whereof these fragments (gathered from him at last) are but a
taste of the great Grace granted to him in all heavenly wisdom and knowledge,
who being dead yet speaks, to the great reproof of his Parents in their
shortness to him (and of him) under so much longer profession, and for more
full improvement of him, whose swift race (toward his latter end) is
impartially set forth (uprightly) for the sake of Youth, and elder than he,
that may not yet meet Death (with his Comfort The true end of publishing this
after his death, being his own end of desiring life.
and Composure) so considerately, hoping one good end of the Lords removing him
may be for the more safe setting forth this part of an account of him (through
grace) to the provoking of many to turn to the Lord, which was the greatest end
of his desiring to live, beseeching all wisely to consider it, and duly ponder
Eccles. 9. 10. What soever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might;
for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave
whither thou go: which was through God of great advantage to him.

By his near Relation.
An Acrostick.
CAll to my Burial my Aquaintance young,
And let them hear what Grace has done for me;
Let them allured be by my sweet Song,
Eternal, through Unchangeable Decree,
Because (through Grace) by Faith I am made free.
Unto the highest praise of God on high
Exalt the Prince of Peace, in whom I rest;
Redeeming Mercy made my soul desie,
Not only Death, but every other test,
Of my unfeigned Love, at twelve years old;
No weakness, wit, nor fear could make it cold.
In proof whereof bare bones did sacrifice
Unto my Lord the way this world despise.
And had I lived Methusalem's long day,
Unto Him should my Soul subjection pay.
Pro. 10. 7. The memory of the Just is blessed.
I. V.

An Anagram.
CALEB VERNON.
Nue Noble Race.
A New and Noble Race he ran so fast,
That he o're-took the swiftest Saint at last.
He ran in earnest to the Refuge City,
And therein found escape, defense and pity;
And underneath the Everlasting Arms,
Which did support his Soul from fear of harms.
Indeed he ran, as Caleb ran to find
The promised Land, when Israel lagg'd behind.
His Teachers wanted strength to keep him pace,
He out-ran Parents in his Noble Race:
As if the Angels had lent him a Wing
To run with them in Love to Isreal's King.
Like the young Lad which Zechary sets forth
With measuring-Line, wherein did lie his worth:
In which the Angels ever do retain
Their glory, as their waiting does remain,
Environed in the Word Psalm. 130. 20
and Will of God,
Which was indeed dear Caleb's choicest food.
And seeing he so followed his dear Master,
I would not faint although he ran much faster;
But for my Children and my Soul must weep,
That we instead of running so, do creep.
In twelve days and an half from Iordans joy,
He did more than in twelve years ere did I.
But grace perhaps did each day for a year
Seal him a Pattent in return of Prayer
For Life, chiefly, that Converts he might make,
And took him hence for the Election sake;
That safely this might be set forth of him,
And he not hazarded hereby to sin.
For few can bear his praise, and few reproof,
But both, I trust, hereby shall now help Youth
To their Conversion, like to Caleb's; then
To this dispose of him I Will add, Amen.
But until then excuse me if I weep,
That yet I live, and Caleb fell asleep.
For else I fear great evils yet to come,
And such removed that Judgment may have room.
But may the Mouths of Babes Hosannahs fill,
The Enemy and the Avenger must be still.
The Lord make Caleb's Cluster then in truth
The first fruits of his harvest amongst Youth,
And stir up Aged too to swifter pace,
By this Example in the Noble Race.
J. V.

From a very dear Relation,
An Acrostick.
CAn Caleb stay when God will have him go
Away to Caleb, and himself also?
Lo, he a Child, yet Christian did become
Er't pleased his Father for to call him home;
But was no sooner newborn but he dies
Unto the Lord a most sweet sacrifice;
E'ne unto him, that made him twice to live,
Render he did what er'e he had to give;
Name, Spirit, Soul and Body, though but poor,
Offered up all, What could a Prince do more?
Now to the Lord alone be praise therefore.
W. A.

An Anagram.
CALEB VERNON.
An Noble Cure.
THou Lord on him have wrought A Noble Cure,
From World, Flesh, Devil, thus to set him free,
His Soul full sweetly to thee to allure,
To make him happy to Eternity.
A Cure so Noble that it shall remain
On days to come, to praise of thy rich grace,
Who never undertook'st a Cure in vain
Among the Seed of holy Jacob's Race.
Physician of great value Lord art thou,
And virtue also from thy Wings is found,
For healing sin-sick-souls, none else knows how
As thou, of every desperate mortal wound,
Which to thy praise for ever shall redound.
W. A.

From his own friend, and his Fathers friend.
CALEB VERNON.
Anagram.
Bor'e unclean.
Nue clean Robe.
Through Adams nature I Unclean was bor'e;
Through Grace (betimes) Christ's Nue clean Robe I wore.
BY Nature in my first estate
A wretched Babe was I,
In open field, deserving hate,
In blood and filth did lie.
And in that state I did delight,
As in my sport and play,
And therein would with all my might
Have wallow'd night and day.
And though from gross enormities
I might by men be cleared,
Yet to my Maker's searching eyes
Defiled I all appeared.
Though Nature with a pregnant wit,
And comeliness adorned me,
And Education adds to it,
To teach, restrain, reform me:
What proved it but a feigned paint
On much defiling sin?
It did not kill, but lay restraint,
Where outrage would begin.
A pleasant picture to the eye
I hereby might appear,
By which, to close Idolatry
Some might be drawn, I fear.
But God (that faithful he might be)
That deadly snare would break,
And that right early unto me
His Grace and Peace might speak.
With tenderness, on these intents,
He strips me of my Vail,
My costly Cov'rings all he rents,
My Countenance makes pale:
My Comeliness to rot he turns,
My witty words to groans;
My moisture up with drought he burns,
Discloseth all my bones.
And in a day of public ire
Me these rebukes did meet,
When Pestilence, as burning fire,
Slew thousands at his feet.
I, who to blossom did begin
With such fair paint before,
Now, as the early fruit of sin,
This character I wore.
Despised Idol, broke to earth,
A potsherd, no way fit
To take up fire out of the hearth,
Or water from the pit.
But though near corruptible dust
This curious Frame was brought,
By gracious pleasure stay I must
Till noble works were wrought;
Till deep convictions of my sin;
Till Jesus formed in me;
Till, as my portion, I begin
The Lord's dear Christ to see.
Till all my sins were done away,
Till terrors made to cease;
Till heart and mind could sweetly stay
In thought surpassing peace:
Nay, till in an accepted day
My homage I could bring,
And in his instituted way
Devote me to the King:
Till Christ put on, his Truths allowed,
His dying marks embrace;
His Cause confessed, his Works avowed,
His Sufferings boldly face.
His Promises for a portion took,
Saints for companions chose,
And on him set a fixed look
For future free dispose.
Since then in an unusual way
Rich Grace has thus arrayed me,
And in my young (yet dying) day
With glory overlaid me.
What properly could I desire,
But now dissolved to be,
And in this Marriage choice attire,
My Bridegrooms face to see.
In Kedar who would not bemoan,
If there he must reside,
Ah wretched man! who would not groan
In sinful flesh to bide?
Who 'ld lodge in such a nasty shade,
As torturing tottering stands,
That has a Palace ready made
Not with polluted hands,
Where sin, temptation, suffering, strife
shall fully be destroyed,
All dying swallowed up of life,
And God at full enjoyd.
What aile my Parents then to weep,
My friends to be dismayed,
Relations such a do to keep,
To see a Child unray'd?
Its filthy garments laid in dust,
It laid repose to take,
Until the morning, when it must
With Royal Robes awake?
May this a witness be to Truth
In this backsliding day,
A Crystal Mirror unto Youth
How to amend its way.
A. C.

By an old and honorable Disciple of Christ (in the same Congregation) who
dearly loved him, and is since also himself fallen asleep in Jesus, and in the
Hope of the Resurrection to glory by him.
I Cannot! I adorn thy Sable Hearse
With any lofty straind Heroic Verse,
Nor blaze thy praise with Heraldry Divine;
This thou at chievd'st among the Saints betime,
And left'st thy Name an Odor sweet to those
That with Christ Jesus and his Truth did close.
Thou likewise an Example wast to all
That knew thee rightly, were they great or small.
Christ gave thee grace, by grace thou did conceive
A saving Faith, by saving Faith did live.
At twelve years old indeed thou could dispute,
And readily some learned ones confute.
A truly Calebs Spirit was thee given,
To follow Christ on Earth, and into Heaven.
We now thy Heavenly glories may recite,
Oh that in us might be the joys we write:
That what thou do enjoy in full, a taste
Have here we may, to stir us up to haste
To be with thee, that so from troubles here
In bliss we may be placed, where is no fear.
What louder grief, with such an Emphasis
Struck through some Ears, to hear, what Corpse is this?
What flocks of Saints were crowding, oh what storms
Rest in their looks? Grief wandered through all Forms
For thee, dear Soul: But seeing that the Loss
Is only ours, let us the grief ingross,
And fly to Christ, with whom is all relief,
That by him stayed may be our flowing grief.
Now judge Spectators, if you do believe,
Whether all those that knew him, may not grieve?
Parents and Brother, Sisters and Church Members,
For this great loss, both sighs and sorrow tenders;
There Is cause enough, yet friends be all content,
And make his Life and Death your President.
John Symonds, Senior.

Prove. 23. 23, 24, 25. Buy the Truth, and sell it not: also Wisdom and
Instruction and Understanding.

The father of the Righteous shall greatly rejoice: and he that begets a wise
Child, shall have joy of him.

Thy father and thy mother shall be glad, and she that bare thee shall rejoice.


To all that love the Lord Jesus in sincerity: The Testimony of two or three
Witnesses to the truth of the foregoing Treatise.
THis that now comes to your hand, is a little part, as a few fragments of that
full table those were entertained with that had the blessing of being nigh that
little one, which is here presented to you: the truth of which for the most
part we can testify, having been eye and ear witnesses of these things. What
it is, we truly desire it may be blessed unto you to the ends designed by the
Author of this little Book; It being the main, If not the only end why this
little follower of God desired to live. It may be the breathings from that
heart that so much longed (being converted) to convert others, may be of use,
though imparted at the second hand, we have seen made good, Pro. 14. 27. The
fear of the Lord is a fountain of Life, etc. And He that believes in me, as
the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water,
John 7. 31. Some of us have been much convinced by what we saw, what bare
conversions there are in the world, and how far short of believing as the
Scripture has said, most men and women are, that leaves them so short of the
Spirit, hinted 1 Pet. 2. 7. We have been too much strangers to that Faith that
works by love, and puts us under Gospel-constraints, To live to him that died
for us, and rose again. God has rebuked this Generation in this little one,
who served his Generation by the will of God, and fell asleep. He came to
Christ as a poor miserable vile undone sinner, and to pass through the straight
gate he wisely disburthened himself of what was gross and bulkie. He became
indeed as a little Child, and was so fi^ted to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, having first unlearned what he attained in his Education and other
accomplishments, like Phil. 3. 7. He learned of the Father to come to Christ,
as John 6. 45. to a whole Christ, whom he embraced heartily, and followed
fully, and is upon the advantage of that good welcome, Mat. 25. 21, 23. Parents
take then this encouragement, to train up your Children in the admonition and
fear of the Lord, and observe what is said in the Preface to this Book for your
help in this thing. And Children let this Example persuade you to remember your
Creator in the days of your Youth. This Labor, on your behalf, as it has our
witness to the truth of it (above hinted) and our commendations to you, for the
matter of it, as seasonable and useful; so it shall have our ^^^uest before the
Throne of God, that it may not be, a further witness against you. Remembering
Prove. 13. 13. but a special advantage in Gods hand unto your Salvation and
furtherance in his will. To his grace we commit it and you, being always
willing to approve our selves

Yours, truly longing for your souls present and eternal good, W. S. T. G. I. W.


FINIS.

