THE GREAT ANTICHRIST.

2 TIMOTHY 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Know this, that in the last days shall come
perilous times, etc.

By J. V. Prisoner.

Printed in the Year of our Lord, 1643.

THE GREAT ANTICHRIST.
2 TIMOTHY 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 1. Know this, that in the last days shall come
perilous times.

2. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy.

3. Without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent,
fierce, despisers of those that are good.

4. Traiterous, heady, high minded, lovers of pleasure more then lovers of God,

5. Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such
turn away.


IN the last days the Scripture foretells the coming and continuance of The
Antichrist, (...), 1 Ioh. 2. 18.
the great Antichrist, the man of sin, whose members were many petite
Antichrists, that is, the forerunning heretics, for in them the (...). 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.
mystery of iniquity wrought in Saint Paul's time, who said, Ye know what
withholdeth that he should be revaeled in his time, that is, the Roman (...),
Chrysostom. in 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.
Ethnic Empire, which when it was removed, then came in that Antichrist. The
Persians succeeded the Chaldeans, the Grecians subdued the Persians, the Romans
followed the Grecians, and after the Roman Monarchy ceased in Augustulus, the
Hesperian Caesar, Revel. 8. Nauclerus,
the Star Absynthites that fell from Heaven, about the year 666. Magdeburg.
Centurists, Baronius, Annal. circa 666. An.
Constans the Emperor gave the government of the City of Rome to the Pope.
Then was Antichrist the bestia bicornis, the beast with two horns, his Revel.
13.
Ecclesiastical and Temporal power, whereas before he had only the
Spiritual power to be Universalis Papa, supreme over all; so then Antichrist
has continued above a thousand years, by consent of the foresaid writers; Yet
Andreas and Arethas upon the Cap. 11. 7.
Apocalypse, with other Fathers, seem to hold that Antichrist shall continue
but three years and a half, which is true in a sense, for his three last
years shall be most grievous to the persecuted Saints, such Dan. 12. 1, 2.
Revel. 11. 7, 8.
tribulation as never was, in mockings, scourging, bonds, imprisonments, war,
bloodshed, and he shall not suffer their bodies to be buried. These are the
perilous times spoken of in this Text, therefore have I made so large a
preface to it, wherein observe; first, a precept to get knowledge, know this;
secondly, the subject, this in general, but in particular it is a prophecy of
the perils of the last times; thirdly, the adjunct, in the last days;
fourthly, the causes, 1. Opinions, 2ly. Vices of men here particularized.

1. For the first observe in general, Knowledge is a precious thing, Eccles.
12.
The preacher was wise, and still taught the people Knowledge; all men
naturally desire to know, knowledge of the Ancients is commended in Scripture;
David cites a Proverb of the Ancients, 1 Samuel 24. 13.
As says the Proverb of the Ancient, (...) David. Kimch.
of the first that made it, Wickedness shall go forth from the wicked; His
sin goes forth from him Kimchi in locum. R. Solomon, R. David. ibid.
willingly, and his punishment goes after it, his ruin comes from himself. S.
Paul thrice cites the Poets which were Syrian in Acts 17. (...) Arab. (...)
Prophets among the Heathen.

First, against Idolatry, Acts 17. (...). wise men.
We are his offspring, therefore the Godhead is not like the work of man's
hand that has neither reason, sense, or life.

Secondly, against Atheism denying the immortality of the Soul, 1 Cor. 15.
Let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall dye, be not deceived, evil
communication corrupts good manners.

Thirdly, against Lying and Epicurisme, Titus 1. (...).
the Cretians are always liars, evil beasts, slow bellyes; Three main
articles are confirmed by humane learning, but there are in those days
ignorant sectaries that oppose all learning, pretending inspiration by the Holy
Ghost, as the Gnostikes of old, yet it was the commendation of Timothy, Epiphan.
that of a child he knew the Arab. (...)
holy letters; But why should I trouble your ears with invectives against the
holy books. (...), 2 Timothy 3. 15.
these? I leave them to meditate on three Proverbs, (...). 2 Pet. 2.
A wise man contending with a fool, whether he rage, or laugh, he has no
rest: A fool is wiser in his own conceit, then seven men that can render a
reason: Bray a fool in a mortar, and his foolishness will not depart from him.

2. I proceed to the subject, which is a prophecy of perilous times. This day
is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears, animus meminisse horret, My heart
trembles at this, and is removed out of his place, but you must know it, and
therefore I must speak it; these are the perilous times or (...). Sir. (...)
Arab. (...) grievous times.
difficult, all men are in such straits that they know not how to deliver
themselves, as Israel between the red Sea and the Egyptians; secondly, hard
times, wherein men want food to eat, and raiment to put on, all men cry out, O
tempora, O mores, oh hard times, and evil conditions of men! We have heard of
Germany and Ireland, and would not believe, now we see and feel; thirdly,
cruel times, the Son dishonours his Father, the Father rises up against his
Son to put him to death, Brother robbs and kills his Brother. This Civil
War in the judgment of the Scelus fraternae ^^ecis. Remi in via Remoria
Romae. Horat. Suis and ipsa Roma viribus ruit.
Heathen is the punishment of rapine and fratricidy; fourthly, inexorable Te
saepe vocantiduram, difficilis mane Horat. id est, inexorabilis.
times, they are for War when we petition for Peace: woe to me that I dwell
with them that hate peace, and breath out slaughters, whose teeth are as
spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword, Lord deliver me from
those four generations of the last times, Prove. 30. 11. There is a generation
that curses his Father, and does not bless his Mother, do not the Martialists
of these times think it zeal to kill Father and Mother in this cause? There
is a generation pure in their own eyes, and not purged from their filthiness;
Who are these but the impure Hypocrites in my Text, There is a generation, How
lofty are their eyes, and their eyelids are lifted up? are not these the proud
Pharisees? There is a generation, their teeth are as swords that cry out,
War, War, and no Peace, that devour the poor and needy by rapine and
imprisonment, against reason and common rights.

I come now to the causes of these evil times, which are two: First, the
Opinions. Secondly, the Vices of men, here mentioned, not reduced to the head
of profaneness, but Hypocrisy? The Hypocrites reign, and the people are
ensnared, Job. 34. Antichrist is the great Hypocrite, Heretics and Sectaries
of these times are limbs of Antichrist, and make up Revel. 17. (...) est
confusio, a (...) Genes. 11. 9.
Babel the Great, which is the confusion of all sects.

First, for their opinions, it is said in my Text, They are lovers of
themselves, of their own wills and Sir. (...) Arab. (...)
opinions, for the time shall come, says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 4. 3. that men
will not endure sound doctrine; enquire out of these two Epistles, and the
Epistle to the Romans, and we shall find what sound doctrine is. First, the
doctrine of prayer for Kings, 1 Timothy 2. 1. I exhort first of all that prayers
be made for Kings, but certain Brownists of these times will not pray for the
King, but revile him in their prayers. Secondly, the doctrine against 1 Timothy 2.
12.
Women Preachers, I suffer not a Woman to teach, nor to usurp authority, but
says Isay, Isay 3. 12.
Women rule over you. Thirdly, the doctrine of obedience to 1 Timothy 6. 1.
superiors; but now Servants run away from their Masters without their
consent, and rise up against them in the public cause; do these induce sound
doctrine? Rom 1.
Fourthly, the doctrine of justification by faith, which Pelagians of old, and
the Papists now deny. Fifthly, sanctification, Romans 6. 1. which Gnostikes and
Nicolaitans formerly, now Familists and Antinomians deny. Sixthly, the doctrine
of predestination without foresight, Romans 9. 1. which Papists and Arminians
oppose. Seventhly, the doctrine of subjection to Kings, though they be Heathens
and Tyrants, which Epiphan.
Gnostikes of old, and now Anabaptists and Brownists oppose, they can live
without a King, though Saint Paul says, Romans 13. 1. Let every soul be
subject, but these men think they have no souls, because they would have no
King in Israel, that they may do that which is right in their own eyes, Judges
21. ult. The Christians of Rome paid tribute and custom to Nero and Trajan
Tyrants, but these rob the King of his due, and yet they say pro Rege; they say
Kings of old were anointed, therefore the people was subject as to Gods
ordinance, but now it is not so: To which I answer R. David. Kimchi.
with the Jew, no King the son of a King was anointed, except in case of
division about the right, as Solomon when Adoniah would be King, but the
Kingdom came by succession, as every man's inheritance descends from his
fathers. Again they say, The Kings of Jury made no such covenant as our Kings
do; I answer with the same Jew, the contrary appears in the example of Ioash
and Iehoiada, who made a covenant between the King and the people, and though
Ioash were an Apostate and a Tyrant, yet the Traitors and murderers of the
King were cut off by his son that reigned after him; the King and Kings son
will never forget to punish Traitors, as appears in the example of David 1
King. 2. 8. Kimchi, Rasi Ralbag.
on his death bed, who forgot not Shimeie's curse.

Moreover they say, a King is a humane creature, and therefore may be removed
by man: I answer, He is an ordinance humane, that is, taken out of Men, not
from Angels, yet by Gods appointment he is supreme, (...), 1 Pet. 2. 13.
1 Pet. 2. 13. and all inferiors are appointed by him; but the supreme
powers, as Kings and Emperors are Sir. (...)
appointed of God, Roman. 13. 1. The Jews had a Grand Council of seventy one
Elders, Numb. 11. Gather to me seventy men of the Elders, and Moses who was
King was above them all, (...) Talmud Sanhed. Perek. 1. The lesser Sanhedrin
was of two hundred and thirty sometimes: they go not forth to war, nor gather
the Council of the Tribes, (...) but by the Grand Council of seventy one.
They judge not the King at all, (...) he goes not forth of his Palace to
mourn for the dead, etc. in Deuteronomy. 17. thou shall set a King over thee, the
King then is supreme; they ride not on his Horse, nor sit on his Throne to
rule, yet the book of the Law is with him when he goes to war, or sits in
judgment. There were three companies of Judges in Jerusalem, at the door of
the mount of the House, in the Court, and in a paved Chamber, where the Grand
Council sat of seventy, and the King, from whence was no appeal, Deuteronomy. 17.
Talmud Sanhed, Perek. 11. Lastly, the doctrine of indifferent things they
cannot endure, no Ceremonies, but their own inventions, yet the primitive
Christians, though differing in Ceremonies of meats and days, lived in mutual
charity, Romans 14. 1. 2. The use of this is already made by the blessed Apostle,
Romans 16. 17. I beseech you brethren mark them that cause divisions and (...).
Arab. (...) that is, Divisions to separate from the Church, of (...) to break
off.
scandalls (to make many stumble and fall) contrary to the sound doctrine ye
have received, and avoid them, for they serve not the Lord Jesus, (as they
pretend) but their own bellyes, what care they if they can eat and drink,
and fare deliciously every day, if flocks or herds of poor men's be driven
away, and they undone for ever? and by fair words, they deceive the hearts of
the simple, not of the wise, who see plainly their hypocrisy, but like
Absalom, they steal away the hearts of the Kings well-minded Subjects by lies:
But I would have you, says Saint Paul, simple in evil, and wise in that which
is good, to hold fast the points of sound doctrine forenamed, and the God of
peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly; Chrysostom. Theod.
who is Satan? but he that will not endure sound doctrine, as is plain by the
coherence, who is all for War and blood? but the God of peace shall subdue
these Satan's, and bruise them to powder, and that shortly; this God of peace be
with you that hold fast the doctrine ye have received, and follow not such as
heap to themselves teachers like waves of the Sea, tossed with every wind of
doctrine, and they heap up 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4. Sic Arab. (...) and Sir. Chrysostom.
(...) Ralbag. in 2 Samuel 20. 23.
to themselves, they have their peculiar teachers; one of Paul, another of
Apollo, of Cephas, etc. a great presumption in these men; David had Ira the
Jairite for his Priest, and Kings and Nobles have theirs, and now there must be
a parity, all the Vulgar sort must have their teachers, according to their own
lusts, and private humors having itching and restless ears, weary of hearing
the truth, and therefore they turn to fables, wherein they still itch after
novelties. This is the first cause of these perilous times, The opinions of
men. I come now to their vices.

4. Their selfwill in those ways, they are lovers of their (...) a (...) 2
Kings 10. 15. si vobis placuerit. Idem. R. David
own wills, Genesis 49. 5. like Simeon and Levi, they are brethren in evil,
instruments of cruelty are in their habitations, or their (...) a Graeco (...).
R. Solomo. Heb.
Swords are instruments of cruelty to shed blood under the cloak of Religion,
as Sectaries do; Into their secret council my soul come thou not, if my body
be forced and my goods, yet in (...)
their association my heart be thou not united, for in their wrath they killed
a man, one man of ten thousand, the Prince of the Land; and however this ONE be
yet alive by miracle, yet many noble Lords and Gentlemen have perished, and bin
taken, neither have these men rested here, but in their rage have dug down,
(not a Wall) but Walls of Cities, and fortified Towns, and not only Heb.
(...) Heb. (...) est murus and bos. R. David. R. Levi. R. Sol.
houghed Oxen, but slain them, and driven away Sheep and Oxen, robbing and
spoiling, and all this in their (...)
selfwill; these two brethren were dissuaded by the other ten, but they were
selfwilled, and would slay without pity; so I am persuaded there are ten for
two in this City and Kingdom for Peace, but when they speak thereof the two
are for War, for they are selfwilled, and delight in blood, a (...)
and in their delight dig down walls, and kill men and beasts, eradicate
men, their wives and children, and turn them out of doors, because they are
for peace, and these two, Simeon and Levi, will have no Accommodation. Cursed
(says the old Father) be their wrath, for it is fierce, and their fury bitter
in the end, and in Judge. 21. 3. Israel wept aloud and bitterly, Alas! a Tribe
is lost this day, and I am afraid without a speedy peace, not one of ten, but
all our twelve Tribes will be lost; I will (says the old Patriarch) divide
them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel, Simeon had no portion, but Cities
scattered here and there R. David, Abben Ezra, Ralbag. in Genes. 49.
throughout the Tribe of Judah, and Levi had forty eight Cities out of the
other Tribes, that so they might never associate any more to shed blood* and
what can be expected of a selfwilled association and war, but dispersion; the
part that prevails will root out the other with a final As in Ireland.
extermination of familyes, and whether will ye fly ye Simeonites? and as
for Levi, alas! he is vanished already; thus much for Selfwill, which is the
first of the vices that cause such perilous times.

Secondly Covetousness, which is as all the rest here mentioned, a bosom sin
of the Hypocrites, when the Pharisees heard that Christ preached against the
service of Sir. ab (...) Confidit. Luke 16.
Mammon, and confidence in riches, they derided him, for they were covetous;
This love of money is the root of all evil, of the evil of sin, as Apostasy;
of the evil of punishment, as perdition, 1 Timothy 6. 10. Love of money makes
children fight against parents, subjects against their Sovereign; hope of
money brings forth murders, rapine, and extortion, but thou, O man of God,
(...), Oecum. Plutarch. in Curio.
O Christian, fly these things; the Roman Curious refused the Samnites Gold,
and was content with a dinner of herbs, an earthen dish, and a wooden stool, 2 Timothy 6.
If we have food and raiment, let us be therewith content.

The third vice is Pride, whose daughter is vainglorious boasting, for their
pride I shall produc^ but one Parable against Luke 18. 9, 10.
those that trusted in themselves that they were righteous, and what pride is
like this pride, to magnify themselves, and despise others? they thank God
they are not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, nor as the poor Publican,
they boast as the Infidels, Jews, and Pharisees; the Publican went home
justified to his house rather then they: And Publicanes and Harlots shall enter
into the Kingdom of God before them.

Fourthly, Disobedience to Parents, and Blasphemy, these two I join together;
for reviling of superiors is blasphemy, whether you take Parents naturally,
(for against such they unnaturally fight) or politickly for Masters, against
whom Servants rise up at this time to kill them, and Subjects against their
Sovereign, though like (...)pro and contra.
Antichrist, they pretend to be for Christ when they are against him; Augustus
Caesar was called Pater atque princeps Horat.
Father and Prince, and therefore they that are disobedient to their Kings, are
also to their Sir. (...)
Parents, or superiors, men set over them, Romans 13. 1. forecited, Let every
soul be subject to the higher powers, the supreme powers then were Emperors,
not Consuls and Senators, (as the States of Venice, Luca, Holland which were
then ceased, for there were seven heads of the Beast, or Revel. 17. 10, 11, 12.
Arab. (...) seven Kings of the earth. Julian. and August. lib. 5. de Civ. Dei.
seven kinds of government, whereof the two last were Emperors and Popes; the
five first were fallen, the sixth of Emperors was in Saint John's time, and in
Saint Paul's, and to this Saint Paul commands subjection, tribute, and custom,
Chrysostom. in 2 Thessalonians 2.
except they say that Saint Paul prophesies in this chapter of a new government
to be erected, (...). Arab. (...)
which is not yet, and how it shall then concern the Romans let them show:
For the last and seventh head or King of the Romans is the Papacy, to which I
think they will profess no subjection at all, if they have any conscience of
their oath; but it is objected, these Kings were Tyrants, therefore no duty
belongs to them; the answer is in Nebuchadnezzar, whom likewise they hold to be
a tyrant, yet Israel is commanded to serve him, Jerem. 27. 6. I have given all
these Countries to Nebuchadnezzar, and they shall serve him. And Zedekias,
because he broke his oath of subjection, was exoculated as a just recompense on
his own head. Ios. lib. 18. Antiq.
The Galileans stood for liberty with Judas, Acts 5. and denied tribute to
Caesar, and therefore Pilate mingled their blood with their sacrifice.

Fifthly, (...) Sir. sic Arab. (...)
these Hypocrites are unthankful, either they deny kindness which they have
received, or will not acknowledge it, or not requite it, they are the worst of
all men that have enjoyed the Gospel of peace and plenty above eighty years,
as long as ever Israel enjoyed in Moses days, Judge. 3. 30.
Ehuds, David's, and Solomon's, and yet are unthankful, murmurers at their
portion, complainers of the times, Oh foolish people, and Deuteronomy. 32.
unwise, ask thy Fathers and they shall teach thee; thy Elders, and they shall
declare unto thee the wonderful Reformation in this Nation, the slavish
Invasion by Water, the Hellish Gunpowder-treason by Fire, and how God has
brought thee through fire and water, (wherein thou could not live) into a
moist place, wherein thou have lived so many years in plenty, but Jesurun has
waxed fat and kicked, and for ingratitude is justly with a Civil War
consumed.

Sixthly, Unholy, or (...) Sir. a (...) ^exare, 1 Samuel 14. and David Kimchi in
Psalm. 1. 1.
unquiet, and restless are the Hypocrites, they are all for War, and accuse
Petitioners for Peace of a Catilinarian conspiracy; it is God that (...) Sir. a
(...) ^exare, 1 Samuel 14. and David Kimchi in Psalm. 1. 1.
creates peace, man cannot do it; it is as hard a work as the Creation, Our
Isay. 57. 3. and ult. Rudis indigestaque moles.
Land is without form and void, darkness is on the face of the deep, nothing
is but confusion in our Church and State, it is the spirit of the Lord that
moves on the face of these dark waters, saying, Let there be light, and there
was light, this light that God creates is peace; secondly, this peace is a
fruit, a fruit of the spirit, Love, Joy, Galath. 5.
and Peace, but whence comes Iam. 4. 1, 2.
war and fightings? from the spirit of malice and envy; thirdly, it is said a
fruit of the lips of the messengers of peace. How beautiful on the mountains
are the feet of those into whose lips grace and peace is poured; Psalm. 45.
Heb. (...) Isay 57. 19. Kimchi. Rasi Chaldey.
fourthly, God creates a double peace, Peace, peace national and personal,
which cannot be without truth, but there are restless men, whose sins
torment their conscience, and love no peace; the Text says, They are Cum He"
indicativ. (...) Kimchi.
the wicked, emphatically remarkable wicked men, these Hypocrites revile others
as wicked, when themselves are by the spirit of God styled the most wicked,
that disturb the National peace, and trouble our Israel by killing and
stealing; They are like the troubled Sea that cannot rest, Raging waves of the
Sea, foming out their own shame, whose waters rage continually, and cast up
mire and dirt into the Royal face, both by word and writing. Woe to these
Sectaries of Cain, who loved blood and slew his brother, and was called (...),
Basil.
the first Disciple of the Devil; Abel was a Shepherd and a man of peace, and
he slew him, John 1. 3.
because his works were righteous; These covetous hypocrites run greedily after
the error of Balaam, who would have cursed and defied Israel for reward, and
they shall perish in the gainsaying of Core, who rose up and rebelled against
Moses the Deuteronomy. 33.
King, and against Aharon, who was the Priest of the Lord, so these endure
neither God, the King, or any Ministers, but of the lowest of the people. To
conclude with Isay 57. ult.
Isay, There is no peace says my God with the wicked; these wicked will have
no peace; for then all is lost, which they have spent in war; their restless
disposition appears in all the ensuing particulars; they are
Covenant-breakers, False-accusers, Traitors, heady, high minded, etc. of each a
word, and so an end.

Seventhly, Theoph.
they are Covenant-breakers, they have made a covenant with the King, and taken
the oath of Allegiance, but this oath they regard not, they have their Pope to
dispense with it: Chald. (...)
Achitophel made a Covenant with David, but broke his Covenant, and therefore
is accursed in Psalm. 55. 21. He has profaned his Covenant. Zedechias rebelled
against Nebuchadnezzar the King, (who was a Tyrant also, as they say) when he
had made him swear by God, and hardened his neck, so that the wrath of God came
upon them, and there was no healing, 2 Chronicles. 36. 12. King Solomon charge all
Subjects to obey the Kings commandment, and that in respect of the oath of
God, Eccles. 8. 2, 3. but these urge the Kings oath, legibus quas vulgus
elegerit, but themselves keep no oath. Besides, these men make Covenants with
the Subjects of the King, and the same day like Fides non servanda haereticis.
Jesuits break the same, their Jesuiticall faction, like Antichristians,
dispenses with the oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and their subscription
was forced, and therefore they revolt: Deus bone! is there any Religion in
these? no Heathen story is able to parallel their sophistication. In 2 Samuel
23. 1. there was a Famine three years for Saul and his bloody house, because
he slew the Gibeonites* the reason was, Jos. 9. 14. and 19.
because of the oath of the Rulers (though R. David.
taken out of error,) to avoid Ralbag. R. Isay.
the scandal of the Nations, and the seeming, not real profanation of the
name of God; but these Hypocrites are Truce Breakers, and hold it lawful so to
do.

Eighthly, they are without natural affection, witness their zeal in killing
and spoiling of Fathers, Sons, Brethren, Sisters, Kindred, etc. but of this
before.

Ninthly, they are false-accusers, in Greek (...). Sir. (...)
Devils, in Syrian Hypocritical mockers at feasts, that like the Devil their
father, tell lies for morsells, Psalm. 35. 15. In my affliction they rejoiced,
the abjects, viler then the earth, they rent me with their teeth, and ceased
not, they print, preach, speak lies against the Lords anointed (as David was)
every day. Psalm. 120. 1, 2.
Lord deliver him from lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue.

Tenthly, Chrysostom.
Incontinent, what shall I say of their incontinency, both in the concupiscible
and irascible, no penalty is now inflicted, and it is a shame to speak of the
things done of them in secret.

Eleventhly, these Hypocrites are fierce: Let Jehu speak for them all, Come,
see my zeal, says he to Jonadab, he killed the King and Queen, and seventy
sons of the royal Progeny, all his kindred, and Priests, 2 Kings 10. 15, 16.
and 28. 29. 30.
and destroyed Baal out of Israel; he would have no peace, What peace as long
as the whordomes of thy mother Jezebel, and her witchcrafts are so many, his
Zeal was all for truth, (as he said) so the Sectaryes and others are all for
truth, and no peace while Jezebel lives, their driving is like the driving of
Jehu the son of Nimshi, Heb. (...)
for they drive furiously, or madly, but when by war and blood they have
obtained peace, Austin. Ierom.
I wish they set not up a worse Idol, then they have put down, as Iehu their
father did, Baal was Mars the planet, Ralbag, or Jupiter Belus, which Iehu
destroyed, and set up the The Calf was Serapis the Egyptian God, and there
they learned Idolatry, Vitulus ex vacca fulmine icta, genitus, quae rursus non
parit, (...), a god worthy of the Egyptians says Cambyses in Herodot.
Calves, a far worse Idol, and made the common people Priests; so I wish
that these set not up, as they begin, the meanest of the people, and drive out
the sons of Levi as Iehu did.

Twelfthly, they are haters of good, that is, moderate men, who are not carried
with their turbulent zeal, by which many a good Ionadab is deceived, and their
hatred is irreconciliable to eradication of their familyes, expulsion of their
wives and children, and banishment from Country and friends, because they
cannot endure to see them, or hear of them, and this to a political creature
is worse then death, in Joel 2. what have you to do with me, O Tire and
Sydon, who have taken my silver and gold, and brought them to your palaces, and
the children of Judah ye have sold to the Grecians to remove them far from
their border: and do not these haters of good men send their brethren far
away from their houses, lands, and friends, that they may seize on their
inheritance; But thus says the Lord to you Cains, behold I will raise them
from the place whither you have sent them, and return your recompense on your
own heads, and I will sell your sons and your daughters to the sons of
Judah, and they shall send them to the Sabeans, to a nation afar off, for
Jehovah has spoken it.

Thirteenth, they are (...).
Traitors, fathers betraying children, and children betraying Proles lupi.
Tigridisquesilvas petat, Feras and inter quaerat affinem sibi.
fathers to the death, the offspring of the Wolf and Tiger, and the wild
beasts their kindred, breaking the bonds of society between man and man, and
delivering men up to Magistrates and Rulers, for a word, and that in secret,
our Savior prophesyed of these Traitors, Luke 21. 16. Your fathers, and
brethren, and kinsmen, and friends, shall betray you to death: do we not see
this in these days of Civil war, a father will not spare his child, a child
will kill his father in battle, and if he cannot so kill him, he will betray
him to death, by discovering his secrets, or by false accusation, under
pretense of justice; But the greatest Traitors are such as fight against the
King, and they pretend all this is for the King, Principem occisum loqui malum
fuisse, vel tyrannum dicere est. Tragicus. O dictu scelus summus dominio, major
exemplo fuit. Pax descendit assimilis Iovi Aurato in ul nas imbri.
though his own person have been in imminent danger more then once: these are
they that call darkness light, and light darkness, evil good, and good
evil, the use of this is made by Isay the Prophet, say not a confederacy to
whom this people shall say a confederacy, neither fear their fear, but fear
Isay 8. 21.
God, and meddle not with Traitors that curse their God and their King, and
look upward, for as it follows, they are proud and heady, and their counsels
shall be carried headlong.

Fourteenth, these Hypocrites are hasty in all their consultations, without
deliberation they pretended Reformation must be done in a day, not considering
the diverse gradations of a Reformation; Josiahs wonderful Reformation was of
the continuance of three hundred years, the reigns of Asa, Iosaphat,
Iehoiada, Iotham, Hezekiah, Manasseth, Josiah, and then also was Festina lent.
but fainedly, and not with the whole heart, and for punishment of Delinquents
they are too hasty; have they never read of Ier. 3. 10. Zephan. 1.
David what he said of the sons of Zerviah, Ye are too hard for me? he
would, but could not punish these two great Delinquents, except he had involved
his whole Kingdom in a Civil war, as is now done; lastly, they are too
hasty in their hostility; have they not read that Israel Judges 20.
lost forty thousand in two days in a Civil war through too much
hastiness, and precipitancy, not consulting with the Lord? and surely in this
respect, these men have cause rather of mourning then rejoicing.

Fifteenth, these are lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God; whence come
these wars and fightings, James 4. 1.
do they not from their lusts and pleasures that war in their members? their
pride, ambition, popularity, avarice, for hereby their portion (who were
beggarly) is made fat, (...) Dan. 11.
and their meat pleasant; they live by war, therefore they burn incense to
their net, Habak. 1. 16.
and sacrifice to their dragge. They cry nothing but war and blood, dig
they cannot, and to beg they are ashamed, therefore they resolve to kill,
steal, rob, rifle, or do any villainy to satisfy their lusts, which they love
more then God.

Sixteenth, They have a form of godliness, but deny the power thereof, they
have a (...).
portraiture, picture or delineation of godliness, but no life at all therein;
Consider the particulars, they Matthew. 6. 1.
give alms, but it is to be seen of men, they make long prayers, but to be
heard of men, they fast, but (...).
disgrace their faces, appearing as sad when they are not: what is this but a
picture of godliness without life? it was never known from the beginning of
the world, that a dead beast was offered in sacrifice to God, but the
Hypocrites present dead sacrifices to God. Again, in their Sabbaths is a show
of godliness, but no life, for they say, Amos 8.
When will the Sabbaths be gone? and like the Pharisees their viperous
progenitors, abuse the letter of the Sabbath against doing good; they sit John
9. etc. Matthew. 12. 1. Luke 13. Matthew. 23. 1, 3.
in Moses chair to teach, and to judge others according to the Law, but do
the contrary, and break all Laws; they make long prayers to devour Widows
houses, (...) Rasi. R. David.
they enlarge their phylacteryes of the hand and head, there is the letter, but
no power; their heads are full of mischievous devices, and their hands are full
of blood, They 2 Timothy 3. 7.
are ever hearing and learning, there is the shadow, but are never able to come
to the knowledge of the truth; there is no power, except it be over silly women,
as the Apostle here says, These Hypocrites 2 Timothy 3. 6.
intrude into houses, and lead captive filly women, laden with sins, and led
about with diverse lusts. This time is a plain interpretation of this
Prophecy. Another power they have got likewise, by the show of godliness, it
is against the King, like Janis and Jambres, the two Sorcerers of Egypt, that
resisted Moses who was Deuteronomy. 33. 5. (...) Ralbag. Abben Ezra.
King in Jesurun: These sorcerers were Hypocrites, for their miracles were but
glisterings, and delusions of the eyes; The use of all this is,

First, our Savior says, Luke 12. 1, 2.
Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is Hypocrisy. Hereby we are
most like the Devil, who transformes himself into an Angel of light, and
hereby we become limbs of Antichrist, the first borne of the Devil, who is
the great Hypocrite, Revel. 13.
That has two horns like a Lamb, but speaks like a Dragon.

The second use, 2 Timothy 3. 5.
From such Hypocrites turn away, so says Saint Paul, avoid their society, for
they are selfopinionated, selfwilled, greedy of money, proud, unnatural,
truce breakers, fals-accusers, traitors, heady, fierce, unthankful, Procus
populi.
popular, unquiet, haters of all moderate men, lovers of lusts and pleasures,
and deceiving the world by a form of godliness, so that they believe
Rebellion to be Zeal, and Treason to be Religion; Depart from me, ye
Hypocrites, ye bloudthirsly men. The Lord give us grace to depart from them
here, lest we have Matthew. 12. 51.
our part with these Hypocrites hereafter in the lowest Dungeon of Gehenna,
from which good Lord deliver us by Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father, and
holy Spirit, be honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

