GOD In the Mount.

Or, Englands Remembrancer.

Being a Panegyric Piramides, erected to the everlasting high honor of
Englands God, In the most grateful commemoration of all the miraculous
Parliamentarie. Mercies wherein God has been admirably seen in the Mount of
Deliverance, in the extreme depth of Englands designed Destruction, in her
years of jubilee, 1641. and 1642.

By the unworthie admirer of them, JOHN VICARS.

Jehova-jireh.

Genes. 22. 14. I will praise thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, and will show
forth all thy mavelous works.

Psalm. 9. 1. Commit thy cause to God which does great things and unsearchable,
mavelous things without number.

Job 5. 8, 9. Deuteronomy. 33. 29. Happy art thou, O Israel, who is like unto thee, O
People, saved by the Lord! the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of
thine excellency; And thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee, and thou
shall tread on their high places.

Psalm. 111. 2, 3, 4. The works of the Lord are great, sought-out of all them
that have pleasure therein. His works are honorable and glorious, and his
righteousness endures for ever. He has made his wondrous works to be
remembered; the Lord is gracious and full of compassion.

LONDON: Printed by T. Pain, and M. Simmons for John Rothwell and Thomas
Underhill. 1642.

TO THE ETERNAL, ALMIGHTY, AND MOST GLORIOUS, WONDER-WORKING,
INCOMPREHENSIBLE, AND INDIVISIBLETRINITIEIN UNITY; JEHOVAHJIREH. GODIN THE
MOUNT: J. V. HIS MOSTUNWORTHIE AND SINFUL SERVANT DOES DEDICATE AND CONSECRATE
(BY CHRIST JESUS HIS ONLY MERITS AND MEDIATION) HIM-SELF AND THESE HIS POOR
LABOVRS, TO HIS EVERLASTING PRAISE AND GLORY.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, thrice Noble and illustrious Senators of the House
of Peers in Parliament.

TO OUR Truly Honorable and most renowned Patriots; the House of Commons, in
Parliament.

RIght Noble Lords and Englands Commons rare, (For, whom the Lord has joined,
disjoyn who dare?)

Your humble Servant, Vowed -- Votarie, Has to Heav'ns-Honour And your --
Memory

* Most humbly, this Pyramides -- erected, Hopeful, by your just power to be
protected

From sturdiest Storms which Mischiefs mightiest blast May dare on It or your
blessed actions cast,

By foul -- aspersions, Causeless -- Calumnies, To rob-both us and you Of our
fair -- prize,

* Even, happy Halcyor days, Which, God, -- by you, Begins -- to -- bring To
blessed Britains view.

Whose eyes and heart (late) full of frights and tears Your untyr'd Prudence,
Providence re-chears

Courage -- great Patriots God is on your -- side Whiles you do to -- his
Gospel -- close abide.

* Go -- on, like David's Worthies, -- valiantly, To curb -- and crush
Truths-foes-malignity.

Go on, I say, like Nehemiah's brave, Like Ezra's and Zorobabels most grave

To work -- a pure, A perfect -- Reformation, As men most -- famous In your --
generation.

* Yea, -- most renowned To -- Posterity, As Faiths fast -- friends And --
props of Verity.

As wise Repairers of those Breaches great, Which did both Church and State so
sorely threat.

Go on, though you great obstacles endure; Sol shines most clear, though clouds
It (often) obscure: Heaven crown your Counsels (still) with good success, And
you and yours for all your labors bless.

So -- ever -- prays John Vicars.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL HIS MOST WORTHY and ever most highly honored good
friends, Sir RICHARD SPRIGNALL, Sir JOHN WOLLASTONE, Alderman PENNINGTON, and
Alderman WARNER, Together with each of their most truly virtuous and pious
Consorts, my singular good friends; All of them eminent Patrons and Patterns of
Piety, Virtue, Religion and Learning: J. V. unfainedly prays the most happy,
fair and full fruition of the glorious effects of the plenarie-Reformation
intended by this pious Parliament, here; And of the Saints celestial
beatificallvision, in Heaven, hereafter.
HAving by Gods good hand of providence and direction (Right Worshipful and my
most highly honored good friends) undertaken a subject of Gratitude to our
holy God in this succeeding historical narration of all his wonder-striking
Parliamentarie-mercies to us of this English-Nation, in general; I could not
but reflect my serious thoughts on your Worships as most worthy objects also
of my thankful heart, for many singular favors and courtesies toward me, in
particular. And so much the rather because of that which Chrysostom, in his 51
Homily on Genesis, has as sweetly as succinctly touched. Nihil tam gratum Deo
and homini quam anima grata and gratias agens. Nothing in the world is so
acceptable to God or man as a gratefull-heart and a thankefultongue. The due
and deep consideration whereof (I say) has made me most desirous (as most
bounden) to tender this ^umbl^ and plain-sti^'d history of Englands God in the
Mount of Mercies, ^r, Englands Remembrancer of gratitude to God for all the
Parliamentarie precious blessings most fully and freely conferred; or rather
poured-down upon her within these 2 years last past, as a ^estimonie of my most
thankfull-heart to your good Worships for many both public and private favors
to me and mine. Which history though I ingenuously acknowledge it might well
have befitted a far more fluent and high-soaring rhetori^all-Penman than my
poor and plain unworthie-self; yet since it has pleased the Lord that my poor
zeal for Gods glory has thus prevented them, I most humbly hope and heartily
desire candide and courteous acceptance of it and of my sincere desire and
endeavor, mainly, to manifest my infinitely obliged gratefull-heart, first, to
our ever-living and ever-loving wonder-working Lord God; next, to our most
Pious Patriots, his precious Agents and instruments in these great and glorious
works; and then to your worthy selves my much honored friends: Which my
endeavor herein, though short (I say) of your judicious exp^ctation, and of
the histories due desert, yet hoping it may remain as a pledge of my plighted
humble services and bounden gratitude, and as the best Barthol'mew-faring,
which my poor ability was able to present to your good Worships, with the
humble tender also of m^ heartiest poor prayers to the throne of grace for all
sanctified sublunarie blessings and celestial soul-cheering graces on you and
a^l yours, I ever rest,

Your good Worships in the Lord,

GOD IN THE MOUNT, OR, ENGLANDS REMEMBRANCER.
Gods 2. royal Prerogatives or attributes, Mercy and Justice.
THE omnipotent and omniprudent great God of heaven and earth, having by his
unsearchable wisdom, unresistible power, and most pure and inculpable
righteousness, from all eternity both foreseen and preordained the ways and
means of manifesting and declaring to the world his two especial and most
glorious attributes of Mercy and Justice; Mercy on his elect and choice
vessels of honor, and justice on the forsaken vessels of wrath, those devoted
vassals of the devil, and both these in that admirable Masterpiece of his
workmanship of the world, Man. Who, as the Prophet David says of himself, was
fearfully and wonderfully made: And, for this and and purpose having put this
excellent creature, Man's happiness.
Man, into a most pure and perfectly holy condition, placing him in Eden or
Paradise, a place of most wonderful delight, and admirable variety of
sense-affecting contentments; and having also given him an absolute power to
have persisted and continued in that holy and blessed estate. Satan, that
subtle and accursed Serpent, and that arch-enemie of Satan's fall, for pride.
man's holiness and happiness, being by self-pride and arrogancy thrust out
of heaven, and thrown headlong into hell, and so to abide to all eternity, in
an unrecoverable cursed estate of damnation; Hereupon being become Gods enemy,
extremely envied that holy and happy condition of Gods Satan tempts man.
(then) darling, Mankind, and therefore, to bring his malignant spite to the
issue he aimed at, falls a belying of God to man* tempts and at last deludes
man, makes him fall into his sin, pride and disobedience, thus, prevails in his
project, and thereby made man, unhappie man as miserable as himself, by Man's
fall.
being, for sin, deprived and divested of his former fair rooes of beauty and
holiness, and depraved and poisoned in his whole soul and body with sin and
uncleanness, and thus in himself a forlorn creature, perpetually liable to
Gods wrath, and so consequently to eternal damnation. But, now, God Job 33.
24. ^uk* 1. 69.
out of his infinite wisdom and mercy found out a ransom and mighty Redeemer
for man (even so many as he had predestined to salvation) the Lord Jesus
Christ, the second person in Man's restoration, by the promised-Seed.
Trinity. In whom, and by whom, even this promised seed of the deceived woman,
the Lord resolved to repay and revenge Satan's malice and mischief to man;
promising, that though Satan by man's fall had bruised the woman's heel; yet her
seed the Lord Jesus Christ should (by a strange way) break his head, even by
his death be Satan's death and destruction. And hereupon A combat denounced
twixt the woman's seed and the Serpents-seed.
the Lord God denounced an everlasting combat and irreconcilible enmity between
these two and their offspring to the end of the world, namely, Christ, and the
rest of the holyseed of the woman even all the succeeding Saints and
chosen-children of God in Christ: And, the Devil and his angels, even all the
desperate profane-ones and crafty hypocrites of the world, who should from
time to time, in all ages, most maliciously harbor in their hearts a natural
antipathie against the godly to hate and despise them, and therewith also take
pleasure and delight in plotting and practicing all mischief and villainy
toward them, though (God in his wisdom and mercy having so graciously ordered
it) always, for the most part, with illsuccesse to themselves in the issue:
God, who is most faithful and able to perform, having promised to be with his
Church, Matt. 28. 20.
in a way of protection and preservation, even to the end of the world. Now thus
you have briefly seen the combat decreed, and the combatants also to maintain
the warfare: whereby The cause of the Combat.
the Church of God is put into a truly militant condition, and daily constrained
to exercise its spiritual Militia (as the wicked do their Malitia against
them) and to be always armed, not only with the whole armor of God, spoken
of by the Apostle Ephesians. 6. but also with worldly weapons and humane power and
prudence to defend themselves and offend their enemies as God shall enable
them. But if you ask me, now, the cause of their quarrel, the reason and
ground of the grudge and clandestine hatred which the wicked of the world bear
to the holy and humble Saints and servants of the Lord? Truly, the answer is
easy and at hand, yea the Apostle has made it 1 Ioh. 3. 1^.
for me, who by way of argumentation asks himself the very same question,
touching Cain and Abel, Wherefore did Cain, who was of that wicked-one (the
devil) kill his godly brother Abel? Because (says he) his own works were
evil, and his brothers righteous. Religion, innocent-religion and true
Holiness True religion.
is the great eyesore to the ungodly, and therefore (as the said Apostle in the
same place, ver. 13.) marvel not that the world hates them.

This, then, I say, is the main-ground of the quarrel betwixt these two
combitants; which hot combustion and contention, The prosecution of the Combat.
as it has been fiercely followed in all ages past, from the beginning of the
world, and will be so till the end thereof: So, it was never more mischievously
manifested to be so, than in these our days, I mean, for, at least, these two
or three hundred years last past, to this present time; and that, in all the
parts of Europe, especially by the Papists or Romish Catholics, as they In
France, Germany, England, Scotland, etc.
call themselves against the Hugonets, in France, Lutherans and Calvenists in
Germany, and Protestants in England, Scotland, and Ireland; and in brief, by
the Romish Antichrist, against the Reformed-Christian in all parts. And the
implacable rage of this arch-adversarie of the Lord Jesus Christ has far
transcended all the malice and mischief of all former ages cruelties, both of
the old Assyrians and Philistines to the ancient Isra^lit^s, or the last ten
persecuting heathen-Emperours to the Primitive-Christians. The ill-successe of
the malignant Combatants.
But, as in all those former ages, the more Satan, by his impious agents and
wicked instruments, has with inveterate vexations and extremest persecutions
mangled and maligned the people of God: So, the more propitiously God has
preserved and increased them, like innumerable Phenixes rising and reviving out
of their dead ashes, fully confirming that old The blood of the Saints is the
seed of the Church.
adagie, The blood of the Saints is the seed of the Church. This truth, in both
its branches has been also most copiously confirmed in these our more modern
times, and chiefly (I may well say) in this our Kingdom of England, among all
the Nations of Europe (Germany only and Ireland excepted at this time for
cruelties but not for preservations) which has tasted the bitterdrafts of
Romes wrath in a deep measure; and yet the more this Antichristian enemy has
raged against Christ and his faithful servants against the Gospel and its true
professors, the less he has prevailed; and the more they have increased to
the glory of God, and the terror and amazement of the wicked of the world;
Their divellish and desperate aims having been deceived in the issue (as was
touched before) and God having faithfully performed his good word and promise to
his Matthew. 28. 20.
Church and children to be with them, and for them, to the end of Psalm. 34. 19.
Man's necessity is Gods opportunity.
the world; And though he suffers them (oft-times) to be closely and strictly
hemmed in on all sides with great straits and distresses, yet their greatest
necessities have ever proved Gods fairest and fittest opportunities to be seen
in the Mount for their deliverance; even then (I say) when the enemy thought
to have swallowed them up quick, without all humane hope of redemption and
redress, then, yea even then, has our good God always (for the most part)
plucked the prey out of their devouring jaws, broke the Psalm. 35. 17.
cheeks and teeth of the ungodly* and rescued and recovered his darling (the
Church) from the Lyons-den, their destinied destruction. Which is the main
scope and drift of our intentions, at this time, and in this Treatise* even to
make clear to the eyes and understanding of all the world that will not
wilfully blind them, and obstinately shut them up from beholding the evident
sunshine of the truth, in the subsequent and most luculent demonstrations
England the Landmark of Gods mercies.
thereof, in this Kingdom of England after a special manner, which, God has
graciously made the very Landmark of all his rich mercies, to the everlasting
glory of his great Name, and free grace unto us, a most sinful and undeserving
Nation, as we have been, and that in the midst of such means and miracles of
mercies which he has conferred on us, and wrought for us, above all our
neighbor Nations round about us.

Now, herein, my purpose is (omitting many former mercies to our Land of high
concernment, and most worthy of everlasting The Pope began to be pusht-down by,
King Hen. 8. King Edw. 6. Queen Elizabeth.
and indelible thankful remembrance, as the shaking off of the Antichristian
shackles and yoke of Popery, begun in the days of King Henry the eighth and
his most blessed Son, King Edward the sixth, but especially in the happy
halcyon-dayes of Queen Elizabeth's reign, of ever most blessed memory; Since
whose most blessed days and times we have enjoyed the Gospel of peace, and
peace of the Gospel, almost these hundred years (and now are not only
Protestants but most blessedly begin to be reformed Protestants)
notwithstanding the many most nefarious and treacherous plots, against her
sacred person, happily Spanish-Armado. 1588. Powder Plot by Papists, 1605.
defeated; the falsely so termed, Invincible Spanish Armado, in 1588* and the
most exorbitant and hell-hatch't Powder Plot, by those Romish traitors, Garnet
a grand-Jesuite and his twelve impious apostles, in the year, 1605, by heavens
vigilant eye of providence timely prevented, together with many private and
pernicious conjurations or conspiracies, not so much by force as by fraud
clandestinely machinated, and by Gods mercy fruitlesly The main occasion of
this Treatise.
attempted; enough to fill up voluminous Treatises, and inf^^it^ly to magnify
Gods endless praises) all which, I say, here, to omit, my purpose and main
intention is, as I fore promised (by the blessed assistance of Gods gracious
Spirit) to manifest and declare to all (who vouchsafe the patient and
impartial perusal hereof) all the memorable and wonder-striking Parliamentary
Parliamentarie-Mercies.
mercies effected for and afforded unto this our English Nation, (mauger the
malice of Hell and Rome, Papists and profane Atheists, Satan's active and able
agents) with inthe space of less than two years last past, 1641, and 1642.

And for the better and more exact setting forth of the most illustrious luster
and glorious beauty of these incomparable parliamentarie-pledges of Gods
undoubted love and free favor toward us, my intention is, first, to show my
Reader, the cloudy-Mountain The Mount of Straits.
of Straits, into which, the Lord had in his wisdom and justice brought us, or
rather suffered us to be drawn and driven into for our sins and transgressions;
and then the sweet The Mount of Mercies.
and serene-Mountain of Mercies, wherein God was most gloriously seen (of his
mere mercy) for our most timely and happy deliverance. I mean, I say, to let
the godly Reader see the deep distress and danger whereinto we were plunged by
the nefarious Iesuiticall-Priests and pontifick Prelates like Simeon and Levi.
and multifarious plots and projects of Jesuiticall-Priests and perfidious
Prelates (for I may most justly couple and link them together, like Simeon and
Levi, brothers in iniquity) of these our late and worst times, and other most
disloyal atheisticallagents in these desperate designs, all of them
faithless factors for the Sea of Rome, all of them complotting and contriving
to reduce us to the accursed Romish religion, yea all of them combining and
confederating to work and weave our three famous and flourishing Kingdoms,
England, Scotland and Irelands fatal and final rui^e and downfall. This being
done* I shall endeavor, by Gods assistance, most punctually to promulgate and
most exactly to record, to posterity, those even myriades of remarkable mercies
conferred on us to strange amazement and deep admiration of all truly pious and
faithful Contrary juxta se posita, mag is illucescunt.

Dangers and Deliverances opposed show the more gloriously.


Christians. That thus, contraries being set together in an exact Antithesis or
opposition, they may both appear the more apparently to the eyes and
understanding of ingenuous and judicious beholders; that thus, I say, the
dangers being seriously considered and worthily weighed, the mercies may the
more gloriously break forth, like the Suns glorious rays and heartcheering
bright beams, after a thick and black cloudie storm and heart-damping tempest,
and that thus, I say, the god y Reader ruminating and recollecting Both in his
sad and serious re-cogitations, may justly and ingenuously acknowledge, that,
God was in the Mount, for our Deliverance.

Now, herein, for my better and more methodicall proceeding in this renowned
Story, I have resolved to make our most The first Parliamentarie-Remonstrance.
famous and renowned Parliamentarie-Worthies first Remonstrance, (wherein all
our Kingdoms heavy pressures and oppressions are summarily and succinctly even
to the life delineated) my most worthily imitable copy and pattern to write
by: but in these I intend to be as concise and brief, as conveniently may be,
because my chief aim and resolution is ^o hasten to the copious and
comfortable narration and description of our Parliamentarie-Mercies and
Deliverances, to the everlasting glory and precious praise of our great and
good God, and that, at the rare and fair sight and cordial contemplation of
them, the godly Reader may break out, in an ecstasy of holy and heavenly joy
and say, with holy David, Truly, Psalm. 73. 1.
God is good to his English Israel, and to all therein, of an upright heart.

Wherefore, now, to pretermit all further ambages and circumlocutions, and to
address my self seriously to the matter intended, I shall first (with my most
worthie-Masters) briefly The root and growth of this their plot.
declare the root and growth of their mischievous designs, and the rice of our
dangerous estate thereby. Secondly, the maturity and ripeness to which the
malignant party had hatched and cherisht it, before the beginning of this
Parliament. Thirdly, The ripeness of it.
the efficacious means used for the eradicating and rooting up of this evil
weed so rank-grown in the garden of the Kingdom; The means of curing it.
both by the Kings royal assistance and Heavens blessing on the Parliaments
great wisdom, industry and providence. Fourthly, the bold affronts and
audacious obstructions and oppositions The boiling obstructions against the
cure.
to interrupt and check the Parliaments fair and faithful progress and
proceedings therein all along. Fifthly and lastly, the counter-checking means
used to annihilate and make void those obstacles and impediments which so
retarded The counter-checking of thoseobstacles.
the fair fabric and comely structure of a happy reformation of those
superfluous and rank-grown evils, and of redintegrating and re-establishing the
ancient honor and security of this Crown and Nation, even by a
Parliamentarie-power, the only remedy left (under God* to prop-up the
tottering State, to force away our overflowing fears, and to heal the mortal
wounds and sores of our distressed Land.

The root and r^ce of the plot was, The Complotters.
Now the root and rice of all the plot was found to be a pernicious woven knot
of malignant active spirits combining and confederating together for the
supplanting and utter subverting of the fundamental Laws and principles of
government* on which the religion and government of the Kingdom were firmly
established: And those actors and promoters were first and principally,
Jesuited-Papists Jesuited-Papists.
whose teeth had long watered for* and whose eager appetites had long hungered
after the subversion of our Religion. Secondly, perfidious and rotten-hearted
Prelates and Arminian-pontificians, who mightily (and maliciously) cherishing
Prelates and Pontificians.
formality, or conformity and superstition, greedily also gaped after a change
in Religion, or at the least, the outrageous supporting
Eeclesiasticall-tyrannie and usurpation. Thirdly, Profane and irreligious
Courtiers.
profane, irreligious, and even atheistical Courtiers, and Councillors of
State, who for their own private and beggarly ends had engaged themselves (as
being, doubtless, mercenarie pensioners) to foreign Princes, to the prejudice
of their own natural Their Principles to work by.
King and the State at home. And, as you have seen the agents were potent and
politic: So, the common principles by which they molded and managed their
crafty counsels and actions were as pragmaticall as prejudicial. As, first,
to To set the King and people at jarres about Prerogatives and Liberties.
work and win the King to stand stiffly to his Royall-prerogative, and the people
for the maintenance of their Privileges and Liberties, that thus they might
have the advantage by siding with the King against the Subject, and so to be
counted his fastest friends and trusty servants, and thereby engrosse to
themselves and their factious confederates all places of greatest trus^ and
power in the Kingdom; that so they might the more safely fish in troubled
waters. Secondly, to suppress and stifle the sacred To suppress the power and
purity of Religion.
purity and power of religion, and to curb and keep-under all of all degrees
that were best affected to it, in profession and practice, these being sore
pearls in their eyes, and the greatest impediments to that change which their
voracicus and eager appetites extremely longed and labored to introduce among
us. Thirdly, To countenance all their own, and to disgrace all the opposite
party.
to countenance and encourage their own fast faction, and on all colorable
occasions, to disgrace, vilify, and dishearten all the opposite party.
Fourthly and lastly, by slanders and false imputations to work the King to an
utter-dislike of Parliaments, and unjust and forcible ways of supply, yet
masking To cause the King to disaffect Parliaments.
them with fair pretenses of great and just advantage to his Majesty, though
indeed they brought more loss than gain to him, and great distress and
distractions to the whole Kingdom.

And thus have you summarily seen the Basis or foundation of their building;
now be pleased with as much brevitie as may be, to behold what a fair fabric
and stately structure they raised Note this well.
and erected on it. And here by the way, take notice of this diffusive
sememting-materiall, or bracing-piece conglutinating or holding fast the body
of the whole ensuing frame; namely, that in all the compacted and conjoined
ligaments of this omi^ousarchitecture, the Jesuits crafty counsel, and as
wicked as witty wiliness was instead of a prime architector or Master Builder
of the whole edifice; and had they not all been (by Gods overpow'ring
providence) timely prevented, these Jesuiticall-Artificers would undoubtedly
have over-builded the Prelaticall-Labourers, and instead of a new, have pulled
down an old-house on the heads of all the rest of those as credulous, as
accursed cooperating Carpinters or workmen with them, in this their Babell of
confusion.

Primo regis Caroli, o^us serves^ere caepit.

This plot wa^ first machinated in King James his days.

The first Parliament at Oxford dissolved.

Sad effects of the dissolution of that first Parliament.

Rochel lost.

West Indie voyage diverted.

C^^es attempted.

Peace with Spain without Parliaments consent.

The Palsgraves cause deserted.

Billetted* Soldiers over the Kingdom* German. horse A second Parliament
dissolved.


And, now, in the first year of the Kings reign, their work began to be
revived, and hotly to be set upon again. For, it is here to be considered that
in the last year of King James his reign it had been somewhat dampt and qu^sht*
both by the breach with Spain, that year, as also by his Majesty's marriage
with France, whose people were not so contrary unto, nor so hotly active
against the good of Religion, and prosperity of this Kingdom as those of
Spain; and besides the Papists in England being more zealously addicted and
affected (for matter of Religion) to Spain, than France; yet still they
retained a resolution to weaken the Protestant-partie in all parts and places
of Europe, yea, even in France* thereby to make way for an intended change at
home.

The first effect and evidence of which their recoverie of strength was the
dissolution of the first Parliament at Oxford, after two Subsidies granted, but
no grievances removed. After which, many other bitter effects of this bad
begi^^ing followed, or rather flowed and gushed-out apace; as namely, the loss
of Rochel Fleet, yea of Rochel it self (a lamentable evil to the
French-Protestants) by the unhappie help of our ships. The diversion of a most
facile and hopeful war from the W^st-Indies to a most expensive and
successelesse attempt on Cal^s; rather to make us weary of war than
prospe^ous in it. The precipitate breach of peace with France. A peace
concluded with Spain, without consent of a Parliament, contrary to promise made
by King James to both Houses, whereby the Palatine c^u^e was shamefully
deserted by us. The Kingdom soon charged with billetted Soldiers, together
with the concomitant project of Germane-horses to enforce men by ^ear to all
arbitrarie taxations. The dissolution of a second Parliament* in the second
year of his Majesty's reign, after a declarative intention of granting Sad
events on the breach of this Parliament also.
five Subsidies. Violent exacting the said sum, or a sum equivalent to it, by
a Commission of Loan* Diverse worthy gentlemen imprisoned for refusing to pay
it. Great sums of money extorted from subjects by Privie-Seals and Excise.
The most A third Parliamentdissolved.
hopeful Petition of Right blasted in the blossom of it. A third Parliament
called, and as quickly broken, and therein Parliamentari^ By which cruel usage
Sir John Ell^ot a most worthy Member of the House and pious patriot, died then
in prison.
privileges violated, by after ill-usage of some of the best and worthi^st
Members thereof, who were clapt*up in close-imprisonment, denied all ordinary
and extraordinary comforts of this life, and preservation of health, no not so
much as their wives permitted to come unto them, yea deprived of spiritual
consolation for their souls, not suffering them to go to Gods House for
enjoyment of public Ordinances, or godly Ministers to come to them, but kept
them still in this oppressive condition, not admitting them to be bailed
according to Law. More bad issues on the breach of the third Parliament.
And this cruelty might have been perpetual to them and others, had not
another Parliament been necessitated to relieve and release them. Upon the
dissolution of those Parliaments, O what scandalous and opprobrious
Declarations were published to asperse and besmear their proceedings, and some
of their wo^thiest Parliaments and Parliament Members mightily vilified and
disgraced.

Quarto Caroli


Members, unjustly to make them odious; and the better to color their
exorbitant violence exercised on them, Proclamations set out to those effects,
thereby also extremely disheartning the Subjects, yea and forbidding them once
so much as to speak of any mo Parliaments, this being in the fourth year of the
Kings reign. Then, injustice, violence and heavy oppressions, without all
limits o^ moderation, brakeout upon the people, like unresistible floods
gushing out of a broken-down Dam or stoppage with huge inundations, checking,
yea even choking all our freedoms, and fast fettering our freeborn hearts
with manacles and chains of most intolerable Knighthood money.

Tonnage and Poundage.

Book of Rates.


taxations. Witness, the mighty sums of money gotten by that plot of
Knighthood, under a fair color of Law, but, i^deed, a mere violation of
justice. Tonnage also and poundage received without any pretext or color of
Law The book of Rat^s inhansed to an high proportion. A new and unheard of (yet
Ship Money.
most heavy) taxation over the whole Kingdom, by Ship Money; Both these under a
color of guarding the Seas, by which there was charged on the Subject near
upon 700000* li. some years, and yet, Merchants constantly left naked to the
violent robberies of Turkish-pirates, to the great los^e of many fair Ships and
much goods, and imprisonment of their bodies in Forests enlarged.

Coat and Conduct-money.

Traind-bands Arms taken away.

Gunpowder engross^d.

The Forest of Dean.

Many Motheating Monopolies.

Restraint of habitations and trading.


most miserable bonds of Turkish-slaverie. The enlargement of Forests,
contrary to Magna Charta. The exaction of Coat and Conduct-money. The forcible
taking away of the Train'd-band Arms. The desperate design of Gunpowder
engrossed into their hands, and kept from the Subject in the Tower of London,
and not to be had thence, but at excessive rates and prices. The destruction of
the Forest of Dean, that famous timber-Magazine or Storehouse of the whole
Kingdom, sold to Papists. The canker-eating Monopolies of Soap, Salt, Wine,
Leather, Sea-cole, and almost all things in the Kingdom of most necessary and
common use. Restraint of Subjects liberties in their habitations and trades,
and other just interests; together with many other intolerable burdens which
poor Isachars shoulders were not able to bear, but grievously to groan under
(and which for brevities sake I desire to pass over, as not being my main
intention to insist on, but to hasten to our most happy deliverance from them)
for refusal of which foresaid heavy pressures, O what great numbers of his
Majesty's loyal Subjects Corporal ^^xations and punishments inflicted on many
good Subjects.
have been vexed with long and languishing suits, some fined and confined to
prisons, to the loss of health in many, of life in some; some having their
houses broke-open, and their goods seized on, some interrupted in their Sea
voyages, and their ships taken in an hostile manner by Projectors, as by a
common enemy. The Court of Star Chamber having chiefly fomented and
Star Chamber Court a main fomenter of Suits and Censures.
increased these and such like most extravagant censures and most unjust suits,
both for the improvement of devouring Monopolies, and of diverse other causes
wherein has been none or very small offenses, yea sometimes for mere pretenses
and surmises without any proofs, yet punished as severely as foulest
malefactors, yea and that, in matters of Religion and spiritual cases of
conscience, for which the good Subject has been grievously Oppressions for
Religion and Cases of Conscience.
oppressed by Fines, Imprisonments, stigmatizings* mutilations, whippings,
pillories, gaggs, confinements, banishments, yea and that into perpetual
close-imprisonments in the most desolate remote (and as they hoped and intended
^emorslesse) parts of the Kingdom, and that also, in such rough and rigid
manner, as No l^sse than transcendent barbarous cruelty.

Judges displaced and discountenanced for their honesty.

The Privie-Councill Table, a great favourer of these illegalities.


has not only deprived them of the society of near and dear friends,
exercise of their professions, comfort of books, use of poper or ink, but even
violating that neerest-union which God has established twixt men and their
wives by forced and constrained separation. Judges also put out of their places
for refusing to do ought against their oaths and consciences, others so
overawed, that they durst not do their duties. Lawyers checked for
faithfulness to their Clients, and threatened, yea punished for honestly
following lawful suits. The Privy Council also a mighty maintainer and
prosecuter of illegall-suits against the Subject The Court of Honor, Chancery,
Exchequer-Chamber, Court of Wards, and almost all other English-Courts have
been exceeding grievous in their excessive jurisdictions. Titles of Honor,
Selling of justice, and places of judicature.
places of Judicature, Serieant-ships at Law, and other offices of trust have
been sold for great sums of money; and they that buy must needs sell. And
thereby also occasion has been given too frequently, of brib^rie, extortion,
and partiality, it being, indeed, seldom seen that places ill-gotten should be
wellused. These and such like Land-devouring enormities, have been countenanced
and practiced in our long-languishing Commonwealth.

Prelatespranks in the Church.
And if we look into the course and carriage of things in the Church also, O
how many impieties and irregularities have we, there, long beheld abounding and
surrounding us, to the high dishonor of God, and disgrace of true Religion!
The Bishops and the rest of the Pontifician or rotten-hearted Clergy and
Arminian-faction, under a pretense (forsooth) of peace, uniformitie Suspensions
and excommunications.
and conformity have like so many si^ly Cesars triumphed in the chariots of
their Spiritual Courts, by their suspensions, Excommunications, Deprivations,
and Degradations of diverse painful, learned and pious Pastors of our Church,
and in the vexatious and grievous grinding oppressions of great numbers of The
high-Commission-Court, little inferior to the Spanish-Inquisition.
his Majesty's good Subjects. In which cases, the high Commission-Courts
pragmaticall pranks have been unsufferable; the sharpness and severity whereof
grew to such an unlimited monstrous growth, height, and strength, as was not
much unlike, and very little inferior to the Romish or Spanish-Inquisition,
yea and in many cases, by the Archbishops super-superlative power it was made
much heavier, it being (as often as they pleased) assisted and strengthened
both by the furious power and authority of the Star Chamber and
Councill-Table, when the wrath and rage of their own-Courts could not reach as
high as their hatred extended to the utter wracking and worrying of the
innocent and holy lambs of Christ, whom indeed the world was not In City and
Country men and women forced to fly into foreign parts.
worthy of. This they did both in Cities and countries, extremely vexing and
perplexing those of the meaner sort, Tradesmen and Artificers even to the deep
impoverishing of many thousands of them, and so afflicting and troubling others
with threats and expensive suits, that great numbers, to avoid these miseries
and mischievous molestations departed out of the Kingdom, Into Holland and
New England.
some into Holland, some into New England and other desert and uninhabited
parts of America, thereby exposing themselves, their wives, children and
estates to the great danger of winds and waves by Sea, and many other
inevitable hazards by Land. Those Who they were which got most preferments.
only were held fittest for preferments, at home, and obtained them soonest who
were most officious and sedulous to promote and propagate idolatry,
superstition, innovations and profaneness, and were most violent and virulent
sons of Belial in railing against and reviling godliness and honesty.

Court sermons what, and to what end.
Now, all this while, also, the most public and solemn sermons at Court before
the King, were nothing else, for the most part, but either to advance the Kings
prerogative above Laws, and to beat-down the Subjects just propriety in their
estate and goods, or full of such like frothie kind of invectives, the only
way (in those days) to get fat morsels, rich benefices, and Ecclesiastical
preferments (the onely-prey they sought after) And thus also laboring (as the
second main part of their play) to make those men odious to the King and State,
who conscientiously sought to maintain Religion, Laws and liberties of the
Kingdom; and such men were sure (still) to be wrung and wrested out of their
livings, Godly Ministers thrust from their livings.
if Ministers; And out of the Commission of peace, if of the gentry, and all
other places of employment and power in the government of the Commonwealth.
Yea and those few godly and religious Noble personages, which were of the
privy-Councill, though Counselors in name, yet not in power or authority,
only used at the Councill*board to execute and countenance, not to debate and
deliberate-on their State resolutions; nay, so far from being employed in any
place of trust and The faction now grown to its height.
power that they were utterly neglected, discountenanced, and on all occasions
injured and oppressed by the rest of the contrary faction; which now was grown
to that height and entirenesse of power, that now they began to think-on the
complete catastrophe and consummating of the whole work, to their hearts
desire, which stood on these three parts or pillars of confusion.

Three parts of now perfecting thewhole plot.
First, that the Government must be arbitrarie, set free from all limits of
Law, both concerning persons and estates. Secondly, union and conformity
between Papists Protestants, both in doctrine, discipline and ceremonies, only
it must not (yet) be called or counted Popery. Thirdly, Puritans rooted out of
the Realm, by force, or driven away by fear: And thus now at last we have the
full dimensions, every way, of this pestilent and most pernicious plot.

And could they possibly have dug deeper? or in humane apprehension and
contrivement have founded it firmlier? Whatsoever worldly wit and wealth could
do, whatsoever carnal craft, power and policy could effect was wholly for
them with full and copious concurrence, they now seemed to carry all
irresistibly before them. And now nothing was wanting fully to finish the work,
no stone unturned, no Remora to be removed, Psalm. 62* 9.
save only one; In which, God gave them the lie to their teeth, according to
that of the Psalmist: Surely, men of low degree are vanity, and m^n of high
degree are a lie, and both to be laid in the balance, they are altogether
lighter than vanity it self. Such vanity, yea such lying-vanity these
great-ones in their supercilious highbuilt hopes and bigg-swoln timpanie of
ambition, pride and perfidie, began to be now rendered by the wisdom and
mercy of our good God. This one rub, I say, now to be removed, proved the main
break-neck of their whole design, and makes way Malum cons^lium consultori
pessimum.
for mine also, which is, to let you and all the world see moss clearly how
heaven made these impious plotters fall by their own folly and madness, by
their own creft crest all their secret counsels and confederacies, and made
their own invented mischief Psalm. 7. 14, 15, 16.
work-out their own miseries. According to that of the sween Singer of Israel,
most pertinent to this purpose. Behold he traveled with iniquity, has
conceived mischief, and brought forth falsehood. He made a pit, and delved it,
and is fallen into the ditch, which he made for others, his mischief shall
return upon his own head, and his violent dealing shall fall upon his own pate;
Whiles Gods dear Saints of England and Scotland escaped as birds out of the
snare of those Fowlers, and by Gods free grace and rich mercy found full and
fair deliverance. Which, I say, is the main scope and How they began to put
their threefold plot, aforesaid, into full execution.

Scotland attempted.


principal aim of this our present history. For now, as they verily believed,
they had made England their absolute-asse to bear all their back, yea,
soul-breaking burdens: So that they thought it most fit, now, in the last
place, to reduce Scotland to such Romish-harmonie and conformity to embrace
those Popish superstitions and innovations as might make them apt to join with
England in that great change which they intended; for, as for Ireland, they
were sure enough to prevail there at their pleasure, as it is too well known to
us all, and to themselves also by their late bloody experience, which had been
much more, had not God crossed their plot (there) also, and enabled us to help
them.

A new Liturgy and Canons put upon them.
Whereupon our Church-Canons and a new-minted Liturgy (not the very same which
is used with us in England, which, with our vestures, gestures, and
superstitious service-ceremonies, had been abundantly enough to have vexed them;
but with most pestilent Popish-additionals and unsufferable new inventions of
the Arch-prelate of Canterbury, or some of his Romish-factors framing, put in,
over and above ours* to make them stark mad, (as it were) must be sent unto
them, and most violently obtruded on them; Both which, they instantly and
stiffly opposed, especially when they considered and called to mind those But
rejected.
three rare gentlemen (as some imminent Scots have acknowledged) who* had been
so lately and barbarously abused on pillories in England (but the 30th. of June
before; and this attempt on them, was in August immediately following) for
opposing and writing against those and such like Romish fopperies; their women
in Scotland being the first and forwardest stoutly to Dux faemina facti. Virg.
in his Aen.
resist such an uncouth and strange imposition on them. Where, by the way, let
me desire the godly Reader not to pass over this remarkable passage slightly,
as a trivial thing. For, though this child of hope was, now, but in the embrio
and unpolisht conception, and as yet had no strength at all to bring forth a
perfect birth of deliverance to them or us in the eye of the world* yet Zach.
4. 10.
let us remember what a notable caution the Prophet gives us. Despise not the
day of small things. For, they shall rejoice, and shall see the plumet in the
hand of Zerubbabel, with those Cap 3. 9.
seven eyes of the Lord which run to and fro through the whole earth. Now the
women having thus begun to oppose this new English-Romish Pope an Archbishop of
Scotland appointed (as they called it) to A great disturbance in the Church.
read and publish it in his fine linen Ephod, and other Popish-Pontificalibus,
were seconded by the men, between whom was a huge hubbub made in the Church at
the bringing in of the new Liturgy or Service Book, which they, I say, thus
utterly rejected and cast out from amongst them; and upon this first 1 Kin. 18.
44.
and small rising, like the cloud (at first) no broader than a hand, All
Scotland opposes it.
it quickly grew so big that the whole Land was overspread with it, the
Kingdom in general being highly incensed also They are proclaimed Rebels in
all Churches in England.

An army raised against them.


against it did utterly refuse to admit it among them. Whereupon, foul
calumnies and scoffs were cast upon them in England, yea a Proclamation read in
all Churches, calling and counting them Rebels and Traitors for thus resisting
our Prelates most injurious impositions on them; and an Army was speedily
raised at the Prelates instigation to enforce them by fierce compulsi^^ to
obedience, and to take that yoke on their necks; for the advancing of which
said army, our Prelates with the rotten-hearted Clergy and Papists were most
free and forward with libe^all contributions.

The Scots do the like.
The noble and valiant Scots were thereupon constraine^ to do the like, in
their own just defense. But, when both Armies were met* and ready for a bloody
encounter, God who has the hearts of Kings in his hands, by the honest and
wholesome counsel of his Nobility, so wrought on the heart of our King, that
The first Pacification.
(maugre all the pr^gging malice of the malignant-partie, then, about him) a
fair and friendly Pacification was speedily agreed on, and the King returned to
London with much honor to God in the Mount.
himself and sweet content to all, but those that wished to have ruinated all.
And now, tell me, did not God (here) begin to be seen in the Mount for our
deliverance, in thus at the very f^rst onset of their devilish design
stopping the intended current of Psalm. 33. 10* 11, 12.
Christan-bloodshed. And as the holy Prophet David sweetly, The Lord brings
the counsel of the wicked to noug^^, and ma^es their devises of none effect.
But the counsels of the Lord stand fast for ever, and the thoughts of his heart
to all generations. Blessed therefore is the Nation whose God is the Lord, and
the people whom he has chosen for his inheritance.

The malignant party displeased with the Pacification.
This unexpected reconciliation was, I say, most welcome and acceptable to all
the Kingdom except the malignant party, who like envious elves gnashed their
teeth, and with malice gnawed rancorously on their own hearts, and therefore
began again to spit yet more envy and spite out of their mischievous mouths
against the Scots and this happy peace; especially William Laud Chiefly the
Arch-Prelate Laud, and the Earl of Straford.
the Arch-Prelate of Canterbury, and the Earl of Straford, the two monstrous
heads of their faithless faction, who I say, began again mightily to malign
and bitterly to inveigh against the peace, and to aggravate matters and
exasperate the Kings wrath against the proceedings of those Peers that promoved
it, making his Majesty believe that it was a very dishonorable peace, and
disgraceful to the Kingdom, insomuch that the King forthwith Preparation for
war, again.
prepared again for war with them. And such was their confidence or rather
immarbled impudence, that having (by all means forementioned) corrupted and
distempered (at least as they thought) the whole frame and government of the
Kingdom, they now also hoped to corrupt that f^^^^tain which was the only
means (under God) to restore all to a right fram^ and temper again, a
Parliament; to which end, they persuaded his Majesty to call one, but not to
seek counsel^ of them, but to A Parliament motioned to an ill intent.
draw countenance and supply from them, and to engage the whole Kingdom in
their wicked quarrel, and so to make the mischief and mis^rie too, National.
In which mean time they continued all their unjust levies of money* resolving
either to make the Parliament pliant to their will, and (as the Prophet said of
the Psalm. 94. 20*
wicked in his days) to establish mischief by a law; or else to break it up
again at their pleasure, and to shift otherwise* as well as they could by
colorable violence (as formerly) to go-on to take what might not be had with
consent. Now the ground alleged for the justification of this war was this,
namely, the undutifull demands of the Scots in their Parliament, which they
conceived was cause enough for his Majesty to war against them without once
hearing their justification of those their demands: and so thereupon a new
Army was mustered and prepared against The Scots prosecuted again.
them, their ships were seized on in all Ports and parts of our Kingdom, and of
Ireland also, their Petitions rejected, and their Commissioners refused
audience: In sum, the whole Kingdom was thus miserably distracted and
distempered with leavies of The Earl of Straford in Ireland calls a Parliament,
whereby they deeply engage themselves for this war.
money, and imprisonment of those who denied to submit and crouch to those
Leavies. In which interim, the Earl of Strafford posted into Ireland, called a
Parliament there, out of hand quickly caused them to declare against the Scots,
and to grant four Subsidies toward the war, yea and to engage themselves,
their lives and fortunes for the prosecution of it to the utmost of their
power, and to give direction for an Army of 8000. foot, and 1000 horse, to be
immediately mustered up, which were all A Prosopopoeia to Ireland, as touching
this act, and her present state.
for the most part, Papists. O Ireland, Ireland, even this very deed of thine
(above all thy other high provocations of general profaneness, and especially
of complacencie with base idolatrous Papists all over thy Kingdom) in thus
obliging thy Self in such a most unjust war against thine honest and
harmless Brethren of Scotland, has, I am confidently persuaded, most
unhappily plunged thee into that most lamentable plight of blood and misery
which now of late thou have grievously found and felt to thy unspeakable and
unparalleled sorrow and smart, and has made thee such a deplorable prey to
their most barbarous mawes and bloody teeth of those Popish-rebels, or rather,
inhumane Caniballs and unnatural Vipers, whom thou so lately so lovingly (yet
most irrelegiously) did nourish and cherish, as A short, yet sharp check to
England also.
so many venomous Snakes in thy bosom (And I pray God this be not too frequent
a fault among us in England, namely, to embrace in the arms of our foolish
love, a Papist as equally as a Protestant) to this thy utter and inevitable
destruction, had not the Lord in wonderful free mercy and favor prevented it
in preserving Dublin.

The Earl of Straford having thus acted Sinons part in Ireland, The Earl of
Straf. returned home.
to his most wicked hearts content, triumphing in his treachery; with more
haste than good speed, returned to England, where this most subtle Sinon, or
rather scelerous Simeon, and Simeon and Levi.
A fourth Parliament called, April, 13. 1640.
Laud, his lewd brother, Levi, right brothers in iniquity, together with the
rest of that pernicious party (at our Parliament in England, which began,
April, 13th, 1640.) had so prevailed with his Majesty, that the said
Parliament was most urgently incited and stimulated to yield supply toward the
maintenance of this war with Scotland, and that, before there was any provision
for the relief of those great pressures and groaning grievances of the people,
as have been forementioned. But, by Gods overswaying power and good providence
(before any such thing could be to the purpose debated or resolved on) base
fears and jealousies The said 4th: Parliament dissolved.
preocupating the hearts of the malignant party, they suddenly and scelerously
advised the King by all means to break-off thus Parliament also, and to return
to their former ways of waste and confusion, in which they hoped their own
evil intentions Mark this, O England for thy comfort.
were most like to proceed and prosper. But here, by the way, take along with
thee, good Reader, this note or observation on these premises, namely, that,
had our Parliament afforded the least supply to that wicked war, yea though but
one 6. d* with Reverend Mr. Case in his 12. Arguments of comfort to England.
their consent, they had made the quarrel National, and thereby the plague and
punishment of such a great sin, most justly Epid^micall. Take this, then, O
England, as no small mercy from thy gracious God, who thus mercifully freed
thee from such a Land-devouring sin and heinous provocation as Ireland does
woefully witness it.

May 5. 1640. Violent courses again exercised to get money.

Very ill usage to some eminent Parliament Members.

A scandalous Declaration published.

A forced loan of money urged in the city of London.

Aldermen imprisoned for refusing it.

The Apprentises rising in Southwark side and at Lambeth.


Now that Parliament thus fruitlesly ended, they again fell to their former
tyrannical practices and squeezing course of enforcing supplies out of the
peoples estates, by the Kings own power and prerogative, at his own will, and
without their consent; yea the very next day after the dissolution of that
Parliament, some eminent Members of both Houses had their Chambers and Studies,
yea their Cabinets and very pockets of their wearing clothes searched for
Letters and writings, another of them, not long after close-imprisoned for not
delivering to them some Petitions, which he received by authority of that House
in time of Parliament. A false and scandalous Declaration was then published
against the House of Commons in the Kings name, which yet (by Gods mercy) took
no effect in the hearts of the people, but contrariwise made the impudency of
the suspected authors of it more odious to them. A forced loan of money was
then attempted in the City of London, to be made a president (if it prevailed)
for the whole Kingdom; but some Aldermen refusing it, were sorely thr^atned and
committed to prison. About which time there fell out a mighty and tumultuous
rising of Apprentis^s and young men in Southwark and Lambeth side, with clubs
and other such weapons, especially at the Arch-prelates house in Lambeth, which
put him into such a fright and perplexity, as made him hide his head and fly
from place to place, from Lambeth to Croydon, and from Croydon to convey
himself to some more private and remote hiding place for fear of their fu^y; So
that we might have said of him as the Prophet Jeremie did of Pashur that false
prophet, (Jer. 20. 3.) The Lord has not called thy name Pashur, but
Magor-missabib; even fear, and terror and trembling round about thee. Which
(as 'twas probably believed) was the cause that the farther and more furious
execution of their violent courses to get money from the Subject Exodus 8. 19.
was not prosecuted. Now, though Pharaoh's Magicians were so wise and honest,
that at the sight of the dust of the earth turned into (...) they cried out it
was the finger of God: yet this lofty Levite of Canterburies heart was as hard
as Pharaoh's himself, and would not, with any remorse or penitencie of spirit,
acknowledge the hand of God against him, but, (just like Pharaoh, (I say) grew
more and more out-rageous hereby. For, in The Clergy continue their
Convocation.
all this interim, he and the rest of the Bishops and Clergy cont^nued their
Convocation (though the Parliament was dissolved) and by a new-Commission,
turned it into a Provinciall-Synod, in which they audaciously contrived new
Canons containing many New Canons made.
matters contrary to the Kings prerogative (which they so deceitfully pretend to
uphold) the fundamental Laws of the Realm, Parliament privileges, and
Subjects liberties, and mainly tending to dangerous sedition, upholding their
unjust usurpations, and as impudently as impiously justifying their Popish
innovations, idolatries, and superstitious worship of God. Among A new-forged
Oath, with a monstrous etc. in it.
which their accursed Canons they had forged a new and strange Oath for the
establishing of their Antichristian tyranny, with a most prodigious and
monstrous Et caetera, in it, thereby to have deeply ensnared and grossly abused
both Ecclesiastics and Laymen, as they distinguish them. Which Oath for its
craft and labyrinthick intricacie, and no less hellish cruelty so to
captivate men's consciences, I have thought fit here to insert.

The Oath.
I, A. B. do swear, that I approve the doctrine and discipline, or government
established in the Church of England, as containing all things necessary to
salvation; and that I will not endeavor, by my self or any other, directly or
indirectly to bring in any Popish doctrine, contrary to that which is so
established: nor will I ever give my consent to alter the government of this
Church by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, etc. as it stands now
established, and as by right it ought to stand, nor yet ever to subject it to
the usurpations and superstition of the Sea of Rome. And all these things I do
plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear, according to the plain and common
sense and understanding of the same words, without any equivocation or mental
evasion or secret reservation whatsoever. And this I do heartily, willingly and
truly upon the faith of a Christian. So help me God in Jesus Christ.

Punishments on those that refused to take it.
Which Oath, whosoever refused to take must be most severely punished with
suspensions, deprivations, and excommunications, or forced by other vexations
to fly out of the Land, that so the Kingdom being cleared of these squemish
and nice-conscienced fellows, (as they call and count tender conscienc'd men) a
fairer and wider way might be made for the advancing of that grand^signe,
namely, the Reconciliation of our English Church to the Church of Rome.

Now, here (me thinks) I cannot pretermit to let the Reader see and take
notice, how properly this plot of theirs may be paralleled with that of Pharaoh
against the Israelites in Egypt, who Exodus 1. 9, 10.
though kept-under with great and grievous thraldom and most heavy burdens;
yet grew to such a numerous multitude, that Pharaoh, being afraid of their
number and still-increasing strength, Pharaohs speech to his Nobles.
spoke thus to his Lords and Counselors. Come-on, my Lords, let us deal
wisely, and endeavor timely to cure this growing Gangrene, let us keep the
children of Israel under with vehement vexations, and destroy all their male
children in their birth, lest they grow too strong for us, and either forcibly
get from us, or join in battle with our enemies against us: But God crossed
this his craft and Pharaohs policy proved mere folly.
cruelty, and made this very plot of theirs the groundwork of the greatest
harm even to their whole land, by Moses preservation, whom God used as the main
instrument of the Egyptians destruction. Thus, even thus, I say, it fared with
our Prelates and Pontificians, who, by reason of our Scottish br^threns
expulsion of their pernicious Prelates out of Scotland, not unjustly fearing
that the English Puritans would endeavor the like supplantation of their
English hierarchy, by the Scots example; Come, The Arch-Prelate of Canterbury
his speech to his Pontificians in the Synod.
therefore (says the Archbishop of Canterbury to his Pontifician crew) let us
now deal wisely, lest too late we repent it, let us cur^ the courage of that
increasing Puritanicall-sect which so hates our apostolicall-Prelacie, let us
vex and perplex them with the heavy and hard loads of cer^monies,
superstitious innovations and new-east Canons with an etc. Oath (right
muddie*bricks, straw and stable of Romish Egypt) which, I hope shall prove the
very Quintessence of all our former plots and projects, and the only way to
fix our selves fast, and rivet our selves so firmly into the apos^olicall chair
of this Kingdom (by swearing the Puritans, both Clergy and Laics to our
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction) as that no power either of Prince or Parliament
shall ever be able to set us, hereafter, beside the sadle. But, see, I pray,
how the Lords overpowring wisdom and goodness defeated their so high-built
hopes, crossed this their deep craft, and made this Oath and book of Canons the
ground of their greatest overthrow. So that all that see with the right-eye of
a true understanding, may justly say with Jethro, Exodus 18. 11.
Moses father in law. Now I know that the Lord is greater than all (Romes
idol-) gods, for, in the (very) thing wherein they deal^ proudly, the Lord was
above them. For, after this, their courage began to quail (for this present
Parliament was resolved on, shortly after those Canons and Oath were made)
their proiects prospered not, all their devis^s were on the declining hand,
Gods vindicative indignation continually prosecuting them to their shame and (I
hope) to the utter ruin of their most insolent and unsufferable Antichristian
tyranny, as the sequill shall manifestly make clear, in the description of our
deliverances, whereunto I mainly address my thoughts and intention. Now Large
taxations laid on the Clergy tow^^d the war.
for the yet more absolute furthering of their most p^stiferous proiects, they
(in that Synod) laid great taxations on the whole Cl^rgie, as namely, 6.
Subsidies, besides a bountiful contribution to forward the intended war
against Scotland, to which, they all (of the pontifician and scandalous rout
especially) showed themselves, generally, very free and affectionate, and which
war, some of them, in their mad and hair-braind zeal, were not ashamed Bellum
Episcopale.

Prayers against the Scots as against rebels.


to style and entitle, the Bishops War; yea, a solemn prayer was composed and
enjoined by the Bishops, to be used in all Churches, calling the Scots Rebels
in it, thus, as much as in them lay, to embrew both Nations in blood, and to
make the wrath and fury between them irreconcilible. And here, now, the Reader
The Soldiers marching forward to York.
must be pleased to take notice, that the Army was now going forward for York;
and therefore we may (here) not unfitly observe (as a first demonstration of
Gods beginning to cross and countercheck their malevolent machinations) how
the soldiers, which were pressed and now passing forward to York, did most
Turn rude-Reformers.
strangely and uncontroulably turn rude-reformers, as they marched through the
Countries, forcibly intruding and getting into Churches, and there,
irresistibly, pulling-down altar-rails, turning altars into Communion Table
postures, making inquiry, in the Towns where they came, how the Ministers
carried themselves in their pastoral charges: if godly and diligent Preachers,
they reverendly and respectively used them; but, if Romes Minions (I mean
Arminians) superstitious lazy drones, rotten-hearted Baals priests, or
covetous pluralists, where-ere they came and found such, they vexed, derided,
and most contemptuously used them, utterly disdaining also and refusing to Non
omnin^ laudo, admirer tamen.
be ordered or commanded by popish-Leaders. Now although I do not, I may not
justify these their mis-carriages, yet, who can deny a special hand of
divine providence taking most high displeasure and just offense against our
Prelates and Pontificians former violent and furious practices, and beginning
thus at the very first onset in this their great design, to blast their
bloody intentions. And, certainly, if prudent Deborah did curse Meros, Judge.
5. 23. 31.
justly, and the inhabitants thereof, with bitter curses, because they went not
out to help the Lord against the mighty: What bitter curses, think we, then
shall fall upon those who most affectionately afforded strong aid to mighty
and most malicious Popish enemies, against the Lord and his dear saints and
servants? Even so, O Lord, (as she goes on) let all thine enemies perish, but
let those that love thee, be as the bright and glorious sun when he goes forth
in his resplendent might. But, to go forward. At this time also The Papists did
enjoy almost a full toleration.

Sir Francis Windibank their great friend.

A Popes Nuncio.


the Popish faction enjoyed such exemptions and exceptions against the penal
Laws of the Land, as amounted very near to a full toleration of their religion;
Besides many other favors and Court-encouragements. They had a Secretary of
State, Sir Francis Windibank a powerful ag^nt for the expediting of all the
Papists desires; a Popes Nuncio. residing here to act and govern them according
to Romes influences, and to mediate for them, Great liberty to the Papists.
with the concurrence of foreign Popish Princes. By this Nuncio's authority,
the Papists of all sorts, Nobility, Gentry and Clergy A Popish private
Parliament in England.
were convocated after the manner of a private Parliament, new Popish
jurisdiction erected of Romish Archbishops, taxes leavied, a new government of
State contrived independent to ours; yea contrary to ours both in interest and
affection, secretly corrupting the ignorant or negligent professors of our
religion, and closely combining and uniting themselves against such as were
sound professors, and in this posture only watching and waiting for an Diverse
notable private contrivements of the Popish party for the full perfecting of
the plot.
opportunity by force to destroy those whom by fear or fraud they were
hopeless to seduce. For the full effecting whereof, they were strongly
strengthened with all kind of warlike ammunition, encouraged by Popish prayers
weekly enjoined by their Nuncio; and such power had they then procured at
Court, that secretly a Commission was issued out, intended for some great Ones
of the Popish profession both for leavying and martial command See here, by
all these particulars if England was not bought and sold to destruction.
of Soldiers according to those private instructions. His Majesty's treasure
also was extremely exhausted and consumed, his revenews anticipated, his
Servants and Officers compelled to lend him great sums of money, multitudes
tired with attendance on the Councill-Table for refusal of illegal payments,
prisons were filled with their commitments, and many Sheriffs summoned into
the Star Chamber, and some imprisoned for not being quick enough in leavying
the Ship Money, and generally all the people, over the whole Kingdom,
languished twixt grief and fear of the issue of these strong and strange snares
and entanglements, no visible sign, nor hope of humane help being left us, but
in dolor and desperation.

England brought into a Mount of Straits.
And was not England, now, brought into a Mount of straits indeed? Could hell
it self or the fiercest fiends and furies the rein have hatched a more horrid
and hideous contrivement, and that under a colorable pretense of law and
right, forsooth, and royallprerogative? Were not these like to prove rare
Common-wealthsmen and Statesmen, who, as the Prophet David complains, (and as
touched before) would establish and set up wickedness by Psalm. 94. 20. Jer. 16.
16. Genesis 10. 8, 9. Nimrod a mighty hunter.
a Law? Yea, these were truly, Those many fishers, which the Lord threatens to
send against his sinning people to fish them, and many hunters to hunt them.
Yea, I say, those most nefarious Nimrods, those mighty hunters, even most
audaciously before the Lord, who, to raise-up and erect this their Babel of
confusion, hunted not beasts, but the best of men, not for recreation, but for
rapine and the utter ruin of true Religion. Wherefore, now at last, the Lord
our great Jehovah, whose eyes run to and fro, through-out the 2 Chronicles. 16. 9.
whole earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is
perfect toward him; hearing the groans and crying prayers of his poor
afflicted people, to whose throne of grace and mercy they now made their only
earnest addresses and pressing approaches; who, I say, being a God hearing
prayers, pardoning sins and a present Psalm. 65. 2. Nehem 9. 17. Psalm. 46. 1.
Luk 8. 48. Exodus 14. 13. Deuteronomy. 3^. 35, 36.
help in greatest straits and distresses, gives them a gracious return, bids
them be of good comfort, and fearlesse, yea bids them stand still and see the
salvation of the Lord, which he will show them. For, to me (says the Lord)
belongs vengeance and recompense; your enemies foot shall slip, in due time*
for the day of their calamity is at hand, and the the things that shall come
upon them do make haste. For the Lord will judge his own people, and repent
himself for his servants Admirable comfort in deepest distress.

Mr* Cala. Fast-Ser.


injuries, when he sees that their power is gone, and there is none else to
help. I am therefore graciously resolved (says our God) to make England a
School of mercies, and to set it in the highest form thereof, yea and to make
it the captain of the School, and thereby intend to set him one-lesson to get
by heart, even a lesson of true gratitude The introduction to the now
subsequent Parliamentarie-mercies.
and holy obedience, for the mercies which now I intend to show and bestow upon
it. Such mercies indeed (good Reader) as thou shall now see, and (to thy souls
admiration and comfortable contemplation) behold, that had I as many tongues,
hands and p^ns, as I have hairs on my head, and exquisite dexterity fitly to
manage and make use of them all, they would not suffice to set out the praises
of our good God for them, being indeed such A mighty and strange overture of
things for the better.
mercies, as none but God himself could (miraculously) conser upon us, by such
a mighty and admirably strange overture and turn of things, which God now
began to work by this Parliament, and all for the better, yea more and more
admirable mercies to us within these two years than has been bestowed on
others in many ages. Which now by Gods gracious assistance, I shall abundantly
make most clear and conspicuous, to the high honor and glory of God, and the
unspeakable consolation and joy of his saints and holy ones. The Nobility
begins to be sensible of our sorrows.


For, now, behold, the Lord began to open the eyes and to touch the hearts of
our Nobles, now at York, with the King, and to make them weary of their
too-long silence and patience (if I may so call it and to lay to heart the
Kingdoms great distractions and deep distempers, to be thereupon impatient of
any longer delays, and very sensible of the duty and trust which belongs to
them; some, therefore, of the most eminent of them adventured to petition the
King (who being, now, at York, had there advanced The Kings royal Standard set
up at York.

The Peers do petition the King.

The Scots also were vexed as well as we*


his royal Standard, and gathered thither the cream of the whole Kingdom) yea
and at such a time too, when as ill Counselors were so powerful and
prevalent with his Majesty, that they had reason to expect more hazard to
themselves, than fair and facile redresses of those palpable and public evils
for which they then interceded. At which time, also, of this Kingdoms deadly
burning-fever or violently shaking-ague of intestine miseries and oppr ssions,
the Scots having been long time restrained in their trades, impoverished by
loss of many of their ships and goods, bereaved of all possibility of
satisfying his Majesty by any naked Supplication, wherein they had been long
time tired, and even quite wearied-out, being as frequently as fruitlesly
denied their desires, and now at last (to shut-up quite all doors of hope from
them an army marching to the gates of their Kingdom to force They enter our
Kingdom with a strong Army.
them to slavish subjection and obedience. They, hereupon, resolving to stand on
their most just defense, and with their swords (since words would not prevail)
to make their own passage, for audience, to the King; with a strong army (as
their last remedy) of Saints rather than Soldiers entered the Kingdom, and
without The Scots at New Castle.
any hostile act or spoil in the country, as they passed save only (being
affronted by some of the Kings army) to force their passage over the Tyne at
Newburn, near Newcastle, and had a fair opportunity to press on further upon
the Kings army, out that duty and reverence to his Majesty, and brotherly
love and true Christian affection to our English Nation (according to the The
intention of the Scots Army^ printed and published in private.
tenor of a most excellent Declaration, printed and dispersed over the Kingdom,
immediately upon their entering the Realm, entitled, The Scots mind and
intention with their Army; which gave great satisfaction therein) made them
stay there, piously and patiently, as loving friends, not foes, voluntarily to
wait and supplicate again to his Majesty at York, for justice in their
innocent cause against their wicked enemies: Whereby the King had the better
leisure to entertain better Counsel, according to those Noble Peers Petition
also, forementioned, wherein the The King entertains good counsel, at York.

Sept. 24* 1640.


Lord our God so blessed him, that he summoned a great Council of Peers* then
at York, to meet together with him, on Sept. 24, 1640. The Scots hereupon, the
first day of the great Council presented another most humble petition to his
Majesty, whereupon a treaty was appointed at Rippon, in which, things A
treaty at Rippon.
were so wisely and worthily agitated by the Commissioners on both sides, and in
all that interim, a sweet cessation of Arms A cessation of Arms agreed.
agreed upon, that at last, it was resolved that the full conclusion of all
differences between is and the Scots should be referred to the wisdom and care
of a Parliament declared to begin, A fifth Parliament called, and to begin,
Novem* 3. 1640.
November. 3d, then next ensuing, as the sole means (under heaven) to cure all
these foresaid maladies, and to recover the Kingdom of its heart*sick diseases
and (otherwise incurable) mortal wounds, and to settle the State of things
(which (otherwise) seemed insuperable) into a right frame and posture. For, as
has been abundantly manifested, all things were so out of joint, the King and
whole Kingdom brought to such exigents and precipitating sad and bad issues,
that had not God thus timously struck in, and thus necessitated this
Parliament, England (undoubtedly) R^dis indigestaque moles.
had been made, long ere this, a confused Chaos of confusion, a ghastly Golgotha,
and a most foul field of Blood, and posterity might have sighi^gly sobd*out
(not sung) of it. Ah, England, England, once called Albion, for thy white
rocks, now too justly may be called Olbion, for thy black deformity of
destruction and desolation! O London, famous London, Englands (once) glorious
Seges ubi Tr^j^ fuit.
Troynovant, now become a desolate wilderness, the plowma^s fallow-plains or
vast fields of corn; or, as the Prophet Jeremie, by his Jerusalem* might most
properly have painted thee out also, as in the 1* of his Lamentations. But,
now, behold, thy God is come unto thee, is now seen, yea, now, I say, if God in
the Mount.
ever in the Mount of Mercies for thy admirable deliverance from this most
profound abyss of deepest danger, in this mighty mercy of the Lord to thee
but new-now poor gasping-England, in that the English and Scottish-armies
should lie so near each other in a martial manner, and yet seem Both to shake
hands together, should only look one another in the face, and not embrue their
hands in the blood of each other, but sit still, rest together in peace, and at
length part (as they did) like good friends. O who can forbear, but in a
transcendent rapture of joy and gratitude, break-out, with holy David, and say,
or rather cheerfully Psalm. 68. 34. 32. Psalm. 46. 9.
sing; Ascribe unto the Lord worship and honor, ascribe unto the Lord the
glory of his name. Sing unto God ye Kingdoms of the earth, O sing praises unto
our God. Who makes wars to cease unto the end of the earth, who breaks the
bow, and cuts the spear in sunder, and Psalm. 68. 19.
burns the chariots in the fire. Who daily loadeth us with his benefits, Job 5.
13. Psalm. 94. 11. Isa. 29. 14.
and is the only God of our salvation. Who infatuates the wisdom of the wise
and prudent, and makes the counsels of Princes to come to naught. But, now, to
proceed where I left; A Parliament was (I say) appointed to begin, Novem. the
third, a Parliament said I? (strange word) what? a Parliament? why, who durst
(once) A Parliament.
be so bold, as only to whisper his desires of a Parliament? who (once) durst
mutter, much less utter-out such a word, A Parliament in England, again? Yet,
thus it was, yea and thus timely too yea and such a Parliament too, as this
Kingdom never saw ^he like, for length and strength of goodness, for Church
and State; to Gods due glory and everlasting praise be it spoken. Certainly
(then) if ever, now was our God gloriously seen in the Mount of Merci s for
Englands greatest good and hoped happiness.

But now see again* (as I premised at the beginning) the serpentine-seed,
Satan's agents, must be still working and plotting against all the springing
hopes and budding comforts of Gods people, if it were possible to blast them in
the blossoms. For, A plot to spoil the Parliament
now, since they saw to their secret sorrow, a Parliament must needs be, and
this omen also unavoidable, all their crafty pates were contriving and casting
about how to stifle this conception of comfort in the very womb. For, the
malignant party spying well that they could not (as I said) put off the
Parliament, they therefore cunningly and closely endeavor by their Courtly
agents to have such Members of it chosen in every Corporation, City, and Shire
as might only advance their mischievous Machinations The Kings and
Queensletters.
and base designs in Parliament. They, therefore, procure the Kings and Queens
Letters to Counties and Shires, get Earls, Lords, Knights and Gentlemen ride up
and down to help them.
both Earls, Lords, Knights and Gentlemen to ride in person and rove up and down
to all parts and places of the Kingdom to make parties for them in choice of
such as they should nominate. Yet, see again, on the other side how the Lord
counter-plotted and infatuated all their craft, care, and industry therein;
for, notwithstanding all their cost and coyl, all their running and riding,
God, God counterplots and crosses them.
I say, frustrated their impious expectation, in most places. The Lord, who
holds the hearts of all men in his hands, caused the willing people from all
parts, spontaneously to flock and assemble together like such unheard of
numerous swarms of bees of all requisite sorts and qualities, with most
unbended courage and Parliamentary Worthies chosen.
irrefragable resolutions to chuse-out and select, such pious, prudent and
every way accomplished Worthies for this high and honorable work, as are most
hopeful, by Gods gracious support and assistance to strike the stroke of a
most blessed and long looked for, yea longed-for happy Reformation; yea, I
say, making up such a blessed A blessed College of Physicians.
College of Phisicians, as are likely (by Gods benediction on them and
protection over them) to cure the (else) almost curelesse maladies and
infirmities of Church and State, which were ready to sink into the inevitable
gulf of woe and wretchedness, and to drink the last draft of deadly destruction.

O, who can passe-by such a remarkable passage of Gods admirable providence,
surpassing admiration in this special piece of comfort to us! yea, I may
justly say, this masterpiece of the whole ensuing frame of all our succeeding
parliamentarie-rejoycings? and not cry-out with most emphaticall cheerfulness,
with holy Moses, Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the gods? Who is Exodus
15. 11.
like unto thee? glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders.
Psalm 89. 5, 6, 7, 8.
And with the sweet Psalmograph, holy David, The heavens shall praise thy
wonders, O Lord, thy faithfulness, also, in the assembly of Saints. For, who
in heaven can be compared to the Lord? Who, among the sons of the mighty can
be likened to our God? Now, at the first sitting and meeting of this blessed
Parliament, though all oppositions seemed to vanish, the forementioned
mischiefs of the Diverse difficulties at the first beginning of this Parliament.
malignant party being so evident (which their accursed counsels and
co-operations produced) that no man durst stand-up to defend them: yet, the
whole work it self afforded difficulty enough, if you cast your eyes on these
particulars. First, the multiplied evils and long-rooted corruptions of 16.
years growth, powerful delinquents who were, now, to be brought to judgment
and reformation. Secondly, the Kings household was to be provided for; for, they
had brought him to that want that he could not supply his mere ordinary and
necessary expenses assistance of his people. Thirdly, two armies were then to
be paid, which amounted very near to 80 thousand pounds a month, and yet the
people over the Kingdom must be tenderly charged, having been formerly
miserably exhausted contra^ieties they met with, in all these, were very
incompatible, which yet in a great measure they calmly reconciled; these
difficulties therefore, seemed to be invincible, yet by Gods good providence,
and these most renowned Worthies indefatigable care and diligence, Six
Subsidies granted.

Pole Money.


they comfortably over*came them At the beginning of the Parliament, six
Subsidies were freely granted, together with the passing of a Bill of
Pole Money, for speedy supply of present occasions, which could not amount to
less than 600000. l. besides The mountanous dispatch of great affairs, of the
Parliament at the first.
the said six Subsidies. Yea, these prudent patriots contracted that great
arrere-of charges due to our faithful brethren of Scotland, to 220 thousand
pounds. And notwithstanding all these most urgent and inevitable charges and
pressing occasions* the Lord so blessed the proceedings of this precious
Parliament, that the kingdom is for the present, and will be much more for the
future, by Gods mercy, a great gainer by all those charges, as will evidently
appear by the subsequent cloud of witnesses, the many remarkable parliamentarie
mercies, which our great Jehovah has graciously strewed into our happy laps
and bosoms by them. And To stop the mouths of slanderers.
this is here the rathe touched and mentioned to stop the mouths of those
repining envious elves of ingratitude, who notwithstanding these so
conspicuous, and egregious restimonies of these ever to be honored Worthies
most impregnable pains and industry, yet would fain fasten their fangs of
calumny and detraction on their most honorable actions and proceedings, which
even their inf^rnall black-mouthed mother Envy her self, cannot but (though
contrary to her nature) most justly commend. As, first, that uncouth and (till
of late) unheard of heavy taxation of Ship Money abolished.

Coat and Conduct taken away.


Ship Money, by this Parliament abolished, which drained from the Kingdom
above 200 thousand pounds a year. Coat and Conduct-money taken away from
unjustly troubling the Subject, which in many countries amounted to little
less than Ship Money. Soap.
That scouring project of New-sope also overthrown which brought an hundredth
thousand pounds a year into private Wine.
proiectors purses. That soaking plot also on Wine, which amounted to above
three hundred thousand pound. And that of Leather, which rightly computed could
not choose but exceed Leather.
both those former, put together, this is also annihilated. Yea, that
unseasonable (and indeed unreasonable) patent for Salt pulled out of their
enhansing hands, which could not but Salt*

Many other Monopolies suppressed,


countervail in value, that of Leather Besides many other Statestarving
Monopolies, whereof some (as has been seen in those forementioned) prejudiced
the Kingdom above a Million of money yearly; all quite suppressed by this
renowned Parliament, which formerly, like so many greedily gaping graves or
unsatiable horsleaches were continually crying-out, Give, Give, and restlesly
sucking-out the vital spirits of the State, and pitifully debilitating,
thereby, the nerves and ligaments of the whole Commonwealth.

The root of all the former evils plucked up, viz. Arbitrary government.
But, that which was far more worth than all those foresaid great benefits,
which, indeed was the very root and rice of all those and such like taxations
and vexations, is also, by power of this Parliament, quite taken away, viz. the
Arbitrarie power pretended to be in his Majesty to tax his subjects, and
charge their estates at his pleasure, without consent of his Parliament, which
great and grievous yoke which extremely wrung our wronged necks, for the
present, and would have done much more for the future, to our posterity) is
now by this happy Parliament declared by Both-Hous s to be against Law, and is
also ratified by an Act of Parliament. And was not Elohim our God God in the
Mount.
all-sufficient, most gloriously seen here in the Mount for our large
deliverance, from such and so many pinching straits and deep distresses as we
were all brought* yea plunged into, as have been formerly most evidently and
undeniably shown? And, therefore, have we great cause, with that sweet singer
of Israel to elevate his praises, herein, and to say, I will magnify thee, O
my Psalm. 145. 1, 2, 3.
God and my King, and will bless thy Name for ever and ever. Yea every day
will I bless thee, and praise thy Name for ever and ever. For great is the
Lord, and greatly to be praised, and his greatness is altogether unsearchable.

Yea, and that which is very remarkable, and no less extraordinary
comfortable to Gods children; How did the Lord (before this Parliament began,
and hitherto ever since) stir-up and inflame the fire of supplicating faith or
faithful supplication and A spirit of prayer and humiliation stird up in the
hearts of Gods people in private.

Rich returns of our prayers.

Our enemies plots proved their owngreatest plagues.

Judge. 13. 23.


fervent zeal in private humiliation to seek the Lord in the face of Christ for
mercy and reconcilement to our poor Land and Nation, so as the like was never
seen in this Kingdom before. And, O, what faith-confirming and heart-cheering
rich returns of prayers has the Lord our good God cast into our blessed
bosoms, in both granting us the very things (yea and much more than) our
hearts desired; and crossing ours and the Churches enemies both Papists and
Prelates in their plots which we feared, yea and still making their own
desperate devises to lite heaviest on their own heads, and their own impious
inventions occasions to make them still sit-down by weeping-crosse, and bear
the greatest damage and condign detriment in themselves. Whence we may very
well Against the false fears and faithless faintings in Gods people.
conclude with Manoahs wife, Sampsons mother, against all false and faithless
fears and jealousies (whereunto I perceive, even Gods own dear people are
too-much addicted) That if the Lord were pleased or had a purpose to kill (or
destroy) us, he would not have received an oblation or sacrifice from us,
neither would have showed us all these things, nor would (as at this time) have
done all these great things and much more yet following for us; But if God had
had no delight in us, but purposed to destroy us, and to deliver-up our Land
and lives into Papists hands, and to make a prey of us and ours to them, he
would not (surely) have suffered us or given us hearts to seek him in prayer
and importunate petitions, and yet at last, have frustrated all our hopes and
expectations: But contrariwise when God intended to destroy the children of
Israel for their high provocations of the Lords irreconcilable wrath, he Ier.
7. 16.
flatly forbad the Prophet to pray for them: whereas on the other side, I say,
our gracious God has freely poured on us the spirit of grace and supplication;
has not only received sacrifices from our (though sinful) hands, but in
Christ Jesus (his ever prevailing Acts 12. 20.
Blastus, nay rather ever most meritorious blessed Son) has smelt a sweet
savor in our sacrifices, as has been already in part imparted to us, and
made clearly obvious to our eyes and understanding, and comes now most
copiously to be farther most fully demonstrated to us.

And, here, me thinks, it is not improper or impertinent to put A Fleet of
Spanish-ships at Sea.
the Reader in mind of one remarkable mercy of the Lord unto us, which though
it be not (I confess) on all parts absolutely concluded on; yet for my part, I
confidently believe (these plotting times and weighty circumstances considered
and put together) I may justly enroll it in one of the chief places and number
of our most famous parliamentarie deliverances, though I say it was and has
been covered and couched under fair machi^ilian vizards of other intentions*
when they saw God had miraculously crossed and defeated their former strong
expectation. For (unquestionably) the Popish and malignant party had deeply
persuaded (if not assured) themselves that long ere this (especially about the
time of this plot now to be mentioned) their desperate projects should have
been brought to a high pitch, and that ere this time we and Scotland should
have been deeply engaged in bloody broils, and been pell-mell together by the
ears in the Northern parts of the Kingdom. The sly Fox of Spain therefore, must
The Spaniard is apt to watch and catch advantage^.
needs watch advantages on our homebred and imbred distractions and
uncivill-civill wars, thus to purchase to himself the long lookt-for spoils and
most precious prey of three fair Crowns, at once; To which purpose, upon
traitorous instigation and intelligence too, no doubt, from some of his
pensioners in the Court of England* he had made ready and set forth to Sea, a
mighty Fleet of ships, a second great armado, well fraught and furnished with
men and ammunition, and other instruments of wrath and fury for our certain
perdition and designed destruction. Thus unsuspected and unexpected, they had
smoothly and silently made their way into our narrow Seas, and lay hovering
within sight The Spanish fleet on our Narrow-Seas, in sight of Dover.
of Dover, fearlesse (it seemed) of least resistance from us, if not hopeful of
ample assistance to land their forces, and make our Land feel the fury of
Spaines conquering arm. But, behold, as thus they lay about our coasts, and we
(as it were) lay fast a sleep in this great danger, the God of our
English-Israel, who never slumbers nor sleeps in the protection of his people,
had his ever most vigilant and wakefull eye over us, even then, I say, when we
were most supine and careless or fearlesse of any imminent disaster so near
us, the Lord our God fought for us, yet without us, stopped this (otherwise)
overflowing inundation of misery and destruction, crossed and crushed their
rotten-egge of windy hopes, by The Hollanders meet with them.
sending our honest old neighbors of Holland to confront them, though with but
a very small Fleet (at the first) which afterward quickly increased, under the
conduct and command of their heroical and most magnanimous Admiral Martin
Martin Tromp Admiral of the Fleet.
Tromp, whose honor and high renown, the trump of Fame shall most worthily
sound out to posterity, and crown his temples with never withering-wreathes of
laurell-branches, who had no sooner espied them, but most fiercely and
furiously he set upon their whole formidable Spanish Fleet, gave them such
battering broad sides, and such Canon-thundring and powder-roaring salutations
as quickly pulled down their so late so lofty Spanish pride, and maugre all their
espani^lized bravadoes, the utmost strength of their strongest vessels was so
battered and bruised, their falsely The Spanish fleet beaten and destroyed.
supposed impenitrable ribs and big-swoln bellies so peir^'t and pestred, that
they quickly queld their courage, fired, sunk and took many of their greatest
ships, and dissipated and scattered the rest from our coasts, few of them
escaping the heroic Hollanders martial violence, to our great (though
unsensible yet unspeakable) comfort and security, we our selves not having
struck one streak in our own defense, nay it is well if we did not yield the
Spaniards supply of powder and other necessaries (that time) to our own
destruction, had not God thus strangely and strongly withstood it. Say, then (O
England) did not Jehovah, our great Lord and God most apparently appear, now,
in the Mount for thy mighty deliverance? did he not make good his word and
promise Isa. 54. 17.
by his holy Prophet. That no weapon forged against thee shall prosper, and
every tongue that rises against thee in judgment thou shall condemn.
Certainly, if ever, at this time was this prophecy most exactly made good to
England, and to our faithful No weapon can be forged nor tongue raised against
England and Scotland.
brethren of Scotland. For, what sharp and death-wounding weapons have been
forged against us, both abroad and at home? what slanderous tongues, have risen
up in judgment, yea in most false judgment against both us and them, calling
and counting Gods beloved ones among us factious and seditious, and among our
honest brethren of Scotland, traitors and rebels, as has been formerly
touched; but now we have seen, to the high honor of God and joy of our hearts,
that none of their weapons have prosper'd against us; yea their slanderous
tongues, which so falsely judged us and our beloved brethren, we have condemned
to the clear eyes of all men, that wilfully look not a squint on all just
things.

For, has not this our most noble and renowned Parliament, together with the
Kings full content and consent therein, proclaimed our brethren of Scotland,
the Kings most faithful and A Pacification and blessed union between the three
kingdoms, by Act of Parliament.
loyal Subjects? Confirmed a fair and full Pacification and union of firm love
and mutual defense, twixt us and them and the Kingdom of Ireland with an Act
of oblivion of all mistakes and misconceits on either side: all these, I say,
ratified by a blessed Act of Parliament? Yea, and that which adds no small
luster to it, that it has hereby freed us from civill-wars, which of all
wars are most uncivil, from intestine wars, wars that would have eaten-out
our own bowels; from wars, I say, of Christians with Christians, yea of
Protestants with Protestants, which of all wars could not but have been most
fell and fatal. O who, then, can see these things, these miracles of mercies,
without deep admiration and holy adoration of our great God? Who can forbear to
break-out into cordial praises, to raise-up trophies of everlasting fame and
honor to our great and glorious Lord and King? Who can choose but ingenuously
acknowledge with holy David, That we got not these good things into our
possession by Psalm. 44 34.
our own sword, neither did our own arm save us: But thy right hand, O Lord, and
thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou had a love unto us.
Thou art our King, O command deliverance, still, to thy poor worm Jacob. For,
through thee alone shall we pull-down our enemies, through thy Name only shall
we tread them under that rise up against us. T^^ thou O God that risest up in
judgment Psalm. 76. 9, 10.
to save all thy weak-ones on earth, turning the rage and fury of man into thy
praise, and making the remainder of their wrath to obey thee.

Good men made Officers of State.

The Scaligers of our rustie times.


A most remarkable mercy was it also, that the Lord put into the hearts of the
renowned Scaligers of our corrupted times, for the better purifying not only
of the conduit-pipes of Justice, to begin (as about this time) to put pious and
noble Peers into places of honor, trust and power, that thus the stern of
government may be the more happily steered with uprightness and impartialitie.
To which purpose (as a main help thereto) they have most happily taken away
that State-staggering Star-Chamber-Court; The Star-Chamber-Court, President,
and Council of the North, etc. dissolved.
dissolved and dissipated into smoke* the crushing-Courts of the President and
Council of the North* and limited and co fined the unlimited bounds of
businesses at the Councell-Table; but also to scour the muddie and even
stinking channels of wrong and oppression, by easing the Commonwealth of those
living-grievances thereof (a great advantage to the peace and tranquillity of
the State) I mean those evil Counselors and Officers of State, who had been
principal actors of all our foresaid miscries and mischiefs; making thereby
(as it were) a plaster to heal the deadly wounds of Church and State, and most
hopefully to recover the almost incureable diseases of the Kingdom, by a
plaster, I say, of The Earl of Straford beheaded.
the blood of that insulting arch-traitor, the Earl of Straford, who as he had
well-nigh stabd the State to the heart by his deep and most dangerous plots
both abroad and at home: So the stroke of Justice retaliated with blood his
most bold and bloody designs maugre all his slyest shufflings and crafty
jeerings of the Law to have eluded it, and thereby hoping to have prevented the
said just vengeance on him.

And here by the way, I desire the Reader to take notice of ^ex ^alionis.
Gods most equal and upright ways and dealings, with wicked, ungodly, and
blood-thirstie men, how exactly he repayes the bloody An English- Haman.
plots and purposes of all proud and ambitious Hamans in their own coin; as,
here, is most perspicuously seen in this our English-Haman, who in his heart
had vowed the wrack* and ruin of all Gods faithful ones in England, Scotland
and Ireland, at the least. But we have happily seen this proud Haman, the first
that felt the due stroke of justice, to the honor of God, and the terror of
all such daring traitors. And as for the rest of that rabble, I may Psalm. 62. 3.
here take-up that of the holy Prophet David, How long will ye imagine mischief
against men, ye shall be slain all the pack of you; for, as a bowing or
tottering-wall shall ye be, and as a rotten fence. 2 Samuel 20. 12.
Tremble, therefore, at this, all ye perfidious conspiring Sh^ba's, and fear in
time such just retaliation. Certainly, There is none like unto thee, O Lord,
thou art great, and thy Name is great in Ier. 10. 6, 7.
might. Who would not fear thee, O King of Nations, for, to thee it does,
indeed, appertain (to do justice, and take revenge) for as much as among all
the wise men of the world, and in all their Kingdoms, there is none like unto
thee.

Judge Bartlet and other Judges and Bishops impeached of high treason and
imprisoned Much content among men, upon the Earls beheading.

The Archprelate of Canterbury impeached of high treason, and imprisoned.


Now, this Remora thus happily (though very hardly) removed, this
clinging-clyver (I mean the foresaid Earl of Straford) which was ready to
overtop and choke the good corn of the Kingdom, thus blessedly eradicated;
together with the impeachment and imprisonment of Judge Bartlet and diverse
other Judges and Bishops, it was most strange to say and see what a sudden and
general serenitie and calmnesse from late former fears and affrights shon upon
the hearts and minds of most men a long time after, even all over the Kingdom.
Especially, also, when that Lamb-skin'd Woolf the Arch-prelate of Canterbury,
who had so long and so craftily and cruelly woorry^d Christ's innocent lambs,
was also impeached of high treason, and thereupon forthwith, put into safe
custody under the Black-rod, and afterward lockt-up fast in the Tower of
London, for his suture safe forthcoming, and thus all his former huge and
hyperbolicall puff of ayrie honor and false windy reputation among his
clawing Pontificians, now at last tumbled into the dust, yea besmeard with the
Q Elizabeth's saying, touching Popish Bishops, in her days of deliverance.
dirt of due disgrace, contempt, and ignominy. O then it was m^rry with
harmless lambs when ravening wolves were shut up f^st, and lambs at liberty.
As it is recorded to be the speech of that blessed Queen Elizabeth of
ever-rarest memory, upon the Lords delivering her from all her unjust, great
troubles, by the happy decease of her fierie-Sister, Queen Marie, when the
Romish bloody Bishops of her time were clapt-up into prison, in her stead, and
she delivered from their divill^sh thraldom.

Yea, then, I say, the former thick-clouds and foggi^-mists of manifold fears
began to be cleared, and the fair sunshine of The malignant party, now began
to fear.
cheerful hopes to arise in the hearts of Gods people: and contrariwise, a
stonishment and fear began to surprise the spirits of traitorous proiectors,
especially at Court. For, much about these times, or not long before and after
also, Sir John Finch, Secretary Sir Ioh. Finch, Secretary Windibank, etc. fly
away for fear.
Windibank, Mr. Jermin, and since of late also, the bold and waspish young Lord
Digbie, in the depth of the guilt of their consciences, being impeached also of
high treason, trusting more to their heels celerity, than their hearts
sincerity, which, it seems, was none at all, posted away in private like most
unworthie fugitives, being thus spued-out (as I may say) of their own native
country like nauseous clods on the stomach of the State, which could not be at
any ease or content till it had by some means disgorged them. Or rather, as it
is reported of that hateful vermin Rats and Mice, who by instinct of nature,
observing an old barn or rotten-house ready to fall or be puld-down, A fit
simile of Rats and Mice in an old house or barn.
they skip and scud and creep away, apace, to some more remote and secure place,
thus to save themselves from that (otherwise) inevitable destruction: So, I
say, did this traitorous vermin of our Kingdom, those devouring rats of rapine
and mice of mischief, who would have gnawn and eaten into the bowels of
Religion to the ruin of Church and State, finding the rotten-house of their
long-plotted mischiefs ready to fall on their own heads, to their unavoidable
destruction, thought it now h^gh time to skip and scud and run away for their
lives, and to get themselves far enough beyond Sea, out of the reach of Justice
strong and longreaching A double benefit came to the Kingdom hereby.
arm at home. By which means, namely, justice, thus cone on some of them, and
the said stroke of justice, thus terrifying and affrighting others away out of
the Kingdom; the Church and State are like, by Gods mercy, to reap this double
benefit, to wit, ease and freedom from fears for the present time, and also
most hopeful long preservation for the time to come.

And was not here a rare parliamentarie mercy indeed, to the Cateline a^
traitor to old Rome.
Kingdom? to be rid (any way) of such Catelines of their Country? And ought we
not to be as thankful to our God for his privative, as positive favors toward
us, as well for the absence of We ought to be as thankful for privative, as
positive mercies.
evil things, as the present possession of good things, as well to see Gods
enemies fly before us, as to see his faithful servants and dear saints
returning-home unto us? Yes doubtless; and to triumph in their terror, and to
laugh and rejoice when their fear comes upon them, yea, when it comes upon them
like a fierce armedman. Prove. 6. 11. Psalm. 92. 7.
For, so says Solomon and the kingly Prophet David* When the wicked spring as
the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity do flourish, it is that they
may be destroyed for ever. Yea, says he also, Psalm. 73. 18, 19.
Certainly thou, O Lord, did set them in slipperie places, and thou castedst
them down into destruction. O, how suddenly do they fall into desolation, and
are utterly consumed with fear and terror! And Psalm. 58. 10, 11.
then, he sweetly concludes fully to our purpose. The righteous shall rejoice
when he sees the vengeance, he shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked.
So that a man shall say, verily there is a reward for the righteous, verily it
is God that judges the earth.

Now, whereas for these many years, heretofore, the discontinuance and unhappie
dissolution of Parliaments has (most like the want of sovereign healing-salv^s
to dangerous sores) occasioned extreme prejudice by long f^stering and
p^stering enormities in Church and State, and mightily encouraged the audacious
and A Trienniall Parliament*
most ungracious workers of iniquity through strong hopes (thereby) of
impunity: Our good God has by this blessed Parliament provided a cordial
preservative and sovereign antidote against such future pestilentiall diseases
and mortiferous growing gangrenes, namely, in that our renowned Worthies have
by a firm Act of Parliament, settled a Trienniall-Parliament, to be for the time
to come duly called among us. And yet farther; since the frequent and abrupt
dissolution of Parliaments has also been no small supportation to the wicked
intentions of traitorous active spirits among us: It has pleased the Lord to
put into the hearts of the King and Parliament with an unanimous consent The
most blessed continuation of this present Parliament.
to pass a Bill for the most happy and blessed continuation of this present
Parliament, so as that it shall neither be dissolved nor adiourned without the
consent of both Houses. Which two Laws well and seriously considered,
(especially the last of the The excellent benefit of these 2. last Laws*
two, the incomparable happiness whereof I am not able to relate for the
present, but time to come may) may justly be thought more advantageous to the
Kingdom than all the former, because they secure a full operation of present
remedy, like a constant course of wholesome physic to a very crazie body full
of increasing and growing infirmities, affording, I say, a perpetual spring of
remedies to Church and Commonwealths future growing griefs and maladies. And,
because (according to that old adagie) a A threefold cord is not easily broken.
threefold knot is not easily untied, or a threefold cord, not easily broken;
the more strongly to corroborate all our hopes and ensuing comfort^, and to
make them as constant as cordial; see, how, yet farther it pleased the Lord
our good God to enlarge his hand of bounty and benignity toward us, to leave
no means unassayed that might conduce to a perfect cure; and therefore, I say,
how he put into the hearts of our ever to be honored Worthies in Parliament,
Both Church and State sick at the very heart.

The Church sick of a quotidian-ague of Popery.

The State of a Consumption by oppressive taxations.


both Peers and Commons, seriously to consider how sick at the very heart the
Commonwealth was, both Church and State; Religion panting by many fearful
fainting-fits of a strong and violent Quotidian-Ague of Popery, Arminianisme,
and many Popish, apish innovations, mightily tending to idolatry, and
superstition; and the State brought into a deep consumption, almost hopeless
of remedy, by reason of those many and mischievous taxations and impositions
most unjustly pressing and oppressing its strength and abilities, as has been
most abundantly set forth and shown in our preceding descriptions of them.
Therefore, I say, on judicious advise and premeditation of the condition of
Both, our most noble College of expert Physicians, (by Gods good providence)
timely thought on an Aurum-potabile, a precious potion, A Protestation
a select electuari to recover its almost irrecoverable health and strength, a
most pious and prudent Protestation, to be taken (next to the heart) all over
the Kingdom to revi^ their formerly fainting spirits, like pure Aqua-vitae, or
most sovereign stomack-water to help us all against the future chilling and
killing qualms of Popery and Oppression.

The Protestation.
Wednesday, May, 5. 1641.
I, A. B. do in the presence of almighty God, vow and protest to maintain and
defend, as far as lawfully I may, with my life, power, and estate* the true
reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of
England, against all Popery and Popish innovations within this Realm, contrary
to the same doctrine; and according to the duty of my allegiance, his
Majesty's royal person, honor and estate; As also the power and privileges
of Parliament; the lawful rights and liberties of the Subject, and every
person that makes this Protestation* in whatsoever he shall do in the lawful
pursuance of the same. And to my power, and as far as lawfully I may, I will
oppose, and by all good ways and means endeavor to bring to condign
punishment, all such as shall either by force, practice, counsels, plots,
conspiracies, or otherwise, do any thing to the contrary of any thing in this
present Protestation contained. And further, that I shall in all just and
honorable ways endeavor to preserve the union and peace between the three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland; and neither for hope, fear, or
other respect, shall relirquish this promise, vow and Protestation.

A Protestation, I say, most worthy to be taken by all honesthearted English
Protestants, over the whole Kingdom; a Protestation, Who they be that refuse to
take the Protestation.
which I dare be bold to say and justify, none but hardened impious Papists,
profane atheistical Libertines, or grossly ignorant asses, and carnal
earthworms only* can dare to be so graceless or else shameless, either
directly to refuse or so much as dissemblingly to defer or neglect on any
color of pretense whatsoever. And that ye may see the substance of what I say,
herein, ratified by the Worthies of our Parliament, I thought fit to give you
here their own Vote thereon.

Friday, July, 30. 1641.
Resolved on the Question.
That this House does conceive that the Protestation made by them is fit to be
taken by every person that is well affected in Religion, and to the good of the
Commonwealth; and therefore does declare, that what person soever shall not
take the Protestation is unfit to bear office in the Church or Commonwealth.

Now then (good Reader) put all these last recited admirable mercies together,
and tell me whether thou do not most evidently see, and may not most
freely and faithfully say that our God in the Mount of Mercies.
great Jehovah has most blessedly brought us out of the Mount of many mighty
straits and been seen for our most happy deliverance from them all in the
Mount of mercies? And seeing these so great and gracious mercies to so sinful
and so undeserving a Nation and provoking people as we are, so ungrateful, so
unfruitful; O who can forbear to break-forth in holy exultation to the high
exaltation, by praises* of our good God, and with the pious Prophet David, that
sugared singer of Israel, say and sing with Psalm. 18. 1, 2, 3. and 31, 19, 23.
the (...) llifluous melody of a most grateful heart, I will love thee, O
Lord, my strength, the Lord is my stonie-rock* my fortress and my deli^ rer,
my God, my strength in whom I will trust; my buckler, the horn of my salvation,
and my high tower. O how great is thy goodness, O Lord, which thou bast
laid-up for them that fear thee, and which thou have laid-out and wrought for
them that trust in thee, even before the sons of men. O, therefore, love the
Lord all ye his Saints, for the Lord preserves the faithful, and plenteously
rewards the proud doer, Yea, I say* wait on the Lord (therefore) and be of a
good Psalm. 27. 14.
courage and he shall strengthen thy heart, wait, I say, on the Lord.

Thus have we seen what wonders God has wrought for us, in the Commonwealth;
he pleased now therefore to lengthen-out and lend me thy Christian patience,
and I shall now also show thee how the Lord has been as gloriously seen (if
not much more) in the Mount of parliamentarie-mercies to his poor afflicted
Parliamentarie mercies to the Church of God.
and affrighted Church among us; which yet, the Reader must be pleased to take
notice, were intermixedly performed together with the most and first of those
forementioned in the Commonwealth, only I have ranckt them together for mine
own better and more methodicall handling of them.

About the beginning of this blessed Parliament, the Lord put into the hearts
of our grave and godly parliamentarie Senators to act their first pious parts
about reformation of Religion by a most diligent inquisition and search after
oppressions and oppressors of the Church of God, and by their parliamentarie
power to break and knock off the pushing horns of those fat bulls of Prelates
and Pontificians.
Bashan, wherewith they had fiercely and furiously, yea and as it were even
frantickly pusht at and almost goard to death the people of God: and first,
upon the petitions of Mrs. Bastwick and Mrs. Burton, the pious, but (then) most
disconsolate and too untimely widowed-wives of their thrice noble and heroic
husbands, as also a petition exhibited in the behalf of most precious Mr.
Prinne, that incomparable and rare pair-royall of most worthy witnesses Ier.
38. 7. Dr. Bastwick, Mr. Burton, Mr. Prinne, freed from prison.

Dr. Laighton also, M. Smart, Mr Walker, Mr. Foxely, Mr. Lilborn, and many
others set a* liberty.


of Gods truth; the pious Parliament, like noble Ebed-melech, redeemed those
just Jeremies of the Lord out of their (otherwise) perpetually captivating most
remote and desolate dungeons* to the great joy and comfort of Gods dear Saints;
together with religious Dr. Laighton, a long and lamentable Sufferer for the
great cause of Religion; as also, reverend and religious Mr. Smart, Mr. Walker,
Mr. Foxley, and that undaunted picus young gentleman Mr. John Lilborn, and many
others, all of them, immediately set at liberty on the exhibiting of their
petitions to the Parliament, who had most of them been most unjustly and most
injuriously clapped up in close imprisonment, some of them fast fettered in
irons, all of them most grievously abused (by our fathers (forsooth) of the
Church, as they will be most falsely termed) especially those three former most
renowned suffering-worthies, whom these persecuting Prelates had even most
barbarously, as it were, buried alive in most remote and remorselesse (as they
intended it) imprisonment from sight, much less society of any friends, yea
utterly debarring their wives from coming to them, clean contrary to the Laws
of God and Man; This, I say (to their everlasting shame and infamy) being Isa.
29. 20, 21.
perpetrated by those right terrible-Ones (indeed) mentioned by the Prophet Yea,
those proud scorners, who watched for iniquity, to make a man an offender for
a word, and laid snares for any that durst reprove in the gate, and turned
aside the just for a thing of naught. But, whom now the Lord our God has
consumed and brought to naught, and by their own pernicious and crafty
counsels, has justly cut off, and left in their own snare, which they had
prepared for others, just according to that of wise Prove. 11. 8.
King Solomon, The righteous is delivered out of troubles, and the wicked comes
in his stead. The Lord having most resplendently cleared the honor and
integrity of all those his honorable suffering heroes, restoring them to
comfort, credit, and high reputation, ever since their (as it were, princely
and triumphant) return to London, and most sumptuous entertainment to all Gods
people, being brought home like three conquering Cesars on horsback. Even so as
that we may say, and most justly declare before them, as king Ahasueros caused
to be proclaimed before good Mordecai, when he so highly honored him in the
very Hesth. 6. 11.
sight and presence of wicked Haman; Thus shall it be done to the man whom the
King delights to honor. As it is most worthily and punctually related, at
large, in their own most famous history of all their magnanimous sufferings
and even Princelike restoration and return from their captivity to former
freedom, penned Mr. Prinnes most excellent History of all those three
famous-sufferers.
by pious Mr Prinne himself, my ever much honored and most precious friend. And
did not the Lord, here most strongly and strangely show himself in the Mount
for the redemption of all these his beloved Isaac's from their unparalleled
thraldom, and threatened utter ruin, and cause his wrath to lay hold on those
Genesis 22. 13.
Romish-Rams who were entangled in the bushes of their Bishoplyabuses to Gods
children, and so (by his admirable wise providence) to make them a prey to his
just indignation instead of his innocent and tenderly affected Isaac's his
beloved lambs? As hereafter in its proper place we shall have more full and fit
occasion yet farther to make manifest to the eyes and understanding of all wise
and impartial Judges. We may therefore sing and say with holy David: Be glad
in the Lord, therefore, O ye righteous, who thus Psalm. 32. 11. and 3. 1, 3* 4.
taste and try his great love and truth unto you, and shout for joy all ye
that are upright in heart. Rejoice, I say, in the Lord, O ye righteous, for,
praises are comely, for the godly. Sing a new song to the Lord, yea sing
cheerfully and skilfully with a loud noise; for the word of the Lord is right,
and all his works are done in truth.

Paarliamenta^^ ^rdiners*
Then also did our wise parliamentarie Gardiners stub and grub up those noisome
trees and shameful shrubs, whose spreading spite and unprofitable power did
mightily overtop, and furiously infest the happy harvest and fair and full
crop and increase of Gods blessedly fruitful Orchard-trees, fruitful I say,
in holiness of life, and painful and profitable administration of the Word
and Ordinances in their power and purity. For, about this time, also,
State-Engineers.
our expert State-Engineers, our Worthies in Parliament did most prudently
countermine, and by their parliamentarie power blowup The Prelates ill-legall
Synod nullified.
the outworks and Babel-batteries and mischievous-mounts of our Prelaticall
Canoneers, making their spureous Synod to be utterly illegal; turning the
mouths of their accursed Canons, on themselves, making them (indeed) truly
paper-Canons which could neither rend us, nor roar against us, but flash in
their own Their accursed Canons damned.
faces, and spoil themselves; damming them up, or rather damning them, as most
Antichristian and illegal, by an unanimous Vote in Parliament. And as for that
monstrous Et-Caetera-Oath, that Their monstrous Et caetera-Oath also condemned.
hideous and prodigious Hydra, that bottomless abyss, I say, and
deep-devouring whirl-pool of Romish craft and subtlety which should have supt
and swallowed-up into its wide-yawning iaws both Church and Commonwealth, this
they also happily stifled in the Embrio of it, ere it could come to its birth,
much less any of its intended Romish destroying growth and maturitie. Then
those most prudent Senators for the better purifying of the Churches channels
and Conduit-pipes of the Gospel of grace, and, (by Gods blessing) to cause them
to issue forth more wholesome and pure streams for Gods people to drink of;
discovered and discountenanced too, a stinking heap of atheistical and
Romane-rubbish, Scandalous priests discovered and discountenanced.
a rotten-rabble of scandalous priests and spurious bastard-sons of Beliall, who
by their affected ignorance and lazieness^, their false* doctrines and
idolatrous and superstitious practices in Gods worship, as also by their most
abominable evil lives and conversation 1 Samuel* 2. 17.
had, like Hophni and Phincas made the Lords Ordinances to be even abborred by
the people, who to their hearts unexpressible grief having continually
complained of their gross misdemeanors to those who would be counted the
grave pi^lars (forsooth) of the Church, but were, indeed, but Rom^s
rotten-posts in thus fostering such fostering henbane of the Church, their
functions infamy and the foulest stains of that holy calling; yet could find
no redress of those evils; but contrariwise, scoffs and jeers and more hard
increased pressures heaped on them (just like the children of Israel in their
slavish brick*kils) yea and sometimes punished for complaining; Till, now,
those our most pious and prudent Reformers voted against them as most unfit to
abide in the Ministry. Yea, then those our parliamentarie Worthies, the
better to help forward the most blessed work of Church-reformation, unanimously
voted against and discountenanced Non-residents and Pluralists voted against.
all our too-rich and lazy Non-residents and soul-pining, if not soul-plaguing
Pluralists, those spiritual Polygamists, who (were the law of man as firmly
exact and strict for spiritual as it is for carnal Polygamie, or having two
wives) we all know what their danger and just demerit should be. With these
also have they most worthily voted down, a sweatlesse swarm of droanish Deans
and Prebends voted down.
Deans and unprofitable Prebends, and such like Clergie-trash, who lay lurking
in the Bec-hives of the Church, and lurching-away the sweet honey from the
laborious Bees, painful Preachers, yea infesting and molesting them with their
waspish-stings of Antichristian tyranny (just like the mustie Munches and
lazie-Abbeylubbers of Rome, in times past, and which base and blockish
condition, they (certainly) longed and labored (secretly) to set up again, but
I trust their eyes and heart too, shall fail them ere they effect it) until
they had quite driven them out of their honeycombes, and killed or starv'd-up
them and theirs by prisons or exile; all these, I say, were by those our
blessed Master Builders in Parliament by their unanimous suffrages not only
voted against as a superfluous and unprofitable burden on Gods Church, but
Godly Pastort and Lecturers set up again with the peoples consent.
thereby also a way was made plain, and wide-doores were set open for a blessed
restoration and replantation of most faithful and painful Pastors, and
laborious Lecturers, chosen and set up with the peoples consent and good
liking, and not to have dumbdogs or soul-robbers and thieves which came not in
at the door, but through the windows of the Church, violently obtruded on
them, whereby the Gospel begins to thrive and flourish again, Isa. 1. 27.
and Sions young-converts to be graciously growing up among us, in the true
judgment and knowledge of Christ Jesus; whereas, formerly the Prelates and
Pontificians durst scoff, fleer, and jeer familiarly at those faithful and
painful Lecturers, and most atheistically ask in derision, What kind of
creatures those Lecturers were, and most impiously and audaciously (even in the
presence of the great God of heaven) vow to Which very words the Arch-prelate
of Ganterbury spoke most proudly to a godly Pastor my worthy friend.
worm them out ^re they had done with them. But our good God gave these cursed
cows (or rather wild bulls of Bashan) short horns, and though they had gone-on
in a great measure, and done much mischief therein, yet they could not do the
hurt which their hearts aimed at, ever blessed and praised be our good God for
it. And now good Reader reflect thine eyes and review these rare mercies, and
tell me then, was not Englands God, herein, also seen in the Mount of Mercies,
by this so strange an overture and alteration of Our Candlesticks almost lost,
and stinking-snuffs setting-up.
things interposed between such eminent and imminent danger of utter loss of
our bright and burning Candlesticks of the Gospel, and fear of stinking snuffs
of ignorance, error and atheistical profaneness to be set up in their
places, and little or no hope (at least it^ humane apprehension) of help by
less than such miracles of mercies as God himself has in these our happy
days wrought and poured-down upon us, and such indeed as none but a God could
procure for us. O how sweetly and suddenly has God Psalm. 126. 1.
turned our Captivity into admirable freedom and liberty. And who can consider
these things without serious and deep admiration? and who can call them to
remembrance without heart-ravishing joy and delight? yea who can choose but
acknowledge in his most grateful heart the great praises of the Lord? and with
holy David, that harmonious chanter and musical inchanter of Israel, confess
Gods infinite free favor and love to England in Psalm. 32. 7.
thus encompassing and begirting us about with sweet songs of such deliverances.

But yet here is not all, for our blessed parliamentarie Worthies have also
given us great hope (by Gods goodness) of timely Oxford and Cambridge hopeful
to be purged.
purging also the two famous Fountains of our Kingdom, Oxford and Cambridge
from the much mire and mud of Romish innovations, which, settling there also
has made their streams stink of Popery; yea, I say, great hopes of happily
healing the (once most clear-sighted, but now and of long time) blear-eyes of
our Nation, grown mighty sore with Romish-rednesse, by drinking in too much of
the wine-lees of poisoning Popish fopperies; in so much that Truths clear
sighted Servants eyes began to be mightily offended by but looking on them; and
not without cause, for, Matthew. 6. 23.
as our Savior himself says; If the eyes be evil, the whole body will be
full of darkness; and, if the light that is in a kingdom (and especially which
is to give light to a whole kingdom) be darkness, O how great is that
darkness! and such truly began to be our Kingdoms condition; but now we have,
I say, great hopes, by Gods gracious assistance, that our Parliament will
seasonably provide a sovereign Collyrium or eye salve, some well-distilled
eyebright of Reformation to purify the sight of these two, once most glorious
lights in the whole Christian world.

Yea, these our noble Nehemiahs, and grave and gracious Ezra's have taken most
pious pains to see Gods Sabbaths more sincerely sanctified than of late they
have been, and the profane soil Sabbath-dayes better sanctified.
of traveling Carriers, Taverns, Alehouses, and Tobacco-shops, and other loose
and irreligious Shopkeepers (who heretofore mightily polluted that day) most
sweetly swept away any cleansed. A work of great concernment and high esteem
for the glory The due praise of the true sanctification of the Sabbath.
of the Lord, than which, I am certain, a greater, a better cannot be
undertaken, as being the very prop and promoter of all true Religion, and
without the entire and sincere sanctification whereof all true religion would
quickly decay, and be utterly lost; yea, I say, a Nation-upholding Christian
duty of richest valuation, as having more precious promises annexed to it than
any other I know of in the whole book of God, and which has more ennobled our
Realm and made our Kingdom more illustrious (God alone who has so graciously
upheld it among us, have all the praise and glory of it, and we only the
comfort) than all our reformed Neighbors about us; yea such a blessed and holy
duty as has caused more mercies to fall, yea flow, upon our English-Nation
than ever did on any people of the Christian world. Yet our most injurious
Prelates, together with their profane Pontificks have most shamelesly striven
to viciate and defile this our Sabbaths precious honor (the main ready and
road-way to have brought the curse of God upon us* and utterly to have ruinated
our whole Kingdom) by whose means it began in King James his days to A profane
book for sports on the Lords day.
receive a deep died stain by that most wicked and accursed book of tolerating
vain sports and profane recreations, forsooth, on the Lords day, which, since
has been avowed and advanced more highly by them, than, at the first; but now,
since, in our present Sovereigns time more pertinaciously pressed and
perniciously enforced on Gods dear Saints and servants in the ministry than
formerly it had been, whose tender-consciences could not Most violently pressed
by the Prelates on Gods people.
endure it, and who (being in their most just zeal for the Lords high honor
therein, and sincere love to true Religion transported above all fears and
frowns) were most egregiously abused, vexed and punished for refusing to admit
and read the said wicked-book in their Churches: until it most graciously
pleased our good God by the blessed Parliament to prevent the most mischievous
growth of this unexpressible abomination of our so holy Fathers of the Church
together with the rotten rabble of Pontifick-Arminians, Romes Minions indeed, by
a particular Order from the House of Commons in Parliament for the more strict
sanctification of that day, which I have hereunto annexed.

The Order of the House of Commons for the due sanctication of the Sabbath or
Lords day, April, 10th. 1641.
IT is this day ordered by the House of Commons that the Aldermen and Citizens
that serve for the City of London, shall intimate to the Lord Mayor, from this
Hou e that the Statutes for the due observing of the Sabbath be put in
execution. And it is further ordered, that the like intimation from this House
be made to the Justices of Peace in all the Counties of England and Wales. And
the Knights of the Shire of the several Counties are to take care that copies
of this order be accordingly sent to the Justices of Peace in the several
Counties.

Printing-Presses set open again.

The Sabbaths honor thereby vindicate^* God in the Mount.


And also by setting our Printing-Presses open whereby a happy way was laid
open again for Gods learned and loyal Servants by their pious pens and
elaborate labors to vindicate the Sabbaths most glorious luster to the honor
of godliness and purity of Religi n. And was not the Lord, herein, also, seen
in the Mount of Mercies for Englands preservation from the guilt of such a
wrath provoking sin, of such a Land-scourging r^^ as this might have proved to
out Kingdom* had it so continued, as by the Psalm. 47, 6, 7, 8.
hellish zeal of out Prelates it was intended* Sing praises, therefore, O
England, sing praises unto God, O sing praises, sing praises to our glorious
King. For, God is the King of all the earth, sing praises, therefore, O
England, to thy God with understanding. Thy God, O England, reigns over the
whole world, and sits gloriously triumphing on the throne of his holiness.

Gods worship in the Church, better ordered.
Yet, here is not all, for, our ever to be honored heroic Parliamentarie*
Worthies have added to that former pious pains o^ theirs, this their godly care
also, namely, to (...) and purify the holy worship of our God from the filthy
l^^s and dregs of Popish From Romish Ceremonies.
Ceremonies, whereby the tender ^onsciences or godly Ministers are not so tied
to Romish trumper^^ of vestures* and gestures, crouchings and cringings, and
Jesu-worshippings, and a multitude of such like mimicall actions in Gods
worship and service, as formerly they had been most tyrannically pressed and
enforced to. Crucifixes and Popish*pictures in Churches dimolished.
Yea, all Images, Crucifixes, and any pictures or representations of any of the
persons of the Trinity, or of the Virgin Mary, quite dimolished and extirpated
out of Gods house; All corporal Jesu-worship, I say, and altar-adoration (sure
and infallible signs of Popish ignorance, and of the Romish-Strumpets
outward-paintings, but inward rottenness, what ever fair (yet false) pretenses
foolish men and women would, like Jeroboam for his golden calves-worship, All
Jesu-worship prohibited, and all altar-rails dimolished.
impiously put upon them) most piously prohibited, and Altar-rails pull'd-down,
and Communion-Tables set in their proper postures; yea all high-steps and
ascents to their Altars (clean Exodus 20* 26.
contrary to Gods prescript word) by degrees commanded to be levelled; burdens
and conscience-grievances, which neither we nor our forefathers that truly
loved the Lord Jesus Christ, and were tenderly-affected to his pure worship,
could possibly bear: But now they are most happily taken from our tired necks,
and almost broken-backs, as by an Order of Parliament may and does most
comfortably appear, which for the precious excellency and rare memory thereof,
I have thought good here to insert, exactly and verbatim as it came from the
Parliament, to the everlasting glory of our great and good God, the honor of
our Worthies in Parliament, and the unexpressibly joy and consolation of all
Gods people that peruse it.

An Order from the Parliament against diverse Popish Innovations. Dated, Sept.
8. 1641. being Wednesday.
Whereas diverse Innovations in or about the worship of God have been lately
practiced in this Kingdom, by enjoining some things and prohibiting others
without warrant of Law, to the great grievance and discontent of his Majesty's
Subjects; for the suppressing of such Innovations, and for preservation of the
public peace, it is this day ordered by the Commons in Parliament assembled,
that the Churchwardens of every Parish and Chapel respectively, do forthwith
remove the Communion Table from the East end of the Church, Chapel, or
Chancell, into some other convenient place; and that they take away the Rails,
and level the Chancels, as heretofore they were, before the late innovations.
That all crucifixes, scandalous pictures of any one or more persons of the
Trinity, and all Images of the Virgin Mary shall be taken away and abolished,
and that all tapers, candlesticks and basins be removed from the
Communion Table. That all corporal bowing at the Name (Jesus) or toward the
East end of the Church, Chapel, or Chancell, or toward the Communion Table be
henceforth forborne: That the Orders aforesaid be observed in all the several
Cathedral Churches of this Kingdom, and all the Collegiate Churches or
Chapels in the two Universities, or any other part of the Kingdom, and in the
Temple-Church, and the Chapels of the other Innes of Court by the Deans of the
said Cathedrals, by the Vice-chancellours of the said Universities, and by the
Heads and Governors of the several Colleges and Halls aforesaid, and by the
Benchers and Readers in the said Innes of Court respectively. That the Lords
day be duly observed and sanctified all dancing and other sports, either
before or after Divine Service be forborne and restrained, and that the
preaching of Gods Word be permitted in the afternoon in the several Churches
and Chapels of this Kingdom, and that Preachers and Ministers be encouraged
thereunto. That the Vice-chancellors of the Universities, Heads and Governors
of Colleges, all Parsons, Vicars, and Churchwarden* do make certificates of
the performance of these Orders: and if the same shall not be observed in any
the places aforementioned, upon complaint thereof made to the two next
Justices of Peace, Major, or Head-officers of Cities or Towns Corporate. It is
ordered that the said Justices, Major, or other Head-officers respectively,
shall examine the truth of all such complaints, and certify by whose default
the same are committed. All which Certificates are to be delivered in
Parliament before the thirtieth of October. next. Resolved upon the Question*
That this Order now read shall be an Order of it self, without any addition for
the present and that it shall be printed and published.

Nay, here is not all yet, for, our God whose hands are still open to replenish
and satisfy our souls with joy and gladness* yea Liberty to hear the Word
without controlment.
(now) to nourish and cherish our formerly sad hearts with the failings of his
overflowing favors, has taken from us our accustomed terrors and restraints
of free liberty to hear the sweet sound of Aarons b^ls especially on the
Lords*dayes. As is more fully seen and assisted by a blessed Order from the
Parliament to our unexpressible comfort, which Order I have thought fit to be
here inserted.

Die Mercurii, Sept. 8. 1641.
IT is this day ordered by the House of Commons, now assembled in Parliament;
That it shall be lawful for the Parishioners of any Parish within the Kingdom
of England and Wales, to set up a Lecture, and to maintain an orthodox
Minister, at their own charge, to preach every Lord's Day, where there is no
preaching, and to preach one day in the week, where there is no weekly Lecture.

He. Elsyn. Cler. Dom. Com.


Whereby no man (now) is enforced to stay at his own Church where there is no
preaching to promote the honor of the day, and to feed hungry souls with that
heavenly manna, whereof (the Lord knows) many thousand souls in city and
country stood in The misery of men's souls by Prelates soulcrueltie.
need, and (had our Prelates stood in the height of their quondam pride and
cruelty) they must not have stirred out of their own Parishes to seek it
elsewhere, but their souls must have starved and died for lack of it, or else
have been poisoned* with base Arminian stuff and dregs of Popery, thereby to
suffocate and choke A notable piece of Prelaticall tyrannies now, blessedly
abolished.
their poor souls and spiritual understanding, and to make them (like
themselves) fit fuel for the increase of the flames of hell; Such* I say, was
their soul-killing cruelty and tyranny. For why, in those days of the ruff
of their pride, they had familiarly and most easily (yet with Romish craft and
subtlety) under a pretense (forsooth) of too-abstruse and profound and
dangerous points not The Kings Declaration before the book of Articles.
fit to be handled in pulpits by ordinary Preachers, but by their grave
Bishops, Doctors* Deans* and suchlike rare seraphicall rhetoritians,
Schoolmen, and masters of (High Commission) Sentences, nor in all Churches, but
in Cathedrals (forsooth) and that not at all times, but at Easter, and
Whitsuntide; and such like solemn Festivals, under these pretenses. I say, they
had by their exorbitant Ecclesiastical power and jurisdiction, easily, but
impiously prohibited The High Commission Court most blessedly put down.
all pure and powerful preaching on deep points of o^l-saving-grace, as free
justification by faith* predestination, certainty of salvation, final
perseverance* and such like; discountenancing* yea punishing all those that
thus preached or opposed their Popish-Arminian Doctrines, and advancing and
preferring none but their own Arminian faction, rotten-hearted Prete^ses* apt
to be A fit description of the Arminian rabble.
turned with every wind of false-doctrine, mere temporizers, altar ^ringers*
fellows only fit to make Romish-jades to carry Popish-packs to Lambeth Fair,
and soul-crushing burdens on their basebacks, and mercenarie shoulders. But,
now, see (I say) (O, to heavens eternal praise and glory be it spoken, and to
our unspeakable Romes caterpillars blown away.
comfort) how our good God, by his blessed Parliament has freed our Pulpits,
Churches, and our consciences too from the soul-devouring corruptions of these
Clergie-caterpillars, no better than Romish-locusts who are most blessedly
blown away with the Eastern-wind of Gods vindicative indignation against them.
And instead of these that did so besmear, deface and defile Truths most amiable
countenance and sacred beauty, the Lords Persecuted Pastors return home.
gracious outcasts (who had formerly been checked and chid, and churlishly
forced out of the Kingdom (by our Prelates pride and insolency (more worth
than thousands of their Pontifick train) and constrained to expose their lives,
their wives, children, and estates, to all the miseries which Sea and Land
could threaten or bring upon them, are now most happily called home again. O
injurious holy Fathers, thus unworthily to use, thus irreligiously to abuse
Gods so precious jewels, and to prize their beggarly Popish ceremonies before
such holy Saints of God, who shined so illustriously both in their lives and
learning. By which so blessed change and overture for the best, Truth durst now
show her fair face in every pulpit, and speak plainly and home, and needed not
(as formerly) to be shrouded under secret shelters, or creep into corners for
fear of pernicious persecutours: yet thus it was, ^ea thus it familiarly was
practiced by our Prelates (to their indelible shame and infamy be it spoken)
witness their hideous High-Commission-Court, a Court of everlasting illsavour,
which, indeed I may fitlier call a Spightfull rather than a Spiritual Court:
which at the first (as a reverend and eminent divine well notes) was ordained*
like the dogs in Romes capitol, The High-Commission-Court most blessedly put
down.
to fright and scare away Romish Jesuiticall thieves and enemies of the Church;
but has all along, for the most part sorely bitten and barked against honest
men only (especially in these our later days) and driven them from the
Church. A Court, I say, which made no scruple familiarly to slay both the souls
and bodies of Gods most dear and precious servants, not only in those hot
Marian-flam^ng days, but even in these our more modern times, wherein our
Prelates and their pragmaticall Pontifician Sycophants did so crake and brag of
their soft and smooth fatherly- government of the Church, O how many souls and
bodies has that accursed Court shut up in dark dungeons* or else made poor
waveringmindes A brief description of the High-Commission-Court
turn Apostates for fear of their Harpeian-pawes to crush and squeez them out of
their means and livelyhoods, to the utter undoing of them and theirs. The
wickedness of which Court may more fully, yea more foully appear by our taking
notice of the limbs and members of it, who from the very head to the foot of
them, are a pack of irreligious, profane, and most loose-lived The members of
the High-Commission-Court duly delineated.
nominall Protestants at large, yea, generally, atheistical scoffers at
sincerity in Religion and the power of godliness, which indeed was a paradox
and mere mystery to them, and which they never were nor would be acquainted
with. Certainly, all that rightly know them and know, how, piously to discern
and to judge between light and darkness, can truly testify with me this
truth, that it is exceeding difficult (if not impossible) to find one among
them all that is truly and cordially pious, even the best of them ascending
only to the happiness of a mere civill-honest man, (in my best observation of
them for these forty or fifty years) and what their happiness therein is, (if
it ascend no higher) our blessed Savior Christ himself will to their little
comfort tell them namely, that Mat. 5. 20.
if their righteousness exceed not the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, they shall never enter into the Kingdom of heaven. But, now,
blessed, for ever blessed and praised be our just and glorious God, this wicked
Court, together with that other illegitimate The Ex Officio Oath damned.
and spurious offspring of our Lordly Prelates, I mean, their Oath Ex Officio*
an elder bratt of the other Babylonish-brood, and no less replete with
accursed Conscience-torturing Snares than the other, to break the backs of
men's and women's estates, consciences, and earthly comforts, by racking the very
Souls and wracking the bodies, by imprisonments, of both Sexes that were
conscientious, and would not obey their wicked injunctions. And in no small
measure also was this Court and Oath, together with their perjurious and vile
Visitation-Articles, a most miserable vexation to poor Churchwardens all over
the Kingdom, who Church-Warde^s freed from their visitation vexations.
by these netts were entangled, and by their most unjust (...) and unlawful
injunctions were made a prey to their p rnicious practices, and thereby also
made forges and a^vills for the Prelates to hammer all their torturing
taxations on Gods peoples Consciences. But, now, I say, both this wicked Court
and those their bastard-bratts are (by Gods good providence and great mercy)
condemned to return to their Stygian-Patrons, from whom they had their first
rice and Original. And, O, I could wish, with all my heart, that (in ^ternam
rei infamiam) That-Sentence were set on this Court, or that room of
Lambeth-House where it was constantly kept, which is mentioned in the prophecy
of Dan. 2. 5. and 3 2^.
Daniel, namely, that it might be made a jakes or dunghill, with this
inscription engraven in Marble with fair capital letters. The
High-Commission-Courts deserved destin^e, being the vote of a reverend holy
Minister of this Kingdom.

See beer the extreme malice and rage of the Prelates.

The Starr-Chamber Court voted down* and the Councill-Table limited and
restrained.


This jakes was, once, the High-Commission-Court. So hateful and hurtful, I
say, was that Court and its accursed effects to Gods people in this Kingdom,
especially being back^ and ^oulsterd-up with the irresistible wrongs and
unavoidable oppressive censures of the Star Chamber, whether godly men and
women of all ranks and conditions that disobeyed the High-Commissions unlawful
Commands, were turned over when their own Ecclesiastical Power was not
prevalent enough to punish and plague them so deeply as their malice and
mischief aimed at: Yea and the all-overtopping power of the Councill-Table was
no small assailant of the subjects and assistant to the Prelates wicked
Designs; but, that tyrannizing Starr-Chamber Court is by our prudent
Parliamentary Worthies voted down (as has been formerly touched) to the
unspeakable comfort and freedom of the Kings best and most loyal Subjects;
and the immoderate and excessive power of the Councell-Table is by the wisdom
of our most Worthy Senators so ordered and restrained, that we may well hope
(by Gods mercy) such things as were heert^fore frequently done to the
intolerable prejudice of the Subjects liberty, will appear amongst us in
future times but only in Stories, to give us and our posterity more just
occasion to bless our God for his Majesty's goodn ss, and for the faithful and
indefatigable endeavors of this present Parliament.

Now, then, put all these last forementioned Parliamentary-Mercies together
into one account, and then tell me whether Those last great mercies summed up
together.
they do not arise to a mighty (...) and deep debt of ^^erlastingly obliging
gratitude to our so bountiful and ^p^n-handed and enlargedhearted a God to us
so und serving, and rather wrath-provoking a people, in thus conferring such
(...) such incomparable free kindnesses on England such a sinful naug^ ^ie
Nation? Yea, tell me (good Reader) on serious reco^^ction and recogitation of
these most bounteous bl ssings, whether the Lord Jehovah has not been seen
most conspicuously to England above all Nations round about it, On the Mount of
matchless Mercies (to the ineffable God in the Mount.
joy and rejoicing of our Souls) in the deepest gulfes of our stinging-Staites.
Whether our God has not with admirable patience, Isa. 30. 18, 19, 20.
goodness, and favor, waited on us that he might be gracious unto us, and
exalted himself that he might have mercy upon us: for the Lord is a God of
judgment, O blessed are all they that wisely wait for him. For, his people
shall dwell in Sion at Jerusalem and shall weep no more. For, he will be very
gracious unto them at the voice of their cry, and when he shall hear it, he
will answer them. And though the Lord give them the bread of adversary (for a
season) and the water of affliction, yet shall not their Teachers be removed
into a corner any more, but their eyes shall see their Teachers again. Thus, O
even thus has our gracious God directly dealt with us, thus has our
English-Israels Sh^aph^rd of his late poor despised stock kept a careful watch
over us, who had been else made the Prelates perpetuall-Asses England like to
have been Romes perpetual Ass. Psalm 7^. 19, 20 23, 24.
to bear all their Romish and slavish burdens. Wherefore with holy David, we
may justly and ingenuously acknowledge; Thy righteousness, O God, is very high,
who have done great things for us, O God who is like unto thee? Thou who have
shown us great and sore troubles, yet have quickened us again and brought us up
from the depth of the grave. Our lips shall greatly rejoice when we sing unto
thee, and our hearts and souls which ^hou have redeemed. Our tongues shall
talk of thy righteousness all the day long; for they are confounded and brought
unto shame which most seditiously and scelerously ought our destruction. And
thus have we all most perspicuously ^een and observed how gracious and
propitious the Lord has been to his late most tottering Church* crossing her
(...) ^n all their deepest designs and most sublime imaginations, leaving them
still in the lurch and loss when they seemed to swell with highest conc^ipts of
cruel and accursed conquests over their harmless brethren, letting them see
(if they wilfully blind not their eyes) their big-swoln tympanie of
unsufferable pride and arrogancy to be turned A tympanie of pride An (...)
fatuus o^ selfdeceit.
into a flashie ignis fatuus of self-deceiving subtlety; and changing all
their vaporous*puffs of gross impiety into folly and madness

But, now let us proceed to enlarge our most serious observations on what
remains still in a most admirable measure heerin, and let us yet farther see
and consider, how the Lord who is neverweary of well-doing* nay who takes
delight and great pleasure to pleasure his freely beloved Ones with his
plenteous benefits; Of Genesis 27* 38.
whom we cannot say as Esau to his Father Isaac; Have thou but God is an
unexhausted Spring of mercies
one blessing, my Father? but a God who the more he gives the more he has to
give, being indeed, an unexhaustible spring and never to be dried but
ever-overflowing fountain of all goodness whatsoever. But, withal, take this
note by the way with thee, good Reader, that as before, so now especially in
these ensuing remarkable mercies thou shall see the rage and malice of the
malignant party, marveilously interposing their wicked plotts to cross and
utterly to frustrate, as much as in them lay, all the ways and means of Gods
intended, yea and miraculously performed mercies to us, but yet all their
plotts and desperate designs by Gods good providence, were still strangely
thwarted and timely discovered and disappointed, to our comfort and their shame
and helpless vexation. Let us now then, I say, goe-on to see how our glorious
Lord and King persists to make us (of our selves, I confess, and in respect of
our Capernaum-like means of grace so unimproved, the most* infull and
undeserving Nation under heaven) the most beloved and Compelling of the Subject
to take the Order of Knighthood, abolished.

Stannary-Courts and Clerks of Markets rectified.

Parkes and Forests also rightly ordered.

Priests and Jesuits banished.

Sommersett-House, that cage of unclean birds cleansed.


happiest Nation in the world. See therefore how our renowned
Parliamentary-Worthies freed the Kingdom from that former illegal compelling
of the Subject to receive the order of Knighthood against their will; from the
encroachments and oppression of the Stannary-Courts and Extortions by Clerks
of Markets, from vile vexations also by Parkes and Forests, which were now by
a Law reduced into their right bounds and limits. Yea how they moved and
prevailed with the King to set forth his Proclamation for banishing all the
Romish Priests and Jesuits out of the Kingdom on pain of death upon their
after-apprehension in the Land: Together with an Act of Parliament for
disarming of all Popish-Recusants over the whole Kingdom, to the great comfort
and security of Gods people, who before were in continual fear of their
mischievous insurrections, as being well acquainted with their rebellious
Spirits on all advantages* it also being a Principle of their Religion, for the
advancement of the Catholick-Cause, not to keep any plighted faith with
Heretics; for such they account all that are not of their Romish (not faith,
but) faction. Yea that cage of most unclean birds, Sommerset-House, I mean, in
the Strand, cleansed in good measure of those Egyptian croaking Froggs, the
Filthy Capuchin-Fryers and Priests, who lay lurking there too long, like so
many muzled Wolves and Tigers: all these or the most of them banished and
transported over-Sea from us: And the Queen Mother of France, (the more to free
our hearts The Queen Mother of France also sent away.
from fears and discontents) happily also transported beyond Sea from us. About
which time also to settle our hearts with yet more solid comfort, and the more
firmly to consolidate our future hoped happiness, it pleased the Lord to put
into the hearts of our most noble Parliamentary Patriots, to unite and knit all
the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, in-a most firm A most
happy union between all the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland.

An act also of oblivion thereunto annexed. Both Armies in the North disbanded.


League and Conjunction of perpetual love and amity, and of mutual defense
against all malignant Adversaries either domestic or foreign: and to confirm
all this by a particular act of Parliament, ratified by a full consent of the
King and both Houses, together with an act of absolute oblivion of all
exceptions and differences whatsoever formerly intervening twixt Prince and
people. Upon which both Armies of English and Scottish Soldiers were shortly
after most happily and peaceably dismissed and disbanded, to the high hononr of
our wonder-working God, and the unexpressible joy and comfort of both Nations,
thus most lovingly and sweetly shaking hands of true friendship at their
peaceable departure.

And for the farther confirmation of this our happiness and due retribution of
praise and glory to the Lord our God the author of it, there was an Ordinance
of Parliament for a day of public and solemn thankesgiving for this peace so
happily concluded between England and Scotland, which for the glory of God and
honor of our King and Worthies in Parliament, I have thought fit here to
insert verbatim as it was published.

An Ordinance of Parliament for a day of public thanksgiving for the peace
concluded between England and Scotland.
August the 27. 1641.
Whereas it has pleased almighty God to give a happy close to the treaty
of peace, between the two Nations of England and Scotland, by his wise
providence defeating the evil hopes of the subtle adversaries of both
Kingdoms; for which great mercy, it was by the Kings most excellent Majesty,
the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament enacted, that there should be
a public thanksgiving in all the Parish-Churches of his Majesty's Dominions:
It is now ordered and declared by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that the
time for the celebration of that public thanks to almighty God for so great
and public a blessing, shall be on tuesday the 7th of Sept. by prayers,
reading and preaching of the Word in all Churches and Chapels of this
Kingdom, whereof we require a careful and due observance; that we may join
in giving thanks, as we partake of the blessing with our brethren of Scotland,
who have designed the same day for that duty.

According to the act of this present Parliament, for confirmation of the
Treaty of Pacification between the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland,
whereas it was desired by the Commissioners of Scotland, Our brethren of
Scotland attested to be loyal and faithful Subjects.
that the loyalty and faithfulness of his Majesty's Subjects might be made
known at the time of the public thanksgiving in all places, and particularly
in all Parish-Churches of his Majesty's Dominions: Which request was graciously
condescended unto by his Majesty, and confirmed by the said Act. It is now
ordered and commanded by both Houses of Parliament, that the same be
effectually done in all Parish-Churches throughout this Kingdom upon tuesday
the 7th day of Sept. What said our Arminian foul-mouthed Priests to this.
next coming, at the time of the public thanksgiving by the several and
respective Ministers of each Parish Church, or by their Curates, who are heerby
required to read this present Order in the Church.

God in the Mount.
And was not the Lord most gloriously here seen in the Mount of admirable
mercy and deliverance to England and Scotland after such a marveilous manner
as never any Nation could produce the like parallel of gracious providence?
And may we not therefore with holy David* Isreal's sweet singer confess we have
found the Psalm. 9. 9, 10.
Lord (according to his word) a sure defense for the oppressed, even a refuge
in time of trouble. And therefore they that know thy name will put their trust
in thee, for thou Lord have not forsaken them that Psalm. 68. 20.
have seriously sought thee. Yea, he that is our God is the God of salvation,
and unto this God and mighty Lord belong the issues from death* Here also ere
I have done with this mercy, let me desire the Reader to take notice of the
admirable wisdom and justice of God in thus clearing the innocence and
integrity of his children* O, what bitter aspersions did the Prelates,
Arminians, and malignant party cast on our brethren of Scotland at the first,
nothing but traitors and rebels could be heard out of their slanderous mouths:
But, now see, I say, how Gods wisdom and justice ordered Those slanderous
tongues of wicked Priests forced to give themselves the lie in their Pulpits.

I^^. 5. 16. Psalm. 63. 11.


it, that even those tongues that had so taunted them* yea and in their pulpits
too, should now be forced even in the face of their Congregations to give
themselves the lie. That of Job being heerin most clearly ratified* that The
poor has hope and iniquity stops her mouth: and that also of the holy
Prophet David, which is full to our purpose, That the King and all good men
shall exceedingly rejoice and glory in God; but the mouth of them that speak
lies shall be stopped. And now also, let me tell thee, courteous Reader, (to
make these mercies yet more glorious to the praise of our God) that in the
interim that those two Armies lay so together in the North, the pestilent
Spirits of the Malignant party lay not still, but were most maliciously
working by their agents and instruments (the Popish Lords and pernicious
Prelates being also maine sticklers in all these mischievous designs) to
disaffect A notable design of the Popish Lords and Prelates with the English
Army in the North.
and discontent his Majesty's Army by scandalous and most false accusations and
imputations on the Parliament, thus to engage it for the maintenance of their
most wicked designs of keeping-up the Bishops in their votes and Lordly
honors and functions, and by force to compel the Parliament to order limit
and dispose their parliamentarie proceedings in such a manner as might best
concur with the intentions of their dangerous and potent faction. Now this
plot of bringing the English - Army from the North Southward to London against
the Parliament for the causes aforesaid, having been particularly enquired into
and examined both by that noble and virtuous Gentleman Mr Fynes and Sir Philip
Stapleton, with others, they made report thereof to the House of Commons about
June 17. 1641. That they found, that for the advancing of the said plott, the
Earl of Strafford had attempted The Earl of Straford attempted his escape out
of the Tower.
his escape out of the Tower, and to effect it the better, had promised that
worthy Gentleman Sir William Belfore, then Leifetenant of the Tower 20000 li.
and to marry his Son to his Daughter, and to make it one of the greatest
Matches in the Kingdom; but Sir Williams loyalty was such as not to be
corrupted by such base bribes. That Captain Billingsl^y was invited by Sir John
Suckling, (a suckling, indeed, in honesty, but not Sir John Suckling a party
in this plott.
in treachery,) to have employment in this pernicious project; and that one
Captain Chidley brought down many instructions to the Army. That Colonel
Goring should have been Leivetenant-generall The Prince also and the Earl of
Newcastle were to advance the work.

The French also were to assist in it.

The hot zeal of our holy Bishops to work our destruction


of the said Army, and that the Prince and the Lord of Newcastle were to meet
them in Nottinghamshire with a thousand Horse; all which Propositions came from
Mr Jermine and were dispersed and made known by Sergeant Major Wallis and
Captain Chidley. The said Wallis having confessed also that the French would
assist them in this their Design; and that our holy (or rather hollow-hearted)
Clergy of England, whereof the reverend (forsooth) Bishops were the
ringleaders, would at their own charge set forth and maintain a thousand horse;
far more than ever they yet proffered (by a thousand) to assist against the
barbarous and bloody Popish Rebels of Ireland: To the addition of their
everlasting shame and ignominy be it spoken. Master Iermines Letter
intercepted.
Finally, that an intercepted Letter of Mr Jermines to Mr Mountague imported,
that they expected the Earl of Straford with them in the North (but blessed be
the Lord, their wicked hope was frustrated as aforesaid) and that for the
better completing Portsmouth also attempted to be got into their hands.
of these their most accursed designs, Jermine much endeavored to get
Portsmouth into their hands (as one Mr Bland confessed) but could not compass
it. These and such like plotted designs, for the ends aforementioned, being
farther discovered and witnessed by several depositions of diverse examinates,
as the Reader may more fully see in the late Remonstrance of Ireland, published
by authority of the Parliament. But when this mischeivous assign and attempt
of theirs, thus to bring on that Army against the Parliament and City of
London (which they well knew was all along a main and strong fast friend to the
Parliament) had been by Gods great mercy timely discovered, and thereby
utterly frustrated and prevented, they presently undertook and attempted
Another design with the Scottish Army also against the Parliament and City of
London.
another design of the same damnable nature, with this addition to it, namely,
to make the Scottish Army neutrall, and so to sit still and let them alone
whilst the English Army (which they had labored to corrupt and invenome
against the Parliament and City of London by false and slanderous suggestions)
should execute their malice to the subversion of our Religion, and the
dissolution of our long happy government. Thus, I say, did they plott and
continually practice to disturb our peace and to destroy all the Kings
Dominions: And for that cause had employed most industriously their Emissares
and agents in them all for the promoting of these their devilish designs. But
by Gods infinite mercy, and the vigilancie of such as were honest and
well-affected to religion, Both designs timely discovered and disappointed.
to peace, and the prosperity of the Parliament, they were all, I say, still
(timely) discovered and defeated, before they could be ripe enough for
execution among us in England and Scotland. Only in Ireland which was
farther-off, and full of Papists, Jesuits and Priests, they had time to mould
and prepare their wicked work, and had brought it to much pernicious
perfection. For, not long after, the most bold and bloody rebellion in Ireland
The most bloody and barbarous rebellion in Ireland discovered.

The great danger of the utter loss of Ireland.


brake-out there, which had it not been timely revealed and prevented by Gods
great mercy and good providence in the preservation of the Castle of Dublin,
but the very Eave before it should have been taken by the rebels; the whole
Kingdom had been fully possessed by them, the government of it totally
subverted, the true Religion had been quite extirpated and rooted out, and all
the Protestants whom the conscience of their duty to God, their King and
country would not have permitted to join with them, had been utterly
destroyed, as in a most lamentable manner very many thousands of them (poor
souls) have already been, as is most fully and fearfully to be seen (to the
terror and amazement of all Christian hearts that read the same) both in The
Irish-Remonstrance and Irelands Tears.
that Treatise, entitled, Irelands-Tears, and the Irish-Remonstrance. And,
indeed, they have, thereby, kindled such a fire, there, and blown it into such
an over-spreading flame, as nothing but Gods extraordinary blessing upon the
wisdom and endeavors of this State will be able to quench it. And certainly
had not God in his great mercy to our Land and Nation discovered and
confounded their first design, for the grand-plot of all on England and
Scotland, we all in England had certainly been the England mainly intended to
have been the prologue of Irelands miseries.
prologue to this woeful tragedy in Ireland, and had by this time (and before
them) been the most deplorable spectacle of lamentation and woe, ruin and
confusion to all Europe that ever the Sun beheld. And therefore here, me
thinks, we may most fitly take up that of holy David, with a little inversion
of the words to our selves. If the Lord had not been on our side, now may
England Psalm. 124. 1, 2, 3, 4. etc.
say (and that most justly) if the Lord had not been on our side, when men rose
up against us; Then had they swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was
kindled against us. Then the waters had overwhelmed us, the proud waves and
raging billows had gone over our souls. But blessed, O, for ever blessed be
God, that has not given us over as a prey to their devouring teeth.

Now about this time, it pleased the Lord to permit the malignant Sir Will.
Belfore put out of his Lieutenantship of the Tower.
party so far to prevail with the King, (and among them the Lord Cottington, a
Popish Lord, and strongly suspected to be one of the prime projecting heads of
that faction) that Sir William Belfore, a worthy and noble gentleman then
Lieftenant of the Tower of London was displaced from that office of so great
trust, The Lord Cottington made Constable of the Tower.
and the said Lord Cottington made Constable of the Tower, who presently kept a
great pudder in the Tower, placing and displacing things therein, planting
Ord^nance on the walls thereof, with their mouths toward the City, entertaining
Soldiers to guard and keep it of very ill-condition, and suspected for
Popery; all these to the great terror and amazement of the vigilant Citizens
of London, who had still extraordinary jealous eyes on him and all his actions
and carriages, and thereupon complained and petitioned the Parliament against
him, and his demeanor in the Tower, and the Parliament moved the King most
instantly about it; who on their long and urgent importunity at last so far
prevailed with Cottington displaced.
his Majesty, that he put the Lord Cottington from being Constable of the
Tower, and chose-in one Colonel Lunsford to be Col. Lunsford made Leiftenant
of the Tower.
Leiftenant thereof; a man of an ill name and condition of life, and whom I my
self knew a prisoner in Newgate, not very long before, for a great abuse
offered by him to Sir Thomas Pelham, now a worthy Knight of Sussex, and at
which time of his imprisonment, there, it was generally and credibly reported,
that upon an abuse done by him also to one of the Officers of Newgate (who had
been his very good friend in the time of his imprisonment) he brake prison, or
stole away, and left the poor Clerk of Newgate in great distress and danger
thereby; and a man, indeed, most justly excepted against by our grave
parliamentarie Senators, as most unfit to have such a trust and power entrusted
to him, especially in times of such great and constant fears and distractions
of the State and City of London. Whereupon, this man also was much and long
petitioned against, both by the Citizens of London, to the Parliament, and by
the Parliament to the King, to have him removed, and a man of known Lunsford
also displaced.
and approved integrity, on whom they might safely confide, to be chosen into
the place, and to have the safe custody thereof committed to him. Whose
removeall was also, at length with much ado condescended unto, by his
Maisstio, and the said Colonel Lunsford put out, the King putting in one Sir
John Byron, Sir John Byron made Leiftenant of the Tower.
a gentleman though of no such ill-savour of life as the former, yet not
answerable to the desires of our prudent Worthies in Parliament, whose wisdom
and circumspection foresaw that to be amiss in the choice, likewise, which
much discontented them; and Petitioned against.
enforced them to petition his Majesty for his removeall also, as it was the
joint desire likewise of City and Country. Here therefore we may now see the
great goodness of our God, in thus wisely disposing and ordering things; that
though the malignant party seemed so far to prevail, and get advantages
against Gods people, yet even in these also the Lord still crossed them and their
devillish*designes, and regarded the desires, and cleared the fears of his
servants for his own Names sake. Much about which time, a most impious and
malicious-hearted fellow audaciously sent a letter to the Parliament, directed
and endorsed to that ever most A Plague Sore plasture sent in a letter unto Mr.
Pim.
highly honored Member of the House of Commons, Mr. Pim, a most pious patriot
of his country, and in it a filthy fresh plaster taken from a plague sore,
expressing in the letter what it was, and why it was sent, namely, in hope, that
the very sudden sight and thought on it (he being, then* in the Parliament
House) might and would damp and dead his heart with fear, and so have infected
the worthy gentleman to death, with it. A copy of which letter I have thought
fit here to insert, that the Reader may see the odiousness of it and this
action more fully.

The copy of the Letter sent to Mr. Pim, in the Parliament House, with a
filthy plague sore plasture in it.
MAster Pim, do not think that a guard of men can protect you, if you persist
in your traitorous courses, and wicked designs. I have sent a paper-messenger
to you, and if this do not touch your heart, a Dagger shall, so soon as I am
recovered of my plague sore. In the mean time, you may be forborne, because no
better man may be endangered for you.

Repent Traitor.

Which letter was delivered, I say, as Mr. Pim went into the Parliament. But
contrary to the wicked intention of the master and message, God (whose will all
his creatures obey, to Dan 3.
save or slay, as he pleases, as was remarkably evident, in that fiery furnace
seven times hotter than ordinarily, yet not able so much as to singe the hair
or clothes of that pair royal of God-adoring Hebrews cast thereinto) preserved
this Noble Gentleman from the intended evil thereof. For, this undaunted and
conscience-unspotted courageous Worthy (like that magnanimous Roman Camillus
a renowned Roman Captain, Plutarch in his Lives.
Camillus of whom Plutarch in his Lives, makes mention, who whiles he was
delivering his Embassage to the heathen Prince to whom he was sent by the
Senators of Rome, and with whom the Romans, that time, waged war, this Princes
Nobles had suddenly and unknown to Camillus, set a mighty Elephant close
behind his back, and made it suddenly and extremly to roar, thereby thinking to
have startled and frighted this famous Roman, but he was nothing moved
therewith, but went-on smoothly and undauntedly with his Embassage, to the
wonder and amazement of this Prince and his Nobles, who were mightily taken
with the Mr. Pims most undaunted spirit against the plasture.
unbended resolution of this courageous Roman) so, I say, this piously
valourous-hearted gentleman, Mr Pim, was nothing at all dis-heartned or
distempered at the sight of the plaisture, nor with the wicked threats which
that atheistical wretch sent besides in the letter to stab him with his Dagger
if that plasture failed, God Mr. Pims due praise.
having hitherto preserved him (and I trust so will) a most loyal subject to
his Sovereign, and a most prudent and painful promoter An objection answered.
of the best good in Church and Commonwealth. And although it may,
peradventure, be objected, that this was but a private or particular passage,
and therefore not so pertinent to our purpose: yet considering the eminency of
the person, and his employments and use in Parliament for the public good, and
the transcendent malice and envy of that malignant person whoever he was,
aiming at a public mischief therein, I could not conceive it impertinent to
the present occasion, but very worthy our The Citizens of London petition both
Houses of Parliament.
observation and gratification to God for it. Much about this time also it
pleased the Lord to put into the hearts of the worthy Citizens of London, to
take into their serious consideration the great retarding and delaying of the
weighty affairs of the Kingdom, and the unhappie protraction of punishing
Delinquents, together with the uncomfortable reluctancies and disunion between
both the Houses, and all this by reason of an ill-affected potent and
pernicious destructive party, especially in the House of Lords, by Prelates
and Popish-Lords, striving and contriving to hinder or quite make void all good
Votes among them, and to advance all evil. Therefore, I say, the most and
best-affected and pious-hearted Citizens of London unanimously petitioned Both
Houses of Parliament touching those and such like serious and important
matters, being, I say, most of them, men of the The Citizens most grave and
substantial delivery of their Petition.
best note and quality of the whole City both for piety and ability. Who went
with their Petition to the Parliament, in a most grave and substantial
equipage, in fifty or sixty Coaches at the least, and were there most
graciously and gratefully entertained both by the Lords and Commons, and
received a most cordial The gracious answer to their Petition.
and comfortable answer to their Petitions; which act of theirs (they being the
samplar and pattern even of the whole Kingdom, and upon whom the eyes of the
whole Land were cast, to be by them encouraged and directed) begat such an
honest and happy emulation in all the Counties of the Kingdom, as by Gods
great mercy produced most blessed effects to us all, as shall be more
particularly and punctually declared in its proper place.

Not long after also, the honest Apprentises of the said City of London being
very sensible of their Masters sufferings by The Apprentises of London do
likewise petition.
those distractions in the Commonwealth, and the general decay of trading, and
thereby also of their own present and future great discouragements in their
hope of comfortable subsistence and livelihood when they were to be freemen of
the City, if these inconveniences continued: They also hereupon took the
courage and resolution to exhibit their Petition to the Parliament for speedy
and timely redress of these encroaching and growing evils. Which act of theirs
was so modestly and orderly managed by them, that the Parliament received their
petition most courteously, and returned them a very fair and favorable answer,
in brief, for the present, with promise of a more full and satisfactorie answer
in convenient time. After whom also, the Porters of London, The Porters of
London also do petition the Parliament
pinched with extreme poverty by reason of the decay of trading, were thereby
necessitated, and by Gods providence thousands of them stirred up and
stimulated to petition the Parliament for speedy redress of their present
pressures, whose Petition also was very lovingly received by the Parliament,
and they received a well-pleasing reply for the present. Now what an admirable
and rare effect these Petitions produced, to add most justly to this catalogue
of our parliamentarie mercies, this subsequent passage shall clearly
demonstrate to the godly Reader, The Apprentises of London go again to the
Parliament for an answer to their* Petition.
viz. Not long after a certain convenient number of Apprentises being very
modest in carriage, and well-spoken young men, went very civilly and peaceably
to Westminster to the Parliament for a further satisfactorie answer to their
Petition, as was promised to them. But it pleased the Lord it so fell out, that
that desperate and furious, Colonel Lunsford, and very many ruffian-like
fellows with him, being at that time in Westminster Hall, and there walking up
and down, at last took occasion by uncivil and provoking Are greatly affronted.
words to the said Apprentises and Citizens at that time also walking there, to
make a great disturbance and hubbub among them, and from mocking and jeering of
them, and quarreling The Bishops the cause of the quarrel.
about Bishops (whom the Apprentises and Citizens had, indeed, petitioned
against in all their Petitions) threatening those that durst once speak against
their reverend Bishops, at last they drew*out their swords* and the said
Colonel Lunsford and his quarrelling comrades flew in the faces of the
Citizens, and furiously beat them out of Westminster Hall before them, being
Citizens abused at Whitehall by Courtiers there.
all unweaponed, and coming only in a fair and unoffensive manner (as
aforesaid) to receive an answer to their petition; and as they departed home
from Westminster by Whitehall, they were there again most grossly abused and
beaten by the Courtiers, and such like, so that diverse of them were sorely
wounded, and some 1641.
thereby killed by them. Whereupon, the next day (these things falling-out about
Newyeers-tyde, or in Christmas-holydayes) very many Citizens and apprentises
went again to Westminster armed, and better prepared than the day before, for
such affronts, if any were offered to them. But now see how it pleased the Lord
it should come to pass, some of the Apprentises A great disturbance and hubbub
at Westminster. Abbey the next day.
and Citizens were again affronted about Westminster-Abbey, and a great noise
and hubbub fell out thereabouts, othersome of them watched (as it seems by the
sequel) the Bishops coming to the Parliament, who considering the great noise
and disquiet which was by land all about Westminster, durst not come to the
Parliament that way for fear of the Apprentises, and therefore intended to have
come to the Parliament by water in barges; but the apprentises watched them
that way also, and as they thought to have come to land were so pelted with
stones, and The Bishops are frighted from the Parliament by apprentises by land
and water.
frighted at the sight of such a company of them, that they durst not land, but
were rowed back and went away to their places. Now, see herein, good Reader, a
most notable over-powering impression of divine providence on this business,
and learn hence so much wisdom as not to despise seeming contemptible things
and small beginnings, as I have formerly touched on a like occasion. These
lordly and lofty Prelates, (among whom, and a The most remarkableevent of that
affront to the Bishops.
prime one too, it seemed, was that supercilious Arch-prelate of York, Bishop
Williams) took foul scorn and high indignation at this affront by Boys and
prentises, thus to be debarred from the Parliament, especially fearing lest any
thing might pass in the House against them, touching their lordly dignities by
their absence, on which they had great cause to keep continual jealouseyes and
vigilant watch, they now standing on very ticklish terms The Bishops just fears
and jealousies of theirdownfall.
with the State, and being so perpetually and universally petitioned against
from all parts of the Kingdom, as a prime branch of the malignant party, and
special perturbers of all good for Church or Commonwealth; therefore, I say,
being ve xt to the heart, and deeply stung with discontent, they vowed revenge:
and thereupon gathered together into their secret Conclave full fraught with
Stygian-rancour and rage, and assisted, no doubt, with some Jesuiticall
influence of Romish spirits, they contrived and contracted The Bishops do
petition the King and Peers touching their grievances.
a piece of mischief or mischievous petition to the King and House of Peers,
which they wholly intended against the happy and successful proceedings of
the Parliament, but our good God diverted it to their own further ruin and
destruction. Now that you may see their own act and deed attested and avouched
under their own hands, I have thought fit here to insert it, verbatim, as they
themselves penned and exhibited it to the King.

To the Kings most excellent Majesty, and the Lords and Peers now assembled in
Parliament.
The humble Petition and Protestation of all the Bishops and Prelates now
called by His Majesty's Writs to attend the Parliament and present about London
and Westminster for that Service.
THat whereas the Petitioners are called-up by several and respective Writs,
and under great penalties to attend the Parliament, and have a clear and
indubitable right to vote in Bills, and other matters whatsoever debateable in
Parliament, by the ancient customs, Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and ought
to be protected by your Majesty, quietly to attend and prosecute that great
Service. They The Bishops Petition and Protestation to the King and Peers.
humbly remonstrate and protest before God, your Majesty, and the noble Lords
and Peers now assembled in Parliament, that as they have an indubitate right to
sit and vote in the House of the Lords; so are they, if they may be protected
from force and violence, most ready and willing to perform their duties
accordingly. And that they do abhominate all actions or opinions tending to
Popery, and the maintenance thereof; as also all propension and inclination to
any malignant party, or any other side or party whatsoever to the which their
own reasons and conscience shall not move them to adhere. But, whereas they
have been at several times violently menaced, affronted and assaulted by
multitudes of people in their coming to perform their services in that
Honorable House, and lately chased away and put in danger of their lives, and
can find no redress or protection, upon sundry complaints made to both Houses
in these particulars. They likewise humbly protest before your Majesty, and
the noble House of Peers, that saving unto themselves all their rights and
interests of sitting and voting in that House at other times, they dare not sit
or vote in the House of Peers until your Majesty shall further secure them
from all affronts, indignities and dangers in the premises. Lastly, whereas
their fears are not built upon fantasies and conceits, but upon such grounds
and objects as may well terrify men of good resolutions, and much constancy.
They do in all duty and humility protest before your Majesty and the Peers
of that most honorable House of Parliament, against all Laws, Orders, Votes,
resolutions, and determinations, as in themselves null, and of none effect,
which in their absence, since the 27th. of this instant month of December,
1641. have already passed; as likewise against all such as shall hereafter
pass in that most honorable House, during the time of this their forced and
violent absence from the said most honorable House; not denying, but if their
absenting of themselves were wilful and voluntary, that most honorable House
might proceed in all their premises, their absence or this protestation
notwithstanding. And humbly beseeching your most excellent Majesty to command
the Clerk of that House of Peers to enter this their petition and protestation
among his Records.

They will ever pray to God to bless, etc. Jo. Eborac. Tho. Duresme. Rob. Co.
Lich. Jos. Norw. Jo. Asa. Guli. Ba. and Wells. Geo. Heref. Rob. Oxon. Ma. Ely.
Godfr. Glouc. Jo. Peterburg. Morris Landaff.

This petition and protestation being thus exhibited to his Majesty, the King
was pleased to send it immediately to the House of Peers, who having seen and
perused it, were forthwith highly offended with it, and so sent it immediately
to the House of Commons; whereupon both Houses met in the painted Chamber, at a
Twelve Bishops impeached of high treason, and imprisoned in the Tower.
Conference there, and after it, accused those 12. Bishops of high treason, for
endeavoring to subvert the fundamental Laws of the Realm, and the very being
of Parliaments; whereupon they were by the Lords sequestered from the
Parliament, and imprisoned, ten of them in the Tower, and (for their age sake)
two of them committed to custody to the Black-Rod. Thus was the Parliament
most happily freed of 12. of them at one clap: And thus, I say (ever blessed be
the Lord our God for it) that which the Parliament long desired, and the
well-affected people over the whole Kingdom so long and so unanimously
petitioned for Quod nequit ingenium D^us fecit.
(even the extirpation of the Bishops out of the Parliament) but could not well
tell how to accomplish it, God has made themselves agents and actors of to
their own just shame and sorrow, but to the high content and rejoicing of all
Gods faithful children and servants. And, certainly, if ever, here was a most
visible print of Gods over-powring providence crossing these Prelates craft,
paying them in their own coin, and most clearly manifesting Job 41. 34.
himself to behold all the high things of the earth, and that he only is King
over all the children of pride.

And yet (give me leave, good Reader, to give thee this one note by the way, of
no small consequence and concernment, touching these our present Prelates of
England) notwithstanding all Mark this note well.
the most evident and undeniable manifestations of Gods arrows of wrath and high
displeasure shot against them all, partly for Craft and cruelty.
their craft and cruelty exercised against Gods faithfull-ones, and partly for
the Laodicean-temporizing coldness and security even of the very best and most
moderate of them all, without exception Laodicean security.

Judges 5.


of any one, who have rather chosen (like the accursed, yea bitterly accursed
rulers of Meros) to lie still, to sleep in a whole skin, enjoy quietly their
fat Bishoprics, and lordly dignities and ease O how far short came all our
best Bishops of noble Q. Hester in her zeal and courage for God and his Saints!
therein, than with noble and renowned Queen Hester, who, in the cause of her
afflicted people the Jews, resolved (in a far more certain danger, every way,
than they could have been liable to) to hazard her life and honors, with an,
If I perish, I perish, (ah shame, unexpressible shame to them all, that a
weak-woman should outstrip them all in a masculine heroic spirit for her
religion and people) than like her, I say, to expose their rich revenews, much
less their very lives as she did hers (tell me, I say, of one among them all,
that did thus) to danger or loss, to adventure the safeguard and welfare of
the Church and children of God, which they saw daily so overtop't by rank
over-growing popery and atheism. Which laziness and coldness of theirs,
though they slightly pass it over as a small sin or no sin at all; yet Christ
himself our blessed Savior tells them, they are no less than down*right
Antichrists, even flat and false enemies of the Lord Christ, as is clear,
(Matthew. 12. 30.) by our Saviors own words. He that is not with me, is against
me. Which being so, let them all (even the best and most moderate among them)
take heed of 1 Cor. 16* 22.
that fearful sentence of the Apostle. If any man love not the Lord Jesus
Christ, let him be Anathema Maran-atha. Even, accursed with a most bitter
curse. And how can these Prelates say, truly, that they love the Lord Christ,
when they either so palpably persecute him in his beloved members, or at least,
egregiously slight and disrespect him, in suffering his holy cause and
faithful servants to be so discountenanced and trampled upon, as they have
been these many years, especially of late. And yet, I say, in all this so
dangerous Here is the pith of the note, which In desire thee to mark.
and double-guilt and deep-die of gross impiety in them (which indeed is the
note I aim at, and is the wonder and admiration, mixed with grief of my soul, to
see and consider) that even the very best of them has not to this very day
given us the least print or expression of true repentance and godly remorse of
The great impenitencie of our Prelates.
soul and spirit, for these so great and grievous sins of theirs of cruelty
and security, or carelessness of Gods people and their religion; but even the
best of them still, I say, suffering the Gospel of grace and truth to sink or
swim, what cared they, so they may be quiet, and be thought great Clerks, rare
disputants against Popery in words and writings only (yet often juggling with us
therein too) and the wise and moderate men (forsooth) of the world. Yea, I say,
so far are some of them from cordial remorse and penitencie for those accursed
abominations aforesaid, that Bp. Hall (a most fierce, but fruitless stickler
for Diocesan Episcopacie) in a book of his lately printed and published in his
own defense.

2 Kin. 9. 22. Bp Halls Peace of Rome.


one of their most moderate, wise men of peace, since his being in prison in
the Tower, has not been ashamed with his accustomed rhetorically-glorious and
smoothly painted phrases to daub over his great-guilt of conscience, especially
in point of security and carelessness of Gods truth forementioned by me. O
these men of peace (forsooth) how have they forgotten even hypocritical Jehu's
asseveration, What peace, so long as the whoredoms of that Romish Jezebel are
so many and so mischievous amongst us? Yea I say again to him in particular, he
should have had no peace with Rome, as well as he wrote of, the no peace of
Rome. But thus, I say, these our holy Fathers of our Church* forsooth, these
our lordly Prelates, who with Bishop White, must be counted Princes too, have
carried themselves in Two Scottish Bishops renounced their Bishoprics, as an
Antichristian function.
those their great evils; The Lord in mercy timely take from them their such a
heart of stone, and give them a heart of flesh, and clear the eyes of their
understanding so wilfully blinded, that they may with those two honest
self-denying and humble-hearted Bishops in Scotland, ( In his defense of
Episcopacie.
whom Bishop Hall scoft and jeered at for it) with self-denying shame and sorrow
repent their horrible impiety to God and his Church, and abhor such a princely
p^mpous function (never of Christ's institution) as (even inevitably, for ought
I can yet see to the contrary) occasions such faction and defection Ezra 6. 11,
12.
from sincerity and truth. Which, if they labor not timely and truly to
express, they must pardon me if I believe it were most just with our God, if
he should raise up against them in their impenitencie, such a just judge as
godly Ezra records, even that heathen yet (surely) honest-hearted King Darius
to have been, in that noble and renowned sentence of his, whose words are
these. I have made a Decree, that whosoever shall alter this word (namely of
re-erecting and building-up again the old O how much more precious are the
living temples of the Holy Ghost, which, our Prelates have been so far from
building up, that the worst of them have labored to pull down and destroy, the
very best of them have lazily and carelessly suffered to be destroyed.
materiall-Temple at Jerusalem) let timber be pulled down from his house, and
being set up as a jibbet) let him be hanged thereon; and let his house be made
a dunghill (or jakes) for this. See here* for This, only for This. What This?
Why only for daring so much as to alter the Kings honest resolution, as
aforesaid. But he goes on in the 12. verse. And the God that has caused his
name to dwell there, destroy all Kings and people (note this emphaticall
expression of this honest King) that shall put to their hand to alter or
destroy this House of God (ah shame to our guilty Prelates herein) which is at
Jerusalem; of the House of Commons, wherein you shall find the true and genuine
description of it to the full, which is this.

Januarie, 17th, being Monday, 1641.
A Declaration of the House of Commons, touching a late breach of their
Privileges, set forth by themselves.
Whereas the Chambers, Studies, and Truncks of Mr Denzill Hollis, Sir Arthur
Haslerigg, Mr John Pim, Mr John The great design of Ian. 4. 1641. exactly
described.
Hampden, and Mr William Strode, Esquires, Members of the House of Commons,
upon Monday, the third of Januarie, 1641. by color of his Majesty's Warrant,
have been sealed-up by Sir William Killigrew, and Sir William Flemen, and
others, which is not only against the privilege of Parliament, but the common
liberty of every A Sergeant at Arms sent from the King to apprehend the five
Gentlemen accused of high treason.
Subject. Which said Members, afterward, the same day, were, under the like
color, by Sergeant Francis, one of his Majesty's Sergeants at Arms, contrary
to all former presidents, demanded of the Speaker, sitting in the House of
Commons, to be delivered to him that he might arrest them of high Treason. And
whereas, afterward, the next day (being the 4th of Januar. 1641.) his Majesty
in his royal person came to the said House, attended with a great multitude of
armed The King himself went to the Parliament with 500 attendants Papists and
others.
men in warlike manner, to the number of about five hundred, both Soldiers,
Papists and others, all of them armed, with swords, and Pistols, and other
weapons, who all came up to the very door of the House, and placed themselves
there, and in other parts and passages near to the said House, and diverse of
them pressing to the door of the said House, thrust away the doore-keepers,
and placed themselves between the said door and the ordinary attendants of
his Majesty, The Soldiers demeanor about the Parliament-door.
holding up their swords, and some holding up their pistols ready cocked, near
the said door, and saying, I am a good marks-man, I can hit right I warrant
you, and they not suffering the said door (according to the custom of
Parliament) to be shut, but said they would have the door open; and if any
opposition were against them, they made no question, but they should make their
party good, and that they would maintain their party; And, whenever any
Members of the House of Commons were coming into the House, their attendants
desiring that room might be made for them, some of the said Soldiers answered,
A Pox of God confound them: and others said, A Pox take the The Soldiers most
audacious and accursed speeches.
House of Commons, let them come and be hanged, What ado is here with the House
of Commons. And some of the said Soldiers did likewise violently assault, and
by force disarm, some of the attendants and servants of the Members of the
House of Commons, waiting in The Parliament attendants and Servants about the
door disarmed by force.
the room, next the said door, and upon the Kings return out of the said House,
many of them by wicked oaths, and otherwise, expressed much discontent that
those Members of the House (for whom they came) were not there; And others of
them said, When comes the word? but no word was yet given. As they thus stood
without, at the door, to the great terror and disturbance of all the Members
then sitting, and according to their duty in a peaceable and orderly manner
treating of the great affairs of England and Ireland, and his Majesty having
The King placed himself in the Speaker of the Parliaments chair.
placed himself in the Speakers chair, he demanded of them the persons of the
said Members to be delivered unto him, which is a high breach of the rights and
privileges of Parliament, and inconsistent with the liberties and freedom
thereof. But the King not finding those foresaid Members, whom he came for, in
the House (for they The plot blessedly crossed by the absence of the gentlemen.
were purposely absent, with the consent of the House on strong suspicion of the
said intended event) as he expected; thereupon, he rose out of the Speakers
chair, and departed from them without any farther The King departed out of the
Parliament
molestation; whereupon, the Soldiers and Cavaliers at the door, seeing the
King coming forth, cried out, a lane, a lane, and so went all away. After
which, some of them being demanded what they thought the said company intended
to have done; answered, That, questionless, The main intention of this great
and grievous design.
in the posture they were set, if the word had been given, they should have
fallen upon the House of Commons and have cut all their throats (horresco
referens; Quis enim talia fando, temperet a lachrimis.) All this being fully
proved to be most true, upon several examinations taken the same Januarie the
7th, before a Committee, then appointed by the House of Commons to sit in
London. In which A Proclamation published at Westminster. against those
Parliament-Worthies.
interim, a printed paper, in the form of a Proclamation, bearing date, the 6th
of Jan. 1641. issued out, at Westminster, or Whitehall; for the apprehending
and imprisoning of them, therein suggesting that through the conscience of
their own guilt, they were absent and fled; not willing to submit themselves to
justice. The Parliament did therefore declare, that the said printed paper is
false, scandalous and Voted to be a scandalous and illegal paper.
illegal, and that notwithstanding the said printed paper, or any Warrant
issued out, or any other matter yet appearing against them, or any of them,
they may and ought to attend the service of the said Those worthy gentlemen
justified by the Parliament.
House of Commons, and the several Committees now on foot. And we do further
declare, that the publishing of several Articles purpourting a form of a
charge of high treason against the Lord Kimbolton, one of the Members of the
Lords House, and against the said Mr Hollis, Sir Ar. Haslerigg, Mr Pym, Mr
Hampden, and Mr Strode, by Sir Will. Killigrew, Sir Will. Flemen, and others in
the Innes of Court and elsewhere, in the Kings name, was a high breach of the
privilege of Parliament, a great scandal to his Majesty and his government,
a seditious act manifestly tending to the subversion of the peace of the
Kingdom, and an injury and dishonor to the said Members, there being no
legal charge or accusation against them.

A brief congratulatory for Gods mercy in this their so great a deliverance.
Recollect now then (good Christian Reader) thy sad and serious thoughts, and
muster-up thy most exquisite meditations on this so ponderous and weighty a
passage of Gods admirable providence, and protection of his own
parliamentarie-Worthies (for so, me thinks, I may fitly call and count them)
and tell me whether God was not wonderfully seen here in the Mount of straits,
to turn it (in a moment) to a Mount of deliverance to his faithful Servants;
yea, and in them, to the whole Kingdom? whose weal or woe (as we all are or
ought to be most sensible) was wrapt-up in them, being the representative Body
thereof; And when thou have fully and feelingly recogitated and ruminated on
this exuberant parliamentarie-mercie, tell me, I pray thee, whether thou and I
and all true English-hearts have not most redundan^ reason and copious occasion
with blessed Moses, a little before his death (and dying men's words ought to
make deep impression of credence Deuteronomy. 33. 26, 27.
in our hearts) to confess and acknowledge, That there is none like unto the
God of Jesurum, who rides upon the heavens in the help of his beloved-ones,
and in his excellency on the sky. The eternal God is their refuge, and
underneath them are his everlasting arms, Psalm. 109. 27, 28.
and he shall thrust their enemies before them. And they shall know that it was
thy hand (O Lord) and that thou only have done it; and that though they have
cursed, yet thou have blessed, and that when they arose thou made them
ashamed, but have caused thy servants to rejoice. Exodus 19. 4.
Yea and have carried them on Eagles wings (far and free from danger) and have
brought and placed them near to thy self. Yea, I say, again, now, if ever,
those noble and renowned parliamentarie-Worthies found that of Solomon most
true. That the Name of the Lord is a strong tower: the righteous run into it,
and are safe. To conclude this, therefore, let the grateful and gracious
consideration of this so great a deliverance cause me and thee, and them all
whom it so nearly and peculiarly concerns, to break-out, with holy David, that
sacred and sugared Singer of Israel, and to say, O give thanks unto the Lord,
and call continually upon his Name. Sing Psalm. 105. 1, 2, ^.
unto him, O sing Psalms to his great Name, and talk of all the wondrous works
which he has done, and all the glorious judgments of his mouth.

The Parliament adjourned and turned into a Grand-Committee at London in the
Grocers*Hall.
Now after this so terrible affront and disturbant affright to the Parliament,
it pleased those pious and prudent Worthies of both Houses for a space to
adjourn their sitting at Westminster, and to turn Both-Houses into a grand
Committee, and for their greater safety and assurance from Popish-plots and
combinations, to sit in the City of London, in the Grocers-Hall. Where, by
Gods mercy and most safe protection they were most cheerfully guarded every
day by the train'd-Bands of the City, and extraordinary lovingly entertained,
and most respectively used according to the high merit of their worth and work,
and unto theirs and our high content and singular comfort.

The Ministers of London petition the Parliament for an Assembly and a monthly
Fast.
In which interim of their sitting in London, very many of the well-affected
and faithful Ministers of London unanimously petitioned the Parliament, both
for choice of an Assembly for settling Church Discipline, and for the ordering
of a Monthly fast throughout the whole Kingdom, until the distresses of
Ireland and the distractions of England were by Gods mercy graciously quieted
and composed. Which petition of theirs in both those material branches
thereof, was most favorably entertained by the Parliament, and received a
desired answer; the Assembly of Divines being now by vote in Parliament fully
resolved on, and all An assembly of Ministers resolved on in Parliament.
of them nominated for all the Counties throughout the Kingdom for their advise
to the Parliament for settling and ordering the pure worship of our God, and
true Apostolical discipline; Wherein, the Lord grant they may all be as
meek-hearted* gracious, and faithful as holy Moses was, to do nothing therein
(no not in the least particular thereof, especially in Gods worship) but most
punctually according to the pattern of the Apostles practice and precepts, no
question fully and sufficiently to be A monthly Fast proclaimed all over the
Kingdom.
found in Gods Word. The Monthly fast also was speedily put in practice all
over the Kingdom, which being as it were a spiritual Militia (as a reverend
and learned Divine of our City calls it, most properly) puts the Kingdom into
a spiritual posture of a God-pleasing holy warfare (if religiously kept both
for sin and from sin) that we may, as it were, even fight and contend with God
by prayers and tears, by sighs and groans, as good Jacob was said thus to
wrestle with God, yea and may be prevailers with God for a blessing on our
Land, our King and Parliament, Church and State, and thus also at length, may
prevail with men, even against all the enemies of our peace and prosperity
both domestic and foreign. Domestic, I mean our imbred sins, base lusts, and
corruptions; Foreign, that is, treacherous projectors, and clandestine
malignant emulatours of our happiness both at home and abroad. And are not
here two parliamentarie-mercies more of most high concernment; and such as give
us strong and irrefragable Romans 8. 31.
assurance that God is with us, and will be with us (if they be rightly and
religiously managed) and then we need not fear who is 2 King. 6. 16, 17.
against us. Yea, then (as the Prophet said) They are more that are with us than
those that be for our enemies. Yea, even the Lords legions of chariots and
horsemen of fire round about us, to defend us, and to consume them. Whereby we
may even already triumph and exult with pious Paul, and truly say, Thanks be
unto God who 1 Cor. 15. 57.
has given us victory; yea and made us more than conquerors through Christ, in
whom he has freely loved us. But to proceed.

In this time also of the Parliaments sitting in London by a grand-Committee of
both Houses, the stout-hearted and well-minded Ship-masters and Mariners to
show their love and loyalty to the King and Parliament, exhibited their
Petition to the grand Ship-masters and Seamen petition the Parliament, and
proffer their service to it on all occasions.
Committee, and therewith also their votes and desires full of courage and
candor to serve his Majesty and the Parliament to the utmost of their power;
which their readiness and cheerfulness, therein, was most lovingly regarded,
both by the Lords and Commons, and shortly after a fair and fit occasion was
offered to make use of their love and service therein, which they most really
manifested to the full, as now you shall hear.

The time being now expired, and the last day of the Parliaments Tuesday, Ian*
11. 1641.
adjourning from Westminster being now come, Jan. the 11. 1641. being Teusday,
and their just jealousies and fears being many and great, especially by that so
late high breach of privileges of Parliament, mentioned, Jan. the 4rh, and our
Worthies, now, of necessity to return to Westminster, the noble and renowned
City of London most cheerfully and voluntarily proffered their best service and
abilities to attend and guard them by land to the Parliament at Westminster,
and by Gods assistance to secure them from danger all the way by land, to which
purpose the City Captains had commanded their train'd-bands and Officers Our
Parliament-Worthies most bravely attended to Westminster. by land.
at arms to prepare themselves thereunto, and their Musketteirs with powder and
bullets, and pikemen with glistering arms, which was performed in a most
gallant and martial manner; and thus our parliamentarie noble, grave Senators
both Lords and Commons were in their coaches safely (by Gods mercy) conducted
and attended to the Parliament by land. By water also the And by water.
same day, the stout and courageous Ship-masters and Mariners had suddenly and
most bravely made ready a great number of long-boats and such like vessels
furnished with pieces of Ordnance, Muskets, and other Sea warlike instruments,
their vessels also A brief description of the brave carriage of the Soldiers
and Sea men by land and water.
gallantly adorned with flags and streamers, together with Martiall-musick,
Drums and Trumpets; so as it was a most admirable rare sight to see and hear
their carriage all along, and when they came to Whitehall and the Parliament
Houses, and understood that the parliament-Worthies were safely there arrived.
O how bravely did the train'd-bands by land, make their thick and quick volleys
of shot echo in the air, and the valiant Seamen let fly their thundering
shot both great and small by water, their trumpets sounding, and their Drums
beating in such a triumphant and congratulating manner, as could not possibly,
but strike-dead with terror, amazement, and vexation the hearts of the Popish,
prelaticall Terror to the malignant party; But joy and comfort to the godly.
and malignant party, that either saw or heard it, or heard of it, but
contrariwise, as must needs extraordinarily exhilarate and rejoice all the
loyal and honest hearts of Gods people that beheld it, or heard of it. And as
this was a singular testimony of the cordial affections of the City and
Seamen, and highly advancing the glory of God, who thus put into their hearts
to express their faithfulness and thankfulness to God, our King, and the
Parliament, The legality of the acts aforesaid by land and water.
under whom, and by whom, we enjoy the Gospel of peace and peace of the Gospel,
in such rare and fair tranquillity and serenitie above all Nations in the
world. And for the ratification of all this to be warrantable and legal to be
done; I have thought fit here to insert the Vote of the Parliament published by
their authority.

Ian. 8th, 1641.
At the Committee of the House of Commons appointed to sit in London to
consider of the safety of the Kingdom and City of London, and of vindicating
the privileges of Parliament.

Resolved upon the Question.

THat the actions of the Citizens of London, or of any other person whatsoever,
for the defense of the Parliament, or of the privileges thereof, or the
preservation of the Members thereof, are according to their duty, and to their
late Protestation and the Laws of this Kingdom. And if any person shall arrest
or trouble any of them for so doing, he is declared to be a public enemy of
the Commonwealth.

Resolved upon the Question.

That this Vote shall be made known to the Common-Councill of the City of
London.

Nay, yet to make the beauty and brightness of that foresaid Tewsdayes
sunshine of comfort, yet more glorious to our eyes and Buckinghamshire men came
riding into the City, to petition the Parliament.
hearts; That very same 11th of Jan. I say, being Tewsday, came a numerous
multitude of Buckinghamshire men, both Gentleman, Ministers, and others of that
County, on hors-back, in very fair and orderly manner with the Protestation in
their hats and hands, partly in the behalf of the most worthy Knight of their
Shire in Parliament, Mr Hampden, but especially to petition the Parliament for
the reformation of evils in Church and State, the just punishment of
Delinquents, the timely relief of Ireland, the sweet and harmonious concurrence
of both Houses against Essex, Hartford and other Counties come to London in
great multitudes to petition the Parliament.
all sinister obstructions, and the expulsion of Prelates and Popish*Lords out
of the Parliament, and to assure their best services and assistance to the King
and Parliament, on all just occasions. And since which time, even immediately
after, mighty multitudes out of Essex, diverse thousands out of Hartford-shire,
Barkshire, Surrey, and other Counties of the Kingdom; in brief, from all Shires
and Counties of the whole Realm, came still one after another to London, to
exhibit their petitions to the Parliament in the causes aforesaid, from all
parts swimming in one stream of affections and petitions, all having one
desire, all, I say, as one man unanimously consenting in this one thing,
namely, a serious and settled resolution to petition and pray a speedy refining
and reforming of persons and things amiss among us.

God on the Mount.
And was not the Lord Jehovah seen in this rare Mount of Meries also? Thus to
knit the hearts of the people together so far distant in habitations from one
another, according to that faithful promise of his mentioned by the Prophet. I
will give Ier. 32. 39.
them one heart, and one way, says the Lord, that they may fear me for ever,
for the good of them and of their children after them. And now, good Reader,
take thankful notice and cognizance, to the everlasting praise and glory of
the Lord, the only God that hears prayers, and grants gracious returns unto
them in his due The Bishops are quite voted out of the Parliament for voice and
place.
time, that upon these confluences of unanimous desires of the Kingdom from all
parts thereof the Bishops were voted against from having any intermedling with
temporal affairs and dignities, and so incapable of votes in Parliament, it
having pleased the Lord our most wise God, first to catch them in their own
nooz, to entangle them in their own snare whereby their persons were (even by
themselves) first sequestered from the Parliament by Law, they being fast locked
up in prison in the Tower* For, on Febr. 5. 1641. the noble House of Commons
past a Bill (nemine contradicenti) against their having any vote in Parliament,
which being sent to the renowned House of Lords* those prudent Peers mended the
said Bill and added, that they should The House of Lords make the Bill against
the Bishops most full of comfort to us all.
have no seat or place neither, as well as no voice or suffrage among thm, which
was most gratefully entertained by the Commons with particular thanks to the
Lords for their wisdom and love therein to the Commonwealth; and so it past
again most currently with them, and being now returned to the Lords, it past
clearly among them also immediately. And thus on that happy fifth of February,
was the Church of God most mercifully freed of that pestilentiall disease
wherewith it had long been infected and infested, namely, the Antichristian
tyranny of our English Prelates by reason of their princely pomp and lordly
dignities, and familiar intermedling and tampering in temporal affairs to the
continual provocation of the wrath of Matthew. 20. 26.
God, and the derogatorie dishonor of Christ's will and prescript pleasure in
their ministerial function. It shall not be so with you. Note this.
And now let the godly Reader, here see and consider the admirable equity and
justice of our wise and most holy God, meeting Bishops, who had no heart nor
voice for Christ, have, now, no voice nor place for themselves in Parliament. 2 Chronicles 21. 20 Note this also.
them full in their own ways and works. They, who being Lords and Barons
(forsooth) in that high Court of Parliament, yet could seldom or never find a
heart or voice for Christ and religion, but freqently against Christ in his
holy members, and against the power and purity of religion; have, now (most
justly) no voice or place in Parliament to help themselves, but are thrust out,
as men not desired, like that wicked King Jehoram, who departed this life,
without being desired. And take this note also, by the way, before we leave
them; That, they, who in themselves and predecessors (ever since the time of
glimmering reformation Non-subscription silenced many godly Ministers: now
their subscription has imprisoned and almost unbishoped our proud Prelates.

Prove. 5. 22.


even in Queen Elizabeth's days of ever blessed memory, to this very time, all
along, without intermission) had silenced, suspended, imprisoned, and
impoverished many hundreds, if not thousands, of holy, painful and profitable
Preachers for Non-subscription; have now, by an act of subscription, imprisoned
themselves in the Tower of London, and almost quite divested themselves of
their Prelaticall arrogated superiority over their fellow-Ministers. Thus God
has taken them by their own iniquities, and has held them with the cords of
their own sin. Thus Goliath is slain with his own sword, and Haman is hanged
upon his own gallows. And thus was their former furious and most injurious
carriage and course a just presage and omen of their total ruin and downfall,
which, in substance, is now blessedly come to pass, in this their denudation,
stripping and whipping from their lordly dignities, haughty honors, and busy
intermedling in secular affairs, the rest I hope and pray will perfectly be
effected in Gods due time.

Now, then, see here and observe (good Reader) with a wise and most grateful
heart (both in regard of the thing it self, and also of those two material
circumstances, so observable, therein) God in the Mount.
whether the Lord was not admirably seen in the Mount of Mercy* to his poor
Church, in this so rare and singular freedom of it from future fear of
Prelaticall tyranny. And give me Isa. 51, 7, 8, 9, 11.
leave to use the Prophets own words, by way of exulting gratitude to the Lord
our God. Hearken unto me (dear Christians) ye that know righteousness, the
people in whose heart is the law of the Lord. Fear ye not the reproach of men*
neither be ye afraid of their revilings; for, the moth shall eat them up like a
garment, and the worm shall gnaw them like wool; But my righteousness shall
be for ever, and my salvation from generation to generation. Awake, awake, put
on strength, O arm of the Lord, awake as in ancient days, and as in the
generation of old. Art not thou it that has cut Rahab (the Prelates of
England) and wounded the Dragon (the whore of Rome)? Therefore do the redeemed
of the Lord return and come with singing to Zion, and everlasting joy shall be
on their head. They shall obtain gladness and joy, and sorrow and mourning
shall fly away.

The Kingdom put into a posture of defense.
About this time also it pleased the good hand of God to direct the hearts of
our prudent and provident parliamentarie-Worthies to take notice of the most
dangerous distractions of the kingdom, and as just as great fears of intestine
turmoiles which might arise among us by the Papists and malignant-partie, if
not timely prevented; and therefore to resolve, according to the joint desires
of the Subject in all their petitions exhibited in Parliament to settle a
Militia by Act of Parliament, for a certain time, namely, until it might
please the Lord happily to compose our differences, and to put a blessed end to
our domestic and foreign fears, that thus by putting the Kingdom into a
posture of defense, we might by Gods mercy be the better secured both from Sir
John Byron, Leiftenant of the Tower, displaced.
homebred treacheries and transmarine invasions. For, which purpose, they
resolved, in the first place, to displace Sir John Byron from his
Lieutenantship of the Tower of London, and to put in Sir John Connyers, a man,
in whom they had good assurance, they might confide, both for his fidelity and
martial abilities; Sir John Conniers made Leiftenant by the Parliament
which, though with much struggling, at last they obtained of his Majesty, to
theirs and the Cities full content in that particular.

And for the better putting of life into the sad and bad affairs of Ireland,
and the more speedy and certain subduing (by Gods A fair and famous project of
subscription for relieving of Ireland moved and promoved in Parliament.
assistance) of those most barbarous and inhumane Rebels and accursed idolaters
of Rome; It pleased our most wise God to infuse a fair and famous project into
the hearts of diverse heroic and worthy Citizens of London, first to proffer,
themselves, by way of subscription of certain sums of money, to be paid in at
several payments, by them and other well-affected Subjects both in City and
Country: Whereunto (the thing being moved by petition, and singularly approved
in Parliament) the Lords and Commons in both Houses gave admirable
encouragement, by their free and forward subscription of great sums, and all
their moneys so laid out to be repaid and satisfied out of the Rebels lands,
when by Gods aid and assistance they should A general collection ordered also
to be over the Kingdom for the distressed English inhabitants in Ireland.
be totally suppressed and destroyed, and not before, nor by any other ways or
means. And, since that (by reason of the most a^rocious and unparralleld
cruelties of those Romish-rebels in Ireland) very many of the distressed and
bespoiled English-Protestant inhabitants, especially women and children, who
were necessitated to fly thence, carrying their lives in their hands, and glad
(poor souls) they so escaped to Dublin, and so over-Sea into diverse parts of
this Kingdom, being thereby plunged into deplorable poverty and misery) It
was, I say, further ordered by our truly charitable and pious Parliament, that
there should be a general collection or contribution over the whole Kingdom,
for and toward the present relief and supply of such distressed men, women and
children, as could hardly subsist without present help and relief. Which said
collection was so fully and freely advanced The most liberal collection for
Ireland at Aldermanbury in London.
in this our noble and renowned City of London, that at one Church therein, viz*
Aldermanburie, under reverend and religious Mr Calamies fruitful Ministry,
upon his pious and patheticall motion and instigation to his willing people, a
Collection was made and gathered, at the Church-doores and parishioners houses,
which amounted unto between 600 and 700 ^. at the least.

Toward the latter end of February also, 1641. It pleased the Lord to blow-off
all clouds of displeasure from the Kings royal A gracious answer from the
Kings Majesty touching the Liturgy and Church Government.
heart, and to cause his countenance to shine so serenely on the Parliaments
proceedings, that he sent the House of Lords a most gracious and comfortable
answer, intimating his royal concurrence and desire of correspondencie with
both Houses, both in passing those Bills then exhibited to his Majesty, and
also referring all matters touching the Liturgy and Church Government to the
wisdom and piety of the Parliament to settle and resolve on.

And, here, again (good Reader) let us reflect our eyes and serious thoughts,
and see whether the Lord does not still carryon his works of mercy to us, by
his own strong-arm, and almighty power and providence; that thus we should now
have such strong and heart-chearing hope of a happy and long desired
rectifying and reformation of our Liturgy and Discipline, two ticklish pieces
to be tampered with, on pain of highest indignation and displeasure in bypast
times, but now you see and hear of talk yea resolution of reforming them.
Hereby ratifying and confirming his most righteous word and promise, by the
Prophet, in showing himself unto our Kingdom a most resplendent Za^h. 2. 5.
glory in the midst of us. Making good also that old promise of his to his
ancient people of Israel, namely, I will turn my hand upon thee, and will
purely purge away all thy dross, and take away all thy tin. O that we
therefore in the way of thankefulness^ would sincerely perform his holy and
just desire of us, namely, in deed and in truth to obey his voice, and
cheerfully to do all that he has commanded us!

Yet, see, the (still) invincible and inveterate malice of the malignant
party, who notwithstanding that they cannot but evidently see the hand of God
against them crossing all their counsels, turning their perniciously boiling
obstrisctions to their The malignant party, still, plotting, first, in London.
own destruction in the issue: yet still, I say, they manifest (right
Pharaoh-like) more flintinesse and hardness of heart, presumptuously spurning
at (as it were) and despising all Gods most wise and over powering proceedings
against them; thereby most clearly treasuring-up wrath and confusion unto
themselves against the day of Gods vengeance and heaping up coals of calamity
on their own heads against the day of the Lords burning jealousy. A seditious
Petition framed and presented to the Parliament against the Militia of the
City, and other things of dangerous consequence.
For, much about this time a most pernicious and seditious Petition was forged
and framed by some of the grey-headed but not grave-hearted Citizens of London,
which was boldly presented to the Parliament by them. A Petition, I say, much
tending to sedition, and the overthrow of the Parliaments proceedings,
especially concerning the Militia of the City, aiming therein at the overthrow
of the said Militia, and the sure defense of the whole Realm (under God) which
they had formerly most firmly settled over the whole Kingdom. In which seditious
plot and devilish design of theirs, though many of no small or mean rank and
quality in the City, yea and some of the highest degree thereof had deep
hands and spotted hearts to further it, and therefore had subscribed to it:
yet, one or two most pragmaticall spirits among them, were chief agents and
active instruments openly and audaciously appearing and persisting One Mr.
Binion a mainstickler in the foresaid seditious Petition.
in it, namely, one Mr Binion, a Silkman in Cheapside, who carried himself most
proudly and insolently therein from first to the last. But the truly godly,
grave and loyally-affected Citizens of London understanding thereof, disavowed
it, immediately, joined together against it, in another most honest, fit and
fair A counter-petition exhibited by the honest Citizens against it.
Petition clean contrary to that other, exhibited the same in Parliament,
desired the justice of the Parliament against ^he other, which was received
with singular approbation of both Houses. Whereupon, the other was not long
after cast out of The malignant Petition censured.
the House, condemned to be burnt by the hangman, as a most scandalous and
seditious paper; and the foresaid Mr Binion himself (persisting in his
obstinate and malevolent misbehaviour, was made an example of terror to the
rest (who more wisely shrunk-in their heads, and recanted their former
oversight) being Mr. Binions censure:
for his foresaid insolences and misdemeanors fined 3000. l. disfranchised
from the immunities of the City, made incapable of ever bearing any office in
the Commonwealth, and imprisoned for two years in the Castle of Colchester.
And yet, again, notwithstanding all this, I say, yea this so fresh and modern
admonition (as a man might have thought) to those malignant spirits; The
Kentish malignant Petition.
They, not long after brake out again into a like misdemeanour in the County of
Kent, by the main instigation (as it is conceived) of Sir Edward Deering* late
a Member of the House of Commons, Sir Edw. Deering.

Sir Edw. Deerings book of his Speeches printed.


who at the beginning and for some continuance of this Parliament was well
reputed and reported of, but at last brake-out into a most violent and virulent
opposition of the honorable and pious proceedings of the Parliament, which he
further most undiscreetly prosecuted by printing and publishing a book of all
his former and later Speeches in Parliament, and one, especially not spoken,
Himself and his book censured.
but only intended to have been spoken in Parliament. Whereupon the said Sir E.
Deering was called to the Bar, sent prisoner to the Tower, cast out of the
House from being any longer a Member among them, and his said book condemned to
be burnt* The Authors opinion of him and his book.
Which book, though it cannot be denied, but must be ingenuously confessed, did
render him a Scholar, and witty acute r^etori^ian, yet was full fraught with
palpable expressions of an illaffected heart not only to the most wise,
worthy and untainted negotiations of the Honorable Parliament, but even to
religion and the power of godliness. A gentleman he was, whom I must
acknowledge, I my self much honored for the good things I conceived to be in
him at first; but when I had read this his book (which I did, all-over, as
advisedly and impartially as God enabled me) I found therein, even almost in
its very portall or introduction to the matter of it and so along, such an
unjust and immeritorious eulogie or elogie and hyperbolicall praise of the
Archprelate The Arch-Prelates conference with Fisher a Jesuit.
of Canterbury in general, and of his book (if his) of his conference with
Fisher the Jesuit, in special: A book most full of pregnant expressions (yet
cloudily couched) of the said Prelates Popish rotten-heartednesse, as a most
sound and learned Reply to it, A Reply to the said Conference.

Witty, but irreligious scoffing at piety and godliness in Sir Eds. book.


has copiously and clearly discovered to all judicious and impartial
Scholars that have read it) together with his affected witty je^ring and
scoffing at true piety in some places, and irreligious sublime justification
of gross Popish superstition in other some; I could not, hereupon, I say, (God
knows my heart) but greatly grieve for his sake, thereby so dishonored, and
blush at mine own so clear mistake, who had willingly harbored so good
opinions of him before. But to leave him to his great Lord and Master to whom
he must either stand or fall, with my hearty prayers for his true and timely
retractation, I return to my purposed matter, from which I have a little
digressed, but I hope not much transgressed therein.

The seditious petition of Kent was much countenanced by the Earl of Bristow
and judge Mallet.
Another seditious Petition (I say) was hatched and contrived in Kent, wherein
(I say) it is more than conceived that Sir Edward Deering had a deep hand, which
contained matter much to the same effect with the former of London; Which also
it seems was much countenanced and encouraged by the Earl of Bristow and judge
Mallet, and for which they were both sent prisoners to the Tower of London;
which Petition being on the 29th of April, 1642. brought to the Parliament by
some of the prime The Petition brought to the Parliament.
malignant-ones (the rest of that rout being some certain thousands remained at
Blackheath for an answer, but were fain to depart with a flea in their cares)
they received most foul (but most just) disgraces at their entrance into the
City, the gate at Their usage in the delivery of their petition.
the Bridge-foot was shut against them, they themselves were disarmed, their
weapons being there taken from them, two of their prime leaders, having
exhibited their Petition in Parliament, were committed to safe custody till
fit opportunity of further examination of this their high contempt and
arrogancy. The Honest party of Kent petition against the malignant party.
But immediately after, the truly religious, honest, and well-affected party of
the said County of Kent unanimously also united themselves in an honest and
loyal Petition, therein utterly disavowing and protesting against that other
seditious and scandalous one, who were all, together with their Petition most
courteously and lovingly entertained, and dismissed with great thanks from the
Parliament, for that their so honest and peaceable demeanor.

And was not the Lord Jehovah seen here in the Mount of God in the Mount.
Mercy, in thus both timely discovering and discountenancing these very
dangerous designs of theirs (as much as in them ^ay for the present) extremly
to blend and disgrace the just, fair and faithful proceedings of the
Parliament; and though they most secretly and subtly carried and contrived
their designs therein, yet the Lord graciously caused them to be stifled in
their birth. ^ Tim. 3. 8, 9.
So that we may most fitly take up that of the Apostle Paul, who speaking of the
perilous times that should come in the last days, after a recital of a
ragged-regiment of malignant and illaffected persons, brings in Jannes and
Jambres (two audacious and arrogant companions) who obstinately and proudly
withstood Moses, reviling and speaking evil of the truth; men of corrupt
minds, reprobate concerning the faith. But they shall not proceed (says the
Apostle) for, their folly shall be manifested to all men. As it is now with ours,
blessed be the Lord our most wise God for it, and all their malice and mischief
is fallen still upon their own hoads. Psalm. 115. 1, 2. 3.
Wherefore, we may, nay we must, with holy David, most gratefully acknowledge,
Not unto us, Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name be all the glory given, for
thy mercy and for thy truths sake* Who have not suffered the heathen (or
wicked) to say, where is now their God? But our God is in heaven, and has done
whatsoever he pleased.

The King having unhappily left his Parliament, sends Messages to them.
Now after these things, the King having pressed the Parliament, with diverse
Messages in his unhappie departure and distance from it (as by and by shall be
more fully and particularly set forth) and thereby constrained our prudent
Worthies in Parliament to clear their integrity to his Majesty, and the whole
Kingdom, yea and to the whole world also, if occasion were offered; they sent
to his Majesty, and afterward set forth in print diverse Declarations,
Remonstrances, and Messages from both The Parliaments wisdom and moderation in
their answers to them.
Houses of Parliament, all of them written and penned with such prudence,
pi^ti^, and humility toward his Majesty, as most apparently evidenced their
great and godly care for the preservation of his Honor and the Kingdoms
welfare, to the great and unexpressible comfort and content of all Gods people,
especially in the most sweet continued symphonie and harmonious concurrence of
Both Houses which now began to be more and more strongly increased,
notwithstanding the great and even mountan^^^ obstructions and terrible
distractions of the times mightily molesting and retarding their most important
and weighty affairs, ou^ most prudent and pious Peers still showing themselves
(as was The sweet unanimity of both Houses notwithstanding their great
discouragements.
touched before) more forward, if possi^ly it might be, in all good motions than
the House of Commons. A mercy, which (things and times considered) we are not
able sufficiently to prize and praise the Lord for, it being that blessing of
the Kingdom which was so long and so earnestly desired by the universal
confluence of the Petitions of the whole Kingdom; yea that great blessing, I
say, which the Apostle Paul so heartily and vehemently desires 1 Cor. 1. 10.
among his beloved Corinthians, That they might all speak the same Concordia re^
parvae cres^unt, Discerdia magnae dila^untu^.
thing, and that there might be no division among them, but that they may be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. Yea that
rare blessing which the Prophet David cannot set out sufficiently without a
note of admiration, in the excellencies of it, when he said* Behold how good
and joyful a thing Psalm. 133. 1, ^.
it is brethren to dwell together in unity. Yea (says he) it is like the
precious ointment upon Aarons head, distilling thence to his beard and running
down to the skirts of his garment. Such a pr^^io^^ ointment, may I truly say,
is this unity and concord in these two Concord ^ sweet ointment to a Kingdom.
honorable Houses of Parliament, poured on the head of our Sovereign,
distilling thence on the comely beard of his Kingdom, this renowned Parliament,
and sweetly streaming thence down to the skirts or garments of the Land the
people and inhabitants thereof. And now see, I pray, the blessed effects of
this happy union and precious complacencie between the King and Both Houses of
Parliament, at this time. For about the 9th of April, the Lords and Commons in
Parliament resolved to set upon the The Liturgy and Church government voted to
be reformed.
reformation of the Liturgy and government of the Church, whereby Gods worship
and service should be more purely performed than formerly it had been, and
discipline more piously administered. And for this purpose they passed Votes in
Both Houses, and most prudently pitched upon certain eminent godly, grave and
learned Divines out of every Shire and Corporation of the Kingdom, who should
meet together at a time appointed to discuss and consult among themselves what
should be most apost^licall, orthodox and nearest to the truth of Gods word,
and so to advise the Parliament for the settling of the same, as by their order
printed and published by their authority may and does more fully appear, which
here I have thought fit to insert and mention to thee.

The Order of the Lords and Commons touching the Liturgy and Church Discipline.
Apr. 9. 1642.
THe Lords and Commons do declare that they intend a due and necessary
reformation of the government and Liturgy of the Church, and to take away
nothing in the one or other but what shall be evil and justly off nsive, or at
the least unnecessarie and burdensome. And for the better effecting thereof,
speedily to have consultation with g^^ly and learned Divines. And because this
will never of it self obtain the end sought therein; they will therefore use
their utmost endeavor to establish learned and preaching Ministers with a good
and sufficient maintenance throughout the whole Kingdom, wherein many dark
corners are miserably destitute of the means of salvation, and many poor
Ministers want necessary provision.

Now then tell me (good Reader) whether the Lord appeared God on the Mount.
not in a Mount of Mercy, in this so unexpectible an act of long desired
reformation in this kind? In these two so extremly deified Acts 19. 28.
Diana's of our English Ephesus, so long settled upon their ol^ lees, and so
generally applauded by the Pontifician and other ignorant and malignant party
of our land, so as it was thought a thing almost impossible to be effected. Yet
see, I say, what ou^ God can do, what mountains of difficulties and
disturbances he is Isa. 46. 11, 12, 13.
able to remove, when he, once, resolves it according to that of the Prophet: I
have spoken it, (says the Lord) I will also bring it to pass, I have purposed
it, I will also do it. Hearken unto this ye stout-hearted that are far from
righteousness. I will bring near my righteousness, it shall not be so far
off, and my salvation shall not carry, and I will place salvation in Sion for
Israel, my glory. Yet, see, still, the malignancie of the serpentine-brood,
breeding and breathing more and more threats and vexations to the sacredseed of
the woman. For, not long after, that aforesaid hopeful The King, by his
ill-affected Counselors grows into discontent with his Parliament
amiable symphonic of sweet accord between the King and his Parliament began to
be besmeard with the black-coal of evil counsel, and his Majesty's affections
to be so alienated and estranged from his grand and grave Council of
Parliament, that in discontent he most unhappily sequestered his person from it,
almost as far as his affection, even from the Southern toward the Northern
parts The King departs from London.
of his Kingdom, to the universal and great grief of his loyal Subjects who
made their earnest desires post as fast after him by their humble Petitions to
return to his Parliament, but alas, all in vain, for in deep discontent his
Majesty goes on in his journey, The King takes the Prince along with him.
takes the Prince along with him, was accompanied or attended on by a company of
furious Cavaliers, who showed themselves in an hostile manner about Hampton
Court and Kingstone upon Thames, past on thence to New Market, and so into the
The King comes into the North.

Hull attempte^ to be taken for the King.

But prevente^ by Sir John Hotham.

The K: came to Hull and required it to be delivered up to him.

On refusal thereof was declared to be a traitor.

Propositions made to the Gentry of York.

Swords draw^.


North, where an attempt was made by the Earl of Newcastle to have taken in
Hull, and the full fraught Magazine thereof, variety of martial ammunition,
for the Kings use, but he was prevented, and Sir John Hotham a worthy Member
of the House of Commons was put in possession thereof, for the use of his
Majesty, and the good of the whole Kingdom. Not long after the King went
himself in person to Hull, requiring the rendition of the Town and Magazine
into his Majesty's hands, but Sir John Hotham having order to the contrary from
the Parliament, refused so to do, and was therefore by his Majesty's command
declared a traitor. Propositions were made to the Gentry of York to assist his
Majesty's proceedings against Sir John Hotham for the taking in of Hull into
his Majesty's possession by compulsion, since he could not obtain it of him by
persuasion. About which time* Sir Francis Worthly and diverse others siding
together, and pretending themselves to be for the King, with their swords drawn
in an unaccustomed and unexpected manner, demanded who was and would be on the
Kings side? By this evil act act of theirs in an especial manner manifesting
themselves ^o be truly of the serpentine-seed, and therein imitating their
father the devil, that grand seedsman of all sedition, whose main plot Divide
and impera.
is and ever was to divide and separate what God has united. Making a false and
foolish discrepancie and difference, first between A false and foolish
distinction made between the King and Parliament.
the King and the Parliament, which ought not to be; and secondly between the
Parliament and the people, which cannot be. For what is the Parliament but a
representative-Bodie of all the people in the whole Kingdom; and therefore to
make men believe that the Parliament intends to wrong the people, by bringing
in an arbitrarie government (the thing which they mainly hate and Insanire cum
ratione.
labor against) is to make men mad with discretion, to make us think the
Parliament labors to undo themselves with us, and to Who is for the King, and
who for the Parliament? interpreted.
provoke us madly to rush on them to our own certain ruin. To ask a man
therefore whether he be for the King or the Parliament* is to ask him whether
he be for the King or for himself* See then (discreet Reader) the drift of this
devilish design and false distinction, which is merely to make men fall
together by The gentry at York assembled again.
the ears, and to sheath their swords in one another bowels. But now the King
receiving no content in this their fruitless meeting, the Ge^trie (but not
Freeholders, which was taken ill) were again summoned to assemble together
before the King, May the 23th being Friday, to resolve upon a guard of horse
and foot to safeguard his person; this also was a long time fruitlesly The King
resolved for Ireland, but contradicted therein by the Parliament.

Freeholders of Yorkshire discourteously used.

The Militia interdicted (to be exercised) by the King.


agitated. About which time or not long before, his Majesty published his
resolution to go in person to Ireland to subdue the Rebels, which was utterly
disliked by the Parliament as a business of very dangerous consequence. The
Gentry, Yeomen and Freeholders of York again are summoned together to York,
but the honest yeomen were discourteously and uncivilly used by many of the
Cavaliers or attendants about his Majesty; complaints were made thereof to the
King, but not answered to their desire. His Majesty much about this time also
forbade the exercise of the Militia, contrary to the Parliaments constitution
over the Kingdom, and about the 15. or 16. of May, 1642. directed his Letter to
Captain Philip Skippon, Sergeant Major Captain Phillip Skippon summoned to York
to the King.
general for the Militia of the City of London, a brave and expert old
Soldier and Commander in Arms, and a most pious and virtuous Gentleman,
requiring his personal attendance at York, all excuses set apart, and that
there he should know his Majesty's pleasure: But this command was inhibited and
contradicted to the said Captain Skippon by the authority of Both Houses of
Parliament, as is afterward more fully declared. After this, about May the
26th, the King sending a letter to the Lord The K: sends to the Lord Keeper to
remove Midsommer Term.

The L. Keeper and diverse other Lords leave the Parliament.


Keeper to remove Midsommer Term from London to York: this also was opposed by
the Parliament, as shall also be farther declared in its proper place. Much
about this time also or not long after this, the said Lord Keeper and seven or
eight other Lords left the Parliament on a sudden, and without the consent
thereof, and departed from London to York, to the King. In all which time, the
Parliament sending many submisse Messages and humble Petitions to his Majesty
at York, all of them full of wisdom, piety and patience, yet receive austere
and unpleasing replies, even as his Majesty found unsatisfactorie returns to
his expectation and desires in all or most of his negotiations in those
Northern parts ever since his unhappie abode there. But An objection.
what is all this (it may be objected) to the present intention of
parliamentarie mercies to be manifested to us? I answer, this The Answer.
fore-past brief discourse serves greatly to show us, in the first place* a
mighty fume and smoke now ready to break out into a most combustuous and
furious flame, by the perverse and most Gods over-powring wisdom and mercy
still preventing our hastening mischiefs.

Instrumentally by the pious and prudent demeanor of the Parliament.


pernicious counsel of the malignant party about the King (as the Parliament
had often informed his Majesty in several Messages) if the Lords
over-powering providence had not cast on the water of op^rtune qualification
and timely quenching of the same, by the admirable wisdom and singular
moderation of this pious and prudent Parliament, hindering the boisterous
breaking-out thereof, both by their modest, grave and gracious Declarations,
their most humble Petitions, their prudent and provident Votes and Orders, and
their patient and most submisse Messages to his Majesty at York; especially by
those two Declarations or Remonstrances of Both Houses, March, 12. and March,
23. their most humble, wise and moderate Petition March, 26. About which time
also it pleased the Lord to stir up the hearts of the The Lords and gentry of
Ireland petition his Majesty's return to London.

So do others.


Nobles and gentry estated in Ireland, but then residing in London* to
petition his Majesty's return to London, and gracious agreement with his great
and highest* Court of Parliament. Together with the Gentry and Commons of the
County of Lincoln, Staffordshire, and Munmouth in Wales; as also a most
excellent and patheticall Petition from those of Cheshire, and another cut of
Lancashire; all of them with an unanimous concurrence of Votes and suffrages,
beseeching and imploring his Majesty's Our dear Brethren of Scotland also
mediate with his Majesty to return.
speedy and propitious affection and return to his Parliament. Yea our ever to
be honored, and intimately to be loved Brethren of Scotland also were not
wanting in their love and loyalty to send their faithful Commissioners, and
among them the noble and renowned pious and prudent Lord Louthen to advise and
beseech his Majesty to return and listen to his loyal and faithful The
gentry and Commons of Yorkshire petitioned his Majesty's return to London.
Subjects in Parliament. The Gentry also and Commons of the County of York
most humbly and earnestly besought and petitioned his Majesty, April the 30th,
to reflect his favorable and princely affections on his great Council at
London, and to cohere and adhere to their wholesome and honorable advise for
his Majesty's honor and welfare: Together with the Knights, Gentlemen and
others of the County of Yorks wise and modest answer to his Majesty's demands
of them, not long after, in these words.

May it please your most excellent Majesty.
The Knights, Gentlemen and others of Yorkshires Answer to his Majesty's
demands.
WE shall all be ready to defend your royal Person from violence, by all such
ways and means as the Law and our duty bind us. And as for the means to
vindicate your Majesty's honor, and to put you into possession of your own; we
conceive that the best advise that we can offer to your Majesty is, humbly to
desire you to hearken to the counsel of your Parliament, who we assure our
selves will be careful of your Majesty's person and honor, and to whom your
Majesty has already been pleased to direct a Message to that purpose.


The Declaration or Remonstrance, May 19. 1642.
Again, a full and fair Declaration or Remonstrance was sent to his Majesty
from Both Houses of Parliament, and to the whole Kingdom, bearing date, May,
the 19th, wherein were expressed the several Depositions of diverse, about the
bringing in of the Army (formerly in the North, and then intended against ou^
Brethren of Scotland) to London against this Parliament. And since that,
another Declaration or Remonstrance, bearing date Another Declaration or
Remonstrance, May 26. 1642.
May 26th, 1642, in answer to one under his Majesty's name, concerning the
business of Hull, sent in a message to Both Houses of Parliament, May 21. In
which Remonstrance was fully set forth the Kings of Englands deep tie of regal
stipulation to rule the Kingdom according to the fundamental Laws made by the
Commons thereof or people of the Kingdom, and ratifying and maintaining the
Subjects immunities and freedoms, to the reciprocal and harmonious happiness
of King and Subject. Therein Sir Io Hotham cleared from the imputation of
treason laid on him.

The Magazine brought to the Tower of London.

The Popish and pernicious plot against Hull timely discovered.


also fully and fairly clearing Sir John Hotham from the imputation of treason
in his holding the town of Hull to his Majesty's and the Kingdoms just use and
welfare. The safe transportation and removal of that great Magazine of warlike
ammunition from Hull to London, notwithstanding the Kings interdiction of the
same. The timely and happy discovery of that dangerous plot against Hull by
one Thomas Beckwith, gentleman, a Popish-recusant, and an inhabitant of Beverly
in Yorkshire and others his confederates, signified most fully and exactly by
Sir John Hothams own letter to a worthy Member of the House of Commons, and
published in print, June 3, 1642. Both Houses of Parliament ratifying and
confirming by their Orders unto The exercise of the Militia ratified by the
Parliament in York, Lancas. etc.

Sergeant Major Skippon cleared by the Parliament.


York, Lancas. and all the whole Kingdom, the exercise of the Militia, for the
better security and safeguard thereof both against homebred conspiring Popish
recusants, and foreign confederating Romish invaders of the land. The
Parliaments clearing of that most worthy and pious gentleman Captain Phillip
Skippon from any legal disobedience to his Majesty's command, in not tender ng
his personal attendance on him at York; which was confirmed by 3. several
Votes in Parliament, which for the Readers more full satisfaction I have here
inserted.

May 17th, 1642.
Parliamentarie Votes clearing Sergeant Major Skippon.
1. THat this command of his Majesty to call Captain Phillip Skippon, Sergeant
Major general of the Forces of London, to attend his Majesty's person at York,
is against the Law of the Land, and the liberties of the Subject.

2. That this command of his Majesty to call Captain Phillip Skippon, Sergeant
Major general of the Forces of London, to attend his Majesty's person, being
employed by Both Houses to attend their service, without their consent, is
against the privilege of Parliament.

3. That Captain Phillip Skippon, Sergeant Major general of the Forces of
London, shall continue to attend the service of Both Houses according to their
former commands.

The same day also, which was, May, 17, 1642. It having been rumoured that
Midsommer-Term should be adjourned to York, and the Parliament understanding
thereof, the Lord Keeper was required to declare whether he had (...) any
command from his Majesty to that purpose, which being answered See here one
notable advantage of the legal continuation of this Parliament.
and satisfied by him to the Lords, that he had such a command, and the Lords
conceiving how inconsistent the same was to a Parliament sitting at Westminster
(not to be dissolved or adjourned without their consent) the Records being
carried to York, whereof Both Houses were to have daily use; and that the
Judges (whose advise and assistance the House of Peers daily required) should
be so remote from them. They therefore voted.

Midsommer Term not to be adjourned from Westminster. to York.
That the Kings removeall of the Term from Westminster to York* the Parliament
sitting at Westminster, is illegal: And therefore further ordered, That the
said Lord Keeper should not issue-out any Writs, or seal any Proclamation for
adjourning the said Term from Westminster to York, as aforesaid.

Delinquents to be proceeded against.
About the 20. or 21. of May, 1642. a Committee of Both Houses was nominated to
consider how they should bring to con dign punishment, those parties who are
Delinquents and yet ^protected against proceedings in Parliament. At which tim
also the House took into consideration his Majesty's summons of the 14. of May,
commanding the gentry to appear before him in their equipage* And thereupon
voted;

Votes of Parliament against the Kings proceedings in York.
1. That it appeared that his Majesty seduced by wicked Counse^^ intends to
make war against the Parliament, who in all their consultations and actions
have proposed no other end unto themselves, but the care of his Kingdom, and
the performance of all duty and loyalty to his person.

3. That whenever the King makes war upon the Parliament* it is a breach of
the trust reposed in him contrary to his Oath, and tending to the dissolution
of this government.

Two Acts of Parliament in Ric. 2. and Hen. 4. proving such proceedings to be
flat treason.
3. That whosoever shall serve or assist him in such wars are traitors to the
fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, and have been so adjudged in two Acts of
Parliament, namely, 11 of Ric. 2. and 1 of Hen. 4. and ought to suffer as
traitors. Which said two Acts, taken out o^ the Records in the Tower of London,
containing diverse Articles (...) treason then exhibited in the Parliament,
against the Archbishop of York. Michael de la Pool and others, in the time of
Ric. 2. most exquisitely and punctually depainting the present state of things
with us now, were by Both Houses of Parliament voted to be printed and
published in French, English and Latin on May, 26, 1642. Since this, about
May, the 25* a dispatch was made from the Parliament, to their Committee at
York, with an An Ordinance of Parliament sent to York touching their
train'd-bands.
Ordinance of Parliament, to be published in all Market Towns over that whole
County, declaring that the Train'd-bands ought not to be raised by his
Majesty's personal command, as the affairs of the Kingdom now stand. And on
May, 27. and 28. Two Orders of both Houses sent into Lancas. and to all
Counties in England and Wales.
1642. two Orders from both Houses were printed and published. The one to all
high Sheriffs and all other Officers within the County of Lancaster, and in
general to all the Counties of England and dominion of Wales; Both of them, to
this effect, that, In regard of their just jealousies and grounded-fears, that
his Majesty seduced by wicked Counsel intended to make war against the
Parliament, therefore, no Arms and Ammunition should be conveyed toward York.
And for To oppose the illegal proceedings at York.
keeping a strict watch within their several limits and jurisdictions, and to
search for and seize on all such arms and ammunition, and to apprehend all such
persons going to York with any such; and to suppress and hinder the raising
and coming together of any Soldiers, horse or foot, by any Warrant or
Commission from his Majesty alone, without the advice and consent of his
Parliament. By this and all other forementioned means to stop and hinder the
breaking out of civil broils and dissentions in the Kingdom, and to maintain
and propagate the blessed and happy peace thereof; yea the care and The
Parliaments care to see to the arms and ammunition of the Kingdom.
providence of this Parliament continually contriving and casting about for the
welfare of the King and Kingdom, gave order that the several Societies of
Sadlers, A^mourers and Gun-smiths should forthwith certify to the Houses of
Parliament* what numbers of Arms and Sadles they were to provide weekly, and
for whom. And have been most vigilant and circumspect to cause their Ordinance
for the Militia of the Kingdom (for the better strengthening of it) to be put
into execution in Lincolnshire, which his Majesty had opposed by a
Proclamation, which Ordinance The Militia exercised in diverse Counties.
of Parliament was, notwithstanding, obediently observed and exercised, in
Buckinghamshire* Middlesex, Essex, Leicestershire, and other Counties. And
about the 29. or 30. of An Ancient of Sir Ioh. Hothams imprisoned at York.
May, 1642. It having been informed to the Parliament that an Ancient of Sir
John Hothams was apprehended and imprisoned at York; the Parliament presently
sent to the Committee there to know the ground of his detenor, and if for being
in the service of both Houses then they hold it an act of hostility against
the Parliament, and are likewise to return the names of all such Members of the
House as are at York, their presence there, tending to countenance the war
intended against the Parliament. And The 19. Propositions sent to his Majesty
from the Parliament for an accommodation.
about June the second, this most pious and prudent Parliament sent a most
submissive Petition, with 19 Propositions from Both Houses of Parliament, all
of them containing matters of high concernment for the singular good (as they
providently conceived) both of Church and Commonwealth, which in their most
religious and prudent aims might extraordinarily tend to a most blessed,
happy and deeply desired accommodation and reconciliation of differences and
misunderstandings betwixt his Majesty and them, protesting and seriously
assuring his Majesty that if he would vouchsafe to grant those their most
humble and behoofefull requests, they would with all alacrity of mind and
celerity of endeavor apply themselves so to regulate his Majesty's revenues,
and to settle such an extraordinary and constant increase of it, as should be
abundantly sufficient to support his royal dignity in majesticall honor and
princely plenty, beyond A harsh message returned to the Parliament in reply
to their 19. Propositions.
the proportion of any of his Subjects grants to any of his Majesty's
predecessors. But this so humble submission, these fair propositions, and this
so loyal a protestation of fidelity and integrity toward his Majesty
conceived and brought forth shortly after, a very harsh and unpleasing reply
unto them, to theirs and our no small sorrow and continued, yea and aggravated
grief and discontent.

The sum of all these former passages considered together.
Now the sum of all these premised particulars so summarily mentioned
together comes to thus much; that all these many weighty and various premises
seriously considered, and impartially preponderated, cannot but most copiously
discover and lay open to the eyes of all that are not wilfully and obstinately
blind and too extremly incredulous (even against clearest sight, sense, and
most resplendent demonstrations) on the one side, the most sturdie and untyred
(though, hitherto, blessed be the Lord, most fruitless) projects, plots and
crafty contrivements of the malignant party, under a specious color and
pernicious pretense of advancing A clear dese^ption of the ayms of the
malignant party.
regal authority, prerogative, and the Kings prosperity, and yet all of these
(by them) most egregiously injured and abused to the sly subversion of both
King and Kingdom. First (as a most eminent, worthy and pious Member of the
House of Commons lately related it most pithily and pertinently) by weakening Mr
Denzell Holles, in his most excellent Speech to the Lords. June 15. 1642.
and invalidating the proceedings and power of the Parliament, and making way
for the utter subversion of it. Secondly, for this end, by gathering forces
together at York* under a pretense of a guard for his Majesty's person, but
purposely to make opposition against the Parliament* and thereby also to
support Delinquents, to slight and scorn the power and orders of the
Parliament, esteem or reputation. Thirdly, to send out bitter invectives, and
unjust aspersions, in his Majesty's name as Declarations and messages from him,
only to perplex the Parliament with ^edious expense of their precious time to
answer them, and thereby also by false colors and glosses to make the people
disaffect the Parliament, yea (and if possibly) to stir them up to destroy it
(and all Parliaments for ever) and with it, themselves, their wives and
children. Fourthly and lastly, to draw the Members of both Houses away from
their duty and attendance on them, and to go down to York* thereby to make the
Parliament, as it were, bleed to death, and moulder to nothing, and thus to
blemish the actions of Both Houses of Parliament, as done by a few and
inconsiderable number, and rather a party than a Parliament, and perhaps to
set-up an Anti-parliament at York. A desperate and most dangerous practice,
utterly to ruinate all. But all in vain, I trust in the Lord, as hitherto, we
have happily seen, in all their designs, for ever blessed be the Lord our God
for it.

The loyal and laudable ayms and ends of (...) the Parliament in all the
forecited particulars.
But, on the other side, we may most apparently perceive, and clearly behold by
all those forementioned particulars on the Parliaments part, the most
admirable and even onely-heaven-inspired wisdom, moderation, prudence, piety,
patience and indefatigable vigilancie of our ever to be honored, and
everlasting renowned Peers and Commons in Parliament, most humbly demeaning
themselves always toward his Majesty, most wisely and courageously against
the malignant party, most religiously and faithfully to Church and State in
general, and most graciously, tenderly and affectionately, as so many fathers
of their Country to all singular petitions and petitioners desiring their aid
and assistance, in a fair and fitting way for the good of Church and State;
which was most undeniably evident by the most sweet An irrefragable testimony
of the Parliaments integrity.
reciprocal resulta^ce and concurrent confluence of hearts and affections of
all in City and Country, over all the whole three Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, that had any spark or glimpse of true grace, yea of but
mere common-grace and goodness, to the infinite praise and glory of the Lord
our God, be it A most blessed marriage twixt Peace and Truth. 2 Kin. 20 19.
spoken, and to the unexpressible joy of our souls, even of the souls of all
those that cordially love and desire to live to see the glorious and most
happy espousals and never-again-to be-sequ^stred-union and marriage twixt
Peace and Truth, the grand and gracious desire of that good King Hez^kiah, the
main, if not only aim and and of this prudent Parliament; and which ought to
be also of every true godly Christian with them.

Now, therefore, friendly Reader, I say all those forementioned particulars
conglomerated into one body of serious animadversion, those clouds of
witnesses attesting this truth, say, was God in the Mount.
not thy wonder-working God, the Lord Jehovah most admirably, most gloriously,
even far beyond all humane apprehension or expression, seen in the Mount of
mercies for Englands mighty Deliverance? Tell me, good Reader, speak thy
conscience freely, has not England found, yea has not this blessed Parliament
2 King. 6. 11, 12.
found our God raising up one Elisha or other to reveal, and timely to discover
all the wicked plots and devises of the malignant party, (even now and of
late, and indeed all-along) against the happy hope-breathing condition of our
greatly envied Church and State? So that we may say of England, (now adays,
especially within this year and a half) as Balaam, once, said of the children
of Number. 23. 23.
Israel. Surely, there is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any
divination against Israel: for, according to this time, it shall be said of
Jacob and of Israel, What has God wrought? So, certainly, we have all seen it,
and the very adverse and malignant party No enchantment against England; no
divination against the Parliament.
must needs confess it. Surely, there is no enchantment against England and
Scotland, nor is there any divination of the wicked that can prosper against
the Houses of Parliament for, according to these times of our wonderful
deliverances, It shall be said to succeeding posterity of England and of
Scotland; O what has our most gracious God freely wrought for us? Nay, let me
speak in particular to those of the malignant faction, or let me rather sing it
out with most emphaticall joy, as Moses did in his sweet song of Gods high
praises, and let them deny it if they can. Their Rock is not as our Rock, even
they our enemies themselves being Deuteronomy. 32. 31.
judges. For, had their rock, or rather Egyptian-reed been able We have a Rock
to rest on, our adversaries have but an Egyptian Reed to rely on.
to have over-powred our celestiall-Rock, we had (undoubtedly) long ere this,
been made most woeful spectacles, to them and theirs, of ineffable ruin and
implacable wrath; whereas we are, now, most hopefully happy spectators of
their most black shame, sorrow and precipitating confusion. Even so, Amen, Lord
Jesus hasten it for thine elects sake.

Now then these things being thus, how can we but with holy David, break out
into overflowing cordiall-gratitude, and say with his heart and tongue. What
shall we render to the Lord for all his blessed benefits toward us? We will
take the cup of salvation and call on the Name of the Lord. We will pay our
vows (of universal true obedience) unto the Lord, in the presence of all the
people. Yea, I say, how can we forbear to break-forth into pious King David's
excitation and stimulation of our hearts to infinitely obliged thankfulness,
but with sincere rouzed-up souls to sing. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all
that is within me bless his holy Psalm. 103. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Name. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all (or any of) his precious
benefits. Who has forgiven all thine iniquities, and healed all thy great and
grievous diseases: Who has redeemed thy life from destruction, and has
crowned thee with loving kindness and tender mercies.

The sum of all.

A fourfold Use or Observation.


In sum, therefore, to wind-up all briefly, let me beseech thee, good
Christian Reader, to make this fourfold holy use and observation of all these
premises, these remarkable and unparalleld parliamentarie-mercies to England,
to unworthie, sinful England. First, to admire and adore the infinite and free
mercy of our good God, who has done all these great things for thee,
Observation. To admire and adore Gods free grace and mercy.

Ezekiel. 36. 22, 23.


even for his own Name sake, because this so glorious a wonderworking attribute
of free grace and merci? pleases him best of all. Know O England, that it was
not for thine own sake, that God has done all these things for thee, but for
his holy Names sake, which (alas) thou had most extremly profaned. But thy
God was willing to sanctify his own great Name, which thou, I say, had
profaned, and because he would make the wi^ked and ungodly among thee to know
that God is the Lord, and that he will be sanctified in you, before Isa. 16.
11, 1^.
their eyes, and that they may see that the Lords hand is listed u^ against
them though they will not see, yet they shall see and be ashamed of their envy
at Gods people, when the fire of Gods wrath devoures his enemies, and when they
shall perceive that the Lord only has ordained peace for his people, and has
wrought al his works in us and for How to look on our sins.
us. Let us not therefore (my dear Christian English brethren and friends) so
much look on our sins as to dead our hearts, or to damp our faith, by saying
one to another; O, but our sins are greater than other Nations, and therefore,
surely, the Lord will not (yet) save and deliver us, till we are fitted for
mercy. Alas, alas, if God should not be merciful to us till we are fit for
mercy, Mark this well. Deuteronomy. 7, 6, 7, 8.
certainly, he must never be merciful to us. But, here we see, and Moses
confirms it farther to us, that oftentimes) God shows not mercy to a people
because they are greater in number, or better in condition* or fitter for his
mercy than another people, but because the Lord freely loved us above or
before all others ou^ neighbor Nations round about us, and that he might keep
his Psalm. 50, 15.
word and promise made of old, to save his people when they called on him in
the day of their trouble, that so they might glorify him. And most undoubtedly
for this very end the Lord has Gods way of saving a people by free mercy.
poured on his people of England (within these two or three years) an
extraordinary spirit of grace and prayer or supplication, in these days of
their distress and great calamity; yea and notably manifested by all these
forementioned returns of prayer, even far beyond their hopes and desires, that
he is a God hearing prayers* and so has encouraged his people (notwithstanding
their sins) to come unto him, and has clearly let them see that it is not in
vain to call on our God, and to wait till he have mercy. Hence, therefore, I
say, let us learn to admire and adore the bounteous and open-hand and enlarged
bowels of love and compassion of our good God and indulgent Father, who has
done all these so great and so good things for us, even of his own mere mercy
Psalm. 147. 20.
and free favor, and because mercy pleases him. Since, then, unquestionable,
that God has not so dealt Observation.
with every Nation, nay I may justly say, not with any Nation, as he has with
us of England: O let us all seriously endeavor to outstrip every Nation round
about (...) Thankfulness and Thankfulness and obedience.
Obedience, which is the second Observation I desire to make of these
remarkable parliamentarie mercies to us. Thankfulness, I say, first to our good
and gracious God, who has been the only author and fountain of all these full
and fairly overflowing mercies blessed where the enemy has cursed. To God.
Who has, thus, made the plots and devises of our adversaries, the main means
of their own shame and smart, of their own certain ruin and destruction. Yea
who has thus firmly and faithfully performed all his good word and will unto
us hitherto, and Psalm. 115* 1.
therefore with holy David to cry out and say, Not unto us, Lord, not unto us,
but unto thy Name give all the glory, for thy mercy and for thy truths sake.
Yea to raise and rouze-up our souls to the highest peg and pitch of holy
ecstasies of praise and thanksgiving to our God, and to break-out as the same
holy David did. My Psalm. 108. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise, even
with my glory. Awake psalterie and harp (yea, awake soul and heart) I my self
will awake right early, yea and right earnestly. I will praise thee, O Lord,
among the people, and I will sing praises unto thee among the Nations. For, thy
mercies are great above the heavens, and thy glory above all the earth. Set up
thy self (therefore) O our God, more and more, above the heavens, and thy glory
above all the earth. And let not this our thankfulness be merely Thankfulness
must produce universal obedience.
a work of lip-labor; but let it also (yea especially) produce an effectual
work of life-labour* of true obedience, which, indeed, is better than
sacrifice. Obedience, I say, to all Gods commandments, universall-submission to
the whole will of God. Which is mainly seen in breaking-off from our sins
(those great blocks) that stand in the way, and hinder Gods good things from
us; accursed sin, I say, which locks up all the gates of Gods goodness and
True repentance is the golden-key to open the door^ of Gods treasury.
sweetness from us) by true and cordial repentance, by hating and forsaking
our closest and s^yliest insinuating darling sins our bosome-Dal^lahs, which is
the onely-golden-key to open the doors, to*lift-up the floodgates of all Gods
rich treasury of grace and overflowing favors and mercies to us.

Objection. But, here, I may demand (and not impertinently I hope) May we not
also give thanks and due commendations to our noble and renowned Worthies in
Parliament, who have so cheerfully and so indefatigably spent themselves and
their precious time for us and the Kingdoms good?

Answer. Yes undoubtedly, and that most duly; but in the first and most, and
best place, to the Lord our God, who is the author and fountain next place, as
the To our renowned Parliament-Worthies.

Mr Calamie in his Fast Sermon, p. 1^. A suitable simile.


channels or conduit-pipes by and through whom God is pleased to convey these
comforts to us. And, as a grave, godly and learned Divine of our City fitly
observed; It is not only decent and comely to give them thanks, even as we
would, if a Lord or great friend should send us some extraordinary gift by his
servant; we would first give condign thanks to the Lord or friend that sends
it, and also gratify the servant or messenger by whom it was sent, with some
real expression both of our high esteem of the donor, and also of our
grateful hearts to the messenger for his pains in bringing it to us: So,
without all question it is not only decent (as I said before) but due and
equal that we should Why we ought to be most obligedly thankful to this
blessed Parliament.
(at least) return most hearty thanks to these honorable and happy Messengers
of our great Lord and gracious God, who has, by them, conferred upon us such
and so many indelible monuments of mercies and admirable Deliverances;
especially when we consider, I say, with what invincible patience and pains,
what admired wisdom and untyred sweetness of spirit, both Lords and Commons,
have for us and our good neglected their own lives and livelihood, their own
private and personal affairs and just delights, (otherwise) befitting such
persons and personages even beyond the slender and lanck expression of my poor
pen, yea of the most eminent parallel of any bypast times* And therefore
worthy, yea most worthy that we should praise and prize them, and pray for
them too, that our God would repay into the bosoms of them and their posterity
all the sweetness of their love and loyalty to God their King and Country,
which we all have found and felt to our unspeakable joy and comfort.

The Parliaments most just Panegyric, or due praise.
Which being so, as most certain so it is. Ah foul shame for such as most
injuriously endeavor to traduce and blemish (as much as in their foul mouths
and false hearts is) the most honorable name and unspotted reputation of so
renowned prudent Peers and pious Patriots, whose equals (for piety, prudence,
patience and indefatigable pains for Church and State) this Kingdom Envy and
ingratitude against this present Parliaments proceedings.
and Nation, never, since it had a being beheld. Yet some, I say, have not
blushed nor been ashamed to manifest such foul effects of black and
ignominious ingratitude (and therein most palpable impiety) as cannot choose
but be most exceeding irksome and odious both to God and man. Some, saying they
see little or nothing done (as yet) others convinced in their consciences of
what is already done, yet extremly extenuate and under-value the same, saying,
what have they done in so long time, what is yet reformed by them that was
amiss before? Nay are not things (say some spurious imps of Envy) worse than
they were The true cause of Parliament calumniations and slanders.
before (for so they count the works of reformation already wrought, and
farther endeavors of pure ordinances in Religion, right rules of justice which
indeed is the main thing that vexes them, and which, they extremly fear lest
it cut them short of the former liberty of their base lusts) This, I say, and
much more dares black-mouthed malignitie belch out against these our
neversufficiently to be praised and prized Heroes, notwithstanding all those
most admirable and amiable white-clouds of witnesses of their mighty and
blessed pains and piety, as have been by me abundantly made known in all those
forementioned parliamentarie-mercies, wherein, as, I have fully and fairly (I
think) told my Readers what they have done: So, I could yet farther tell them
what more they would have done, had not the most notorious envy and malice of
impious and irreligious opposers the Act. 13. 10.
malignant Elymasses of our times, and enemies of all righteousness and true
goodness mightily molested and perniciously What the Parliament intends yet
farther to do.
opposed their pious purposes and religious resolutions therein. As namely, a
full removeall of the inordinate power, vexation and usurpation of Bishops, the
reformation of the pride and idleness of many others of the Clergy, the
casing of the peoples consciences from unnecessarie ceremonies in Gods worship,
the censuring and removing of unworthie and unprofitable Ministers, and
contrariwise, the maintaining and setting-up of godly and diligent Preachers
through the whole Kingdom; together with many other things of great importance
for the singular good of the Kingdom, which long have been in proposition and
agitation in Parliament (which the Reader may see most particularly set forth
by our The first and famous Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom; set
forth, December* 15. 1641.
Parliamentarie-Worthies themselves) but, which have been extremly and
necessitously retarded and hindered by plots and projects of the malignant
party; but, which God (I trust) will in his own good time ripen and bring to
maturity of a through reformation, to the praise of his grace and
wonder-working glory.

The third serious consideration and observation of all these rich and rare
Parliamentarie-mercies, incomparable mercies and Observation.
gracious deliverances of ou^ land and Nation, so deeply designed To make' us
more faithful and less fearful.

King David's encouragement.

Psalm. 44. 1.


to destruction, but so admirably plucked (as a brand) out of the fire of
confusion, should, most justly, make us more faithful and less fearful. The
Prophet David made it a ground of comfort and encouragement to him, to consider
what God had done for his Church and children in former times. We have heard
(says he) with our ears, O God, and our fathers have told us what works thou
did in their days, and in the times of old. But what a ground of comfort and
heart-stablishing encouragement may it be to us, who Ver. 2. 3, 4.
have not only heard our fathers tell us of Gods former wonders, but have
visibly seen with our own eyes, and found by our own present experience, how
our God has with his mighty hand and stretched-out arm supplanted our
enemies, and blessedly begun to plant us. How the Lords right hand and mighty
arm, and the light of his countenance (because he had a favor to us) has put
us into much present possession of our hearts desires, and gloriously commanded
great deliverances for us. It was also (and that most justly) a strong
strengthening supp rtation to loyall-hearted and royally-affectionated David's
experimental faith.
King David, to assure himself of an undoubted conquest over that seeming
unconquerable uncircumcised Philistine, great 1 Samuel 17. 37.
Goliath, namely, the sweet heart-fortifying experience he had had of Gods
assisting power and preservation against the paw of the Lion, and the paw of
the Bear. And shall not these our so many and so mavelous great deliverances
and so sweetly and so freshly*tasting-merci s cause us to be confident, that
our God will deliver us also from the great Goliah-like and Philistine fears of
future most dangerous designs by our most private and pernicious plotting
enemies? O foul shame if they should not! Certainly (Christian Reader)
experimental faith must needs be an unmovable, an impregnable rock, not to be
dashed out of countenance, or driven from its so fast hold by base and slavish
fears, Nehem. 6. 11.
but to be the more settled and confirmed in faith. O (says courageous and noble
Nehemiah) shall such a man as I am fly for fear Sweet encouragements to rely
on God.
of any enemies? So may I say to thee (good Reader) and to all my Christian
brethren of England, shall men of so many mercies, so many rare pledges of
farther purposed deliverances, all ready put into our hands, faint and be
afraid? Shall we damp and dead our hearts with base servile fear, and slavish
doubts of infidelity, and, thereby, extremly discountenance our glorious cause,
and mightily encourage our insulting enemies, who would gladly triumph in our
pusillanimous terrors and effeminate faintings? Ou^ God forbid. Let us call to
remembrance, and lay it sadly and seriously to our hearts (for it is a most
certain and undeniable truth) that nothing did so cut short the children of
Israel from entering Infidelity a mostdangerous means to deprive us of our
happy hopes.
into Canaan, fruitful Canaan, the desire of their souls (because the promised
land of peace and plenty) as godless infidelity still questioning and as it
were catechizing Gods power and faithfulness. O, so, let us take great heed that
infidelity and false-fears cut us not short of our hopes of a pure reformation
(the desire of our souls) and of a perfect deliverance from ensuing dangers,
the promised heart-chearing happiness of us and our posterity. But here I
desire I may not be mistaken; I have not so pressed this duty of Advise not to
be secure or careless also.
faithful repose in God, out of former happy experiments as to cast any of
Gods children into a lethargi of supine security, or improvident carelessness.
No, God forbid this also. For, I hereby forbid not all fear, but do desire we
may still and over retain that godly fear which may graciously keep our hearts
in such an humble posture and disposition as may preserve us from carnal
security, as may make us fear the Lord, tremble at his judgments, What fear
is requisite in times of danger.
and not dare to sin against him; fear thus (still) on Gods name, and spare not,
for, doubtless, blessed is the man that (thus) fears always. But, I, hereby,
desire only to beat down and keep-under that slavish f ar and cowardly
fainting of spirit, which I observe A great failing in Gods people.
to be too frequent in Gods dearest children, to the dishonor of our gracious
and bountiful God, and the wonderful weakening and wounding of so glorious a
cause as we are interessed in, (and blessed be our God that ever we had a part
in it) especially having God on our side, and his sure word of promise to
support us to back and bear us up in our strictest straits. Wherefore, my
Brethren, let us seriously and sincerely often check and control such unsound
and unwarrantable fears, with that fair and favorable reproof from the Lord
himself of such false and faithless Isa. 51. ^.
fears in his children* Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the
people in whose heart is my Law. Fear ye not the reproaches of men, neither be
ye afraid of their revilings* For, the moth shall eat them up like a garment,
and the worm shall eat them like wool* but my righteousness A precious
preservative against false fears in Gods children.
shall be for ever, and my salvation from generation to generation. And that
especially in the 12 and 13 verses of the same chapter. I, even I am he that
comfort you, who art thou that thou should be afraid of a man that shall
die, and of the son of man which shall be made as grass* and forgettest the
Lord thy maker, that has stretched forth the heavens, and laid the foundation
of the earth* and have feared continually every day, because of the fury of
the oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy, and where is the fury of the
oppressor? Certainly, good Reader, here is a most exact description of the
condition of very many of Gods children, even at this very day; O what fear of
the force or fraud is there of men, yea of wicked men, who shall undoubtedly
perish together with their most desperate designs and profoundest policy?
What startling is there at a base weak project of theirs, though our eyes have
seen them vanish like a vapor and come to naught? What frights and fears are
in the hearts of Gods people, even every day (as the Lord says) because of
their seeming fury, but certain frenzy and madness; which yet, our God has
crushed and confounded in its highest ruff and deepest danger-threatning
bluster* For shame, therefore, for shame, let us labor against such
groundless, such causeless fears* and put on godly resolution and invincible
courage, since the Lord is our God, and is good, and does good, and who has
done all this great good for us; Which brings us to my fourth and last
Observation on these forementioned pa liamentarie mercies, namely, That the
Lord only is our Observation. God only is our salvation, therefore to wait on
him for deliverance Psalm. 3. 8. Isa. 36. 6.
salvation, and has engaged himself and his own great Name to deliver us, by
his faithful word and promise, and that therefore we should patiently, wisely,
and zealously depend on him for deliverance. Since, I say, the Lord only is
our strength, and not the failing arm of flesh which we know is an accursed
prop, and will deceive like the broken reeds of Egypt; let us therefore often
remember that of good King Jehosaphat, which indeed, I desire may be a constant
and cordial memento to us all to stablish and strengthen our hearts piously
and patiently to wait on the 2 Chronicles. 22. 20.
Lord, namely, Hear me (says that good King) O Judah, and ye inhabitants of
Jerusalem, believe the Lord your God, so shall ye be established, believe his
Prophets (and promises) so shall ye prosper. Even so I say to thee, O England,
and ye noble and renowned inhabitants of London, famous over the whole
Christian world for the glory of God among you, believe the many and most sweet
and precious-promises which God in Christ has made unto you, so shall ye
certainly prevail and prosper; lay hold on the promises, yea, rest and roll
your selves, and even live upon the promises, so shall it undoubtedly go well
with thee. Now, we have a sure word of promise, that Babylon shall fall, yea
says the Isa. 21. 9*
Lord, by the Prophet (in respect of the certainty of it) Babylon is fallen, is
fallen, (with an ingemination, which implies, matter of Ier. 51. 8.
moment) and all the graven images of her gods, the Lord has broken to the
ground. Yea says the Prophet Jeremie, Babylon is suddenly fallen and
destroyed. Now then, I say, good Reader, having such a sure word of promise
(even from the fountain of Truth, yea Truth it self) let us with Christian
courage, by faith lay fast hold on it and infallibly believe it, for Truth has
spoken it; and certainly heaven and earth shall sooner perish than one jot or
tittle of his precious word and promise shall not be performed. Have thou, I
say, (as a reverend and learned Divine, once sweetly Mr Carall Pastor of
Lincolnes-Inne.
delivered) a sure word of promise, abide close by it, for, certainly,
whatsoever the work of Gods providence may be (which ofttimes, I confess,
seems, even point blank to cross and contradict our hopes, mainly for trial
of our faith and patience) yet, stick-fast to the word of promise, rest and
rely on it, wait with the patience of the Saints for the performing of it:
For, as the Lord said to the Prophet, Write the vision, and make it plain upon
tables that he may Haba. 2* 2, 3*
run that reads it. For, the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the
end it shall speak and not lie, though it tarry, wait for it, because it will
surely come, and it will not tarry. See here, good Reader, what sound and solid
grounds of Christian courage, comfort and confidence is here? Who then would be
afraid? Who would not strongly and immoveably rely on the Lord his so mighty,
so sure foundation? See, I say, what an abundant Cornucopia of sweet refection
is here for the most drooping heart that may be, who then would Tantalize in
the midst of such and so fair heartupholding store? Alas, alas, good Reader,
if, under such props and supportations our hearts should flag, and faint, and
sink, by Infidelity is the root of slavish fear.
fear and infidelity (which indeed is the bitter root of slavish fear) might
not the Lord too justly upbraid us, as, once, he did the murmuring children of
Israel, the sinful and rebellious Israelites? Since the Lord only is our fast
and firmly-rooted Rock, and his Deuteronomy. 32. 4, 5, 6
works are perfect, and all his ways judgment, a God of truth, and without
iniquity, most just and right. If we thus corrupt our selves (with sinful
infidelity) our spot is not then the spot of his children, but we being thus a
perverse and crooked generation, may not the Lord, then, I say, most justly
upbraid us, and say, Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise?
Is not God your Father that has bought you and established you? O remember the
days of old (of thy old slaverie and bondage of Romish-Egypt, the black and
palpable fogs of Popish idolatry and superstition) consider the years of many
past generations, ask your fathers and they can show you, your elders and they
can tell you. And certainly, as good Ezra said in such a like case: If after
these great mercies and deliverances which God has wrought for us, and
wherewith he has so graciously crowned Ezra 9. 13, 14.
us, we should yet again break our covenant with God, we should violate his
righteous commandments, turn his so sweet and precious grace into wantonness,
and make this his patience and goodness to us a ground of our licentiousness,
and loosse living, would not the Lord (and that most justly) be angry with us,
until he had utterly consumed us? Yes certainly he would. For, though it is most
true that the Lord has proclaimed himself to the whole world, and all
generations have found him to be, The Exodus 34. 5, 6, 7
Lord, the Lord, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in
goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquiti^,
transgression and sin: yet it is as true, that he will by no means clear the
guilty, but will visit the iniquity of fathers upon the children, and upon
the childrens children unto the third and fourth generation. Wherefore, I say,
let our only fear be to off^nd this God, as loving and obedient children; to
disobey so loving* so gracious and indulgent a Father of mercies, and God of so
many comforts and consolations; yea to provoke so patient a God, so loath to
strike when stirred, yea constrained thereunto by our unsufferable sins; so
ready to help and heal what sin has wounded. Let us, then, be seriously
advised, since such free favor is shown unto us, to behold Isa. 26. 10.
the majesty of the Lord, and to learn righteousness, and not to do unjustly
in the land of uprightness; lest whiles we will not learn righteousness by
the historical miseries of others (I mean Germany and Ireland) God make us a
history of woe and wretchedness ^o Mr Calamie in his Sermon on the Fast.
others round about us. Yea, I say, let us contrariwise be co^str^ined
cordially to love such a God of love who so d^lights to load ^s with his love
in such unparralleld and unpattern'd measure as never any Nation could produce
the like presidents. But let this our love be free and filial* not mercenarie,
and so (as reverend M* Calamie before mentioned in his said Fast-Sermon)
meretricious love, only, or else mainly for love of reward or fear of
punishment, but let it be pure and sincere, and out of an honest heart and good
conscience, as unto the Lord, the only searcher of the heart and reins, and
who is only pleased with sincerity and integrity of heart, truth in the
inner-parts. And, now, to wind-up all and to conclude* le^ holy love* I say,
and perf^ct obedience be the precious r^^ribution of all these rare and
singular mercies of our bountiful God unto us; unto us, I say, a Nation so
i^^^deserving such an (...) of ove^flowing favors, a Nation so well-deserving
an ^npattern'd-deluge of direst destruction; a Nation so freely, so
extraordinarily beloved, a Nation so meretoriously deserving to be extremly
hated; a Nation, I say, so filled and fraught and beautifide with blessings,
and yet a Nation and people so defiled and stained with si^s and transgressions
of deepest dies. In sad and most serious consideration whereof, 2 Samuel 12, 20,
21, 22, 23, 24.
I desire that what that good Prophet Samuel pressed on the people of Israel might
take deep impression on mine own and all my conscionable and Christian Readers
hearts, Though (O England) thou be a sinful Nation, yet fear not, turn not
aside from following the Lord, but serve him (now) with all your heart. And
turn not aside O England take heed of Romish idolatry and superstitious
innovations.
(with disloyal apostacy to base and bloody and blasphemous Rome, or any of
her Romish innovations and Nation-confounding high provocations) for then
should ye go after vain things which cannot profit or deliver you in the day of
your distress, for they are vain. But cleave and adhere fast to the Lord (and
to his pure and holy worship) for the Lord will not forsake his people, for his
own great Names sake, because it has pleased the Lord to make us his people
above all Nations round about. And as for me your poor and unworthie brother
(that I may use the said holy Prophets own words) God forbid, that I should sin
against the Lord, in ceasing to pray continually for my land and nation. But I
desire (by this Prophets blessed direction) to admonish and show you the good
and right way, to conserve and increase all these many and most rich mercies
and deliverances to you and your springing posterity. Only fear the Lord, and
serve him in truth, with all your heart; for, consider how great things he has
done for you. And now for a full and final close and conclusion of all, give
me leave (good Reader) to use my most dear and even blessed Saviors holy and
wholesome exhortation to that disp^ssessed man in the Gospel, on whom he Mark
5. 19.
had wrought that great miracle. Go home to thy friends (says our Savior) and
tell them how great things the Lord has done for thee, and has had compassion
on thee. So, I to my self and all my godly Readers, Let us go home to our own
hearts, to our own houses, yea and to Gods house too, and tell our own souls,
our wives, children Go tell wha^ great things God has do^^ for thee.
and friends, yea and teach our children to tell their posterity after us, how
great and how good things the Lord our God has done for us, for England,
Scotland and Ireland, three most sinful Nations; and how he has had
compassion on us, merely for his own free mercies sake, and because mercy best
pleased him. And, then, and therewithal, let us again and again ruminate and
recogitate, yea practice and perform that pregnant precept of our great Lord
and Master Christ Jesus to that poor and infirm man, who had for many years
together been a poor lame creeple (just our case in the spiritual sense) and
whom our Savior had wonderfully Ioh. 5* 14.
cured. Behold thou art made whole, sin no more (says our Savior) lest a
worse thing come unto thee: So let us all say to our own souls Sin no more,
lest a worse thing come unto thee.
in particular, and to our land and Nation in general, behold we are all
(hitherto) strangely saved and delivered out of the hands of our malicious and
malignant enemies; O let us take heed and labor (by the help of Gods Spirit)
that we sin no more (especially The sin of Romish idolatry a most dangerous
sin. A ^it simile.
that realm ruinating sin of backsliding to Romish idolatry and Popish
superstition) lest a worse thing come unto us. For, certainly, as a wise
husband will discreetly bear with many failings, yea and main faults and
infirmities too in his wife whom he loves; but i^ she once defile his
marriage bed by adultery, O he can by no means endure that indignity and
disgrace: So undoubtedly it is with the Lord our God, who has married his
Church and children to himself, who will (as we all have deep and daily
experience, and as was most remarkably evident in King David) bear with many
gross and foul faults, and failings in them, but if once they Luke 22. 32.
defile his marriage bed (as I may so call it) violate their faith (not that I
think or believe it is * possible for his truly elected-ones and
effectually-called-ones to fall away totally or finally from true faith, or
soul-saving grace) and pure profession or religion, by commi^ting idolatry
(spiritual adultery) and foolish and faithless superstition, he will by no
means put-up or endure this heinous, yea this hideous and most hateful sin,
this infallibly punishment-provoking sin, especially, I say, if it be
stubbornly and stiffely persisted in, but (as was notably manifested in King
Solomon) will undoubtedly be avenged on us for this insufferable disloyalty,
and the fire of his conjugall jealousy will most infallibly break-out upon us
to our utter destruction without remedy. From which so high and dangerous an
indignity to our good God, the Lord for Christ's sake, by the irresistible
power of his good Spirit, preserve and uphold England, Scotland and Ireland,
and all tha^ have by Gods gracious power and good providence, shaken-off and
broken in pieces that heavy, yea that hellish yoke of Romes Antichristian
tyranny.

Amen and Amen.
All glory be to God alone.
FINIS.

