A WARNING TO BACK-SLIDERS; OR, A DISCOVERY FOR THE RECOVERY OF FALLEN ONES.

Delivered in a SERMON at Paul's, before the Right Honorable, the Lord Mayor
and Aldermen of the CITY of LONDON.

By RALPH VENNING.

Hosea 2.7. Then shall she say, I will go and return to my first husband, for
then was it better with me then now. LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for
John Rothwel, at the Fountain and Bear in Goldsmiths Row, in Cheap Side. 1654.

To the Right Honorable THO. VINER, LORD MAJOR: AND THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, THE
ALDERMEN of the City of LONDON.
Honorable and honored,
I Hope it will not be imputed to me as a crime, that I did all I could to keep
this Sermon from the Press, not fearing that it would do any hurt; but rather
that it might do little, if any good, in this hard, very hard-hearted age. But
seeing it has pleased (I think I may without offense say) God and you, to call
it to remembrance, some months after it was preached I could not but obey your
Order, in giving you that which you called for, viZ. the Sermon, and not
another thing. For indeed, having observed some books frontispic'd with a
Sermon Preached at PAUL'S, which (as it is said of Sir Francis Drake's Ship) had
nothing left (not a plank nor rib) but the very name thereof; I durst not (and
I hope none will think it a too nice and a needless scruple of conscience,
that I say) I durst not give you that to read which you did not hear. You have
the same things and words, with no more variation then; nor inded so much as,
the necessary, very necessary difference, that is to be put between pen and
tongue, required.

If it be estimated by the seasonablenesse of it, it will (as it seems you
judge) be beautiful; and I hope that it will not be the less acceptable, nor
the more succesless, for being plain: for I profess (to prevent all
exceptions to be made against it on that account) that it has more of heart,
then Art, and of affection, then affectation. The time would not give me leave
to usher it in with any Preface, nor to close it with any Oratorious
insinuations; nor is it (I think) fit to do it now, on the grounds
forementioned.

Homely, yet I hope wholesome, as it is, let it go; and the blessing of God go
along with it. The less man appears in it, the more God may appear by it. If
it may bring some glory to his Name, by engaging any to remember either from
whence they should not fall, and so to stand fast; or any to remember from
whence they have fallen, and so to return, I shall be glad, though my Name
suffer by it, as I believe in some men's esteems it will. But not to trouble
you any longer with such things, nor to enlarge this Porch beyond the
proportion allowable; I shall instead of speaking to you speak to God for you.

I do heartily beseech Almighty God, that that City (over which God has made
you overseers) may never become an harlot, that it may never be said of it, It
has lost its first love, and left its first works. It was full of judgment,
righteousness did lodge in it, but now murderers. That its Silver may never
become dross, nor its wine be mixed with water; that its Princes may never be
rebellious, noir companions of thieves; that none of them may love gifts, nor
follow after rewards; that, Oh that, it may never be said, they judge not the
fatherless, nor does the cause of the widow come before them; Lest the Lord of
Hosts, the Mighty One of Israel should say, Ah, I will ease me of mine
adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies. The good Lord rather turn his
hand, and purely purge away the dross, and take away the tin, and make Judges
as at the first, and Counselors as at the beginning; that she may be called,
the City of righteousness, the faithful City; and for these things, the
beauty and the glory of the whole Earth. Thus, honorable and honored, is the
hearty prayer of

March 1654. Your humble Servant, RALPH VENNING.

A WARNING TO BACKSLIDERS, OR A Discovery for the Recovery of Fallen ones.
Let him that has an care to hear, hear what the Spirit says to the Angel
of the Church of Ephesus.

REVEL. 2.5. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do
the first works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy
Candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.


IN this Epistle you have these three parts,

1. The Superscription, by way of Preface, and Introduction, in the first verse.

2. You have the Contents of the Epistle, in the five following verses; wherein
you have, 1. A commendation, in the 2, 3, and 6th. verses. 2. An exception,
which implies a reproof, v. 4. 3. An exhortation in the Text, v. 5.


3. The third branch of the Epistle, viz. the Epilogue or conclusion of it, v.
7 He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches.
That which is written to one, is spoken to all.

My Text falls among the Contents of the Epistle, and is the third part
thereof, viz. the exhortation backed with a threatening.

In the exhortation you have three things required.

1. A sight and sense of their sin; Remember therefore from whence thou art
fallen. 2. A repentance for their sin; Remember, and repent. 3. A returning
from their sin; Do the first works.
The threatening has these three things in it.

1. The certainty of Christ's coming; I will come. 2. The suddenness of his
coming; I will come quickly. 3. The end of his coming; I will remove thy
candlestick out of his place, unless thou repent.
I shall very briefly touch a few general Observations, which the context and
the Text do afford us, and then come closer to the words.

The first Observation is this, That God takes special notice, and keeps an
exact account of all our doings, be they good, or be they bad; ( I know thy
works, viz. what they were, and what they are.) God has his books of
Remembrance written, according to which he will judge the world; for he will
bring every work to judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or
evil; I know thy works, etc.

2. Obs. That persons may be praised to their dispraise: they may be commended
to their discommendation; I know thy works, but, or Nevertheless.

A man's praise is ever the less, when he is praised with a Nevertheless. To
commend with a but, is but to discommend. To say, such a man was a meek man,
was an humble man, was an holy man, is not a praise, but a dispraise; you did
run well, who hindered you? Such an one was good, but quantum mutatus ab illo?
the man is not what he was. Praises with exceptions are (little better then)
disparagements. Nevertheless, etc.

3. Obs. The good we have done will not excuse the bad we do do; God will not
put the good in one balance, and the bad in another, and make allowances of the
bad for the goods sake; No, it is no excuse at all to Ephesus, that she had
labored, and that she had wrought, when it can be said. I have against thee,
and thou have left thy first works. Former fruitfulness will be no excuse for
present barrenness; former industry will not plead for any man's present
idleness; a good beginning will never make amends for a bad end. If the latter
end be worse then the beginning, it had been better for them, they had never
known the way of righteousness, then when they have known it, to depart from
the holy Commandment. I have against thee etc.

4. Obs. That when love decays, our works decay; he lays all upon this: Thou
have left thy first love. As is our love of Cod, such will be our obedience
unto God. If our love be quick and lively, our life will be full of good works;
but if once love decline, works will decay; for faith it self works by love;
Thou have left thy first love.

5 Obs. That God does not strike without warning. God does not surprise his
creatures, not fall upon them at an unawares, but he gives them notice of his
coming, before he comes; and he admonishes before he threatens. Remember,
(says he) or else I will come. God does not take advantage against poor
sinners, nor deal with them according to their iniquities; for then, who could
stand? but God, though he might use his Sword, will yet use his Word, and
therefore gives them notice beforehand; and this is the very reason given by
Peter, why God makes not haste to destroy the world, because (says he) God is
longsuffering, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance; Repent, or else I will come, etc.

6. Obs. If Gods admonitions do not take with us, Gods threatenings will
certainly take hold of us; if we do not hear his Word, we shall undoubtedly
feel his Sword; if you do not repent, I will (without doubt, certainly I will)
come, and remove thy candlestick, etc,

I shall mention no more as to the general; only give you four other
Observations from the Text, and then single out one of them to speak unto.

The first is this,
1. That to remember from whence we are fallen, is a very great help to our
recovery; to remember from whence we are fallen, does very much conduce to our
recovery; it is like going into one's native air, when in a consumption:
Remember, etc.

2. God does not only require that we should remember from whence we are
fallen, but he also requires that we should repent for falling; Remember, and
repent.

3. God does not only require that we should repent for sin, but he also
requires that we should repent from sin, and do the first works. Repentance
is to be not only for dead works, but from dead works. To repent without
reformation is a contradiction, and whosoever (as one quotes from Tertullian)
repents with a contradiction, shall be pardoned with a contradiction; to repent
and continue in sin, is repentance with a contradiction; to be pardoned and go
to hell, is a pardon with a contradiction; such repentance, such pardon; Do
then the first works.

4. If backsliders do not remember, and repent, and reform, their doom will be
sad at the coming of Christ. He will come, but to their cost and torment, for
he will take away their candlestick, and cast them into outer darkness; Else I
will come, etc.

The first of these four is the Proposition which I shall speak unto, viz. That
for a people to remember from whence they are fallen, does very much conduce to
their recovery and restoration. In the handling whereof, I shall show, 1. What
it is to remember. 2. That to remember does conduce to recovery. 3. How
remembering from whence we are fallen, does conduce to recovery.


To the first, viz. what it is to remember. The word has three significations;
each and every of which does very well suite with what is intended in the Text.

1. To remember, is to call to mind that which we had forgotten, which we had
let slip out of our memory. And so it is used in Mat. 26.25. When the Cock crew,
Peter remembered the words of Jesus, (and that very remembrance engaged him to
repent; For he went out and wept bitterly.) He remembered the words of Jesus,
that is, he called to mind what Jesus had told him, and he had forgotten, viz.
That before the Cock crew he should deny him thrice. So then to call to mind
that which we once were, and to look back upon that which we once did, and from
which we are now falen, is useful for our recovery and restoration to that
state.

2. To remember signifies to meditate upon; Now meditation is a thinking of a
thing over and over, again and again; it is the fixing and settling of the
thoughts upon such or such a subject. So it is used in Ps. 63.6. I remember thee
upon my bed, (and presently adds, as an explanation of his meaning) and
meditate of thee in the night-wathes. So that to remember is not barely to call
a thing to mind, but to keep it in mind, to revolve it over and over. So,
Joh. 15.20. Christ charges them to remember those words, viz. That the Disciple
is not above his Master. To remember, that is, to think often of, and muse much
upon those words. Now thus a settled meditation upon, and keeping in mind the
thoughts of what we once were, and what we once did, and what we once had, and
from all which we are now fallen, does very much conduce to the re-instating of
us into that condition.

3. There is yet an higher degree of meaning in the word, and that is, as it
signifies to lay to heart; not only to call to mind, and keep in mind, but to
lay to heart: Remember from whence thou art fallen, that is, lay it to heart,
be seriously and tenderly affected with it; for that is the laying of a thing to
heart. According to this sense yon have the word u'sd, Isaiah 57.11. Thou have
not remembered, nor laid it to thine heart. And in the Lamentations, chapt. 3.
v. 19, 20. it is very pathetically and feelingly expressed; Rmembring mine
affliction and my misery, the wormwood and the gall, my soul has them still
in remembrance, and is humbled in me. This is that which our remembrance is to
reach unto, viz. to an humbling, to an heart-affecting, yea, to an
heart-afflicting, for our being fallen; and thus to remember does exceedingly
conduce to our recovery; and that it does so, is the second thing which I am to
prove.

And this I prove by two irreproveable witnesses.

1. Gods own Testimony.

2. The experience of fallen ones or backsliders themselves.

1. God himself, who is truth, speaks the truth and cannot lie, tells us so
much in Jerem. 8.5, 6. Why then is this people of Jerusalem slidden back with a
perpetual backsliding? they hold fast deceit, they refuse to return. I
hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright; no man repented him of his
wickedness, saying, What have I done?

As much as if he had said, How comes it to pass? what is the reason? why is
it, that no man repented of his wickedness? It Is, says he, because no man
asked himself, What he had done? no man remembered from whence he was fallen; no
man did so much as consider his ways, nor cast an eye back upon his former
conversation, No man said, What have I done. This remembering is a reflex act,
it is a kind of catechizing the soul, putting queries to a man's heart: Now
says he, there is no man does this, they call not to mind, nor lay to heart
their backslidings. They that mind not what they have done, are not like to
mind what they should do. The sum of it amounts to this, that if men did but
remember from whence they were fallen, 'twere scarce possible, but they should
repent, return and do their first works.

2. Besides Gods Testimony, you shall have another to second it, (that out of
the mouth of two witnesses this word may be established) and that is, the
experience of backsliders or fallen ones. That in Hos. 2.7. is a pregnant
instance: Then shall she say, I will go and return to my first husband; Why
so? ask you, why? there is good reason for it; For then it was better with me
then now.

Here you see, that calling to mind from whence she was fallen, engaged her to
return; I will return, for it was better, etc. Go where we will, we shall never
speed so well as in walking with God; and if we decline his way, and go out of
his paths, we shall never be at ease till we return again.

It will never be so well as it was at first, till we come to our first
Husband; It was better then, then now.

Another experience as evidential as the former, you have from the Prodigal,
Luke 15. who, says the text, When he came to himself, (Mark that, when he
came to himself, the man was not himself before; sin besots men, it darkens and
dulls their understandings, that a man is not a man, but is beside himself) But
when he came to himself, he quickly went from himself unto his father; when he
called to mind what he once had in his fathers house, when he remembered his
former state, and compared his past with his present condition, now, says he,
I will arise and go to my father; when he remembered from whence he was fallen,
he repented, etc.

A third, and no less famous an experience, you have of this in Psalm. 119.59.
I bethought me, says he, of my ways, and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies:
He speaks the language of a man that had been wandering, that had gone out of
his way, and turned aside to bypath; but at last is at a stand, and makes an
halt, and then bethought himself: I began, says he, to call to mind whence I
came, whither I was going, and where I was: and finding that I was not right,
but was fallen; I faced about, and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies.

Thus you see the truth clearly evinced, That remembering from whence we are
fallen, does very much conduce to our recovery.

The third thing which I have to do, is to show you how remembering from whence
we are fallen, does help us to return, what kind of influence it has upon
our hearts; or what are the things which it makes use of to engage us to
return.

It works upon us these three ways.

It works 1. By way of shame. 2. By way of fear. 3. By way of ingenuity.


1. The remembering from whence we are fallen, works upon us by making use of
that shame and shame fac'dnesse which is in man. Man (if not hardened by sin)
is a modest creature, and will blush at a fault when he sees it; Now when he
comes to remember what he once was, and now is not; and what he once did, and
now does not; what he once enjoyed, and is now deprived thereof; the man is
ashamed, and bethinks himself to return for very shame.

You know when a man has had the name and fame of a valiant man, and shall now
be reputed, and reported a coward, he will need no other spur then shame for
the quickening of him, to approve himself a man that may recover his first
honor.

Shame has a very great influence on men, and truly, (as the Proverb says)
Past shame, and past goodness.

But if a man retain his modesty, and do not get a brazen forehead, a whores
face, or a brow of brass, there is more then hopes of his recovery, whenever he
remembers from whence he is fallen.

This needs no clearing, it is so clear; yet take a proof of it from Ezekiel. 16.
toward the latter end, v. 61. Then thou shall remember thy ways; pray mark
it, Then thou shall remember thy ways; and what then? Thou shall be ashamed.

So also, v. 63. That thou may remember, and be confounded, and never open
thy mouth any more, because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee: Mark
it, shame even after I am pacified; shame after reconciliation; after God
remembers his Covenant, it will become us to remember our ways, which have not
been good, and that with shame. In ver. 60. says he, I will remebmber my
Covenant, and, v. 61. Then shall thou remember thy ways.

Now the shame arises upon this account, that a man should fall from that
duty, that love and service from which he has no reason, nor shadow, nor
pretense of reason to fall. It Is the most unreasonable thing in the world to
sin against God; and if man be asked why he sins? he must for ever speechless,
that is, silent, not having any reason to give, any thing to say, why he should
depart from God.

Thus God disputes it with backsliding Israel, Jer. 2. Thus says the Lord,
What iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me,
and have walked after vanity? As if God had said, What evil have I done? as
Christ said, For which of my good works do you stone me? what have you to lay
to my charge? what occasionhave I given you that you should not love me now as
at the first? what reason can you produce for your Apostasy, and for your
falling from your first love? am not I as lovely as ever, and as loving as
ever? for so God reasons with them in the latter end of that Chapter: O
generation, O vile, foolish, reasonlesse generation, see the Word of the Lord,
gainsay it if you can; have I been a wilderness unto Israel, or a land of
darkness? If so, you have some occasion to revolt and turn away backward; but
if not, wherefore then say my people, what reason have my people to say, We
will come no more to thee? Oh! what a shameful thing (says God) is this, that
a people should go from a God that never did them hurt, but good all their
days? A God, who when they wanted bread, fed them; when they wanted water,
smote the rock, and gave them drink, He was no wilderness to them in the
wilderness; While they were in a barren land, God was fruitfulness to them,
he rained Manna from Heaven, and fed them with Angels food, and gave them Honey
out of the rock, etc.

Now after this expostulation, when a man reflecting upon himself, shall look
back upon, and read over his ways, and then find I had no reason to break the
holy, just and good commandments of my God; I can give God no account why I
should return to folly, why I should walk after vanity, lying vanities, why I
should forsake my first love; What follows hereupon, but shame and blushing? so
that for very shame, the man repents and returns to do his first works.

2. Remembering from whence we are fallen, works upon us by way of fear. There
is in man a fear when he has committed evil; fear falls upon him, and the man
is afraid, lest the iniquity of his heels should overtake him. You know, that
no sooner had Adam sinned, but the man was afraid, and hid himself for fear. No
sooner had Cain sinned, but Cain was afraid, and presently his countenance
fell. When men fall, their countenance and their courage falls. When once men
remember from whence they are fallen, they fear lest threatenings should take
hold of them, and are afraid lest God should reward them according to their
iniquities.

God shakes his rod over backsliders, and threatens them, that if they do not
come to him, he will come, etc. If they come not to him for their safety, he
will come to them for their ruin. Now very fear, lest the wrath and damnation
which God has denounced against sinners, should fall upon them, and be their
portion; very fear (I say) ingages them to return.

And my beloved, God does allow in us this principle of fear; none of the
faculties or affections of man are extinguished, but all made use of in working
man Godward; God does not only make use of a man's modesty, and love, and
ingenuity, but he makes use also of that fearfulness that is in man: and
therefore you shall find, that Christ himself ( surely not for naught) gives
this rule to his own Disciples: Fear not him that can kill only the body, but
fear him that can take soul and body and throw them into hell, I say unto you,
Fear him. And as the Apostle says, so may I, Knowing the terror of the Lord,
we persuade men; Knowing what a dreadful thing it is to fall into the hands of
the living God, we persuade men to remember from whence they are fallen, and to
repent.

3. But then thirdly, remembering from whence we are fallen, works upon our
ingenuity too. Man is a very docible and teachable creature, and is exceedingly
wrought upon by courtesies and kindnesses; Now when a soul sees, that God does
not only threaten him, in case he do nor come in, that he shall be damned; but
also promises him in case he do come in, that he shall be welcome, that he
shall be saved; this so works upon man's ingenuity, that he cannot find it in
his heart to stand it out against such a God

A God of love and kindness, who promises all the entertainment that love can
make for poor souls; and, Oh Lord, how sweet will that be!

God deals not with man after the manner of men, Jer. 3.1. They say, (says
God) If a man put away his wife, and she go from him, and become another man's,
shall she return again? No, say they, by no means; But I say. Thou, and though
thou have played the harlot with many lovers, yet come, and welcome to me, says
the Lord.

Now what soul can find in its heart, when God says, Come, and I will pardon
all thy backslidings, I will forgive all thine iniquities, I will entertain
thee, and remember thy sin no more, thou shall never hear of it again, I will
never upbraid thee with falling from thy first love, if thou will return and
make thine abode with me: What soul, I say, can look God in the face, and turn
his back upon that face, that lovely and smiling, lovelooking face? Who can do
it?

I remember a very notable instance of this ingenuity in Saul toward David;
it is a place worth your turning to it, to read and observe it, 1 Samuel 24. You
know that David had an advantage against Saul, and could have cut off his head,
but David cuts off only the lap of his garment, to let Saul know that he could
(for it was in his power to) have done more; Now said David, Behold, this day
thine eyes (sufficient witnesses) have seen how the Lord had delivered thee
into mine hands, and some bade me kill thee (would I have observed the
opportunity of providence, or attended to counsel, I had slain thee,) but mine
eye spared thee, (whose eye spared not me,) and I said, I will not put forth
mine hand against my Lord, (though my Lord has put forth his hand against me.)
Moreover, my Father, (if thou doubt it) see, yea, see the skirt of thy Robe in
my hand, for in that I cut off the skirt of thy Robe, and killed thee not; know
thou and see, (for it is undeniably true) that there is no transgression in my
hand, that I have not sinned, (as it is charged upon me, as if I sought not only
the Crown, but the Kings life, that I might have his head, and then the Crown,)
and if not, Why, Oh why huntest thou my soul i.e. my life, to take it? Here is
DAVID'S plea. Let us now see the issue and success thereof, verse. 16. It came
to pass, when David had made an end of speaking these words, that Saul
(melting and weeping) said, Is this thy voice, my son (Oh my son) David, and
Saul lift up his voice and wept, and he said (yea, and had cause to say) to
David, Thou art more righteous then I: (and he proves it clearly thus,) For
thou have rewarded me good, whereas I rewarded thee evil, and thou have
(demonstratively) showed this day, that thou have dealt well with me; for as
much as when the Lord had delivered me into thine hand, thou did not kill me;
(which he wondered at upon this account) if a man find his enemy, will he let
him go well a way? Oh no, and at last, says the Text, Saul went home; Saul
scorned to be so base to hunt after David's life any more; No, but Saul went
home. Why now here is the case, the very case, (my beloved) we are all every
one of us a backslidden man, that is fallen into the hands of God; He might have
cut off our heads, but (Oh mercy!) he only cuts off the skirt of our garments,
and when he has done, he shows it us, and then asks us, Oh ye sinners, ye
sinners, how can yeo hunt after my Glory? how can ye hunt after my Name? how
can ye break my holy Commandments? with what face dare ye do these things?

Now I say, very ingenuity makes the soul to cry out as Saul did, Is this thy
voice, O my God? is this thy voice? have I ( alas, I have) done wicedly, I will
do so no more; I will go home, LORD, I will go home. I will hunt after thy
Name, and thy Glory no more; for thou ( Oh love!) though thou did find me
thine enemy, yet did thou let me go well away. Oh, says Ingenuity, shall I
now be an enemy to the God, that has been a friend to me? God forbid. Ah no, I
will go home.

Take but one instance of this overcoming consideration, wherein you shall see
backsliders returning upon this very account, in Jer. 3.22. Return, ye
backsliding children, says the Lord, and I will heal your backsliding; What
follows hereupon? Behold, we come unto thee, Oh Lord, our God. What Ingenuity
(if any left) can stand it out against such sweet invitations? such not only
alluring, but securing promises? surely none. Behold, we come!

Thus much, or thus little may suffice concerning the Doctrinal part, to have
shown you, That remembering or calling to mind from whence we are fallen, does
very much conduce to our recovery, and how it does it by working upon our
Modesty, Fear and Ingenuity. What remains now?

But to beseech every one to remember whence ye are fallen, for we are all
fallen short of the glory of God. And here we might take an occasion to look as
far back as Paradise, and to view that innocent state wherein man once stood,
and there also to take an account how well it was with man then, when he stood
before God, having no clothing but his innocence; and therefore needed not to
be ashamed though naked; no sin, no shame.

Certainly, my beloved, it is not with us, alas, it is not with us, our
blushing tells us that it is not with us, as when we came out of the hands of
God; Our fear also tells us, that it is not with us, as when God made us; if
God should come to us, as he did to Adam, and say, Adam, where art thou? where
art thou, O man? I am afraid, that he would find ( as well as make) us afraid;
he would find us running behind the trees of the garden to shelter our
selves, and say, I heard thy voice, and was afraid.

Now I say, let us call to mind from whence we are fallen, for we are all
Renegadoes, we are all degenerated, we are all slidden back, and fallen down
into a lumpish, earthly condition; Oh let us look back again to Paradise, and
let our eyes affect our hearts, that we may be re-instated, yea, into a better
Paradise even into the second Adam, the Lord Christ from heaven, heavenly;
There Is no way to Paradise but by Christ, This day shall thou be with me in
Paradise; Be with me, mark that; when a man is with Christ, ( that I may
allude) he is then in Paradise, then truly in happiness. That day wherein
Christ comes to a man's houso, salvation comes to a man; and that day that a man
comes to Christ, he comes to salvation.

Oh, let us long to be dissolved in this sense, to die to our sins, that we may
be with Christ; that we again enjoy that old acquaintance which man had with
God before he sinned, before shame, and before fear seized upon our hearts.

But seeing this is not the direct meaning, import, or scope of this place, I
shall pass it by, having given it this touch by the way.

This word preperly relates to us, as we have pretended to look heavenward
again, by having an eye to Christ, making a profession of the Name and fear of
God: and that which it calls upon us for, is to consider whether it be with us
as at first, whether it be with us as in the days of our youth, when we came
in to God in the beginning of our days. Let us look back a little, and
remember from whence we are fallen; for I am afraid, it will be made appear
that we are fallen, not only short of God, ( for that we are at best) but short
of our selves; we are not as we were, we do not do as we did, it is not with us
as in months past.

Now that you may know whether and wherein you are fallen, and so remember it
as to repent, and do the first works; I shall show you what Christians are at
their first coming in, and conversion to God; I shall draw the picture of their
life, though not to the life, and set before you some of their frames and works
at first. There are ten things which I shall commend to your consideration,
with my prayer to God, that they may conduce to recovery.

The first thing is this,
First, That at the first Professors looked more after goodness, then after
greatness; they minded more the beautifying of their souls, then the
^^^orning of their bodies; they minded more eternity and the things thereof,
then they did time and the things thereof; they cared more to be the Lords
people, then to be Lords amongst the people. When others cry, Who will show us
any good, (corn, and wine, and o^le,) their cry is, Lord lift up upon us the
light of thy countenance; Let us enjoy our God, take the world who will. This,
I believe, some of you know was once your heart; well then, if now thou mind
greatness more then goodness, and the adorning of thy body more then the
beautifying of thy soul, and the things of this world more then the things of
eternity and eternal life, thou art fallen. O remember from whence thou art
fallen. Souls had wont to be so taken up with the longing after communion with
God, that they were scarce at leisure to bestow their looks upon the worlds
vanity; If thou now be at leisure to bestow thine heart, thou art fallen; O
remember then from whence thou art fallen.

It is a very glorious frame that is mentioned concerning our forefathers, in
the 11th. of the Hebrews, Abraham, and Jsaac, and Jacob; in the 13th. verse.
These all died in faith, not having received the promises; but having seen them
a far off, were persuaded of them, and embraced them, (to embrace a promise at
a thousand years distance, two thousand years distance that is noble faith;)
and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth; for they that
say such things, declare plainly that they seek a Country. (Mark) their whole
business was to go home to God; all their travel in this world, was to travel
heavenward; they make no more use of this earth, but to set their feet on it,
and walk on heavenward, they declared plainly; no Demonstration is more
evident, then that Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob sought a Country; that they
were not taken up with the things of this world, they sought a country.

Now (my beloved) if we are come to this, that we declare plainly, that we sit
down and build our houses, and our Palaces, and out Cities, as if this were to
be our rest are we not fallen? Surely if Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob were
alive, they would blush to see Professors in our days, that Pilgrims should
take up their abode on earth; Well then, Remember from whence thou art fallen,
and go to thy old wont again; look after goodness more then greatness, and
communion with God more then enioyment of the world. But then in the second
place,

II. At the first, when Believers come in to Jesus Christ, they are very
industrious in all holy duties, publicly and privately; they will take pains
for God, and for their souls, and will not offer unto God that that cost them
naught; They will rise early, and go to bed late, I, and eat the bread of
carefulness; The doing of their fathers will, for that is their meat and their
drink; and certainly if it be not thus now, thou art fallen; if thou put off
God with any thing, nay, ( may I not fear put off God) with nothing, art thou
not fallen?

Thou had wont to have been much in prayer, and much at hearing; if now thou
art but little at prayer, and little at hearing; art thou not fallen? They had
wont to long for Sabbaths, and, O when will they come? and now they think
Sabbaths long, and when will they be gone, and art thou not fallen? O member
from whence thou art falen, do thy first works, pray as in the days of old,
and hear as in the days of old, with an appetite.

Many a time some of your souls know that you could leave the world to follow
prayer and hearing; and now do not your souls tell you to your face, you can
leave prayer and hearing for the world? and is not this a fall? I, and the fall
is great. O remember from whence thou art fallen, and do thy first works, to
thy old industry again.

My beloved, it is a great mistake to think that duties are drudgeries; if
people abound in duty, they are afraid lest they should come under a Covenant
of Works: why (my beloved) I tell you, that under the Gospel you must work for
your living, Work out your salvation with fear and trembling; I say it again,
under the Gospel you must work for your living; He that will not labout (in
this sense) he shall never eat; I am afraid that many under pretense of fearing
a Covenant of Works, have thrown away the Works of the Covenant. O remember
from whence ye are fallen, and to your first works again; up and be doing, be
as industrious (as ever) at hearing, and praying, for it is for your souls. But
then,

III. Believers and professors at first, when they began to be Saints, though
they prayed, much and heard much, they thought it all but little yea, all
nothing, unless they enjoyed God in all these; if they at any time came to the
wells, and found no waters, they have gone away shamed; if they had come to
her, come to prayers, and have not enjoyed God, have not found their hearts
wrought upon, to be made the more humble and the more holy by it; they have
gone sighing away, and with groans they have departed from the very Throne of
Grace; well then, but if now thou can be contented with bare hearing, though
thou be never the better for it, and with bare praying, though never the better
for it; I tell thee thou art falen, O remember from whenoe thou art fallen, and
to thy first works again.

Never think that the work is done till thou be drawn nearer to God by it, (as
the Apostle says) so order it, that all your meetings may be for the better,
and not for the worse.

Now when are our meetings for the better, but when we are the better for our
meetings? What is it to draw near to God in prayer, if we be not drawn nearer
to God by prayer? What is it to go and ask for humility, and abide proud? to
go and ask for heavenly-mindednesse, and abide earthly? What is this? will
bare praying argue the souls communion with God? No, but when a soul is cast
into the mould of his prayer, and has enjoyed the frame he has prayed for,
then he may say he has had communion with God; an^ therefore (I say) return to
your first works; never think hearing and praying enough, unless you have your
God in, and the work of God upon your hearts. But then,

IV. Christians primitive, (let me call them primitive Christians) at their
first coming in to God, all their expresions to God and man are genuine
natural, without Art, ceremony or complement; they deal downright, plainly and
honestly with God and man; their prayers to God, they are not a heap of words,
but a stream of affection; they are not a multitude of expressions, but
breathings and longings of soul after God; their heart first speaks their
words, and then their words speak their hearts to God, they feel what they do;
I, but now, if thy expressions to God be matter of Art, and matter of
complement; if thou put God off with a parcel of good language, thou art fallen.

Time was when thy heart spoke first, if now thy tongue run before thy heart,
thou art fallen. O remember to do thy first works again.

And as to men their expressions were as honest, and as cordial, and as sincere
as to God; they spoke what they meant, and they meant what they spoke; they did
not speak every one to his neighbor, with a heart and a heart. I am afraid we
have too sad a cause to make complaint with the Prophet in the 12th. Psalm.
Help, Lord, the godly man cease, the faithful fails from among the children
of men; they speak vanity everyone with his neighbor, with flattering lips,
and with a double tongue do they speak: a heart and a heart, that is, they so
speak, that a man does not know them when they speak: A man can lay no more
stresse upon their words, then upon the wind; they give one as good words as
any in the world, and one hugges himself to think, O this will come to
something, and all these words come to nothing. This was not at first, men made
conscience first of speaking, and then of performing; men were shie of
promising, but if they promised, they were so honest as to keep their words,
though they lost by it, though it were to their hurt, though it were to their
prejudice; if it be not so now, thou art fallen; O remember then (I may say)
thy first words in this sense, and let thy words and thy expressions be genuine
and natural, the very breathings of thy heart; do not complement with God or
man. But then in the fifth place, (for I will dispatch all I can.)

V. Believers, or Christians, or Saints (call them what you will) at their
first coming in, they have a very high and honorable esteem of them that bring
them in; their hearts are knit to them, who knit their hearts to God; they are
almost married to them, that married them to Christ; they love them so dearly,
so cordially.

I will show you but one instance to speak for all the rest. In Galatians. 4. It
pleased God to make use of Paul to convert the Galatians, to bring them home to
Jesus Christ; now says he in the fifteenth Verse, When my temptation was in my
flesh, you despised not, nor rejected, but received me as an Angel of God, yea,
as Christ Jesus: If Christ himself had come in person, you could not have given
him more honorable entertainment, and a more cordial welcome then you gave me.
But now (says he) Where is then the blessedness you spoke of before? for I
bear you record, that if it had been possible you would have plucked out your
own eyes to have given them to me Surely they were dear indeed, that were
dearer then ones own eyes; and yet (mark but the next Verse,) Am I become your
enomy, because I tell you the truth? They that once, at first would have pulled
out their eyes for Paul, would at last have pulled out Paul's eyes, and were
they not fallen think you?

Time was, when beautiful were the feet of them that brought the glad tidings
of peace; not only beautiful were the glad tidings of peace which they brought,
but they that brought them were beautiful; that is, they were welcome; why
now, with what face can thou say, the tidings of peace which they brought are
lovely, but they that brought them are loathsome? with what face can thou say
it? I am always afraid that that which is brought, is never welcome, when they
that bring it are not welcome.

(My beloved) time was (to my knowledge) time has been, when a godly Minister
that God has made use of to convert a soul, Ohow dear was he? and how near was
he lodged to the hearts of such Persons! but ah, but now, not a good look, nor
a good word for them that did them no wrong but this, to bring them in to
Christ; pardon them this wrong. What says Paul, Am I become your enemy,
because I tell you the truth? O forgive me this wrong. I seek to save you, and
you seek to undo me; pardon me that wrong.

(My beloved) I durst ask many a soul, whether if ever they knew Jesus Christ
indeed and in truth, God did not use some or other Minister of the Gospel to
bring them in? I say generally; if so, why then should not that be as desirable
to bring thee up that was desirable when it brought thee in? Is it an injury to
help thee heavenward? does it do thee any wrong to save thy soul? if so, be
their enemy, though they tell thee the truth; but if it do good to thee, and to
save thy soul be a courtesy, make much of them. If God should take away the
Candlestick, or the Candle out of the stick, thou would wish for it again;
but if any be otherwise minded, let me tell them, they are fallen; and let me
beseech them to remember from whence they are fallen, and to repent, and do
their first works. But in the sixth place,

VI. Believers at first, upon their first advance heavenward, while they put
their foot forward to eternal life; O how watchful were they over their hearts,
and over their ways, killing sin in the very first motions of it!

I dare say, that a thought of being proud, a thought of being covetous, a
thought of sinning has pierced their souls as a sword; and O how have they
gone mourning all that day long, wherein they have found an earthly mind, and
an inclination to decline from God! So tender were their souls, that if Satan
did but offer a temptation, their very hearts rise, I, and in their might they
rise up against it, and were so truly conscientious, that they abstained from
it, I, and abhorred the very appearances of evil; If a thing did but look like
sin, though it were not a sin; yet if it did but look like a sin, O how
were they afraid to look at it! how would they stand at a distance from pitch,
and touch it not, lest they should be defiled! how shie were they of looking
upon the wine, when it was red in the glass! and if a garment were but sported
with the flesh, O at what a distance would they stand!

Now (My beloved) if it be not so, you are fallen; if you have lost this
tenderness, and lost this conscienciousnesse; and can now make bold, not only
with the appearances of evil, but with appearing evil, and apparent evils, are
you not fallen? Time was when you were afraid to look like a proud person, what
now to be a proud person, is it not to fall think ye? Time was when they were
afraid, lest their carriage should give any body to think they were wanton; I,
but now to carry it like wantons, is it not to fall? My beloved, I beseech you,
remember your first works, that good tenderness and bleeding of soul at but a
touch of sin. Again,

VII. They were not only watchful over themselves, fearful to offend, and
blessed is that man that so fears always; but they were also watchful over
their brethren, over one another, they were their brothers keepers; I, and
would not in any ways suffer sin upon their brother: and I must profess, I do
not know wherein professors are more fallen then in this. It is true indeed,
they watch; but is it not for one another haltings? It is true indeed, they
will reprove but is it not with reproaches? Saints had wont to go like Shem and
Japhet, backward to cover the nakedness of their brothers; and now like wicked
Cain, who can fastest discover their brothers nakedness? and O what a fine
thing it is, if they can but find another as bad as themselves, as if another
man's sin would justify them, and free them from condemnation!

Moreover, if these souls in the days of old, could not gain their brothet by
exhortation, or counsel, or reproof; why, they would go home, and mourn
exceedingly, as Jeremiah says; If I cannot prevail, I will go and mourn in
secret; and, O, how did their eyes run down with tears, because others did not
keep Gods Laws! but alas! now, that that Paul would have told the world of
weeping, men tell the world of laughing; and that is that there are men, whose
god is their belly, who are enemies to the Cross of Christ; O remember from
whence ye are fallen, and do your first works: Leave reproaches, but use
repoofs; and instead of watching for haltings, be sure to watch to keep from
halting. (But to make have) in the 8th. place,

VIII. There was this remarkable (and I beseech you observe it) in all
primitive Professors, and all young beginners, (as I may call them) they took a
special care of all their Families, and Relations committed to their care; O how
did they travel in birth for their children, till they were newborn!, and
travel again till Christ were formed in them; O! how would they beseech the
Lord, that their servants might serve God? what care there was to make every
one in the Family a Saint, a holy wife, a holy child, and a holy servant, to
have a Church in a house?

You know, GOD called Abraham his frind, why? I know, he will teach his
children after him, and says Joshua, As for my part, do you what you think
good, but I and my house we will serve the Lord. O, what care there was among
the old Professors, the old Puritans (you called them) to bring up their
children in the fear of God, and to look to it, that a vile person should not
be let into, much less abide in their house, if they could help it? But now
(My beloved) is it not the sad complaint that is (and is to be) made, no
children more neglected then Professors children, no servants more neglected
then Professors servants? O that this should be spoken in these days where
there is more light in words, but (it seems) more darkness in deeds; O
remember from whence you are fallen!

To your old Family-work again, O set up Family Duties again lif ever you mean
to have good Families, up with Familyduties again; if ever you mean to have
good Relations, pray more with them, and pray more for them; if ever you mean
to have good children, O give them up to God, and teach them the fear of the
Lord, train them up in his paths betimes. Little would one have thought that
ever it should have been a question among Christians, whether one should teach
children the fear of the Lord; whether one should teach a child the trade of
his way, when he is young, that when he is old he may not depart from it?

I remember that it was the saying of a Heathen, being asked, what things we
were to teach children to know? We must (said he) teach them to know that when
they are young, that they must do when they are old: that was his answer. We
were best call him a Christian, and call Christians Heathens, for by their
practice both may be said. Is it not a shame that it should be said, no
children so rude, so vile, so abusing the Name of God, as them that will be
(forsooth) the most eminent Professors, and of them that have attained (in
pretention) to more steps then ordinary heavenward? But in the nineth place,

IX. Saints at their first coming in to God in the beginning of their days they
were visible Saints, he that did run might read an alteration. Alas! the Saints
are grown invisible, and are they not fallen? Tertullian tells us that
Christians were known by the amendment of their lives; no man so meek as the
Christian, no man so holy as the Christian, so just, so upright, so faithful
as the Christian; they were known all the world over by being the best men,
they were visible Saints; a man might have tead the image of JESUS CHRIST in
them, and the verteus of their Master were limned over; The lived the word of
life in the works of their lives.

But now Saints (I say) are grown invisible, and are they not fallen? Truly
there are scarce any outward words or works almost to be found, by which one
can discern a Saint from a sinner in our age; It was otherwise once, but we
are fallen. They will tell you, O what sweet enjoyments they have within! it
may well be within, for none can see it without; Christ tells us, By their
fruits (says he) you shall know them; And, Hereby, shall all men know that ye
are my Disciples, if ye keep my Commandments. O we can talk of ravishments
within, and O what a place of Scripture was set home upon my heart at such a
time! and O how God ravished me upon such a day! O but can ointment be hid? can
a man conceal coals in his bosom? where is this humility and holiness that
should arise from this communion with God? where is the righteousness, the
justice, the upright dealing amongst men that was wont to be visible amongst
the Saints? O that in a visible worldt he Saints should be invisible!

It is storied of a Philosopher (if I mistake not) the Cynick, Diogenes, that
he went with a Lanthorn and candle at high noon into the Marketplace; the
people asked him what he meant to do? I am going to find out a man (says he:)
A man (say they?) here is a multitude of men, here are store of men in the
Market; O (says he) I would find out a man, one that acts like a man, and
lives like aman.

Truly, one might go (would God there were no cause to say it,) through
Congregations, and through such meeting places as these are, with a lanthorn
and candle amongst the Saints to find out a Saint, amongst Professors to find
out a Professor.

You will say, here are store: I, here are Professors, but where is that that
is professed? A man may find many that profess humility, but where is that
humility that is professed? one may find many that profess holiness, but where
shall one find the holiness that is professed? one may find many that
profess heavenly-mindednesse, but where shall one find the heavenly-mindedness
that is professed? As he said, Give me that tells me the man is a man: so, give
me that too that tells me a Saint is a Saint; give me that that makes a Saint
visible, a visible Saint for my Religion. In the last place,

X. Saints at the first coming in to Jesus Christ, were very choice of their
company, and of their communion; they were not every bodies fellow, at least
every body was not theirs. Says Paul, I am crucified to this world, I and the
world is crucified to me; I am even with it, (says he) I pay it in its own
coin; the meaning of it is this, the world thinks not the Saints worthy of
their company, and the Saints think not the world worthy of theirs. At first
they were very choice of their society, 'twas a vexation to their soul to live
in Sodom, an hell to them to be with Mesek, and to have their habitation in
the tents of Kedar; they would not be amongst the crowde, nor go with a
multitude to do evil.

They were in very truth Separatists, that is, men that did withdraw from sin
and sinners; I mean no faction, not this, nor that; but (I say) they were truly
Separatists, men that separated from sin and sinners. You have somewhat in
one of Paul's Epistles as an answer to that question, 1 Cor. 5.9. It seems the
(poor souls) were very shie of their company, what company they kept; and
therefore says he, I write to you not to keep company with Fornicators, yet
not with the Fornicators of this world, for then ye must go out of the world;
the world is so full of them, that you will scarce buy or sell, but you will
meet with a drunkard, swearer, fornicator, or one sinner or other; But (says
he) if there be any man that is called a brother, any man that professes the
Name of God, and the fear of God, and this man be a fornicator, or this man be
covetous, or this man be so and so; I would not have you eat with that man, no,
I would not have you so much as sit at his table, much less at Gods Table with
that man.

And the same Apostle says, 2 Cor. 6.14. Why will ye be unequally yoaked? What
communion has light with darness? What fellowship has Christ with Belial? or
righteousness with unrighteousness? To see a Saint and a sinner keep company,
were to see the living and the dead keep house together, and you know what
sweet work there is like to be; Why now, if thou be no more shie of thy
company, but likest all, as if all were alike, thou art fallen: It may be thou
can please thy self as well in a fornicators company, or in a drunkards
company, or in an earthworms company, or in a jesters company, as thou can
in the company of a Saint, or in the company of a dear child of God: I tell
thee, if so, thou art fallen; O remember from whence thou art fallen, and do
thy first works.

Be choice, (says he) have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, nor with the workers of darkness, but reprove them rather; how? by
withdrawing from them, by having no more fellowship with them; For Saints to
be intimate with sinners, is to intimate that they are sinners; and therefore I
beseech you, that you will please to remember from whence you are fallen, and
let us so remember as to repent; Let it grieve our hearts that we have grieved
our God, and let us love him the more, for that we have loved him so little;
let us now make strait steps to our feet, and be double diligent; and as it is
said of another of the Churches, let our works be more, I, and better at last
then at first. O that as we grow in days, we may grow in grace, and abound in
the work of the Lord!

Thus (my beloved) let us remember and repent, and do our first works; and
then, when Jesus Christ comes we shall not need to fear the removing of
Candlesticks, but the lighting up of joy and peace to our souls; I, and he will
say unto us, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for
you.

So much (and no more) for this time.

FINIS.

