DIVINE CONSIDERATIONS Treating Of those things which are most profitable, most
necessary, and most perfect in our Christian Profession.

By JOHN VALDESSO.

1. COR. 2.6. Howbeit we speak wisdom amongst them that are perfect; yet not
the wisdom of this world.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed for E.D. by Roger Daniel, Printer to the University. 1646.

Celius Secundus Curio a servant of JESUS CHRIST, to all those that are
sanctified by God the Father, and saved and called by Jesus Christ our Lord.
The Mercy, the Peace, and the Love of God be multiplied unto you.
SEe here (Brethren) we make tender unto you, not of Boccace his Hundred
Novelties, but of The hundred and ten Considerations of Valdesso; the great
importance whereof I shall declare unto you. Many both Ancient and Modern have
written of Christian affairs, and of them some better then others; but who is
he next the Apostles of our Lord and the Evangelists, that has written more
substantially and divinely then John Valdesso, would perhaps be hard to find.
There be some that have left many great and laborious Books; but amongst them
there are also many of little importance, and are not much necessary to a
Christian life, being fraught with unprofitable questions, and Philosophical
disputations, from whence has sprung a thousand inconveniences in the Church
of Christ. And to give a proof that I say the truth in this matter, I will set
down some of those inconveniences, whereby judgment may easily be given of the
rest.

First therefore, though they have written huge Books, yet they did not avoid
many falsities, follies, and vanities: for as the wise man testifies, Many
words cannot want much vanity.

Next, these great Writers have drawn all the Scriptures to Questions and
Disputations, and made as it were an Academy thereof, raising such doubts in
every thing, as they have made the Doctrine of the Son of God and of his
Apostles, and our most certain and infallible hope of eternal life, to become
a matter altogether doubtful. And this which I shall now add, is not of less
importance then the other inconveniences: and that is, that with their ample
and infinite volumes, they have withdrawn and estranged men from the study of
the truly holy Scriptures, and from the contemplation of simple verity, and
instead of Christ's disciples have made them men's scholars: so that we are come
to that pass, that more and greater credit is given to those which are termed
Doctors (as if so be Christ and his Apostles were not the true and eternal
Doctors and Masters of the Church) then to the simple doctrine of Christ
himself.

This is the benefit and edification that the Church has reaped from these
huge Volumes, which our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ seeing, (the safety of
his Church being more dear unto him then his own life) he has stirred and
raised up some, and opened their eyes, to the intent that they should by little
and little reduce his sheep to the green and healthful pastures of holy
Scripture, and to the pure, clear, and sweet fountains of Gods word. And herein
every one has busied himself according to his talent, that is, the gift which
he has received. But to me it seems, and I hope it will do so likewise to all
that have a true relish of Christ's Doctrine, that this our Author in these
divine Considerations, and some other writings of his, has so well considered
and propounded to all our considerations the duties of a Christian man, that
there are but a few, yea, very few that can go before him. He has not indeed
writ so huge a Volume, nor scribled so much paper: No, the Books which he has
written are little and few, but pure, clear, and truly Divine.

Many have written of the virtues, manners, and duties of a wise and good man,
as Aristotle, Panetius, and Cicero; and amongst Christians, Ambrose; and in our
age Thomas Venatorius: but none of all these has entreated with such
sublimity, nor made such effectual demonstration, nor discoursed with such
sweetness, nor with such majesty, nor with such authority, nor with such
grace, as our Valdesso.

This, this is that which truly deserves to be entitled the book of Christian
duties, the book of Christian demonstrations, and of truly divine speculations.

Herein is showed the Original, the Cause, the Progress, and the End of every
motion, of every action, of every event that is done under heaven, either by
God, or the devil, or by the godly, or by the wicked man; and all this from
clear, certain, and unquestionable Principles of holy Scripture, accompanied
with so good and proper examples, and similitudes, and comparisons, and
divisions, and definitions, that unless we will be too too obstinate, and out
of common sense, we must needs come to agreement touching that which a man ows
unto God, to himself, and to his neighbor. And further, what the benefit of
Christ is, and to whom it is profitable, what the infirmity, and what the power
of Christ is, his abasement and his exaltation, our own mortification, and our
vivification, election and reprobation, and a thousand other such like good and
profitable heads are here to be clearly learned, in such manner, as growing
practick in this book, you shall come to understand all things necessary to
holy Scripture, better then by the great and many Commentaries of many others.

Now for this great and heavenly treasure we are all debtours to Vergerius, as
the instrument of the Divine providence, in causing it to be printed for the
view, and enjoyment of every one. He coming from Italy, and leaving his feigned
Bishopric to come unto a true Apostleship, whereunto he was called by Christ,
brought with him many excellent compositions; doing herein, as men use to do
when their houses are on fire, or their City sacked, and ruined; every one
endeavors to escape away with the best and most precious things that he has:
so our Vergerius esteeming nothing more dear then the glory of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, brought away with him those things, which might best
serve to the illustration and enlargement thereof. He abandoned therefore the
earthly treasures, and brought away with him the heavenly and divine treasures,
amongst which this is one of the best, and most rare that can be imagined. And
knowing that good and excellent things become so much greater, better, and more
praiseworthy, as they become more common; he left unto me these hundred and
ten Considerations, that I should cause them to be put in print, which I have,
as you see accordingly, performed with as much diligence as I have known, or
been able to use.

These Considerations as many well know, were first written by the Author in
the Spanish language, but afterward by a certain pious and worthy person
translated into Italian. Yet have they not been able altogether to quit those
forms of speech which are proper to Spain. And besides there are some words,
though not many, of the language of the Author. For John Valdesso was by Nation
a Spaniard of noble kindred, of an honorable degree, and a resplendent
Chevalier of the Emperor, but a much more honorable and resplendent Chevalier
of Christ. True it is, he did not much follow the Court, after that Christ had
revealed himself unto him, but abode in Italy, spending the greatest part of
his life at Naples, where with the sweetness of his Doctrine, and sanctity of
his life, he gained many Disciples unto Christ; and especially among the
gentlemen, and Cavaliers, and some Ladies: he was very eminent, and most
praiseworthy in all kind of praise. It seemed that he was appointed by God for
a Teacher, and Pastor of noble and illustrious personages: Although he was of
such benignity, and charity, that he accounted himself debtour of his Talent
to every mean and rude person, and became all things to all men, that he might
gain all to Christ. And not this alone, but he gave light to some of the most
famous Preachers of Italy, which I very well know, having conversed with them
themselves.

He never had wife, but lived most continently, nor did he attend to ought
else, as much as he could, then unto true Mortification, in which death
overtaking him, he became perfectly mortified, so to be perfectly quickened in
the resurrection of the just, and to enjoy our Lord Christ. He died in Naples
about the year 1540. He has left behind him also certain other good and pious
Compositions, which as I hope shall by Vergerius his means be communicated unto
you.

Go to then, Brethren and Sisters, in the love of God, and in the precious
blood of Christ Jesus, take this Treasure, and think withal, that the benefit
lies not in having, and possessing it, but in the use and fruit that is hence
to be gathered. He has made consideration of these good things not to give
nourishment to the imagination only, but likewise to put in execution that
which has been considered and resolved on. It is necessary indeed, that we
should have the knowledge, but it is necessary likewise to accompany the
practice therewith, because the commendation of every virtue and art consists
in the practice, and in the performance of action agreeable to that virtue and
art.

And you that waste all your time idly in reading of Boccace his hundred
Novelties, and the like, lay them awhile aside, and read these Considerations
of Valdesso, which are indeed true Novelties. For in them is treated of that
great, Divine, and joyful, new and gladsome tidings of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, of the great Pardon for sins, of the Reconciliation made with God by
the death of the Son of God. Here you shall find the true and holy
Enamourments of God, and of Christ with mankind. Here you shall find the true
Embraces, and the true kisses given by means of the holy Spirit. And last of
all, you shall here find where the true delights and pleasures of those souls
are, which are enamoured of God and of Christ, and disenamoured of the world.

And if happily the language seem not so spruce and dainty, as that of Boccace,
call to mind that which great Paul the Apostle of Christ Jesus has said, that
the kingdom of God stands in the power of the Spirit, and not in excellency of
speech. Howbeit to say truth, neither is this manner of speech to be slighted:
For I verily find it exceeding proper, and good to express that which is
intended; and that is the chief virtue of every Writer.

But I will here put an end to my discourse, that I may no longer deprive you
of the sacred reading of these Divine Considerations, which you also reading,
and that with diligence, and prayers to God for me and all others, shall take
into due consideration: To the end, that we may come all to be enamoured of
Christ, and incorporated in him, as he is incorporated in us; To whom be Honor
and Glory everlasting!

From Basil, 1. May 1550.
(...) A Table of the Divine Considerations.
1. How it is to be understood, that man was created after the Image and
likeness of God. 2. That man's happiness consists in knowing God, and that
we cannot know God except we first know Christ. 3. In what the Sons of God
differ from the sons of Adam. 4. From whence the revengefull affection
proceeds in men: and what effects the long sufferance has, wherewith God
deferreth the revenge of those injuries, which men do unto him. 5. The
difficulty of entering into the kingdom of God; how it is to be entered, and in
what it consists. 6. Two depravations of Man, the one Natural, the other
Acquisite. 7. It is Gods will that we should commit unto him the issue and
success of all our desires. 8. The Covenants which Jesus Christ our Lord made
between God and man. 9. An excellent privilege of piety. 10. In what regard
the estate of a Christian that believes with difficulty, is better then of that
Person which believes with ease. 11. In what manner Gods being just, does
redound to the profit of them, that by revelation believe in Christ. 12. How
the reason of our inward man serves us to that which the eyes of our outward
man do. 13. A comparison which shows in what the benefit which mankind has
received from God by Jesus Christ, does consist. 14. Amongst the things which
Christian Piety obliges us to believe, what that is which is believed with
greatest difficulty. 15. How Christians ought to govern themselves in their
tribulations, afflictions and troubles. 16. That the promises of God belong to
them who believe them. 17. In what manner a Man ought to resolve himself
touching the world, and touching himself, that he may become a true Christian.
18. In what things that person who desires to enter and to persevere in the
kingdom of God, ought to be exercised; and what a man brings of his own
thereunto. 19. That the Christian life consists in this, that a man esteems
himself dead to the world, and alive unto God. 20. That in the Infirmities,
Amendment, and Health of the mind, Men ought to govern themselves, as in those
of the body. 21. The difference of sins and sinners: The obligations of
Piety: The signs of Piety and Impiety. 22. For what reason God sometime gives
a godly man a Child, and soon after takes him away. 23. How we are disenamoured
of the world, and enamoured of God. 24. That those Persons, who are governed by
the holy Spirit in their serving of God, endeavor to increase in the love of
God. 25. How pious persons may resolve themselves when God calls them to any
change of place, or state of life, and when not. 26. That the flesh whilst it
is unregenerated flesh is the enemy of God; and that Regeneration is properly
the work of the holy Spirit. 27. That by Mortification a man maintains himself
in his Christian resolution; and by reducing of his mind to God he maintains
himself in the certainty of Gods providence. 28. How a man should assure
himself of his Vocation. 29. That to believe with difficulty is a sign of
Vocation. 30. That God in communicating spiritual things unto us, deals as
in giving us the fruits of the earth. 31. That the liveliness of Affections is
more damageable then that of the Appetites; and that it is necessary that both
the one and the other should be mortified. 32. Of the abuse, and of the right
use of the holy Scriptures. 33. In what manner through patience and consolation
of the Scriptures we maintain our selves in hope. 34. In what does consist the
benefit which men have obtained from God by Christ. 35. Whence that difficulty
comes, which pious persons find to continue in that which appertains to Piety
and Justification. 36. In what Christian Liberty does consist, how it is known,
and how it is to be exercised. 37. That they who know God by man's relation,
have a false opinion of him, and they who know him by the holy spirit, have a
true. 38. By a comparison is showed in what the error of false Christians does
consist, and what true Christians do. 39. That Quickening answers to
Mortification, and the glory of the Resurrection answers to quickening. 40.
Two wills in God, the one Mediate, the other Immediate. 41. That God will that
pious persons should know that all things are to come from him, and that they
should have them all of him. 42. In what sort a pious person ought to govern
himself in the state of inward prosperity, and adversity. 43. How a pious
person may assure himself to have obtained Piety and Justification, by the
Spirit, and not by humane wisdom. 44. In what manner a man shall know what
fruit he has made in Mortification, and what is the cause that they who apply
themselves to Piety, are tempted by Affections and Appetites, with which they
were never before tempted. 45. Whence the fear of death proceeds in pious
persons, and that it is a sign of Predestination for a man to content himself
that there should be another life. 46. That they who walk through the Christian
path without the inward light of the holy Spirit, are like unto them that walk
in the night without the light of the Sun. 47 Four signs to know them by,
who pretend piety and the spirit* not having either the one or the other. 48
That he who prays, and works, and understands, does then pray, work, and
understand as he ought, when he is inspired to pray, to work, and to
understand. 49. Whence it proceeds that humane wisdom will not attribute all
things to God: and in what manner they ought to be attributed to him. 50. In
what the depravation of man does consist, and in what his reparation does
consist. In what Christian perfection does consist. 51. In what manner God
makes himself to be felt, and in what manner God makes himself to be seen. 52.
That a Christian ought to put an end to the affection of ambition, which does
consist in growing, and also to that which does consist in maintaining. 53. In
what manner the men of the world attending unto honor, are less vicious, then
attending unto conscience. 54 That prayer and consideration are two Books or
Interpreters, very sure ones to understand holy Scripture, and how a man ought
to serve himself of them. 55. Against curiosity: and how the holy Scriptures
ought to be read without curiosity. 56. Which is the most certain, and most
secure way to obtain perfect mortification. 57. Whence it comes to pass, that
by the knowledge and sense of the things of God, the Flesh is mortified. 58.
Eight differences between them who pretend and procure to mortify themselves
with their proper industry, and them who are mortified by the holy spirit. 59.
That in the motions to pray, the spirit does certify a man that he shall
obtain that which he demands. 60. Whence it proceeds that the superstitious are
severe, and the true Christians are merciful and pitiful. 61. In what manner
a pious person governs himself in those things that befall him. 62. That humane
wisdom has no more jurisdiction in the judgment of their works, who are the
sons of God, then in the judgment of the proper works of God. 63. By seven
conformities is showed that the holy Scripture is like a candle in a dark
place, and that the holy spirit is like the Sun. 64. In what manner Jesus
Christ our Lord will be followed and imitated. 65. How that is to be understood
which S. Paul says, that Christ reigns, and shall reign, until the
resurrection of the just being made, he do resign his kingdom to his eternal
father. 66. In what manner the malignant spirit is more impetuous then the holy
spirit. 67. That in the regenerate only by the holy Spirit, there being
experience of the things of God, there is also certification of them. 68. That
the desire of knowledge is imperfection in a man, contrary to the judgment of
humane wisdom. 69. That a man ought always to acknowledge himself
incredulous, and defective in faith: and that there is so much faith in a man,
as there is knowledge of God and Christ. 70. In what those three gifts of God,
Faith, Hope, and Charity do consist: and in what their eminency amongst other
gifts does consist: and the eminency of Charity amongst the three gifts. 71.
Upon the most holy prayer of our Savior. 72. That man pretending that part of
the image of God which did not appertain unto him, lost that part which did
appertain to him. 73. That the union between God and man is made by love: that
love grows from knowledge: what knowledge, love, and union are 74. That it
betides to pious persons in spiritual things, as it befalls in outward things
to him, who having been blind begins to see. 75. How it is understood, that God
communicates unto us his Divine treasures by Christ: how God reigns by Christ:
and how Christ is the head of the Church. 76. What Scandal is, and in what
manner Christian persons ought to govern themselves in the case of Scandal.
77. Two contrarieties, between them that live according to the flesh, and them
that live according to the Spirit. 78. Two griefs, one according to the world,
and the other according to God: And two weaknesses, one according to the flesh,
and the other according to the Spirit. 79. How perrillous the errors be which
men commit, pretending piety. 80. What Gods intent is, demanding of men that
which of themselves alone they cannot give him: And why he gives them not at
once all that he will give them. 81. Two weaknesses in our Lord Christ, and in
his members; and two powers in him and them. 82. In what properly consists
that agony which Jesus Christ our Lord felt in his passion and in his death.
83. Five considerations in the resurrection of Christ. 84. That only the
incorporation in Christ is that which mortifies. 85. Four ways by which a
Christian knows God by means of Christ. 86. To know the inward motions when
they are of the holy spirit, when of the Malignant spirit, and when of a man's
own spirit. 87. That all the creatures were spoiled in man's depravation, and
that they shall be restored in man's reparation. 88. What the cause may be, that
God commanded man that he should not eat of the Tree of the knowledge of good
and evil. 89. Six causes, for which it seems necessary, that the son of God
should live in that manner, and that form of life wherein he did live. 90. In
what the Christian perfection, the Duty, and Decorum does consist. 91. That
only the sons of God have certain satisfaction in every thing. 92. In what
manner mortification is the proper sign by which we know our selves the sons
of God. 93. That that suffering is most Christian, and most acceptable to God,
in which he that suffers, finds least of his own will. 94. Three sorts of
conscience: one by the law natural, and the other by the written Law: and the
other by the Gospel. 95. That men are incapable of the divine Generation of the
sons of God, and of the spiritual Regeneration of the sons of God. 96.
That then a man knows himself a pilgrim in this world, when because God loves
him, the world persecutes him. 97. Whether Justification be a fruit of piety,
or whether piety be a fruit of Justification. 98. How that is to be understood
which the holy Scripture says, attributing condemnation sometimes to
unbelievers, and sometimes to evil works; and salvation sometimes to Faith,
sometimes to good works. 99. Whence it proceeds that men believe not that all
our sins were punished in Christ, or they believe it with difficulty. 100.
That the fruits which in Christians in the beginning of their Incorporation in
Christ, seem to be of the spirit, are of the flesh. 101. Whence it comes that
the wicked cannot believe; that the superstitious believe with ease; and that
the godly believe with difficulty. 102. That Christian faith has necessity to
be confirmed by experience: Of what kind the experience is, and how it is
obtained. 103. Against the imagination, with which our Christian faith is
troubled. 104. That Baptism through the Faith of the Gospel is efficacious
even in children, who dye before they come to the age to be able to approve
their being baptized. 105. Three principles whence the ignorances arise, with
which men err again: God. 106. That that which the Scripture calls the
knowledge of Good and Evil, the wise men of the world have called, and do call
natural light prudence and humane reason. 107. In what manner from a man's not
knowing himself, nor God, there is caused in him an impossibility in accepting
the grace of the Gospel. 108. In what manner the evil of Adams disobedience
appertains to us all: and the good of Christ's obedience reaches unto us all.
109. The knowledge which as a Christian I ought to have of Christ, and of them
who are the Members of Christ. 110. That the principal gifts are not
understood, until they be possessed.
Mr. George Herbert to N. the Translatour of this Book.
MY dear and deserving Brother, your Valdesso I now return with many thanks,
and some notes, in which perhaps you will discover some care, which I forbear
not in the midst of my griefs; First for your sake, because I would do nothing
negligently that you commit unto me; Secondly for the Authors sake, whom I
conceive to have been a true servant of God; and to such, and all that is
theirs. I owe diligence; Thirdly for the Churches sake, to whom by Printing it,
I would have you consecrate it. You owe the Church a debt, and God has put
this into your hands, (as he sent the fish with money to Saint Peter,) to
discharge it: happily also with this, (as his thoughts are fruitful) intending
the honor of his servant the Author, who being obscured in his own country,
he would have to flourish in this land of light, and region of the Gospel,
among his chosen. It is true, there are some things which I like not in him, as
my fragments will express, when you read them; nevertheless I wish you by all
means to publish it, for these three eminent things observable therein: First,
that God in the midst of Popery should open the eyes of one to understand and
express so clearly, and excellently the intent of the Gospel in the
acceptance of Christ's righteousness (as he shows through all his
Considerations,) a thing strangely buried, and darkened by the Adversaries, and
their great stumbling block. Secondly, the great honor and reverence, which he
every where bears toward our dear Master and Lord, concluding every
Consideration almost with his holy Name, and setting his merit forth so
piously, for which I do so love him, that were there nothing else, I would
Print it, that with it the honor of my Lord might be published. Thirdly, the
many pious rules of ordering our life, about mortification, and observation of
Gods Kingdom within us, and the working thereof, of which he was a very
diligent observer. These three things are very eminent in the Author, and
overweigh the defects (as I conceive) toward the publishing thereof.

From his Parsonage of Bemmorton near Salisbury. Sept. 29. 1632.
Divine Considerations.
CONSIDERATION I.
How it is to be understood, that man was created after the Image and Likeness
of God.

I Have many times endeavored to understand in what properly that Image and
Likeness of God does consist, in the which the holy Scripture says, Genesis
1.27. Man was created: and whilst I have endeavored to understand this by
reading, I have not profited at all; for reading drew me now to one opinion,
and by and by to another, until at last endeavoring to do it by
consideration, it seemed to me that I understood, or at least that I began to
understand it. The same God which has given me that which I have attained,
shall (I am assured) give me that which I yet want.

The Image and Likeness of God, as I understand, consists in his proper
essence, wherein he is impassible, and immortal; yea also, good, merciful,
just, faithful, and true. With these Qualities, and with these perfections, I
understand that God created man in earthly Paradise, where, before he became
disobedient to God, he was impassible, and immortal; yea, also he was good,
merciful, just, faithful, and true.

This Image and Likeness of God, the first man lost by his disobedience to
God, and so he became passible and mortal; yea also wicked, cruel, impious,
unfaithful, and a liar.

Having understood this by consideration, I come to compare it with the
doctrine of holy Scripture, and I find it agreeable with that which Saint Paul
says, Ephesians. 4.22, 23. and Colos. 3.9, 10. (where he speaks of putting off
the old man, and putting on the new,) and by this I am confirmed in my
consideration.

Moreover I consider that this Image of God was in the person of our Savior
Christ; in his soul before his death, being good, merciful, just, faithful,
and true; and in his body after his resurrection, being altogether impassible
and immortal.

Finally I understand, that they, who being called and drawn by God unto the
grace of the Gospel, make the righteousness of Christ to become their own, and
are incorporated in Christ, do in this present life recover, in some measure,
that part of the Image of God, which appertains to the soul; and in the life
everlasting, they recover that part also which appertains to the body. And by
this means we shall all come, through Christ, to be like unto God, as Christ
is; every one in his own degree, Christ as the Head, and we as the Members.

And verily it shall be a mavelous happiness, to see goodness,
mercifulness, justice, faithfulness, and truth in men; and to see them also
impassible, and immortal, to see them much like to Christ, and to see them
much like to God; and to see, that together with this happiness of men, the
glory of God increases, and the glory of the son of God increases; by whose
means we shall all acknowledge that we have obtained our happiness,
acknowledging for our Head the self same Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. II.
That man's happiness consists in knowing God, and that we cannot know God
except we first know Christ.

MAny men have desired and labored much to understand in what a man's
happiness does properly consist; and having endeavored this, as men, by
humane wisdom, have all of them erred in their imaginations, as they likewise
err almost in all other things, which they endeavor to know by humane wisdom
only.

This matter, which I say, so many have with much labor desired to understand,
Jesus Christ our Lord teaches us in one word, saying, This is eternal life,
that they may know thee the only true God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus
Christ, John 17.3. As if he should have said, herein consists men's
happiness, That they should know God and Christ.

But how ever Christ teach it, none understand it, but they that leave to be
men, that is, they which leave the image of Adam, and take the image of Christ:
for these only know Christ, and in Christ, and through Christ, they know God.

Men, whilst they remain still men, come indeed to a certain kind of knowledge
of God, by the reading of holy Scripture, and by the contemplation of the
creatures, but they find not happiness in this knowledge. For in truth
happiness does not consist therein. But it consists only in that knowledge of
God, which they get that leave to be men, and know God, as they are
incorporated in Christ, first knowing Christ. And, as I understand, the reading
of holy Scripture, and the contemplation of the creatures, serve to increase
and augment in them that knowledge of God, in which happiness and eternal
life are found.

That knowledge of God, which they get who know him by the creatures, as I
understand, is like to that knowledge, which an ill Painter gets of a most
perfect Painter, by seeing the things which he has depainted. And that
knowledge of God, which they get who know him by the holy Scriptures, as I
understand, is like to that knowledge which an ignorant and unlearned man gets
of a famous learned man, by reading the things which he has written. And that
knowledge of God, which they get who know Christ, and are incorporated in
Christ, as I understand, is like to that knowledge which I have of the King, by
having seen his image, and by having had very particular information of all his
usages, by the relation of persons, who are very inward with the King.

Having understood this, I understand in what the happiness of man does
consist, and I find my self to be happy; and I understand much better then I
did before, the great obligation that men have to God, and to the Son of God
Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. III.
In what the Sons of God differ from the Sons of Adam.

SAint Paul says, They which are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons
of God, Romans 8.14.

And certainly so it is, that he that is the Son of God suffers himself to be
ruled and governed of God; and he who suffers himself to be ruled and governed
of God, is the Son of God. And on the contrary, they who rule and govern
themselves by humane wisdom, which Saint Paul calls the wisdom of this world,
1. Cor. 1.20. they are the sons of Adam: and the sons of Adam rule and
govern themselves by humane wisdom, neither knowing, nor feeling any other
regiment, or government: I understand this regiment, and government, as well
touching that which belongs to the body, as touching that which belongs to the
soul.

The sons of Adam ruling and governing themselves by their own humane
wisdom, have certain Rules and Medicines to maintain and keep themselves
healthful, and they have others to regain health when they are sick or infirm;
as Herbs and Roots, and many other things, that serve to this effect. But the
difficulty is, to know at what time and season to make use of these things,
which is almost impossible.

The same sons of Adam have for the maintaining and keeping their souls in
purity and simplicity, the Law of God, and the Doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles. But the difficulty is, to know how to understand this Law, and this
Doctrine, and how to apply and make use of it, which I hold to be more
impossible. And in case that both the one and the other were possible, I should
peradventure say, that as if they knew how to make use of the creatures, they
might maintain themselves in bodily health and strength; so likewise if they
knew how to make use of the holy Scriptures, they might maintain their souls in
ghostly and spiritual health. But holding both these for impossible, I
conclude, that it is not possible for a son of Adam to maintain the health
either of his soul, or of his body.

The sons of God endeavoring daily to mortify their humane wisdom, and not
to order nor govern themselves by it, though they make use of the common food
and medicines which the sons of Adam do; yet they wholly renounce the virtue
and power of the creature, depending and trusting only upon the love and
goodness of the Creator, who is their Father and Physician, and by whom they
are immediately governed and maintained in bodily health; if not as much as
they themselves would, at least as much as is sufficient, and may serve for
their souls good, which is the principal thing.

It is true, God suffers them to fall into infirmities and sicknesses,
sometimes to mortify them, sometimes to try them, and sometimes that they may
know him for their Father and Lord: he oft-times healing them without using the
medicines, which the sons of Adam use.

So also in the purity and holiness (which is the health) of the soul, the
sons of God growing daily in grace, and perfecting themselves in holiness,
as they of Samaria, John 4.42. said unto the woman, Now we believe, not because
of thy saying, for we have heard him our selves, so they say of the holy
Scriptures, now we live and grow in spiritual strength, not by the letter or
outward relation of the Scriptures, but by the inward teaching and anointing of
the heavenly spirit of truth, this is that which rules and governs us in the
ways of holiness and righteousness. And so long as he abides in us, and we
in him, we need no other guide, because we are hereby led unto God our father
in heaven.

And as it is possible that a man may be the son of God, and suffer himself
to be ruled, and governed of God: so is it possible, that a son of God may
keep and maintain himself in bodily and spiritual health.

The sons of God do make use of physic for the health of their bodies, and
of the holy Scripture for the health of their souls; but this they do, without
putting confidence in them, for all their trust and confidence is in God only.

They make use likewise, to preserve the health of their bodies, of the
observation of times, and places; as they make use of some rules to preserve
the health of their souls. This they do rather to conform themselves outwardly
with the sons of Adam, then because they feel themselves to stand in need of
such observations: forasmuch as they being governed by God alone, observe the
will of God, and wholly depend on it.

These truths they understand that prove them, others find in them many
intricacies: For the natural man perceives not the things that are of the
spirit of God, 1. Cor. 2.14. always he blames them, and condemns them.

That I may be the better understood, I put this example: There are two men
would pass a great river by wading; there comes to them one that is
experienced in the river, and says unto them in this manner; If you will pass
over of your selves alone, you are to enter here, and when you are entered, you
are to govern your selves thus, and thus: But if so be you will that I should
lead you over, come after me and fear not.

Of these two men, one confident in his own wisdom, upon that which has been
told him, puts himself alone into the water: by him I mean the sons of Adam.
The other having confidence in him that is experienced in the river, goes after
him: by him I understand the sons of God.

And as I hold that the presumption and error of the sons of Adam, is much
greater folly then that of him, who when he might pass the river with a guide
and safely, puts himself to the hazard to pass it alone; so I hold that the
prudence and discretion of the sons of God, that suffer themselves to be
ruled and governed by the spirit of Christ, is much greater then that of that
man, that chooses rather to pass the river with a guide, then alone.

And it is to be understood, that in as much as we are incorporated in Jesus
Christ our Lord, in so much are we the sons of God.

CONSID. IV.
From whence the revengefull affection proceeds in men: And what effects the
long sufferance has, wherewith God deferreth the revenge of those injuries
which men do unto him.

PUtting on one side all the offenses that from the beginning of the world
until this present day have been done by men one toward another; and setting
on the other side only those, which one man in one day only does to God, it
seems to me that those done against God, are beyond all comparison more in
number, and greater in weight, then those done against men.

Considering further the revengefull affections in men so extreme, that there
are very few injured who being able to revenge themselves, do not take revenge:
And considering in God, that he being able with one beck utterly to confound
all those that offend him, he does not, but rather tolerates them, yea, and
gives unto them of his good things; I have set my self to examine, whence this
revengefull affection in men proceeds, and what effects the Patience of God
does work. And I find, that the revengefull affection in men proceeds from the
depravation of the first man; for I am assured that if humane nature had not
been depraved, men would have been most estranged from all revenge. For the
first man being created after the image and likeness of God, it is a manifest
thing he was created with an affection estranged from revenge, as we know God
is. This for that which belongs to men. From the patience with which God
suffers the injuries which are ordinarily done him, I consider, that all these
effects proceed worthy (according to my judgment) of great consideration.

The first is, that many of the injurers and impious, become servants and
pious, which would not come to pass, if they were taken away in their injuring.

The second, that if God should suddenly consume the wicked, in a short space
all the wicked that are in the world would be taken away; and there being no
wicked, the pious would not have the means to exercise their piety, the which
is necessary should be exercised, to the intent that being purified, it may
shine out to the glory of God.

The third is, that pious men considering how God is estranged from revenge,
and remembering themselves that that which belongs to them in this present life,
is to recover the image of God, with which the first man was created, they
should reduce their minds to leave all affection of wrath and revenge; saying,
when they are tempted to revenge, these and other like words, My intent is to
recover the image and likeness of God, with which the first man was created.
This was altogether estranged from revenge, forasmuch as God being able to
revenge himself, does not revenge himself: and therefore it belongs not to me
to revenge my self, but to do that which my God does, to whom I endeavor to
make my self like.

These three effects I find redound to the gain of the pious: And I find other
two which redound to the damage of the impious.

The first of which is, that by how much they live the longer, by so much the
more do they offend, and do injuries: And thus they treasure up unto themselves
wrath and eternal condemnation, Romans 2.5.

The second is, that with the unquietness and trouble which they suffer in
their consciences, they begin to feel in this life that which they are to
suffer in the other; and thereupon they desire to die, supposing to be free
from this their punishment, and on the other side, they would not die, fearing
lest their punishment should be augmented unto them. In so much, that through
the patience wherewith God suffers and deferres the revenge of the injuries
which men do unto him, I find three benefits to the godly, and two damages to
the wicked. Whereupon it seems to me, that even as the good redounds to the
damage of the wicked; so also that which seems evil, redounds to the profit of
the pious, that do hold and embrace that piety, which is obtained by faith in
Jesus Christ our Lord.

I will here add three things, the first, that God commanding me that I should
pardon them that do me injury, it is the self ^^me as if he commanded me that I
should be like unto him, and that I should do as he does. Secondly, that the
affection of revenge proceeds from a base mind, and that the inclination to
pardon proceeds from a generous. Thirdly, that a Christian man seeing that he
can with greater ease pardon an injury, then revenge it, he knows that God
requires that, which is very easy for him to do, and that which is more
convenient for him, and more profitable to him. And by this means I know how
great the love is which God bears unto men, for whom he has executed the
rigor of his justice upon his only begotten Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. V.
The difficulty of entering into the kingdom of God; how it is to be entered,
and in what it consists.

NAturally man trusts not to another man, but for that which he cannot do of
himself; nor does he put confidence in God, except for that which he knows and
sees that he is not able to obtain by means of any creature: so great is the
impiety of man's mind. And hence it proceeds, that he who has greater help of
the creatures, does bring himself with the greater difficulty to have
confidence in God.

That this is true, we see that amongst sick people, they only are brought to
submit to the will of God, that have not the means to pay Physicians, nor
procure physic; and they wh^ although they have means, are in such extremity,
that they have no hope at all in Physician or physic.

From whence I consider the perverseness of man, and also the goodness of God,
in as much as he does help and favor them who when they can do no otherwise,
commit themselves to his divine will: And in our necessities, he does not so
much regard how pious, or how impious we be, as he does the truth of his own
promise, to help and relieve us whenever we call upon him and trust in him.

That this is true, we have the proof every hour, not only in our sickness,
but also in all other things that befall men in this present life.

This which we see by experience in outward things, we may also see in inward,
forasmuch as a man is never brought to trust and rely upon God for his
justification, resurrection, and eternal life, until he see and know that
this cannot be obtained by means of the creatures.

Now considering that as well for outward, as for inward things the rich man
has the means, according to his own opinion, to be able to serve himself with
the creatures, without referring and resigning himself to the will of God, that
he should do with him according as it seems good to him; I know the cause why
Christ says, that a rich man enters with difficulty into the kingdom of
Heaven. that is, comes to resign himself unto the will of God, and to suffer
himself to be ruled and governed by God, renouncing the regiment and government
of humane wisdom, and renouncing the help of the creatures.

Whereupon I gather, that he whom God will set in his kingdom, whether he be
rich, or whether he be poor, first he opens his eyes, that he may see his own
utter disability, and the impossibility that all creatures have to be able to
give him that which he pretends to, and would have.

And I consider, that the difference that is between the pious and the wicked,
when they recommend themselves to God, consists in this, that the wicked
recommendeth himself to God, because he can do no otherwise, and the pious
recommendeth himself to God, even when he might help and serve himself with
the creatures, and this as well in outward things, as also in inward. And I
suppose that a man may come to know when he trusts in God for inward
things, by that which he shall find in himself touching his trusting in God
for outvvard.

They which are in the kingdom of God after this manner which I have spoken
of, are the poor in spirit, which Christ commends. And such an one did David
feel himself, when he called himself poor and needy. And they, as I
understand, have in part obtained that which is demanded, when we say, Thy
kingdom come: Gods good spirit being come into their hearts, which teaches
them to depend upon God for all things, both of this life and of the life to
come.

And considering the felicity that does consist in the being and persevering in
this kingdom, I understand the cause why Saint John began his preaching from
this saying, Matthew. 3.2. The kingdom of God is at hand: and why our Lord
Christ so began his preaching: and why he sent the Apostles to preach and
persuade men to enter into this kingdom, Matthew. 4.17.

Whence I gather, that the beginning and end of Christian preaching, ought to
be to preach the kingdom of God, and to persuade and urge men that they
should enter thereinto, renouncing the kingdom of the world, and all that
appertains thereunto.

The man that has entered into, and does persevere in this kingdom, I consider
that he is planted in God, as a tree is planted in the earth: And as the tree
maintains it self, and produces flowers and fruits by the virtue which the
earth communicates unto it; so he also that continues in the kingdom of God,
maintains himself, and produces flowers and fruits by the spirit of God which
governs and rules him. And he that is such, is the son of God, is just,
and shall be glorious, and have everlasting life: for he is conformable to
Jesus Christ the Son of God. And he that is such an one, does (as it were for
vantage) enjoy of the things of this present life, little or much, according to
Gods good will, and to the setting forth of Gods glory.

Between that which they that are without this kingdom of God, know and
understand of it, by that which they read and hear; and that which they who
are in it understand and know of this kingdom, by that which they feel and
prove in themselves, I know a much greater difference, then between that which
they know and understand of the regiment and government of a most perfect king,
by that which they read and hear, being themselves out of the same; and that
which they know and understand of it, by that which they see and prove, being
themselves under the same.

I will add this, which in my judgment is to the purpose, that according as
the qualities of the herbs that are in the same meadow are different, so they do
diversely participate of the virtue of the earth, some more some less, and some
in one manner, and some in another: Even so as the constitutions of them who
are in the kingdom of God are different, so does God diversely communicate unto
them of his spirit, to one more, to another less; to one after one manner, and
to another after another; and all are in the same kingdom, and all participate
of the same spirit, even as all the herbs in the same meadow do participate of
the same virtue of the earth. And as the herbs, if they had sense, would affirm
that what has been said of them is true; so also they that appertain to the
kingdom of God because they have the spirit, do affirm that which is said of
them to be true, acknowledging it altogether from the favor of God, by Jesus
Christ our Lord.

CONSID. VI.
Two depravations of Man, the one Natural, the other Acquisite.

IN every man not quickened by the holy spirit, I consider two depravations, one
Natural, the other Acquisite. The Natural I understand to be expressed in
that of Job, Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one; and in
that of David, I was conceived in iniquities; and in that of S. Paul, We were
by nature the children of wrath: and likewise in all those places of holy
Scripture, in which this humane nature of ours is condemned. The Acquisite I
understand in that, All flesh had corrupted his ways; and in that of S. Paul's,
I was alive once without the Law; and generally in all those places of
Scripture where the malignity of our flesh is spoken of. From the natural
proceeds the acquisite, and by the acquisite the natural is inflamed.

Of these two Depravations I understand that the natural cannot be repaired
but by grace, and that they only are free from it, who enter into the kingdom
of God by faith, and come to be the sons of God by the holy spirit which
abides in them; In such sort, that in them, who knowing Christ by Revelation,
and accepting the covenant which he made between God and man, believe, and
because they believe are baptized; the natural depravation is repaired, and
they remain only with that which is acquisite; from which they go on freeing
themselves by little and little, the spirit of God helping them therein. And
whilst they go on freeing themselves of it, that wherein they offend is not
put to their account of sin, because they be incorporated in Christ Jesus: for
S. Paul says, There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.

The Depravation acquisite with the inflammation of the natural, I understand,
that as it was got by habit, so it may be lost by habit: and to this serve the
Laws and Precepts which humane wisdom has found out; in such manner, that a
man may of himself free himself from the acquisite depravation, and from the
inflammation of the natural, as we read that many did free themselves, (such
as were Socrates and Plato, who by their own wisdom and industry freed
themselves from the slavery of many sensual appetites and passions, which
their corrupt nature and evil company had led them into;) but he shall never be
able to free himself by himself from the natural depravation: for from this,
as I have said, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ only does free us.

CONSID. VII.
It is Gods will that we should commit unto him the issue and success of all
our desires.

IN effect it is true, that we understand many things by experience, which we
should not understand by knowledge; as this, I having oftentimes determined to
do many things, the one more pious, holy, and Christian then another, and
having seen, for the most part, the issue and effect to be quite contrary to
what I determined; and on the contrary, observing that some other pious and
Christian things were done by me, without my predetermination or forecast; I
stood as it were confounded in my self, not understanding in what this secret
did consist.

I did not wonder, that in things which I determined as a man, the contrary
should come to pass of that which I would; but I did wonder, that in the
things which I determined as a Christian, the same should befall me. And
finding my self in this confusion, it came to pass that I read that resolution
of S. Peter, Though I should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee. And
considering that although the resolution was pious, holy, and Christian, the
contrary of that which he resolved, befell him; I understand that my
determinations had not their issue and effect according to my desire, because I
did not well consider mine own utter disability to perform any holy and good
work.

So that I understood by experience, that although God punished my
inconsiderateness, in not suffering that to come to pass which I intended;
yet on the other side he satisfied my general desire of doing good, by
suffering that to come to pass, which I did not procure, nor hope, nor pretend
unto. Whence I have gathered, That the will of God is, that I should depend on
him in such manner, that I should determine or propound nothing, without
holding him before mine eyes, showing unto him my good will, and referring unto
him the issue and success of my desires and endeavors. And that as well in
things which appertain to the outward and corporal living, as in those things
that appertain to the inward and spiritual living.

This will of God does so much restrain me, that although I know that this
which I have said, is that which he requires; yet I dare not determine, saying,
I will do it accordingly, because I know mine own disability; but this I do, I
continue constant in my desire to conform my self always with this will of
God, and to refer to him the issue and effect of all my good desires; and I
assure my self that God in his mercy shall favor me in this good design of
mine. And in this manner I ought to govern my self in all things.

For example, I shall find in my soul a fervent desire to have confidence in
God in all things, I will offer up this desire to God, and humbly commend to
him the issue and effect thereof. In this manner I desire to govern my self in
Charity, in Hope, in Mortification, in Christian simplicity, and in all other
things which may make me like unto Christ, and like unto God, and in all those
things that may redound to the corporal and spiritual profit of my neighbors.

In this manner I wish every Christian to govern himself, or (to speak better)
to suffer himself to be governed of God; assuring him that God will not only
fulfill his desires, but content him with many other things, which though he
neither thinks on them, hopes for them, nor desires them, shall be effected by
him to the glory of God, and to his own edification, and his neighbors. This
God shall do through Jesus Christ our Lord.

For confirmation of these things which have been said, I consider that a man
naturally determines only of those things which he supposes to be in his own
power to do, or not to do: In as much as no man determines to cause that it
should rain, or be fair weather. Whence I gather, that our determinations shall
never want arrogance and presumption, if we shall think that to be in our
power, which is no more in our power then to cause rain, or to make fair
weather. Wherefore we ought not to determine, but to desire, and to refer to
God the issue of that which we desire.

Together with this I consider to the same purpose, that in our Christian
determinations we ought always to consider, whether that which we determine,
be acceptable to God or no: for it is a sign of great ignorance to determine
to do a thing for the honor of God, which thing we are not certain is
acceptable to God. And so I resolve my self, that our determinations shall then
be good and discreet, when they shall be conformable to that which God requires
of us, and answerable to our ability; for it is a foolish thing to promise that
which is not in the power of him that promises to perform. And this being
true, it is well said, that we must offer up all our desires to God, and hold
for certain, that he will favor us in them for Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. VIII.
The Covenants which Jesus Christ our Lord made between God, and Man.

ALL of us in acknowledgement of that being which we have from God, are born
with obligation to love God, to depend upon him, and to suffer our selves to be
ruled and governed by him. But this love and duty of ours is not performed by
reason of our natural corruption and evil inclination, which draws us to the
clean contrary. This obligation we may call the law of nature; and we may say
that to discover this obligation of ours, and this depravation, the law came,
which God by means of Moses gave unto the people of the Jews. This evil
inclination is so powerful in the minds of men, that how much soever they
labor in it, they never attain to the full performance of this their
obligation.

God knowing this, sent his only begotten Son into the world, being made
man, and was pleased, that upon him should be executed his justice for that
which all men had failed, and were to fail, touching the obligation with which
we are born. In such manner, that this is the covenant between God, and man,
That they should believe, and hold, that that justice, which was executed upon
Christ the Son of God, does free, and make them exempt from the punishment
which they should deserve for that wherein they fail, in regard of the
obligation with which they are born; and that God makes them just, holds them
for adopted Sons, and as such rules and governs them, in this present life,
and afterward raises them up, and shall give them eternal life.

Humane wisdom is not capable to admit this covenant. First, because seeing
Christ to be a man as others are, it cannot be brought to understand that he is
the Son of God. Then, because it sees not upon what to ground the truth of
this covenant so as to believe it, and hold it for certain, and to rely upon
it: for hereunto is necessary a proper and particular Revelation or inspiration
from God, which must throw down to the ground all the discourses of humane
wisdom, in such manner, that holding it for certain and firm, that Christ is
the Son of God, and that the justice which was executed upon him, does make
us exempt from that wherein we fail touching our obligation, we are hereby
assured that God does justify us, according to the covenant which he has made
with us, and being justified we are incorporated in Christ, and planted in him;
in such manner, that as an herb is sustained by virtue of the earth where it
grows, or is planted; so we are sustained by the virtue of Christ in whom we
are planted, because we persevere in the covenant.

Upon this Covenant two other Covenants depend, the one is, that we believe
that Christ rose glorious, and that the belief of this does incorporate us in
the resurrection of Christ, to the intent that we should rise as he arose, and
that God should do unto us that which he did unto Christ. Humane wisdom finds
not wherein to ground the resurrection, it believes it not; but the man that
has accepted the first Covenant, does easily accept this second. The other
Covenant is, that we believe that Christ lives an everlasting life in a
sovereign degree with God, and that the belief of this gives us eternal life,
God doing unto us that which he did, and does with Christ.

Humane wisdom finds not wherein to ground the hope of this eternal life: but
the man who has by revelation accepted the first Covenant, and by the first
has accepted the second, does easily accept this third, so that we being
assured that Christ is the son of God, we do by faith accept the covenant of
justification, which does incorporate us into the death of Christ; and we do
accept the covenant of the resurrection of Christ, which does incorporate us
into the resurrection; and we do accept the covenant of eternal life, which
does incorporate us into that eternal life, which Christ lives. We believe
four things, and God does four things for us. We believe, The Christ is the
son of God, That he dyed, That he rose, And that he lives. And God make us
his sons, he justifies us, he raises us up, and he gives us eternal life.

Of the two first we have enjoyment in this present life, and these make us
that we love God, that we depend upon him, according to the obligation
wherewith we were born, having overcome a great part of our evil inclination.

Of the other two we shall have enjoyment in that other life. Now we
experimenting here in this life, in these two first things, the truth that is
in the Covenant, which Christ made between God and us, we assure our selves of
the truth which is in the two last; which we shall experiment when it shall
please the divine Majesty: In the mean space let us endeavor to stand and
persevere in the Covenant, and Covenants, which Jesus Christ our Lord has made
with us.

CONSID. IX.
An excellent privilege of piety.

ALL the good works whereunto we apply our selves in this present life, do
appertain either to the Being a Man, or to the being godly and pious.

The Being of a Man draws us to have compassion one toward another, to help
one another, and that, in all those things that appertain to the commodities of
this life.

Piety draws us to have confidence in God, to love him, to depend upon him; it
draws us to have confidence in Christ, to love him, and to preach him; it draws
us to mortification of the affections and appetites* that are after the flesh,
and it draws us to the despising of all that which the world does prize, as
honors, states, and riches. Now there may be a man altogether estranged from
piety, who will not only exercise himself in all those things, to which the
being of a man does draw him; but also in those things that are proper to
piety, enforcing himself also to do those things, and he shall do some of them:
And there may be another altogether pious, who shall not only exercise himself
in those things, which are properly belonging to piety, but also in those
things which are proper to the Being of a man, applying himself unto them, when
they offer themselves unto him. And as the stranger to piety exercising himself
in those things, which are properly of piety* does not exercise himself in
piety, but in the being of a man, (for his principal intent is his own proper
interest, which is proper to the being of a man,) so on the other side, the
person, that is altogether pious, exercising himself in those things, which are
proper to the Being of a man, exercises himself in piety, because his
principal intent is the glory of God, which is proper to piety. And it comes
to pass, that one estranged from piety, shall preach Christ, and shall not
exercise himself in piety, because his principal intent will be his own glory
and interest: and on the contrary it comes to pass, that a pious person will
do good to one that is without piety, and he shall be exercised in piety,
because his principal intent is the glory of God: And although he was not
moved to that thing with Christian charity, but with humane mercifulness,
nevertheless he exercised himself in piety.

Whereupon I gather, that the greatest of all others are those privileges,
which they enjoy which have piety, which is obtained by the holy spirit, which
is communicated to the faithful by Jesus Christ our Lord.

I will add this, that as he who is estranged from piety, is as it were
deprived of the knowledge of the difference of works which is here set down; so
also is he deprived of the knowledge that he does never exercise himself in
piety. And that he, who is pious, does excellently well understand, when he
exercises himself in those things which are proper to a man, and when he
exercises himself in those things which are properly of piety; and this he
does most easily, by his due care and remembrance of the works that he has
done, and the grounds whereupon he did them. It is true that these privileges
of piety are in effect Books, which Isaiah says, God has prepared for them
that love him, that is, for them that should come to know, and to love him,
being justified by faith in Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. X.
In what regard the estate of a Christian that believes with difficulty, is
better, then of that Person which believes with ease.

AMongst them which have the name of Christians, I do consider two sorts of
men, the one extremely facil to believe in matters of Religion all that is told
them; and the other extremely hard. And as I understand it, the facility of the
one grows from superstition, and from little consideration; and the difficulty
of the other in believing, grows from too much consideration.

The first on no cause call humane wisdom into counsel; and the second call
it in all things: and so with difficulty they are brought to believe that which
humane wisdom does not approve.

The first, amongst some true things which they believe, believe many false;
and it comes to pass that they give much more credit to the many false, then
to the few true: The second, do not believe the false, and doubt of the true.

Considering further, I find that the first by the spirit of God, when it is
communicated unto them, are certified of those true things which they believe,
by which certification they go by little, and little, freeing themselves from
deceit in false things, and so they leave them.

Moreover I find, that the second, by the same spirit of God, when it is
communicated unto them, are certified in the true things, by which
certification they fortify themselves in believing the true things, and in not
believing the false things, in such manner, that the holy holy spirit entering
into two persons, one very easy to believe, and the other very difficult, it
puts them in that estate, that the one combats with his own self, laboring to
drive out of his mind those falsities, to which with much facility he had been
persuaded; and the other combats with himself, laboring to certify himself
in those true things, which he has not been able to believe by the relation of
men. Both these persons labor, but I hold for better the estate of the person,
that is hard to believe, then of him that is easy, and that for three causes
principally,

The first, because it is more easy to believe the truth, whereunto the holy
spirit helps, and many other things help, then to unbelieve a lie, which
superstition and many other things hinder from.

The second, because the person who is easy to believe, may with ease be
deceived; and he that is hard, suffers himself hardly to be deceived.

And the third, because the person that is easy to believe continues a long
time in error, as they did in the primitive Church, that were converted from
Judaisme to Christian Religion: And he that is hard, remains free from all
false opinion, in as much as he only believes that which the holy spirit
teaches him.

Whereupon I resolve my self, that without any comparison that estate is
better, in which the spirit of God puts the person hard to believe, when it
begins to instruct him, then that estate in which it puts him who is easy to
believe.

Together with this, I resolve my self, that that which is believed without the
instruction of the spirit of God, always consists more in opinion, then in
faith, and is always mingled with false and fained things.

Whereupon it may be understood, that when a person equally gives credit to all
things that are said unto him, he is without the spirit of God; he believes by
relation, humane persuasion, and by opinion, and not by revelation, nor
inspiration.

And it being true, that the blessedness of a Christian man does not consist
in believing, but in believing by He often uses this manner of speech,
believing by Revelation, whereby I understand he means only the effectual
operation or illumination of the holy spirit, testifying, and applying the
revealed truth of the Gospel; and not any private Enthusiasmes or revelations:
as if he should say; a general apprehension, or assent to the promises of the
Gospel by hearsay, or relation from others, is not that which fills the heart
with joy and peace in believing; but the spirits bearing witness with our
spirit revealing and applying the general promises to every one in particular,
with such sincerity and efficacy, that it makes him godly, righteous, and sober
all his life long; this I call believing by Revelation, and not by relation.
revelation, and not by relation; it is concluded that that is not Christian
faith which is by relation, but only that which is by revelation is the
Christian faith, and that which makes us blessed, and that which brings with it
Charity, and Hope, and that which purifies the heart, and is that which in
every thing is pleasing unto God: In this faith God make us rich by Jesus
Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XI.
In what manner Gods being just, does redound to the profit of them, that by
revelation believe in Christ.

ALL the Perfections which the holy Scripture attributes to God; seem even
according to humane wisdom, to redound to the benefit of man, except it be
one, which seems to redound to his damage: forasmuch as it is beneficial to a
man, that God should be omnipotent, liberal, wise, faithful, bountiful,
merciful, and pitiful; but it seems not beneficial to him, that he should be
just. For God being just, and man unjust, he finds not how to be able to save
himself in Gods judgment.

The goodness of God is so great, that being willing that this perfection of
his, which seems to us to redound to the damage of man, should no less redound
to his benefit, then all the other; he did determine to execute upon his own
Son all the rigor of that Justice, which he ought to have executed upon all
men for all their impieties and sins, to the intent that men holding this truth
for certain, that God has executed the rigor of his justice on his own Son,
may know that it is as beneficial to them, that God is just, as that he is
merciful; it being certain, that administering Justice he cannot fail to save
them, they having accepted for their own, that Justice which was executed on
his own Son.

Whereby I understand and assure my self, that God revealed unto the Saints of
the old Testament, That his justice ought to be executed upon his own Son Jesus
Christ our Lord, and therefore they might certainly hold, that it was no less
favorable for them, that God should be just, then merciful; together with all
the other perfections, that are attributed unto God.

Furthermore I understand, that those men which are not assured by revelation,
that God has executed on Christ the rigor of his Justice, do always fear the
judgment of God, and it is grievous unto them that Justice is in God; for they
do not find how to be able to satisfy it.

From this fear superstititions grow, scruples grow, and ceremonies grow: From
all which we are free, that are come by revelation unto the knowledge of
Christ, being certain that God being just, he will not twice punish.

Let us believe the Gospel, which does certify us, that we were punished in
Christ; and in this let us assure our selves, knowing that God is Just, and
that we have been already punished on the Cross in Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XII.
How the reason of our inward man serves us to that, which the eyes of our
outward man do.

HAving often said, that to be and persevere in the kingdom of God, it is
needful for a man to mortify in all things and altogether his reason, and his
humane prudence; it is doubted, this being true, to what purpose God put reason
in a man, since he will not have him to serve himself therewith whilst he
abides in his kingdom. To this it seems to me that I may answer resolutely,
that God put reason in the inner man, to that end for which he put the eyes in
the outward man. For as much as the outward eyes are able to see the Sun, not
of themselves, but with the self same Sun, and likewise all those things which
the Sun discovers: so the reason which is in the inward man, is able to know
God, not of it self, but with the self same God, and likewise all those things
which God manifests.

The first man priding himself of his reason, would know God without God, as if
one would see the Sun without the Sun; and he deprived himself of the knowledge
of God, and was left to the government of his own reason. And he and all they
that have imitated him, procuring to know God with their own reason, or by
their own understanding of the Scriptures, and by contemplation of the
creatures, are more rash then they who being unwilling to see the Sun with the
Sun, should endeavor to see it with the light of candles.

Now this being true, we may understand that God has put reason in man, to the
end that with it he might know God, but with God, and not by his own discourses.

It is meet that God should require of man that he mortify his own reason, in
as much as it presumes to know God, and the things of God by it self alone,
without the spirit of God; if so be he desire to know God, and to abide in the
kingdom of God in such manner as he ought.

Of this mortification we have already at other times spoken, and said that it
is that which Jesus Christ our Lord discovers unto us.

CONSID. XIII.
A comparison which shows in what the benefit which mankind has received
from God by Jesus Christ, does consist.

A Certain great Kings Vassals rebelled against him, for their rebellion he
condemned them to death, deprived them of their goods, drove them out of his
kingdom; being condemned, deprived, and driven out, they set themselves to
serve other kings, strangers, and enemies to their natural King.

Things standing thus for some space of time, the King that was benign toward
his vassalls, desiring to reduce unto his kingdom those that went wandering,
and banished, first of all he executed the rigor of his justice upon his only
Son, and afterward he sent to make public proclamation throughout the whole
world, in the which he declared, that his justice was already satisfied, and
that he generally pardoned all those that had rebelled against him, exhorting
them to return unto his kingdom, and promising unto them entire restitution of
that which they had lost.

They which were culpable in the rebellion heard this proclamation, of which
some pretending that they had not run thereinto, would not accept the pardon;
it seeming unto them that accepting it they should make themselves to have been
rebels: Others, although they knew themselves rebels, would not give credit to
the proclamation, it seeming to them too strange a thing, that the King should
pardon them, because his Son had been obedient to him. Likewise some others,
although they knew themselves rebels, although they held the proclamation for
certain, although they took copies of it, and they themselves published it,
notwithstanding all this, they dared not to return unto the kingdom, but
rather by all ways and means possible to them, they bestirred themselves to
obtain pardon of the King with services, gifts, and presents; by no means
willing to enjoy the Kings liberality, or the obedience of the Kings Son: And
so not coming to the kingdom, their estates were not restored unto them, and
so neither these nor those other enjoyed the general pardon; in such sort that
as much as belonged to them, it was no more then if it had never been made.
There were some others, who knowing themselves rebels, and giving entire credit
to the proclamation, having confidence in the Kings word, accepted the pardon
general, and came unto the kingdom, submitting themselves in all things, and
altogether unto the regiment of their own King. And although at the beginning
they doubted somewhat of the pardon, and so much the more, as they saw that
their estates were not presently restored unto them; notwithstanding, they
resolving not to depart from the kingdom, and seeing that the King used them
well, and that by little and little, he went on restoring unto them that which
they had lost by their rebellion; they likewise went on, certifying themselves
to have obtained the pardon, and found themselves most contented in having come
to serve their own King, and to abide under his regiment and government.

And because they had proved the evil of rebellion, and of banishment, they did
deprive and dispoyl themselves of all friendship, and of all intelligences with
men, and of all their own proper designs, which according to their opinions
might make them another time rebels. In this they employed and exercised
themselves; whereupon by little and little they gained so much credit with the
King, that not only he restored unto them all that which they had lost by
their rebellion, but he gave them many great gifts, and he used them in that
manner, as if so be they had never been rebels.

This is the Comparison: and although it be of it self clear, I will not cease
to declare it a little better, and say, That the first man being in the
kingdom of God, created to the image and likeness of God, rebelled against
God, for which rebellion he was deprived of this image and likeness of God, he
was driven out of the kingdom of God, and he was condemned unto death; and in
this banishment all mankind abode, serving the devil a long while.

God willing of his infinite mercy to remedy this evil, first of all executed
the rigor of his justice upon his Son Jesus Christ our Lord; and afterward
sent to preach throughout all the world, how that now his justice was
satisfied, and how that he had now pardoned all them that were rebels, and that
they might at their pleasures return unto the kingdom, out of which they were
driven, and that he would restore unto them his own image and likeness, which
they had lost. This Proclamation has been heard throughout the whole world.
And of mankind some holding themselves Saints and just, have imagined that the
pardon belongs not to them; it seeming to them, that where there is no error
there needs no pardon; and so they have let it pass. Others, although they
hold themselves for rebels, yet trust not to the pardon, it seeming to them a
thing too too strange, that God should pardon them and receive them into his
kingdom, and restore unto them that which they had lost by rebellion, for
another justice and obedience.

There are others, who albeit they know themselves rebels, and although they
hold the pardon for certain, and embrace the Gospel, and read it, and preach
it; yet for all this they cannot bring themselves to enter into the kingdom of
God, because they have more confidence in themselves then in God; and so they
will rather stay under the government of their humane prudence, then come unto
the kingdom of God. These think they ought to gain the pardon of their
rebellion with their industry, and diligence, and with their merits. And
because as well they as those others, come not to the kingdom of God, they
feel not the benefit thereof, nor enjoy the liberality of God, nor the
obedience of Christ. And unto this estate they are brought through their own
arrogance and presumption, and so by this means continue always in their
rebellion. There are others who know themselves rebels to God, and do give
entire faith and credit unto the pardon general, which is preached unto them
on Gods behalf in the Gospel, and so instantly without further bethinking
accepting the pardon, they come unto the kingdom of God, renouncing the
kingdom of the world, and the government of humane prudence. And albeit these
at first may seem to make some kind of doubt, doubt of the pardon, doubt of the
government and regiment of God; yet in as much as they depart not from the
kingdom, they go on certifying themselves both in the one and the other of
these matters; and so much the more, as they feel that God proceeds in
restoring unto them that image and likeness of God, which the first man lost
by his rebellion, with all those other privileges which were lost by the same
rebellion.

And because the principal punishment of the rebellion was death, albeit he do
not deliver them from temporal death, for they die as well as others; yet he
delivers them from eternal death, promising them the resurrection, and giving
them a signal thereof, by the inward vivification and by the resurrection of
Christ.

And these men live in the height of cheerfulness, attending only to mortify
their wisdom, and their humane reason, and all those other things that led
them to their fore-passed rebellion, and which might lead them on to the like.
In this they abide, in this they persevere, and so they go getting so much
favor of God, that he does not only cause them to feel the pardon, and that
happiness which is to be in his kingdom, and to possess the image of God in
it; but he does many other graces and favors unto them, accepting them for his
sons.

This kingdom begins in this present life, and is continued in that which is
to come. And all this felicity those persons do acknowledge from the liberality
of God, from the obedience of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XIV.
Amongst the things which Christian Piety obliges us to believe, what that is
which is believed with greatest difficulty.

HAving set my self sometimes to consider, with how great difficulty man's mind
is brought to believe as it ought the things of Christian piety, when it sets
it self to view and review them; I am come to examine amongst all these, what
that is in which there is greatest difficulty found. And I am resolved, that it
is the Pardon General by the justice of God executed on Christ.

I am come to this resolution by considering that all men being friends to
their own interesses, do easily believe those things, in which they loose
nothing by believing them, and with difficulty they do believe those things,
which being believed might redound any way to their damage.

In as much therefore as it being true, that amongst all those things which are
believed in Christian piety, only this General pardon, as it is said, might
redound unto the damage of him that believes it, in case it should not be
true, it seems to me that my resolution is good, That amongst the things
which are believed, this is that which is believed with greatest difficulty. I
might fortify this my resolution with many reasons; but this seems to be so
clear, that I will content my self therewith; proving it with that which is
seen by experience, that even he who gives credence to the Proclamation which
is published through the world concerning the Pardon general, and shows that
he does believe it, by renouncing all outward justification, and by entering
into the kingdom of God (in which God equally provides for his, both of things
that appertain to the body and the soul;) nevertheless even he finds much
repugnancie in his mind, when he will reduce it to those terms, that he should
totally hope from God the sustentation of the body, and of the soul, in as much
as he always goes thinking, and saying in himself, How if it should not be
true, that God would provide things necessary for my sustentation without mine
own solicitousnesse, what shall become of me? And again, How if it be not true,
that God has executed upon Christ the rigor of his justice, and that by his
order the Proclamation of Pardon general be published through the world? if
these things be not true, I shall remain miserably abused. And it is certain,
that so much more any person makes these discourses, by how much it seems to
him that he might of himself provide both for the one, and the other.

Passing on further, and willing to examine whether with greater difficulty a
man brings himself to hope from God, either the sustentation of his body, or
that of his mind, I suppose it is the sustentation of the body. This I suppose
to be so, in regard that a man brings himself with less difficulty to expect
from God that which he certainly knows he cannot be able to obtain of himself:
It being therefore true, that a man does more distrust himself touching his
justification, then his sustentation, it is concluded, that there is greater
difficulty to bring a man's self to hope for his corporal, then his spiritual
sustentation.

Having gone thus far with my consideraon, I well understand what the cause
is, that the rich man enters with difficulty into the kingdom of God. And
willing to persuade my mind, that it should bring it self to depend on God, as
well in corporal, as in spiritual things, I call to remembrance, how Christ
does promise them for vantage to those, who seek the kingdom of God. And I
suppose, that finding all that which Christ promises in things pertaining to
the soul, to be true, I have no cause to doubt, but I should find him true
likewise in those things, which appertain to the body.

When this does not suffice me, I think in this manner; Since that I am
justified in having accepted and believed the Proclamation of the Pardon
general, and since that I am entered into the kingdom of God, from which the
first man was driven by rebellion, and that I go on recovering the privileges
which the first man lost by his rebellion; ought I to doubt, that God without
my solicitousnesse will provide for me in outward things? since it is true that
the first man, as long as he remained in the kingdom of God, was provided of
them without his own solicitousnesse: And that this is true I know from hence,
that among other punishments, with which God punished his rebellion, this was
one, In the sweat of thy brows shall thou eat thy bread.

From all these Considerations I gather, that it becomes me to attend with my
mind to depend on God, as well in the sustentation of the body, as in that of
the mind. And so much more in the sustentation of the body, now I have accepted
and believed the proclamation of the Pardon general, and am entered into the
kingdom of God: for I know it is true, that with greater difficulty a man
brings himself to trust in this matter, then in that other.

Together with this I gather, that I shall then be entirely a citizen of the
kingdom of God, when I shall depend altogether on God, being a lively and true
member of the son of God Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XV.
How Christians ought to govern themselves in their tribulations, afflictions,
and troubles.

BEcause humane wisdom, as we have elsewhere said, thinks that it is humility
not to have confidence in God, and that it is pride to have confidence in him;
it is necessary that a Christian should always stand upon his guard touching
this point, so that he be not deceived in taking the one for the other.

When a pious person finds himself in some great trouble and distress, he is
tempted by the Devil, through the means of humane wisdom, persuading him that
it is amiss to believe that God shall deliver him from that distress and
trouble in which he finds himself; and tells him that that which appertains to
him, is only to bring his mind to be content with that which God will do
concerning him.

This persuasion seems pious and holy, but being examined with a Christian
spirit, a man may know in it a certain spice of desperation, and diffidence;
which consists in that first part, where it is said, that it is amiss to
have confidence in God. And although the second part with the desire of
reducing the mind to submit it self to God, be good, yet it is marred by the
first.

Now to the intent that the second may be good, the Christian spirit makes the
first good thus: it persuades every pious person when it sees him in distress
and trouble, that God has promised that he will make account of them, that
make account of him, and that he will not suffer them to be evil entreated of
worldly persons, nay more, he will have great care of them, and will help them,
and defend them.

Thou make account of God, hold then for certain and firm, that God makes
account of thee, and that by and by he will draw thee from this distress and
trouble, in which thou find thy self, in such sort as the wicked who seek
thy harm, shall have no cause to rejoice at thy harm.

The holy Spirit speaking to him these words, it brings to his memory all the
promises that God in holy Scripture makes, pertaining hereunto. And when the
pious person that is in tribulation, is made capable of this truth, and stands
firm and constant in this hope, then it persuades him to reduce his mind to be
content with that which God will do with him in that tribulation. And in such
case this conformity with the will of God is pious, and holy, because it is
founded upon confidence, which is a pious and holy foundation.

To this humane wisdom opposes it self, and says, Thou having seen that God
permits, that his should be persecuted, afflicted, and evil entreated, in what
can thou found thy confidence, that he will free thee from this affliction
and trouble? In what I say, O Christian, can thou found this confidence?

To this the Christian spirit replies, It is true, that God permits all that
you say to befall them which are his, when it is for the cause of the Gospel,
for the manifestation of his own glory, for the illustration of his own name,
and not for the malignity and appetite of the men of this world; God indeed
permits that his Saints shall be evil entreated because they be Saints; for
from hence redound all that which we have spoken of. But he does not permit it,
when they are evil entreated as men, for the things of the world. For he has
promised altogether the contrary.

David glories, That he had not seen in all his life any just man forsaken of
God: And in this may all just men glory: for albeit God permits that they
should suffer, when they suffer because they be Saints and just men; yet he
does not permit that they should suffer for those things which indifferently
befall to men in this present life.

From all this which is spoken, it may be gathered, that a Christian when he is
evil entreated for his piety and justice, rejoicing that in it and by it the
name of God is glorified, he ought to submit himself wholly and altogether to
God, reducing his mind to content it self with that which God shall ordain, and
dispose concerning him: and when he is evil entreated as a person of the world,
he ought to believe and be assured that God will draw him out of that
affliction and trouble, with much satisfaction and content; reducing his mind
also to be content with that which God will do.

And this truly is a Christian disposition of the soul, which is only found in
them that stand incorporated in Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XVI.
That the promises of God belong to them who believe them.

CHristian piety requires that a Christian man should hold certainly and firmly
that God will maintain him in this present life with his grace, and in his
grace; and that in the other life he will give him immortality and glory.

Humane wisdom presuming* or pretending piety, persuades him that he ought to
hold for certain that God will deal thus with him, but on condition that he
have Faith, Hope, and Charity, which are the gifts of God that give life and
being to a Christian. And in the mean while humane wisdom understands not,
that a man shall so far enjoy these three graces, as he shall abide certainly
and firmly grounded in those other two things, wherein Christian piety requires
that a Christian man should abide firm, and assure himself in. For in these two
things does Faith and Hope consist, from which Charity does arise and proceed.

Whence it is well gathered, that it belongs to a Christian to shut his ears to
humane wisdom, and to open them to the Promises of the holy spirit; and so to
attend to certify and stablish himself in those two first things. And he shall
then obtain and possess these three Christian gifts of Faith, Hope, and
Charity, when he shall certainly and firmly believe that God will maintain him
in this present life with his grace, and in his grace; and that in the other
life he will give him immortality and glory.

I know, will the pious Christian say, that God calls unto him only those whom
he has first known and predestined: I know also, that those whom he calls,
them he justifies and them he glorifies. And I know certainly that he has
called me, and thereby I assure my self that he has known and predestined
me, and that he has justified me, and he will glorify me. In this let him
stand, in this let him confirm himself without doubting in any manner: for the
promises of God are fulfilled with them only that believe them.

That this is true, may be proved by many authorities of holy Scripture. But
better it is to say, That the truth of this matter is not believed, except it
be in some measure experimented; and the experience appertains only to them
that stand incorporated in Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XVII.
In what manner a Man ought to resolve himself touching the world, and touching
himself, that he may become a true Christian.

ALL the Christian business consists in trusting, believing, and loving: for
all this is piety, justice, and holiness; forasmuch as a man having
confidence, gets piety; believing, gets justice; and loving, holiness.

That a man may trust, believe, and love, it is necessary to apprehend, to
understand, and know: To apprehend, in what thing he ought to have confidence,
To understand in what it is convenient to believe, And to know that which ought
to be loved. Of this wisdom, knowledge, and intelligence, a man is incapable,
partly for the depravation that is natural to him by reason of Original
sin, and partly by reason of that which is acquired by evil custom, and
worse exercises.

The Wise man meant this, when he said, That wisdom enters not into a mind
that is evil inclined, nor abides in a body subject unto sin.

Whereupon I understand, that a man which desires to trust, believe, and love,
that he may obtain piety, justice, and holiness; to such an one it appertains
to be wise, to know, and to understand; despoyling his mind of all evil
inclinations, and estranging his body from all evil exercises, and from evil
custom.

Together with this I understand, that to the intent a man may dispoil his mind
of every evil inclination, it is meet that a man should courageously and
generously resolve himself touching the world, turning his back to all the
honor, glory, and estimation thereof, not pretending unto it, not procuring
it, nor desiring it in any thing, nor in any manner, putting an end to all
kinds of ambition, and self esteem.

Together with this I understand, that to the intent a man may estrange his
body from all evil exercises, and from all evil customs, it is meet that a man
should valourously resolve touching things which concern himself, renouncing in
good earnest all those things, from which there does come, or may come any
carnal satisfaction, or corporal content; putting an end to all, estranging
himself from it, and abhorring it. For doing thus he shall purify his soul,
and body, and shall make himself able, (God giving unto him that wisdom,
understanding, and knowledge, which he is capable of) to obtain Confidence,
Faith, and Love, and shall be Pious, Just, and Holy, and consequently he shall
become a true Christian.

Unto this resolution I understand that Jesus Christ our Lord inviteth every
one of us, saying, He that will come after me, let him deny himself, or forsake
all, and take up his cross: and then a man is said to take his cross upon
him, when willingly he suffers the martyrdom with which the men of the world
will martyrize him, whether it be of the body, or of the soul. That of the body
the true Christians of the Primitive Church did suffer, when those which were
open enemies of God and of Christ, took away their lives because they believed
in Christ. That of the mind has been suffered, and is daily to be suffered by
true Christians, that have followed the steps of the ancient, when they who are
secret enemies of God and of Christ, do despise them, esteem them for vile, and
for no body, deprive them of honor and fame. And as I understand it, this is
the most cruel, and most terrible, and most unsupportable martyrdom of all:
And a man that stands constant in this kind of martyrdom, may well hold
himself for a true martyr of Christ.

Together with this I understand, that to the resolutions which a man should
make with the world, and with his own self; and to the martyrdom whereunto he
ought to be ready, Christ added, And let him follow me, I conceive a man does
not obtain piety, justice, and holiness through the resolution, nor through
the martyrdom, but through the imitation of Christ, in as much as imitating
Christ, he goes recovering in his mind the image and similitude of God, with
which the first man was created, believing to recover it also in his body in
the resurrection of the just, where having obtained impassibility and
immortality, the Christian shall perpetually rejoice with Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XVIII.
In what things that person who desires to enter and to persevere in the
kingdom of God, ought to be exercised; and what a man brings of his own
thereunto.

UNderstanding that which our Lord Jesus Christ says, that none can come unto
him, except his eternal Father draws him: and understanding what S. Paul
says, that all men have not faith, and that Faith is the gift of God; I
understand likewise that it is not in any man's power to believe, to love, and
to have confidence. Neither is it in a man's power to know God, nor to know
himself, nor to hate the world and himself: Forasmuch as all this must come
unto him by particular and especial favor of God; in such sort, that as it
seems hereby it is not in man's power to form and frame his mind, so that he
should become pious, just, and holy; for all this must come unto him from God.
On the other side I perceive many Exhortations, and Admonitions, of which the
holy Scripture is full, by which generally men are exhorted and instructed unto
piety, justice, and holiness. I conceive, that it appertains to every man to
desire and procure piety, justice, and holiness, but it must be by praying
and seeking them of God; for from him only, and by this means only, they are
procured and obtained. And as I understand, it appertains to that Christian man
that exercises himself in desiring and demanding this, to exercise himself with
all study and diligence in those things which belong to him, and which seem to
be in his own power to do; that is, in refraining the affections, and the
appetites, at least in outward things, in which they may be restrained; that is
to say, not to see that which would give satisfaction to thine eyes, and not to
hear than which delights thy ears, and so in all other outward senses, in
which a Christian may overcome himself, separating his body, when he cannot
separate his mind

But above all things a Christian man ought to attend principally not to
content the men of this world, neither to walk, nor to speak after the relish
of their words; evermore remembering that saying of S. Paul, If I seek to please
men, I am not the servant of God. In which matter he ought observe this rule;
If so be he be solicited to please men in things contrary unto piety, he shall
in no wise please them: if in things conformable to piety, always: And if in
indifferent things, he shall please them in those things in which he
displeases himself, and he shall not please them in those things, wherein he
finds his own proper satisfaction. In such manner, that then he shall bring
himself not to please men, when they desire of him things contrary to piety,
and when he shall have in those things which they desire, his own proper
satisfaction. And in this manner he shall not forbear to satisfy them, because
he would not content them, but because he would not offend piety, and because
he would not give nourishment to his mind touching its own satisfaction.

To this pass a man shall easily bring himself, recommending himself to God,
and always living with watch over himself, imagining that he lives amongst
more then mortal enemies, amongst which it becomes him to stand always on his
guard, that nothing may happen unto him unawares. Now a Christian man
exercising himself as I have said, must not think hereby to get piety, justice,
and holiness; but he shall only keep his mind very wakefull, and his manners
well moderated; to the intent that when it shall please God to give unto him
piety, justice, and holiness, they may fall into his soul so happily and
prosperously, as water falls on good ground, when it is plowed and cleared from
thorns and stones. Holding this for certain, that as the Tiller when he clears
his ground from thorns and stones, does no way oblige God that he should send
his rain and his sun upon it; so neither does a man by purging and cleansing
the appetites of his body, and the affections of his mind, oblige God that he
should send his holy Spirit to him. But as the sun and the rain do more good
to the earth which it finds plowed and purged from thorns and stones; so in
like manner the holy Spirit does more good to the mind which he finds free
and purged from all worldly affections, and all carnal appetites. And after
this manner the Christian man understanding that which belongs to him, and
exercising himself therein, and understanding what he is to expect from God,
and desiring it, and waiting for it, in short time shall find himself much
conformable to the image of God, and unto that of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XIX.
That the Christian life consists in this, that a man esteem himself dead to
the world, and alive unto God.

THe Christian name in the first beginning, was in the eyes of the world so
vile, so despised, so dishonored and abject, that none accepted it, but only
they who being called of God, and having set an end to ambition, to glory, and
all worldly reputation, did esteem and judge themselves altogether dead unto
the world: And properly this name of a Christian was taken by them when they
came unto Baptism; in such sort, that first they were called of God, and did
esteem and judge themselves as it were dead unto the world, and after that they
came to Baptism, in which they took the Christian name. For those which were
baptized, although they were formerly called Saints, were afterward called
Christians; in as much as being chosen of God, they did accept the justice of
God executed on Christ; and being baptized, they became dead and buried to the
world, and they were raised up, and did live toward God, making profession to
imitate Christ, who died with ignominy to the world, and lives gloriously to
God. This S. Paul meant where he says, that the Christians are dead and buried
in baptism with Christ in his death; to the intent that as Christ was dead and
buried, and lives; so we also being dead and buried, may live.

We Christians are dead and buried as well in respect of our being dead on the
Cross with Christ, as also in respect of the opinion which the world has of
us, and of that which we have of the world; and we are raised up and Live, as
well in respect that we are raised up with Christ, as also in respect of that
opinion which God has of us, giving unto us his holy spirit; and of that which
we have of him, endeavoring to make our selves very like to the Image of his
only begotten Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

In process of time the Christian name began to be honored and glorious in
the eyes of the world, Kings and Emperors themselves being honored thereby.
And Baptism is now given and communicated to them, which do not persevere in
that first resolution to judge themselves dead unto the world; albeit in
baptism the Christian name is taken, and that in Baptism a man does promise,
and make profession to imitate Christ, in that he died unto the world, and
lives to God. For although in the eyes of the world it be an honorable thing
to take the Christian name, and to make the Christian profession, yet it is a
dishonor to accomplish that which is promised, and to keep the profession. Men
commonly contenting themselves with taking that part with Christ, which is
now honorable, that is, the name and the profession, care not to take that
which is ignominious, that is, to die unto the world; nor that which the world
neither sees nor understands, that is, to live unto God. And therefore that
which S. Paul says, belongs not unto them: for they are neither dead with
Christ, nor are raised with Christ: for none rises, but he who is dead.

I consider, that it belongs to a Christian, to the intent that he may satisfy
the name which he holds, and observe the profession which he has made in his
Baptism, to reduce himself to that resolution to which men in the beginning of
the manifestation of the Gospel did reduce themselves, every man saying after
this manner: I am dead and buried as much as belongs to the world; for when
they baptized me, they slew me, and buried me: and I am raised up, and live
toward God; for when Christ died, I was buried in Baptism with Christ in his
death, and I began to rise, and to live with Christ in his resurrection, and in
his life. God killing the flesh of Christ on the Cross, killed mine; and
raising up Christ, raised up me. Now it being true, that I am dead and buried,
it is necessary, that in me there be no greater liveliness of worldly
affections, and carnal appetites, then in a man, who truly and effectually is
dead and buried. And it being likewise true, that I am raised up with Christ
and alive unto God, it is needful that all those affections and desires should
be alive in me, which are in a man who is truly and effectually raised up. He
that lives with this determination and resolution, will live on his guard, and
be watchful; in such sort, that when he shall know in himself any affection,
or any appetite which belongs to a man that lives to the world, straightvvay
he will labor to kill it, saying, this belongs not to me who am dead to the
world. And when he shall find himself solicited by any thing that is matter of
honor, and of vvorldly esteem; or when he shall resent himself, because the
one, or the other is taken from him, he will quickly provide remedy for the
evil, saying, I know I live not unto the world; why then I ought not to
pretend unto, or to esteem that which the world esteems; and if I live unto
God, I ought not to pretend unto, nor to esteem but only that which God
pretends unto, and esteems; that is, that I should esteem my self dead and
buried in respect of the world, and that I should esteem my self raised up,
and alive unto God; in such sort, that I being dead, and buried unto the world,
ought not to pretend unto the things of the world, nor I ought not to resent
my self, when I am deprived of them; and being raised up by God and living
unto God, I ought to pretend unto the things of God, and to be grieved and to
resent my self, when I shall be deprived of them. And the things of God,
which a Christian ought to pretend unto, are the gifts and graces of the holy
Spirit, that may rule and govern him, and which may maintain him in the
possession of the kingdom of God in this present life, as much as may be, and
in eternal life, as it ought to be; and this by Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XX.
That in the Infirmity, Amendment, and Health of the mind, Men ought to govern
themselves, as in those of the body.

IN the Infirmity, Amendment, and Health of the mind, I conceive, that those
men which remain in the kingdom of God, ought to govern themselves, as
discreet men govern themselves in the Infirmities, Amendment, and Health of the
body. That which I would say, is, that as the discreet person that is sick in
his body, seeks discreet and experienced Physicians, who by applying unto him
convenient medicines, and giving him rules and directions do cure him: Even so
he that finds himself sick in his mind, ought to seek a spiritual and
experimented Physician, or Physicians, that may set him in the way of the
knowledge of Christ, that so becoming the member of Christ, he may be healed of
the Infirmity of his soul, of which I understand all those are healed, who
being called of God do believe in Christ: all others remain in their infirmity.

Furthermore I say, that the discreet person, that is upon recovery of his
bodily infirmity, lives always very attentive and wary of himself in all
things, being careful not to eat any thing that may cause him to relapse, nor
to commit any excess that may make him fall into the same inconveniency: so he
who finds himself to have any health of mind, whilst he remains upon his
recovery, ought to live very attentive to himself, and wary over himself in all
things, being careful not to engage himself in any of those things which may
cause him to relapse, or loose any part of that health which he has gotten;
being always when ever he comes into company, and in other affairs of the
world, attentive and watchful not to take any of those things that may do him
hurt; even as he carries himself that is upon recovery, in banquets and other
occasions, where he is afraid to err in any thing that may overthrow his
bodily health, feigning that he eats, and does not eat, and behaving himself in
such sort, that he hurts not his bodily health, nor offends those that behold
him.

Furthermore I say, that as he who having been sick, and upon recovery,
although he find himself well, if he be a discreet man, yet does not suffer
himself to be transported to eat things contrary to his health, nor to do any
damageable exercises, although he do not live with that attention, with which
he lived when he was upon recovery, being afraid to return unto the sickness
of which he was cured; so in like manner he that finds himself healed of the
infirmity of his mind, feeling himself much mortified, and much quickened, ought
not to live negligently, nor to debauch himself, or put himself out of his own
way in the dealing and conversations of men, and in intermedling with the
outward things of the world, being afraid to return to his former infirmity by
the depravation of his mind; well considering that the relapses of the mind
into sickness, are more dangerous then the relapses into bodily sickness;
albeit God himself does ever keep from this kind of falling those that have got
health by regeneration and renovation, which the holy Spirit causes in those
who are incorporated in Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XXI.
The difference of sins and sinners: The Obligations of Piety: The signs of
Piety and Impiety.

ALL men that sin, sin either against themselves, or against their
neighbors, or against Christ, or against God. They sin against themselves,
which defile their bodies with carnal vices, and with drunkenness, and
deprave their minds with ambition, envy, and wrath: for whilst they occupy
themselves in these, besides the natural depravation with which they are born,
they add corruption to their manners. They sin against their neighbors,
doing them evil and damage in their persons, in their estate, in their honor
and fame, and giving them evil example, and evil doctrine. They sin against
Christ, justifying themselves by their own works: for thereby they show that
they give no credit to Christ, touching the Covenant of Justification, which
covenant he made between God and man by shedding his blood. I say, they declare
that they do not hold it for a thing firmly established, and that they do not
rely upon it. They sin against God, when they resent themselves, and are
grieved touching that which God does: For in grieving, resenting, and
afflicting themselves, they show that they do not content themselves therewith.
And this discontent of men proceeds from this, that they esteem it not good,
and their esteeming it not to be good proceeds from this, that they have not a
good opinion of God, upon which ground they grow in the end even to hate God.

Now they who sin against themselves, sin against the dignity of a man:
they who sin against their neighbor, sin against charity: they who sin
against Christ, sin against the faith: and they who sin against God, sin
against natural piety.

They who sin against themselves, sin also against their neighbors,
inasmuch as by their sins they give evil example; and they sin against
Christ, inasmuch as by their sins they make Christian Religion to be evil
spoken of; they sin against God, inasmuch as they are convinced in themselves
either by the Law, or by their own judgments, that they offend God in that
which they do.

They who sin against their neighbors, sin likewise against themselves,
augmenting their proper depravation and corruption: they sin against Christ,
depriving themselves of Charity, which is the proper counter-signe of Christian
Piety; and they sin against God, being convinced in themselves, either
through the Law, or through their own consciences, that they offend God in that
which they do.

They who sin against Christ, sin against themselves, depriving themselves
of justification, and consequently of the kingdom of God; they sin against
their neighbors, in giving them examples of incredulity; and they sin
against God; for in offending the Son, they offend the Father, and offending
him that is sent, they offend him that sent.

They who sin against God, sin against themselves, depriving themselves of
piety; against their neighbors, by giving them evil example; against Christ,
for the same respect that they do who sin against Christ; they sin against
God, for the union which is between Christ and God.

From hence I gather, that a man owes to himself purity and cleanness, which
is got by mortification of the appetites and affections, which are according to
the old Adam. He ows unto his neighbors Love and Charity, with good example,
and good doctrine; To Christ, faith; and to God, piety.

And I understand, that as unto faith there is also annexed certain hope of the
resurrection and life eternal; so unto piety is annexed the worship in spirit
and in truth.

Furthermore I gather, that to live licentiously and vitiously, is a sign of
depravation and corruption: To live hurtful to his neighbor, is a sign of
malignity and iniquity: To live superstitiously and ceremoniously, is a sign
of incredulity and diffidence: To live discontent for that which God does, is a
sign of impiety: as on the contrary, to live chaste, and pure, and modest, is a
sign of mortification: To live without prejudicing any one, is a sign of
charity and goodness: To live with peace of conscience, is a sign of
fidelity and confidence: To live contentedly touching every thing which God
does, is a sign of piety and holiness. Whereupon I understand, as
mortification and charity are gotten only by Gods gift; so likewise faith,
and confidence, piety, and holiness, mortification, and charity are continued
and increased in a man by the Spirit of God, even that which is obtained
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

I will add this further, that in those things wherein men sin against
themselves, and against their neighbors, if so be they sin through weakness
and infirmity, presently after they have sinned, they are sorry and repent,
considering the offense of God, and the hurt of their neighbor, and of
themselves. And in those things wherein men sin against Christ, and against
God, if they sin through weakness and infirmity, they do the same,
considering the offense of Christ, and of God, the ill example of their
neighbor, and their own damage.

On the contrary, as they that sin in carnal vices, find satisfaction in
their sins, when they sin through wretched wilfulness; so also they who
sin against Christ in outward justification, and against God, being grieved
at those things which God does, if so be they sin through incredulity and
impiety, they find satisfaction in their own works, and in their own opinions.

And by these counter-signes may a man know when he sins through frailty and
infirmity, and when through wretched wilfulness and incredulity; always
setting before his eyes the light of the Spirit, which is obtained through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XXII.
For what reason God sometime gives a godly man a Child, and soon after takes
him away.

EXamining with my self what God intends, when he bestows upon a godly person
a child, and a few days after takes him away again; I suppose he intends that
which we intend, when we give an infant a thing, and seeing him much delighted
therewith, and desirous to make experiment of his mind and inclination, we take
it away again. And as we like well that child whom we see with the same
cheerfulness to part with the thing, when we take it from him, with which he
took it, and dislike him when we see him sorrowful and stubborn; so God
willing to make proof of a pious person, and of his mortification, gives him a
son, and when he sees him joyful, takes him from him; and if he leave his
son, when God takes him away, with the same contentedness with which he
received him when God gave him, he gives good sign of his piety, and
holiness; but if he be sorrowful, grieved, and weeps, he gives an ill sign
of his piety, and a worse of his mortification.

One difference there is, that we giving the thing to the child, and taking it
away, intend to prove and know him; and God in bestowing a son upon a pious
person, and taking him away, intends that the said person should know himself,
and understand how far he is proceeded in piety, and in mortification; and he
intends to exercise him in mortification. And it is a much more easy thing to
God to give a son to a man, and to take him away, then for a man to give a
Pear, and take it away.

Herewith I understand, that every pious person ought to demean himself toward
God, when he deprives him of any thing which he has given him, how dear soever
it be unto him, as a well inclined child demeans himself toward his father,
when he takes from him the thing which he had given him. But to this piety none
ever come, but they only who enter in at the gate, and that is, our Lord Jesus
Christ.

CONSID. XXIII.
How we are disenamoured of the world, and enamoured of God.

FInding my soul altogether barren and dry, and as it were estranged from God,
and understanding that this was because God had hid his presence from me; I
thought to relieve and comfort my self in this my necessity by reducing my
memory, that it should not think upon any other thing but God. Scarce had I
made this deliberation, and begun to put it in execution, but I perceived that
although it be in my power to exercise my memory in God, as in another thing;
yet for all that it is not in my power to make that my mind should feel the
presence of God, and so free it self from its barrenness, and dryness, and
estrangement from God. Furthermore, I understood a very great difference
between the state in which the soul that labors to have God present, finds it
self, from the estate in which it finds it self, when God causes it to feel
his presence. And being willing to know in what this difference consists, I
understood it consisted in this, that in one estate man's spirit works, and in
the other, the holy Spirit works. And so I resolved with my self, that
between these states, there is the same difference, that is between Flesh and
Spirit.

Passing on further I understood, that those men who upon their own designs,
and for their own interesses desire and endeavor to disenamour themselves of
the world, and enamour themselves of God, not being inspired nor moved
thereunto by the holy spirit, are much like to those men, who for their own
designs, and for their own interesses, do labor and endeavor to disenamour
themselves of a base and vulgar thing, and to enamour themselves of some other
thing that is qualified with much worth; not being incited thereunto either by
the sway of their own proper affections, or by the desire of the thing it self,
to which they would affectionate themselves: I would say, that the
difficulties, the distasts, and the troubles are much alike, which the one and
the other make experience of, and that neither these, nor those do ever obtain
that which they pretend.

Furthermore I understood, that those men, whom God would disenamour of the
world, and enamour of himself, are much like to those men, whom a person of
quality would withdraw from another base and vulgar person, and make enamoured
of himself. I would say, that almost the self same things befall to the one, as
to the other; that with the same facility the one and the other both disenamour
and enamour themselves; and that almost the self same things betide the one and
the other; and that there are almost the self same conceits in the one and in
the other: for as the one is forwarded to unlove, and to love by favors, and
cherishments, and by outward demonstrations; so the other is forwarded, or (to
speak better) is constrained to unlove, and to love by favors, and
cherishments, and inward demonstrations, spiritual and divine.

This one notable difference I find, that the one, because he loves changeable
things, remains always with fear; and the other because he loves stable things
is void of all fear. Furthermore I find, that the one of them has his
satisfaction in his own power touching that which he loves, by means of
remembrance; and the other stands always at the mercy of God, it not being in
his own power to be able to take or feel more satisfaction, then that which God
will give unto him, causing him to feel and taste his presence.

And I understand, that when the person whom God would disenamour of the world,
and enamour of himself, applies himself by his own industry, and exercises to
enamour himself of God, he does experiment in himself that which he proves, who
for his own designs, and interesses would disenamour himself of the world, and
enamour himself of God. In such sort, that they whom God disenamours, and
enamours, can give testimony of the estate of them, who labor to disenamour,
and enamour themselves; but these cannot give testimony of the state of those
others. Whereupon I understand, that men toil themselves in vain that seek for
their own designs to disenamour themselves of the world, and to enamour
themselves of God.

Furthermore I understand that they may judge themselves to be most happy, who
know that they have not been moved of themselves to disenamour themselves of
the world, and to enamour themselves of God, but have been moved thereunto by
the spirit of God.

Furthermore I understand, that they who go about to disenamour themselves of
the world, and enamour themselves of God, loose their labor, when without
being moved by him to love, they by their own industry, and by their own
exercises seek to discover Gods presence, when he hides it from them; And when
God is withdrawing himself from them, they for their own satisfaction would
have him present.

And above all things I understand, that the proper exercise of them, whom God
would disenamour of the world, and enamour of himself, is to apply their minds
to disenamour themselves of the world, not accepting of its favors, nor its
cherishments, nor its flatteries, but driving them away from them, flying them,
and abominating them: Not pretending for all this, that God being moved by this
their exercise, should enamour them more of himself; but that the favors of
God finding them dispoiled and deprived of the favors of the world, will
become more effectual in them, will more penetrate, and transform them more
into the love of God, and so they shall more speedily and entirely obtain and
get the Love of God. That this is true, every man will easily understand, that
shall consider, how that he that has expelled and altogether abandoned the
familiarity and conversation of a base and vulgar Person, comes much more
easily to enamour himself of a Personage exceedingly qualified in worth.

Having passed through these considerations, and understood these secrets, and
others that are annexed unto them, and that do depend on them, looking into the
Holy Scripture, I have known that these things are very conformable to that
which I have read therein: forasmuch as Solomon in his Canticles, does
celebrate this Enamourment between God and the soul, and that the departing
from God is called Adultery, when the soul leaves God, and applies it self to
the World. And it seems to me, that our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, leaving
one that would have followed him, and calling another that alleged excuse or
delay, it was nothing else, but to refuse the love of one, and to enamour the
the other. This as I conceive he meant, to let his Apostles understand, when he
said unto them, you have not chosen me, but I have chosen you; as if he should
have said, you have not enamoured your selves of me, but I have enamoured you.
And this, as I understand, S. John meant when he said, that to become the
sons of God, must proceed, not from the will of man, nor from man's spirit,
but by the will of God, and by the Holy Spirit; in such sort, that during this
present life it behooves every man to apply himself to disenamour himself of
the world, and to occupy himself in praying to God that he would enamour him of
himself, to this effect give him his holy Spirit, which is obtained by
believing in Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XXIV.
That those Persons, who are governed by the holy Spirit in their serving of
God, endeavor to increase in the love of God.

GOd generally loves all men, and he loves with particular love, all those for
whom he has executed the rigor of his Justice upon his only begotten Son
Jesus Christ our Lord. Men generally hate God, and they hate him with
particular hatred, who are guilty to have added other depravations to their
natural depravation.

The love which God bears men, proceeds from the great things which he has
done for them, in such sort, that with reason he loves them more, to whom
justification by Christ does appertain. And man's hatred toward God proceeds
from the depravation, wherewith he offends him, (for as it is said, He that
offends, pardons not,) in such sort, that with reason they most hate God, that
have most offended him.

According to reason it seems that God being most perfect, he ought to be most
soveraignly beloved of man, and that man being most highly imperfect, ought to
be most highly hated of God. Likewise because man has received many good
things from the Liberality of God, he ought much to love God; and God having
received from man nothing but offenses and injuries, he ought to be hated of
God. But on the other side so great force has the obligation which God has to
love man for the great matters that he has done, and does for him, that
however he know the height of imperfection to be in him, and that he is
offended by him, he does not leave to love him: it coming so to pass on Gods
behalf in this case with men, as it comes to pass to a good father, with a
disobedient and vicious son, who is more drawn by the force of that which he
has done for his son, to love him, then by the disobedience and depravation of
his son to hate him. And likewise on the other side, the hatred and enmity
which a man has to God through his natural depravation, and through the
offenses that he has added to this depravation, enforce so much, that although
man know the height of perfection in him, and although he find and feel himself
benefited of God, he cannot only not bring himself to love God, but also he
cannot leave to hate him. That betiding a man in this case with God, that
betides to a vicious and malignant son with a good father, with whom his
villainy, and malignity has more force to hate his father, then the knowledge
of his fathers goodness, and of the great obligation which he has to his
father, to make him love him.

Whereupon I understand, that God willing to be loved of man, as a good father
would be loved of his son, (knowing that the impediment of this love is that
which is spoken of, that he who offends pardons not,) executed the rigor of
his justice upon his own son, as if a good father should say to a disobedient
son, See, I have chastised thy brother for thy disobedience and offenses; since
then I have taken away the impediment, love thou me, as I love thee.

Hence I understand, that the intent which God had in executing the rigor of
his justice on Christ, was not less to secure me, then to satisfy himself.
Further I understand, that a man who gives credit to this justice executed on
Christ, accepting it, and making it his own, does altogether loose the hatred
which he bears to God, and begins to love God, even as the son who believes
that his father has chastised his brother for that which he had disobeyed in,
leaves to hate his father, and begins to love him. And now I understand that as
the son desiring, not that his father should love him, for he already knows
that he loves him; nor much less that he should love him more, for he knows
that he loves him much; but he himself desiring greatly to love his father,
applies himself with all his force to serve him in every thing, which he thinks
to be pleasing unto him, and puts himself to great hazards for him, and
deprives himself of all his pleasures and all his satisfactions for him;
considering that being loved by his father, and likewise doing great things for
his father, he shall come to love his father greatly. Even so the man that is
already justified, desiring not that God should love him, for he knows already
that God loves him, nor that he should love him more, for he knows that he
loves him much; but he himself desiring to love God much, applies himself with
all his force to serve God; knowing that being beloved of God for the great
things which God has done, and does for him, that he also doing great things
for God, shall come to love God greatly.

Furthermore I understand, that the consideration of the great sins which God
has pardoned us, makes us to grow in the love of God, as the consideration of
the great offenses which we have done, when we do not feel the pardon, makes us
to grow in hatred.

Furthermore I understand, that the services which those persons who are
governed by the Spirit of God, do to God, are not done to satisfy the
obligation with which they were born; neither are they done as humane wisdom
instructs, and as humane Philosophy teaches; pretending piety, thereby to
oblige God, either to the intent that he should pardon their offenses, or that
he should love them; but properly to bind themselves to love God more, and
every day more to increase in the love of God.

Furthermore I understand, that the services unto which the holy Spirit applies
these persons, are to disenamour them of themselves, and of the world, and to
enamour them of God, and of those persons that love God. And I understand that
then a man disenamours himself of himself, when he deprives himself of all
those things which may give, or cause unto him outward satisfaction in any kind
whatsoever. And then, as I understand, he disenamours himself of the world,
when he takes away and apparts from his mind all thought to satisfy and please
the world in things of the world, and when any occasion offers it self, he puts
this deliberation in effect.

And then I understand a man affectionates himself to God, and to the persons
that love God, when he applies himself with his mind unto them; when by service
and benefits he does oblige himself to love them, doing unto them that which he
would do unto God himself, if he saw him to have need of his service,
accordingly as David says he himself did, Psalm. 16.

And furthermore, that to suffer for Christ, and for the confession and
manifestation of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, does above all things enamour them
of God and Christ, that so suffer. And I understand, that in their sufferings,
love does in great part deprive them of the sense of that which they suffer.

And withal this I understand, that without comparison the love which God
bears a pious and just man, however sorry a one and imperfect he be, is much
greater then that love which a pious and just person, however much perfect he
be, bears to God; even as a good father more loves a son, however sorry a one
he be, then a son, however good he be, loves his father: And because this is
so, it is no marvel if they who be such live with much security, that neither
in this present life any thing shall befall them that shall be evil for them,
nor that that felicity which is promised to them that are pious and just, shall
be wanting unto them in the life everlasting; knowing the particular providence
of God; and they are just, accepting the justice of God executed on Jesus
Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XXV.
How pious persons may resolve themselves when God calls them to any change of
place, or state of life, and when not.

A Very great part of Christian piety, as I understand, consists in this,
That a man should never dispose of himself, nor put his own will in execution,
nor say in his thoughts, This would be well for me, if so be he have not some
evident sign of the will of God: In such sort, that when the state wherein he
finds himself, the place, or the manner of living shall become wearisome to
him, and there shall come thoughts into his mind, that This or that thing would
fit him well; he shall presently say, But what know I, if this would be good
for me? God is he, who knows what is good; and since he knows it, to him I
offer and resign my self, that he should set me in it; and in the mean space I
will believe, that that which is best for me, is to continue in the state
wherein I am. With this resolution a man condemns the judgment of humane
wisdom and reason, and renounceth his natural light, and enters into the
kingdom of God, resigning himself to the regiment and government of God.

Furthermore I understand, that albeit to some Saints of the Old Testament, and
to others of the New, God has manifested his will as it were by words; yet the
common language now, with which God speaks to the pious, is to put into their
hearts that which they should do, and afterward to necessitate them to do it,
or to facilitate the execution thereof: In such sort, that when a pious person
shall feel himself moved to change his state, place, or manner of living, or
whatsoever other thing, in which he shall be doubtful whether it be a motion
of the Spirit, or of the flesh; if he shall see himself necessitated to put it
in execution, or shall find much facility in executing it; he shall take it,
that God declares his will unto him by this means; and holding that
demonstration for a sufficient token of Gods will, he shall not doubt to put it
in execution. If he shall have the will, but neither the necessity, nor the
facility, he shall keep himself quiet; and if so be he shall have the
necessity, or the facility, and not the will, he shall likewise abide quiet;
saying, If this be the will of God, he will put it into my will, that I should
put it in execution. In this he shall so much more assure himself, inasmuch as
I understand and hold for certain and firm, God is so jealous of them that
attend to this piety, that even then when they are so much solicited by sensual
appetites, and by humane affections, that they come to desire to put their own
wills in execution. God himself hinders them, to the intent they should not
come to deprave themselves, except when he means to punish them; letting them
fall into that which they desire, because they hold it a good thing for them;
as he punished David in the case of Bathsheba; and this punishment is very
terrible; which as I understand does not consist in the execution of that thing
which a man desires, but in the knowledge of the inconvenience wherein he finds
himself to be fallen after the execution. In these like cases also pious
persons know the will of God, but it is that will of his which is with wrath
and with fury; and so they do confirm themselves in this matter, and think that
nothing befits them, but that in which they find themselves: And they stand
attentive to hear the language of God, when he moves the will, and
facilitateth and necessitateth the execution thereof. With which language I
understand that God also speaks unto the impious, as he spoke to
Nebuchadnezzar, and as he spoke to Darius and Cyrus, and as he spoke to Titus
and Vespasian. But there is very great difference in that which they that are
pious do, and in that which they do that are impious; forasmuch as they neither
knew, nor do know the will of God, and therefore albeit they did it, yet for
all this they did not serve, nor do serve God therein. But the pious, because
they know the will of God, and knowing it put it in execution, they serve God
therein. And inasmuch as they who are such, do set themselves to all their
works with this knowledge, they do as I understand, in all things serve God.
Those are they who believe, and put on Gods righteousness executed on Jesus
Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XXVI.
That the flesh whilst it is unregenerated flesh, is the enemy of God; and
that Regeneration is properly the work of the holy Spirit.

SAint Paul the Apostle speaking by experience of the holy Spirit, condemns the
flesh for the enemy of God. I understand by flesh all men, inasmuch as they are
not regenerated by the holy Spirit. Humane prudence, that always opposes it
self against the holy Spirit, holding this condemnation for an hard and
terrible thing, and not willing to endure it, will have what S. Paul means by
flesh, that which Socrates or Plato would have meant, that is, the Judgment of
the flesh. In this opinion all they who follow humane wisdom do concur,
holding it for an absurd and evil thing to condemn as sins, all the works of
unregenerated flesh. For according to their opinion, there are some with which
unregenerated men do not only not offend God, but in effect do him service,
such as are those wherein they agree with beasts, both the one and the other
being moved by natural instinct; as for a father to beget children, and for a
son to nourish his father; which things humane wisdom says, since they be not
vices, nay rather being virtues in brute beasts, it is no ways just to say
that the self same should be sins in unregenerated men; for in such case the
condition of mankind would come to be worse then that of brute beasts. Here I
understand humane wisdom deceives it self, inasmuch as it does not consider,
that the brute beast having neither wisdom, nor reason, does not alter the
order of God, nor the institution of nature; and a man not regenerated by the
holy Spirit, by his prudence and reason does continually pervert and alter it;
nay, he cannot leave to pervert and alter it, inasmuch as being proud, he goes
mending the works of God by his own reason, and by his own prudence, and
inasmuch as loving himself in every thing that he does, he pretends his own
interest, and his own proper glory; and so he does not follow the natural
order, nor intend the glory of God. In such sort as the father bringing up the
son, and the son nourishing the father, every one of them intends only his
own glory, and his own interest, and his own satisfaction. That being properly
in men through the vice of their corrupted flesh, which leaves to love, and to
esteem God, and esteems and loves it self, aiming in every thing at its own
proper glory, and its own proper interest

Whereupon I consider in this present life that which is in the house of a
great lord, who has thirty slaves, for whom he does sufficiently provide all
necessary things, and appoint them the things, in which he will be served of
them. Of these thirty slaves I imagine that ten of them are fools, without
understanding, and without any manner of discourse, altogether as beasts. These
as I understand without perverting, and without altering the order which their
lord has given them, do that which is commanded them, not pretending any thing
else, but only to obey their lord: The other ten, I suppose, are well
experienced, and have judgment, and discretion, who pretending to know and
understand as much as their lord, and sometimes more, pervert the order that is
given unto them, supposing to find the point better, and having an eye to their
own interesses, have always an eye to gain their liberty, and to be better
entreated, and more cherished of their lord, not contenting themselves with
their servitude, nor contenting themselves with that ordinary entertainment
which they receive from their lord: The other ten, I imagine to my self, are
likewise experienced, and understanding, and such as have judgment, wit and
understanding, but persuading themselves that their lord knows more then they,
and no ways priding themselves of their own knowledge and understanding,
without perverting or altering the order that is given unto them, obey their
lords meaning, and content themselves with their servitude and entertainment,
aiming only in the doing the will of their lord, at his profit, satisfaction,
and glory. The first ten serve but like beasts with their bodies, and these in
the world are the brute beasts. The second ten in serving, pretend to serve,
but offend; and then offend most, when they serve most, and best; for then they
do most alter, and pervert the will and order of their lord: And these are all
men, inasmuch as they are not regenerated by the holy Spirit: The third ten
serve as obedient Sons, not perverting nor altering the order and will of their
lord; and they serve both with their bodies; and with their minds; and these
are the men that are regenerated by the holy Spirit, without which regeneration
it is impossible that men should reduce themselves to this degree. and
therefore Saint Paul well says, that the flesh is the enemy of God, and is not
subject to the law and will of God; neither though it would, could it; inasmuch
as a man doting upon his own wisdom, and his own reason, pretends to mend the
works of God, and inasmuch as being enamoured of himself, in every thing which
he does, he has an eye unto himself.

To the intent this may be the better understood, I say, that by regeneration I
understand that change, and outward and inward Renovation, which the holy
Spirit works in those persons, who believing in Jesus Christ, and accepting
as their own Gods justice, that he executed upon Christ, are changed and
renewed in all their affections and desires, in such sort, that no ways
pretending in the execution of their own appetites, nor in the sway of their
own affections, that which they did pretend before their regeneration, have
lost that understanding to go about mending of Gods works, and have lost their
own love, whereby they loved themselves, as if one of the ten slaves of the
second order should pass to the number of the ten of the third order.

Those men who by wit and humane artifice pretend to change and renew
themselves, as I understand, do not obtain this Christian regeneration, but
that which is humane, that which is of the flesh, and of humane wisdom, and
reason; such as was that of some heathen Philosophers. For in Christian
renovation the holy spirit only has part, nay, it is so much Regeneration,
and Renovation, as it is wrought by the holy Spirit; that is, inasmuch as the
holy Spirit works it in a man, when he feeling his election, and his vocation,
and permitting the holy Spirit to work in him, without pretending to work of
himself, or to follow his proper judgment, or his proper opinion in any thing;
so that when he thinks himself to stand furthest off from his Regeneration, and
Renovation, he finds himself more near, and more entire, and more perfect
therein. And this is that Regeneration, and Renovation, which Saint Paul says,
the holy Spirit works in them which are true Christians. And this is that which
the Son of God himself, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ spoke to Nicodemus.

CONSID. XXVII.
That by Mortification a man maintains himself in his Christian resolution; and
by reducing of his mind to God, he maintains himself in the certainty of Gods
providence.

THe man that being called of God, feeling his vocation and answering unto it,
applies himself with his mind to piety, as I understand, is first moved to
resolve himself touching the world, not willing to have from it any greater
part, then that which it shall please God to give him in the dignities and
estimation thereof; and he is moved to resolve with himself, not desiring
touching his body, either more commodities, or any better condition in outward
matters, then it shall please God to put him into. Furthermore I understand,
that a man cannot maintain himself in his resolution with the world, if so be
he do not mortify the affections that live in him, of Ambition, and Avarice,
and of self-estimation; neither can he sustain himself in his Resolution with
himself, if he do not mortify his sensual appetites that live in his body.
And therefore after that the faith and feeling of his vocation has moved him
to these two Resolutions, this faith, and the holy Spirit (which is
communicated unto him together with faith,) do mortify in him the affections
which might hinder, and disturb the Resolution with the world; and the
appetites that might hinder and disturb the Resolution with himself: In such
sort, as faith and the holy Spirit do mortify the affections and appetites of
a man, to maintain him in those resolutions, which through his vocation he has
made with the world, and with himself. Whereupon I understand, that for a pious
person to feel himself tempted by ambition, and his own proper estimation, is
not a sign that he stands not resolute with the world, but that he has not
mortified his affections. Likewise I understand, that for a pious person to
feel himself tempted by the pleasures of the body, is not a sign that he
stands not resolved with himself, but that he has not mortified his Appetites.
And so I take this Resolution, that a pious person who answering to his
vocation is resolved with the world, and with himself, desiring to maintain
himself in his Resolutions, ought to attend unto Mortification, which as has
been said, maintains a person in his Resolutions.

I likewise understand that the same calling of God does move a man being
called to accept the particular Providence of God in all things; holding for
certain that all are his works wherein his will does particularly concur. And
I understand, that the faith whereunto a man is called, and the holy Spirit,
which by faith is communicated unto him, do bring a man to content himself with
every thing that befalls him either good, or evil; being certainly persuaded
that whatever befalls him, is for his good, and in this certainty of Gods
providence he rejoices.

And hence also I understand, that for a pious person to resent and grieve
himself at those things, which happen amiss to him touching his body, is not a
sign that he has not certification of Gods providence, but that he has not
reduced his mind to content himself with that which God does. And so I resolve
my self in this matter, that together with a man's attending unto the
mortification of his affections and appetites, he ought to attend to reduce his
mind to this conformity to the will of God. For in this manner maintaining his
own Resolutions in himself, he shall also maintain the Certainty of Gods
providence, and shall likewise maintain himself in piety, justice, and
holiness, which is got by believing on Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XXVIII.
How a man should assure himself of his Vocation.

FOrasmuch as I understand, it does greatly import, that a man should be
certain that he is called of God to the grace of the Gospel of Christ, that is,
to the intent that believing in Christ he should obtain immortality and
eternal life: (for this certainty works in him the resolution with the world,
and with himself, and mortification, by which he is maintained in his
resolutions.) I come now to say, that a person that shall not have had a
Vocation so evident clear and outward, as was that of Saint Paul, after the
coming of the holy Spirit; or as was that of the Apostles, whilst Christ
conversed with men; nor so effectual and powerful as in some persons, in whom
although it be inward, yet the effects are so evident as may serve for outward;
but shall have had a quiet, and remiss Vocation, as it is in those persons, in
whom it being inward, and not able to show it self by outward signs, because
they are of themselves outwardly moderate in their affections and appetites: I
say, that such a person may certify himself of his Vocation, by the sense and
feeling that he has of his justification through faith. I would say, that when
a pious person being moved unto Christian piety, or having understood the
motion, shall doubt whether he were moved and called of God, or only moved by
his own self-love; finding in himself some sense of his justification by Faith,
that is peace of conscience, (which all they obtain, who believing make Gods
justice their own) he may well assure himself, that his motion to piety was the
Vocation of God, and no design of humane wisdom; this being certain, that
only they who are called of God, do feel in themselves the benefit of Gods
justice executed on Christ Jesus our Lord.

CONSID. XXIX.
That to believe with difficulty is a sign of Vocation.

THE Easiness with which they believe the matters of Christian Faith, who
believe by Opinion, by Relation, and by persuasion; and the Difficulty with
which they believe them, who believe them by Inspiration, and Revelation, has
led me to this Consideration; that they who believe by Relation, amongst some
true things believe many false, and are likewise more easy to believe false
things then true; and they who believe by Revelation, believe only true
things, and of falsities they admit none; in such sort, that the difficulty of
believing is rather a sign of Vocation, then the easiness. He that believes
by Revelation, believes as much as he feels, and because in those things which
he does not feel, he finds contradiction, he believes that which is inspired,
and revealed unto him, and yet not that always, but when the Revelation, and
Inspiration, and the inward sense is lively and entire. They who obtain this
Faith, Christ calls them Blessed, and these are the sons of God. And this is
the faith that always leads Charity, and Hope in its company, and without
which it is impossible to please God; That which purifies the hearts, makes
them clean, and quickens them. Of which our omnipotent God make us rich by
Christ our Lord!

CONSID. XXX.
That God in communicating spiritual things unto us, deals as in giving the
fruits of the earth.

SEtting my self sometimes to reason with God, I say unto him in this sort:
Wherefore Lord, when thou call a person to thy kingdom, do thou not make
him presently feel his justification? Wherefore do thou not presently give
him the holy Spirit, which should rule and govern him? And why do thou not
show unto him thy presence? To this it seems to me, that he makes answer to me,
saying, For the self same cause, that I do not make the grain as soon as it is
sown, to spring, so that it may be reaped. This, say I, is the curse of sin:
And this other matter, says he, is also through the curse of sin. Again, say
I, Since thou have done it with Saint Paul and with some others, why do thou
it not generally with all? For the self same cause (replies he) that I have
sometimes given men bread to eat without causing it to grow by the ordinary
way, willing to show my omnipotency both in the one and in the other. As those
persons (say I,) Lord to whom thou have given bread by extraordinary ways, do
more acknowledge that bread from thy liberality, then those other, who have it
by ordinary ways; even so also, all thine elect would more acknowledge all
their inward gifts from thy liberality, if so be thou would do with them
that which thou did with Saint Paul, rather then guiding them, as thou
guidest them, by an ordinary way. I will (says God) that both the one and the
other should acknowledge from me that which they obtain by the ordinary way;
and that so much the more, as it seems to themselves, that they get it by
industry and labor. For in this thing I will that they should mortify the
judgment of their humane wisdom, which mortification should not be necessary,
if they had these things by extraordinary way. I will have the labourer to
labor the ground, and to sow his seed, and I will that he shall attribute to
me the fruit of all his labors. I will likewise that spiritual persons labor
and endeavor what they may, and yet I will have them submit themselves to
believe and to love, and so get justification, and the holy Spirit; and I will
that they attribute all unto me. And hold thou it for certain, that as the
labourer should prove himself very rash, that should think to gather much
grain, having the rain at his command when he pleased, and the Sun when he
pleased; so likewise should that spiritual person be very rash, who would hope
to increase much in piety and holiness, having the inspirations in his own
power when he would. Whereupon hold for certain, that he does take the better,
who freely in all things, and every where leaves it for me to do, without
opposing himself in any thing, and without supposing to govern by himself that
which ought to be governed by me. With these Considerations I put my mind in
quiet, when I find it impatient, and not well enduring to expect God; referring
and submitting my self in all things and every where to my God; being assured
that he does govern and will govern me in this Christian business, according
to my necessity, through his only begotten Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XXXI.
That the liveliness of Affections is more damageable then that of the
Appetites; and that it is necessary that both the one, and the other should be
mortified.

EXamining in what properly the liveliness of affections, and of the Appetites
does consist, and when this liveliness does offend, and when it does not
offend: I resolve my self, that the liveliness of affections consists in the
inward satisfaction that is according to the flesh, that is, when a man abides
alive and vigorous in relishing with the senses of his mind, the things that
belong to the world, such as are honors done to him, self-boastings, and that
which is principal, his reputation and fame. And I understand that the
liveliness of appetites consists in the outward satisfactions, that is, when
a man abides alive and vigorous to relish with his five bodily senses, the
things that delight and content the sensuality. And resolving my self, that
this liveliness of affections and appetites is then hurtful, when he who has
it knows it not, understands it not, or does not hold it for a fault, or
defect; and that then it does not hurt, when he that has it knows it, and
understands it, and holding it for a defect and a vice, goes by little and
little refraining and mortifying it: I come to consider, which of the two is
most damageable, and most contrary to the holy spirit, either the liveliness
of affections, or that of the appetites? In this resolution, I come first to
consider, that the liveliness of affections holds the inward man alive in the
things of the world; and that the liveliness of appetites holds the outward
man alive in things of the flesh. And I understand that by how much the soul is
more worthy then the body, by so much is the liveliness of affections more
contrary to the spirit, then that of the flesh. Furthermore I consider in this
matter; A certain person goes to a feast for his own satisfaction, I would say,
to satisfy his appetites in seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, and touching;
and another person goes to comply with the world for the satisfaction of him
that makes the feast: And it will seem, that in him that goes for his own
satisfaction there is a greater liveliness, then in him that goes for others
satisfaction, but it is not true: for if in him that goes for others
satisfaction, the affections of his own proper estimation, and of the honor of
the world, were not alive, he would not go: In such sort, that albeit he does
not go being drawn by his appetites, yet he goes being drawn by his own
affections, and by theirs whom he desires to please. It being very true, that
that person that goes for his own satisfaction, satisfies his own appetites;
and he that goes for others satisfaction, satisfies his own affections and
others: It is clear that the satisfaction of the affections is more damageable,
and more contrary to the spirit, then that of the appetites. Furthermore I
consider, that in the eyes of humane wisdom he is reprehended, and defamed,
that is unbrideledly alive in his appetites; and he is praised and honored,
that is moderate and temperate in them; and he is esteemed to be a Saint, that
has altogether mortified them. And on the contrary, he is esteemed and prized,
that keeps lively in his affections of honor, and his own particular esteem;
and he is esteemed vile and of no worth, that is in all these things mortified.
Now it being true, that to the eyes of humane wisdom that always appears
great, which to the eyes of the holy Spirit seems little; and that always
appears little to humane wisdom, which appears great to the holy Spirit; it
will easily follow that humane wisdom holding the appetites more damageable
then the affections, the holy Spirit will hold the affections more damageable
then the appetites. Many other things might be considered to confirm this, but
these abundantly suffice to come to my intent, which is this, that that person,
who studies to be like unto Christ, and like unto God, and to comprehend the
Christian perfection, (in which he is comprised by the incorporation whereby he
stands incorporated in Christ) must attend to the mortification of his
affections and appetites, always keeping strict account with them, to kill
them in that wherein he shall see them alive. But principally he ought to
attend to the mortification of his affections, as well for that respect which
we have spoken of, as also because in the death of the affections, the
appetites die; but the affections do not at all die in the death of the
appetites; nay it comes to pass, that in the death of the appetites the
affections revive: for as has been said, in the eyes of humane wisdom the
mortification of the appetites is very highly esteemed of, and therefore a man
is praised and honored for it.

Hereby I understand this, That when any person kills his affections by humane
wisdom and industry, despising honor, and reputation of the world; he grows
vicious and licentious; for the appetites live and grow unbridled: And when
another person kills his affections by the holy Spirit, he does together
therewith kill his appetites: by which proof a man may judge of many designs
and motions pertaining to the despising of the world, whether they be of humane
spirit, or from the holy Ghost.

I would to God that in me the affections were altogether dead, and likewise
the appetites, so that neither my mind should be delighted with any thing that
were not spiritual and divine, nor my body should take of the things of the
world more then that which suffices to sustain it in the world the time that
God has ordained that it should live here! But if so be I must run out in any
thing, and that some kind of liveliness will remain in me, that of the
appetites would less displease me, then that of the affections. I would say, I
should hold it for less inconvenient to see in me some liveliness of
appetites, and to satisfy my self in them; then to see in my self any
liveliness of affections and to satisfy my self and others in them. Nay
verily, if the shame of the world, and the ill example I should give to
spiritual persons did not restrain me, I could scarce contain my self
sometimes from suffering my self to be transported to the satisfaction of my
appetites, holding it for certain, that by that means I should sooner mortify
my affections, and that my affections dying, my appetites would also die with
them.

I will add this, that the affections are mortified, when a man having
opportunity to grow in honor and reputation, and in much credit with men, will
not, but renounceth all: And that the appetites are mortified, when a man
properly may satisfy them, and does not satisfy them.

He that mortifies his appetites, does kill his flesh; and he that mortifies
his affections crucifieth himself entirely with Jesus Christ our Lord.

In saying, That sometimes satisfying my appetites, I should think to mortify
my affections; I mean this, that the shame and confusion which I should deserve
in having satisfied my appetites, would be a cause that I should not think of
being honored and praised, and so satisfy my affections whilst I mortify my
appetites. This I hold for certain many of those persons prove in themselves,
who attend unto the Spirit, of which persons only I speak.

CONSID. XXXII.
Of the abuse, and of the right use of the holy Scriptures.

I Understand that learned men being without the Spirit, do suffer the self
same deceit in the holy Scriptures, which unlearned men without the spirit of
God do in images; in this manner: An unlearned superstitious man keeps a
crucifix of Christ in his chamber, by means whereof, always when he enters
into his chamber, he remembers that which Christ suffered; and finding (as he
thinks) piety and religion in this remembrance, he puts in all other parts of
his house other images like unto that; and knowing well that always as he
walks up and down his house, he shall see these images, which will bring to his
memory that which Christ suffered, he cares not to imprint in his mind Christ
crucified, contenting himself to see him painted: and as long as he does not
keep him in his mind, he neither feels nor tastes the benefit of Christ's
Passion. And it comes to pass, that when this superstitious unlearned man is
moved to demand any thing of Christ, it seeming sufficient to him to behold him
painted with his bodily eyes, he cares not to lift up his mind to behold him
with spiritual eyes; in such sort, that a man may say, that he does not pray
unto Christ, but unto that picture.

In the self same manner a learned man without the Spirit, keeps written in
holy Scripture, the things that pertain to a Christian man [both] that which he
ought to believe, and that which he ought to do; in such sort, that when ever
he gets his book, he understands both the one and the other: And this seeming
sufficient to him, he employes all his study and diligence in having many
books, that may declare unto him the sense and meaning of the holy Scripture,
not caring at all to imprint in his mind that which he reads, and that which he
studies therein, nor to frame his opinions, nor his conceits in things
pertaining unto Christian piety, according to that he there reads, and studies.
And being desirous to understand some secret of God, and of spiritual matters,
applying himself to seek it in holy Scripture, he does not lift up his mind to
pray God that he would show it him, and teach it him so, that he does take for
his aim the spirit of God; but [he contents himself with] that which by his own
proper nature and wit he learns from that which was written by them, who had
the spirit of God. And if so be they suffer this deceit, that handle the
Scriptures which were written by the holy Spirit, what may we think is the
deceit of them, who handle the writings that are written by humane spirits?

The unlearned man that has the spirit, serves himself with images, as with
an Alphabet of Christian piety; forasmuch as he so much serves himself with the
picture of Christ crucified, as serves to imprint in his mind that which Christ
suffered, and to taste and feel the benefit of Christ. And when he has
imprinted him, and tastes and feels him, he cares no more for the picture,
leaving it to serve for an Alphabet to other beginners: And when he has Christ
in his mind, and is inspired to demand any thing of Christ, he cares not to
set his corporal eyes on the picture, but sets his spiritual eyes on the
impression, which he keeps in his mind: In like manner, a learned man that has
the spirit, serves himself of holy Scriptures, as of an I much mislike the
comparison of Images and holy Scripture, as if they were both but Alphabets,
and after a time to be left. The holy Scriptures have not only an elementary
use, but an use of perfection, neither can they ever be exhausted (as pictures
may by a plenary circumspection) but still even to the most learned and and
perfect in them, there is somewhat to be learned more: therefore David desires
God in the 119. Psalm, to open ^is eyes that he might see the wondrous things
of his law, and that he would make them his study; although by other words of
the same Psalm it is evident, that he was not meanly conversant in them.
Indeed he that shall so attend to the bark of the letter, as to neglect the
consideration of Gods work in his heart through the word, does amiss; both are
to be done, the Scripture still used, and Gods work within us still observed,
who works by his word, and ever in the reading of it. As for that Text. They
shall be all taught of God, it being Scripture cannot be spoken to the
disparagement of Scripture; but the meaning is this that God in the days of
the Gospel will not give an outward law of ceremonies, as of old; but such an
one as shall still have the assistance of the holy Spirit applying it to our
hearts, and ever out-running the teacher, as it did when Peter taught
Cornelius: There the case is plain, Cornelius had revelation, yet Peter was to
be sent for; and those that have inspirations must still use Peter. Gods word:
if we make another sense of the Text, we shall overthrow all means, save
Catechizing, and set up Enthusiasmes.

In the Scriptures are Doctrines, these ever teach more and more. Promises,
these ever comfort more and more, Romans 15.4.



Alphabet or Christian piety, wherein he reads that which appertains to
piety, until such time as it penetrate into his mind, so that he tastes and
feels not by judgment, nor by humane wisdom, but by his own proper mind, in
which he imprints the knowledge of God, which is there written; so as when
there comes unto him a desire to understand any secret of God, first he goes to
the book of his mind, and consults with the Spirit of God, and afterward he
goes to prove that which he has understood, with that which he finds written
in those holy books; so as having at first served himself with holy Scriptures
as with an Alphabet, he afterward leaves them to serve for the same effect to
other beginners, he attending to the inward inspirations, having for his proper
master the spirit of God, and serving himself with holy Scriptures as with an
holy conversation, and which causes refreshment unto him, altogether putting
from himself all those writings which are written by humane spirit. And so as
well in the unlearned with the spirit, as in the learned with the spirit, is
fulfilled that which was prophesied of the time of the Gospel, where it is
said, they shall be all taught of God, Isa. 54.13. accordingly as they
experiment in themselves, who obtain the spirit, which is communicated by Jesus
Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XXXIII.
In what manner through patience and consolation of the Scriptures, we maintain
our selves in hope.

ACcording to Saint Paul, The doctrine of this Consideration clears that of
the former: for as the servant leaves not the letter when he has read it, but
keeps it by him, and reads it again and again, and the more the promise is
delayed, the more he reads it, and fortifies himself with it; so are we to do
with the Scriptures, and this is the use of the promises of the Scriptures. But
the use of the doctrinall part is more, in regard it presents us not with the
same thing only when it is read, as the promises do, but enlightens us with
new considerations the more we read it. Much more might be said, but this
suffices, he himself allows it for an holy conversation and refreshment, in
the 32. Consideration, and amongst all divine and spiritual exercises and
duties, he names the reading and meditation of holy Scriptures for the first
and principal, as Consid. 47. and others; so that it is plain the Author had
a very reverend esteem of the holy Scripture, especially considering the time
and place where he lived.
Romans 15.4. we who in this life abide in the kingdom of God, Maintain our
selves in the hope of eternal life through patience, and consolation of the
Scriptures, The patience consists in this, that although the accompishment of
that which we desire, seem long, we do the more fortify our minds to hope more
and more, no ways departing from confidence. And the consolation of Scriptures
consists in this, that reading in them the promises of God, we do anew
confirm, and fortify our selves in hope; there betiding unto us that which
betides to one, to whom a lord promises by his letters a thousand ducats of
Advance-money, who maintains himself in the hope to have it through patience,
fortifying his heart more and more through hope, when it seems to him that the
accomplishment of the promise is delayed, no ways departing from his hope, and
comforting himself with the letter of the lord, in which reading the promise,
he does anew comfort himself in hope, and anew confirm himself in the
confidence which he has to obtain that which is promised him. I say, that like
as he bearing the delay, and reading the letter, conserves himself till the
promise be made good unto him: So we on the other side, bearing with patience
the delay of Christ's second coming, and reading the holy Scriptures, confirm
our selves until we come unto that eternal life, which is promised us by
Jesus Christ our Lord,

CONSID. XXXIV.
In what does consist the benefit which men have obtained from God by Christ.

A Certain rich man has a woman slave, vicious and ill inclined, who has her
children also vicious and ill inclined, as her self is. He because they be
such, will not for some time keep them in his house; but at another time for
some other occasion he contents himself to keep and maintain some of them in
his house; and moreover, to the end they may the more willingly stay with him,
it pleases him to use them as sons; and because he sees their evil
inclination, and sees, that if so be he goes by the way of rigor with them, it
will be impossible to keep them in his house, he does [therefore] not only
pardon them for being born of a vicious and ill inclined slave, (for, forasmuch
as concerns this point, he did set his mind at quiet, when he took them into
his house) but he likewise pardons all that which they shall do, being
vitiously, and villanously drawn, and overcome by the evil inclination with
which they were born. And they by the good usage of their Lord, (who has made
himself a Father unto them,) and by the good customs that they learn, being in
his house, leave that which they inherit from their old and evil mother, and
get that which they see in their new and good Father: and in this manner they
come to be heirs of the goods of their Lord, who is become unto them a Father.
By this similitude I understand, in what Christ's benefit toward men does
consist. The rich man is God: The evil slave is humane nature depraved by the
first transgression: Her sons are all mankind: The house of God is the
kingdom of God: The time in which God admits men into his kingdom is the time
of the Gospel: The occasion is the justice of God executed on Jesus Christ our
Lord: For this, God is content to admit into his kingdom them that come unto
him, and to hold them for sons, and so use them as sons. And because he
knows their evil inclination, and sees that if he [should] use rigor with
them, it will be impossible for them to keep themselves in his kingdom, he
[therefore] pardons them not only the fault of their depraved nature, with
which they are born, which is original sin, (for forasmuch as belongs to
original sin, he pardons it when he admits them to his kingdom;) but also
all those things which they shall do vitiously and villanously, being drawn,
and overcome by that evil inclination with which they were born, (which is
proper and natural unto them) whilst they resist and strive with it.
Whereupon they by the favor of God, who of a Lord is become unto them a
Father, making them sons of slaves, and by the good customs which they learn
continuing in the kingdom of God, do by little and little forsake that which
they hold of their old evil and vicious mother; and get that which they see in
their new good and heavenly Father, leaving, both to appear and to be like
their mother. And as before they came unto the kingdom of God, they had and
represented in them the image and the likeness of depraved nature; so likewise
being entered into the kingdom of God, they have and represent in themselves
the image and similitude of God; recovering that which the first man lost. By
this I understand in what sort man was created unto the likeness and
similitude of God, and in what does consist the benefit that men have received
by Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XXXV.
Whence that difficulty comes, which pious persons find to continue in that
which appertains to Piety and Justification.

COnsidering that the duty of Piety is for a man to content himself with every
thing which God does, persuading himself and holding for certain, that every
thing that so comes to him, is Good, Holy, and Just; believing that all that
which comes to pass in this present life, comes to pass by divine providence,
without admitting that any thing should come to pass by chance: And
considering that the duty of Christian Faith is to accept with his mind, and to
confess with his mouth, the Gospel of Jesus Christ our Lord. I see on one side
in many men that have not the spirit, much conformity to the will of God, in
such manner, that they neither grieve themselves, nor resent out of measure the
death of those persons whom they greatly love, nor the loss of goods, nor the
loss of honor, and that they themselves are content to die: And I see
likewise in many other men that have not the spirit, much acceptance, and much
confession of the Gospel, without any scruple or doubt at all. And I see on the
other side, that some spiritual persons grieve themselves, resent, and are
very sorrowful for the death of those persons whom they loved, and for other
inconveniences that befall them, and they cannot bring themselves to be willing
to die, and that they feel the loss of estate, and the loss of honor; And I
see also in other persons who have the spirit, much wavering in the
acceptance, and confession of the Gospel, that they cannot believe, nor
confirm themselves in all that is therein. I have many times set my self to
consider the causes whence these contrary effects should proceed; forasmuch as
it seems, that in him who has not the spirit, there should not be conformity
with the will of God, nor should he give credit to the Gospel: and in him that
has the spirit, there ought to be both the one and the other. And after
consideration I understand, that however flesh does sometimes a little
contradict flesh, yet in the end flesh suffers her self to be overcome, and
subdued by the flesh: whereupon there being in a man that has not the spirit,
as well an affection of the flesh willing to conform it self with God, as to
grieve, to be sorrowful, and to resent it self for the inconveniences that
offer themselves in this present life; it comes to pass, that one affection
overcoming the other, it seems that such a man does conform himself with the
will of God, but it is not true: for he does conform himself, but only with
his own proper will, whereby, for his own satisfaction, and for his own
designs, he does determine to content himself with every thing, and to conform
himself in all things to the will of God.

That this is true, we read in many books of the Gentiles, and we hear and see
it in many other Nations altogether Infidels, and others that counterfeit
faith. Likewise I understand, that there being in a man that has not the
spirit, as well an affection of the flesh to accept and confess the Gospel, as
not to accept nor confess it; it comes to pass that one affection overcoming
the other, it seems that such an one believes the Gospel; but it is not true:
for he does believe only his own opinion and imagination, as the Jew that
stands stubborn in his Law, and as the Moor that believes his Alcoran.

On the other side, I understand that the flesh always repugnes against the
spirit, always contradicts it, and always struggles with it, by reason of the
great enmity that is between them two. Whereupon it comes to pass that there
being in a man that has the spirit, an affection of the spirit, that makes him
willing to conform himself to the will of God, contenting himself with every
thing that God does, and combating and resisting the flesh, which is not soon
overcome; it comes to pass that the man who has the spirit, laments, resents,
and is grieved for the corporal incommodities, and for all those other things,
in which the flesh suffers, and above all things for death. For so we see that
the Saints of the Law did grieve themselves; and Saint Paul, a Saint of the
Gospel would have resented it as himself says, Phil. 2.27. if that friend of
his Epaphroditus had died; and even the son of God our Lord God Jesus Christ
did resent himself, and was grieved at the death of Lazarus, Mat. 26.38.

In like manner I understand, that there being in the man which has the
spirit, an affection of the spirit to be willing to accept, and confess the
Gospel, and the flesh repugning and contradicting, because it has no part in
such desire, nor in such will; it comes to pass that a man that has the
spirit, feels a weakness in his faith, and goes wavering and doubting in it,
as we have read in some Saints, and as we see it in others; in such sort, that
as from the small contradiction which the affections of the flesh have amongst
themselves, there comes forth an appearance of Piety, and Faith, in them that
have not the spirit: so from the great contradiction that is between the Flesh
and the Spirit, there proceeds from them that have the spirit, a weakness in
piety and faith: that befalling in a man, which befalls in the world, in a
Province, or in a Commonwealth; that as it comes to pass, when any person
speaks or publishes any thing with an affection of the spirit, he presently
finds an opposition, contradiction, and outward persecution, although it be a
thing which is ordinarily spoken and practiced, but without the spirit, and out
of humane affections: so likewise when a man goes about through the motion of
the spirit to persuade himself, and confirm himself in any thing pertaining to
piety, or justification, he suddenly finds an inward opposition, and
contradiction: for his own affections, and his own appetites, which are mortal
enemies to the spirit, rise up against him. And this comes to pass,
notwithstanding that the self same things have been formerly accepted and
believed of him by his own proper affection and opinion.

Whereupon I gather this conclusion, That it is a sign, that it is the holy
Spirit which works in a man the will and desire to increase in piety and
justification, when a man finds in himself much opposition and contradiction;
and when also he finds outward opposition from men. And I resolve my self, that
in this fight and opposition a man ought to labor and travel much, but
without afflicting, or grieving himself; for although the flesh together with
all its affections remain alive, yet the holy Spirit shall have the victory,
and be the conqueror. For it is not meet that the son of the slave, that is,
the flesh, should be heir with the son of the freewoman, that is, the
spirit, of those goods that properly belong to the spirit, that is, of the
knowledge of God, in the present life, and of the vision of God, in life
everlasting. And saying the flesh, I understand the affection of flesh, that
which men receive from Adam, all which must needs die in us, to the intent that
all that may live in us, which we can receive from Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XXXVI.
In what Christian Liberty does consist, how it is known, and how it is to be
exercised.

THat it may be well understood, wherein Christian liberty does consist, how it
is known, and how it is exercised, it imports much to understand first in what
the Hebrew servitude did consist, how it was understood, and how it was
exercised. The Hebrew servitude, as I understand, proceeded from the command of
the law, which by threatenings and promises kept men in servitude, and entreated
them as servants. Amongst the Hebrew people, some applied themselves to the law
by inspiration, others out of opinion; and there were others also who cared not
for the law, living licentiously; these knew not the Hebrew servitude, neither
exercised themselves in it. They who out of opinion applied themselves to the
law, desiring and procuring that the curses wherewith the law threatened
transgressors, should not be executed on them, and that the promises which the
law made to them that observed it, might be fulfilled in them, knew the Hebrew
servitude, but did not exercise it as they ought: for being governed by their
own proper spirit, they were most superstitious in some things, and most
licentious in others. They who by inspiration applied themselves unto the law,
and exercised themselves in it, as was meet, desiring the promises thereof, and
fearing the threatenings, knew the Hebrew servitude, seeing that it behooved
them always to stand knit unto the law, and they exercised themselves in it as
was meet, holding themselves for servants, and depending on the will of God;
for being governed by the holy spirit, that did inspire them to the fulfilling
of the law, they were pious, holy, and just. In such sort, that the Hebrew
servitude consisted in the law, and was known when men applied themselves to
the observation of the law; and was exercised, when the application proceeded
from the holy Spirit. On the contrary, the Christian liberty consists in the
abrogation of the law, which was altogether abrogated in the coming of the holy
Spirit, which succeeded in place of the law to govern the people of God.

Among them who have the name of Christians, there are some, who feel this
Liberty by the holy spirit; there are others who guess at it by humane spirit;
and there are others, who neither feel nor guess at it.

They who neither feel, nor divine it, are altogether like unto them amongst
the Hebrew people, who divined the servitude of the law, being in all things
most superstitious, obliging and binding themselves not only to that which
they think to be the law of God, but also to that which they know to be the law
of man; and more then this, they themselves do oblige and bind themselves to
other laws; in such sort, as they know not in what Christian Liberty does
consist, neither do they exercise it, living wretchedly in miserable and hard
servitude. They, who by humane spirit divine Christian Liberty, are much like
unto them amongst the Hebrew people, who made no account of the law, they
taking away from themselves all manner of yoke, live licentiously, not knowing
nor exercising the Christian liberty, as is meet. They are ordinarily impious
and vicious; and I understand that they divine Christian liberty, by humane
spirit, who by their own wit and judgment, and by that which they read and
hear, that a Christian man is free, not considering whether they be Christians
in such manner, as that Christian liberty appertains to them; these call the
licentiousness of the flesh, Christian liberty.

They who by the holy Spirit feel the Christian liberty, are like to them
amongst the Hebrew people, who through the holy Spirit applied themselves unto
the Law: They know, that Christian Liberty consists in this, that a Christian
shall not be All the discourse from this place to the end of the chapter may
seem strange, but it is suitable to what the Author holds elsewhere, for he
maintains that it is faith and infidelity that shall judge us now since the
Gospel, and that no other sin or virtue has any thing to do with us; if we
believe, no sin shall hurt us; if we believe not, no virtue shall help us.
Therefore he says here, we shall not be punished for evil doing, nor rewarded
for well doing or living, for all the point lies in believing or not believing.
And with this exposition the Chapter is clear enough but the truth of the
doctrine would be examined, however it may pass for his opinion, in the Church
of God there is one fundamental but else variety. The Authors good meaning in
this, will better appear by his 98. Consideration of faith and good works.
punished for his evil living, nor be rewarded for his well living; knowing
that punishment is for unbelievers, and the reward for the faithful: inasmuch
as God will punish them that believe not on Christ, and not believing on him do
not accept the covenant that he set between God and man; and that he will
reward them that shall believe in Christ, and accept the covenant of Christ.

They who in this manner know the Christian liberty, having no regard to
rewards or punishments, but having a regard to observe the decorum of those
persons whom they represent in this present life: that is, to be a member of
Christ the most perfect head, and to live in this life a life like unto that,
which they are to live in eternal life, do well exercise the Christian
liberty: For being governed by the holy spirit, on one side they find and know
themselves to be free and exempted from the law, insomuch that it seems to
them, that they may say with Saint Paul, All things are lawful unto me, 1 Cor.
10.23. Neither fearing to be punished for transgression, nor hoping to be
rewarded for observation; and in this they feel and know the Christian liberty.
And on the other side they find, and know themselves obliged to be like unto
Christ in their life and manners, and therefore they say with S. Paul, All
things are not expedient. Thus they exercise themselves in Christian liberty:
so that Christian liberty consists in the abrogation of the law, and is known
when men do not fear the punishment of the transgression of the law, nor
pretend the reward of the observation thereof. And it is well exercised when
men observe the decorum that belongs to a Christian, who is a member of Christ,
and ought in all things to be very conformable to Christ. Hence I gather, that
since men that divine Christian liberty by humane spirit, wit, and judgment,
make themselves vicious and impious; and not understanding it, make themselves
superstitious and miserable; and understanding, knowing, feeling, and
exercising it by the holy Spirit, become holy, pious, and just, becoming very
like unto Christ our Lord; it is good that a man should apply himself to
understand the Christian liberty, craving of God his holy Spirit, which may
cause him to know and feel it, and likewise make him to exercise it. And in
this manner neither will the not knowing it make him to live with superstition
and in misery: nor the knowing it by humane spirit, make him to live licentious
in his manners, and impious in his mind: and to understand, know, and exercise
it, will make him to live without fear before God, with holiness and
righteousness all the time of his life, and will afterward set him glorious in
life everlasting, with Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XXXVII.
That they who know God by men's relation, have a false opinion of him, and they
who know him by the holy Spirit; have a true.

THis is always true, that men frame their opinions and conceits of those
things which they know not, according to the relations and informations that
men give them of those things. And it comes to pass, that when a man takes an
affection to every thing which he sees, we hold him for vain; and that when he
does delight to take money and gifts, we hold him for covetous; and that when
he does not pardon when he is offended, we hold him for cruel, inhumane, and
revengefull: So this is always true, that when we have need of such a man, we
do endeavor to gain his good will with those things which are according to the
opinion and conceit which we have of him by relation; in which we continue and
persevere, until such time as coming into acquaintance and familiarity with
that man, by little and little we have other opinions and conceits of him,
according to that which we our selves know of him. Whereupon now we do not go
about to gain his good will by those things with which we did at first,
following the Relation; but by those things which according to our own
knowledge seem to us to be to purpose.

This betides us with God: Men being deceived by humane Philosophy, and by
their own wisdom and reason, which does not reach unto the knowledge of God;
and being deceived principally by superstition, and false religion, they make
relation that God is so delicate and sensitive, that he is offended for every
thing: that he is so vindicative, that he does punish all offenses: that he is
so cruel, that he punishes them with eternal punishment: that he is so
inhumane, that he delights that we should chastize our persons, insomuch as to
shed our own blood which he has given unto us; and that we should deprive our
selves of that substance which he has given unto us, to the end that we should
therewith maintain our selves in this present life; that he does delight that
we should go naked and barefoot, always suffering: that he is vain, and that
presents do please him, and that he delights to have gold and goodly furniture;
and in sum, that he delights himself in all those things, in which a tyrant
does delight, and rejoices to have from them that are subject to him.
According to this Relation which men make to us of God, we frame our opinions
and our conceits of God; and so much the more, because what men tell us by word
of mouth, we find written in the writings of men. And inasmuch as both they and
we, when we begin to read holy Scripture, have already conceived this opinion
of God, and formed these conceits of him, it comes to pass, that not gathering
the true fruit of holy Scripture, which consists in the knowledge of God, but
rather stretching it out, and understanding it according to that opinion, and
to those conceits which we bring with us by the Relation of men, it befalls
us, that the holy Scripture being the Relation of the holy Spirit, by means
whereof we might conceive a true opinion and right conceits of God, we make it
that it become the relation of men, and that it speaks not that which the holy
Spirit intends, but that which humane ignorance imagines. From whence it comes to
pass, that men knowing that they have need of God, because they hold him for
sensitive, for vindicative, for cruel, live in continual scruples, and
continual fear and terror, which are things that ordinarily beget hatred.
Because we hold him for inhumane, we punish our own persons with fastings, with
watchings, with disciplines, and with all those other things which the flesh
abhorres; and in this we think much to please God, because we account him
covetous, we offer unto him our goods, and we adorn him with ornaments of gold,
of silver, and of jewels. And in sum, because we account him a tyrant, we
demean our selves with him in all things and every where, as we demean our
selves with them that are tyrants. In this we abide, and in this we persevere
all the time that we frame our opinions and our conceits of God, by the
relation that we have of men. Whence I understand, that whilst a man procures
to gain Gods good will by these things, he shows that the opinion and conceit
that he has of God, is by man's relation. And if any man shall say unto me, I
do these things to conform my self with others, but I have no confidence in
them, nor do I esteem them at all; I shall answer him, that it is a most
difficult thing to understand whether he trust in them or no. And I shall say
unto him, Will thou, brother, understand whether thou trust in them or no?
Examine thy self well, whether thou find satisfaction in doing of them, or no;
whether thou have a good opinion of them who do them, or no; and whether thou
have an evil opinion of them that do them not, or no; and so shall thou
understand whether thou have confidence in them, or no. And finding that thou
have confidence in them, hold for certain, that the opinion and conceit which
thou have of God, is by relation of men.

They who accepting the Gospel, and through the covenant of justification which
is by Jesus Christ our Lord, are made the sons of God, and having familiarity
with God, know God, and get a new opinion of God, and frame new thoughts of
God, not now by relation but by knowledge and experience; and going unto the
holy Scriptures with their new thoughts, find written in it the self same which
they know and experiment: they find that God is patient, merciful, slow to
wrath, and estranged from revenge; except it be in them that are the vessels of
wrath, whom also God for sometime suffers. Understanding this, they drive out
of their minds all scruples, fears, and terrors; they understand that God is
full of such loving kindness, that to give eternal life to men, he sent into
the world his own son, made a man, on whom he executed the rigor of his
justice, whereby they know, that he does not delight that men should punish
their own persons; but this indeed he requires, that they should in such sort
be dispoiled of self love, that being evil entreated upon whatsoever occasion,
they should not be grieved nor resent themselves; And that he would not that
they should deprive themselves of their goods, but that they should possess
them in such manner, that being by whatever occasion deprived of them, they
should not esteem it for evil, nor be sorrowful; and that it being necessary
to leave them, God calling them to the preaching and manifestation of the
Gospel, they should immediately leave them, and deprive themselves of them.
Finally, these persons holding this new opinion, and these new conceits of God,
knowing God first in Christ, are just and holy; and knowing that God delights
himself in holiness and righteousness, they serve him in holiness and
righteousness. And also acknowledging God in natural things, they content
themselves with all things, after whatsoever manner they come to pass; they
follow willingly that order which God has set, without being grieved or
resenting themselves for any of those things which befall them, holding them
all for good, and just, and holy; although sometimes according to the judgment
of humane wisdom they be judged the contrary. And because they understand that
God is delighted with this obedience, and this mortification of humane wisdom,
in serving with obedience, and with mortification, they serve with piety: In
this they abide whilst they remain in the opinion and in the conceits which
are had of God, by the familiarity, and by the knowledge, and by the experience
that they have of God, who accept the covenant of justification, which is by
Jesus Christ our Lord. They as I understand, not only find no satisfaction in
those things which they do, who stand in that opinion of God, and in those
conceits of God, which are had by relation of men; but if they be necessitated
to do them, they feel displeasure and discontent: And this displeasure, and
this discontent in these things, I understand to be a good countersigne for to
know that a man has now lost the opinion, and those conceits of God which are
by relation of men, and has obtained that opinion, and those conceits of God
which are by familiarity, and by the knowledge of God, and by the experience of
those things which are by the spirit of God.

By this Consideration I understand the cause why a person beginning to have
familiarity with God, and to have experience of the things of the spirit of
God, it seems every day to him that the knowledge of God is renewed in him,
that is, that he comes anew to know God; because that holding a long time
imprinted in his mind that opinion of God, and those conceits which are by
relation of men, and not being able at once to dispoyl himself of them, and
leaving them by little and little, he goes on by little and little, receiving
that opinion and those conceits of God, which are by the spirit of God.
Whereupon it comes to pass, that it seems to him to make so many changes in
the knowledge of God as those are, which he makes in leaving his old opinion,
and his old conceits of God, and in clothing of himself with a new opinion, and
new conceits of God. And because it is also more proportionable to the depraved
nature of man, to abide in the first then in the second, in the old then in the
new, in that of Adam then in that of Christ, in that of the Law then in that of
the Gospel; I understand that with difficulty does a man spoil himself of the
old, and cloth himself with the new. And I understand, that to a regenerate
man and renewed by the holy spirit, it appertains to keep his mind all his life
long attent to despoil himself of that opinion, and of those conceits of God
which are by relation of men; and to cloth himself with that opinion, and with
those conceits of God, which are by Revelation of the spirit of God, which is
obtained by Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XXXVIII.
By a comparison is showed in what the error of false Christians does consist,
and what true Christians do.

THis is certain, that all of us would judge and hold them for very sots and
fools, who finding themselves banished from a kingdom by their demerits, and
there being presented unto them on their Kings behalf a Patent subscribed with
his name, and sealed with his seal, by which he pardons them, and enables them
to return unto the kingdom; and they taking the Patent, and acknowledging the
Kings hand in it, and the Kings seal, should not care at all to come unto the
kingdom; but set themselves to examine, whether the seal with which that
Patent was sealed, were of gold or of brass; and occupying themselves in
adoring and adorning it, themselves always abiding in exile, and deprived of
the kingdom, and deprived of the Kings grace, procuring by other means, and by
other ways to have that which the King had freely and liberally given unto
them by that Patent of his, which they had read and acknowledged, and which
they adore and observe with reverence, doing in it and with it, that which is
of no importance to them, to that purpose for which the King sent it unto them.
For that which belonged to them to do, if so be they were wise, were in
receiving and acknowledging the Patent, to come unto the kingdom, and to
accept the Kings grace, and afterward to observe and well keep that his Patent
in testimony of their pardon, and thereby should they know from the Kings hand,
and from his seal whatever concerned them to know

By this comparison I understand what a man ought to do, presently after he
comes to the knowledge of the Evangelicall preaching, which is like unto a
Patent, by which God freely and liberally pardons all those misdoings, by
reason whereof we remain in exile and out of his kingdom, and he does enable
us to return, and to enter into it, and to recover his favor, and together
with it his image and similitude. And I understand also how great, and wherein
the error, the sottishnes, and the folly of men does consist, who reading the
Gospel, approving it and holding it for true, and yet not relying upon that
which it promises, nor entering into the kingdom of God, nor making peace with
God, do occupy themselves in examining and discussing curious matters of God,
and of Christ, such as appertain not to them, and are not profitable unto them;
and do occupy themselves in serving God and Christ, in those things which are
not required of them, nor are acceptable unto him, and by which they do
peradventure more procure the wrath of God against themselves. In this error I
understand it, all men come, who govern themselves in Gods affairs with humane
wisdom, not knowing God, nor knowing Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XXXIX.
That Quickening answers to Mortification, and the glory of the Resurrection
answers to Quickening.

THis is certain, that as soon as a man being inspired of God, accepts the
covenant of justification by Jesus Christ our Lord, he begins to die unto the
world, and to live unto God, to die unto Adam, and to live unto Christ, to come
out of the kingdom of the world, and to enter into the kingdom of God: And
that at that time which a man dies, the soul being separated from the body, he
does accomplish his dying to the world, his dying to Adam, and his coming out
of the kingdom of the world; and that when he shall rise again, his soul
returning to unite it self with the body, he shall live perfectly and entirely
unto God; he shall live unto Christ, and shall abide in the kingdom of God.
Whereupon, considering the difference that is betwixt the state of a man
however much mortified he be to Adam, and to the world, whilst his soul
remains with his body, and the estate of another man already dead, his soul
being severed from his body; I understand the difference that shall be between
the estate of a man, how much soever mortified he be to God and to Christ,
whilst he continues in this present life, from that estate in which he shall
stand being raised to God and to Christ in eternal life: understanding that
there shall be without all compare greater difference between the state of the
resurrection, and that of vivification, then is between the state of death and
that of mortification, although this should be never so great. I would say,
that much greater is the difference between a man raised up, and him that is
quickened, then that which is between a man that is dead, and him that is
mortified; understanding that the mortified stands as it were dead, standing
crucified unto the world, and unto himself, rather in the other life then in
this; and that he who is quickened, stands as it were not raised up, standing
subject to passions and to death, from all which he is free in the
resurrection. And understanding all this, I use so to call mortification an
imperfect death, and vivification an imperfect resurrection. And I understand,
that such shall the resurrection be in eternal life, as the vivification is in
the present: I would say, that the glory of the resurrection shall answer to
the perfection of the vivification. Whence I gather, that since vivification
answers to mortification in this present life, and that the glory of the
resurrection in eternal life, shall answer unto vivification, it belongs to
the pious Christian who desires to live eternal life, to attend to mortify
himself much, to become much like to Christ in his death, that he may be
likewise much like to Christ in his resurrection, in which a man shall
perpetually abide in the kingdom of God, together with the Son of God
himself, Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XL.
Two wills in God, one Mediate, the other Immediate.

IN God I consider two Wills, one Mediate and General, and another Immediate
and Particular. With one I understand, he governs the universe; and with the
other I understand, he governs those who are redeemed by Christ. Of the one I
understand all the creatures are the executioners, every one in his degree and
office; and of the other I understand the holy Spirit is the executioner, and
the persons which are partakers of the self same spirit.

Furthermore I understand, that men do ofttimes grieve themselves for those
effects which result from the Mediate Will of God. because it seems to them to
redound unto their damage. And I understand, that of those effects which result
from the Immediate Will of God, those persons to whom they appertain, do
always rejoice, because they always redound to their good. The effects of the
Mediate Will I understand to be those which result from the heavenly
influences, and other natural causes, which following the order that God has
set, do sometimes hurt, and sometimes help. This order and this course I
understand, is sometimes altered by the Immediate Will of God; and I understand
it is sometimes restrained by the same Will. And in this alteration and
restraint I understand, that one part of that Will of God which we call
Immediate, does consist; because it follows not the common and general
order: The other part of the Immediate Will of God I understand consists in
those things which he himself does by his word, and by the holy Spirit; such as
are the Creation of the World, and particularly that of Man; the Reparation of
mankind by Jesus Christ; the Vocation to the participation of this good;
Justification, with all the other spiritual knowledges and feelings. To this
immediate will of God, I understand a man was subject in his first creation;
And I understand, that in sinning, he made himself subject to the mediate will
of God. under which subjection I understand all evils do consist, and all
troubles, to which our humane nature is subject, amongst which death is a most
principal one.

In this discourse that has been said, I understand two things; the one, that
Adam disobeying God, made us subject to the will of God which is mediate, and
thereupon to evils, and to death: And that Christ obeying God, returns his to
the subjection, and to the will of God, which is immediate; and therefore he
frees them from evils and from death; from death he frees them by the
Resurrection, in which they shall live an eternal life; and from evils he does
sometimes free them, causing that those should not touch them, which should
touch them according to ordinary course; at other times depriving them of the
feeling of them; and other times mortifying them therewith; In such sort that
the evil is converted into good: and as he does not in such manner free them
from death, that they should not dye, but he does enable and dispose them to a
most happy and everlasting life; so neither does he free them from evils, in
such sort, as they should not touch them, but he does enable and teach them to
draw good out of these evils.

The other thing which I understand is, that the continual sighing of a man,
that feels, or begins to feel in himself the benefit of Christ, ought to be in
desiring and demanding to be freed from the subjection of Gods mediate will,
and return under that will which is immediate. For God being soveraignly good,
or rather goodness it self, in that immediate will of his there can be nothing
but that which is such as he himself is. And I think assuredly, that Christ
counselling his to say, Thy will be done, in earth as it is in heaven, does
counsel them to have this desire of which I have spoken, and that they should
always sigh in this manner; as if he should have said; Crave of God that he
would make you exempt from that ordinary Regiment and government, and make you
free from the government of his mediate will, and that he would set you in that
of his immediate will; in such sort, that like as the heavenly armies are
immediately governed of God, so you also, that are on earth may be immediately
governed of God!

Whence I gather, that when a pious person shall feel himself troubled and
molested in his body, or in his mind; it shall be well, that attributing that
trouble and molestation to the subjection of that will of God which is mediate,
he should feel in himself the evil of Adam: and that desiring, and sighing to
feel the good of Christ, he should say to God, Thy will be done! Free me, Lord,
from this thy mediate, and general will, and set me in thy immediate, and
particular will! deprive me of the feeling of evil by the disobedience of Adam,
and set me in the feeling of good by the obedience of Christ! they who say
these words, Thy will be done, and understand it not in this manner, if they
shall well examine their minds, I am assured they shall find they say it,
because they cannot otherwise choose: for if so be they could cause that God
should do that which they would, they would not easily submit themselves to the
will of God: but when they cannot put in execution their own wills, they say
unto God, Thy will be done, making a virtue of necessity. They who say unto God
Thy will be done, pretending as is said, to be subject to the will of God, that
is immediate, they say it with all their mind, they say it with the holy
Spirit, and they say it in that sense which Jesus Christ our Savior intended
it should be said.

I do not understand, that in that will of God which I call mediate, there is
not a particular providence of God, but I understand, that that providence is
general to many persons, such as is the rain, the sunshine, etc. of which
things many enjoy their parts. And the immediate will I understand is a more
particular and more favorable providence with them who are elected, such as it
was in giving us Christ, and such as are other favors, which are done more to
one then to another; of which sometimes some wicked likewise have their part,
although that be not Gods principal intent; so as when he staid the Sun
through Joshua's prayers, of that favor many wicked had their part, as a man
may say, by chance; the people of God enjoying it much otherwise, because they
felt the favor of God in it. In this manner a man may discourse through all
outward favors, which God does unto his, of which others likewise that are not
his, do always enjoy some part, but they do not know that more particular and
more favorable providence and will of God in them, and so as much as concerns
them, they are things that come by chance.

I resolve therefore my self in this, that saying the mediate will of God, I
understand that general providence of God, which is with natural order, in
which always God does concur; and that saying the immediate will of God, I
understand the more particular and favorable providence of God, by which the
natural order is altered. And to this I attribute all that which God works in
his, and for his. And I call them his, who are incorporated with Jesus Christ
our Lord.

CONSID. XLI.
That God will that pious persons should know that all things are to come from
him, and that they should have them all of him.

COnsidering that Jesus Christ our Lord certifies every pious person, that he
shall obtain from his eternal Father all that which with confidence he shall
demand in Prayer; and experimenting in my self, and finding the same experience
in other persons addicted unto piety, and sometimes I do not obtain that which
I demand, when to my seeming I have most confidence in prayer, and that
sometimes I do obtain that which I demand, when to my seeming I have less
confidence in prayer; I suppose that God so demands of a man confidence in his
prayers, as he demands of him all his love. God well knows that a man cannot
love him with all his heart; and he well knows, that he cannot have confidence
in prayer; for both the one, and the other, is contrary to his natural
inclination; and it is necessary, that both the one, and the other, should come
from him. And he requires it of man, because man should know himself, and
knowing himself should humble himself, and remit himself to the mercy of God,
and should not pretend to be able to do any thing of himself. And because he
knows that a man's mind is most arrogant, he is sometimes the more deaf to a
man's petition, when it seems to a man himself, to have greatest confidence in
his prayer. This God does to the intent that a man should not attribute that to
his own confidence, which he obtains by prayer; and to the intent that he
should understand the difference between that confidence which is properly his
own and that which comes from God: and to the intent he might know, that he
makes account of him, and that he loves him, sometimes he gives him that which
he demands, when to his own seeming, he has least confidence; other times he
gives it him without demanding, only upon desiring; and sometimes he gives him
that which it may be he would desire, without any desiring at all. Whereupon I
understand, that God would have from a man, that he should apply his mind to
give all his love unto him, to have confidence only in him, to hope from him
all whatever appertains to this present life, and to the future. With this
application, and with this propension, I understand that a man obtains two
principal things; the one, that God winks at his coldness in love, his
weakness in confidence, and his impatience in hope; and the other, that God
himself by little and little goes inflaming him in love, fortifying him in
confidence, and animating him in hope; and so he comes to fulfill that, which
Jesus Christ ou^ Lord promised.

CONSID. XLII.
In what sort a pious person ought to govern himself in the state of inward
prosperity, and adversity.

IT comes to pass that a pious person finding himself in a dry and
discontented estate, finds himself likewise without confidence, and as it were
an Infidel. And it comes to pass that finding himself in another estate with
satisfaction, and with joy, and content, he finds himself together therewith,
full of confidence, and full of faith, whereupon the enemy of mankind willing
to disturb his felicity, comes to persuade him that he trusts and believes
for the good which he finds in himself, in such sort, that he has confidence
in himself, and not in God; and it is clean contrary. And therefore the pious
person finding himself in that first estate, shall know and understand what he
is of himself, what his own being is, and the being which he has from Adam;
and shall think, because he has at other times felt the favor of God, he
feels in that estate his disfavour; forasmuch as none ever feels the disfavour,
but he that has felt the favor: and so thinking shall assure himself of his
election, of his vocation, and predestination, and shall say, The same God, who
without my desert has at other times favored me, shall draw me out of his
disfavour, and return me unto his favor again.

When a pious person shall find himself in the estate of prosperity, he shall
know and understand that which he is through God, and the being which he has
from God, and the being which he has through Christ, and shall know in himself
the presence of God, unto which he shall attribute his loving, his confidence,
his believing, and his hope; knowing that they are all the gifts of God, having
already known what he is of himself, what he is without God.

In this manner knowing himself in that first estate deprived of the presence
of God, and knowing God in the second state, and being rich by the presence of
God; he shall much augment himself in the knowledge of himself, and in the
knowledge of God: and this, as Solomon says, is all that belongs to a man. He
would say that herein consists all his being, and all the perfection of a
man, that he should know that his being and his perfection comes from God,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XLIII.
How a pious person may assure himself to have obtained Piety and
Justification, by the Spirit, and not by Humane wisdom.

FOrasmuch as I understand that amongst other things with which the evil Spirit
disquiets and molests the thoughts of persons applied unto piety, one is to
persuade them, that the knowledge which they have of God, and of Christ, and
that understanding of the spiritual things of the holy Spirit, is not gotten
by them through Revelation, or inward Inspiration, (as they obtain it who are
elected of God, and as it ought to be, to the intent, that that blessedness,
for which our Savior pronounced S. Peter blessed, may reach unto them;) but by
humane wisdom, by Judgment, and by humane industry, as those men obtain it,
who are not elected of God, and therefore are neither held, nor called blessed.
And because understanding this, I desire that they who know God and Christ by
the holy spirit, should understand their good and their felicity, I say, that
every pious person, and just by the Justice executed on Christ, being tempted
with such imaginations and persuasions, should first hold it certain, that if
his piety and justification were not the work of the holy Spirit, he should not
be tempted with such imaginations, nor with such persuasions. For flesh is
never contrary unto flesh, and it is always contrary to the spirit. And
therefore the evil spirit, who, as David says, seeks ill thoughts, serving
himself of the enmity that is between the flesh and the holy Spirit, does
disturb the Spirit with such imaginations and persuasions. If they cannot by
such means drive away from them such kind of imaginations and persuasions, let
them compare that which they know of God and of Christ, and that which they
understand of spiritual things by the operation of the holy spirit himself,
with that which men of the world, who are prized and esteemed for their wits,
judgments, and industries, do commonly understand, who have read the same
things which they have, and have heard the same things which they have, and
pretend that self same which they do: And finding, as indeed they shall find,
that it is much different, and of another quality, from that which commonly men
of the world know and understand; they may well certify themselves, that
neither by wit, nor by Judgment, nor by humane industry, they have obtained
the grace of Piety, and the grace of Justification, but properly by divine
revelation, and by divine inspiration, and by the holy Spirit; except they be
so presumptuous and arrogant, that they think themselves to have more wit,
industry and judgment, then other men. But this thought is always far from
those persons which are elected of God to the participation of the grace and
favor of God, which is preached amongst men in the Gospel of Jesus Christ our
Lord.

CONSID XLIV.
In what manner a man shall know what fruit he has made in Mortification; and
what is the cause that they who apply themselves to Piety, are tempted by
Affections and Appetites, with which they were never before tempted.

I Consider, that when a person would understand the profit that he has made
in mortification, that is, what affections and appetites he has mortified, he
shall know it by examining himself thoroughly, what affections and appetites he
has found alive in himself having been tempted by them. And considering what,
and which of them are now dead and mortified, he shall understand what profit
he has made in mortification. For I understand, that he who has never felt
the shame to speak of the Justice of Christ, has not mortified the affection
of shame, which is proper and natural unto man: and he that has felt the
shame, and now no more feels it, he it is that has mortified it; as S. Paul
had mortified it, as he shows, saying* that he was not ashamed to preach the
Gospel. And I understand; that if he had never been ashamed, he would never
have gloried in not being ashamed. In like manner I understand, that none has
mortified the affection of the honor of the world, and of his own proper
esteem, but he that having been tempted thereunto, and having combated with it,
is now no more tempted. This self same I understand of the affections of anger,
of envy, of hatred, and of revenge, as I likewise understand it of the sensual
appetites: Understanding that none has mortified the carnal appetite, but he
that having been tempted by it, and having combated with it, is no more tempted
and overcome with it. This self same I understand of that appetite, which
delights to see things that please the eyes, and to eat things, that please the
taste, and to hear vain things and matters of the world, and to smell delicate
things; understanding that he only may say, that he is mortified in these
appetites, who having been tempted and molested by them, and having combated
with them, is now reduced to such terms, that either he feels them not, or is
so much master of them, that with ease he overcomes them, when ever they molest
him. And because none dies, but he that has lived, it being necessary, that in
them who are to be quickened, all that which is according to the flesh, should
die, as well touching affections as appetites, I understand, that all this
being to die in the regenerated, it is the work of God, that presently when a
man sets himself to piety, he should be molested and tempted, not only from
those affections and appetites, with which he was formerly tempted, but
moreover with others, which he never before felt, being different, yea and very
strange ones; to the intent that feeling them alive he may kill them, and
killing them, his regeneration should be made perfect, as appertains to them
that are members of the Son of God Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XLV.
Whence the fear of death proceeds in pious persons, and that it is a sign of
Predestination for a man to content himself that there should he another life.

WIlling to understand whence it proceeds, that many estranged from piety have
voluntarily offered themselves unto Death, and have willed and desired it; and
many pious are grieved, and much resent the remembrance of Death, not being
able to reduce themselves to be content to die; which according to humane
reason ought to be clean contrary; because they who are estranged from piety
either do not believe the other life, or are doubtful of it, or do no think to
be happy in it; and they who are pious, believe the other life, and are very
certain of it, and are assured that they shall be happy in it. I think this,
that amongst them who are estranged from piety, some do not fear death for some
opinions whereof they are persuaded; and others because they hold it for a
point of valor not to fear it; and others love death, believing that they
shall get fame by dying; and others* because it is troublesome, and painful
unto them to live in necessity, or dishonor; wherein they do as the
sick-patient, that puts himself into hazard of running into a greater sickness
through desire of coming out of that less which he feels. In all these I
consider their own rashness, folly, and impatience. Moreover I think, that
amongst the pious that fear death, some fear it because they are not thoroughly
confirmed in piety, nor thoroughly assured of that Justice, by which eternal
life is obtained; others fear it through natural instinct, it being Gods doing
that men should fear Death, and love life, to the intent they may preserve
themselves in life; and others fear it, in as much as it is given to men in
punishment of their sin, it being Gods doing, that a man should feel as a
punishment that which is given him as a punishment by general sentence, which
belongs to every man, as indeed the evil of original sin belongs to every
man.

In every of these I know piety, justice, and holiness, albeit, in the first
I know weakness and infirmity; as I also account it a great weakness in those
pious persons, who without feeling any inward inspiration, that God would have
them to die, do desire, and love Death: for this desire is not free from some
branch of impatience, like unto that of them who are strangers from piety.

Whence I take this resolution, that forasmuch as in them who are strangers
from piety, the not fearing of death proceeds from rashness, folly, and
impatience; and the fearing of death in the pious proceeds from piety, justice,
and holiness; that neither the stranger from piety has cause to exalt
himself, when he fears not death, nor the pious has cause to be sorrowful,
when he finds himself fearful of death: knowing that this fear proceeds from
his own weakness and infirmity; or from his want of faith and assurance of
life eternal; or it comes to him by natural inclination; or it comes to him
through sense of the punishment of sin, which is effectual in all them that
appertain to the people of God, yea even when themselves think it not so.
Whereupon if a man shall say, that Christ having satisfied for original sin,
they who are his members ought not to feel the punishment of death, I shall say
unto him, that Christ did not revoke that sentence given against us, whereby we
are all obliged to death, but that he remedied it by his resurrection, in such
^ort as we die by Adam, and shall rise again by Christ.

I also take another resolution, that is, that a pious person does then content
himself to die as pious, when by his death the glory of God is illustrated, as
the Christian Martyrs did content themselves: also when it is Gods will that he
should die; for then as I understand, God gives him contentedness and
willingness to die, in such sort, as when a pious person feels in himself a
strong fear of death, not being able to bring himself to be content to die, he
may hold for certain, that God will not at that time take him out of this life.
And he ought to think that as long as he fears death, the natural inclination,
and the punishment of sin work their effects in him, and so he will not be
grieved, nor account himself less in piety for this matter. They that are
strangers from piety, when they least fear death, and when they have most
brought themselves to be contented with it, if they would speak truth, will
confess that if it were in their power, they would not that there should be
any other life; for they are not certain to be happy therein. And they who are
pious, when they most fear death, speaking the truth will confess, that they
would not be contented that there were no other life; feeling within themselves
that God has not created them for this life, but for another. And for a man to
be thus not contented with this life only, as I understand, is a great
countersigne to be assured of his piety, and of his Predestination. For I hold
for certain, that to them to whom God means to give eternal life, he does also
put a great love and great affection of it into their hearts, in such sort,
that he who shall find in his mind a desire that there were no other life, let
him hold himself impious, although he would choose to die, but let him not
despair: for albeit he be in impiety at present, yet he ought to think that God
is able to draw him out of it, as he has drawn, and does draw all them that
have been, and are pious. And he who shall find in his mind a love of eternal
life, not contenting himself with this present, may hold himself for pious, and
for predestined unto life everlasting, although he fear death; considering
all this which has been said, and above all, that even the only begotten
Son of God feared death, Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XLVI.
That they who walk through the Christian path without the inward light of the
holy Spirit, are like unto them that walk in the night without the light of the
Sun.

ALL they who being guided only by their natural light, and by humane
wisdom, presume to understand the things that are of the Spirit of God, and to
walk in the Christian way, that is to live Christianly; I liken them to a man
that goes by night with the light only of his own eyes, through a way that is
full of dangers and inconveniences. And it seems to me, that as to such an one
sometimes a piece of wood will seem a thief, and a stone an armed man, and
thereupon he will fly, and be afraid; and another time the water will seem a
stone, and he will wet himself, and the shadow will seem to him a tree, and
thinking to lean to it, he will fall on the ground: Even so he that walks Gods
way, being guided by his natural light only, is sometimes affrighted by those
things which ought not to affright him; and is sometimes secured, and reposeth
himself on those things, on which he ought not to secure nor repose. And so
going, he goes on groping like a man amazed, and without knowing what he does.
He that walks by the light of the holy Scripture, and by the examples of
Saints, but without the Spirit, I liken him unto one that walks by night
carrying a candle in his hand, and goes not altogether in the dark: but yet
notwithstanding he goes not without fear, nor he goes not secure in his mind,
nor certain not to fall into many inconveniences. Whereupon I understand, that
as to the traveller of whom I have spoken, that travels by night by the light
of his own eyes only, the best and most wholesome counsel that could be given
him, were that he should stay in his journey whilst the night lasts, until
such time as the sun were risen, and would show him the way, and the things
that are in it, that so he might travel, being helped by the light of his own
eyes: Even so to him that walks Gods way only with his natural light, with
the testimony of Scriptures, and with the example of Saints, the best and most
wholesome counsel that could be given him, is that he should stay his journey,
whilst the night of his own proper blindness continues, until such time
that God send him his spirit by means whereof, with his natural light, and
with his wisdom, he may be able well to understand the journey, and to see all
that is therein. And if any person shall demand me, saying, How shall I do to
stay my self in this journey? I will answer him, He means (I suppose) that a
man presume no^ to merit^ that is, to oblige God. o^ just fie himself before
God by any acts or exercises of Religion; but that he ought to pray God
affectionately and fervently, to send him the light of his Spirit, which may be
unto him as the Sun to a traveller in his journey; he in the mean while
ap^lying himself to the unquestioned duties of true piety and sincere Religion,
such as are Prayer, Fasting, Almesdeeds, etc. after the example of devout
Cornelius. Or thus; There are two sorts of acts in religion; acts of
humiliation, and acts of confidence and joy, the person here described to be in
the dark, ought to use the first, and to forbear the second; Of the first sort
are repentance, prayers, fasting, alms, mortifications, etc. of the second,
receiving of the Communion, praises, Psalms, etc. These in diverse cases
ought, and were of old forborne for a time.
Exercise not thy self in any thing pretending justification or merit thereby,
in any kind, or in any degree, but pray God affectionately, that he would send
thee his spirit, which may be unto thee as the Sun in this journey, wherein
by thine own wisdom thou neither know nor can travel; and stand
attentive all the time that God shall defer to send unto thee his Spirit,
applying thy self to all those things which offer themselves to thee, in which
thou know true piety without any mixture of superstition; and content thy
self with whatsoever God does, and have no opinion or esteem of all whatever
thou do thy self. This is that which I say unto him. And I understand, that
as if the sun should break forth altogether with all his splendor, it would
in such sort blind the eyes of the Traveller of whom I have spoken, that he
would not be able to make any more use of them then as if it were night: Even
so in like manner, if the Spirit of God should at once give unto a person all
that knowledge which he gives in length of time, it would blind him, and put
him in greater inconvenience, then at first. And because this is true, I
understand that our God rich in liberality and in mercy, gives unto us his
Spirit, and he gives it unto us in such manner, as it may help and not harm us,
not according to our appetites, but according to his eternal wisdom, by which
as a good Father, he governs them who are his sons, remaining incorporated
in his only Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XLVII.
Four signs to know them by, who pretend piety, and the spirit, not having
either the one, or the other.

UNderstanding that the false Prophets, of whom our Lord Jesus Christ
counsels us to beware, because they show themselves as sheep and are wolves,
are properly those who having entered themselves into Christian piety, pretend
by their own exercises, and by their own industry to obtain the spirit of God,
and to become spiritual, and not being able to compass their intent, remain
always impious in their minds, although they dissemble and fain piety as much
as it may be fained with strange superstitions, and other ceremonies, which
have an appearance of piety, and understanding likewise that the cause why
Jesus Christ our Lord says unto us, That we should beware of them, is because
they are the most pernicious pestilence that can be for them who attend unto
piety; inasmuch as having lost the shame of the world, and having renounced
honor and outward reputation, and having lost the respect unto God, and to all
religion, they do only attend to do all the damage that they can to piety,
and to those persons that attend unto it, finding the door open thereunto by
the communication and conversation that they have with such persons. Now
desiring that pious and spiritual persons should know these kinds of wolves
that make themselves sheep, and knowing them, should beware to converse and
deal with them, with that dove-like simplicity which they have obtained through
the holy spirit, using that serpentine wisdom which is natural unto them; I
have considered four countersignes whereby spiritual persons may discover,
whether he that comes unto them, comes being called of God, or comes on his own
designs being called by his own self love: I would say, whether he that seems
to despise that false religion which the men of the world follow, and would
apply himself unto that true religion which the sons of God follow, comes
freed from the deceit by his own wisdom, and by his own humane reason, or
purely by the participation of the holy spirit. For as I understand, they who
come to be freed from the deceit of false religion by humane wisdom, are
always impious, and are pernicious to spiritual persons.

The first countersigne is, The great affection to spiritual things, being
delighted in them, and exercising them with favor and zeal. And I call
spiritual things all those things which are properly of the holy spirit, and
are inward and divine, such as are the reading of holy Scripture, discourses of
holy things, continual prayer, and continual adoration in the spirit, that
is, for a man to be contented with what ever God does, holding it for holy, and
for just, and for good, as much as the frailty of the flesh permits.

The second Countersigne is, The total abhorring of all those conversations,
and of all those readings of men, and of books, in which there is no part of
the holy spirit to be seen. For I understand, that a man that has truly tasted
the conversation, and the reading of those persons, and of those books, in
which the holy spirit is, cannot taste other men, and other books; that if he do
relish them, it is a sign he has not tasted those other.

The third counter-signe is, To approve the things of the holy Spirit, the
conceits, and the knowledges, and the apprehensions, that are obtained by the
holy spirit, and that with the mind, and not with the wit. Humane wisdom does
sometimes approve spiritual things not with the mind, but with the wit and by
opinion, and not by inward sense. And I understand that a man that has the
inward feeling, does easily know when one approves them with his mind and when
with his wit.

The fourth Counter-signe is, The Mortification of the mind, and of the body;
of the mind in all the affections that are according to the world,
(amongstwhich I put especialy curiosity, in what way soever it come palliated,
and adorned, and of the body, in all the appetites that are according to the
flesh. Humane wisdom approves and teaches mortification; but however much it
approve and teach it, there never was yet, nor never shall be man, that without
the Christian spirit, I would say, without remaining incorporated in Christ,
can obtain it in such sort that it may not be easily discerned by him that
shall in part have got it by Jesus Christ our Lord. And therefore I resolve my
self in this, that pious and Christian persons may securely admit unto their
conversation and acquaintance, those men whom they shall see affectioned unto
spiritual things; drawn away and disenamoured from those things in which the
holy spirit has no part; and those of whom they shall see the things of the
holy spirit to be approved; and in whom they shall see true mortification:
holding for certain, that humane wisdom and hamane craft cannot feign, or
dissemble in all these things, although it may in some of them; which may be
easily discovered by pious persons, to whom it appertains to use the serpentine
wisdom, in such sort, that making use of these four counter signs, they shall
know those who come unto them making show of sheep, being indeed wolves, and so
doing they shall make use of that help which Jesus Christ our Lord gives.

CONSID. XLVIII.
That he who prays, and works, and understands, does then pray, work, and
understand, as he ought, when he is inspired to pray to work, and to understand.

SAint Paul, in the eight to the Romans understands that Prayer is one of
those things, wherein in our weaknesses, and infirmities we are favored of
God, and helped by the Spirit of God: And so he says, That we not knowing how
to pray as we ought, the Spirit of God prays for us. Whereby I understand,
that then the holy Spirit prays for us, when it moves us to pray, for then it
prays in us. And I understand that he who prays with the Spirit of God,
demands that which is the will of God, and so he does obtain what he will. And
he who prays with his own spirit, demands that which is his own will, wherein
consists the not knowing neither what, nor how we ought to pray.

Man's mind is presumptuous and arrogant; and not willing to yield, that it
knows not what or how it ought to pray, says, I will crave of God that he
should do his own will, and so I cannot err: and does not consider, that to
pray in this manner, comes because a man cannot choose, and that peradventure
it would not go well with him, nor is convenient for him, that God should do
his will: as it was not convenient for Hezekias, when death was intimated unto
him; and that he does not know how he shall content himself, and conform with
the will of God. But man not willing to give himself as overcome, no not by
this neither, says, I will demand of God, that he would cause that I should
content my self with that which shall be his will, and so I shall be sure to
hit the mark; and does not consider that oftentimes it is better for a man not
to content himself, nor to conform himself with Gods will: as it was better for
Hezekias, and as it is better for those persons, who by grieving and resenting
himself for that which God does, come to reacknowledge themselves, and to know
God, and to humble themselves, and to exalt God; in such sort, as will they,
nill they, man's mind is forced to confess that which Saint Paul says, that we
know not what, nor how we ought to pray. And he who confesses this,
understanding from the self Saint Paul, that the spirit of God prays for us,
and in us, will apply himself to pray God, that he would give him his Spirit to
pray for him, and in him. When he that prays by humane Spirit, says those
words of the Pater noster, Thy will be done, albeit they be words spoken with
the Spirit of God, he does not pray with the Spirit of God, because he does not
pray being inspired, but taught. And Saint Paul does not say, That the holy
Spirit teaches us to pray, but that he prays by us, and that he prays in us.
I will add this, That they who pray with their own spirit, when they obtain
that which they demand in prayer, they feel in their minds a contentedness
mixed with pride, and with self estimation; and they who pray with the holy
Spirit, obtaining that which they demand in their prayers, feel a most
excessive concent, mingled with humility, and with mortification. And I hold
that these feelings are sufficient to give a person entire knowledge, whether
he pray with his own Spirit, or with the holy Spirit. It is very true, that in
case a man have never prayed with the holy Spirit, he cannot make this
difference. Cornelius prayed with the holy Spirit before Saint Peter went to
his house, yet he did not understand, that he prayed with the holy Spirit; but
he understood it afterward, when by Saint Peter's means he had obtained of God
even more then he desired. I mean not, more then the Spirit of God, which
prayed by him, and in him, but more then Cornelius himself desired in his own
mind; in such sort, that oftentimes the Spirit of God prays in us, and by us,
without our knowledge that it is the holy Spirit that prays, and what that
thing is, which in prayer is demanded. The same I understand in working, as in
prayer: for S. Paul likewise puts them for gifts of the holy Spirit, to
minister, that is, to do service to our neighbor, and the exercise of charity.
And I understand, that because we do not know how, nor when to work, God gives
us his Spirit that should work in us.

Humane wisdom, that always opposes it self to the Spirit of God, pretends
to know how to work, and when it does work it works for its own benefit, it
works for its own glory, and for its own satisfaction, and not purely for the
benefit of his neighbor, nor for Gods glory, nor for the satisfaction of them
that love God, and therefore it knows not how, nor when it ought to work. On
the contrary, the Spirit of God works for the profit of our neighbor, for the
satisfaction of them that love God, and it works for the glory of God. When he
that works by humane Spirit imitateth the works of holy men, and follows the
doctrine of the Saints, I do not understand that he works with the holy Spirit,
but with his own spirit, because he does not work being inspired, but taught:
And Saint Paul says, That it is a gift of the holy Spirit, to work by the holy
Spirit. They who work with humane wisdom, find content in their own works,
mingled with arrogance, and with presumption: And they who work with the holy
Spirit, find likewise content in their own works, but most different, and
mingled with humility, and mortification. In such sort, as a person examining
his mind after he has wrought, may by this consideration understand, whether
it be humane wisdom that has wrought in him, or the Spirit of God. It is very
true, that he who has never wrought with the Spirit of God, cannot make this
difference. In Cornelius I consider the same in his working, as I have done in
his Prayer: He did work with the holy Spirit, but he did not understand that it
was the holy Spirit; and he understood it when he saw and felt in himself that
which arose from his working. And between that which Cornelius wrought; and
prayed with the holy Spirit, before he knew Christ, and received the holy
Spirit, and that which he prayed, and wrought with the holy Spirit, after that
he had known Christ, and received the holy Spirit; I make this difference, that
at the first praying, and working he did not understand that he prayed and
wrought by the holy Spirit. That which I understand in praying, and working, I
understand likewise in the acknowledgements of God, and in the understanding of
holy Scripture, considering that Saint Paul sets also these understandings for
gifts of the holy Ghost; understanding that humane wisdom not knowing how to
understand the things of the Spirit of God, God gives his spirit unto them who
are his, to the intent he may teach them those things. Man's mind is proud and
haughty in this point, as in all others; whereupon putting it self before the
holy Spirit, it goes helping it self as much as it may, to gain by its own
understanding and judgment the knowledge of God, and the understanding of
Scriptures. And it is a mavelous thing, that how much the more it labors
therein, so much more it disenables it self, taking and understanding the
things of God, and of the spirit of God, in a contrary sense, and by the
contrary. They who understand and know the holy Spirit, by how much more they
apply themselves to understand and know, by so much do they know and understand
the more. When as he who knows and understands the things of God, goes about to
do it with his own wit, and judgment, albeit he do understand that which the
Saints have understood, yet I do not understand, that he knows and understands
with the holy Spirit, but with humane wisdom; understanding and knowing as
being taught, and not inspired. And Saint Paul makes it to be a gift of the
holy spirit to know the holy spirit. He who knows and understands the things of
God, with his own wit and judgment, finds the same satisfaction that he finds
in other knowledges, and in other understandings of humane things, and of the
writings of men; and with this satisfaction looking upon it, he feels pride and
self-esteem in his own mind. And he that understands and knows with the holy
spirit, finds in that which he knows and understands, most different
satisfaction from, that which he finds in those other things, which he knows
and understands; and finds in his mind, humility, and mortification; in such
sort, that by the feeling which a person finds in his own mind, when he shall
have got a knowledge of God, and when he shall have understood a place of holy
Scripture, he may judge if he have gained that knowledge, and that
understanding with his wit, and judgment, or with the spirit of God. If so be
the feeling shall be of pride, and of self esteem; judging that what he has
known and understood, to be by his own wit and judgment, he shall not stablish
himself therein: And if the feeling shall be of humility, and mortification,
judging that what he has known, and underderstood, to be by the holy spirit,
he shall stablish himself in it. It is very true, that he who has never known,
nor understood with the holy spirit, cannot make this difference.

From these three considerations I come to take this resolution, that as well
to pray as is meet, as to work, and to know, and understand, so for all other
things also, in which we exercise our selves with our minds, or with our bodies
in this present life, we have need of the government of the spirit of God,
without which, although it be grievous to us, we ought to confess, that we
know not to pray as we ought, nor to work as we ought, nor to know and
understand as we ought. With this confession we shall always demand of God his
holy Spirit, and he shall give it us through Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XLIX.
Whence it proceeds, that humane wisdom will not attribute all things to God:
and in what manner they ought to be attributed to him.

FOr three Causes I understand it, men being deceived by the judgment of
humane wisdom, will not confess that every thing comes from God. The first
is, that they might not deprive themselves of the merits of their own good
works, understanding that they should deprive themselves of them, when every
thing should be attributed to God; inasmuch as in their good works, the
goodness of God would be that which was to be considered, and not that of men.

The second Cause I understand is, because men judging of good works with the
self same judgment, with which they judge their own proper works, they hold
that for evil in God, which they would hold for evil in evil men: And it
seeming to them an evil and absurd thing to attribute any evil thing to God,
who is sovereignly good, and is goodness it self, they resolve that they will
not attribute every thing to God.

The third Cause, as I understand, is because they think that if men believed
that God did all things, they would become dissolute in their lives,
licentious, vicious, and insolent, and remiss in succouring, helping, and
favoring their neighbors; every man saying of himself, If I live ill, it is
because it pleases God that I should live so, and he himself when it so seems
good to him, will make me to live well; and saying of their neighbor, If such
a one be needy, tribulated, and afflicted, it is because it so pleases God,
and when it shall please God that he should not be so, he will draw him out of
necessity, and out of tribulation, and out of affliction, and therefore it is
not necessary that I should meddle therewith.

To these three Causes or reasons of humane wisdom I understand that a man may
fully answer in this manner. To the first, that if men knew themselves, they
would know in themselves rebellion, iniquity, and sin, and in their works
self-love and self-interest, and so they would not pretend to obtain merit
through their own works; and not pretending it, the first cause of impiety
would be taken away, in which they do easily fall that are in the eyes of the
world just and holy: for they properly are those that seek merit in their
works. From this inconveniency they are free, who knowing the being and the
nature of man, renounce their own merits, cleaving only to the justice of God
executed on Christ.

To the second Cause and reason it may be answered, that if so be it seem to
men an absurd and evil thing, that God should harden the heart of Pharaoh,
making him to sin in not suffering the people of God to depart; and that God
should command Shimei, that he should sin by cursing David; and that God
should make them to sin, to whom the Scripture says he gave the spirit of
error, and that he should ordain that Judas should sin by selling Christ;
and that God should blind them of whom S. Paul (Romans 1.) speaks, that they
should fall into filthy and abominable sins: And if likewise it seem an
absurd and evil thing to men, that which God does to many men in the world, it
is not because the things are in themselves absurd and evil, but because they
are works of the holy Spirit; and men judging with humane wisdom, with which
they cannot understand the divine secret that is in them, come to judge falsely
of them; being herein toward God, as rash men are toward their Princes,
judging evil of them; when for the good government, and for the common profit,
they do something which turns to the damage of some particular, not considering
the intent which the Prince has in such like things. For if they did consider
and understand, they would judge well of those things, and of the Princes that
do them. I say in the same manner rash men, because they understand not the
intent which God has in his works, they judge them evil, and then pretending
piety, they will not attribute them to God; but if they did know and understand
the intent that God has in those things which they judge evil, they would hold
and judge them for good; and so they would not come to deprive God of his
particular providence in every thing. And certainly if these men did consider,
that God hardening the heart of Pharaoh, that he should sin, not letting Gods
people go, did intend to illustrate his glory, and to make manifest his power
in favoring his people, they would account the hardness of Pharaohs heart
amongst the works of Gods mercy; forasmuch as that which the people of God
desired, was thereby effected: and the same judgment they would make of the
curses of Shimei; and of Judas his selling Christ; and of the sins of them of
whom S. Paul speaks in the first of the Romans; and they would make the same
judgment in all the works of men, not doubting to attribute them all unto God,
searching out the secret judgment that is in them, even as pious persons
search them out, to whom it ofttimes happens, that they hold something of their
own or others for an error, because they know not the intent that God has in
it; and afterward by time knowing the intent that God had in it, they hold it
for a very good thing. And to the same persons it oftentimes befalls, that they
hold a thing for well done, which afterward by tract of time they know was ill
done. This sometimes happens to them, when they stand not very attent to
consider the judgments of God; and sometimes, because it does not please God
that they should understand that which he intends in his works; as peradventure
it did not please him that Moses and Aaron should understand that which he
intended in the hardness of Pharaohs heart, to the intent they should not
cease to be very instant, that he would let the people of God to go out.
Whereupon it seems, that man's piety consists in applying his mind to
understand that which God intends in his works, especially in those which seem
absurd and evil; and to reverence and approve those which he does not
understand, holding them all for holy just and good.

To the third cause and reason which men find, not to confess that God does
all things, it may be effectually and by our own experience answered, That
those men who believe and hold for certain that. God does all things; for this
self-same cause that they abide in this certainty, are pious and just; and
being pious and just, are in themselves most temperate, and most modest, and
are toward their neighbors most merciful, most diligent, and most liberal;
inasmuch is piety and justice do mortify in them the appetites of sensuality,
that might make them vicious and insolent, as also the affections of the mind
that might make them interessed and lovers of themselves, and consequently
remiss with their neighbors. This mortification in them proceeding partly
from that union which they hold in their hearts with God, never forgetting God,
and principally from that incorporation with which they stand incorporated in
the death of Christ, who killing his own flesh on the Cross, did likewise kill
the flesh of all them, who believing in him are made his members. And they who
remain in this, never come to excuse their licentious lives in the liveliness
of their minds, saying, It pleases God they should be so; nay rather, finding
in themselves any vice, and finding in their minds any liveliness to the flesh
or to the world, they know the relics of their own iniquity, rebellion, and
sin, and demand of God that he would mortify them in them, as he has
mortified the rest: nor do they ever become remiss in helping and favoring
their neighbors; except inasmuch as the affections that are according to the
flesh, and humane wisdom dying in them, and those which are according to the
spirit reviving, they do not move with an anxious affection of the flesh, but
are moved with a moderate desire of the spirit: In indifferent things there is
room for notions, and expecting of them; but in things good as to relieve my
neighbor, God has already revealed his will about it: therefore we ought to
proceed, except there be a restraining motion (as S. Paul had) when he would
have preached in Asia. And I conceive that restraining motions are much more
frequent to the godly, then inviting motions; because the Scripture invites
enough; for it invites us to all good, according to that singular place, Phil
4.8. a man is to embrace all good; but because he cannot do all, God often
chooses which he shall do, and that by restraining him from what he would not
have him do.
and inasmuch as they do not feel in themselves any motion to help and succor
their neighbors, they know that God will have it so.

This I say, because those persons that stand in this piety, keeping good
account with their inward motions, hold those to be wills of the flesh, which
are not according to that which they know to be the will of God. And they hold
those to be the will of the spirit, which they know to be conformed to the will
of God; making this judgment by that which is the du^ of piety, and that which
is the due of justification, and by that which the holy Scriptures both New and
Old teach; and standing attent hereunto, they overcome the motions which are
according to the flesh, and execute those which are according to the spirit.
And albeit they have their imperfections by Gods will; yet their desire is to
become perfect. And although they hold the sufferings of their neighbor to be
the will of God, they hold likewise their motions to help and favor them, to
be the will of God; and knowing in their own imperfections, and in the
sufferings of their neighbors the will of God which is with wrath, and knowing
in their own desires of perfection, and in their motions to succor their
neighbors, the will of God which is with mercy; loving the will which is with
mercy, and flying from that which is with wrath, they do attend unto
perfection, and do attend to succor their neighbors.

Having said that which moves men not to attribute all things to God, and that
which may be answered unto it, now I will say that which I think thereabout,
remitting my self to more perfect and spiritual judgment.

In God I consider two wills, as at other times I have considered it; one
Mediate, inasmuch as it works by these which we call second causes: and the
other Immediate, inasmuch as it works by it self. Unto the Mediate I understand
men stand subject through original sin; and from the Mediate I understand
that men are exempted and freed by regeneration, but in a certain manner.

I suppose, that in a man's avoiding those things which by this Mediate will
might do him harm, and in choosing those things which by the self same might do
him good, a man's freewill does consist; I mean, in all those things which are
outward and bodily, not in those things which appertain to virtuous or vicious
living. To the Immediate will of God I understand generally all men are
subject, God working in them, in some with love, in others with hatred, in some
with wrath, in others with mercy, in some with favors, in others with
disfavour. And this will of God I understand is that unto which S. Paul says,
men cannot make resistance; and this I understand that God uses illustrating
his glory, and showing his omnipotency in them that are his, in such sort, that
in this Will of God there are two parts, or two wills, one of hatred, of wrath,
and disfavour, and the other of love, of mercy, and favor. The first, as I
understand, fell upon Pharaoh, upon Shimei, and upon them, to whom God gave the
spirit of error, and upon Judas, and upon those whom God delivered over to a
reprobate sense. And this self-same I understand fell upon all those which are
vessels of wrath, as was Nero, and as all they have been and are, and shall be,
who with malignity persecute the Christian spirit in those who are the members
of Christ. All these as I understand, do the will of God without understanding
themselves that this is the will of God. For if they did understand it, they
would cease to be impious, and they would be pious. That will of God which is
of love, of mercy, and favor. I understand it in Moses, and Aaron, and David,
and in the Saints of the Law, and I understand in it S. John Baptist, and in
the Apostles, and in the Martyrs, and likewise in all those who are called of
God to the participation of the Gospel, all which I understand do fulfill the
will of God; for herein consists piety. And I understand, that neither This
Doctrine howsoever it is true in substance, yet it requires discreet and wary
explaining.
Pharaoh, nor Judas, nor those who are vessels of wrath, could cease to be
such: nor Moses, nor Aaron, nor Paul, nor those who are vessels of mercy; in
such manner, that Judas could not forbear to sell Christ, nor S. Paul could not
forbear to preach Christ. Finally, I understand, that in those things which are
done in the world by Gods mediate will, they who are vessels of wrath, know the
natural order, and know the goodness or malignity of men. And I understand,
that in the same things they who are the vessels of mercy, know in the natural
order the will of God, who set this order; and in that which is or seems to be
goodness or malice of men, they know with the will of God, the goodness and
malice of men. In the same manner I understand, that in those things which are
done by the immediate will of God, they who are impious do know only their own
wills, and the wills of those that do them: and I understand that in the same
things they who are pious, know the will of God, attributing all things to God,
considering in those who are the vessels of wrath, as were Pharaoh, Shimei,
Judas, and Nero, the will of God with wrath, with hatred, and with disfavour;
and knowing in them who are vessels of mercy, as those of the Hebrew people,
and those of the Christian people, the will of God with love, with mercy, and
with favor. And in this manner without doing injury to God, without depraving
themselves, and without loosing charity; nay rather, illustrating the glory of
God, mortifying themselves, and growing in charity, they come to believe that
God does all things, some with his mediate will, and others with his immediate
will; some as in vessels of hatred, of wrath, and disfavour; and others as in
vessels of love, of mercy, and favor. And those are they, who amongst all men
are pious, knowing God, and are just, knowing the Son of God Jesus Christ our
Lord.

CONSID. L.
In what the Depravation of man does consist, and in what his reparation does
consist. In what Christian Perfection does consist.

COnsidering that which I understand and know of Gods being, inasmuch as he is
impassible and immortal, and inasmuch as he is wise, just, merciful,
faithful, and true; and considering that which I understand and know of the
being of a man, inasmuch as he is passible, and mortal, and inasmuch as he is
ignorant, impious, vindicative, false, and a lier: And understanding by the
testimony of holy Scripture, that man in his first creation was created after
the image and similitude of God; I come to understand that there is as much
difference from the kind of being in which God created man, to that kind of
being wherein he now is and abides; as from that being which I know of God, to
that being which I know of man. And knowing by testimony of holy Scripture,
that for the sin of the first man, from that first perfect being, and that
being like unto God, man is come to this imperfect being, and like unto the
being of other animals, inasmuch as pertains to his body, and to the being of
evil spirits as touching his soul; I come to understand, that the evil which is
come to mankind by the sin of the first man, consists in this, that of
impassible he is become passible, subject to cold, and to hear, to hunger, and
to thirst, with all other corporal incommodities; and of immortal he is become
mortal, subject unto death; and of wise he is become ignorant; of just,
impious; of merciful, vindicative; of faithful, false; and of true, a lier.
Whereby I understand, that because the evil into which mankind fell through
sin, touches men in their bodies and in their minds, the grace which God
has pleased to do unto mankind by means of Jesus Christ our Lord, appertains
likewise both to bodies and to minds; and so it is, that as soon as a man is
called of God, and does accept for his the justice of God executed on Christ;
being made a member of Christ, he begins to be partaker of that first
reparation, which is of the mind, and is by the death of Christ. And it is also
true, that that man who shall depart from this life a member of Christ, shall
be partaker of the last reparation which shall be of the body, and shall be by
the resurrection of Christ, and shall be in the general resurrection of all
men; in such sort, as they who are members of Christ, by the death of Christ do
repair the evil of their minds in this present life, if not altogether, yet in
part; and they do repair by the resurrection of Jesus Christ the evil of their
body in life everlasting, and then shall they have recovered entirely that
image, and that similitude of God with which they were created, being in their
bodies impassible and immortal, and being in their minds just, wise,
merciful, faithful, and true, in which I understand our whole felicity does
consist.

After that I have understood all this, I resolve my self, that the proper
exercise of a Christian in this present life, is to attend unto the reparation
of his mind, and to recover the image and similitude of God, with which he was
created. And albeit, as I have said, so much of this is recovered as there is
(as a man may say) of the incorporation in the death of Christ in a man;
nevertheless I understand it appertains to a Christian to exercise himself to
recover it in this manner: When he shall be solicited by the depravation of his
mind unto impiety, remembering himself that God is just, he shall say, No, to me
it belongs to be just, and not impious. When he shall be solicited unto
revenge, remembering himself that God is merciful, he shall say, No, to me it
appertains to be merciful, and not vindicative. When he shall be solicited
unto wrath, remembering himself that God is patient, he shall say, No, to me it
appertains to be patient, and not wrathful. When he shall be solicited to
falsity and lies, remembering himself that God is faithful and true, he shall
say, No, to me it appertains to be faithful and true. When he shall be
solicited to desire to be esteemed and prized of the men of this world,
remembering himself that God is a pilgrim and stranger in this present life, he
shall say, No, to me it appertains to be a pilgrim and stranger with God, that
I may be altogether like unto God. And finally, when he shall be solicited to
any thing, which may redound to the hurt of his neighbor in any sort
whatsoever, remembering himself that God loves men so much, that to repair their
evil and damage, in which they were thrown down headlong, he gave his own Son
unto death, he shall say, No, to me it appertains to have love and charity. And
so running through all those things, with which a man may be solicited by his
own affections through the depravation of the mind, he shall find perfections
in God, with which he may repress them; and so by little and little he shall
go on, augmenting in himself the reparation of his mind, which is the first
thing, and he shall go every hour more perfecting the reparation of his body,
which is the last. And in this exercise I understand the Christian perfection
consists. I would say, that so much is a Christian more or less perfect in
this life, inasmuch as occupying himself in this exercise, he does obtain more
or less of that part which is to be gotten in this present life, of the image
and likeness of God, with which he was created. And for this cause I
understand, that our Lord Jesus Christ concludes his discourses of Christian
perfection, saying, Be ye perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect: as if he
should have said, Finally, I exhort you that you attend to be like unto God in
perfection: he is perfect, and do you also attend to be perfect as he is. And
this is properly a Christian admonition, inasmuch as it is of Jesus Christ our
Lord.

CONSID. LI.
In what manner God makes himself to be felt, and in what manner God makes
himself to be seen.

HAving oftentimes said, that to those persons who are entered into the kingdom
of God, accepting the grace of the Gospel, God makes them to feel his presence,
and to the same he lets his presence to be seen through a glass darkly, as S.
Paul speaks; I come now to say, That it is without all comparison a greater
favor which God does to them, to whom God lets his presence be seen, then that
which he does to them, to whom he does make his presence to be felt; inasmuch
as he that sees it, it is necessary that he should feel it; but it is not
necessary that he that feels it, should see it: I would say, inasmuch as sight
cannot stand without feeling, but feeling may be without seeing. That this may
be well understood, I say, that as I understand it, then a man feels the
presence of God, when loving, and believing, being confident, and hoping, and
when praying, and working, and understanding, he does really and indeed feel
that he is moved and enabled by the holy Spirit to love, to believe, to have
confidence, and to hope, and also to pray, to work, and to understand, feeling
that the holy Spirit is that which does inspire him to love, to believe, to
have confidence, and to hope. And it is he himself that prays, works, and
understands in him: for so it is, that in all these exercises, feeling the
favor of the holy Spirit, he feels the presence of God. Furthermore I say,
that then a man sees the presence of God, when by the gracious favor of God it
is showed unto him, in what manner God sustains all the things which he has
created in their proper being in which he created them; and in what manner God
failing them, or withdrawing himself from them never so little, they would
fail in their beings. To make clear this Consideration, I imagine that which is
ordinarily seen in the house of a Prince, where all they that abide in his
house, do depend of him, and are sustained by him in that degree and in that
dignity, in which he has placed them; and the Prince dying all the whole
house breaks up, and cease to be; in such sort as he that was Secretary, is
now so no longer: The same I say of all the other Officers of the house, who
all of them in the Princes death loose that being, which the Princes life gave
unto them.

Passing on forwards, I consider that which by experience is understood in a
man, who is so far a man inasmuch as his soul stays in his body, that being
altogether sustained by the benefit thereof. I would say, that the members of
the body exercise their own offices so long as the soul abides within the body;
the soul departed, the body dissolves and returns to earth; in such manner, as
they are now no more eyes, which were formerly eyes, the same I say of all the
members of the body, all which, the soul being departed from the body, loose
that being which they had by the presence of the soul in the body.

In the Princes house because I am able with my wit and judgment to consider
and see that which I have said, it is sufficient to see, and consider the
presence of the Prince, his providence, his bounty, liberality, and justice,
inasmuch as he maintains his house with good order, and with good government.
And inasmuch as I am able with my wit, and discourse to understand by
experience, that the soul being parted from the body, a man cease to be that
which he was, every one of his members ceasing to execute the office which it
exercised: I am able also to understand by experience, that the being which the
body has, comes by the soul, and that the soul is she that governs every one
of the members of the body as is meet, making them to serve to that for which
they were created. And so I understand that there are in the soul providence,
and discretion, and all the other good qualities annexed thereunto. But in God,
inasmuch as I am not able either with my wit, or by experience to understand in
what manner all things depend of him, in such sort, as he failing them, they
fail; I cannot by my self see that which is in the Princes house, nor
understand that which I understand in a man; albeit by that which I hear
spoken, and by that which I read, I may imagine it: But wanting the seeing, and
vvanting the understanding by experience, I cannot certify my self in it,
until God himself let me see, and understand how this is, showing me his
presence, which I understand consists in this, to see how all things depend
on him, and are united to him; he giving to them life, motion, and being.
Furthermore I understand, that it would be great satisfaction to the Princes
favorite servant, when the Prince were unalterable, and immortal, to see that
his being and his sustentation in that degree comes to him from the Prince, and
depends upon the life of the Prince. And I understand also, that it would be
very great satisfaction to see really, and indeed in what manner the being and
sustentation of his body depends upon his soul. And I understand that it is
without any comparison much higher, and more excellent then any of these, that
satisfaction, that glory, and that content which those persons feel in
themselves, who in any sort whatsoever, see in what manner God sustains and
maintains all things, giving unto them a being, and giving unto them life, in
such manner as without him they would cease to be, and to live. For in this
vision they know, and feel themselves favored of God, and in the same they
quiet themselves, and assure themselves in their own minds; understanding that
they are sustained and governed by him, who has all things in his own power.
And in the same vision in a new manner they know in God omnipotency, wisdom,
justice, mercy, truth, and fidelity; and knowing this, they grow in the love of
God, in faith, and in the confidence of God, and in patience, with which they
hope for eternal life. And so that comes to pass which I said in the
beginning, that a man seeing the presence of God begins to taste in part in
this present life, that which he shall taste entirely with Jesus Christ our
Lord.

CONSID. LII.
That a Christian ought to put an end to the affection of ambition, which does
consist in growing, and also to that which does consist in maintaining.

UNderstanding that Jesus Christ our Lord says to all us that are Christians,
that we should Learn humility of heart from him; And understanding also, that
Saint Paul does admonish us, that we should reduce our minds to that which we
know of Jesus Christ our Lord, who being the Son of God humbled himself to take
a shape of a man, making himself a man; I come to know, that as humility of
mind is the most profitable thing to a Christian, so also the affection of
ambition, which is the contrary, is the most pernicious thing, and that which
most deprives him of Christ, and most makes him the member of Satan. And I call
affection of ambition all that desire, all that thought, and all that
diligence, which a man uses with intent to increase his estate, his honor,
and his reputation, and to maintain that which he has got; in such sort, as
there are two parts of the ambitious affection; the first to increase, the
second to maintain. Humane wisdom judges them free from the affection of
ambition, who set an end to growing; and in very truth they are free from a
good part thereof. Yet the other remains, which is so much harder to leave, by
how much humane wisdom does not know it; nay rather judges them vile, and of
no worth that have it not: But the holy Spirit which knows it, judges them
ambitious which have it; and will that they whom he governs, should utterly
leave it, renounce it and free themselves, in such manner, that they have no
intent to grow in the eyes of the world, nor are they studious to keep what
they have, although it require not of them, that they should studiously, and
for their own fantasies do things, by which they should come to be abased, and
diminished from that state of honor, and reputation, wherein they find
themselves; contenting it self, that they should reduce their minds to
increase, and decrease, according as it shall be Gods will. And the holy Spirit
will also, that together herewith they should employ themselves altogether, and
in all things to augment themselves in the eyes of God and to maintain
themselves in that, wherein they shall be augmented. And therefore to the pious
Christian, who ought to learn humility of Christ, and to reduce himself to be
like unto Christ in his humility, it appertains to set an end to all ambition,
dispoiling himself of all affection, and thoughts, touching his advancement in
the things of this world, or touching his maintaining himself in them; thinking
only to augment himself in the things of God, trusting, hoping, loving, and
procuring to maintain himself in that which he shall have obtained touching
confidence, hope, and love, resolving himself, that that which appertains to
him, is to please God, and them who are partakers of the Spirit of God, and not
the world, nor those who follow the opinions, and counsels of humane wisdom:
and doing so they shall become like our Lord Jesus Christ.

CONSID. LIII.
In what manner the men of the world attending unto honor, are less vicious,
then attending unto conscience.

ALL men are generally malign, and perverse, insomuch as to walk amongst them
is the same as to walk amongst Tygres, and Lions, and amongst Vipers, and
serpents: except only inasmuch as their furies, and their outrages are tied by
some chains, amongst which the chiefest, and most strong are honor, inasmuch
as pertains to this present life, and conscience for the life to come. I would
say, that the intent of the honor of the world does bridle some men that they
are not so vicious, nor so licentious in their living, as they would be,
following their natural inclination: And some other men the fear of eternal
punishment bridleth; for they think, if I do this I shall offend God, and he
will punish me with eternal punishment: And this is the conscience, in such
manner that a man may say, that all men who are not governed by the holy
Spirit, are like many Lions that stand chained, that they should not do harm,
but in such manner as breaking the chains with their fury, they do evil
according to their natural inclination, inasmuch as the men that stand bound
with these chains, do not evil, nor are licentious; but the chains being broken
with their fury, and rage, they do evil according to their natural
inclination. Whereupon considering, that of these chains with which men stand
bound, the strongest is the honor of the world; inasmuch as a man does more
easily cast his conscience behind, then his honor; I come to understand that
the men who attend unto the honor of the world, because they are tied with the
stronger chain, are amongst the other men of the world, the less vicious and
less licentious, partly by their own proper inclinations; for being subject to
the government of humane wisdom they do much esteem honor; partly for respect
of those persons, with whom they take counsel; who being themselves applied to
honor, and understanding it, do always counsel rightly according to that
which belongs to honor; which does not so happen in conscience, inasmuch as a
man is not of himself inclined unto it, either because he does not believe more
then he sees, or because he doubts, or because he puts himself upon the hazard;
and inasmuch as willing to be counseled in those things whereof he doubts, he
takes counsel with other men, who neither are applied to conscience, nor
understand it, and so cannot counsel rightly according to that which is due to
conscience. That this is true, he shall clearly know, whosoever shall come to
examine himself; finding it true that they do more esteem honor then
conscience, and that they are more resolutely, and more virtuously counseled
in a business, when they put it in a case of honor, then when they put it in
a case of conscience. And it may be, that the cause, wherefore (according as it
is reported) they live less viciously amongst the Infidels, then amongst
those, who are called Christians, is because they in most things attend unto
honor, and these in many things attend unto conscience. Out of this generality
I except regenerated men, renewed by the holy spirit, who without being bound
with chains, live modestly, and temperately; In this they are governed by the
holy Spirit, which is communicated unto them that believe: In whom this
government is so powerful, that without being bound with any chain; (for they
fear not dishonor, nor are of scrupulous conscience) they pass the men of the
world in not being vicious, and licentious, having slain all their affections
on the Cross of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LIIII.
That Prayer and Consideration are two books or Interpreters very sure ones to
understand holy Scripture, and how a man ought to serve himself of them.

I Hold it for a very certain and very true thing, that for the understanding
of holy Scripture, the best, the most certain, and the highest interpreters of
all, that a man can find, are these two, Prayer, and Consideration. Prayer as I
understand, discovers the way, and opens, and manifests it: And Consideration
I understand, puts a man into it, and makes him walk therein.

Furthermore I understand, that it is necessary that these two interpreters or
books should be helped on Gods part, he inspiring him who prays, to pray. For
I understand that he who prays, not being inspired to pray, prays out of his
own proper fantasy, out of his own proper affection, and out of his own
proper will; and not knowing to pray as he ought, is not heard in his prayer:
and he who prays being inspired to pray, prays for the glory of God, and
prays for the will of God, and knowing to pray as he ought, he is heard in his
prayer, that being granted him which he demands.

Consideration, as I understand, ought to be helped on man's part, who
considers of spiritual things with his proper experience. I would say that
he who considers, should have proved in himself those things, of which holy
Scripture speaks; in such manner, that by what he finds, and knows in himself,
he comes to understand that which is written in holy Scripture. They who
consider without this experience, go in the dark, and go groping, and albeit
they sometimes divine, and some other times they do hit right, not having the
proof thereof in themselves, they neither know, whether they do hit right, nor
relish that wherein they do hit right.

And they who are in prayer helped from the holy spirit, and in consideration
are helped by their own proper experience, oft-times hitting right, or rather
as it were always, they do both know that they hit right, and they do relish
that, wherein they do hit right. To be better understood, I declare my self
with two authorities, one of S. Paul, and the other of David, daring to put the
example in my self. I say that reading that of S. Paul, Even as the testimony
of Jesus Christ is confirmed in you, and willing to understand it well, first I
will work with the book of prayer, praying God that he will open unto me the
way for the understanding of these words; and in my prayer I stand steady, as
much as I can keep my mind firm in it. Afterward opening the book of
consideration, I begin to consider within my self, of what Christian matters I
have any experience; and I begin also to examine, what is that testimony of
Jesus Christ, which he brought unto the world. And finding in me the government
of the holy spirit, and feeling my self justified in the justice of God
executed in Christ (which two things are so joined together, that a man can
hardly understand, which of them he feels most, either the government of the
holy spirit, or the justification by faith;) and understanding that the
testimony, which Christ published unto the world, does principally resolve it
self into two parts, that is, into that; The kingdom of heaven, or the
kingdom of God (which is all one) draws near; and into that, which he speaking
of his own blood says, For you, and for many it shall be shed to remission of
sins: Of which two parts, one has intent unto the kingdom of God, which is
begun to be felt, and tasted in this present life, and is continued, and
perpetuated in life eternal; the other unto the justification that is by
Christ: I come to resolve my self, that S. Paul understood, that the
Corinthians might testify by their proper experience, that Christ spoke the
truth in the testimony which he gave unto the world, as well touching the
coming of the kingdom of God, as also of justification by the justice of God
executed in his most precious flesh. And I understand, that so much a man may
call, and judge himself a Christian, inasmuch as he has this testimony of
Christ our Lord confirmed in himself. In like manner willing to understand that
of David, For I am a stranger with thee, etc. and having opened the book of
Prayer, I open that of Consideration, and I go examining in what manner I am a
Pilgrim, and stranger in this present life. And finding, that I am such,
inasmuch as I am not known, nor am prized, nor esteemed in the world, and
inasmuch as I do not prize, nor esteem the world: And finding likewise, that
God in this self same manner is a Pilgrim in the world; for he is not known,
nor prized, nor esteemed in the world; and because he neither prizeth, nor
esteems the world, holding it for that which it is, I understand, that David
would say: Lord, because the world does that with me, which it does with thee,
and I do that with it which thou do, I am a stranger with thee. And I
understand, that in this manner the Saints of the Law were strangers with God;
and in this manner are the Saints of the Gospel, and amongst them as the head
the Son of God our Lord.

In this manner I understand a man is to serve himself of these two divine
books: and I understand, that the one helps the other marvellously: And I also
understand, that he who can consider with his proper experience, does always
err, when he sets himself to consider without having first opened the book of
Prayer. And I think that always as it were, when he is moved to pray, the
motion is the instinct of God.

Out of all this I gather, that this being true, that the true understanding of
the Scripture ought to be sought by means of these two interpreters or books,
which are Prayer, and Consideration: and that prayer needs to helped with the
inspiration of God, and Consideration with the experience of that man that
considers; it is also true, that to the pious Christian, who sets himself to
holy Scripture, it appertains to live in a continued desire, that God would
give unto him his holy spirit, and to attend to the mortification of all that
which is flesh and humane wisdom in him, to the intent, that vivification may
succeed to mortification: for they only, who have begun to be mortified, and
to live, can consider by their own proper experience; for they only feel in
themselves the spiritual gifts of God, which they obtain, who believe in Jesus
Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LV.
Against curiosity; and how the holy Scriptures ought to be read without
curiosity.

Man's mind desires to maintain it self alive, and to conserve it self in its
liveliness, with diverse meats, amongst which, as I understand, Curiosity is
that which most pleases it, and most satisfies; as well in regard of it self,
as that always there goes ambition, and vanity mingled therewith. And I
understand that this Curiosity is so savoury unto the mind of man, that it
feeds thereon, in what manner soever this meat be seasoned, and dressed, so
that it be Curiosity. Now it being needful, that this humane mind should die,
to the intent, that in the persons who attend unto Christian piety, that
resolution may be maintained, which knowing themselves to be dead on Christ's
Cross, they have made, and do make with the world, and with themselves: it is
also needful, that this food of curiosity should be taken from them, not
giving it unto them in any manner, nor by any way; taking it from them
principally in those things, in which piety, religion, and holiness, which are
the most precious things, may be pretended. And amongst these I hold for most
dangerous the study of holy Scripture, when it is with curiosity: for albeit it
is ordinarily a good means to kill the mind of man; the mind is on the other
side so alive, that it converts it into curiosity, delighting to maintain it
self with that alone, when it cannot with other things. And therefore I
understand, that it belongs to the pious Christian to stand very vigilant, and
wary in many things, in which there may be curiosity, and that he should not
have it, and principally in the study of holy Scripture; to the intent, that
the sincerity of the holy spirit, which is in it, may not be converted into
curiosity of the flesh, as it befalls the curious, who read the Scripture only
to know, and understand: In which I understand, that the Pious Christian ought
only to intend the inward knowledges, and feelings, which God by means of his
holy spirit shall give unto him; and those, which he by means of these shall go
experimenting of the things of the holy spirit, in such manner, as taking into
his hand a book of holy Scripture, he should intend to understand that which
belongs to him; and so think, that he understands not that which he has not
experimented: and thus thinking, if he shall desire to understand it, he shall
attend to experiment it; and not to seek with curiosity that which others have
therein understood: and attending unto experience, he shall likewise attend
unto total mortification of the mind, depriving it of all curiosity; and
together with the experience, and with the mortification, he shall get the true
understanding of holy Scripture, and shall understand how that the Christian
business does not consist in knowledge, but in experience: And he shall know
the deceit that they suffer, who think that they do not understand holy
Scripture, because they be not instructed, nor furnished of knowledge and
humane learning; understanding that it is needful for them, who are instructed
and rich in them, to By renouncing the help of humane learning in the studying
to understand holy Scripture, he means that we should not use it as the
only, or as the principal means; because the anointing which we have
received, and abides in us, teaches us, 1 John 2.27.
renounce and leave them, for to obtain the true understanding of holy
Scripture, which as I have said, is not gotten by knowledge, nor ought not to
be procured with curiosity, but is gotten with experience, and ought to be
procured with simplicity. Inasmuch as to them who are instructed and adorned
with this simplicity, God reveals his secrets, as the proper Son of God
himself affirms, Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LVI.
Which is the most certain, and most secure way to obtain perfect mortification.

HAving oft-times said, that the mortification of all that which a man has
from Adam, is very necessary to a Christian: it is not long since that I
understood the cause why it is necessary, and the most certain, and most secure
way to come to obtain it. And I have learned it from the Apostle Saint Paul,
where he having said, that he did endeavor to make himself like unto the death
of Christ, with intent to come to the participation of his resurrection;
laboring to comprehend the Christian perfection, as he felt himself
comprehended by it in Christ; he says, that he did this altogether forgetting
things that were behind, as well those which might breed him satisfaction, as
also those which might cause him molestation; and occupying his mind, in
remembering that he was called of God through Christ, and that the vocation was
from above, that is, that he was called, to the intent that believing he might
obtain everlasting life, or rather I understand, that it is the continual
thought and desire of everlasting life, by which the holy spirit mortifies
them, who being called of God do answer to their vocation. And so it is, that a
man keeping in his memory this thought, comes to fly and abhor all those
things that may hinder him this vocation; and he comes to seek and love all
those things which may conserve, and increase it; and so coming to hate his
affections, and appetites, knowing that they are those which may hinder his
vocation, he comes to mortify them in such manner, that all that which he had
of Adam dying in him, and that which is of Christ living in him, he comes to be
much like unto Christ, it befalling unto him the same which befalls a person,
who being called by a great prince to a great feast, and fearing to be hindered,
and disturbed in his journey by some delightful things that may present
themselves unto him, he takes as expedient to free himself from all those
things, and to pass freely through them, to keep always in his memory, that
he is called by that great prince, and that he is called unto that great feast,
in comparison whereof all those feasts that may offer themselves unto him in
the way, are not feasts, but childrens plays. I would say, that this person
carrying this thought alive in his memory does mortify in himself all those
appetites which might come unto him of seeing those feasts, which offer
themselves to him in the way, much better then if so be he should make a
resolution not to see them. For it might be, that coming by chance to see them,
he should be hindered, and disturbed by them, in such manner that when he
should come to see the principal feast it would now be finished. Even so the
person that is called of God, keeping alive in his memory the thought of his
vocation, does mortify and kill in himself all the affections and appetites,
which being according to the old man might hinder him, and disturb his
vocation, much better, then if he did determine always to combat with them:
For it might be, that wandering from the thought and memory of his vocation, he
might also wander from his determination. I shall say better, that doing after
this manner, the holy Spirit is that which mortifies him; and if he should do
in other manner, it being humane wisdom that should work, he would never come
to obtain his intent; it being Gods ordinance, that the spirit of God should be
the master and the guide of all them, that are called unto the grace of the
Gospel of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LVII.
Whence it comes to pass, that by the knowledge and sense of the things of God
the Flesh is mortified.

EVery day I go certifying my self, that the Christian business is not
knowledge, but experience: I would say, that it is not got by knowledge, but by
experience. First of all I understood, that the proper exercise of a Christian
is to attend unto mortification. Attending unto it he feels, that the profit of
it consists in this, that a man mortifying his affections and appetites, goes
by little and little comprehending that divine Christian perfection, in which
he is comprised by the incorporation, with which believing he is incorporated
in Christ. Passing on further, I know that the most certain and secure way, by
the which he who is called of God, comes to true mortification, is always to
hold firm in his memory a firm thought, that he is called of God, and that the
calling is made to give him everlasting life. Now I understand that this
mavelous effect of mortification through the remembrance of the vocation,
proceeds partly from the baseness of the flesh, and partly from the efficacy
of the things of God. I would say that the flesh being vile, and miserable, and
being every way feeble, and infirm to be able to hold in it self the
knowledges, and senses of divine things, it comes to pass, that by the
efficacy of them it is affrighted, and becomes vile in its own eyes; in such
manner, that it is easily overcome, and mastered by the spirit, and so it
remains mortified together with all those things which are corrupt in a man by
the depravation of the flesh. And because the remembrance of the calling by God
is very efficacious in men with the knowledge and sense of heavenly things, and
that all men are frail and infirm, I understand that which God says, That a
man who shall see him shall not be able to live. And therefore the perfect
vision of God is reserved to the just in eternal life; when the flesh being
raised up shall be a subject able to endure the vision of God. In this mean
space on the one side by the benefit of God, the flesh is mortified in the
just, not only in the memory of their vocation to life everlasting, but also
with every other particular vocation and sense, which appertains to the things
of God: And on the other side God goes moderating in them these knowledges, and
these senses, to the intent they should not come to nothing, accommodating them
to the frailty of the flesh, as we temper the hot liquor, which we would keep
in a glass vessel, in such manner, as the liquor is preserved in the vessel
without breaking the glass. And I understand, that corporal and outward
exercises, together with those other things which are of man's industry, do
serve unto those persons which are called of God, for a certain entertaining of
themselves in that state and measure of grace, unto which the knowledge and
sense of heavenly things has brought them, until such time as by these
exercises and labors there is given unto them a new and fresh supply of the
knowledge and sense of God and heaven, which may make them to make progress in
mortification: in such manner, that I have reason to say, that the Christian
business is not knowledge, but experience. If it were knowledge, it would work
the effect that other knowledges do, that is, to swell up, and make proud those
who have it. And because it is experience, it does the effect which other
experiences do, that is, to humble and cast on the ground all that which is
humane wisdom, and to exalt and lift up to heaven all that which is in the
spirit. I understand this effect is in them, who being called of God are
members of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LVIII.
Eight differences betweeen them who pretend and procure to mortify themselves
with their proper industry, and them who are mortified by the holy Spirit.

THis is always a truth, that all men in applying themselves to religion, as
well unto the false, which consists in superstitious observations, as unto
the true, which consists in accepting the grace of the Gospel of Christ, do
apply themselves likewise to mortification. But amongst them who apply
themselves to this mortification, I have considered eight notable differences,
by which a person may know, whether he mortifies himself by his own industry,
or whether he be mortified by the holy Spirit.

The first difference is, that they who mortify themselves by their own proper
industry, are presumptuous and ambitious, knowing their own proper virtue in
their mortification; but they who are mortified by the holy Spirit, are humble,
and modest, not knowing any proper virtue of their own in their mortifications:
for the holy Spirit works in them that which a very great fever does; for as by
a fever a man becomes as it were deprived of all carnal desires, keeping alive
only the desire of health; so by the presence of the holy Spirit a man becomes
as it were deprived of all that which is flesh, keeping alive only spiritual
desires.

The second difference is, that they who pretend to mortify themselves, go
always seeking new ways and new inventions to obtain mortification; but they
who are mortified by the Spirit, embrace those occasions of mortification,
which are offered unto them, by what way soever they come, persuading
themselves, that with them and in them, God will mortify them.

The third difference is, that they who mortify themselves always live sad
and discontent, because they deprive themselves of their pleasures, and
corporal contents, and are not cherished with the spiritual; but they who are
mortified by the Spirit, live as it were always cheerful and contented,
because they abhor, or begin to abhor corporal pleasures, and begin to
taste spiritual pleasures.

The fourth difference is, that they who mortify themselves, are much like
unto a man, whose head were cut with a rough and rusty saw, inasmuch as all
things are unsweet and sour unto him: but they who are mortified by the
Spirit, are like unto a man whose head were cut with a sharp sword, and an arm
skillful in cutting; inasmuch as the holy Spirit mortifies him, he himself
oftentimes not feeling the mortification till it be past. That this is true,
those persons who are mortified by the holy Spirit know by experience.

The fifth difference is, that they who mortify themselves living always in
continual trouble, and in continual labor, are like unto a man that learns
with exceeding pains a most difficult and unpleasant science, who finding in
the principles thereof much unsweetnesse, and much molestation, comforts
himself only with an opinion, that he shall at last prove excellent in that
science: but they that are mortified, neither troubling nor disquieting
themselves in their mortifications, are like unto a man that goes delighting
and recreating himself in the study of that science which he has already
learned, wherein finding few things which he understands not, he finds few
things that trouble him.

The sixth difference is, that in them who mortify themselves by themselves,
there is never true mortification; nay rather, they are like unto quick lime,
inasmuch as the quick lime smokes not whilst there is no water cast thereon,
which is no sooner cast upon it, then it shows the fire that it has within; so
they whilst they have no occasion to err, do not err; and when occasion
comes, they presently show the liveliness that they have within them, either
erring, or being straightly solicited to err: but they who are mortified by
the holy Spirit, have true mortification, and are like unto dead lime, inasmuch
that like as the dead lime does not smoke, how much water soever be cast upon
it: so neither do they err, nor are much solicited to err, although many
occasions offer themselves unto them.

The seventh difference is, that they who mortify themselves, in the occasion
of erring do miserably loose themselves; for being deceived by humane wisdom,
they do always go solicitously and scrupulously, avoiding the occasions which
incite them to err: but they who are mortified by the spirit, even in the
occasions of erring that offer themselves unto them, are refined as gold in the
fire, for being helped by the holy Spirit in the proper occasions they are
mortified, not avoiding any of them; and therefore they are the same in the
occasions, as out of the occasions.

The eighth difference is, That they who mortify themselves by their proper
industry, do principally attend unto the mortification of the flesh, having no
intent to mortify the mind, not knowing that from thence arises all the evil:
but they who are mortified by the holy Spirit, attend principally unto the
mortification of the mind, knowing that from thence comes all the evil; and
knowing that the mind being mortified, the flesh remains mortified.

By the examination of these differences, may a person know whether he
mortifies himself, or whether he be mortified by the holy Spirit: being
advertised of this, that there are three estates or sorts of those persons who
are mortified by the holy Spirit.

The one is, when the holy Spirit mortifies them without their knowledge or
feeling of the virtue of the holy Spirit in them. And in this estate that
belongs to them, which is said in the fourth difference.

The other is, when the holy Spirit mortifies them, and they feel and know in
themselves the virtue of the holy Spirit. And in this estate, there appertains
unto them that which is said in the first difference.

The third sort is, when through the absence of the holy Spirit, or because
they do not feel and know his presence, they go mortifying themselves with
their own industry. And in this estate they feel a good part of that which is
said in the first, third, fourth, and fifth difference: for it is very true,
that to them who are mortified by the holy Spirit, their own industries in
mortification are profitable unto them; according to what Saint Paul says,
That to them that love God, all things work for good to the glory of God, and
of the Son of God Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LIX.
That in the motions to pray, the Spirit does certify a man that he shall
obtain that which he demands.

REading in Isaiah, that death being intimated from God unto Hezekiah a pious
king, he resented himself, was grieved and lamented, praying God with tears
that he would not take away his life: and reading a little after, that the
destruction of Jerusalem being intimated from God unto the same king, with the
Babylonian captivity, without resenting himself, or being grieved or lamenting,
and without praying God that he would revoke the sentence, he was contented,
that the will of God should be executed, accepting it as a benefit of God, that
those evils should not come in his time: And considering that God prolonged the
time of Hezekiahs life, and that he did execute his sentence upon Jerusalem; I
come to certify my self, that pious persons being governed by the spirit of
God, and chiefly in their prayers, inasmuch as S. Paul says, The spirit of God
prays by them, and in them, they do never as it were pray to God, but for that
which it is Gods will to grant them, of which the holy Spirit which inspires
them to pray, is certain. According to the judgment of humane reason, it had
been more just and more convenient, that Hezekiah should have resented himself,
and lamented, and been moved to pray God for the revocation of the sentence
given against Jerusalem, then for the revocation of that sentence which was
given against his own proper life: but Hezekias a pious king, moved by the holy
Spirit prayed for his own life; and for that which touched Jerusalem, he
conformed himself with Gods will: whereby I understand, that it behooves pious
persons to keep good account with their motions; I would say, they ought to be
well advertised being moved to pray to God for any thing, whether that motion be
of humane spirit, or of the holy spirit. And I understand likewise, that the
proper countersigne whereby they may be able to judge between these motions, is
the inward certainty, or uncertainty with which they shall find themselves in
prayer. Finding themselves uncertain that they should obtain of God that which
they demand, they shall judge that the motion is of humane spirit; and finding
themselves certain to obtain it, they shall judge that the motion is of the
holy Spirit: forasmuch as the motion of the holy Spirit draws always with it
the certification; a man judging in this manner, if the Spirit of God which
has moved me to pray, did not know that it is the will of God to grant me that
which I demand, it would not have moved me. This certification I certainly hold
was in Hezekiah, at that time when he demanded his life to be prolonged. And
because he did not feel in himself this certification, I do certainly hold,
that the self-same Hezekiah did not demand that the sentence against Jerusalem
should be revoked. With this assurance I see that Christ prayed, raising up
Lazarus, and praying for the conservation of his disciples. And with
doubtfulnesse, it seems to me, he prayed in the Garden; and because he felt
whence this motion did arise in praying, he remitted himself unto the will of
God. And if the Son of God himself felt these two motions, and in one of them
he found himself certain, and in the other, as it seems to me, he found
himself doubtful; every one may think whether it be not necessary to be
watchful over himself in them; albeit they only shall know them, that shall
be true members of the same Son of God Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LX.
Whence it proceeds that the superstitious are severe, and the true Christians
are merciful and pitiful.

THe severity and rigor that I see and know for the most part in those persons
which the common people hold for devout and spiritual, they being in very
truth superstitious and ceremonious, inasmuch as appertains to the chastising,
or desiring to chastise the vices and defects of men; I understand proceeds
from two causes. The one is the proper nature of a man, who is inclined to
prize and esteem his own things, and to condemn and despise others. And the
other is the proper nature of superstitions and ceremonies, to which is annexed
severity, and rigourousnesse. And so it is, that these superstitious and
ceremonious persons, desiring that their superstitious and ceremonious living
should be esteemed and prized, are forced to be severe and rigourous with works
and words against them, who being not as they are, have outward defects and
vices, that so their manner of life which they hold for virtuous, may be the
more prized and esteemed. And it is likewise true, that superstitions and
ceremonies having their original and beginning from some kind of law, which
men have imagined, and severity and rigor being annexed to the nature of a
law, (for by these it is maintained,) it comes to pass, that as well those who
attend to the observation of the law, or of the ceremonies and superstitions
that arise from it, as also they who attend to cause others to observe them,
are severe and rigorous against them that do not observe them. From hence I
understand the cause whence the severity and rigor in the Hebrews did proceed.
And hereby I do not marvel, if they that in being superstitious and ceremonious
are like unto the Hebrews, are also severe against the vices and defects of
men. And that which I more esteem is that hereby I understand why God in the
time of the Law was severe and rigorous, showing more severity and rigorousnes
unto men, then pity and mercy, although he did show them both the one and the
other. And I esteem it much more, that hereby I understand, that because after
that God sent his only begotten Son Jesus Christ our Lord into the world,
men stand not subject to the Law, but under the Gospel, which is estranged from
severity and rigor; it comes to pass, that they who belong unto the Gospel,
being the people of God, are not severe nor rigorous against the vices and
defects of men, but are rather pitiful and merciful. And also it comes from
hence, that God shows more pity and mercy, then severity and rigor. In such
manner, that the affection of severity and rigor in a man is a sign of
self-love, and of a mind subject to the law, to superstitions and ceremonies,
as were the minds of the Hebrews: And a pitiful, and merciful affection is a
sign of mortification, and of a mind freed from the Law by the Gospel; such
are those of true Christians, members of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXI.
In what manner a pious person governs himself in those things that befall him.

EVery pious person in those things that come unto him in this present life, as
I understand, governs himself in this manner: The accidents being of that
quality, that his own will concurres not in them, if they be adverse, and
contrary, as the loss of honor or of estate, or the death of some person dear
unto him, he comforts himself, saying, so it has pleased God. And if they be
prosperous, and favorable, as the increase of outward and inward goods, he
does not pride himself, considering, and saying, this is the work of God, and
not mine. The things being of that quality, that his own proper will concurres
in them, if they be of evil, such as are his proper defects, and sins, he
embraces himself with Christ, saying, If in me there be defects and sins,
there is in Christ satisfaction, and justification: And if they be of good, and
of favor in outward works, or in inward comforts or consolations, he does not
grow proud, because in such matters he sees the goodness of God, and not his
own proper goodness. And I understand, that the content which such a person
finds in those things which he does well, is much like to the content, which a
person may feel, when one makes a good letter, because another that writes
well, holds and guides his hand; that as such a person contents himself seeing
a letter made with his hand, although not with his skill, attributing the skill
to him that guided his hand, and attributing to himself the errors that are in
the letter, knowing that the other would have made a better with his own hand:
so the spiritual person does content himself in the consideration of the works
which God does in him, and by him, attributing them to God, and attributing to
himself the errors that are in his works, knowing that they would be much
better, if God had done them without him. That this is true, they shall
understand by proper experience, who have a relish of the things of the holy
spirit, which are obtained by Jesus Christ our Lord,

CONSID. LXII.
That humane wisdom has no more This Chapter is considerable, the intent of
it, that the world pierces not godly men's actions no more then Gods, is in
some sort true, because they are spiritu^lly discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. So l
kewise are the godly in some sort exempt from law^; for the law is not made for
a righteous man, 1 Timothy 1.9. But when he enlarges he goes too far. For first
concerning Abraham and Sarah, I ever took that for a weakness in the great
Patriarch, and that the best of Gods servants should have weaknesses, is no way
repugnant to the way of Gods spirit in them, or to the Scriptures, or to
themselves, being still men, though godly men. Nay they are purposely recorded
in holy Weir. Wherefore as David's adultery cannot be excused, so need not
Abraham's equivocation, nor Paul's neither, when he professed himself a Pharisee,
which strictly he was not, though in the point of Resurrection he agreed with
them, and they with him. The reviling also of Ananias seems by his own
recalling, an oversight; yet I remember the Fathers forbid us to judge of the
doubtful actions of Saints in Scriptures, which is a modest admonition. But it
is one thing not to judge, another to defend them. Secondly, when he uses the
word jurisdiction, allowing no jurisdiction over the godly, this cannot stand,
and it is ill doctrine in a Commonwealth. The godly are punishable as others,
when they do amiss, and they are to be judged according to the outward fact,
unless it be evident to others as well as to themselves that God moved them;
for otherwise any malefactor may pretend motions, which is insufferable in a
Commonwealth. Neither do I doubt but if Abraham had lived in our kingdom
under government, and had killed his son Isaac, but he might justly have been
put to death for it by the Magistrate, unless he could have made it appear,
that it was done by Gods immediate precept. He had done justly, and yet had
been punished justly, that is, In humano foro, etc. secundum praesumptionem
legalem; according to the common and legal proceedings among men. So may a
war be just on both sides, and was just in the Canaanites and Israelites
both. How the godly are exempt from laws is a known point among Divines, but
when he says they are equally exempt with God, that is dangerous and too
far. The best salve for the whole Chapter is to distinguish judgment. There
is a judgment of authority (upon a fact) and there is a judgment of the
learned; for as a Magistrate judges in his tribunal, so a Scholar judges in
his study, and censureth this or that; whence come so many books of several
men's opinions: perhaps he meant all of this latter, not of the former. Worldly
learned men cannot judge spiritual men's actions, but the magistrate may, and
surely this the Author meant by the word Jurisdiction, for so he uses the same
word in Consideration 68. ad finem.
jurisdiction in the judgment of their works, who are the Sons of God then
in the judgment of the proper works of God.

IN the self same manner, and for the self same cause, for which Saint Paul
understood Romans 8.14. that they who are governed by the Spirit of God, are the
sons of God, I understand that they who are the sons of God, are governed
by the Spirit of God. And I understand, that as humane wisdom is incapable of
the knowledge of God, so likewise it is incapable of the knowledge of them, who
are the sons of God. And even as humane wisdom discerns not the admirable
counsel that is in the works of God, so neither does it discern the divine
counsel that is in the works of them, who are the sons of God: both those,
and these being done by the spirit of God.

Further I understand that humane wisdom, when it sets it self to judge the
works of them that are the sons of God, condemning and taxing them, it does
so out of the self same rashness, with which it sets it self to judge the
works of God, condemning them, and calumniating them. I would say, that that
rashness of men is not less, which follow the judgment of humane wisdom,
when they set themselves to judge evil of Moses for the Hebrews whom he slew
when they worshipped the Calf, Exodus 32.37. etc. and when they set themselves to
judge evil of Abraham, because he commanded his wife Sarah, that she should
lie, saying, that she was his sister, and not his wife: And because S. Paul
cursed Ananias, standing at judgment in his presence. And because he excused
his cursing, saying, he did not know him. And when in like manner they set
themselves to judge certain things like unto these, which the sons of God do
being governed by the spirit of God, which according to the judgment of humane
wisdom are absurd, and reprovable, and according to the judgment of God, are
holy, and good: I say, that this is no less rashness then that, with which
they set themselves to judge evil of God, because he favors many lewd men with
temporal good, depriving many good men thereof, and because he does other
things which humane wisdom calumniates, and condemns, and for which humane
laws do rigorously chastise those men that do them: inasmuch as humane wisdom
has no more jurisdiction in the judgment of the works of pious men, then in
the judgment of the works of God, they being done by God himself, and the
other by those who being the Sons of God are governed by the spirit of God,
and therefore are free, and exempt from all humane law, as God himself is free
and exempt. I would say, that men should not have had more reason to have
punished Abraham, if he had killed his son Isaac, then to condemn God, because
he slayes many men by sudden death. But this government of the spirit of God is
not known, nor understood, but of them who are partakers of the spirit of God
it self, as it is known by experience, and as it is said by S. Paul the great
Preacher of the Gospel of God, and of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXIII.
By seven conformities is showed that the holy Scripture is like a Candle in a
dark place, and that the holy spirit is like the Sun.

The Author does still discover too slight a regard of the Scripture, as if it
were but childrens meat, whereas there is not only milk there, but strong meat
also, Heb. 5.14. things hard to be understood, 2. Pet. 3.16. Things needing
great consideration, Matthew. 24.15. Besides, he opposes the teaching of the
spirit to the teaching of Scripture which the holy spirit wrote. Although the
holy spirit apply the Scripture, yet what the Scripture teaches, the spirit
teaches; the holy spirit indeed sometime doubly teaching, both in penning and
in applying. I wonder how this opinion could befall so good a man as it seems
Valdesso was, since the Saints of God in all ages have ever held in so precious
esteem the word of God, as their joy and crown, and their treasure on earth.
Yet his own practice seems to confute his opinion, for the most of his
Considerations being grounded upon some text of Scripture, shows that he was
continually conversant in it, and not used it for a time only, and then cast
it away, as he saves strangely. There is no more to be said of this chapter,
especially of the fi^th thing in it, but that this his opinion of the Scripture
is unsufferable. As for the text of S. Peter, 2. Pet. 1.19. which he makes the
ground of this consideration, building it all upon the word, until the
day star arise; it is nothing. How many places do the fathers bring about
Until against the Heretics who disputed against the virginity of the blessed
Virgin, out of the text, Matthew. 1.25. Where it is said, Joseph knew her nor
Until she had brought forth her first born son, as if afterward he had known
her: and indeed in common sense, if I bid a man stay in a place until I come,
I do not then bid him go away, but rather stay longer, that I may speak with
him, or do something else when I come. So S. Peter bidding the dispersed Hebrews
attend to the word, till the day dawn, does not bid them then cast away the
word, or leave it off; but however he would have them attend to it till that
time, and then afterward they will of themselves attend it without his
exhortation. Nay it is observable that in that very place he preferres the word
before the fight of the transfiguration of Christ. So that the word has the
precedence even of Revelations and Visions.
SAint Peter in his second Epistle, chap. 1.9. understands, that a man that
attends unto piety, having no other light to guide him in it, then that of the
holy Scripture, is like unto a man that is set in a dark place having no other
light in it, then the light of a candle; and he understands that the man that
attends unto piety having obtained the spirit of God which guides him, and sets
him in the way, is like unto a man that stands in a place, wherein the
sunbeams enter, which make it clear, and resplendent: Whence I consider seven
things. The first, that as the man set in a dark place, stands better with a
candle then without it: so the man that attends unto piety, which to him is a
dark place, inasmuch as humane reason, and wisdom do rather do him harm, then
good in it, stands better with the holy Scripture then without it.

The second thing which I consider is, that as a man in a dark place sees not
the things that are therein so clearly, and manifestly with a candle, as he
might see them with the sun; so a man that attends unto piety does not
understand, nor know the things of God, nor God himself so clearly and
manifestly, with holy Scripture, as he might see and know them, with the spirit
of God.

The third thing which I consider is, That as a man set in a dark place with
the light of the candle only, stands in danger to remain in the dark, if by
any mischance the candle should be put out; so the man, who attending unto
piety has no other light then that of holy Scripture, stands in danger to
remain without light, there coming any occasion that may deprive him of the
holy Scripture, or of the true understanding thereof.

The fourth thing which I consider is, that as it sometimes befalls a man set in
a dark place, where the light of the candle is, that being desirous it should
give more light, he snuffes it himself, or seeks some other to snuff it; and
in the snuffing, it so comes to pass, that it is extinguished, and a man
remains without light; so unto a man, that attends unto piety only, with that
which he knows and understands by holy Scripture, it sometimes comes to pass,
that willing to understand more, or better in it, or by it, either he himself
interprets it, or seeks some to interpret it to him, and in interpreting, it
comes pass, that of holy Scripture making it humane Scripture, a man remains
in the dark, albeit he does not so persuade himself.

The fifth thing which I consider is, that as upon the Sunbeams entrance into
an obscure, place, where a man serves himself of the light of a candle, it
comes to pass, that a man sees more clearly then before, all the things that
are in that place, the candle remaining as it were without light, and without
splendor, in such manner, that now a man being desirous to see the things that
are in that place, that which he least looks upon is the candle: So the holy
spirit entering into the mind of a man, that attends unto piety, serving himself
of the Scripture to that intent, it comes to pass, that a man understands, and
knows the things of God, and God himself more clearly then he did before; the
holy Scripture remaining, (inasmuch as to him ward) as it were without light,
and without splendor: in such manner, as now being desirous to understand the
things of piety, and desirous to know God, that which he least looks upon is
the holy Scripture, attending to consider with the holy Spirit, that abides in
his mind, and not with that which is written in the Scripture. And therefore S.
Peter well commends the study of holy Scripture; but whilst a man stands in
the dark place of humane wisdom, and reason, and he wills that this study
should continue so long, until the light of the holy spirit shine into the
mind of a man: understanding that this light being come, a man has no more
need to seek that of the holy Scripture, which departs of it self, as the light
of the candle departs, when the Sunbeams enter; and even as Moses departed at
the presence of Christ, and the Law at the presence of the Gospel.

The sixth thing which I consider is, that as a man which enjoyes the light of
the Sun, when he did certainly know that it would not fail him, albeit he would
not cast away the candle for the benefit received, but would rather leave it to
the intent it might serve another to that purpose which it had served him, and
yet notwithstanding would not serve himself thereof in that which he did before
serve himself: so the man that enjoyes the light of the holy spirit, knowing
certainly that it cannot fail him, albeit he do not cast away holy Scripture,
but rather leaves it, that it may serve to another for that which it has
served for unto him; nevertheless he does not serve himself of it, in that
whereof he did formerly serve himself, as I have before at other times
considered.

The seventh thing that I consider is, that as it is not of the essence of the
Sun, when it enters into a place where a candle stands, to show and discover
all that which the candle contains in it; so likewise it is not of the essence
of the holy spirit, when it enters into the mind of him, who being applied unto
piety serves himself of holy Scripture, to show, and discover all the secrets
that stand shut up therein, albeit it do show, and discover that part of them,
which God will shall be discovered unto a man to whom the holy Spirit is given.

The gifts of the holy Spirit are different, and the holy Scripture being
written by diverse persons, who had different gifts of the holy Spirit, and so
writ diversely, by consequence, it is understood of those persons, who have the
holy Spirit, of one in one part, and of another in another part, according as
the gifts are different, which are communicated from God with the holy Spirit
by Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXIV.
In what manner Jesus Christ our Lord will be followed and imitated.

HAving at other times in these Considerations touched, as I then understood,
that which Jesus Christ our Lord says, Luke 9.23, He that will come after me,
let him deny himself, and take up my Cross and follow me; I come now with
better consideration to say, that I understand that in these words Christ
says, Every man that will follow me being desirous to be a Christian, let him
renounce that which humane wisdom reaches him, saying, that a man ought not
to be wanting to himself, to his own, and to his honor; and let his whole
intent be not to be wanting unto God, nor to them that are Gods, nor to the
honor of God. And let him take upon himself his Cross, which is his
martyrdom, the shame, and the ignominy that he shall suffer in the eyes of the
men of this world in being wanting unto himself, and to his own, and to his
honor. And so doing, he shall follow me, who have been wanting unto my self,
making my self a servant of a son, that I might not be wanting to God; and I
have been wanting to mine own, not esteeming them for mine, but those only
that God has called, and made mine, making them holy, and just; and I have
been wanting to mine honor, contenting my self to die as a malefactor: and so
doing he shall follow me, and shall be truly a Christian. In such manner, as
properly the injury, and the shame that redounds to a Christian through the
denial of himself, in being wanting to himself, and to his own, and to his
honor, is the Christian Cross, and is the self same as to go after Christ. I
would say, these words of Christ are of as much value, as if I should say, he
that will be a Christian, let him esteem himself dead unto the world, inasmuch
as not to seek the glory, nor the reputation of the world, and let him procure
that which Christ procured, and seek that which Christ sought; and in this
manner he shall be a true Christian, as they are, who knowing themselves, and
feeling themselves bought by Christ, do hold him, and know him for their Lord,
and for their superior, and do worship in spirit, and in truth the true God,
who is the Father of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXV.
How that is to be understood, which S. Paul says, that Christ reigns, and
shall reign, until the resurrection of the just being made; he do resign his
kingdom to his eternal father.

THe men that reign in the Kingdom of the world, live under four most cruel
Tyrants; the Devil, the Flesh, Honor, and Death. The Devil tyrannizeth over
them making them impious, and enemies of God, and oft-times brings them to
that pass, that they kill themselves by diverse ways. The flesh tyrannizeth
over them, making them vicious and licentious. Honor tyrannizeth over them,
making them light, and vain, and presumptuous, in such sort, that they die
whilst they live. Death tyrannizeth over them, not suffering them to enjoy
their prosperities, and happiness, cutting short their steps in them. This
tyranny none understand, but they that feel it, and they only feel it, who
being desirous to enter into the Kingdom of God, do endeavor to reduce
themselves to piety, do labor to mortify the flesh, and will resolve
themselves with the world, putting an end to glory and to their own honor, and
think to dispose themselves, and to content themselves to die. For as soon as
ever they would do this, they find difficulty in it, they feel and experiment
the tyranny, and they know themselves tyrannized over.

These persons, if so be their desire to enter into the kingdom of God be a
calling of God himself, and not their proper fantasy, accepting for their own
the justice of God, executed on Christ, do in this present life, go out of the
tyranny of the three tyrants in going out of the Kingdom of the world, and
entering into the Kingdom of God, wherein God reigns through Christ. I would
say, that Christ reigns as the son of God, he being in them that stand in
his kingdom, and with them, properly the same which the head is in the Members
of the body, for as from the head there descends virtue and efficacy into the
members of the body, which are governed by it; even so from Christ there
descends virtue, and efficacy to them, that are in the kingdom of Christ, with
which they combat against the tyrants, that hold other men tyrannized: and so
they are governed by Christ in this present life, and by means of the same they
shall obtain the resurrection, and life everlasting: and so they shall go out
of the tyranny of the fourth tyrant, which is death, and shall enter into the
kingdom of God, where God shall reign by himself. In the mean space they
being gone out of the kingdom of the world, having felt the tyranny of the
four Tyrants, do feel the sweetness, and pleasantness of the kingdom of
Christ, feeling in themselves the virtue, and efficacy of Christ; and the
government of the holy Spirit, and feeling themselves masters and lords of
their sensual appetites, and of their affections of honor, and of the
ambition of the world; being resolved with themselves, and with the world,
inasmuch as being incorporated in Christ, they find their flesh dead, and they
find dead in them the respect of the world, and they stablish and comfort their
hearts with the continual hope of their resurrection, immortality, and
eternal life. Which hope and persuasion causes in them this effect, that
albeit they feel death according to the body, yet they feel it not as much as
belongs to the soul, through the certain hope of resurrection. In this I
understand consists the kingdom of Christ. And because the resurrection of the
just being accomplished, woe shall not need to combat with the Devil, there
shall be no need to mortify the flesh, nor to resist the world, nor shall
there be death to overcome: I understand, that Saint Paul says, that when
Christ shall resign this kingdom to the eternal Father; and that God shall
be all in all, ruling and governing every thing by himself: in such manner, as
the kingdom of Christ according to Saint Paul shall endure until the
universal resurrection, and the kingdom of God in men shall then begin, and
shall be continual, men perpetually acknowledging the benefit received by
Jesus Christ our Lord. Like as it betides unto a thirsty traveller, to whom
there is given a vessel of cold water, who whilst he drinks feels the benefit
of the vessel, which gives him the water; and having drunk, albeit setting the
vessel aside he thanks him that gave him to drink, nevertheless he
acknowledges that by means of the vessel he received that benefit. In such
manner that as the thankful wayfaring man, who is refreshed with the vessel
of cold water, whilst he drinks, feels the benefit of the vessel, and after
he has drunk, feeling and knowing the benefit of him that gave him the
vessel, he knows likewise the benefit of the vessel. Even so men, whilst
they stand in this present life, they feel the kingdom of Christ, feeling the
benefit of Christ; and in eternal life they shall feel, and know the benefit
of God, who has given Christ unto them, and they shall know the benefit of
Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXVI.
In what manner the malignant spirit is more impetuous then the holy Spirit.

BEing desirous to understand, which spirit is more impetuous in a man, the
Holy, or the Malignant; I resolve my self, that the malignant spirit is much
more impetuous in the impious, then the good spirit in the pious; being moved
to this resolution for two Considerations, of which one is founded in the
proper Nature of the spirits: for the malignant is by nature impetuous, and the
holy is by nature mild and quiet, insomuch, that if at any time there seem to
be violence, or alteration, that is none of its own, but of the liveliness of
man's flesh, in which, and by which the holy Spirit works. And the other is
founded in the proper nature of men: for they being more inclined unto the
motions of the malignant spirit, then to that of the holy spirit, it comes to
pass, that unto that of the malignant spirit they are incited with their
proper affection, and inclination; and to those others of the holy Spirit they
are benumbed from the self same thing. In such manner as the malignant spirit
being impetuous of its own proper nature, and the malignant spirit being
incited in the impious with the proper nature of the impious; and the holy
Spirit being made more slow in the pious, through the proper nature of the
pious, inasmuch as he is a man; it comes to pass, that the malignant spirit is
more impetuous in the impious, then* the holy Spirit in the pious. And in the
impious I understand that ordinarily the Holy spirit is nothing at all
impetuous; and in the pious I understand the malignant spirit is more or less
impetuous, according to the greater or lesser liveliness of affections, that
is found in him. And in the same manner I understand, that the motion of the
holy Spirit is more or less efficacious, according as the mortification that
is in him, is greater or less; inasmuch as through the liveliness of the
affections, and appetites of the pious, the force and violence of the malignant
spirits are increased, and by mortification are repressed, and retarded: and
because it is likewise true, that through the liveliness of the affections,
and appetites of the pious, the forceablenesse of the holy Spirit is retarded
and repressed, and with mortification is increased, and helped. Understanding
that all this is true, I understand likewise, that the pious, who would that
the motions of the malignant spirit should not have force nor be efficacious in
him, and that the motions of the holy spirit should have force and efficacy in
him, ought to attend unto the mortification of his affections and appetites,
attending to mortify in himself that which he has of Adam, and to make alive
that which he has of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXVII.
That in the regenerate only by the holy Spirit, there being experience of the
things of God, there is also Certification of them.

ALL that in this life is done, known, or understood, is either by natural
instinct, or it is by experience, or by knowledge, or by divine inspiration and
revelation. In the beast there is natural instinct and experience, as every
one may by himself consider. In men there is generally natural instinct and
experience, as in beasts, although with greater excellency; and there is also
knowledge, which as I understand, consists in that which one man learns from
another, man having no greater assurance thereof, then the relation that is
made unto him; and this as much in divine things as in humane, In men
regenerated by the holy Spirit there is natural instinct, and experience, and
knowledge, and moreover divine inspiration and revelation. I say, that
regenerated men know and understand some things by natural instinct, others by
experience, and others by science, and others by divine inspiration. The
natural instinct standing more chaste and more pure in them, then in other men.
And having experience not only of natural and humane things as other men
have, but also of spiritual and divine things; and having not only science
learned from other men, but also inspired and revealed from God. All men being
without the holy Spirit, are without experience of spiritual and divine
things; having only that science of them, which is gotten by the bare reading
of the holy Scripture; whence it comes to pass, that as in the humane and
natural things of which they have no experience, having only the science they
remain with opinion, without any assurance; even so in divine matters, being
without experience, they remain with opinion, without any assurance. Inasmuch
as where there is no experience, there can be no assurance. And experience in
the things of God is reserved to them, who have the Spirit of God, who having
experience of spiritual matters, know that they know and understand natural
and humane things, I would say, that the difference between that which
regenerated men know and understand in divine matters, and that which other
men, how wise soever they be, know and understand in the same things; is as
much as is between that which those Physicians which only have the Theory,
know and understand in Physic, and that which those Physicians, who together
with the Theory have the Practice. Whence I gather, that unregenerated men
having no experience in divine matters, cannot have either confidence or
diffidence that should be solid and firm; but only through opinion, in such
manner as they have in humane affairs. And therefore that is true which I have
written in another Consideration, that God oft-times gives unto pious persons
some things which they have no confidence to obtain, denying them some other
which they have confidence to obtain; understanding that this comes to pass,
when his confidence and his diffidence consists in science and opinion, and not
in experience and certification. Furthermore, I come to gather that regenerated
men having experience of spiritual things, have assurance of them, and that
having assurance, they have also confidence and diffidence solid and firm. And
therefore that is true which I have written in another Consideration, that
through that certainty or incertainty with which pious persons find themselves
in prayer, they may understand when they are inspired to pray by the holy
Spirit, and when they are moved to pray from humane spirit, and consequently
when they are to be confident, and when they are to be diffident.

Hezekiah king of Judah had experience in spiritual matters, and therefore
being inspired to pray in his infirmity, he prayed, and his life was prolonged
to him according to his confidence. And the self-same king being diffident to
be able to obtain by his prayers of God, that he should revoke the sentence
given against Jerusalem, did not pray. If he had not had experience in divine
things, governing himself only with science, he would with so much the more
confidence have prayed, demanding the revocation of the sentence given against
Jerusalem, inasmuch as he had praying obtained the revocation of the sentence
given against his life: But having experience, he forbore to be governed by
science, and so he stood firm in the confidence, and firm in the diffidence.
And if experience of divine things teaches thus much to one of them, who had
the spirit of Moses, how much better shall it teach it to them who have the
spirit of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXVIII.
That the desire of knowledge is imperfection in a man, contrary to the
judgment of humane wisdom.

HUmane wisdom judges, that the desire to know is a great perfection in man;
and the holy spirit judges that it is a great imperfection in a man. Humane
wisdom confirms her opinion, saying, That it has been seen by experience,
that in the world those men have lived most virtuously, who having the greatest
desire to know, have most given themselves to endeavor to know, and have known
most: And here is alleged a troop of Philosophers. And the holy Spirit on the
contrary affirms his sentence, saying, That through the desire of knowing,
sin came into the world, and through sin, death, and with it all the miseries
and all the troubles whereunto we stand subject in this present life. That this
is true, is proved by the persuasion of the devil, who said unto Eve, You shall
be like Gods, knowing good and evil. Passing on further, the holy Spirit says,
that the desire of knowledge destroyed the Hebrews; inasmuch as desiring to
understand the prophesies that spoke of the Messiah, and procuring to
understand them by the way of wit, and humane discourse, they imagined to
themselves, and figured a Messiah so contrary to him whom God sent them, as
when they had him, they knew him not, and not knowing him they did not receive
him, and from their not receiving him, redounded not only that they did not
enjoy him, but it caused their ruin and perdition. Passing on further the holy
Spirit says, that the Gentiles desiring to know the original, and the
beginning of natural things, did procure to know them with their own wits and
discourses; whence comes to pass that which S. Paul said, They became vain in
their imaginations, and they worshipped the creature, and ran headlong into
other absurd and brutish inconveniences. In the same manner the holy Spirit
says, that many men desiring to know the things which appertain to Christian
religion, and procuring it with natural light, have made such strange conceits
of God, and of Christ, and of the Christian state, and of the Christian living;
that a man may say with truth, that of Christ they have nothing but the name;
participating on one side of the inconvenience of the Hebrews, inasmuch as they
read holy Scripture, and desiring to understand it, procuring this not with
that spiritual light with which it was written, but with natural light, they
do not understand it: and participating on the other side of the inconvenience
of the Gentiles, inasmuch as desiring to know that which the Gentiles knew,
they read that which the Gentiles writ, and they think as the Gentiles thought,
and frame Gentiles minds.

The holy spirit having proved his sentence against that desire of knowing
which men have, says further, That that virtue which is got by desiring to
know, and knowing that which may be known with natural light, is rather a vice
then a virtue; inasmuch as it makes men presumptuous, insolent, and
consequently impious, and incredulous. That this is true, appears by this, that
the men that follow their proper natural light, by how much they are more
virtuous, according to the world, by so much they have less confidence in God,
and do so much less believe in Christ, and therefore are so much more impious,
and more incredulous; in such manner, that I may well say that the desire to
know is a great imperfection in a man.

In this discourse I learn two things. The one, that humane wisdom has no
jurisdiction in judging of the perfection and imperfection of a man. The other,
that it appertains to every man who being called of God to the grace of the
Gospel, makes answer thereunto, to mortify and kill in himself the desire to
know, of what sort soever it be, that he may not fall into the inconvenience of
false Christians, and of the Gentiles, and of the Hebrews, nor into that
wherein our first parents fell; and that they may come to the perfection
whereunto S. Paul came, not desiring nor procuring to know other then Christ
and him crucified. Which wisdom we ought to desire and procure with prayer to
God, we who having accepted the grace of the Gospel, are true Christians
incorporated in Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXIX.
That a man ought always to acknowledge himself incredulous, and defective in
faith: and that there is so much faith in a man, as there is knowledge of God
and Christ.

WHen I consider the great efficacy which Jesus Christ our Lord attributes unto
faith, saying, that with it how little soever it be, we may Divines hold that
justifying faith and the faith of miracles are diverse gifts, and of a different
nature, the one being gratia gratis datae, the other gratia gratum faciens,
this being given only to the godly, and the other sometimes to the wicked: yet
doubtless the best faith in us is defective, and arrives not to the point it
should; which if it did, it would do more then it does. And miracle working as
it may be severed from justifying faith, so it may be a fruit of it, and an
exaltation, 1. Joh. 5.14
remove mountains from one place to another, Matthew. 17.20. returning upon my
self, and not finding my self with such an efficacious faith, I know how weak
and feeble my faith is, and then I turn my mind to God, saying with the
Apostles, Lord increase my faith, Luke 17.5. and saying with the father of the
lunatic, Lord help my unbelief. Mark 9.24. And understanding that my faith is
to come through the gift of God, and holding for certain, that I shall have so
much of faith, as I shall have of the knowledge of God, and of Christ;
forasmuch as men, how ever good relation they have of other men, do so much
trust them as they know them; I turn my self to pray God, that he would let me
know him, and would let me see him, and that he would let me know and see
Christ as much as may be in this present life, to the intent that I may have
confidence, and so my faith may be strong and efficacious. Wherein I consider
the craft of the enemy of mankind, and most full of enmity against Christ,
inasmuch as b^ understanding that the intent which Christ had in setting forth
the efficacy of faith, was that men, how much soever they believe, and how much
confidence soever they have, should always judge themselves incredulous and
defective in the faith; the devil has made, that amongst men who do approve
the Gospel of Christ, it should be an honorable thing to believe, and a
shameful thing not to believe, or to doubt, to the intent that persuading
themselves for their own honor sake, that they do believe, they should not
come to know themselves incredulous, and defective in the faith; and so they
never come to get that which Christ intends they should get, that is, the
knowledge of God, and of Christ, and by the knowledge faith, and by faith
justification, and by justification glorification and eternal life. And in
very truth great is the blindness, and ignorance of men in every thing, that
see only with the eyes of humane wisdom; and very excessive great in this,
that not admitting in humane matters one testimony that testifies only of
hearsay, except he speak of certain knowledge, or proper experience; it
persuades it self by it self, and by others, that in divine matters it
suffices to testify on hearsay, having neither certain knowledge, nor proper
experience; neither pretending the one nor procuring the other; and that which
is worse, reprehending them, who pretend the certain knowledge, and procure the
experience, not contenting themselves to testify on hearsay by rerelation of
others. And in divine matters, I understand that they have certain knowledge,
who know God and Christ by revelation and inspiration, of which things they
only can give testimony, who have them, and their testimony is true. The other
albeit they give testimony of themselves by hearsay, their testimony is not
true, because they do not feelingly know what they speak. And in the same
things of God I understand, that they have experience, who find, and feel in
themselves the effects, which the knowledge of Christ which makes them just,
works in them, and by consequence the effects of piety, and the effects of
justification. All other men, when they give testimony of these things not
having the experience of them, their testimony is not true, because they do not
feelingly know what they speak.

From all this I come to gather, that a man ought to judge himself incredulous,
and defective in the faith, as long as he has not so much faith as suffices
therewith to remove mountains from one place to another; and that judging
himself such, he ought to demand of God, that he should give him faith, not
contenting himself to testify in divine things by hearsay, and by relation,
but by certain knowledge, and proper experience.

Furthermore I come to gather, that there being in effect as much faith in a
man, as there is knowledge of God and Christ, and that by faith a man gets
justification, and by justification he gets glorification and life eternal;
and that God being able to give in an instant to a man so much knowledge of
himself, and o^ Christ; letting himself to be known, and showing forth Christ
unto him so much as suffices to believe; we ought not to distrust of the
salvation of a man, whilst his soul is in his body: always hoping that God
will do with him that which he can do, and that which he uses, suffering
himself to be known, and showing Christ unto him; to the intent, that knowing
he may believe, and love, and believing, he may enjoy the Christian
justification, and enjoying the Christian justification he may go to live, and
reign with Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXX.
In what those three gifts of God, Faith, Hope, and Charity do consist: and in
what their eminency amongst other gifts does consist: and the eminency of
Charity amongst the three gifts.

COnsidering that the Apostle sets forth the most high and excellent amongst
the gifts of God faith, hope, and charity, I have oft-times set my self to
examine in what this eminency does consist, and not having been able to
understand in what they consist, it seems to me, that I am not able to
understand, in what their eminency amongst the rest does consist. Now beginning
to mine own seeming a little to understand in what they consist, I begin
likewise to feel in what their eminency does consist.

Faith as I understand, consists in this, that a man should believe and hold
for a certain all that which is contained in holy Scripture, having confidence
in the divine promises, that are contained in it, as if to him properly, and
principally they had been made. Of the two parts of faith, which are to
believe, and to have confidence, I understand, that of one of them a man's mind
is in some manner capable: I say, that a man is able to bring himself to
believe, or at least to persuade himself, that he does believe: And of the
other I understand he is incapable; I say he is not able of himself, to reduce
himself to have confidence, nor to persuade himself that he has confidence: in
such sort, as he who believes, and has not confidence, shows that his belief
is industry, and humane wit, and not divine inspiration; and he who believing
has confidence, shows that his belief is inspiration and revelation. Whereupon
I understand, that to have confidence is a good countersigne in a man, to
certify himself that he believes by inspiration and revelation.

Hope, as I understand, consists in patience, and in the sufferance, with which
a man that believes and has confidence, expects the accomplishment of the
promises of God, without putting himself into the Devils service with impiety,
or into that of the world with vanity, or into that of his own flesh with vice.
Like as a captain, who having promise from the Emperor that at his coming into
Italy he will use his service, albeit the Emperor slow his journey, and he be
solicited by many Princes, that would serve themselves of him, will accept no
party, expecting the coming of the Emperor, fearing that if he come, and find
him in others service, he will not accept him to his own service. This hope
presupposes faith; I say that to expect, it is necessary, that there should be
faith in him who hopes, with which he should give credit to that which is told
him, and have confidence in that which is promised him: for otherwise he should
not be able to maintain himself in expecting. And that hope does properly
consist in this, I understand by some speeches, which we read in the Gospel,
such as is that of the ten virgins, who did expect the bridegroom; and that of
men, that expect their lord when he returns.

Charity, I understand, consists in the love, and in the affection, which a man
that believes, has confidence, and hopes, carries to God, and to Christ, and
likewise to the things of God, and of Christ, standing properly affectionated,
and enamoured of believing, of having confidence, and of hoping; in such
manner, that because he who has these three gifts of God, stands united with
God, believing, hoping, and loving, with great reason are these three gifts the
most high, and most excellent amongst all the other.

Having understood in what these three gifts of God consist, and in what their
eminency does consist, and desiring to understand for what cause the same
Apostle puts charity for more eminent, then faith and hope, I think, and hold
for certain, that the eminency consists in this, that he who believes and has
confidence, shall never stand solid in the faith, if he find not a taste, and
relish in the believing, and in the having confidence; nor shall he stand solid
in hope, if he do not find a taste and relish in the hope: Charity therefore
being that which gives the taste and favor, with which faith and hope are
sustained, it well follows that charity is the most eminent of the three,
inasmuch as it maintains, and upholds the other, and it by it self alone
maintains and upholds it self; and inasmuch as faith shall fail, when there
shall be nothing to believe, nor to have confidence in; and hope shall fail,
when Christ being returned, and the resurrection of the just being made, there
shall be nothing more to hope for: but Charity shall never fail; for there
shall be always what to love, and there shall be always what to taste. For in
eternal life we shall love God, and Christ, and we shall find relish, and
savor in the contemplation of God, and of Christ; we, who in this present life
have lived with faith, hope, and charity, being incorporated in Jesus Christ
our Lord.

CONSID. LXXI.
Upon the most holy prayer of our Savior.

IN the most holy prayer of our Savior I consider all this: First, that
calling God Father, it becomes me to reduce my self to hope from God all that
which an obedient son may hope from a most good, and loving Father. And albeit
I am a disobedient son, it matters not: for God considers me not by that
which I am of my self, but by that which I am by Christ, of whom I am a member,
and who was a most obedient Son; through which Sonship I call God Father.
Though this were the Authors opinion, yet the truth of it would be examined.
The 98. Consid. about being justified by faith, or by good works, or condemned
for unbelief or evil works, make plain the Authors meaning.
If I should call him Father for the common generations sake, my being would be
of importance, but calling him so through particular generation, ^y being
imports not to make me obedient or disobedient, but as I have said the being of
Christ, who was most obedient. And furthermore I understand, that it is
necessary, that I should reduce my self to be with God such an one, as a good
and obedient Son is with his Father.

Secondly, I consider that saying Our, I presuppose, that I hold for brethren
all those, who through regeneration, hold God for their Father, and that I
ought to govern my self with them, as with brethren.

Thirdly I consider, that because God is where he is known, holy Scripture
uses to say, that God is in Heaven, for there God is known. God is in all his
creatures; but it is not said that he is, but only in them who know him, and
where he lets himself to be known.

Fourthly I consider, that the proper desire of a pious Christian is, that Gods
Name should be sanctified; I would say, that God should be esteemed, and judged
of every one for holy, and for just, in all his works, as he is in truth.

Humane wisdom not finding holiness, not justice in many of those things
which befall men in this life, flying from the inconvenience of attributing
injustice to God, falls into another inconvenience, depriving God of his
particular providence in all things. And the holy spirit knowing in all things
holiness, and justice on Gods part, does not doubt to attribute them all to
God; desiring that men captivating the judgment of their own humane wisdom,
should sanctify the Name of God, confessing, and holding that God does all
things, and that in all things is holiness, and justice. There are some men,
who sanctify God in the things which they judge good, drawing themselves back
in those things which they judge to be evil. And there are other men, who
sanctify God generally in all things, but with the mouth, and not with the
heart. And the desire of the pious Christian is, that God should be sanctified
in all things, and that the sanctification should come from the heart; for in
this manner God will be sanctified.

Fifthly I consider, that the proper and continual sighing of a pious
Christian consists in the desire that the kingdom of God should suddenly come,
when the resurrection of the just being made, Christ shall resign the kingdom
to his eternal Father. For that shall be properly the kingdom of God,
inasmuch as the just shall be governed immediately by God, seeing God himself
face to face. God reigns in this present life in the just, but by Christ, as
he gives light but by the Sun: and God shall reign in life eternal by
himself, as by himself he shall give light.

Sixthly I consider, that the pious Christians flying from the will of God
which is with wrath, and that which is mediate by those things which we call
second causes, do demand that that will of God should be done here on earth,
which is done in heaven, understanding that which is with mercy, and with love,
and that which is immediate by God himself.

Seventhly I consider, that the pious Christians feeling, that through the
curse for the first man's sin it results, that they eat their bread with
sorrow and care, they demand of God, that freeing them from the solicitousnesse
and the grief, he would provide them of ordinary sustentation, in such manner
that they may be provided and sustained according to their necessities, without
grief or solicitousnesse; acknowledging their sustentation only from the
liberality of God, and even in this beginning to feel the remedy of the first
man's sin, together therewith feeling the benefit of Christ.

Eighthly I consider, that the pious Christians, not because they make any
doubt of the general pardon which they have had by the justice of God executed
on Christ, for of this they are most assured; but because they rejoice to
remember themselves that they are debtours; which remembrance breeds in them
humility in the sight of God; they ask always of God, that he would pardon
them those things, for which he might in justice punish them. And I understand,
that they allege the pardon which they have given to them who were their
debtours, rather to oblige themselves to pardon, then to oblige God that he
should for such cause pardon them. This I understand thus, by that which Jesus
Christ himself adds in the Gospel, saying, If you pardon, you shall be
pardoned.

Ninthly I consider, that the pious Christians knowing their own weakness,
fear temptation, inasmuch as it may sever them from Christian decorum; and
knowing herewith the necessity which they have to be mortified with
temptations, they demand of God, not that he should not tempt them, but that
the temptations may be of that quality, that they should not make them to loose
the Christian decorum.

Tenthly I consider, that pious Christians having understood that many are the
evils that combat the just, they are afraid to be oppressed by them, and
knowing the frailty of their own forces to be able to make resistance, they
have recourse to God, demanding of him that he should free them from all.

In these desires, and in these demands I understand that pious persons stand
and persevere, not only through the outward doctrine of Jesus Christ our Lord,
which they find written in his history* but also through the inward doctrine of
the holy Spirit, who puts these desires into their minds, and moves them to
demand these things. And they who with the outward doctrine of Christ, have not
that inward of the holy Spirit, in praying as taught and not inspired, do not
pray as the true and lively members of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXXII.
That man pretending that part of the image of God, which did not appertain
unto him, lost that part which did appertain to him.

IN the creation of man, I read that he was created after the image and
similitude of God. And a little after I read, that pretending to get the image
of God, he became disobedient to God, and was driven out of earthly Paradise.
Whereupon understanding that the image and similitude of God, with which man
was created, was different from that which man in his depravation pretended
unto, I am come to consider, that the image of God with which a man was
created, is that which appertained to him as a man, that which might stand and
be received in him; and that the image of God which a man pretended unto, is
that which did not appertain unto him as a man, that which is properly of God
not being communicable to the creatures. And albeit from the words which
contain the creation of man, there is only gathered, that the image of God
with which he was created, did consist in the superiority that he had over all
other creatures; nevertheless, by that which it seems to me S. Paul felt, and
that which I see fulfilled in Christ, and feel and see begun in them that are
the members of Christ, I understand, that besides the superiority which the
Scripture notes, man was like unto God, inasmuch as belongs to his mind, in
piety, justice, and holiness, and as much as belongs to his body in
impassibility and in immortality. In this I certify my self, remembering that
we recover by Christ that which we lost by Adam. We lost by Adam, piety,
justice, and holiness, and we lost the impassibility and immortality of our
bodies; and by Christ we shall in this life recover piety, justice, and
holiness in our minds, and we shall recover in eternal life the impassibility
and immortality of our bodies. And because I see Christ being raised impassible
and immortal, I have said, that I see in him that complete and perfect image
of God which man lost. And because I feel that they who are the members of
Christ being regenerated by the holy Spirit, have piety, justice, and
holiness. I have said, that in them I see the image of God begun to be
repaired, which the first man lost,

Of that image of God which man pretended unto, albeit from holy Scripture I
cannot gather, that it consisted but only in the knowledge of good and evil;
nevertheless by that which I consider in every of those men, who have not
obtained the Christian regeneration; and properly by that which even they who
have obtained it do feel in themselves, and know of themselves; I understand
that besides the knowledge of good and evil, which holy Scripture notes, man
pretended unto that image of God, which consists in the proper being of God,
who is of himself, and gives being and life to every thing that is, and lives,
and therefore loves himself, and for himself loves all things, and would be
loved for himself and above all things, and has majesty, and glory, and
omnipotency.

This I think understanding thus, that since there yet lives in a man that
cursed persuasion of the enemy of humane kind, there yet lives a rash pretense
to obtain that image of God, which only appertains to God, not being
communicable to the creatures.

Whence as I understand it proceeds, that a man will not depend on others, but
on himself, to which things he attends as much as is possible for him; and that
he loves himself, and loves all things for himself; and pretends in every of
his own matters his own proper glory, and would put in execution every thing
that comes into his appetite. And from this fountain I understand, proceed in a
man those other things, which are annexed unto these, such as are proper
estimation, ambition, vainglory, anger, envy. And I understand, that in those
men who have obtained Christian regeneration by Christ, so much does the
pretense to Gods image which belongs not to them, go abating, as much as they
go recovering that which belongs to them; in such manner, that as piety,
justice and holiness go increasing in them, so does self-love, ambition, and
proper estimation, arrogance, and their own rashness go decreasing: The
incorporation wherewith they stand incorporated in Christ working this singular
effect in them, from which it comes that they are humble and obedient sons,
not presumptuous nor disobedient, as was the first man.

To understand this better, I set my self to consider between God and man, the
devil and Christ, the same as between a father and a presumptuous son, an
evil slave and an obedient son. And I understand, that God did with man
giving him his image and similitude, that which a father does with his son,
giving unto him in his house authority such as belongs to a son. And that man
did with God, pretending unto the image of God, that which a presumptuous son
does with his father, that contents not himself with that degree which he has
in his fathers house as a son, but pretends and wills the degree which his
father, has: And that the devil did that to man, persuading him to become
disobedient, which an evil slave does toward his master, procuring to sever his
son from his obedience, to do him displeasure, and to ruin him. And I
understand that Christ did with God, in contenting himself that on him should
be executed the justice of God, that which an obedient son does with his
father, contenting himself that his father should chastize him for that, for
which he ought to chastize the other disobedient son, to reduce him to his
obedience, and to restore unto him in his house that degree and that dignity
which belongs to a son. From all that is said, I take two resolutions: The
first, that it belongs to the pious Christian to desist from the pretense of
that image and similitude of God, which belongs not to him, renouncing every
desire to know, all self-love, all ambition, all proper esteem, all arrogance,
and all presumption; and to attend to recover entirely that image and
similitude of God which appertains unto him, demanding of God greater piety,
greater justice, and greater holiness, and demanding of him impassibility, and
immortality. The second, that to the pious Christian it belongs to know his
reparation from the obedience of Christ, and to know his depravation from the
disobedience of Adam, and so to leave to imitate Adam, and to attend to imitate
Christ: Who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with
God, but made himself of no reputation, taking upon him the form of a servant;
for which cause God has exalted him, and given him absolute power and
superiority in heaven and in earth. So much did avail before God the obedience
and the humility of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXXIII.
That the union between God and man is made by love: that love grows from
knowledge: what knowledge, love, and union are.

SO far forth as I understand, does a man remain united with God, inasmuch as
a man loves God; that if the love be great, the union is great; and if the love
be little, the union is little. Some men there are who love God by relation,
but they remain not united with God, because they first loved themselves before
God, loving God for themselves. There are other men, who love God because God
himself willing to be loved of them, has let himself be known and seen by
them; they stand united with God, because they first love God before
themselves, loving themselves for God. In them as I understand, so great is the
union which they have with God, as is the love which they have to God: and so
much is the love which they have to God, as is the knowledge which they have of
God. If the knowledge be perfect and entire, the love is perfect and entire;
and the union is perfect and entire; and on the contrary: in such manner, that
there is as much perfection or imperfection in the union, as there is
perfection or imperfection in the love and knowledge. The same is between love
and knowledge. Whereby I understand, that because the knowledge which men have
of God in this life is imperfect, through the power of our flesh, the love also
which they have to God is imperfect; and the union is imperfect which we have
with God. And I understand also, that because our flesh in life everlasting
shall not be base, but glorious, our knowledge shall be perfect, our love shall
be perfect, and our union shall be perfect.

In the mean while I understand, that a pious person, who by the liberality of
God begins to know God, and to love God, and to stand united with God, ought to
pretend to grow in the knowledge, in the love, and in the union, not judging
himself deprived of the knowledge, nor of the love, nor of the union with God,
whilst he finds in himself any part of true knowledge, any part of love, any
part of union.

The true and efficacious knowledge of God, as I have otherwhere said, as I
understand consists in certain tastes, and in certain knowledges of the being of
God, which pious persons do obtain, some more, some less, some with greater
evidence, some with less, according to the will of God, which causes the
tastes and the knowledges, of which they can only give testimony who have
tasted them, nay they only understand this language, it being to all others
altogether unintelligible; it being most true which S. Paul says, that a man
without the spirit of God, does not understand the things that are of the
spirit of God.

The true and efficacious love of God I understand consists in an affection
from the very bowels which a man bears to God, and to all those things that are
Gods, desiring that he should be known, loved, and prized in the world, in such
manner as is just: To the intent that he should be known, loved, and prized
with this bowelly affection, I understand Christ wills that his Christians
should say that first part of Our Father, which all appertains to the glory of
God. From this bowelly affection I understand it proceeds, that a man loves God
above all things, loving every thing for God, the creatures in general,
inasmuch as they are the creatures of God; all men, inasmuch as they be the
creatures of God, and inasmuch as God wills that our neighbor should be loved;
(and our neighbor is every man, of what blood soever, state or condition;) and
men regenerated by the holy spirit as the creatures of God, as neighbors, and
principally inasmuch as in them is seen and known the image and likeness of God.

Amongst the creatures the man that loves God, loves them most who do most
illustrate the glory of God. And amongst men whom he loves as neighbors, he
loves them most, whom he sees less depraved, and less impious. And I say
less, understanding that in all men, who are not regenerated by the holy
Spirit, there is found depravation and impiety. Amongst regenerated men he who
loves God, for the love of God loves them most whom he sees and knows to be
most conformable to the image and similitude of God, and in whom he sees this
image more proper, and more natural. And a man who loves God, loves himself as
the creature of God, as a neighbor, and inasmuch as he sees the similitude and
image of God reformed in himself; not procuring, nor willing in any other
manner to be loved for himself; but rather despising, and abhorring the love
that men bear him, when they do not love him for the love of God. In this
manner I understand, that a man who loves God, loves himself for the love of
God, and loves all things for the love of God. And further I understand, that a
man who loves himself above all things, loves God for respect of himself; and
this man pretends his own profit in the love of God: he loves in respect of
himself the creatures, loving them more from whom he expects more profit: he
loves all men in respect of himself, loving them most which are most
profitable, and most necessary: and he loves in respect of himself, the men
whom he thinks to have obtained the Christian regeneration, loving them most by
means of whom he pretends to be able to get piety, justice, and sanctity. And
resolutely he pretends and procure to be loved for himself, and to be loved
above all things, which as I have at other times said is natural to a man,
inasmuch as he pretends to get that image which belongs not to him. And here I
understand that a man, who reduces himself to a desire of not being beloved
but for the love of God, finding molestation in the love which is born toward
him for himself, may judge to have made great profit in the knowledge of God,
in the love of God, and in the union with God. Of this sort and quality, as I
understand, is the love which men have, who are united with God, which as I
understand is in part in a man in this present life, and shall be entire in
life everlasting. And he who shall feel any thing of this part, has great
reason to live joyful and content, holding that part as an earnest of his
increase, and of his perfection in life everlasting.

The true and efficacious union between God and man, consists in this, that S
John says, that he who loves God, dwells in God, and God dwells in him. Gods
dwelling in a man may well be felt, as it is in truth felt; but to them who
feel it not, it cannot be made to be understood. The same may as it were be
said of man's dwelling in God. And I say, as it were, because it seems that it
may be made to be understood, saying, that he who loves God, stands united
with God, abides in God, always remembering God; even like as he who loving a
creature stands united with it, abides in it, always remembering himself of it.
It is very true, that not thus neither is the dwelling of man in God understood.

For this union I undestand Christ our Lord prayed unto his eternal and
heavenly Father, demanding of him, that they who were to believe in him, should
be one with him, and with the Father himself, and should be one between
themselves.

From this divine union it proceeds, that a man altogether, and in all things
remits himself to the will of God, renouncing his own proper will, and so
brings himself to will that which God wills, and in that manner which God
wills, to love that which God loves, and in that manner which God loves it, and
consequently not to will that which God wills not, and not to love that which
God loves not. And the man that is thus remitted and thus reduced, may hold for
certain that he stands united with God, and that he dwells in God, and God in
him. And he shall understand, that he so far stands united with God, as far
as he stands thus remitted, and thus reduced. If he stand much, the union is
much; if little, the union is little.

It proceeds also from this divine Union, that a man likes and dislikes all
those things which those persons like and dislike, who stand in the same Union;
in such manner, that there is between them a very great conformity in wills;
and so great is the conformity which is between them, as the union is great
which they have with God, and between themselves. This conformity is likewise a
good countersigne, with which a man may certify himself, whether he stand
united with God, and how much of this union he has gotten.

Having understood how the union between God and man is made by love; and that
love grows from that knowledge which a man has of God. And having likewise
understood in what the union, and the love, and the knowledge do consist, I
come to resolve my self in this, that to that person which attends unto piety,
it belongs to attend to obtain the knowledge of God, and with the knowledge the
love, and with the love the union. Attending to obtain all this by the
liberality of God, and exercising himself in knowing himself, I mean the frail
and miserable being of man; and to disenamour himself of himself, not willing
to be loved for himself, and procuring to be loved for God; and in disuniting
himself from himself, not willing to have things according to his own fantasy
and will, but as God shall offer them to him either by himself, or by means of
men, or by means of the creatures. And thus shall he obtain the perfect
knowledge of God, the perfect love of God, and the perfect union with God. But
not now in this present life; for the flesh except it be raised up, is not a
fitting subject for this; but in life everlasting, where the flesh being raised
up shall be an able subject to be as it shall be like unto the glorious flesh,
with which Christ Jesus our Lord arose.

CONSID. LXXIV.
That it betides to pious persons in spiritual things, as it befalls in
outward things to him, who having been blind begins to see.

TO the person that begins to understand spiritual and divine things, and that
begins to to know them, I understand that befalls which befalls those persons,
who having by some accident lost the sight of their eyes, begin to recover it.
I say, that as those persons go knowing the being of things, according as they
go recovering the sight of their eyes; first confusedly, as it befell to the
blind man in the Gospel, who beginning to open his eyes saw men, and it seemed
to him that they were trees; and afterward less confusedly, until such time
as by little and little they come to see, and know things in their own proper
being.

In the same manner these persons go on knowing spiritual and divine things,
accordingly as they go purifying their minds with faith, and with love, and
with union with God.

First, they know them confusedly, and afterward less confusedly, and so by
little and little they go advancing in the knowledge of them, until such time
as they arrive and come to know God, and the things that are Gods, in that
manner which may be in this present life. And hence, as I understand, it
proceeds, that that thing which a person without the spirit holds for holy, and
just, and good, in the things of God; another person who has the spirit,
condemns and reputes defective and evil. And hence it likewise proceeds, that
that which a person, who has little of the spirit, holds for most certain,
another who has more spirit then he, holds for an error. Going on thus from
one step to another, the clearness of that judgment increases which
spiritual persons have of divine matters. Whereby I understand, that the
error of pious persons, when in those divine and spiritual matters which they
know, they form their conceits according to that which they come to know by the
first knowledge, not expecting other knowledges more clear and more evident, is
no less, then that of the blind man, who begins to recover the sight of his
eyes, when in the things, which he begins to see, he forms his conceits
according to that which they appeared unto him at the first, not expecting to
see them better, and more clearly.

Furthermore I understand, that it belongs to every pious person to be very
modest, and very moderate in approving or condemning things wherein God is
pleased or displeased, considering that the judgment which God makes of things
is very different from that which men make, how spiritual soever they be:
inasmuch as oft-times a person that has much spirit condemns that, which
another who has little spirit approves. And I understand, that only those
things ought to be approved for holy, and to be condemned for evil, of which we
have the certain testimony of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXXVI.
How it is understood, that God communicates unto us his Divine treasures by
Christ: how God reigns by Christ: and how Christ is the head of the Church.

WIlling to understand in what manner we, who are the members of Christ, do
obtain all the things of God by Christ, I consider, that as all men, who have
the outward sight of the eyes clear, do know the outward being of things
through the benefit of the Sun, in which God has set his outward light: so
all men who have the sight of their inward eyes clear, do know all inward
things by the benefit of Christ, in whom as Saint Paul says, God has set all
the treasures of his Divinity: I say, that as God having set all the outward
light in the Sun, the Sun it self sends forth his beams, which work his
effect, and are efficacious in those which are fit to receive it, forasmuch as
only those living creatures are deprived of the benefit of the Sun, to whom
eyesight is wanting, and they who shut themselves up in caves, or dens,
whereinto the Sunbeams cannot pierce: in the same manner, God having put in
Christ all the treasures of his divinity, Christ poures out his treasures upon
them, who being men are clothed with the same livery, with which he was
clothed; which treasures are efficacious in those persons, which God has drawn
unto the knowledge of Christ, and so they are members of Christ, they only
being deprived of this divine influence who have not the knowledge of God, and
consequently are not pious, and who have not the knowledge of Christ, and
consequently are not just; for in them only the divine treasures, which Christ
poures out upon men, are not efficacious; they standing as much deprived of the
sense, and knowledge of them, as he who is born blind stands deprived of the
sense and knowledge of the light of the Sun. And I understand, that as it
appertains to him who finds himself in this privation, to pray God, that he
would open and clear the sight of his eyes, in such sort that he also may enjoy
the light of the Sun, inasmuch as the Sun of its own self lets it self to
be enjoyed: so in like manner to him who feels not in himself the gifts of God,
which are communicated unto men by Christ, it appertains to pray God, that he
would enable him, and that he would purify him, in such sort as he may become
a good subject to receive the divine treasures efficaciously, which Christ
poures out upon all men, inasmuch as God has for all, put them in him, and he
generally poures them out upon all men, as Saint John very well understood,
saying, That of that which abounds in Christ, we all, who are his members
receive grace, and more grace: Inasmuch as God by the means of Moses gave unto
us the law only, but by means of Jesus Christ he gives grace unto us,
Justifying us in the Justice executed on Christ himself; and he gives unto us
truth, giving unto us his spirit, which teaches us every truth. And because
all these divine gifts do come, and shall come unto men in this life from
Christ, and he gives them unto them, and communicates them unto them, it is
rightly said, that this is the kingdom of Christ, and that it shall so long
last, until the resurrection of the just being made, Christ resign the
kingdom to his everlasting Father. God reigns at present, but by Christ, even
as God sends his light but by the Sun: and in the life eternal God shall
reign by himself, and communicate his light. I say, that in the life eternal
all divine gifts shall come immediately from God unto men, and from God shall
come light immediately unto men. In this manner understanding the benefit of
Christ toward men, and the kingdom of Christ in this present life; I
understand likewise after what sort Christ is the Head of the Church, that as
from my head there descends virtue throughout all my members, they being all
governed, and sustained by it: so from Christ descends virtue for all them that
appertain to the Church, being all of them sustained, and governed with the
divine gifts which are communicated to them from Christ. And I understand that
they appertain to the Church, who being called of God, and drawn to the
knowledge of Christ, are able to receive with efficacy the divine treasures,
which the only begotten son of God Christ Jesus our Lord sheds upon all.

CONSID. LXXVI.
What scandal is, and in what manner Christian persons ought to govern
themselves in the case of Scandal.

COnsidering how much esteem is made in holy Scripture of Scandal, inasmuch as
Jesus Christ our Lord threatens the world because of scandal, advising us that
we should give scandal to none of those who believe in him; And inasmuch as
Saint Paul says, that for the avoiding of scandalizing of one Christian, he
would forbear to eat flesh all the time of his life: I have desired to live in
this life in such sort, that I be not cause of scandal to any: And I have
desired the same for those persons whom I love in Christ. And considering that
on the other side a man cannot live in this life without scandalizing some;
forasmuch as even Christ himself scandalized; nay he is even called a rock of
offense, inasmuch as many have fallen stumbling at his humility, and abasement,
and do fall without being able to rise.

First I have considered, that scandal is the same as offense; and so we say,
that he is scandalized, who for that which he hears or sees done, severs
himself, or is solicited, and tempted to sever himself, from that which he
ought not, or would not sever himself.

Afterward I have understood by holy Scripture, that God scandalizeth, and is
scandalized; that Gods Saints scandalize and are scandalized; that the By the
Saints of the world he every where understands the cunning hypocrite who by the
world is counted a very Saint, for his outward show of holiness: and we meet
with two sorts of these Saints of the world; one, whose holiness consists in a
few ceremonious and superstitious observations; the others, in a zeal against
these, and in a strict performance of a few cheap and easy duties of religion,
with no less superstition; both of them having forms or vizars of godliness,
but denying the power thereof.
Saints of the world scandalize, and are scandalized; and that the men of the
world, who do not attend to any holiness, scandalize, but are not scandalized.

God scandaliseth his Saints, when they being imperfect, and setting themselves
with natural light to judge the works of God, are tempted to judge evil of
God, or not to believe the providence of God. That this is true appears by the
73. Psalm, Truly God is loving unto Israel. God likewise scandalizeth the
Saints of the world in all things that are not conformable to humane reason.
For they having no other then natural light, and judging them therewith, they
do tax and condemn them for evil. And hence it proceeds, that with difficulty
they bring themselves to be willing to attribute particular providence to God,
and that they will not admit predestination, except after their own way,

They who judge the works of God with spiritual light, God never scandalizeth
them* nor them who captivate their understandings to God: Neither does God
scandalize the men of the world, for they keep no account with God, believing
that all things come by chance.

God is scandalized, or tempted to do that which he would not, being as he is,
merciful; and pitiful, when they, who he holds for his own, and favors as
his own, distrust themselves of his promises, or of his omnipotency and
providence, inasmuch as with their diffidence they provoke him to punish them,
as it were against his will. In this manner the Hebrews in the Desert
scandalized him, as appears by the history, and by the 78. and 95. Psalms.

God is also scandalized from the Saints of the world with the arrogance, and
presumption with which they sell themselves for Gods saints, for which God is
forced to punish them with blindness as he punished the Hebrews, and punishes
false Christians. And God is scandalized from the impious, when with their sins
and vices they show, and discover the impiety and infidelity of their minds,
inasmuch as he is as it were necessitated to destroy them, as appears by many
places of holy Scripture, and particularly by that which S. Paul says, Romans 1.

The Saints of God scandalize God in the manner that has been spoken of; and
they scandalize one another, when they that are perfect use more liberty then
is fit in the presence of the imperfect, through which liberty the imperfect
are tempted to make an evil judgment of the Christian faith, or to do as the
perfect do, not knowing that they do amiss. From this sort of scandal Saint
Paul had intent always to keep himself, as appears, Romans 14. and 1 Cor. 8. the
same scandalize the Saints of the world, when they do not conform themselves
with them in the things which to their seeming are religion, and sanctity. So
the Scribes and Pharisees were scandalized at Christ, as appears, Matthew. 15.
And the Hebrews were scandalized at S. Paul, as appears by this, that even unto
this present day the saints of the world are scandalized at the Epistles which
S. Paul writ, judging them hurtful to Christian living. And so a man may say,
that the Saints of the world have stumbled, and do stumble at Christ, and at
true Christians, and at their actions, and so much the more as they be the more
like unto Christ. Of this scandal Christians that are the Saints of God are to
take little care, as Christ himself took little care, saying, Let them alone,
they are blind leaders of the blind, Matthew. 15. The men of the world are not
scandalized by the Saints of God, because they come in no competition with
them. The Saints of God are scandalized from God through their imperfection,
and by means of the same imperfection, the imperfect are scandalized from the
perfect, as has been said. The Saints of God are scandalized by the Saints of
the world, by being falsely doctrinated and counseled by them, and being by
them persecuted with detraction, with evil entreaties, and with death, they are
solicited to depart from the Gospel, and from Christ. This is that scandal for
which Christ threatens the world, and from which Christ exhorts every one to
keep himself, Matthew. 18.

The Saints of God are likewise scandalized by wicked men, though they buy
their own scandal, for seeing in them the works of impiety and incredulity,
they are tempted to the same, or are molested by them. In this manner was Lot
scandalized with the filthiness of the men of Sodom, as appears 2. Pet.
2.7. And the Saints of the world scandalize God, and the Saints of God in that
manner as has been said. And they themselves are scandalized from God, and by
the Saints of God, in that manner as has been said. The same are scandalized
one at another, inasmuch as it would be a wonder to find one that approves
another manner of living, a thing which is natural to the holiness of the
world, which consists in superstitious observations. The same are scandalized
from the men of the world, inasmuch as they conform themselves with them in
nothing. The men of the world scandalize God, and the Saints of the world in
that manner as has been spoken; but themselves are never scandalized in any
kind: for they keep no account with God, nor with religion, nor with piety.

There is indeed a generation of men in the world, who through the conversation
which they have with the Saints of the world, pretending a certain manner of
holiness, are scandalized as the Saints of the world are scandalized, albeit
they be not so pernicious as the Saints of the world.

From this I come to gather this resolution, that every Christian ought to
attend to form in himself a mind so like unto God, and unto Christ, that he
should altogether be scandalized at those things at which God is scandalized;
that is, at the diffidence and doubtfulnesse of them who are the Saints of God,
but imperfect; at the arrogance of the Saints of the world; and at the vices
and sins with which the men of the world do manifest the impiety and
incredulity of their minds; and that it appertains to him to attend to form his
living so like to the life of our Lord Christ, that he do not in any manner
scandalize God, distrusting or doubting of his promises, or of his omnipotency
and providence; nor scandalize the Saints of God in any thing, esteeming little
to scandalize the Saints of the world, when the glory of God comes between the
Christian truth, and edification, and the profit of the Saints of God, as
Christ did, as appears Matthew. 15. and as S. Paul did, and as they have done and
do from time to time, who have followed and imitated, and do follow and imitate
Christ. Let the Saints of the world stumble and fall, and break their necks
rather then the truth of the Gospel suffer any detriment in the Saints of God.
Whereupon if any shall doubt, saying, How shall I govern my self, when I shall
be forced to scandalize either the Saints of God, which are imperfect in being
superstitious, or the Saints of God which were never superstitious? I shall say
unto him, that he ought to beware of doing as S. Peter did in Antioch, Gal.
2.11, 12, etc. who having more respect to them that were superstitious,
scandalized, and caused them to stumble who had never been superstitious. I
would say, that having respect to the superstition, and pertinacy of the
converts from Judaisme, he did scandalize, and put in hazard the sincerity of
the faith of the converts from gentility, feigning the observation of the Law
against the rule of Christian faith. And I will say unto him, that he ought to
do as S. Paul did at the same time, who having more respect that the faith of
those of the Gentility should not be scandalized, then the superstition of them
of the Judaisme, did publicly reprove S. Peter. I say, that if a Christian
that understands the Evangelicall Gospel, and knows Christian verity, shall
find himself amongst persons that begin to understand, and know them, he shall
do well to accommodate himself to their incapacity and frailty, doing as they
do. And I further say, that in case he be hereby carefully intending to draw
them to the knowledge of the Evangelicall faith and truth, where there is both
the one and the other sort of persons, if he shall think that dissembling with
them that do as yet keep any part of superstition, he shall scandalize, and
make them fall who are free from superstition, inasmuch as seeing him in the
superstition, they may come to hold the superstition for necessary, he ought
not to dissemble in any manner, although he should think to put his life in
danger; having always regard that the Christian faith and the Evangelicall
truth stand firms and constant. Here I will add this, that when a Christian
scandalizeth a Christian who knows the Evangelicall truth, because he would not
scandalize another Christian, who as yet does not well understand it, if his
error proceed from covetousness, or from ambition, because the one is richer
or more powerful then the other, his error is intolerable. And if his error
proceed from indiscretion, or from weakness and infirmity, it is tolerable.

By that which has been said I learn these thirteen things;

1. What Scandal is.

2. That to the intent I be not scandalized at the works of God, it is needful
to renounce my wisdom, and my humane reason, and to pray to God that he give
me spiritual light, with which I may understand his works.

3. That I do then scandalize God, when I distrust his promises, his
omnipotency and providence

4. That I ought to refrain, as much as is possible, to use my Christian
liberty in presence of weak Christians that are infirm in the faith.

5. That I ought lightly to esteem the scandal that the saints of the world
take at the truth of the Gospel.

6. That the scandal that is pernicious to him who scandalizeth, is that which
the saints of the world do, pretending to do service unto God. And here I
learn, that I ought to keep my self as from the fire to persecute any man in
what manner soever, pretending to do God service therein.

7. That I ought to hold it for a good sign of piety, when the works of
impiety, and of the infidelity of the men of the world do scandalize me.

8. That it is a good sign to know the saints of the world, by their being
often and easily scandalized by any person, and their publishing and showing of
their scandal.

9. That it is a sign of impiety for a man not to be offended nor scandalized
in any thing.

10. That it becomes me to be like God, and Christ in the inward, to the end I
be not scandalized but by that wherewith God and Christ are scandalized.

11. That it becomes me to live like Christ, that I may not scandalize but as
Christ did.

12. That for no cause I ought to scandalize any in prejudice of the Christian
faith, although I do know that I scandalize the weakness and infirmity of
imperfect Christians.

13. That I learn, that having scandalized in prejudice of the Christian faith
through indiscretion or weakness, my error will be tolerable; but when I
shall scandalize in prejudice of the same through covetousness, or ambition my
error will be intolerable. And from this error I am certain my God will
preserve me, and all those whom he has called to the acceptance of the grace
of the Gospel, to be heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXXVII.
Two contrarieties between them that live according to the flesh, and them that
live according to the Spirit.

COnsidering that men who live according to the flesh, while they think not of
it, do believe little, have less confidence, and love much less, as they
themselves well know and feel, and accordingly show it in their words, although
they would not show it. And considering that when they take themselves into
consideration, they persuade themselves that they believe much, and have much
confidence and love: And considering on the other side, that those who live
according to the spirit, although they seem regardlesse and think not of it,
believe, have confidence, and love more or less, according to that part of the
spirit which they have; as they themselves know and feel in themselves, and as
they show in their words, speaking with more piety, faith, confidence, and
affection of the things of God, when they ordinarily speak, and when the force
of the spirit moves them to speak of piety, faith, confidence, and love, then
all the men of the world together, when they set themselves with diligence and
attention to speak thereof. And considering also that it comes oftentimes to
pass, that those persons, upon examination of themselves cannot bring
themselves to believe, nor less to have confidence, and much less to love: I
have set my self to understand, whence these so contrary effects proceed. And I
find, that one part proceeds from that which Christ says, Luke 6, 45. that out
of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. Whence it comes to pass,
that he who lives according to the flesh, having in his heart neither faith,
confidence, nor love, cannot give of that which he has not; and consequently
cannot except he set himself purposely thereunto, make show of faith,
confidence, or love. And because he who lives according to the spirit, has in
his heart piety, faith, confidence and love, and being able to give of that
which he has; it is necessary how careless soever he seem to be, that he
should yield forth piety, faith, confidence, and love. And therefore the holy
Scripture, Proverbs 10.11. calls the just man's mouth a vein or mine of life.
And I find likewise, that the other part of these contrarieties proceeds from
this, that the man who lives after the flesh, because he keeps no account with
his heart, does then persuade himself that he believes, has confidence, and
that he loves, when he has the faith, confidence, and the love in his
understanding. He knows that it is necessary for a Christian, that he should
believe, have confidence, and love; and he persuades himself, that he believes,
has confidence, and loves* because he knows and understands that he ought to
do so. But they who live according to the spirit, because they keep account
with their hearts, not contenting themselves to hold the faith, confidence, and
love in their understandings, cannot persuade themselves, that they believe,
have confidence, or love, but when they feel in their hearts the effects of
confidence, and love. And because this sense and feeling is through the favor
of God, who gives it not when men would, but when it pleases his Divine
Majesty, hence it comes to pass that those who live after the Spirit, do then
find most difficulty in believing, loving, and having confidence, when they do
most instantly go about to procure it. Whence it may be gathered, that the
sign of what a man has within him, is to be taken from that which he shows
outwardly, and ordinarily when he is regardlesse. And further, that through the
facility, or difficulty, with which a man persuades himself to believe, have
confidence, and love, it may be known, whether his faith, confidence, and love,
be in the head and understanding only, or in the heart also. And so this
conclusion is made, that they who while they think not of it, speak most
Christianly; and when they would bring themselves with humane industry to have
confidence, to believe, and love, find most difficulty in it, are true
Christians incorporated in Jesus Christ our Lord,

CONSID. LXXVIII.
Two griefs, one according to the world, and the other according to God: And
two weaknesses, one according to the flesh, and the other according to the
Spirit.

AS Saint Paul puts two griefs, 2 Cor. 7, 10. one according to the world, and
says, that this causes death; and the other according to God, and says, that
this causes life: Even so I put two weaknesses, one according to the flesh;
and I understand, that this causes fear; and another according to the spirit,
and that this causes love. And I put them, because I feel them in the griefs
which Saint Paul puts; I understand that then a man feels grief according to
the world, when he falls into some such inconvenience, as causes shame, or
loss, or any other discommodity in the eyes of the world, in the reputation
and dignity of the world. And I understand, that this grief causes death,
inasmuch as a man that grieves in this manner, except he speedily remedy his
grief, becomes blasphemous against God, attributing unto him the cause of his
grief, and lamenting it, and being blasphemous against God, he comes to get
himself eternal death. So I understand, that then a man feels grief according
to God, when he falls into any inconvenience, by reason whereof he fears to be
deprived of the grace of God, and of the holy spirit of Christ, and of God
himself. And I understand, that this grief causes life, inasmuch as he who is
grieved in this manner, does more, and better know himself, and so does more
cordially recommend and remit himself to God, and from this recommending
himself to God, he comes to attain resurrection, and life everlasting,

For the two weaknesses which I put, I understand that a man is then weak
according to the flesh, when his weakness grows from self love: And I call
this a weakness, to resent himself for those things, which come to pass
against his will. This weakness I understand causes fear: for where self love
is, there is always fear. And I understand that this weakness is tolerable in
Christians, being no sign of impiety, but of imperfection. Also I understand
that a man is then weak according to the spirit, when his weakness grows from
the love of God, resenting himself, when he sees himself deprived of God, or of
any of the things that are of God, which are means to him to grow in the love
of God, and in the confidence in God. This weakness I understand causes love,
because it proceeds from love, and so is converted into love, and is therefore
laudable, and a sign of Christian perfection.

Weakness according to the flesh, but not blame worthy, I understand was that
which Saint Paul Romans 9.2. felt for the reprobation of the Hebrews. And
weakness according to the spirit, I understand was that which Saint Paul, 2
Cor. 12.7. felt through the thorns in the flesh; and that which he felt Phil.
2.27. for the sickness unto death of his friend. And that also was weakness
according to the spirit, which they of Miletum felt for the departure of Saint
Paul. Acts 20, 37.38.

Whence I gather, that Christians ought not to grieve themselves much in their
weaknesses, that are according to the flesh, since in them they be tolerable;
for they are not mortal: And that Christians ought to rejoice much in their
weaknesses which are according to the spirit, inasmuch as they are signs of
perfection, and the way of vivification, of Resurrection, and of eternal life.

The children of this world feel the grief that is according to the world, but
they do not feel the grief which is according to God: and the sons of God
feel the one and the other grief; the one, inasmuch as Adam lives in them, and
the other, inasmuch as Christ lives in them.

The children of this world have indeed the weakness that is according to the
flesh, but all of them do not know it for weakness, neither feel it as such.
The weakness which is according to the spirit, they neither have, know, nor
feel. And the sons of God have, know, and feel both the weaknesses, knowing
in the weakness that is according to the flesh, the relics of the old Adam;
and in the weakness that is according to the spirit, the renovation of the new
Adam our Lord Jesus Christ.

CONSID. LXXIX.
How perilous the errors be, which men commit, pretending piety.

I Hold that amongst those errors, which we, who are the sons of God, by
committing may offend God, the greatest are those, which are committed
pretending piety. That this is true, I see as well by the rigorousnesse, with
which God has punished these errors as it is read in holy Scripture; as also
because it appears in the Scripture, that God has with his hand (as it were)
restrained them who have been his, not consenting that they should fall into
these kind of errors; not having done the same in other errors, wherein they
have had intention to satisfy their appetites, and affections.

Of the rigourousnesse, with which God has punished them who have erred
pretending piety, he might principally give testimony, who willing to hold up
the Ark of the Testimony, 2 Samuel 6.6, 7. which to his seeming was about to
fall, died instantly: And Saul who was deprived of the kingdom of Israel, and
perpetually of the grace of God, for the sacrifice that he made to God for the
victory that he had against certain nations, of which God had given him
command, that he should not leave any thing alive, which should not pass the
edge of the sword, 1 Samuel 15.

Whereupon if any shall demand, saying, Why then has not God used the same
rigorousnesse with others, who have erred more perniciously, pretending piety,
as a man might say of Saint Paul, who before he was a Christian, pretending
piety persecuted and slew the Christians? I will make answer, First, that
hitherto God has not given me the account thereof. And I will say, that God
does not use this rigorousnesse, except with them, who are of the number of
his. And Saint Paul when he was in that error, was not in the number of those
who were Gods; the Hebrew people having then left to be the people of God; and
therefore his error was not punished as that of Uzzahs, nor as that of Saul's.

That God has restrained with his hand his elect, not suffering them to err
in piety, albeit he have suffered them to err in other things; serves me for a
most effectual example that which is written of David, who pretending piety,
desired to build the Temple of Jerusalem, and God did not consent thereunto,
because it was not his will, that he should build it unto him; and therefore he
should have erred, if he had builded it. And the same pretending to satisfy
his appetites with Bathsheba, caused her husband to be slain, and did with the
wife what pleased him; to which matter God set no impediment at all.

In like manner Saint Peter not pretending piety denied Christ, and God
permitted it; and pretending piety he would not converse with the Gentiles, and
God did not permit it. As likewise he did not consent to it, that Saint Paul
should go, where he pretending piety would have gone, until that pretense of
his became not his, but of the holy spirit which abode in him.

And I hold it certain, that the most continual and ordinary temptation, with
which pious persons are tempted is this of pretending piety, in which the angel
of Satan transfigures himself into an Angel of light, making that to seem
piety, which is no piety. But pious persons may comfort themselves with two
things: the one is, that against the temptations of the angels of Satan, they
have the illuminations of the holy spirit, who discovers the deceit of the
malignant spirit. And the other is, that God uses to restrain with his hand
the pious, that they should not fall into this kind of error, it being so much
contrary unto true piety. And together herewith, the pious ought always to
stand watchful, so as the angel of Satan coming transfigured into an Angel of
light, they may know him, and guard themselves from him.

Three things here offer themselves to me. The first, seeing the error is so
great, which is committed by men pretending piety, every man ought to go with
more regard to do those things with which he pretends piety, then to do things
with which he pretends his proper satisfaction.

The second, that those who are elected of God, do not err pretending piety
through the illuminations which they have of the holy spirit, and because God
restrains them with his hand. It is a great sign of piety, and of the election
of God, not to err pretending piety.

And the third, that then a man erres pretending piety, when he does a thing,
wherewith by himself alone he thinks to satisfy God, and to oblige God. As if
I should chastise my body, not with that intent, with which S. Paul says he
chastised his, that is, to hold it in servitude, and subjection to his spirit;
but with intent to merit by that chastisement, which I do on my self.
Amplifying this comparison throughout all the outward things which men do, it
it easisily understood, when they err pretending piety. And I return to say,
that he who shall feel himself directed by that way, through which he does not
err pretending piety, he may certify himself, that he is the son of God,
and consequently brother of the only begotten son of God Jesus Christ our
Lord.

CONSID. LXXX.
What Gods intent is, demanding of men that which of themselves alone they
cannot give him: And why he gives them not at once all that which he will give
them.

UNderstanding that it is true in effect, that men who see with the eyes of
humane wisdom, hold it for injustice and cruelty in God that he demands of men
things which they of themselves alone cannot give him, such as are, The love
with all the heart, in the time of the law, and the Faith of the heart, in the
time of the Gospel; which are two things which a man is of himself as able to
give unto God, as he is able to touch heaven with his hand. And understanding
likewise as it is in effect true, that the men who see with the eyes of the
holy spirit, do in and through the same, demand, know mercy, and piety in God;
and they should have known altogether the contrary in him, if so be he should
demand things that men could give unto him with ease. And considering whence
these two so contrary judgments proceed, which humane wisdom and Gods holy
Spirit make concerning this demand of God; I understand that the judgment
which humane wisdom makes, proceeds from the not knowing the being of God, and
the not knowing the being of man; and that the judgment which the holy Spirit
makes, proceeds from the knowledge of Gods being, and the being of man. And it
is certain, that because humane wisdom knows not the being of God, it comes to
pass that seeing he demands of men that which they cannot give, it judges
that he does this to condemn them, as it would of one of the Princes of this
world, who should require of his subjects, that they should not sleep for a
whole year, setting a penalty if they did sleep. And because humane wisdom
knows not the being of a man, it comes to pass that it would hold it for a
better and more profitable thing for a man, that God should require of him that
which he can give, rather then that which he cannot give; even as it holds for
better, that a Prince of the world should demand of his vassals rather that
which they can give him with ease, then that which they cannot give him, though
with difficulty. And it is also true, that from the knowledge which the Spirit
of God has of Gods being, it comes to pass that not judging of him as of one
of the Princes of the world, it knows, that he demanding of men that which they
cannot give him, he does it not to condemn them, but to save them: and that
from the knowledge which the holy Spirit has of the being of man, it proceeds,
that knowing that man in himself is so arrogant, that if God should demand of
him for his salvation things that he could easily give of himself, he would
enter into such pride when he had given them, that by the self same way whereby
he thought to obtain salvation, he would get condemnation; by this he comes to
know, that the intent with which God demands of men that which of themselves
they cannot give him, is not to condemn them, as humane wisdom judges;
neither is it to hinder their salvation, as humane wisdom judges, which
hereupon holds God for unjust, and for cruel: but it is to save them, and to
further their salvation: God doing this to the intent that men assaying and
trying to love God with all their heart, and to believe in him; and finding
themselves altogether unable thus to love and believe, they should have
recourse unto God, and beg those graces of him, and by those gifts and graces
of his, they may obtain that felicity which they desire, not for that which
they are of themselves, but for that which they are through God. In such
manner, that with much reason, not humane, but divine, men that see with the
holy Spirit, know mercy and piety in God, considering that he demands from men
that which they cannot give him of themselves, and they would know cruelty in
God, when he should demand of them that which they could give of themselves.
Even as a man that has discretion, when he saw that a father should put the
government of his estate upon an ignorant and unwise son of his, holding the
father for wise, he would judge that he had not intent to make his son the
heir, but to cause him to loose the estate: So much different is the judgment
which the Spirit of God makes in the judgment of God, from that which humane
wisdom knows in the same things. And here I understand, that for the causes
for which God demands of men that which they cannot of themselves give him, it
comes to pass that to them to whom he begins to give love, and faith, and
increase and growth in them, through some acknowledgements and feelings, and
some tastes of spiritual and divine things, he does not give so much evidence,
and and so much clearness in them, as they themselves would, and as much as
might serve to make that they should fully comprehend him with their
understandings. I would say, that as he demands of them that which they cannot
give him, to the intent they should not grow proud, as they would if he should
demand of them that which they could give him, and so their salvation would be
hindered; so he does not let them entirely comprehend spiritual things, which
he sometimes makes them feel, to the end they should not pride themselves, and
so hinder their salvation. God knows our evil lump, and desiring our salvation
he deals with us, as he sees it convenient we should be dealt with: herein
doing that with us, which we do with a child, when we would have him to love
us, and depend on us. I would say, that as we give not the child at one time
all that which he would have from us, and which we mean to give him; nay rather
some things we give him altogether, others in part, and others we only show
unto him, so much as to breed in him a desire to them, and to enamour him of
them, to the end he may go enamouring himself of us, may follow, and depend on
us; knowing that if we gave him at once all that which we have to give him, he
would grow proud, and would not love us, nor depend on us: so God gives not
unto us at once all that which we would have from him, nor all that which he
will give us, but some things he gives altogether, and others in part, and
others he lets us see so much as suffices to breed a longing in us for them,
and to enamour us of them; to the intent we may follow him, love him, and
depend on him. This he does, because he knows us to be such, that if he should
give at once all that which he has to give us, we should become proud, and so
he should not have from us what he would, that is, that we should love him with
all our heart, and that for the obtaining of eternal life, firmly believing we
may make ours the justice of his only begotten son Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXXXI.
Two weaknesses in our Lord Christ, and in his members; and two powers in him
and them.

IN Christ I consider two weaknesses: the one is that which he felt in the
inward; and the other is that which he showed in the outward. That which he
felt in the inward, I consider in the tears which he shed over Jerusalem; and
in those which he shed in the death of Lazarus; and in the agony with which he
prayed in the garden, sweating drops of blood. And that which he showed in the
outward, I consider it seeing he was held for base, for vulgar, for vile, yea
and also for an ill, a pernicious, and for a scandalous man, and seeing that he
was mocked, injured, and persecuted until he was crucified for a malefectour,
and as a malefactor. And I understand that without any comparison the
weakness that Christ showed in the outward, was greater then that which he
felt in the inward. I would say, that the inward which he felt, was not in that
degree of weakness, which the outward was, that he showed.

In the same Christ I consider two Powers, two virtues, and Efficacies. The one
is that which he felt in the Inward, the other is that which he showed in the
Outward. The power which Christ showed in the inward I consider in this manner,
that he said to S. Peter when he reprehended him for cutting off Malchus his
ear, Think thou not that I can pray my Father, and he shall send me more
then twelve Legions of Angels? And I consider in many speeches which I read in
S. John, when Christ spoke of his Union, which he had with God. And the power,
which Christ had in the outward, I consider in the miracles which he did, and
in the authority, with whith he did them, and in the Power, and Majesty with
which he spoke, and taught. And I understand that without all comparison, the
power, the virtue, and the efficacy that Christ felt in the inward, was
greater then that which he showed in the outward. I say, that the outward which
he showed, was not in that degree of power, as the inward was, which he felt.

In every one of them, who are Christ's members, I consider the same, as it
were, that I consider in Christ. I will put the example in S. Paul, in whom
after the same manner I consider two weaknesses, one which he felt in the
inward, and the other which he showed in the outward, That which he felt in the
inward is well known by that which he says of sin, that dwelt in him. Romans
7. and for that he says, 2. Corinthians. 2. I will gladly glory in my infirmities.
and in that, when I am weak, then am I strong. For I understand it was said
unto him on Gods behalf, My grace is sufficient for thee, for my grace is
perfected in weakness. And that which he showed in the outward, was well
shown by the evil^ opinion that almost every one had of him; every one
persecuted him, every one reviled him, evil entreated him, martyrized him, as
is read in the Acts of the Apostles, and as he himself writes, 1. Cor. 4. and
2. Cor. 11. And I understand, that the weakness which S. Paul showed in the
outward, was much greater, then that which he felt in the inward. I say, that
which S. Paul felt in the inward, was not in that degree of weakness, as that
which he showed in the outward. In the same S. Paul I consider two powers, two
virtues, and efficacies; the one which he felt in the inward, and the other
which he showed in the outward. That which he felt in the inward he published,
saying, I can do all things in him who enableth me. And he showed it very
openly Romans 8. saying, that there was no creature able to separate him from the
love of God. And that which he showed in the outward, is seen by the miracles
which he did, and by the many people that he converted. And I understand, that
the power which Saint Paul felt in the inward, was much greater then that which
he showed in the outward. I say, that which Saint Paul showed in the outward,
was not in that degree of power, as that which he felt in the inward,

The same which I consider in S. Paul I consider in every one of them which are
the members of Christ, more or less, according as is that part of faith and of
the spirit, which every one of them possesses, understanding that from Saint
Paul's being a member of Christ, it proceeded that he was in all that has been
spoken like unto Christ. Further I understand, that the consideration of the
two weaknesses considered in Christ, works the same effect in him that
considers them, that the weakness which he feels in the inward, goes abating
in him, inasmuch as his affections and appetites go on dying; and the weakness
which he shows in the outward, goes increasing, inasmuch as he is esteemed more
vulgar, more vile, and of less regard, and more mocked, injured, persecuted,
and worse entreated. And I understand also, that the consideration of these two
powers, virtues, and efficacies considered in Christ, works that effect in him
that considers them, that in him grows increasing the power, virtue^ and
efficacy that he feels in the inward, inasmuch as he has more conscience, has
more spirit, and more other knowledges, and divine conceptions of God, and of
the things of God. And there goes abating in him the power, virtue, and
efficacy which he shows in the outward, inasmuch as he only shows himself when
he is inspired and moved of God to show himself; so as that so much is one the
more like to Christ, inasmuch as he is more weak in that which is seen, and
more powerful in that which is not seen.

I will add this, that the Saints of the world know the power in God by the
power that Christ showed in the outward, knowing weakness in God through the
weakness that Christ showed in the outward. They know power in God through the
transfiguration of Christ. And they know weakness in God by the death of
Christ. But I understand, that the Saints of God know without all comparison
greater power in God through the weakness which Christ showed in the outward,
then through the power which Christ showed in the outward: and it is so indeed,
that they know greater power in God by the grace of Christ, then by the
transfiguration of Christ, knowing that it is so indeed. And so it is
perceived, that from Christ's showing himself weak, his death on the Cross did
result; and from his death on the Cross is resulted all the good of the world,
all the felicity, and prosperity, which they who are Christ's members do enjoy,
and shall enjoy together with Christ, there being in them that which was, and
that which is in Him, to whom be glory for ever.

CONSID. LXXXII.
In what properly consists that agony, which Jesus Christ our Lord felt in
his Passion and in his death.

HAving oft-times heard speak of the agony, of the fear and loathing, and
sorrowfulness, which Jesus Christ our Lord felt at his passion and death, by
persons who pretended to show the cause why Christ felt so much his sufferings,
and his death; many other men having suffered and died, some as men, and some
as Christians, some of them without having showed so much sense, others having
showed none at all, and others having made show to rejoice, and delight
themselves in their suffering, and to rejoice in their death. And never having
remained satisfied, neither with that which I heard say, nor with that which I
read in their books which handle this matter. Last of all joining that which I
heard a Preacher say with that which is read in Isaiah chap. 53.5. and in S.
Peter, 1 Pet. 2.24. I have made this resolution, That God having put all our
sins on Christ to punish them all in him, and he having taken them all upon
himself, and known them all in general, and in particular, he felt for every
one of them that confusion, that shame, and that grief, which he should have
felt, if he himself had committed them. Whereupon seeing himself in the
presence of God polluted and defiled with so many, and so abominable sins, it
came to pass that he felt all that agony, all that fear, all that
sorrowfulness within himself, and all that shame and confusion, which
appertained to every one of us to have felt for every one of our sins, had we
been punished for them. Whence proceeded, that he sweat drops of blood in the
garden, for the anguish which he felt, not because he saw himself near unto
death, but to see himself in the presence of God full of so many sins, for
which reason he prayed putting his face to the earth, as if he had been ashamed
to have looked up to heaven, knowing that there lay upon him so many offenses
committed against God. And this truly is the cause why Christ showed more sense
of grief in his passion, and in his death, then any of the Martyrs, that have
suffered for the Gospel, and then any other man of the world that has dyed for
the world. And of this shame, and confusion, which Christ felt seeing himself
defiled with our sins, he may have felt some little parcel, that has seen
himself in the presence of some great Prince, praying him for the pardon of one
that has been a traitor, he feeling the shame that belonged to the other to
have felt. Now that it is true, that God has laid on Christ all our sins,
and that Christ has taken them all upon him, is plain by Isaiah, chap. 53.
where he says, He took our infirmities, and our griefs he suffered: and a
little after, he was scourged for our rebellions, and beaten for our
iniquities: and a little after, he took on him the sins of many: and more
then this he says, we were healed by his blewnesse of stripes. And this is
proved by Saint Paul, Romans 7. who feeling the self same which Isaiah felt,
says as it were the self same which Isaiah does, And wretched man that I am!
for now am I well aware of the evil that I have done in offending God, not
living according to the will of God, inasmuch as with every one of my offenses,
and with every one of my sins I have augmented the agony, the fear, and the
sorrowfulness which my Lord Christ suffered in his death and passion.

Hereby^ I understand two most important things: The one, that if the rigor of
the justice that was executed on Christ, as well in the outward as in the
inward, had been executed upon all us, every man taking that part which
belonged to him for his offenses, and sins, we should all have gone into
destruction; there being none of us sufficient to be able to endure on himself
that punishment which belonged to him for his part, in case Christ had not
satisfied the justice of God for us all. And the going into destruction, I
understand should have consisted in this, that none of us should have been able
to stand solid and firm in the suffering without fainting, and so to ^ever our
selves from the obedience of God: And therefore Caiaphas said well, if he had
meant well when he said it, it is expedient that one man should die for the
people, that the whole nation perish not. The other thing which I understand
here is, that it was more then necessary, that he should be more then a man,
nay that he should be the Son of God, who was to reconcile men with God. For
being to be punished for the sins of us all, knowing them, and feeling them
all in himself, as if he had committed them all, he might make resistance to
the agony, fear, and sorrowfulness, to the shame and confusion, without coming
to nothing, and without in any manner departing, no not in any part, from the
obedience of God; persevering and standing therein solid, and constant, as our
Lord Jesus Christ stood, who was likened to a Lamb that is lead to the
slaughter as well for the innocence with which he lived, as for the obedience
wherewith he was content to be sacrificed for us, being the son of God, and
one self same thing with God, whose obedience is, and shall be unto him, glory,
and honor for evermore, Amen.

CONSID. LXXXIII.
Five considerations in the resurrection of Christ.

IN the glorious resurrection of Jesus Christ our Lord I consider five things,
which do in a great manner excite me to live in this present life, a life very
like unto that, which I am to live in life everlasting.

The first is, that as the torment, which Christ ^elt in suffering, was in
great manner increased, because he took upon him our sins, and knew them on
himself, as well as if he had himself committed them all: so the glory, which
Christ ^elt in his resurrection was increased in great manner, to see that we
all of us arose with him.

The second, that as God slaying on the cross the flesh of Christ, slew ours,
in such manner, that to himward we are held, and judged as if we had been
really, and indeed dead: so God raising up Christ raised us all up, in such
manner that as much as belongs to him we are held, and judged as if we had been
really raised up.

The third, that as the effect whereby our incorporation in the death of Christ
in this present life is known by our mortification, not that which we make with
our own industries, but that which we obtain by the incorporation in Christ,
which the holy spirit works, which is by faith communicated unto us, making us
to abhor the world with all that which is world, and also our selves with all
that which is ours: So likewise the effect by which our incorporation into the
resurrection of Christ is known in this present life, is our vivification,
which incorporation in Christ the spirit works in us, regenerating and renewing
us all, and altogether; and making us to love God, and all that which is Gods,
and to love Christ, and all that which is Christ's.

The fourth thing which I consider is, that as with my sins I augmented the
agony, and the torment of Christ in his passion; so with my resurrection I
augment the joy and pleasure of Christ in his resurrection. And as I am grieved
at that, so I glory in this. Nay, the glory of this makes me to forget the
sorrow of the other.

The fifth thing which I consider is, that only they, who stand incorporated
in Christ are certain of their resurrection, founding it in the resurrection of
Christ. And therefore S. Paul willing to persuade the Corinthians the
resurrection of the just, founds his persuasions on the resurrection of Christ.
With these Considerations we Christians shall come to feel in our hearts the
profit, which comes from the glorious resurrection of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXXXIV.
That only the incorporation in Christ is that which mortifies.

REturning to consider that which I have at other times considered about the
two depravations that are in a man, whereof the one is natural and hereditary,
the other acquisite and learned; I come to understand, that both these
depravations are in the mind, and in the body also. I say, that from our first
parents all men inherit this, that they are born in their minds wicked, and
enemies of God, and infidels to God, and full of self love; and in their bodies
they are born vicious and evil inclined. And I say further, that with evil
exercises, with evil companies, and with false doctrines, we go on augmenting
as well the depravation of the soul, through which we are born the sons of
wrath, as that of the body, through which we are manifoldly worse then beasts.

Humane wisdom not knowing the natural depravation of the mind, nor that of
the body; nay, only knowing the inbred depravation of the body, has never had
intent to mortify in men but only that which it has known for evil. And
hence it comes, that all the Laws, Doctrines, and Religions, which men have
found out, have had intent only to mortify the depravation of the body, and
of this only the acquisite. But God knowing principally the natural
depravation, and of this holding that of the mind for the worse, had in the law
of Moses an intent to mortify both the one and the other depravation, and
principally that of the mind, which is more natural and more pernicious unto
men, being as it is more contrary unto God: And therefore commanded the love of
God, the worship of God, and the confidence in God, and forbade all inward
concupiscence. This which the Law of God pretended to do, it never did, not
through the imperfection thereof, but through the imperfection o^ men. But the
incorporation in Christ does it forasmuch as as soon as a man is incorporated by
faith in Christ, the natural, and inbred depravations begin to die in him, and
they go on dying accordingly as he goes incorporating himself in Christ. And a
man goes incorporating himself in Christ accordingly as he goes on being like
unto the death of Christ; and a^ long as he goes on through this way, the thing
wherein he erres are not imputed to him; either through natural or inbred
depravation and the natural depravation dying first in him and of this, rather
that of the mind then tha^ of the body, the mortification of the acquisite
depravation which remains, is facilitated, to to the end that he should, as it
were by way of exercise, attend to mortify it whilst he lives. And he
mortifies it rather with inward consideration, then with outward works. And his
consideration is of that which Christ suffered, of the being dead on the Cross
with Christ, and the being raised with Christ, and that it is his intent to
live in life eternal with Christ; which considerations are of such efficacy in
a man, that making him to loose the taste of all things of this present life,
they mortify in him all that is flesh, and all that is world; albeit I do not
think that it dies altogether, until that a man die indeed. From all this is
gathered, that humane wisdom knows not what thing mortification is, and that
the law of Moses commanded it, but did not give it; and that it is only gotten
through the incorporation, wherewith we who believe are incorporated in Jesus
Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXXXV.
Four ways by which a Christian knows God by means of Christ.

HAving often spoken of the knowledge of God as of a most important thing, Joh.
17.3.
yea so much that in it felicity and eternal life consists: and having said
that there are three ways to know God; One by the contemplation of the
creatures, Consid. ^
which is proper to the Gentiles: the other by reading of the holy Scriptures,
which was proper to the Hebrews; and the other by Christ, which is proper to
Christians. And having never remained satisfied in this third, (I would say in
the manner of that understanding, through the which we Christians know God by
Christ) after that I had well considered it, I find four ways, by which we
Christians know God by Christ.

first is by the Revelation of Christ,

second is by the communication of the holy spirit.

third is by christian Regeneration, and Renovation.

fourth is by a certain inward vision.

1. By the Revelation of Christ, I understand that a Christian knows God, when
Christ suffers himself to be known, because we then know God in him, he being
the express image of God, according to that he says to S. Philip, He that
sees me, he sees my Father also. John 14. and to what S. Paul says, Colos, 1.
speaking o^ Christ, who is the Image of the invisible God. And that it is true,
that a Christian knows God by Revelation of Christ, is manifest by that^ No man
knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him.
Matthew 11. This Revelation I understand is inward, having nothing that is
visible, and so it appertains to the inward eyes, and not to the outward. And
this presupposes the knowledge of Christ. I would say, that the knowledge of
Christ precedes the knowledge of God by revelation of Christ which knowledge of
Christ I understand consists in knowing his Divinity and his Humanity, his
being Divine and Humane, his glory and his ignominy, his dignity and his
baseness, and so his omnipotency and his humility. And it is certain, that I
knowing that Christ is the Image of God, and seeing in him Omnipotency,
Justice, Truth, and Fidelity, I come to know not now by relation of holy
Scripture only, but by the revelation of Christ himself, that there is in God
omnipotency, justice, truth and fidelity, forasmuch as these are in Christ,
and Christ is the Image of God. In such manner as he who in this manner knows
Christ, not by relation of men, but by inward revelation of Christ, may say
with truth, that he knows God in Christ: As the man, to whom S. Paul, in whom
was a great part of the image of Christ, should have discovered all his mind,
all his inward things, might have said with truth, that he knew Christ in S.
Paul, although this comparison serves not to prove, but to explain that which I
say.

2. By the communication of the holy spirit I understand the christian knows
God; for I understand that the holy spirit is given to them that believe in
Christ. And understanding by S. Paul, that the spirit of God searches out the
deep secrets of God, I understand that we also know God himself and by Christ,
inasmuch as the holy spirit is given unto us by Christ, Christ himself being he
that gives it unto us, by the will and ordinance of God, even as by the same
will and ordinance, the light is given unto us by the sun. And it is certain,
that the holy spirit is efficacious in me that am a christian, to make me know
omnipotency in God through the great power which he shows in me, mortifying me,
and making me alive; to make me know wisdom in God by the wisdom which I get
through his holy spirit; to make me know justice in God, because he justifies
me in Christ; to make me know truth in God, because he keeps promise with me;
and to make me know goodness and mercy in God because he bears with my
slothfulness and sins. And so I come to know all these thing in God, not now
by relation of Scriptures only, but by that which the holy spirit works i^ me
which is communicated to me through Christ.

3. By Christian Regeneration and Ren^vation I understand that a christian know
God. For he being regenerated, and renewed by the holy spirit, which is
communicated unto us by Christ, goes on leaving, and renouncing the image of
Adam which is proper unto us by humane generation, by which we are naturally
the sons of wrath, enemies of God, impious rebels, and infidels; and goes on
taking, an^ recovering that image of God, which is proper unto us by christian
regeneration, by which we are as it were naturally the sons of grace, adopted
sons of God; we are the friends of God, pious, obedient, and faithful; and
so by little and little we come to know God in us, knowing in our selves those
divine perfections, which the holy spirit attributes to God. And getting
regeneration, and renovation through the holy spirit, and the holy spirit
through Christ, it comes to be true, that by Christ we know God in us. And it
is a clear case, we should never know in God truth, justice, goodness, were we
not first in some measure true, faithful, just, good, etc. It being natural
for man to judge of others according to that which he knows in himself.

4. By a certain inward vision I understand, that a christian knows God, after
that he has known him by the revelation of Christ, by the communication of the
holy spirit, and by the Christian regeneration. And forasmuch as belongs to
this knowledge, I refer my self to that which I have said in the 51th.
Consideration: Wherein I have set certain comparisons, by which a man that has
not attained to this knowledge of God, may in some sort come to understand in
what it does consist. And if he do arrive to this; I am sure, that there will
come upon him so great a desire of this knowledge, that he will continually go
after God, saying unto him these amorous words, Show unto me the light of thy
Countenance. And I am also certain that God will show it unto him, when, and as
it shall please his divine Majesty, accommodating himself to humane
incapability, which is most incapable of this inward vision. And because
Christians incorporated in Christ, who know God by revelation of Christ, by
communication of the holy spirit, by christian renovation and regeneration, go
on making themselves capable of this inward vision, going on nearer and nearer
toward impassibility and immortality; it is truly said, that we christians
come to know God by Christ by a certain inward vision, but in part, as may be
in this present life; the perfect, and entire vision being reserved for life
eternal, where perpetually seeing God face to face, we shall be most blessed
with Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXXXVI.
To know the inward Motions when they are of the holy spirit, when of the
malignant spirit, and when of a man's own spirit.

I Remember I have formerly written in an Epistle, how men in this present life
are moved to all things which they do with one of these three spirits; with the
holy and divine spirit, with a man's own and evil spirit, with a malignant and
diabolical spirit. And because I understand how much it imports them who
attend unto Christian perfection, to know with what spirit they are moved to
work, or not to work; I come anew to consider, that we who attend to Christian
perfection, do well know that to obtain that which we seek, which is
immortality and eternal life, it becomes us to follow the motions of the holy
spirit, and to fly those of the malignant spirit, and to combat with those of
our own spirit. Further I consider, that it befalls many, that not knowing how
to make difference between these Motions, thinking to follow the holy spirit
they follow the malignant spirit, or go after their own proper spirit. Their
error proceeding not because they know not whither they ought to go, for they
well know they ought to go toward eternal life; nor because they know not the
way; for they know well, that the way is piety, justice, and holiness; but
from their not knowing in what thing properly piety, justice, and holiness do
consist; for in case they knew it, they would draw nigh to know when they are
moved by the holy spirit, when by the malignant spirit, and when by their own
proper spirit. For inasmuch as a man goes on knowing in what thing properly
piety, justice, and holiness do consist, his eyes are daily more opened to
know when he is moved by one spirit and when by another; without which knowledge
a man that attends to Christian perfection is much like unto a ship, which
stands in the midst of the sea, not knowing with what wind to sail, because it
has lost the needle. Having afterward considered how that all this is true, of
which there is none that attends unto Christian piety but can give testimony;
I come likewise to consider, that after that a man, who attends unto Christian
piety, knows that he travels toward life eternal, and knows that the way is
piety, justice, and holiness, it is necessary that he should know, that
holiness consists in the election of God; that is, that they only are holy
whom God chooses, and accepts for himself; that justice consists in
believing in Christ, that is, that they only are just, who believing make
Christ's justice theirs; and that piety consists in approving for good all that
which God works, and to be contented therewith; that is, only they are pious,
who with their minds approve that which God works; and in such manner content
themselves, that they would not change, nor alter it, though they could. I
understand, that this being known, a man begins in some measure to approach to
know the motions of the spirit, when they are of the good spirit, and when they
are of the evil spirit, and when they are of a man's own spirit. Forasmuch as he
holds for motions of the good spirit all those things, which go directed to
answer unto the vocation of God, to say with S. Paul, Lord what will thou that
I should do? And with Ananias, Behold, Lord, here am I! and all they which go
directed to believe in Christ, to say always, Lord increase my faith! and all
they which are directed to resign themselves in all things, and altogether to
God, to suffer themselves to be ruled and governed of God, approving and
holding for good all that which God does. The same holds for motions of the
evil spirit, all those which are contrary to these. He holds for motions of his
own spirit, those which although they be not contrary to these, are not
contrary to himself. By this I suppose every person, who shall keep strict
account with himself, shall approach near to the true knowledge of the spirits,
to understand with which of them he is to walk. And I suppose that he shall
better approach when he knows that those are motions of the holy Spirit, which
shall draw him to the imitation of Christ principally; inasmuch as he was most
obedient to his eternal Father; inasmuch as in him was perfect charity:
inasmuch as he had profound humility, and exceeding great meekness. For it is
certain, that the holy spirit in them who are the members of Christ, being the
same which was in Christ, does inspire and move them unto that, unto which it
did inspire and move Christ; him as head, and as the lawful Son, us as
members, and adopted sons: And certifying himself likewise, that those are
motions of the malignant spirit, which are contrary to these; and that those
are motions of a man's own spirit, which do draw a man unto his proper interest,
to his proper honor and glory, and to his proper recreation and satisfaction.
And moreover I do not say hereby, that he does assure himself in making this
difference of spirits, and in knowing these motions; but I say, that so a man
comes approaching thereunto, reserving the perfect, and entire knowledge to them
who have it by particular gifts of God, who know Satan even when he transforms
himself into an Angel of light, when he offers, and propounds unto them things
of apparent piety, justice, and holiness, to which time these advises do
properly belong, it being a very great inconvenience, into which men fall, when
they err pretending piety.

Finally, I resolve my self in this, that a man who desires to make good
proceedings in Gods ways, attends to recover in this present life the image of
Christ, setting Christ before his eyes, and bringing himself to follow those
motions which Christ would have followed, and to combat with those motions
which Christ would not have followed. And this is that perfection, which is
proposed to all of us that are the members of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXXXVII.
That all the creatures were spoiled in man's depravation, and that they shall
be restored in man's reparation.

REading S. Paul, I find he touches many secrets worthy of much consideration.
And amongst others I esteemed it for most worthy that which he touches Romans 8.
concerning the restoration of the creatures in the glorious resurrection of
the sons of God: into the consideration of which secret I have oft-times
entered, and it has befallen me, that by how much the more I would have
understood it, so much the less have I understood it; At length my spirit came
to this understanding, that as man in his depravation marred all the creatures,
so in the reparation of man all the creatures shall be repaired: That the first
Adam subjecting all men unto misery and unto death, marred all the creatures;
and that the second Adam Jesus Christ our Lord conducting men unto felicity and
to eternal life, shall repair all creatures. But as I did not understand in
what sort all the creatures were marred in man's depravation, so I did not
understand in what sort they shall be repaired in man's reparation. In which thing
that secret which S. Paul means, does consist, which secret it seems Isaiah had
formerly understood, c. 65. where God promised to create new heavens and a new
earth. And the same secret it seems Saint Peter understood in the last Chapter
of his second Epistle; and the same seems to be understood in the Revelation,
chap 21. Then I understand, that God having created man in a state of
immortality and sovereign happiness, he created all things which such order,
and with such temper, that they did all of them accord to make man immortal,
and most happy. Further I understand, that man subjecting himself to misery by
eating the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, and making
himself liable to death in being disobedient to God, eating the fruit of the
tree against the commandment of God; it was necessary that all the creatures
should leave their being and their temper, with which they were created to make
man immortal, and most happy, and take another being, and another temper,
whereby they should all accord to make man miserable and mortal, From hence
proceeds the evil influences of the heavens, and the poysonfull and
unhealthfull things which the earth brings forth, all which augment man's
misery. And from this that all creatures took upon them to make man miserable,
and mortal; Saint Paul says, that all of them do anxiously desire to be free.
Understanding this, I come to understand that men being to be immortal, and
most happy in the resurrection of the just, all the creatures shall return to
recover that being, that temper, and that order with which they were created,
to make men in their reparation immortal, and most happy, as in their
depravation they did alter their being, their temper, and their order to make
them miserable, and mortal.

In this generality of creatures I do not understand the good Angels to be
comprised; for not being marred they have no necessity of being repaired: nor
the evil angels; for not having been marred with man to make man miserable, and
mortal, they shall not be restored with man to make him immortal, and most
happy. In this consideration more then in any other of these which I have
hitherto considered, me thinks I see the most high obligation, which not only
all men in particular, but all the creatures in general have to Christ.
Forasmuch as through Christ's obedience men shall return to that being of
immortality, and felicity, which they lost by Adams disobedience. And by the
same, the creatures shall return to recover their being, and their most perfect
temper, which they lost through the disobedience of Adam. And so this remains
imprinted in my mind, that Adam disobeying God, depraved all men, and condemned
them unto death, and marred all the creatures: and subjected them, as Saint
Paul says, to vanity; And that Christ obeying God, repaired all men, and gave
unto them immortality, and restored all the creatures, and put them into their
firm, and stable being. I speak of this that shall be in the Resurrection of
the just, as though it were already; forasmuch as to Godward it is already,
Christ being already raised up. And by how much the more I remember this, so
much the more do I abhor all manner of disobedience to God, and so much the
more do embrace my self with all manner of obedience to God. And I feel, that
inasmuch as I go applying my self to this, so much the image of Adam goes
abating in me, and the image of Christ goes on reforming, and likewise that of
God, to whom be glory everlasting Amen.

CONSID. LXXXVIII.
What the cause may be, that God commanded man that he should not eat of the
Tree of the knowledge of Good and Evil.

OFt-times I have endeavored to understand, why God when he set man in earthly
Paradise, commanded him, that he should not eat of the fruit of the Tree of the
knowledge of Good and Evil; not being satisfied with that which commonly^ is
understood, that God commanded this, to the end man should acknowledge him for
superior: which cause shall not be sufficient to me, albeit I refuse it not,
and as often as this desire has come upon me, I have as often driven it from me,
holding it for curious, as I hold for curious all the desires, which go seeking
out the reason of Gods works. And it is befallen me, that having been now free
from this curiosity, reading with other intent the first chapters of Genesis, I
suppose I have understood what I desired; first I understand, that God created
man in an entire, and perfect estate, in which he had the spiritual light,
which served him for that for which the natural light now serves him, which
was the same, that the knowledge of good and evil was. Further I understand,
that in the midst of that earthly Paradise there were two Trees, of which the
Scripture calls the one the Tree of life, and the other the Tree of the
knowledge of good and evil: In which I understand God had set this natural
virtue, that the one of them should make them who eat thereof, immortal; and
that the other should give the knowledge of good and evil, to them that did eat
thereof. And understanding, that as the immortality was supreme felicity, so
the knowledge of good and evil, was extreme misery. That which I say of the
Tree of life, I understand by this, that God having given man the curse for his
sin, the Scripture says that he drove him out of earthly Paradise, that he
should not eat of the Tree of life, and so live for ever. Neither was God
content to have driven man out of Paradise, but he set for guardian a Cherubim,
whereby it seems that this Tree had that natural virtue to give immortality.
That which I say of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, I understand by that
which I read, that the self same instant in which our first Parents being
deceived by the Serpent did eat of the fruit of the Tree, they had the
knowledge of good and evil; in such sort as suddenly their eyes were opened,
and suddenly finding defect as they imagined in the works of God, they knew
themselves to be Naked. Whence I come to understand, that God did with the
first man, as the mother does with her little son; I say, that as a mother
seeing her little son having a knife by him, fearing if he take it in his
hand he would cut himself with it, commands him that he should not come nigh
unto it, telling him if he come near she will chastise him: So God setting the
first man i^ earthly Paradise, and knowing the inconvenience wherein he was to
fall, if he did eat of the fruit of the Tree of the knowledge of good and evil,
commanded him, that he should not eat thereof, telling him, that if he did eat,
he should die. Furthermore I understand, that as the child coming nigh the
knife, and cutting himself falls into the inconvenience of which his mother had
given him warning, and his mother beats him for his disobedience according as
she had threatened him; so that the child falls into two inconveniences, the one
is, of having cut himself with the knife, and the other is of blows for the
disobedience toward his mother: So the first man eating of the Tree of the
knowledge of good and evil, falls into the inconvenience, which God gave him
warning of, and God punished him with death, as he had threatened him; so as man
falls into two inconveniences, the one is of having his eyes opened to know
good, and evil, whereby he lost spiritual light, and got natural light, he
lost divine knowledge, and got humane science and discourse; (and that was
through the proper nature of the Tree, which should without the forbidding to
eat of it, have had the same effect) and the other inconvenience is that of
death, and that was for the disobedience, with which he did eat the fruit of
the Tree. disobeying God. Whence I come to gather, that God showed most
exceeding great love to man, in commanding him that he should not eat of the
fruit of that Tree: for I understand that he commanded him, because he should
not fall into the inconvenience in which he fell upon the knowing of good and
evil; Which inconvenience is much greater then we can imagine. This is
according to what S. Paul Romans 5. says, that sin entered by disobedience, and
death entered by sin, which was executed on all the descendents of the first
Adam: For in his disobedience they all disobeyed, and so all sinned^ and
therefore all die; As on the contrary by the obedience of one justice or
justification entered, and by justification life entered, unto which all the
members of the second Adam Jesus Christ our Lord shall be raised up in glory:
For he obeying, all they obeyed, and so they are all justified, and shall
therefore all of them be raised up to glory, and immortality. This
understanding which I have set down of the virtue of these two trees, satisfies
me, inasmuch as thereby the benefit of Christ is illustrated and set forth. For
the rest, I remit my self to better understanding.

In this Consideration some things offer themselves to me, which I would desire
to know, but holding them for curious I leave them, until it shall please God
to make me to understand them. And this I hold for certain shall be, when the
desire of knowing shall be mortified in me in every thing and altogether. For
God will^ that as the first man desiring to know, lost himself; so we should
gain our selves, mortifying and slaying every desire to know, contenting our
selves only to know Christ crucified, wh^ is to us the Tree of life, to him be
glory for ever Amen.

CONSID. LXXXIX.
Six causes, for which it seems necessary, that the Sir of God should live in
that manner, and that form of life wherein he did live.

AT present I find six causes in this Consideration of the mavelous counsel,
wit^ which the only begotten Son of God being made man, lived amongst men in
that form ^ life, wherein we read that he did live.

I. That God having determined to deceive humane wisdom in saving not them
that were wise, but them that believed, as Saint Paul understands it, 1. Cor.
1. it was necessary that Christ should take upon him in the world a form of
living, in which he could by no means be known by humane wisdom. If Christ had
taken on him S. John Baptists form of life, humane wisdom would have found in
that outward austerity, whereon to found it self so as to accept him for the
son of God: And if he had taken upon him Moses his form of life, humane
wisdom would have found in that outward greatness whereon to found it self so
as to accept him for the son of God. And therefore it was necessary that he
should take upon him that form of life which he took, wherein was no appearance
at all of austerity, or of greatness. And so, it comes to pass, that by how
much the more humane wisdom considers it, so much less does it find whereon
to found it self so as to come to accept Christ for the son of God. And
hereto squares fitly a letter which I remember to have written, intending to
show the cause wherefore Christ did sometimes show his divinty, and at other
times hid it.

II. That the life of Christ being to be an example of life to them whom he
came to make the sons of God, it was necessary that he should take that form of
life which was most imitable of all the rest. If Christ had taken the form of
Saint John Baptists life, he would have frighted many with the austerity of it;
And if he had taken that of Moses, few could have been able to imitate it; and
therefore it was necessary that he should take that which he did take, so
imitable to all sorts of people, that no man can excuse himself, saying, I
cannot imitate Christ, I cannot live as Christ lived. Yet I do not understand,
that Christ taking that form of life which he took did intend that every one
who was to be the Son of God, should imitate him in that outward form of
living, but that it should be the most easy to imitate by them, who would
altogether imitate him as well in his outward, as in his inward living: as for
the inward, in his obedience to God, in charity, meekness, and humility of
mind; and as for the outward, in living without austerity, without greatness,
but with poverty, baseness and vileness.

III. That Christ coming to save all sorts of people, it was necessary he
should take such a form of life, in which he might practice and converse with
all sorts of people. If Christ had taken Saint John Baptists form of life the
Publicans, sinners, and harlots would have been ashamed to speak unto him; nay
verily if he would observe decorum, he was bound not to speak, nor converse
with them: and if he had taken Moses his form of life, base and vulgar persons
could not have practiced and conversed with him, by reason of his greatness.
And therefore it was necessary he should take that form of life, which he took,
wherein he might practice and converse, as he did with all sorts of people,
insomuch as he was for this reproched by them, who made profession of
holiness, and called a friend of Publicans and sinners.

IIII. Christ coming to preach the kingdom of God, and to put himself in the
possession thereof; and the kingdom of God consisting, as S. Paul says, Romans
14.17. in righteousness, peace, and joy of the holy Ghost, it was necessary,
that by his example he should show unto us a form of life much to this purpose,
to maintain us in the righteousness, and in the peace, and in the joy of the
kingdom of God. If Christ had taken S. John Baptists form of life, which was
by the world approved for holy; (for the world is so wise that it esteems them,
who esteem not it,) he should have put his imitatours in competition with the
Saints of the world; and if Christ had taken Moses his form of living, which is
procured by the men of the world, he should have put his imitatours in
competition with the men of the world: and therefore that form of life which he
took was necessary, which is of such quality, as they who imitate him do well
preserve themselves in their righteousness, peace, and joy. For coming not in
competition with the Saints of the world, nor with the men of the world, they
are not deprived of the possession which they have of the kingdom of God.

V. That Christ being to suffer for our sins a cruel death, shameful, and
public, and unjust, not voluntary, it was necessary he should take a form of
life that was fit to come to this effect. If Christ had taken Saint John
Baptists form of life, although the fame of holiness would not have freed him
from a cruel death, as it did not free Saint John Baptist; yet it would have
freed him from a shameful and public death, as it did free Saint John
Baptist. And if Christ had taken Moses his form of life, albeit the greatness
of the estate would not have freed him from a cruel death, as it has not
freed many great men of the world; yet it would have freed him from a shameful
and public death: and therefore it was necessary^ that he should take that
form of life which he did, wherein dying shamefully, he did enoble shame; and
dying publicly he certifies all of us, that we might know it, and may believe
our justification by his death, of which thing we ought to be most assured.

VI. That Christ coming to preach, and to give inward regeneration, and
renovation^ which things presuppose mortification, it was necessary that he
should take a form of life very commodate to mortification, to show with it,
and by it the proper way of mortification. If Christ had taken Saint John
Baptists form of life, he should have well shown the way of the mortification
of the body by the asperity of life, but not that of the mortification of the
mind, because of the honor and reputation which this form of life has in the
world. And if Christ had taken Moses his form of living, he should not have
showed either the one or the other kind of mortification, and therefore it was
necessary, that he should take that form of life which he took, in which much
better then in any other, a man gets the mortification of the mind, and by that
of the mind that of the body; inasmuch as the world holds for vile and base,
those who without making profession of outward holiness live holily, and
despise them altogether; inasmuch as after this despising comes the
mortification of the body. And so in them that imitate the form of Christ's
living, is certain and perfect mortification.

In these six causes I learn six things.

1. That he who by consideration of Christ's life, would know him to be the
son of God, must of necessity mortify the judgment of his humane wisdom.

2. That no man can excuse himself, saying, that he cannot imitate the form of
Christ's living.

3. That then a Christians form of life is most like to Christ's, when it is apt
to make all sorts of people practice and converse with him.

4. That that form of living is most apt to make that a man in it should
preserve himself in the possession of the kingdom of God, that comes in
competition with no sort of men, neither with the Saints of the world, nor with
the men of the world.

5. That that form of life is most like to that of the son of God, that is
most exposed to martyrdom.

6. That that form of life is most proper, and able to obtain Christian
mortification, which is most despised in the eyes of the world, in which
without making profession of outward holiness, a man lives holily. And of the
things which have been spoken, I take this resolution, that they who live
holily, without making profession of outward holiness, are very much enabled
and exposed to martyrdom, do preserve themselves very well in the kingdom of
God, are fit to converse with all sorts of people, imitating the form of life
in which Christ held, and deceive humane wisdom: and therefore that properly
appertains to them which S. Paul says Coloss. 3. Ye are dead, and your life is
hid with Christ in God, to whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen.

I will add this, that Christ continuing in that form of life in which he was
born, being born the son of God, until that he dyed by the will of God;
teaches us, that we shall do well to continue in that form of life, in which
we found our selves when we were called to be the sons of God. So that in it
we attend to reduce our form of life as much as may be possible for us, to be
answerable to that form of life which Christ held in this world, in such manner
as in us may shine out entirely the image and similitude of Jesus Christ our
Lord.

CONSID. XC.
In what the Christian perfection^ the Duty, and De^orum do consist

I Have often times said, that Christian perfection consists in this, that a man
incorporated in Christ, in his death and in his resurrection, should live
according to the Christian Duty, keeping the Christian decorum; understanding
that so much shall a man get Christian perfection, inasmuch as he shall live
according to Christian duty, keeping christian decorum. Now I say that then a
man lives according to christian duty, and keeps christian decorum, when he
imploys himself in those things, in which Christ would have employed himself.
And consequently I say, that then a man departs from the christian duty, and
leaves to observe christian decorum, when he imployes himself in those things,
wherein Christ would not have employed himself: in such manner, as to him who
would obtain Christian perfection, and is desirous to apprehend that dignity in
which he is comprehended, it appertains to live in all things and altogether
according to the Christian duty, and to observe the Christian decorum; setting
before his eyes the whole life of Christ, constituting his duty and his
decorum, in being in every thing and altogether like, unto Christ, doing only
that which Christ would do, and by no means doing what Christ would not do.

Passing on further I say, that men whilst they are, as the Scripture terms
them, flesh and blood can by no means attain to so great perfection as that
which is known in Christ. So also, that to all them, who know and feel
themselves incorporated in the death and resurrection of Christ, it appertains
to fix their eyes upon this so high perfection, and to intend to obtain it, and
in effect to procure it. For to this I understand the holy spirit moves, and
conducts them, to whom Christ is communicated. Here I gain two things, the one,
that from henceforth I shall attribute to weakness of my flesh, all that which
I shall do, which Christ would not have done; and all that which I leave
undone, which Christ would not have left undone: And I will attribute unto the
force and efficacy of the Christian spirit, all that which I shall do, which
Christ would have done; and all that which I shall leave undone, which Christ
would have left undone, not excusing my self in that which shall proceed from
mine infirmity, and weakness, nor waxing proud for that which shall proceed
from the force and efficacy of the Christian spirit. The other thing which I
gain is, that from this day forward I shall not go examining what is lawful;
holding that to be a matter of servants and slaves: But I will go viewing, and
reviewing what is expedient; holding that to be for sons. And I will hold it
for a thing convenient and expedient for me to live according to Christian
duty, and to observe Christian decorum, regarding this duty, and this decorum,
as it were to say in the face of Christ, in all that which is written of him,
and in all that which by the things which are written, and by that which I
shall experiment in me, I shall be able to gather from his divine perfections.
In these two things I understand other two: the one, that they do not know the
Christian dignity, who go procuring to cover with pretense of Christian piety,
those things which they do through weakness and infirmity of the flesh: and
the other, that they do not know themselves for sons of God, who go examining
what is lawful: (This being certain, that they who know the christian dignity,
do with good will manifest, and confess that which is of the weakness, and
infirmity of their flesh, and that they who know themselves for sons of God,
being ashamed to examine what is lawful, go observing what is expedient,
attributing to their proper infirmity, and weakness all that which they do,
and all that which they leave to do.) Attending to what is Lawful, and going
out of what is expedient; out of which they, who know themselves for sons of
God, and know the christian dignity, do never procure to go.

The weakness, and infirmity I understand we have it all of us in the body,
and in the mind. To the weakness and infirmity of the body I understand
appertain all those things in which we do delicately, and with corporal
delight, serve unto our corporal necessities. And to the infirmities, and
weaknesses of the mind, I understand appertain all those things, in which we
have intent to satisfy the eyes of the world; in such sort as I traveling on
horseback do delicately serve unto the necessities of my body, a thing which
Christ did not ordinarily: And this is a weakness and infirmity of my body.
And procuring that my riding on horseback should be polite, and well
furnished, I have intent to satisfy the eyes of the world: and this is a
weakness, and infirmity of my mind. This example may be extended to all other
things, which we deal about in this present life. Whereupon it is fit to
advertise, that they who begin to conform their lives in outward and corporal
things with that of Christ, run hazard of never getting the conformity in the
inward, which is the essential; and to fall into vain glory, and presumption.
And therefore it is needful, that every person called of God to the grace of
the Gospel, should begin to conform himself to Christ's living in the inward,
that is, in obedience to God, in meekness, and humility of mind, and in
charity; and afterward attend to conform himself also with the living of
Christ in the outward; but so much only, as the outward shall help him, and
serve him to grow in the inward: For this is that, which principally pleases
God, and Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XCI.
That only the Sons of God have certain satisfaction in every thing.

BY one of these three ways we come unto all things, as well those which
pertain to piety, as unto all other things: by our own wills; against our own
wills; and by the favor of God. In those things unto which we come by our own
will, there is design; in those things whereunto we come against our wills,
there is passion; in those things, whereunto we come by the favor of God,
there is admiration. The sons of Adam never find certain and firm
satisfaction in those things, unto which pretending piety, they come with
design. For their designs are always founded in self-interest, and in
self-love. And holding this foundation when their designs succeeded not, they
cannot stand with satisfaction, how much soever they persuade themselves to
remain satisfied, and would show it to others. That this is true, they know by
experience, who with design pretend piety, changing their manner of living,
their state and condition of life, or do exercise themselves more in on thing,
then in another. The sons of God do then find certain and firm satisfaction,
in those things, unto which they come by their own proper will with design,
when their design is either to help the mortification, and the vivification,
into which they have begun to enter by the favor of God, or is to serve Christ
in his members. That this is true they understand by experience, who holding
themselves for dead in the cross of Christ, do attend unto mortification, with
design to mortify themselves only to live as dead, in as much as they are
dead, and their life is hid with Christ in God. Colos.. 3.

The sons of Adam do seldom abide without passion, and grief in those things
whereunto they come without their will, such as are diseases, infirmities,
death and dishonor: for they do not in these kind of things, know the will of
God; or if they know it, they hold it for rigorous, and therefore judge
themselves enemies of God. That this is true all of us know by some experience.
The sons of God then are without passion, and grief in those things
whereunto they come against their wills, when knowing the will of God, they
reduce themselves to conform themselves with it; in which conformity they find
content and satisfaction in their minds, albeit the flesh feel grief, and
affliction, being in that estate wherein it would not be. And it is no marvel,
that in them who are such, the flesh should resent it self and be grieved;
since it did resent it self, and was grieved in the only begotten son of God
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Tho sons of Adam do seldom come to the things of piety, by the favor of
God; and when they do come, they do not feel it, nor know it, and therefore do
not taste it, and not tasting it, they cannot therein find satisfaction. That
this is true, they know by experience, who having been the sons of Adam, are
now the sons of God, who do remember themselves of some things unto which
they came by the favor of God, they not knowing the favor of God in them, and
therefore not tasting it, nor finding content in them. The sons of God come
many times by the favor of God to the things of piety; and when they feel it,
and know it, then they taste it, and tasting it, they find satisfaction
therein, and they remain with admiration. That this is true, the sons of God
themselves know by experience, coming to many things without their own will,
and without design, without contradiction, and without passion, but properly
through the admirable favor of God; in such sort as they find themselves to
have a detestation of those things which they formerly loved, and with love of
those things which they formerly hated; without knowing by what way, or by what
means they are come unto it. This mavelous and favorable work, I understand
that God works in hi^ sons in this world, opening their eyes to the knowledge
of the justice of Christ, which showing unto them that it appertains to them,
make that they abhor their own proper justifications and merits, I would say,
all that which me^ do pretending to justify themselves in the sigh^ of God;
which they altogether leave, despise and condemn. Opening their eyes to the
knowledge of his divinity, he draws them to the knowledge of themselves, and of
the men of the world, and so disenamours them of themselves and of the world,
and enamours them of himself, and of Christ. Opening their eyes to the
knowledge, that God slaying on the cross the flesh of Christ, did also slay
their flesh, he draws them to the hatred of their own flesh, and makes them
such, that resolving themselves with themselves, they love mortification, and
procure it. Opening their eyes to the most happy estate of life eternal, by
the consideration of Christ raised, he makes them to hate the present life, and
all that is in it, and appertains to it; and so they love eternal life, and
despise the present life, and rejoice to loose it. Finally, alvvayes when God
would reduce his sons to the hatred of an evil thing, he gives them the
knowledge of a good thing. For he knovvs that being affectionated to the good,
they will hate the evil much the rather then if he gave unto them the
knowledge of the evil thing it self; as much the rather, and with more ease,
I should bring my self to hate the vvorldly living, considering the felicity of
the Christian living, then I should do, considering the evil of the vvorldly
living only: Which I understand proceeds from the natural condition of man's
heart, which cannot leave to love something; in such manner, that to reduce it
to hate any thing which it loves, it is necessary that there should be some
other thing propounded to it, which it may love.

In this discourse I intend Ten principal things.

1. That the sons of Adam do not find in any thing certain or firm
satisfaction; and that the sons of God find it in all things which they do as
the sons of God.

2. That as then my design in that which I do by my will, shall be Christian,
when I shall endeavor to augment my self in that in which I have begun to
enter by the favor of God.

3. That in that which comes unto me contrary to my will, albeit the flesh
resent it self, and be grieved, the mind is to be contented and satisfied.

4. That I am come by the favor of God into those things, in which I do not
know mine own design, nor others violence.

5. That God giving unto me the knowledge of spiritual, eternal, and true
things; he draws me to the hatred of corporal, temporal, and false things.

6. That through the knowledge of life everlasting, I come to hate the present
life.

7. That knowing my self dead on the cross of Christ, I further my
mortification.

8. That attending to the knowledge of God, I come to the knowledge of my self,
and of the world, and into hatred of my self, and of the world.

9. That attending to know the righteousness of Christ I renounce all mine own.

10. That they who do not begin to hate their own righteousness, and
themselves, and the world, and the present life, and temporal things, and
false; have not as yet begun to be the Sons of God, but are as yet the Sons
of Adam: Forasmuch as in them who begin to be the Sons of God, all these
hatreds are begun to be felt, unto which they come by as many other affections.
And Sons of God are they, who believing the Gospel stand incorporated in the
only begotten Son of God Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XCII.
In what manner Mortification is the proper sign, by which we know our selves
the Sons of God.

HAving oft-times said, that the proper sign, whereby a man may know himself
to be the Son of God, being dead on the Cross with Christ, and being risen
with Christ, is mortification, by means whereof he hates the world, and
himself: And understanding that the Devil being crafty and subtle, might from
hence take occasion to disquiet the Sons of God, giving them to understand
that they are not such, since they do not know in themselves so much hatred of
the world, and of themselves, that they have not oft-times pleasure to content
the world, and to satisfy themselves; I come to declare my self in this
manner; I understanding by experience, that suddenly when a man is called by
God to the grace of the Gospel, and enters into it, and is incorporated in
Christ, and is therefore dead with Christ, and risen with Christ, he feels, and
finds himself inwardly much changed in his designs, and purposes; in such
manner that he hates that which he loved before, and loves that which he hated
before: I am of this opinion, that Mortification, and the hatred of the world,
and of himself. is the proper sign, whereby a Christian knows himself to be
the son of God, and therefore the heir of eternal life. But I do not
understand, that this mortification, nor this hatred are at an instant, or at
one throw perfect and entire in the mind, and in the body of a man, who becomes
the Son of God by acceptance of the Gospel, and by incorporation in Christ:
Nor that they are perfect and entire, no not in the mind: But I understand,
that the incorporation in Christ works this effect in a man who accepts the
grace of the Gospel. For as before he accepted it, he delighted himself, and
rejoiced with his mind, and with his body, in the honors, and in the dignities
of the world, seeking them and procuring them, and keeping his intent
principally on them, neither tasting, nor rejoicing in the principal and
divine things, nor having any intent unto them, and therefore neither seeking,
nor procuring them; so after that he has accepted it, he hates in his mind
that which he formerly procured and sought, and loves that which before he
despised and fled; changing altogether his intent. And albeit his body repugnes
and contradicts, being not as yet altogether mortified, it suffices that his
mind stands changed as much as concerns the intent conformable to his
knowledge. That which I say of men and dignities of the world, I say also of
the delights and pleasures of the world, understanding, that as the man that
accepts the grace of the Gospel, before he do accept it, is intent to seek and
procure his pleasures and his contents, delighting his sensuality, and would if
it were possible have as many other corporal senses for to content, and
satisfy himself sensually in the use of the creatures; and is grieved, and
resents himself, when any of his corporal senses fail him, or are in any kind
marred; so after he has accepted the grace, he does not only not attend to
that which he formerly attended, but on the contrary he is altogether intent to
deprive himself of all that which may give content and satisfaction to his
sensuality, and is grieved that he is necessitated to satisfy it in any thing,
for the sustentation of his life; and therefore would be content (if it so
pleased God) to be deprived of his senses, and rejoices when he finds himself
deprived of any of them, or finds himself with any defect in any of them. All
this I say in some degree a man begins to feel in himself suddenly after he
accepts the grace of the Gospel, becoming the son of God. And I say further,
that as a man goes on growing in the incorporation in Christ, so he goes
growing in his mortification, and in his hatred, in quality and in quantity; in
quality, hating every day more that which he has begun to hate, because he
knew it estranged from Christ, and unworthy of a Christian person incorporated
in Christ; hating it likewise with his body as well as with his mind, outwardly
and inwardly, as are the things which in themselves are foul and unclean,
(which things also men will hate, who with natural light pretend to be just,
and holy) and in quantity, hating much more those things which he has begun to
hate. For he begins the spiritual light being more clear in him, to go on to
know more distinctly the things which appertains to a Christian man, and those
things which do not appertain to him, he goes on hating them more and more;
first hating them with his mind, and reducing himself by little and little to
hate them also with his body, and laboring that his hatred as well of the
mind, as of the body, may go on increasing in him. And this is properly the
exercise of a Christian man, for the whole time of his life.

From all this discourse this may well be gathered, that the sign whereby I
know that I am the son of God, and that I am dead on the cross with Christ, is
not the total mortification, nor the total hatred of the world and of my
self, with my mind and with my body in all things; but the beginning of this
mortification, and of these hatings, and that in some principal things,
especially when it is come without being procured or sought with humane
industry; and when it continues in the mind, albeit the flesh, and the
sensuality will seek and procure the contrary; yea and albeit in that which is
offered to it, it rejoices, and delights it self; the mind standing free
from that rejoicing, and from that delight, feeling displeasure and trouble in
those things, of which it is forced through the frailty of the flesh, to take
more then is sufficient to supply its corporal necessities; in such manner as
the body receives those things, and not the mind, a man feeling together with
the satisfaction of his body, affliction of the mind. And in this, that is, for
a man not to take more of the creatures then that which suffices to serve to
his corporal necessities, I understand consists that hatred, which Christ
will, that they who would be his members, should bear to their proper life. And
I understand that S. Paul standing in this combat of his mind, would not that
his body should take more of the created things, then that which suffices to
maintain him alive; and his body would take more of them to satisfy and
delight its sensuality: he felt that which he wrote to the Romans, chap. 7.
And since that went so with Saint Paul, which he himself in that place says
and confesses, no Christian is to esteem himself an alien from Christ, nor
from the Christian Sonneship, because he feels a liveliness in his flesh, and
because he feels not in every thing and altogether, the hatred of the world and
of himself, which it behooves him to have, that he may be perfect; but feeling
part of this mortification, and of these hatreds, as has been said, he has
good cause to hold himself for the Son of God incorporated in Christ, and dead
on the Cross with Christ, and to attend in such manner to mortification, that
it may so much grow, that he may become like to Jesus Christ our Lord, who as
S. Paul says, pleased not himself: to him be glory for ever, Amen.

CONSID. XCIII.
That that suffering is most Christian, and most acceptable to God, in which he
that suffers, finds least of his own will.

ALL that we suffer in this present life, who attend unto Christian perfection,
whether in the body, or in the mind, is either by our own will, or by some
others will. By our own will we suffer when we deprive our selves of our
commodities, and satisfactions: And we suffer by others wills, when without our
will we are deprived of our commodities, and satisfactions. Man's mind, as I
have often said is most arrogant, and being such, it seeks in every thing its
own glory, and its own honor: And therefore according as our humane mind
stands alive in us more or less, so we find more or less satisfaction in that
which we suffer. If the mind stand much alive, we find much satisfaction in
that which we suffer by our own will, and little in that which we suffer by
others will; And if the mind stand much mortified, we find little satisfaction
in that which we suffer by our own wills, and much in that which we suffer by
others will. And this much or little satisfaction, may give us testimony of our
mortification.

The person which has his mind much alive, always feels and resents himself
in those things which he suffers through others will, as well because he does
not think that suffering those things with patience, he pleases God, it
seeming to him, that it is because he cannot choose; as also because man's mind
being most arrogant cannot suffer that violence should be offered unto it. He
who has his mind much alive, does always rejoice, and content himself in
those things which he suffers by his own will, both because in suffering he
thinks to please God, as also because where he knows his own will, he always
finds satisfaction. On the contrary, he who has his mind much mortified,
always esteems little, and has suspicion of that which he suffers by his own
will, as well because the principal thing, whereunto he has intent, is to
mortify his own will, always being suspicious of it; as also because being in
the midst of his own glory, he cannot well content himself with that suffering
which is voluntary, knowing that it always redounds to the glory and honor of
him who suffers. And he who has his mind much mortified, does always much
esteem and content himself with that which he suffers by the will of God;
as well because he knows that what he suffers, redounds, to the glory and
honor of God, unto which thing he principally attends; as also because he
therein mortifieth his own will.

Amongst those things which a man suffers by his own will, being able not to
suffer them if he would, I put Abstinencies, Disciplines, and Watchings, with
all that which is thereunto annexed: And amongst those things, which a man
suffers by another will, I put Violences, Dishonours, Persecutions,
Martyrdomes, Infirmities, Deaths, with all that which is thereunto annexed.

They who have by experience known what thing a live mind is, and what thing a
dead mind is, or at least which is begun to be mortified, examining themselves
by that which they shall have suffered, and shall suffer in both these manners,
that is, by their own wills, and by others will, shall know that all that which
has been written is true, their knowledge answering to experience, and knowing
it they will attend to mortify their minds from good to better, until they
have reduced them to those terms, that in what they shall suffer by their own
will, they intend to help and serve them who are the members of Christ, and to
further their own mortification, which faith and the holy spirit work in them,
as I have otherwhere said: and that in that which they suffer by others will,
knowing in all that the will of God, (and not that of men, and of other
creatures which cause them to suffer) they rejoice themselves, and content
themselves, intending to satisfy unto the duty of piety, and to observe
Christian decorum. And I understand, that a man who suffers by others will,
does then attend unto the duty of Christian piety, when coming into poverty by
any occasion whatsoever, he contents himself, therewith. The same I say of
dishonor, of corporal infirmities, and of death, with all other things which
are of that quality. And then I understand, that he who suffers by others will,
observes Christian decorum, when suffering for Christ, he is contented to
suffer, Glorying as S. Paul says in afflictions! And for Christ I understand
they suffer, who either for preaching the Gospel, or for teaching Christian
living, having the gift of an Apostle, or of a Doctor, are persecuted, evil
entreated, dishonored and martyrized; and they who for the Christian life, in
which a man attends to recover the image and likeness of God by the imitation
of Christ, are esteemed base, murmured at, and slandered; and they who to
accommodate, and satisfy them who are the members of Christ, and stand
incorporate in Christ, deprive themselves of their commodities, and
satisfactions. And this voluntary suffering I hold to be most proper to a
Christian.

They who suffering by others will imitate Job, satisfy unto the duty of
Piety, and conform themselves unto the will of God. And they who suffering by
others will, and also by their own will, shall imitate S. Paul, observe the
christian decorum: God having showed in Job a most efficacious example of
patience in suffering by another will in natural things, and in S. Paul a
most divine example of courage and patience in suffering by others will in
Christian matters.

In this discourse I intend eight things.

I. That according as my mind does more or less content it self with that
which it suffers by its own will, or by others will, I know that the
mortification thereof is greater or lesser,

II. That in that which I suffer by my own will, if I do not suffer it for
Christ, I seek mine own honor, and glory, and mine own interest, and profit.

3. That contenting my self with that which I suffer by others will, I do
satisfy unto piety, and observe christian decorum, and therefore seek the
honor and glory of God.

4. That I ought to hold for certain, that all suffering of what sort soever it
be, which without my will offers it self to me in this present life, is by the
will of God.

5. That as then I shall in my sufferings satisfy christian piety, when I
shall imitate Job.

6. That as then I shall in my sufferings observe christian decorum, when I
shall imitate S. Paul, inasmuch as he imitated Christ.

7. That they suffer for Christ, who preach and imitate him, and they who serve
him in his members.

8. That that voluntary suffering is most proper to a christian, that redounds
to the profit of them who are incorporated in Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XCIV.
Three sorts of Conscience: one by the Law natural, and the other by the
written Laws: and the other by the Gospel.

ALl men of the world, as I understand, frame their consciences by one of these
three means: There are some, who attending unto natural piety, which
consists in this, that a man employ himself wholly, and every one of the
members of his body, in those things for which he knows God created him, and
them; and that he serve himself with all created things properly and only in
that which God created them for. They go forming their consciences by the law
of nature, having a good, or bad opinion of themselves, according as they know
their living is conformable, or not conformable to the duty of natural piety;
and by how much they have their understandings more enlightened to know that
whereunto they are bound by Natural piety, and by how much the more they do
apply themselves to satisfy unto this obligation, so much worse opinion have
they of themselves, knowing that they fail much, and in many things come short
of the duty of natural piety, whereunto man through the depravation of
original sin can by no means satisfy of himself.

There are others, who attending unto the Hebrew piety, which consists in this,
that a man should in every thing, and altogether live conformable to those Laws
whereunto he is obliged, or persuades himself to be obliged, observing them
according to the intention of him that made them; these go forming their
consciences by that which they know of those Laws, having a good, or evil
opinion of themselves according as they know their living conformable, or not
conformable to that which the Laws demand of them. These I understand by how
much the more they do know that, whereunto those Laws oblige them, and by how
much they do the more apply themselves to fulfill that obligation, so much have
they worse opinion of themselves; knowing that they fail much, and in many
things of the Hebrew piety, whereunto they have intent to satisfy; that being
impossible unto them, as well for the blindness of their understandings, with
which they can by no means know properly the intention of him that gave the
Laws, (and not knowing it, they can never secure themselves to have satisfied
unto them,) as also through the rebellion of the Flesh, which as S. Paul says,
Romans 8. subjects not himself to the law of God, neither indeed can. There are
other men, who hearing the voice of the Gospel, which promises remission of
sins, and reconciliation with God to them who believe in Christ, leaving to
pretend natural piety, and renouncing the pretense of Hebrew piety, embrace
themselves with christian piety, which consists in this, that a man being
incorporated by faith in Christ, should esteem himself pious, just, and holy,
although he do not altogether satisfy natural piety, nor Hebrew piety; and
moreover although he do not altogether satisfy the duty, and the decorum of
Christian piety. These by how much they have their understandings more
enlightened in the knowledge of the Gospel of Christ, and by how much they do
more apply themselves to give credit unto the Gospel, so much better opinion
have they of themselves, forming their opinions not by that which they know of
themselves, but by that which they believe of the Gospel, which God knows, who
does not consider them by that which they are in themselves, but by that which
they are in Christ. He does not hold them for Though this be the Authors
opinion, yet the truth of it would be examined, the 98 Consideration about
being justified by faith or by good works, or condemned for unbelief or evil
works, make plain the Authors meaning.
good nor for evil by that whereby they approach, or by that whereby they go
far off from the duty of natural piety, nor from the duty of Hebrew piety.
nor for that they observe or not observe the Decorum of christian piety; but
for the fidelity, or infidelity, with which they persevere, or sever themselves
from the Gospel and from Christ.

The men that attend unto natural piety, without having christian piety, are
for the most part vicious; for in them the flesh is made licentious.

The men that attend to By Hebrew piety he means not the very Ceremonies of
the Jews which no Christian observes now; but an analogate observation of
Ecclesiastical and Canonical laws, superinduced to the Scriptures, like to
that of the Jews, which they added to their divine Law. This be^^ well weighed
will make the Consideration easy and very observable For at least some of the
Papists are come now to what the Pharisee were come to in our Saviors time.
Hebrew piety without having christian piety, are ordinarily superstitious, and
are scrupulous, nay from hence rise all the scruples, and doubts in those that
are called This is true only of the Popish Cases of Con^cience, which depend
almost wholly on their Canon law and Decretals, knots of their own tying and
untying: But their are other Cases of Conscience grounded on Piety and
Morality, and the difficulty of applying their general rules to particular
actions, which are a most noble study.
Cases of conscience. For men not being able entirely to understand the
intention of him that gave the Law, it comes to pass, that a man not being
able to certify himself to have satisfied unto the Law, goes procuring to
satisfy with superstitions, and nevertheless remains with very great
scruples, the which are the greater in them who stand most applied to satisfy
unto Hebrew piety. Besides that, in the understanding of the intention of the
Law there are so many opinions, as the men are that go to understand it. In
sum, whilst a man continues subject to the law, having framed his conscience
by the opinion which ho has of himself, he never comes to feel peace of
conscience.

The men that attend to christian piety, go forming their consciences, as I
have said, by the opinion which God has of them, considering them incorporated
in Christ, and not by that which they know of themselves. According as
christian piety is more efficacious in them, so do they go on every day
satisfying more and more unto natural piety, and unto Hebrew piety; not to
form their own consciences by their own satisfaction, but to observe the duty
of Christian piety, and the Decorum of the Gospel. In these only, vices are
not found, for in them the Flesh is not licentious; nay rather being dead on
the cross with Christ, they go by little and little mortifying it. And in them
only are no superstitions, nor scruples; for they know that Christ has freed
them from the Law, having satisfied for them; and being free, they have none
any more to accuse them. And because they also know that God sets not to their
account that wherein they fail in the duty of Christian piety, and in the
Decorum of the Gospel, which does amourously oblige us to be like unto God, and
to the son of God Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XCV.
That men are incapable of the divine Generation of the sons of God and of
the spiritual Regeneration of the sons of God.

AMongst the things in which humane curiosity shows her rashness, I hold it
for a very principal one to endeavor to comprehend, and to understand the
Divine generation of the sonne^ of God, in what manner the son is begotten of
the Father, for what cause the Word o^ God is called the Son, or the son of
God i^ called the Word. I say that I hold this rashness^ very principal
amongst the rest: for I understand, that humane understanding is as incapable
to comprehend the divine generation of the son of God, because this is a
thing altogether alienated from that which he knows, understands, and
experiments touching his own generation, as the understanding of a worm, which
is bred of the corruption of the earth, is incapable of the generation of
mankind, that is, how one man is the son of another man, or one creature is
bred of another; because this is a thing most alienated from her own proper
generation; besides this, in case a worm should come to understand in what
manner a man is generated of another man, and would make other worms to
understand it, they would never be capable thereof, it being a thing altogether
alienated from their generation: so supposing that some one man should come to
understand the divine generation of the son of God, and would make other men
understand it, they would never be able to understand, because it is a thing
most different from their generation. And therefore extreme great is the
rashness of men, who with their natural light only, will understand this
divine mystery; and also great is that of them, who will understand it being
helped by the holy Scriptures and the language thereof, without the inward
teaching of the holy spirit of God. And hence it comes, that albeit S. John
understood the divine generation of the son of God, and would give it to
understand to men, they are not capable thereof, not understanding that, which
according to S. John, the words signify, with which he would declare it; as
what thing S. John meant, saying, (...), or Verbum, the word was made flesh;
willing also to show better the incapacity of humane intelligence in the divine
generation of the son of God, I think on this wise; that if it be incapable
of the spiritual regeneration of them who being incorporated by faith in the
son of God, come to be the sons of God by adoption; how much more shall it
be incapable of the divine generation of the natural son of God? Now that
humane intelligence is incapable of this spiritual regeneration, all they who
are regenerated know by experience; knowing in themselves, that they should
never have understood this divine mystery, if they had not experimented it; and
knowing also, that although they labor to make others capable who are out of
it, they do nothing at all; as the worm also should do nothing at all, which
having understood how the matter of humane generation goes, would make other
worms capable thereof. This I understand by that discourse which S. John tells,
chap. 3. that passed between Jesus Christ our Lord, and the great master of
Israel called Nicodemus, who came to speak with him by night. For Christ
speaking unto him of the spiritual regeneration, whereby a man leaves to be
the son of wrath, and becomes the son of grace, leaves to be the son of
Adam, and becomes the son of God, Nicodemus with all his natural light and
humane knowledge, and with all his intelligence of sacred Scriptures, was so
incapable of this spiritual regeneration, that Christ marvelling at it, said
unto him. Art thou a Master in Israel. and know not these things? and adds,
If I have told you earthly things, and you believe not, how will you believe if
I tell you heavenly things? Willing to say, if thou be incapable of this
spiritual regeneration, which although it be spiritual, is nevertheless
such, as is wrought here on earth, and in the men of earth; how much more
incapable will thou be of the divine generation to believe it, of which I would
speak unto thee; forasmuch as it is not done on earth, but in heaven, and is
not done in an earthly thing, but in an heavenly. Let this then be the
conclusion, that it being true, that whilst a man is without the spirit, with
all his natural light, with all his sciences, and humane learnings, and
writings, he is not only incapable to understand the divine generation of the
son of God, but he is also incapable to understand the spiritual generation
of the adopted sons of God. Let none be so bold without having obtained the
spiritual regeneration, as to presume to understand it, nor to speak of it.
Nor let none be so rash, that without having obtained the spiritual
regeneration, and having been admitted to those sacraries of God, unto which
Saint John was admitted when he said, In the beginning was the word, he should
dare to understand it, penetrate or compass it, with his wit and humane
discourse; knowing, that of this divine mystery they only are capable, unto
whom by the will of God it shall be revealed, by the only son of God Jesus
Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XCVI.
That then a man knows himself a pilgrim in this world, when because God loves
him, the world persecutes him.

COmmonly all men esteem themselves citizens of those places where they were
born, esteeming themselves pilgrims and strangers in all other places. They who
pretend that every place is a man's country, esteem themselves strangers no
where. They who being regenerated, and renewed by the holy spirit, and so are
become more then man, esteeming themselves Citizens of the kingdom of God, and
of eternal life, esteem themselves pilgrims in all countries of the world. The
first following sense, go after the judgment of sensuality. The second
following the natural light, go after prudence and humane reason. And the
third following the spiritual light, go after Faith, Hope, and Charity. The
first delight themselves in that which pleases sensuality. The second
despising that which pleases sensuality, seek their own glory, and
satisfaction of their minds. The third despising both the one and the other,
love the honor of God, and the glory of Christ. The first the world loves. The
second the world despises, albeit on the other side it prize and esteem them.
And the third the world despises, hates and persecutes. The first God knows
not. The second God abhorres. The third God prizeth, loves and favors. Where I
do not understand, that God prizeth, loves and favors this third sort, because
the world despises them, abhorres and persecutes them, but that the world
despises, abhorres and persecutes them, because God priseth them, loves and
favors them.

Further I understand, that from their thus feeling themselves on one part
prized, loved and favored of God, and on the other part despised, persecuted
and hated of the world, it redounds, that they following where the holy spirit
leads them, running after Faith, Hope, and Charity, esteem themselves Pilgrims
in this present life, esteeming themselves Citizens of eternal life. Esteeming
themselves Pilgrims in this present life, they live like Pilgrims, having no
intent to inherit in this present life, nor to rejoice in that which they
rejoice, who are Citizens thereof, and so they pass lightly through all these
things, setting affection on none of them. And holding themselves Citizens of
eternal life, they begin to live, as they live there, and they have intent to
inherit in it, and to rejoice in that which they rejoice, who are Citizens
thereof, and herein they set their affections. They I understand, that albeit
the remembrance of death frightens them in regard of the sense, in regard of
the liveliness that is in them, in their affections and appetites, yet in
regard they esteem themselves Pilgrims in this present life, and Citizens of
eternal life, it comforts them, and gives them content, considering that death
is the end of their Pilgrimage. They who albeit they be indeed prized, loved
and favored of God, are not yet despised, hated and persecuted of the world,
do not as yet esteem themselves Pilgrims in this present life, not being
handled as Pilgrims; albeit they esteem themselves Citizens of eternal life,
inasmuch as they know that they are prized, favored and loved of God. It is
true indeed, that this estimation is not entire, nor perfect in them, until
that the world knowing them prized, loved and favored of God, begins to handle
them as Pilgrims, despising them, hating them and persecuting them. For as then
they feeling themselves handled by the world as Pilgrims, have recourse to
Christ, and recourse to God: and being as they are more prized, more loved,
more favored of God, and more enlightened in the knowledge of eternal life,
they esteem themselves Pilgrims and strangers in this present life, in such
manner that however afterward the world return to prize, love and use them
well, they do not leave to esteem themselves Pilgrims, and to hold it good to
go out of this pilgrimage.

Here I understand two things: The first, that it is Gods will, that they whom
he loves should live as Pilgrims. And the second, that between them who hate
the world, because they are persecuted of the world for piety, and them who
hate the world for other respects, there is this difference, that these second
although they bear hatred to the world, whilst they are despised of it, and
would be content to go out of it, yet when the world returns to prize them,
they loving the world, would by no means go out of the world. And the other
after that they once hate the world, seeing themselves despised, hated and
persecuted of the world, they never more return to love the world, how much
soever it love, and esteem them. This difference proceeds from hence, that
following the light of the holy spirit, and being enlightened in the knowledge
of eternal life, they do always hold themselves for pilgrims in this present
life, and always hold themselves for Citizens of the Kingdom of God in
eternal life, and therefore hate this life, and rejoice to go out of it. On
the contrary, the other following their natural light have no certainty of
eternal life; and if they have any, they are not sure to be well in it, and
therefore they do not altogether hate this life, nor rejoice to go out of it.
In this discourse christians shall understand, that they are to esteem
themselves pilgrims and strangers in the world in this present life, and that
they are to esteem themselves Citizens of the Kingdom of God, in life
eternal: And that if so be the feeling themselves very fearful of death,
shall make them know that they are not come to this to esteem themselves
pilgrims, they ought with continual prayer to seek it, being certain, that by
how much more perfectly they shall stand therein, by so much the less shall
they be fearful of death, and they shall be most like to Christ and to God,
who have been and are in this present life strangers and pilgrims, and like
such have been, and are used. And to every Christian it appertains to procure
to be like to God, and to the son of God Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XCVII.
Whether Justification be a fruit of piety, or whether piety be a fruit of
Justification.

WIlling to examine between these two gifts of God, Piety, and Justification,
which of them may be said to be the fruit of the other, that is whether piety
be the fruit of justification, a man being first just before pious, or whether
justification be the fruit of Piety, a man being first pious before just; and
willing in this matter to proceed with order, I first say, that by Piety I
understand the true divine worship, which consists in worshipping God in
spirit, and in truth, John 4. approving with the mind whatever God does,
holding it for just, holy and good. In this signification I understand S. Paul
uses this word Piety, 1. Tim. 3. And I say, that by justification I understand
that purity of conscience which dares appear in judgment before God, such as
was S. Paul's, when he said there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness,
etc. Passing on further I understand, that calling into counsel for the making
of this examination the natural light, prudence and humane wisdom, she will
always say and affirm, that justification is a fruit of piety, understanding
that one cannot have justification, and purity in his conscience, if he do not
first worship God in spirit and in truth, giving unto him that which it ought
to do as his creature: and that suddenly when he gives to God that which he
ought to give, he is just having purity in his conscience. And so it is
resolved by humane wisdom, that Justification is a fruit of piety; since from
a man's being pious it redounds that he is just. Further I understand, that
calling into counsel for the making of this trial the holy spirit, and the
Christian spirit, he will say and affirm, that Piety is the fruit of
Justification, understanding that a man cannot have Piety, worshipping God in
spirit and truth, if he be not first just, accepting the Gospel of Christ and
so making Christ's justice his own, and understanding that instantly when a man
believing is just, he begins to have Piety, adoring God in spirit and truth.
And so it is truly resolved, that Piety is a fruit of Justification: for a man
is first just, then pious. If that were true which natural light, prudence and
humane wisdom says, for the same cause it would follow, that there has not
been, nor is, nor shall be a pious man, who should give entirely, and
completely unto God that which he ought to give. And it being true, that which
the holy spirit, and the Christian spirit says* it well follows that there
has been, is, and shall be a great number of just men: for there has been,
are, and shall be many men, that have been are, and shall be justified by
Christ, accepting, and making Christ's justice their own. Men that judge that
Justification is a fruit of piety, by the same case give testimony of
themselves, that they judge by natural light, by prudence and humane wisdom,
as Plato, and Aristotle would have judged, who had no knowledge at all of
Christ. And in very truth I know not what they think of Christ, of the
Christian business. nor of the Gospel. The men that judge that Piety is a
fruit of Justification, by the same rule give testimony of themselves, that
they judge by the holy spirit and by the Christian spirit, as S. Peter and S.
Paul judged, who largely knew Christ, and had the spirit of Christ. They have
this opinion of Christ, that in him God punished all our sins, that is, all
that wherein we fail of that which as the creatures God we are bound to give
unto God. They think of Christian business, that it is a living under the
government of the holy spirit in holiness and righteousness. And they think
of the Gospel, that it is a Proclamation that compriseth these two things,
Remission of sins, and Justification by Christ; And the regiment and
government of the holy spirit: which two things they enjoy, who believing in
Christ accept the Gospel. From all this I gather, that they who understand
Justification to be a fruit of Piety, follow Plato and Aristotle; And that they
who understand Piety to be a fruit of justification. Justification being a
fruit of Faith, follow S. Paul and S. Peter. It is also gathered, that this
name Piety understood in the manner in which it is here understood, cannot be
attributed to God, because he ows no man any thing. Nay on the contrary every
one ows to him. And that which he does with us, is not for piety, is not for
debt, nor for obligation, but for compassion, for mercy and liberality, being
in every thing toward us compassionate, merciful and liberal; which ought
principally to be known in this, that he put all our sins on his precious
son Jesus Christ our Lord, to put on us the justice of the same Jesus Christ
our Lord,

CONSID. XCVIII.
How that is to be understood which the holy Scripture says, attributing
condemnation sometimes to unbelievers, and sometimes to evil works; and
salvation sometimes to Faith, sometimes to good works.

AMongst those things in holy Scripture, which give molestation to Christians,
who who having faith feel within themselves the fruit of Faith, that is,
Justification, and the fruit of Justification, that is, peace of conscience,
when they will examine with themselves their conceptions, and their spiritual
feelings, I hold for very principal this, that feeling themselves justified by
Faith, and consequently with peace of conscience, they cannot understand for
what cause Christ speaking of the day of Judgment, Matt. ^5. says that he
will condemn some, because they have not done well, and will save others,
because they have done well: Nor for what cause S. Paul says, Romans 2.6. That
God will render to every man according to his works: Romans 2. And S. Peter 1.
Ephesians. 4.5. That God will judge every one according to his works. At which they
so much the more marvel, That Christ says, Mark 16.16. That he that believes
shall be saved, and he that believes not, shall be damned. And that S. Paul
says, Romans 10.9. That the Faith of the heart justifies, and the confession of
the mouth saves. And that S. Peter 1. Ep. 1.9. attributes the salvation of the
soul to Faith. And from their not understanding of this matter it comes to
pass, that every one of them thinks in this manner; If God be to judge me
according to my works, there is no doubt but he will condemn me; for there is
not in them any goodness; nay in those which seem best, there is much
pollution of self-love, interest, and self-glory, in such sort, as if I be to
be judged by my work, it will go ill with me. Whereupon being desirous to take
away this molestation, and scruple of Christian and spiritual persons, and to
salve the sense of the holy Scriptures, so as they should not contradict
themselves, I think thus, That in good or evil works God considers not the
quantity, but the quality, which consists in the mind of him that does the
works in the thing wherein he imployes it. That this is true in evil works
needs no ^^proof: and that it is true in good works is evident by that which
Christ says of them that cast their moneys into the Treasury of the Temple,
praising the mind of her that did the work. And it is evident likewise by that
which Christ says speaking of the day of judgment, where he does not say that
he will save them who have been charitable simply, but they that have been
charitable with himself, that is, they who believing shall stand incorporated
in him. Whence it seems that Christ says, Matthew. 25.40. and 45. that he will
save them who have used charity with him, and condemn them that have not used
it. Now it being clear, that none can work with a godly mind, but they only
who are godly, and holy; nor can know Christ in his members to use charity
toward him, but they only, who appertain to the body of Christ; i^ is
'clearly proved, that none can work well or Christianly, but those who are the
member^ of Christ, those who have the spirit of Christ, are godly, holy and
just, and believe in Christ. And this being proved, it is likewise proved, that
it is the same in holy Scriptures to say^ That men shall be saved by their good
works* and condemned by their evil works; and to say^ That they shall be saved
by their Faith, an^ condemned by their unbelief. Whereupon Christian persons
are to know two things. The one, That they only work well who being justified
by Christ, do not pretend to justify themselves by their own good works, and
so working they work purely for the love of God, and not for their own love; as
those men work, who not holding themselves justified by Christ, pretend to
justify themselves by their own good works, and so working for their own love,
and proper interest, and not for the love of God; they do not work well; for
their works do not please God, and therefore cannot be called truly good works.
The other, that God judging them according to their works, will not put to
their account the pollution that he shall know in them, having pardoned them
original sin together with all that which they have from this evil root. But
he will put to their account the Faith which he has given them, and the purity
that shall be in their works whether few or many, inasmuch as they shall be the
fruit of Faith. And so God shall save them, showing ^n the outward judgment,
that he saves them for their good works, saving them indeed by the Faith, which
he has given them. God shall ^ustifie the sentence with which he condemns ^he
impious and superstitious, and shall save ^he pious and holy, alleging the
outward works ^f the one, and the other; the living with holiness and
righteousness on the one part, and the living with unrighteousness and
impiety on the other part. But this shall be only to justify his sentence
before men, who see the outward works only. And in the same sentence they who
know and see the inward, the root whence this living and working on the one
part, and this living and working on the other, grow, they being more then men
by Christian regeneration, shall know, that faith has saved them that shall be
saved, and that unbelief has condemned them that shall be condemned. Here may
the wicked and superstitious person say to me, willing to calumniate holy
Scripture, and to canonize his own superstitious works; If thi^ which thou
say be true, what need were the^ to make mention of works? Were it not
better that the Scripture stood solid in saying tha^ whosoever shall believe
shall be saved, and whe^soever shall not believe, shall be condemned To them I
will answer three things.

1. That from their not understanding the Scriptures it proceeds, that they
find as the think inconstancy in them, and they would (...) find it, if they
understood them; and th^^ should understand them, if they would not g^ about to
understand them with natural pr^dence and humane reason, which is incapab^^ of
the things which are of the spirit of Go^ such as are the holy Scriptures.

2. That God willing as has been said to j^stifie his sentence before men, who
see only the outward works, it is necessary that he should allege the works
which are outward, those which give testimony of the faith of him who believes,
and of the infidelity of him who believes not.

3. That all men being most ready to evil works, and most slow to good works,
it seems necessary that the holy Scripture should use this manner of speech, to
refrain man's pronenesse to evil, and to incite their slownesse to good; to the
end, that as they who now feel Christian Regeneration and renovation, should
depart from evil, and apply themselves to good, only for the duty of
regeneration and renovation, to observe Christian decorum, not to grieve, nay
rather to rejoice the holy Spirit: So they also who begin to feel themselves
regenerated and renewed, should make their vocation sure and to work out their
salvation. And this should they also do, who do not know regeneration nor
renovation, for fear of being condemned. And so even these should be less
evil; And they being less evil should be more good for their own interest;
until such time is having begun to feel the affections of Christian
regeneration and renovation, they ^lso may be good, not doing evil; and do^ng
good not now for fear, and for interest, ^ut only for the duty of Christians
incorporated in Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom be glory for ever.

CONSID. XCIX.
Whence it proceeds that men believe not that all our sins were punished in
Christ, or they believe it with difficulty.

COnsidering the extreme difficulty, wherewith men bring themselves to believe
the Gospel, the good news of the remission of sins, justification and
reconciliation with God through the justice of God executed on Christ,
forasmuch as they also who believe by revelation, and divine inspiration, find
more difficulty in believing this remission of sins, Justification and
Reconciliation, then all other things besides, which the Christian Church
believes; I have many times set my self to think whence this difficulty may
proceed; and at length I am come to this resolution, that to believe this
Remission of sins, Justification and Reconciliation, a man finds in himself
the contradiction of his evil conscience; and from hence it comes, that with
extreme difficulty they who believe by divine Revelation and Inspiration, bring
themselves to hold themselves for just: they who believe by opinion and
relation, being never able to bring themselves to this.

They who believe being inspired, until they find peace in their consciences,
do not entirely ^elieve the Gospel. And finding peace in their consciences,
the inward contradiction ceasing, the difficulty of believing the Gospel is
taken away. They who believe being taught, as they never find peace in their
consciences, so they never believe the Gospel: For the inward contradiction
never cease, and that not ceasing, neither does the difficulty in believing
cease; nay whilst the contradiction lasts, the difficulty may be called
impossibility. Men do easily believe by relation of holy Scriptures, that God
is most omnipotent, most just: They believe, that Christ is most innocent, and
pure from all sin; They believe that Christ suffered by the will of God: for
in none of these things they find inward contradiction which might hinder them
from believing that which holy Scriptures affirm. And not to exclude the
benefit of Christ, they believe also that Christ satisfied for original sin,
for neither in this do they find contradiction; inasmuch as their consciences
not accusing them of original sin, they not knowing their own fault therein,
they easily bring themselves to believe, that without their own merit that is
pardoned unto them, wherein they know not their own fault. But when it comes to
the point, to believe that Christ satisfied God for the sins that every one of
them commits, albeit they have the Scriptures which most largely give testimony
thereof (nay they all in conformity preach this) yet suddenly they draw back,
because they find the inward contradiction in their own consciences, and so
they resolve to restrain the benefit of Christ only to original sin;
understanding it after their own manner, or to enlarge it also to their proper
sins, but with the addition of proper satisfaction. As if Christ had said, I
have satisfied for the sins of you all, but with condition, that every one
should satisfy for his own. And they consider not the injury which herein they
do to Christ, they consider it not because they feel it not, and they feel it
not because they know not Christ. They who by Gods gift believe that God is
most just, that Christ is most innocent, that it was the work of God that
Christ should suffer, and that he suffered for original sin, in the end
reduce themselves to believe, that through Christ's sufferings they get
remission of sins, and are just, and are now by the grace of God reconciled
with God: considering in this manner, if God be most just, if Christ be most
innocent, if that which Christ suffered, he suffered by the will of God, and
the will of God was that he should satisfy for original sin; it is also true,
that men who have obtained the whole pardon of their sins, are just, and are
reconciled with God, since by original sin we all become sinners, unjust, and
enemies of God, and do things whereby we grow in injustice, and in enmity. With
this consideration they pacify their consciences, and further their believing,
and hold for certain, that they who do not believe this, either do not believe
that God is most just, or do not hold that Christ is most innocent, or do not
believe that it was Gods will that Christ should suffer; for if they did
believe this they would believe that which follows; that is, that he suffered
not for himself, but for them, and so would hold themselves for just. Here I
understand all this, First, the blindness of humane wisdom, which is not
capable of the truth which the Gospel preaches. Secondly, the ignorance of
men, who not understanding whence this incapacity comes, do not attend to
remedy but to cover it. Thirdly, that Christ satisfying for original sin, he
satisfied for all that which we sin through evil inclination, which is
natural unto us through original sin. Fourthly, that the faith of them who
believe being taught, neither quieting, nor pacifying their consciences, does
not further them to believe that all our sins are punished in Christ.
Fifthly, that the faith of them who believe inspired, quieting and pacifying
their consciences, helps them to believe, That all our sins were punished
in Christ. And so it is, that they who have this inspired faith, proving in
themselves the truth which the Gospel preaches, come to understand by
experience that which at first they believed by inspiration. First they believe
that Christ was punished for them. For so the Gospel preaches unto them, and
they are inwardly moved to believe that it is true. Afterward finding peace in
their consciences, they understand in what manner Christ was punished for them.
They who do not believe this, or believe it, not being inspired, but taught,
never finding peace in their consciences, do never understand, that saying of
the Prophet being fulfilled in them, Except you shall believe, ye shall not
understand, Isaiah 7.

CONSID. C.
That the fruits which in Christians in the beginning of their Incorporation in
Christ, seem to be of the spirit, are of the flesh.

SEeing by experience, that almost in all persons who accepting the Gospel come
to be incorporated in Christ, in the beginning of their incorporation, there
are found certain tastes, feelings, desires, vehemencies, and certain mystical
understandings of holy Scripture, of the Christian business, and certain
tears, all which seem to be of the spirit, but are altogether of the Flesh, and
as matter of the Flesh in time, dry up, and fall away. And willing to
understand whence this proceeds, I have considered, that every one of them, who
are incorporated in Christ, they are like unto a branch, which being cut from
one tree is grafted into another. For as that branch would not produce the
fruit which it does, if it were not grafted into that tree; though that first
fruit be as it were altogether of the sap which it brought with it from the
tree from whence it was cut: so the person incorporated in Christ would not
have the tastes, feelings, vehemencies, desires, or the understandings of
Scripture, or the tears which he has, if he were not incorporated in Christ;
though these are as it were all Flesh, affection of the flesh, complacencie,
and satisfaction of the flesh; which standing yet alive, and not able to
satisfy nor please it self in carnal matters, pleases and satisfies it self
in spiritual matters. Whence I understand, that every one who comes to be
incorporated in Christ, may rejoice in those tastes, feelings, desires,
vehemencies, understandings, and tears, inasmuch as they assure him, that he is
incorporated in Christ; for he should not have any of these things, if he were
not partaker of that incorporation. And I understand, that holding them for
fruits of the flesh and not of the spirit, by the sap of that root of Adam, and
not of that root of Christ, he ought to cast them away, and to cut them off, no
ways resting upon them, nor feeding himself with them. For that would befall
him which befalls many persons, who feeding themselves with such meat, persuade
themselves that they live in the spirit, when they live in the flesh. And I
understand, that they ought to have intent, that there should be nothing found
in them, but that which is of the spirit, and of the root of Christ, in which
he stands incorporated and engrafted holding for fruit of the root of Christ,
humility, meekness, patience, the despising of himself, the denial of his own
proper will, the obedience to God, charity: for all these things were seen in
Christ whilst he conversed corporally amongst men: and unto these does God
inspire us, and the spirit of Christ move us. And these shine out in them, who
stand perfectly incorporated in Christ; and even those first unripe fruits
redound to the glory of God, and to the glory of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. CI.
Whence it comes, that the wicked cannot believe; that the superstitious
believe with ease; and that the godly believe with difficulty.

IN the wicked I consider the impossibility in believing; and I call them
wicked, who make profession to be the enemies of God, as Pharaoh, and as the
Scribes and Pharisees, who were contrary unto Christ. In the superstitious I
consider the easiness in believing; and I call them superstitious, who not
being godly, make profession of piety, and believe that they are pious. And in
the godly I consider the difficulty in believing; and I call them godly who
having by the Spirit accepted the general pardon, which the Gospel offers unto
them, attend to confirm themselves in it, and to live in this present life, a
life like unto that which they are to live in life eternal. The impossibility
of the wicked I understand consists in this, that God blinds their eyes, and
shuts their ears, and hardens their hearts, to the end that not knowing the
general pardon, which is intimated unto them, they do not believe it, and so
do not obtain salvation. This S. John 12.39, 40. understood in this manner,
when he said, therefore they could not believe, because Isaiah said again, he
has blinded their eyes. Nay this very thing Christ meant, as is proved by the
three other Evangelists, and S. Paul understood it, as S. Luke testifies the
last of the Acts 25, 26, 27. The easiness wherewith the superstitious believe,
I understand proceeds from their believing with humane wisdom, and from
believing by opinion, by relation, by use and custom; they holding it for
impiety to doubt. That this is true is proved by this, that amongst those true
things which they believe, they believe many other false things, and they
believe the false things, more then the true. Nay they do not believe that
which is the foundation of all true things, that is, the remission of sins,
and the reconciliation with God by the justice of God executed on Christ. And I
say they do not believe it; for if they did believe it, for the same reason
they would leave to be superstitious, and would be pious.

The difficulty wherewith the godly believe, I understand proceeds from humane
wisdom, from evil conscience, and from the liveliness of mind, and from the
lasciviousness of the flesh. It proceeds from humane wisdom, for by how much
they go on the more procuring to assure themselves in the faith, so much the
more opposition, and impediment does humane wisdom make against them in it.
That this is true, is proved by this, that because they principally procure to
assure, and confirm themselves, that all their sins were punished in Christ,
in this they who are Christians, find more difficulty, then in all other
things which they believe. It proceeds from evil conscience, inasmuch as it
accuses a man as the enemy of God; and therefore he with difficulty assures
himself in that which the Gospel proclaims, that God has now pardoned him,
and holds him for his friend. That this is true is proved by this, that
instantly when a man finds peace in his conscience, he stands confirmed in the
faith, in such manner that he is little solicited to doubt. It proceeds from
the liveliness of the mind, and from the lasciviousness of the flesh,
inasmuch as men's mind being a friend to life, and his flesh being a friend to
rejoicing, does eagerly combat against the faith; understanding or guessing
that faith slaies in a man the liveliness of the mind, and mortifies the
lasciviousness of the flesh. That this is true is proved by this, that as the
liveliness of the mind and the lasciviousness of the flesh does die in a man;
so the believing goes on increasing. But it is not to be understood that either
death, or mortification of the mind or flesh, are those things which increase
our belief, but faith being that which kills us, and mortifies us, the
believing is increased in us, the forces being taken away from our enemies; I
say from them, which make difficult to us our believing. In such manner as
humane prudence, and evil conscience, and the liveliness of our minds with the
laciviousnesse of our flesh, are three Instruments whereby the evil spirits
serve themselves to make difficult our believing to us, who believe by
Revelation, and by divine Inspiration, Nay with these three Instruments I
understand that the belief of the general Pardon is hindered to the
superstitious, who with ease believe all other things: and with the same I
understand, believing is made impossible to the wicked, whom God has made
blind, deaf, dumb; there being in all men, that is, in the impious, in the
superstitious, and in the godly self-love for the Principal enemy. And
certainly it is true, that from it proceeds the contradiction of humane
prudence, and of an evil conscience, and from it the repugnancy of the
liveliness of the mind, and lasciviousness of the flesh. That this is true,
is proved by this, that if there were no self-love, a man would not be so
curious in willing to assure himself of Christian verity, he would not be so
scrupulous in his conscience, nor would so much oppose the mortification of the
mind, nor of the lasciviousness of the flesh, and so the contradictions would
cease, and the contradictions ceasing, the difficulty of believing would also
cease.

From all this discourse this resolution may be taken, that if the wicked would
be free from the impossibility in believing, they must attend to renounce their
self-love, if they can: And that if the superstitious would know that they are
not pious, that they do not believe as they ought to believe, nor that which
they ought to believe, they must attend to renounce their self-love as much as
they can: And that the godly who shall feel themselves molested with the
difficulty of believing, and would take away the difficulty, and so make easy
the believing, they must labor to disenamour themselves of themselves, and of
the world, and to enamour themselves of God, and of Christ. This they shall do
by considering the evil that is in them, and in the world, and the good that is
in God, and in Christ. I say this consideration will be very profitable to
them, so that it always go accompanied with prayer, praying God, that he would
disenamour them of themselves and of the world, and that he would enamour them
of himself and of Christ; and that he would mortify in them all that which is
flesh, and humane prudence, to the end they may be capable of so great a
quantity of Faith, that they never come to doubt, nor to stagger in it, being
to him always loyal and faithful, as belongs to them, being made his sons by
the incorporation wherewith they stand incorporated in his only begotten son
Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. CII.
That Christian faith has necessity to be confirmed by experience: Of what
kind the experience is, and how it is obtained.

BElieving being the foundation of the Christianity, which consists in
accepting the general pardon by the justice of God executed on Christ, it
seems necessary, that a Christian should exercise himself in those
considerations which appertain to believing. And so amongst other things which
I have considered about believing, this is one, that a man never stands solid,
and firm, and constant in the Christian faith, until he have in himself some
experience of that which he believes. And it is certain, that he holds so much
firmness as he holds of experience in himself, and no more. It befalls us that
believe the Gospel which happens to us concerning a wise and spiritual man:
that as whilst we believe the wisdom, and spiritualty of this man by relation
of other men, we are so disposed, that other men coming, who make to us a
contrary relation, we change the opinion which we had of him, or at least we
doubt of it, until having strict familiarity with such a man, we know by
experience that the relation is true which was made to us, for as then no man
is able to persuade us to the contrary: even so likewise whilst we believe
that which the Gospel says, that God punished all our sins in Christ, by
their relation who preach the Gospel to us, we stand in hazard, that other
Preachers coming, which should tell us the contrary, we shall believe in
another manner, or at least we shall doubt of the first preaching, until that
we by having experience of that which is preached unto us in the Gospel, stand
firm, and constant in that which we believe, all the men of the world being
unable either to change, or alienate our faith in any manner, after that it is
confirmed by our own experience. Whence I understand that the first and
principal intent, which we ought to have, who accept the Gospel, believing
that in Christ God has punished all our sins, is to get the experience of
this, to the end that our faith being so confirmed, no man may be able to sever
us from it, nor make us doubt thereof, or stumble, as they are able to do,
whilst our faith is not confirmed with experience. And if any man shall ask
me, how the experience of faith is gotten? I answer, that then a man has
experience of that which he believes, when he has peace in his conscience, it
seeming to him that he can appear in the judgment of God, with that self same
security wherewith he would have appeared, if he had lived with that innocence
wherewith Christ lived, and had by Gods will suffered that which Christ
suffered. Furthermore I answer, that mortification and vivification are most
efficacious experiences, by which our faith is confirmed, inasmuch as they
only who believe and know themselves just in Christ, have mortification and
vivification. And if another shall ask me; saying, how shall I who believe do
to confirm my faith with experience? I answer two things. The one, that he
renounce all justifications that are without Christ, as well those which consist
in not doing, as those which consist in doing; and that embracing himself only
with the justification which is in Christ, which does consist in believing, he
address himself with prayer and supplication to God, that he would make him
feel the peace of conscience, that he would mortify him, that he would make
him alive, and the other, that he keep very strict account with himself, of his
works, words and thoughts, with intent to know in all these things how much
mortification, and how much vivification he has gotten; and with intent also
to mortify himself, and to make himself alive every day more and more, hereby
intending to get this Christian experience, with which the Christian faith is
confirmed. And to him that would consider, and know how he ought to do to
renounce his own justification, as well those that consist in not doing as those
which consist in doing; I say unto him, that those which consist in not doing,
h^ shall renounce; knowing that if he do no^ kill, if he do not rob, if he be
no fornicatour, if he do no injury to his neighbor, it i^ either because he is
not inclined thereto, or because he fears the shame of the world, or the
punishment wherewith such sins are punished in this life. And of this he may
assur^ himself, considering that he forbears not to d^ other things, unto which
he is inclined, which are not so shameful in the world, and are no^ punished
in this life; such as are ambition* honor, self-satisfaction, and reputation.
An^ I say unto him also, that the things which consist in doing, he shall
renounce; knowing o^ one side the superstition which he has put i^ some of
them, and on the other side the s^^ love with which he has contaminated, an^
defiled the other. And thus he shall come (...) these terms, that knowing
himself in himself deprived, and dispoiled of all his own justification, he
shall be constrained to comfort himself with that which the Gospel offers unto
him, showing unto him how God punished all our sins in his only begotten
son Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. CIII.
Against the Imagination; with which our Christian faith is troubled.

I Now return to consider that which I have oft-times said, that for a man to
be solicited to doubt, is a sign of Christian profiting. For I understand that
such solicitation grows from a man's being willing to believe, and from his
desiring to stand firm and constant, in the Christian faith of the general
pardon which is intimated unto men in the Gospel. The wicked are not solicited
to doubt, because they neither will nor desire to believe. Nor are the
superstitious solicited to doubt; for believing with humane and carnal
wisdom, they have none to solicit them to doubt. They who have made progress
in a Christian life are little solicited to doubt; for having with much
experience confirmed their faith, they have disarmed their enemies, I mean
those that did solicit them to doubt. And here I understand, that men are
incapable of being able to have so much faith in them, as that they should be
altogether freed from being solicited to doubt, and therefore God gives them
the faith according to their capacity, as we do not put so hot water into a
vessel of glass, as into one of earth, nor so hot into one of earth as into
one of brass, accommodating it unto the temper of the vessel, not willing it
should be broken, so God does in accommodating faith to the fitness and
capacity of the receiver, in such sort, as the much solicitation to doubt
remains only for them, who having left impiety, and being freed from the
deceit of superstition, begin to accept by the holy spirit, the general pardon
which the Gospel publishes, and begin to bring forth fruit in Christian
living, and go profiting in it. For they desiring to believe find alive in
themselves humane prudence, of which the evil spirits serve themselves to
solicit them to doubt. And so it is, that when one of these persons renouncing,
and leaving his own justifications; those which consist in doing, and those
which consist in not doing, will comfort himself with the justice of Christ,
which the Gospel offers unto us, when through his own imperfection he sees it
not so clear, and discovered, as he sees corporal things, and those which
consist in humane prudence, he is suddenly tempted, and solicited to doubt of
the truth, which the Gospel affirms; whereupon such a person ought suddenly to
remedy the temptation in this manner.

First he shall hold for a certain sign of his profiting in Christian faith to
be solicited to doubt, and he shall say, if I had not a will and desire to
believe, I should not be solicited to doubt, as I was not solicited when I did
not stand in this will, and in this desire, and so he shall come to quiet
himself with this matter, whereby the Devil procures to disquiet him. And if
there shall come a fancy to him to say that his doubting is of the same quality
with that of them who doubt without the spirit, he shall say it is not true;
for they who doubt without the spirit feel no distaste in doubting, nor desire
to be free, but I feel distaste in doubting, and desire to be free of it, and
consequently am certain that my doubting is not of that quality with that of
theirs who doubt without the spirit.

Secondly, he shall think thus, if this Christian faith were not a spiritual
and divine thing, it would not find in me that contradiction which it finds, as
those things have not found contradiction in me, which were not spiritual nor
divine, but superstitious, and humane, in which I would persuade my self. And
in this manner the contradiction, with which the devil would disquiet him,
shall be an instrument to him to quiet him.

Thirdly, he shall think this: If this Christian faith were not the gift of
God, I should not feel in my self those new desires to please God, to stand
always united with God, to see him glorified and sanctified of all men, which
desires I have felt since I have in earnest applied my self unto this faith.
And in this manner with the experience of the love of God, he shall assure
himself of the truth of that which the Gospel affirms.

Fourthly he shall think thus: If this Christian faith were not a spiritual
and divine thing, it would not have begun to give me an abhorring of corporal
and humane things, and the things of the world, the which I do not altogether
abhor, I am at least come to this that I do not love them, procure them,
desire them, as I was wont. And in this manner by experience of mortification,
he shall confirm himself in the truth of the Christian faith.

Fifthly, he shall think thus: If I knew any other better thing then this, or
at least that were equal to this, with which I might appear before the
judgment of God, I should indeed have cause to doubt of the truth of this; now
I knowing no other thing better, nor any other thing such as it is, I have no
cause to doubt. And thus he is come upon the gain, and not on the loss, and
that in persevering in this Christian faith he cannot loose, but gain. And if
it shall come into his fancy to say that he might loose much in case that that
which the Gospel says, were not true, inasmuch as he should attribute that to
Christ, which were not due to him, and it not being due to him, he should come to
offend the glory and the Majesty of God; he shall instantly have recourse to
experience and think thus; After that I know my self pardoned through Christ,
and reconciled with God through Christ, acknowledging my self dead with Christ,
and raised up with Christ, and expecting my glorification with Christ; I know,
and feel, and find in me the beginnings of mortification, despising the world
and my self; and I feel the beginnings of vivification through the love and
affection to God, to the glory of God, and to the will of God. And these
principles are good. And it being true, that from an evil cause never comes a
good effect, it is true also, that the cause is good, whence this effect is
grown. And therefore it is most certain and true that which the Gospel
publishes and affirms: That God having put on Christ all our sins, and
having punished them all in Christ, he has pardoned us all, and has
reconciled us unto himself by Christ; which pardon and reconciliation all they
which believe enjoy. Hereby a Christian shall stay himself, who (willing to
comfort and secure himself with the justice of Christ) shall be disturbed with
the persuasions which shall solicit him to doubt, and shutting the door to
them which may come, shall recommend himself to God, saying with Hezechias,
Lord I suffer violence, answer for me, Isai. 38. And let him be sure, that God
will help him, fulfilling with him that which he promised by David, where he
says, I am with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and bring him to Honor.

CONSID. CIV.
That Baptism through the Faith of the Gospel is efficacious even in Children,
who die before they come to the age to be able to approve their being Baptized.

TAking occasion from that which S. Peter says, 1. Epist. 12.20.21. That the
Ark wherein Noah saved himself in the flood, was a figure of our Christian
Baptism, I consider that as Noah giving credit to the word of God, did believe
that the flood would come, and that himself and his should be saved in the Ark,
not by virtue of the Ark, which could not naturally work this effect, but by
the will of God, who used this Ark for an instrument of safety to him and his:
so we also giving credit to the Gospel of God, believe that Christ shall come
to judge the quick and the dead; and we believe that all our sins being
punished in Christ, we and ours shall be saved in that judgment, being
Baptized; not by virtue of the water which cannot naturally work this effect,
but by the will of God, who uses the water for the means of our salvation.
God could well have saved Noah in the flood without the Ark; and it seems he
took the Ark for the means to condescend unto the frailty of Noah, who more
easily believed that he should be saved in the Ark, then he would have believed
that he should have been saved without the Ark. Albeit he did not trust in the
Ark, but in the word of God, who promised to save him in the Ark: and so not
the Ark, but Faith was that which saved Noah, Heb. 11.7. with which he made the
Ark, and put himself in it. In the same manner God could well save us in the
day of judgment without the water of Baptism, and it seems he takes the water
for the means to condescend unto our frailty, which causes that we do more
easily believe to be saved by Baptism, then we should believe to be saved
without it; albeit we have not confidence in the water, but in the word of the
Gospel of God, which promises to save us by Baptism: And so we shall be
saved in the universal judgment, not because we are Baptized, but through the
faith with which we are Baptized. Where I understand two things: The one, that
to all of us who are Christians, it appertains to secure our selves in the
judgment of God with the remembrance that we were baptized, as Noah secured
himself in the Flood with the remembrance of the Ark, the Ark being to him that
which Baptism is to us. The other, that we who are baptized being children,
are to assure our selves that we are then really, and indeed baptized, when the
years of discretion being come, and feeling by the will of God the voice of the
Gospel, we rejoice that we are baptized; in such sort, that if so be we were
not baptized, we would then be baptized: That betiding to us which might have
befallen a man, who had been put into the Ark of Noah whilst he was asleep,
who being awaked, and finding himself in the Ark, would have thanked Noah that
had put him in the Ark; affirming, that if he had not been entered therein, and
could have entered, he would without all doubt have entered therein. So that as
that man being entered into the Ark not by his own faith, but by the Faith of
Noah, should have saved himself in the Ark by his own faith, esteeming it good,
that he had entered into the Ark: so we who in our infancies were baptized,
having entered into Baptism, not through our own Faith, but by the Faith of
them who put us therein, shall be saved in Baptism by our own faith, approving
and holding it for good that we were baptized.

Another thing also may be said, that as the Beasts which Noah put into the Ark
entered in by the faith of Noah, and were saved in the Flood by the faith of
Noah, they having neither knowledge of good nor evil, to enter into the Ark, or
to approve their entering in, but being put into it: so the children of
Christians, who enter into Baptism by the faith of their Parents, and come not
to the age to be able to approve or reprove that which their Fathers have done;
they, because they have not the knowledge of good or evil, shall be saved in
the day of judgment, by the faith with which their Fathers have put them into
Baptism. In effect exceeding great is the force and efficacy of Faith, I say
of that which giving credit to the promises of God, stands certain of the
fulfilling of them, showing its assurance by putting in execution that outward
thing, which on Gods behalf is commanded. This Faith saved Noah in the Flood by
means of the Ark, and this Faith shall save all us in the day of judgment, by
the means of Baptism; us, who believing the Gospel shall be Baptized in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, to whom be glory
for ever, Amen.

CONSID. CV.
Three principles whence the ignorances arise, with which men err against God.

COnsidering that which S. Paul says of the sin which he had committed
against God in persecuting the Christian Church, But I obtained mercy, because
J did it ignorantly in unbelief; 1. Tim. 1.13. And considering the prayer
wherewith Christ being put on the Cross prayed his eternal Father for the
sin of them that crucified him, saying, Father, forgive them, for they know
not what they do. Luke 23 34. And considering that which S. Paul says of the
wise men of the world; For if they had known it, they would never have
crucified the Lord of glory; 1. Cor. 2.8. I gather three Principles, from which
I understand all the errors which men do against God through ignorance, do
proceed. The first is Malice. The second is Inconsiderateness. The third is
Incredulity. In this manner from S. Paul's standing in unbelief, from his not
believing that Christ was the Son of God, that he was the promised Messiah in
the Law, that he died for the sins of every one, that he was raised up for
the resurrection of every one, and that he was glorified for the glorification
of every one, it proceeded, that he persecuted and slew them that did believe
and preach this, thinking therein to do service to God, as from step to step
others have done with the same intentions which S. Paul did, who as S. Paul
did, have erred and do err against God; not by Inconsiderateness; for he, and
they go with attention to that which they do; nor through Malice; for they do
not hate for their own interest those whom they persecute, but through
Infidelity, because they do not believe in Christ. Whence I understand it
proceeded, that God using mercy with S. Paul gave him to know Christ, and so of
a famous persecutour he became a most famous Preacher; the same mercy and
pardon has been given, as I understand, to all them who have erred as S. Paul
erred. From the Gentiles, who were Ministers and executers of Christ's death,
not considering what they did, proceeded that they erred inconsiderately
killing the innocent, as many Gentiles have erred, who have been the death of
many Christians, not considering what they do. For if they did consider it as
they ought, there is no doubt they would not do it. And therefore because they
err as Beasts, their error is not put to their account. This I believe,
holding for certain that God did hear Christ, when he said, Father, forgive
them, for they know not what they do! And S. Steven, when he said, Lord, lay
not this sin to their charge! From that the Scribes and Pharisees minds stood
full of indignation against Christ, as have been and are from time to time full
of indignation against them that imitate Christ, the minds of those, who being
like unto the Scribes and Pharisees make profession of outward holiness, being
void of the inward, it did proceed, and is come to pass, and goes on
proceeding, that maliciously killing them whom they have known and do know to
be members of Christ, who have been always hated of the Saints of the world,
because they ruin and throw down that sanctity, whereof they make profession.
With them I do not understand that God uses mercy: For they stand not as S.
Paul did, in Incredulity, that is, not incredulity which makes them err, but
their error proceeds from their Malice and Malignity. Nor do I understand that
Christ prayed, nor that his members pray for them; for their error arises not
through Inconsiderateness, but from Malignant depravation. Nay this sin I
understand is that which Christ calls Matthew. 12.21. The sin against the holy
Ghost, which he says, shall not be pardoned, neither in this nor in the other
world. And this sin I understand Saint John calls a sin unto death, John
5.16.

The men who imitating the Scribes and Pharisees, err through ignorance
arising of malice, I understand they have left to be men, and are infernal
spirits.

The men who imitating the Gentiles who killed Christ, err through ignorance
arising from inconsiderateness, I understand they have left to be men, and are
beasts. And the men who imitating S. Paul, err through ignorance bred from
incredulity, are as I understand truly men, to whom incredulity is as proper,
as Inconsideration is proper to Beasts, and as malice is proper to the
infernal spirits. And therefore the error which grows from incredulity and
inconsiderateness without mixture of malice, finds mercy with God, he being
drawn to the faith who erres through ignorance bred of incredulity. Whereupon
if any ask me, saying, Whence do thou think that the Hebrews erring through
ignorance, grew, of which S. Paul says, Romans 20. For being ignorant of the
righteousness of God, and going about to establish their own righteousness
they have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God? I answer him,
that it was bred partly from Malice, and partly from Incredulity, through the
hatred which they bore unto the Gospel. That this is true is proved by this,
that some believed, and others remained in their unbelief. The same I answer to
him that shall demand of me, Whence did proceed, and does proceed the erring
through ignorance in them, of whom Christ says, John 16.2. Every one that
shall kill you, will think that he does God good service? And so much the more,
by how much to me it is proved that S. Paul was one of these, and found mercy:
for his erring through ignorance, grew from incredulity.

In this discourse I learn this; That every man ought to stand on his watch,
not to appassionate himself at any time in the things that appertain to
religion: I mean in defending one thing, and impugning another with passion, to
the end that the passion may not blind him in such manner as he come to err
against God through Ignorance bred of malice.

Further I learn, that a man ought not without due consideration to set himself
to any of those things which shall offer themselves unto him, much less to
those which belong to religion, to the end that he come not to be counted in
the number of Beasts.

Further I learn, that a man who finds himself free from passion and
inconsideration, that he err not against God, ought to acknowledge himself to
be in Incredulity, and so to pray God, that he would free him from it. And in
the mean space he ought to abstain from putting in execution those things which
are in prejudice of his neighbor; (as S. Paul's persecuting the Christians
was,) And then the more, when they shall seem to him more holy, and more just
before God.

And I learn further, that only the regenerated Christian being more then a
man, being gone out of Incredulity, doch not err through Malice,
Inconsideration, or Incredulity, but erring only through frailty, inasmuch as
he has not yet left altogether to be a man, has not as yet altogether
comprehended the Christian perfection, wherein he is comprehended by the
incorporation with which he stands incorporated in the death, in the
resurrection, and in the glorification of the son of God Jesus Christ our
Lord.

CONSID. CVI.
That that which the Scripture calls the knowledge of Good and Evil, the wise
men of the world have called, and do call natural light, Prudence, and humane
reason.

BY that which I read of the Creation, and Depravation of man, I consider that
a man was first created after the image and likeness of God, and was put in
the garden which they call earthly Paradise; and afterward eating of the fruit
of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, lost the image and likeness of God,
and was driven out of the earthly Paradise, remaining with the knowledge of
good and evil: understanding that as it is not natural for a man according to
his first creation to abide out of earthly Paradise, so it is not primarily
natural to him to have the knowledge of good and evil. And by that which I
experiment in the reparation of man in his regeneration and renovation,
considering that for the accepting of the grace of the Gospel, the remission of
sins, and the reconciliation with God by the justice of God executed on
Christ, that so he may enter into the kingdom of God, and to recover the image
and similitude of God, and to have the government of the holy spirit he is
necessitated to captivate his understanding, and to renounce and mortify his
prudence, humane reason, and natural light; I understand that that which holy
Scripture calls the knowledge of good and evil, the wise men of the world have
called and do call natural light, prudence, and humane reason. And so I come
to understand, that a man is necessitated to captivate his understanding, to
mortify his own prudence and natural light, which is the same as to renounce
the knowledge of good and evil, that he may obtain Christian reparation,
regeneration and renovation. For it is a most just thing, that if he be to
recover that which he lost, he should first renounce that which he gained, that
is, if he would recover his spiritual light, he is to renounce his natural
light. And if we grant (as it is necessary to grant by that which we read, and
experiment) that the reparation of our humane nature by Christian regeneration
and renovation, consists in this, that a man accepting the Gospel, and being
incorporated in Christ, goes recovering the being, the degree and dignities, in
which the first man was created; and goes on leaving the being, the degree and
the dignity, in which the first man remained after that he was depraved; It is
likewise necessary, that we should grant, that as that which we gain is not
natural to the being which we now hold, so likewise that which we leave was
not natural to the being which we had according to our first creation. Whereby
we come clearly to understand, that the natural light which we now hold, is
not from our first creation, but from our depravation. And besides this, that
the spiritual light which we gain by Christ, is from our first creation. And
this spiritual light I understand was so natural to a man in his first
creation, as the knowledge of good and evil, and natural light is now natural
unto him. And I suppose, that the first man not acknowledging the spiritual
light for a thing properly his, but communicated to him by the favor of God,
did desire the knowledge of good and evil, pretending that that would be to
him, as it is, natural. And of this knowledge of good and evil, I understand
that a man gets a greater or lesser part, according as he is more or less
purged, and purified in his affections and appetites, which are according to
the flesh. Whence I suppose the wise men of the world have taken occasion to
believe, that the knowledge of good and evil is a spiritual thing, and is of
the first creation of man; not considering that this effect proceeds hence,
that as the knowledge of good and evil, and the natural light is a perfection
of man in the state of his depravation, so the spiritual light was in the
state of his first creation, and is in the state of his reparation.

Against that which has been spoken two things offer themselves: The first,
that by that which S. Paul says, Romans 1. that the Gentiles by their natural
light might have known God, and by that which he says, Romans 5. That they might
have naturally known the will of God, it seems, that the natural light is not
of the state of the depravation of man, but of the state of his first creation.
The second, that it being true, the old Saints as David, and the new Saints as
S, Paul, in that which they have written have served themselves of natural
light, of Prudence and humane reason, it seems that it is not evil, nor that it
ought to be renounced, left and mortified. To the first I understand it may be
answered, that S. Paul willing to convince the Gentiles, inasmuch as they did
excuse themselves, saying that they could not know God, and therefore worshipped
him not; nor could know the will of God, and therefore they had lived
viciously; he shows them, that although they had not had the knowledge of God
to worship him, nor yet of the will of God to obey it, (which knowledge being
by spiritual light was in the first man before his depravation, and abides in
Christians in our reparation,) nor the knowledge which the Hebrews had by their
holy Scriptures; yet, that they having had the knowledge, that can be gotten
with the natural light by the contemplation of the creatures, and by the
testimony of their consciences; and not having done according to that knowledge
and that will of God, they came to be in fault; neither did there remain any
excuse at all to them. So that from the words of Saint Paul it cannot be
gathered, that a Christian man is not to renounce his natural light, but that
the natural light suffices to know God in a certain manner, and to understand
the will of God.

To the second thing I understand it may be answered, that the Saints serve
themselves in their writings of the knowledge of good and evil, in that of
which it is capable; (in which it is also illustrated in them by the spiritual
light) And that they have renounced it, and mortified it in that of which it is
incapable; that is, in the justification by Christ, in the reconciliation with
God, in the regiment and government of the holy Spirit, and generally in all
celestial, spiritual, and divine things. I understand indeed that the
happiness and perfection of a man, would be much more greater, if that the
knowledge of good and evil were totally extinct, and dead, and the spiritual
light were totally kindled, and alive in them. But I understand, that the flesh
as it is passible and mortal, is not a subject fit for so great felicity. And
I understand that this shall be after the resurrection, when it shall have
obtained impassibility and immortality; in the mean time it is necessary, that
the Saints should serve themselves with the knowledge of good and evil, and
with natural light, because they converse, and deal together with men, who
serve themselves with the same knowledge, and with the same light, following in
that the counsel of Christ, be you wise as serpents, Matthew. 20. and that which
Saint Paul says, be you wise in understanding, 1. Cor. 14.

Here two things offer themselves unto me:

The first, because the knowledge of good and evil, the natural light,
prudence and humane reason are in a man through his disobedience to God, and
are in the state of depravation, it comes to pass that this knowledge, this
light, and this prudence never give man true felicity, nay rather as Solomon
affirms, Ecclesiastes 1.18. As science, light and wisdom increase, so
affliction, anguish and sorrow increase; and therefore felicity decreaseth.

The second, considering that Adam before he had the knowledge of good and
evil, was not ashamed to stand naked; and after he had the knowledge of good
and evil, was ashamed and clothed himself; I come to understand, that whilst a
man has the spiritual light, and serves himself thereof, he knows no defect
in any of the works of God, nor does pretend to correct and amend them. And
whilst he has the knowledge of good and evil, and serves himself thereof, he
knows defects in the works of God, and pretends to correct and amend them; such
is the arrogance of men, who glory to have the knowledge of good and evil, to
have much natural light, much prudence, and much humane reason. And such is
the humility of the men which have the spiritual light, that they look upon
all the works of God, and acknowledge them to be most perfect, holy and good;
these are they who stand in the kingdom of God, standing by the faith of the
Gospel, incorporated in the son of God Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. CVII.
In what manner from a man's not knowing himself, nor God, there is caused in
him an impossibility in accepting the grace of the Gospel.

BY how much the more I set my self profoundly to consider the benefit of
Christ, considering that it is in all, and upon all them that accept it, so
much the more do I marvel, that all men run not after it, and embrace it,
and set it in their hearts; there being offered unto them by way of gift, the
remission of their sins, reconciliation with God, and consequently
immortality, and life with Christ; And having set my self many times to
consider whence it may proceed, that all they who have knowledge of this most
singular grace, do not accept it; I understand, that it proceeds from a man's
not knowing either himself or God. And in effect it comes to pass, that man
not knowing in himself the impiety, malignity and rebellion, which are natural
in him through original sin, he does not distrust himself to be able of
himself to satisfy God, and to be just before God. In the same manner it comes
to pass, that man not knowing in God bounty, mercy and fidelity, does not
trust in God, and so cannot persuade himself, nor secure himself in his mind,
that the justice of God appertains to him, that God accepts him for just by
reason of that which Christ suffered. And if a man knew himself, considering
himself impious, malignant and rebellious, not only of himself, but being as
he is the son of Adam, he would distrust himself to be able of himself to
justify himself. And if he knew God, knowing in him bounty, mercy and
fidelity, he would easily trust himself of him, accepting the pardon which the
Gospel offers him; and so much the more, as knowing himself it would not seem
strange to him, that God should pardon him without his own merit, the evils and
inconveniences wherein he knows himself to have fallen, partly without his own
proper fault, and partly with his own proper fault, bred, and derived from that
of others: with which as I understand David excused his sin, saying behold I
was shapen in wickedness, and in sin has my mother conceived me; whence I
understand, that as it is impossible that a man not knowing himself, nor
knowing God, should accept the grace of the Gospel, and should secure himself
with it, so it is impossible, that a man knowing himself, and knowing God,
should pretend, or think to justify himself by his own proper works, or to
avoid the evil, or to apply himself to the good. And if one shall say unto me,
How then did the Hebrew Saints who knew themselves and knew God, pretend to
Justify themselves with the sacrifices which the law commands? I will answer,
that the Hebrew saints did not place their justifications in their sacrifices,
but in the word of God which promised to pardon them, they making those
sacrifices. And here I understand, that it was much more difficult to the
Hebrew saints, because they knew themselves, and knew God, to reduce
themselves, and to hold themselves for just, sacrificing; then it is for the
Christian saints, who know themselves, and know God, to reduce and hold
themselves for just, believing, and accepting the grace of the Gospel. Inasmuch
as it is most certain, that the Hebrew saints in sacrificing knew that they
gave unto God, that which they themselves out of their natural inclination did
delight to give him, and that which they knew is not pleasing in it self, or
for it self, nor contents God, as is proved by many things which we read in the
old holy Scripture, and is particularly in the 40. and 51. Psalms, and Isaiah.
And inasmuch also as it is most certain and true, that the Christian Saints
believing, know that they give unto God that which by their natural
inclination they would not give, and that which God delights, and would should
be given unto him, as is proved by all the Scripture. Whence I take this
resolution, that the men who in the time of the Gospel pretend to justify
themselves by working, give testimony of themselves, that they know not
themselves nor God. And they who pretend to be just by believing, give
testimony of themselves, that they know themselves and know God. Whereupon
remembering my self of a comparison which I have written, That God did with the
Hebrew people giving them a ceremonious law, that which a Merchant does
departing for the Levant, and doubting of the chastity of his wife, knowing her
inclined to compose sonnets, and canzons, he enjoins her every day to write him
a sonnet on some of those things passed between them, albeit he delights not in
sonnets. And considering, that to the Hebrews, who knew not themselves nor God,
that came to pass which might have come to pass to the Merchants wife, in
case that not knowing her own inclination, nor that of her husbands, she should
think to justify her self with him giving him sonnets, having lost her
chastity; and considering that to the Hebrews who knew themselves and knew God,
that came to pass, which might have come to pass to the same woman, in case
that she knowing her own inclination, and that of her husbands, should pretend
in making sonnets to obey her husband, and not to wander out or exercise her
self in other matters in dishonor of her husband; I come to know the exceeding
great inconvenience wherein they remain, who in the time of the Gospel pretend,
and suppose to justify themselves by works; yea, and by works which are not
commanded them: forasmuch as they cannot pretend obedience, as the Hebrew
saints did, which obedience was imputed to them for righteousness, and held
them united with God without committing adultery against God, as they who
neither knowing themselves, nor knowing God, did pretend to justify themselves
by sacrificing.

In this discourse I learn two most important things.

The first is, that since it is true, that God demands not now of men that they
should sacrifice, demanding of them that they should believe, that they should
accept the grace, the remission of sins, and the reconciliation with God
which the Gospel offers them, showing unto them how that God having put on
Christ the sins of all men, he has punished them all in him, and so his
justice rests satisfied: The man how much soever a sinner and wicked he be,
who shall not hold himself pardoned and reconciled with God, and so for just;
shall by this give testimony of himself, that he knows not God, since he does
not trust himself on his word, and that he does not know Christ, since he does
not stand assured that he is just in Christ. And if such a man shall pretend to
justify himself by works, he shall give testimony of himself, that he does not
know the natural inclination of man; in such sort, that either I must know my
self to be just in Christ, although I know my self a sinner in my self, or I
ought to deny that which the Gospel affirms, that God in Christ has punished
the sins and iniquities of all men, and mine together with them; or else I am
constrained to say, that God is unjust, punishing sins twice, once in Christ,
and another time in me. And because to say this would be impiety, and to deny
the other would be incredulity, it remains, that I enforce my self to account
my self pardoned, and reconciled with God, and so for just in Christ,
subjecting the natural light to the spiritual.

The second thing which I learn is, that it being true, that the impossibility
which is in man to accept this holy Gospel of Ghrist, proceeds from a man's not
knowing himself, nor knowing God, it belongs to every man to apply himself in
good earnest to know himself and his own natural inclination, taking it even
from Adam; and to know God, taking for his principal application continual
prayer, praying God affectionately and fervently, that he would open the eyes
of his mind in such manner, that he may come to these acknowledgements, and
praying him that has begun to open them, that he would every day more and more
open them. And in this manner if he shall not have begun to accept the holy
Gospel of Christ, yet in going on to take away the impossibility, he shall
begin to accept it; and if he shall have begun to accept it, the difficulty
which he finds in accepting it being taken away, he will accept it more and
better, faith being efficacious in him to mortify him, and to make him alive,
with which things the Christian faith is confirmed in us, which is the
foundation in that most divine confession of Saint Peter, Matthew. 16.16. when he
said unto Christ, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God, to whom be glory
for ever Amen.

CONSID. CVIII.
In what manner the evil of Adams disobedience appertains to us all: and the
good of Christ's obedience reaches unto us all.

BY that which I read in holy Scripture, and by that which I know in my self, I
understand, that for to come to believe the good of Christ's obedience, and that
in Christ's obedience we all obeyed, and that in Christ's raising up we all
arose; it is convenient and necessary to believe the disobedience of Adam, and
that Adam disobeying we all disobeyed, and that in Adams dying we all dyed. I
say it is necessary for every man to believe the evil of Adam, that he may come
to believe the good of Christ. For I understand that it is impossible that a
man should believe the good of Christ, if he do not believe the evil of Adam.
Inasmuch as not believing it he shall not feel it, and not feeling it he shall
not desire it, nor procure to free himself from it, and not desiring not
procuring it, he will never come to believe the good of Christ, which is the
proper medicine against the evil of Adam. But if he believe the evil of Adam,
together with the believing it, he will feel it, finding himself in himself
impious, unfaithful, and the enemy of God; and as he shall know himself to be
come into such impiety, and infidelity, and enmity without his own proper
fault, so he will easily reduce himself to believe to be able to come unto
piety, fidelity, and friendship without his own proper merit; whereupon he will
believe the good of Christ, and believing it he will feel it, feeling himself
more faithful, and more the friend of God in Christ; and then shall know with
effect, that as the evil of Adams disobedience, whilst he did not believe, and
not believing it did not feel it, was effectual to make him by his own fault
more impious, more unfaithful, and more the enemy of God: so the good of the
obedience of Christ is in the same manner efficacious, whilst he believes it,
and whilst believing it he feels it, to make him in himself more faithful,
and more the friend of Christ. Whence I understand, that as they who believe
the evil of Adam, do free themselves from it, and they who believe the good of
Christ, do enjoy it: so they who do not believe the evil of Adam, do not free
themselves from it, and they who do not believe the good of Christ, do not
enjoy it. It is very true, that as they who believe the evil of Adam and the
good of Christ, pass through the evil of Adam, and the good of Christ is in
part suspended in them: so they who do not believe neither the evil of Adam nor
the good of Christ, pass through the good of Christ, and the evil of Adam is
suspended in them. Inasmuch as they who believe, pass through the miseries of
this present life, and through death, which are things of the evil of Adam;
whilst they stand in this present life, and whilst their bodies abide in the
sepulchers, the good of Christ is in part suspended in them. And as they who do
not believe, pass in this present life through the good of Christ, enjoying
many things together with them that believe the good of Christ; and in eternal
life because they shall be raised up, the evil of Adam shall be suspended in
them: so I understand as the evil of Adam was efficacious to make us all die,
from which death notwithstanding they who believe are free; so the good of
Christ is efficacious to raise us all up; of which Resurrection notwithstanding
they shall have no joy, who do not believe, because they shall not be in good
estate therein. In Adam we all die, in Christ we all arise, 1. Cor. 15.22. And
in the evil of Adam shall they all remain, who shall not accept the good of
Christ. But in the good of Christ none shall remain, but only they who have
believed him, and shall have accepted and felt it. For in effect the
Resurrection of Christ shall not be glorious, but only for them, who believing
themselves to be dead in Adam, and raised up in Christ, shall give themselves
to live in this present life, as dead and raised up, beginning even now to live
a life much like unto that, which they have to live in life everlasting; so
that as the Vivification is an imperfect Resurrection, so the Christian living
in the state of this Vivification is imperfect, albeit in respect of the living
in the state of Depravation it is most perfect. And the draught of living in
the state of the Resurrection, inasmuch as it is imitable in the state of
vivification, we see in Jesus Christ our Lord in his purity, bounty, fidelity,
obedience and charity. And here I learn two things. The one, that since a man
believing the evil of Adam, frees himself from it, and believing the good of
Christ, enjoyes it; it belongs to every one to believe this evil, and this
good, not expecting for all that to feel it, that he may believe it; for this
were to pervert the order which God has set, who will that we shall believe
before we feel; but believing that he may feel it: For believing together both
the evil and the good, the efficacy of the good will deprive us of the feeling
of the evil, in this present life in part, and altogether in life eternal;
inasmuch as we shall be then altogether free from the evil of Adam, and
altogether intent to enjoy the good of Christ. The other thing which I here
learn, is, that they who in this present life do not give themselves to live as
dead and raised up, imitating the life of Christ, do not believe that they dyed
in Adam, and that they rose again in Christ, how much soever they say and
affirm that they believe both the one and the other. For if they did believe
them, there is no doubt but they would apply themselves to live as dead and
raised up, this being properly the efficacy of Faith, to reduce by little and
little them that believe themselves in truth to be dead in Adam and raised up
in Christ, to live as dead and as raised up; not because they intend to become
just, but because they do now know and feel themselves just in Christ, and
because they hope for the crown of justice, that is, immortality and life
eternal. And here I will add this, that as the acceptance of the indulgence,
which a King makes unto them that being fled for some excess out of his
kingdom, and remain in the service of another King, is efficacious to make
them leave the strange kingdom, and the service of the strange king, and
return to their own kingdom, to serve their own King: so the acceptance of
the Gospel is efficacious to make, that all men who accept it, leaving the
kingdom of the world, and the service of the world, should come unto the
kingdom of God, and to the service of God: and that leaving to live according
to the flesh, they should live according to the spirit: so that they who leave
not the kingdom of the world, and the service of the world, and the living
according to the flesh; give testimony of themselves, that they have not well
accepted the Gospel, how much soever they say they believe it, no otherwise
then they who do not leave the strange kingdom, and the service of the strange
King, returning into their own kingdom, to serve their own king; give
testimony of themselves, that they do not accept the indulgence of their King,
how much soever they say they accept it, and believe it, since they do not the
will of the king, which would the same from them, which God would from us; that
is, that we should leave the kingdom of the world, and the service of the
world, and that we should come unto the kingdom of God to serve God in
holiness and righteousness, and in the Gospel of his only begotten son
Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. CIX.
The knowledge which as a Christian I ought to have of Christ, and of them who
are the members of Christ.

DEsiring to resolve my self in the knowledge which as a Christian I ought to
have of Christ, I consider in him two generations, the one divine, and the
other humane: and two times, the one of shame, and the other of glory.
According to the divine generation I know that Christ is the word of God, the
son of God, of the same substance with the Father, and one and the same with
him, so like unto him that he might well say to Philip, Philip, he that sees
me, sees my Father also, John 14. This as I understand is that Word with which
God created all things according as Moses says, God said Let there be light;
And according to that which David says, by the word of the Lord were the
Heavens made. Psalm. 33.6. With this word, I understand that God maintains all
things, conformable to that, In him was life, John 1. And to that, Upholding
all things by the word of his power. Hebrews 1. This word I understand, by the
work of the holy spirit in the womb of the most holy Virgin, God clothed with
flesh, with intent to repair all things by him, as he made all things by him,
and maintains all things with him. And I understand that this word of God, as
Isaiah says, chap. 53. was prosperous in Christ; inasmuch as that came to
pass, which God intended in him, and by him. And so I understand, that it is
one and the self same word, that of which S. John says, In the beginning was
the word, and the word was with God, and the word was God: and more beneath,
And the word was made flesh: and that which S. Paul says Col. 1. For by him
all things were created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth. But setting
my self to search in what thing this divine generation of the son of God, of
the Word of God does consist, in what manner the son is generated of the
father, for what cause the Word is called the Son, and the Son is called
the Word, I find my self so incapable of this knowledge, that I anew confirm my
self in that which I have written in the 95. Consideration; That as the worms
which are bred of the corruption of the earth, are altogether incapable of the
manner by which one man is generated by another; even so the men who are
generated by carnal generation, are altogether incapable, not only of the
manner how the Son of God was generated, but also of the manner how the sons
of God are regenerated by the holy spirit of God. And if I should understand in
what manner Moses, and David, and Saint John, and Saint Paul understood it,
that God created all things by his word, I should also understand this divine
secret, which I go searching out. Wherein I go considering the power, wherewith
Christ also in his humble state did that which he would, being suddenly obeyed
by his creatures, none of them giving any further impediment, then was granted
unto them. If it shall please God, that I be capable of this divine secret,
before I go out of this present life, I will also adjoyn that here which he
shall teach me to his glory, and the glory of Christ, and the good of those who
are the sons of God in Christ, and through Christ. Otherwise I will content
my self with this; for I am sure, that I shall see with these corporal eyes in
life eternal, that which at present I desire to see with the eyes of my mind.
And in the mean space I rejoice in this, that at present I know that this Word
of God, this son of God, with whom and by whom God has created, and repaired
all things, is of the self same substance of the Father, and one self same
thing with him, and is eternal as he is. I understand, that the holy spirit
accommodating it self to our incapacity, speaking with us, uses these words
used amongst us, such as are word and son, not to the end, and by them we
should comprehend the divine secret, but because we may have some name to
express him by. According to this divine generation I understand, that Christ
is the first begotten son of God by his eternity, that he was always the
Son, and that he is the only begotten son of God by his singularity, that
he is only the Son by generation, all others that are sons being sons by
regeneration. For what belongs to the divine generation of Christ, I understand
that in him was neither diminution, nor augmentation. He was the same before
his incarnation, that he was in his incarnation, and that he is in his
glorification.

According to the humane generation I understand, that Christ by the work of
the holy spirit was generated in the womb of the most holy Virgin, in what
manner I know not, to me it suffices to know, that the flesh with which the
Word of God clothed it self in this world, was taken from that most holy
Virgin, and according to this flesh I know Christ for the Son of David and of
Abraham. And I see now in part fulfilled in him, the promises of God made unto
David, Psalm. 89.34.35. as much as belongs to the perpetuity of the Kingdom in
his seed; and those made unto Abraham, Genes. 13.16. and chap. 22.17. as much as
belongs to the multiplication of his seed, and as much as belongs to the
inheritance of the world. And I exspect to see them entirely complete in life
eternal, the resurrection of the just being made.

According to this humane generation I know in Christ two times: the one of
shame, and the other of glory. In the time of his shame I know him a man
passible and mortal, with all the miseries which being annexed unto
passibility and mortality, do grow in man that lives in poverty. And I know him
with flesh like unto mine, saving that his was not sinful flesh, nor flesh
subject unto sin as mine is. In this time I know Christ most humble and most
meek, he esteeming himself for that which he was, in that being in which he
stood clothed with flesh, as one disguised amongst men, that he might be
handled of men as a man. In this self same time I know Christ most obedient to
his eternal father, most clean from all sin, and therefore most just, and
most holy; in such manner as he might securely say to them who persecuted him
and calumniated him, Who of you can convince me of sin? Joh. 8. And S. Paul
speaking of him might well say, (2. Cor. 5.21.) He who knew no sin. And S.
Peter 1.2. Who did no sin nor was any guile found in his mouth. And of this
innocence of Christ all the Scriptures are full, as of a most necessary thing
to be understood of all them who know themselves just in him, and by him.

In the time of glory I know Christ a man impassible and immortal, and I know
him most glorious and most triumphant, as he who has gotten absolute power in
heaven and in earth, having obtained the kingdom of God, and the inheritance
of God for Gods elect, having slain all of them in him, raised them all up in
him, and glorified them all in him: and so that comes to be true of them, which
is of him. In this time I know Christ for Lord, for Head, and for King of the
people of God, of the Church of God, and of the elect of God. I know Christ for
Lord of the elect of God, because he has redeemed them with his precious
blood, delivering them from sin, from hell, and from death, in which things
the first man had set them, and unto which things he had obliged and made them
subject. And because the Apostles in their writings do joy to call Christ Holy,
they know Christ for the Head of the Church of God: For God having put in him
his holy Spirit with all the treasures of his divinity, he communicates and
distributes them most liberally to those who being incorporated in him,
appertain to the Church of God, to every one according to his capacity, doing
with them that which my head does with my body: that as my hand if it could
speak, would say and affirm, that it feels that from my head there descends a
vital virtue, by means whereof it lives; so every one of those who being
incorporated in Christ are of the Church of God, because he can speak, says
and affirms, that he feels that from Christ there comes unto him a spiritual
virtue, by means whereof he lives a spiritual life. This S. John thus
understood, (chap. 1.16.) when he said. For of his fullness have we all
received, and grace for grace: and so S. Paul understood it, Coloss. 1.18. For
it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell. I know Christ for
King in the people of God; for I understand that he is he who with his spirit
rules and governs it, not only in inward things and divine, as Head, but also
as God: and in outward and corporal things, as King. In all which things being
as they are the sons of God, as Saint Paul says, Romans 8, 14. they are led by
the Spirit of God. And so I understand that the kingdom of God is not called
the spiritual kingdom, because he governs us in spiritual things; but
because governing us in spiritual and corporal things he does not govern us
with the outward law, but with the inward law, which is the government of the
Holy Spirit and the Christian spirit. Of this kingdom of Christ the holy
Scriptures are full. Esaias. 5. Mic. 5. Daniel. 7. By which I understand that in
this present life God reigns, but by Christ; and that in life eternal God
shall reign, but by himself only: For then he shall be all in all. 1. Cor. 15.

In this manner I know Christ glorious for King of the people of God, for Head
of the Church of God, and for Lord of the Elect of God. And I know Christ
humble, most innocent and free from all sin, and abounding in all justice:
And I know fullfilled in him in part the promises of God made to David, and to
Abraham. And I know him for the Son of God firstborn, and only begotten and
I know that he is the Word of God with which God created all things; and I know
him eternal and consubstantiall. And I hold for certain, that as the Christian
faith shall go on being in me more efficacious, mortifying me and quickening
me: so these knowledges of Christ shall go on being more clear, and more
distinct, by which I shall go on from day to day, always more knowing God as
he may be known, whilst this flesh being passible and mortal, is not a
subject to see Christ, and to see God face to face, as I shall see him in life
eternal.

Having taken this resolution in the knowledge which I ought to have of Christ,
I go resolving my self in the knowledge that I ought to have of them who are
the members of Christ, considering every one of them a Son of God; not
firstborn as Christ, who always was a Son, but an adopted Son by Christ,
and in Christ; not begotten as Christ, who is the son by generation, but
regenerated by Christ and in Christ, born the son of wrath, and reborn the
son of God; not in the state of glorification, in which Christ is, but in the
state of opprobry, in which Christ was; not Lord of Gods elect, but one of the
number of them, who being elected of God are the servants of Christ, redeemed
and bought by Christ; not head of the Church of God as Christ, but a member of
the Church of God, of which Christ is the head; not King of the people of God
as Christ, but governed by the spirit of Christ, by means of which spirit I
know that all the members of Christ stand united amongst themselves, and united
with Christ himself, and therefore united also with God, God abiding in them,
and they in God. And so I see fullfilled that Prayer, which Christ made unto
his Father for this union ( John 17.) saying, That they may be one in us. And I
understand, that in this union consists all the christian perfection. I pray
God, that he do in such manner imprint this in my memory, that it may not sever
it self, or depart from it, not so much as for one moment, to the intent that I
never may do any thing which shall not be worthy of this union, which I
acknowledge from my Christ who is my Lord, my Head, and my King. To him be
glory with the Father, and the holy spirit. Amen.

CONSID. CX.
That the principal gifts are not understood, until they be possessed.

A Most great testimony of Christian life is this, that according as a
christian man goes perfecting himself in his christian customs, so he goes
clearing himself in his christian conceptions. Nay I hold for certain, that the
selfsame christian spirit which goes perfecting him in his customs, goes
clarifying him in his conceptions; insomuch that it can be hardly understood,
whether the clarification in the conceptions comes from the perfection in the
customs, or the perfections in the customs come from the clarification in the
conceptions. And therefore it is sure to say, that both the one, and the other
comes from the christian spirit, which does marvellously work both the one and
the other in them who accept the Gospel of Christ. This I have said to this
purpose, that I having understood that the christian business is not science,
but experience, and having by many comparisons procured to make some persons
capable of this truth, I have never remained satisfied in my mind; in such
manner that it seemed to me that I had expressed after mine own manner my
conceit, until now that having in mine own judgment comprehended it with more
clearness, it seems to me that I am able to express it better. And so I say,
that between the believing, and accepting the christian things, Faith, Hope and
Charity, with humane wit, or with a christian spirit; I know the difference,
which I know between accepting, and approving those three moral virtues,
Magnanimity, Valor and Liberality, and having them indeed. I say, that as
there be men, who hearing others speak of these three moral virtues, and of
the perfection of them, albeit they do not know them in themselves, yet do
approve them and accept them for good: so there be also of those men who
hearing speak of those three gifts of God, Faith, Hope and Charity, and of the
perfection, and efficacy of them; albeit they do not know them in themselves,
yet they do approve them and accept them for good, believing that they who
accept the grace of the Gospel, do enjoy the remission of sins, and the
reconciliation with God through Christ, and approving the hope with which they
expect the felicity of eternal life, and the love with which they love God
above every thing, and they love their neighbor as themselves. And I say
further, that as whilst they, who approve those three moral virtues not
possessing them, albeit they willingly hear talk of them, through the desire
which they have to possess them; yet it is not so much as that it gives them
entire satisfaction: nay rather, when they look upon themselves, and find
themselves without them, they grieve themselves, and are malecontent, and so
much the more as it seems to them that the virtues are more perfect, because
they do more loose the hope of being able to obtain them: so likewise they, who
approve these three gifts of God not possessing them, albeit they rejoice to
hear speak of them, through the desire which they have to possess them; yet
is it not so much as that it gives them entire satisfaction: nay rather, when
they look upon themselves, and find themselves without them, they grieve
themselves, and stand malecontent, and so much the more as it seems to them
that the gifts are the more perfect, because they so much more loose the hope
of obtaining them. Further I say, that as when it should happen, that those men
who approve the three morrall virtues not possessing them, should come to
possess them, knowing themselves magnanimous, valiant, and liberal; they
would affirm that they never well understood what thing these three virtues
were, and would after a much other manner rejoice to hear speak of them,
knowing them to be in themselves: and albeit it would grieve them when they
knew themselves imperfect in them, yet it would not grieve them that they
should be so perfect as they are. So likewise when it befalls that the men who
approve the three gifts of God not possessing them come to possess them,
because God gives them unto them, knowing themselves endued with Faith, with
Hope, and with Charity, they affirm that they never well understood what these
three gifts of God were, and do most fully rejoice and satisfy themselves to
hear speak of them; and so much the more, inasmuch as they speak more highly
of them, because they know them in themselves. And albeit they are sorry, and
grieve themselves, when looking upon themselves they know themselves imperfect
in them, yet it grieves them not that they be so perfect as they are; nay
rather they are content, and (if it were possible,) they would add unto them
much more perfection. So much is the satisfaction which they find in believing,
hoping, and loving. In this manner I understand, that as none is capable of
knowing what it is to be magnanimous, or valiant, or liberal, but only he who
has magnanimity, valor, and liberality: so none is capable of knowing what
Believing, Hoping, and Loving are, but he who through the Christian spirit has
the gift of Faith, Hope, and Charity. And so it comes to pass to be so true,
that a man may as it were touch it with his hand, That spiritual and Christian
gifts are not understood until they be possessed.

In this discourse I understand all this.

First, that it being true, that none are capable of the gifts of God to
understand them, but they only who have them, it appertains to every person
that would understand them, first to demand them of God, and not to think that
he understands them until that he know them, and feel them in himself, as the
magnanimous knows, and feels magnanimity in himself.

Secondly, that they may say that they know, and feel the gifts of God in them,
who find entire satisfaction, when they hear others speak of Christian
matters; and albeit they are sorrowful, and grieve themselves, when they see
themselves imperfect in them; yet they rejoice, and content themselves that
they should be so perfect as they are; considering that by how much they are
the more perfect, by so much the more does the glory of the Gospel of Christ,
and of God come to be illustrated, and so much does the baseness and the
vileness, the infirmity and the weakness of man come to be more known.

Thirdly, that as one in being magnanimous has magnanimity in being valiant
has valor, in being liberal has liberality; so in ones accepting the grace
of the Gospel, he has Faith, and is Just, and in desiring the day of
judgment, has Hope, and is holy; and in Loving God and his neighbors, has
charity, and is pious.

Fourthly, that as the magnanimous does not loose his magnanimity for twice or
thrice falling into pusillanimity, except he neglect himself in such manner
that forgetting to be magnanimous he becomes pusillanimous. And what I say of
the magnanimous, I say of the valiant, and of the liberal. So the just man by
Christian faith does not loose the justice of Christ for committing two or
three iniquities, except he neglect himself in such sort of the Faith, that
forgetting himself of his being just by faith he become unjust. And that which
I say of the Just, I say of the Holy through Hope, and I say of the Pious
through Charity: so if one demand of me saying, whether I believe, that he who
has by the gift of God Faith, Hope and Charity, can come to loose his justice,
his Holiness, and his Piety, which he has gotten with Faith, with Hope, and
with Charity. I say unto him, that if it be possible that he should come to
loose his Faith, his Hope and his Charity, it will be also possible, for him to
loose his Justice, his Holiness and his Piety, these being the effects of
those. And I say unto him, that I hold it for more difficult, that one who has
by the gift of God, Faith, Hope and Charity, should deprave himself in such
manner, that he should loose them, and with them should loose his Justice, his
Holiness, and his Piety; then it is for another, who is by natural gift
magnanimous, valiant, and liberal, to come to make himself so pusillanimous,
so fearful; and so covetous, that he should loose his magnanimity, valor, and
liberality. And I will say moreover unto him, that as it is a secure thing for
the magnanimous, valiant, and liberal to live upon his guard, suspecting
himself, that if he should grow negligent, he might come to loose his
magnanimity, his valor, and his liberality: so likewise is it a secure thing
for the Just, Holy, and Pious to live upon his guard, suspecting himself, that
if he should grow negligent, he might come to loose Faith, Hope and Charity,
and with them Justice, Holiness, and Piety. It is very true, that I shall hold
him for much more secure, who by the inward spirit shall be assured that he can
by no means come to loose his Justice, his Holiness and his Piety, then that
other, that always lives upon his watch suspicious of himself. For I
understand that the security which is divine, mortifies, and kills all the
desires of sinning, as that which is humane quickens them, and kindles them.
And I understand also, that the suspecting, which is as it were a fearing, even
when it is of the holy spirit, being a thing proper to the Hebrews, is a thing
of imperfect Christians; it being proper to the perfect Christians who have
much Faith, much Hope and much Charity, to say with S, Paul, who shall separate
us from the love of Christ? Romans 8.

Here I will add this. That as Liberality is so annexed to Magnanimity, that
he cannot be magnanimous that is not liberal; so Hope and Charity are so
annexed unto Faith, that it is impossible that he should have Faith, who has
not Hope, and Charity; it being also impossible that one should be just without
being Holy and Pious. But of these Christian verities they are not capable, who
have not experience in Christian matters, which they only have, who by the
gift of God, and by the benefit of Christ have Faith, Hope, and Charity, and so
are Pious, Holy, and Just in Christ, and do attend to comprehend that Piety,
that Justice, and that Holiness, in which they are comprehended, being like
unto God, and to the Son of God Jesus Christ our Lord, AMEN.

FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Index, directing to the chief matters contained in this Book.
The number denotes the page.
A
HOw Adams disobedience pertains to all, 416 The evil by Adam must be believed,
before we can believe the good by Christ, ibid. Sons of Adam who, 5, 6. and how
they govern themselves both for the recovering and conserving of bodily and
spiritual health, 7 Of spiritual Adversity, and prosperity, and how we are to
behave our selves in both, 143 In what the liveliness of Affections consists,
100 and when it is hurtful, ibid. when and why it is more hurtful then the
liveliness of the appetites, 101. why, and how the affections are to be
mortified, 103, 104 See Mortification and Appetites. How to behave our selves
in outward afflictions, 47 In what the agony of Christ did properly consist,
299 Ambition, what and how pernicious, 188 there is a twofold ambition of
growing, and maintaining, both must be left, ibid. Of Angels good and bad: See
Spirits. In what the liveliness of the Appetites consists, and when it is
hurtful, 100. See Mortification and affections. Assurance, vid. Security. All
Gods attributes redound to the believers benefit, 34
B
THe faithful were not called Christians till they were baptized, 60. Who
only at first would be baptized, and why none else, 59. How we dye to the
world and live to God by baptism, 60. Our profession made in baptism is to be
observed, else baptism is fruitless, 62. The ends, of Baptism, 60. How and
why Baptism becomes efficacious in children, before th y come to years of
discretion, 394. How Noah's ark was a figure of Baptism 395. We must secure our
selves in the judgment of God with the remembrance of our Bap isme, ibid. When
we are to assure our selves that we are really and indeed baptized; 396 Two
sorts of Christian b^lievers, one easy, the other hard to believe matters of
religion, the causes of both, and in what the ones estate is better then the
other, 30, 96, 380 Believers by opinion and relation, 374, 377. by inspiration
and revelation 381. which Believerss have true peace of conscience and which
not. ibid. Whence difficulty of believing proceeds in all men 382 Impious men
cannot believe, and why so, 381. Why men either will not believe or believe
with d^fficulty that all our sins were pun shed in Christ, 374 Pardon
general is believed with most difficulty, 43, 131 132, 374. Provision for our
bodily sustentation is hardlier believed then for our spiritual and why so.
44, 45. we ought to depend on God alike for both, 47. See Faith. Our benefit by
Christ pertains to our body as well as to our souls, 179, 180
C
CEremonious persons are severe and rigorous, and why so, 243 Charity in what
it consists. 246 its eminency above faith and hope, ibid. Christ's agony, what
299. Benefit by Christ set forth by an apt similitude, 111. Why it is not
accepted of all, 4^9. Before we can believe it we must feel the evil of Adam,
416. It is suspended in part till the resurrection, 418. What it is to the
creatures, 388. It pertains to our bodies as well as to our souls, 179, 180.
Ends of Christ's coming in the flesh, 24. How Christ is the head of the Church,
268, 269. How Christ is to be imitated, 225 What form of life Christ took upon
him, 329 And why such a form was necessary, 318 It showed the way of
mortification, 329 Two generations in Christ, divine and humane, and how we are
to conceive of both, 421 How Christ's obedience reaches to all, 416. Christ's
full satisfaction set forth, 376. how we are to conceive of the members of
Christ, 429. Christ the word, 422. Two times in Christ, viz. opprobry and
glory, and how we are to conceive of him in both, 425 The Christian cross
what, 225 In what the whole Christian duty consists, 53. In what the Christian
perfection duly and decorum do consist, 180, 181. How a true Christian life is
to be attained, and wherein it consists, 53 59. A great testimony of a
Christian life, 430. Christian profiting is known by being solicited to doubt,
389. When Christian suffering is most acceptable, 346. The faithful were not
called Christians till they were baptized, 60. True Christians are merciful
and pitiful, 214 Christianity how esteemed at first, and how since. 59 Church,
Christ is the head thereof, 268 What Conceit we are to have of Christ and his
members, 421, 425, 429 Condemnation why attributed to infidelity, why to evil
works, 369 Confidence in prayer, 234. how it is required and why, 141 Three
sorts of Conscience, 1. By natural law: 2. By written law: 3. By the Gospel,
351. How strongly Conscience contradicts the belief of forgiveness of sins
against Scripture and continual preaching, 375, 376. Peace of Conscience how
hardly attained, 374 Consideration with precedent prayer, a special means for
right interpreting the Scripture, 192 Three Covenants between God and man in
Christ, 24. Humane wisdom is incapable of these Covenants and why so, 25. What
benefits we do and shall enjoy by believing these Covenants, 27 The Creatures
execute Gods general will, 136. As the Creatures were marred by man's fall, so
they shall be repaired in man's reparation, 317 The Christian Cross what, 225
when a man is truly said to take up his Cross, 55 Curiosity, how pernicious it
is, 197. The holy Scripture must be read without it, ib. What desires of
knowledge are curious. 320, 356
D
HOw Damnation is attributed sometimes to infedelity sometimes to evil works
368 Whence the fear of death in godly men proceeds, and the desire of it in
some estranged from piety, 149. How it tyrannizeth over worldly men, 227. Our
benefit by Christ's death, 303 Denial of our selves, See self. Depravation of
man, it is twofold, natural and acquisite, 18. 305, How both are repaired, 19.
306. And discovered by Gods written law, 24. In what man's Depravation consists,
7^. 305. How general and great it is and how restrained, 190. Humane wisdom
knows only the acquisite Depravation 305 The effects of man's disobedience to
God, 37. How Adams disobedience pertains to all, 416 Devil, See evil spirits.
The Devils tyranny, 1^7 Who are solicited in doubt, and who not, 3^9. To be
solicited to doubt, is a sign of Christian profiting, ibid. Remedies against
being solicited to doubt, 39^
E
A Good sign of Election, 258 Errors, See sin^es and ignorance. Those Errors
that men pretending piety run into are very dangerous, 285 How far the
examples of Saints do help us in the Christian way. 154 Christian experience,
233, 385 430. 431. In spiritual things it is the chief thing, 193, 233, 386 It
confirms faith, and how, 385. When a man has experience of what he believes,
386 The Christian business consists not in knowledge but experience, and why
so, 199, 203, 430.
F
FAith in what it consists, 114 243, 385. Where^n its efficacy is seen. 420. A
particular revelation from God necessary to it, 25. Two parts of it, viz. to
believe, and to have confidence, 244. Man of h mself capable of the former not
of the latter ibid. Of fai h had by relation and revelation, 124 Four chief
objects of faith in respect of Christ 26, 27. Our faith is proportionable to
our knowledge of God and Christ, 239 Defect of faith is in the best, which they
ought to acknowledge and the Devils policy in keeping them from this
acknowledgement 240 Hindrances of fai h 13, 14, 2^4. Helps to it, 384. It is
confirmed by experience, 385. How salvation is attributed to faith and good
works, 369. See Belief. How the things that come to us by Gods favor are known
338 Flesh, what Saint Paul understands by it. 87. All works of it offend God
and why, ibid. The tyranny of it, 227 How it is to be mortified 203 The effects
of them that live according to it, 279. Some fruits of it in novices in Christ,
seem to be fruits of the spirit, 378 Flesh sometimes contradicts flesh, but
always the spirit, 115. See Spirit and works. Man's Freewill consists only in
outward, not in spiritual things, 176
G
TWo generations in Christ, divine and humane, 421. Men cannot understand the
divine generation of the Son of God, and why so, 356, 423 Spiritual gifts are
not understood till they be enjoyed, 431 The glory of God and Christ increases
by the recovery of Gods image in man. 3 Why God demands of us what we of our
selves cannot perform, 289. All things are to be attributed to God, and why man
will not yield to this, 168, 248 Man's folly in not believing the Gospel is set
forth by a similitude, 131 Gods free grace in Christ set forth by a similitude,
111. How God tryes our graces, 71 Grief, according to the world, and God, how
known, 282. and the effects of both, ibid.
H
Man's happiness consists in knowing God and Christ, 3 A twofold hatred of God,
viz. general and particular, 78 How the h^alth of the mind is to be restored
and preserved, 64 In what holiness consists, 313 How honor tyrannizeth over
men. 227. It restrains unregenerate men's outrages more then conscience, and why
so, 190 In what hope consists, 246. and How it is preserved, 110 How profitable
humility is to a Christian, 187 We must beware of hypocrites, and how they are
to be known, 157
I
THree kinds of ignorance, 398. which excuse sin, and which do not, 3^9 In what
the Image or likeness of God consists, 2, 252. Man was created after it, 2.
179. 403 how he lost it, 2, 252, 403 How it was in Christ before his death, and
how after his resurrection, 2. How far it is recovered by the regenerate in
this life, 2, 180. They shall fully recover it in life eternal, 2, 180. A
Christians chief exercise in this life ought to be to recover the image of God,
ibid. and how a man may help himself therein, 181, 404. What was that image of
God which man pretended unto and the effects thereof, 252. They only which
have the image of Christ know God and Christ 4. See more in the 72. and 106.
Considerations. A man by imitation of Christ obtains piety, justice, and
holiness, 55, 317. Christian perfection obtained by it, 332 Why and how Christ
is to be imitated, 225, 331, 335 Signs of impiety, 69 Who are impious, 380.
The impious cannot believe and why, 381 Incorporation in Christ only
mortifies, 305. 341. Our mortification increases proportionably to it, 344. The
true and infallible fruits of it, 38 How damnation is attributed to infidelity,
and how to evil works, 369 Infirmity, See Weakness. Inspiration, 233. See
Revelation. Natural instinct, 213 Interpreting. See Scripture Humane wisdom
cannot judge of the actions of God, and of his children, 217, 238, 239. The
contrary judgment of men with the spirit, and with out it in spiritual
matters, 264. We must be modest in our judgment of spiritual things. 265 In
what justice consists, 314 Gods justice redounds to the believers benefit, 34.
Justification what, 365. It begets piety not piety it, ibid. How to dispoil our
selves of our own justifications. 388. They who pretend to justify themselves,
know neither God nor themselves, 412, 413. See more under the title of Christ.
K
THe kingdom of God and Christ in what it consi^ts in this life, 228, 268. How
it is attained, and what a man brings of his own thereto, 56 The sweetness of
it, and in what it consists, 228. How men are reduced unto it, and who only.
39. How God deals with men before he sets them into it, and how they are
qualified who enter into it, and the privilege they enjoy who are in it, 15
16. None do rightly know it, but they who are in it, 17. It ought to be the
chief subject of Christian preaching, 16. They who would enter into it feel the
tyranny of the devil, the flesh, horror and death, and being once entered into
it, are freed from the three former in this life, and from death at the
resurrection, 228 Of Christ's consigning of his kingdom to the Father, 229 Man's
happiness consists in knowing God and christ, and what kind of knowledge it
must be, and who only have it, 4. How far the knowledge of God by the
Scripture and creatures, may conduce to every man's happiness, 5. How we may
come to the knowledge of God, 308. How and when it is perfected, 203. In what
it consists if it be true and efficacious, 258 it breeds a love of God
proportionable, ibid. And a good opinion of him, 128. A Christian knows God by
Christ four manner of ways 308. The difference between the knowledge of God
and Christ had by inspiration, and that which is gotten by wit, judgment, and
humane industry, 145. The knowledge of God gotten only by relation works false
opinions of God. 125 What evil the not knowing our selves causes, 169. The lack
of knowledge of our selves and God, make us that we accept not the grace of the
Gospel and benefit by Christ, ibid. After what manner, and by what degrees the
knowledge of spiritual things is wrought in us, 264. Who have certain
knowledge in spiritual matters, 241. The knowledge of divine treasures is h^d
by the benefit of Christ and how, 267 Desire of knowledge in the judgment of
humane wisdom a perfection, in the judgment of the holy spirit an
imperfection, 236 Desire of knowledge is to be mortified, 324, 237. What
desires of knowledge are curious, 320 Why the tree of knowledge of good and
evil was forbidden to man, 320. That which the Scripture calls the knowledge of
good and evil, the wise men of the world call humane reason, prudence and
natural light, 403 Man's knowledge before the fall was by spiritual light,
since by natural light, 321, 405
L
WHat Gods common language to his Saints is, 84 Why the written law came, 24
How far the law of nature binds us to God, ibid. Moses law, See Servitude. In
what Christian liberty consists, how it ^s known, and to be exercised, 119 Of
natural and spiritual light, 321, 414 Of likeness of God, See image. A great
testimony of a Christian life, 430. We must begin to live a life here, much
like that which we shall live in everlasting life, 418. We are to keep our
selves in that form of life in which we were found when we were called to be
the sons of God, 331. Why it was necessary that Christ should live in that form
of life in which he did, ibid. How our life is bid with Christ in God, 330,
336. Humane wisdom believes not eternal life, 26. The desire of another life
after this is a sign of predestination, 153. It is a sign they are imotous in
whom no desire of another life is, ibid. The tree of life, and what natural
virtue God set in it 321 The effects of Gods long sufferance. 11. See more sub
tit. Patience. Gods love general and particular, 78. Man's love to God, and how
caused, ibid. Of the love of God and the world, and who love God aright, 72. Of
our love of God wrought by God and by our selves, 74. Diverse manners of our
love to God, 257. In what the true and efficacious love of God does consist,
258. How and in what degree a pious man bestows his love on the creatures,
259. Our love of God how and when made perfect, 263. It answers our knowledge
of him and our union with him, 256
M
SIns through malice, 398. It is the sin against the holy spirit, and the
sin to death, 400 Martyrdom of body and soul what, 55, 225. who are most
exposed to martyrdom, 330 How to conceive of the members of Christ, 429 True
Christians are merciful, superstitious are rigourous, 213 Who they are that
seek merit by their works, 170 Mortification of affections and appetites, why
necessary and by what wrought, 92. 100, 159, 232, 341, 344. Whence a Christians
mortification proceeds, 173, 340. Mortification is an imperfect death, 134. The
certainest way to obtain it, 200. It is wrought only by incorporation in
Christ, 305. Differences between them who are mortified by their own industry,
and them that are by the holy spirit, 205. Three estates in them whom the
spirit mortifies, 209. How a man's proceeding in mortification is known, 147.
The profit that is gotten by it, 203. It makes us like Christ, 201. Christ's
life showed the way of entire mortification, 328. What form of life is most fit
to obtain it, 339. It is a countersigne whereby to know our selves the sons
of God, 341 All religions pretend it, 205 It is proportionable to the degrees
of our vivification, 135. How the knowledge and sense of the things of God do
mortify the flesh, 200, 240 How to know when our inward motions are of the
holy, the evil, or a man's own spirit, 312. Motions of the flesh and spirit,
174. 293. How motions of the flesh are to be overcome, 173. How to know when we
are moved of God to put a thing in execution, and when not, 84, 95, 212, 293.
How to know when motions to pray are of the humane, and when of the holy
spirit, 212. It behooves pious persons to keep good account with their motions,
21^. 293. The motion of the holy Spirit is more or less efficacious according
to the measure of our mortification, 232 Certain mysteries which men pry after,
and yet cannot understand, and why so, 356
N
HOw far the law of nature does oblige us to God, 24 Natural depravation, 18
Natural conscience 356 Natural piety what, 24, 355 Natural light 321, 403 It
was not from the first creation 404. 405 How far it is to be used and how far
to be mortified 407
O
HOw Christ's obedience reaches to all 416 Our Obligation to God by the law of
nature, 24. It is discovered by Gods written law, ibid. Offense, See Scandal.
What opinion we are to have of Christ and his members, 428, 429. How to take
our selves off from opinion of our own righteousness, 388
P
WHy pardon general is hardlyest believed. 43. See Remission of sins. The
Passion of Christ. 299, How dangerous passion is in matters of religion. 401
How great Gods patience appears being compared with man's revengefulnesse, 10.
See long-sufferance. In what Christian patience consists, 99 Peace of
conscience is hardly obtained, 375. who only have it, 378 In what Christian
perfection consists, 182, 331. How it is attained, 332 Physic and Physicians
how to be made use of to conserve bodily health. 8 Piety in what it consists,
113. 314. 365. It is a fruit of justification, 365. An excellent privilege of
it, 28 The signs of it, 69. 286 The kinds of it, viz. Natural, Hebrew,
Christian, and what each of them is, 352. and how men are qualified by
attending unto each of them, ibid. Who are pious, 380. Why they believe with
difficulty ^82 how they govern themselves in things befalling them, 215 Pilgrim
See Stranger. Two Powers in Christ and his members, and what the saints of the
world and the Saints of God, know from either. 294 A good sign of
Predestination 152 The Lords prayer expounded, 247. Prayer when by the holy
spirit and when by our own spirit, 61, 183, 193. And how each are to be
discerned, 163, 183. Who pray as they ought, 161, 183. Prayer with
Consideration the best means to understand and interpret the holy Scriptures
by, and how to be made use of, 193. Confidence in prayer how and why required,
141. Why prayer with great confidence is sometime not heard, when with lesser
is. ibid. 235 The kingdom of God ought to be the chief subject of Christian
preaching. 16 Gods presence e^joyed and not; with the effects of both, 72 73
Whence the sense of Gods presence to the soul is caused 183, Whether Gods
presence seen or felt be the greater savor, ibid. Pride, see Ambition. Our
profession made in baptism is to be observed, or else baptism becomes
fruitless to us, 62 How to behave our selves in spiritual prosperity, ^43
outward prosperity hinders faith, 14, 44 When our purposes are good, 23 Our
wills in our purposes must be remitted to God, and why so, 20 In all our
purposes we must first consider whether that which we purpose be accepted of
God, 23
R
Humane reason, why to be mortified, and if so, why God ^ut it in man and
whereto it serves 36 84 406. See more, Sub tit. wisd. and natural light.
Rebellion against God; see disobedience. Our fall and Redemption set forth by a
comparison, 37 255. Regeneration what, and how wrought 90 404 It is not
understood of natural men 357. How the good works of the Regenerate and
unregenerate d ffer 28 87. How Christians know God by regeneration 310 How
warily we ought to behave our selves in matters of Religion 401 402. All
Religions pretend mortification 205 Rem ssion of si^nes is hardliest believed,
and why so 374 In what man's R^paration consists 179 ^^5 ^56 404. The creatures
shall be repaired in man's reparation 317 What maintains us in our Resolutions
92 Of Christ's Resurrection and our rising again with him 303. To whom only
Christ's Resurrection shall be glorious 418. The Resurrection is not believed by
humane wisdom 25. The glory of our Resurrection shall answer the degrees of
our vivification 134. Vivification is an imperfect Resurrection 135. The
benefit by Christ is suspended in part till the Resurrection 417 etc. Who only
believe them selves dead in Adam and raised up in Christ 419 Particular
Revelation from God is necessary to faith ^5. Blessednesses consists in
believing by Revelation 33. Christians know God by Revelation of Christ 388
Revelation 233. See Inspiration. Whence Revenge in men proceeds 10 etc. How to
take our selves off from the opinion of our own Righteousness 308
S
WHy God required the sacrifices of the law, and yet delighted not in them, 412
Salvation why attributed to faith, and why to good works 364 The full
satisfaction of Christ set forth, 376. Who have certain satisfaction in all
things, and who not, the reaons of both, 335. Scandal and the differences of
it, 269. When it is tolerable and when not, 277. How to behave our selves for
the avoiding of it, ibid. Scripture how to be made use of for conserving the
health of the mind, 8. How to be read by us, 106. 197. How the knowledge of it
is gotten and when, 199. What are the best means of interpreting of it, 192 The
difference between the spirits and the scriptures guiding of pious persons,
22^. How the scripture confirms our hope in the promises, 109. How far only
the scripture and examples of Saints may direct men in the Christian way while
they are without the Spirit, 154. The scripture compared to a candle, the holy
spirit to the sun, ibid. 2^2. Securi^y or certainty divine, 436 Wherein
s^lf-denyall consists, 225 Hebrew servitude what, 119 Sin made man subject to
Gods mediate will, 137. The difference of sins and sinners, and how men sin
against themselves, their neighbors, Christ and God, 66. The signs of diverse
kinds of sins, 69. Sins of ignorance and whence they arise, 398. When they
excuse and when not, 399. How sin both original and actual was satisfied for
by Christ, 376 Sons of God and Adam who, 5. By what each do govern themselves
both for the recovering and conserving of bodily and spiritual health, 6, 7
Sorrow, see grief. How diversely God communicates his spirit to his, 18. How to
exercise our selves that we may obtain the holy spirit, 155. How we may know
when the holy spirit prays works or understands in us, 161, 193. The holy
spirit compared to the sun 154 155, 222, 223 How we know God by the
communication of the holy spirit. 309 The spirit is always opposed by the
flesh, 1^4. 1^5. A sign of the spirits work in us, 118. The holy spirit
executes Gods immediate or particular will 1^7. The effects of them that live
according to the spirit, 279 Humane wisdom erres in presuming to understand
the things of the pirit, 153, 218 How Christians in the beginning of their
incorporation into hrist are deceived about the fruits of the spirit, 378 How
God bestows spiritual things and why he bestows them not ordinarily without
man's industry. 58, 98. The contrary judgment of spiritual things in men that
have the spirit and that are without it 64, 265. Pious persons ought to be
modest in judging of spiritual things, 265. Spiritual gifts are not
understood till they be enjoyed, 431 The evil spirit is more impetuous in its
motions in the wicked, then the holy spirit is in the pious, 230. How evil
spirits disquiet pious persons, 145, 38^. By what the evil spirits hinder
faith, ibid 390, 391 How and where men account themselves strangers or
pilgrims, 360. How we are strangers or pilgrims with God in this life, 181,
195. Who account themselves strangers in this world, who not, and the reasons
of each, 360 What suffering is most Christian, 344. What suffering is a sign
of mortification, ib. 345 Suffering by our own and others wills, when good and
when not, 346 Who are superstitions 380. Superstitious men believe with ease,
and why so, 381. Superstitious and ceremonious persons are severe and rigorous
213 THe most ordinary temptation which befalls pious persons, 287 The Testimony
of Jesus Christ what, 194. Two parts of it, ibid. Divine Treasures, see
Knowledge. The Tree of knowledge of good and evil why forbidden to man, ^20.
And what virtue God had set in it 321. The Tree of life and what natural
virtue God had set in it, ibid. How God tries our graces and dispositions, 71.
The ends of Gods trials of men and the signs of piety and impiety by it, ibid.
and 72 Troubles or Tribulation, see Afflictions. We must trust in God in
outward afflictions 47. How we must trust in him when we suffer as Saints, and
how when we suffer as men of the world, 49
V
HOw man's vitiousnesse is restrained by honor and conscience. 190 How
hristians know God by inward vision, 311 Our vivification is effected by
Christ's resurrection, 304 It answers the degrees of our mortification, 135. It
is an imperfect resurrection. ibid. 418, 419 Divine mysteries which man's
curiosity would, yet cannot understand, 356. Understanding when by the spirit
and when by humane wisdom, 165 Our union with God is proportionable to our
love of him 257 In what the union between God and man consists, 26 What are
the effects of our union with God 262. How and when our union with God is
perfected, 263 Of certainty of vocation, and why it is necessary, 95. To
believe with difficulty is a sign of our vocation, 96. The continual
remembrance of our vocation is the most certain way to obtain mortification.
2^0. The effects of that vocation that is from God. 92
W
Weakness according to the flesh and spirit, and how both are known and their
effects, 283. Two weaknesses in Christ and in his members, 294. What the Saints
of the world and the Saints of God know from either, 293. In what weakn^sse of
body and mind consists, 334 Our wills must be remitted to God in all our
purposes, and why, 20, 84, 94. By remitting our wills to God, he will fulfill
our wills, yea do more then we desire, 122. It is a great part of piety to
remit our wills to Gods disposing. 72, 84. Two wills in God, the first mediate
or general, ^37. the second immediate or particular, 176, The effects of
either ibid. The creatures are executioners of Gods general will, the holy
spirit of his particular, 136. Man by sin subject to Gods mediate will,
before not, 137, 176. How Christ's obedience has freed his from it, ibid. Thy
will be done how understood, 139, 149. All are subject to Gods immediate will,
176. Gods immediate will twofold, of mercy and wrath, ibid. The sons of Adam
govern themselves by humane wisdom, 6. It is incapable of the covenants
betwixt God and man in Christ, 25. It opposes believing, 51. How it erres in
presuming to understand the things of the spirit, 154, 168, 217. It will not
attribute all things to God, and why so, 168. It cannot judge of the things of
God and his children. 217, 3^7. The actions of God and of his children seem
absurd to humane wisdom, 170, 2^9. It judges justification a fruit of piety,
365. The blindness of humane wisdom in divine matters, 241, 367. See more of
humane wisdom, p. 87, 102. 164, 169, 248. See also reason and natural light.
Serpentine wisdom, 158 Christ the word, 422 How damnation is attributed to
evil works and unbelief, 369. And how salvation is attributed to good works and
faith, ibid. The good works of regenerate and unregenerate, and how they
differ, 28. 87. All works of the unregenerate flesh offend God, 87 God more
respects the quality then the quantity of our good works, 371. Who only do
works acceptable to God, ibid. When we work by the holy spirit, and when by
humane wisdom, 164. The world is to be abandoned before we can become true
Christians. 53
(...).

