ERRATA.
PAge 3. sentence 23. for, for all, read all for. p. 17. s. 135. for Gods, read
God. p. 28. s. 223. for overread undervalued. p. 31. s 254. for fearful, read
faithful. p. 35. s. 280. for complements, read complement, p. 39. s. 312. for
robs, read rob.

In the Paradoxes.

Page 10. sentence 49. for ye, read yea.

CANAANS FLOVVINGS. Or a second part of MILK and HONEY; BEING Another Collation
of many Christian Experiences, Sayings, etc. WITH An Appendix called the
HEATHEN IMPROVED; OR, The Gibeonites hewing of wood, and drawing of water for
the Sanctuary.

By RALPH VENNING.

Despise not small things; you may make much of a little.

London, Prinred by S. Griffin, for John Rothwell, at the Fountain and Bear
in Goldsmiths Row in Cheap Side. 1653.

To the READER.
Friend,
I Cannot tell how to invite thee, because I know not whether the entertainment
be worthy of thee; if thou look for dainties, and rarities, I fear thou will
not make a good meal here; if plain fare will be acceptable, come and welcome,
and much good may it do thee: as to my self, if thou wonder why I write thus,
be pleased to know that I write not to please men, or for the praise of men;
for I am sufficiently assured, that these are not the things, nor this the way,
by which I should get glory, if it were in mine eye: the best of it is, I am
aforehand with all men in this, that none can think more meanly of what I have
done, then I my self do; and therefore I shall not think my self undervalued,
though thou put no value upon it; it is such as I believe, all will not like,
nor will all dislike; though all will not be pleased, yet some will not be
displeased to read it. I call on no man to commend it, but on any (that finds
fault) to come and mend it, to do better things then these, or these things
better. It Is common and easy to find faults in our selves and others that are
to be mended, but hard and rare to mend the faults that are to be found.

Happily some would persuade thee and me to believe, that some other things of
mine, and writing another way, might be more serviceable; have a little
patience, and if God give life and ability, I may in due time make trial, for I
would willingly do good by any and every talent that God has given me.

These are not the first, but (though I have remains) are very like to be the
last of my Juvenilia, or youthful collections. Some Scriptures are only
alluded to, that I might give an hint to this, that the Scriptures a
storehouse, which would furnish with such variety of illustration and
exemplification, that we need not go down to the Philistines to sharpen our
axes, nor travel so much for Outlandish rarities to garnish (Sermons and
Dicsourses) the dishes of Gospel Grace withal. I have made some application of
Heathen instances also, and could wish that many who go under a better name,
were but so good men, and that the Israelites did the Sanctuary as much service
as the Gibeonites. Some stories are interwoven, which I hope may pass for more
then table-talk, and serve in better stead, then many vain, idle,
soul-infecting stories, which are too too often told to pass away time,
without any tendency to spiritual improvement. If it be said, many of these
things are to be found elsewhere; I grant it, yet many will find them here,
which else perhaps had never known they had been elsewhere. To be short, if
thou think 'twill do thee any good, go on; if not, forbear; though I hope
thou will not place it among thy lost time, if thou peruse it; nay, happily thou will allow me some grains for my weakness, when thou perceivest that I meant
well, and was (at least) willing to do thy soul good. If it be not done now,
I will watch and wait, when, and till I can, for surely I shall be a lover of
souls, and endeavor to do them good, while I have a being.

August 1654. RALPH VENNING.

CANAANS Flowings: OR, More Milk and Honey. BEING Another Collation of many
Christian Experiences, Sayings, Sentences; and several places of Scripture
improved.
The First Century.
1. SOme men (would Professors did not) mind this world so much as if it would
never have an end; and the World to come so little, as if it would never have a
beginning.

2. Professors need not be so much affected with the goods of this world, for
the best is not good enough to make an Heaven: nor need they be so much
afflicted with the evils of it, for the worst is not bad enough to make an Hell.

3. Any thing (the best) on this s'ide Heaven (compared with that) is misery;
and any thing (the worst) on this side Hell, (compared with that) is mercy.

4. Saints should and do (if they do as they should) look upon all the
commands of God as easy and pleasant; 1. because commanded by God that loves
them; 2. because to be obeyed by them that love God.

5. Seeing God does all things well, we should think well of all things which
God does.

6. Christians should not only purpose to be religious, but they should be
religious to purpose.

7. To worship God in spirit, is the spirit of our worship; flesh is
unsuitable, and unacceptable.

8. If we should be much thankful for a little mercy, what a shame is it to be
but a little thankful for much mercy!

9. Seeing God was so willing to put his son to death for our sakes; how (oh
how!) willing should we be to put our sins to death for Gods sake?

10. If pleasures are (as indeed they are) displeasing, Eccles. 2.12. (
Vespatian was tired with a triumph) what then are displeasures? if our
recreations are toylsome, what are our toils? if our ease be painful, what is
our pain? on this side the enjoyment of God, there is no rest; for all the rest
is vanity and vexation of spirit.

11. It behooves Christians to be often in self-trial, and to be always in
self-denial.

12. Sinners are alive to that which Saints are dead, viz. sin: and dead to
that to which Saints are alive, viz. righteousness.

13. Sin may be in his heart who is a Saint, but his heart (who is a Saint)
cannot be in sin.

14. The doctrine of the Gospel is not only able to comfort, but it is a
comfortable doctrine.

15. There are many who hold the truth which they are to do, but do not do
the truth which they hold; thus holding truth in unrighteousness, they have
the wrath of God reveald from Heaven against them, because they received not
the love of the truth, which was revealed from heaven to them.

16. Much is but little, where more is expected; and good is not good, where
better is expected.

17. Some men forget to pray, others forget what they have prayed, and others
forget that they have prayed; so little of their heart is in duty, and so
little impression of duty is in their heart, that all comes to nothing.

18. They who deserve nothing, have good reason to be content with any thing;
and they that deserve not any thing have no reason to be discontented, though
they have nothing.

19. God sometimes puts his people to a little pain, that he may give them much
ease.

20. How desirable so ever the things be which we desire, we are to submit and
surrender our desires to God, and say, Not my will O Lord, but thine be done.

21. It Is a lovely sight to see a den of thieves turned into a house of prayer;
but it is a loathsome sight to see an house of prayer turned into a den of thieves.

22. The least measure of grace is better then the greatest measure of gifts:
for the greatest measure of gifts without grace is not, but the the least
measure of grace (though without gifts) is acceptable to God in the discharge
of duties.

23. It Is dangerous sinning against conscience, for such are in danger to make
(at length) no conscience of sinning.

24. It Is no small mercy to be kept from small sins; but how great a mercy is
it to be kept from great sins! Oh Lord, when from all sins? in the mean time,
happy they who can in sincerity say, it is not we that sin, but sin that
dwells in us.

25. Most men can easily remember if they have any thing against their brother,
that he may right them: but few men care to remember if their brother have any
thing against them, that they may right him; which is the great command on a
great peril, Matthew. 5.23.

26. In prayer the heart should first speak the words, and then the words
should speak the heart.

27. There are two, and but two kind of sins; the one of commission, in doing
what ought not to be done; the other of omission, in not doing what ought to be
done; for both these men shall be judged at the last day. For sins of
commission, Jud. 15. for sins of omission, Matthew. 25.41, 42.

28. God in the Covenant has promised to take away the flesh of the heart, and
to give an heart of flesh.

29. Many ungodly men have enough, yet are not content; godly men are content
with what they have, and that is their enough.

30. A part of the Christians Evening prayer is, that he may not sleep in his
sin, nor sin in his sleep.

31. When a Saint goes to bed, he should look on himself as buried alive in a
grave above ground; and not knowing but that he may sleep the sleep of death,
he should commit his spirit into the hands of God, praying and hoping, either
for a resurrection for the better in this world, or for a better resurrection
in the world to come.

32. A part of the Saints morning prayer is, that seeing it has pleased. God
to renew his life, his life may be renewed to the wel-pleasing of God.

33. We should labor for rest, and follow our work while we live; for when we
die, (if in the Lord) we shall rest from our labor, and our work shall follow
us.

34. A Saint does pray, not only that the Word of God may sanctify the
creatures to his use, but also that in and for the use of the creatures he may
sanctify the God of the word.

35. A Saint does pray, not only that the curse which sin brought may be taken
away, but also that the sin may be taken away which brought the curse.

36. A Saint does pray, not only that God would shed abroad his love upon the
creatures, that they may be serviceable to him, but he prays also that God
would shed abroad his love in his heart, that he may be serviceable to God.

37. We should show mercy to the poor, not only out of pity to them, but
out of piety to God.

38. A Christian will willingly acknowledge that he owes his life to the death
of Christ.

39. We should not only bear the rod, but hear the rod; and did we hear
the rod, and him that appointed it, we should the better bear the rod which
he has appointed.

40. Time was when he (that is now a Saint) grieved that he could sin no more;
but now he grieves for that grief, and that ever he sinned so much; yea, might
he have his next prayer granted, it should be that he might sin no more.

41. He that will have his secrets kept, must keep his secrets.

42. We have no reason to complain of, or to be discontented with God, how
ever he deal with us; for the least good is more then we deserve, and the
greatest evil is no less, nor no more then we deserve.

43. If when we have done all, we are but unprofitable servants; how
unprofitable servants then are we, who do not do all, no nor scarce at all,
what is our duty to do?

44. Them goods will do no man good, with which a man does no good. Goods are
not good as ((...)) things had, but as ((...)) things used and improved, so as
to make friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness or deceitfulness.

45. Well may a Saint say that he cannot be without God, for he cannot be well
without God; vivere est valere, to live is to be well; and beside well being
(which is to live, move, and have our being with and unto God) the rest of our
life (though we live, move, and have our being in him) is death, or but little
better.

46. A Saint would willingly be more affected with Gods goodness, and more
afflicted for his own badnes.

47. A man should apply himself to Christ, to be delivered, not only from
sin, but from sinning.

48. Wise men, when they have not opportunities will make them; but fools will
not take opportunities when they have them.

49. Many persons have the grace of desire, and do desire grace; and yet many
times enjoy not the grace of their desire.

50. Providence that cross our designs, are no cross providence to Gods
designs.

51. Christ's satisfaction, not our sanctification, is the ground of our
justification; and yet where ever he is justification, he is sanctification
also; or else there could be no salvation; for without holiness no man shall
see God.

52. In the good-natured and welbred person, a little grace will make a great
show; but in an ill-natured and a person not wel-bred, a great deal of grace
will make but a little show.

53. I would not (says one) be always busy and doing, nor ever shut up in
nothing but thoughts; yet that which some would call idleness, I would call the
sweetest part of my life, and that is my thinking time. Thoughts are good
company, if they be good thoughts; and so a man may be never less alone, then
when most alone; that is, all alone, when all is but one.

54. God many times awakens them at a Sermon, who came to sleep at a Sermon, so
that (I speak it seriously) God takes them napping.

55. While we are in this world, we know but part, and but in part; hereafter
we shall know more, and more fully; yet then the fullness will not (cannot) be
fully known.

56. Gods thoughts and purposes toward Sion, and Sions thoughts of Gods
purposes, are many times clean contrary, Isaiah 49, 27, 28. My thoughts are not
your thoughts, nor my ways your ways, says the Lord, Isaiah 55.8.

57. Paul, Noble and Publiquespirited Paul became all things to all men, that
all men might gain by him; but many (and not now adays?) base spirited and
self-seeking men, become all things to all men, that they may gain by all men.
Paul sought the good of other men, but these seek other men's goods.

58. We are unworthy for whom God should do any thing, and unworthy to do any
thing for God; but he is worthy for whom we should do all things.

59. Though Gods ways are hid from us, yet our ways are not hid from God,
Isai. 40.27. Though we know not the way that he takes, yet he knows the way
that we take, Job 23.8, 9, 10.

60. Many men rejoice in the light wherein they should walk, but do not walk
in the light wherein they rejoice.

61. It Is not very safe to trust them with too great a power of the sword in
their hands, who have not the power of the word (which is the sword of the
spirit) in their hearts.

62. Where sin abounds, grace abounds; but where grace abounds, fin does not
abound; for (says the soul) because God has been merciful to me who sinned
against him, I will not sin against God who is merciful to me.

63. Things done by men have a tendency to bring about Gods ends, though the
men that do the things, do not intend it, Isai. 10.5, 7. Acts 4.27, 28.

64. It sometimes overthrows men to have done too much good, or too great
service, for the Princes and Grandees of the world (though they are willing to
have others beholding to them, yet are) unwilling to have themselves beholding
to others.

65. Many hear, and love to hear the things which they are to do; but few
do, and fewer love to do the things which they hear.

66. In an unregenerate estate a man is free from God, and a servant to sin;
but in a regenerate estate, a man is free from sin, and is a servant to God:
his first freedom was perfect slavery, his second service is perfect freedom.

67. He is a fool that does not say in his heart there is a God; but what a
fool is he, that says in his heart there is no God?

68. It Is a sin not to think that there is a God; but what a fin is it to think
that there is not a God? yet alas! such wretches there are in the world as do,
if not in words, yet in heart and works deny God to have a being, though in him
they live, move, and have their being; but though such are Atheists on earth,
yet when they come to hell, they will not be Atheists there, where they will to
their cost and pain, feel that there is a God.

69. It Is not enough to a Saint that he has prayed for grace, unless he have
the grace prayed for.

70. Life-Reformation, without heart-renovation, will never attain to
heaven-salvation.

71. There is such a connection between being in Christ Jesus, being a new
creature, faith working by love, and keeping the Commandments of God, that
they are put one for all, as appears by comparing 2 Cor. 5.17. Gal. 5.6. Gal.
6.15. and 1 Cor. 7, 19. What therefore God has joined together, let no man put
asunder: he that takes one for all; without all, will find it nothing at all.

72. Christ does not only deliver his people from eternal condemnation, but
also from a sinful conversation; yea, he delivers them from a sinful
coversation, that he may deliver them from condemnation.

73. It Is a dangerous thing not to look over our ways; but it is much more
dangerous to overlook our ways.

74. It Is a greater honor to us to serve God, then it is to God that we serve
him. It Is not he, but we are happy by it; as the Queen of Sheba said of
Solomon's servants, 1 Kings 10.8.

75. The devils believe and tremble, and so do Saints, for they work out their
salvation with fear and trembling; but with this difference, the devils
tremble because of the judgment which sin will bring; the Saints tremble
because of the sin which brings the judgment; the devils and wicked men
tremble because they have sinned, the Saints tremble that they may not sin.

76. The head may remember what the heart forgets, but the head will never
forget what the heart remembers. The sense of mercy is the best memory, Deuteronomy.
4.9. lest they depart from thine heart.

77. Though one soul be more worth then a whole world, yet a whole world of
souls is not worth one Christ; oh how great then is the love of God! that he
would give his only begotten son to save the souls of men.

78. Though the prayer we make to God cannot, yet the God to whom we make our
prayers can change our hearts.

79. As faith without works is, so works without faith are dead also; religion
is not in believing or doing, but in believing and doing; it is not any one
thing, but things which accompany or contain salvation, Heb. 6.9.

80. A Saint should daily and duly observe Gods dealings with him, and his
dealings with God.

81. 'Twere better not to be born, then to be, and not to be new born.

82. How can we expect that God should hear us when we call on him, if we will
not hear him when he calls on us.

83. A Saint had rather suffer for the Gospel and religion a thousand times,
then that the Gospel or religion should suffer once by him.

84. He that would see God in ordinances, when he comes to them, should seek
God before he comes to the ordinances.

85. If we fall in with God, it matters not who fall out with us.

86. Many men have the things of their peace to consider of, but (alas!) but
few consider of the things of their peace; they hide their eyes so long from
the things of their peace, that at last the things of their peace are hidden
from their eyes.

87. Men should take heed of giving themselves to lasciviousness, lest when
they give themselves over, God give them up to lasciviousness and vile
affections, as he did them, Romans 1.26.

88. It were to be wished (provided it cross not the calling of God) that
great men were good men, or that good men were great men.

89. Many persons as soon as Sermon is done have done with the Sermon, and as
soon as prayer is done, have done with the prayer; when as they should then do
the Sermon, and practice the prayer.

90. A Saint does good not only because it pleases him, but because it
pleases God; nor does he avoid sin only because it displeases him, but
because it displeases God.

91. The work of the Gospel is to make bad men good, and good men better.

92. He that is most full of God, is most empty of himself; and he that is most
full of himself, is most empty of God.

93. Though all graee be in all Saints, yet some grace scarce appears in most
Saints, and most grace scarce appears in some Saints.

94. Among them that have called themselves shepherds, there have been found
some idle, and some idol-shepherds.

95. A gracious heart does not only hate sin when it is committed, but he hates
to commit it, Romans 7.15.

96. We should study not so much what shall become of us, as what becomes us;
for what shall become of us is among the secret things which belong to God; but
what becomes us is among the revealed things which belong to us.

97. As God-love is the fulfilling of God's law, or the law as to God; and
man-love the fulfilling of man's law, or the law as to man; so selflove, or
sin-love is the fulfilling of the law of sin: for the whole law is fulfilled in
this one word, love.

98. Some would not seem evil, and yet would be so; and some would seem good,
but would not be so; but tell me, thou hypocrite (said Chrysostom) if it be a
good thing to be good, why will thou not be that which thou would appear to
be? for that which is a shame for a man to appear to be, is much more a shame
to be it indeed: either be therefore such as thou appearest, or else appear
such as thou art.

99. Some men had rather be of that religion, and of such opinions in that
religion, which will raise them; then be of that religion which will save them:
as if advancement in this life were more worth then a resurrection unto and an
ascension into eternal life.

100. Latimer says of the Clergy, that they were so wise, that by their
wisdom, they had almost made all the world fools.

The second Century.
101. Man is not (true) as God, and therefore not to be trusted; God is not
(false) as man, and therefore not to be distrusted.

102. The promise is as satisfying to faith, as performance is to sense.

103. He that believes every thing that is reported, and reports every thing
which he believes, will report that which should not be believed, and believe
that which should not be reported.

104. He that leaves all things, and denies not himself, forsakes nothing; and
he that denies himself, and sets not his heart on what he has, forsakes his
all, though he keep it all.

105. The best way to enjoy ones will is to deny ones will; not to own our will,
when our will does not own Gods: and then to be sure, he may do what he will,
that will do but what he may.

106. Many men know the good they are to do, but do not do the good they
know, to them it is sin. Jam. 4.17. others do they know not what; these may
do good, but the good they do cannot be well done; others know not what they
are to do, but this will not excuse them from doing; for every man should learn
what he is to practice, and then practice what he has learnt. Practice
without knowledge is like Leah fruitful, but blear-eyed; and knowledge without
practice is like Rachel fair, but barren; when Rachels face, and Leahs womb,
when knowledge and practice meet in the same person, then happy is he.

107. No man cares for sorrows, yet nothing works sorrows more then cares; for
they that will be rich, pierce themselves through with many sorrows.

108. We should welcome God not only when he brings good to us, for that is to
welcome God for our own sake; but we should also welcome God when he brings
evil upon us, for that is (which is better) to welcome God for his own sake.

109. How much soever good men suffer, and how ill soever it go with them in
this world, if they be found in ways of well-doing, they shall do well; for
Christ will say, Well done thou good and faithful servant.

110. Good Lord! into how many evils should we fall, did not thou keep us
from them? and how many evils would fall on us, did not thou keep them from
us?

111. As nothing will more disquiet us (as to public affairs) then the
consideration of man's disorderly acting, so nothing will more quiet us, then the
consideration of Gods ordering man's actings: for God never so leaves the reins
on men's necks, but that he keeps them in his own hand.

112. Inordinate affection brings extraordinary affliction.

113. It Is a great mercy to have any good thing in this world; what a mercy
then is it to have many good things in this world? but what a misery is it to
have all our good things in this world?

114. The old Saints, or the Saints of old time lived new lives; but alas! the
new Saints, or the Saints of new and latter times, live old lives.

115. It Is hard to be conformable to the world in the outward man, and to be
conformable to God in the inward man; it is hard to be like a sinner without,
and not to be a sinner within.

116. A Saint begs of God that all Gods dealings may have love to him written
upon them, and as heartily begs of God that all his dealings may have love and
holiness to the Lord written upon them.

117. A Saint is a man of another world in this, and therefore should live out
of the world while in it, and have his conversation in Heaven.

118. If a man have not an appetite to pray, let him pray for an appetite; for
neglect or omission of a duty never fits, but always unfits for duty.

119. When the Apostle says, I live, he does not mean, that he lived alone
without Christ; and when he says, not I but Christ, he does not mean, that
Christ lived alone without him: but his meaning is, that by Christ he is what
he is, according to that saying, 1 Cor. 15.10. by the grace of God I am what I
am; and that, I labored more abundantly then they all, yet not I, but the
grace of God; as if he had said, I owe not only this, but my self beside to
Christ, I owe my life to Christ, who is the life of my new life.

120. A Saint does but little of the good he does, 1 Cor. 5.10. and he does not
much of the evil he does, Romans 7.20. it is true he lives and labors, yet not
he; it is true he sins, yet not he.

121. Meetings are then for the better, when we are the better for our meetings.

122. The image of the first creation makes men excel other creatures, but the
image of the second creation makes men to excel men.

123. He that begs of God for daily bread, begs food for his soul as well as
his body: for either a man should not take more care then need, because God
knows we have need of these things, and does give us richly to enjoy not only
for this life, but (which is better) for a better life.

124. What certain hazzards do men run for uncertain gain! it is uncertain
whether men shall gain or no, all are but adventurers: it is as uncertain
whether they shall keep what they have gotten: it is certain that if they have
gotten much, and have kept it long, yet that they shall be taken from it, or it
from them. No trade so gainful as godliness, if it be closely followed.

125. The best and worst of this world puts us upon longing for Heaven; for if
the best of the world be good, heaven is much better; and if the worst be so
bad, who would not long to go from bad to good.

126. If a Christian be called to be a Magistrate, it is not enough for him to
be a Christian man, but he must be a Christian Magistrate: he should rather
cease to be a Magistrate, then cease to be a Christian: it is not enough to say,
he is a Christian and a Magistrate, but that he is a Christian Magistrate: when
God has conjoynd them, man must not disjoyn them.

127. The most (and most commonly used) policy, is little better then
circumstantiall dissimulation; be sure therefore not to act the serpent without
the dove: it is better to act the dove without the serpent, then the serpent
without the dove; it is better to be pious without policy, then to be politic
without piety.

128. Its worse to be heart-tied, then to be tongue-tied in prayer; it is better
to be straightened in expression then in affection; if there be much of heart, it
matters not how little of art there be in prayer, for what some men most
admire, God least regards, viz. volubility of tongue, variety of expression,
and ready utterance.

129. Time was when professors had heart to serve God, but wanted time and
liberty; but now professors (and many of the former) have time and liberty, but
want heart.

130. It Is an easy matter to teach others what to do, but it is an hard matter
to learn our own teaching, and do what we teach: Many know to counsel others
how to walk, who know not how to walk by their own counsel. To such it may be
said more truly then he to Job c. 4.3, 4, 5. Behold, thou have instructed many,
and thou have strengthened the weak hands, thy words have upholden him that was
falling: but now it is come upon thee, and thou faintest; it touches thee, and
thou art troubled.

131. They that stand in slippery places (as all in high places do) had best
be much on their knees, and then they are in no great danger of falling, at
least of falling dangerously.

132. Its fitter for youth to learn then to teach, and for age to teach then to
learn; yet there are some young men old enough to teach, and no old man too old
to learn.

133. Many men love the sin, that cannot abide the name; they love pride, but
it must be called decency; love covetousness, but it must be called thrift and
good husbandry; love flattering and dissembling, but it must be called
civility, and good breeding: and many times the same persons love the name of
grace, but cannot abide the grace; they hate godliness, yet would be called
godly; loath Christianity, yet would be called Christians: let such know, that
sin without the name will damn, and the name of grace without grace will not
save. Lord, let me be more taken with godliness, then with the name; and not
at all with sin, though it have not the name.

134. To be so sorrowful as to forget our selves is weakness, and to be so
merry as to forget God is wickedness.

135. A man should not lay up so much as to give nothing, that is covetousness:
nor give so much as to lay up nothing, that is prodigality.

136. A good conscience always keeps good cheer, for it is a continual feast,
and he that has it fares well, though he have no other food: the fattest Capons
do not afford such merry thoughts as a good conscience. What a shame is it
then to a Christian, if he cannot be merry without merriment, nor make melody
without music, nor dine and sup without dainties and sauce? shall not the
light of Gods countenance make us more glad then they that have their corn, and
wine, and oil? Lord, while others are like them in Job c. 21. from v. 7. to
16. let me be like-minded to Habucuk, c. 3, 17, 18, 19.

136. If God give us the use of mercy to pleasure us, it is but reason that we
should use the mercy to please him.

137. If things fall not out as we would have them be, yet let it content us
that they fall out as God would have them be; God attains his end, though we
miss ours: we know what we would have; but what we should, is better then what
we would. Can we be better disposed of, then by wisdom, goodness, and
faithfulness it self? does not God do all things well? he looked upon all
that he made, and behold it was good exceedingly. We therefore should not open
our mouth (to complain) because it is his doing; but in every thing give
thanks; for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning us.

139. Some are foolish wise men, others are wise fools: the foolishness of God
is wiser then the wisdom of men, for that's enmity against God. They are wise
who are wise for their souls; and they are fools who are not so, how wise
soever they are otherwise.

140. Seeing God does not afflict willingly, we should not sin willingly;
seeing he delights not to grieve the children of men, the children of men
should not delight in any thing that will grieve him.

141. All the sufficiency of the Saints, and the sufficiency of all the Saints
is from Gods alsufficiency; who is sufficient for these things? we are not
sufficient of our selves to think one good thought: my grace is sufficient for
thee.

142. Men should not come together barely to meet, least their meeting prove
but a bare coming together; without true cordial sincere friendship to improve
society, society is but a meeting; and without which (though it be good to
meet, yet) the meeting will not be good; such coming together will rather be for
the worse then for the better.

143. Many men would willingly be Gods sons, who care not to be Gods servants;
but God knows none for sons, but such as serve him: many would willingly be
retainers, and wear Gods livery, that do not care to wait, and to go and
come at his bidding. 'Twill, (but alas!) 'twil be cold comfort to be called
servant, when it shall be said, thou idle and wicked servant. Dives was never
the better that Abraham called him son; nor Judas that Christ called him
friend. Titles, when they are but titles, entitle to nothing.

144. That preaching is most Apostolic, which is most like the Apostles
preaching; when men come not with wisdom of words, but with the words of
wisdom; when men come not with excellency of speech, or entising words, to
evidence and demonstrate their learning, but in the evidence and demonstration
of the spirit, to evince Gods teaching; for then the faith of men will stand not
in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God.

145. A form of godliness and the power of sin may dwell together, but the
power of godliness and a form of sin cannot dwell together, much less the
power of godliness and the power of sin.

146. A gracious heart can truly say, though I am not what I would be, yet I
would be what I should be.

147. Whom God predestinates them he justifies, and not one more; and whom he
justifies and glorifies, he did predestinate, and not one less.

148. Though God give us never so much, he has never the less; and how much
soever we give him he has never the more.

149. The salvation of man, and the means to attain it, is not only Gods
design, but Gods work; it is not only his will that it should be so, but it is
his work that it is so: he does not only will that we should be saved, but he
does save us; he does not only will that we should be justified, but he does
justify us.

150. At the Supper of the Lord it is not man that offers Jesus Christ to God,
but God that offers Jesus Christ to man; and therefore by way of thankfulness
man should offer up himself to God.

151. Did we account of the things of this world as things that we must
account for in the world to come, we should use them, if not less, yet better.

152. The lowest thoughts we have of our selves, are not low enough; and the
highest we have of God, are not high enough.

153. At such times when Gods dispensations are doubtful, men's disputations
about them are full of doubts.

154. A Saint prays that God will not suffer him to take any work in hand but
what he will prosper, and then prays God to prosper the work he takes in hand.

155. Many men do by their Religion as Tradesmen do by recreation; never go
about it, but when they have nothing else to do; give God that time which they
know not how else to bestow. Men put off God with any thing, yea with nothing.
Offer it to thy Prince, and will he accept it? we give him but the dregs, when
the spirit is his due; we would not be served as we serve him: we would have
God give us the best, and we (alas!) we give him the worst. How unjust is this!
Lord, I have nothing good enough for thee; my best is too bad, mine all is too
little; such as I am and have, I give unto thee; the Lord accept it.

156. It Is little less then a wonder, how some persons can be so wicked in
good families, and how others can be so good in wicked families.

157. When a Saint is fit for a change, and a change fit for a Saint, (whether
it relate to place, condition, or employment) it shall then be: and who would
have it before?

158. There are many persons of good quality, who yet (the more is the pity)
are persons of bad, very bad qualities.

159. If many that seek to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven shall not be able,
what will become of them that do not seek? not any of them shall enter; if
seeking will not serve the turn, strive then to enter, put all your strength to
it, for straight, very straight is the gate; and narrow, very narrow is the way
that leads unto life, Luke 13.24. compared with Matthew. 7.14.

160. If God be with us, it matters not who be against us, it will go well;
but if God be against us, it matters not who be with us, it will go ill.

161. Men many times will give no more, because they have given something
already; but God makes his having once given, an argument to give again: he
shows mercy, because he has shown mercy; and does good, because he has done
good. Heretofore-mercies are (to Saints) good ground of hope for
hereafter-mercies.

162. He that loses an hundred pound in the flesh, and gets a thousand
pound in the spirit, is a gainer by his loss: who would not change for the
better? who would not become a fool that he may be wise? who would not become
poor to enrich himself? if a man lose any thing for Christ, he shall lose
nothing by Christ, he shall be repaid in kind, or (which is all one, nay which
is better) in kindness.

163. Our superfluities should give way to our brothers conveniences, and our
conveniences to our brothers necessities, yea even our necessities should give
way to their extremity for the supplying of them.

164. A babe in Christ is a small thing, yet it is no small thing to be a babe,
though but a babe in Christ.

165. Men should not glory in what they have received, but give glory for what
they have received: not only the talent, but the improvement of the talent is
to be attributed to God, Lord thy pound has gained ten pound, Luke 19.16. not
only faith to work, but the work of faith; not only grace, but the actings of
grace is to be attributed to the glory of God, and not to the power or praise
of man.

166. To be evil at good is bad, but to be good at evil is worse: they are wise
to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge.

167. While we have any thing to give, and any thing to be forgiven, we should
be willingly charitable.

168. Adversity indeed is the more grievous, but prosperity is the more
dangerous condition to the sons of men.

169. Some speak but little to the purpose, others speak but to little purpose;
Now as the proverb says, as good not at all, as to no purpose, or not to the
purpose.

170. God speaks much in a little, and man speaks but a little in much.

171. Christ was delivered for our sins, that we might be delivered from our
sins.

172. A Saint prays that he may not be willing to do any thing which God
wills not; and that he may not be unwilling to do any thing, but willing to do
every thing which God wills.

173. Sorrows lie heavier then sin on the wicked, but on the godly sin lies
heavier then sorrows.

174. A Saint is more sorry that he should be discontented at any
disappointment, then that he should be disappointed of any contentment, or that
which we call so, for there is no such thing under the Sun.

175. Many men act grace, when yet grace is not acted; they act humility and
self-denial, when humility and self-denial are not acted; they do like
Stage Players, appear and make show of another thing then they are: this is
the art of grace, rather then the act of grace; and such persons are but
artificial Christians.

176. A believer is beholding to God for the Christ which he beholds, and holds
by faith; and for the faith whereby he beholds and holds the Christ.

177. Worldly sorrow breaks hearts, but godly sorrow heales broken hearts.

178. Though Christ free us from sin, yet not from sorrow; he frees us from
the sin we sorrow for, but not from the sorrowing for the sin he frees us from.

179. Christ is the Son of God, and therefore beloved, Matthew. 3.17. we are
beloved, and therefore the sons of God, 1 John 3.1.

180. If thou repent with a contradiction, God will pardon thee with a
contradiction; if thou repent and not reform, that is repentance with a
contradiction; God will pardon thee, but send thee to hell, that is a pardon with
a contradiction. Oh be not deceived, God is not mocked.

181. It Is more comfortable doctrine to hear that some shall be saved, as the
doctrine of election teaches; then to hear that its uncertain whether any
shall be saved, as the doctrine of free will teaches.

182. The love of God does not know what it is to be idle, and idlers do not
know what it is to love God.

183. A man need not fear nor doubt to say, that there is a partial hypocrisy
in some men at all times, and in all men at some times.

184. They that fear not God and his greatness here, will be afraid of God
and his greatness hereafter.

185. God loves them that love him, and they that seek him shall find him,
Prove. 8.17. and yet there are some who shall seek him early, but that early will
be too late to find him, Prove. 1.28.

186. God can supply the absence of any, yea of all creatures; but not any, no
not all the creatures can supply the absence of God.

187. Though we are less then the least of all Gods mercies, yet he thinks
not the best to be too good for us; he neither spared to send his Son, nor
spared his Son when he sent him, but gave him up to death, yea it pleased the
Lord to bruise him. This is love! Oh what a manifestation, what a commendation
of love is this! and how shall he not with him as freely give us all things?

188. We may say that we know no reason why we should have so many mercies; and
the reason is, because mercy goes not by reason, but by grace: and God shows
mercy, when, where, and because he will; and that not because the creature, but
the mercy pleases him.

189. Children is sometimes a name common to all the Saints, to all the sons
and daughters of God; and thus a Babe-saint is a child, and among the children;
and a Fathersaint is but a child, and among the children: but sometime the name
is appropriated to a certain sort and size of Saints; so that it may be truly
said, all that are born of God are children, but all that are born of God are
not children as soon as they are born.

190. It was once said of one, Oh that thy body prospered as thy soul
prospers; but it may be often said of many, Oh that thy soul did prosper as
thy body prospers.

191. There are many that make good professions, but few that make their
professions good, or make good their professions.

192. If God were at man's dispose, what a God would he be! and if man were not
at Gods dispose, what a man (poor miserable man) would he be!

193. Tertullian says that the Christians did so sup as if they were to pray,
they did it with such vvatchfulnesse and heavenly mindedness: a good example
for Christians in our days, who pray as if they supped with very supine and
careless spirits.

194. If love find fault, it is that there may be no fault to be found: God on
this ground finds fault with his people, that his people may be without faults.

195. They are two choice mercies: 1. To have a broken heart for sin. 2. To
have the heart broken off from sin.

196. How little do we make of much mercy, and how much do we make of a
little misery! how little do we do for much mercy, and how great and much
ado do we make about a little misery! A little misery afflicts us much, and
much mercy affects us but little.

196. God has two dwelling places, the highest heavens, and the lowest hearts;
that is the habitation of his glory, this of his grace.

198. The Son of God became the son of man, that the sons of men might become
the sons of God.

199. If we be just and faithful in confessing the sins we would have
forgiven, God will be just and faithful in forgiving the sins we confess.

200. If men will not do what grace will have them do, grace will not do
what men would have it do; if men will not submit to graces teaching, men
shall never enjoy graces salvation.

The third Century.
201. To be without many sins, is the holiness on Earth; to be without any
sin, is the holiness of Heaven.

202. The things of this world are (and who would love such things as are) ever
wheeling; he that was upmost but even now, is presently undermost, as Haman;
and he that was undermost is upmost, as Mordecai: trust not then to greatness,
for no man is so fixed, but he may fall; despise no man's meanness, for none is
so low, but he may rise.

203. When Diogenes heard Zeno with subtle arguments endeavoring to prove
that there was no motion, he suddenly starts up and walks; Zeno asking the
cause thereof, said Diogenes, Hereby I confute you, and prove that there is
motion. Walking with God is the best way to confute them that think religion to
be but a notion; walking will prove motion.

204. When we are doing Gods business, we should forget our own; our eyes and
hearts should be fixed only on him: when we go to hear, we should not employ
our eyes, but our ears. O Lord pardon the many wanton glances, vain thoughts,
wandering eyes and desires, yea the wicked designs of many, that go to
Sermons, not to hear the Word, but to see their Mistress.

205. He that is sure of Gods love to him, is sure of Gods power for him; what
good cannot God do when he will? and what good will he not do for them to
whom he bears good will? They that know his name, may well trust him.

206. It Is not yet with us as well as it should be, if (though it be ill with
us) we be not content with what we are: for we should learn in all estates to
be content.

207. If a man be not converted, he may thank himself; but if he be converted,
he must thank God: that he is not converted is from man's free ill will: that
he is converted, is from Gods free good will.

208. Religion allows none to be idle; he that will not labor, must not eat;
in Religion, as well as any calling else, we must work for our living: God has
not promised to work for them that play. He is not like to be saved, that does
not like to work out his salvation. He that is found a faithful and weldoing
servant, will find a Well done good and faithful servant, enter thou into thy
Masters joy; but of the wicked, slothful, and unprofitable servant it is said,
Cast ye him into utter darkness.

209. If Esau were so much to blame to sell his birthright for a mess of
Pottage, which yet was to save his life; how much more are they to blame that
Ahab-like sell themselves to work wickedness, that for a title of Honor,
esteem of men, or for a little white and yellow dust, which is called Gold and
Silver, (mere vanities) will sell their souls? alas these ticklings will turn
into stings, and the torment will be the more torment, the more pleasing the
sin was. 'Twill be but cold comfort for any man to go to Hell with credit; or
that others think him gone to Heaven, when he feels himself in Hell.

210. It Is good to be prepared for that at all times, which may come at any
time, viz. death: if it come unsent for, yet it should not come unlookt for.
Setting a man's house and heart in order, will not make a man die the sooner:
'twill help a man to die the better. He that when he comes to die has nothing
to do but to die, may well beg to be dissolved, for he can say, I am ready to
be offered, if the time of my departure be at hand.

211. A bad great man is a great bad man: for the greatness of an evil man
makes the man's evil the greater; such a man will have many sins to answer for
which he never committed, because his committing of one made many others to
commit many, who happily had never done so, had they not been led by the example
of their leaders. If we take not heed, other men may have cause to be sorry for
our sins, and we have cause to be sorry for other men's sins; for they may
become our-other-mens sins.

212. Some men are kind to others, but for their own ends, and when they have
once attained the end for which they were kind, there is an end of their
kindness; they will serve you for their needs, and when you have served their
needs, you shall observe that they will neither serve nor observe you any
longer. Alas, do not men serve God thus! does not rich Jacob forget to pay
what poor Jacob did promise?

213. Some men have much to use, who make but little use of what they have.

214. Were we as loving as God is lovely, how (Oh how) infinitely should we
love him!

215. To some (as to Dives) death is the end of all comfort, and the beginning
of all misery; to others (as to Lazarus) death is the end of all misery, and
the beginning of all comfort. Lord, let my condition be such, that at death I
may pass from torment to comfort, and not from comfort to torment.

216. Every man loves to be beloved, and is apt to take pleasure in this, that
others take pleasure in him; whence that which ought not, does often come to
pass, men comply with men's humors, and that they may not be thought uncivil
will sin for company, and to please others, displease God. Oh Lord, let me
never cease to be a good Christian, that I may be thought a good companion. Let
me choose rather with Moses to suffer reproaches, then to enjoy the pleasures of
sin for a season; and rather go to prison with Joseph, then to live a Laplin to
the lust of the eye and the pride of life, or to be lulled and hushed asleep by
the fawnnings of this worlds flattery; Let it be enough to me to be beloved of
God.

217. Whatever talent, indowment or estate God has given thee, improve it not
for thy pleasure, but to please him; not to honor thy self, but to henour
him; for if he have not the glory, thou will have the shame, and cry out at
last, Inopem me copia fecit, Oh that I had never been rich, my riches have made
me poor; Oh that I had never been fair, my beauty made me proud and wanton;
Oh that I had never been learned and witty, my wit has made me a fool: abused
good turns to the greatest evil. Let not therefore the wise man glory in his
wisdom, nor the rich man in his riches, but let him that glories glory in
this, that he knows and loves, serves and honors God.

218. He that promises what he cannot do, is a foolish man; and he that
promises what he means not to do, is a false man; the first deceives others
most, the latter deceives himself most; and he that promises what he may not
do, is while courteous to others, cruel to himself; while a friend to another,
an enemy to his own soul.

219. A man may meditate of good, and yet his meditation may be evil; and a man
may meditate of evil, and yet his meditation may be good: It Is good to meditate
of good to do it, and of evil not to do it.

220. If it be good for us to draw near to God, Oh how good is it when God
draws near to us!

221. It Is good that a man should wait for God, Lament. 3.26. for God is good
to them that wait for him, Lament. 3.25.

222. It Is better to spend ones time in doing good, then in getting goods; for
the goods we get we must leave, but the good we do will never leave us: When
we rest from our labor, our works shall follow us.

223. God stands in no need of us, for he is blessed without us; but we stand
in need of God, for we cannot be blessed without him. Oh the gracious
condescension of God!

224. If a man cannot be rich with honesty, he should be content to be poor;
for it is better to continue poor with a good conscience, then to grow rich
with a bad one.

225. He that truly desires heavenly joys, or the joys of Heaven, which shall
never have an end, cannot but desire to have an end of earthly joys which are
but for a season.

226. It Is great reason that we should continue to pray, because ourwants
continue; and it is as great reason that we should continue to praise, because
our mercies continue. Who is there so full, that wants nothing? and who so
empty, but has something? Let none give over praying, but he that wants
nothing; and let none give over praising, that has any thing. Is not the mercy
we want worth the asking? and is not the mercy we have worth the acknowledging?
it is sin and misery to give over duty.

227. He can be no friend to thee, that is a friend to thy faults; and thou
can be no friend to thy self, if thou be an enemy to him that tells thee of
thy faults. Will thou like him the worse that would have thee be better?

228. Christ has commanded us to love our enemies, and to do good for evil;
which if we do not, we wrong our selves more by not doing good to them (for
that is our sin) then they did by doing us wrong, for that was but our
affliction: and the evil of sin is worse then the evil of suffering.

229. Some men do well, and say nothing, according to the rule of Christ,
Matthew. 6.1.-4. others say well, and do nothing, according to the Pharisees,
Matthew. 23.3.

230. It Is strange to see how the Kingdom of sin is divided, and yet stands;
there are diverse Iusts; lusts that differ and disagree, as covetousness and
prodigality. Poor sinners! what an hard task have they that serve diverse
lusts? that like Tapsters and Drawers must answer all: if pride call, here Sir;
if lust call, anon Sir; if covetousness call, I come Sir; how can, and yet how
does the same sinner serve these several masters? sad case when men are ruled
by unruly lusts.

231. To refuse Jesus Christ, and the tenders of grace and mercy by him, is the
shortest way to Hell; some men ride the rode, the high way to Hell, while they
drink, swear, lie, whore away their souls; but they that re fuse Christ
Jesus, run by way of the plain, they make a shorter cut; while others go by
the bow, these go by the string: Lord, what haste do men make, and what pains
do men take to damn themselves!

232. Its better to beg ones bread with Lazarus on earth, then to beg ones
water with Dives in Hell. Better to be tormented with sores in this world, then
to be sorely tormented in the world to come. Better to go from Lives door to
Abraham's bosom, then from Dives Table to the Devils Dungeon.

233. Some men lend, looking for nothing again; such lending is giving: others
give, looking for something again; such giving is but lending: others give and
lend, for he that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord; this is putting to
use without usury; this is laying up by laying out.

234. Many men do in words confess God, who do in works deny God; such men
shall not be judged by their words, but by their works. Satan's condemnation
will not be the less that he quoted Scripture, and called Jesus Christ the Son
of God, that he believes, and trembles, and is transformed into an Angel of
light: nor will it fare the better, but be far the worse with such men as have
had a form of godliness, and denied the power thereof, seeing they have held
the truth in unrighteousness; 'twil profit nothing to have been a professor of
piety, seeing they were workers of iniquity: Nay, their condemnation will be
the greater, for saying, I go Sir, but went not. Oh remember, if godliness be
good, why wilt not practice it? if it be evil, why wilt profess it? if thou will name the Name of the Lord, depart from iniquity, for what else have thou
(thou bold brazenfaced sinner) what have thou to do to take Gods Name into thy
mouth, and hate to be reformed? Think on this ye that forget God, lest he
tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver.

234. Times Redemption.

It Is dangerous putting of that to another day, which must be done to day, or
thou may be undone to morrow. Now or never, now or never; if it be not done
now, it may never be done, and then thou art undone for ever: Eternity depends
on this moment. The work thou have to do (viz. working out thy salvation) is
great, thy life at longest is but short, and thou can call no time thine, but
the present time. I have read of one Archias a Lacedemonian, that while he was
quaffing and ryotting, one delivers him a letter, to signify to him that some
laid in wait to take his life, and desiring him to read it presently, because
'twas a serious business; Oh said he, seria cras, we will think of serious
things to morrow; but that night he was slain. Oh boast not of to morrow, thou
know not what a day may bring forth: Why will thou talk of many years,
when this night thy soul may be taken from thee. Oh what would thou give for
a day, when it may be a day too late. Consider therefore in this thy day, to
day while it is called to day, the things of thy peace, lest they should he hid
from thine eyes, and while thou like a blind Sodomite do grope to find a
door of hope, fire and brimstone rain about thine ears.

235. Clean contrary.

Many men instead of using the world as if they used it not, use the things of
God as if they used them not; when as they should serve God and but make use of
the world, they serve the world and do but make use of God; they do not love
these things for Gods sake, but God for these things sake.

236. A Part no Portion.

The great fallacy with which Satan desudes many men, is that Logicians call a
been compositis ad male divisa; when he gets them to take Religion into pieces
and then takes one piece for religion: one cries up Christ, another Faith,
another love, another good works: but what is God without Christ, or Christ
without faith, and what is faith without love, and what is love without works?
but now, take God in Christ by faith which works by love and keeps the
commandments of God, this is pure religion. It Is the whole that is the whole
of man.

237. The new Command.

The command of loving one another, is not called new as to the thing to be
done, for that was from the beginning, but as to the manner of doing it, or the
rule according to which it is to be done. Formerly 'twas love thy neighbor as
thy self, (there self-love was the rule) but here it is love one another as I
have loved you (here Christ's love is the rule) we should love one another
better then we did, because Christ loves us better then we our selves.

238. Greater condemnation.

If sinning against the light of Gods works had so great a condemnation, Romans
1. how great a condemnation will be to them that sin against the light of
Gods words? and if the law condemned much, the gospel much more; for if they
escaped not, but dyed without mercy, who finned against Moses, him that spoke
on earth, much more shall not they escape, but are worthy of a sorer
punishment, who neglect the great salvation, and refuse him that speaks from
Heaven, Jesus Christ.

239. The Sinner speechless.

No man can give any reason why he should sin against God; if God should ask
men, as he did the man that had not on the wedding garment, Why came thou
bither without a wedding garment? So, why art thou proud? and thou wanton? and
thou unclean? and thou covetous, and thou drunk, and why do thou swear, etc?
Men would be as he, that is, speechless; they could give no reason, for indeed
there is no reason to give. One may say to sinners as Absalom said to Hushai.
is this thy kindness to thy friend? Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish
people and unwise? What iniquity have your fathers, may God say, or you found
in me? What can you lay to my charge? Am not I a lovely and a loving God? Can
any bid more for your love then I? Can any do more for you then I? If you can
speed better, and mend your market, go away and leave me; if not, why will ye
spend your money for that which is not bread, and your labor for that which
satisfies not? If you can find no fault with me, why will you commit such a
fault as to leave me? What cause have you to say, We will not come to thee? Is
it a crime to feed you? Is it a crime to clothe you? Is it a crime to preserve
you? Is it a crime to send my Son into the world to save you? Is it a crime to
beseech and beg you (as for an alms) that you would be reconciled, and be
happy? forgive me this wrong.

Be astonished, O Heavens, at this, and be horribly afraid, Jer. 2.11, 12, 13.
Why? What Is the matter? the matter! it is this, My people have committed two
evils, they have forsaken me without a cause, and have changed their glory for
that which does not profit. Oh sinners, let me say to you, as Saul to his
servants, 1 Samuel 22.7. Hear now ye Benjamites, will the son of Jesse give every
one of you Fields and Vineyards, and make you Captains of thousands? Oh poor
Souls, will sin, will Satan, will the world give you Heaven and Eternal life?
Why will you be so unreasonable to sin against God, and wrong your own souls?
Oh hear, and fear, and do no more so wickedly.

240. Come and see.

A sight (one sight) of Jesus Christ does more ravish and overcome a soul, then
all the reports that can be made of him; the tongue of men and Angels cannot
set him forth so lively and lovely as a poor soul finds him. Who can believe
honey to be so sweet, as he that has tasted it knows it to be? the daughters
of Jerusalem wonder at the daughter of Sion, when sick of love, and say, What
is thy beloved, more then another beloved? Why so fond? Oh says the soul, his
mouth is most sweet, yea, he is all desires -- althogether lovely; this is my
beloved, this, Oh this is my beloved. When poor creatures come to know him as
by himself made known to them in his beauty, they then say as John 4.42. we
believe not because of thy saying, for we our selves have heard him, and know
(assuredly) that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the world; yea, they
say as the Queen of Sheba said of, and unto Solomon, 1 Kings 10.5. (Oh Lord)
for indeed a greater then Solomon is here, and therefore let me say, Oh Lord)
since I saw thy wisdom, and the house that thou have built, and the meat of
thy Table, and the sitting of thy servants, and the attendants of thy
Ministers, and their apparel, etc. there is no more spirit in me -- to say the
rest. Ah 'twas a true report that I heard of thee, when I (poor I) was in mine
own (self) Country, but I believed not the words, till I came, (oh happy
coming) and mine eyes (oh blessed eyes) had seen it: and behold the half was not,
no not the half was told me; thou exceedest, abundantly exceedest the report
which I heard. Happy thy men! happy thy servants, which stand continually
before thee, to hear thy wisdom, which is able to make wise unto salvation!
Blessed be the Lord thy God which delights in thee (in thee is he well
pleased) to set thee on the throne of Israel, whom he loved for ever. Oh Lord
says the soul, help me to give, but what? Silver and Gold? Alas, what is an
hundred and twenty talents of Gold? and of Spices very great store? and
precious stones, though as many as the sand of the Sea? No, Lord, it is mine
heart, such as it is, that I would bestow, for indeed thou have ravished me with
one of thine eyes: Take it, Lord, it is wholly thine, Oh that not a vain thought
might lodge in it any more; shall it be thus, Lord? then awake my glory, and
thou my soul, and all that is within me praise the Lord, and bless his holy
name. What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits, and among all, for
that, for that which is the worth of all, and more worth then all the rest.

Herb. -- I will do for that,
Alas! my God, I know not what.
But though I cannot fully pay the shot,
Let me not love thee, if I love thee not.
Let all the glory of my glory be,
To give all glory and my self to thee.
This is too little, more is due,
I cannot requite it, Lord, it is true.
241. When a poor soul considers what God has done for him, in admitting him
into communion with himself, to eat bread at his Table continually, he cries
out (even weeping for admiration) as Mephibosheth did, 2 Samuel 9.8. What is thy
servant, that thou should look on such a dead dog as I am! Such a God, on
such a dog! And when he considers from what a low, to what an high estate God
has brought him, he says as Jacob, Genesis 32.10. I am less then the least of
all thy mercies, and of all the truth which thou have shown me, for with my
staff I went over this Jordan, and now I am become two bands. And when Jesus
Christ tells a soul, that he will make him a King, and a Priest to God, he
humbly says as Saul to Samuel, 1 Samuel 9.21. Am not I a Benjamite, ^f the
smallest of the Tribes of Israel? And my family the least of all the families
of the Tribe of Benjamin? Ah Lord, wherefore speak thou so to me? Yea, it
says as Elisabeth said to Mary, the blessed Mother of blessed Jesus, when she
heard the salutation, that the babe (the heart of a poor believer) leapt within
her, and she spoke, yea, she spoke aloud; Blessed, yea blessed art thou,
whence! Oh whence is this to me, that the Mother of my Lord (Oh says the soul,
that my God) should come to see me, even me, poor worthless me! That it fares
with them as with them, Luke 24.36 -- 42. Jesus stood in the midst, and said,
Peace be unto you; and they were terrified and affrighted: but he said, Why are
ye troubled? it is I; behold my hands and my feet, and they believed not for
joy and wondered.

242. Devils incarnate.

Persecuters are called Devils, Rev. 2.10. and as they do the Devils work, they
shall have the Devils wages; they cast Gods Saints into prison, and the Saints
God will cast them into prison, into an everlasting prison and dungeon of outer
darkness, unless they repent. Christ will say to them at last, as Gideon said
to Zeba and Zalmunna, Judges 8.18, 19. what manner of men were they, whom you
slew at Tabor? and they answered, as thou art, so were they, each one resembled
the child of a King: then will Christ reply as Gideon, they were my brethren,
the sons of my father, as the Lord lives, had you feared me, and saved them
alive, I would not slay you, I would not damn you; but now, away to prison,
away to Hell. Woe (this woe) to him that offends one of Christ's little ones;
it were better for him that a millstone were hung about his neck, and he cast
into sea; I far better then to be cast into the bottomless pit of Hell.

243. The sins of professors quickly ripe.

The sins of a professing people or Nation, are sooner ripe, then the sins of
the wild world, as fruit that grows more in the Sun, they are concocted and
come to maturity sooner: and therefore ('it is observable that) God bears longer
with the world, yea, and (in a sense) deals more gently in their punishment.
The sin of the Amorites was long (many years) ere it was full ripe; but Isreal's
was ripe in forty years; and seeing they were known of any people of the Earth,
therefore God will visit upon them all their iniquities, and that to their
cost, they shall more intensely feel his wrath. How dear was this Israel unto
God, by how many sweet, loving and precious appellations were they called? his
people, his spouse, his treasure, his Jewels, his darling, and yet God cast
them to the dogs. Oh how should England hear, and fear, and do no more so
wickedly, lest God make a quick dispatch, and do as by Asia, remove the Candles
and the Candlesticks out of their place.

244. The happy Adventure.

When a poor soul begins to be sensible of sin and its danger thereby,
though it lie down in sorrow, yet it should not mourn as without hopes; but
resolve as the Lepers. 2. Kings. 7.3. to prefer (though an uncertain) hope,
before a certain death. Say as they, why sit we here until we dye? if we
enter into the City, the famine is there, and we shall certainly dye; if we
sit still here, we dye also: now therefore come, let us fall (for the host of
the Syrians, let the poor soul say) into the hands of God, if he save us alive
we shall live, if he kill us, we shall but dye. Dye? Oh poor souls, never any
came to God by Christ, but they were saved alive; Come to him then for he will
not kill you, indeed he will not. Come to him and say as the Prodigal, when he
came to himself, how many hired servants of my Fathers have bread enough and
to spare, and I perish with hunger. I will arise and go to my Father etc. I,
do so, arise and go, for there is hope in Israel concerning this thing. See
how his father had compassion on him, how he ran, how he fell on his neck, how
he kissed him, and bid him welcome home. Say then as Hester c. 4.16. I will go
in unto the King, if I perish, I perish. What soul? perish say thou? no, no,
the Golden Scepter is held out, thou may come and welcome. God will say as
the King to Hester, c. 5.3. What will thou, and what is thy request? it shall
be given thee, even to the Kingdom; whereupon Hester made a feast for the King,
but God will make a feast for thee: Do thou not hear what he says: Luke
15.22. Bring forth the best robe, and put it on him, put a ring upon his hand,
and shoes on his feet, Kill the fatted Calfe, let us eat and be merry, for
this soul was dead and is alive, 'twas lost, and is found; Oh who would not
come to thee, thou, O thou lover of souls?

245. The smitting of Amalek.

A Saint should do by his corruptions, as Saul was commissioned to do by
Amalek: 1. Sam. 15.3. Go and smite Amalek, and utterly destory all that they
have, and spare them not, but slay both Man and Woman, Infant and Suckling, Ox
and sheep, Cammel and Ass; yea he should do as Ioshuah, c. 8. v. 26. who
withdrew not his hand until he had utterly destroyed the inhabitants of Ai. He
that is merciful to sin is cruel to his own soul.

246. Busie-idlenesse.

Man's idle time is the Devils working time, he does most when men do least; for
as Latimer said, the Devil has more service done him in one holy day, then in
many working-dayes.

247. The hypocritical deceitful pleasures of sin.

The pleasures of sin say unto us, as Jael said to Sisera, turn in my Lord,
turn in to me, fear not; and if we ask water, they will give us milk, and bring
forth butter in a Lordly dish; but when we are turned in, they ( as she did
Sisera) cover us with a Mantle, and finding us (by their lullings) to fall fast
asleep, they put their hand to the nails, and their right hand to the workmans
hammer, and with this hammer they smite us, piercing and striking through our
temples; at their feet we bow, we fall; where we bow, there we fall down dead,
Judge. 4.18, 19. with 5.25, 26, 27. their lips indeed drop like the honeycomb,
and their mouth is smoother then oil; but their end is bitter as wormwood,
sharp as a two-edged sword, their feet go down to death, and their steps take
hold on Hell, Prove. 5.3, 4, 5. with much fair speech they cause us to yield,
with the flattering of their lips they force us, and little think we, that we
go as an Ox to the slaughter, and as a fool to the stocks, till a dart strike
through our liver, as a bird hastes to the snare, and knows not that it is
for his life, Prove. 7.21, 22, 23.

248. Not Heaven, but God in Heaven.

If a Saint were in Heaven, and saw not Gods face there, he would say as
Absalom said to Joab, 2 Samuel 14.32. Wherefore am I come from Geshur? it had
been good for me to be there still, unless I may see the Kings face. Though
Heaven be Gods dwelling place, yea, his Presence Chamber, yet a Saint could not
be at rest there, if he saw not God: it is not the Jasper, nor the Crystal,
it is not the pure Gold wherewith the streets are paved, it is not the pearls,
nor the precious stones that are precious in his sight, but the Lord God
Almighty, and the Lamb, who are the light thereof: Whom have I in Heaven but
thee?

249. God more then self.

A Saint cares not how ill it go with him, so it go well with Jesus Christ;
he says, as Mephibosheth to David, 2 Samuel 19.30. yea, let him take all,
inasmuch as my Lord the King is come again in peace unto his house. So it may
go well with Gods name, Moses cares not though his be blotted out of the book
of life: and said John, he must increase, but I must decrease, this my joy
therefore is fulfilled.

250. Little faith in the world concerning the world.

A Gentlewoman being told that the world and the glory of it was but vanity;
it is true said she, Solomon said so, but he tried it first, and so will I.
Alas, that we cannot take Gods word, we cannot believe till (nor scarce when)
we see: the world bewitcheth us before we will believe it to be a Witch; we
believe it not to be poison, till we are poisoned.

251. The custom of the Country.

God has two daughters; the younger, which is Heaven, is fair and lovely, like
Rachel, and courted by all; the elder is Repentance, which (with tears) is
blearey'd, like Leah, and neglected by most: but if men ask, as Jacob for
Rachel, God will answer as Laban did him, it is not mos loci, it is not the
custom of the place to marry the younger before the elder. He that will not
marry the Leah of repentance, shall never have the Rachel of Heaven.

252. Not my will, but thine.

I have heard of a good Woman, who when she was sick, being asked whether she
were willing to live or dye; answered, which God pleases; but said one, if God
should refer it to you, which would you choose? truly said she, if God should
refer it to me, I would e'n refer it to him again.

253. Plain Preaching.

Bernard Preaching one day very Scholastically, the Learned thankt him, but not
the godly; but when another day he preached plainly, the good people came
blessing God for him, and gave him many thanks, which some Scholars wondering
at; ah said he, Heri^ Bernardum, hodie Christum; yesterday I preached Bernard,
but to day I preached Christ; it is not Learning, but teaching; not the wisdom
of words, but the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit, that is welcome to
Saints.

254. The less of man, the more of God.

I can ( said Dr. Twisse of himself) take some pains in writing Controversies,
but I cannot take pains in making a Sermon; and when I have taken most, I find
that I have less edified my people, though perhaps more pleased my self.

It Is not man's explication, but Gods application of truth which edifies.

255. Savoury Salt.

Salt is the first set on, and the last taken off the table, that every dish
from first to last maybe seasoned. May not the Apostle refer to this, when he
says, let your speech be seasoned with Salt. Col. 4.6. Let it be Savory, such
as tends to edifying. Can that which is unsavory be eaten without salt? or
what taste is there in the white of an egg? Sales without Sal, the grace of
speaking without speaking of grace, or a grace in speaking, without speaking
grace is but unsavory: would God our table-talke might never want Salt.

256. Old men and Babes.

God has Saints of several degrees and sises, and some of them have more
Communion with him then others: from among the multitude he chose twelve to be
with him, from among the twelve, he chose three (Peter, James, and John) which
were e secretioribus of the privy council, from among the three he chose out
John as his peculiar darling and bosom favorite, of whom it is said five times,
that he was the disciple whom Jesus loved. So now to this day, God has his
babes, who eat milk and nothing else; his Children, who know their Father and
are assured of his love; his young men, who go out to war; and the Fathers
in Israel whose gray headed experience and wisdom abounds: for they know him
from the beginning.

It Is a great mercy to be one of Gods, though but one of his little ones, yea
the least of all; to be a Star, though not of the first magnitude: to be a
Disciple though not a John, nor one of the three, nor one of the twelve, nor
one of the seaventy. But to be a John, a darling, to lean on his breast, to
lie in his bosom, Oh how great a mercy! it is mercy to be newborn, though one
be but newly and as one newly borne, but to grow up to a perfect Stature to be
a man in Christ Jesus, Oh how great a mercy! Lord perfect all that which
coneerns thy Servant, yea, that which concerns all thy Servants.

257. A Dialogue between God and Abraham: Wherein is evinced 1. Abraham's
faith, Heb. 11.17, 18, 19. 2. Abraham's fear, Genesis 22.12.


He feared God, but was not afraid of God: His faith was all tried, yet not at
all tired, but rejoiced as a strong man to run his race, which was the more to
be admired, if we consider what ifs and ands, what put offs and objections,
Abraham might have made, when God tempted Abraham and said.

God. Abraham my servant, my friend, where art thou? Come forth, attend to
execute my Commands.


Abraham. To which he said, behold me, here I am, speak Lord, for thy servant
hears, I am wholly at thy command and service, do with me and mine what
seems thee good; If thou bid me go, I will go; and if thou bid me come, I
will come; whatever thou bid'st me do, I will do it.


God. Then God said, Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou love,
and get thee to the land of Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt offering,
upon one of the Mountains which I will tell thee of.


Abraham. To this, he did not, but might have pleaded; why Lord, thou art
blessed in thy self, and need not any thing; thou desire not sacrifice,
else would I give it thee, and thou delightest not in burnt offerings it is
true, Lord, thy sacrifices are a broken and contrite heart, and that I will
willingly offer, do not despise but accept of that.


God. But says God, offer thy son.


Abraham. Lord, If thou will have an offering, all my herds and flocks are at
thy service; behold (as long after this Araunah said to David) here are Oxen
for burnt sacrifice, and threshing instruments, and other instruments for wood,
all these things will I willingly give unto the King, and the Lord my God
accept it.


God. No says God, I will take no Bullock out of thine house, nor he Goats
out of thy fold, for every beast of the forest is mine, and the Cattle on a
Thousand hills; I know all the Fowls of the Mountains, and the wild beasts of
the field are mine; if I were hungery I would not tell thee, for the world is
mine and the fullness thereof; will I eat the flesh of Bulls, or drink the
blood of Goats? No, Abraham No, but offer thy son.


Abraham. Lord it is true, thou art above these, and he that offers thee praise
honors thee; and therefore thou call upon us, to offer unto God
thanksgiving, and to pay our vows to the most high; and Lord I am willing to
pay my vows in the great Congregation. Accept of my thanks, and I will thank
thee the more; receive these Vows as part of the debt, and I will vow and pay
thee more.


God. No says God, Nothing but thy Son, offer, Abraham offer thy Son.


Abraham. Lord, If thou will have the flesh of man to be sacrificed, and his
blood to be powered out, then take one of my servants, Do not call my sins to
Remembrance and slay my son: good Lord spare my son.


God. No says God, offer up thy son.


Abraham. Lord if thou will have a son take Ismael, Spare mine Isaac, Lord
spare mine Isaac.


God. No says God, take thy son even Isaac.


Abraham. Lord, he is mine only son, he has not a Brother, nor are there any
more in Sarahs womb, Lord, I beg only this, spare mine only son.


God. No says God, take thine only son.


Abraham. Why Lord, I have had him but a little while; if thou will take him,
yet good Lord, let mine Isaac and I laugh together yet a while.


God. No says God, take him now.


Abraham. But Lord, I love him, and so, that to take Isaac is to take my life,
which is bound up in the life of the lad; and if thou take him away, thou will
bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.


God. Well says God, I know thou love him, but must you not love me better?
offer up this son, this only son, this Isaac whom thou love.


Abraham. But Lord, though thou art righteous when I plead with thee, yet let
me talk with thee of thy Judgments. What will the wicked say, when they shall
hear that thou delightest in blood? and that thy servants must offer their
children unto thee; Lord, who will serve thee at this rate?


God. Well, says God, I take but mine own, and I may do with mine own what I
please; I that give may take; and therefore mind not you what the world will
say, but what I say; and I say, offer thy son.


Abraham. But Lord, have thou not commanded me to do no murder, and must I now
imbrue mine hands in blood? and in mine own blood too? Oh happy I, might my
blood go for his! Oh Isaac, Isaac, my son Isaac, my son, my son, would God I
might die for thee, Oh Isaac, my son, my son! Lord, how can this stand with the
Law which thou have given me?


God. Abraham, says God, such things are not first just, and then willed by
me, but willed by me, and therefore just. Abraham, do you not know that I can
repeal, or make exceptions? it is I that say it, therefore do it. Who is this
that darkneth counsel by words without knowledge? gird up now thy loins like a
man, smite him, kill him; have not I commanded thee? be courageous and a son of
valor, go and offer thy son.


Abraham. But good Lord, thou have made this exception, when thou did show
man what was good, and pleasing in thine eyes, thou would not that he should
give his firstborn for his transgression, nor the fruit of his body for the
sins of his soul, but to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with God;
to obey (thou say it) is better then sacrifice, and to hearken then the fat
of rams.


God. Well then, says God, hearken and obey, this is to do justice, this is
(Oh wonder) to show mercy; this is to walk humbly with thy God.


Abraham. Seeing I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, I will yet say,
Lord, he is the son of the promise, in whom (thou have said that) all the
nations of the earth shall be blessed; now Lord, if he die, and die a child
without children, where then is the blessedness thou spakest of? what will
become of the blessing?


God. Well Abraham, says God, perform you what I command, and I will perform
what I promise. What will Abraham, who was once not weak in faith, and
considered not his own body, nor Sarah's, when 'twas dead, who staggered not
through unbelief at my promise, but was strong in faith, and gave me glory, who
was fully persuaded that what I had promised, I was able to perform, and was
not disappointed of his hope, though against hope; will this Abraham now call
me in question? have thou known my name, and will thou not trust in me? am not
I the Lord who change not? have I said it, and shall it not come to pass? is
there any thing too hard for God? am not I able to raise up even out of stones,
to raise up children unto Abraham? Cannot I say to dry bones, live? thou have
received him from the dead in a figure, and were Isaac in the grave, could not
I who am the resurrection from the dead, say, Isaac come forth? arise and walk,
that thy father may receive thee with double joy, saying, Isaac my son, who was
dead, (yea, who was twice dead) is alive. Abraham, offer thy son.


Abraham. My dear Lord, seeing I who am but dust and ashes, have taken upon me
to speak unto thee, Oh let not my Lord be angry, if I speak once more. If I may
not prevail to (Oh that I might prevail to) save Isaac alive, yet let me
entreat thee, that I may not be the Priest, let not mine hand be upon him, how
can I see the death of the child! Good Lord, let some other do it, surely I
cannot lift up my hand, or if I do, shall I not wish it may wither, or be
turned into a stone? will not these eyes run down with rivers of tears? Ah,
Lord, I can speak no more, mine heart will break, mine hand will shake: Send by
whom thou will send, let me, Oh let me not go.


God. Yes thou, take him thou, and go thou, and offer him thou, none but thou.


Abraham. Ah Lord, yet once more, but this once more, and I have done. I am old
and full of days, past travail, spare me a little, let me not go so far as
the land of Moriah; let it (if it must be, let it) be done at home.


God. No Abraham, take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou love,
and get thee into the Land of Moriah, and offer him there, no where but there.


Thus you have seen, if not a faith of Miracles, yet a Miracle of faith, that
one who had so much, and more to say, should say nothing, but rise up early in
the morning (after he had slept upon it, if sleep he could) and saddle his
ass, and take two of his young men, and Isaac his son, and cleave the wood,
and rise up and go to the place; and lest he should be interrupted by his
servants, he left them with the asses, and lays the wood upon his son, his son
Isaac, (he must bear his cross) and when this innocent soul, this Lamb did
open his mouth (not to complain) but to ask for another, he tells him, ( could
Abraham tell him without a sigh?) that God would provide; and what is Abraham
about to do now? what to bind him? Ah, Abraham, was thine heart in thy hand,
or thy hand in thine heart? What, and lay him on the Altar! Tears, Abraham,
tears. What, and stretch forth his hand, and take the knife, to slay his son!
Oh wonder! Yet Abraham is so far from holding or praying to God to hold his
hand, that the Lord himself cries out, Oh Abraham, hold thy hand.

This is Abraham, of whom God says, now I know thou fear (love) me,
seeing thou have not withheld thy son, thine only son from me. How then with
admiration, and adoration, may we say to God, now we know thou love us, in
that thou have not withheld thy son, thine only son. Isaac was but a shadow
(and the offering up of Isaac but a shadow of the offering ^p) of the Son of
God. Oh what a ^ove-token is this! herein is the ^^ve of God manifested; in
this ^od commends his love, God (...) love the world, that he gave ^s Son,
and that to death, that his Son might give life to us. Was ever love like
thine! That thou would part with a Son, such a Son, so precious in himself,
so precious in thine eyes, who was thy Sabbath, thy rest, in whom thou were
well pleased, for sinners, for enemies, who did wickedly even as they could.
Ah, Lord, never was there love like thine.

-- Thy love, Oh Lord, to me Surpasses that of Abraham to thee. 258.
Boldness in Prayer.

God gives all men leave to pray, but he gives his people leave to be bold in
prayer; and that not only for themselves, to say, as Jacob, I will not let
thee go, but for others, as Moses for Israel; and as Luther said, thy will be
done. Remarkable is the boldness which Abraham used with God, in the case of
Sodom, Genesis 18.23. where he seems at the first dash to charge God with a kind
of injustice, and yet but upon a peradventure; six times he comes to God, and
always with but a peradventure; he fell (a great fall) from fifty to ten, and
that but with a peradventure, and yet God gives him the hearing; yea, seems
willing to have taken less, if Abraham had but had the boldness to bring his
fifty to five.

Is God no more Almighty? What is Prayer?
Bold creature, Prayer becomes God's Conqueror.
Rare Stratagem of war! Prayer wins the field,
Yet God's not overcome, but God does yield.
259. Let not the left hand know what the right hand does.

When a Christian is about to perform any duty, he should say to himself, as
Abraham said unto his young men, Genesis 22.5. Abide you here with the Ass, and I
and the lad will go yonder and worship; only let him leave out this and come
again. Self tarry you here, flesh tarry you here, I and my spirit must go and
worship; a poor soul may say many times, the spirit is in him; but oh it is
glorious when one can say, that he is in the Spirit, and can attend upon God
without distraction.

Ah my dear Lord, divorce my self from me!
Then single I will singly worship thee:
Yet one wish more, for better two then one,
And it is not good for man to be alone.
That I may to thee double honor give,
Let thine in me, and me in thy Spirit live.
260. An heavenly use of earthly things.

Use recreations, and that which is more necessary, very eating, and drinking,
and sleeping, not as things which thou likest, but as things which thou
lackest; not out of lust, but necessity: Look on all the pleasures of this
world, either as sins or snares, and then thou will not take too much pleasure
in this world. Use all Earthly things as thou do a pair of stairs, by which
thou go up to thy chamber, but still keep them under thy feet; though
thou put forth thine hand, yet keep in thine heart, and be sure that while the
things of earth have thy body, the things of Heaven may have thy soul: though
all things be lawful to thee, yet come not under the power of any. Let not thy
servants be thy masters: thou were not made to serve thine estate, thy body,
and thy sensual appetite, but they were made to serve thee. Use thine estate
then to serve thy bodily-occasions, and thy body to serve thy soul-occafions,
and thy soul to observe Gods Commandments; thus all thou do will be a glory
to thee, because all that is thus done (decently and in order) is done to the
glory of God: and thus while others turn their service of God into a bodily
exercise, thou may turn thy bodily exercise into the service of God.

261. Improvement.

Were men but as wise for eternity, as they are for time, and did they
spiritually improve their natural principles for their souls, as they do
naturally for their bodies and estates, what precious Christians might men be;
for instance.

1. Principle. To believe good news well grounded. Why then is not the Gospel
(which is the best and best grounded news in the world) believed? 2. To love
what is lovely, and that most which is most lovely. Why then is not Christ the
beloved of men's souls, seeing he is altogether lovely? 3. To fear that which
will hurt them. Why then are not men afraid to sin, seeing nothing is so
hurtful to them as sin? 4. Not to trust a known deceiver; why then do men
trust 1. Satan, the old Serpent, the deceiver of the world? 2. The world, and
its deceitful riches. 3. Their own hearts, which are deceitful above knowledge.
Alas! 5. To lay up for a rainy day; for old age. Why then do not men lay up
for eternity, treasures of faith and good works against the day of death and
judgment? 6. He that will give most shall have it. Why do not men give their
love and service to God then? Does not he bid most? 7. Take warning by others
harms. Why do not men take heed of sinning from the sufferings and torments
which others undergo for sinning? 8. To have something to show under men's
hands, because they are mortal. Why then will not men have something to show
under Gods hand for their security to salvation, seeing not God, but they are
mortal? Ah, if men did but walk by their own rules, and improve such and many
others of their own Principles, what an help would it be to godliness. But
alas, God may complain of men as of his people of old, my people do not
consider, men do not consider.
262. How bad soever they are who profess the truth, yet the truth which they
profess is never the worse; if they offend and wrong their souls, do not thou
be offended and wrong thine own soul.

263. We many (alas too many) times have to do with God, without confidering
what we have, or with whom we have to do.

264. Some good things come to the Saints in this life, but the rest and the
best is reserved for the life to come.

265. Recreation.

Some men are so much at, and so much in recreations, that they lose the
recreation of recreation, let it be but short and 'twill be the sweeter,
especially if thou preserve thine heart, to be as free to go off as to come
on; else it is to be feared, that if thou work at thy play, thou will play at
thy work; for he that makes his recreation a business, will think his
business a toil; and if once thy calling be a wearines, thou will soon be
weary of thy calling, and then there is room made for the next lust that offer's
it self to thy service, that thou mai'st offer thy self to 'its service.

266. The day of Judgment.

The day of judgment will be to many dies deceptionis a day of deceit, not
that it will deceive any, but make it appear that many have deceived
themselves with vain hopes of heaven, of which they will then be disappointed.

Many that have past man's day of approbation, may at that day meet with
reprobation.

Many that have been looked upon, and have looked like gold here, may be found
dross then, yea reprobate silver will he call them.

266. The teachings of God.

Some duties God teaches us by precept, as says and repentance; others he
teaches us by example, as love mercy etc. many are taught both these ways,
which yet are not taught of God, because they learn not what they are taught.
Men are then properly taught when they are powerfully and effectually taught,
so as that they learn the truth as it is in Jesus.

267. Surely he that love's himself will not hate his brother, for while he is
out of charity with his brother, God is out of charity with him; and he loses
more for want of Gods Love, then his brother loses for want of his love.

269. As he that provid's not for the relief of his own family is worse then
an infidel, and has denied the faith; so he that relieves not them that are
naked and destitute of daily food, has also denied the faith. James 2. The
true believer therefore should so provide for his own family, as that he may
relieve others and so relieve others, as not to wrong his own family; for
though charity seek not her own, yet without offense or offending, charity may
begin at home.

270. He that repents of a good act, turns good into evil.

271. Many, because they can hide their sin from men, are apt to think that
their sin can be hid from God; because they sin unpuni'sht, that sin has no
punishment, and because they can sin with ease, that it is an easy thing to
sin: but ah when God shall reprove them, and set their sin in order before
their faces, and when the wages of sin, which is eternal death, shall be their
portion, and when the gnawing worm shall ever live as a sting in their
consciences, they will then know how they have been deceived and hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin, that they might not be sensible what an evil
and bitter thing it was that the fear of God was not before their eyes.

272. Many men go about to mince, mitigate and lessen their sin, and s^y of it
as Jonathan in another case, I have tasted but a little honey on the top of a
rod, and I must die. I have stolen, I have lied, I have taken a bribe, I have
used false weights and measures, I have dissembled and equivocated, but 'twas
but for a little, and must I die? Alas, they that sin for a little, will not
find their sin little; nay, the sin is the greater that men would transgress
the good Commands of the great God for so little. The less the temptation, the
greater the sin; if thou can find it in thine heart to sin so high at so low
a rate, at what a rate would thou sin for more? If thou can sell Christ for
thirty pieces, what would thou do for a greater price?

273. A man should not hate the person for the sins sake, nor love the sin for
the persons sake.

274. It Is good to take the changes of this world without changing, not to be
exalted when we are exalted, nor to be cast down, when we are cast down; but to
carry it with an even frame toward God and man, as having learnt how to abound
without pride, and how to want without murmuring.

275. Be not curious nor busy in enquiring after other men's business; he that
minds the doing of his own business, will find business enough to do.

276. Some men never forsake their sin; till their sin forsake them, they do
wickedly as they can, and as long as they can, and were their power as much as
their will, they would neither leave sin, nor suffer sin to leave them: they
will as much as they have power to do, though they have not power to do as much
as they will.

277. A drunken and an angry man do both agree in this, that they speak they
know not what, and afterward they know not what they spoke.

278. There Is little difference in Religion, between not giving to the poor,
and taking from the poor, btween not saving and kiling, between not doing good,
and doing evil; for in Matthew. 25. the sentence of condemnation is past, not for
opposing, or taking from, or killing, but for not relieving the poor; it is
past-on sins of omission, because indeed the omission of good is the commission
of evil.

279. I have heard of a woman, that did grudge to give her husband obedience
and honor, because as she said he was unworthy; to whom it was answered, that
how unworthy soever he were, yet the command of God was worthy to be obeyed;
whatever she had to say against her husband, she had nothing to say against the
command of God, which is holy, just, and good.

280. When a Surgeon comes to let us blood, we bid him welcome, we thank
him, and give him a fee beside: and shall we not welcome God, when he comes by
any affliction to let us blood, and to cut out our dead flesh? especially when
we may say as a Maid, who lay under a Surgeons hand, and being ask't how she
could endure such lancing, etc. she replied, 'twas her father, who loved her,
and did it to do her good. They verily for a few days chasten us after their
own pleasure, but he for our profit, that we may be partakers of his holiness.
And shall we not bless him?

281. A Minister living near to a Philosopher, did often persuade him to become
a Christian; Oh but said the Philosopher, if I turn Christian, I must or may
lose all for Christ: to whom, and to which the Minister replied, if you lose
any thing for Christ, he will repay it an hundred fold: I but said the
Philosopher, will you be bound for Christ, that if he do not pay me, you will?
Yes, that I will said the Minister: So the Philosopher became a Christian, and
the Minister entered into bond, and became a surety for the Surety of the
Covenant. When this new-Christian-Philosopher was on his sick and deathbed, he
held this bond in his hand, and sent for the Minister, to whom he gave up the
bond, saying, Christ has paid all, there is nothing for you to pay, take your
bond. Surely though a man should be a loser for Christ, he shall be no loser by
Christ, he will make amends for all, Matthew 19.21.

282. When we know not what to do, we should not be disconsolate, nor
discontent, but have our eyes to God; for though we are at a loss, yet God is
not, he is where he was, when we know not where we are; though other men may
master us, yet God is more man's master, then man is ours, yea, when we are in
our enemies hands, we are not out of Gods hands. Wait quietly on him, and he
will bring it to pass, delight thy self in him, and he will give thee thine
hearts desire; in all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy path.

283. A stumbling block removed. Many men stumble at this stumbling stone, that
those who teach well, live ill; the good Lord remove the offenders, and the
offense: Tush say they, we know them too well to think they are in earnest.
Alas! alas! indeed it is true, they that Preach the Gospel of truth, should
practice the truth of the Gospel; but if they will not, wilt not thou? is the
truth the worse, because they are bad? the Doctrine which they Preach, may save
thee, if thou believe it, and do it, though they that Preach the Doctrine may
not be saved themselves. If they be so bad to go to Hell, will thou be so mad
to follow them there? What said our Savior of the Pharisees, (bad men in good
employment) after their sayings do ye, Matthew. 23. and as the Proverb says, do
as they say, and not as they do, unless they do as they should do; it is not so
much the Preachers Practice, as the Preachers Doctrine, that thou art to mind;
if they teach what they should, that is to thee, if they do not, what they
teach, that is to themselves. But oh all you that speak in the name of the Lord,
let me beg you, that we may all be living and walking Gospels; Our work is not
only to be Heavenly in the Pulpit: Shall we Preach Christ to others, and be
without proof of Christ living in us? Shall we make our selves transgressors,
by destroying the things that we build? How can we think that others will learn
of us, if we will not learn our selves? Do we think to go Heaven any other way?
Shall it always be said in reproach, that when in the Pulpit, it is pity they
should come out; but when out, it is pity they should come in? What! shall we
bring up an evil report upon the good Gospel? shall we take his name into our
mouth, and not be reformed? shall we that say to others, live holily, live wick
edly? shall we that teach Gospel-faith, not believe and tremble? shall we that
call upon others to have their conversation in Heaven, mind Earthly things,
and become enemies to the Cross of Christ? shall we that make our boast of the
Law, through breaking of the Law dishonor God? for by this the name of God is
blasphemed among men. Oh that therefore we may be an example of the believers,
not only in word, but in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith and
purity, and so take heed to our selves, and our Doctrine, that we may save our
selves and them that hear us. And you dear souls that are offended, let me
beseech you in the bowels of our Lord Jesus Christ, not to think the worse of
Preaching, if Preachers be bad, nor to think that the Gospel preached is faulty,
because the Preachers are in fault. Oh let your profiting be known to all men,
do not refuse an Heavenly treasure, though in an Earthly Vessel; nor think the
worse of the Gospel, though Judas be a Preacher. As thou love thy soul, do
not be offended with that which is without offense, though he that brings it do
offend.

284. He that gives most may do most good to others; but he that gives best,
does most good to himself.

285. Some persons pass their few days here in an uncomfortable and wearisom
sadness of spirit, and come to Heaven ere they are aware; others pass their
days in a golden dream of jollity, and drop into Hell before they think of it.
Its better to dream of Hell, and when one awakes to find himself in Heaven,
then to dream of Heaven, and when one awakes, to find himself in Hell.

286. Its better to be a child of Abraham, though called dog as the woman was;
then to be a dog, and yet to be called a child as Dives was. Empty titles have
but empty comforts; Judas was more a Devil, though and when Christ called him
friend, then Peter was though and when Christ called him Satan. Peter though
called Satan, was Christ's friend, and Judas though called friend, was Christ's
enemy. Peter though bid to get behind, was not cast off, and Judas though
kissed, was not embraced. Mind not names, but things.

287. Who gives more?

God out-bids sin and Satan, and therefore surely if he that will give most
shall have us, we shall be (...) the Lords. Satan at most and best could (to
Christ which was for all mankind at once) but say, all this will I give thee.
This? Is this all? This all is nothing at all to what God offers. God offers
not only these things, but greater and better things then these: for
godliness has the promise of this life, and of that to come. Who can bid
more? Does sin bid pleasures? God bids more and better; sins pleasures are but
for a season, but at Gods right hand are pleasures for evermore; ever and more.
Do ye bid Crowns? God bids a Crown immortal which fades not away. Do they bid
a Kingdom? Christ bids Kingdom and Glory. Oh for shame, let us not deny God
our souls, seeing he bids most and best for them.

288. Praise dispraised.

He that rises early to praise his friend with a loud voice, it shall be a
curse to him: when the Pharisees came to tempt Christ, they praised him: If
they that praise thee to thy face, come not to tempt thee, yet a temptation
comes with the praise: Be thou therefore so civil to thy self, as to beg thy
friend that he would not be so civil to thee; its better that thou by speaking
should silence him, then that thou should be silent, while he is speaking:
for though thou hear no ill, yet he does not hear well, that hears his own
praises. He does thee more hurt that praises thee, though there be cause, then
he that dispraiseth thee when there is no cause; the one is thine enemy,
though he be thy friend; the other is thy friend, though he be thine enemy.

289. Partiality.

It Is strange to see how some strain at G^a^s, and swallow Camels; make
conscience of Tithing, Mint, and Cummin, and yet make none of neglecting the
weightier things of the Law: Swear they will not, yet make no bones of lying,
dissembling, doing to others what they would not have others to do to them; of
selfe-seeking, though to the breach of their promise, and to the hurt of
others: Herod would not dispense with his Oath, but could dispense with his
Conscience, and commit murder without a scruple. Many persons make conscience
of observing all Ordinances, (as they phrase it) which make little or no
conscience of neglecting many duties, or doing them negligently, without sense
or feeling: Dinah's brethren cannot in conscience marry their sister to an
uncircumcised man, yet can without conscience marry their own souls to revenge
and murder. Many cannot in conscience keep communion and maintain fellowship
with such as they acknowledge godly, because they are not of their opinion, and
in their way, who yet can maintain communion with such as they judge not godly,
being of their opinion, and in their way. Is this regular conscience? True
conscience is universal conscience; and therefore David's Prayer, make mine
heart sound in thy statutes, that I be not ashamed, may well be joined with,
and expounded by David's Principle, then shall I not be ashamed, when I have
respect to all thy Commandments. Surely if thou be not ashamed of thy
partiality, thy partiality will bring thee to shame; the wisdom that is from
above is not only without hypocrisy, but without partiality.

290. Wretch that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? Even he
whose body was delivered unto death, and overcame death by dying.

291. There are two strong arguments whereby to oppose temptations to sin. The
first and the greatest is this, how shall I do this wickedness, and sin
against God? Who can find it in his heart to dishonor his God? The second is
like unto it, how shall I do this wickedness, and wrong mine own soul? What,
shall I be a self murderer? get behind me Satan, though thou will have to do
with me, yet what have I any more to do with thee?

392. It Is no wonder that the world care's not for Saints, for the saint is a
man of another world in this; were he of the world, the world would love 'its
own: and it is no wonder that the saints care not for this world; For what
should strangers, sojourners and pilgrims load themselves with bag and
baggage for? no, they declare plainly that they seek a country, and would not
always stay in the world, for all the world. The world is crucified to me, and
I unto the world.

293. Saying of prayer without praying.

Many men say the Lords-prayer which do not pray it; they (as Austine before
Conversion when he prayed for Chastity) are afraid lest God should hear them;
they do not care that God should say Amen, or so be it, though they themselves
will say so; they say, Our father, but if he be their father, where is his
honor? they say, which art in heaven, but did they believe it, how durst they
sin as they do on earth? they say, hallowed be thy name, yet take Gods name in
vain; they say, thy kingdom come, yet oppose the coming of his Kingdom: they
say thy will be done on earth as it is heaven, yet will not stand to their
words, for this is the will of God their sanctification, but they will none of
that. They say, give us this day our daily bread, yet mind not the feeding of
their souls with the bread (Christ Jesus) which came down from heaven. They
say forgive us as we forgive others, but alas, if God should take them to their
word, how undon were they, whose hearts burn with malice and revenge, even
while they pray, or say thus; for forgiveness they say, lead us not into
temptation, yet run into it, and tempt the devil himself to tempt them. They
say, deliver us from evil, and yet deliver themselves to evil, and give up
themselves to fulfill the wills of the flesh, etc. yea, it has bin observed,
that they sin most against this prayer, who stickle most for the saying of this
prayer.

294. Much from a little.

Christians should be very shy of the occasions of evil, and take heed of the
wine when it is red in the glass, and have an eye to their eye when they look
on a maid. Dinah out of a gadding curiosity must needs visit the daughters of
the land, and while she goes to see the daughters, the son saw her, visamque
cupit, and having seen her, he took her; having taken her, he lay with her;
having layn with her, he defiled her; the report whereof coming to Jacobs
sons, they were grieved; being grieved, they were wroth; being wroth, they
meditate revenge; meditating revenge, they speak deceitfully; speaking
deceitfully, they deceived; having deceived, they slew; having slain, they
spoiled: see how great a fire a little matter kindles, what great evils there
issue forth from small beginnings. Take heed then.

295. Riches are called thorns, such riches may be touched, but not rested
upon; can thou set thine heart upon a thorn, without pierceing thy self
through with many sorrows.

128. Self oondemned in another.

We many times condemn others, and therein pass sentence against our selves;
thus Judah said of Tamar, bring her forth, and let her be burnt, not
considering that he spoke the word against his own soul: thus David to Nathan,
the man that has done this thing shall dye; not considering that he was the
mau. Lord wherein I have sinned, help me to pull out mine own beam, before I
judge another for his moate; and wherein others have sinned, help me so to
junge their frailties, as considering my self least I also should be tempted,
and then I should as much need their pity, as they now need mine.

297. Fiekle inconstancy.

Ah Lord, how much have we to do with our selves, poor wayward, peevish,
froward we are, not well either full or fasting: either its too hot, or too
cold, too wet, or too dry, we would, and then we would not. We are discontented
if we have not, and not contented with what we have; if we have health, we
would have wealth; if wealth, we would exchange it for health; when in company,
we have a mind to be alone; when alone, we would we were in company; Romae
Tybur amo, ventosus Tybur^ Romam.

The City is too full of company and close, the Country is too solitary and
open aired.

Quod petit, spernit, repetit quod nuper omisit,
Aestuat, and vitae disconvenit ordine toto.
Oh! how I like, dislike, desire, disdain,
Repel, Repeal, loath, and delight again.
My self I follow, and my self I fly,
Beside my self, and in my self am I.
My self am not my self, another same,
Unlike my self, and like my self I am.
Self-fond, self-furious, and thus wayward elf,
I cannot live without, nor with my self.
We e'ne put God to it to know what to do with us; and if he did not cross us,
'twould be a curse to us; it is well for us that it is all with us; if it were
not bad, it would be worse; there is scarce any thing (though we scarce think it
so) that we are more beholding to God for, then for crossing us; for woe to us,
if he let us alone, it is ten to one but hearts desires and lean souls would go
together.

298. Moderation.

A moderate mind will be content with a moderate estate, and nothing more
conduces to moderation then to know that the time is short, and the Lord is at
hand; he that thinks seriously of these two, can neither be careless nor
covetous: let us then be carelessly careful, and carefully careless: let us be
careful of to day, and careless of to morrow, for sufficient to the day is the
evil thereof.

299. It Is hard to be cheerful without levity, or serious without melancholy;
we verge to extremes. In conveniences and snares attend all constitutions and
complexions (and like Syllogismes sequimur deteriorem partem.) Cheerfulness is
most like to do the body good, and the soul hurt, and seriousness is most like
to do the soul good, and the body hurt, if we take not heed; that therefore
soul and body may receive good, and no hurt, let us be cheerfully serious, and
seriously cheerful; while cheerfulness is the sall, let seriousness be the
ballast of the Vessel; if we want ballast, we may move too swiftly; if we want
sails, we shall move too slowly.

300. It Is not in man to direct his way.

It Is hard to know what course to take to obtain an end, to be compos voti, and
to enjoy ones desires: for that which sometime is to some the only help, at
other times is to others the only hindrance. Some denials had never been
given, had it not been for the importunity of them that requested, and some
requests had never been granted, if the requesters had not been importunate.
Fabius (Cunctator) conquered by delays. Caesar by expedition and quick
dispatch. 'Twas but Veni, Vidi, Vici. There is uncertainty in wisdom as well
as folly. The course we take to save us, kills us, and that which we fear will
be our undoing, proves our safety. What a simple thing is man! Wisdom also is
vanity. In all thy ways acknowledge God, and he shall direct thy paths.

The third Century.
301. God afflicts Saints, because he loves them; the Devil afflicts them,
because he hates them; If God did not love them, he would not; if the Devil did
love them, he would not afflict them. God afflicts them for their gain, that
they may be sanctified and saved; the Devil afflicts them for their loss, that
they may sin and be damned: But this is their comfort, that God loves them more
then the Devil can hate them, and that Gods love will do them more good, then
the Devils hatred can do them hurt; and that God is better able to bring about
his ends, then the Devil is able to bring about his. Lord, let me be a Saint,
though an afflicted one, and loved of thee, though the world and the Devil hate
me. Sanctify; I do beseech thee, the Devils temptations, and mine own
corruptions to me; I shall then know that all things work together for my good,
when I am the better; and that they are sanctified to me, when I am the more
sanctified.

302. Death.

-- He that would try
What is true happiness indeed, must dye.
The good man's end is surely the beginning
Of his true joy, cause 't puts an end to sinning.
There were three Saints, Job, Elias, and Jonah, desiring to dye out of
discontent, two Saints, Simeon and Paul, content to desire death, and two other
Saints David and Hezekiah, not discontented, yet not content to dye: Lord, let
me rather be content to dye, then be discontented to live; for though having
with Simeon seen thy salvation, I desire to depart in peace; and with Paul,
long to be with Christ, which is far better; yet I dare not outface thee as
Jonah did, to say it is better for me to dye then to live; Surely it is not good
to dye in anger, nor well to be angry unto death. Let this be the care of my
soul, that while I live, I may live to thee, and then when I dye, I shall live
with thee. So thou may be magnified, its no matter whether it be by life or
death; yet seeing (as Hezekiah said) it is the living praise thee, Oh (as David
prayed) spare me a little, and give me strength (to do thy will) before I go
hence and be no more seen.

303. We obtain nothing by the merit, but many things by the means of prayer.

304. It Is easy to tell a Lie, it is hard to tell but a Lie; it is hard to
commit one fin, and but one sin.

305. While others fret at the prosperity of the wicked, and are envious at the
foolish, because they abound in goods; my prayer for them shall be this, much
good may they do with it, and much good may it do them; the first is the
duty, the next is the blessing; if the duty be not done, the blessing will not
come. If they do not do good, 'twill do them no good. For not what one has,
but what one does with what one has, makes happy or miserable.

306. Some men can say, as Esau; I have enough, or rather as it is in the
Hebrew, I have much; but few can say, as Jacob, I have enough, or (as it is in
the Hebrew) I have all, or God is all to me, he is mine all. He has not enough
how much soever he has, that has not God for his portion; and he that has
God for his portion, has enough, how little soever he has. It Is not happy are
the people that are in such (a plentiful) case, but happy are the people whose
God is the Lord.

307. The Alphabet or Crosse-row.

This Text, Matthew. 16.24. is the Christians Alphabet or Crosserow: We learn
that first which we must always use, as our letters and our vowels, we can
spell no word without them. This lesson of selfdenial must be first learnt,
because always to be practiced; for without it we can do nothing, that is,
nothing pleasing to God, or profitable to our selves: he that denies himself,
does himself most good, and he that seeks himself, does himself most hurt. The
reason we are such bad scholars, and non-proficients, is because we are so long
in taking out this first lesson, dimidium facti qui been coepit habet. He is
more then half way, that learns this first line of Religion; till that be
learnt, a man cannot proceed to take up the Cross, and follow Christ; if
therefore we would be Christ's disciples, let us deny our selves.

308. Comparison.

Few men judge themselves happy or unhappy, according to what they are, but by
comparing themselves with others; where all go naked, none are ashamed: Many
augment their misery, by seeing others more happy; and yet think themselves
happy when they see others more miserable. We many times gather our sorrows
from others joys, and our joys from others sorrows. We bless our selves,
when we see them below us, and yet think all we have to be no blessing, when we
look on them that are above us. Lord, let not me think my good the less,
because others have more; or my evil the more, because others have less; but
let me learn in all estates to be content, and to welcome the will, come how it
will.

309. Some men while they are wits in jest, are fools in earness; for commonly
they are the trifling things of the world, whom serious men have to do withal,
when they have nothing else to do: their greatest business is to laugh, and
their reward to be laughed at.

310. We are to labor for what the Son of man gives, and God will be sought
for that which he will do for the house of Israel; Gods promises and our
prayers are middle things between Gods purposes and our seize.

-- God expects we should crave
The mercy he intends we should have.
311. Gods being sometimes better then his word, (in doing that which he never
engaged himself by promise to do, and so doing above, exceeding abundantly
above all that we were able to ask or think, in being found of them that seek
him not) is no indulgence to idleness, or dispensation from duty: We are not
to mind what God can do, or does do, but what God has said he will do, and
the way wherein: if ever we expect to enjoy what is promised, we must do what is
commanded; laboranti and speranti Deus dabit: Though God have promised to give
to them that ask, yet he has not promised to give without asking: and seeing
it is but ask, and have; we may not blame God for not giving, but our selves for
not asking; and if we ask, and miss, we may blame our selves for asking amiss.

312. The most things in the world are perfectly imperfect; and the best things
in the world are but imperfectly perfect.

313. Saints have so learned Christ, and of Christ, as not only to restrain
their hands from hurting, but their hearts from hating their very enemies.

314. Prayer is the sold in Paraphrase.

Which is the sense of the soul enlarged and explained, it is the soul speaking
its mind, and minding what it speaks to God; and a gracious heart never thinks
it well done, but when every confession has its weight of sorrow, and every
petition its fill of grace.

315. Am I become your enemy because I tell you the truth? What turn-coats are
these? But awhile since they would have pulled out their eyes for Paul, and now
they would have pulled out Paul's eyes, who told them the truth. Light is
pleasant, yet offensive to sore eyes; honey is sweet, but it makes wounds to
smart; truth is most wholesome, but distasteful to distempered pallats: Lord,
let me never hate them which tell me the truth, nor the truth which they tell
me.

316. A mistake.

The world has always had thoughts of Religion clean contrary to what it is
and does. Most men are so mad as to think a Religious life madness; as if
Religion did but make men melancholy and dull their spirits, and make them look
wrinkled with sorrow and care long before they are wrinkled with age; as if it
did but depresse men's spirits, put an end to all their joys and pleasures, and
incapacitate men to be great and glorious in this world: insomuch that he who
makes conscience of his ways, is looked upon, but as one of God Almighties
fools. Alas, what a mistake is this! Can there be greater and better joy then
rejoicing in the Lord, joy in the holy Ghost, unspeakable and full of glory?
Can there be better cheer then a good conscience? If Saints mourn and are
sorrowful, it is because they are no better, and they are the better for that;
for godly sorrow works repentance to salvation, never to be repented of;
Religion takes no man off from any thing that is good; and is it not good to be
taken off from evil? Is it cowardice to be afraid of sin? Blessed is he that so
fears always: Is not he stronger that overcomes himself, then he that
overcomes a City? Is it folly to be wise to salvation? Is it loss to be
godly? When as indeed godliness is the great and only gain. Is it not better
to be poor with honesty, then to be rich by knavery? To which of the Saints
will ye turn? Surely they that condemn Religion never were religious. Ask
Abraham, Moses, etc. if the ways of God be not pleasantness, and his paths
peace; if his yoke be not easy, and his burden light? Ah Lord, whatever
others call wisdom, let this be mine to fear thee, and to depart from evil;
let godliness be my gain; while others take care to be great, let me take care
to be good: while others seek Conquests over men, let me fight the good fight
of faith, whereby I may conquer the world, and the evil man my self; and if
this be to be vile, let me be more vile; if this be to be a fool, let me be a
fool. Dear Lord, if none will love thee, yet let me love thee. It Is better to
go to Heaven, though alone, then to go to hell with company: as long as I am
happy, I care not though the world think me miserable.

317. Worldly riches are like Nuts; many clothes are torn in getting them, many
a tooth broken in cracking them, but never a belly filled with eating them.

318. Love in descent is stronger then love in ascent: hence (they say) parents
are more loving to their children, then children to their parents: I am sure
it is true between God and us, his descending and condescending to love us is
stronger then our ascending love to him.

319. Every variation from unity is a step to nullity; and when men go from
one Religion to all, they are in the ready way to go from all to none.

320. Whatever God gives to us, he gives freely, and whatever he takes from us,
he takes justly; therefore where God is free to give, let us be just to use;
and where God is just to take, let us be free to resign.

321. The Scriptures are to many in an unknown tongue, though in their own
tongue.

322. Indirect means may sometimes prosper, but its never blessed.

323. Though a man should be so honest as to be plain, yet he should be so
discreet as to be pleasing when he reproves.

324. He speaks himself a fool, that does that, which reason tells him is
unreasonable; hence sinners called fools.

325. Love.

Causinus tells us of one Raimundus Lullus, who was so ravished with love, that
being asked any thing, he would answer nothing but love: where dwell thou?
with love. To whom belongest thou? To love. Whence come thou? From love.
Whither go thou? To love, etc.

Oh that we were thus taken with the love of our lovely and loving God!

It Is likewise said of Mary, that by strength of love, she was dead to all the
objects of the world; she had her thoughts so employed on her Jesus, that she
was almost insensible: She had eyes, and saw not; ears and heard not; senses
and felt not; she was not where she was, for she was wholly where her master
was, though she knew not where he was: She knew no are but that of Love; all in
her turned to the love of him whom she loved above all.

Oh thus to love dear Jesus, is worth the name of Love: how cold and frozen is
ours!

326. Hope against hope.

Many men have been destroyed by hoping against hope, and some have been
preserved by it: hope undoes most wicked men, but the good may say, we are
saved by hope.

327. The evil of evil company.

By being in ill company we suffer both in our names and our souls; it is both
disgraceful and dangerous: if we could keep our souls free, yet our names will
suffer; and if we could keep our names safe, yet our souls are in danger.

328. The Gull.

Cicero reports of Cato, that he wondered how Soothsayers could forbear
laughing, when they met with one another, because they knew that they gulled
the people; and well might he jeer the Astrologer, that told him he had cast
his nativity, and would tell him what should befall him; tush said he, I have
been newborn, since I was born.

329. Its unnatural to hate them that love us; it is natural to love them that
love us; but it is supernatural to love them that hate us.

330. The Religion that proceeds from an humor, is but an humorous Religion.

Men usually express themselves and carry it in religion according to their
natural humor, and are apt to mis-judge others if they comply not with their
temper: Some are so pitiful that they could save the damned, others so
Choleric that they could damn the saved: hence the melancholy christian is
offended with the cheareful, and the cheerful with the melancholy: so that
not only the world but saints themselves put false constructions, upon the
carrage of saints. The melancholy man looks on John Baptist as a choice man,
because of great abstinence and austerity, as well in cloths as diet. For such
humors are apt to think that religion consists much in sadness (Christ say
they wept often, but we read not that he laughed at all) and sc^rse will they
believe him a good Christian, that is not something Hypocondriacall: yet the
world passes a clean contrary sentence, and say he has a devil. The more
sociable sort of cheerful saints, provided they they keep decorum, and be of
Christ's spirit, as well as christ's example, do doubtless most adorn and
advantage religion: christ did not only rejoice in spirit, but was popular and
disdained not the tables and conversations of the greatest sinners, for which
the wicked world judged him as a wine-bibber, a great friend (and indeed he
was) to Publicans and sinners. Now we should take heed, 1. That we take not our
natural temper and humor for religion: a man may be moderate by the heavines
of his Phlegm, and zealous from the heat of his choler; our care therefore
should be that our sorrow, moderation and austerity on the one hand, and our
joy, cheerfulness and zeal on the other hand, be truly spiritual and
christian. 2. we should take heed not to condemn other saints, that are not of
our natural humor; not to think the sociable and cheerful to be but good
fellows and genial-jovial blades; or to think the more deprest, sad dejected,
and retired spirits to be discontented. God has several sorts of saints which
he exercises (as several members of the body or several vessels in an house)
most to that end to which they are appointed, his Beanerges's and his Barnabas,
his John and his Paul, every one in their own place according to the gift and
grace received (yea the same saint is sometimes in the exercise of one grace,
at another time in the exercise of another grace, sometime most in
selfe-abasing, at other times rejoicing in Christ Jesus, sometime in hope at
other times in fear.) Now it may be his zeal does best for him, and thy
moderation for thee; his cheerfulness best for him, and thy sadness best for
thee: that which it may be is an occasion of sin to thee, is none to him, and
that which would be an occasion of sin to him, is none to thee; judge not
therefore another by thy self, nor think that every one must be cast in thy
mould.

331. We cannot give a reason of infinite things though (and indeed because)
there is infinite reason for them: it is not because there is want of reason or
too little, but because there is such excess of reason, or too much for our
capacity.

332. A pure conscience is the safest safeguard in time of scandal.

-- hic murus aheneus esto,
nil conscire tibi, nulla pallescere culpa.
Mine innocence shall be my brazen wall, the faultles man need not for fear
look pale.

333. Surely if we thought that God were good to us in every condition, we
should have good thoughts of God in every condition.

334. They that would avoid the evil of occasions, must avoid the occasions of
evil, as Solomon inculcates by four several expressions in one verse, Prove.
4.15. That you may not enter into the path of the wicked, and not go in the
way of evil men, 1. Avoid it: 2. Pass not by it. 3. Turn from it, 4. And pass
away. They that play with wantonness, are like to play the wantons.

335. Gods dispensations are so checquer-wrought with blacks and whites, that
many times a Saint has cause to rejoice, but yet with trembling; and at other
times to tremble, but yet with rejoicing.

336. It was a desperate saying of one (a Lawyer) that as he that will not
adventure his body cannot be valiant, so he that will not adventure his soul
cannot be rich. Men had better lay down their trades, then live by sinning.

337. Surely goods ill gotten will never be good; it is better a man should be
able to say (as a good man once on his deathbed to his wife) I shall leave
thee no great estate, but I shall leave thee a good estate; an estate well
gotten, then to say, wife, or child, I shall leave you a great, but not good,
because an ill-gotten estate. To have an estate with a curse, is to be
miserably rich.

338. Heaven and Hell.

That which makes Heaven so full of joy, is, that Heaven is above all fear; and
that which makes Hell so full of terror, is, that Hell is below all hope:
Heaven is a day which shall never see any approachings of night; and Hell is a
night that shall never see any dawnings of day.

339. Did we consider that both our good and evil were from God, it would make
our good to be the better, and our evil not to be so bad.

340. A wise man's heart commands his tongue, but a fools tongue commands his
heart.

341. Success at first does many times undo men at last; many may say, that
they had never been unhappy, if they had not been happy,

342. A Christian should not care much for what he has, and he should care
nothing for what he has not: for what he has, may not be, and what he has
not, may never be his.

243. Man's Preaching is but voice without power; but Gods is power without
voice; Man's is word without work, Gods is work without word; man does but
speak, but God speaks and does, every one of Gods words end in works; he said,
Let there be light, and 'twas so.

344. God speaks of things that are to be done, and yet to come, as if they
were already come and done. Many Prophesies of things to be, run in the Present
Tense, as if they were in being. Babylon is fallen, it shall as certainly fall,
as if it were fallen: by hope we are saved; we are as safe as if we were saved,
and are kept safe that we may be saved. He that believes not, is condemned
already; for he shall be as surely condemned, as if he were already in Hell.
Them whom he predestined, he called, justified, and glorified; they shall be
as surely called, justified, and glorified, as if 'twere done.

344. All the glory of the world has a stain, and all the beauty a spot; there
is nothing that is all desires, altogether lovely but Christ Jesus.

He is, but time denies to tell you what,
Sum all perfection up, and he is that.
The praises of all others are with a but, and an exception. Naaman was a
mighty man, but a Leper; such an one, so and so, but etc. fair, but foolish;
serious, but subtle: Let us lay out our hearts then, not on that which is
lovely but in part, but on him who is lovely in every part.

346. Contentment.

Whosoever in present state himself can rightly bear,
Has neither ill that is past, nor future ill to fear:
The one which is no more, ought now no more to fray us,
The Other which is not yet, as little can dismay us.
Not he that has but little, but he that covets more,
Not the contented, but covetous man is poor.
The man who hungers not, he needs not bread I think,
The man that never thirsts, has never need of drink.
347. We are so far from meriting by our works of mercy, that our works of
mercy stand in need of mercy.

348. We can (alas we can) go from heavenly things, to earthly things, and
carry our hearts with us; but how seldom is it that we can go from earthly
things to heavenly, and carry our hearts with us?

349. Men appoint walls and bulwarks for salvation, but God appoints salvation
for walls and bulwarks: Salvation is often without walls and bulwarks, and
walls and bulwarks are often without salvation. Salvation is the safer
safeguard.

350. Saints desire not only to receive the word into their liking, but to be
received into its likeness; not only to love it, but to live it.

351. God knows the names of all the men in the world, and yet he knows but
few men by name.

352. To be a servant, is sometime put for a sin, as to be the servant of sin,
or servant of men; sometime it is put for a curse, as servant of servants shall
thou be, said Noah to Cham: Sometime it is put for an honor, when a man is
called, and is the servant of God.

353. As there is joy in Heaven at the conversion of a sinner, so there is a
kind of joy in Hell, when one sins that is converted.

354. Its a great piece of wisdom so to order our condition and conversation in
this world, that we may be able to attend upon God without distraction; a
distracted man can do but little, and that little cannot be well done: duties
are well done, when done with a present and suitable frame of heart, but the
distracted man has neither.

355. The fear of man makes men to sin, but the fear of God keeps men from sin.

Genesis 3.5. Your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and
evil. His eyes indeed were o'pe,
And then he had the skill
To know the difference
Between the good and ill:
Then did he know how good
Good was, when he had lost it,
And evil too he knew,
But ah how dearly cost it?


356. Lawful things are often the occasion of unlawful things: we should use
them then (for of them it may be said, as the Apostle of the Law, the Law is
good, if a man use it) lawfully. The sins of the old world are described, Luke
17.27, 28. not by unlawful, or things evil in themselves, but becoming such by
the abuse. They did eat and drink, etc. which things are necessary to preserve
life, and yet by these they lost their lives; they in these things sinned away
their lives from the earth, and their souls into bell.

357. Feasting times are too too often sinning times; it is true, its not sinful
to feasi, if our feasting be not sinful; which that it may not be, we should
not spend too much care like Martha, nor too much cost and time like Dives, who
fared deliciously every day: while we are eating and drinking, we may be
dying, (in remembrance whereof the Egyptians used to serve in a deaths head at
their feasts) and therefore in eating and drinking, we need be holy, and do
that, and all to the glory of God.

358. That we might not think riches evil, God gives them to those who are
good, yea, to the choicest, the chiefest, the very best of good men, to whom he
never gives any thing that is in it self evil: and lest we should think riches
the chiefest good, the best good, God gives them to them that are evil, to whom
he never gives the chiefest good.

359. Love of pleasure, and fear of suffering, are the two great things, which
keep men from minding that which is their chief good; which if enjoyed, would
either free them from suffering, or fill them with pleasure in suffering, and
make them say, as Augustine, quam suave estistis suavitatibus carere, how sweet
is it to want the worlds sweets.

True rest is not attained by spending of the year
In pleasure soft, sweet shades, downbeds, and dainty cheer.
These leave the soul as empty of content,
As does a dream, when time of sleep is spent.
There Is more true joy in godly sorrows tears,
Then in sins pleasures; he that truly fears
The God of Heaven, and humbly walks with him,
He, he is the man that has an Heaven within.
360. It will much aggravate the condemnation of some, that they have been so
careful of their bodies, and so careless of their souls; they are so taken up
with the things of this world, (which are but half goods, for they reach but
half, and the worse half of man) that ye rise early, go to bed late, and eat
the bread of carefulness, for their bodily accommodations, when their poor
souls may sink or swim, that is left at six and seven, the soul is not in all
their thoughts. One said he had so much business to do, that he must trust God
with his soul, he could not look after it. Most men are like the woman, who
when her house was on fire, so minded the saving her goods, that she forgate
her child, and left it burning in the fire; at last being minded of it, she
cries out, oh my child, oh my child! So men scrabble here for a little pelf,
and let their souls be consumed with the fiery heat of cares, and at death cry
out, oh my soul, oh my soul! how (ah how) mad are most, that while they pamper
their bodies, starve their souls, for so much eating and drinking takes away
their stomachs to spiritual things. What care and pains do men and women take
to clothe and neatifie the body, when the poor soul goes naked and bare, and
has not one rag of righteousness to cover it. So curious and nice about their
dressing, and keeping their house, that there must not be one hair out of
place, nor so much as a spot in a rubbed room, yet so negligent of their souls,
that that goes in its night-clothes, (undrest) all the day long; that many
times under a silken and satin suit, there is a very course soul; in a clean
neat house, a sluttish soul; under a beautiful face, a deformed soul; under a
fair outside, a foul inside; Would thou that read be not guilty. Ah
dear hearts, if the body be more worth then raiment, surely the soul is more
worth then the body. Oh what a weight does the Scripture lay upon this word
Soul, it is the emphasis of the Text where it is: Hear, and your soul shall live;
He that sins, wrongeth his own soul; Fear him that can kill the body, and
throw the soul into Hell. What will it profit a man to gain the world, and lose
his soul? Soul-mercy is the greatest mercy; Soul-promises the most precious
promises; Soul-salvation the greatest salvation; and therefore to neglect the
soul, is the greatest neglect; and that men and women will know at that day,
when they shall cry out, woe unto us, we have rewarded evil to our own souls.

361. There is scarce any one thing whereof men and women are more proud (at
least wherein and whereby they show their pride more) then apparel; though
indeed there is no one thing (sin it self excepted) that we have more cause to
be ashamed of then our apparel, for they tell us that we are sinners: Adam and
his wife were naked, and were not ashamed. Our ornaments are but badges of our
sin and shame; and it is to this purpose observable, that the same word in the
Hebrew which signifies a garment, signifies treachery and prevarication, to
show that we have committed treason against God, else there had not been need
of a fig-leafe-apron to cover our nakedness. Who now can be proud of being a
sinner? Who can find in his heart to be proud of that, which tells him, that
he has lost his innocence? Surely he that has sinned himself into shame,
should be ashamed of his sin: and though it be a shame, and a sin to go naked,
yet when we are clothed with our garments, we should be clothed with shame as
with a garment.

362. He that will have his mind satisfied with earthly things, must not think
to attain it so much by increasing the things he desires, as by decreasing his
desire to the things. Latius regnes, avidum domando spiritum, quam, etc.
mortificaton is the best way to satisfaction.

363. Few men get good, though most get goods by greatness, many men grow much
the worse, and I never read but of only one Vespasian that was the better,
solus imperantium vespasianus mutatus in melius. Magistratus jndicat virum. Of
how many may it be said, as Tacitus of Galba, omnium consensu capax imperii
nisi imperasset, no man sitter to be an Emperor, if he had not been an
Emperor; how many have been good commonwealths men, gallant Patriots, till
they came to be states men; as if men minded goodness only to make them
great, and then nuncium mittunt virtuti, bid it farewell, as he that always
had a fishing net spread on his table till he got a Bishopric, and then
caused it to be laid aside, saying he had what he fished for.

364. All men came into the world alike, the poor as well as the rich, and all
men shall go out of the world alike, the rich as well as the poor; nothing
more certain then this, that we brought nothing into the world, nor shall we
carry any thing out of this world: if therefore we have food and raiment, let
us be content; for godliness with a comp^tency (we read it with contentment)
is great gain.

365. Unhappy happiness.

Some men are so unhappy in having happy wits, that they make their wit their
happiness, jeasting themselves out of all that is earnest, and like fools
make sport of every thing, even sin it self; alas! what pity it is that men so
witty, should have ^o more wit then to destroy themselves! a jesting lie or a
lie in jest may make a man lie in hell in earnest. Though such men look on
religion but as a nicety and an impertinent curiosity, as that which imprisons
their genius, yet they will one day find to their cost and sorrow, what
unpleasant things the pleasures of sin are, and that it will be no brave thing
to have sinned in braverie.

366. All temporal things are troublesome, If they be good it is trouble to
forgo them, and when we see that they must be parted with, either we wish that
they had not been so good, or that we had never enjoyed them; as some did of
Austine when he dyed. If they be evil, their presence is troublesome; and
still we wish either that they were good, or that we were eased of them. Good
things are troublesom^ in the event, and evil things in then (...) they in the
future, because they shall come to an end, these in present, because they do
continue: O(...) men would look to things which are Eternal, for they are
good here, and will be better hereafter.

367. What a madness is it in men to trouble themselves and the world about
the Orthographie of a word, as whether we should write Faelix or Felix, and
never study to be happy: to trifle away their precious hours about notions,
and dye fools. They are but frivolous, idle and trivial writings, which are
only compact and held together with exquisite choice words, and ranged to just
smooth cadencies, unless they be stuffed full of notable saiyngs and wise
sentences, by which a man does become not only more eloquent, but more wise,
which teaches us not only to speak well but do to well.

368. Philosophy no religion.

This was accounted among many purely true, and truly pure Philosophy, for a
man to know him self, to enjoy himself, to center in himself. But I am sure
it is true and pure religion, to know God, to to enjoy God, to center in God, so
to live in contemplation of him, and in conversation with him, as if there were
nothing else in the world to know: as if there were none to think of us, or
for us to think upon; none to love us or for us to love.

369. All the Lords doings, but especially his doings in our hearts, should be
marvelous in our eyes. According to the day of grace it shall be said, what
has God wrought?

370. The Hebrews have a saying, that deus magis delectatur adverbiis quam
nominibus, God is more delighted in adverbs then in nounes: it is not so much
the matter that is done, but the manner how it is done that God minds. Not how
much, but how well. It Is the well doing that meets with a well done. Let us
therefore serve God not nominally or verbally, but adverbially.

371. We think it a great matter to be known of a man and wished well, and
yet thereby we become neither white nor black, the better or worse, rich or
poor, for our knowledge is small in capacity, limited in effects and
inefficacious in operation: but it is not so with Gods Knowledge. Happy they
that are known of God.

372. Science in most, conscience in the rest make all cry out, there is a God.

373. There is no truer misery then false joys.

374. Christians many times sin most when least tempted, and sin least when
most tempted.

375. It Is punishment as well (or indeed as ill) to take away the good which
was formerly enjoyed, as to inflict an evil which was not formerly suffered.

376. He is an happy man that is beaten when the stroke is a stroke of love.

377. Though God would have sinners hearts broaken, yet so tender is he that he
would not have them break their hearts, nor be swallowed up with overmuch
sorrow.

378. The good man's best and the bad man's worst is to come: Isaiah 3.9. I will
say to the righteous it shall be well with them, they shall eat the fruit of
their doings: say to the wicked, woe, it shall be ill with them, for the reward
of their hand shall be given them. Oh this shall be; how sweet will it be to
the godly, and how bitter to the ungodly! men that like sins work, will not
like sins wages, they that are content to sin on earth will not find content in
hell.

379. Man discovers himself to be a sinner by covering his sin.

380. He that seeks Philosophy in Divinity seeks the dead among the living,
and he that seeks Divinity in Philosophy seeks the living among the dead; I
may say as the Angel of Christ, religion is not here, she is risen.

381. Surely they do not love God, who love any thing more then God; or, they
love not God at all, who do not love him more then all.

382. The love of God to any soul is good ground of glorying here, and to
expect glory hereafter.

THE HEATHEN IMPROVED. OR, The Gibeonites hewing of wood and drawing of water
for the Sanctuary.
1. SCipio made his boast, that there was not one of his soldiers but would
adventure their lives for him, if it were to leap into the sea, or to cast
themselves down an high tower, if he required it. How much them should
Christians be at Christ's command, and not love their lives unto the death,
especially seeing all his commands are holy, just, and good.

2. When news came to Anaxageras of the death of his son, at which they
thought he would have been much troubled, he said, I begat him mortal. Should
not Christians much more quiet themselves at the loss of children, which
though they beget mortal, yet not without hope of immortality.

3. A Philosopher walking abroad, found a woman weeping, and asking her the
reason, alas said she, I have broken my Pitcher; and walking another day, found
another woman weeping, and asking her the reason, she told him, her son was
dead. He presently says, did that woman think that an earthen Pitcher would
not break? and this woman, that a mortal man would not dye? Should we not
expect that changeables will change? That the fashion of this world will pass
away? We should so use creature-enjoyments, as if we were taking leave of
them. Our moderation of joy and sorrow should be known, because the end of all
things is at hand.

4. Socrates when the Tyrant did threaten death to him, told him he was
willing; nay, then said the Tyrant, you shall live against your will: nay, but
said Socrates, whatever you do with me, it shall be my will. And a certain
Stoic speaking of God, said, quid vult volo, quid non vult nolo, vult ut vivam
vivam, vult ut moriar, moriar. What God will, I will; what God nills, I will
not; if he will that I live, I will live; if it be his pleasure that Idye, I
will dye. Ah how should the will of Christians stoop and lie down at the foot
of Gods will; not my will, but thine be done.

5. Plutarch in his Epistle Consolatory to his wife, on the death of a child,
among many other arguments has this. We must always think well of what the
Gods do. And shall not Christians think well of what God does, and say as
Hezekiah, good is the word, and good is the work of the Lord.

6. A Roman servant knowing that his Master was sought for to be put to death,
put himself into his Masters clothes, that he might be taken for him, and so
was, and put to death, in memory whereof his Master erected a brazen statue. Oh
what Monuments shall we erect for Christ, who when we were to be put to death
would die for us! for a good man some would dare to die, and greater love then
this cannot be shown, then that a man may lay down his life for a friend; but
behold, herein God manifests and commends his love to us, that while we
were yet sinners, yea enemies, Christ dyed for us.

7. Phoeion an Athenian Captain, being condemned to death, and seeing one
Cnippus condemned to the same death, but very fearful, he comforts him with
these words, is it not enough to thee that thou art to dve with Phocion? Should
it not comfort us in our suffering, that we dye with Christ?

8. Antonius after Julius Caesar was slain, brought forth his coat all bloody,
and laid it before the people, saying, lo here is the Emperors coat.
Whereupon the people cried out, slay the murderers. Shall we not say so of
sin, which slew our Lord Christ, and would have slain us?

9. Numa held, that the service of God was greater honor then to be a King;
and shall not Christians think so?

10. Alexander distributing very large gifts, was asked what he would keep for
himself? he answe^'d hope; by hope are we saved. He has a great deal who has
not so much hope of good, as a good hope.

11. 'Twas the saving of an Heathen, Condo and compono quae mox de^romere
possum; I lay in, and lay up, that I may lay out; and shall not Christians do
so?

12. When Pericles went into the Pulpit to make Orations to the people, he
would make his prayer to the gods, that nothing might go out of his mouth, but
what might be to the purpose; a good example for Preachers.

13. Phocions wife having many Jewels shown her by a Lady, said, all my Jewels
are there, pointing to her husband; and Cornelius said of the Gracchi, his sons
coming in when a Lady was showing her Jewels, hi soli sunt ornamenta mea, these
are mine ornaments; much more should a Christian point to Christ, and say,
Christ is my all in all?

14. It was the saying of Metellus, that to do evil was a thing too easy, to
do good without danger, was a thing too common; but to do good with danger,
was the part of an honest and religious man.

15. Man's nature (says Plutarch) cannot bring forth any fruit, which has not
some blemish.

16. Its said of Cato, that no man saw him to be changed, though he lived in a
time when the Commonwealth was so often changed; he was the same in every
condition, though he ran through variety of conditions: O that it could be
said of the Christians, that they were Catoes in our days; that they did
exercise and exert the like gracious, humble, and heavenly frames and acts in
these times of their prosperity and advancement, as they did, or seemed to do
in the days of their adversity, when they were under the feet of them that are
now under foot.

17. The Mahometans live in such an exemplary concord, that they seldom break
into ill language; but if they do so, a third man will reprove him, with a fie
mussul-man, fall out! and all is appeased. Were it not to be wished that the
Mahometans were Christians, and in this that Christians were Mahometans.

18. Themistocles said to Simonides, asking an unreasonable matter of him, thou
can be to good Poet to sing against the rule of Music, nor I a good
Governor to do any thing against the Law. Justice must be preferred before
courtesy.

19. Aristides it is said was never the prouder for any honor, nor thought
himself disgraced by any overthrow, b^ing always of this mind, that it was
the duty of an honest Citizen to be ever ready to offer his body and life to
do his Country service, without respect and hope of reward of money, or for
honor and glory. It Is good to live above encouragements and discouragements,
and to mind nothing so much as our duty.

20. A poor Scholar (Aeschines) having nothing to give his Tuto^ (Socrates) for
his pains taking with him; when others gave gifts, Sir, said he, I have nothing
to give you, but if you will take me, I will bestow my self upon you. Will thou
so, said Socrates, nay, then I will give thee thy self better, and so
instructed him in Philosophy. Christ has taken more pains for and about us,
and shall we not give our selves to him? Who will give us our selves better
again, and instruct us in Divinity to the saving of our souls.

21. A great man having injured a Philosopher, sent his servant to entreat or
charge him that he would not write against him; by whom ^e return^d this
answer, that he was not at leisure to think of him. Oh sweet living, when
injuries intermeddle not with the soul, but it can enjoy it self, and employ it
self without disturbance.

22. Valerius Maximus, tells us of a young Noble man that attended on Alexander
while he was sacrificing, and while he held the Censer for Incense, there fell
a coal upon his flesh, and burnt it so, as the very sent of it was in the
nostrils of all that were about him; and yet because he would not disturb
Alexander in his service, he did not stir to put off the fire from him, but
holds still his Censer. What care should we take then that we may attend upon
the true and living God without disturbance?

23. Antisthenes desired of his gods nothing in this world to make his life
happy, but the spirit of Socrates, that was contentment to be able to bear any
wrong or injury, and to continue in a quiet temper of spirit whatever befell
him. Oh if Christians had but the spirit, I will not say of Socrates, but of
Christ Jesus, oh how happy might they be in all conditions!

24. Marius Curio sitting at home at dinner with a dish of Turnips, some of
Romes adversaries sent him many bribes and promises of great rewards, to have
made him unfaithful to his Country; but said he, that man that can be
contented with such fare as I have, will not be tempted with your rewards.
Could we be content with a little, the temptations of much, would not much
tempt us.

25. One saying to a Philosopher, Could thou but please Dionysius, thou
need'st not eat herbs and roots; the Philosopher answered, could thou but
eat herbs and roots, thou need not to please Dionysius. To the
humble-minded, temptations of greatness are no great temptations.

26. When Pyrrhus designed war against the Romans, one Cineas said to him, if
we overcome the Romans, what benefit shall we have of the victory? We shall
then answered Pyrrhus, overcame all the rest of Italy with ease; but said
Cineas, when we have won Italy, what shall we do then? Why then said Pyrrhus,
we will pass into Africa, and conq^er Carthage; but said Cineas, when we have
all in our hands, what shall we do then? Why then said Pyrrhus, we will be
quiet, and take our ease, and make merry: and why said he, may we not do so now
without further travel and trouble? Many persons design these and these things,
and then give their soul a quietus est, a writ of ease. But he that cannot be
quiet in his present state, cannot promise himself quiet in a future state; we
many times go from quiet for quiet, and from rest for rest, and lose what we
have for hopes of more. Why not quiet now?

27. Plutarch reports of a certain people, that to manifest their disliking and
disdaining of men overmuch dejected by any affliction, did condemn them in
token of disgrace to wear women's clothes: Seeing they did unman themselves,
they should go as women. If thou faint in the day of affliction, thy strength
is small; too many Christians I fear would come under the condemnation and
disgrace of this Law.

28. Seneca has this similitude to set out the great evil of murmuring under
small afflictions. Suppose, says he, a man to have a very fair house to dwell
in, with very fair Orchards and Gardens, set about with brave tall Trees, for
ornament; what a most unreasonable thing were it in this man to murmr,
because the wind blows a few leaves off the Trees, though they hang full of
fruits. If God take a little, and leave us much, shall we be discontent? If he
take our son, and give us his own; if he cause the Trees to bring forth fruit,
shall we be angry if the wind blow away the leaves?

29. Since God, said Socrates, is so careful for you, what need you to be so
careful for your selves? How like is this to that of Christ, Take no thought,
etc. for your heavenly Father knows that ye have need of these things: let
your conversation be without care, for God cares for you.

30. When Socrates in a dispute did bitterly fall upon one of his Familiars,
said Plato to him, it had been better to have spoken of these things in
private; and replied Socrates, should not thou also have told me so in
private? Reprcofes are not very like to take, when in reproving we commit the
evil which we condemn.

31. Socrates wittily rebuked the pride of Alcibiades, when he proudly boasted
how much land he had that lay together, by bringing him a Map of the world,
saying, pray show me where your Land lies here? One prick of a pin would have
described it all. Alas, why do we boast? The whole world is nothing to Heaven,
and that which we have, is nothing to the whole. Shall we be proud of Atoms
and dust?

32. Cato among other things repented of this, that ever he spent 1 day idle.
Dionysius the elder being demanded, if he had nothing to do, God forbid, quoth
he, that ever it should be so with me. Scipio the elder, said, that he was
never less alone, then when most alone, when he was at leisure, he had the
greatest business. What a shame is it to Christians to be found idle, and
trifling away that time, which Heathens made so much of? Heu perdidt diem.
Alas, I have lost a day, said Titus Vespasian, of the day wherein he had done
no good.

33. Tully thought him not worthy the name of a man, that spent a whole day in
pleasures of the flesh. And Socrates had such a vile esteem of sin, that he
thought it one of the greatest torments of men in another life, to be bound to
the sins they most delighted in in this life. And Seneca said of himself, I am
too great, and borne to greater things then that I should be a slave to my
body. Oh Christians what do you do more then others? will not you live above
the flesh and deeds thereof.

34. Remember said one to Antigonus that thou art son to a King, and that will
keep thee from base courses. And when Philip would have Alexander (who was
weary swi^t on foot) to run in the Olympicke games, I could be well content
quoth he, provided they were Kings and Princes to run with me. Let Christians
then stand on their birth and name, to do nothing below the state of Kings
sons, nothing unbecomming such as are heaven-borne. Is it for Kings sons O
Lemuel? is it for Christians to be vain, proud, covetous? etc. Vellem si non
essem Imperator, said Scipio.

35. When Alexander saw an apparent great danger near him, now saye's he
here is a danger or trial fit for the mind of Alexander. Christians should say
of the greatest trials, here is a trial for a Christian. As it is said of
Ignatius that when he felt his flesh and bones begin to be ground between the
teeth of wild beasts, now says he I begin to be a Christian. For as Queen
Elizabeth said in prison, the skill of a Pilot is best known in a tempest, the
valor of a Captain in a battle, and the worth of a Christian in time of trial.

36. When the Senators had wounded Caesar with many sore wounds, Brutus also
gave him a a stabbe, with that he looks upon him and says, (...); what! and
thou my son? all the wounds that Jesus Christ receive from the world go not so
much to his heart as when his children wound him, what and you my sons and
daughers?

37. When Alexander saw Diogenes so well content with a little, he said to
those that mocked at his condition, if I were not Alexander, I would wish to be
Diogenes. Many could be almost Christians; were it not for this honor, these
riches and pleasures, I would be a Christian.

38. When Alexander on a time sung and played curiously on an harp at a
banquet, his father Philip said to him, art not thou ashamed to have skill in
these trifles? Ah how many christians borne to better and more noble
employments then dancing and playing, have (alas have) more skill in such
things then in better. But are ye not ashamed? etc.

39. Alexander when he sat in judgment, would stop one of his ears to hear
the other party withal. Our tale is good till another is told; we should not
condeme one report but hear both sides. He that condemns a man till he hear
him, does unjustly, though there be just cause to co^demn him.

37. It Is said of Fabricius, that he was so just, as you might sooner turn the
course of the Sun, then turn Fabricius from doing justice. And Aristides was
so famous for justice, that he was called by the name of Aristides the just.
When two came before him, said he that accused the other, Aristides, this man
did you such an jniury at such a time, to which and whom Aristides answered,
Friend I sit not here to hear what he has done against me, but what he has
done against thee. Oh that Christians were so famous for holiness, and
justice, that it might be said, there is such an one the humble, such an one the
meek, such an one the holy, such an one the just, such an one the patient: it
could have been said of Noah and Abraham, and Moses, Job, etc. and why not of
us?

41. When the Tyrant commanded that Anaxarchus should be put into a mortar, and
beaten to pieces with an iron pestle, he cries out to his persecuters, you do
but beat the vessel, the husk of Anaxarchus, you do not beat me. Men may kill
the body, and they can do no more.

42. Agrippa having suffered imprisonment for wishing Caius to be Emperor, was
the first that was preferred by Caius when he came to be Emperor, and had a
chain of gold given him as heavy as the chain of iron that was on him in
prison. If we suffer for Christ, we shall also reign with him; and if our
afflictions abound, our consolations shall abound much more; for our light
affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding
eternal weight of glory. Men may suffer for Christ, but they shall not lose by
it.

43. The Gauls when they had tasted the sweet wine of Italy, asked where the
Grapes grew, and would never be quiet till they came there: they that taste
the sweet wine of heavenly consolations, will never be quiet till they come to
Heaven.

44. Alexanders body was of such an exact and excellent constitution, that it
gave a sweet sent like to a perfume. So should a Christians conversation, be a
sweet smelling savor to God and men.

45. 'Twas a sad and lamentable expression of Lysimachus, who had lost his
Kingdom for one draught of water, O dii, quam brevis voluptatis gratia ex rege
me feci servu: Oh for what a short pleasure, have I made my self of a King a
slave. Alas, for what poor and short enjoyments, do men run the hazard of
losing the Kingdom of God and their souls.

46. Cleopatra told Mark Antonie, it is not for you to fish for Gudgeons, but
for Towns, Forts, and Castles. It Is below Christians to look after low and
little things, ad majora nati, they are born, that is, newborn, to look after
the kingdom of Heaven.

47. Plutarch says of Themistocles that he accounted it below his state to
stoop to take up the spoils (though chains of gold) which the enemy had
scattered in the way, but said to one of his followers, thou may, for thou
art not Themistocles. It Is for worldly spirits, it is below the state of
heaven-born spirits to stoop to earthly things. Worldlings may, they are not
Themistocles, they are not Saints.

48. 'Twas accounted so great an honor to be free of Rome, that who ever was
free of that City, was not to be free of any other. Shall not Saints think it
honor enough to be free Denizens of the City, the Heavenly Jerusalem which is
above?

49. When one presented Antipater King of Macedonia, with a a book that treated
of happiness, his answer was (...), I am not at leisure. How many are there
that cannot find leisure to receive the book and word of happiness sent by
Christ to save their souls?

50. Cato was so grave and good a man, that none would sin in his presence:
whence it grew to a proverbial Caveat among them one to another, Cave tibi,
spectat Cato; take heed what you do, Cato sees you. O how should we stand in
awe of the All-seeing God, and say to our own hearts, and one another, Cave
tibi, Deus spectat, take heed, for God looks on.

51. Seneca to Lucilius. Live with men, as if God saw thee; and pray to God, as
if men heard thee.

52. When King Demetrius had sacket and razed the City of Megoera, to the very
foundation, he demanded of Stilpo the Philosopher, what losses he had
sustained? none at all, said Stilpo, for war can make no spoil of virtue; and
it is said of Bias, that his Motto was, Omnia mea mecum porto, I carry all my
goods with me, viz. his goodness. Ah how should Christians live above these
things, and like Habakkuk, rejoice in the Lord, and the exercise of a gracious
spirit, and a good conscience, when there is nothing but loss and want on every
side.

53. Ariston said, that neither a bath, nor an Oration does any good, unless it
purify, the one the skin, the other the heart; that is good, that does good.

54. When Themistocles was to marry his daughter, there were two suitors, the
one rich and a fool, and the other wise, but not rich; and being asked which of
the two he had rather his daughter should have, he answered mallem virum sine
pecunia, quam pecuniam sine viro. I had rather she should have a man without
money, then money without a man. The best of marriage is in the man or the
woman, not in the means, or the money.

55. Aristides to Dionysius the Tyrant, demanding his daughter in marriage,
said, he had rather see her burnt then married to a Tyrant. It Is better not to
marry, then not to marry in the Lord. It Is poor honor to be married to a
wicked man of honor.

56. When one asked Alexander how he could sleep so soundly and securely in the
midst of danger, he told him that Parmenio watched; he might not well sleep when
Parmenio watched. Oh how securely may they sleep, over whom he watches, that
never slumbers nor sleeps? I will, said David, lay me down and sleep, for thou
Lord, make me to dwell in safety.

57. Xenophanes when one Lasus called him coward, because he would not play at
dice with him, said, I confess I am a very coward in these things that are
evil, for I dare do nothing at all. It Is better to be reproacht for not doing
evil, then to do evil to avoid reproach.

58. Pericles being requested by a friend to bear false witness in his behalf,
and to bind it with an Oath, told him, I am your friend as far as the Altar,
as if he had said, saving my conscience, and duty to the gods, when any would
have us sin, let us tell them, your friend, or your servant, usque ad aras, I
will do any thing to please and pleasure you, except displeasing God and my
conscience.

59. When Agesilaus his own father would have had him give sentence in a cause
contrary to the Law; father, quoth he, your self have taught me from my very
childhood, to obey the Laws; I will therefore be obedient to your good
precepts, and pass no judgment against the Law. In such cases we should know
no man after the flesh, but be as Levi, who knew not his own father.

60. Aristarchus scoffing at the great number of Sophisters in his days, said,
that in old time hardly could there be found seven wise men throughout the
world; but in our days, quoth he, much ado there is to find so many fools:
it is a bad age when men are wise in their own eyes.

61. One attempting to kill Prometheus the Thessalian, run him so deep with his
sword into an impostume, that he let out the corruption and saved his life; so
says Plutarch, a reproachful speech delivered in anger, or evil will, is the
cause of healing some malady in the soul, which before was hidden or neglected.

62. Pythagoras was wont to say, that we were then in best case, when we did
approach unto the Gods, and worship them; it is good for us to draw near unto
God, yea so good, that it is never well with us but when we are with God.

63. When news was brought Zeno, that his ship with all the fraught and
merchandise therein was cast away; thou have done well, O fortune, said he, to
drive us to our studying Gown, and our Philosophers life again. We should look
upon losses and afflictions, as that which is to draw or drive us nearer unto
God in holiness of life.

64. When Alexander came to Diogenes, and asked him if he wanted any thing, and
would request any thing of him, nothing said he, but that thou would stand
out of the Sun. To a gracious heart there is nothing comparable to the shining
of the Son of righteousness.

65. A Persian King had one about him, whose place and office it was, to say
unto him every morning as he entered into the Chamber; arise my Lord, and have
regard to those affairs for which Mesoromasdes, i. e. the great God would have
you to provide. We should bethink us every night what we have done, and every
morning what we have to do for and in obedience to the great God.

66. God, says Plutarch, hates and punishes those, who will seem to imitate
him in Thunder, Lightning, and Sun beams; but those that be followers of his
virtues and goodness, he loves and advances. An admirable observation, and
suitable to the Scriptures.

67. Nicias a Painter was so affectionately bent to his art, that he often
forgate himself, and would ask his servants whether he had dined or no? The
intentness of Archimedes also is famously known. Oh that we could be, if but
now and then so intent at meditation of God, etc.

68. Dionysius the younger used to say, that he kept and maintained many
Learned men, not because he did esteem them so much, but for that he desired to
be esteemed for their sake. May we not fear that many entertain Preachers and
Ministers on the like account and for the same reason.

69. After Dionisius was deposed from his royal dignity and banished, one asked
him what good Plato and all his Philosophy had done him? this benefit I have
thereby, said he, that I have learned to bear with patience this change and
alteration of my fortune. And when one judged Socrates by his Physiognomy to be
of a churlish sullen, froward, and dogged disposition, for which the people
were ready to beat him, knowing Socrates to be one of the meekest and serenest
spirited men that could be; Socrates himself said, it is true, my disposition is
as he has said, but Philosophy has made the alteration. Ah! shall they speak
more of the efficacy of Philosophy, then Christians of Christianity? God
forbid. Oh that Christians would make it appear that they have learned the
truth as it is in Jesus, and that the grace of God has appeared to, and taught
them, by holding forth the word of life, and showing the virtues of the Lord
Jesus Christ, who excelled all that did virtuously.

70. When word was brought to Alexander, that at a feast there was one that did
mis-call him and revile him, it is said he a rovall and Kingly act to suffer
blame for well-doing. When ye do well and suffer for it and take it patiently,
this is acceptable unto God. 1. Pet. 2.20.

71. After Antigonus had bin a long time sick of a lingering disease, and well
recovered again, he said, we have gotten no harm by this long sickness; for
this has taught us not to be so proud, by putting us in mind that we are but
mortal. 'Twas good for me that I was aflicted.

72. Paedaretus being not chosen one of the great council consisting of three
hundred men, returned with joy, saying, I am glad that in the city of Sparta
there are found three hundred better men then my self. We should rejoice in
common good, though carried on by others, and we our selves have no hand in it.

73. Endamedas seeing Zenoerates an old man studying philosophy with young
scholars in an Academy, demanded of one that stood by what he was, and being
told that he was one that sought after virtue, said he, if he be still studying
and still seeking it, when will he use and practice it. Alas how many are there
that are ever learning, but never come to the knowledge of the truth.

74. When Hephestion quarrelled with Craterus, Alexander reproved him thus:
what power have thou of thy self? what could thou do, and where would
thou be, if a man should take Alexander from thee. Some men look high, who are
upheld by others countenance and power, or else must be as low as the earth
they tread on.

75. Agesilaus the great being asked how a man might gain himself the greatest
name and reputation, if (said he) a man say well and do better. No such good
name as that which good works do get.

76. Alexander Commanded his treasurer to give Anaxarchus the Philosopher,
whatsoever he demanded, and when his trasurer brought him word that he craved
an excessive sum, viz. an hundred talents, The man said Alexander does very
well, knowing as he does that he has such a friend of me as both can and will
bestow so much upon him. We may ask great things of the great God, being
assured that he both can and will make good his promises. He will give like a
God.

77. When the Pilot of Antigonus his own Gally came to him and told him that
the enemy had a far greater number of ships then they, said he, being here
in person, for how many ships do thou reckon me? how many soever and how
strong soever our enemies be, yet having Christ with us, there is more for us,
then there is against us.

Nil desperandum Christo duce and auspice Christo, if God be with us, who can
be against us? they should never despair nor fear, that have God on their side.

79. One day when Phocion had delivered his advice among a great assembly of
people, and seeing that with one accord they all approved his speech, he was
ashamed; and turning toward his friends, said, What, have I spoken some words
that are not good, that this people speak well of it? A good man may in some
cases be jealous of himself when the bad approves him. Woe unto you when all
men speak well of you.

80. One asking Agesilaus the great, what children should learn when they were
young? answered, that which they were to practice when they were grown up.
Teach a child the trade of his way, and when he is old he will not depart from
it.

81. It Is said of the Lacedaemonians, that they never asked how many their
enemies were, but where they were. So should Christians fall on and fight the
good fight of faith, without considering the numbers that come against them.

82. Alexander being asked why he did not gather money and lay it up in a
public treasury? for fear said he, lest being keeper thereof, I should be
infected and corrupted thereby. A good Caution for them that love to bear the
bag.

83. A Philosopher being asked why rich men attended not the gates of
Philosophers? because said he, they know not their need of Philosophy. The
reason so few attend at wisdoms gates, is because they know not the need they
stand in of Christ Jesus.

84. Socrates said of them that would put him to death, they may take away my
life, but they cannot hurt me. Men may kill Saints, but they cannot hurt them.

85. When there were commotions in Caesar's Army, the very name of Quirites
hushed them. Oh that the name of Christ might prevail to hush the commotions
that are among professors, who bite and devour one another, and do themselves
more hurt then their enemies could.

86. Polemon coming into the school of Zenocrates, with his drunken company
crowned with Garlands purposely to outface him and his Philosop hy; Zenocrates
nevertheless went on with a lecture of temperance, pressing it so far, that it
wrought much upon Polemon, yea so much, that he immediately abandoned his
former courses, and became his disciple, and proved the strictest of the whole
Sect. How many have been thus caught at Sermons, and of vile sinners become
strict Saints?

87. One of King Cyrus Courtiers, and a great Favorite, having but little
estate, when he was to marry his daughter, was asked, Sir, where will you have a
portion for your daughter? he answered, (...), Cyrus is my friend. Saints may
say much more, (...), the Lord is my friend.

88. Furius Camillus was always like himself, the same man, not pufft up by
being dictator, no^ dejected when forbidden his Country. The Christians Motto
should be that of Queen Elizabeth's, semper eadem, always the same; not to be
lifted up, when lifted up, nor cast down, when cast down.

89. Its written that Timotheus the Athenian, after he had in the account he
gave to the state of his Government, often interlaced this speech, in this
fortune had no hand, he never prospered after in any thing he undertook. See
Dan. 4.30. Isa. 10.12, 13. When men disown God, God dis-owns men.

90. Antisthenes being asked what he had got by Learning? Answered, that he
could talk with himself, he could live alone, he needed not to go abroad, and
be beholding to others for delight: Much more may he say this, yea and much
more then this, who has learned Christ, and the truth as it is in Jesus.

91. Either we must not come to great persons, or coming seek to please them,
said Aesop to Solon; either we must not come to them at all, or coming tell
them the truth, and counsel them for the best, said Solon to Aesop.

92. Zenophon tells us, that when Cyrus gave Artabasus one of his Courtiers, a
Cup of Gold, he gave Chrysantas his Favorite nothing at that time but a kiss,
which occasioned this speech from Artabasus to Cyrus, Sir, the Cup you gave me
was not so good gold as the kiss you gave Chrysantas. God gives wicked men
many times gold, but without kisses, and godly men kisses, but without gold;
yet the godly may say, there is more gold in their kisses, then in the others
gold.

93. There was a long feud between Themistocles and Aristides, but being both
employed in service for their Country, Aristides bespake Themistocles thus, If
we be wise, its high time we should now leave off this vain envy and spite we
have a long time born each other, and that we should enter into another sort of
envy more honorable and profitable; I mean which of us two, shall do his best
endeavor to save Greece. To which Themistocles made this answer, I am sorry,
Aristides, that herein your honesty appears no greater then mine; but seeing
it is so that you have deserved the honor in beginning and procuring such a
commendable strife between us, I will henceforth endeavor to exceed you in
continuing this your desire.

Oh that Saints would learn from Heathen, to lay aside their particular
differences, to mind public advantage. Shall, alas! shall Heathens be better
at self-denial then Christians?

94. Artaxerxes ready to perish with thirst, was constrained to drink
puddle-water, of which he professed that he never drank wine with more delight.
To the hungry souls, every bitter thing is sweet. In times of straits, a little
is much, and that that is very bad, is very good.

95. When Archimedes had found out the resolution of a question in the
Mathematics, he cries out as one ravished (...), I have found it, I have found
it: So when a soul that has been sick of love for Christ Jesus, meets with
him, she ravished with joy, cries out, I have found him whom my soul loves.

96. Said one, and I suppose a Roman, it is unbecomming a Roman spirit, to cry
out, I am undone, while Caesar is safe. Oh how unbecoming Christians to cry out
I am undone, while Christ and their interest in him is safe.

97. Galienus the Emperor, when the report came to him that Egypt was lost,
what then, (said he) cannot I live without the flax of Egypt? And when word
was brought that a great part of his Dominions in Asia was wasted, what then
(said he) cannot I live without the delicacies of Asia? Oh for Christians to
speak thus of any of their losses, from a principle of acquaintance with and
enjoyment of God, is excellent. It Is like, very like, yea very much like that
of Habakkuk, c. 3.17. though the fig tree should not blossom, neither shall
fruit be in the Vines, the labor of the Olive shall fail, the fields shall
yield no meat, the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no
herd in the stalls, yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
salvation. What? cannot I live and rejoice without the flax of Egypt, and the
delicacies of Asia?

98. God, said Socrates, will be worshipped with that kind of worship only
which himself has commanded; and he will not be worshipped, said Cicero, with
superstition, but with piety. Oh that Christians would hear and learn!

99. When Caesar was about 25 years of age, he wept, that he had lived so long,
and done no great exploits; when as Alexander at that age, had conquered almost
all the world. How many souls that have lived to twenty five, yea to thirty
five, it may be forty five, and more years, and have not yet done any thing
to the conquering of the world, the subduing of sin, the working out the
salvation of their precious souls.

100. It Is a most shameful thing (said Seneca) to speak one thing and think
another. Let not thine heart reproach thy tongue, when thou speak to God or
Man.

101. Epictetus complained that there were many who would be Philosophers as
far as a few good words would go, but were nothing for practice.

Such as say well and do well are to be embraced, said Aristotle, but their
very profession is to be suspected who back it not by a suitable practice. It Is
not names, but things, not words, but works. What pity it is to conjoyne
drunkard or swearer, or proud or covetous with Christian; when the drunkard
goes to hell, what will then become of the Christian? men join what God has
separated, and God will separate what men has joined. It Is no less an
abomination to put a good name upon a bad man, then to put a bad name upon a
good man.

102. It Is storied of Caesar, that he never said to his soldiers ite, go on,
but venite, come on, or follow me. Christ gives his people no command to obey,
but he shows them the way, follow me, is his word of command.

103. Phocion after he had done many notable services for the Athenians was put
to death by the; but a little before his death he charged his son never to wish
ill to the Athenians for what they had done to him. Wish them well, that wish
you ill, love and be a friend to your enemies, pray for and curse not them that
do despightfully use you.

104. When Flaminius the Roman General had set the Greeks at liberty they so
cried out Soter, Soter, Savior, Savior, that the very birds astonished at the
noise fell to the earth. Oh with what shoutings should Saints cry out of Christ
Jesus, Soter, Soter, Savior, Savior, seeing he has set them at liberty from
Satan sin and wrath to come?

105. Crates threw his Gold into the Sea, saying, ego perdam te, ne tu perdas
me. I will destroy thee, lest thou destroy me. If men do not put the love of
the world to death, the love of the world will put them to death.

106. One of the Emperors said of Rome, inveni lateritiam, marmorcam reliqui,
I found it built of bricks, but I leave it of marble: Christ always makes us
better then he finds us. He finds us a lump of dyrt dunghill, a sink of sin
and uncleanness, but he purges us from dead works and builds us up an holy
(which is the most glorious) temple unto God.

107. Alexander said of two of his Courtiers, that the one loved the King, but
the other loved Alexander. May not Christ say of professors, that some love
Jesus, but few love Christ. Vix diligitur Jesus propter Jesum, Jesus is scarce
loved for his own sake. 'Twas Augustine his complaint.

108. A certain stranger coming on embassage to the Senators of Rome, and
coloring of his hoary hair and pale cheeks with vermilion, hue a grave
Senator espying thedeceit, stood up and said what Sincerity can we expect, at
this man's hand, whose locks and looks and lips do lie? think the same
(says one) of all painted hypocrites.

109. Julius Caesar would never fore-acquaint his soldiers of any set time for
removal or onset, that they might be always in readiness. Be ye also ready,
for ye know not the time when the Son of man will come.

110. Socrates when he saw one drnuke or discomposed, and out of order, would
say, (...), am not I such a one? by the sight of others sins, men may learn to
bewail their own sinfulnes and heart of corruption. As Master Bradford,
(commonly called holy Bradford) when he saw any drunk or heard any swear,
etc. would railingly complain, Lord I have a drunken head, Lord I have a
swearing heart. And the disciples feared themselves each man rather then
another, and therefore said Lord is it I? but Judas (he alters the word, being
the bag-bearer and a mere hireling) he says, Master is it I?

111. Magnus est animus qui se Deo tradidit, said Seneca. He is of a truly
great spirit, who resignes up himself to God: Pusillanimous and low spirits
strive and murmr. Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust him, and he shall bring
it to pass, Psalm. 37.5.

112. When the Senate informed Augustus of what some had said of him, tush,
said he, non tantum habemus otii, we are not at leisure to listen to every
slander that is raised of us. A Christian should be (as it is said of Severus the
Emperor) careful of what is to be done by him, but careless of what is said of
him.

113. When Pyrrhus, Councellor to Sultan Selimus, persuaded the Sultan to
bestow the great wealth which he had taken from the Persian Merchants upon some
notable Hospital for releife of the poor, nay rather said he, let it be
restored to the right owners, and so it was. Ill-gotten goods given to the poor
is no charity, restitution is the best advantage can be made of such gain.
Would there were more Zacheus Christians in the world, for though by
restitution they might be poorer in goods, yet they would be richer in
goodness. A little good estate is better then a great bad one.

114. After that Socrates was put to death at Athens, Aristophanes rehearsed a
Tragedy of his concerning Palamedes who had been executed by the Grecians long
before at the siege of Troy, in which tragedy were these verses.

Ye have slain, ye have slain of Greeks the very best,
-- that never any did infest.
At the hearing whereof the people were so moved, that they presently fell upon
the Authors of Socrates his death and drew them forth to punishment. Oh that
(as one applies it) we could be as nimble to apprehend and to be avenged of our
sins, who put Christ to death who was without sin, who never did any hurt,
but good all his days.

115. Contemno minutulos istos deos modo Jovem habeam propitium, said a heathen
man; I contemn and despise all those petty gods, so Jupiter be my friend. So
Christ (says the heavenly man) be my mediator and intercessor, I care not for
the petty advocates which the Papists adore.

116. Numa Pompilius forbad the Romans to believe that God had the form of
beast or man; and it was from the beginning of Rome an hundred and seventy
years that they had no Image of God, either painted or graven. Plut. in vit.
Rome-Heathen more Christian, then Rome-Christian, or rather Antichristian.

117. God, whom just men desire to be like unto, does excel all humane nature
in 3 several things; in immortality, in power, and virtue; of which three,
virtue is the most honorable and precious thing. Plut. in vita Aristidis.

118. Plato asking quid fuit, quod semper erit, et nunquam fiebat, what that
was, that always was, and never was made, et quid fuit quod semper fiebat et
nunquam fuit, what that was, that was always made, and yet never was, received
this Answer: The first is God, the second is a creature.

119. Phocion said to one that requested an ulawfull thing of him, thou can
not have me for a friend and a flatterer both. He is the truest friend that
will do nothing but what consists with the truest friend-ship, and a good
conscience.

120. This was the noblest glory that could be among men, when a man bore the
bell and praise, not that he was the swiftest among the swift, or the strongest
among the strong, but honest among the honestest. Plut. in Lycurgo.

121. When Philip asked Democritus, if he did not fear to lose his head? he
said, no, for if he took away his head, the Athenians would give him one
immortal, he should be statued in the Treasury of eternal fame. So Ovid.

Me tamen extincto fama perennis erit. Should not Christians then live above
fear of suffering, and say as the Apostle 2 Cor. 4.16, 17.

122. Numa Pampilius put so much confidence in the gods, that one day when it
was told him, that his enemies were in arms against him, his answer was, and I
sacrifice. Plut. in vit. Thus said David, Psalm 109.3, 4. They sought against
me without a cause, but I gave my self unto Prayer.

123. Brutus visiting Ligarius, and asking him, what, sick, Ligarius? no,
Brutus, said he, if thou have any noble enterprise in hand, I am well: So
should a soul say for Christ.

124. Some write of Epaminondas, a famous Theban, and some of Philip King of
Macedon, that after high and unexpected Victories, they became (in their
outward appearance at least) very sad, more like Mourners then Triumphers, for
no other reason then for fear of some eminent disaster; for they held it
ominous among the Ancients, to have long prosperity: One of them has this good
saying, though ill enough meant by him; God will not endure that any should
think well of himself, but himself. It Is much according to Scripture-discovery,
that when men glory in their pride, God stains the pride of their glory.

125. When one wished Pythagoras (as I think) that the gods would give him
whatsoever he desired, nay rather said he, that I may desire but what they will
give. Gods will is better for us, then ours for our selves, it is not for us to
prescribe, but to submit to God.

ERRATA in the Milk and Honey.
S. for sentence, l. for line.

Sentence 96. line 3. for becomes of, r. becomes us, S. 258. for thy will, r.
my will be done. S. 294. r. much from a little. S. 295. r. such thorns may be
touched. P. 250. lin. ult. for be pressed, r. deprest.

In the Heathen Improved.

S. 7. l. 3. for Cenippus, r. Eunippus. P. 193. l. 3. for our r. one tale. P.
200. l. 2. leave out not, and r. he might well sleep. S. 82. for Alexander, r.
Anaxander. S. 93. leave out no, and r. appears greater. S. 110. for
railingly, r. wailingly complain. Ibid. for a drunken head, r. heart.

FINIS.

