THE ANATOMY OF THE Body of Man:

Wherein is exactly described every Part thereof, in the same Manner as it is
Commonly showed in Public Anatomies.

And for the further help of young Physicians and Chyrurgions, there is added
very many Copper Cuts, far larger than is printed in any Book written in the
English Tongue.

Also Explanations of every particular expressed in the Copper Plates.

Published in Latin By Joh. Veslingus, Reader of the Public Anatomy in the
most Famous University of Padua;

And Englished By Nich. Culpeper Gent. Student in Physic and Astrology, living
in Spittle-fields near London.

LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden Hall, and are to be sold at his Shop,
at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil near the Royal Exchange. 1653.

TO HIS WORTHY FRIEND Samuel Hyland Esquire; Nich. Culpeper wishes increase of
Grace in this World, and a Crown of Glory in that to come.
Worthy Sir,
IT might seem a strange Speech (had it not had a private interpretation) that
of Tirestas the Prophet, quoted by the Poet, who answered Liriope, enquiring of
him, Whether her son Narcissus should be long lived or not? he replied, He
should if he knew not himself; an answer as strange as it was obscure: for that
Learned and wise Greek, held, That the knowledge of a man's self was the first
step to virtue; and sad experience witnesses that many in our days have been
ruinated for lack of it, but unhappy Narcissus (if the Poets say true) fell
inammored on his own beauty, and so perished. If it made any thing at all to my
present purpose, I could quote you what many other Histories say of him;
however the Moral of it (if rightly considered) may give a check to such, who
pursuing after shadows, lose the substance: As for the Speech of Tiresias, if
it be taken in a general acceptance, it will be found as false as what is
falsest, the knowledge of a man's self being of all Natural knowledge the most
profound and most to be desired, for he that knows himself aright cannot but
know all the world, because he is an Epitome of it; Knowledge was that which
Solomon desired when God gave him all the world to choose in, and bad him ask
what he would have, and he would give it him, as you may read 1 Kings, 3. he
said, Lord, give thy servant an understanding heart that he may judge between
good and bad: And the speech pleased the Lord that Solomon had asked this
thing: And God said unto him, because thou have asked this thing, and have not
asked for thy self long life, neither have asked riches for thy self, neither
have asked the life of thy enemies, but have asked for thy self Knowledge to
discern judgment; Behold, I have done according to thy word, Lo, I have given
thee a wise and understanding heart, so that there was none like thee before
thee, neither after thee shall any arise like unto thee; And also I have given
thee that which thou have not asked, both riches and honor. It seems God
rewards those with transitory things which seek knowledge of him in the first
place, and if so, how will he reward those that labor what they can with might
and main to hide knowledge from their Brethren and fellow Creatures? Indeed
those that are used to behold and view the Nature and Reasons of things, may
easily perceive, not only by the inward Gifts and Endowments of man's Mind, but
also by the outward Shape of his Body, far passing and surpassing all other
living Creatures, that he was made for some notable end and purpose above them:
This the Poets themselves could and did discover.

Pronaque cum spectent animalia caetera terram,
Os homini sublime dedit, Coelumque videri
Jussit, and erectos, ad sidera tollere vultus.
And whereas others see with down-cast eyes,
He with a lofty look did man indue,
And bad him Heavens transcendent glory view.
It was a most Divine Speech of the Poet indeed, Man was made with an erected
face to admire at the glory of the Creator; a man shall seldom hear a truer
word in the Pulpit, so that it is palpable that man was not made for Pleasure,
nor Honor, nor enough of needful outward things which they commonly call
Riches, which the men of this Iron Age look after in the first place, though
they be indeed the last and lowest part of the world; they are necessary
servants to a man, and as servants they are to be used; and whosoever is
respected in this world for his riches sake, he is respected for his servants
sake, and not for his own: and indeed neither the Philosophers of Old, nor yet
the Men of our Days could ever make a true definition what Riches was, or at
leastwise such an one as could please me: Aristotle held Riches to be enough of
things needful, but if that be true, then a Beast is as rich as a Saint. The
Stoic Philosophers held riches to consist in having enough Earth and Air, but
if that be true, how should a man do for Victuals? this present world holds
riches to be enough of Gold and Silver, but what one of their enoughs is I know
not, nor (I am confident) themselves neither.

Crescit amor mummi, quantum ipsa pecunia crescit.
-- the event does prove
As Riches does increase, so does its love.
The more Riches men have, the more they desire, and they never know when they
have enough; for if a covetous man had as many Needles as Paul's would hold, and
as many Bags of Gold as all those needles would last stitching, they would
never be contented: besides, if riches consist barely in the enjoyment of
money, then that man which Pliny (when Hannibal besieged Casiline, and there
was a sore famine in the Town) quotes, would be accounted a very rich man who
sold a mouse for two hundred pence one day, and died himself for lack of food
the next.

But worthy Sir, It is not Riches I treat of in this Book, but Knowledge, and
particularly the knowledge of a man's Body: I will not stand here to prove how
much the exact knowledge of the Body conduces to the mending or marring of the
internal Faculties or Endowments of the mind, for that were but to trouble you
in the midst of your business amongst your many Employments, both private at
home, and public abroad for the good of this Nation, the last of which has
made your Name precious in the eyes of all honest people: neither shall I spend
time in making an Apology why I appear in print in this Nature wherein I have
so many Predecessors in the English Tongue; the reason is clear, Some of them
are too large, others too short, none of them have the Demensions of Man's Body
so exactly cut in Copper as you shall find them in this Book, wherein, as in a
looking Glass, you may see man turned the wrong side outward, and all his
internal parts laid open to you view, whereby your spirit may be even ravished
in the consideration of the Wisdom and Power of that God who has made man in
such an absolute form, so accurate in all his delineaments; if such be the
Creature, what is the Creator?

Lastly, Let me crave pardon, and I hope I shall not be denied it, in presuming
to stamp your Name in the beginning of it: Truly your reallity to the good of
this Nation was such, and so still continues even in that crooked and perverse
Generation in which we live, that I knew no other way how to show forth a
thankful mind to you than by doing as I have done: If it be accounted a fault,
let it be venial, and let an honest intent find sooner entertainment with you
than a hare-brain'd action.

The God of heaven and earth bless you with the Blessings both of this Life,
and that to come, that you may go on in the good work as hitherto you have
done, even till such time as it pleases him to let us enjoy one desired
Liberty. Sir I am

Yours unfainedly NICH. CULPEPER.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
IT is no hard matter for one that has been trained up in the School of
Xermes, and is any thing skilled at all in the Egyptian Learning ( Xermetical
Philosophy being far more ancient than Galens Method) I say it is no hard
matter for one that has been trained up in that Learning to prove that the
life of all things is all one with it self in all persons, and that the
difference between sick persons and healthful, wise persons and fools, virtuous
persons and vicious, if you will take virtue and vice in a Phylosophical sense,
lies in the temper of their Bodies; neither is it any small step to the knowledge
of the temper of a man's Body, to know the exact deliniaments thereof in an
Anatomical way; a man must know in what part of the Body a Disease lies, and
the place, and quality of that place also, before he knows how to remedy it, if
Galen's Art be true; and I would willingly teach Galenists, if I thought they
were not too proud to learn; I would fain teach fools wisdom if they were but
willing to learn; for why may there not be a way left in Nature to bring
ignorant people to knowledge, as there is to bring mad people to a sober life?
which the vulgar commonly call, Rational. That Madness is a Disease of the
Body, all know, neither is it unknown but to few that Folly is a Disease of the
Mind, and yet it is Epidemical at this time, the more is the pity; it were
easily proved if a man would go about it, That it is the Body afflicts the
Mind; for it is absolutely impossible the Mind should afflict the Body, the
Mind being Aetherial, Immortal, and no way subject to corruption: I care not
greatly if I spend a little time and pains in clearing this to you, so far as
will serve the turn to show the truth of it, and not to exceed the limits of an
Epistle.

The Divine and Immortal Mind proper to man is wise, and alike wise in all men,
being one and the same in all points in all men; and this is easily proved
because God from whence it comes is one and the same; the difference then, is
when it is divided and sent into different places. It was excellently spoken of
that Noble Polonian, says he, If you lay diverse Colors round upon a Table at
a distance one from another, imagine White lay here, and Green there, and Red
there, Blue there, Salt in another place, Alum in another; now if you take a
pot of fair clear Water, and power down in the midst of them, that which runs
through the red Color will be red, and that which runs through the blue Color
will be blue, and that which runs through the Salt will be salt, and that which
runs through the Alum will be Allumy, etc. and yet the water which is powered
down amongst them is one and the same.

Take another familiar Example or two, for things are better cleared by
Examples than they are by themselves: There are innumerable kinds of Lights in
the world, that differ in form and bigness, according to the matter that
receives them; there are some great fires, and some little ones, some burn
clear, and some are smoky; there are some great Candles, and some small ones,
and some Torches, and yet the Sun from whence all these receive their light, is
of it self all one and the same in all places. Take another Example, which
shall bring the matter a little closer home to the point, As the Sun of himself
ever shines and sees all things, unless his beams be stopped by a cloud or
some other thick matter; even so the Mind of Man considered alone by it self,
knows all things, but being entangled in the Body, and darkened by its
cloudiness and infirmities, it can see nothing without the leave and help of
the Body; this course then the Mind is fain to take, considering her self she
cannot step forth out of the Body, nor range abroad to discern the Idea's of
things as they are in themselves, She is fain to take the demonstrations of
things as she can receive them from the Body though they be in never so poor
and deceitful a way.

1. She is forced to employ the outward Spirits that keep their residence in
the edg and border of the Body, I mean the five Senses, Seeing, Hearing,
Smelling, Tasting, and Feeling; neither can these operate without their proper
Instruments, viz. The parts of the body where they lodge, viz. Seeing cannot see
without the Eye, nor Hearing hear without the Ear.

2. These bring in tidings to the Mind, viz. The Shows, Shapes, and Idea's of
things; yet cannot the Mind of man understand these without an Interpreter,
therefore are there inward Beams or Senses which lodge in the Brain, three of
them by Number, which take these tidings from the external senses, and
represent them as it were in a glass to the Mind, to wit, Apprehension, Memory,
and Judgment; then the mind laying them altogether, and comparing one with
another, judges of them, which is good, and which is bad, which is fit, and
which is not fit to be done: Now if these Messengers of the Mind, or the places
of the Body where they lodge, be foul, or gross, or thick, they give either
dull, or false information to the Mind; a Looking-glass if it be so corrupted
will do the like to the face of the Body: Thus I think it sufficiently proved
that the afflictions of the Mind have their Original from the Body: And besides
I have taught you a little Philosophy, though it belonged nothing at all to my
present purpose. I hope you see by this time how beneficial the knowledge of the
Anatomy of a Man's Body is to the rectification of the Endowments of his Mind;
indeed, to his well-being both in this world, and that to come, if he mind
virtue here, and intend to inherit happiness hereafter.

How requisite it is to the Cure of the Diseases of the Body, every one can
tell you, and therefore I may hold my peace and not spend time in proving the
Crow to be black, or the Swan white. Only this I desire you to take notice of,
and so I conclude, That whereas I have been vituperated many times for being
Critical in my Writings, I have altogether for born it here, though I confess I
shall not please every body in this Translation, whether a man go at one side
of the street or the other the dogs will bark at him; and the man in Aesops
Fables, whether himself rid, or his boy, or both of them, or neither of them,
could not please the next he met.

As for Veslingus the Author of this Work which I have here Translated, he was
(and for ought I know, or can hear, is still) the public Reader of the Anatomy
Lecture at the famous University of Padua in Italy. I confess I differ in
Opinion from him in some few particulars, and but in few, especially where he
makes the Heart the fountain of Blood, as also the Veins that carry it, wherein
it is apparent that he drank too deep of Aristotle's spittle: I confess I passed
it by in silence; diverse are of that Opinion; let them give me leave to use
mine, as I have given them to use theirs. As for the Brass Cuts, they are
performed very exactly, far exceeding any that ever were printed in the English
Tongue, inferior to none in the world. Truly, I wish this poor Nation much good
by this Work, that the Lord would open their eyes, that they might see the
truth and themselves, and let them rest confident, That whilst I am amongst the
Living, I shall never cease to do them good according to my power.

Nich. Culpeper.

The Contents of the CHAPTERS.
CHAP. 1. Of the common Coverings of the Body. Page 1 CHAP. 2. Of the Bones and
Muscles of the Abdomen, and of the Peritonaeum. Page 5 CHAP. 3. Of the Omentum,
Stomach, and Guts Page 9 CHAP. 4. Of the Mesenterium, Sweetbread, Liver, and
Spleen Page 15 CHAP. 5. Of the Kidneys, Ureters, and Bladder Page 11 CHAP. 6.
Of the Instruments of Generation in Man Page 23 CHAP. 7. Of the Instruments of
Generation in Women Page 26 CHAP. 8. Of the Fruit in the Womb Page 30 CHAP. 9.
Of the external parts of the Breast. Page 35 CHAP. 10. Of the Heart and Lungues
Page 39 CHAP. 11. Of the organs of Voice and Speech Page 44 CHAP. 12. Of the
Muscles of the Scapula, Back, and certain of the Head Page 48 Chap. 13. Of the
external parts of the Head, their Bones and Muscles Page 51 Chap. 14. Of the
Brain and Cerebellum Page 58 Chap. 15. Of the Eyes Page 64 Chap. 16. Of the
Ears Page 69 Chap. 17. Of the Bones of the Extreme Parts Page 75 Chap. 18. Of
the Muscles of the Hands Page 180 Chap. 19. Of the Muscles of the Foot Page 184
Chap. 20. Of the Veins, Arteries, and Nerves of the Extreme Parts Page 188
Joh. Veslingus to the Reader.
Demetrius sacked Rhodes, and the Suburbs being taken, he threatened the City
with Fire and Sword; they sending an Ambassador, entreated him, that he would
not burn the Table of Protogenis, placed upon the Wall; he readily answers,
That he would sooner burn the Image of his Father, than such a piece of
Workmanship; for the Workman had painted Jalysus one of the Heroes of Rhodes in
a Table, to wit, the Image of the Body drawn with a Pensil.

What place then (my Reader) should the Context it self of the Body of Man, his
inward Parts and Adornments, have in our minds, when Demetrius was so chary of
only the Shadow? Truly, the very same which the Workmanship of God ought to
have, he being a delicate Epitome of the whole world, by which alone the Eternal
God showed what he was able to do in the Universe.

Men famous for Wisdom in Ancient times were ravished with contemplation of
this; although from the Age of Alcmaeon even to Diocles, they were content with
the curious Inspections only, and buried the Mystery in silence, and left
nothing to posterity, till the exquisite Knowledge of Man's Body inflamed Man
with a greater desire of Study, brought it out of darkness into light, as the
most solid Foundation of that part of Physic called Physyology: Amongst the
Ancients, Galen bears away the Bell in this part of Study, which is to be found
in his Praiseworthy Works of Dissection; afterward in this latter Age, the
Precepts of this Art being rectified, diligent men increased the Art of Anatomy
of the Body of Man, with profitable Observations; then it came into great
Volumns, explaining the Functions confusedly, and answering needless Questions;
also Figures were added cut in Copper, to feed the Eyes of those that had not
opportunity to see the Dissection.

In this so famous Anatomical Light, I have known not a few, profit but little
by so great Labors, being wearied out with the bulk of the Books, and miserably
entangled in the snares of Controversies; another spends all his time in
contemplating the Figures, as though he were beholding the Siege of Troy, and
being ignorant of the Substance, rejoices in the Image of things.

To recall those Errors, I framed this small Work, in the manner as we show it
in public Dissections of the Body of Man: I avoided Controversies, which
belong rather to Contemplatists, than the Theaters of Anatomists, which were
built to behold, not to dispute in. I was least of all solicitous about the
Figures; for although very many ingenuous men have been very exact in them, yet
he labors in vain, that labors to find the natural position of Parts, their
magnitude, order, hardness, softness, and as Celsus says, their smoothness,
process, recess, insertion into another, or reception of another into
themselves, accurately by them.

What ever it be, we would have it brief, and not enlarge it with many words,
imitating that of Salustius of the Carthaginian Law; it is better to speak few
things here, then to pass by many things with silence, seeing such things as
are prescribed to young men of the Body of Man, are scarce better done any
where, than what here is laid down to faithful Eyes; and yet if you regard only
the speech, you will deny, as Apelles did of the Table of Protogenis, that the
work has any grace; or if you regard the novilty of the style; both of them I
easily grant you, being not desirous of Popular applause.

I propound the History of the Parts of the Body showed in Dissections; for
what profits it to garnish it with flourishes, which appears without spot in
its Native Beauty, being the naked Workmanship of Nature: Neither thought I
good to abstain from the words already in use, lest I should seem to draw a
cloud over other Men's Works, and darken the way to the Temples of Wisdom and
Aesculapius. Most of it I drew out of the common Fountain, but the Manuduction
is drawn out of my own Vessel. I had to my Master, a famous man, Fabricius
Bartoletus of Bonona, Chief Physician to the Duke of Mantua.

If you regard the Order, you are beholding to me for that; I digested it into
so many Chapters, as publicly it is demonstrated in Anatomies, and the Series
of every Chapter is in the same manner as it is showed to the eye in public
Dissections; In the Breast I show the Adductor of the Shoulder, and the Muscles
of the Scapula called Serrati, before the Intercostals, the Lumbal Muscles
after the Extenders of the back, the movers of the Scapula before the muscles
of the head and back: The reason that I join the Tongue with the Larynx, is
it is singular nexure with the Os Hyois, and the Os Hyois with the Larinx; the
bones of the Limbs are set before the Muscles, seeing the greatest part of them
move the bones: to both I add the Nerves, Arteries, and veins, which the Divine
Creator has made common with the bones and muscles. I did not treat of the
Nature of similary parts by themselves for brevity sake, seeing that belongs
rather to Physiology, and without Tautology could not here be treated of.

This I entreat of thee who ever reads this Work, That thou would give thy
mind as well to pardon failings, as to know the truth, if thou meetest with
any, caused either through forgetfulness, or non-understnding: my serious
intent was to lead such young men as are studious in Physic into the Knowledge
of Anatomy; if my endeavors want strength, thou can not in equity deny me
pardon, seeing thou thy self may run upon the same Rocks in other
difficulties. Farewell

The Names of several Books printed by Peter Cole, at the sign of the
Printing-Press in Cornhil, by the Exchange; London.
Five several Books, by Nich. Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physic and Astrology.
1 A Translation of the New Dispensatory, made by the College of Physicians of
London. Whereunto is added, The Key to Galen's Method of Physic.

2 A DIRECTORY for Midwives; or a Guide for Women.

3 GALEN'S Art of PHYSIC with a large Comment.

4 The ENGLISH PHYSICIAN; being an Astrologo-Physical Discourse of the Vulgar
Herbs of this Nation; wherein is showed how to cure a man's self of most
Diseases incident to man's Body, with such things as grow in England, and for
threepence charge.

Also in the same Book is showed, 1. The time of gathering all Herbs both
Vulgarly and Astrologically. 2. The way of drying and keeping them and their
Juyces. 3. The way of making and keeping all manner of useful Compounds, made
of those Herbs. 4. The way of mixing the Medicines according to Cause, and
mixture of the Disease, and the part of the Body afflicted.

5 The Anatomy of the Body of Man, Wherein is exactly described the several
parts of the Body of Man, illustrated with very many large Brass Plates.

A Godly and Fruitful Exposition, on the first Epistle of Peter. By Mr. John
Rogers, Minister of the Word of God at Dedham in Essex.

The Wonders of the Lodestone, by Mr. Samuel Ward of Ipswich.

An Exposition on the Gospel of the Evangelist St. Matthew, by Mr. Ward.

Clows Surgery.

Marks of Salvation.

Christians Engagement for the Gospel, by John Good-win.

Great Church Ordinance of Baptism.

Mr. Love's Case, containing his Petitions, Narrative, and Speech.

Vox Pacifica, or a Persuasive to Peace.

Dr. Prestons Saints submission, and Satan's Overthrow.

Pious man's practice in Parliament Time.

A Treatise of the Rickets, being a Disease common to Children; Wherein is
showed, 1. The Essence. 2. The Causes. 3. The Signs. 4. The Remedies of the
Disease. Published in Latin by Dr. Glisson, Dr. Bale, and Dr. Regemorter, now
translated into English.

Mr. Symsons Sermon at Westminster.

Mr. Feaks Sermon before the Lord Major.

Mr. Phillips Treatise of Hell.

-- of Christ's Geneology.

Seven Books of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs lately published; As also the Texts of
Scripture upon which they are grounded.
1 The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment, on Phil. 4.11. Wherein is showed, 1.
What Contentmentis, 2. It is an holy Art and Mystery, 3. The Excellencies of
it, 4. The Evil of the contrary sin of Murmuring, and the Aggravations of it.

2 Gospel Worship, on Levit. 10.3. Wherein is showed, 1. The right manner of the
Worship of God in general; and particularly, In Hearing the Word, Receiving the
Lords Supper, and Prayer.

3 Gospel-Conversation, on Phil. 1.17. Wherein is showed, 1. That the
Conversations of Believers must be above what could be by the Light of Nature,
2. Beyond those that lived under the Law, 3. And suitable to what Truths the
Gospel. holds forth. To which is added, The Misery of those Men that have their
Portion in this Life only, on Psalm. 17.14.

4 A Treatise of Earthly-mindedness. Wherein is showed, 1 What
Earthly-mindedness is, 2 The great Evil thereof, on Phil. 3. part of the 19.
Verse. Also to the same Book is joined, A Treatise of Heavenly-mindedness, and
walking with God, on Genesis 5.24. and on Phil. 3.20.

5 An Exposition, on the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of the
Prophecy of Hosea.

6 An Exposition on the eighth, ninth, and tenth Chapters of Hosea.

7 An Exposition on the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth Chapters of Hosea,
being now Complete.

Twelve several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Collected into one Volumn. Viz.
1 The great Gospel-Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and
applied from Christ's Priestly Office.

2 Satan's Power to Tempt; and Christ's Love to, and Care of His People under
Temptation.

3 Thankfulness required in every Condition.

4 Grace for Grace; or, the Overflowings of Christ's Fullness received by all
Saints.

5 The Spiritual Actings of Faith, through Natural Impossibilities.

6 Evangelical Repentance.

7 The Spiritual-Life, and In-Being of Christ in all Believers.

8 The Woman of Canaan.

9 The Saints Hiding Place in time of Gods Anger.

10 Christ's Coming is at our Midnight.

11 A Vindication of Gospel Ordinances.

12 Grace and Love beyond Gifts.

A Congregational Church is a Catholic Visible Church By Samuel Stone, in New
England.

A Treatise of Politic Power, wherein 7 Questions are Answered, 1. Whereof
Power is made, and for what ordained; 2. Whether Kings and Governors have an
absolute Power over the People; 3. Whether Kings and Governors be subject to
the Laws of God, or the Laws of their Countries; 4. How far the People are to
obey their Governors; 5. Whether all the People have be their Governors; 6.
Whether it be Lawful to depose an evil Governor; 7. What Confidence is to be
given to Princes.

The Compassionate Samaritan.

Dr. Sibbs on the Philippians.

The Best and Worst Magistrate, by Obadiah Sedgwick.

The craft and cruelty of the churches Adversaries, by Matthew Newcomin.

A sacred Panygrick, by Steph. Martial.

Barriffs Military Discipline.

The Immortality of Man's Soul.

The Anatomist Anatomized.

King Charles his Case, or an Appeal to all rational men concerning his Trial.

Mr. Owens stedfastness of the Promises.

Mr. Owen against Mr. Baxter.

AN ANATOMICAL TREATISE.
CHAP. 1. Of the common Coverings of the Body.
IF you disdain not to turn thy eyes and mind to the Corpse of Man Artificially
dissected, whether the Profession of Wisdom or Physic delight thee, I promise
thee here something worth thy labor and not to be despised, for there is not
the least nor most abject part of Man, but by its admirable structure thou
may know him that made thee, to be most wise, most powerful: Thou shall find
out the causes of all the actions, the consent and concord of thy whole Body,
the Foundation of Health and Sickness, thou may the better apply Remedies to
afflicted parts; and in the time when Nature calls for remedy, thou need not
be hurried on with rashness, nor retarded by fear.

In the Body of Man, both Ventricles and Limbs are to be heeded; the common
name of Limbs comprehends both Hands and Feet: we call those notable Cavities of
the Body, Ventricles, in which Nature has placed diverse parts dedicated to
diverse actions, to settle their abode in. Of these are three.

The first, which is the lower, is called the Abdomen and is internally
compassed with the Psritonaeum, it is called the Abdomen, because it hides and
involves all those Bowels which are ordained for the preparation of the
nourishment of the whole Body, the begetting of Children, the producing and
cherishing of the Seed.

The second, which is the middle, is bounded about with the Pleura, It is in
the Fountain of vital heat and in it are the Lungues.

The third, which is the highest, is included in the head, and stoutly defended
by the Skull; in this, Plato places the Celestial part of Man.

We, because we would avoid putrefaction, begin the Dissection at the lower
Ventricle, or Abdomen, whose fore part, which is next the lower Cartilages of
the Ribs, the ancients called Hypochondria, and is divided into the right and
left; But the other, we of Modern times, very fitly call that part which is
next the Stomach and the uppermost Guts, Epigastrium; but that which contains
the lower part of the belly, even to the groyn and privities, Hypocastrium, the
middle, between the Epigastrium and Hypogastrium; we call the region of the
Navil the back part of the Abdomen, the upper part of it is called the Loins,
the lower part the Buttocks.

Of the parts of the Abdomen, some are common to the whole Body, some proper to
its self; the common parts are the skin, scarf-skin, fat, and fleshy Membrane.

The Skin is a Membranous covering of the Body, drawn over the outward parts,
defending them from injury, and giving judgment of tangible Objects: I call it
a Membranous covering, because the substance is the same with a Membrane, and
it is stretched abroad like it, yet it differs from a Membrane in Temperament,
conformation and office; it takes its original not from Blood, nor yet from the
Vessels, but from the Seed, and this, the first radiments of the Embrion in the
womb testifies, which Nature compasses about with a thin skin, even so soon as
it is compacted; Hence also like other Seminal parts, even in a Blackmoors,
under the black thin skin, it is white; neither when it is lost does Nature
restore again the same, but another substance like it, which is called a Callus
or Scar.

It receives its quickness of sense from the Nerves, not only the extremity of
which, but also diverse small branches, are spread abroad in it, as is very
clear in the third and four pair of Nerves which pass to the face and the sixth
pair which pass to the Arms. It receives also many small veins and Arteries
that so it may be furnished with blood for nourishment and vital spirit for
quickening, that the coldness and dryness of it may be allayed, that part of of
it about the Abdomen, is supplied by veins and Arteries from the Epigastricts,
Lumbals, and Mammary branches.

The Habit of the skin is altogether different, according to the variety of
temperament, age, sex, and region; The skin on the top of the head is thickest,
that on the sides thin, that on the face and palm of the hand thinner, and that
of the lips thinnest of all; that on the tops of the fingers is mean, that so
the sense of touching might be the more perfect. It has very many passages or
holes in it, of which some are wide, as the mouth, nose, ears, eyes, and
privities, etc. seeing they are necessary either to receive in food, or cast out
excrements, others are small and innumerable by which sweat and fuliginous
vapors transpire.

It is in color naturally white, and sticks loosly to the fat that is under
it, so that in some places being cut, it may be blown up from it, as has been
tried by some in that barbarous fashion of cuting Leprosies; It sticks fast to
the fleshy membrane of the forehead, as also to that of the soles of the feet,
and the palms of the hands: So that the motion of those parts, it is drawn into
wrinkles together with it, by which as by Hieroglyphics: the curiosity of man's
brain has drawn indications of things to come.

A famous thin skin covers this skin externally, which the Greeks very acutely
call Epidermis, the Latins Enticula, and we Scarf-skin; it takes its original
from the dewy moisture on the out side of the skin, which is made thick into
that form, partly by the gentle and nourishing heat of nature, partly by the
dryness round about, whence it comes to pass that the Embrion being yet very
tender, yet this though very soft is found about it; it obtains its firmness
by age, even such a firmness that sometimes it restrains the excrements that
pass through the pores of the skin: It is extended all about the body where the
skin is, and sometimes through hot and fiery vapors that pass through the
pores, you may see it divided; as in such cases when we English say the skin
pills off: It is all together void of life and sense, and yet so firmly knit to
the skin that it can hardly be separated.

Neither is the use of this Scarf-skin (though it seems so small a business)
small, for without this could not the pores of the skin be covered, the
continual moisture of the body restrained, the body be made able to endure heat
and cold, nor the limbs be cleansed of dirt and filth.

Serpents seem yearly to cast off this Scarf-skin; but the scaly skin is not a
true Scarf-skin, but a thin membrane made of viscous slime and filth, and the
dryness of the air about, the same happens to men in fevers, especially upon
their tongue.

Underneath the skin is the fat, which is an unctuous or greasy substance of
the body, produced out of the Oily substance of the nourishment, which lying
like a mat about the body, not only defends it from the injury of cold, but
also restrains the immoderate dissipating, or scattering of the internal heat;
therefore in the Child even when it detained in the womb, it begins to grow,
yet is it more in quantity, and thicker after it is born. Art imitates Nature
in this, in that it puts Oil upon Liquors which are full of Spirit, least the
Spirit should exhale.

The body is universally surrounded with it; if you except the Eyelids, the
lips, and the Privities of men: the office of which would be vitiated either by
needless weight, or superfluous moisture: The fat is thickest about the Abdomen
and loins, mean upon the breast, and thinnest upon the head, nature providently
regarding and providing for the want of all places: the fat considered in it
self ( Quatenus fat) wants both life and sense, yet it receives both, from the
Mammary, Lumbal, and Epigastrick branches of the arteries, and the strings of
the nerves which are mixed with it.

The matter it self from which it is produced show its temperament to be
moderately hot, mixed with an aerial moisture: Its effects are evident, viz.
moderately to heat and attenuate, and more plentifully to moisten. Also it is
well known to profit much in pains of the sides and joints, to keep the hair
from falling off, and to take away the deformity of scars. It grows most about
the hottest parts of the body, and cannot positively take its original from
cold: that kind of fat which is called Pinguedo is softer than that which is
called Adeps (I suppose Adeps to be that which we English vulgarly call Suet)
and as it grows with more difficulty, so it melts without ease. It is joined to
the skin and to the membranes underneath it; and besides the foregoing uses, it
moistens and refreshes those parts of the body appointed for violent motions;
lastly it is placed in the intervalls of the Muscles, to better their motion,
and increase their comeliness.

Underneath the fat of the whole body is stretched out the skin, which the
Latins call Membra Carnosa, and Panniculus Carnosus. I know not what better
version to give it then a [fleshy membrane] Although in the Abdomen of a man
ripe in years, it carries no fleshy appearance at all, yet about the forehead,
the Neck, the hinder part of the head, and the Ears, it has an intertexture of
Musculous flesh, and therefore it serves not only to keep the Fat in its due
place, but also to divide one Muscle from another, and all of them from the
other flesh: It obtains veins, Arteries, and Nerves from the nearest branches
to it; it is stretched out over all the parts of the body, even where the use
of the Fat is either very little or none at all

Its constitution is not always single; for in fat bodies you shall find it
often double, sometimes manifold in respect of temperature: it is cold and dry,
which coldness and dryness is quallified by the neerness of the flesh and Fat,
it is exquisite in sense, anoyed by sharp vapors, and sudden shakings, it
sticks close to the Fat, to the Muscles, to the ligaments of the bones, at
which places it may easily be found.

Place here the Table of the first Chapter, which has the Number 1. at the
corner of the brass Plate.

Human anatomical diagrams AN EXPLANATION OF THE TABLE OF THE FIRST CHAPTER.
The first Figure shows the Effigies of a living Man, in which, not only the
external parts of the Abdomen, but also the Veins under the Skin which are
conspicuous are represented.
A The right Hypochondria. B The left Hypochondria. CC The Epigastrium. DD The
Bowels. EE The Hypogastrium. FF The Groyns. G The Region above the Privities. H
The Vein of the Forehead. I The Vein of the Temples. K The external Jugular
Vein. L The cephalic vein of the right Arm. M The basilick vein of the right
Arm. N The middle or common Vein, which is not in the same place in all Bodies.
O The cephalic vein of the left Hand. P The vein of the left Hand, called
Salvatella. QQ The Vein Saphaena descending. RR The Vein Saphaena in the Foot
it it self. SS The Sciatick Vein.
The Second Figure expresses the common coverings of the Body of Man, and the
Muscles under them laid open.
A A The Scarf-skin. B B B B The Skin. C C C C The Fat. D D D D The fleshy
Membrane. E E Part of the pectoral Muscles laid open. F F F Certain beginnings
of the Muscles called Serrati antici majores. GG HH II The Muscles of the
Abdomen obliquely descending. G HH Their toothed beginnings. I I I I The tendon
of the oblique descending Muscles, under which the right Muscles of the Abdomen
with their Nervous inscriptions appear. K K The white line of the Abdomen.




CHAP. 2. Of the Bones and Muscles of the Abdomen, and of the Peritonaeum.
THe parts which are properly attributed to the Abdomen, are either external
(which deservedly bear the name of parts containing) or internal which we call
parts contained; amongst the external are numbered the Bones, the Muscles, and
the Peritonaeum connexed with them.

We begin with the Bones which are the drier parts of the body of man, and the
harder, ordained for the stability of the whole body, the firmness of the
joints, and the strength of voluntary motion.

Their first substance, they have from the seed, and therefore they are all
Carthilaginous at first, and grow solid in process of time, they are longest
before they grow bony at the ends, which the Greeks call Epiphyses, and the
Latins Appendices.

They are covered with a notable membrane which is called Periosteum, of the
vessels they receive in, the Veins are evident, the Arteries more obscure, and
the Nerves obscurest of all; and yet the pain which is felt not in a few
places, when they are laid open by the hand of the Chyrurgion, manifests,
that the Nerves penitrate not only to the external membrane, but also into the
holes of the Bones themselves.

There is a mighty diversity both in their magnitude and figure, so that they
ought all to be handled in particular, and not in the universal: They are in
number above three hundred, a great part of them are bowed into Sinus, or stick
out in heads, which nature has covered with a soft cartilage as it were with a
crust; that so the bowing of the joints might be the safer and readier: part of
them have cavities like long pipes, part of them have small holes like Sponges,
as the present bones of the Abdomen have; all of them abound with marrow, or
with a juice like marrow, whereby their cold and dry nature is not a little
mitigated.

The joining of the Bones is made the stronger both by Carthilages and
Ligaments, of which the Cartilages are Spermatical parts usually joined to the
Bones, but not so hard, that so the joints may bend the better: The Ligaments
are Spermatical also, and are softer than the Cartilages, although they are
more or less soft according as they are round or flat: It is very fitting we
should take notice of the manner of their conjunction or joining severally.

The Bones of the Abdomen are but few in number, but of great bulk, occupying
the lower and hinder part of it, in the fore part they are not necessary, least
they should hinder the distention of the belly: These be the Vertebrae of the
loins, the os Sacrum, Coccix, that which the Ancients called the Bone without a
name, vulgarly called Ischium or Coxa, which contains the Ilium, Coccendix
and the Bones of the Pubis.

The Vertebrae of the loins are in number five, ordained for the safe passage
of the Marrow of the back, and the descending of the Nerves, the inferior are
larger than the superior, that they may the better hold up the back, they have
various processes which Authors call Apophyses, of which two are transverse,
four oblique, two superior, and as many inferior, and one acute: the oblique
processes especially strengthen the joints; the transverse and acute, are for
the convenience of the Muscles: In the middle cavitiy of the Vertebrae the
Marrow of the back descends; other lesser cavities are found about the sides,
where the Vertebrae are joined, to give passage to the Nerves of the loins;
they are joined backwards by their oblique processes, by that juncture which
the Greeks call, Ginglymos, when there is a mutual reception between them,
forwards by Hormonia; the rest are joined by Syndesmos, or by the benefit of
Ligaments, although they stick but loosly together, least immoderate rigor
should make the bowing of the loins difficult; but this being common to the
rest of the Vertebrae: I shall pass it by in few words.

Under the loins is the os Sacrum, being notable above all the rest for its
thickness and strength, being the Basis of so many Vertebraes which are above
it; for the most part it consists of six parts, which aemulate the Vertebrae,
growing narrower by degrees from abroad beginning; all of them being immovable,
and in aged Persons seeming to be but one Bone.

Like an appendix to the os Sacrum is the os Coccix composed of three small
bones bowed forward for the more convenient sitting of the man, their joining
together by Cartilages is but loose, so that they are somewhat moved out of
their places by the hard travail of women.

On both sides of this follows the os Ilium, which is the superior part of the
Coxa, or Bone without a name. It is large, strong, and with a broad back. The
gut called Ilium gave the name to this Bone, either because its manifold
circulations are near it, or else because it seems to be propped up by this
Bone.

To this is committed the os Coxendix, which others call Ischium; another part
of the Coxa, being also thick and firm, it has a large Cavity like the saucers
of the Ancients, into which the globous head of the thigh is placed and it is
joined to the sides of the os Sacrum, firmly with a doubletye.

Forwards from this on both sides is stretched out the os Pubis, compared to
the former; it is thin, and has a great hole through it, least its weight
should hinder the nimbleness of the body: on its extreme parts it has a
Cartilage, and it is strongly knit to the next bone of the side, both with a
circular and membranous Ligament; neither yet is this knitting so tith but it
may (like the former bones we mentioned) give way a little in the strong
travail of women.

But this Description of Bones (according to the consent of most Authors) must
be otherwise propounded, if we regard their Natural distinction as they are in
the Bodies of Children; for in such, even ti^ seven years of age, they are
manifestly divided, and may be taken asunder; therefore that portion which is
the lower, broader, and larger, even to the middle of the Acetabulum, makes the
Os Ilium, the other portion stretched forward from the Acetabulum, divided two
ways; the superior part makes the Os Pubis the inferior, the Os Coxendix,
which not alone, but with the other two joined with it, make the Sinus for the
head of the Thigh, and with the Os-pubis makes that foremost large hole.

Urgent necessity requires Muscles in the Abdomen for the expelling of
excrements, to wit, Organical parts, endewed with fibrous flesh, and strong
tendons, by which Nature endeavor the compression of the belly and the parts
therein contained. Of the Muscles there are five pair, which by reason of the
diversity of their Operations, have obtained a diversity of names.

The first are, Obliquely descending, and are larger than the rest, and have a
very broad Tendon, which goes like two other subjects, viz. the Peritonaeum in
men, and the worm-like Ligament of the womb in women, near to the Groyn: They
take their beginning under the great Musculus Serratus of the Breast, by
unequal or toothlike productions, then they fall back, where the transverse
processes of the Vertebrae of the Loins end; in the middle of the Abdomen a
concourse of tendons being made, they end there, in a certain white line, they
are furnished with Veins, Arteries and Nerves from the branches of the
intercostals where they come to the breast.

The next pair of the Muscles of the Abdomen is termed Obliquely Ascending,
arising near the transverse processes of the Vertebrae of the Loins, and the
utmost brim of the Os-Ilium; rising thence they join themselves to the eleventh
and twelfth ribs, and after by a doubled tendon they come to the right Muscles
of the Abdomen, they also end in the white line, they have their Veins and
Arteries from the branches of the Veins and Arteries which are called Musculae,
whose original is from the Vena cava and the great Artery, about their division
into the Iliack branches, they have their Nerves from the Lumballs, and the
lowermost intercostals.

The third pair are Transverse Muscles and have a Membranous beginning from the
Transverse Processes of the Vertebrae of the Loins, and passing by the Os
Ilium, they stick to the Peritonaeum and end where the other did; they
participate of the same Veins, Arteries, and Nerves with the Muscles obliquely
ascending,

The right Muscles make the fourth pair, in which, by excellent workmanship of
the Creator, the Epigastrick Veins and Arteries ascend, then these carriers of
nourishment and vital heat descend by the internal mammaries near the Cartilage
called Mucronata, or through its cleft: The Anastomosis of these Veins is very
conspicuous in women with child, and therefore the womb being much stopped, or
compressed with great swellings, being stretched from the Groyn up to the
Breasts, they resemble a channel, sometimes of the thickness of a finger; They
have their Nerves from the intercostals, stretched all along the middle of the
Abdomen, they are divided into two, three, and sometimes into four
inscriptions, as it were into so many Muscles, at the Cartilages of the Ribs,
and the Cartilage of the breast, called Mucronata where they rise, they are
fleshy, and they end in the Os Pubis where they are fastened by a strong and
tendinous body.

The Muscles called Pyramidales make up the fifth pair, the figure of which,
especially joined together, being like a Pyramide, gave them their name; they
take their basis from the Os Pubis, from which rising and growing more slender
by degrees, they admit their tendon into the white Line; they are auxiliary to
the right Muscles, and compress the lower parts the more strongly, the ends of
the right Muscles Being fleshy and broad supply the defect of these.

But the four greater pairs which we mentioned, bind in the Abdomen, for the
expulsion of excrements, and also help the breast to avoid its phlegm. An use
also may be given of each of them severally, and no obscure one neither, seeing
they cherish the heat of the Bowels, and ad comeliness to the part, we might
mention the two Lumbal Muscles here, saur and quadratus, but they more rightly
belong to the Muscles of the back.

Amongst the containing parts of the Abdomen, the last is the Peritonaeum, a
Membrane so called which compasses the Bowels about; neither does it only
compass them, and keep them in, but also (by the consent of no small Authors)
investeth them with their common skin, by reason of the variety of its
Situation, it has veins and arteries from the Phrenici, the Muscles of the
Loins, the Mammaries and Epigastricks, it has Nerves from the Vertebrae of the
Breast and Loins, neither is this Membrana single, for about the Reins, Ureters
and Bladder, it is manifestly double, the forepart of it is thinner, it is
thickest toward the back, in both places it is strong, also by affluxion of
humors it sometimes swells to the thickness of the skin, showing a double
tunicle every where by reason of the humors within, being then alike in
thickness to the Membranes which compass the bowels about.

The Peritonaeum passes not only to the Gula of the Vessels above and beneath,
and such as outwardly compass about the child in the womb, but also to the
worm-like Ligaments of the womb: Also in the Body of man, its processes are
considerable, for it gives two tunicles, in which the Spermatick Vessels and
Testicles are wrapped; It is joined in many places, both to the parts under it,
and the Muscles near it to the Diaphragma, and the upper Vertebrae of the
Loins, from whence it is held to take its beginning.

Place here the Table of the first Chapter, which has the Number 1. at the
corner of the brass Plate.

Human anatomical diagrams THE TABLE OF THE SECOND CHAPTER UNFOLDED.
This Table lays open the Bones of the Abdomen in seven Figures: two others,
to wit, the eighth and ninth shows the Muscles of the Abdomen: The tenth gives
you a clear sight of the Parts, the Peritonaeum being removed. FIG. I.
Expresses the five Vertebrae of the Loins, as they are observed on the fore
part.
a a a a The Transverse Process.
FIG. II. Lays open to your view, the Vertebrae of the Loins, as are presented
on the back Part.
a The hole for the Marrow of the Back. b b The transverse Process. c c c c The
oblique Process. d The acute Process.
FIG. III. Represents the internal face of the Os Coxae, as it is united in
such as are grown up.
A Os Ilium. B B Os Coxendix. C Os Pubis.
FIG. IV. Demonstrates the external face of the Os Coxae.
A Os Ilium. a a The Spine of the Os Ilium. B Os Coxendix. C C Os Pubis.
FIG. V. Gives the internal view of the Os Sacrum divided into six parts.
a a a a The holes which give passage to the Nerves. b The three parts of the
Coccyx.
FIG. VI. The same Bone externally to be seen.
a The hole for the Marrow of the Back. b b b Lesser holes for Nerves. c Os
Coccyx.
FIG. VII. The Figure which deciphers the Os Coxa, as it is observed to be
distinct in Children.
A Os Ilium a little taken from the rest. B B Os Coxendix. C C Os Pubis. a a
The cleft distinguishing the Os Coxendix and Os Pubis.
The connexure of all the Bones of the Abdomen, see in the Table to Chapter 17.
FIG. VIII. A The Muscle of the Abdomen obliquely descending, in which
a a Are the toothed beginnings. b b The Tendon sticking to the white Line. E
The Muscle of the Abdomen obliquely ascending, in which c c c Its beginning. d
d A portion of its tendon which covers the right Muscle. e e The right Muscle
of the Abdomen.
FIG. IX. A The transverse Muscle loosed about the beginning, in which
a a a The beginning. b b A portion of the Tendon. B The right Muscle of the
Abdomen, in which c The Beginning. d d d The Nervous inscriptions. e The end. C
The back part of the other right Muscle, in which d Shows the Vein and mammary
Artery descending. e The Epigastrick vein and artery ascending. f The
Anastomosis of the veins. g g The Peritonaeum laid bare from the muscles. D D
The Pyramidal Muscles. E E The Process of the Peritonaeum descending to the
Cods.
FIG. X.
A Part of the Pectoral Muscle detected. B The Sternum. C The Stomach being
something hid by the Liver. D The Liver. E The Omentum in its Situation. b A
portion which sticks to the Liver. c c A portion which is knit to the bottom
of the Stomach. d d d The remainder of the Omentum as it lies upon the Bowels.
F F The Bowels in their situation. G The Navil Vein. H The Ligament of the
Bladder composed of the Urachos, and the two Navil arteries. I The bottom of
the Bladder. a a a a The Peritonaeum divided.




CHAP. 3. Of the Omentum, Stomach, and Guts.
HItherto of the external part of the Abdomen; we come now to the internal
parts; of which, some perform the office of public digestion, others the labor
of begetting and conceiving the Child. Those dedicated to public digestion
are, the Stomach, Sweetbread, Liver and Spleen; Subservient to these are, the
Guts, Omentum, Gall, Reins, and Bladder: The Vessels which respect the
Generation, are, the Spermatick Vessels of both Sexes, the Privities of Men,
the Womb of Women; of which we shall speak severally as they come to Anatomical
view.

The first of the internal parts that comes to view is the Omentum, which the
Ancients called Epiploon; it is a double Membrane filled with fat, which is
joined to the Stomach about the bottom, and spread over the Guts, that it may
cherish those bloodless parts by its gentle heat. Authors deduce its inferior
wing immediately from the Peritonaeum, its superior from the common tunicle of
the Stomach; it has Veins from the Vena porta, and the superior wing has the
Gastroepiploica, both right and left, which are common to the stomach also; the
inferior wing has the right Epiploica and the Postica. Its Arteries are
derived from the Coeliacal branch, and the Mesenteriack. Its Nerves are few and
small, and come from the plexure of the sixth pair of the costal Nerves, and all
this is that it might not be destitute of nourishment, life and sense. It has
Glandulae scattered here and there, sometimes more, sometimes fewer, which like
Sponges take away the superfluous moisture thereof.

Its largeness is various according to the diversity of Bodies; In some it is
not stretched below the Navil, and in some it is; the fatter it is, the heavier
it is, so that in very fat Women it causes barrenness: In all it is double,
and the Tunicles being taken away between the Stomach, Spleen, and the Gut
Colon, it often give a receptacle to wind and serosus humors. Its fatness takes
away its natural coldness and dryness, and yet in falling down it is very
subject to putrefaction for this very reason, It is joined to the round lobe of
the Liver, to the Sweetbread, Spleen, and bottom of the Stomach, to the Gut
Colon, which its office is to cherish.

The Omentum being taken away, the Stomach appears, being an Organical part of
the inferior Ventricle, which converts the foot being taken and well chewed by
the teeth into a white substance which the Ancients called Chyle; it consists
of a threefold Membrane, which is stretched out when it receives in meat, and
contracted again when it is digested; the outward Membrane is called common,
and it is supposed to receive it from the Peritonaeum; the middle Membrane is
more fleshy, that so it may retain the more heat; the inner is fuller of Nerves
and is the very same that cloatheth the inside of the pallat, this is wrinkled
and unequal for the better embracing the meat, and that it may not be suddenly
vexed with the acrimony of juyces, it is defended with a mucilaginous crust, a
delicate variety of Fibrae, is both in the middle and inner tunicle, stretched
out, rightly, obliquely; and orbicularly, which gives solid strength and easy
motion to it.

The stomach receives veins partly from the trunk of the Vena porta, partly
from the branches thereof, both from the right, which is called the
Mesenterick, and from the left, which is called Splenical: From the trunk of
the Vena porta arises the vein which is called Vena gastrica dextra; others
call it Pylorica, and it is divided about the lower Orifice of the stomach;
from the Splenical branch arises the vein called Gastrica major, which
compassing about the superior region of the stomach, and the superior Orifice
in form of a Crown, is called Coronaria, and by certain Anastomosis joins it
self to the Pylorica, then the lesser Gastrial veins, and the short vessel, or
short vein, which is sometimes within, sometimes without the Spleen, is
stretched out toward the bottom of the stomach; sometimes it is not single but
manifold. Lastly, the vein called Gastroepiploica sinistra, which comes from
the lower branch of the Splenical vein is distributed to the left side of the
bottom of the stomach, as also to the Omentum: from the Mesenterick branch
arises the vein called Gastroepiploica dextra, which also is distributed to
the bottom of the stomach, partly before and behind, and partly to the Omentum,
and it receives Gastroepiploica sinistra by Osculations. All these you may see
clearly delineated in the Table of the following Chapter, figure the sixth.

The Arteries of the Ventricle or stomach, arise from the Coeliacal branch of
the great Artery, from its right, and especially its left branches, and keep
company with the veins like man and wife together: The Nerves give the animal
Spirit from the external branch of the sixth pair, both right and left, and are
very copious about the upper Orifice; hence comes the sense of that place to be
so ready and exquisite, and such a wonderful consent betwixt the stomach and
the bowels, for that pair of Nerves, seeing it is not bestowed upon the stomach
alone, but also upon the rest of the parts of the Abdomen makes a great consent
between them; we shall speak of it here briefly, but shall describe it and show
it fully in the Theater.

There arises a Nerve of the sixth pair within the skul from the beginning of
the marrow of the back, a little below the fifth pair which seems to arise out
of the concourse of very many small Nervs having passed the Skull, it is knit to
a Nerve of the seventh pair, and passes to the tongue and the Muscles of the
bone Hyois, and on both sides it is divided into an external and an internal
branch.

The outward branch of the right side, after it has administered branches to
the Muscles in the Neck, then in its progress to the internal Muscles of the
Larinx, then to the Sphincter of the Throat, between the Jugular vein and the
Artery called Carotides; it slips under the Clavicula in the breast, certain
branches which it sent out being again united; they make that Nerve which is
called Recurrens or running back, because running back about the subclavian
Artery, near the right side of the Aspera Arteria, or Windpipe, then into the
Windpipe; then is distributed in the Muscles of the Larinx; making its
Progress from thence, and giving small branches to the Pleura and Pericardium:
It is stretched out not only to the external tunicle of the Lungs; but also in
the Lungs themselves, to the Branchi of the Aspera Arteria by many branches: At
last having obtained the name [Stomachicall] it is divided into two Branches,
and penetrating both the Gula and Diaphragma; it embraces the superior Orifice
of the stomach, with a Net like contexture of many small Nerves, and it bestows
a small Branch also upon the Liver.

The Internal Branch of the sixth pair on the right side, strengthens its
Fibrae, with a long, red, and callous substance: In its Progress by the
forepart of the Neck, whilst it applies to that plexure, which is made of the
cervical pairs of Nerves, and taking small Branches from them, growing thick
again by its own callous Body, it is carried to the Thorax or Breast; in which
descending under the Pleura, near the roots of the Ribs: A small Branch being
taken from each inter costall Nerve (whence it obtained the name Costalis:) at
last having passed the Diaphragma, and sent certain small Branches to the
Original of the Mesenterium, with the other Internal Branch which is its
companion, it produces a Nervous plexure, variously guarded with callous
Bodies, from which by the right Region of the Mesenterium, Branches pass to
the Guts to the Omentum, Liver, Gall, and right Kidney: The remainder of it,
which is free from this plexure, is partly spent upon the os Sacrum; partly
upon the bottom of the Womb, and right side of the Bladder.

In like manner is the Nerve of the sixth pair distributed by the left side of
the breast and Abdomen; Save only the external branch of it bends back its
Recurrens, under the trunk of the great Artery: Besides it sends a special
Branch with very many Divisions to the Pericardium, and the Heart its self;
then it passes to the Nervous plexure of the Mescuterium, partly by its self,
partly united to the right Stomachical, having first sent a special Branch to
the Liver. The left internal Branch of the sixth pair, even as the right makes
up part of the plexure we spoke of before, from which it is carried to the left
Region of the Mesenterium, the Spleen, and left Kidney: That part which avoids
this plexure is sent to the os Sacrum, the bottom of the Womb, and the left
part of the Bladder.

From this admirable pair of Nerves, we return now to the Stomach; the
structure of which in Man is single, and the bigness mean: It is manifold in
Beasts, because their meats are harder in digestion. It is distinguished into
the bottom or Cavity, and the two Orifices, of which that which is uppermost,
and on the left side, our Ancesters propperly named the Stomach: It is
garnished with many Fibrae, and Nerves circuled in an Orb: It is great and
thick, and the seat of Natural appetite.

The inferior Orifice whichis on the right side, the Ancients called Pylorus,
or Janitor; for by this the meat digested passes to the next Guts as by a
gate; the heat of the Bowels, round about the Stomach, quallify its cold and
dry Temperature: the Stomach is in form like the Bag of a pair of Bag-pipes; it
is placed by the Wisdom of God, in the left Hypochondrium under the
Diaphragma: The right part is committed to the Liver, the left to the Spleen,
below, it is cherished by the Omentum, and underneath it lies upon the
Sweetbread, as it were upon a Pillow.

The superior Orifice passes to the Throat or Gula, about the eleventh or
twelfth Vertebrae of the Breast; the right or inferior Orifice passes down to
the Gut called Duodenum, and in this middle space of the Hypochondria, in which
that Cartilage of the Breast called Mucronata is a little bowed inwards; make a
Cavity of the Breast outward, which the vulgar Latins call Foveam cordis, and
we the pit of the Stomach.

In this place we often feel pains in the stomach, which we falsely impute to
the upper Orifice thereof: when indeed they arise either from sharp or corrupt
Food, or excrements, sticking about the narrow passages of the Pylorus; or sent
up from the Gall thither. The various affections of the Sweetbread being near
to the Pylorus, ad no small part to this trouble; as also the faults of the
Cartilage called Mucronata, whether it turn its point inwards or outward.

Now will we give this breife description of the Gula, which is also called
Osaphagus; although it might more fitly be described with the Aspera Arteria,
and the Lungues: Yet we will not separate those parts in word which Nature has
joined together in deed. It is the channel by which both meat and drink
descends to the Stomach: It is composed of just as many Membranes as the
Stomach is.

About its beginning, it is moved by three pairs of Muscles, and the Sphincter,
which causes the deglution, or gulping in swallowing: The first pair is called
Cephalopharigigaeus; sent from the confines of the Head and Neck, and is
stretched abroad in the Tunicle of the Pharingaeus: The second pair is called
Sphenopharingaeus, which inclining downwards is extended in the sides of the
Oesophagus; the third pair is called Stylopharingaeus; it takes its beginning
from the appendix called Styliforme, from whence descending with a fleshy and
round Body, it ends in the sides of the Gula: Of these the first pair lifts up,
the other dilate the Oesophagus: the Sphincter of the Throat, arising from both
sides of the buckler like Cartilage, and opening transversly by the back part
of the Throat, by stopping the Gula, drives the meat downwards.

It has veins and Arteries in the upper part, from the jugular veins and
Arteries, and from the internal Arteries called Carotides, Nerves from the
external branches of the sixth pair; in the Breast it has Veins from the Branch
without a fellow, Arteries from the intercostals, Nerves as before; about the
Stomach it has the same, that it has at its upper Orifice.

It has many Glandulae which administer moisture to its membranes, for the
easier swallowing, of which the superior are posited at the sides of the
tongue and Larynx, the inferior which are many stick in the breast to the
branches of the Aspera Arteria. The Oesophagus takes its beginning from the
extremity of the Jaws, where it is joined to the Larinx, descending straight
down to the Breast, first toward the right side, then toward the left: It
pierces the Diaphragma about the eleventh Vertebrae of the back, and so is
united to the superior Orifice of the Stomach.

As the Stomach is joined to the Gula, so are the Guts to the Pylorus; they are
ordained to take away the burden from the Stomach, to gather together, and cast
out the excrements; they are covered with a Membranous substance like the
Stomach; they have a common tunicle largly ore-spread with the fat of the
Mesenterium, for the better conversation of their heat; their propper Tunicle
is double, intertexed with diverse strings, which give not only the greater
strength; but also the readier, motion; of the propper Tunicles, the middle
most is most fleshy, the inner more Nervous, slippery, and filled with
wrinkles, both for their safeguard, and the better to embrace what they have to
embrace.

The Guts have very many Veins; from the right Mesenterical branch of the Vena
porta, and also from the left: they have Arteries from the upper and lower
Mesentericals, they have Nerves from the sixth pair derived from the
Mesenterical plexure: to these come abundance of small passages, for the
Distribution of Chyle; which in this age Assellius was the first that brought
to public view. Of which more when we come to the Sweetbread.

The length of the Guts exceed the length of the Body of Man diverse times, and
lie in many foldings, that so they may keep what they receive the longer: their
Temperature is cold and dry, which is assuaged both by the vital Spirit, and
the Fat: Their form is, round, that so they may the better admit the Chile, and
cast out the excrements; they are underpropped by the Bones, which are gently
knit to the Abdomen; but more especially by the Membranous ties of the
Mesenterium.

They are divided according to their Tunicles, into thin and thick: The first
of the thin Guts Herophilus calls Duodenum; because it is the breadth of twelve
Fingers: this admits a pore from the Gall, by which sharp humors it is provoked
to expel the Excrements; it is of a great largeness, that so it may unite the
large Stomach to the smaller Guts.

Neither yet (if the name please your fancy) are you to begin your Mensuration
at the Pylorus, but to determine it at twelve Fingers breadth, that so you may
avoid two errors. First, That you give not part of the Janitor to this Gut.
Secondly, That you be not led by that foolish conceit, that men's Bodies were
formerly bigger than they are now; which the Sepulchers of those Kings and
Priests in Palestina, those in the Pyramides in Egypt, and those Bodies which
have been kept in Arabia in Mummy, many thousand years; not exceeding the
Bodies in Europe in bigness, easily witnesses.

The next of the thin Guts is called Jejunum; because of its emptiness, which
the swift descending of the Chyle causes: where this emptiness ends, the Gut
called Ilium begins, and is the third of the thin Guts: It is so called from
its manifold rings, or Circumvolections; it is longer than the rest by far, and
has very many Veins, and Arteries; but it is narrow, and thence it comes to
pass that the internal Tunicles being broken by a deadly stoppage, it causes
that disease called the Iliack passion: the office of the small guts is to
receive the Chyle and keep it that it may the better be distributed.

The first of the thick guts is called Caecum, because it has no passage into
another of the extreme guts; this is very small in such as are grown up to age,
and hangs like the worm like process to the beginning of the Colon, and the end
of the Ilium, and yet it is not to be excluded from the number of the Cuts,
because in children it is always full of excrements, and performs the same
office with the thick Guts

The Colon is the second of the thick Guts, and is larger and wider than the
rest, it has a small shut which serves to stop the excrements and wind that
they may make a little delay in passing downwards: It rises about the right Os
Ilium, and is joined to the Kidney next to it, from thence bending under the
Liver it is knit to the Omentum, the bottom of the stomach, the Spleen and left
Kidney, from whence bending back it ends in the right Gut; it has a proper
bond of its own by which the order of its Cells are contained; it has also a
special Ligament by which it is knit both to the inferior and superior parts.

The third of the thick Guts by reason of the manner of its extension, is
called the right Gut, this by its proper and middle tunicle is far more fleshy
than the rest, and full of right strings; the lower part of it is moved by
strong Muscles, to wit, Sphincter, by which it is drawn together, and two
Levators by which it is lifted up; The Sphincter is joined to the lower parts
of the Os Sacrum, and is spread about the Fundament with fleshy and transverse
strings, to which a thin Muscle is joined both in body and office, in the
extremity of the fundament, being about a fingers breadth, and as it were
compact in the skin. The Muscles called Levators arise from the Ligaments of
the Coxendix and Os Sacrum, by a distinct portion they descend to the
Sphincter; in men they join themselves to the root of the Yard, in Women to the
passage of the Womb.

The Hemorrhoidal Veins are scattered about the right Gut, the internal of
which, most usually arises from the left Mesenterical of the Vena porta, but
sometimes from the right, sometimes from the Splenical branch of the Vena
porta, sometimes from within the Spleen, sometimes from without; the external
Hemorrhoidal veins proceed from the Hypogastrick branch of the Vena Cava, and
are distributed to the Muscles that move the Fundament.

There are also Arteries which accompany the Veins, part of which come from the
inferior Mesenterick branch, and part from the Hypogastrick Artery, to those
small Nerves adjoyn themselves which proceed from the extremity of the Marrow of
the Back, and as it is the common office of the thick Guts to gather the
excrements together, and provoke them to expulsion, so it is the property of
the right Gut to retain them till occasion serve to cast them out.

Place here the Table of the third Chapter, which has the Number 3. at the
corner of the brass Plate.

Human anatomical diagrams AN EXPLICATION OF THE TABLE OF THE THIRD CHAPTER.
The Omentum and Mesenterium, figure I. The Gula with its Muscles, figure II.
and III. The Stomach and Bowels under it, figure IV. The Tunicles of the
Bowels, figure V. and VI. The Muscles of the right Gut, figure VII. The Nerve
of the sixth pair, figure VIII. FIG. I.
AAAA. The Mesenterium with the Guts adjoined. aaaa. The Glandulae of the
Mesenterium. BBB. The Vessels of the Mesenterium diffused to the Guts. CC. Part
of the Colon stretched out. DD. Part of the Omentum drawn abroad upwards.
FIG. II.
AA. The first pair of the Muscles of the Gula, called Cephalopharyngaeus. BB.
The second pair of the Muscles of the Gula, or Sphenopharingaeus. CC. The third
pair, Stylopharingaeus. DD. The Sphincter of the Throat. EEE. A backward view
of the Gula. F The left external Nerve of the sixth pair. G. The right external
Nerve of the sixth pair. H. The superior Orifice of the Stomach. III. The bottom
of the Stomach. K. The inferior Orifice of the Stomach with a portion of the
Duodenum annexed to it.
FIG. III.
AA. The Muscles Caephalopharyngaeus conspicuous on the fore part. BB. The
Muscles Sphenopharyngaeus. CC. The Muscles Stylopharingaeus. DD. The Sphincter
of the throat dilated. E. The internal face of the Gula. F. The descending part
of the Gula.
FIG. IV.
A. The superior Orifice of the Stomach knit together within a thread. B. The
inferior Orifice, or Pylorus. CC. The common tunicle of the Stomach separated.
D. The middle tunicle of the Stomach. E. The inner tunicle of the Stomach. F. A
portion of the Duodenum. GG. The gut called Jejunum. HHH. The gut Ileum as it
lies in its foldings. I. The Gut Caecum. KKK. The Gut Colon. L. The shut, being
opened in the beginning of the Colon. M. The beginning of the right Gut, knit
with a thread.
FIG. V.
PP. The common tunicle of the guts separated. Q. The middle tunicle of the
Guts, which is the first proper one.
FIG. VI.
R. The rugged tunicle of the Guts which is the second proper,
FIG. VII.
M. The right Gut cut off. NN. The two muscles called Levatores. O. The
Sphincter of the Fundament.
FIG. VIII.
. The Nerve of the sixth pair on the right side, in which AA The external and
greater Branch. a The branch which is carried to the Neck. b A branch of the
seventh pair, joined to this sixth pair which is carried to the Neck. c A Nerve
of the seventh pair joined to the sixth under the skull. d A branch of the
seventh passing to the muscle of the Os Hyois. e A branch from the seventh to
the tongue. ff A Nerve from the external branch of the sixth pair, which is
carried to the internal muscles of the Larynx. g g The right Nerve called
Recurrens. h h Many Nerves distributed to the Lungues and wind pipe. iii The
branches of the right Stomachical, stretched out. BBB The internal, or costal
branch, laid open with its bunches. The Nervous plexure of the Mesenterium
guarded with certain callous Bodies. l l The branch which is carried to the
Omentum, Duodenum, and Liver. m m The branch which is carried to the right
Kidney. n n n n The branches distributed in the Mesenterium and Guts. o The
branch which goes to the Os Sacrum. p p The extremity of the internal right
branch, which is distributed to the Womb and Bladder. q r The branches from the
internal right side, which make the plexure on that side. The Nerve of the sixth
pair on the left side; in which, the signification of the Letters is the same,
save only G Is the Nerve from the left Recurrens, which is distributed to the
Pericardium, and Heart it self. ** The Nerve which from the external left
stomachical is carried to the Liver. l l The Nerve which is carried to the
Spleen and Gut Colon. m m The Nerve of the left Kidney. The remainder are the
same with the former.




CHAP. 4. Of the Mesenterium, Sweetbread, Liver and Spleen.
THE most wise Creator of Man, has taken care by the intervening of the
Mesenterium, that the manifold foldings of the Guts might not come into a
confusion, and so man's health be endangered thereby; It is a double Membrane,
furnished with Glandulae and fat, joined to the Peritonaeum, fitted to cherish
the Bowels as well as to keep them in Office and Order; a famous number of
Veins are dispersed in it from the right Vein of the Vena porta, joining
themselves together by many Osculations, even before those small branches go to
the Bowels. The Arteries are not inferior to these, which proceed from the
Mesenterical superior branch of the great Artery, and also from the inferior:
It has many Nerves from the plexure of the internal of the sixth pair, and the
Marrow of the Loins.

To these belong those passages which carry the Chyle, which the first observer
of them, called Venae Lacteae because of their white color; but this as it may
be seen in the dissection of live creatures, so the creatures being dead, and
the distribution of Chyle ceasing, the whiteness cannot be discerned.

And yet it often happens, that by reason of the intemperancy of men, abundance
of humors flowing through so many Vessels, the pores which carry the Chyle are
obstructed or (in plain English) stopped, and the Juice being putrified, it
causes fevers, the cause lying in the Mesenterium.

The largeness of the Mesenterium is great, being increased by fat which
corrects the cold and dry temperature of the Membranes by heat and moisture; it
sticks strongly to the uppermost and third Vertebrae of the Lions, and binds
the foldings of the Guts, every where firmly to its self.

The Sweetbread [Pancreas] is a Glandulous part of the Abdomen, very
profitable for attenuating and purging the Chyle, and preparing it for the
Liver and Spleen before it be turned into blood, for as Nature deduceth the
blood it self, which is either for nourishment of the fruit in the womb, or to
make seed for the Generation of it, by diverse degrees or steps, even so the
Juice which it turns into blood, it alters it in the mouth, concocts it in the
Stomach, eases it of excrements by the Bowels, and by the sweetness of the
Sweetbread, frees from sharp and salt humors, and therefore the Sweetbread is
always full of Chyle, as you may find if you dissect a creature alive, and cut
it with a knife.

It receives the Chyle, and having received it, sends it to the Liver; not by
any veins or arteries descending from the Vena porta, but by special passages,
which by reason of their color, Asellius named Venae Lacteae, as I told you
before: they are long and round Vessels with a very thin Membrane, very small,
ascending upwards from the Sweetbread, to the Liver; about the place where the
trunk of the Vena porta descends, they pass downwards to the Guts with very
small branches; they have very small shutters which hinders the regress of the
juice they draw to the Guts; the knitting of the Sweetbread to the Spleen
seems rather to perswarde a man that they pass thither than any passage yet
found out; and yet it is certain they do pass thither, because they convey a
watery portion of Chyle not yet colored to the Spleen.

The Original of the Venae Lacteae is deduced from no place so fitly as from
the Sweetbread; for as Nature produces all veins and arteries from the trunk,
from which the branches are distributed throughout the Body, so the foundation
of the Venae Lacteae is at the Sweetbread, and the branches pass to the Liver
and Guts; and yet the Creator of all things would not bring them into one
common Trunk, by reason of the latitude of the Sweetbread; as the Nerves which
are the Organs of the senses though they arise from one spring, yet is their
intervals in their originals, the Splenical branch of the Vena porta, and the
left Coeliacal Artery, as also small Nerves from the Gut Duodenum, pass through
the Sweetbread, and yet it has a proper Vein of its own, from the Vena porta,
and Arteries from the left Coeliacal, and a thin skin from the Mesenterium,
which incompasseth it round.

Also there is a most observable and singular channel in the Sweetbread,
lately found out by our Versungus, which to a curious eye carries the structure
and show of a vein: It arises from the Gut called Duodenum, sometimes in the
extremity of the biliar pore, having a common Orifice with an outward shut,
sometimes near the biliar pore, from a distinct place; it is stretched
transversly in the Sweetbread with short, yet very many branches; it is wide
at the beginning, and consumes by degrees before it come at the extremity of
the Sweetbread; sometimes it is double in man, but unequal in length, and
arises near the biliar pore at about a fingers breadth distance.

The use of this channel is no ways hard to be found out, for seeing it brings
a certain sharp juice not unlike to the Gall, it separates the juice of its own
Nature from the Chyle, and carries it away to the Gut Duodenum, and therefore
this being stopped, the Sweetbread swells by reason of the excrements retained;
and so, many vessels being by this means compressed, the Liver and Spleen
receive no small damage.

The Sweetbread in fat men is bigger, and in such as die not through default
of Nourishment, it is of a clear white color, and therefore of old it was
called Lactium: It is stretched out transversly under the Stomach toward the
Spleen, being more diducted toward the Liver; it has a wonderful nexure with
the Liver, by proper vessels and passages compassed about with a Membrane: It
sticks close also to the Duodenum, as though it drew a part of its Chyle from
it; its copulation with the Spleen is not so strong, and besides its former
offices, it cherishes the Stomach.

The Liver succeeds this, being a famous part in the lower ventricle, being the
shop, or workhouse of Blood and Natural Spirit: Its substance is fleshy, like
congealed blood, whence Erasistratus gave it the name Parenchyma; in the
Embrion like other parts produced of seed, it is white, only the small Veins in
it look red, then it looks yellowish by degrees, till at last it get the
perfect color of blood; and yet there are some living Creatures that although
the blood in the Veins be red, yet the Liver is white, yellow, or green, it is
covered with a thin single Skin, sticking round about close to it.

It has Veins of two sorts, the superior, or Vena Cava, which by its great
trunk carries blood from the Liver, and distributes it throughout the Body: The
inferior, or Vena porta, the branches of which are more in number, from which
the umbilicate Vein arises to the Child in the womb, and without the Liver,
the branches the Splenical and Mesenterical Veins pass, which distribute blood
to the Spleen Omentum, Stomach, and Guts; a freequent conjunction is made
between these, that so the blood may be dispensed the more perfectly, the more
easily. Some few Arteries accompany the Veins about the Liver, from the right
Coeliacal branch of the great Artery, and two small Nerves from the right
internal of the sixth pair, and the external left Stomachical.

The magnitude of the Liver in Man is great, and its figure almost round, it is
divided into two parts, bending and hollow; the first being bowed, fits its
self to the levity of the Diaphragma, the other is inferior, and more unequal,
for it sticks out in a Lobus, and is hollow with a double Sinus, the one of
which holds the Gall, the other embraces part of the Stomach: Lastly, by a
notable cleft it sends out the umbilicar Vein, which in Men grown up, is
hardened to a Ligament. The temperature of the Liver is hot and moist, that so
it may the better concoct the blood.

Above, it is joined to the Diaphragma, and to the Cartilage of the Breast
called Mucro nata, by a strong Membranous Ligament: backwards it is joined by
the Peritonaeum to the Vertebrae of the loins; below, it sticks to the Abdomen
by the umblicar Ligament; it is placed under the Diaphragma and the Cartilages
of the ribs, on the right side of the Abdomen, and embraces the Stomach, and
cherishes it by its kind heat.

The Gall is joined to the Liver, and is the receptacle of the chollerick juice
of the Blood: It is composed of two Membranes, whereof the outer is common to
the Peritonaeum; the inner which is propper to the Gall, is thicker and
furnished with Fibrae of all sorts, for its better motion, and greater
strength: Also it is defended, with a certain crust against the acrimony of the
substance it contains. It has Veins from the Vena porta, and small Arteries
from the right Goeliacal. It has a Nerve from the plexure of the Costalls: it
has peculiar passages into the Liver, between the roots of the Vena Cava and
Vena porta, whereby it draws its Choler.

It is divided into the bottom which is wider, and the Neck which is narrower:
a narrow channel goes from the Neck of it, with shutters to keep the Choler
from running back, which ends in the biliar pore; the narrowness of which is
the cause that often times the thick excrements of the Gall breads stones in
it, though not very hard ones, sometimes round, sometimes angular; and
sometimes like a Mulberry both in color and form. The Gall is in the right
Sinus of the Liver, and firmly joined to it, both by its upper and middle part.

The Biliar pore is something larger than the channel of the Gall, and carries
Choler from the Liver to the Gut Duodenum: It is carried into the Duodenum by
an Oblique flexure between the Membranes; usually it is single, but sometimes
double toward the end: It seldom reaches to the Pylorus, and as Nature expels
choler by the channel of the Gall at set times: by this pore it is administered
by degrees, and continually, both when the Chyle is distributed, and before; as
is clear in the dissection of Creatures alive.

The Ancients held Choler to be the poison of the Body, the worst excrement of
Blood, and that not a few living Creatures wanted it; because they could find
no Gall anexed to the Liver: but all Creatures that have Blood, have this
Biliar pore, and if the Body be disposed according to the law of Nature: this
hot and sharp humor both defends the Chyle from putrefaction, and causes the
excrements easily to be expulsed, and strengthens the Bowels, by which means
health is firmer, and life the longar.

Over against the Liver, is the Spleen, being an Organical part of the inferior
Ventricle, which receive the watery, and earthy part of the Chyle to be turned
into Blood, its substance is fleshy; yet looser than that of the Liver, being
like a Sponge to drink up copious humors, and therefore when it is obstructed,
it swells mightily; it has one single skin which Authors asign to the
Peritonaeum, it has Veins from the Splenical of the Vena porta, which are as
small as hairs: Its Arteries are more in number, and more famous (by reason of
which, it has much vital heat) and those from the left Coeliacal branch: It
has Nerves from the left branch of the costals of the sixth pair, and from the
Nervous plexure of the Mesenterium, dispersed by the exterior parts.

The magnitude of the Spleen is bigger in melancholy Men than in others; its
temperature, by reason of the abundance of Arterious blood it receives, is hot
and dry: It is of a blackish purple color in youth, of a leaden color in age;
it is in form hollowish in the internal face, gibbous on the external, and not
much unlike to a Neats-tongue; although this be not always, for sometimes it
is greater, firmer, with some distinct lobes of the color of thick Blood, so
that it seems to be like to the Liver, not only in form, but also in office:
Its place is in the left Hypochondrium, a little lower than the Liver, it is
knit to the Diaphragma, and to the Cartilaginous ribs, and to the left Kidney,
by its bowing part; but by its hollow part to the Omentum, Stomach and
sweetbread, by other vessels, and its own Membranes

All the learned agree, that the office of the Spleen, is to draw the watery and
earthy part of the Chyle: the Blood being made of the purer part, but nature
has clouded the passages by which this is carried to the Spleen, for no
observation as yet has discovered any passages of the Venae Lacteae into it,
and that it is not carried by the Splenical Vein, the dissection of Creatures
alive witnesses; as for the Arteries, their office is to carry vital Spirit to
it.

And yet it is agreeable to reason that it should draw it from the Sweetbread
it self, though by reason of the smalness of the passages it is not manifest,
and it may possibly draw the said juice from the Stomach, which lies near it,
and for this the substance of the Spleen, its abundance of vital Spirit, its
sicitasion, and the diseases it is so often molested with, seems to plead.

Place here the Table of the fourth Chapter, which has the Number 4. at the
corner of the brass Plate.

Human anatomical diagrams AN UNFOLDING OF THE TABLE OF THE FOURTH CHAPTER.
The fourth Table lays down the Situation of the Sweetbread, Liver, and
Spleen, and the Delineation of the Vena Porta. FIG. I.
A The hollow part of the Liver. B The round unequal, or bowing part of the
Liver. ae The Umbilicar Vein drawn upwards. C The Gall in its Situation. D The
Spleen in its natural place. EE The Sweetbread in its proper place. FF The
Vena Porta descending by the Sweetbread under the Liver. G The superior
Mesenterical Artery. aaaa The branches of the Vena Porta, extended by the
Mesenterium. bbbb The branches of the artery distributed by the Mesenterium. HH
The Mesenterium it self dismantled of its superior Membrane. II The Splenical
Vessels laid open, the Pancreas being cut.
FIG. II.
AA The Body of the Sweetbread deciphored in its Natural form.
FIG. III. The back part of the Sweetbread, together with the Spleen turned
downwards.
AA The substance of the Sweetbread, its Membrane being taken off. BBB The
channel of the Sweetbread newly found out. C The biliar pore joined to the
channel. DDD A portion of the Guts Duodenum and Jejunum, cut off. E The common
Orifice, by which the biliar pore and channel of the Sweetbread, open
themselves into the Duodenum. FFF The internal face of the Spleen. GGG The
veins and arteries distributed in the Spleen.
FIG. IV.
AA The unequal or bowing part of the Liver. B The skin of the Liver separated
from it. CC The Ligament of the Liver called Septale. DD The large branches of
the Vena Cava within the Liver.
FIG. V.
AA The hollow part of the Liver turned upwards. B The Lobe of the Liver by
which it joins it self to the Omentum. C The cleft of the Liver, out of which
the Umbilicar vein descends. E The Umbilicar vein turned upwards. F The Gall
placed under the Liver. G The channel of the Gall. HH The biliar pore, with the
channel stretched outward, together with a part of the Duodenum, noted by M. I
The trunk of the Vena Porta descending from the Liver. K The right Caeliacal
artery. L A Nerve arising from the plexure of the costals.
FIG. VI. The Vena Porta whole, distinguished into branches, as it is publicly
showed.
AAA The trunk of the Vena Porta; A the inferior portion, descending from the
Liver. AA the deduction of it to the right and left with an infinite number of
small branches. B The Splenical branch, divided first into great, afterward
into very many small branches, and distributed like strings about the Spleen. C
The right Mesenterical branch. D The left Mesenterical branch. aa The Umbilicar
vein, b The vein of the Gall. c The vein of the Sweetbread. dd The vein called
Gastrica dextra. eee The greater Gastrica sinistra. fg The lesser veins called
Gastricae sinistrae. h The vein called Vas breve. ii The vein called
Gastroepiploica sinistra. KK The vein called Gastroepiploica dextra. ll The
Hemorrhoidal veins produced here from the right Mesenterical branch of the Vena
Porta. m The vein of the Duodenum.
FIG. VII.
A The unequal part of the Spleen laid open. BB The Membrane of the Spleen
separated. CC The black substance of the Spleen.
FIG. VIII.
AAA The hollow part of the Spleen which receives the Vessels. B The Splenical
vein with its three branches. C The Splenical artery divided in like manner
before it enter the Spleen.




CHAP. 5. Of the Kidneys, Ureters, and Bladder.
THe most wise Creator of the Body of Man has ordained the Reins, or Kidneyes,
to receive that thin moisture which is redundant in the making of Blood; they
consist of a thick fleshy substance, least the continual, and copious flowing
of moisture to them should weaken them: If you would search into them, you must
of necessity remove the Membranes wherewith they are covered, and they indeed
are two; the one external, common to the rest of the bowels by the
Peritonaenum, the other internal; the external is endewed with much Fat, which
gave names to the Veins and Arteries Passing to it.

Besides them, on both sides is a glandulous Body, which is called Glandula
renalis, Ren. Succenturiatis, and the Capsula of melancholy: It is compassed
about with a thin skin, furnished with vessels of all sorts: the right Glandula
often receives a Vein from the trunk it self of the Vena Cava, which is short,
yet wide, going into its Sinus with a wide Orifice, and sometimes it takes it
from the next emulgent Vein, as the left does; its Arteries proceed from the
emulgents, and Nerves from those which are communicated to the Kidaeyes, their
magnitude is not always alike, they are usually as big as that drug we call
nux Vomica; if the Man be any thing ancient, their form is like the Kidneyes,
long, and somewhat depressed; sometimes the upper part of them is angular: they
have a Cavity within filled with black and melancholy matter, their color is
sometimes reddish, and sometimes like Fat.

They are placed under the Diaphragma, above the fatty Membrane, so as the
right is joined to the Vena Cava, the left is a little under the stomach; what
their use is, is not yet suffciently found out; it is supposed that they help
the passage of the serosus moisture, and contract a part of the melancholy,
which like a Runnet helps to separate the urine from the Blood, also to
underprop and cherish the parts next it; although sometimes there are more and
lesser Glandula furnished with Veins and Arteries, which Nature disposes about
the Kidneyes.

But the internal and propper Membrane of the Kidneyes, binds the Kidneyes
themselves straight about: To which Kidney come large vessels, to wit, a Vein,
and an Artery, both of them known by the name Emulgent: The Emulgent Vein is
something unequal in situation, proceeding from the trunk of the Vena Cava,
being double at first, and then dispersed in diverse divided Branches: also the
Emulgent Artery is almost as big as the Vein, and arises from the trunk of the
great Artery, and brancheth it self into the Reins as the Veins do: the number
of the Emulgent vessels is often different, and their progress to the Kidneyes
unequal, Nature providently regarding its own scope; to these some small Nerves
are added, from the plexure of the internal branch of the sixth pair, to which
the left Stomachical branch comes.

The Kidneyes have fleshy knobs, called Papillares, because they are like
tears, they are about the bigness of a Bean, and about ten in number, disposed
with certain intervals, that so by their small pores the urine may pass clear to
the ureters.

Also the Creator of Man has formed two Kidneyes, by reason of the multitude
of humors they are to seperare, and that if either of them be at fault, the
other might be subservient to him; they are in form like to a french Bean
(which from them, were called Kidney Beans) outwardly bowing, inwardly
unequally hollow: It is monstrous when both of them stick together, or when
they are so bowed that both ends touch, or when either of them is double; yet
their surface is often unequal by reason of Glandulae that stick to them, in
the conception, and remains even in age* The copiousness of water that
continually flows to the Reins, mitigates their hot and dry quallity: the right
Kidney lies under the Liver, the left under the Spleen, near the Muscles of the
loins called Psoas: The right Kidney lies lowest, by reason of the bigness of
the Liver, both of them are joined to the Diaphragma, and loins by the outward
Membrane.

The Ureters receive the urine, being separated by the Reins, and carry it to
the Blader, they are round channels composed of a double Membrane, the exterior
of which they have from the Peritonaeum for their strength sake; the interior
is propper to themselves, strong and Nervous, endewed with many right and
oblique strings, they have small Veins and Arteries from the next descending
vessels, and small Nerves from the Plexure of the sixth pair, and from the
loins; they are usually in number two, sometimes more, the third descending
from the left Kidney near the second.

They take their beginning from that loose and membranous Sinus, which Authors
call Infundibulum renum, from which they pass within the small pores of the
Reins, and their extremities being opened, they take in those fleshy knobs
called Papillares, which we spoke of before, to which they are usually equal in
number; then contracting themselves, they descend and pass above the Muscles
Psoas, and pass into the Bladder toward the lower part thereof between the
Membranes.

The Bladder is an organical part of the inferior Ventricle, which keeps the
Urine it receives from the Kidneys, and expels it when the weight or acrimony
of it makes it troublesome; it consists of a threefold Membrane, the external
of which, the Peritonaeum bestows, the other two are proper to its self, of
which the middlemost is thickest and full of fleshy strings, and is of great
concernment for the expulsion of the Urine; the innermost is thin and quick of
sense, and defended from the sharpness of the Urine by a mucous crust: It has
veins and arteries from the Hypogastricks; Nerves from the lower internal
branches of the sixth pair which touch not the plexure of the Mesenterium, and
also from the Os Sacrum, not only age, but also its violent stretching alters
its magnitude.

It is divided into the bottom and the neck; the bottom is the superior and
wider part of the Bladder, from which the Vrachos passes to the Navil; which
is wider toward the bottom, but grows slender by degrees toward the Navil;
this when man grows to any age, together with the Umbiliar Arteries, makes that
strong Ligament of the bladder, by help of which the bottom of it is detained,
which else would be depressed by the Bowels lying upon it, (which see more at
large in the Tenth Figure of the Second Chapter) and yet sometimes it happens
even in ancient people, that the Vrachos being loosned by some violent means,
gives way to the Urine by the Navill.

The neck of the Bladder is the inferior part, more narrow, more fleshy: The
strings of this being cast in a circle, makes the Sphincter which shuts the
passage that the Urine may not flow from us whether we will or not: The Bladder
has three passages, of which, two are obscure, by which the Urine passes into
it by the Ureters; one greater, by which it passes out: It is in form like a
Pear, and possesses the bottom of the inferior Ventricle; the bottom of it is
fastened by the Vrachos, the Neck in Men to the right Gut and the Glandulae
prostatae; in Women to the Neck of the Womb and the Os Pubis.

Between the Bladder and the Reins, in the public order of Dissections, there
is worth the observation, the descending Trunks of the Vena Cava and the great
Artery, although Nature seldom keep the same order in the number, magnitude,
and situation of the branches. The Vena Cava after it has sent out the
Emulgent under the Diaphragma, and the Spermatical veins passing downwards, it
sends out three or four Lumbals and distributes them to the Vertebrae of the
Loins, and the marrow included in them, the superior of which passing upwards
are joined by Anastomosis, to the descending branches of the internal Jugular
about the Os Sacrum; the Trunk of the Vena Cava being placed under the great
Artery, is divided into two great branches which are called Iliacks, to wit,
the internal and external, from which the superior Vena Muscula, and Vena Sacra
proceed. From the internal Iliack branch, which is the least, arises the
Muscula Glutea, and the famous Hypogastrick vein, which gives branches to the
longitude of the neck of the Womb, to the Muscles of the bladder and right Gut,
and to the Os Sacrum: from the external Iliack branch, which is the greatest,
after the internal Iliack the Epigastrick vein, which is double in Women and
proceeds to the neck of the Womb and the Privities, the remainder of it after
it has passed the Abdomen, makes the Crural branch, which we shall speak to
hereafter.

The progress of the great Artery is not much unlike to this, for after it has
brought forth the former Mesenterick Artery; then the Coeliacal; afterward, the
Emulgent, Spermatick, and inferior Mesenterick, the Lumbals, and that which is
called Sacra: It is divided about the Os Sacrum into Iliack Branches, of which
the interior produces the Arteries, Muscula and Hypogastrica which keep the
same pace with the Veins; the exterior brings forth the Epigastrick and the
Pudenda, that which is remaining descends to the Legs, and makes the Crural
Arteries.

Of these Veins and Arteries, see more in the last Chapter of the Book.

Place here the Table of the fifth Chapter, which has the Number 5. at the
corner of the brass Plate.

Human anatomical diagrams AN EXPLANATION OF THE TABLE OF THE FIFTH CHAPTER.
The present Table lays open the Reins with their Glandulae, the Emulgent
Vessels, Bladder and Vreters. Also the rise and progress of the Spermatick
Vessels. FIG. I.
AA The Glandulae of the Reins, or the Capsula of Melancholy. B The right
Kidney uncovered of the Membrane. C The left Kidney. D The descending trunk of
the Vena Cava. E The descending trunk of the great artery. FF The right Ureter.
GG The left Ureter. HH The right Vessels preparing the Seed. II The left
Vessels preparing the Seed. K Part of the Bladder, besides which, the Vessels
carrying the Seed are turned in the Abdomen. L Part of the right Gut cut off.
FIG. II.
AA The common Membrane of the Reins which is bespred with fat. BB The
Glandulae of the Kidneys. C The right Kidney. D The left Kidney. E The proper
skin of the Kidneys partly separated. F The trunk of the Vena Cava descending.
G The trunk of the great artery descending. H The left Emulgent Vein. II The
right Emulgent Vein. aa The right Emulgent arteries. bb The left Emulgent
arteries. c The left Spermatick artery. d The left Spermatick Vein. e The right
Spermatick Vein. f The right Spermatick artery. g The Fatty Vein arising from
the Emulgent. h The fatty artery. KKKK The Ureters on both sides. LLLL The
Vessels preparing the Seed. MM The Scrotum with the testicles in it. NN The
Vessels carrying the Seed. O The Bladder stripped of his external tunicle.
FIG. III.
A The Capsula, or right Glandula Renalis. BB A Vein from the trunk of the Vena
Cava coming into it.
FIG. IV.
A The Capsula dissected. BB The hollowness of the Capsula somewhat laid open.
FIG. V.
AA The internal face of the dissected Kidney. BB The Emulgent Vein with his
branches distributed in the Kidney. C The Emulgent artery in like manner
distributed.
FIG. VI.
AA The Kidney dissected. B The Sinus of the Ureter about the Kidney. C The
round form of the ureters descending from the Kidneys. DD The narrow passages
of the ureters. EEE The fleshy Knobs called Papillares.
FIG. VII.
AA The common tunicle of the Bladder drawn back. BB The middle tunicle and
bottom of the Bladder. C The inner tunicle which appears when the Bladder is
cut. D The Orifice of the bladder by which the Urine passes out. EE The Neck
of the Bladder which seems swelled by reason of the Prostatae joined to it. FF
Part of the Ureters that come to the Bladder.




CHAP. 6. Of the Instruments of Generation in Man.
BY these Organs the Nutriment is wrought or made by which the frail Nature of
Man is sustained, which perishing by age is sustained by posterity.

Of these in Men, some perfect the seed, others sow it in the fruitful field of
Nature being perfected: of the first are the preparing vessels, the
Pampiniforme, the Epididymides, the Testicles, the Parastatae, the Vasa
deferentia, and the vessels that keep the seed: Of the latter are the vessels
that cast out the Seed and the Yard.

The preparing vessels are two veins, and as many arteries; the right of the
veins arises most commonly from the Trunk of the Vena Cava, either with a
single or double root; the left most commonly arises from the left Emulgent,
so that in their original the scope or pastime of Nature is observed. The
Arteries most commonly arise from the Trunk of the great Artery, and pass down
ward being mixed with the veins; they enter the Peritonaeum, and by their
manifold plexure they make the bodies called Pyramidalia, because from a narrow
beginning they become broad like a Pyramide; they are called also Pampiniformia
because they are curled like the Claspers of a Vine, from thence they tend
downwards, and are distributed to the Epidydimis and the Testicles.

The Epididymides are small, white, hard glandulous bodies, covered with the
common tunicle of the Spermatick Vessels, they are longish and hollowish, where
they are committed to the Testicles, sometimes they are so big that on the one
or other side they represent another Testicle; they lie near to the Testicles,
to whose proper Membrane, with very many strings and passages they are joined;
here is also a nexure found about the extremity of each Testicle, for they lie
rather in the middle space than stick to them; their office is to give their
first rudiments of Seed to the blood the preparing vessels bring in, and commit
it to the Testicles for the perfecting of it.

The Epididymides are the Testicles joined, so called, because they witness
strength and manhood; they have a glandulous white and soft substance, having
small Veins and Arteries from the Spermaticks, most neatly distributed in them;
they have Nerves partly from the internal branch of the sixth pair, which
declines the plexure of the Mesenterium, partly from the marrow of the back,
that they may have sense as well as life and nourishment; they are compassed
about with a proper Membrane of their own, strong and thick, which because it
is white in color, they call Albuginea; the Divine Creator has formed two of
them, that so the work might be done by the other when the one languisheth, or
is deficient.

In respect of manifest quality; they are hot and moist, not because they have
a fountain of heat which they distribute to the body, for the changes that
happen to the Body when they are lost, either in voice, temperament, or
strength, comes through defect of any Natural heat flowing from the stones, but
from the oppression of that copious matter which uses to be converted into
Seed: in form they are almost oval, both for security sake and also for
capacity; they hang in men without the Abdomen that so they might not be so
lustful, and that the matter whereof the Seed is made, might be the better
perfected by the length of the passage, to which the Testicles ad strength and
fruitfulness.

For it is an error to hold that their hanging down conduces any thing at all
to the casting out of the Seed, because the Seed is received from them, being
made fruitful by the ejaculating Vessels which are far remote from them;
neither do they change, or any way frustrate the office of the Yard; they
contain Seed, but such as is very thin, as is seen by Carcasses not consumed by
disease nor fasting, and therefore it receives its last perfections in the
Seminal vessels, and Prostatae.

To the Epididymides are joined the Parastatae Variciformes, so called because
they resemble the form of veins when they are swelled, crooked and bowed for
the better elaborating of the Seed; they are Nervous and hard in the touching:
from these whatsoever is carried upwards into the Abdomen, is turned back to
the Bladder, and is called Deferentia.

For the security of the Testicles has Nature provided a thing like a sack or
bag, called Scrotum, (we in English call it the Cods, and is visible) it is
divided by a line in the midst, neither is the composition of it single, for it
has a skin with its scarf-skin, and a Membrana Carnosa, close knit to the skin
and wrinkled with it, which they call Darton, because it can hardly be
separated from the skin: after this is the Elytroides, or proper Membrane which
compasses the Testicles round, and this is a process of the Peritonaeum, and
is double as the Testicles are.

The external part is furnished with Muscles which from their office are called
Cremasters or holders up; also from the fleshy texture of strings a red
Membrane is formed, which Authors call Erythroides: the internal part which
immediately compasses about the Testicles; is called Nervea; this being the
proper tunicle of the Testicles is sometimes bespread with fat, and so being,
is a hindrance to the fruitfulness of the Seed. The Cremaster Muscles arise
from the Ligaments of the Os pubis, under the transverse Muscles of the
Abdomen; they hold up the weight of the Testicles, and bring them to the
Spermatick vessels.

We come now to the Vasa deferentia, which are turned toward the backside of
the Bladder, afterward by degrees dilated into certain Bladders in which the
Seed being perfected is kept, they cast out the Seed into the Vrethra by a
special passage.

The ejaculating vessels are the last of the Spermaticks, which are called
Prostatae Glandulosi, they are two fleshy, hard, and firmly joined bodies,
compassed about with a strong Membrane; it is in bigness, almost as big as a
Walnut, and not unlike it in form, one side of it joins to the Capsulae, from
which it receives the Seed, the other side is joined to the Neck of the
Bladder, by many and small passages, and when the Seed is troublesome either by
reason of its quantity or quallity, it casts it out into the Vrethra.

The Yard was principally ordained that it might cast seed into the bottom of
the Womb it consists of a skin and a fleshy Membrane, without any the least
fat, least its motion should be retarded, and the sense of pleasure in the act
of copulation taken away by moisture.

It is properly made of two Nervous bodies with the Vrethra, or vessels through
which the urine passes, and the Glans; its body is long, thick, and of a soft
substance, as though it were filled with Marrow; It has a numerous company of
Veins and Arteries, that so it might be furnished with heat and Spirit; It is
moved by two Muscles, and they are very short, but thick and strong, deduced
from the Nervous beginning of the Coxendix. The beginning of the Bodies is from
the inferior end of the Coxendix, in the beginning they are disjoined,
afterward in their progress joined by enclosure, and stretched to the Glans
of the Yard.

Under these is the Vrethra, or channel, which is the passage both of urine and
seed; it is composed of two Membranes, of which the internal is thin and
exquisite in Sense, which causes both pleasure and pain; the external is thick
endewed with transverse Fibrae, both for motion and strength sake; the Vrethra
has two Muscles pretty long, yet slender, their original is from the Sphincter
of the right Gut, they terminate about the middle of the channel, and dilate it
the readier to expel the seed.

In the beginning of the Vrethra is a fleshy shutter, which shuts the Orifices
of the Capsulae; this being either broken by unadvised putting a Cattheter into
the Bladder, or else gnawn asunder by sharpness of excrements causes an
uncurable Gonorrhaea, or running of the Reins.

Famous vessels are communicated to the Yard, Veins, and Arteries, from the
Hypogastricks and Pudendae, whereof the one is distributed by the external
Skin, the other by its Nervous Bodies; to these is added a double pair of
Nerves from the os Sacrum, of which the one is distributed to the Skin, the
other to the inner part of the Yard.

The extremity of the Yard is called the Glans, of a fleshy, soft, and Spongy
substance, it is covered with a thin Membrane, that so it might be the softer
to feeling, and the more exquisite in Sense.

A great part of it is covered with the common coverings of the Body, which is
called Preputium, or the foreskin, which is tied to the under-part of it by
the Bridle; this foreskin grows immoderately in young Children in Egypt and
Arabia, that either for Religion sake, or fear of other disadvantages that
might thence ensue they cut it off: such as devote themselves to Chastity, hang
a Ring in that part which remains.

Place here the Table of the sixth Chapter, which has the Number 6. at the
corner of the brass Plate.

Human anatomical diagrams AN EXPLICATION OF THE TABLE OF THE SIXTH CHAPTER.
This Table shows the Spermatick Vessels, the Testicles, the Membranes of the
Scrotum, the Yard, the Reins, and Bladder. FIG. I.
A The right Glandula renalis. B The left Glandula renalis. CC The Reins on
each side. D The left emulgent Vein. E The right emulgent Vein. FF The right
and left emulgent Arteries. G The right Spermatical Vein. HH The trunk of the
Vena Cava descending. I The left Iliack branch of the Vena Cava. K The right
Iliack branch. L The right Spermatical Artery. MM The trunk of the great artery
descending. N The right Iliack branch of the great Artery. O The left Iliack
branch of the same. P The left Spermatical artery. Q The left Spermatical vein.
RR The left Ureter. SS The right Ureter. TT The Vessels preparing the Seed. tt
The same Vessels, in what place the Pampiniformia begin. VV The Vasa deferentia
passing behind the Bladder. XX The Scrotum with the Testicles in it. Y The
Bladder. Z The neck of the Bladder. aa The two Muscles erecting the Yard. bb
The two Muscles dilating the Urethra. c The Body of the Yard. d The Praeputium.
FIG. II.
AA The skin of the Scrotum separated. BBB The Membrane called Dartus. CC The
external part of the membrane Elytroides. DD The Cremaster arising under the
transverse Muscles of the Abdomen. EE The internal or membranous part of the
Elytroides. FF The proper white tunicle of the testicle separated. f The same
joined to the testicle. G The Glandulous substance of the testicle. H The
Vessel called Pampiniforme or Pyramidale. II Epididymis. K The Parastate.
FIG. III.
oe A portion for the preparing Vessels. AA The Pyramidal Vessels. BB
Epididymis. CCC Parastates. D The testicle covered with its proper Membrane E A
portion of the Vasa deferentia.
FIG. IV.
AA The contexture of the veins and arteries in the Pyramidal Vessel. BB
Epydidymis. CC Parastate. DD A portion of the Vasa deferentia.
FIG. V.
A The Bladder laid bare from its outward tunicle. BB A portion of the Ureters.
CC A portion of the Vasa deferentia. DD The Capsulae. dd The end of the
Capsulae. EE The Seminal Bladders. FF The Glandulae Prostatae. GG The Urethra.
HH The Muscles which erect the Yard. II The Muscles which dilate the Urethra.
KK The two Nervous bodies of the Yard. L The Preputium drawn back. M The Glans
with its Bridle.
FIG. VI.
A The internal tunicle of the Bladder being open. BB Part of the Vreters. CC
The Orifice of the Ureters as they are diducted into the Bladder. DD The
beginning of the Capsulae. EE The Seminal Bladders. GG The Glandulae Prostatae
divided. L The hole in the Capsulae passing into the beginning of the Urethra,
which is covered with a shutter.
FIG. VII.
A The Membrane of the nervous body of the Yard separated. B The blackish
marrow of the same body. C The Glans laid naked.




CHAP. 7. Of the Instruments of Generation in Women.
THE preparation of the Instruments of Generation, is no less in the Body of
Women, than it is in the Body of Men, for there are those by which the Seed is
produced, and mixed with the Seed of Man being produced, and stirred up for the
Generation of the Child; such as regard the Seminal matter are the preparing
vessels, the Testicles, the perfecting vessels to which those that cast it out
are joined The Womb is for the Conception of the Child.

The preparing vessels are two Veins, and as many Arteries as they are in Man,
the right of the Veins proceeds from the Trunk of the Vena Cava, the left from
the Emulgent. The original of the Arteries, is from the great Artery, and yet
in the beginnings of those, the work of Nature is various, as it is in those of
Men: these vessels join themselves in their progress, and yet still remain
within the Abdomen, and are carried partly to the Testicles, partly to the
Tubae of the Womb; its bottom and Neck in which turning themselves upwards by
the Hypogastrick vessels, they join by Anastomosis, and so they subminister
matter not only to breed the Child, but also to nourish the parts.

The Testicles of Women are of a Glandulous substance, softer, and fuller of
juice then Men's are, in such as are young, but lesser, and harder in such as
are Ancient; they have only one single Skin, but that is very strong, and
fastened to the Ligaments of the Womb; about the bottom of it; they have an
evident passage to the bottom of the Womb, though it be but short, and another
more slender, and not so easy to be seen, to the Neck of the Womb.

There are neither Epididymides, nor yet Parastatae about the Testicles of
Women; for the Seed of Women needs not that exquisite digestion that the Seed
of Man does, for the constitution of it is perfect, seeing it gives fit matter
to make the Fruit.

Neither yet does Women's Testicles stand only for ciphers neither, for they
receive the matter from the preparing vessels, and turn it into a watery milky
substance; as is copiously found many times in their dissection, especially in
such as were young, and flourishing when they died: This Siminal juice is
carried from the Testciles, partly to the Tubae by small passages like the
Venae Lacteae, that there it may be perfected; partly to the bottom, and Neck
of the Womb, that it may keep them soft and moist, and as the Ancients think to
stir the Women up to Venery; although this is only in hotter Natures, and such
whose passages are streighter.

To the bottom of the Womb which touches the Testicles, the portion of
Spermatical moisture, the Child being now conceived, is of far Nobler use,
for it bears up the Child, and keeps it from the violent heat of the Womb, and
sustains it, that the umbilicar vessels which at first excel a Hair not much in
bigness, be not broken by the shaking of the Mothers Body.

The vessels which keep the Seed, and cast it out, are called Tubae, they are
two round Bodies joined to the bottom of the Womb on each side, they are called
Tubae because of their crooked bowing like a Trumpet, they are composed of two
Membranes, which are common also to the Womb its self, they have Veins and
Arteries from the Spermaticals, which are divided into small branches, and
Nerves from the same, which creep to the bottom of the Womb. Lastly, as we
showed before, there is a Nervous passage inserted into the bottom of the Womb,
which is very seldom extended beyond the longitude of the Tubae.

About the Womb are no Prostatae, nor needs there, because they are no divided
Bodies, but joined by the Tubae, and the Seminal moisture passes easily into
the Womb, as you may easily perceive, if you do but crush one of them with your
Finger. Obstructions are freequent in the Tubae, as well as in the Womb; as
also swellings, which out of question are causes of Barrenness.

Such Women as are fuitful have a twofold Spermatical matter, the one watery,
which moistens and refreshes the Womb, and Fruit in it, the other which is
thick in the Tubae, which is mixed with the Seed of Man to make the Conception.

To receive and preserve both Seed and Fruit, is the Womb ordained, it is a
part of the inferior Ventricle composed of two Membranes, that so it may be
stretched wide when the Child is in it, and contracted again when it is Born;
the exterior Membrane it has from the Peritonaeum, which is strong, and out of
danger of breaking, the interior which is propper to the Womb, is full of
strings and pores: between these Membranes a fleshy contexture compasses both
the bottom and Neck of the Womb, which in the time of Conception like a Sponge
drinks up the superfluous moisture, and is of a wonderful thickness when the
Woman is with Child, but else very compact.

Also it sometimes happens, that when the Womb is narrow, and the Child great,
or a Mole bred together with the Child, with mighty pain in Childbearing, not
only the thick, but also the thin substance of the Womb with its Membranes is
broken, and the child breaks out with its Head, Feet, and Hands, wheresoever
there is way made into the Abdomen, and sometimes it falls down with its whole
Body upon the Mothers Bowels.

The Womb has a numerous company of vessels, of which the Veins which
accompany the Arteries on the upper part of it, descend from the vessels which
prepare the Seed; the middle and inferior parts are supplied from the
Hypogastricks, which creeping upwards again, join themselves by inosculations
to the fore mentioned vessels; the Nerves which come to the superior part of
the Womb, are the extreme branches of the costal Nerves of the sixth pair; the
middle and inferior part is supplied from the Os Sacrum.

Not only age, but also the Sports of Venus and breeding Children alters the
bigness of the Womb: the intertexed flesh, and the plenty of Blood flowing
thither, alters the cold and dry temper of the Membranes, which is so
plentiful, that it administer nourishment to the Child, and flows out monthly
at other times: Its situation is in the lower Region of the Abdomen, where by
the concourse of the Os Sacrum, Ilium, Coxendix, and Pubis, the Pelvis is
framed, and for this intent it is larger in Women, than it is in Men, and gives
way about the Os Sacrum, and Pubis (though the Ligaments be very strong) in the
time of travail; forward it is joined to the Bladder and the Os Pubis by the
help of the Peritonaeum, backwards with the right Gut

Above it has singular Ligaments and very strong, but loose, least they should
be detrimented by the swelling of the Belly when the Woman is with Child; the
first of these which is in the sides, seems to be a stretching out of the
Peritonaeum, it is Membranous, and broad, so that it bends the Tubae,
Testicles, and womb, to the Os Ilium, and is like the wing of a Bat, or Flitter
mouse; this being immoderatly loosned, or broken by violence, the bottom of the
womb falls down upon the Neck, or else into one of the groynes.

The other Ligament is round and Nervous, produced forwards from both sides of
the Bottom, and having pierced the Peritonaeum and joined it self to the
Tendons of the Muscles of the Abdomen, above the Os Pubis, it dilates its self
into a Membrane, joins its self to the Clysteris, and loosly binds the bottom
of the Womb to the foreparts; but indeed this round worm like Body is something
else besides a bare Ligament, for if you diligently mark its structure it
consists of a double Membrane, even as the Womb it self does: it takes its
original at the bottom of the Womb, where the Tubae and Testicles are: It is
porous within, and toward the end it is evidently hollow, and moist, with a
watery Seed in such Women as die a violent death, and therefore it is more
probable that this Worm-like vessel, when the mouth of the Womb is shut, gives
passage to the Seminal Matter from the Testicles to the Neck of the Womb, and
casts out excrements by those passages from both Groyns.

The office of the Womb is to receive the Seed, which is the principal of
Generation, to keep and cherish it being received, and to bring forth the child
into the world, all which it does by its proper faculty: this will appear more
clearly if we consider the parts of the womb distinctly.

It is divided into the bottom, the Neck, the passage, the extremity of which
is the Woman's Privities. The uppermost part of the Womb is called the Bottom;
it is thicker and harder in those that are not great with child, the hand will
easily grasp the bigness of it: outwardly it resembles the form of a Guord,
being rather compressed than exactly round, if the Woman has never been with
Child; it has a small Cavity within, and but one, which is divided into the
right and left by a very small line; and yet in this secret little shop, the
Eternal Creator of all things begins and furnishes the admirable Structure of
Man, only by a few drops of Seed.

Where the Womb begins to grow narrower, that is called the neck, and this
usually Authors confound with the passage: in this is the Orifice of the Womb,
called internal, very small; it is broadish in Virgins and Women which never had
child, but round in such as have; this opens to receive the Seed, and shuts
close when it is received, and it stretches to an extreme wideness to give
passage to the Child.

To the bottom of the Neck is joined the passage which is usually called the
Neck of the Womb; it is a soft and loose channel with unequal wrinkles, that so
it may the better give intromission to the Yard of Man, and extromission to the
Child; at the end of it, on the forepart, it receives the neck of the Bladder;
behind it is strongly bound to the Sphincter of the right Cut.

The remainder of it is terminated in the Privities, in which the two lips are
external, then the fleshy and soft productions which Authors call Nymphae and
Alae; by these it is defended from external injuries: between these Alae is the
Clystoris, a small round Body, made up of two Nervous portions, spongy within;
it is endewed with two Muscles on both sides, they are very small, but their
office is the same with those that dilates the passage in males; it has plenty
of vessels of all sorts, and is very exquisite in sense, that so by tickling it
may cause pleasure in the act of Copulation.

Its unprofitable excrement (which the Arabians call Endemium, the Egyptians,
Malum) which sticks out immoderately in young Girls, they cut off and scar:
Under the Clystoris toward the internal part of the passage is the passage of
Urine, which is short in Women, and has a small Caruncle to defend it from cold.

Such Virgins as keep themselves from playing the wantons with themselves, from
the use of Venus and other external injuries, have a fleshy skin that covers
the passage, guarded with Caruncles, which Ancients called Hymen; it has a
cleft in the middle through which the Terms monthly flow, the form of which
quite cease after they have had to do with a Man and born Children; this as
it is in Infants, and such Virgins as are not Marriagable, we give to the view
of such as have chaste minds in the fifth and seventh Scheam of the next Table.
In these, whatsoever is extended upwards by the sides from the inferior angle
of the Privities, contains the cleft, and is a laying open of the internal
tunicle of the passage, which is Membranous with many very small Veins and
Arteries, which in Virgins makes up that fleshy circle like a flower; it is
more fleshy in some than it is in other some, so that it represents the form of
two Caruncles: It is commonly thin, and the weaker by reason of the defluxions
of humors, so that it is broken without much ado. Two fleshy Productions like
myrtle Leaves are near this skin, or else like Almonds, which make the passage
the narrower in Virgins, by which, the Caruncle which compasses about the
passage of the Urine is seen.

These things by the Law of Nature being thus constituted, Nature being careful
for the defense of Virginity, sometimes frames another thin skin from the
inferior angle of the Privities and the sides, which is stretched cross the
chink like a zone, neither gives it any passage save only near the passage of
Urine, where it is loose and severed from the parts of the Privities: This, men
very skilful in Anatomy, have formerly described for the Hymen; this is but in
few, and many Midwives tear it away for an unprofitable excrement: See its form
in the sixth Figure of the following Table.

Place here the Table of the seventh Chapter, which has the Number 7. at the
corner of the brass Plate.

Human anatomical diagrams AN EXPLICATION OF THE TABLE OF THE SEVENTH CHAPTER.
This Table shows the Genitals of Women: First of all in their Natural
Situation; then their several Parts out of their Situation; Lastly, the Hymen
and Zone. FIG. I.
a The right preparing Vessels. b The left preparing Vessels. c A portion of
the right Gut. d The bottom of the Womb sticking up above the Bladder. e The
Bladder.
FIG. II.
A The right Glandulae renalis. B The left Glandulae renalis. CC The Kindneys
on both sides. DD The right emulgent veins. EEE The right emulgent arteries. FF
The trunk of the Vena Cava, divided into the right and left Iliack branches. G
The left emulgent vein. H The left emulgent arteries. II The right Spermatical
vein. K The right Spermatical artery. L The left Spermatical artery. M The left
Spermatical vein. NN The trunk of the great artery divided into the right and
left Iliack. OO Women's Testicles. PP A portion of the broad Ligament. QQQQ The
Tubae of the Womb, depressed on both sides with the Ligament, that so the
Testicles may appear. R The bottom of the Womb. SS The round Ligaments of the
Womb cut off below. T The neck of the womb. V In the right side, the
Hypogastrick vein distributed in the Womb. V In the left side, the Hypogastrick
artery distributed in the Womb. X In the right side, the Hypogastrick artery
distributed in the Womb. X In the left side, the Hypogastrick vein distributed
in the Womb. Y The passage of the Womb. Z The Bladder depressed above the
Privities. aa A portion of the Ureters cut off about the Bladder. bb A portion
of the Vreters descending cut off about the reins. cc The preparing Vessels
dilated about the testicles. dd The Vasa deferentia.
FIG. III.
AA The bottom of the Womb dissected cross. BB The cavity of the bottom. C The
neck of the Womb. D The hole in the neck of the Womb of a Woman which has
brought forth. EE The wrinkled face of the passage of the womb. FF The round
Ligaments of the Womb cut off underneath.
FIG. IV.
A The right testicle. BB The right Tubae depressed. C The left testicle. bb
The passages of the testicles of the womb. DD The left Tubae of the Womb. E The
bottom of the womb. FF the round Ligaments of the womb cut off below. G The
Bladder inserted to the passage of the womb and stretched upwa^ds. HH Portions
of the Ureters. II The two musculous parts of the Clytoris. K The body it self
of the Clytois.
FIG. V.
A The head of the Clytoris stiking out under the skin. BB The external Lips of
the Pivities drawn aside. CC The Alae or Nymphae drawn aside. D The Caruncle of
the passage of Vme besides (a) EE The two fleshy prodixtions like Myrtle
Leaves. FF The Membranous containing of the chink.
FIG. VI.
A The Membrane drawn cross the Privities vulgarly taken for the Hymo.
FIG. VII.
A The Privities of a young Girl, ^n which the signification is the same as in
^he fifth figure.




CHAP. 8. Of the Fruit in the Womb.
TO the Body of the Mother we adjoyn the contemplation of the fruit in the
Womb, because it is a part of it though temporary, as not only the community of
substance and nourishment, but also the nexure of the Secundine and Umbilicar
vessels to the Womb witnesses; this Fruit we consider as genuine, and
nourished by the Womb, and as being fitting to breath the air, it breaks out
from that narrow enclosure.

The small Body of the Embrion is formed by the vital virtue of the Seed of the
Man, from which office it is called Plastica; of which, by the appointment of
God himself, by his infinite wisdom, goodness and power, he has left not only
obscure footsteps, but also clear arguments; to this, the heat of the Seed and
Nourishment from the Mother administers: the Compendium that does this great
work is very small, not exceeding the bigness of a great Emmet; from which,
that is first formed, without which life cannot be preserved, to wit, the
Heart, and from it the veins and arteries as from their Basis, afterward the
Liver, and then other parts which come first into use.

That the Heart is first formed before any other part your eyes will witness,
if you dilligently contemplate the framing of the Embrion in Eggs; and although
the Heart be very little and altogether white, yet by reason of the blood
contained in each Ventricle, it has a transparent redness to be distinguished
from the other parts: The motion of the Heart helps and confirms this, for so
soon as any blood is to be seen in the Veins of the Embrion, the Heart being
full of blood moves with a swift, yet ordinary pulse; so often as it is dilated
it receives blood into its Ventricles; so often as it is compressed, it casts
it out, and this appears in the Heart whilst it is white, though something
increased. Besides, it must first be formed by reason of its singular plenty of
heat, which no other part of the Body is equally endewed with. Lastly,
necessity requires its first formation, that so by its motion the vital Spirit
may be stirred up, increased and distributed to the Body.

The matter of which the first forming sisteme of the Body is produced is the
Seminal substance in the Body of the Mother, which passing from the Tubae to
the bottom of the womb, to which the Seed of the Man ads heat and Spirit, and
to the increase and maintaining of it is the Blood of the Mother required; this
comes not at all to that first mixture from the Seed, neither does it make any
Parenchyma, but after an interval of time, the Umbilicar vessels and Heart
being framed it is drawn and takes its redness with the Muscles.

Of the parts procreated, some lose their use, others retain it so long as life
lasts; such as lose their use are, the Navil and its Vessels, the the
Membranes which compass the Child in the womb, and the Placenta; the use of
these cease so soon as the Child is brought forth to light.

The Navil is a Membranous ducture, by which the Vein and Arteries arise from
the child to the Mothers Womb; both this and the Secundine wants Nerves because
they have no use of sense: It is of a famous length, even in the very beginning
of the Formation, although the bigness of the Embrion at beginning be no bigger
than a great Emmit, or a small Be; but when the Fruit is ready for
extramission, the Navil-string is three spans long, and as thick as ones
finger, both for the strength of the Vessels, the perfecting of the blood by
its long passage, the commodious motion of the Child, and the easier drawing
out the Secundine; it has no distinct nodes, yet is it wreathed and unequal,
for the easier bowing of the included vessels.

The rise of the Navil, is from the middle of the Abdomen, that the inclination
of the Head and Breast of the Child might be the readier toward the mouth of
the Womb; at the biginning of the Embrion it swims in the Liquor of the Amnios,
but when it is more perfected it is bowed for the most part above the Breast,
and produced backwards by the hinder part of the Head to the Forehead, and
joined to the womb by Membranes and the contained Vessels.

The Vessels contained in the Navil, are, one vein and two arteries; the vein
is largest, and takes its Original from the Foundation of the Vena porta within
the Liver, therefore it descends by the Arteries of the Liver to the Navil, and
being divided into very many branches above the Chorion, it joins its self to
the Womb, and carries Blood for the nourishment of the Infant: The Umbilicar
Arteries take their Original from the Iliack branches of the great Artery, from
which place being stretched upwards by the sides of the Vrachos, they enter the
Navil, and are manifoldly distributed above the Corion with the Veins, they
carry vital Spirit, and communicates it to the Child.

It is far enough off from the truth that these vessels pass to the Child
from the Mothers womb, and the Membranes adjacent, for in the young ones of
Birds, it is easy to be seen that Nature deduceth the Veins and Arteries, from
the Fruit it self enclosed in its Secundines, and by degrees divides them into
lesser branches; It does the like in vegetables, whose roots come not from the
Earth to the Plants, but the Plants send them to the Earth for nourishment, and
this is abundantly proved in Bulbous roots that grow out of the Earth; neither
comes this opinion near the truth, that the Arteries and umbilicar vein are
framed before the Heart and Liver, for neither Heart nor Liver is made of
Blood, but of Seed, and the whole Systeme of the Body is made before any
vessels pass from it; for before the Bowels are formed, there is no need of
vessels: as the Conception of living Crearures, and the Seeds of Plants
evidently demonstrates.

The Vrachus is added to the Umbilicar vessels, being a Membranous Body, round
and porous within, arising from the Basis of the Bladder, and attenuated
toward the Navil, it delivers the Urine from the Bladder to the Amnios, and
yet this seems doubtful to these who behold the solidity of this vessel, the
smalness of its pore, and the obscurity of its passage out by the Navil; but so
soon as the Infant is born, whatsoever of the Navil string is left to the Body
after it is cut off, its former use ceasing, is turned into a Ligament.

The Membranes which compass about the Child in the womb, are two, of which,
that which is next the Body of it is called Amnios, being soft, light, and
clear, gently joined to the Chorion where the Placenta is; from the very
beginning of the Conception, it contains a watery Liquor, which defends the
tender Limbs of the Embrion in the violent motions of the Mother,; and in the
labor of the Mother the Membranes being broken, it mollifies the passages, and
gives the easier extramission to the Child: that this is gathered together
between the Membranes, Amnios, and Chorios, the connection of the Tunicles, and
dilligent observation denies; neither can there come any detriment to the
Child, from the sharpness of this humor, seeing the Cuticula easily defends it.

The other Membrane they call Chorion, and it compasses the whole Child round,
on the outside of the Amnios, and is the thicker of the two by odds, it is
smooth on the inside, and is furnished with abundance of the Umbilicar Veins
and Arteries; In which place (the Child increasing) the Liver or Placenta of
the womb arises; in Figure it is a soft and Spongy piece of flesh, and has
many branches of the Umbilicar vessels, both to cherish its heat, and nourish
its substance.

To these they add the Allantoes, or Skin in which the Urine is kept, although
this appears in the Anatomy of Bruites, rather than of Women.

To these Membranes Ancient Authors defend and prove mightily, and as mightily
disagree about certain vessels called Acetabula and Cotyledones, which some say
are, some say are not joined, some hold them to be the mouths of the vessels
swelled with Blood, other pieces of flesh between the Chorion and the Womb,
which prop up the Umbilicar vessels, and receive the Blood when it flows too
fast to the Child, which is conspicuous in the Wombs of Sheep, and the like
Creatures.

If we search out what answers to this in women, you must look to Placenta
before described, which being hollow on that part next the Chorion, unequal on
that part which is next the womb, represents the same form, only it is far
bigger, and by the softness of its substance, and multitude of its vessels,
performs the same office: These are the parts of the Child which are useless
after Birth, and are called the Afterbirth or Secundine.

The parts of the Body which continues still in office, the Child being born,
are the same which are in the Ventricles, the unlikeness of which the child in
the womb, to a man's of age, is here to be spoken off, the Ventricle of the
Child in the womb, though it be contracted, yet is it never Empty, but always
white and covered over with the Liver. The Guts are seven times as long as the
Body, and the Gut called Caecum is filled with excrements; the excrements of
the small Guts are Phlegmatic and yellow, those in the great Guts solid and
hard, which the Ancients called Meconium: The Liver appears great, and
stretched out even to the left Hypochondrium, the substance of it before it
grows red, may be seen full of purple Veins, and the Gall under it appears
yellow, and swelled: The Sweetbread is large, and by its bright color
evidently show the diduction of Chyle, and yet it shows it more clearly after
the Child is born, whilst it sucks. The second Table of this Chapter presents
you with its delineaments.

The Glandula of the Kidneyes are of a wonderful bigness, and lie not in the
Reins, as they do in such as are grown up, but lie upon them, and embrace the
superior part of them; the reins themselves are great, and have very many
Glandulae; the Ureters are wide, and the Bladder full of Urine; the bottom of
the womb in young Wenches is compressed, and the Tubae stretched out, the
Testicles great, al which the Second Figure in the forementioned Table
Specifies.

The Bowels of the Abdomen which are allotted, for public digestion, do not
want private digestion, but manifestly operate for the common profit of the
Infant; for that the Stomach makes Chyle, is manifest by the matter contained
in it, and by the various excrements in the foldings of the Guts: Although the
Sense of Man cannot yet perceive by what passages the substance to be converted
into Chyle, comes to the Stomach: The fancies of the Ancients that the Child
sucked in at its mouth, being exploded for many difficulties, yet is it
agreeable to reason, that as in Men, the Liver and Spleen receive whatsoever is
to be turned into Blood, so whilst the Fruit is nourished in the womb, the
passage of the throat being denied, the Stomach should draw that from the Liver
and Spleen which it digesteth, and turns into Chyle; that the Liver makes
Blood in the Fruit is clear, by the separation of the Chollerick and watery
excrement, for although the Blood of the Mother by which the Embrion is
nourished be pure, yet is it unlike to the temperature of the Fruit, and
therefore stands in need of another separation and change.

About the Breast, the Veins are very full of Blood; but the most notable thing
in the Heart is, there is a large passage out of the Vena Cava into the Arteria
Venosa, or an anastomosis, defended with a Membrane; also a small channel out
of the Vena Arteriosa into the great Artery, so that the Blood may readily
pass from the right ventricle of the heart into the left, these passages as
age comes, Nature stops up by degrees, unless some great obstructions of Phlegm
(as sometimes happens) stop up the vulgar passages: the Heart it self is great,
and its ears and vessels large, the Lungues seem Bloody, neither have they as
yet obtained their rariety, because of their rest, and yet their Birth being
near, and the place they move in growing loose; the Lungues grow lighter, and
gently draw in some air, and this is clear, because sometimes a sound is heard
of the Fruit, not only in Bruits, but also in Women.

The Heart moves in the Embrion so soon as the Mothers Blood flows to it, which
it perfects within its Ventricles, and endews it with vital Spirit, that so it
may preserve and stir up the faculties of other parts, the parts of the Ears of
the Heart is distinct in respect of time from other parts, for they first of
all compel the Blood into the Heart by compressing themselves, then by dilating
themselves draw Blood again.

As for the Head, the nearer a Child is to Birth, the heavier it is, it is
distinguished by certain great Bubbles, which to the beholders gave opinion, of
the three Regions of the whole Body, the balls of the Eyes are great, and stick
out; the Brain is almost fluid, and the Nerves very soft; the Bones of the Skul
like tender barks, and if you except the forehead, distinguished by no
Sutures. The Crown is covered only with a thin Membrane, till the Bones of the
forehead, and hinder part of the Head are joined, the passages of hearing,
with the adjoining Bones, Os Cribrosum, and the Horns of the Hyois are
Cartilaginous.

And yet (which is strange) such Children as are brought forth in the ninth
month; the hardness and greatness of the Bones of the passage of hearing, is
almost equal to those in Men of perfect age, and not these only, but that also
which is called the Tympanum; the Membrane of which is comprehended with the
ring-like Bone, which gives the foundation of hearing; also the Labyrinth and
Cochlea are not less in bigness, than by proportion of Figure, to perfection,
whence it is clear that a Child soonest obtains perfection of Hearing.

The Bone called Cuneiforme, is divided into four parts; the Bones of the
forehead, and inferior Cheek, are manifestly divided. The teeth lies hid in
the Jaws, least the Child in stead of sucking, should bite, the roots of them
are soft and mucous, and hide the Fundamentals of the second Teeth.

The Vertebrae have no processes, but consists of three distinct Bones, of
which the foremost which is the greatest, is like a Lupine; the two hinder are
less, and by their meeting make that hole for the Marrow of the Back. The
Sternum is divided into four parts, and sometimes into more; as also the Os
Ischium, Il^um, and Pubis.

The extremity of the Bones which make the Wrest and Ancles are Cartilaginous,
and obtain hardness strength, and perfection by age.

Place here the first and second Tables of the eighth Chapter, which has the
Number 8. and 9. at the corner of the brass Plates.

Human anatomical diagrams AN EXPLANATION OF THE FIRST TABLE OF THE EIGHT
CHAPTER.
The Fruit in the Womb being often helped by Physical Remedies, requires no
less diligent observation than the Body it self of Man: therefore we have given
you the representation of it in two Tables according to the Method of
Dissections. The first of which, lays open to your view the Umbilicar Vessels,
and the Sceleton: The other the Deliniament of the Bowels. FIG. I. Shows the
Child ready to be born, as it lies in a fit posture for extramission.
AAAA The parts of the Abdomen dissected and distracted. BBBB The body of the
womb divided into four parts CCCC The Chorion and Amnios joined together, and
dissected into four parts. D The Child turning its head downwards, which is the
natural way of Birth.
FIG. II. Shows the Child taken out of the Womb, the Umbilicar Vessels, and
Membranes separated about the beginning.
A The Umbilicar vein distended from the liver. BB The two Umbilicar Arteries
rising to the Navil. C The Urachus knit to the Navil. DDD The Navil produced
even to the Placentum. EE The Amnios separated from the Chorion, under which a
portion of the Navil appears. FF The Chorion divided into four parts. GGG The
Umbilicar veins and arteries, distributed in the Placenta which are extended
above the Chorion, but very lucidly appear under it.
FIG. III. Explains the Secundines, in what part they cleave to the womb.
AA The unequal part of the Placenta. BBBB The Chorion under the Placenta.
FIG. IV. Shows the Bones pertaining to the Head.
AA The bone of the Forehead distinct from the Suture. BB The two bones of the
fore part of the head. C The Crown as yet Membranous by reason of the distance
of the Bones. D The inferior cheek divided into two parts.
FIG. V. Shows the ring-like bone of the Infant, to which the Membrane of the
Ear called Timpanum is knit.

FIG. VI. The bones of the Ears, removed a little from their Natural Situation.
A The Mallcus. B The Incus. C The Stapes. D The little bone annexed to the
Ligament of the Stapes, first found out by D. Sylvius.
FIG. VII. Exactly represents the Labyrinth and Cochlea of the Ears perfect in
all parts.
A The Oval hole in the Tympanum, which looks toward the Labyrinth. B The round
hole in the Tympanum between the Labyrinth and the Cochlea. CCC The three bony
Cavities of the Labyrinth. DD The Cochlea.
FIG. VIII. Shows the internal face of the Cochlea with the Labyrinth.
A The oval hole. B The round hole. CCC The three circles of the Labyrinth
something opened. DD The Cochlea broken, showing the little inward porous
circle.
FIG. IX. The Vertebra of the Infant in three distinct parts.
A The first back part. B The second back part. C The third fore part.
FIG. X. Shows the Vertebrae of the Neck, the bones of the Breast as they are
seen on the fore part.
A Denotes only the upper part of the Sternum, the rest are under it.
FIG. XI. Shows the back, and its Vertebrae, wanting their Processes.

FIG. XII. Shows the Vertebrae of the Loins with the bones that make the Pelvis.
A The five Vertebrae of the Loins, whose Processes are yet cartilaginous. B
The Os Sacrum composed of six parts. CC The bones called Ilium. DD The bones of
the Pubis. EE The bones of the Coxendix.
FIG. XIII. Expresses the bones of the whole hand.
abd The Appendices of the bones, yet cartilaginous. c The bones of the wrest
all cartilaginous.
FIG. XIV. Represents the bones of the whole Foot.
abd The Appendices of the bones which are cartilaginous. c Certain
Cartilaginous bones of the Instep.




Human anatomical diagrams THE SECOND TABLE OF THE EIGHT CHAPTER UNFOLDED.
This Table comprehends all the Bowels which are found in the Abdomen, and
Breast of the Infant. FIG. I. Singularly expresses the Lacteal Veins, as they
are represented at a single view.
AAA The hollow part of the Liver. B The Gall. CC The umbilicar vein bowed
upward. DD The Stomach turned upwards. E Its lower Orifice tied with a string.
F A portion of the Jejunum cut off near the Pylorus. GGG The Pancreas of a
famous bigness. H The Spleen. II The right Kidney covered with the common
Membrane. K The left Kidney in like manner covered. LLL The Mesenterium
stretched abroad. MM etc. The Guts knit to the Mesenterium. aaaa Certain
Lacteal veins stretched from the Sweetbread to the Liver, whereof few, and
those the least of them are here expressed. bbb etc. Lacteal veins distributed
from the Sweetbread to the Guts, and those bigger. ccc etc. The Meseraick
branches of the Vena porta. dd etc. Branches of the Meseraick arteries.
FIG. II.
A The right Renal Glandula. B The right Kidney. C The left Glandula of the
Reins. D The left Kidney. E The Vena Cava descending. FF Its internal Iliack
branches. GG The external Iliack branches of the Vena Cava. HHH The great
artery with its external Iliack branches. II The internal branches of the great
artery. KK etc. Both Umbilicar arteries bent downwards. L The bottom of the
womb compressed. M The neck of the womb. N The bladder turned downwards. O The
Urachos. P The node of the Navil cut off. a The vein of the right Renal
Glandula. b The artery of the right Renal Glandula. c The right emulgent
artery. d The right emulgent vein. e The right spermatical vein. f The right
spermatical artery. g The left artery of the Renal Glandula. h The left vein of
the Renal Glandula. i The left emulgent vein. k The left emulgent artery. l The
left spermatical vein. m The left spermatical artery. nn The Vessels preparing
the Seed. oo The testicles of a great magnitude. pp The broad Ligaments of the
womb. qq etc. The Tubae of the womb bowed down. rr The round Ligaments of the
womb cut off below. ss Portions of the Vreters cut off.
FIG. III.
AA The Lungues diducted on both sides. B The Heart whole. C The trunk of the
great artery coming from the Heart. D A portion of the same artery passing
downwards. E The Vena Arteriosa stretched from the Heart. aa The channel
between the Vena Arteriosa and the great Artery. b The beginning of the right
subclavian artery. c The beginning of the right Carotides. d The beginning of
the left Artery Carotides.
FIG. IV.
AA The Lungues diducted. B The Heart cut toward the right Ventricle. C The
Vena Cava opened near the Heart. D Anastomosis between the Vena Cava and
Arteria Venosa. E The shutter in the Anastomosis.
FIG. V.
A The Corpus Thymium separated from the Vessels of the Heart.




CHAP. 9. Of the external parts of the Breast.
THe lower Ventricle, and the parts in and about it being already spoken of,
the middle ventricle follows, which is called Thorax, in English the Breast,
which is round about circumscribed with the Pleura; In which we will consider,
First, the external parts, then the vitals themselves.

To the external parts of the Breast, belong the common coverings of the Body,
of which we have spoken already; also the Pectoral Muscle, the Serratus Anticus
both greater and lesser, and of Bones, the Claviculae and Scapulae.

The Pectoral Muscle is so called, because it is spread abroad the Breast and
much increases its bigness; its original is from the middle Clavicula, the
Sternum, the Cartilages of the sixth, seventh, and eight Ribs, it has a short,
yet strong Tendon inserted into the Bone of the Shoulder between the Muscles
Deltois and Biceps, and holds it stoutly to the Breast.

The Muscle called the greater Serratus anticus, arises obliquely to the Basis
of the Scapula, from eight Ribs, five of the true ones, and three of the
Bastard ones, and draws it down forwards. The lesser Serratus anticus, lies hid
under the Pectoral, and proceeds from the second, third, fourth and fifth Ribs,
and passes to the process of the Scapula, called Ancyrois, or Beak-like, which
moves the Scapula obliquely forwards; of the Clavicula and Scapula because they
belong especially to the Shoulder, shall be treated of in the seventeenth
Chapter.

And yet properly to the Thorax belong the Breasts, the Bones the Breast is
composed of, the intercostal Muscles, the Pleura, the Mediastinum, and the
Diaphragma.

The office of the Breasts in Women is to breed Milk, if you consider them in
Women that give suck; they consist of very many small glandulous Bodies,
diverse in bigness, that they may not only receive the Blood from the small
Vessels, but also the vapors and milky moisture, which is largely distributed
to them from the Stomach and Sweetbread: by instinct of Nature, these small
Bodies are contained together with a Membrane with diverse cavities which
contain milk, the foundation of which remain when the milk is gone; they have
much fat, which serves not only to ad comeliness to them, but also to conserve
vital heat in them.

They receive two veins, one derived from the axilliar branch which is
distributed by the external part of the Breast; the other is called Mammaria
and is distributed by the internal part from the subclavian branch of the Vena
Cava: they have also so many Arteries as veins arising from the same roots,
namely from the Subclavian branch of the great Artery, and the axilliar, which
are distributed in the same manner to give them vital heat; they have Nerves
from the fourth Branch of the Marrow of the Back.

In the midst of the Breasts are the Nepples, round and rare, endewed with a
Membrane from the glandulous Bodies; they have a thin skin full of holes, and
stick out, that the Child may the better suck; round about them is a red circle
like a Halo.

The bigness of the Breasts is varied, not only by years and their performing
their office, but also by the humors that flow thither, and the diversity of
the climate: In the Women in Europe, they are more contracted, but in the
Arabian and Indian Women they are so long that they can give their Children
suck over their shoulders: They are in number two, that so the woman may give
two children suck; in temperament they are hot and moist, and are placed in the
midst of the Breast, that so they may be the nearer to the Fountain of Vital
Heat, and the readier to give the Child suck as the Mother carries it in her
arms.

Their proper action is the Generation of Milk, although it be not yet very
clear by what ways it is done, because in Carcasses the passages are hid; as
the passage of Chyle is in the Mesenterium, and of Seed from the Testicles to
the Parastatae, and from the Prostatae to the Vrethra, and other like passages
in living Creatures, and yet the Dissection of living Creatures that give suck,
gives some light to it.

For Bones, The Breast is defended with the Sternum before, on the sides with
the Ribs, and behind with the Vertebrae of the Back; the substance of the Bones
of the Sternum is spongy and red, usually divided into three parts, although in
age it grow into one Fone; the first and largest of them, resembles the knob of
a Cup, the other two are joined to them by Cartilages; it has a Cartilaginous
apendix, which by reason of its form is called Mucronata; it is the defense of
the Diaphragma, and sometimes gives passage to the Mammary Vein and Artery;
this also in old age grows Bony, sometimes it stick inwards and sometims
outward, and that no small prejudice to the Stomach; sometimes it sticks out
toward the Navil as long as ones finger, and is stiff, and then it wonderfully
hinders both the distribution of the Chyle by compressing the Pylorus, and also
the bowing of the Body forwards.

The Ribs are partly Bony as on the Back and Sides, partly Cartiaginous as on
the fore part where they are joined to the Sternum; the one increases the
strength, the other makes the motion of the Breast the easier, and the Breast
it self the safer from external injuries; they are in number on each side
twelve, of which, the seven superior are called True, the other inferior,
Basterd Ribs, not because they are shorter but because they end not in the
Sternum with Cartilages, for indeed nothing in our Bodies is spurious or false,
but all formed by the hand of Almighty God.

They have a hollowness in the inferior part through which they give safe
passage to the Veins, Arteries, and intercostal Nerves; all the Ribs are bowed
in a circular form, that so they may give convenient largeness to the Breast;
externally they are somewhat uneven, but internally where they are joined to
the Pleura they are very smooth, on the Back they are received by the holes of
the Vertebrae, some of them have a single, some a double knob; they are bound
together with firm Ligaments, and are joined to the Sternum before by
Cartilages, and also they stick too on another, yet is not their nexure so
firm, but external injuries often loses it, and in the Dropsy Ascites the
water often disjoyn the Cartilages of the inferior Ribs.

As many Ribs as there are, so many Vertebrae are there to receive them, and
twelve pair of Nerves from the Marrow of the Back proceed from them, the
formation of Vertebrae is the same with those of the Loins, save only the Bones
are more depressed.

The Muscles of the Breast which cause the motion of it, are, the Subclavia,
the triangular Muscle, the Intercostals, and the Dorsals; of the Subclavian
Muscles is but one pair only, taking its beginning from the inferior part of
the Clavicula, from whence it passes to the first Rib and its superior part,
which it moves upwards and outward.

The Triangular Muscles are produced from the internal part of the Sternum, and
stick to the Cartilages of the superior Ribs, which whilst they contract, the
Heart also moving it self by their softness, they keep it from being hurt by
the Sternum. The Intercostal Muscles on both sides, are noted to be twenty two
pair, of which, eleven are external, and as many internal, distinguishing
themselves by the obliquity of their strings: The external Muscles proceed from
the inferior part of the superior Ribs, and end in the superior part of the
inferior Rib, and therefore by drawing the Ribs, they further inspiration: The
internal intercostal Muscle proceed from the superior part of the inferior Rib,
and end in the inferior part of the superior, and by withdrawing the Ribs help
the expiration; they receive veins from the Vein without a fellow, and the
superior intercostal, Arteries from the superior and inferior intercostals,
Nerves from the Marrow of the back, from the eleven pair on each side, to which
the internal branches of the sixth pair join themselves.

As for the Dorsal Muscles, though they pertain to the Breast, yet are they
better found out by dissection when the Carcass is turned over upon its Belly,
therefore we shall speak of them in the following Chapter, yet to the containing
parts of the Breast are to the referred: The Pleura, Mediastinum, and
Diaphragma.

The Pleura is a Membrane girding the ribs, and their Museles and incompassing
all the internal parts of the Breast: It has Veins, Arteries, and Nerves, from
the intercostal branches, and about the Vertebrae of the back it is manifestly
double, it is strong every where, smooth next the Lungues, and firmly knit to
the joints of the back. The plenty of vessels often causes an inflammation in
it, and corruption is often gathered there, and remains sometimes between the
sides of the Pleura, sometimes near the Lungues, and sometimes in the Cavity of
the Breast, the Lungues being safe.

The Mediastinum, although it may be reckoned amongst the internal parts of the
Breast, yet seeing it appears to be only a continuation of the Pleura, we will
describe them together. It is a double Membrane stretched from the Vertebrae of
the Breast to the Sternum, and distinguishes both Breast and Lungues, to the
right and left part, bearing up both the Heart and Pericardium: It has a
proper Vein of its own, which is called Mediastina, which arises from the
subclavian branch of the Vena Cava, and it has other small branches from the
Mammaries and Vein without a Mate; it has Arteries from the Mammaries, and
Nerves from the sixth pair, especially from its left recurrent branch.

The Largeness of the Mediastinum equals the longitude and depth of the Breast,
its duplication under the Sternum, is evident, with an observable interval
bteween, in which sometimes a conflux of vicious humors, and sometimes wind is
gathered, and in deep Wounds, when the vitals themselves are not hurt, they
admit of a speedy and easy cure: It is indifferent firm in respect of
strength, and soft toward the Lungues, and sometimes has fat on it.

The Diaphragma follow, otherwise called Septum Transversum, which is placed
between the Breast and the Abdomen, and gives bounds to both Cavities, and
concurs with the external costal Muscles to help inspiration; It is framed of a
double substance, for it has a Musculous flesh and a double Membrane, the
superior of which it has from the Pleura, and the inferior from the
Peritonaeum, and by their concourse they fill up that part of it which wants
flesh; it has Veins and Arteries from the Vena Cava and great Artery, which
are joined to it; It has famous Nerves above from the plexure of the Nerves of
the Neck, from the greater descending branch of the fifth pair, and this
causes the consent between the Diaphragma, and the Head and Muscles of the
Lips.

On the right side the Vena Cava, and on the left side the Gula passes through
the Diaphragma: It is stretched out, first of all into two fleshy; Secondly,
into two tendinous processes, by which the great Artery descends, the rest of
its form is almost circular, joined to the Vertebrae of the Loins, and the
bastard ribs: In the middle where it has a Nervous center, it is firmly joined
to the Pericardium, and sometimes it knits to it self the lobes of the Lungues
which lie upon it, sometimes it has Aposthumes in it, as big as ones fist,
which by reason of their weight cause a most extreme Difficulty of breathing.

Place here the Table of the ninth Chapter, which has the Number 10. at the
corner of the brass Plate.

Human anatomical diagrams A DECLARATION OF THE TABLE OF THE NINTH CHAPTER.
This Table represents the Muscles and bones of the Breast, its Membranes and
Diaphragma. FIG. I.
A The Pectoral Muscle in his situation. B The same Muscle out of his
situation. C Serratus major anticus in its situation. D The same a little
removed out of it. E Serratus anticus minor totally in its situation. F The
subclavian Muscle in its situation. f The Clavicula bowed back under the
pectoral Muscle. gg Platysma myodes in the neck with their right strings. GG
etc. The external intercostal muscles without their situation. HH etc. The
internal intercostal muscles in their situation. II A portion of the
Diaphragma in its situation. K Part of the great artery descending. L The hole
for the Gula passing the Diaphragma. M The hole for the Vena Cava descending.
NN The square muscles of the loins in their situation, of which Chap. 12. OO
The muscles called Psoas in their situation, of which Chap. 19.
FIG. II. Shows the bones of the breast as they are to be seen forwards.
AA The Sternum. B The Mucronata, or sword-like Cartilage. CC etc. The
cartilaginous part of the Ribs. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. The true Ribs. 8. 9. 10.
11. 12. The bastard Ribs.
FIG. III. Shows the Ribs, Vertebrae and processes on the back part.

FIG. IV. The Breast opened, in which
AA The Mediastinum drawn to the side. BB The tunicle of the Mediastinum
diducted under the Sternum. C The right lobe of the Lungues.
FIG. V.
AA Part of the Pleura drawn at one side from the Ribs. BB The Ribs laid bare
from the Pleura. CC The Ribs clothed with the Pleura.
FIG. VI. Shows the Diaphragma separated from the Ribs and Vertebrae.
AAA The fleshy part of the Diaphragma covered with its Membrane. BB The
Phrenical arteries. CC The Phrenical veins. D The passage of the Vena Cava. E
The passage of the Gula. FFF The membranous part of the Diaphragma. G The hole
between the fleshy portions of the descending of the great artery.
FIG. VII.
A The left nerve of the Diaphragma. B The right nerve of the same. C The
superior membrane of the Diaphragma separated. D The fleshy substance of the
Diaphragma. E The hole for the Gula. F The hole for the Vena Cava. GGG The
Membranous part. HHH The fleshy parts between with the great artery descends.




CHAP. 10. Of the Heart and Lungues.
THE Heart and Lungues occupy the Cavity of the Breast, although the
Oesophagus, Windpipe, and common vessels, have also their proper places in it.

Before we can behold the Heart, we must remove the Pericardium by which the
Heart is wrapped round: It is of a Membranous substance, and not only contains
the Heart in its proper place, but also defends it from injuries, neither is
this Tunicle single, but is observed to be outwardly the same with the
Mediastinum, inwardly to proceed from the vessels produced from the Heart: It
has small Veins from the Phrenical, its Arteries are are scarce conspicuous: It
has Nerves from the external, and internal branch of the sixth pair, and its
Recurrens; although the right branch of those Nerves which are carried to the
Diaphragma, pass by the out side of it, it is very near the Heart, only there
is that Interval between the Heart and it, which is commodious for the motion,
and pulsation of the Heart; about the Basis of the Heart where it is joined to
the Mediastinum, it gives passage to the Veins and Arteries; It contains in it
a thin Liquor, gathered of resolved vapors, whereby the dryness, and sudden
heaviness of the Heart is allaied.

The Heart it self, which is the Prince of all the Bowels, and the Fountain of
vital heat and Spirit, by whose flourishing the Creature flourishes, and by
whose languishing it languisheth, and by whose failing it dies. I call it the
Fountain not of that primoginial heat produced by the substance of the Seed,
but of the influential heat; which is taken from nourishment, or drawn by
Blood; It consists of a thick and compact substance, that it may not only keep
that hot and vital Spirit to its self, but also communicate to the whole Body
by the Arteries: It has a proper Membrane of its own, which is very thin, and
yet very strong.

The coronal Vein and Artery are distributed about the exterior part of it, the
Vein from the Vena Cava, which by a Moon-like shutter stops the Blood running
back; the Artery from the great Artery, which gives his branches most
especially to the left side of the Heart, it has Nerves from the next branches
of the sixth pair, which are distributed to the fleshy substance of the Heart,
and are scarce observable to any, of those which come to the Pericardium we
have spoken before, of which, that which proceeds from the left Recurrens gives
a branch to the Basis of the Heart, neither can the Heart want these, for its
motion sake, because it moves before the animal faculty gives either Sense or
motion: It has very many Spermatical parts, according to the recess of its
Cavities, like Nerves in form, but larger, and if you dilligently view them in
a Dissection, you shall find they have a pore within. The greater part of the
Heart is covered with fat, which preserves it from consuming, which sometimes
is so copious, that the blind South-sayers that judged by the entrails of
beasts, said they had no Hearts, because they could not see them for fat.

There hang appendices near the Basis of the Heart, on each side, and by reason
of their likeness they call Eears, and their substance is almost like; Save
only that the left is a little more solid, they are both of them hollow, and
full of Nervous strings; yet the Heart being contracted Systole, it may receive
the Blood flowing into it, and return it back again; the bigness of the Heart
in Man is famous, though various according to age and Temperament.

It is divided into the Basis, or broadest part, and the top; which is the
narrowest, and ends in a point: It has two Ventricles, the right, and the
left, the right is the thinner, but the larger, distinguished by a thin and
fleshy portition, which sometimes being doubled, makes a third.

From the right Ventricle, the Vena Cava takes its original, whose beginning is
strong, being Membranous with shutters at the end, that it may administer Blood
to the Heart to perfect. I call it a vessel, because it contains a liquid
substance, to be distributed to all the parts of the Body, and a Membranous
vessel, on it consists of its own proper Tunicle, which is single and soft,
that it may the better draw the blood by inosculations, and yet for safeguard
in its progress, where it lies more open; it is covered with the covering of
the adjacent parts.

Also the Provident Creator has added shutters to it, to wit, very thin
Membranes, in form like a half Moon, which looks toward the beginnings of the
Veins, which set a moderation to the preternatural motion of the Blood, out of
the great Veins into the less; these although they may be seen in the
Mesenterick, Splenical emulgent Azygus, and jugular Veins, yet are they more
freequent in the Veins of the Limbs, which we shall treat of in the last
Chapter; from these the three shutters about the mouth of the Vena Cava, differ
a little in form, and from their form Authors call them Tricuspides; these are
joined to the Nervous strings of the Heart, and withstand the regresse of the
Blood into the Vena Cava.

The Vena Cava arising up above the Heart produces the Azygus, or Vein without
a fellow, the branches of which, are commonly distributed to the inferior Ribs;
the inferior portion of this, descending near the fleshy portion of the
Diaphragma, is inserted again on the left to the Emulgent, on the right side to
the Vena Cava, and to the first of the Loins, the Institution of Nature being
various herein, which sometimes the Azygus being let pass, produces a famous
Vein from both Subclavian branches of the Vena Cava, near the Mammaries, which
is stretched out all along the Breast, even to the Os Sacrum, from which both
all the intercostal Veins, and the Lumbals proceed: when the Vena Cava arives
at the Throat, it is divided into two large branches, called Subclavian, from
which the superior intercostal, the internal Mammary, the Mediastina, the
cervical, and Vein called Muscula arise; above, the interior and exterior
jugular, and the superior Muscula are produced.

Also from the right Ventricle of the Heart arises a vein, which for its
double Tunicle is called Arteriosa, which being distributed both to the right,
and left part of the Lungues, by great branches administers Blood freely to
them; about the bnginning of it are three Membranous shutters, very
conspicuous, looking outward, called Sigmoides from their form, they shut in
the Blood which flows back from the compressure of the Lungues, but is indeed
an Artery, not a Vein, for besides the substance of an Artery which it has, it
has also pulsation as well as the rest of the Arteries, as the Dissection of
Creatures alive shows, and it carries Blood already attenuated by the Heart.

The left Ventricle of the Heart, is smaller than the right, but more fleshy,
whereby it stirs up the Spirit in the received Blood, both by its self, and by
its stronger motion, and this is called vital.

The great Artery called Aorta, takes its beginning from this; a Membranous
vessel in continual pulsation while life remains, of a shining color, and
distributes the Blood being absolutely perfected in the Heart, to the whole
Body: Its substance is more Nervous than a vein, and covered with a double
Tunicle, of which, the internal is the thicker, and is sometimes stiff in old
age, so that in, and near the Heart it represents a Bony circle; the external
is thin, to which the Membranes of the adjoining parts ad strength.

At its beginning are three shutters conspicuous, and are called Lunar from
their Figure, and keep the Blood from returning back again into the Heart,
neither is there any other shutters in all its Progress, for the strength of
the internal tunicle does not easily suffer dilation; and besides, there is no
delay in the passage of blood in it: Its blood is hotter, fuller of spirits,
and of a brighter color, and seeing the distribution of it by pulse is
continual, the heart must needs be continually supplied by the Vena Cava to
fill its Ventricles, and this causes a perpetual motion of Blood to the Heart,
more or less; for the very same end Nature has placed the veins as companions
to the arteries, that they might readily receive what might be administered to
the emptying of the Heart, for the exact knowledge of which our age is beholding
to William Harvey.

The descending Trunk of the great Artery as it distributes the inferior
intercostal Arteries, the Phrenical and others which we discoursed of when we
treated of the Abdomen; so passing out of the Heart it is divided into two
large subclavian branches, from which, before they pass out of the Breast,
arises below, the superior intercostal Artery, and a little higher the
interior Mammary, the Vertebral and Cervical; the remainder of the great Artery
produces the Carotides on both sides, the internal and external branch of
which rise up to the head.

Near to those Vessels about the Throat are the Thymus, a soft and spongy piece
of flesh, which underproppeth them for their safeguard.

From the left Ventricle of the Heart, proceeds an Artery which the Ancients
call Venosa because it has but one Tunicle and dividing its branches, it is
carried to the right and left region of the Lungues, taking the Blood mixed
with Air to its self, and carrying it to the left Ventricle of the Heart. It
has two shutters to stay the blood from flowing back from the Heart into it,
which Authors call Mitrae because they are like a Cardinals Cap; but this
vessel is rather to be called a Vein than an Artery, because its substance is
the same with the Veins, neither has it pulse as Arteries have, it carries the
Blood tempered with Air to the Heart.

Between the Ventricles of the Heart is a partition called Septum, which is
hollowish toward the left side, but gibbous toward the right, having very many
small holes; many passages come to this same Septum, of a various bigness from
the Vena Cava and the Arteria Venosa, which cloth the Basis of the Ventricles,
and administer necessary Blood unto them.

In temperature the Heart is without doubt the hottest of all the Bowels; its
Basis is in the midst of the Breast, only the top of it inclines toward the
left side as it moves; it is joined to the next parts by its Vessels, and by
the Pericardium to the Mediastinum and Diaphragma.

Its proper action is to perfect the Blood, and to give it heat and vital
spirit, and motion which is called Pulse; this is distinguished into Systole,
when the Heart drawing its self together expels the Blood, and Diastole when it
extends its self to receive it.

According to the opinion of the Ancients, only the Heart consumes not in
lasting diseases, and yet it often happens that it does pine by reason of hot
distempers; sometimes a glandulous substance makes its passages straight, and
sometimes they are filled with Phlegm, whereby the sick loses his life
leisurely and by degrees.

On both sides of the Heart are the Lungues, which are dissimilar parts of the
middle Ventricle and by drawing in the cold air, and returning back the
fuliginous vapors they cool the vital heat, therefore that they may every where
be filled and distended, they are composed of a soft substance rare and subtle,
and covered with a porous Membrane; they receive very large vessels, the
Arterial vein from the right, and the Venal artery from the left Ventricle of
the Heart: also the windpipe which we shall discourse of in the next Chapter,
it has small Nerves from the external descending branch of the sixth pair, but
dispersed about the exterior Tunicle, and the hinder parts of it, where they
are joined to the branches of the Windpipe, not only for their safety, but
also for the means of its sense, that it may not be troublesome to their motion.

The Lungues being swelled by inspiration of air, fill the Breast universally,
and the Mediastinum being between they are divided into the right and left
part, both which for the more safeguard is divided into the superior and
inferior lobe; outwardly, the Lobes resemble an Ox hoof; inwardly they are
hollowish, and gently embrace the Heart, and therefore often communicate their
vices to it, although if putrified matter lie in the gibbous part without any
evident rottenness, or feverish burning; the strength of the Heart and the
vigor of the Natural functions remains long untouched.

They are judged to be in temperature hot and dry, by reason of the plenty of
spirits, and scarcity of nourishment although the moisture that always flow to
them and the frequent access of cold Air seems to obscure both, they are
thicker in Children, and grow rare by degrees, and also change color, for in
old age they are limber and whitish, they are joined to the Neck by the
Windpipe to the back and Sternum by the Mediastinum to the Pleura and
Mediastinum by the skin that compasses them sometimes, and sometimes by some
fibrous nexures. The action of the Lungues is respiration, which they are moved
to by the copious flowing of hot blood to them, by the Arterious vein; the same
is done by the Muscles, breast and Lungues dilating and contracting themselves
in the Breast.

Place here the Table of the tenth Chapter, which has the Number 11. at the
corner of the brass Plate.

Human anatomical diagrams A DECLARATION OF THE FIRST TABLE OF THE TENTH
CHAPTER.
This Table chiefly represents the Heart, its Membranes, Vessels, Ventricles
and shutters, then the Lungues and the Aspera Arteria separated from them. FIG.
I.
A The Pericardium compassing the Heart. BB The Lungues embracing the Heart in
their Natural Situation. C The Vena Cava ascending above the Heart. D The
beginning of the vein without a fellow. E The right subclavian vein. F The
right Jugular vein. G The left Jugular vein. H The left subclavian vein. II The
right and left Carotis Artery. KK The right and left subclavian Artery. LL The
Nerves of the sixth pair descending to the Lungues. M The beginning of the great
Artery descending.
FIG. II. Shows particularly the vessels passing from the Heart to the Lungs;
which are showed you separated in the third and sixth figure of the following
Chapter.
A The Pericardium taken from the Heart. B The Heart with the Coronal veins and
arteries. C The trunk of the great Artery passing out of the Heart. D Its
descending part turned upwards. EE The left branch of the Arterial vein
distributed to the Lungues. F A channel between the arterial vein, and the
great artery. G The right branch of the arterial vein. HH The right and left
branch of the venal artery. I The Ear of the Heart. KK The Lungues about the
Heart. L The proper tunicle of the Lungues separated.
FIG.. The Heart of an Infant whole.
A The proper Membrane of the Heart separated. B The substance of the Heart
bare. CC The right and left Ears of the Heart. D The great Artery sticking out
of the Heart. E A portion of the Vena Cava.
FIG.
A Part of the Heart transversly cut. B The left ventricle. CC The right
ventricle conspicuous. DD The Septum of the Heart.
FIG. III. Shows the Vena Cava dissected with the right Ventricle.
A The Orifice of the coronal Vein. B The Anastomosis between the Vena Cava and
the venal artery. CCC The shutters called Tricuspides. DDD The right Ventricle
of the Heart opened. aa The passages between the Membranes ending in the Septum.
FIG. IV.
A The arterious vein dissected in the right ventricle. BBB The shutters called
Sigmoides in the arterious vein. CCC The right Ventricle of the Heart opened.
FIG. V.
A The great Artery dissected near the Heart. BBB The semilunar shutters of the
great artery. CC The left Ventricle of the heart. D Part of the left Ventricle
turned back.
FIG. VI.
A The Venal artery dissected. B The beginning of the Anastomosis between the
venal artery and the Vena Cava. bb The passages between the Membranes ending in
the Septum. CC The two mitral shutters. DD The left Ventricle of the Heart
opened.
FIG. VII. Shows the backward part of the Lungues and windpipe, as they are
joined to the Heart.
A The right Nerve of the sixth pair which comes to the Lungues. B The left
Nerve of the same. C The middle branch between each Nerve. D The branch which
is carried to the Pericardium. EE The two greater branches of the windpipe
which are Membranous behind. FF The hinder part of the Lungues. G The proper
Membrane of the Lungues. HH A portion of the Pericardium left. I The heart left
in his Situation.
FIG. VIII.
A The windpipe cut off under the Larynx. B The right branch thereof divided
first into two parts. C The left branch thereof divided into greater and lesser
branches. ddd etc. The extremity of the branches ending in membranous channels.




Human anatomical diagrams A DECLARATION OF THE SECOND TABLE OF THE TENTH
CHAPTER.
In this Table the Trunks of the Vena Cava and great Artery as they pass from
the Heart are represented; with their chief branches only produced even to the
Limbs. FIG. I. Shows the Vena Cava.
A The beginning of the Vena Cava, with his large orifice about the Heart. BB
The rise of the subclavian branches. C The beginning of the descending trunk.
DD The right and left Iliack branches. aaa etc. The branches of the Axygus
distributed to the Ribs. bb The superior intercostal. cc The internal mammary.
* The Mediastina. dd The Vertebral Vein. ee The internal Jugular cut off under
the skul. ff The external Jugular, from which the inferior branch rises to the
Organ of speech, and the Subcutaneus by the face and Temples, and backwards by
another branch to the Ears. gg The Cervical Vein. hh The progress of the
subclavian branches. ii The internal scapular vein. KK The external scapulars.
3.3. The vein carried to the Muscle Deltois. ll The superior Breast-vein. mm
The Cephalic vein cut off. nn The basilick vein cut off. oo The inferior
Breast-vein. p The left phrenical vein. q The right phrenical vein. rr A famous
branch distributed in the Liver. ss tt etc. The sprigs thereof distributed in
the right and left side thereof. uu The Venae musculae, or superior Lumbals. yy
The veins of the Renal Glandulae. xx The right and left emulgent. zz The right
and left spermatical. aa The beginning of the Lumbals. bb The Vena muscula of
the inferior Lumbal. gg The Vena sacra. DD The external Iliack branch. EE The
Epigastrick vein. dd The internal Iliack branch. ee Vena Glutea. zz The
Hypogastrick veins. ee The veins of the Privities. thth The inguinal veins. KK
etc. The branch of the crural vein. iii The Saphena. ll The vein Ischias.
FIG. II. Particularly describes the coronal vein of the heart.

FIG. III. Show the Arterial Vein of the Heart.
A The beginning by which it passes out of the right ventricle. BB Its
branches which pass to the right part of the Lungues. CC Its branches which
pass to the left.
FIG. IV. Shows the great Artery.
A Its beginning rising out of the heart. BB The beginning and progress of the
subclavian branches. C The trunk descending. DD The right and left Iliack
branches. aa The artery Carotis. bb Its external branch distributed to the
Jaws, Face, and backwards to the Ears. cc The internal Carotis cut off under
the skull. dd The vertebral artery in like manner cut off. dd The cervical
muscula. ee The internal Mammary. ff The branches of the superior intercostal
artery. gg The internal scapular artery. hh The external scapular artery. ii
The superior breast-artery. kk The inferior breast-artery. lm The arteries
distributed to the muscles of the Shoulder. nn The inferior intercostals. oo
The phrenical arteries. p The famous artery called Coeliac^. q Its right branch
divided into three parts; of which, the superior and inferior is distributed to
the Liver, and the middle to the Gall. r The left branch of the Coeliacal. s
The right Gastrical artery. t The splenical artery divided in small branches to
the spleen. u The artery called Epiploica. ur The Gastroepiploica. x The artery
carried to the Renal Glandula. yyy etc. The superior Mesenterical artery
distributed into branches. zz The emulgent arteries. aa The rise of the Lumbal
arteries. bb The spermatical arteries. gg The inferior Mesenterical artery
derived into many branches. The Arteria sacra. DD The external Iliack artery.
dd The internal Iliack. ee Arteria Glutaea. zz The Hypogastrick artery
distributed to the right Gut and Privities. The Hypogastrick artery distributed
to the womb distinguished from the former. ee The umbilicar artery. EE The
Epigastrick artery. thth The Arteria Pudenda. ii The Ischias. kk The inferior
Arteria Muscula. ll The artery which goes to the internal Iliack muscle.
FIG. V. Shows the Coronal Artery of the Heart.

FIG. VI. Shows the Venal Artery arising from the left Ventricle of the Heart.
A Its Orifice. BB Its branches distributed to the right side of the Lungues.
CC Its branches distributed to the left.




CHAP. II. Of the Organs of Voice and Speech.
THE Windpipe called Trachaea and Aspera Arteria conduces much to the
perfecting of the Office of the Lungues, being the channel by which we draw air
by inspiration, and by expiration cast out fuliginous vapors, and form voice
and speech: Its substance is partly Cartilaginous, that the voice might be the
easier, by reason of the dryness of the Organ, and partly Membranous where it
is joined to the Oesophagus, that the dilation of it might not be hindered by
lying upon a hard body. The Cartilaginous part is not all one, but composed of
very many rings, of which the superior are the greater; those which are next
the Gula, want the inferior part of their circumference, the rest remain whole
till after they have entered the substance of the Lungues, they are all
curiously knit together, by a fleshy Ligament, at last they end in Membranous
channels like Arteries.

The Windpipe is covered with a double Membrane, one external which they hold
it has from the Pleura, which is thin and firmly bound to the Ligaments of the
Cartilages, the internal is thicker and common to the pallat of the mouth, of
exquisite sense, and ready to cast out what troubles it, it is bedewed with a
fatty humor, that the sound may be the cleerer, for being rough with phlegm, the
voice is hoarce, if dried with heat, it is not steady, [ Clangosus is when the
voice begins grave, and ends acute.]

It has veins from the external Jugular, Arteries from the Cartides, Nerves
from the external branches of the sixth pair, and its Recurrens: Sex and
difference of Temperament alters the bigness of the windpipe; in form it is
like a small shrub that has crooked branches every way, neither is it joined
to the Lungues only, but also to the Oesophagus, and by its head to the Os
Hyois.

It is divided into two parts, Bronchus and Larinx, that which is called
Bronchus is the lower part, long, and divided into many branches in both sides
of the Lungues: The Larynx is the superior part or head of it, formed of
Cartilages and Muscles, for the forming and expressing of sounds.

Its Cartilages are five, whereof the first is called Thyroides or
buckler-like, from its form, being hollow within and gibbous without, which is
that which sticks out in the Throat of some men: Its processes are four, of
which, two which are superior, and the longer are joined below to the sides of
the Os Hyois; the other two which are the inferior and shorter, are joined to
the ring-like Cartilage.

The Buckler-like Cartilage is moved by three pair of Muscles, of which, the
first which draws the Cartilage downward, proceeds from the superior and
internal part of the Sternum, and is inserted into the inferior side of the
Cartilage, it is called Sternothryroides by the Ancient.

The second pair which are very small, move the Cartilage in the same manner,
but something obliquely; they take their origional forewards from the Ring-like
Cartilage, and end in the inferior side of the Buckler-like Cartilage, from
whence they obtained the name Crycothyroides, though sometimes on the sides
they are largely divided into two Muscles; by both these pairs the chink of the
Larynx is not a little dilated: to draw the buckler-like Cartilage upwards, and
bind together the chink of the Larynx, is the third pair ordained, which
arises from the inferior side of the Hyois, and ends about the inferior part
of the Bucker-like Cartilage, and is called Hyotnyroides.

The second Cartilage is called Cricoides, or ring-like, because before it is
round, behind has a broad back, just like the Ring the Turkish Archers use to
fight in (I doubt my Author was mistaken, it was the Parthian horsemen, not
the Turks, that used to fight in Rings.)

The third and fourth Cartilages, are called Arytaenoides, because their form
makes a lip like a Laver, and they represent that part of the Larynx which is
called Glottis.

Both of them for the better framing of the voice, are moved with four pair of
Muscles; of which, the first are called Thyroarytaenoides: It arises from the
middle internal part of the Thyrois, or buckler-like Cartilage, it is fleshy,
and raised upwards and forwards, into the sides of the Arytaenois, and binds in
the chink of the Larynx. The second pair are called Arytenoides, they are very
small, yet fleshy, and arise from the Arytenois, in what part it is joined to
the Ring-like Cartilage, it ends in the Arytenois; the extremities of them so
meeting together, that they seem to be but one Muscle; by this pair whilst the
Basis of the Arytenois, is obliquely moved, and drawn together, the chink also
of the Larynx is shut. The third pair is called Cricoarytenoides posticum, for
they arise from the Cricois, or Ring-like Cartilage, from its broad back, and
are inserted below into the Aritaenois, by a short and Nervous tendon, which
whilst they move backwards, and outward, they open the passage of the Larynx.
The fourth pair is called Cricoarytaenoides Lateralis, because they arise from
the back side of the Ring-like Cartilage, and end in the Arytaenois, and dilate
the passage of the Larynx.

The fifth Cartilage is called Epiglottis, or that which covers the Chink,
least the meat and drink should pass down the Windpipe, and yet it shuts not
so close, but thin humors which pass down gently may pass that way: It is
softer than the rest of the Cartilages, and in form is like an Ivy leaf; the
larger the Larynx is, the larger is the Glottis, and as that is larger, so the
Voice is strong and graver: The lesser, dryer, and narrower the Larynx is, the
weaker, and shriller is the Voice.

The Os Hyoides, called also Ypsiloides, is placed about the Basis of the
Tongue, both for its safeguard, and also for its motion, it consists of three
Bones, which being joined together, represent the form of the Greek letter
Vpsilon, of these the middlemost is largest, broad, and something hollow, to
which the other are joined like Horn; many Cartilaginous appendices are joined
to these, which sometimes also grow Bony, of which two are very freequent, in
form and bigness like a grain of Wheat, and placed about the middle Bone, which
is called the Basis of the Hyois; two others stick to the lateral Bones, which
are called Horns, and are knit to that Nervous Ligament of the Bodkin-like
apendix, in what form they are often seen in the Body of Man, the eleventh and
twelth Figure of the following Table will declare.

The Os Hyois, is removed by five pair of Muscles, of these that which moves
it down right arises, from the top of the Sternum, and ascends to the Basis of
the Hyois, and is called Sterno Hyoides; another pair moves it obliquely
downwards, which arises from the superior side of the Scapula, besides the
process called Coracois, and consisting of a Nervous Body, is carried to the
sides of the Os Hyois, and is called Coraco Hyoides: The third pair, which
draws it obliquely upwards, arises from the extremity of the Bodkin-like
apendix, with a round Body, and is stretched to the Horns of the Hyois, and is
called Stylocerato Hyoides: The fourth pair which draws it directly upwards,
arises from the internal, and lower part of the Chin, and passes to the Bones
of the Hyois, and is called Geniohyoides; to these we add a fifth pair, which
are commonly attributed to the tongue, and are called Genioglossum, which arise
inwardly from the Chin, under the former, and end in the Basis of the Hyois,
drawing it upwards; although in respect of the former, they might more rightly
be called the internal Geniohyoides. The Os Hyois, is joined to the Bodkin-like
apendix, and to the Buckler-like Cartilage; especially to the Tongue, for the
reasons mentioned before, and receives the Epiglottis in its Cavity.

Also the Tongue is the framer of Speech, and a great help to the swallowing of
the Meat, and preparing it for the Stomach: It is of a fleshy substance, soft,
and rare, covered with a thin Skin, and full of pores; It has two veins from
the external Jugulars, which are called R^ninae, and as many Arteries from the
Carotides; It has two pair of Nerves, of which, the smallest comes from the
fourth conjugalation, and is carried to the exterior part of the Tongue; but
the greater which goes to the interior part of it, comes from the seventh
conjugalation.

The Tongue is moved both by the Muscles of the Hyois, and also by its own
proper Muscles, which are four pair; the first which is genuin to the Tongue,
lifts it up, and arises from the Bodkin-like apendix, and is inserted about
the middle of it, and called Styloglossus; another pair arises from the Basis
of the Os Hyois, and depresseth the Tongue, this also ends about the middle of
the Tongue, and is called Basioglossus: The third pair moves the Tongue to the
Sides, and arise from the Horns of the Hyois, and is joined to the sides of the
Tongue, and for that cause called Ceratoglossus; to these are added a fourth
pair of Muscles, arising from the hinder grinders, and are called Myloglossus,
this is not immediately inserted into the Tongue, but into its Ligament, and is
supposed to turn the Tongue upward.

The Tongue of man has a mean habit divided upon a Line along the length of
it: In respect of the harmony of manifest quallities it is temperate: If it be
colder or moister, it is by accident; It is joined to the parts under it by a
strong and Membranous Ligament, the extremity of which makes a bridle, the rest
of it is joined to the Os Hyois, and Larinx.

At the root of the Tongue are two Glandula, which the Greeks call Antiades,
and Paristhmia, but the Latins Tonsillae; a fleshy and loose substance
compasses them about from the pallat, which as it receives them in its
Cavity, so it takes a moist excrement from them: There are other Glandulae
under the Chin, between the Hyois, and the Muscles of the Tongue; as also
behind, which are called Parotides, the common use of them, is to receive the
superfluous moisture, and to moisten the parts adjacent to them.

Near the Epiglottis, from the extremity of the pallat, is a Pendulous,
Fungous, Red piece of flesh produced, which Authors call Gargareon and Uvula:
It is moved by two pair of Muscles, of which, the external takes its original
from the top of the Wedge-like Bone, near the joint of the Maxilla, and passing
with his tendon by the Chink of that Bone, it is inserted into the sides of the
Gargareon, which moves it forwards when the Tongue is depressed, the other or
internal pair, begins a little higher, from the top of the Bone of the Temples,
which looks to the internal wing of the Wedge-like Bone, and descends with a
fleshy and round Body, into the middle of the Uvula, both of them conduce to
the easy descending of the nourishment, the pleasantness of the Voice, and the
preparation of the air which is drawn into the Breast.

Moreover the Neck is an apendix to the middle Ventricle, and is long for the
better ordering the Voice; the hinder part of which, is called Cervix, it has
both the common coverings of the Body, and vessels, as Veins, Arteries, and
Nerves; also Vertebrae, and Muscles of its own.

Its Vertebrae are seven, of which the Spinae Bifidae, and the transverse
processes have holes through them for the Ascending of the Vertebral Artery:
The first is called Atlas, thin in substance, and without a Spina, which holds
up the Head, like the Olympus of the Body, to which it is knit with a strong
Ligament; It is larger in Lions, and the like beasts of prey, and has
transverse processes like wings, which adds not only strength, but also some
stiffeness to the Neck, which the Ancients falsely attributed to the several
Bones: In the Cavity of this the second Vertebrae is received, which for its
turning, is called Epistropheus, it sends out a round process, and long like a
Tooth, from whence Hippocrates gave it the name Vertebrae, the head and first
Vertebrae are turned about this, it is both knit to the hinder part of the
Head, and compassed about with a strong Ligament: The third is called Axon by
the Ancients, the rest have no distinct names.

The Neck is moved by four pair of Muscles, of which, two bow it, and the other
extend it; the first that bows it, is called Longus, which arising under the
Oesophagus from the fifth Vertebrae of the Breast is knit to the first
Vertebrae of the Neck; to this long Muscle is a short one adjoined for its
shortness called Brevius, arising from the transverse processes of the inferior
Vertebrae of the Neck to the Basis of the Head, and therefore together with the
pair called Mastois, bows not the Neck, but the Head. The second pair for its
form sake is called Scalenum, which arises from the first Rib of the Breast,
with a broad and fleshy beginning, and growing slenderer by degrees, passes by
its oblique fibrae to the transverse processes of the Vertebrae of the Neck:
the third and fourth pair we shall describe in the following Chapter amongst
those Muscles that extend the Head.

Place here the Table of the eleventh Chapter, which has the Number 13. at the
corner of the brass Plate.

Human anatomical diagrams AN EXPLANATION OF THE TABLE OF THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER.
In this Table is laid open to view, the Cartilages of the Larynx, with their
Muscles; the Os Hyois with its Muscles; the Tongue, its Nerves and Muscles; the
Uvula with its Muscles; the Tonsils, the Vertebrae of the Neck and its bowing
Muscles. FIG. I. The external face of the Buckler-like Cartilage.

FIG. II. The internal face of the Buckler-like Cartilage.

FIG. III. The hinder view of the Ring-like Cartilage.

FIG. IV. A view of the foremost part of the same Cartilage.

FIG. V. VI. The Cartilages called Arytaenoides.

FIG. VII. The Epiglottis.

FIG. VIII.
A The Buckler-like Cartilage. BB The pair of Muscles Hyothyroides. CCCC The
pair of Muscles Sternothyroides. DD The small Muscles called Cricothiroides.
FIG. IX.
A The external part of the Epiglottis joined to the Larynx. BB The Muscles
Thyroarytaenoides. CC The lateral Muscles Cricoarytaenoides. D The Ring-like
Cartilage. EE The fore part of the windpipe.
FIG. X.
A The internal face of the Epiglottis. aa The sticking out of the cartilages
Arytaenoides. BB The Muscles Arytaenoides every where loosed. CC The Muscles
Cricoaritaenoides postici. D The broad part of the Ring-like cartilage. EE The
hinder and membranous part of the windpipe.
FIG. XI.
A The Basis of the Os Hyois. BB The horns of the Os Hyois. CC The two
cartilaginous Appendices.
FIG. XII.
A The internal face of the Basis of the Os Hyois. BB The internal face of the
horns. CC The two cartilaginous Appendices.
FIG. XIII.
A The sides of the Os Hyois. BB The muscles Geniohyoides turned downwards. CC
The internal Geniohyoides commonly called Genioglossi. DDDD The muscles
Sternohyoides. EE The muscles Styloceratohyoides. FFF The Muscles
Coracohyoides. ff The middle tendinous part.
FIG. XIV.
A The inferior part of the top of the Tongue. BBBB The muscles Basioglossi.
ssss The nervous substance between the muscles. CC The muscles Ceratoglossi. DD
The muscles Styloglossi. EE The muscles Myloglossi. aa The Nerves of the Tongue
from the fourth conjugation. bb The Nerves of the Tongue from the seventh
conjugation.
FIG. XV.
A The Gargareon or Uvula. BB The external pair of Muscles. bb Its tendon which
passes the chink. CC The internal pair of muscles something compressed. D Part
of the Pallat from which the Uvula hangs.
FIG. XVI, and XVII. Shows the Glandulae called Tonsillae.

FIG. XVIII.
AA The long muscles bowing the neck. BB The muscles bowing the neck called
Scaleni. aa Part of the Nerves tending to the arms. CC The muscles bowing the
Head with the Mastoides.
FIG. XIX. Shows the seven joints of the neck.

FIG. XX. The first joint of the Neck, in which
aa The two holes holding the hinder part of the Head. bb The holes on the
sides which gives passage to the arteries to ascend.
FIG. XXI. The second Vertebra of the Neck.
a The tooth-like process. b The Spina Bifidia.
FIG XXII.
a The Spine: the rest is like the other joints.




CHAP. 12. Of the Muscles of the Scapula, Back, and certain of the Head.
VEry many Muscles occupy the Back, of which some are proper to it, and some
move the parts near it.

The first in order of dissection are the two Muscles called Trapezii and
Culcullares because being joined together they resemble a Friars Cool, they
move the Sapula; they begin at the hinder part of the Head, and the hinder
processes of the Vertebrae of the Neck, being joined by a Membranous nexure to
the eight superior Vertebrae of the Back; from hence being knit together by
degrees, they end in part of the Clavicula, on the top of the shoulder, and
especially in the Spina of the Scapula and the Basis of it; neither is their
motion simple, their Original having such latitude, for by reason of the
diversity of their fibrae, they move the shoulder backwards as well as
obliquely upwards or downwards.

Under the Trapezii is the pair of Muscles called Rhomboides, from their form,
this also is peculiar to the Scapula; they take their beginning from the three
inferior Vertebrae of the Neck, and as many of the spinous processes of the
superior Vertebrae of the Back; afterward descending obliquely with a fleshy
beginning and end, they are carried to the Basis of the Scapula, which they
move backwards and obliquely upwards. The Muscle called Serratus Anticus minor,
moves the Scapula forwards, which we mentioned in the ninth Chapter. Lastly,
the pair called Levatorium is proper to the Scapula, so called from their
office; they take their beginning from the transverse processes of the second,
third, fourth, and fifth Vertebrae of the Neck, they are stretched downwards
with a fleshy and strong end, and knit to the superior angle of the Scapula,
and lift both it and the shoulder up forward.

That the Muscles of the Back may be the better discried, you must first
separate the broad pair of Muscles, which are called Latissimum Dorsi, although
they are peculiar to the shoulder and not to the Back, their beginning from the
posteriour processes of the Vertebrae is broad and Membranous; they begin from
the sixth Vertebrae of the Back even to the middle of the Os Sacrum, and part of
the Os Ilium, from hence they pass both above and below by the sides of the
Back, till they come to the inferior angle of the Scapula, being fleshy and
contracted they end about the head of the Shoulder with a short and strong
Tendon, which stoutly moves it backwards.

The proper Dorsal Muscles are both those called Serratus Posticus, from their
tooth-like productions in form of a saw; also the Sacrolumbi, the longest of
the Back, and the Semispinati. Of the Serrati Pistici, two are superior and
lesser, two inferior and greater: The superior arise with a thin and
Membranous beginning from the hinder processes of the three inferior Vertebrae
of the Neck, and the first Spine of the Vertebrae of the Back, afterward being
fleshy in their descention; they are carried to the three or four superior
Ribs, according as they are endewed with two or three tooth-like productions:
The inferior Serrati postici, arise from the Spines of the inferior Vertebrae
of the Back, with a Membranous beginning, then running transversly they are
knit to the intervals of the inferior Ribs, others take the beginnings of them
both, from the intervals of the Ribs, and their ends in the Spines of the
Vertebrae, and that they conduce to the turning about the Vertebrae. The
original of the Muscles Sacrolumbi, is from the extremity of the Os Sacrum,
their beginning is fleshy inwards, nervous outward, whence arising up about
the lower Vertebra of the Back, they depart a little to the Ribs, from the
longest Muscle, into which they are inserted with various Tendons, and compress
the Ribs in expiratton. The beginning and progress of the longest Muscles of
the Back is from the Os Sacrum, Os Ilium, and Vertebrae of the Loins, and are
at first united to the Sacrolumbi, and are first distinguished about the lower
Vertebra of the Back, and bestow their Tendines upon the transverse processes
of the Vertebrae of the Back and Loins, and they are strong extenders of the
Back, and of all those Vertebrae that have processes: The Semispinati serve
also to move and extend the Back, they are altogether fixed in the Vertebrae
and furnish them with Tendons from the top to the bottom. This is certain,
these three Muscles we spoke of, if we consider the conjunction of their
beginnings, the one-ness of their Membranes, and the community of their office,
they make but one Muscle; but if we regard the multitude of their Tendons, and
variety of their endings, they seem very many.

Under the Sacrolumbi and the longest Muscles, are the two extenders of the
Loins, called Sacri; these rise externally from the Os Sacrum, and by a various
progress fasten their Tendons in the Vertebrae of the Loins and their oblique
processes: The bowers of Loins are opposed to these, called Quadrati, which
arise internally from the Os Sacrum, and Ilium; they have a large and fleshy
beginning, and grow slender by degrees, and join themselves to the transverse
processes of the Vertebrae of the Loins, bowing them.

The Muscles which are referred to the Head, some move the whole Head, others
certain parts of it, of which in the Chapter following: They which move the
whole Head, are called, Musculi Splenii, Complexi, Recti majores et minores
which extend it; the superior and inferior oblique Muscles move it about, the
Mastoides bow it: The Muscles are called Splenii from the form of their sides,
they have a double beginning, partly from the five Spines of the inferior
Vertebrae of the Neck, partly from so many of the superior Vertebrae of the
Breast, and end in the hinder part of the Head with somewhat oblique fibrae:
Complexi are so called from the distinction of parts, they arise from the four
transverse processes of the superior Vertebrae of the Breast, and from the
Spine of the seventh Vertebra of the Neck, and are strongly inserted into the
Head from the middle part of the Dug-like prominence: Recti majores are short
fleshy Muscles, arising from the Spine of the second vertebrae of the Neck, and
ending about the middle of the Occiput: Recti minores are under the former,
arising from the bunch of the first vertebra, something divided in their
progress, and end with the former.

Seeing the Head is not only to be extended, but also to be turned about, this
is done by small, yet very strong Muscles; of which, two are called the
Superior, two the Inferior Obliques: The Superior Oblique arise from the
transverse process of the first vertebra, and end in the hinder part of the
Head near the sides of the external right Muscles; The Inferior Oblique arise
from the Spine of the second vertebra of the Neck, and end in the transverse
process of the first vertebra and therefore this vertebra being moved, moves
about the Head.

The Mastoides being long and thick Muscles, bow the Head; they rise partly
from the top of the Sternum, partly from the Clavicula, and are carried with a
Body almost double and Oblique, by the neck to the Dug-like process, from which
they obtain their name; to these are joined as companions the two Muscles in
the Neck, which arise from the transverse processes of its vertebrae, and arise
to the Basis of the Head, and bow it together with them.

These Muscles being removed, the extenders of the Neck remain, namely, two
Tranversals, and two Spinals; The Transversals take their beginning from the
six Transverse processes of the superior vertebrae of the Breast, and end in
the Transverse processes of the vertebrae of the Neck: The Spinals arise from
the seven Spines of the vertebrae of the Breast, and the five Roots of the
Transverse processes of the Neck, having various beginnings, and end in the
Spine of the second vertebra.

Place here the Table of the twelf Chapter, which has the Number 14. at the
corner of the brass Plate.

Human anatomical diagrams THE TABLE OF THE TWELFTH CHAPTER UNFOLDED.
It contains the Muscles which are conspicuous about the Shoulders, Back,
Loins, and Neck, the Carcass being turned over upon the Belly. FIG. I.
AA The muscles Trapezii in their situation. BB The Rhomboides laid a little
to view. CC DD The broadest muscle of the back, in which CC Shows its fleshy
part. DD Its membranous beginning.
FIG. II.
AA Trapezius pulled out of its situation. BB The Rhomboides laid open in its
situation. C The same drawn out of his situation, as yet joined to the basis
of the Scapula. DD Both the Levators of the Scapula. E Serratus posticus minor
in his situation. F Serratus posticus major in his situation. G The same
muscle out of his situation. HH The greatest part of the Musculi Splenii
conspicuous in their situation. II A portion of the Musculi complexi. KK The
Mastoides somewhat separated above. LL The Sacrolumbi not removed out of their
place. MM The longest muscles of the back not separated. NN The beginnings of
the Sacrolumbi and longest muscles united. OO The muscles Quadrati somewhat
laid open.
FIG. III.
AA The beginnings of the muscles Sacrolumbi and the longest united. BBBB The
Sacrolumbi something moved out of their place and distinguished in their
tendons. CCCC The longest muscles of the back somewhat removed, and
distinguished into their tendons. DD The Musculi Spinati not separated. E The
Muscle Complexus in its situation. F The same separated from the Head, that so
the rest may come to view. GG The Muscles extending the neck in their
situation. H The fore part of the Mastoides loosed. I The greater right muscle
of the Head, drawn a little out of his place, that so the lesser right muscle
may appear. K The superior oblique muscle of the Head. L The inferior oblique
Muscle.
FIG. IV.
AA etc. The Musculus Spinatus pulled out of his place, that so the tendons may
be beheld in their order; they are described at the biggest. BB The muscles of
the Loins called Sacer in his place. CC A porrion of the muscles Quadrati in
their place. DD The muscles Spinati in their place. EE The transverse muscles
of the neck deciphored greater and longer than they should be, that so the
tendons may be the better seen. FF The Mastoides separated from the Sternum,
and turned back. GG The inferior oblique muscles of the Head. HH The superior
oblique muscles of the head. II The greater right muscles of the head something
drawn aside. KK The lesser right muscles of the head in their place.




CHAP. 13. Of the external Parts of the Head, their Bones and Muscles.
HAving finished the lower and middle Ventricle, we come to the upper, which is
the seat of those noble functions of the Soul; this is bounded with the
circumference of the Head: It has the Face before, the forepart of the Head in
the middle, and the hinder part behind; the external parts are to be viewed
which serve both for covering and defense, and these are either common to other
parts or proper to the Head, also the brain it self and amongst the Organs of
senses, the Eyes and Ears.

We will begin with those that are common and external, of which, the skin upon
the upper part of the Head is remarkable for its thickness, that so it may
defend the Head the better, and give the better rooting to the Hair, which
Nature has placed thick for the ornament and safeguard of that part, to defend
it from the cold blasts of wind, and the parching heat of the Sun; underneath
the skin is fat, but very little, lest the thickness of it should hinder the
transpiration of vapors; next to the fat is a fleshy Panicle in which we will
show the thin expansions of the Muscles in their proper places.

It has Bones for its safeguard both various and strong; these are covered
with a Membrane which is called Pericranium, which is thin, yet double and
exquisite in sense, by reason of the Nerves distributed unto it, by the hinder
part of the Head and the Temples: It is firmly joined by Sutures by the
Junctures of the Bones, even to the Dura matter with Nervous Fibrae, from whence
there is an easy consent between both Membranes: The Bones of the Head are
referred either to the Skull or the Cheeks; to the Skull pertain the Bones of
the Forehead, the fore and hinder part of the Head, the Temples, Sphenois, and
Cribriforme.

The Bone of the Forehead is of a great bigness, it is usually but one,
sometimes two, even in such as are grown up; it has a double plate filled with
substance like pumice; it has a large passage to the Nostrils, sometimes it is
single, sometimes it has one or two bridges, which a Marrowy Body, compassed
about with a green Membrane, guardeth, they say to prepare the air that passes
to the brain; its thickness, if you compare it with the fore and hinder part of
the Head is mean, in figure it is almost circular, its passages are small,
defending the angles of the Eyes on each side; it has two holes about the
Eyebrows, which give passage to the Nerves of the third Conjugation, although
often times Nature does not give perfect holes, but little trenches only for
the safeguard and distribution of the said Nerves; To these a third hole is
added for the crest of the Os Ethmois, which opens it self in the said hole,
the Bone of the Forehead is joined before to the Bone called Caneiforme to the
Ethmois, to the ten Bones of the Cheek, above by the coronal Suture to the
Bones of the fore part of the Head.

The Bones of the fore part of the Head are in number two, and are thinner than
the rest, and in form unequally square, they have a kind of smoothness to the
touch, and small holes for the Vessels near the Suture called Sagittalis;
within it is garnished with small trenches for the veins which arise up by the
Dura matter; it is divided by its proper Suture which is called Sagittalis; in
its circumference it is joined to the bones of the Forehead, hinder part of the
Head, and Temples.

The Bones of the Temples are also two, less than the rest in bigness, and not
every where distinguished by a double Lamen; they are harder than the rest, and
therefore called Petrosa, or Rocky; they are so thin about the middle that if
you hold them against the light you may see through them; their form above is
circular, beneath various, they stick out in diverse processes, and that
externally toward the face, they have a crooked process, which being joined
with the process of the first Bone of the upper Cheek, make the Os Jugale; then
they have a Mastois, or Dug-like process, because it represents the Udder of a
Heifer; in age they have the Stylois which ends like a Bodkin, but this is more
truly called an Apendix than a Process; Inwardly the Bones of the Temples make
the broad Process called Petrosum, in which the internal Cavities of the Ears
are formed, and certain small Bones of them which we shall show in the sixteen
Chapter; It has three Cavities, whereof, one contains the passage of Hearing,
the second receives the Joint of the inferior Cheek, the third is common to the
hinder part of the Head; It has five holes, of which, the first is conspicuous
in the rocky process and gives passage to the Nerve of the fifth pair; the
second is larger and unequal, situated under the Bodkin-like Appendix, and
sends the greater branch of the Artery Carotis, by the fifth hole of the Os
Cuneiforme to the Brain; the third is famous in bigness and common to the
hinder part of the Head, and gives ingress to the Jugular Vein and the lesser
branch of the Artery Carotis and egress to the Nerve of the sixth pair; the
fourth is observable between the Dug-like Process, and the Bodkin-like
Appendix, and sends out the hard branch of the fifth pair by a long channel; the
fifth, which in some bodies is wanting, is placed behind the Dug-like Process,
and gives a branch of the external Jugular or passage through the Skull. To
these they ad a narrow hole like a chink, and unequal, which passes a small
Artery from the fore side of the rocky Process. The rest of the holes obvious
in this Process, we shall handle in the History of Hearing. The Bones of the
Temples are joined to the Bones of the fore part of the Head, by the scaly or
false Sutures; they stick to the Bone of the Forehead, the Wedg-like Bone, and
that of the hinder part of the Head.

The Bone in the hinder part of the Head is but one in such as are grown up,
being thicker than the rest, although the lower part be thinnest where it is
strengthened by that long knob arising up to it: Its Cavities are nine, of
which, two are remarkable, which contain the Protuberances of the Cerebellum;
its holes are very many, of which, the greatest passes the marrow of the Back
to the Vertebrae; It does not constitute the second and third hole it self, but
with the bone of the Temples, of which we spoke before; near to these is the
fourth and fifth, which is proper to the hinder part of the Head, little and
round, by which the seventh pair of Nerves descend out of the Skull; to these
sometimes is added a sixth and seventh hole, to which Nature appoints the
multiplied branches of the Vertebral veins and arteries; the hinder part of the
Head is more even on the outside, but internally various, and in a manner
resembles a figure of five sides, it is separated from the bones of the Fore
part of the Head with the Suture Lambdois, from the middle and sides of the
bones of the Temples by the Sphenois, also from the first Vertebra of the Neck,
by a double Process both for its motion and security; in its meeting with the
Lambdois and Sagittal Suture, sometimes there is a small bone of a Triangular
form, sometimes with a single, sometimes with a double Lamen, although not
exactly produced to the opposite places, which is an excellent Antidote for the
Falling Sickness; to this, Nature often forms lesser bones, which are like to
it, between the Liniaments of the true Sutures, consisting usually of a simple
Lamen joined to the inferior Lamen.

The Os Sphenois or Wedg-like Bone, makes up the Basis of the Skull; it is only
one in such as are grown up, various in respect of thickness and thinness, and
manifold in Form, for it is garnished with many Processes, of which, some are
external; and of these, some on the fore part, and for their figure sake are
called Perigoides, or Wing-like, others on the back part, which are stretched
out with two Tops toward the Bodkin-like Appendix; the internal Processes are
various as well as the external, of which two are forewards, and form a broad
beginning, end in a point, the backward Processes are as many, which are
stretched out broad, when they are elegantly formed they have two points in
their extremities lightly bowed in the middle; and these processes together
with the space between them, are compared by Authors to the Saddle of a Horse;
the Cavities of the Os Sphenois are many, that which is produced in the middle of
the Saddle is famous above the rest, and receives the Glandula Pituitaria, near
which two others arise, which are smaller, also they are worthy to be noted
which are in the wing-like Processes, which are long and deep Cavities and give
security to the internal Muscle called Pterigois: In both sides of the Sphenois
are seven holes, of which, the first is near the foremost process of the
Saddle, and admits the optic Nerve to the Eyes; the second from a round
beginning ends in a chink, and through it is the second pair of Nerves and a
Branch of the third carried to the Eye; also a large Branch of the Artery
Carotis with the abounding humidity from the Glandula Pituitaria; the third
hole which is under the second is very little and round, by which a Branch of
the Nerve of the third pair is carried to the temporal Muscle, and Pterigoides;
the fourth is on the external side of the Apple of the Eye, and resembles a
large ditch unequally broad rather than a hole, by which the first branch of
the Nerve of the fourth Conjugation, with that of the third pair is distributed
to the temporal Muscle, and descending to the bottom of the upper Jaw, it is
distributed partly to the Nose, partly to its sixth Bone, and sends a small
branch to be distributed to the Pallat; the fifth hole is under the posterior
Process of the Saddle, long and rough, and gives passage to the greater Branch
of the Artery Carotis; the sixth is observable on the external side of the same,
oval in figure, and gives extramission to the fourth pair of Nerves; the
seventh is near the sixth, very small and round, and sends the smaller Branch of
the Internal Jugular Vein, to the Dura Matter: The Os Sphenois is joined to the
first Bone of the upper Jaw, as also to the fourth and sixth below the Pallat,
on the sides to the Processes of the Bones of the Temples, before to the bone
of the Forehead, and behind to that of the hinder part of the Head, by tke
Sutures called Mendosae and Harmoniae, which age most commonly obliterates.

The Os Ethmois or Sieve-like Bone, is less than the orher Bones belonging to
the Skull, and various in habit, it seems to be composed of six parts, of which
the first and second is full of holes like a Sieve, and thence came the name to
the whole Bone; it is covered with the Dura Matter, but it is full of pores, not
only to take in air and smells, but also to put out excrements: the third is the
interior process, not much unlike a Cocks Comb, rising between the Nerves of
smelling, or the Papillar Processes of the Brain: the fourth is another part of
the Process opposite to the former, thin yet hard, and distinguishes the the
Nostrils above: the fifth nnd sixth parts are altogether spongious and full of
holes, and guard the upper Cavities of the Nostrils on the sides, and almost
equals the wideness of them: It is joined to the Bone of the Forehead and to
the second of the upper Jaw, and to the Os Sphenois by light Harmonia, which
old age sometimes takes away.

The Jaws follow, of which, the superior is composed of twelve bones, six on
each side; the first is joined to the external angle of the Eye, and the
foreward process of the Bone of the Temples, and by their processes, make the
Os Jugale: The second makes the inner angle of the Eye, and has a large
passage, by which the overflowing moisture of the Eyes descends to the
Nostrils: The third is interposed between these two: The fourth is the greatest
of all, and occupies a great part of the Cheek and Pallat, and gives holes to
the upper teeth; it has a conspicuous hole near the apple of the Eye, by which
a Nerve passes from the third pair: The fifth, together with its fellow, makes
up the Nose: The sixth, with its fellow makes up the extremity of the Pallat;
and all these are joined rather by Harmonia than Sutures.

This Jaw is accounted movable in the Crocodile by the Ancients, not
distinguishing his small Skull from his huge Jaw, with which it is lifted up
when he moves his Jaw, his Body being near the Earth by reason of the shortness
of his feet; for what Bones soever make the superior Jaw in Crocodiles either
of the Land or Water, are firmly joined to the Skull by Harmonia: neither is it
otherwise in Serpents and Fishes, in all which is the nexure of Bones; neither
are there any Muscles properly moving the superior Jaw.

The inferior Jaw in age is but one Bone, famous both in hardness, thickness,
and strength; It has two Processes, the one acute called Corone; the other
obtuse called Condylus: It has holes for the Teeth as the superior Jaw has:
In the internal Superficies it has two holes, for the beginnings of the
aforesaid processes, by which a Branch of the Nerve of the fourth Conjugation
is admitted to be distributed to the Teeth, In the external Superficies it has
also two, by which the same Branch passes forwards to the lips, their Muscles
and Skin: Lastly, by its thicker Process it is joined to the rocky Bone, a
Membranous Ligament being between.

The Jaws are singularly armed with the Teeth, which are small Bones and serve
not only the chew the meat, but also by resisting the refluxion of the air,
they help the better to pronounce the words: each Tooth receives an Artery from
the Carotides, small veins from the Jugulars, and Nerves from the Branch of the
fourth pair by which the Periostion which covers the Roots of them, and also
the Teeth themselves are exquisite in sense. In Women there are fourteen, in
Men fifteen, and often sixteen in one Jaw; in Men they are of a mean bigness,
and differ partly in figure, partly in office; for some are sharp, which are
called the Dog-Teeth; others, although they are acute, yet they have broader
extremities than the Dog-Teeth, and are called Cutters, others are called
Grinders, the furthermost of which come forth either in Manhood or old age,
and are called the Teeth of wisdom: the Cutters are four, placed before, and
are the first that appear in Children, on both sides of which, is a Dog-Tooth
added, which are called Eye-Teeth, the rest of the Jaw the Grinders occupy,
which are large, broad, and something unequal, they are placed in the holes of
the Jaws, either with three or four roots, or with but one, as the Cutters and
Dog-Teeth, their juncture the Ancients call Gomphosis.

The Muscles which move these parts of the Head, remain yet to be spoken of, to
wit, the Forehead, Eyelids, Nose, Ears, Lips* and Jaws; On each side of the
Forehead is one, which descending from its middle region is ended in the
Eyebrows, which lifts it up, and wrinkles it.

Two Muscles shut the Eyelids, which by a semicircular Production, being
extended from the internal angles to the external, shut them, and yet they are
more properly one Muscle than two; to these they ad the Ciliar Muscle, which
compassing the brims causes the more exquisite shutting: A singular Muscle
opens the Eyelids, of which in the Fifteen Chapter.

The Muscles on each side lift up and diduce the Muscles of the Nostrils, of
which the first is like a Triangle, and descends from the top of the Nose by
the sides, even to the wing; the other arises from the Bone of the Jaw near
it, and ends partly in the exterior wing of the Nose, and partly in the upper
part of the Lip, thereby moving and lifting both of them up: Two slender
Muscles dilate the wing of the Nose, which run Transversly by the top of the
Nose; to these within the wing are two Muscles opposed, which are like them in
bigness, produced from the extremities of the Bones of the Nose, and opened in
each of its wings, which gently bind to the Nose, although the orbicular
Muscles of the Lips help forward and finish this office.

The Muscles common to both Checks and Lips are called both the Quadrati and
Buccinator; Galen calls the Quadratus a Musculous expansion, for indeed it is a
Membrane placed under the fat, but has an oblique contexture of fleshy fibrae;
its beginning is broad from the Sternum, Clavicula, Neck, and Shoulder, it ends
in the Chin, where sticking to the inferior Jaw, it draws it and the parts
adjoining to it downwards; the other is called Buccinator because it swells up
in such as blow the Trumpet: It takes its original from the Gums of the upper
Jaw, and being compassed within with the common Tunicle of the mouth; it ends
in the inferior Jaw, and makes the inward hollowness of the Cheek.

Properly five pair of Muscles are subservient to the Lips, of which the first
lifts up the upper Lip: Its beginning is from the upper Jaw where the Cavity of
the Cheek is, and being compassed about with much fat it descends to the upper
Lip; near this from the very same Jaw arises another pair, thin and broad,
which being inserted into the Lip moves it upwards: The third pair is fleshy
and round, arising from the Os Jugale, and passing obliquely by the Cheeks,
ends in the confines of both Lips, and draws them upwards to the sides: The
fourth pair rises a little lower, near the sides of the inferior Jaw, and from
a broad beginning by an oblique Process becomes slender, which draw the
inferior Lip downwards being inserted into the sides of it near the end: The
fifth pair which is most conspicuous in fleshy Bodies, arises about the middle
of the Chin, and ascends with right strings to the nether Lip, and depresseth
it: To these the binder together of the Lips is to be added, which their soft
and spongy substance makes, which consists of fibrae turned in an Orb like a
Sphincter: As for the Muscles of the Ears we shall speak of them when we speak
of the Ears themselves, amongst which are those called Occipitals.

The motion of the inferior Jaw is very strong, and moved by strong Muscles,
which are in number also five pair, the first pair is called Crotaphites, or
Temporals, because being covered with the Pericranium, they arise with a thin
and broad beginning, about the fore part of the Head and Bone of the Temples,
the nearer it comes to the Os Jugale the thicker it is, under which descending,
it ends in the acute process of the inferior Jaw, with a short yet strong
Tendon, this draws it upwards: Its fibrae the more they recede from the middle,
the more they pass obliquely toward the Tendon: wounds happening in this pair of
Muscles are not equally alike dangerous, for in its superior region being
wounded by oblique strokes, the hurt avoids death, in which place when by a
fall the bone of the Temple is cracked, the life may be saved by setting to the
trepan, but such hurts as afflict the lower and nervous part of it, endanger
life by convulsions. The second pair is called Digastricum or Biventre, and
takes its original near the Dug-like Process, this in its middle passage grows
to a Nervous or Tendinous Body, then it is fleshy again till it come to the
fore part of the Chin, where it ends inwardly and draws the Jaw downwards, in
which motion Nature has provided a Ligament to stop its falling back too far:
The Musculus Quadratus spoken of before concurs in office with this. The third
pair is called Laterale, and Masseterium, having partly a Nervous, and partly a
fleshy beginning, arising from the superior Jaw and Os Jugale, and are broadly
and strongly inserted into the nether Jaw, which by reason of the diversity of
its strings, it moves to the right and left, and forwards. The fourth pair is
called Pterygoides, or the internal Alar, so called because it proceeds from
the internal seat of the Wing-like Process: it is fleshy and carried to the
inferior part of the inward part of the inferior Jaw, by a broad and strong
Tendon, which it draws up, and when it is turned out, it draws it back. The
fifth pair is called Pterygoides or the external Alar; this begins often with a
double body, and fleshy, from the external side of the wing-like process, and
is also fastened in the internal side of the lower Jaw: It withdraws the
inferior Jaw and moves it forwards.

Place here the Table of the thirteenth Chapter, which has the Number 15. at
the corner of the brass Plate.

Human anatomical diagrams AN EXPLANATION OF THE TABLE OF THE THIRTEENTH
CHAPTER.
This Table contains the Muscles of the Face and inferior Jaw; also the bones
of the Skull, and of both Jaws. FIG. I.
AA The skin of the Head detracted. BB The fleshy Pannicle separated. CC The
Pericranium detracted. DD The Skull bare. E The muscle of the Forehead. FF The
muscle that shuts the Eyelids. G The first muscle of the Nose. H The second
muscle of the Nose. I The muscle dilating the wings. K The muscle of the first
pair lifting up the Lips. L The muscle drawing the Lip upwards. M The muscle
drawing the Lip downwards. NN The muscle shutting the Lips. O The Buccinator.
PP The temporal muscle in his place. Q The muscle lifting up the Ear. R The
muscle drawing the Ear obliquely. S The muscle Masseter in his place. TT The
muscle Digastricus moved from his beginning.
FIG. II.
AAA The temporal muscle out of his place, the Jaw^ being dissected. aa Its
acute insertion into the process of the Jaw. BB The Masseter separated. CC The
Digastricus loosed at the end, and drawn aside. DD The internal Pterygoides.
EEEE The external Pterygoides. F The Musculus Quadratus, or musculous Expansion
separated.
FIG. III.
A The bone of the forehead. aaa The Coronal Suture. a The hole of the bone of
the forehead for the Nerve of the third pair. B The right bone of the fore part
of the Head. bb The Sagittal Suture. C The left bone of the fore part of the
Head. D The bone of the Temples. cc The false Suture. d The Duglike process. e
The process of the Os Jugalis. E The first bone of the upper Jaw. F The Jugal
process. G The second bone of the Jaw hid with the shadow of the former. H The
third bone. I The fourth bone of the Jaw. i The hole in it for the Nerve of the
third pair. K The fifth bone. L The lower Jaw. l The hole in it for the Nerve of
the fourth pair to pass out. M The sharp process of the inferior Jaw. N The
blunt process of the inferior Jaw.
FIG. IV.
A The left bone of the fore part of the Head. aa The sagittal Suture. B The
right bone of the fore part of the Head. bb The Suture Lambdois. C The bone of
the hinder part of the Head. D The triangular bone. PH A portion of the bone of
the Temples with the Duglike process.
FIG. V.
AA The cavity of the bone of the hinder part of the Head within the Skull, in
which the Cerebellum lies. B The internal face of the Os Sphenois. CC The Os
Ethmois. D The cavity of the bone of the forehead above the Nose. aa The first
hole in the wedglike bone. aa The second hole. bb The third hole. cc The sixth
hole. * The seventh hole. dd The fifth hole. ee The first hole of the bone of
the Temples. ff The rocky process of the bones of the Temples. gg The third
hole of the bones of the Temples. hh The fourth and fifth hole of the hinder
part of the Head.
FIG. VI.
AA The lower part of the bone of the hinder part of the Head conspicuous. aa
The process by which the hinder part of the Head is joined to the first
Vertebra of the Neck. BB Part of the bone of the Temples. CC The duglike
process. DD The bodkinlike appendix. EE The jugal process. F The External face
of the Wedglike bone. GH GH The winglike processes. I The bone which
distinguishes the Nostrils. KK The sixth bone of the upper Jaw. kk The hole
which passes the Nerve of the fourth pair to the Pallat. LL Part of the fourth
bone of the superior Jaw. m The four Teeth called Cutters. nn The two dog
teeth. oo The rest of the Teeth called Grinders.




CHAP. 14. Of the Brain. and Cerebellum
THat the Brain it self which is the Temple of Wisdom and Memory may come to
view, it is necessary that we take away its coverings, and they are two
Membranes, which the Greeks call Meninge, and the Arabians, Matter, and our
Chyrurgians from them: the Arabians using to express the soft seat or covering
of any thing by the name MOTHER.

Of these, that which does not immediately cover the Brain, is called Crassa
Meninx or Dura Matter, and it is endewed with not a few Veins and Arteries which
ascend by the sides of it: The Veins come from the foremost Branch of the
internal Jugular, the Arteries from the greater and lesser Branch of the
internal Carotis, both of them replenish it with Blood and vital Spirit; It
loosly embraces the Brain that so it may not hinder its increase; it is rough
without, and smooth within, it is doubled with a double Process, of which, that
which is stretched forwards above the middle of the Brain, for the figure sake,
is called Falx, because it resembles a hook; the other is shorter, and defines
the bounds of the Brain and Cerebellum.

By these Processes are certain Cavities or Channels made, some greater, some
lesser; Of the greater, two climb up the Cerebellum to the right and left by an
oblique passage, by the sides of the hinder part of the Head, and in their
beginnings they admit the greater Branch of the internal Jugular Vein; the
third of the greater Cavities, being stretched along the longitude of the Falx,
disperseth copious branches both to the Meninges and also to the middle of the
Skull; here is often a collection of excrements and a filthy putrefaction, and
sometimes callous matter and stones found in a Dissection; the fourth of the
greater Cavities is shorter, passing between the Cerebrum and Cerebellum, two
Branches being first produced, it is partly bestowed upon the callous Body, and
partly enters in two parts, the foremost Ventricles of the Brain, making a
portion of the plexure called Chorois: Where there is a concourse and community
of these Cavities, there that Funnel called Herophilianum is constituted: The
Dura Matter is firmly joined to the Sutures of the Skul, especially to the Os
Sphenois; at other places it is at distance both from the Skull and the Pia
Matter, as the increase and decrease of the Brain requires.

The other Membrane for the diversity of its habit is called Tenuis Meninx and
Pia Matter: It is a very thin and soft Membrane, not only wrapping the Brain
round, but also enrowling the turnings of many Veins and Arteries which
accompany it, which may be easily separated from it.

The word Brain comprehends both that properly called so, and also the
Cerebellum, it is made of a clear substance of the Seed, and makes the animal
Spirit, by which the Soul which is the Governess of the Body performs both
Sense internal and external, and also voluntary motion, therefore in living
Bodies it is swelled with gentle heat and Spirit; in dead Bodies being
dissected in thin slices it shines like Alablaster: The Ancients thought the
Brain was clouded or obscured by Melancholy, or vapors drawn up thither;
Hippocrates rightly conceived that wounds passing deeply into its Cavities were
mortal, and yet here is a huge difference, either by reason of different
properties in Nature, or the ambient air, for light offenses either of the
Skull or Meninges kill some presently, and others whose Brain it self is
wounded escape, yea, although some part of it be taken away, and separated by
reason of putrefaction, also the wound growing together, the leaden Instruments
used in the cure, remain many years fixed in the Brain and Meninges.

The Brain receives Veins on each side from the internal branches of the
Jugulars, and small passages from the Cavities of the Dura Matter carrying
Blood: It has Arteries from the Carotides and those which rise up by the
Vertebrae, which have but a single Tunicle like the Veins; the substance of the
Brain has no Nerve at all, and therefore it is void of sense, although it give
original to all the Nerves.

Its largeness in Man is famous, and it increases and decreaseth as the Moon
does; it is divided into the right part and the left, by the Hook-like Process
of the Dura Matter; it has diverse Cavities which we shall lay open in the
particular dissection; it has an evident heat, although compared with the
other Bowels which are hotter, it may be accounted cold and moist; also it is
made moist by accident, seeing the vapors sent unto it from the Breast and
Stomach, are turned into water, from whence flowing to the inferior parts (if
it have not power to resolve them) it brings sickness in the small Guts: It is
garnished with many circulations like the River Meander; above, it is round
like a Sphere, and therefore Pliny calls it the Heaven of Man, because in
figure it imitates the most Sacred and Noble part of the World: It is seated by
the most wise God, within the strong defense of the Skull, and the Dura Matter:
The Brain is moved like the Arteries, not so much by any inherent virtue of its
own, as by virtue communicated by the Heart.

The Cerebellum is another part of the Brain, produced of the same substance
with its self, and endewed with the same Vessels although fewer in number; it
is nothing near so big as the Brain, and must yield to it in roundness, but it
consists of more Lamens, it is hid within the large Cavities of the hinder part
of the Head, and its office is consecrated to the MEMORY.

These things thus premised we come now to the Method of Dissection, wherein
the distinctions of the substances of the Brain are to be viewed, as also the
callous Body; the two foremost Ventricles, the Speculum Lucidum, the Fornix,
the Plexus Choroides; the third Ventricle and beside that the Eminences in the
fore and hinder part of it, then the Brain being deduced to the sides, and the
shorter Process of the Dura Matter being, draw away the Nerves of smelling: The
first, second, third, fourth, and fifth Conjugation of Nerves, the Infundibulum
and Glandula Pituitaria are to be observed, then the Brain and Cerebellum being
turned to the right side, the Rete Mirabile, the Process and Cavity of the
Cerebellum which is called the fourth Ventricle, and the beginning of the
Marrow of the Back comes to view.

The substance of the Brain is double, the external which is softer and of a
more ashy or yellow color, and the internal which is more sollid and white;
this they compare to the Marrow, the other to the Bark.

The Corpus Callosusn, or Callous Body is a hard portion of the Brain,
conspicuous between its foremost division, under the sides of which the two
foremost Ventricles lies: These Ventricles are the largest Cavities of the
Brain, compassed with a thin skin, and by their bowing exceed in length its
Marrowy substance, on the upper part from a broad and blunt beginning it grows
something sharp toward the third Ventricle or common Cavity; from hence on the
backward parts, they grow roundish again downwards toward the Basis of the
Brain, and being bowed like a hook toward their first beginning, they are
attenuated, and end near the original of the Optic Nerves: They are divided
into the right and left Ventricle, a thin partition passing between them and
the substance of the Brain, which being withdrawn and held against the light is
transparent, and therefore called Speculum Lucidum.

To this is joined above, the Fornix, or vault, being a callous substance of
the Brain; it obtained this name because like the vault of a House, it sustains
the weight of the Brain, which else would fall down into the Cavities: It is
underpropped with three legs, of which two are stretched out downwards toward
the Basis of the Brain, and embracing the root of the Marrow of the Back near
the sides, which a singular prominence being near, with a crooked valley they
design the inferior Cavity of the foremost Ventricle on each side; Arantius
gave the name of Hippocampus or Seahorse, and Silkworm to them: the third leg
of the vault is stretched forward over the common Cavity of the said Ventricles.

Besides in the foremost Ventricles is obvious, the Plexus Choroides made of a
subtle Membrane, and very small Glandulae, and small branches of vessels
variously infolded, both from the fourth Cavity, and the branches of the
Carotis and Vertebral Arteries; That neat and wonderful distribution is seen by
the lower Cavity of the Ventricles, in which, even as in the Rete Mirabile, the
Blood is prepared for the Generation of the animal Spirit in the Brain; But the
Ventricles before mentioned, together with those that follow, by the aprobation
of Modern Physicians, are ordained for the collection of air and abounding
phlegm.

The chink, which is in the valley of the foremost ventricles, being lightly
drawn aside makes the third ventricle of the Brain, according to the opinion of
the Ancients; in which two passages are observable, of which the foremost is
carried down to the Funnel, a Process sticking up, which they compare to a
woman's Privities; the hinder which they liken to the Fundament, is carried to
the Cavity of the Marrow of the Back, and shows that space, which the
beginnings of that marrow make by their mutual concourse, being famous with
four protuberances, and makes the fourth ventricle constituted between the
Brain and Cerebellum; But that Cavity which the principal Authors of Anatomy
call the fourth ventricle seeing it properly belongs to the Cerebellum, we will
speak of it, when we come to it in order of Dissection.

Of those Protuberances, some are lesser and proper to the Brain, which are
called Testicles; others greater, and called Buttocks from a certain similitude
they bear to those parts: The Glandula Pinealis is near these, so called
because it is like a Pine-nut; It is in substance somewhat hard, reddish, easy
to be resolved, and compassed about with a thin Membrane; it is set before the
hinder passage of the third ventricle, to wit, the channel that passes to the
beginning of the Marrow of the Back: Now the superior parts of the brain being
taken away by Dissection and drawn to the side, the Cerebellum appears, and the
Basis of each beginning of the marrow of the back, from whence the Nerves take
their common original.

The Nerves are vessels of the same substance with the Brain, thin and white
Chords (if you except the first and second pair) which being coupled together
by the Meninge, make long and round Channels, by which the Animal Spirit, which
is the Author of sense and motion, is carried to the several parts of the Body;
they have Veins and Arteries for their nourishment and vital heat; they have no
Cavity discernable to the eyes, seeing they seem to contain a whitish marrow
within, which both wounds and obstructions in them sufficiently manifests,
the diligence of Nature in preserving them is admirable, for it brings the
Nerves to the parts they are appointed for by a certain flexure; as they pass
the holes of the Vertebrae, it defends and strengthens them with a seminal
substance, most of them make a plexure one with another, and make a substance
like a swelling or contraction ere they pass further, as though they would
unite their strength; in their progress they are harder.

Amongst the Nerves which take their original within the Skull, the Nerves of
smelling come first to view; they take their slender beginning from the Basis
of the Brain, beyond the hole of the rocky Process, which gives pass to the
Nerve of the fifth pair, and by degrees growing nearer together and thicker,
they are extended above the Os Ethmois: the Process called Crist passing
between, they make the swelling Processes called Mamillaxes with their
extremities, and these in such Creatures whose smell is strong are larger.

The next pair are the Optic Nerves which the Ancients held to be the first,
they are great but soft and more porous than the rest, they take their original
backwards, from the beginning of the marrow of the back, where the two legs of
the vault are stretched out, in the midst of their journey they are joined that
the spirit might more easily pass from one eye to another, then being separated
they pass through each hole of the wedg-like Bone, to the right and left Eye,
this pair being taken away, the Infundibulum comes in sight, being a Membranous
Channel like a Funnel, growing narrower by degrees from a broad Basis, and
carries the redundant phlegm to the Glandula under it: The Glandula it self is
called Pituitaria, and is placed in the Saddle of the Wedg-like bone, and sends
the moisture it receives by the holes next to it to the Pallat.

The second pair of Nerves are those that move the Eyes, and are therefore
called Motorium; they take their original near the former: at their beginning
they are joined, afterward being severed, they pass to the Eyes by the second
hole of the Wedg-like Bone, and to the Muscle which lifts up the upper Eyelid,
to the Adductor and the lesser oblique Muscle; to this we adjoyn that Nerve
which is called the lesser Branch of the fifth pair, which coming from the
middle Basis of the Brain, passes to the Muscle of the Eye called Abducens.

The third pair of Nerves takes its original behind from the basis of the
Brain, and in its progress is joined to the former in the hole of the Eye,
which when it touches it is divided into two branches, whereof one passing
above the Eye by the bony Channel, or hole of the Forehead, is distributed to
the upper Eyelid, the Skin, and the Muscles of the Forehead: The other branch
passes under the eye, and proceeding between the two long Lamens, and sending
branches both to the tunicle of the Nostrils, and to the temporal Muscle, it
passes by the hole of the fourth bone of the upper Jaw, to the Muscles of the
upper Lip and others of the Face; some call this the first branch, some the
first and second of the third pair, which joins it self to the fourth pair; to
this third pair we ad that small Nerve, which arising from the Basis of the
Brain near the prominences which are called Testicles entering the Apple of the
Eye is carried to his Muscle called Trochlea.

The fourth pair arises from the Basis of the Brain with the former, but a
little before it, and descends by the sixth hole of the Wedg-like bone, and
after in its passage it has bestowed branches upon the temporal Muscle, the
internal Alar and the Buccae, to the Teeth of the upper Jaw, the Pallat and
Gums, it is carried into the internal hole of the lower Jaw, and gives branches
to the roots of the Teeth, and passing out again at the external hole of the
same Cheek, its distributed in the inferior lip and his skin, the branch of
this pair which remains, passing by the Muscles in the mouth, it is
distributed to the sides of the Tongue: That small Nerve is nothing else but a
branch of this pair which the Ancients called the fourth pair, thinking it to
be a pair by it self, and is distributed in the Pallat and his Tunicle.

The fifth pair arises from the very beginning of the marrow of the Back where
it is joined to the Cerebellum, it passes the first hole of the bones of the
Temples; it is of one soft substance, and is the proper organ of Hearing,
another harder which passes through the hole called Caecum by the Ancients,
slipping without the Skull between the Dug-like Process, and the Bodkin-like
Appendix, and passes to the Muscles of the Jaw, the skin both of the Jaws and
Ears: Its Progress in the Ears see Chap. 16. Fig. 12.

The sixth pair rises a little below the fifth, descending by the third hole of
the Bone of the Temples, which is common to the hinder part of the Head, and
being divided on each side into internal and external Branches makes that
famous plexure which we spoke of in the third Chapter.

The seventh pair proceeds from the Marrow just passing out of the Skull, and
is harder than the rest, and slips out of the Skull by the fourth and fifth
holes of the hinder part of the Skull; having passed the Skull with its common
covering, it joins its self to the sixth pair, from which being separated it is
distributed partly to the Cartilages of the Hyois, partly to the Tongue it
self, of which see Chapter 3. Figure 8. and Chapter 11. Figure 14. The
beginnings of the Nerves and the Glandula Pituitaria being separated out of the
Cavity of the Saddle, about the Basis of the brain, that plexure of the
Carotides and Vertebral Arteries is to be heeded; Ancient Writers called it
Retiformis, but Modern Rete Mirabile, than which, a ruder expression in the
brain of man admits no comparision. Its use is the same with the Plexus Chorois.

The Cerebellum is a sollid body if you compare it with the Brain, and is
divided into two parts like Globes, between which the two Processes called
Vermi formis appear, to which about the hinder part of the Trunks of the marrow
of the Back, a third is seen, which Varolius calls the Bridge of the Brain,
although this be not always simple, but sometimes unequal with certain bunches
sticking up.

The Cerebellum being turned over with the Brain, and that portion of the
marrow of the back annexed to it, the globes of the Cerebellum being gently
drawn aside, in the basis of them appears a Cavity which the best Anatomists
call the fourth ventricle, Herophylus calls it the principal ventricle,
Arantius the Cistern: Its compass is round, yet something broad, and
distinguished with two Cavities, at the entrance of it, where the Cavity of the
marrow of the back is, the worm-like process hangs over it, and a thin Membrane
is drawn over it, in it, the purer air drawn out of the former ventricles, is
kept for the refreshing of the animal Spirit.

The Marrow of the Back depends upon both Brain and Cerebellum, being but a
doubled Trunk of them both, from whence it passes down the large Cavities of
the Vertebrae which serve like a sheath for it, and sends out Nerves which are
distributed to the whole Body; it is covered with two Membranes as the brain is,
but in its progress is of a harder substance: it has veins and arteries
distributed to it through the holes of the Vertebrae that it may be furnished
with Blood and vital Spirit; about its beginning as we told you, it is
manifestly divided and gives a round Cavity, which ends in a point by degrees,
distinguished by a small chink which Herophilus compares to a writing pen; It
is joined by degrees in its progress; to external view it is single, but
considered in its self it is manifold, and divided into almost innumerable
small Nerves, more or fewer, of which the Membrane encompassing collects into
one branch, and distributes into pairs through so many holes of the Vertebrae.

In the Vertebrae of the Neck are seven pair, which are distributed to the
Muscles of the Head Neck and Shoulders, Arms and Hands, of which in the last
Chapter: The Marrow of the Back has twelve pair, dedicated to the Membranes of
the Breast, Back, and Muscles of the Ribs: The Loins have five pair; the Os
Sacrum six, which shall be described in the last Chapter.

Place here the first, second, and third Tables of the fourteenth Chapter,
which has the Numbers 16, 17, and 18. at the corners of the brass Plates.

Human anatomical diagrams THE FIRST TABLE OF THE FOURTEENTH CHAPTER UNFOLDED.
This Table shows, the Brain laid bare from the Skull, with the Dura and Pia
Matter; also its Cavities and Processes. FIG. I.
AA The Dura Matter covering the Brain. aa The Veins and Arteries distributed on
it. B The Brain covered only with the Pia Matter. bb The Circumvolutions of the
Brain. ccc The Vessels distributed to the Pia Matter from the third Cavity. C
The Dura Matter drawn backwards.
FIG. II.
AA The longer Process of the Dura Matter called Falx, turned out of its
Situation. aa The third cavity of the Dura Matter open. bb The lesser inferior
cavity of the same. BB A portion of the callous body laid to view. CCCC The
brain deduced a little to the sides. cccc The vessels in the fourth cavity,
stretched over the callous body. DD The Dura Matter hanging down on each side.
FIG. III.
AA The substance of the Brain. BB The callous body drawn a little outward. bb
The two Legs of the Vault something uncovered. C The hooklike process drawn
backwards. DD The right fore ventricle opened on the upper part. EE The left
fore Ventricle opened on the upper part. FF The Plexus Choroides. G Part of the
Speculum Lucidum. HH The Dura Meninx detracted on each side.
FIG. IV.
AA The brain explained by equal Section. B The Fornix taken up and bowed
downwards. CC The superior part of the right fore ventricle deducted. DD The
superior part of the left fore ventricle in like manner explained. E The chink
designing the third Ventricle. FF The Dura Matter. a The Glandula Pinealis. bb
The Protuberances, called Buttocks. cc The Protuberances called Testicles d The
Protuberance likned to a woman's Privities. These are better expressed in the
first Figure of the following Table.
FIG. V.
AA. BB. CC. The brain and foremost ventricles explained in their upper part. f
A portion of the Plexus Choroides stretched upwards by the foremost ventricles
D The shorter process of the Dura Matter. EEE The longer process thereof. F The
Torcular of Herophilus. G The Dura Matter detracted. a The first cavity of the
Dura Matter. b The second cavity of the Dura Matter. ccc The third cavity of the
Dura Matter. ddd The lesser cavity in the booklike process. e The fourth cavity
of the Dura Matter.
FIG. VI.
AA BB CC ff signify the same they did in the fifth Figure. DD The Cerebellum
conspicuous in his natural place. E The wormlike process of the Cerebellum. FF
The Dura Matter hanging down. GG The same with the cavities rolled downwards.




Human anatomical diagrams AN EXPLANATION OF THE SECOND TABLE OF THE FOURTEENTH
CHAPTER.
This Table presents in larger Figures the Cavities both of the Brain and
Cerebellum, as they are showed by the Dissections of the Ancients. FIG. I.
Shows the inferior Cavity of the foremost Ventricles of the Brain, the original
of the optic Nerves, the fourth Ventricle with its Protuberances, the Legs of
the Vault, and whatsoever Arantius compared by the Seahorse, or Silkworm.
AAAA The Dura Matter detracted. B The Process of the sieve-like Bone like a
crist. CC Part of the Os Sphenois, showing it self under the membrane, the
Brain being taken away. DD The foremost process of the Os Sphenois, making the
Cavity of the Saddle. EEEE A portion of the Brain left. F The foremost leg of
the Vault bowed forewards. GG The hinder legs of the Vault. HH The Seahorse,
or Silkworms of Arantius. IIII The inferior Cavity of the foremost ventricles.
K The extremity of the callous body sticking out like Buttocks. L The Glandula
Pinealis. MM The Protuberances called Testicles. NN The cavity between the
Brain and Cerebellum commonly called the fourth ventricle. OOOO Part of the
Plexus Chorois bowed backwards, which is carried by the superior cavity of the
ventricles. PP The foremost portion of the Basis of the Brain. Q The bottom of
the third ventricle in which behind is the hole likned to the Fundament; it
tends to the beginning of the marrow of the back; before is the hole compared
to the womb, and is carried to the Funnel. RRRR A portion of the Plexus Chorois
turned backwards, which is extended to the fourth inferior cavity. SS The roots
of the optic Nerves. T The uniting of the optic Nerves. VV The optic Nerves
again severed and passing toward the Eyes.
FIG. II. This Figure shows the proper Ventricle of the Cerebellum, which the
best Anatomists call the fourth Ventricle.
AAAA Each (...) of the Cerebellum whole. BBBB The internal face of the
Cerebellum laid open by incision. CC The worm-like Process of the Cerebellum
whose superior and round part is taken away. DD The proper Ventricle of the
Cerebellum, with its two cavities. E The prominence conspicuous between the two
cavities. F The passage from the third ventricle to the marrow of the back. G
The Cavity of the marrow of the back like a pen. H The chink in the said
cavity. II The descending trunk of the marrow of the back cut off.




Human anatomical diagrams AN EXPLANATION OF THE THIRD TABLE OF THE FOURTEENTH
CHAPTER.
This Table shows the rise of the Nerves within the Skull, also the principal
branches of the third and fourth pairs, the Glandula Pituitaria with the
Funnel, the Rete Mirable, the fourth Ventricle and the most special Veins
arising from the marrow of the Back. FIG. I. Shows the Brain a great portion of
it being taken away above with the Cerebellum diducted to the side.
A The Nerve of smelling. a Its process called Mamillaris. B The Optic Nerve
or first pair. CC The Nerve of the second pair. DD The Nerve of the third pair.
EE The Nerve of the fourth pair. FF The Nerve of the fifth pair. GG The Nerve of
the sixth pair. The Nerve of the seventh pair by reason of its deep rise appears
not.
FIG. II. The side of the skull being broken off, together with the Eye whole,
and the cheek divided, is showed.
A The Nerve of the third pair. B Its branch which goes out at the hole of the
bone of the forehead. C A branch of the same pair which goes out by the hole of
the fourth bone of the upper Jaw. D The Nerve of the fourth pair. E Its branch
which goes to the teeth and gums of the upper Jaw. F Its branch which is
carried to the Tongue. G Its branch which enters the lower Jaw. H The same
branch which passes out at the hole of the lower Jaw.
FIG. III. The Brain with the Marrow of the back being turned, these things
come to view.
AA The Nerves of swelling. aa Their Dug-like processes. BB The two legs of the
Nerves of the first pair. CC The greater branch of the Artery Carotis, the
interior being joined to the Vertebral Artery OO D The Glandula Pituataria. E
The Funnel. F The Protuberances of the Brain, set before the passage which
carries the phlegm to the Funnel. GG The Nerves of the second pair cut off. HH
The beginnings of the Nervs of the third pair. II The beginning of the Nervs of
the fourth pair. KK The beginning of the Nerves of the fifth pair. LL The
beginning of the Nervs of the sixth pair. MM The beginning of the Nervs of the
seventh pair NNN The beginning of the marrow of the back, between the skull and
the first Vertebra. OO The common branch of the Vertebral artery, which being
divided after its union with the Carotis artery CC makes up the Rete mirabile
with it, about the seat of the Wedg-like bone. PPPP Small branches of Arteries
called the Rete mirabile.
FIG. IV.
AA The Cerebellum and his globes. B The wormlike process of the Cerebellum.
CCCC The process of the Cerebellum, called the bridge. DD The beginning of the
marrow of the back. E The cavity of the marrow of the back, called the pen. F
The fourth Ventricle laid open.
FIG. V.
A The trunk of the marrow of the back descending as it may be publicly showed
being taken out of the body. BB The branches arising from the three pairs of
Nerves of the Neck, and two of the Breast, to be distributed to the hands. bb
The small branches running to the muscles of the shoulder. CC The first pair of
Nerves of the hands. DD The second pair. EE The third pair. FF The fourth pair.
GG The fifth pair. HH The sixth pair called Subcutaneus. IIII The pairs of
intercostal Nerves, the two lowermost of which pertain to the Loins. K The
first pair which is carried to the Foot. LL The second pair. MM The third pair.
NN The fourth and greatest pair. O The small Nervs of the marrow of the back,
which are carried to the bladder and muscles of the Fun dament, and to the
Genitals of both Sexes.




CHAP. 15. Of the EYES.
AMongst all the external Senses, the Sight carries the Pre-eminence, which is
seated in the clear Orbs of the Eyes, which the Ancients rightly called the
windows of the mind whereby it exercises its visible part, and the firebrarnds
of Love.

The Eyelids are first of all to be viewed, which are the coverings of the
Eyes, without them they have a thin skin but no fat, within they are covered
with the Pericranium; a fleshy Membrane intercedes these, with which two
Muscles which are the shutters too of the Eyelids are intertexed, which we
mentioned in the thirteenth Chapter; also the Muscle which lifts up the
superior Eyelid, which takes its beginning within the Eye, about the hole of
the Optic Nerve, and being deduced from a thin and fleshy beginning, it ends
in the brim of the said Eyelid with a broad and subtle Tendon: Their
extremities are Cartilaginous, which Cartilages the Greeks call Tharsos; for
their more firm opening, and for their exact closure they have a small Muscle.

When they are open they make two angles, which the ancients called Canthi, the
one on the outside which is less, near which, within the compass of the Eye
lies a famous Glandula, the internal corner is larger, within which lies a
spongy Caruncle, and soft, near the Bone of the Nose, which stops the flowing
of tears by the Nostrils; and for that very cause is called Lacrymalis; in the
Cartilaginous brims of the Eyelids, about the greater angle are two small
holes, a callous lightly hanging over them, which are called Puncta Lacrimalia,
because if you put a Hogs bristle into them they produce tears, they are most
conspicuous in great Beasts, and Men that are prone to weep. But how comes it
to pass you will say that tears are so rife and ready in time of grief? Truly,
not from the Eyes, but from the Brain, by the second hole of the wedg-like
bone, also from the top and sides of the Head they flow to the forementioned
holes; hence it comes to pass that the skin between the external angle of the
Eye, and the Helice of the Ear, together with the panicle under it being
wounded, much watery substance issues out, and continual weeping against ones
will instantly cease.

To the extremity of the Eyelids are hairs inserted, growing out straight, and
when they are grown to their natural length, cease growing; these not only keep
small bodges which fly in the air from getting into the Eye, but also by giving
a gentle shadow they make the sight the more piercing; but this famous use is
lost so often as these hairs are thicker than naturally they should be, and
when they are turned inward and prick the Eyes.

The office of the Eyelids is conspicuous, Viz. to moisten the Eyes, to open,
shut and defend them, and their office is of so great necessity Nature will
perform, when we are so far from willing of it, that we never think of it, for
it is very rare to forbear winking when any thing threatens.

To the confines of the Eyes and Forehead, has the Divine Creator produced the
Eyebrows, being a thick skin sticking out, and rough with hair, not so much
for beauty sake and to shadow the Eye, as to keep the sweat which falls down
from the Forehead out of them.

But the Eyes themselves which are the organs of Sight, are variously furnished
with vessels, Muscles, Membranes and Humors: of the Veins some are external and
visible on the white of the Eye, other some are internal and hidden; the
external veins proceed from the external branches of the Jugulars; the
internal, which accompany the optic Nerve from the internal Jugulars, and are
helped by the Plexus Choroides. The original of the Arteries is not unlike
this, the interior of which arise from the exterior Branch of the Carotides;
the internal come from the Carotides, where with the Vertebrals they make the
Rete Mirabile; hence it comes to pass that in external provocations the blood
being mingled with Spirit the Eyes look red, and sometimes are inflamed: they
have diverse Nerves, the most famous of which, is the Optic Nerve, which
carries the visive virtue to the Eye, and by its expansion, or opening abroad
of its own substance, seems to bestow a threefold Tunicle upon the Eyes; the
next to this is less, which with the two small Nerves its companions,
distributes its Branches to the two Muscles of the Eyes, which are called
Motorii from their office, which we discoursed of in the foregoing Chaprer.

The bigness of the Eyes in a Man grown up is mean; in number they are two,
that so when the one is hurt the common office might be performed by the other,
and yet their consent is admirable, so that the one being hurt by internal
causes against Nature, the other is hurt also, or else grows weaker, or is
blood-shot. If we look upon their qualities by reason of their contained
humors, they are cold and moist, and yet this is wonderfully lesned by the
copious influx of heat and Spirits, by so many vessels, whereby waxing hotter
than a natural mean, they not only infect Looking-glasses being held near them,
but also other men's Eyes with the same distemper.

Nay, the Eyes have light in themselves, and a certain Splendour not only in the
humors but also in the Membranes; indeed this is but mean in Man, because the
actions God has ordained for him are to be performed in the day time, but it
is greater in such living creatures as get their food by night, the inbred
light of whose Eyes overcomes the darkness round about them; there is scarce
another part of man's Body that gives more manifest signs of health and sickness
than the Eyes do: In a man that is in health, they are full and bright; in a
Man that is ill, they are sunk, sad, troubled, or obscure, till death has
overcome Nature, that they fail in strength and sight, and give warning of
changing this life for another. Lastly, Consider that the Ancients were
persuaded that the whole force of the mind was insisted in the Eyes, and that
there was no Beast so fierce, but if his Eyes were covered would be milder.

Their figure ought to be round, not so much that they might move the easier,
as that they might receive visible objects the better; they carry the same form
the Stars do, that by them we may measure their rising and sitting, and
therefore it was a custom amongst the ancient Romans, to carry men that were
near death out into the air that they might behold the Heavens: The wise
Creator has placed them in a high and strong hole of the Skull; high, that
they might perform their office of watchfulness the better, and strong amongst
the Bones that they might be the better defended from wrong.

But that we may the better know their actions, we will view, first their
Muscles, then their Membranes, and last of all, their Humors; the Muscles which
move the Eyes of Man, are six in number, which have fat about them to defend
them from the injury of coldness and dryness: Of these, such are called Recti
as perform the right motions of the Eyes; some are called Oblique, whose
magnitude and thickness is almost equal with the right; they take their
beginning from that internal bone, about the large holes which admit the
Nerves, and are carried under that Tunicle called Annata, to that which is
called Cornea; these are four in number, of which, the first lifts up the Eye,
and is called Superbus, because proud people usually go with their Eyes
elevated: The next opposite to the first depresseth the Eye, which action
because it is a note of modesty, the Muscle is called Humilis: The third
draws the Eye right to the inner angle, and is called Bibitorius, because
when people drink they turn their Eyes inward that they may look in the Cup:
The fourth draws the Eye to the external angle, and is called Indignatorius,
because men lear on that fashion when they are angery; these are the right
Muscles.

The Oblique Muscles are two, and are called Amatorii, because the glances of
the Eyes entice Lovers; Of these, that which is less and inferior in
Situation, rises in that place; the first Bone of the Jaw, is joined to the
fourth in extreme part of the inferior Orbita. It ascends obliquely upwards
toward the outward angle of the Eyelid, and passes with a short Tendon to
the Iris, and turns the Eye obliquely downwards, toward the outward angle; the
other oblique Muscle which is called the greater, is longer and higher in
Situation, and has the same beginning with the third of the right Muscles,
near the internal angle of the Eye, it enters the Cartilaginous Trochlea, with
a thin beginning, from whence passing obliquely, by the superior part of the
Eye, it ends near the end of the oblique Tendon of the inferior Muscle, and
turns the Eye about toward the internal angle.

The Membranes which include the Eye are common and proper; The first of the
common is called Adnata or Conjunctiva, neither is it any thing else than the
Pericranium, spread abroad to the Eyelids, and white of the Eye. The other is
called Innominata, and seems to be nothing else but a subtle expansion of the
Tendons and Muscles, especially the right ones, and is produced to the
circumference of the Iris or Cornea Membrana.

The first of the proper Membranes is called Sclerotes, or hard, by reason of
its thickness and habit; on the fore part which is transparent it is called
Cornea, because in cleerness it resembles a thin Horn; it sticks something out
on the fore part.

The second of the proper Membranes is called Wea; on the fore part it is far
thinner than the former, and has diverse colors, behind it has a certain
black smootiness; that this is requisite for the more perfection of sight, is
probable by this Argument, Because in the Embrion in the Womb, even before the
Eyes are covered with the Eyelids, it is produced by Nature of a blackish color,
manifesting it self through the Scelotes; that portion of it which is
transparent through the Cornea, is called Iris, by reason of its variety of
colors; it has a manifest hole in it called Pupilla, through which, as
through a window, it discerns the Species of visible objects: It is free from
any nexure both before and behind, notwithstanding in the Circumference of the
Cornea; being firmly joined to the bounds of the Sclerotes, it makes that
Ligament which Authors call Ciliare, from which according to the latitude of
the Wea, toward the Christalline humor, certain small strings run like black
lines, like the hair of the Eyelids; by their help the hole of the Wea, is
contracted and dilated, and the Christalline humor it self suffers gentle
motion.

The remaining and greater part of the second Membrane, which compasses about
the hinder part, and sides of the Eye, and where it is knit to the Sclerotes is
called Choroides, both because it compasses the Eye, and because it is endewed
with not a few small veins; and as the Al-wise Creator made the Corneal Tunicle
clear, that so the visible object might touch the internal or illuminated part
of the Eyes, so he made the second Membrane opacous, that the visible Image
being received into the Eye, might be the more clear by the shadow round about
it.

The third of the Membranes is called Retiformis, or Amphiblestroides; It is
soft and of a Mucous substance; it obtained its name, because being put into
the water it is like a little Net: It is stretched from the very center of the
Optic Nerve above the vital humor, even to the Ciliar Ligament.

The fourth Membrane is called Christalina, and compasses the Chrystalline
humor before, and is as thin as a Cobweb, and was therefore called Aranea.

The fifth and last Membrane is called, Vitrea, embracing the Vitreal Humor,
famous both for its lightness and thinness; in the Eyes of Living Creatures
being made thick by a gentle boiling, both this and the former may be discerned
from the humor they contain in them.

The Humors of the Eyes come now in play, which are in number three; the
Aqueal, Chrystalline, and Vitreal; all of them clear and void of any color,
that the Idea of visible things which have colors may be the better discerned.

Of the Humors, the Aqueal is the first, thinnest, and most fluid, moistning
the Christalline humor, and that part of the Vitreal which is next it; it is
distributed as well within as without the Uveal Membrane: It is gathered before
within the Cornea, behind by the Christalline and Vitreal Tunicle, and
comprehended with the Ciliar Ligament.

The Christalline humor excels the rest by far in soliddity, cleerness, and
splendour: It is produced by Nature from a clear portion of the Seed, and makes
the very Fundamental of the Eyes, so that they err that think it to be void of
heat and spirit, and also of true nourishment, for its original is of Seed, and
it increases like other parts: It is in form like a little lentil, of a
compressed roundness, in what part it looks toward the Pupilla, and is next
the Aqueal humor; that side of it which lies in the Cavity of the Vitreal
humor, is beheld in a longer Sphere; neither is this always so, for sometimes
the fore part is most globous, the hinder part more obtuse, and sometimes both
sides are alike: It is placed in the midst of the Eye, yet so as it sticks out
most on the fore side.

The Vitreal humor is greater than the other two, and is like melted glass, not
only in substance, but also in bright color; it occupies all the Cavity of the
Eye that is left by the other two; behind, and on both sides it is round;
before, it has a Cavity, in which is placed the Christalline humor.

The action of the Eyes is Sight; in which, if you regard the expression of the
visible Species within the Eye, the Christalline Humor has the pre-eminence:
If you regard the sensibility of this expression, then the optic Nerve and the
expansion of it by the Net-like Tunicle has the pre-eminence.

Also it ought to be doubtful to none, that the Eyes are the procurers of love,
for not only colors, but the universal figure and Harmony of things is
committed to them by the Mind, and the Grace and Beauty attending them.

Place here the Table of the fifteenth Chapter, which has the Number 19. at
the corner of the brass Plate.

Human anatomical diagrams AN EXPLANATION OF THE TABLE OF THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTER.
This Table comprehends the Eyelids with the Muscle called Levator; also the
proper Muscles of the Eyes; the Membranes and the Humors included in the
Membranes. FIG. I.
AA The Levator muscle of the superior Eyelid. B Its tendon thinly opened. CC
The Cartilages of the Eyelids. DD The Caruncle in the internal angle. dd The
Puncta Lacrymalia. E The external angle of the Eyelid.
FIG. II.
AA The Fat behind the Eyes. BBB The muscles of the Eyes not separated. CC Part
of the Eye covered with the tendons of the muscles.
FIG. III.
A The right muscle lifting up the Eye. aaa etc. Small Nerves carrying motion,
sense, and spirit. B The right muscle depressing the Eye. C The right muscle
drawing to the Eye. D The right muscle drawing the Eye from. E The inferior
oblique muscle, whose tendon is but only separated from the part of that which
follows. F The superior oblick muscle. G The Trochlea of the same muscle. H The
Sclerotes covering the hinder part of the Eye. II A portion of the Optic Nerve
inserted into the Eye.
FIG. IV. Shows a Sheeps Eye, and in it the seventh muscle which Man needs not.
ABCD The four right muscles. E The inferior oblick muscle, which here is
large. F The superior oblick muscle which is slender. G The Trochlea of the
superior oblick muscle. H The seventh muscle of Brutes drawing the Eye to. I
The hinder part of the Eye covered with the tendon of the seventh muscle. K A
part of the optic Nerve included in the seventrh muscle.
FIG. V.
ABCD Show the am e with the former, the oblick muscles being removed. aaaa The
common membrane celled Innominata. bb The Iris transparent through the Cornea.
FIG. VI.
AAA The Membrane Sclerotes dissected. B The Membrana Cornea. C A part of the
optic Nerve.
FIG. VII.
A The Membrana Uvea. a The hole in the Uvea or Pupilla. BB The Ciliar Ligament
with its strings. CC The Membrana Choroides looking black.
FIG. VIII.
AA The Net-like Membrane. aa A Rupture in it upon the Vitrial, which by reason
of its softness is unavoidable in a Dissection. BBB The Membrana Choroides not
yet separated. CCC The thickness of the Membrane Sclerotes. D Part of the
optic Nerve.
FIG. IX. The three humors of the Eyes received in a Vessel.
A The Crystalline Humor posited in the Cavity of the Vitreal. BB Some
appearance of the Ciliar strings. CC The Vitrial humor. DD The aqueal humor,
being but little, and placed round about the Vitrial.




CHAP. 16. Of the EARS.
EVen as the Eyes conduce to the pleasure of the life of Mortals, for the use
of the light, and are therefore most precious parts of the Body, Even so the
Organs of Hearing are excellent for the learning of Wisdom and Discipline: Of
these, some parts are manifest to the Eyes, and others hidden within the holes
of the Os Petrosum.

The manifest part of this Organ they call the Ear, Auricula, and more
distinctly the external Ear: This consists of diverse parts, of skin, some
small fat, and a fleshy Membrane underneath, but properly of a Cartilage, a
lobe, and private vessels: The Cartilage is the uppermost and largest portion
of the external Ear, that the passage of Hearing may be kept open night and
day: Its Cavities and Productions are not easily beaten out of play, for by
their soft bowing, they yield to the Head when it lies down, and to other
external things, but especially they force the sound they receive strongly
inwards.

A soft substance occupies the inferior part which is called Lobus; it is more
like fat than flesh, and in this, being pierced through, people wear Jewels:
Women in old time used to lay out more cost in nothing than in Pearls to hang
in their Ears; neither are the Arabian Women less mad who hang huge Rings
there, and hold it a grace also to wear such in the sides of their Noses.

These parts have Veins from the external and internal Jugulars, Arteries from
each Carotis and two Nerves, produced especially from the second pair of the
marrow of the Neck, to which a small branch is to be added from the hard
portion of the fifth pair, which passes by the hole called Caecum, and these
creep along the sides and lower part of the Ear.

Nay, least any thing should be wanting to the perfection of this noble Sense
in Man, the Divine Creator has placed two Muscles about the Cartilage we spoke
of, which for their singular thinness Galen calls Perigraphius or Linaments of
Muscles, expressed in the Membrane under the fat, with a Fleshy fibrous
intertexture, sometimes more plainly, sometimes more obscurely, that that being
stretched out, so often as we would hearken attentively, and the lower part of
the Ear being gently drawn back; by the help of these Muscles it passes more
directly to the Membrane of the Timpanum: Of these, that which moves the
Cartilage upwards and forwards, being placed upon the temporal Muscle, descends
next the external beginning of the Muscle of the Forehead, and growing narrower
by degrees; it ends in the Ear, in the upper part of it: Those which move the
Ear obliquely upwards and backwards, are held to be five; amongst which, most
commonly with that which went before, that is numbered, arising from the Muscles
of the hinder part of the Head, passes Transversly downwards above the
Dug-like process, and sticks to the root of the Cartilage, sometimes with two,
sometimes with three distinct Tendons.

The magnitude of the external Ear of Man is but small, and easily covered with
the Hair: In respect of its disposition, it is cold and dry: In figure it is
almost oval, yet not without various protuberances, of which that which makes the
extreme brim of it for its wreathed flexure is called Helix, the next which is
inner and answers to the first is called Anthelix: the eminences which behold
the Temples and are roughest with hairs, in some they have a thick tuft like a
Goats beard, is called Tragus, and that opposite to it Antitragus. The Cavities
of the Ears are three, the one interior, which is the Portal of the passage of
Hearing; the other is drawn about this, and from its similitude to a Shell,
called Concha: between the Helix and Anthelix, is a third comprehended, for
which, Authors are yet to seek of a name. The most wise Creator has placed the
ears in the upper part of the Body, because the air soonest carries sounds
upwards: The Cartilage is joined to the Os Petrosum by a strong Ligament, which
is produced from the Pericranium; the rest is joined to the Body by the Tendons
of the Muscles, and the common coverings.

The use of the Ears is not the ornament of the Head, nor yet to hang Jewels
in, although Nature has left certain footsteps of a hole in each Lobus, nor
yet the defense of the Brain which is sufficiently defended by its own proper
muniments, but that the aerial sound being collected and received by so many
Cavities, may more directly pass to the internal Caverns of the Ear, and
therefore although this external Ear be wanting in very many living Creatures,
yet it is palpable by this, that in man it conduces to the perfection of
he^^i^^ because such as have lost their Ears (not for their honesty) or have
them mutilated by cold, or the Cavities stoppped whereby detriment comes to the
hearing, they remedy it by holding the Cavity of their Hand over their Ear.

These are very many Glandulae about the Ear, which drink up the redundant
humor, and underprop the vessels, which Hippocrates by reason of their
neerness, calls Parotides.

But that internal and true Organ of Hearing, is placed in the rocky Process of
the Bone of the Temples, being not only safe by reason of its hardness, against
the violence of external injuries, but also the fitter to retain the sound by
reason of its dryness: Its Cavities and turnings are very many; four are
especially related by the Authors of Dissections which have relation to the use
of Hearing, namely the passage of Hearing, Timpanum, Labyrinthus, and Cochlea.

The passage of Hearing beginning from the Concha of the external Ear, is
clothed with a thin skin and a Membrane with some fat, and with the
Pericranium, even to the borders of the Timpanum: It has a wreathed passage
turning something upwards, that so things which outwardly fall into it, may not
come to the Timpanum, and corruption gathered within it may the readier be
carried out: In the passage of hearing is a viscous humor gathered, yellowish
in color and bitterish in taste, which is a present remedy for wounds and
ulcers; the Ancients called it Cerumen, and the place it self in which it is
found the Hive of the Ears, and we in England call it Ear-wax: It has its use,
for such things as creep into the Ears, are entangled in it, as it were in
Bird-lime, and so offended with its bitterness that they cannot pass to the
Timpanum. In the end of the passage of Hearing is a Membrane, which the Ancient
Greeks called by the common Name Meninge, or the Lymen of the Ear, but Modern
Anatomists, by reason of that eminent Cavity which is near it, call it the
Membrane of the Timpanum; it is the internal covering of the Ear and very thin,
yet by reason of its singular clamminess, it is a Nervous Ligament firm enough,
that it not only sustains the external force of the air without any prejudice,
but by its dryness preserves the Species of the sound, and sends it into the
internal Cavities of the Ear; it seems to be but an expansion of the
Periostion, which being separated, that is separated also; it is exquisite in
sense, both by reason of the Nerves that are distributed in it, and that pass
under it, sometimes it is double, and many times the excrements being thick and
sticking to it like a crust, brings no small prejudice to the Hearing: It looks
down right from an oblique Situation, whereby it is safer from outward
violence, and apter to receive the image of voice; it sticks firmly to the
little bone which is called Mullens, and to the Cavity of the Orbita next to
it, if you except but that part which touches the superior region of the
passage of Hearing, for there the connection is looser, so that the Membrane may
be a little opened.

For in the superier and internal Cavity of the passage of Hearing, the
provident Creator has placed a Muscle intertexed with the Membrane growing to
the skin, and this is seen not only in men grown up, but also continually in
Infants, which here by its thin substance of fleshy fibrae growing narrower
from a broad beginning, with a subtle Tendon touching the Membrane of the
Timpanum, is carried even to the Malleolus, that the Membrane being stretched a
little outward and upwards toward the superior part, the sound may be the
righter taken and the better conveied to the innermost part of the Ear.

This Membrane being taken away, a large Cavity appears, which Hippocrates
rightly calls Antrosa, by reason of the various Cavities into which it is
diffused: Fallopius calls it Timpanum, because the Membrane is placed round
about the edges of it, like a Drum-head: He that would view this accuratly,
must first take away the three small bones placed in it; they are distitute of
Membranes, and yet about their extremities, they are bound with a slender
Ligament for their firmer nexure, the first of these from the likeness of its
form they call Malleolus, it has a round head from which by degrees it is
attenuated, about the middle it is adorned with two processes, one of which is
short, to which the internal Muscle joins it self; the other is longer but
thinner, which lies upon the roundness of the Timpanum, the remainder of the
little bone whether you compare it to a little foot or to a tail, its extremity
being a little turned inwards, lightly turns the Membrane sticking to it, about
the middle; its head is joined to the Anvil placed to it, by such a nexure as
is not very straight by reason of the looseness of the Ligament: It is more
strongly joined to the Membrane under it, for the safeguard and motion of
which, the Moleolus is framed.

But seeing that to the exquisite transmission of sound, it is not sufficient
to unfold the Membrane of the Timpanum, a little outward, but also to consider
the rest of the Dimensions; The wise Creator has produced a Muscle, which is
very little, but in exactness of all parts equal with the greatest, and has
secured it in a singular passage of the Os Petrosum: It takes its beginning
like a Ligament, at what part the stony process is joined to the Wedg-like
Bone, and growing thicker by degrees, it passes commonly with a double,
sometimes with a single Tendon, to the shorter process of the Malleolus and its
Neck, and therefore the bone being moved inwards toward the forepart, it draws
the Membrane of the Timpanum, which is annexed to it inwards also.

The other of the little Bones of Hearing, obtains the name of Anvil, and is of
a thicker body; this has a light Cavity, in which, the head of the Malleolus
is received; as also two Processes, of which, the shorter leans to the hinder
Cavity of the Timpanum, the other is longer, and is firmly, though loosly,
bound by a Ligament to the head of the Stirrup.

Also the third small Bone of the Timpanum is called Stapes, or a Stirrup, from
its figure, it has a round head, which, as we told you, was knit to the
Anvill, it stretches out from its head two Cavities, and a little log bowed
like a bow, with a very thin and porous Basis, least any thing should stop the
passage of the sound; this answers in likeness to the circumference of of the
oval hole, to which it is bound with a loose bond, so that it may be driven
within its Cavity but cannot be pulled out without violence, and these two
small bones are formed for the Malleolus sake that they may conveniently
underprop it and be observant to its motions. To the Stirrup is added a fourth
little bone, round and small, annexed to the Ligament of the Stirrup, which
Francis Sylvius is said first to have found out.

Now the Cavity it self which is called Timpanum comes to view, and presents a
various face to them that behold it, for it has many Cavities and turnings, in
which the violent conflux of air is diverted, and the reflection of the voice
hindered by its singular inequality; also it has diverse pores and passages
which transmit the images of sounds: above, where the shorter Process of the
Anvil is, a large Den is opened, which by its small Caverns opens a way into the
inexplicable hollowness of the Dug-like Process: Beneath, and toward the fore
part, there is a passage from the Timpanum to the Pallat, which is narrower
toward the end by reason of the access of Cartilages, by which the sound being
as it were stirred up in the mouth with the air, passes to the Ear, so also
the humidities against Nature are cast out by the pallat, and that is the
reason such as are dull of hearing, hear better their mouths being open, and
breathing restrained, but when they yawn they are altogether deaf; and although
the outward Ear be altogether stopped, yet they percive their own speech well
enough; neither can any other reason be given, why the mouth and nostrils being
stopped that Membrana of the Timpanum is turned outward with a sound, and if
the violence be the greater it is hurt by it, and by this passage some will
avoid the smoke of Tobacco which they take, out at their Ears: Also Alcmaeon
held that Goats also breathed by their Ears, the air and what is mixed with it,
so readily running from the Pallat to the Timpanum.

The middle of the antrous Cavity which sticks up like a little smooth hill,
has a hole on each side, of which, that which is greatest and shut with the
thin and clear Basis of the Stirrup, they call the Oval window; that which is
less they call the Round window; the one deduceth the sound to the labirinth,
the other to the beginning of the Cochlea; at the end of this, more small pores
are seen.

The oval Window looks into another Cavity far less than the former, which by
reason of its bony passages returning into the same Cavity, Fallopius calls the
Labyrinth; its compass is round, and besides that oval hole which is over it,
it has four holes of its own which end in periods, and a fifth which opens it
self in the end of the broader circle of the Cochlea: These the following Table
sufficiently manifests, but the Labyrinth whole with its circles and the
Cochlea, the Table of the eight Chapter in the second, seventh, and eight
Figure represents.

The Cochlea is a famous Cavity of the Ear, with two circles and a third
portion bowed like a spoon; it is placed in the common rocky process, it is
spermatical, dry, and light, of a substance fit to preserve the sound.

In these abstruse Cavities air is contained even from the very birth; to this
hidden Organ of Hearing are small Veins and Arteries distributed from the
internal and foremost branches of the Jugular Vein and Carotis Artery, but
especially Nerves; for whereas a double portion of the fifth pair is carried
into the posterior passage of the Os Petrosum, or first hole of the Bone of the
Temples, one is harder, which enters the hole called by the Ancients Caecum,
and passes the Skul, by a wreathed passage; the other is softer and divided
from the former by a process in the bony passage, this passes by its greater
part to the Center of the Cochlea, by its lesser to the circles of the
Labyrinth; in both places it perfects the office of hearing: to these a
singular branch from the fourth Conjugation adds its self, and passes to the
Timpanum, from the internal part of the Ear, from whence passing out it divides
its self and partly joins it self to the harder portion of the fifth pair,
partly it is distributed to the Caverns of the Dug-like Process.

From this the Membranes have sense, and the internal Muscle its motion, but in
this part of the Organ of Hearing, if it be demanded which is chiefest and most
necessary to hearing, we must make some distinction, for if we regard that part
which retains the sound, and sends it to the internal parts, the Cochlea will
gain the pre-eminence, but if we search after what is required to the
perceiving of the sound received, the expansion of the soft Nerve placed in the
circulation of the Cochlea will have the dignity.

After the Senses of Seeing and Hearing, there is no reason we should treat of
the Organs of Smelling, Tasting, and Feeling, for the Nostrils are the
Instruments of Smelling, the Bones and Muscles of which we treated of in the
thirteeth Chapter, especially of the Nerves of Smelling in the fourteenth
Chapter. The Tongue is the Organ of Tasting, of whose substance, Muscles, and
Vessels, we writ copiously in the eleventh Chapter: The Feeling is common to
all the parts that have Nerves, or their Branches or Membranes, and has no
particular Organ of its own.

Place here the Table of the sixteenth Chapter, which has the Number 20. at
the corner of the brass Plate.

Human anatomical diagrams AN EXPLANATION of the TABLE of the sixteenth CHAPTER.
This Table represents the external Ear with his Muscles and Cartilages, as
also the internal or chief Organ of Hearing, its Cavities, Bones, Passages and
Nerves, as they are found out by Dissection of such Bodies as are grown up.
FIG. I. Shows the external Ear whole, with its muscles and Cavities.
AA The Helix of the Ear. BB The Anthelix. C The Tragus, or beard of the Ear. D
The Antitragus. E The external lobe of the Ear. FF The external Concha of the
Ear. GG The cavity between the Helices called Innominata. H The muscle moving
the Ear right upwards. III The threefold muscle with his tendon moving the Ear
oblickly upwards, divided into so many parts.
FIG. II. Shows the external Ear conspicuous behind.
AA The skin with the Membrane stretched upwards and downwards. BB The
Cartilage which makes the Ear. C The hole for the passage of hearing. D A
portion of the Ligament of the external Ear. E Part of the Lobus of the Ear.
FIG. III. Shows the fore part of the internal Ear.
A Part of the bone of the Temples containing the rocky process. B The passage
of hearing. C The beginning of the passage or hive. D The duglike process. E
The bodkinlike process broken off.
FIG. IV. The bone of the foregoing Figure is showed, in which the passage of
hearing is cut off, that so the membrane of the Timpanum may be seen.
AA The beginning of the passage of hearing. BB The membrane of the Timpanum. C
The little foot of the Malleus transparent by the membrane. D The duglike
process. E The bodkinlike appendix.
FIG. V. Shows the Muscles of the internal Ear.
A The muscle moving the membrane and Maleolus outward. B The membrane of the
Timpanum. CC The muscle moving the Malleolus and membrane inwards. E The head
of the Malleolus.
FIG. VI.
A Part of the passage of Hearing passing to the Timpanum. BC The cavity of the
Timpanum, in which B The oval hole. C The round hole.
FIG. VII Shows the rocky process with the small bones of the Timpanum in their
situation.
A The Malleolus. B The Anvil. C The superior part of the stirrup conspicuous.
DD The bowing of the Cochlea.
FIG. 7. Shows the three small bones out of their situation.
A The Malleolus with its two processes, its short and long. B The Anvil
applied to the Malleolus. C The Stirrup. D The small bone joined to the
Ligament of the stirrup.
FIG. VIII. Shows the inferior face of the bone of the Temples.
AA The extremity of a quil thrust through that passage of Hearing which is
carried to the pallat. BB Shows the same passage broke off from the next part.
FIG. IX.
AA The cavity of the Cochlea, whose broader part goes to the Labyrinth. BB The
cavity of the Labyrinth, in which the oval hole is conspicuous: also four other
holes which open themselves in the circles are obumbrated by a black color:
the fifth in the extremity of the circle of the Cochlea, is broken off. If you
would see how they are in Infants, look the first Table of the eighth Chapter,
the seventh figure.
FIG. X.
AA The beginning of the passage of the first hole of the bone of the Temples,
into which the Nerve of Hearing passes. BB The rocky process of the bone of
the Temples, in which the cavities are contained.
FIG. XI.
ABCD The end of the passage into which the Nerve of Hearing proceeds laid
open, the bone being taken away. B The cavity in which the softer portion of
the Nerve of Hearing lies in the Center of the Cochlea. C The process between
each portion of the Nerve standing up like a bridge. D Another cavity called
Caecum by the Ancients, Aquaeductus by Fallopius, by which the harder portion
of the nerve of hearing obliquely descends. EE Two footsteps of the circles in
the Labyrinth, which you may see whole, Chap. 8. Table 1. fig. 7, 8.
FIG. XII. Contains a portion of the bone of the Temples, in which the Timpanum
being taken away, and the passage which contains the Nerve of Hearing there
appears.
AA The softer portion of the nerve of Hearing. BB The harder portion of the
nerve of Hearing, obliquely descending under the Timpanum, being thicker about
the place it goes out. CC A small Nerve from the fourth pair joining it self to
the harder nerve of Hearing.




CHAP. 17. Of the Bones of the Extreme Parts.
FRom the Trunk of the Body of Man we come to his Limbs, from the Middle Parts
to the Extreme, to the contemplation of the Hands and Feet, both by the Order
of Nature and of Dissection. These are the Supporters of the whole Body, the
other the Stewards and Storers of it; The Limbs have strong Bones, stout
Muscles, and very many Vessels, for their Life, Nourishment, and Motion sake.

The Bones which are commonly assigned to the Hand, are the Shoulders, Cubits,
and such as are proper to the extremity of the Hand; the Bones of the Shoulder,
are, the Claviculae and Scapulae.

The Claviculae make one Bone on each side, fistulous and thick, more bowed in
Men than they are in Women: One of the Extremities of it is joined to the
Sternum, the other with the superior Process of the Scapula, where it produces
the Acromium or the top of the Shoulder: Its nexure is loose, but with a very
stout Ligament and strengthened with Cartilages.

The Bone called Scapula is broad, and thin; not so much for the defense of the
Costals of the Back, over which it lies like a Buckler, as for the safe
articulation or joynting of the Clavicula and Shoulder: It is in form
triangular, by its longest side stretched out in the Basis, with which the
other two being unequal in length, make two angles, the one superior, the other
inferior: It is hollow within, gibbous without. It sends forth a threefold
Process, of which, one touches the top of the Shoulder, and is called the
Spine of the Scapula, by reason of its figure: It is knit to the Claricula: The
other is lower and less, not much unlike a Ravens Bill, and therefore called
Coracoides: The third is shorter, within whose Cavity the head of the Shoulder
with its Cartilage is hid. To these come their proper additions, as singular
Ligaments by which the Scapula is joined to the head of the Shoulder, and also
to the Clavicula; these are in number reputed to be five, the first of which is
broader than the rest, and springs from the shorter Process encompassing the
whole joint, and is strongly fastened to the first and internal region of the
head of the Shoulder: The second is famous for strength, produced from the
external side of the Process Coracois, and is inserted inwardly into the
Acromium. The third Ligament is round, and takes its original externally from
the Process Coracois, and ends internally in the head of the Shoulder. The
fourth begins above from the Neck of the Scapula; and joins it self externally
to the head of the Shoulder. The fifth has the same beginning with the former,
and ends behind about the external head of the Shoulder; and these Ligaments as
they regard the strength of the Shoulder, so the third, fourth, and fifth, are
fitted to receive the Tendons of the Muscles.

We come now to the Bone of the Shoulder which is large and strong: It has a
great head defended with a Cartilage above: It has a cleft before, into which
the Tendinous beginning of the Muscle Biceps descends for its greater safeguard
and strength; it is knit to the Scapula by Diarthrosis, or articulation; the
Shoulder is globous before, depressed behind: the superior part of the Shoulder
has always a manifest Appendix, to the inferior part sticks out with two
Processes especially, of which the external gives beginnings to the Muscles of
the Metacarpus and those that extend the fingers; at the other, those of the
Wrest, and those that bow the Fingers have their beginning: To these comes
another Prominence outward, for the more commodious bowing of the Radius: Here
are two Cavities, behold of which, the foremost is least, the hindmost
greatest, about which the Arm is turned. The Cubitus is composed of a double
Bone, which are joined together at the Extremity, but separated in the middle,
where notwithstanding they are joined by a Membranous Ligament, that the motion
might be the readier, and also that the Muscles might be the safer.

The first bone of the Cubitus is called Vlna because it is often used to
measure things with, for of old, it was only called Os Cubiti, as the Bone of
the Shoulder was called the Arm; this is larger than the other, and longer, and
attenuated by degrees from the Back; above, it has two Processes, one which is
less and more acute, which is the foremost; the greater is more obtuse, which
is the hindmost, and by the Ancients is called Ancon and Olecranon. Two
Cavities are to be added to these, of which, the exterior and lesser receives
the head of the Radius: The other is larger and semicircular, by which the Vlna
is joined to the Shoulder by that articulation which the Greeks call Ginglymos:
the inferior part of the Vlna ends in a round knob, which is called Styloides,
and by the intervening of Cartilages is knit by a ligament to the Bones of the
Wrest.

The other Bone of the Cubitus is called Radius, and is the higher in Situation
and the shorter, and having a round head, is received by the Vlna, although by
a singular Cavity it receive the Bone of the Shoulder; at the other extremity
is thicker and by a lesser Cavity receives the Vlna, by a greater the Bone of
the Wrest.

The Hand is divided into three parts, Carpus, Metacarpus, and the Fingers: The
Carpus or Wrest is formed of eight small Bones, something different the one
from the other, both in magnitude and form; four of these are placed beneath,
so many are joined to the Bones of the Metacarpus by Synarthrosis; four are
superior, of which, three are joined to the Cubitus and Radius, they are joined
by a Cartilaginous Ligament, and by another Transverse one, which as it defends
the Bones of the Wrest, so it constrains the Tendons of the Muscles to stretch
out the Fingers.

The Metacarpus is composed of four Bones, long and slender, and disjoined in
the middle, that so the Muscles may lie the safer between the Bones, and their
weight may not hinder the agility of the Hand: they have broad Apendices
beneath, into the Cavities of which the Bones of the Wrest pass; the superior
are round, that they may the better receive the orders of the Fingers.

Fifteen Bones, which are diverse in respect of magnitude, make up the Fingers,
if you reckon the Thumb and all, for the first in the Fingers is larger than
the second, and the second than the third, which is covered with the Nail;
externally they are all round, internally plain, that so we might grasp sollid
things the easier: beneath they have broad Processes, in the Cavity of which
they receive others; above they have round Processes received within the
Cavities of others.

The Foot makes up the other Extreme part, under which common name is
comprehended the Thigh, Leg, and that which is commonly called the Foot. The
Bone of each Thigh is but one, but in strength and bigness second to none,
because it is to sustain the whole bulk of the Body; it is round before, but
something compressed behind, and has a rough thing like a line, stretched
obliquely toward the lower part for the more ready commission of the knees: It
has famous Appendices both above and beneath, joined to its Processes; the
superior Appendix joined to its Process is large, and makes the globous head of
the Thigh, having a strong Neck which passes into the Cavity of the Os
Ischium, Ilium, and Pubis (which some call the Funnel, others the Box:) It is
kept in this Cavity with stout Ligaments, one is broad and Membranous, which
compasses about the whole joint, the other is round which is produced from the
Cavity its self, and presently received in the Head: under the neck of the
Thigh are two Processes beheld, and they are increased by their Apendices, of
which, the external is called Trochanter or Rotator major, conspicuous with its
Cavity and properlines; the other or internal which designs the figure of the
blunt knob, is called Trochanter or Rotator minor. Each of them has a strong
and safe insertion, a stable beginning and strong Muscles. The inferior
Appendix of the Thigh waxing thick by degrees with his process is placed in the
Cavities of the Tibia, with a double Protuberance like two large Heads; the
Cavity as it is light before, so behind it is very notable, by which large
vessels with the great Nerve of the fourth pair, is carried to the Legs:
behind, Nature has placed two Bones called Sesamoides to the inferior
Appendices of the Thigh, which defend the beginnings of the Muscle called
Gasterocnemius in its motion.

Before in the Joint of the Thigh with the Tibia is the Mola, which also is
called Patella, a short round Bone, sticking to the Tendons of the Muscles
which extend the Leg, from a Cartilaginous substance it grows to the sollidity
of a Bone by degrees: It is plain without, gibbous within and covered with a
Cartilaginous crust; its nexure is loose that so it may avoid luxation the
better, and yet it is no help at all to the motion of the Muscles.

The Leg like the Cubit is composed of two Bones, much differing both in
thickness and strength; they are disjoined in the middle, and have a strong
Ligament between, and give security to the Muscles that move the Feet.

The first and chiefest of these is called Tibia: It is large, strong, and by
reason of the variety of its sides almost triangular, of which, the foremost
toward the internal side is altogether destitute of flesh, and makes an acute
angle or Spine. It has Appendices different in magnitude, of which, the
superior is famous in largeness, diducted behind into two heads, on the top
with long Cavities it receives the hollow inferior Apendix of the Thigh: in the
middle between the knobs arises a strong Ligament, which makes the
articulation strong, and this is helped both by that Membranous Ligament which
is wrapped about the whole Joint, and by other particular ones, both before and
on the sides. The inferior Apendix of the Tibia is less, and yet it has a
notable Process sticking out on the internal side of the Foot, which is called
the internal Ancle: It has also diverse Cavities, one lateral, to which the
Fibula passes, and two others distinguished by a light Protuberance which is
under the Ancle: as it is above committed to the Thigh, so it is below
committed to the Ancle by Gynglymos.

The other Bone of the Leg is called Fibula, and it is equal in length to the
Tibia, but it is smaller and weaker by ods, from a thick back growing thin by
degrees: It makes a light Cavity above by its round Apendix, to which the
external bounch of the Tibia is joined, and it sends a manifest Process to the
outside of the Foot, which is called the external Ancle-bone, and defends the
Nexus of the Talus with the Tibia.

We come now to the Bones of the extremity of the Foot, which like those of the
Hands, are divided into three parts, Tarsus, Metatarsus, and the Toes: The
Bones of the Tarsus are seven, which differ mightily both in bigness and figure.

The first of them is called Talus, or Astragalus, and conduces more to the
motion of the Foot than the rest: It has a large head and lightly sinuous,
that it may be the better fitted to the Tibia, comprehended on both sides by
the Ancles, it is joined to the Ancles and the Bones of the Tarsus by various
and strong Ligaments before by a prominence with the Bone called Cymbiformis;
underneath partly it sticks out and partly has Cavities, and is joined to the
Calcaneus.

The Calcaneus, Calx, or Heel-bone is the second Bone of the Tarsus, excelling
the rest both in bigness and strength, it is long and stretched out toward the
hinder part, that a man might stand the firmer and not easily fall backwards,
it is unequal with knobs, for the more firm nexure of the Tendons of the
Muscles extending the Feet. It has Cavities on the sides that it might give
descent to the Tendons, especially on the inside by which both Tendons and
Vessels are carried to the Feet: into the Calcaneum are Ligaments transversly
inserted from each Ancle, under which the Tendons of the Muscles pass safely to
move the Toes, as it is joined to the Bone called Cymbiformis before, so above
it is joined by strong Ligaments to the Talus.

The Third Bone of the Tarsus is called Cymbiformis, or Naviculare, seeing it
is carried as it were from the broader hinder part of the Hip to the Narrower
fore part, by a crooked passage; here by a Cavity it receives the Talus, and is
again received by the Wedg-like Bones.

Three Bones make up the rest of the Tarsus, to which the Ancients gave no
names. Fall^pius calls them Sphenoidea, or Wedglike; of these, the first
exceeds the third, and the third the second in magnitude

The second part of the Foot is called Metatarsus, and consists of five Bones,
unequal both in length and thickness, yet are they strong and disjoined in the
midst and give safety to the Muscles; they are thicker where they are joined to
the Tarsus, slenderer afterward; at last being increased by Processes, they
receive the heads of the Toes in their Cavities.

The Bones of the Toes are fourteen, of which, those two of the great Toe are
bigger and stronger than the rest; the other Toes have three apiece, much about
the bigness of the Bones of the Fingers.

The Bones called Sesamoida, remain yet to be spoken to, so called because in
bigness and compressed roundness they are like the seeds Sesamus. From their
first original they are Cartilaginous, and grow sollid by age: Their bigness is
various by reason of the Bones they stick to. They usually account twelve of
them to be in the Fingers, and as many in the Toes, but usually there is fewer.
They stick to the Joints under the Fingers fastened to the Ligaments, and
defend not only the Tendons, but also the Joints.

But seeing that in the following Table you have an elegant Sceleton, or the
joynings of the Bones of the whole Body, it were well worth the while to show
their nexures in a few words. The nexure of the Bones regards either Rest or
Motion; such as regard Rest, are called Symphysis; and this is done either
immediately, or by means of another Body.

That which is performed immediately is done three ways; of which, the first
is Rhaphe, or Sutura, when they are so joined as though they were sewed
together as the Bones of the Skull. The second is Harmonia, or a connexure by a
line as in most of the Bones of the upper Jaw. The third is Gomphosis, and is
as when a Nail is stuck in a board, and so the Teeth are fastened in their
Cavities.

Also the union that is made by means of another Body is done three ways. The
first is called Synchondrosis, which is performed by the intervening of
Cartilages; and such are the Bones of the Sternum, Pubis, and many others. The
second is Synneurosis, which is done by the intervening of Nervous parts and
Ligaments, whether they be round or dilated into Membranes. The third is called
Syssarcosis, which is a nexure by Flesh, as the Muscles about the Shoulder and
Thigh, and the Gums about the Teeth.

The connexure which regards the motion of the Bones is called Arthron, or
Articulation, and is divided into Diarthrosis, or Dearticulation, and
Synarthrosis, or Coarticulation. Diarthrosis is a connexure of Bones, prepared
for evident, strong, and easy motion, as in the Arms, Hands, Thighs and Feet.
Synarthrosis is a connexure of Bones, in which motion is more obscure, weak,
and difficult: both of these kinds of Articulations consists in three Manners.

The first of these is called Enarthrosis, namely when the Cavity receiving is
deep, and the head received into it long, and this is seen in the Thigh with
the Acetabulum, and in the Astragalus, with the Bone called Cymbiforme.

The second is called Arthrodia in which the Cavity is light and the head
committed to it short and depressed; such is between the hinder part of the
head and the first Joint of the Neck, between the inferior Jaw and the Bone of
the Temples, the Ribs with the Vertebrae, and the Cartilages of the Ribs with
the Sternum, the Bones of the Carpus with the Metacarpus, and the Bones of the
Tarsus with the Metatarsus.

The third is called Gynglimus, in which, Bones are so joined that the head of
one passes into the Cavity of another, and in like manner his head into his
Cavity, and so Hippocrates thought the Vertebrae were joined on the hinder
part, so the Vlna is joined with the Shoulder, and the Thigh with the Tibia,
the Tibia with the Astragalus, and the Astragalus with the Calcaneus.

Place here the Table of the seventeenth Chapter, which has the Number 21. at
the corner of the brass Plate.

Human anatomical diagrams An EXPLANATION of the TABLE of the seventeenth
Chapter.
This Table exactly presents the Bones of Man to your view, so that the
Composition of the Bones we mentioned before in the Abdomen, Breast, and Head
are here seen, especially the Bones of the Hands and Feet are seen both before
and behind; also the Ligaments of the Thigh and Tibia; lastly, the Bones called
Sesamoides are curiously represented. FIG. I. Shows the Sceleton of a Body
grown up.
AA The internal fide of each Scapula. BB Both the Claviculae. CC The bone of
the shoulder, otherwise called the bone of the arm. aa The head of the shoulder
produduced from the appendix. bb The external bunch of each shoulder. cc The
internal bunch of the shoulder. DD The bone of the Cubit called Radius. EE The
bone of the Cubit called Ulna. FF The eight bones of the Carpus. GG The thumb
composed of three bones. HH The Metacarpus composed of four bones. II The four
fingers composed of three bones. KK The thigh which some call Crus. LL The
Mola, or Knee-pan. dd The head of the bone of the thigh, or superior appendix.
ee The neck of the bone of the thigh. ff Trochanter, or Rotator major. gg
Trochanter, or Rotator minor. hh The appendix, or inferior head of the thigh.
MM The Tibia. NN The Fibula. ii The internal ancle. kk The external ancle. OO
The seven bones of the Tarsus conspicuous before. PP The five bones of the
Metatarsus. QQ The bones of the toes, of which the great toe has two, and the
rest three apiece. ** etc. The appendices of the shoulder, Radius, Thigh,
Tibia, distinguished by a small line from the rest of the bone.
FIG. II. Contains the Scapula with the Clavicula, to which the bones of the
Shoulder, Cubit, and Hand are joined.
A The left Clavicula, in which a The head which is lightly sinewous where it
is committed to the Sternum. b The other extremity of the Clavicula, whereby it
is joined to the process of the Scapula. B The Scapula. c The short process of
the Scapula receiving the shoulder. d The process of the Scapula called
Coracois. e The process of the Scapula called Spina. f The superior angle. g
The inferior angle. hh The basis of the Scapula. C The notable hinder bone of
the shoulder. f The greater or backward cavity of the bone of the shoulder. g
The crooked process of the bone of the Ulna. D The bone Ulna. E The Radius. F
The external face of the Wrest. G The Metacarpus consisting of four bones. H
The Thumb consisting of three bones. II The orders of the fingers.
FIG. III. Contains the eight bones of the Wrest expressed largely, that so
they might be the better distinguished.

FIG. IV. Shows the Os Ischium, Illium, and Pubis, and under them, the thigh
leg, and Foot.
A The external face of the Os Ilium B The Acetabulum which receives the head
of the thigh. C The thigh conspicuius behind, in which a The superior appendix.
b Trochanter major. The rough line of the thigh. c Trochanter minor. d The
posterior cavity of the inferior appendix. ee The heads of the inferior
appendix. f The protuberances distinguishing the cavities of the Tibia. D The
Tibia conspicuous behind. g The internal ancle. E The Fibula. h The external
ancle. ** The appendices of the Tibia. F The Tarsus. G The Metatarsus. H The
great toe consisting of two bones.
FIG. V. Propounds the bones of the Tarsus distinctly, in which
A Os Astragali. B Os Calcanei. C Os Cymbiforme. D Os Cubiforme. EEE The three
other Wedlike bones
FIG. VI. Show the four greater and four lesser bones called Sesamoides.

FIG. VII. Shows the superior part of the thigh with the Acetabulum.
aa A broad Ligament compassing the joint of the thigh dissected. b A round
Ligament arising out of the Acetabulum.
FIG. VIII. The inferior part of the Thigh and superior part of the Leg is
showed.
a A broad Ligament compassing the Joint. b A Ligament produced out of the
Sepiment. cc The cavities of the Tibia receiving the thigh. d The knee-pan with
a portion of the tendon joined to it.




CHAP. 18. Of the Muscles of the Hands.
THE Hands, seeing they are the famous Instruments of admirable Works, cannot
want both various and strong Muscles; the greatest part of which, together with
those that are referred to the Feet, better deserve the names of Muscles than
those which we have hitherto showed about the Breast, Abdomen, Back, and Head;
therefore that they may not want their vulgar distinction wherein they are
distinguished into Head, Belly and Tail, being something like Mice or Lizards
if you take away their Feet: we must take the beginning of the Muscle for the
head, that part to which the contraction is made for the tail, the end of the
Muscle, or that thin and Nervous part by which it moves; for the belly, the
middle part of the Muscle, which is more swelled by reason of Flesh.

The Tendines of these move admiration almost, being famous in strength, and
clear in color; and although we call it the tail of the Muscle, yet is it
properly a Spermatical part stretched along the length of the Muscle, which
being before scattered in Fibrae, is now gathered together, and being endewed
with Spirit by the Nerves, moves the part it is inserted into by contracting it.

The Muscles of the Hand, pertain, some to the Shoulder, some to the Cubit, and
some to the Hand it self. The Muscles called Deltoides, lift up the Shoulder,
called so from its form, being large and fleshy; it arises from a broad
beginning from the middle Clavicula, the top of the Shoulder or Acromium, and
it is fastened into the midst of the Shoulder with a strong Tendon: Also the
Muscle which proceeds from the Process of the Scapula called Coracois, helps to
perform this office. It has a long fleshy body, and is inserted about the
middle of the inner part of the Shoulder. The Pectoral Muscle which we spoke of
in his proper place, draws the Shoulder to the Breast, and the broadest of the
Back draws it back again, of both which we spoke in the twelfth Chapter.

The Muscle called Rotundus major depresseth the Shoulder; it is of a fleshy
thick body: It arises from the inferior angle of the Scapula, and is inserted
into the Shoulder near the Tendon of the Pectoral Muscle. Also the Muscle
called Rotundus minor depresseth the Shoulder, and if you heed their nexure, it
is but a certain portion of the former: it arises from the inferior angle of
the Scapula, and from a round belly becomes slenderer, and ends in the Neck of
the Shoulder.

Three Muscles seem to compass the Shoulder about; of which, two are placed
above the Scapula, three beneath it: the first of the Suprascapulars, arising
from the Basis of the Scapula, above the Process called Spiniformis, is carried
foreward with a strong Tendon and knit to the fifth Ligament of the Shoulder.
The second arising from the Basis of the Scapula under the Spina, being fleshy
and thick ends with a short and broad Tendon in that Ligament of the Shoulder
which is called the fourth. The Infrascapularis is carried from the inferior
side of the Basis of the Scapulae, being fleshy and broad and ends in the third
Ligament of the Shoulder,

The Cubit is bowed by two Muscles placed before; of which, the first is called
Biceps from his double beginning; from its figure it is called, a Fish: it
arises partly from the Funnel of the Scapula, partly from the Process
Coracois, and descends into the superior head of the Radius, with a round but
strong Tendon. The other of the bowing Muscles is called Brachiaeus; this lies
under the former: it takes its beginning about the middle of the Shoulder, and
being dilated downwards with a fleshy end, it concludes as well in the Ligament
of the Joint, as in the Appendix of the Vlna and Radius.

The Cubit is extended by two other Muscles called Postici, of which, the first
and longer is composed of a double beginning; one high about the Neck of the
Scapula, the other low under the head of the Shoulder; under the Tendon of the
broadest Muscle of the Back; it is broad within, and ends outwardly in the top
of the Cubit: The second extender is shorter and arises about the middle of
the Shoulder, and being joined to the former it ends outwardly on the top of
the Cubit. To these Extenders the Muscle called Anconeus is joined, being of a
very small body, arising behind from the inferior part of the Shoulder, and
descends a little obliquely into the side of the Vlna between the two Bones of
the Cubit.

To move the Radius are four Muscles produced, of which, two which are commonly
called Pronatores, turn the Radius inwards; the other two are called
Supinatores, and move it outward. The first of the Pronati is square in form,
rising transversly from the internal side of the Vlna, and is committed to the
internal part of the Radius. The second is called Teres from its round body
produced from the internal bunch of the Shoulder, and passes obliquely almost
to the middle of the Radius.

The first of the Supinati which is the longer, takes its beginning higher
above the external bunch of the Shoulder, and sending down a Membranous Tendon
passes to the inferior Appendix of the Radius: the other is shorter and thin,
arising below about the Ligament of the Shoulder, and ends near the middle of
the Radius.

Four Muscles are assigned to the Wrest, although three of them come even to
the Metacarpus: two of these are bowers and as many extenders of the bowers of
the Wrest by reason of their difference of Situation: the one is called
internal, the other external; both of them arise from the internal knob of the
Shoulder: The internal passes to the fourth Bone of the Wrest, the external to
the Bone of the Metacarpus that passes to the forefinger.

The internal of the extending Muscles, descending from the external knob of
the Shoulder, is carried to the bone of the Metacarpus which is subject to the
little finger. The external Extending Muscle, arising above the external bunch
of the Shoulder, is fastened often times with a double Tendon, into the first
and second Bone of the Metacarpus.

To the palm of the Hand is referred the Muscle called Palmarius, by means of
which the wrinkling of the skin is the better performed. It takes its beginnig
from the internal bunch of the Shoulder, and stretches out a Membranous Tendon
by the Palm of the Hand, even to the confines of the Fingers, the fleshy
Membrane again unfolds the skin being wrinkled by this Muscle.

The Fingers of the Hand requires various motion and strength, and therefore
various Muscles with strong Tendons, bow them, extend them, and turn them to
the sides. Of the bowing Muscles, some are subservient to more Fingers than
one, some only to the Thumb: Those that are subservient to more, are those that
are dedicated to the motion of the first, second, and third Internodii, of the
four Fingers, (I do not know what English word to give Internodium, it
signifies the space between one Joint and another) that which bows the second
Internodium takes its beginning from the internal knob of the Shoulder, and
toward the end is divided into four Tendons, which pass into the second Bones
of the Fingers: The Muscle bowing the third Internodium, takes its beginning
from the internal bunch of the Shoulder, and the foremost Process of the Vlna,
and with four strong Tendons proceeds to the third Bones of the Fingers. The
bowers of the first Internodium of the Fingers, by reason of its thin and round
Body is called Lumbricalis, and arises from the Membranes of the Tendons of
the foregoing Muscle, and is externally inserted in the first bone of the
Fingers.

The Thumb because it has a singular strength above the rest of the Fingers,
has diverse bowers: Two Muscles bow its first Internodium, which take their
beginning from the annular Ligament of the Wrest and the Bone subject to the
Thumb, and end in the first Bone of the Thumb: Three or four bowers move the
second Internodium which are but short, yet fleshy; they arise from the bones
of the Metacarpus which sustain the fore, middle, and Ring-finger, and end in
the second Bone of the Thumb: The bower of the third bone is but one, but that
one is very strong; this takes its beginning from the Vlna, where it receives
the head of the Radius, passes to the third Internodium of the Thumb with a
strong Tendon; and these are the Muscles which bow the Hands.

The stretchers out of the second and third Internodii of the Fingers, are held
to be two, though indeed they seem to be but one Muscle, for both of them rise
from the external bunch of the Shoulder, and are exquisitly joined in their
progress, their tendons being united, and knit to the second and third Bones of
the Fingers, having neither difference in body nor office. The interosseal
Muscles extend the first Internodium of the Fingers, of which more by and by.

The Thumb as it has two bowers, so has it two singular extenders, one of
which rising from the exterior side of the Cubitus, ascends even to the third
Internodium of the Thumb; the other coming from the like beginning, passes by
a superior portion to a bone of the Wrest under the Thumb, by an inferior
portion to the first and second Internodium of the Thumb, and also further.

Besides these motions the Fingers are disjoined, and then again joined, six
Muscles perform this office, of which, Authors call the three external
Interosseal, being placed between the Bones of the Metacarpus; these rising up
between the sides of the Fingers internally and externally, stretch their
Tendons even to the first, second, and third internodium, to which two Muscles
of a like office come, and are as auxiliaries to them, from the first and last
bone of the Metacarpus.

The fore Finger has singular Abductors, and so has the little Finger. The
Abductor of the fore Finger is more rightly called Indicator: It proceeds from
the middle of the Cubit, and passes frequently with a double body and Tendon,
to the first Internodium both of the fore and middle Finger, and yet sometimes
it terminates in the bone of the Metacarpus, which regards the fore Finger. The
Abductor of the little Finger proceeding from the fourth bone of the Wrest
passing by the Palm of the Hand, is externally inserted into the first
Internodium. The Thumb has its proper Adductor and Abductor, received in its
first Internodium: the Abductor takes its original from the little bone of the
Wrest joined to the Thumb; the other from the bone of the Metacarpus, which
sustains the fore Finger; yet here by reason of its firm nexure by its
Tendinous Body, to the first bone of the fore Finger it seems to draw the fore
Finger to the Thumb.

Place here the Table of the eighteenth Chapter, which has the Number 22. at
the corner of the brass Plate.

Human anatomical diagrams AN EXPLANATION OF THE TABLE OF THE EIGHTEENTH
CHAPTER.
This Table comprehends the Muscles which move the Shoulder, Cubit, and Hand:
of which the greater part stick to their beginnings and ends. FIG. I.
A Musculus Deltoides separated from the beginning B Infrascapularis separated.
C Rotundus minor. D Rotundus major. E The pectoral muscle separated from the
breast, vide Chap. IX. F The fleshy portion of the broadest muscle of the back,
vide Chap. XII. G Musculus Biceps. H The lesser muscle lifting up the shoulder
in his Situation. II The Brachiaeus under the Biceps. K The muscle Palmaris
hanging from its original. L A portion of the Supinator. M The external bower
of the Wrest. N The internal bower of the Wrest. O The bower of the second
Internodium of the fingers. P The bower of the third Internodium of the
fingers. Q The bowers of the first Internodium of the thumb in their first
situation. R The bowers of the second Internodium of the thumb in their
situation. S The Abductor of the little finger. aa The internal face of the
Scapula. b The tendon of the muscle Palmaris. c A portion of the tendon which
bows the third Internodium of the thumb. d The Ligament of the Wrest in its
situation.
FIG. II.
A The lesser muscle lifting up the shoulder. B The muscle Brachiaeus whole. C
The round Pronator of the Radius. D The bower of the third Internodium of the
thumb out of his situation. E The square Pronator of the Radius. F The bowers
of the first Internodium of the thumb out of their situation. G The bowers of
the second Internodium of the thumb out of their situation. aa The internal
side of the Scapula. b Os Humeri. c Os Radii. d Os Ulnae. ee The membranous
Ligament of the Ulna and Radius. ffff The muscles commonly called Adductors. h
The Abductor of the little finger.
FIG. III.
A The first Suprascapularis removed out of his place. B The second
Suprascapularis. C Rotundus minor. D Rotundus major. E The long muscle
extending the Cubit. F The short extender of the Cubit. G The internal extender
of the wrest. H The external extender of the wrest, having here but one tendon.
I The special Abductor of the fore finger with but one tendon. K The extendors
of the second and third Internodij of the fingers united. L The extendor of the
third Internodium of the thumb. M The extendor of the first Internodium of the
thumb, having here but one single body and tendon. aa The process of the
Scapula called Spiniformis. ae The muscle Anconeus. bb The bone of the
shoulder. c The external knob of the shoulder. d The internal knob of the
shoulder. e The tendines which extend the second and third Internodium gathered
together. ff etc. The tendons of the same muscles applying to the Internodij. g
The annular Ligament of the wrest loosed.
FIG. IV.
A The external face of the Scapula. B The bone of the shoulder covered with
the Periostinum. C Os Radij. D Os Ulnae. E The muscle of the Radius called
Supinator longus. F The muscle of the Radius called Supinator brevis. G The
muscle Anconeus. H The membranous Ligament of the Radius and Ulna. IIII The
three interosseal muscles with their Auxiliary. K The Abductor of the thumb.
FIG. V.
A The muscle bowing the second Internodium of the fingers called Perforans. aa
etc. Their tendons. B The muscle bowing the third internodium of the fingers
called Perforans. bb Its tendines passing through the clefts of the tendines of
the former. CCCC The muscles bowing the first Internodium, or Lumbricals. DD
The bowers of the thumb in their situation. cc A portion of the tendon bowing
the third internodium of the thumb.




CHAP. 19. Of the Muscles of the Foot.
FOR the readiness of going, the Foot is aided with various Muscles; part of
which, fit the Thigh and Leg, and part, the Foot it self with various motions.
The Muscles which bow the Thigh are called Psoas, Iliacus internus, also the
Triceps and Lividus.

The Psoas takes its beginning about the two inferior Vertebrae of the Breast,
and the three superior of the Loins, and descends obliquely to the lesser
rotation of the Thigh, The internal Iliack arises from the internal face of
the Os Ilium, and its Tendon being joined with the former, it terminates with
it. The Muscle called Triceps is famous amongst the rest for its bigness, it
arises from the Coxendix and Os Pubis, with a threefold beginning, and is
inserted below into the rough line of the Thigh. The Lividus is produced from
the commissure of the Bones of the Pubis, and inserted into the internal side
of the Thigh by a short Tendon.

Three Muscles extend the Thigh which are called Glutaei, and also prepared by
the providence of the Almighty for the better accommodation of the sitting, and
the safeguard of the Joint Ischium: of these, that which is called Glutaeus
major, being stretched from the brim of the Ilium, Os Sacrum, and Coccix, it
ends under the great Rotator of the Thigh. Glutaeus medius arises from the Os
Ilium under the former, and is fastened with a strong Tendon into the same
Rotator: the lesser Glutaeus arises below from the Os Ilium, and descends to
the superior part of the greater Rotator. These three, though short, yet fleshy
and strong Muscles, as they extend the Thigh, so the Muscle Triceps before
mentioned, moves the Thigh inwards, whereby we climb the Masts of Ships and
Trees, and sit firmly on a Horse.

There move the Thigh about the Muscle called Pyriformis, otherwise called the
external Iliack, the external and internal Obturator, to which a fourth is
added. The Pyriformis rising below from the Os Sacrum, is transversly inserted
behind with a round Tendon into the greater Rotator. The external Obturator
arises from the external compass of the hole, which is commonly accounted the
original of the Bones of the Pubis, and passing transversly is received in the
Cavity of the great Rotator. The internal Obturator, arises from the internal
Circumference of the aforesaid hole, and with a fourfold collection of
Tendons, though with a single fleshy habit, it passes to the place the former
did; for its safeguard sake it is sent through a fleshy substance like a purse.
A fourth is added to these, which arising from the external knob of the Os
Ilium, and the Appendix of the Ischium proceeds to the hinder part of the great
Rotator.

The Tibia is extended by four Muscles, Membranosus, Rectus, Vastus externus,
and internus. The Membranous muscle arising before from the brim of the Os
ilium, with a small and fleshy body, afterward compassing the Thigh about on
every side with a broad and membranous Tendon. It is inserted into the Tibia
and Fibula under the Knee. The right muscle descending from the internal knob
of the Os ilium, includes the Knee with a broad and strong Tendon, and
terminates in the Tibia. Vastus externus is so called from its bulk, it
descends from the great Rotator of the Thigh outwardly, and mixing its large
Tendon with the former, it ends in the same place with it. Vastus internus
takes its beginning from the neck and lesser Rotator of the Thigh, and is
united to the two former by a membranous Tendon, and is knit internally under
the Knee-pan. To these extenders of the Tibia they ad the muscle called
Crureus, which sticks to the Thigh as the Brachiaeus does to the Arm; its
original is taken between the two Rotators of the Thigh, and it unites its
Tendons with the Muscles called Vasti.

The Musculus Subpoplitius moves the Tibia obliquely, which being produced from
the Ligament of the Knee before, ends obliquely in the superior Appendix of the
Tibia.

There bow the Tibia the muscles called Fascialis, or Sartorius, Gracilis,
Seminervosus, Semimembranus and Biceps. The Fascialis descends frOm the
foremost Appendix of the Os ilium, with a long and oblique decursion to the
internal part of the Leg under the Knee. Gracilis arising near the commissure
of the Bones of the Pubis, ends under the former with a round Tendon.
Seminervosus descending from the Coxendix beneath, and passing obliquely
forwards by the posterior part of the Thigh is inserted into the internal part
of the Tibia. Semimembranosus arises from the same beginning, and fastens his
Tendon in the internal part of the Tibia behind. Biceps arises with a longer
portion where the two former do, but is much increased with a fleshy portion in
the midst of the Thigh, and ends with a strong Tendon in the top of the Fibula.

The Muscles which particularly move the Feet are to be referred to the Tarsus,
or Toes, or great Toe: The Tibialis anticus and Peroneus secundus bow the
Tarsus. The Tibialis anticus arising from the superior Appendix of the Tibia
and Fibula, runs transversly under the Ligament of the Foot, and ends in the
bone of the Tarsus subject to the great Toe. Peroneus secundus, is produced
from the fleshy rise of the Fibula, and is inserted externally, usually with a
double Tendon into the bone of the Tarsus, subservient to the little Toe.

The Muscle called Tibialis posticus moves it obliquely downwards and inwards,
and the Peroneus primus outward. Tibialis posticus arising between the Tibia
and Fibula, is inserted into the bone of the Tarsus which is committed to the
Cubiforme, near the internal Ancle. Peroneus primus is deduced from the
Appendix of the Fibula about the external Ancle, and is turned back under the
Ligament of the Foot, and fastened in the bone of the Tarsus, which is joined
to the great Toe.

Gasterocnemius and Musculus soleus extend the Tarsus: both of them famous
Muscles, not only by reason of the bulk of their bodies, but also by reason of
the strength of their actions, and they seem to make up that bulk which is
called the Calf of the Leg. The Gasterocnemius is accounted double, because it
arises from a double beginning, from the internal and external inferior head
of the Thigh, it is inserted into the Heel with a strong Tendon, although it
seem to be stretched out under the soal of the Foot even to the confines of the
Toes. Soleus takes his denomination from the figure of a Fish so called; it
arises behind from the Fibula, and its Tendon is inserted with the former;
here by reason of its thickness and strength, this Tendon above all the rest in
the body is called the Great Chord: before, it is inserted into the Heel, it is
severed a little from the Tibia, and being grievously either wounded or
bruised, it brings pernicious Symptoms. Between these extenders is the Muscle
called Plantaris, which arising with a small body from the inferior external
head of the Thigh, sends a long and slender Tendon to the Heel.

The Muscles which move the Toes, extend, bend, and oblique their Bones; the
extender of the third internodium is dilated from the superior Appendix of the
Tibia, under the transverse Ligament of the Foot, and admitted with four
Tendons into the top bone of each Toe. The extendor of the second internodium
comes from the Ligament on the back of the foot, and passes with four Tendons
to the four second bones. The Interosseal Muscles extend the first internodium,
of which by and by. that which particularly extends the great Toe, takes its
beginning about the middle of the Fibula, under the transverse Ligament of the
Foot and so passes to the three bones of the great Toe; sometimes the Tendon
is doubled, and passes partly to the first Internodium, and partly to the bone
subject to it.

The Muscles called Perforans, Perforatus, and Lumbricales, bow the Toes.
Perforans which they also call Sublimis, takes its beginning behind from the
Tibia, about the internal Ancle, passing under the Ligament of the Tibia and
Heel; in the soal of the Foot being divided into a fourfold Tendon it passes
into the extreme internodium of the Toes. Perforatus is by some called
Profundus, it proceeds beneath from the Heel, and sending out four Tendons,
which are divided toward the end for the passage of the Tendons of the
foregoing muscle, they pass to the second internodium of the Toes. Nature
frames the Lumbricals of the Tendons, of the two former Muscles, as in the
Hands, and in four Tendons they are fastened to the first internodium of the
Toes; a portion of musculous flesh moves forward the bowing of these, which
being stretched from the Heel, mixeth it self with the beginnings of the
Lumbrical muscles. The proper bower of the great Toe proceeds behind from the
Fibula, and follows the way of the Muscle Perforans, and is inserted by a
strong Tendon into the third bone of the great Toe.

The Interosseal muscles moves the Toes obliquely, placed between the bones of
the Metatarsus, of which, such as are external pass to the first internodium of
the Toes; the internal pass even to the second Joint: these muscles also extend
the first and second bone of the Toes; the Toes are drawn together by the
internal, drawn asunder by the external.

The great and little Toe have singular muscles, the one has one Abductor, and
two Adductors; the other one Abductor. The Abductor of the great Toe takes his
rise from the Ligament of the Heel, and passes to its first internodium. The
greater Adductor arises from the Ligament of the bone of the Metatarsus, which
is next to the little Toe, and by an oblique process passes to the first Joint
of the great Toe: The lesser Adductor is transverse in Situation, and arises
from the Ligament of the little Toe, which binds the first internodium, and
passes with a short and broad Tendon to the first bone of the great Toe. The
Abductor of the little Toe is produced outward from the Heel, and ends in the
external side of the first internodium.

Place here the Table of the ninteenth Chapter, which has the Number 23. at
the corner of the brass Plate.

Human anatomical diagrams AN EXPLANATION OF THE ABLE of the ninteenth Chapter.
This Table shows the Muscles produced by Nature for the various motions of the
Thighs, Legs, and Feet. FIG. I.
A The greater part of the muscle called Psoas, which you may see in the 1.
figure of Chap. XI. in its Natural situation, here it is separated from its
beginning, and joined to the internal Iliack muscle, and descends to the thigh.
B The internal Iliack muscle. CC The muscle Triceps something uncovered: you
may see it whole in the next Figure. D Musculus Lividus. E The membranous muscle
conspicuous with a fleshy body about his beginning, whose broad tendon is
separated from the parts under it. FF The right muscle. GG Musculus vastus
externus. HH Musculus vastus internus. II Musculus facialis. K Musculus
Tibialis anticus. LL Musculus Peroneus secundus. MM The Extendor of the third
internodium of the toes. N The extender of the third internodium of the great
toe aa The appendix of the Os Ilium laid open before. b The extremity of the Os
Pubis. cccc The tendon of the membranous Muscle. dd A portion of the muscle
Gasterocnemius hanging out, the leg being depressed: the third Figure shows it
hanging out of its situation under the character KK. e The membranous Ligament
of the Tibia and Fibula. ffff The tendines of the muscles extending the third
Internodium. g The transverse Ligament of the foot separated.
FIG. II.
A The internrl face of the Os Ilium. B A portion of the great muscle Glutaeus,
which the following figure represents separated from the middle Glutaeus. CCC
Musculus Triceps. DD A portion of the Gasterocnemius and Soleus as yet joined.
EE Tibialis posticus. FF Peroneus primus. G The extender of the second
internodium of the toes in its situation. aaaa The interosseal muscles.
FIG. III.
A Glutaeus major separated and depressed to the side. B Glutaeus medius in his
situation. C Musculus Pyriformis. D The fourth muscle moving the thigh about.
E Obturator internus entering the fleshy purse. FF Musculus gracilis. GG
Musculus Seminervosus. HH Musculus Semimembranosus elegantly expressed. III
Musculus Biceps. KK The Gasterocnemius turned backwards, to whose beginnings
two small bones called Sasamoides stick. LL Musculus soleus in his situation.
M The little muscle called Plantaris. N The tendon spread abroad from the heel
under the soal of the foot. O The Abductor of the great toe. P The Abductor of
the little toe. Q The interosseal muscle pertaining to the little toe. aa The
brim of the Os Ilium. b The fleshy purse.
FIG. IV.
A The internal face of the Os Ilium. B Musculus Glutaeus minor in his
situation. C Musculus Glutaeus medius out of his situation. D Musculus
Pyriformis. E The fourth muscle moving the thigh about. e The external
Obturator. F The internal Obturator. G The fleshy purse. H Musculus Popliteus.
II Musculus perforans. K The muscle bowing the third internodium of the great
toe. L Musculus perforatus in his situation. M The Abductor of the little toe.
N The Abductor of the great toe in his situation.
FIG. V.
a The greater Adductor of the great toe. bb The Abductor of the great toe. c
The Abductor of the little toe. dddd The internal interosseal Muscles. e The
lesser Adductor of the great toe.
FIG. VI.
A The muscle Perforatus which bows the second internodium. B The bower of the
third internodium of the great toe. C Musculus perforans, or the bower of the
third internodium. DD A portion of the musculous flesh joined to the beginnings
of the lumbrical muscles. eeee The lumbrical muscles. fff The interosseal
muscles with the Abductors of the great and little toe.




CHAP. 20. Of the Veins, Arteries, and Nerves of the Extreme Parts.
LEst the Extreme parts should be wearied with continual labor, they have
nourishment and vital vigor administered to them by the Veins and Arteries, and
Spirit which is the Author of voluntary motion by the Nerves.

The Veins which are distributed to the Hand take their original from the
common Branch, for the subclavian Vein passing out of the Cavity of the Breast,
changes its name into Axillaris, and having first sent out the external and
internal Scapular Vein, it is divided into two famous Branches, the one
external, the other internal, of which, the one makes the Cephalic or Humeral
Vein, the other the Basilick or Liver Vein.

The Cephalic Vein descending from the upper part of the axillar by the
Shoulder, near the external side of the Muscle that bows the Cubit, gives
certain small Branches to the skin and muscles, and being dilated to the
external knob of the Cubit, it is commonly distributed into three Branches; of
which, the first which is the smallest is sent to the Muscles which bow the
Fingers, and the long Supinator, and therefore is called the deep Branch of the
Cephallica. The second branch which is internal and larger, is obliquely
carried under the Joint of the Cubit, and being united to the internal Branch
of the Basilica, makes that Vein which is usually called the median or common
Vein; this also descending, after it has distributed certain branches to the
Radius, is divided into two small Branches, of which, that which goes to the
Thumb, is called the Cephallical Vein of the Hand, the other has no name and
passes to the fore and middle Fingers: The third Cephalical Branch and the
external, passes obliquely by the Radius to the external or hinder part of the
Cubit, where being joined to a small Branch of the Basilica, it gives branches
to the annular and little Finger, of which, that which passes to the little
Finger is called the Salvatella of the Hand.

The Basilical branch of the axillar Vein, after it has brought forth the
superior and inferior Breast-vein, it enters the Arm, and brings forth the
Liver-vein in the right Arm, and the Spleen-vein in the left Arm, or if you
will the left Basilica, this giving Branches to the axillar Glandulae, it is
divided into two Branches, of which, the deepest associating it self with the
Artery and the Nerve of the third and fourth pair passing the Joint of the
Cubit, it is again distributed into two branches, one external, from which the
Thumb, fore, and middle Finger, the other internal from which the Ring and
little Finger have Veins. The other Branch of the Basilica is called
Subcutaneus, descending to the Cubit produces its double Vein, the one
internal which in the bowing of the Elbow sending out a Vein which joins it
self to the next descending ones, is afterward joined to the Cephalical Branch
and makes the Median, the other external, which divides its self, and by its
greater branch passes to the Wrest and little Finger, and by its lesser to the
internal part of the Hand.

All the Arteries of the Hands proceed from the Axillar branch of the
subclavian Artery which is joined to the internal side of the Shoulder, to the
internal branch of the Basilica after it has sent out the scapular and Breast
Arteries, and to the Muscles which occupy the internal, side of the Shoulder,
and two branches to the Joint, under the bowing of the Elbow it is divided into
two large Arteries, of which, the external is carried to the Wrest near the
Radius, where its motion is felt by Physicians, and having distributed a small
branch to the hinder part of the Hand, being carried under the annular Ligament
it is distributed to the Thumb, Fore and middle Finger; the internal branch
descending near the Cubit is deeper and sends branches to the middle, ring, and
little Finger.

The Nerves of the Hands take their beginnings from the fifth, sixth, and seventh
pairs of the Neck, also from the first and second of the Breast; they are first
joined by a various nexure, before they pass to the extreme parts: they are
vulgarly accounted six pair.

The first pair is carried to the Muscle Deltois, and the skin of the Arm.

The second pair is thicker and being carried by the midst of the Arm before,
is inserted into the muscle Biceps with two branches, and afterward in its
progress gives a branch to the external Supinator of the Wrest: the rest being
produced by the bowing of the Elbow, is divided into two Branches, the external
of which joins its self a companion to the Cephalic Vein, and passes to the
second internodium of the Thumb, and the internal which is thicker and divided
under the Median Vein, and extends its external branch to the Wrest, and its
internal being dilated near the Basilica, sends out small Nerves on both sides
to the Palm of the Hand.

The third pair being joined near the second, having first sent a small branch
under the skin, after it touches the Arm, sends out branches to the second
bower of the Cubit, to the Muscles bowing the third internodium of the Fingers,
and branches to the Thumb, fore, and middle Finger.

The fourth pair is larger and thicker than the rest, and at its rise is near
the Basilica Vein, the Artery and the third pair of Nerves, and first bestows a
double Branch upon the Muscles that extend the Arm, and the skin; about the
joint of the Elbow it sends two Branches to the Wrest, also Branches to the
external and internal side of the Thumb, fore, and middle Finger, three
Branches to the muscles, extending the Wrest and Fingers, the remainder is
distributed to the Wrest.

The fifth pair of Nerves is near the former, and sends Branches to the Muscles
arising from the internal knob of the Shoulder; it produces two Branches, of
which, one passing to the Palm of the Hand, is subservient to the little, ring,
and middle Finger: the other runs to the extremities of those Fingers.

The sixth pair, which is the last of the Nerves of the Neck, is almost
altogether subcutaneous; it has diverse branches, most of which, some pass
under, some above the Basilica, which being pricked in letting blood, cause
acute pain, and convulsions; the remainder of it ends in the Wrest. Note this,
That neither the Veins, Arteries, nor Nerves, have the same bigness in all
Bodies, nor yet the same number nor passage: observe the like in the Foot.

We come now to the Veins of the Foot, which take their original from the the
Iliack Branch of the Vena Cava.

The first is the Saphena, produced by a long product, by the internal side of
the Thigh and Leg, sending branches from the beginning and about the middle to
the Thigh and Knee; it is at last divided into many Branches about the Thigh
and Ancle, to the Toes, especially the great Toe.

The second crural Vein is called Ischias, proceeding externally from the same
Root; this is shorter and runs transversly to the skin before, and the muscles
of the Coxendix, which are next to it.

The third is called Muscula, produced from the crural Branch descending to the
Muscles, to which it gives a double branch, internally and externally, nay,
sometimes it is double in its beginning; the one external which is least, and
passes to the Muscles Rectus, and Vastus externus, which extend the Leg; the
other bigger and internal, which gives very many branches to the Muscles of the
Thigh.

The fourth crural Vein is called Poplitea, arising from the same beginning,
but most commonly has two Branches uniting themselves in their progress; it
descends by the middle of the Ham, and distributing Branches above and below
the Calf of the Leg, is carried to the Heel, and ends in the skin of the
external Ancle.

But the Crural Branch having produced these Branches, descends between the two
heads of the Thigh, and produces a double Branch, internal and external: The
internal gives Branches to the Muscles, which constitute the Calf of the Leg,
and giving Branches to the skin it turns back under the internal Ancle, and
passes even to the great Toe. The external is less than the former, and has
two Branches, of which, the first passes to the Muscles of the Calf of the
Leg, and ^^ose that bow the Toes: about the middle of the Tibia it sends a
small branch to the great Toe, the fore, and middle Toe, and passing the
transverse Ligament outwardly, it gives Branches to the Muscles of the Foot
which bow the Toes; the other Branch after it has dispersed Branches to the
external and hinder region of the Leg, it ends in the external Ancle and Foot.
The Trunk of the Crural Vein joins its self as a companion to the Crural
Artery, and sends out branches to the right and left side.

Nature has often framed shutters in the Veins both of the Arms and Legs,
which restrain the inordinate flux of blood to the extreme parts.

All the Arteries of the Foot, arise from the Branch of the Crural Artery; for
the external Iliack branch passing out of the Abdomen to the Privities, sends a
branch to the internal Iliack Muscle, and passing without the Abdomen is called
Cruralis; internally it produces the Artery Ischias, and the external Muscula,
which is carried to the external Muscles of the Thigh, and the internal Muscula
which passes to the posterior and internal Muscles thereof.

The Branch of the Crural Artery is divided into very many Branches above the
Ham, of which, three or four small ones pass to the Fat, and the Membrane under
it. Of these, that called Poplitea is most observable, which arises about the
middle of the Thigh, and is distributed partly to its inferior Muscles, and
partly to those of the Calf of the Leg.

The Crural Branch descending about the Ham, gives another Artery, called
Suralis, which sometimes is double, and passes partly to the Joint, and partly
to the Muscle of the Calf of the Leg called Gasterocnemius. In the Ham it self
the Artery is divided into the external Branch, which passes to the foremost
Muscles of the Leg, and into two hinder Branches, of which, one passes to the
Muscles of the Calf, the other passing the transverse Ligament of the Foot, is
inserted into the Muscles adducing the Toes.

The common branch descending by the hinder part of the Leg, having first sent
out a small Branch which is distributed to the great Toe and the back of the
Foot, is at length covered with the Tendons of the Toes, and being divided into
a double Branch, passes to all the Toes*

The Nerves of the Foot proceed from the three inferior of the Loins, and the
four Superior pair of the Os Sacrum, and having first made a plexure, they are
afterward divided into four Branches, of which, the first and third are
shorter, and not carried beyond the longitude of the Thigh: the second comes to
the Tibia, and the fourth even to the Nails of the Feet.

The first Branch of the Nerves arises from the upper part of the plexure,
descends to the internal Rotator of the Thigh, and sends Branches to the
Fascialis, Rectus, and Vastus externus.

The second descends by the Groyn with the Vein and Artery, and down to the
Feet with the Vein Saphena, although in this long passage, it give Branches as
to other places, to especially to the Knee, the remainder of it ends in the
Muscles of the Thigh and Knee.

The third branch which is sent from the plexure, passing through the hole of
the Os Pubis, gives branches to the external Obturators, and the Muscles which
erect the Yard; the remainder of it is distributed to the skin of the Thigh,
and the first and third Muscles which bow the Leg.

The fourth is made up of the four pairs which proceed from the Os Sacrum, and
second to none in length, thickness, and dryness: this verging to the lower
part of the Thigh sends a branch backwards to the Buttocks and skin of the
Thigh? and three others to the head of the Musculus Seminervosus,
Semimembranosus and Biceps which bow the Leg, and to the Muscle Triceps, the
trunk it self, some small Branches being sent to the Thigh, to the first
Extendor of the Tarsus and to the Muscle Plantaris, is divided into two
branches in the Cavity of the Knee, of which, the one is external, the other
internal; the external passes to the Fibula, the external Ancle, and the skin
by diverse Branches, and passing the Ligament of the Tibia and Fibula, passing
under the transverse Ligament, it passes to the extenders of the Toes, and the
Toes themselves: the internal Branch passes by the backside of the Leg,
descending between the Muscles or the Calf, is distributed under the Ligament
by the longitude of the Foot, and sends a double Nerve to each Toe.

Nature is often various in the distinction of these Nerves, and yet always
observes its scope: Sometimes this Nerve of the fourth pair is divided higher
above the middle of the Thigh, into the internal and external Branch; sometimes
it keeps whole even to the middle of the Leg, and sends out internal and
external Branches to the Thigh and Leg.

The closures of the extreme parts are the Nails, which are of a middle
substance between Bones and Cartilages; to the Roots of which are carried both
Arteries, Veins, and Nerves, from which they have life, nourishment, and vigor
of sense; they equal the bigness of the Fingers with a decent form, and are a
little bowed; they are firmly joined to the skin, and in the Hands they serve
for apprehension, and handling of small things; in the Feet, for security and
strength.

And thus thou have the scope of Nature in the forming of Man, whereby, the
Name and Power of the most Wise CREATOR is held out, that so thou may cry
out with Panacres, HE IS ALL THINGS.

Place here the Table of the twentieth Chapter, which has the Number 24. at
the corner of the brass Plate.

Human anatomical diagrams AN EXPLANATION OF THE TABLE of the twenteth Chapter.
This last Table shows the Veins, Arteries, and Nerves of the extreme Parts,
being not careful of the smallest branches, the huge multitude of which would
obscure the greater, and dull the Brain of the Learner: The most famous are
delineated, such as are showed publicly in the Theater in Dissection of Men of
perfect age. FIG. I. Shows the Veins distributed to the Hand.
A The axillar branch of the Vena Cava. BBB Vena Cephalica. CCC Vena Basilica.
a The external Scapular. b The branch of the Cephalica, which is carried to the
Deltois. c d Branches of the Cephalica distributed to the bowers of the arm. e
The deep branch of the Cephalica. ff The internal branch of the Cephalica
making the Median. g The Median vein descending. h The Cephalica of the Hand.
ii The external branch of the Cephalica. ae The Salvatella of the Hand. k The
internal Scapular. l The superior breast-vein. m The inferior breast-vein. nnn
The Basilick branches carried to the Extendors of the Cubit. oo The deep branch
of the Basilica. p A singular branch of the deep branch, which is carried out
to the cubit, with the fourth pair of Nerves. q The external branch of the deep
basilical r The internal branch of the same. s The Subcutaneus branch of the
basilica. tt The internal branch of the Subcutaneus branch, which with the
cephalical, procures the median. u Its branch joining it self to the common
vein. x The external vein of the Subcutaneus branch of the Basilica. yy The
greater branch of the external Subcutaneus. z The lesser branch of the same.
FIG. II. The Arteries distributed to the Arm.
A The axillar branch of the artery. a The internal scapular. b The external
scapular. c The superior Breast-artery. d The inferior breast-artery. e f g
Branches of the artery distributed to the muscles of the shoulder. hhh Branches
of the artery distributed to the joint of the Elbow. B The external branch of
the artery in the cubit. C The internal branch. ii The branch which is carried
to the muscles of the Radius. k The branch carried to the muscles of the Ulna.
l m n o Branches carried from the internal branch to the wrest, little, ring
and middle finger. pp Branches carried to the hands from the external branch.
qq r s Branches pertaining to the thumb, fore, and middle finger.
FIG. III. Designs the Nerves distributed to the hand.
4 5 6 7. The four Vertebrae of the Neck. 1. The first Verbra of the breast. a
b c d The five Nerves proceeding out of the holes of the Vertebrae. ff The
first pair of Nerves descending from the plexure **. gg The second pair. hh The
third pair. ii The fourth pair bigger than the rest. kk The fifth pair. ll The
sixth pair which is subcutaneus.
FIG. IV. Contains the veins of the foot.
A The crural branch of the Vena Cava. aaaa The Vein Saphena. bbb The branches
of the Saphena distributed by the interior part of the thigh. cc The Vein
Ischias. dd The internal Musculae. ee The external Muscula. fff The vein
Poplitea consisting of a double beginning. gg The internal branch of the crural
vein. hh The external branch of the same. i The first branch of the external
crural. kk The second branch of the same. ll The remainder of the same. m The
vein of the foot called Ischias.
FIG. V. Contains the Arteries of the Foot.
AAA The crural Artery produced from the external Iliack branch of the great
Artery. a The artery Pudenda. b The artery carried to the internal Iliack
muscle. c The artery Ischias. dd The external Muscula. e The internal Muscula.
ffff The arteries distributed to the membrane and fat. gg The artery Poplitea.
hh The arteries called Surals. ii The foremost branch of the crural artery. kk
The first hindmost branch of the same. ll The second hindermost branch of the
same.
FIG. VI. Represents the Nerves of the Foot.
2.3.4.5. The four Vertebrae of the Lions. 66 The Os Sacrum. A A pair of Nerves
pertaining to the tranverse muscles of the Abdomen. BB The first pair of Nerves
of the foot. CC The second pair. aaa A branch of the same which accompanies the
Saphena. bb The remainder of the same branch. DD The third pair of of the
Nerves of the foot. EEE The fourth pair, which is the greatest. c Its Branch
which turns back to the Buttocks and skin of the thigh. ddd Branches sent to
the bowers of the leg. eeee Branches sent to the bowers of the Thigh. f A
branch sent to the muscle Plantaris and the extenders of the Tarsus. g.h Two
external branches sent to the toes and the muscles of the Fibula. i The
internal branch carried to the great and second toe. k.l The internal branches
sent to the sural muscles. m The remainder of the Nerve of the sixth pair,
dispersed by a double branch under the foot to the toes.
FIG. VII. Shows the Basilica vein open, in which three shutters appear.

FIG. VIII. Shows a branch of the crural vein open, and three double, and one
single shutter.

FIG. IX. and X. Show a portion of the Nerve of the fourth pair divided into
small Nerves like threeds, in gathering together of which, the wonderful power
of Nature appears.






