ENGLAND'S WORTHIES. UNDER WHOM, ALL THE CIVIL AND Bloody Wars since Anno
1642, to Anno 1647, are related.

WHEREIN ARE DESCRIBED the several Battails, Encounters, and Assaults of
Cities, Towns, and Castles at several times and Places; so that the Reader
may behold the time, year, and event of every Battle, Skirmish and Assault.

WHEREIN LONDON-Apprentices had not the least share.

AS ALSO, Several Victories by Sea, by the Noble Admiral, ROBERT Earl of
Warwick.

Heb. 11.Who by Faith subdued Kingdoms. Psalm. 44. 3.They got not the Land in
possession by their own sword, neither did their own arm save them: but thy
right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou had
a favor unto them. LONDON, Printed for J. Rothwell at the Sun and Fountain in
Paul's Churchyard, 1647.

The right Hono:ble Robert Earl of Essex^^ and Ewe Viscount Hereford, Lord
Fereers of Chartley^^ Bourchar, and Lovaine. Lo: General of the Army ^^^ployed
for the defense of the Protestant Religion, the (...) of his maties* Person,
and of the Parliament, the prese^^^tion of the Laws, Liberties* and Peace of
the King d^^ and protection of his ma.ties Subjects from oppressi^^


A LIST OF THE SEVERAL Victories in which his Excellency was engaged in Person.
HIs Excellency being made Captain General by the Parliament over all the
Forces in England, as was Voted by both Houses the 12 day of July 1642.
protesting to live and dye with him. And by the first of August following, his
Excellency had 10000 Men, which he caused to be committed to Officers, and
drawn into Regiments, and so marched immediately into the Field.

The 23 of October next after was a very great Battle fought between Keynton
and Edgehill by his Excellency and his Army; and that of the Kings led by his
Majesty: At which time his Excellencies army killed the Kings General* the
Earl of Lindsey, the Lord Auboney, Sir Edmund Verney, and diverse more; and
took Prisoners the Lord Willowby, three Colonels, and many hundred more, and
brought away 16 of the Kings Ensigns.

His Excellency was in the battle engaged against a great Army, where was the
King in person, and Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Barons,
Knights, and Gentlemen of all orders, who engaged themselves against him; yet
his Excellencies Army fought most cheerfully by the example of their General,
whose undaunted courage put life into every man.

Afterward the Kings Forces being come up to Branford and Henley in November,
his Excellency after several engagements with them, and assistance coming to
him from the City of London, who protested to live and die with him; he forced
the Kings Army to retreat to Oxford with the loss of above two hundred men.

In April, Anno 1643, his Excellency being recruted, marched again into the
field with his Army, and took the Town and Garrison of Redding from his
Majesty, and after several defeats given to parties of the Kings Army he took
the Town of Cirencester.

After which his Majesty's whole Army being again drawn into the field, his
Excellency marched up to them, the Queen came up to the Kings Army, and a
great party with her to strengthen his Majesty's Army against the Earl of
Essex; But his Excellency fought with them near Newbury, where he killed five
Lords, and diverse others of quality, the King with the loss of 500 men,
retreated to Edgehill, whither the Queen came to him.

In May 1644, his Excellency desired the Parliament to have a Committee to
reside with him in the Army, and his Excellency made preparations to the Field,
and presently besieged Oxford where the King then was, and at the beginning of
June got away toward the West, the King and the Prince being gone to Exeter
with the Lord Paulet, and others; his Excellency having taken diverse Prisoners,
drew his Army after them; the Queen fled over into France; his Excellency took
in the West diverse persons in several places, amongst which many of quality,
and diverse Garrisons.

In June his Excellency secured Weymouth, Taunton-Deane, Wareham, Bavonestable,
Mount Stanford near Plymouth, Plimton, Saltash, and Lanceston.

And in July his Excellency gave a defeat to Greenvill near Lestithiell in
Cornwell, and took 100 Prisoners, and killed 300 upon the place, and then took
Tocester and Foy, and did beat them from Newbridge, still taking more Prisoners
daily.

In August his Excellency fell upon the Cornish Brigade near Saltash, and
brake through their Army, slew many of them upon the place, took 300 Prisoners
and 4 Drakes.

Then the Kings whole Army, Maurices and Greenvils were drawn into the field in
Battalia, in number almost 20000 men near Lestithiell, where his Excellency
daily skirmished with them, killed many, took prisoners Colonel Champernoone,
who was sore wounded, and diverse more, many lying 6 and eight in a heap, and
upon desire his Excellency granted them leave (at a parley) to bury their dead.

On Saturday the 24 of August 1644, his Excellency appointed Major Genesis
Whitcot, and Colonel Ware to guard the rear of Lestithiell, and make a damme
to stop provisions from the Kings Army that way; and his Excellency with a
small party of Colonel Gowres Regiment beat off 3000 horse and foot from
Blazy-Bridge, appointed by the Enemy to stop provisions from Millibilli-Bay,
where his Excellency killed many, and took prisoners, 1 Colonel, 2 Captains,
and diverse others.

In the beginning of September, his Excellency notwithstanding that he was
overpowred by the enemy, yet preserved both himself and his men, forced the
enemy from the Seacoasts, and got safe to the Lord Admiral; his Horse not
above 3000, brake thorough the Kings Army; and his Foot not above 6000, though
encompassed with 20000 of the Kings, from Gromporond, Enedor, and Foy even to
Blazy-bridge, who were resolved to give no quarter to our men; yet they fought
it out so gallantly, killing two of theirs for every man that were lost, until
at last they got Articles from the Kings party to have a safe Convoy to
Lestithiell, Poole, and Wareham, their sick men to remain at Foy, and none of
them be pressed to desert their service to his Excellency.

And his Excellency being recruited in September. from the Parliament, and in
October. had his Rendezvous at Titchfield and falling on the Kings rear, took
almost 100 prisoners near King scleare; and with the assistance of the Earl
of Manchester and Sir Will: Waller, routed the Kings Army near Newbury, and
took 9 pieces of Ordnan^e, 300 Prisoners, and 500 Arms.

right Hon.ble. Robert Earl of Warwick.


ROBERT Earl of Warwick Lord Admiral.
THis most Noble and renowned, and a Valiant as virtuous and pious Patrio^ of
his Country, being in the year 1642 made Lord Admiral of the Parliaments
famous Fleet of Ships by sea. First, his ship^ met with five of the Kings great
Ship^ obstinately adhering still to Sir John Pen^ngton and refusing to submit
to the Parliaments Ordinance therein; at last one o^ ^he 5. voluntarily came
in, and the other four were all enforced to the submission o^ the Parliament,
and came in under thi^ noble Admirals command.

2. Not long after, this most noble and renowned Sea-Commander, by some of his
Ships intercepted Letters (in a Vessel taken by sea) and sent them to the
Parliament, wherein was discovered the devilish Design of Digby, D'eves,
Jermin, Hyde Percy, Prince Rupert, Prince Maurice, and 50 Commanders more.

3. In the same year bearing 42 Piece of Ordnance, and had been distressed by
foul weather and driven into the Downs where it was taken.

4. This most valiant Admirals ships took ^ Tobacco-ship, wherein was diverse
letters taken and one especially of great concernment to the State, sent to
Captain Slingsby ^ Royal Sea-Captain, which were all presently sent to the
Parliament; and his ships ^id the Parliament great service about Hull, and took
diverse Vessels of the Kings for the use of the Parliament.

5. At Hull a packet-Boat was taken also and diverse Letters to the Queen of
great concernment therein, intercepted; and in another Ship, taken at sea,
diverse other letters from Secretary Nicholas sent by the King into Holland,
were by his ships inter^epted and sent to the Parliament.

6. In August 1643, his ships also seized upon two brave Ships laden with
Bullion, and 50 barrils of Gunpowder for the Kings service; Together with a
Newcastle Ship, with great quantity of Plate and money for the King.

7. The Commander of the Sea Neptune and other Parliament ships, took also
diverse ships bound from Holland to the King with much Arms, ammunition and
Letters of very dangerous consequence; Together with two brave Ships, the one
Captain Kettlebies and the other Capt. Stradlings, two Royalists, revolters
from the Parliament, and were now set upon in Tinmouth-haven, and they and
their Ships there seized and taken.

8. This most valiant and vigilant Sea-Commanders brave ships took also a brave
Vessel bound for Holland from Newcastle with at least 4000. l. hid in the
Coals to buy Ammunition for the King; Together with a Bristoll ship, called
the Fellowship a Ship of 400 tun, and bearing 24 Pieces of Ordnance in her, was
taken by Captain Smith, laden with Arms, and ammunition for the King.

9. And in February 1642, this noble Earls ships had chased a brave
Dunkirk-ship into Arundell-haven, richly laden with Linen cloth, 20 Pieces of
Ordnance, 100 barrels of Powder, 2000 Arms, and diverse Commanders of quality.

10. And Captain Swanley, one of this our most noble Admirals Sea-Commanders,
being sent by him with a squadron of ships toward South- Wales got possession
of Milford-haven, beat 12 Ships away from thence laden with base and bloody
Irish Rebels to have bin landed there and for Westchester, and both by Sea and
by land obtained diverse brave and famous victories in South Wales, and was
honored by the Parliament with the gift of a Chain of Gold of 200. l. value
in way of the Parliaments thankfulness for his many brave Services.

11. This noble Admirals ships took also three ships pretended to be laden with
Pippins, coming out of France, but underneath the Pippins laden with store of
Arms and ammunition for the Kings use; Together with a brave Ship, which Capt.
Owen his Reer-Admirall took, bound for Dartmouths strength with the States of
Hollands Convoy of ships, but surprised by that brave Sea-Captain, wherein was
at least 8000. l. for the Queens use.

12. And Capt. Jordan, another of this our most famous and faithful L.
Admirals Sea-Commanders with his brave men of War, beat the Earl of
Marlborough, then Admiral of the Kings Fleet at Sea* took 4 of his Ships
laden with Linen Cloth, arms, ammunition and other rich Prizes.

13. After this also this Noble and renowned Earl of Warwicks ships took Holy
land Isle and diverse ships, and all the works Arms and ammunition therein; And
valiant Captain Batten Vice Admiral of this noble Earl and a brave Commander,
took^ a great ship of Dartmouth laden with Oil and Salt for Holland; and a
Dutch Galley valued at 8000. l. with 50 barrels of Money in her, Convoyed also
by two States men of War, but made good Prizes.

14. And in the year 1643 an Irish ship was taken at White-haven in the North,
intending to have relieved Carlisle, then the Kings, with Arms and ammunition,
but thus prevented; Together with a great ship of Apsham, driven into Lime, and
there seized on, worth diverse thousands.

15. And in the year 1644, this most loyal and religious noble Admiral, by
Gods special providence bringing him to Lime, in the time of its exceeding
strai^ Siege and great danger of loosing to Prince Maurice, wonderfully
relieved it both by Sea and Land with his brave Seamen or Mariners, and
thereby got himself everlasting fame and honor.

16. And in 1645, His most valiant and vigilant Vice Admiral Captain Batten*
took two Ships at Waymouth in the West* with 28 Pieces of Ordnance with much
Arms and Ammunition from France. And with his brave ships relieved
Melcomb-Regis, and most bravely helped to regaine it to renowned Colonel
Sydenham from the rage and fury of General Goring.

17. And in the year 1645. this most Noble Admiral was marveilous useful and
assistant to the thrice Noble Lord General the Earl of Essex, in the Western
Seas, by continual supplies of his Land forces by Sea.

18. And in 1646, this foresaid most famous and valiant Vice Admiral, mightily
relieved Plymouth, by Sea; and beat and took diverse Ships coming to relieve
Poldram; together with diverse Vessels taken at Purbeck.

19. He also took a Malignant London Ship, laden with Kersies, and other rich
commodities, worth at least 1500. l. and a ship from France with packets of
Letters, which were thrown into the Sea, but recovered again and sent to the
Parliament.

20. This our most Noble Earls foresaid Vice Admiral took also many Ships,
Shallops, Hoyes, and other Vessels in Cornwall, and about Pen-Dennis Castle,
and diverse rich booties, and Prisoners of quality taken in them, and thus was
continually and most victoriously serviceable to the Kingdom all the time of
the Wars, (...) Gods glory and his indelible honor an^ renown.

The Right Honorable Edward Lord Montague (...) of ^imbol^on, Vis-coun^
^andouile, (...) of Manchester, And Mayor General of the (...) Forces, in the
associated Countye^. Norfolk, Suffolk, and Essex etc.

(...) 1644*



IN the year 1643, when the Kingdom was in a low ebb and great straight: by
reason of the increasing powers of the Royalists, the Lord raised up the heart
of this most Noble and renowned Lord the brave and as Virtuous as Valiant and
Victorious Earl of Manchester to put himself into a Martial posture and
condition* for the defense and safety of the Kingdom, being by the Parliament,
made Major General of the Associated Counties, viz. Norfolk, Suffolk, and
Essex; and first, in September 1643, intelligence coming to London, to the
Parliament, that Linne-Regis, a very strong and considerable Maritime Town in
Norfolk, was broken out into Rebellion against the Parliament; This most Noble
Earl Mustering up his forces, most courageously came against it. Besieged it
strongly both by Sea and Land, and after about a Months Siege thereof, it was
surrendered into his hands* with therein, 50 pieces of Ordnance. 20 barrels of
Powder, great store of Arms and Ammunition.

2. In October 1643, he fought a most brave and great battle with the Popish
Lord Widrington, and General Hinderson on Bullingbrook-hill, near
Horne-Castle, where he obtained a most glorious Victory, took at least 1000
prisoners, among whom were Colonel Sheller and Colonel Airs; and as many
were slain, among whom was Sir George Bowls, and many other brave Commanders
and Gent. of quality, about 200 horse were taken and 135 Standards; and 1500
Arms.

3. Upon the obtaining of this most famous Victory, he possessed himself of the
strong Town of Hornecastle, and took all the Arms and Ammunition therein;
together with the City of Lincoln, and Town of Gainsborough also, with
abundance of Arms and Ammunition in them also.

4. Memorable also (to the honor of this Noble Lord) is that valiant and
vigilant circumspection and providence of his in preventing that dangerous
rising cloud of Insurrection beginning to grow great in and about Laystalke by
some most eminent Malignants there, which had not this Noble and renowned
General sent some of his forces thither timely to suppress, might have
hazarded all those Eastern parts of the Kingdom.

5. He also reduced Croyland (a place very strong both by situation, and
fortification) and having in it a professed Papist for its Governor) to
obedience to the Parliament.

6. He bravely beat and defeated the Enemies at Grantham chasing them almost
two miles, and having utterly routed them took from them 5 or 6 of their
Colors; And took Burleigh-house, and surprised the Lord Cambdens Regiment of
horse, with their Colors, 3. or 4 Companies of foot and Dragoones with all
their ammunition and about 400 prisoners.

7. This Noble and renowned Commander with 50 Colors of his horse and
Dragoones encountered and utterly routed 90 Colors of his Enemies at Winsey,
and killed and took about 1100 of them and near 30 of their Colors.

8. He re-took the City of Lincoln with about 3000 Arms, all the Enemies
Colors, good store of Ammunition and 5. or 6 pieces of Ordnance; and re-took
also Gainsborough Town by storm without any loss of his men, whereby all
Lincolneshire became wholly cleared of the Enemy.

9. He also took Hilsden-house (which brave Alesbury Garrison had atteempted
but could not effect) where he took above 200 prisoners, 12 barrels of powder,
and proportionable Match, all their Arms, and about 50 horse: this being a
most singular good service for the ease and comfort of the whole Country of
Buckinghamshire, which was almost quite wasted, and exhausted by the
plunderings, and continually enforced contributions which were raised by this
Garrison and Oxford forces.

10. This most Noble and renowned Earl, was one of those 3 magnanimous
Generals who in July 1644, beat Prince Rupert, and the Earl of Newcastle, at
Marstone-moore, obtaining there a most glorious Victory over them and presently
upon it took the City of York by assault.

11. He also took (in his Victorious advance from York to the Associated
Counties) the Town and Castle of Tickhill, with all the Arms and Ammunition
therein; and proceeding on further, in his foresaid famous advance he took the
strong Garrison of Welbe^k-house by Composition, together with Sheffield
Castle, a very strong hold in Yorkshire, which he took by storm and a
fierce assault, and therein 400 Arms, 12 barrels of powder, much Match* 20
Tuns of yron-shot, about 400. l. worth of Corn, Beef, Bacon, Cheese, etc. the
Country people thereabout, voluntarily gathering and giving to his soldiers at
lea^t five hundred pounds, as a gratuity for this good service done their
Country, in gaining this place from the Enemy.

12. This renowned brave General took also Boulsover Castle; and Staley-House
also with all the Arms and Ammunition in them; Together with
Wingfield-Man^our, which had long been Besieged by Darby forces, but not
obtained but by this Noble Generals assistance.

Basil Fielding, Earl of Denbigh, Lord of Now^ham Paddock^,



IN the year 1644, about the Month of May, the Loyal heart and valiant Spirit
of this Noble Lord Fielding Earl of Denbigh, being stirred up and stimulated
to show himself in Arms in the high places of the Kingdom for the
preservation of the true Reformed Protestant Religion and just Liberties of his
Country, and being by the Parliament made Commander in chief over diverse
Associated Counties, as Staffordshire etc. 1. This said Noble Lord by his
singular Martial prudence and Prowess, took Russell-hall in Staffordshire and
therein Colonel Lane, and diverse other Commanders, and at least 200 other
prisoners; all the Arms in the said Garrison; and above 10000. l. worth^ of
goods and wares that had been plundered from the Countries and Carriers
traveling that way.

2. In June also following, this Noble Earl lying in Siege before Dudley
Castle, and the King having sent a party of about ^000 horse to relieve the
said Castle and raise the Siege, this brave Commander sent out a party of a
forlorn hope commanded by renowned Colonel Mitton, then Governor of Wem, who
most bravely charged them, but being over charged with the Enemies number to
his paucity, he was brought into a forlorn condition, whereof this Noble
Earl understanding (and being dissuaded by his council of War, to venture
to relieve him, in regard of the great hazard he would run of his whole Army,
but) he, to his perpetual honor, hating so to see and suffer his friends and
so faithful and famous a Commander to Sacrifice their li^es in his cause and
he stand still with admirable courage fell on the Enemy and so fiercely and
furiously and to so good purpose (by Gods mighty and merciful assistance) that
he bravely relieved his foresaid forlorn hope, put the Enemy to a disorderly
flight, slew an hundred of his Enemies in the place, took 17 persons of quality
prisoners, and many common soldiers or troopers, with many horse and much
Arms.

3. Afterward this Noble and brave Commander, accompanied with valiant and
Victorious Colonel Mitton, assaulted and took the strong Town and Castle of
Oswestree, wherein he took Lieutenant Colonel Bladwin, 4 Captains, 3
Lievtenants, 2 Cornets, 2 Ensigns and many other Officers above 300 common
soldiers, and very many arms and much ammunition.

4. About the midst of July following 1644, this Noble Earl marching on with
his Victorious forces and making show, as if he intended to have besieged
Shrewsbury, contrariwise wheeled about, and marching into Cheshire, fell upon
the house of the Lord Cholmley, a very strong Garrison of the enemies in those
parts, which he took by assault with all the arms and ammunition therein;
this also being a singular good piece of service to the State, in regard that
this Garrison had been a very great and long mischief to the Country in all
those parts.

Henry Gray Earl of Standford, Lord Gray* of Groby Bonvile, and Harington* etc.



IN the year 1642, 1. This noble and faithfully affected Earl of Stamford
having, given many real testimonies of his love to Religion and Loyalty to his
Country, was by this present Parliament (for the timely suppressing and
restraining of the ravenous cruelties of the Royalists in Herefordshire,
Cheshire and other Countries, and for the better settling of the peace and
security of them) made Genesis of all South Wales, and the 4 next adjacent
Counties: viz. Gloucester Worcester, Hereford, and Cheshire, in ^esting him
with power to raise forces in all those Countries, and to appoint Officers and
Commanders over them for the mutual defense and preservation of them.

2. Upon the confidence and trust which the Parliament reposed in the fidelity
and activity of the noble Lord Gray. Son and heir to this noble and renowned
Earl of Stamford, both Houses appointed him also Lord Genesis of five northern
Counties, viz. Leicester, Nottingham, Darby, Rutland and Lincoln, to the high
honor both of the most noble Father and his valiant and vermous noble Son.

3. Being upon special occasion of the Kingdoms (then) great straites and
exigences called into the West to oppose the oppressive cruelties and outrages
of Sir Ralph Hopton, he most undantedly forced his passage into Cornwall over a
River, though the Bridge was broken down, at a strong Garrisoned Town called
New-Bridge, where he bravely beat the Enemy, slew diverse in the skirmish, took
prisoners 7 or 8 Gentlemen of quality, about 40 common soldiers, and got very
much Arms and Ammunition.

4. After this, this noble Earl of Stamford chasing and hunting that insolent
rebel^ious and subtle Fox, Sir Ralph Hopton from Bristoll and Exeter, he
drove that theevish Sculker back again into Conwall with great loss of his
Arms, Ammunition, and Ordnance.

5. And in February 1643, this Noble Earl with his forces fell upon about
2000, at the least, of his Cornish Enemies at Modbury, where Sir Ralph Hopten
had strongly entrenched them, but out of which their trenches they were (with
the help of the Devonshire Clubmen) most bravely beaton, and forced to fly,
leaving behind them at least an 100 dead on the ground* and twice as many
wounded, where they took 5 pieces of Ordnance, about an 100 Muskets, near 80
prisoners, and at least 40 horse.

6. After this also, this noble Earl fell fiercely upon Hopton in his quarters
before Plymouth, and forced him to forsake them, leaving behind him for have,
one of his greatest pieces of Ordnance that he had in his Army; And thus this
noble Earl proceeded most successefully against the Parliaments Enemies, till
he returned to the Parliament upon other State employments.



IN January 1643, this most noble and renowned Lord General, David Lesley
Earl of Leven in Scotland* first marched out of Scotland from Barwick into
England and led on an Army of about at least 20 thousand horse and foot, to
help the Lord against the mighty and mischievous Enemies of our Religion and
liberties; and that in the very midst of the bitterest and deepest frost and
snow that men could march through, even to just admiration, with singular
sincerity, faithfulness* fortititude and love unto us never to be forgotten,
but ever to be registered with Characters of God in gratitude to God and them.

2. In this his famous and faithful march through many and mighty difficulties
and disturbances, he came to Alnwicke and Morpeth, 2 Garrison Towns in the
way from Barwicke to Newcastle and soon surprised them, and took also the
Island of Cocquet* which was yielded to him at the first charge* where he took
in all the Arms and Ammunition, near upon 200 prisoners in it, 7 pieces of
Brass Ordnance, and provision of Victual for almost one whole year.

3. This most noble and renowned General having with great hazard and
difficulty passed his Ordnance and Artillery over the River Tyne, which was
then (by Gods providence) extremely frozen even so as to bear the weight of
them (and which had it not been so, he could hardly any way have brought on to
be serviceable to him) he then (being new come to Newcastle and had besieged
and summoned it to yield) took Sunderland a useful and strong Garrisoned
place, with all the Arms and Ammunition therein.

4. He with almost incredible patience and sufferance of hardship lying in the
field in bata^ia about 3 miles distant from Sunderland, with the hardiness of
his brave Scots, so vexed and mouldred the Earl of Newcastles Army then lying
in the field facing one another* but not striking one stroke* that he made the
said Earl of Newcastle silently steal away, with the loss (at that time) of
at least 800 horse and men; yet, I say not one stroke being struck between them.

5. He pursued the said Earl of Newcastle with his brave Scottish forces to
Durham, which also he took with all the Arms and Ammunition in it.

6. He also took Hartlepoole and Lumley Castle with all the Arms and
Ammunition in them* in his Victorious pursuit of the (then) fugitive Earl of
Newcastle who durst not stand to fight with him.

7 He also with his most valiant and Victorious Son Major General David
Lesley, were special Actors and Instruments in the obtaining of that glorious
Victory against Prince Rupert at Marston-Moore.

8. He also was a most famous and faithful Agent and Instrument of our
obtaining the great and strongly fenced City of York, with all the riches.
Arms, Ammunition, and Ordnance in it, both in the City and Castle thereof.

9. In the year 1644, he also after a most tedious and strong Siedge before
Newcastle* at last, most Victoriously took it by a terrible storm, with all
the Arms, Ammunition, Ordnance, Prisoners (which were very many and great ones
too) and the plenteous provision therein of all sorts; but this most noble and
renowned Genesis suffered not his honest Scottish soulders to pillage, plunder or
spoil any Townsmans goods, or to hurt their persons that stood not out in open
opposition and Arms against them, but used them all with singular courtesy and
cirility, to his high honor and ever most deserved praise.

10. This most noble and magnanimous brave Commander not long after took the
strong Castle within Newcastle Town, which for a while held out against him,
all the prisoners (who also were persons, very many of them of special note
and quality) yiedling themselves to his mercy; among whom, were Sir John
Morley, the most desperate Malignant Major of the Town, and three Scottish
Lords.

11. He also took (shortly after) the strong Castle of Tinmouth, and therein
38 pieces of Ordnance, 50 barrels of powder, 500 Muskets a ^ery great number of
Pikes, and great store of shot, great and small, with very much other good
provision.

12. In the year, 16^5, he also took by part of his Army Commanded by the
noble Earl of Calender, the Town of Carlisle, with great store of Arms and
Ammunition, 20 pieces of Ordnance, and much other good provision.

13. This most coragious Commander in the year 1645, took also by storm the
strong Garrison of Cannon-froom in Wales, in the assault whereof he slew at
least 70 of the enemies, and all the Arms Ammunition and Ordnance therein. And
the Parliament taking-most thankful notice of all these* faithful and famous
services of this noble Commander, sent a letter of thanks unto him signed by
the Speaker of the house of Commons; together with a Jewel of 500 l* as a
badge of Honor and respects of both houses of Parliament to him.

14. He also took Raby Castle in Durham, wherein he took 300 Arms and good
store of other Ammunition, and all the Ordnance therein.

15. And in December 1645, this most magnanimous General with his brave
Scottish Army sat down before Newarke, that most pestilent and pernicious Den
of Royal thieves, where he was by the Parliament of England made Commanderin
chief of all the Scottish and English forces before Newarke; and where and when
he took Muschamp-bridge by a fierce assault upon the Newarkers, and the strong
Fort also upon the bridge, whereby he closely begirt the whole Town round
about, and at last took it upon composition, with all the great store of
Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition therein. And there and then King Charles put
himself into the custody and guard of these loyal Brethren. And after all
these famous Victories and parformances, he with his whole Army (having first
delivered the King (at Newcastle) into the hands of the English and Scottish
Commissioners appointed thereunto most faithfully, loyally, and lovingly
marched back again into his own Kingdom of Scotland.



1. IN November 1642, this most noble and renowned Patriot of his Country, the
valiant Lord Fairfax was by the Parliament made General, or Commander in chief
of all the Northern Counties of the Kingdom, and was invested with full power
of Martiall-Law to compel the Royal Malignants and Papists of those parts to
the obedience of the Parliament.

2. In December 1642, this thrice noble Lord encountered the Earl of Newcastles
Army, of about 8000 horse and foot, with a small Army of not above 2100 foot
and 7 troops of horse, at a Town called Tad^aster, about 8 miles from York,
where he slew 200 of the Enemy on the place, set fire on two houses where at
least 20 Papists were burnt to death thereby; and the said Atheistical Earl
of Newcastle was bravely beaten.

3 In April 1643, this noble Lord again did soundly cudgel the said Earl of
Newcastles Popish Army at Leeds in Yorkshire, where he slew many in the
conflict, took at least 400 horse and foot, and thus beat him thence with
great loss and shame.

4. In May 1643, this noble General^ with his valiant and Victorious Son Sir
Thomas Fairfax, set upon their Enemies again at Wakefield in Yorkshire, where
they obtained a most renowned Victory over them, forced them out of the Town,
took all their Officers prisoners, 27 Colors of foot, 3 Cornets of horse,
about 1500 common soldiers, 4 pieces of Ordnance, with store of Ammunition and
other rich booty. 5. In October 1643, this noble and renowned Lord (being about
this time Governor of the most strong and important Town of Mull, which had
then been sorely besieged by that most pernicious Earl of Newcastle, did again
most bravely beat the said Earl of Newcastle and General King a brave
Soldier, and thereby utterly raise that great Royalist Siege, after a very
fierce and furious fight, in which this noble Lord, assisted by famous and
faithful Sir John Meldrum, abtained a most glorious Victory, and among many
others, took a most brave and great piece of Ordnance, called the Queens
Pocket-Pistoll.

6. In February 1643, this valiant and Victorious noble Lord, did with the
successful assistance of valiant and virtuous Sir William Constable, took
the strong haven Town of Whitby in Yorkshire, and therein above 500
Captains, Commanders, Officers and common soldiers, together with at least 20
Commissioners of the Kings Array, almost 1000 Sailors* 40 Vessels great and
small, 500 Arms, many barrels of Powder, Match and other train of Artillery,
and about at least 100 pieces of Ordnance in the ships and works of the Town.
And in April 1644, this thrice noble and brave Commander* the Lord Fairfax with
the Victorious assistance of his famous Son Sir Thomas Fairfax, took that
strong Fort in Yorkshire called Caw^^d-Castle, and also Axholme Island, with
all the forces Arms and Ammunition in them both. 7. In which foresaid month
of April 1644, It also pleased the Lord to Crown this most noble and renowned
L. Genesis of the Northern parts (by the brave assistance of his most noble Son
Sir Tho Fairfax) with a most admirable and glorious Victory at Selby, which in
his Letter to the* Speaker of the House of Commons in Parliament, he (most
justly) termed, a miracle rather then a Victory; wherein he and his magnanimous
Son, most Victoriously beating the Royalists out of the Town took prisoners,
Colonel John Bellassis, Colonel Sir John Ramsde^, Colonel Sir Thomas
Strickland, 2 more Lieutenant Colonels, 1 Major, 8 Commanders of horse* 20
Lievtenants of foot, 6 Cornets, 11 Ensigns, 9 Quartermasters, the master of
their Magazine, their Provost Marshall, diverse Sergeants, Trumpets, Corporals,
Drums and other Officers; slew very many, whose bodies lay strewed in the way
to York, for four miles together; took 4 Brass pieces of Ordnance, 7 barrels
of powder, 16 bundles of Match; above 2000 Arms, many horse and foor Colors,
at least 1600 common soldiers; above 500 horse, all their bag and baggage,
many Ships and Boats upon the River, and at least 400 more prisoners, and some
Commanders among them, at Homcough near Selby. And hereby this most noble and
renowned Lord became absolute Master of the Field, in all those Northern parts.

8. And lastly, In July 1644, this thrice noble and renowned Lord Fairfax was
one of the three most magnanimous and Victorious Lords General, which won that
most famous and renowned Victory at Marsten-Moore, near York, together with
that great City of York it self, with all the Arms and Ammunition therein,
where they most Victoriously beat Prince Rupert, and the Earl of Newcastle,
slew at least 41 51, whereof two thirds at least were assured to be Lords
Knights and Gentlemen of great quality; they took above 1500 Prisoners whereof
very many were Knights and Gentlemen of great esteem and quality; together
with all the enemies Canon, Ammunition, bag and baggage, 1500 Muskets, 40
barrels of powder, 3 tun of great and small bullets, 800 Pikes, besides
Swords, Bandiliers, etc. and abundance of other rich prize.



THis most noble and Victoriou^ Commander Sir Thomas Fairfax, 1. Took Leeds,
with all the Arms and Ammunition, 26 Ian. 1642.

2. With the help of Sir William Brereton, he routed the Lord Byron, took 152
Knights and Gentlemen, 126 Commanders, 1600 common Soldiers, 120 Irish women
with long Knives.

3. This faithful and valiant Commander took Bidle-house and in it the Lord
Brereton, 26 Commanders, 300 common soldiers and all the Ammunition.

4. He with the most noble and valiant L. Fairfax his father, took Cawood
Castle and Axholme Island, with all the Ammunition. 5. These two Commanders
routed the Kings forces near Selby in Y^rkeshire. 11 April 1644. 6. June
1645, This thrice valiant Commander S^r Thomas Fairfax took Nubridge near
Oxford after he had blocked up that City. 7. He routed the Kings forces at
Nazeb^, in the field took 4000 foot and all the Ordnance bag and baggage, with
the Kings Council Cabi^et of letters. 8. He took the City of Leicester, and in
it 200 horse, 400 foot, and all the Ammunition. 9. He took Highworth with all
the Ammunition. 10. July 1645, He relieved Taunton, and retook Ilchester with
all the Ammunition. 11. He routed the L. Goring, took 1000 common soldiers,
1000 horse, 3000 Arms, 25 horse Colors, 21 foot, 2 pieces of Ordnance. 12.
He took Lamport with the Ammunition. 13. He took the Town of Borough, with
all the Ammunition. 14. He took Bridgewater by storm. 15. August 1645, he took
the Castle of Sherborne by storm. 16. And the Castle of Nuney by storm, and
Purshot Point. 17. He took the strong City of Bristoll with all the Ammunition.
18. And the Town and Castle of De^izes, Septem. 1645. 19. He took the Castle of
Farleigh. 20. And the Castle of Kardist, and in it 16 pieces of Ordnance, and
400 Arms. 21. He took Laycock house. 22. And Barkley Castle. 23. And Chedwick
Castle, and Pontefract Castle. October 1645. 24. He routed the Welsh Army
near Hereford and many prisoners and prise taken. 25. He took the Town and
Castle of Haverford west, by storm with all the Ammunition. 26. He took Picton
Castle by storm. 27. And the Castle of Carew. 28. He took Cardiff with the
Ammunition. 29. He took Sandall Castle with all the Ammunition. 30. He took
Charles Fort near Plymouth. 31. And Winchester with the Castle, Novem. 1645.
32. He took Chepstow Castle. 33. And Holt Garrison with all the Ammunition.
34. As also the Town and Castle of Car^^^^ then. 35. And Langford house. 36.
He routed Digby and Langdale twice, took bag and baggage. 37. He took Tiverton.
38. And Munmouth Town and Castle. 39. He took Bolton Castle with all the
Ammunition. 40. Also Shelford house by storm. 41. Also Wharton house near
Newarke, with all the Ammunition. 42. He took Beeston Castle by Composition.
43. He took the Fort of Latham by composition January 1645. 44. He took
Hereford. 45. And the Castle of Embleden in Carmarthenshire, with all the
Ammunition. 46. Skipton Castle with all the Ammunition. 56. And Fulferd near
Exeter. 57. And Chilton house. 58. And Pouldram house by storm. 59. He
relieved Plymouth and beat the Kings forces, Febr. 1645. 60. He took the Fort
of Canterbury by a sudden storm. 61. Also Budex Church near Plymouth by
storm, and in it 100 common ^ouldiers, 100 horse, and 200 Arms. 62. He took
Sir Francis Drakes house. 63. And ^artmouth Town and Castle. 67. As also
^elvoir Castle. 68. And Torrington by ^^orme. 69. He routed the Lord Hopton in
the West, took 400 foot and 300 horse. 70. He took Corf Castle in Dorset-shire.
71. He retook Abington. 72. He routed the Kings forces under Major General
Web, took bag and baggage. 73. He took the Garrison of Ashby-de-la-zouch. ^4.
He took Lastoll and surprised 4 load of Hopto^s Ammunition. 75. He took
Salt-ash, and in it 5 Piece of Ordnance and much more Ammunition. 76. He took
Warbridge and Temple-guard and routed the enemy. 77. Sir Ralph Hoptons forces
were dis-banded and their Arms surrendered to him, there being 5000 horse, Sir
Jacob Ashley routed and himself with 1500 horse taken. 78. Dennis Castle and
Felford Haven. 79. Axmouth Fort, Inch house with 4 pieces of Ordnance. 80.
Higharchall house. 81. Hilford Fort all these he took, and in April 1646. 82.
He took Bridgenorth Town. 83. The Isle of Portland with the Castle. 84. He
routed a party of the Kings horse near Farringdon, 300 taken Prisoners. 85. He
took Exeter. 86. Barnestable. 87. Ilford Fort. 88. Michael-Mount. 89.
Aberistwith Castle. 90. Dunster Castle. 91. Titbury Castle. 92. Woodstock
Manor. 93. Bridgenorth Castle. In May 1645, 94. He took Banbury Castle. 95.
Penrin Castle. 96. Dudley Castle. 97. Hartlebury Castle. June 1646. 97. Ludley
Town and Castle. 98 He took Radcoat house. 99. Carnarve^, Anglesey, and
Bumorris. 100. Bostoll-house. 101. Sherborne house. 102. The City of Oxford, 38
piece of Ordnance, 70 barrels of powder. 103. And Farringdon July 1646. he
took, 104. D^rcester. 105. Liechfield^ close. 106. Wallingford Castle, August
1646 Gothridge Castle. 107. Ruthian Castle. 108. Ragland Castle. 109. Pende^nis
Castle. 110. Flint Castle.

Lieutenant General Cromwell.
FIrst, this most valiant and victorious Commander, serving in the late unhappy
and unruly wars of this Kingdom under the most noble General the Earl of
Manchester for the preservation of the Associated Counties, in May 1643, being
in Lincolnshire with a considerable strength of horse and foot, gave the
Cavaliers of Newarke, a brave defeat near unto Grantham, whom he bravely beat
out of the field, had full execution on them in their flight at least two or
three miles together, slew about. 100 of them at the least, took 45 prisoners
together with many horse and Arms, 4, or 5 of their Colors, and rescued many
of our own men whom they had taken prisoners.

2. In July 1643. he raised the Siege of Gainsborough, which had been strongly
begirt by the Atheistical Earl of Newcastle, whom there he soundly cudgelled
away and obtained a most famous Victory of him, and in the fight slew General
Cavendish, Colonel Beeton and a Lieutenant Colonel, one Sergeant Major, and
one Captain, together with an 100 more Officers and common soldiers which
were slain on the place, and at least 150 prisoners, with many horse and much
Arms.

3. Immediately after this he took Burleigh house by storm, wherein he took
prisoners 2, Col. 6, or 7 Cap. 3, or 400 foot, near 200 horse, with all the
Arms and Ammunition therein, and much and rich pillage within the house.

4. At the famous fight and glorious victory obtained at Marston-Moore, against
Prince Rupert, the Marquess of Newcastle etc. He behaved himself most
bravely at the first onset in that battle, but receiving (at the first charge)
a wound in his reck, was fain to be conveyed out of the field, committing the
further leading on of his brave Regiment to Major General Crawford.

5. Also, about the midst of June 1645, he was a most valiant and undanted
actor and instrument in winning of that most famous and ever to be memorized
victory of Naseby, under the command of the thrice Noble and most renowned
General Sir Thomas Fairfax.

6. And in August following, he most bravely beat above ^000 Club-men, who
were desperately gathered together in a body in Arms at Hambleton-hill near
Blanford, in the West, when he took 300 of them prisoners, slew but about 12
in the place (he endeavoring most nobly to overcome them by treaty and
entreaties, and to shed as little blood as might be) took from them at least
2000 Arms of all sorts, all their Colors and Drums and other ^aggage, and so
happily and honorably ^ppeased that dangerous insurrection.

7. He also had a second principal fame (together with most noble and renowned
Major General Massey) in the wining that ^amous Victory, which was obtained
through fire and water; by these two most ^rave Commanders at La^g port ^ in
the West.

8. In brief, he indeed, and Major Genesis Massey were two of the prime and
principal actors in very many or most of (...) most famous and renowned
Victories ob^ained by and under our ever to be honored famous and faithful
General Sir Thomas Fairfax, in the western parts of the Kingdom, where they
all three purchased ^he undeliable prizes of eternal praises, ho^our and
renown. And he was before the War began chosen a Member of the honorable
house of Commons in Parliament.

^he Faithful and Renouned soldier Phillip ^^ippon etc: Appointed Chief
Marshall of (...) Forcas mysed for Ireland by the Parlimt*



The famous Asts and most memorable Performances of the truly honorable, and
as virtuous as valiant heroick-hearted brave Commander, Phillip Skippon
Marshall Genesis of all the Forces of the most high and honorable Court of
Parliament of England, for the Kingdom of Ireland*
1. THis renowned Soldier and brave Commander, Marshall-Generall Skippon,
served with much deserved honor in himself and reputation to his native
Country, in the Belgicke-Warres, in the Netherlands, under that most renowned
Prince of Orange, Grave Maurice of Nassaw for the space of -- years.

2. After this, returning again into England, the Martiall-spirited Sparks of
the famous Artillery-Garden of the most renowned City of London, to his no
little honor, chose him their pious and most expert Gimnasiarchus, or Captain
of the said Artillery-Garden to exercise and instruct them in the exactest
rules of Martial Discipline where he, thus, continued with much honor and
love for the space of -- years.

3. Afterward about the year 1642, at the beginning of our most unhappy
Civill-Warres, the King being, then, in discontent departed from his
Parliament, and at York; and there understanding that the Parliament had set
the Militia on foot, for the safeguard of the Kingdom, and more particularly
in the City of London; and that the Parliament (at the desire of the said City)
had made this famous and faithful old expert Soldier, their Major General of
all the City forces, in May 1642. He presently directed a letter to him, to
require and command his personal attendance on his Majesty at York, all
excuses being set apart. But, he most loyally acquainting the Parliament
therewith, was by both Houses of Parliament inhibited from going, and by an
Ordinance of Parliament or three several Votes for his indemnity, in both
Houses, was cleared from any legal or disloyal disobedience to the Kings
command therein.

4. In November, 1642 this noble and renowned brave Christian soldier was made
Sergeant Major General of all the Parliaments forces for the defense of the
Kingdom, under the most noble and renowned Lord General Robert Earl of
Essex, his Excellency deceased.

5. About December 1643, this brave Commander, with a party of
impregnable-hearted and renowned Romane-like London soldiers, and valiant and
Victorious Northampton forces, most courageously stormed Grafton house in
Northamptonshire (a place of very great strength and consequence, and the
Queens own Joynter) which after much hard service and many most furious
assaults upon it, they most Victoriously obtained, and took prisoners therein,
Colonel Sir John Digby (a rank and most active Papist, and Brother to that
arch Traitor, George Lord Digby) Colonel Sir Edward Longervile, and 5 Colonels
more, above 300 common soldiers, 600 Arms, 6 pieces of Ordnance, 80 brave
horse, besides many brave Saddle-horses, with very many other rich spoils,
which were left to his Soldiers for their encouragement.

6. In September 1644, the main body of the Parliaments foot forces being
necessitously left in a noose (as it were) or corner of Cornwall, in the
remotest part of the West of the Kingdom, under the command in chief of this
our most renowned Virtuous and Valiant Commander (of whom I may not here,
especially, forget that most memorable Adagie, as it were, that,, He lived
like an Angel, Prayed like a Saint, and fought like a Lion) and being there
reduced to such a straight, as that the enemy hoped, now, to have made them all
their bloody prey; and which this brave Commander observing, and that they must
of necessity, either basely yield to ignoble and slavish Captivity, or else
fight and die honorably, which last, he most magnanimously choosing, so
admirably encouraged all the rest of his soldiers thereunto, both by his
courageous and Christian resolute speeches and exhortations, and also by his
invincible spirit and personal example; that after a most fierce and bloody
fight, they forced their own conditions through the death and wounds of many of
their bloodeist enemies, and in spite of all their adversaries greatest power
and fury, this most noble Commander most bravely brought them all off with
their lives and honor preserved, and to the enemies great loss and shame in
the issue.

7. And here also, we may not forget that most brave piece of service
performed (about April 1645,) by this most wise godly and gallant Commander,
in reducing and settling the new Moddel'd Army, in diverse Regiments both of
horse and foot upon that great change and alteration of the former unruly Army
(at least in the opinion of most men) which after a most excellent speech unto
them, and by his most grave, godly, and discreet managing of things among them,
he so sweetly settled and composed as was even to admiration, and was a great
and most grateful work to the Parliament and whole Kingdom, as things then
stood.

8. And in the most furious and famous battle at Nazeby, in Northamptonshire,
about the midst of June 1645, this most virtuous and valiant Commander having
bin a most eminent actor and instrument (under God) of obtaining that most
glorious and Kingdome-Crowning Victory, there received (among diverse other*
wounds) one most deep and dangerous wound which was credibly reported to be
about 8 inches long in his body on the left side, under his short ribs, by a
bullet which had most dangerously battered his Armor and broken and beaten a
piece of it into his belly, which lay long there to his great continued pain,
so that there was no small fear of his precious life. And it was credibly
reported, that the King himself should say (in a kind of a consolitary way, to
himself) when he heard of this, That though he had lost the Victory at Nazeby,
yet Skippon was slain. But praised be God it proved otherwise.

9. After this renowned Commander had lain a while at Northampton Town, or
thereabout, for the dressing of his wounds, and it being held fit (by the
Parliament, who took tender care over him) to remove him thence to London, for
the more hopeful cure: This brave Gentleman being with all easiest
conveniencie, put into a horse litter to be brought to London, and coming to
Islington a Town a little more then a mile from London; It pleased the Lord
that it should so fall out (to the greater setting forth of his Power and
Providence) that in the said Town, a great Mastiffe-Dog, on a sudden, ran most
fiercely out of a house, fell furiously upon one of the horses that carried the
Litter, got the horse by the Stones, behind, made the horse, thereby, fling and
fly about, and beat and shake the Litter up and down, too and fro, in a most
dangerous manner shaking the good Gentleman's sorely wounded body thereby, and
ready continually to overthrow the Litter and greatly endanger the noble
Gentleman's life; All which while there being no possible means to beat off the
Dog, or make him leave his hold of the horse, till they ran him through with a
Sword and killed him; which as soon as they could, they did; and so brought
this noble Gentleman to his house in Bartholmewes the great, where*
notwithstanding all this (the Lord had so admirably enabled him to bear this
terrible brunt) being laid to rest in his bed, Prayers sent up to God for him
in all the Churches in London, and special care had to the cure of his wound,
by Gods blessing on the industry and fidelity of the honest and Religious
Chyrurgion Mr. Trapham, who at length* by Gods mercy got out a great piece of a
rag of his wastcoat, which had been beaten into his body, by his Armor,
through the force of the bullet, and lay festering in the wound, but thus got
out, in Gods good time, a perfect c^re was made of it. Thus it was made
manifest to the whole World, that God had graciously reserved him unto, yet
some more glorious work for the honor of his great Name, and me good of his
poor Church.

10. About the midst of September following, 1645, the brave City of Bristoll
being taken from the Royalists, it pleased the Parliament to reflect on the
former constant faithfulness and high merits of this renowned Commander, and
so to honor him (as he deserved) as to make him Governor of Bristoll: where,
also he carried himself most piously and prudently, both in point of Religion,
and of Martial discipline to the great honor of God, and good of the City.

11. Since which also, the Parliament most deservedly still eying his prudence,
piety, and fidelity to the State, made choice of him, with a power of about
3000 horse and Dragoones to be a convoy for the 200000. l. to Newcastle, for
our loyal and ever to be beloved Brethren of Scotland; And immediately after,
chose him Governor of Newcastle also, giving him power to substitute a
Deputy Governor of the City of Bristoll, and himself to be the Superior
Governor thereof, notwithstanding.

12. And since all this, to add a yet more glorious luster to all these
honors, which God had thus conferred upon him; This noble Commander, being
most highly honored in the hearts of the people also, was chosen by them, a
most worthy member of the house of Commons in Parliament. And yet again, now,
at last (and yet, I hope, it is not the last) as if the God of Heaven intended to
make him one of his special and peculiar favorites, he has put into the
hearts of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, to make choice of him, to be
their Marshall-Generall of all their forces for the distressed Kingdom^ of
Ireland, this present year 1647. In which* so Supereminent a place of honor
and action, the God of Jacob be with him, the God of Counsel and Courage guard
and guide him, and lead him on (...) and to Conquer, until he also (...) Peace
in that poor Kingdom. Amen and Amen.

Collonell ma^^is Appointed Leivtenant General* of the Horse raised for
Ireland by the Parliment.



The most eminent Actions and most famous and fortunate Performances of that
most generous Gentleman, and as virtuous as valiant and Hectorean-hearted brave
Commander in Arms Edward Massey, Lieutenant General of the horse for the most
honorable Parliament of England, in the Kingdom of Ireland.
1. THis noble and renowned Gentleman having heretofore been an Apprentice of
London (as to the high honor of that most famous City be it mentioned, his
most famous fellow Citizens and Companions in Arms, those brave Sons of
Bellona, renowned Major General Brown, now an honorable Commissioner with the
King at Holmby, much honored Colonel West Lieutenant of the Tower of London,
and brave Colonel Harvey an honorable Member of the House of Commons likewise
were) but being (then) a Sparkie-spirited Active and Ingenious young Gentleman,
and by his studious dexterity becoming a most expert Engineere and valiant
Soldier and Commander in foreign parts, and by the good hand of Gods all-wise
disposal* returning home to his own native Country; and here also, in the
year 1642. in the late bloody broils of our Kingdom, having shown himself a
most brave Soldier and expert Commander, and obtaining (by his precious merits
and activity, in those our homebred uncivil Civill-Warres) the place and
honor of a Colonel; was soon after by noble and renowned Sir William Wallers
means and high recommendations of him) most worthily and happily made
Governor of the strong Town or City of Gloucester.

2. This most noble and renowned Commander had not long continued in the
gallant Government of this foresaid brave City, but that the King himself (in
the top of his turbulent and truculent War (being mightily flesht with the
taking of Bristoll a little before) would needs in his intended way to London
(only as a viaticum) take Gloucester into his possession) with a most
powerful and wrathful Army gave the said City of Gloucester a most unkind
regreet and violent visitation. B^t this most noble and undaunted Governor
Colonel Massey, gave his Majesty such a stop, and walked his horse there so
long, and entertained his King, with such deserved harsh and course welcome
with Cannon and Musket shot, as that he (maugre all the might and malice of
that most formidable Army) he made his Majesty leave the bones and loose the
heart-blood of many of the best and bravest unbidden and unwelcome guests
before Gloucester Walls; and at last (with the happy help of the most noble and
renowned Lord General the Earl of Essex and his brave London forces) enforced
the King to relinquish this hoped fat morsel, and to depart extreme hungry
and angry; being thus, both back-beaten and belly-beaten, to Gods eternal high
praise and glory be it everlastingly remembered, to this most noble and renowned
Colonels indelible fame and honor, be it mentioned, and to the unutterable joy
and comfort of the whole Kingdom, especially (which was at that time in a most
low and languishing, yea in a most drooping and dying condition, as ever it was
in the whole time of that most woeful War, from the first to the last) be it
for ever in deep and broad Characters of golden gratitude registered and
recorded.

3. After this, in the year 1643, the Royalists resolving still as much as
possibly they could to gird up Gloucester, with Garrisons on all sides to ^ire
and starve it up if it might be; but this valiant and vigilant Governor, still
cropped and lopt all their subtilest designs, in the very bud: As first he
dealt with Colonel Vavasor at Tewksbury, in December 1643, then immediately
after this with Sir John Winter, whom he bravely beat out of Newnham, and
soon after also, out of Wotton-Garrison, to his great loss and terror.

4. In February following, he beat Sir Henry Talbot in his own quarters at
Shepstow, took him prisoner, and a brave prize besides. In March following he
beat his neighbor enemies about ^ miles from Gloucester and took much and rich
spoil from them; Again soundly beat Sir John Winter in the Forest of Deane;
And Colonel Min also in his own quarters on the borders of Wales.

5. In May following 1644, he again (...) soundly scourged his Popish
neighbor Sir John Winter in Newnham (...) and Little-Deane in Gloucestershire,
beating them in their own quarters, and taking many prisoners and prizes from
them.

6. In June following, he took B^verton Castle in Gloucestershire with all the
Ordnance, Arms and Ammun^tion therein, Malmesbury also, with two Sons of the
Parle of Barkeshire in it, 28 Officers, 7 or 8* pieces of Ordnance, 400 Arms,
and other rich prize; together with Chippingham strong Garrison, with all the
Arms and Ammunition therein, which he took shortly after.

7. And about the same time, he took Teuksbury also, slew in the taking of it
Colonel Godfrey, and a Quartermaster General, took Lieutenant Colonel Min,
prisoner, together with diverse other Officers and soldiers and very much prize.

8. In August following, General Mi^n^ plundering and spoiling the Country not
far from Gloucester, this noble Colonel understanding thereof, went forth
and bravely encountered him, and after a hot skirmish, slew the said General
and other Officers, and about an 100 common soldiers, took prisoners, 1
Colonel, 1 Major, Captains, 3 Lieutenants, 5 Ensigns, 12 Sergeants* and
about 300 common soldiers, and much other prize.

9. In September 1644, he took by a brave Stratagem the Town and Castle of
Monmouth in South Wales. And shortly after bravely beat the Royalists at
Be^sley, where he took the Governor thereof and 10 Commanders, a 160 common
soldiers; and all the Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition therein. And upon the
Parl. certain intelligence of these this most renowned Colonels famous and
Victorious performances* both Houses of Parliament conferred and settled upon
him and his heirs for ever (as a present encouragement of his fidelity and
brave services) 1000. l. a year of Sir John Winters estate in Gloucestershire.

10. About the middle of October 1644, this magnanimous Colonel understanding
that Sir John Winter* that active Papist had again endeavored to fortify that
considerable passage of Be^ckly or Be^sley, where he had formerly well eudge^^d
him, he most courageously set upon him there also again but now with
extraordinary hazard of his precious life; for in the midst of the fight, his
horse by leaping a ditch, overthrew him to the ground* which a Musketier of the
enemies party soon perceiving, suddenly gave fire upon him, but by Gods good
Providence, he mist his mark, which he also seeing and being somewhat near
him, as soon as he had discharged, he turned the butt end of his Muske^ and
struck fiercely at this brave Colonel, and with the force of the blow struck
off his headpiece (all this being so suddenly done that the Col. had no time
to consider the great danger he was in) but now it pleased the Lord (whom it
seems most evidently by this mighty danger and deliverance, the Lord his God
reserved for, yet some more great hon. work for his further glory and his
Churches good, just as it was though in another kind, with his famous compeere
renowned Gen: Skippo^) it now, I say pleased the Lord to give this noble Col.
such an unda^ted spirit and renewed courage that he suddenly recovered his
feet insta^tly charged the Musketier, and killed him on the place, and very
speedily after obtained a most memorable Victory over Sir I. Winter forced this
his grand adversary to tumble down asleep ^^ill to save his life, but in
danger to have broken his neck, took many Commanders, Officers and common
soldiers prisoners, slew diverse on the place: took 8 barrels of powder, 8
pieces of Ordnance, with many horse and Arms, and returned home laden with as
much honor as rich spoils and prizes.

11. In December also 1644, this most renowned Colonel did bravely beat the
enemies horse which came from Bristoll, about Sedbury in Gloucestershire,
taking very many of them prisoners, together with great prizes. In March
following 1645, he also soundly beat another party of Bristoll Cavaliers, took
Colonel Roberts a great Malignant Royalist of Herefordshire prisoner, and
diverse other Officers in Arms, and common Soldiers.

12. And about the latter end of May 1645, this our most renowned and
undefa^igable active Colonel took the most strong Town of Evesham by a
terrible storm, as sharp as short; took in it prisoners, Colonel Robert Leg,
the Governor of the Town, Colonel Foster, and Lieutenant Colonel Bellingham,
Major Travillian, 13 Captains, 17 Lievtenants, above 20 inferior Officers,
all the Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition therein, which was very much.

13. About the midst also of July 1645, ever to be honored Colonel Massey
being now, (for all his foresaid brave services, in and about the City of
Gloucester) by the Parliament, honored with the title and place of Major
General of the Western parts of the Kingdom, was He who in the head of his
Army struck the first conquering blow, at that brave fight and famous, Victory
at Langport, which was won through fire and water; in which defeat, which he
(here) gave the enemy (which indeed, brake the heart of General ^oring^
Forces) he took at least 5 or 600 prisoners, and at least 300 horse. After this
also, he gave the first, most furious and successful onset upon Tiverton in
Cornwall, which was obtained by a remarkable shot of a Cannon, admirably
breaking the Chain of the drawbridge of that strong Castle, whereby it was
taken.

14. And now, at length, the Lord his God, to add more luster to the splendor
of all his famous performances, and to Crown him with more honor, moved the
^^arts of his well-affected people to make ^oice of him, for a most worthily
honou^^ble member of the house of Commons in Parliament, yea and to add yet
one more sparkie Diamond of honor unto the Crown of all these his most
illustrious Ornaments of honor, the Lord, I say (still manifesting the
faithfulness of his infallible word of Truth, 1 Samuel 2. 30. Those that honor
me, says the Lord, I will honour^) put into the hearts of our most renowned
Parliament, to choose him, now (with his most renowned Colleague in Arms brave
Marshall General Skippon) to be Leivienant General of all their horse in the
Kingdom of Ireland. For whom, as for the other my heartiest Prayers are, that
the heavenly Lord of Hosts would be a Sun and shield to him also, and to gird
him with all honor and renown, courage, counsel, and good success* unto the
completing of a perfect peace in that Kingdom also. Amen, and Amen.

John Vicars.

Sir William Brereton Major General of Cheshire, etc.
THis most valiant and successful Patriot of his Country was blessed by God
with many memorable and famous Victories over his Countries enemies, as first,
in the year 1642. In notably beating that Arch Malignant enemy of those parts,
Sir Thomas Aston near Namptwich utterly ^outing all his forces, taking about
100 of his soldiers prisoners, with many horse and Arms, and making Sir
Vincent Corbet fly in a pannick fear for his life.

2. He beat him again most soundly at Middlewich, where he took prisoners,
Sir Edward Mosely, Colonel Ellis, d^vers Lieutenant Colonels and Majors, 11
Captains, most of all his field Officers, about 600 soldiers, 2 pieces of
Ordnance, many Arms, all his bag and baggage, his Army wholly routed, and
Middlewich firmly possessed by this noble and Victorious Commander.

3. He also obtained a most famous Victory over the Earl of Northampton, who
was slain in the fight, and diverse other Commanders and Officers slain and
taken prisners.

4. He also bravely beat the E. of Darby at Stockton heath; And Sir Vincent
Corbet also a second time at Draighton in Shropshire, and took from him many
prisoners, horse and Arms.

5. And in the year 1643, he took Wolverhampton, and Whitchurch in Shropshire,
by a terrible storm, Stafford Town and Castle also, and Ecoleshall Castle,
with all the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition in them and much other rich prize
and booty.

6. He bravely beat the cowardly L. Capell at Lappington, and at Leighbridge,
where he put him twice to retreat and rout, slew many of his men, and forced
him to fly into Shrewsbury for shelter; he also took Holt bridge by storm, a
strong Garrison of the enemies; with his taking of Wrexham, in Wales, Hawarden
Castle, and Gusanna house a strong Garrison of the enemies in Wales.

7. He won a most famous Victory of the Lord Capell and the Lord Byron at
Namptwich Siege; and Sir Thomas Aston also, where he routed all Byrons Irish
forces, took Major General Gibson, Sir Francis Butler, and diverse other
eminent Commanders prisoners, together with 2000 common soldiers, and bloody
Irish women, 6 pieces of Ordnance, above 20 carriages, all their bag and
baggage, and where were slain in the fight about, 300 of the enemy and Byron
himself forced to fly into Ch^ster.

8. He also beat the enemy (...) poole in Montgomeryshire, together with Sir
Marmaduke Langdale at Malpasse in Cheshire, in August 1644, where he slew and
took many eminent Commanders and Officers, and brought them prisoners to
Namptwich.

9. At Tarvin also he most magnanimously beat the enemy* and slew Col. Marrow,
a most pestilent Atheistical Royalist; and drove the enemy also out of Worrall
Island, and settled firmly many Garrisons in those parts.

10. This most renowned Commander obtained a most glorious Victory over his
enemies at Montgomery Castle, at the relieving of noble Sir Th^mas M^ddletous
forces besieged therein, where he put the enemy being then very strong, to a
total rout and flight, took prisoners Major Genesis Sir Thomvs Tildsley Major
Genesis Broughton, Lieutenant Col. Broughton, Major Williams, 19 Captains, 23
Knights and Gentlemen, 33 Cornets and Ensigns, 57 Sergeants, 61 Corporals, 11
Drums, 5 Trumpets, 1480 common soldiers; slew two Lieutenant Colonels, 7
Captains with many other Officers, 500 common soldiers, and took their Arms
and Ammunition bag and baggage.

11. He also took the Town and Castle of Leverpoole, with all the Ordnance,
Arms and Ammunition therein; and had singular good success in preventing a
dangerous design of Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice to have passed their
forces through Cheshire into Lancashire* against our Brethren of Scotland in
the North.

12. He also took the brave and strong Town and Castle of Shrewsbury, with all
the Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition therein* with very many riches, prisoners
and prizes.

13. He also routed the Kings forces at Denbigh, in Anno 1645, and took 400
of the enemies prisoners about 600 horse, and many of the enemies slain in the
fight.

14. He also took the strong Castle of Beeston with all the Ordnance, Arms and
Ammunition therein; and also took the strong and considerable Town and Castle
of Westchester, by composition or treaty, with all the Ordnance, Arms and
Ammunition therein, which were very many and much other rich prize.

15. He also took the Town of Leichfield, And obtained a most glorious Victory
over the Lord Ashley, the last and greatest prop of the Kings party at Stow in
the Would^ where he routed the said Sir Jacob Ashley^ whole Army, took the Lord
Ashley him^selfe prisoner, with diverse other eminen^ Commanders, about 1800
common souldi^ers, with all their Arms, Ammunition^ bag and baggage.

16. After this he took Titbury Castle^ with all the Ordnance, Arms and
Ammu^nition therein; together with Dudley Castle^ also (a most strong and almost
impregna^ble Castle, in the year 1646) with all the Ordnance, Arms and
Ammunition there^in also.

17. And at last after a long Siege, his va^liant and Victorious forces took
Leichfiel^ strong Close, where he took prisoners* Colonels, 6 Commissioners of
Array, tw^ Lieutenant Colonels, 8 Majors, 32 Cap^taines, 15 Lievtenants, 8
Cornets, 9 Ensign^ 21 Esquires and Gentlemen of quality, 70 common soldiers,
and all the Arms an^ Ammmunition therein; And thus was (...) special
instrument of ending Victorious^^ these our unhappy and unholy Civil War^

Sir William Waller Knight, Sargeant Mayor General* of y^ Parliaments Army^
and one of the Members* of y^ Hono:bl^ House of Commons* 1^48.
THis most magnanimous valiant and victorious brave Commander in arms, Sir
William Waller* one of the most impreg^ble offensive and defensive Walls of this
Kingdom under God, did in the year 1642, (at the beginning of our imtestine
and most uncivil Civil broils) 1, take the strong and considerable Town of
Portsmouth, and Sousey-Castle, with all the Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition in
them, which was very much.

2. He took also Farnhans Castle, with diverse eminent prisoners in it, and all
the Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition therein; together with about 40000. l. in
Money and Plate, beside singular good pillage for his soldiers, which he gave
them freely.

3. He also, with brave Colonel Brown, soundly beat the Lord Grandison near
Winchester, took him prisoner, together with his Lieutenant Colonel, Sergeant
Major Willis* and between 40 and 50 other Commanders and Gentlemen of quality,
about 600 horse* 200 Dragoones, 600 Arms and great store of other pillage, and
took the City of Winchester also at the same time.

4. He took Arundell Castle in Sussex also^ by storm, and all the Arms and
Ammunition therein.

5. He took the City of Chichester likewise, with Sir Edward Ford, high
Sheriff^ of that County for the King, a most desperate Malignant, Bishop King,
as bad as the worst, Sir John Morley, together with many prime Commanders, and
at least 60 other eminent Officers, very many brave horses, about 400 excellent
Dragoones, with 3 or 400 foot soldiers.

6. And in the year 1643, did admirable brave service to the Parliament in the
West by a flying Army of horse, about Salisbury, VVilishire, and Dorsetshire,
to the great terror of the enemies where ever he came.

7. He also took Malmsbury by storm, and Stratagem, and took therein at least
300 prisoners, besies 3 Colonels, 1 Lieutenant Colonel, 1 Sergeant Major, 6
Captains, 6 Lievtenants, 6 Ensigns, 1 Cornet, 4 Quartermasters, and great
store of Arms and Ammonition.

8. He also, most undantedly (with the help of renowned Colonel Mass^y then
Governor of Gloucester) set upon 2000 of the Kings Welsh forces in the Forest
of Deaue under the Command of the Lord Herbers, beat them out of their
trenches, slew about 600 on the place, took 4000 of them prisoners, took 6
Troops of as brave horse as all England could show; almost all their Arms and
Ammunition, together with 5 pieces of Ordnance.

9. And immediately after this, advan^cing toward Teuksbury (so terrible was
the very name of Sir William Waller, that) the whole Garrison of Sir William
Russell hig^ Sheriff of Worcester lying (then) ther^ and hearing of his
approach fled away wi^ only 2 Drakes toward Worcester, and le^ the said Town
to noble Sir Williams peace^able possession.

10. After all this he most Victorious^ marched with his forces into Wales,
too^ 3 Troops of horse completely armed from Prince Maurice; And took High^am,
an^ took therein at least 1444 common soldiers prisoners well armed, and at
least 15^ Commanders and Gentlemen of quality.

11. He also as undantedly as Victoriousl^ marched forward in Wales, and took
the Towns of Newnham, Ross-bridge, Mon^^^uth, and Chepstow, with all the Arme^
and Ammunition in them all.

12. This most resolute and renowne^ brave Commander, took also the Town^ or
City of Hereford, and in it at least 2^ persons of quality; the chief whereof
we^ the Lord Se^^damore and his Son, Sir Wal^ter Py^, Sir William Crofts, and
Sir Richar^ Cave, with diverse other gallants of worth and quality; and upon at
least 2000 Arms.

13. He took also the Town of Lemster about 12 miles from Hereford, a most
Malignant Town but very rich and of great consequence to the Parliament; with
all the Arms, Ammunition, and rich pillage therein.

14. He soundly beat Sir Ralph Hoptons forces in the West, between Glasenbury
and Wells, recovered all the loss which Colonel Popham and Colonel Stroud had
received by them; slew about 250 of the enemies on the place and chase of them,
sorely wounded Prince Maurice himself (who was in the fight) and beat him
twice off from his horse, and very narrowly escaped from being taken prisoner,
took diverse Gentlemen of worth and quality prisoners, and so retreated with
much honor to Bath, where Sir Williams quarters were.

15. He most admirably beat Hopton in the West, at that famous sight at
Tugg-hill eere Sherborne, and Marshfield, where was slain the Marquess of
Hartfords Son, Sir Bevill Greenvill of Greenefield, 2 Lieutenant Colonels, 1
Sergeant Major, 6 Captains, and other Commanders and Officers, above 200
common soldiers, and 300 more mortally wounded.

16. He took the Lord Saulton, a Scottish Popish Prisoner, on the coast of
Sussex, then landed from France with 4000. l. and diverse letters of great
importance, which he sent to the Parliament.

17. He again most bravely beat Sir Ralph Hopton and the Lord Craford at Alton
in Surrey, totally routed their whole Army, by Hoptons own confession in a
letter of his sent to noble Sir. William, wherein were slain, above 40 of the
enemies, among whom was Colonel Bowls; he took 700 prisoners, besides 100 in
a Barn and a 100 more in the field, whereof at least 500 took the Covenant and
served the Parliament, his prizes taken, were near 200 horse, and 1000 Arms,
among his prisoners, were one Colonel, one Lieutenant Colonel, one Major, 13
Captains, 3 Cornets, and much other rich prizes, and took the Town of A^lto^
also, with all the Arms and Ammunition therein.

18. He bravely besieged and too^ again (...) Castle in Sussex, wherein he took
prisoners, Sir William Ford high Sheriff of Sussex a most desperate Malignant,
Sir Edward Bishop, Colonel Ba^fi^ld, with other eminent Gentlemen of quality,
above 50 Reformad^es, 1200 prisoners with their Arms, diverse expert
Engineeres, and at ^000. l. in money and Plate, with great store of other rich
prize and pillage. He also here took a brave Dunkirk ship of great burden
wherein were 20 brave bra^se pieces of Ordnance, 100 barrels of powder, 2000
Arms, great store of Ammunition diverse Commanders, and other persons of
quality, (...) a great quantity of Linen cloth to a ^eat value.

19. He also with the help of renowned ^ajor General Brown, terribly beat the
^ngs forces at Alsford, under the Command Sir Ralph Hopton where the L. John
Bro^er to the Duke of Lenox was slain, and at ^st 500 more, and diverse both
Knights (...) Gentl. of great quality taken prisoners, (...) after all this
took in Winchester again. (...). He soundly beat the enemy at Bazing^se, took
diverse Officers and Comman^s prisoners, and at least 1000 sheep and (...) ^at
Cattle, and a considerable sum of mo^hich they had gathered in the Country. He
pursued the K. in his flight (in Iun^ ^4) out of Oxford, and frighted him* and
his followers in a long chase; and took Shudley Castle by storm, in the way;
where he took prisoners, Sir William Mo^^ton, Lieutenant Colonel Sayer, 2
Sergeant Majors, 4 Captains, 7 Lievtenants, and diverse other Officers and
Commanders, 289 common soldiers, 80 horse, two Drakes; many slain in the
assault on the enemies side, but not one of Sir Williams, a rare mercy and
singular preservation, and thus this most renowned generous General went on
Conquering and to Conquer.

Major General Laughorne.
THis most famous and faithful Patriot of his Country, and most active and
^yik-hearted brave Commander, being ^orthy Gentleman of P^mbrookeshire, and
Gods good Providence, by the arrival, (...) gallant and brave Sea Commander
Captain Swanley at Milford-haven, being much assisted and encouraged now to
stir, in the defense of this his poor County, almost overrun with the
Malignant Welsh Gentry there, especially by the wicked and Atheistical E. of
Carberie, first put himself into Arms, with the foresaid brave Captain
Swanley, and the valiant Major of Pembrooke, a very loyal and pious Gentl. to
the Parliament and his distressed Country, and with what help the well-affected
gentry and Commons of that County could possibly afford them, he first fell
upon a strong hold or Garrison of the enemies called Stock-poole, which after 8
hours assault he took into his possession, with all the Arms and Ammution
therein.

2. He marched thence to another strong Garrison of the E. of Carberies called
Treffloin, within a mile of Tynby, out of which the wicked Earl of Carberie
himself issued with about 200 horse and foot, seeming desirous to relieve the
said Garrison, but this noble Colonel soon beat him thence with the roaring of
his great Ordnance, and he presently took the said Garrison, with at least 45
horse therein, and above an 140 Arms.

3. After this having a little refresht hi^ now fairly increasing forces at
Pembrook Town, he marched to a strong Fort upon Milford-haven mouth called the
Pyll, which having besieged both by land and by water (with the help of brave
Captain Swanleyes ships and valiant Seamen) he soon made the Enemy cry for
quarter and surrender it up, wherein he took above 200 Arms, 18 pieces of
Ordnance, 240 common soldiers, 26 Officers and Commanders, and two good ships
beside, the one called the Globe of Bristoll, with twelve pieces of Ordnance in
her, and the other called the Providence.

4. After this he marched toward Haverfordwest, and in his approach thereunto,
so ^righted Sir Henry Vaughan, and Sir John ^tepuey, then Governor of the said
Town, that he looking forth to see if ^ee could discover his Enemies coming.
^^w about half a mile off a heard ^f black Bullocks with white horns (as
(...) use to have) coming toward him (...) the field, which being all in a
cluster, (...) amazed him, that he ran to the (...) of his forces, and
swearing a (...) desperate great Oath, cries out to his soldiers, The
Roundhead Dogs are coming, at which report, they all ran away as fast as they
could drive each other before them, throwing away their Arms to sly for their
lives, and those that had powder threw it into the River, that so the
Roundheads might not make use of it against them; and by this means the Town
of Haverfordwest, being most disgracefully forsaken, this most noble Major
General took it most easily with all the Arms and Ammunition in it.

5. Then he marched with a brave increase of his Army and Artillery toward
Tinby, where falling on on both sides of it, and after a very sharp and
terrible storming of it, took both the Town and the (almost impregnable) Castle
by assault, wherein he took 3 or 400 prisoners, as many Arms and 7 pieces of
Ordnance, with all the other Ammunition and provision therein, which was very
much.

6, From thence he most courageously marched to Carew Castle, which after a
fierce assault he also took, with all the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition
therein; and therewith consummated a full and total reduction of all the
Malignants and insulting ^is-affected party of all Pembrookeshire, to (...)
obedience of the Parliament.

7. Not long after this, the Earl of Car^rie and the Lord Gerrard of these
parts ^yning together in a body of Welsh and I^sh Papists, and entering into
Pembrooke^^ire, this most valiant and viotorious Com^ander with the strength of
the County ^arched toward them, fell most couragi^^lly on them, put them to the
rout, and in short space made them fly, and did great recution on them; and in
this fight took ^^d slew at least 500 of them, took also ^^om them many Arms
and Carriages, ^^th most of their baggage.

8. This noble and brave spirited Com^ander having thus now most completely
^ered that whole County of Pembrooke of its Enemies, the Parliament in way of
^^ankfulnesse, and as a gratuity and encou^^gement, and trophie of honor, for
all (...) famous and faithful services, made him ^ajor General of all South
Wales, and be^wed upon him all the estate of one John ^low of Sleebridge
Gentleman, a desp^^^ Malignant and Popish enemy to the ^^^^ment, and to his
heirs for ever.

9. After all this, this most noble and courageous Commander persisted in the
prosecution of his valiant performances in those parts, and took diverse other
Towns, Castles, and strong holds of the Enemies, in those parts, even till the
total conclusion of this late unhappy War.

10. And lastly (which I should have inserted before) this most courageous
Commander being informed that Colonel Gerard had besieged Cardigan Castle,
whereof valiant Colonel Jones was (there) Governor, and had sent to this our
noble Major General for his aid and assistance, he accordingly came thither
with considerable forces, and notwithstanding great difficulties which he met
with there, most courageously he set upon him, most bravely beat him, putting
him to a total rout, made great execution upon his forces, took and slew 350
of them, at least 200 of them being found dead on the ground, he also took 600
Arms and 150 prisoners, among whom were diverse Officers, and men of quality,
and 4 Brass pieces of Ordnance,

Major General Pointz.
THis most valiant and courageous Commender, in the year 1645, being a most
active and vigilant Patriot of his perishing and much impoverished Country
(...) the Northern parrts of the Kingdom, and having in the deepest times of
these late desperate Wars engaged himself in Arms for the good of his
Country, and understanding about the month of September 1645, of the Kings
resolution to Relieve the City of West^hester, at that time long and strongly
besieged by the Parliaments forces, this most noble and renowned Commander most
undefatigably undertook a tedious and most tyresome journey, of near upon 300
miles by day and night to overtake and prevent the Kings relief of the said
City of Chester, and at length did so, at Rowto^-Moore, some 3. or 4 miles from
Chester, where he with his most valiant Commanders, Officers and soldiers set
upon the Kings forces, fought a most rerrible and fierce fight with them,
notwithstanding the tyresomnesse of the foresaid most tedious journey, and
after many dangers and difficulties in the batta^le, it pleased the Lord to
Crown him there, with a glorious and most famous Victory, where he at last put
the Enemy to a total rout, and where were lain 2 Lords, whereof the one was
the Lord Bernhard Earl of Lei^^field the Kings near kins^^an, Sir Bryan
Stapleton one Colonel, one ^ievtenant Colonel with at out 400 Officers,
Commanders, and common soldiers, besides what were slain in the pursuit,
which was confidently assured to make up in all near upon 800; they also took
prisoners about 1500, whereof were Sir Thomas Dabridgecourt* Sir Thomas Gore,
Colonel Thomas Weston, Son to the Earl of land, and 6 more Col. 7 Lieutenant
Col. 5 Majors, 19 Captains, 14 Lievtenants, 7 Cornets, 19 Gentlemen of his
Majesty's Lifeguard, 20 other Gentlemen, 5 Trumpefers, and 4 Quartermasters;
2000 horse, great store of Arms, much good pillage for the soldiers; upon the
intelligence of which most glorious Victory, the Parliam. sent 500. l. as a
token of the Kingdoms thankfulness to this noble Major Genesis

3. After this he did much admirable brave service in the North, and parts of
Yorkshire, as the long and tedious Siege of Pontefract, which at length he
took, with all the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition therein.

4. After this also, in November following, he took the most strong and
almost impregnable Garrison of Shelford-house, by a most fierce and furious
storm, wherein were slain by the enemies own obstinacy, disdaining to ask
quarter, and desperately resolving to fight it out, at the last, lost at least
140 of them.

5. He took also Worton-house, a strong Garrison in those parts, which he took
by composition, and therein 150 Arms, 40 Pikes, 3 barrels of Powder, and store
of other Provisions.

6. He took also Welbeck-house, a strong Garrison, being the Marquess of
Newcastles house; which also was taken by composition and surrender on Articles.

7. He took also Skipton Castle which was likewise surrendered upon Articles of
Agreement.

8. And after a long and tedious Siege, he and our dear and loyal Brethren of
Scotland took that most strong Town and most mischievous Garrison of Newarke,
with all the Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition therein, which was very much and
rich, this being also surrendered upon Articles of Agreement.

Sir Thomas Middleton Major General of North Wales.
THis most valiant and renowned Patriot and brave Commander Sir Thomas
Middleton, first, being in Cheshire with his most famous and faithful Achates
or dear companion in Arms, noble Sir William Brereton, and having taken Holt
Castle, Harden Castle, and the Town of Rexham, with all the Ordnance Arms and
Ammunition in them.

2. Noble Sir Thomas went out with a considerable party into Flintshire, where
he surprised and took the Town and Castle of Flint, with all the Ordnance,
Arms, and Ammunition therein.

3. He also took the Town and strong Fort of Mostin, with 4 pieces of Ordnance,
and much other Arms and Ammunition, whereby, he and Sir William were enabled,
the more strongly and securely to Garriso^, their soldiers in all the Towns
about Ch^^ster, for the infesting thereof; the Country coming in unto them, as
also much of the Gentry of note and quality, and that with much willingness
and freeness.

4. And in September 1644, this brave Commander being in the Country of
Mo^^^gomery in Wales, a party of his Army fell upon New-Town in
Monntgomerishire not far from Mountgomery Town, where he took Sir Thomas
Gardner and his whole Troop of horse, 28 prisoners, besides 36 barrels of
powder, some sto^e of Match, 2 horse Colors, and one Quartermaster.

5. Immediately after this, he with his whole Army sat down before Mountgomery
Castle, and summoned it to be surrendered unto him for the use of the King and
Parl. which the black L. Herbert (for so he was termed) presently upon the said
first Summons surrendered upon fair and hon. terms without any further
troublesome contestation, and so he became Mr. of this Castle with all the
Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition therein, although it was as strong a Castle as
any in the Kingdom^ whatsoever, or in all the Principality of Wales.

6. He also took Radcastle a very strong and considerable Garrison, with all
the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition therein; And the enemy out of Leigh
Garrison, not far from Bishops-castle in Wales, and took the Lord Leigh,
Baron of Du^^smore* whom he sent prisoner into Radcastle; and beat the enemies
out of another strong Garrison called Leighall, the house of Sir Pelham Corbet,
the whole Country coming in unto this brave Commander most fully and
cheerfully, not willing to bear Arms against him.

7. He also upon the borders of Mountgomeryshire, bravely beat the enemy near
unto a place called Mathaven, where he by his forces under the command of
valiant Captain Farrer discomfited 1000 of the enemy, and put them to flight
pursuing them three miles together, and slew at least 20 of them in the chase,
took 60 of them prisoners, 12 Officers, and above 100 Arms; and after this
took the Garrison at Mathaven-house, which he burnt down to the ground, that so
it might no longer insest the Country thereabout as it had done.

8. He also had a Principal hand and was a prime ^^ctor in that most famous
Victory obtained over the enemies at their besieging of Montgomery Castle,
where he, Sir William Brereton and Sir John Meldrum, a most famous Commander
since deceased, and renowned Sir William Fairfax (who was slain in this fight)
utterly routed the whole Army of the enemy consisting of at least 5000 horse
and foot commanded by the bloody L. Byron, where this most noble Commander with
his brave compeeres in Arms aforesaid slew at least 500 of the enemies common
soldiers on the ground, took near 1500 prisoners, among whom were Colonel
Sir Thomas Tilsley their Major General Colonel Broughton, Lieutenant Colonel
Bladwell, and Major Williams, 9 Captains, 17 Lievtenants, 1 Quartermaster, 3
Cornets, 22 Ensigns, 52 Sergeants, 57 Corporals, 11 Dr^ms; they took also at
least 2000 Arms, all their Carriages, near 20 ba^rels of Powder, and thus
obtained a most glorious Victory.

9. He also had a prime hand in that brave Victory obtained over the enemy at
Oswestry, where he utterly routed the enemy, put them all to a shameful
flight, slew very many of the Enemies in the pursuit of whom they had full
execution and overstrewed the ways with slain bodies, took prisoner, Francis
Lord Newport, Son and heir to the Earl of Newport, Major Manly, and Major
Whitney, Captain Swin^erto^, 20 Welsh Gentlemen of quality with diverse other
Officers in Arms, 32 Troopers, 2 pieces of Artillery, 7 Carriages, whereof one
laden with powder, 200 common soldiers, whereof most were Welsh men; and very
many arms of those that were slain and taken prisoners, and which were
gathered up on the highways, and in ditches, after the fight.

10. He also has since most Victoriously gone on conquering and to conquer in
N. Wales, and taken diverse other Towns and Castles in Wales, and brought them
into subjection to the Parliament, and been a special means under God, to
reduce all those parts to a peaceable condition.

Major General Brown.
THis most gallant Gentleman being a brave spirited Citizen, and was sent by
the Parliament into Kent, in the year 1643, for the appeasing of a desperate
and dangerous Insurrection, raised and fomented in that County by the
Malignants, the ill-affected Gentry and common people, there; where he managed
things with such singular prudence and prowess that in a short time, he put
the main body of them of flight about S^ano^k* ^^ok 2^0 of them prisoners found
about 1^ slain on the place, besides many whom they had secretly conveyed away;
and by this means he with the speedy help of some of the well-affected Gentry
of the County soon appeased that Rebellion over the whole County.

2. He also after this, took the Town of Winchester, with all the Arms and
Ammunition, in the most famous battle at A^ford in Hampshire, fought by
renowned Sir William Waller, against Sir ^^^lph Hop^^^, and his very potent
Army, this most valiant and renowned Major General was a principal actor and
most un^^^ted Commander and a special means of obtaining a most glorious
Victory, there, over the Royal enemies.

3. In June 1644, the Parliament most worthily having in mind his approved
fidelity, wisdom, and magnanimity, made him Major General or Commander in
chief of three Counties, viz. Oxfordshire, Berks, and Buckinghamshire;
investing him with full power to exercise Martial Law, for the reducing of
those Counties to a peaceable condition.

4. And not long after being made Governor of Abbington, he was a continual
Thorn in the eyes, and Goad in the sides of Oxford and the adjacent Royal
Garrisons, putting them to perpetual loss and vexation; And in February 1644,
he sent forth a party of horse toward Farringdon Garrison, where he took their
whole Court of guard prisoners; and immediately after took 27 horse-load of
Corn, Cheese, and other provisions going to Oxford, whereof they had (at that
time) very great need.

5. He also beat the Oxonians near unto a Town called Hedington, where he took
4 or 5 Carts laden with provisions for Oxford, rescued 2 or 3 Carts of
provision going to Abbington, slew 7 or 8 of the Ox^nians on the place, that
had taken them, took between 30 and 40 prisoners of them* and their chief
Commander; rescued also, then, some of ours, and the Oxford prisoners then
taken, being found to be most of them base and bloody Irish, ^^ee presently
hanged according to an Ordinance of Parl.

6. He also took at Chalgrove, a Town 7 miles from Oxford provision going for
Oxford, with 6 pieces (or Pipes) of Sack, and the Wine-Cooper with them* and
immediately after, overtook a Wagon laden with Sugar and other good
provisions, going to Oxford which also he seized on and sent to Abbington to
make his soldiers merry, he there also took several packs of fine cloth going
thither together with the horses, slew an Irish Major refusing quarter, and
took 19 or 20 good horses more in another conflict with them.

7. He also beat the enemy at a place called Buckland, who were going to
Farrington, whom he overtook, bravely fought with them, and discomfited them,
took a Captain prisoner, with 3 Officers more, and 10 other prisoners, and
immediately after this met with a company of the enemies coming from the
Devizes, fell upon them, put them to the rout, took a Colonel prisoner, a
Sergeant Major, 3 Captains, 3 Lievtenants, and diverse other prisoners, besides
many horse and Arms, and sent them all safe to Abbington.

8. About January in the year 1645, he sent out a party of this his most
active Garrison against some Wallingford horse that were plundering and
pillaging abroad in the Country, whom at last they found and bravely
encou^^^ed, and in the conflict took Lieutenant Col. Lour (then
Deputy Governor of Wallingford) with some other Officers and prisoners of
note, took 50 of their horse, riders and Arms, and also rescued 30 horse of
ours* which the enemy had taken before in other places, and thus continually
weakened and impoverished all the enemies Garrisons round about him, proving
ever (by the great mercy and goodness of the Lord) most successful against
them. And to add histre and honor to all these his famous performances, he
was chosen a most worthy Member (and so honorably continues) of the most
honorable House of Commons in Parliament* and now at last is one of the
honorable Commissioners, Guardians, or attendants upon his Majesty's person at
Holme^y in Northamptonshire.



Major General Mitton.
THis most valiant, active, and successful Commander was a principal actor
and instrument in the admirable taking of the brave and strong Town of
Shrewsbury, which had long time been a pernicious receptacle for the Royalists,
wherein he took prisoners, Sir Michael Er^ly and his Brother, Sir Richard Lee
Barronet, Sir Thomas Harris Baronet, Sir Henry Frederick-Thin Baronet; Sir
William Owen* Sir John Wild, Sir Thomas Lister; 11 Esquires* 2 Lieutenant
Colonels, 1 Major, 2 Doctors, 8 Captains, 15 Gentlemen, 3 Ancients, 4
Sergeants, 9 or 10 other Officers; and about 50 other prisoners, 15 pieces of
Ordnance, many hundreds of Arms, and diverse barrels of Powder; all Prince
Maurice his Magazine; the Town and Castle, and all the works about them; with
diverse Carriages, bag and baggage of the said Princes.

2. He by a party of his forces sent out under the command of his Lieutenant
Colonel Goldgay, at Cherk in Shropshire, took 27 special good horse from the
enemy, under the Walls of the Town, and took 24 of the Enemies prisoners; he
took also 24 more singular good horse from the Enemy at Shraden in Shropshire*
even under the works of the Town.

3. He also had a principal hand in giving the enemy that famous defeat near
Denbigh Castle, as they were going to relieve Westchester, wherein he most
courageously put the enemy to a total rout, took between 5 and 600 horse, and
above 400 foot, slew above 100 on the place, and pursued them 6 miles, doing
great execution upon them all the way, so as that in the evening of that day
there was not above 100 left in a body together, of about 2400 horse and foot.

4. And about the midst of February 1643, he bravely beat the enemy in Cheshire
(who had a desperate design against our Brethren of Scotland) where he soon
discomfited and routed a whole Regiment of them took about 60 good horse, two
of Sir Richard Fleetwoods Sons, Commanders in that Regiment, and other
Officers, 50 foot soldiers prisoners, and above 100 Arms.

5. He also had a prime hand in that brave defeat given to the Enemy near
Dudley Castle* where they were most bravely routed and put to flight, 100 of
them slain on the place, 17 persons of quality were taken prisoners, besides
very many common soldiers, and many good horses taken, with many Arms and
much Ammunition.

6. And in March 1645, he took Shrnarden Castle, a very strong Garrison of the
enemies, with all the Arms and Ammunition therein; and took in also the strong
Garrison of High-Archall in Shropshire, with all the Ordnance and Ammunition
therein also.

7. And in the year 1646, this most valiant and Victorious brave Commander
took Ruthin-Castle also, in North Wales, with all the Arms, Ammunition, bag
and baggage therein, and in the time of his being thereabout, beat the enemy
again out of Denbigh Castle, and took prisoners, 4 Captains, 1 Lieutenant, 2
Corners, diverse Gentlemen and common soldiers, 40 horse, many Arms, and 7 or
8 slain on the place, and their Commander in chief Captain Cottingham.

8. He also took the Town and Castle of Carn^^van, being a very strong Garrison
of the enemies in North Wales, which he took by surrender, with all the
Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition therein; he also immediately after took the very
strong Town and Castle of Bea^-morris, with all the Ordnance. Arms, and
Ammunition therein; and the Parliament in way of thankfulness and just
encouragement of his loyalty and famous performances, made him Governor
thereof, and gave him a Commission accordingly, with full and ample power to
Govern the same.

FINIS.

