TRVE INTELLIGENCE FROM IRELAND. BEING Two Letters sent from Dublin by men of
good Repute the 25 of April 1642. by the last Post. Wherein is Related the
Victorious Proceedings of the PROTESTANTS against the Rebels in IRELAND.

LONDON: Printed for John Sweeting, the second of May. 1642.

SIR,
AT the going down of our Army into the Counties of Kildare, Carlow, Kings
and Queens Counties, under the command of the Earl of Ormond, Lieutenant
General, and Sir Charles Coote, these things happened at their coming to
Typper, they blew up half the Castle, with a Priest in it; it was Master
Nicholas Suttons; they marched down to Atly, releeved the Castle, and hanged
the Governor, with some of the best of the Town, and marched to Garlo, and
releeved it, so to Mariborow in the Queens County, releeved it, so to the
Byror in Kings County, releeved it, which is fifty-five miles from Dublin; and
so came to Athy, from thence they marched homewards to Kill^ush, in the County
Kildare, where they had a Skirmish on Friday the sixteenth of April with the
Rebels, the Lord Montgarret, Lord Viscount Ekerion, Baron of Dunboyne, Richard
Bu^ler, the Earl of Ormonds brother, Sir Morgan Cavanaugh, Collonell Burn,
Collonell Fits Gerald, Collonell Talbot, being the head Commanders, besides
Captains, our Army killed five hundred and odd men, with the loss of six of
ours, and have brought from thence the head of Collonell Cavanaugh, and the
Lord Montgarrets second son Edmond Butler with them, and took from the
Rebels seven Colors, and has placed a Garrison of fifteen hundred foot,
and three hundred horse at the Na^s, and returned to Dublin the 18 of April,
1642.

WE have News that Rathgogan Castle is releeved, and quite defeated the
Rebels before it, where there was to the number of fifty slain; in their
Retreat they were Incountred by some Companies from Millwalocke, but they were
quite Routed by our Forces, slaying about an hundred and fifty, with the loss
of none. The Lord Muskeys Army is routed from that quarter by my Lord Inchequid
and Colonel Vavasor, with only two Troops of Horse and three hundred
Musketeers. The maine body of the Lord Muskeys Forces consist of 36 Colors;
They sent out some to give us Skirmish, but presently packt up their baggage
and fled. Our men pursued them two or three miles, charging fiercely upon their
Rear, and Routed the whole Army; there were slain about two hundred of their
men, without the loss of a man.

SEven hundred Horse are safely Landed here from you, some upon Friday,
Saturday, Sunday and Monday, and the Lord Lile landed here, and Lord Digbie on
Tuesday from Holy-Head. Upon Monday one Master Ask his man was taken with
Powder going to the Rebels, who was that night put upon the wrack, but was
not stretched; the next morning Alderman Bey was committed, as it is supposed,
about that business: that night another was taken with powder, and one James
Clear was committed for buying of Powder in Chester a little before this Plot
was discovered; but it was not brought over, so when the News was come to
Chester, the man that sold it sent for it back from Warmingham; This was not
well carried, for it was not known till now. This day one James Talbot was
brought in, who was at the first of this Rebellion a great Favorite with the
State, and made Sheriff of a County; but in stead of executing that office
made himself a Captain with the Rebels.

Many other pretty things might I write, but it were not worth relating; The
Soldiers are very unruly, and discontented for want of their pay, and we are
much burdened, for their being so much out of order, without we have speedy
aid and money, all things will not go right. I pray God send us as good News
from you, as you have from us, and grant that all things may be settled for the
best. You may perceive how Gods providence is to us in delivering so few from
such a multitude of these rebellious Rogues. This day my Lord Lile went out to
Leislipe, a house of Sir Nicholas Whites, there was none with him but only a
Troop of Horse, the Rogues let them come within a Musket shot of the House or
thereabouts, a hundred Musketeers came out some private way, and were like to
compass them round, then the Rogues out of the house did appear when they
thought the rest had gone behind our horse, so upon that they were feign to
Retreat, but in their turning Lieutenant Colonel Munke was like to be lost,
for a Bullet came through his Coat, and as near to Sir Richard Greenfeild. My
Lord Lile was like to have an ill welcome to Ireland. Farewell till the next
Post, I remain

Your loving Friend E. V.
From Dublin 25 April 1642.
From the Apothecary of the Army in Dublin to his kinsman Mr John Lynne,
Gentleman to the Earl of DANBY.
Good Cosen;
GOD be praised, we are still living though made beggars; the Lord has blessed
our Armies, and given us diverse victories; and such hopes, that those Rebel^s
may easily be vanquished, if succor in any competent time be supplied: We
have lately given them a great overthrow, our Army being but 3500 foot and
horse, encountered their Army, being eight thousand, and made them run to their
bogges and woods, and slaughtered eight hundred of them.

The Lord has blessed us beyond expectation, given us great victories over our
enemies; We have been besieged that we durst not stir out a mile from Town,
now we are able to march forty miles with our Army. Last Sunday being the 17
of April, our Army came home with victory attending them, having entertained
a pitched Battle with the Rebels. In our marching home, being weary, having
been out 12 days, flying up and down the Country, met with ten thousand of
the enemy, who got the ground, wind, and all advantages of us; yet it pleased
the Lord to give us victory, our number being not 4000 men, Sir Thomas Lucas
Son the major of the horse, gave the charge with his horse, after the Ordnance
had played diverse times, and within an hour their Army was routed, and we slew
some six hundred of them, some think a thousand: the Lord be blessed for this
extraordinary victory; they had resolved to have killed every man of us, had we
been beaten. The Lord prosper us, and go out with our Armies, and bring us
home again.

Your loving kinsman till death M. L^N^^.
25 of April from Dublin Castle.
FINIS.

