The New COMMAND RENEWED: OR, Love one another. Being an Endeavor after the
Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace, by several Uniting Principles. Among
which there are ten Rules for a Right understanding of Scripture, very useful
for these divided times. By RALPH VENNING.

Psalm. 133.1. Behold, how good and how pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell
together in Unity. LONDON, Printed for John Rothwell, at the Sun and Fountain
in PAUL'S Churchyard. 1652.

To all who profess love to the Lord Jesus, and yet love not one another,
according to his example and command.
Beloved,
I Wish I could say of you as Paul did say of the Thessalonians, 1 These 4.9
1 These. 4.9. as touching brotherly love ye need not that I write unto you,
seeing ye your selves are taught of God to love one another. But alas! there is
need, yea never more need, that I should write unto you of brotherly love; for,
1 Cor. 3.3.
whereas there is among you envying and strife, and divisions, are ye not
carnal and walk as men? as taught of men, and not of God.

At quis ego tantis, tantillus ego? What am I to such an undertaking as this?
many (the unworthiest of whom I am unworthy to follow) have gone before me,
calling you to your calling, love one another. But do they not all say, who
has believed our report? to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? Do they not
all say, We have labored in vain? We have cried indeed in the chiefest places
of concourse, yea in the concourse of the chiefest, even in the City And in the
high places of the City.
we have uttered our words, and our lips dropped sweetness; our voice was love,
love; live in love. But no man regarded; all our counselt were set at naught.

Alas beloved! what hopes is there left for me to prevail? if Paul 's, if
Apollo 's, if Christ's words have not taken with you, can mine expect to find
acceptance? and yet me thinks I hope beyond hope, because I know that God has
all hearts in his own hand, and can turn them when and by whom he pleases;
therefore though many out of their abundance have cast in much, I hope my mite
will not be rejected. I must confess I have for a great while forborne, lest I
should be a reproach and derision daily; but I am now overcome, and that by
importunity, not so much from without (which yet was much) as from within
(which was more): for these words were within mine heart like a burning fire
shut up, and I was weary with forbearing, I could not contain. For while I held
my peace from this good my heart was hot within me, and while I was musing the
fire burnt, so that I could not but The most of these heads were preached at
the Tower of London.
first speak with my tongue, and now with my Pen.

I said, yea to my self and others I often said, I was few of days, and
therefore I was afraid and durst not show forth mine opinion; I said, days
should speak, and multitude of years should teach wisdom: but the spirit within
me constrained me, and I spoke and must speak that I may be refreshed. My
belly! (should I hold my peace at such a time as this) if this Wine should not
have vent, would be ready to burst like new Bottles.

But let me not (I pray you) accept [nor except] any man's person, neither let
me give flattering titles nor upbraiding language unto any man; should I do so,
my Maker would soon take me away. I know God would lay it to my charge.

Censures perhaps I may undergo, and I indeed expect it; but not from you: let
the world scoff, I care not, having learned to pass through their good report
and bad. I am not ignorant in what a narrow way I walk, how it concerns me to
be cautious, both what I speak and how: for who would undertake to moderate the
extreme immoderation of our days? and yet for my own part I am not solicitous
(good meaning and innocence are careless, and seldom fore-think what to say)
my conscience, yea God himself bears me witness, that I would not write a
Syllable which should give offense. Psalm 27.11
Teach me thy way O Lord, and lead me in a plain path, because of those which
observe me.

I would willingly blot out any expression which might be liable to suspicion;
for truly (as Caesar said concerning his wife) it is not enough not to be in
fault; but things relating to love, (as Caesar's wife) should not be suspected
to be in fault; I hope therefore if any thing do (seeing it is against my will
if any thing do) escape me, which may seem to deviate from the scope, viz.
love, that your love (for love of that which I write for and from, viz. love)
will cover it with a charitable construction.

I have forborne to instance in any thing touching any part or parties, which
might but occasion a prejudice against any of the principles. For as Solomon
says, he that covers a transgression seeks love, but he that repeateth a
matter separateth very friends, Prove. 17.9. And we find it confirmed by
experience, that such proceedings, they do but (as Paul said of profane and
vain bablings) increase to more ungodliness and their words (2 Timothy 2.16.17.)
will eat as does a Gangrene, of whom is, etc. I would therefore, and I wish all
would forget that which is behind, that which is past, viz. Not looking so much
how they came in, as how we may get them out, as one said of original sin.
miscarriages arising from strife and envy; and press to that which is before,
and yet to come, viz. The more excellent way.
Love among Brethren. I have not in the least made it my study or endeavor to
dress the matter in any habit, but plain; and I will give you my reason, viz.
I would not have words stay the Readers from attending the things. That
eloquence offers injury to things, which draws us to observe it; seeing words
are only for the matters sake, and should be no other then would promote it.

Octavius Augustus had a special care to express his mind and meaning most
plainly, and reprehended Marcus Antonius for writing such things that men did
rather wonder at then understand.

Zeno was wont to say that he had two sorts of disciples, the one he called
(...) who respected nothing more then language; these he liked not so well: the
other he called (...) curious to learn such words, as were fit to express
things by, and these were his darlings.

Me thinks the Apostles discourse in 1 Cor. 14. should silence all tinckling
Cymbals.; such as affect such words and phrases as rather tickle the itching
ears of men, then affect their affections, or leave any impression on the
hearts and conscience.

For my own part I acknowledge it my principle (and I would be loath my practice
should give it the lie) to speak to the lowest, and then I am sure the highest
understand me; whereas should I (if at least I were able) speak to the highest,
I should be to the lowest as a Barbarian. In short, I rather choose to speak
shortly, though but five words, which may be to edifying; then to use ten
thousand, which when men hear or read they know not.

I had thought to have collected the several heads, and have set them before
you by themselves, but the whole book being but little, will soon be run and
read over, and therefore I shall spare you the labor of Reading, my self of
writing, and the Printer of Printing.

Thus my beloved friends, having given you a foresight of what I have done, why
and how; and hoping that these things which are cast in by the way are not cast
away. I shall say no more, but pray that it may come unto you with a fullness
of blessing, and be instrumental to unite your hearts in love, which will
satisfy the desire and fulfill the joy of him, who can joy in nothing, but in
being the

Servant of Christ, Ralph Venning.

THE NEW COMMAND RENEWED: OR, Love one another.
PART. I.
GOds one and only design is, by the words of his mouth, and the works of his
hands; to bring forth his own (...) Genesis 1.27
Image in all times and dispensations; and that is oneness. When he created
man, he made him the likeness and image of himself, one; yea, though he
created Male and Female, Genesis 2.24
yet were they not two, but one flesh.

When this Image was defaced, and man continued not in his uprightness, that
is, in his simplicity and oneness; that which God aimed at in the restoration
of man, was the reparation of his image oneness: that God and man might be one
again. Yea, that in Christ all things in Heaven and Earth, which were fallen
out with, and fallen away from man; Ephesians. 1.10
upon his falling away from God, might be gathered together into one.

Yea, all the dispensations and dispensators which God has left in the world
are to disappear and be no more, when once the Saints come in, (...) Ephesians. 4.13
or (more emphatically) into the unity of the faith;

That is (as I with submission conceive) when the Jews and Gentiles, the
fullness of them shall be called in (and come to the knowledge) or rather the
acknowledgement of the Son of God, unto a perfect man; (...), (...) re^d,
(...) Cor. 16.18 (...) He without us is not made perfect.
or the man at age, and the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ;
Christ (I mean mystical) is not yet a perfect man at age, is not yet in
fullness; nor be, till all his Members both Jews and Gentiles are brought
forth. Now when these shall be brought into the unity of faith, which is the
acknowledgement of the Son of God, etc. then is Gods design of oneness
accomplished.

Now to the effecting hereof, God has promised to bestow on his people one
heart, Ezekiel. 11.19. Ezekiel. 11.19
which is not only in relation to their being newborn, and so being one with
God; but as the Jews went with one heart to Jerusalem, that they might build
the Temple: so in relation to this design of the Unity of Faith, God will knit
together the hearts of his people, Isay. 60.8
that they shall fly together like Doves to the windows: yea, and ere they are
aware (I believe) they will find their souls made like the Chariots of
Amminadab, Cant. 6.12
or a willing people. In a word, the top and consummation of all the
happiness, which Christ prays for his, is [ John 17.21.] that they all may be
one, as thou Father art in me and I in thee, that they also may be one in us.
Indeed, the glory of all our hereafter glory will be, an oneness of communion
with the Father, Son, Spirit, and one another in God, who is one in all and all
in one.

But seeing that as yet there seems to be a breach not only between the Jews
and Gentiles; but between them who have attained to the knowledge and
acknowledgement of the Son of God; I shall endeavor to bring the Saints to
keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace; Ephesians. 3.4, etc.
for there is but one body, one spirit, one hope, one Lord, one faith, one
Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in
you all.

Now that we may walk together in one way, it is requisite that we be of one
heart, and that which conduces most thereunto, is, that we be of one mind: for
the more unity there is in judgment, the more there is like to be in affection
(because likeness produces liking) and the more oneness there is in
affection, the more there will be in practice and conversation; the more union
there is, the more communion there will be, and the better; the less union
there is in judgment and affection, the less and worse will our Communion be.

And seeing we can hardly live together, unless we love together, or as the
Prophet says, ( Amos 3.3.) Seeing we cannot walk together unless we be
agreed, I shall (as God inables me) lay down some principles, which if read (as
written,) without prejudice and partiality, will not a little provoke and
conduce to union and agreement.

The first Principle.
1. That we may meet to agree together, 1 Principle.
let us agree to meet together, and that is meet: for says the Prophet, how can
two walk together, unless they Meetings, are meet things.
meet and come together? so I would read that, which we read, unless they Be
agreed.
agree together: meetings are the Poarch or entry into agreements. And me
thinks Christians should not be much entreated to treat together; surely it is
to be feared, that they are loath to agree, who are loath to meet about an
agreement.

Ob. Object. Hindrance of meeting.
But what makes the Saints so backward to meet about an agreement?

Ans. Answ.
These three things.

1. Self-Conceit. 2. Pride of heart. 3. Satan's policy.
1. 1 Self-conceit.
A self-conceit that each of them is in the right; every man has a good
opinion of his own opinion. Matthew. 26.26
Every man puts it off from himself, and instead of saying as did the
Disciples, (when Christ told them, one of you shall betray me) Master is it I?
most are ready to say, Master it is not I. Having exhorted to love Romans 12.10
He adds verse 16. Be not wise in your own conceits.
Most men instead of confessing their blindness, ask like the scornful
Pharisee, are we blind? so loath are men to suspect their own defects. It was
just so in the time of the division between the Roman and Grecian Churches,
each justified themselves, and neither would acknowledge themselves to be in the
error. But Christians hear a little; if you think your selves in the right, I
hope you think so on good grounds, and not that you are in the right merely by
thinking so: now if your grounds be good upon which your conceits are built,
you need not be afraid, nay you may be encouraged to produce them with
boldness. It Is to be suspected that they who refuse to bring forth their
strong arguments, have no strong arguments to bring forth. Christ tells us,
Joh. 3.21. John 3.21
that he that does truth (and he that holds truth) comes to the light, that
his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God.

If men's arguments be pure and good, they will not be the worse, but the more
confirmed by being weighed; if they be found either base metal, or counterfeit,
the discovery will engage them to part with them, and to take their part no
longer, lest they deceive their soul: in short, if they be good, they may do
good, they may help others to see the light; if bad, 'twill be a mercy they
were produced; for you are losers while you follow darkness and lying vanities.

2. 2 Let, pride of heart
The second hindrance to a meeting about agreement is Pride of heart; Men are
loath to be the first movers, lest they should be thought timorous and willing
to yield; but beloved Christians, Christ Jesus did not so; God and we had never
met nor had been reconciled together, had not God come to us first. Though God
were offended by us, and had thence just reason to be for ever offended with
us, yet he sounds a truce, and makes the first tender of agreement; shall we
not walk as we have him for an example?

It Is very observable, that while any one party is low, it pleads for
moderation and reconciliation; but when it has got the staff in its hand, it
scarce minds, much less practices either. Ah Christians, the very Heathens
will shame us; for Aristippus an Heathen, though elder then Aeschines, who
began the strife, sues first for peace: shall we not be friends, said he to
Aeschines? Christians, I beseech you go to one another, and say as Aristippus,
shall we not be friends? And oh that every one would answer as did Aeschines,
yes, with all mine heart.

3. Satan's policy.
A third hindrance to a meeting about an agreement is Satan's policy; we may
take up Paul's words when he writes to the Thessalonians, 1 These. 2.18. we had
come unto you once and again, but Satan hindered us. Christians, why do ye not
come one to another? why are ye not in your journey, it is to be feared Satan
stands in your way and stays you.

The second Principle. Principle, right understanding.

2. Being met, labor for a right understanding, of each others mind; there is
nothing makes men stand at such a far distance as a misunderstanding: it is
with men now as with the men at Babel, the languages are confounded, and they
understand not one another.

At your meetings, Three things beg of God. The delivery of truth you.
seek God about these three things for a right understanding.

1 That God would be pleased by his own Spirit to declare and make clear his
truth unto you; that he would make known to you, and make you to know what is
his good, perfect and acceptable Will, that so you may walk before him in all
well-pleasing.

2. The delivery of truth (...) you.
Entreat God, that he would deliver you to the truth, as well as deliver the
truth to you; not only that he would open his truth to your hearts, but also
open your hearts to his truth, that so you may close with every truth,
embracing and welcoming it as your joy, though it should open you to never so
many repreaches in the world.

3. Entreat God to remove all obstacles, 3 Removal of obstacles
and to take that out of the way which stands in the way, and keeps you from
understanding and owning truth.

Such as these.
1. Self interest in holding any opinion; (...) Self-interest.
nothing more hinders men from going to, or going from an opinion then the
interest they have by holding it; men do not care so much for the opinions they
hold, as for what they hold by their opinions. Many a man thinks (I am
confident) what Demetrius said [ Acts 19.27.] This craft by which we have all
our wealth is like to be set at naught, and then we are like to come to naught.

Hence they begin to fly in the face of truth, and oppose it with outrageous
rage; so dearly sweet, and sweetly dear is their darling gain; They see they
cannot have the Honey, unless they burn the Bees, and therefore fire them
forthwith; they cannot possess the Vineyard unless Naboth be put to death,
and therefore he must be dispatched. When once the coppyhold of gain and honor
is touched, men begin to look about them, and will never call godliness gain,
because gain is their godliness.

Beseech God therefore that you may be unselfed, and may lay down all your
interest of gain and honor.

Let the truth of God be ten times dearer then tenths, or any income of gain
and honor, which comes in by any opinion; for (as some say) where gold grows,
no plant will prosper; so certainly no truth will be dear, nor have heart-room,
where the love of money or honor has taken place.

2. Entreat God to keep you from passionate discourses and disputations; or
from passion in discourses and disputations. For

1. Tha wrath of man works not the righteousness of God.
So much passion as there is, so much there is to no purpose; yea to an ill
purpose.

2. Passion usually arises more from and for self then Christ.

3. Passion hinders the efficacy of the argument; for the tingling of passion
hinders the sound of truth.

4. Passion unfits a man for discourse, and confounds both memory and
understanding; so that as Aristotle has observed (...); they that are in
passion cannot discern nor judge of truth.

5. Christ loses more by the passion then he gains by the disputation; for
while you seek to honor him, he finds himself to be dishonored.

(...).

When two dispute, and the one begins to rage, The other not retorting is more
sage.

3. 3 Prejudice.
Entreat God to remove prejudices, for that does very much prejudice the
entertainment of truth. Ahab had such a prejudice against Michaiah, that he
would not call him Prophet, but [1 King. 22.8.] 1 Kings 22
Michaiah the son of Imlah. There Is one man, Michaiah the son of Imlah, but I
hate him, for he never speaks good concerning me but evil; but as Jehoshaphat
said to Ahab, Let not the King say so; even fo would I say to you, Christians;
let not Christians say of one another, this is a rigid man, I will not hear
him; or this is a Sectary, I will not hear him. Beg of God that prejudice may
not hinder closing with truth.

The third Principle.
3. When God is sought, 3 Principle, speak plainly aNd clearly.
and you begin to discourse, deal faithfully as in the presence of God; Fit
words are better then fine.
use not policy and sophistry to veil the truth. Do not ye equivocate nor
mince your meanings, hiding it under dubious terms, but propose all things
clearly. Affect not novelty or nicety of language, but speak in known and
familiar phrases.

Many times there is such a do kept about terms, that before the discourse be
ended, men lose themselves and the question too: therefore speak plainly and
not in parables. How many 3000 words have these three words cost. (...).
It Is no little vanity to speak such words as will constrain you to use twenty,
and sometimes twenty times more to explain what you meant.

The fourth Principle.
4. Be as willing to hear as to speak; 4 Principle, hear much, speak little.
a man should hear twice as much as he should speak, and it seems to be
intimated in his having two cares, but one tongue. Were there in times of
discourse more hearers and fewer speakers, there would probably be easier and
speedier determinations; much talk hinders observation, and keeps things from
being weighed. A man shall meet with such talkatives, as (like the beating of
an unbrac'd drum) are able to beat some men out of their wits, at least their
patience; they are so confusedly busy, and so busily confused.

The fifth Principle.
5. 5 Principle, weigh what is spoken.
Weigh not who speaks, nor how it is spoken, but what is spoken; you should not
overvalue, nor undervalue a truth, because ye like or dislike the party or his
manner of speaking. Sometime (according to the Proverb) we dandle the child for
love of the Nurse, and take up an opinion for his sake that brings it;
Maldonate said of the explication of a place of Scripture, that it was most
agreeable to antiquity, but because Calvin h^d so interpreted it, he would
choose a new one. Phil. 4.15
and others refuse an opinion because such a one holds it.

But Christians, consider what you do; would a man take poison, though from a
Father, or refuse a Cordial though from an enemy? It was better said, Amicus
Plato, and Amicus Aristoteles, sed magis amica veritas. And the Apostle
rejoiced that Christ was preached, though they that preached him did it out of
envy and to add to his bonds; go from any man to go to truth; but go from no
truth to go to any man. As Christ said; the pollution is not from without,
neither indeed (in this sense) the purity. What is the word the better for
being in Paul's mouth, or the worse for being in Apollos? What is the Heavenly
treasure the worse for being brought in an earthen vessel? or the better when
handed to us by an Angel? is the word of Wisdom the better for the Wisdom of
words? or is truth the less beautiful because naked and not arrayed with
Satin words, and silken phrases? what though a man have neither silver nor
gold to give you, is not Christ worth the receiving?

It Is strange to see how men are led into, and led out of opinions merely by an
opinion of the man. The Philosopher (though he were the same man and of the
same mind) in his squallid rags, could not find admission, when better robes
procured both an open door, and reverence. Boldness and readiness of speech
with the most (though not with the most judicious) bears away the Bell. To go
from Aristotle, Ipse dixit swaid all.
though a man go to reason, is, or had wont to be, no small disgrace in the
schools.

If Herod speak, then it is the voice of God and not of man! but if Paul
speak, then it is what will this babbler say? Some cannot hear unless a Doctor
preach; others will not hear if a Doctor preach. Surely Christians, these
things ought not to be so; truth should be well-come to us though the Devil
the father of lies brought it to us; and no hing but truth, though an Angel
from Heaven be the messenger.

The sixth Principle.
6. 6 Principle, custom. Christ called himself truth, not custom.
Let not custom bear sway for or against an opinion. Let not Antiquity or
Novelty make you respect or disrespect a truth; father truth for truths sake
whether old or new. Though all truth be old Old truths may come newly to light,
God is not tied to time, for the gift of Illumination. Dr. Hall.
, yet our sight of truth may be new; why then should new light be a trouble to
some, or tradition a burden to others? why should Divine or Orthodox, or
Orthodox Divine grow out of date? or why should not a Gospell-Preacher be in
season? Some like words and practices because of custom; others have no other
reason for their dislike. Never walk by what has been done, or what is done,
unles it be what ought to be done. Reduce things to their primitive
institution; and then see what God says of them, Matthew 19.8
as our Savior told the Pharisees, Matthew. 19.8. Though Moses for the hardness
of your hearts suffered you to put away your Wives, yet from the beginning it
was not so.

Men do now adays by opinions, as many do by their clothes; some will keep to
their great grandfathers habit and fashion; others as changeable as the Moon,
think they are never in fashion, unless they be ever changing fashions. Some
cannot like a truth because it is not of ancient standing; others like it
because it is of yesterday. Some can reverence none but gray-hair'd opinons,
others like none but youthful and smoothfac'd ones. It Is true the Age.
multitude of years teaches wisdom, and so may the Youth
few of days; it is truth, and nothing but the truth, and all the truth, which
should have our esteem, whether it be old or young; whether the first borne of
time, or the last.

The seventh Principle.
7. 7 Principle, proper Arguments.
In all discourses and disputations, use proper Media or arguments to prove
your tenets by; bring not Scriptures to your reason, but your reason to
Scripture, or judge reason by reason, and Scripture by Scripture. Moral
arguments are not fit and proper to prove natural Principles by, nor in many
things rational Arguments to prove or disprove Scripture by. Prove spiritual
things by spiritual Arguments, as the Apostle hints to us, 1 Cor. 2.13
1 Cor. 2.13. which things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom
teaches, but which the holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual things with
spiritual; or judging spiritualls with spiritualls. The Apostle did not borrow
words or Arguments from without, but fitted spiritual Arguments to prove
spiritual things. Neverdraw Ecclesiastical conclusions from Political
premises.

The eighth Principle.
8. Discourse not to cavil but to convince, 8. Principle, cavil not.
or to be convinced. Many discourse and dispute more for faction then
satisfaction, and hence come so many fractions.

Many yea too many, discourse and dispute to show forth themselves more then
truth; taking more care to show what may be said, then what should be said:
ever carping and making objections, when there needs none to be made.

The nineth Principle.
9. When truth is spoken, yield to it; 9. Principle, yield to truth.
men think it a shame to submit and surrender themselves after they have so
long and so stoutly stood in the defense of their opinion: and therefore though
they be convinced that their tenet is at least suspicious like so many
sophisters in the Schools they study to evade by distinctions, rather then
give glory to God in confessing their sin.

But Christians, it is no small conquest and victory that you obtain, when your
self, error and darkness is overcome and captivated by truth. It Is an honor
to be overcome by truth; but to overcome the truth is shame. Plutarch makes it
a great discovery of proficiency in virtue, when a man does not take it ill
that he is confuted.

The tenth Principle.
10. 10. Principle, practice together.
When, and as far as you are convinced, practice. Go together as far as you
can; what need you part till needs must? you can agree to preach, hear and pray
together, though in other things you differ I have seen such sweet success
upon the Prayers of Christians met together, who have differed in several
opinions, that I cannot but beseech Christians, that they would not forsake the
assembling of themselves together as the manner of some is. Heb. 10.25.


Let us therefore Brethren, Phil. 3.15.
as many as be perfect, be thus minded; and whereto we have already attained,
let us walk by the same rule: and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God
shall reveal even this unto you.

PART. II. In the mean time let us like Christians observe these ensuing
Principles. More uniting Principles.
They are as salve and you may guess at the nature of our wounds by them; I
shall leave the application of them to the blessing of God.
1. 1. Principle, forbearance.
LEt us bear with one another, and forbear one another in love: We are
commanded to bear one another burdens, Gal. 6.2. That so we may fulfill the
Law of Christ; and we shall undoubtedly be commended; for it is according to the
good will of Christ, if we bear one another burdens. I am confident it is a
burden to many a soul that they are not in all things like minded unto their
brethren; Yea, it is not without some fear and trembling that in any thing they
disagree from so many worthy and gracious men that are otherwise minded. Oh
help to bear, or at least bear with the burden.

You cannot keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, unless you
forbear one another in love, as appears most plainly by their connection, Ephesians.
4.2, 3. forbearing one another in love, endeavoring to keep the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace: this endeavor for unity and peace will be lost,
unless God who bears with us, teach us also to bear one with another.

Take these reasons for forbearance.
Reasons for forbearance 1. The oneness of your end.
1. You all pretend, yea, I hope intend the same end: you profess one and the
same design, viz. the advancement of the Gospel of Peace, and the Peace of the
Gospel. Should ye not therefore in relation to this end, rejoice that Christ is
preached, though some should preach him out of envy and on purpose to add to
your bonds? it was Paul's joy Phil. 1.15.16.18.

Why my dearly Beloved, are ye Ephraim against Manasseh, and Manasseh against
Ephraim, seeing both are for Judah? Oh that Ephraim might not envy Manasseh,
nor Manasseh vex Ephraim any more. See that remarkable passage in Mar. 9. v. 38
says John, Master, we saw one casting out Devils in thy name, and he follows
not us, and we forbad him, because he followed not us. Christians, is not this
many a man's language? forbid him; silence him; out with him, down with him, why
so? why, because he follows not us. But Jesus forbad John to forbid him; for
verse. 39. Jesus said, forbid him not; and he gives two reasons of it; First, no
man which shall do a miracle in my name, can lightly speak evil of me.
Secondly, v. 40. for he that is not against us, is on our part. Christians, can
he be against you that is for Christ; what though he follow not you, he
notwithstanding carries on Christ's end; blessed God, forbid this, that we
should forbid one another to do thy work. 2. Reason, you agree in the most and
best.


2. You agree in the most and the best things. The Fundamentals and essentials
of Religion (in which you to whom I write do agree) are of far more worth, and
therefore of far more concernment to engage you, then circumstantials and
accidentals (the things in which you disagree) are to disingage you.

3. 3. Reason, consider your selves.
Consider that your selves also are men subject to the like infirmities with
your Brethren, and subject to the like passions, and have also your failings
and aberrations; in many things we offend all; who is there that sins not?
good Lord! if thou should be so soon angry with us as we are one with
another, who could stand? Gal. 6.1.
I beseech you to read this Scripture with all lowliness and meekness of
mind, Gal. 6.1. Brethren, if a man (or as the margin reads it, although a man)
be overtaken in a fault, ye who are spiritual, restore such an one in the
spirit of meekness; why so? considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted.
If thou be tempted, that which thou find fault with, may be thy fault.

The second Principle.
2. Until ye are agreed, 2. Charity.
have charitable thoughts, not hard and harsh censures of each others walking.
Judge it rather to be conscience then stubbornness, which ingageth men to walk
in different courses. You would have others think so of yon; why will not you
think so of others? who would not think but that to have every man's good will,
to keep the love of relations, to enjoy their liberties, men would comply with
any thing, were there not an awe upon their consciences? whence it may arise, I
will not question.

Love thinks no evil, viz. of others, 1 Cor. 13.5.
as well as toward others. Love banisheth jealousies and suspicions, and so
consequently censures.

The third Principle.
3. 3. Principle, love whom God loves.
Draw not away your love when God draws not away his love; dare any man deny
his love to that man, where God grants his love? 1 Cor. 16.22.
If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha. But
is any man beloloved and a lover of Christ? Oh take heed, deny him not your
love. Let that of the spirit which appears in him, draw thine heart more
toward him, then that of flesh which appears, take off thine heart from him.

We many times take notice of that which will divide, and not of that which
will unite. A small error was soon espied in certain pictures of Apelles, when
a thousand excellent touches were not at all observed. One hour of Eclipse
causes the Sun to be more gazed on, then a thousand fair days. Those
soldiers who followed Caesar's triumph, published his vices, but concealed his
virtues. But dear Christians, let us rather say one to another, as Queen
Elizabeth said to the Lord Burleigh, sit down my Lord, we make much of you, not
for your bad leg, but for your good Head. Let us make much of each other and
sit down together, not because there is badnesse in the feet; but because there
is goodness in the head and heart.

The fourth Principle.
4. Principle, censure ^^t intentions.
Censure no man's intention, till his practice, either words or works discover
his meaning. Many times by their fears, jealousies and suspicions men create
that in their hearts, which had never a place in the suspected parties
imagination. Jacob was needlessly troubled and causelessly afraid of his brother
Esau, when nothing gave him occasion to suspect his brother, but his own guilty
conscience, which told him he did deserve it. Jacob fears that he came to
execute revenge, when he comes to welcome home his brother, and entertain him
honorably.

Jealousy is as quick as Martial Law; arraignes, condemns and executes all in
a moment.

Mistakes of things ^ause things to be done ^misse.
Nothing does more hurt and wrong to friends then jealousies. Some cry out of
some, these men intend nothing but Anarchy and confusion; so that shortly there
will be no difference of (nor respect to) persons. Others cry out of others,
these men intend nothing but Lordship and tyranny, to encroach all power into
their own hand, and so to be Masters over our faith, and to lord it over the
Lords inheritance. But why are ye become evil judges of thoughts? are you the
searchers of hearts? you would judge more righteous judgment in this, to judge
according to appearance.

The fifth Principle.
5. 5. Principle, Incense not.
Do nothing whereby to incense and exasperate one another. Provoke one another
to love as much as you can, but to wrath as little as you may, nay, not at all.
It Is becoming Christians to use soft words; and they turn away wrath; but many
words stir up strife. Bitter words are like sharp swords, they pierce to the
very soul. Prove. 15.1.
But let others passion provoke your compassion. 'Twas sweetly said of Calvin
concerning Luther, Though he call me Devil, I will call him Saint. Oh that
Christians would learn that lesson of Christ, When you are reviled, revile not
again!

Alas! do not men speak bitterly against bitter speaking; and write bitterly
against bitter writings, becoming inexcusable thereby? Romans 2.1.
for wherein they judge others they condemn themselves, being doers of the same
things. Oh that Christians would overcome evil with good, passion with
meekness, bitterness with sweetness; for a soft tongue breaks the bone,
Prove. 25.15. Oh how did Abigails affection conquer David's passion, though
heated sevenfold! And how did David's kindness to Saul, make Saul confess his
unkindnesse to David! However others carry themselves toward us unbecoming
Christians, our carriage toward them should be no other then is becoming
Christians.

A Publican will love where he finds love, and salute when he is saluted; but
you (ab you Christians!) are to exceed and excel in love; to love when you are
not loved, (though the more you love, the less ye be heloved) to speak fair
when you are ill-spoken of, not to render railing for railing, 1 Pet. 3.8, 9.
but contrariwise blessing, knowing that you are thereunto called.

Christians should be as the Angels, 2 Pet. 2.11.
which are greater in power and might, yet bring no railing accusations before
the Lord; Michael the Archangel disputing with the Devil about the body of
Moses, durst not bring (hark ye Christians) he durst not bring a railing
accusation, but said The Lord rebuke thee. Let us do for the future, as John's
disciples did by their Master, when Herod slew him, Mat. 14.12. they took up
the body and buried it, and went and told Jesus. Let us bury in oblivion all
railings and injuries, only go and tell Jesus, and say, Lord rebuke them.

The sixth Principle.
6. 6. Principle.
Go not about to make one another odious by representing things worse then they
are. Many times the picture of the Lion is more dreadful then the Lion himself.
Good Lord! in what black, ugly and deformed shapes do men set forth one
another, as if they were Monsters and no men?

Ah --
-- Pudetque refer,
Haec dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
Ah --
I blush to tell it,
That I can speak it,
But cannot refell it.
Tertullus never strained his Oratory against Paul, nor Tobias and Sanballat
theirs against Nehemiah, more then Christians (if at least they be as they are
called) do strain theirs to bring one another under disrespect and odium.

The seventh Principle.
7. Draw not conclusions from other men's Principles and then say they are their
opinions. 7. Principle.
We may make the same complaint as David, they wrest, torture and wrack my
words. Alas! Psalm. 56.5.
men set every thing on the tenter-hooks, and stretch and twist every Principle
like a nose of wax.

Alas! What pity it is to see men invert and pervert one another words, and at
length to draw such conclusions as would make one think they meant what they
never meant? 'Twere a good thing to interpret heartily, and when a thing will
bear a double construction, to take it in the best sense. But we see by sad
experience that Sophistry makes more Syllogismes then Logic does.

So some mistook and misreported Paul, Romans 3.8. as if he had said, that we
might do evil, so good might come thereof. Mat. 26.61.
So the Jews depose that Christ said he would destroy the Temple at Jerusalem
in three days and raise it again, when he spoke of his Body, as appears, Ioh.
2.21. John 2.21.
what words thus wrested and perverted may not be called heresy and (as they
said of Christ's words) Blasphemy? when if taken as meant, and in their proper
sense, may be found very sound and consonant to truth. Take heed therefore of
glossing or commenting upon another Text.

The eighth Principle.
8. 8. Principle, Do as you would be done to.
Grant to others what you would have others grant to you. We are usually better
at receiving then at giving; we care not how much we receive, nor how little we
give: though it be more honorable to give then to receive? When our selves are
inferiors and others superiors, we beg (as did the servant, Matt. 18 26) Have
patience a little, have a little patience; but when our selves are superiors,
and others inferiors, we have no patience at all.

Jesus Christ sums up the Law and the Prophets in this Principle, [ Matt.
7.12.] Therefore all things, whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do
ye even so to them. This is all that the Law, viz. love thy Neighbor as thy
self, does require, and the doing of it is the fulfilling of the Law. It Is
indeed a golden rule, a royal Law, the standard of equity, according to which
we must converse with all men.

Ah Christians! did we make other men's cases our own, we should say the case is
altered. Job pleads thus with his friends, (...) 16.3.
I could also speak as you, if your soul were in my souls shead, I could heap
up words against you, and shake my head at you; But I would strengthen you with
my mouth, and the moving of my lips should assuage your grief.

Many a great Commander have upon this very consideration shown themselves
exceeding merciful and kind to their captives, considering it might be their
own case, and then they would be glad of mercy. And indeed victory to generous
minds is only an inducement to Moderation.

See how Adonibezeks conscience flies in his face for his cruelty, when he
himself was served by others as he had served others, Judge. 1.7. And Adonibezek
said, Threescore and ten Kings. having their thumbs and their great toes cut
off, gathered their meat under my table; as I have done so God has requited me.

The nineth Principle.
9. Do nothing in prejudice or partiality; 9. Principle, no prejudice nor
partiality.
the one will make you an enemy to good, the other will make you a friend to
evil. Prejudice will take in nothing, partiality will take in any thing.

Alas! such is our misery that men part Religion, and love by parties. Men love
not (as God loves) without respect of persons; but men love such, because they
take part with them and their designs; and have prejudice against others,
because they are not their followers.

Till we love one another according as Christ has given us command and
example, as he has loved us, that is as his, we cannot expect so sweet a
concord, as then we may.

The tenth Principle.
10. Ascend or descend, go higher or lower, 10. Principle.
do any thing (Sin excepted) that you may agree. Become all things to all
men, if at last by any means you may win some. 1 Cor. 10.24.
No such way to win one another love, as by denying our-selve to seek one
another wealth.

Nature is so in love with unity, that Particular beings will forsake their own
interests, their elements and centres which are their rest and happiness,
rather then there should be a breach or vacuity in nature; and it is but reason
that particulars should serve the universal, [ for they who so lose, shall
save] seeing that unless the vessel be preserved their Cabins cannot.

Alas Christians! how will ye thus seek every man his own, and not the things
of Jesus Christ? Oh how glad am I! my joy is now fulfilled says John, at
Christ's increase, though his increase be my decrease; and Paul would rather
starve himself and never eat flesh while he lived, then do any thing which
should offend or sadden his weak Brother.

Bodies ductile and tensile (metalls that will be drawn into wires; wool and
towe, which will be drawn into yarne or thread) have in them the appetite of
not discontinuing so strong, that they will follow the force which wire draws
and pulls them out, rather then discontinue or forsake their own bodies.

Cratisiclea the mother of Cleomenes, (when he was loath to send her for a
pledge into Egypt) said unto him; come, come, put me into a ship, and send me
whether thou will, that this body of mine may do some good to my Country,
before crooked age consume my life without profit.

O that there were such a heart in us, but to say aside our own particular
relations and interests, that there may not be so many a breach in the public;
let us be weak with the weak, as well as strong with the strong, that we may
make up breaches.

III. PART. For a further help to unity I shall lay down some other Principles
to unite our judgments; and submit them to the judgment of the Saints,
whether they speak according to God or no.
The first Principle.
1. SEeing there is nothing to be practiced, 1. Principle, make the Scripture
judge.
believed or taught, which is not agreeable to the mind of God, Let us make the
Word of God our Judge.

The Scriptures (us is granted by all that I write to) are the touchstone by
which all religious Principles and Acts are to be tried. To the Law and to the
Testimony, if they speak not according to this rule, it is because there is no
light in them, Isa. 8.20. Let nothing pass for current coin, which has not
this stamp upon it.

Certainly no Christian will refuse to make the truth of God contained in the
Scriptures the judge of all he holds and practices, it being the basis of
both, if they be laid on their true foundation; it is the trial which tryes all;
and therefore bring your opinions to the light, to see whether they be of God
or no.

If the Scriptures write jus divium, divine right upon any opinion, it is then
authentic; but all other authority is not sufficient to command either faith
or practice. The Bereans [ Acts 17.11.] were called more noble then they of
Thessalonica, because they did not take things upon trust, and believe
implicitly, but searched the Scriptures daily, whether these things were so.
If any man or an Angel from Heaven bring you any other Doctrine, let him be
accursed, Gal. 1.8.

Certainly these are the undoubted, perfect and infallible rule, for all
matters of faith and practice, or God could not judge the world by them at the
last day.

Let us do therefore as the wife men, when they saw the star, go up to
Jerusalem, that is, to the Law and to the testimony, and willingly acquiesce in
the Answer we receive from the Oracles of God.

The second Principle.
2. 2. Principle, Right understanding of Scriptures.
Labor for a right understanding of Scripture; for the want of this makes all
our differences; we err, not knowing the Scriptures. Every one indeed brings
Scripture, but most bring their own, not the Scriptures own sense, for their
opinions.

For a right understanding of Scripture take these three courses. Three helps
to understand scripture. 1. The Spirit.

First, Consult with the spirit of God. None knows the mind of God, but the
spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.11. The Philistims by plowing with Sampsons heifer,
came to know his riddle. James 1.5.
If any therefore want wisdom, let him ask it of God, who gives liberally and
upbraideth not; Luke 11.12.
yea he gives the spirit to them that ask him.

Secondly, Consult with the Saints; 2. The Saints.
for the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show them
his Covenant, [ Psalm. 25.14] converse with them who converse with God. The
Saints have clearer apprehensions of the Scripture then other men; and can give
a better account of the mystery (not so perhaps of the History) then many a
learned man can do: the reason is apparent; for the godly man, though
illiterate, has the Law in his heart, and the truth in his inward parts; The
Bible is transcribed within him. But the most learned man in the world (if not
a Saint) has it not in the experience, though he have it in the expression.

Not beloved that I speak in dislike of learning and its use; no, I do confess
that next to the Lord Jesus Christ, and Communion with God in him, there is no
portion (whether riches, honors or pleasures) like unto it, in my esteem. This
by the way; now to our purpose. Prove. 24.6.


It is good therefore to consult with the Saints, a conjunction of Counselors
will do well, for in the multitude of them there is like to be safety, Prove.
11.14. As to depend only on other men's judgment, were to make as if the spirit
had not come to thy self; so to depend only on thy own judgment, were to make
as if the spirit of God had not come to others.

Thirdly, Three other Rules.
Use such helps as God has made useful to others for their right understanding
of Scriptures.

Rules for the understanding of the Scripture.
Such as God has made useful to me and many other Christians, I shall set
before you; I speak as to wise men, judge ye what I say. The first Rule.
1. The first Rule.
That the Father, Son and Spirit; as they are one, so they agree in one, 1 John
5.7, 8. they have but one design. The Father, Son and Spirit are not like the
gods of the heathen (which indeed are not gods) always quarrelling one with
another, clashing against, and contradicting one another, though they will many
things, their will is but one.

Therefore if you find in Scripture, that the Sons design in Redemption,
seems to be of larger extent then the Fathers in Election, and the Spirits in
Sanctification, reconcile it by this rule, for there is but one and the same
object of the Fathers Election, the Sons Redemption, and the Spirits
Sanctification to eternal life.

The second Rule.
2. Second Rule.
Every particular is to be interpreted by the scope of the whole, and that will
free Scriptures from all seeming contradictions.

Paul says, Romans 3.28. a man is justified by Faith, without ( (...).
or apart from) the deeds of the law: but Iam. 2.24. Ye see then how that by
works a man is justified, and not by faith only, (...).
or alone.

Now here seems to be a contradiction; but the scope of the Scripture will unty
this knot (as I understand) thus. By Faith alone we are justified, but the
Faith by which we are justified is not alone; It Is not (as I conceive) the work
Faith, nor the works of Faith, but a working Faith whereby we are justified.

By Faith the Person is justified, and by works the Faith is justified; and
thus beloved (I hope) you see clearly, that there is not concordia discors, a
disagreeing agreement, but discordia concors, an agreeing disagreement between
these two Scriptures.

One says (to this our purpose) that to hang on any word or phrase in a Text
and neglect the scope, savours of an Heretical disposition. And Luther has a
sweet saying to this purpose, Grammaticam decet Theologiae cedere, quum
subjecta sunt verba rebus, non res verbis: vox merito sensum sequatur and
litera spiritum. The sense in short is this, Words must give place to the
matter and sense; His reason is this, because the matter is not for the words,
but the words for the matter. And again Divinely, Iste modus intelligendi aut
interpretandi Scripturas, diversa scil. ex diversis locis decerpere, est
fallacissimus; habenda igitur est tota Scriptura ante oculos, and contraria
contrariis conferenda. That way of understanding or interpreting Scriptures,
viz to gather diverse things from diverse places, is most deceitful: the whole
Scripture therefore is to be had before our eyes, and contraries to be compared
with contraries.

Friends, I hope it will not be an offense to any to quote an Author; for I
believe, It Is as lawful to consult with the experience of dead as of living
Saints.

The third Rule.
3. The place is not truly interpreted, 3 Rule.
nor consequence well inferred, the consequence whereof is an absurdity, and
speaks any thing to the disparagement of the God of grace, or the grace of God,
as Luther (Divine Luther, Omnis Scriptura est pro Christo interpretenda, ex.
gr. Serva mandata, scil in Christo; quia fine Christo nihil potestis: All
Scripture is to be interpreted for Christ, as, keep the Commandments; viz. in
Christ: for without him ye can do nothing.

And again, fully excellent and excellently full: Si Adversarii urgent
Scripturam contra Christans, urgeamus Christum contra Scripturam. If our
adversaries urge Scripture against Christ, let us urge Christ against Scripture.

If the interpretation of any Text, draw such inferences after it as these,
viz. That God is unjust; that God is mutable; that God cannot do all things;
that Christ is not able of and by himself to save to the utmost, that the
Saints shall not be kept through Faith by the power of God to salvation: I say,
if such inferences follow the interpretation of any Scripture, it is not truly
interpreted: for they cannot speak against the truth, but for the truth.

The fourth Rule.
4. 4 Rule.
Take heed of distinctions; though there may be use of them, yet for the most
part, the most part of distinctions arise from darkness and ignorance, or from
wilfulness: Therefore take heed of them, and admit not of any which are not
well grounded on the Scripture. Did we speak more punctually to all points, and
more distinctly, there would be fewer distinctions.

It is a common thing with many men, that cannot or will not (Oh that there
were not such as will not.) understand the truth, to raise distinctions and
evade that way. When men know not what to say then like Sophisters they cry
distinguish, we must distinguish. And then Materialiter and formaliter, stricte
and late (poor threadbare terms) are tossed up and down like Tennis-Balls.

The fifth Rule.
5. 5 Rule.
Parables and similitudes hold not in the particulars, but in the whole; not in
every sentence, but in the scope.

They run not on all sour, as we say: they are of more use for Illustration
then Demonstration. And I believe there is not a truth held out in a parable,
but i'ts held forth also in some other place of Scripture, which will be better
to ground on, being usually more clear.

The sixth Rule.
6 Seeing God in Scripture speaks much in a little, interpret Scripture in the
largest sense. 6 Rule. The Hebrew Doctors say that the Law has seventy faces,
i. e. manner of ways to beopened and applied.
Scripture is like to Laws of favor, which are to be extended as far as may
be. We wrong many a Text of Scripture by comfining, bounding and limiting it in
a narrow compass.

The Evangelists look upon several Texts as fulfilled in their days, which
were fulfilled long before; as Matthew. 3.17. Then was fulfilled that which was
spoken by the Prophet Jeremiah, saying, etc Now this was fulfilled Literally in
Jeremy 31.15. When Ephraim (which came from Rachel) was in captivity, In the
New Testament the Apstles bring the same. Testamony to diverse purposes.
and fulfilled here by allusion; as much as if it had been said, we may now
take up the words of the Prophet; as if that place was not fulfilled till now.
And so you shall often find several Texts upon several occasions applied to
several uses; which shows that the sense should not be confined. As for
instance, that Text [ Hab. 2.4. The just shall live by Faith] is applied in
several senses, as appears by comparing it with Romans 1.^7. Gal. 3.11. Heb.
10.38. in all which places it is quoted

The seventh Rule.
7. No place must be interpreted so, 7 Rule.
as to make the two Commandments, love God and love your Neighbor, to
prejudice each other. As the Proverb is, we must not rob Peter us cloth Paul
We may not take from God, to give to our Neighbor, nor take from our
Neighbor, to give to God.

As Honor thy Father and thy Mother: now we must not under pretense of
honoring our Parent; dishonor God; no, it is obedience to disobey them,
wherein we cannot obey them, unless we disobey God. Neither may we under
pretense of Corban or a gift, Mark 7.11.
refuse to do ought for our Father and Mother, as God commands us, lest we make
the word of God of none effect.

The eighth Rule.
8. 8 Rule.
Distinguish between things spoken properly, and things spoken figuratively, as
also between things meant literally, and things meant spiritually. The Prophet
Malachy said, Mal. 4.5. that Elias must first come, which was spoken of John
the Baptist as Christ cleares it. Mat. 17.12. So these words Mat. 16.6. Beware
of the Leaven of the Pharisees, are not meant properly, but figuratively.

If a man should take that place [ Mat. 5.29. If thine eye offend thee, pull it
out] literally, he might be guilty of Selfe-murder. Therefore it is to be
understood spiritually; viz. of any thing that is as near, dear and tender as
our eye to us. Origin, who interpreted all, or almost all other places of
Scripture mystically, understood this place literally [ Mat. 19.12. Some make
themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of God] and thereupon gelded himself: but
surely Origin had not that ab origene; for from the beginning it was not so; it
was not instituted by God; therefore must not be executed by man.

The nineth Rule.
9. 9 Rule.
All places which speak of Administrations and Administrators, are best
understood and interpreted, the nearer the sense comes to Gods design. Gods
design is, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. by all Administrators and Administrations to
bring about the perfecting of the Saints, the work of the Ministry, and the
edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come, etc.

Now all Administrations and Administrators being to help on this, the places
of Seripture speaking of such things, are undoubtedly best understood in the
sense which does promote that work.

The tenth Rule.
10. If Scripture speak it, believe it, 10 Rule.
though Reason cannot find out the reason of it. The Scripture says in Job
26.7. That the earth hangs on nothing. The Scripture says, that one is
three, and three are one. 1 Ioh. 5.7. How can reason think this true? and yet
it is true; for God who is truth, and speaks nothing but truth, says it is so.

Yea, let me add, that could God be comprehended by our reason, we might think
it reason to think he were not God.

The third Principle.
3. If after all these endeavors, 3 Principle.
to attain and obtain the right understanding of Scripture, they yet seem in
any particular to speak darkly: and as to external dispensations, thou know
not with which to close, make holiness thy Rule.

That way which conduces most to self-abasing and Christ's advancement, is the
safest: and did Christians judge of opinions and practices by this Rule, they
would better discern between things that differ.

You hear men say this is Christ, and here is Christ, and both may seem
probable to you; but you know not how to determine: there are strong arguments
on both hands. Now consider, and in good earnest weigh, and that without
partiality, which makes most for a most exact walking with God, and building up
one another in the Faith and fear of Jesus Christ, and accordingly engage.

The fourth Principle.
4. 4 Principle.
Make not that common to all, which God has made peculiar to some; nor make
that peculiar to some, which God has made common to all; do not ye enlarge
when God has strait'ned, nor straiten when God has enlarged. Cast not Pearls
before Swine, nor give the Childrens Bread to Dogs: neither refuse to give the
children bread, and deny not Pearls to them whom God has made his Jewels.

Give every one his due; tribute to whom tribute, love to whom love, honor to
whom honor. Be not you shy of joining your selves when God will join
himself; lest you call call that common and unclean which God has
sanctified. be sure also to make a difference between the precious and the
vile; Ier. 15.20.
then God will make you unto this people a fenced brazen Wall, and though they
fight against you, they shall not prevail; for the Lord will be with you to
save you.

The fifth Principle.
5. 5 Principle.
Confine not God to any, nor deny to God any way of working; know this, that he
works, when, where, how, and by whom he pleases. Because the first Gospel
Ministry was with miracles, can there be none now without miracles? why will
ye limit the holy one of Israel?

If he bring about his end, that is, by the Gospel to bring in poor sinners to
himself what matters it whether it be done by the Work of his Hand, or by the
Word of his Mouth?

And yet who knows but God who did, will again appear in working miracles;
especially at the calling in of the Jews, as he did then at the calling of the
Gentiles. But whether he will or no, let not us limit the holy one of Israel.

The sixth Principle.
6. Do not divorce what God has married, 6 Principle.
nor separate what God has joined together. The fulfilling of the
righteousness of the Law without us, does not hinder the fulfilling of it
within us; nor the fulfilling of the righteousness of the Law in us, deny the
fulfilling of the Law without us.

Why should some (like the Corinthians) cry up Paul, and Apollo, and Cephas,
and neglect Christ? and others cry up Christ, and neglect Yea that reject.
Paul and Apollo? surely Paul, Apollo, Cephas, and Christ are very good
friends. Christ is not included in Paul, nor excluded from Paul; but is within
him, and without him.

Some cry up Christ in the flesh, others Christ in the spirit; but beloved, is
Christ divided? surely Christ in the flesh, and Christ in the spirit, do not
oppose one another; why then should any oppose them one to another?

Some are altogether for the letter, others for the spirit and meaning of the
word; Beloved, why should ye not be for both in one, seeing they agree in one?
Letter and spirit, Word and meaning, do not disagree nor cross one another.
The lesson when the Scholar has learned it by heart, does not differ from that
in the Book, they are still one and the same lesson.

The Word is the meaning expressed, the meaning is the Word explained. Only let
me add, that though the word includes the meaning fully, yet it does not fully
express the meaning; as appears by Christ's exposition of the Law, Mat. 5.

Some look but little to the outward conversation, as if all Religion consisted
in an inward retirement and contemplation; others look as little to the inward,
as if all Religion were in the outward man: but beloved, the inward and outward
man make but one man; the inward and outward conversation but one conformity to
the Will of God. He does not enjoy much of God within, who walks not much with
God without: nor does he walk much with God without, who enjoyes not much of
God within.

The seventh Principle.
7. 7 Principle.
What ever was either rule or privilege under the Law, is still so under the
Gospel, unless we can show its abrogation. What was once discovered to be the
will of God, continues to be so till he himself do disanul it. We see indeed
that many things are revoked, and though they were once his will, are his will
no longer: for God does not speak the word because the word is right, but the
word is right because God speaks it.

Let us not therefore think that the Old Testament's authority is not proof
sufficient; surely as far as I understand, his will there, is not abrogated in
the New Testament, abides still in its full force.

The eighth Principle.
8. 8 Principle.
Use sweetness rather then violence, words rather then Swords to convince one
another; use verba rather then verbera; Argumenta Aristotelica, rather then
Bacillina; rational Arguments, rather then club-Law, to win upon each other.

Certainly, if reason and Scripture will not prevail, imprisonment, etc. are
not like to do it. I am sure the first is more suitable to man, who cares not to
be bound but with the cords of a man, viz. love; cords may bind up his hands
that he cannot hurt, but love binds up his heart that he will not hurt,

A Cart may break ye, but it does abide ye still, but the Sun does melt it
out of it self.

I beseech you Beloved, let us rather pray one for another, then make a prey
one of another: if Christ come and find us beating our fellow servants, how, ah
how shall we look him in the face? Oh that every one that reads, would ask his
heart concerning every Rule, and Principle, how far it does concern himself,
and not put off, as if others, and not himself were spoken to.

Consider what has been said, Try all things, hold fast that. which is good.
and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

PART. IV I shall add some Arguments to provoke us to mutual love.
The first provoking Argument. 1 Argument.

1 It Is the will and command of the Lord Jesus Christ that we love one another.
And oh with what willingness should Christians embrace the will of Christ?
Certainly if his command be grievous to us, the love of God is not in us, 1
John 5.3.

Alas! how little is love your enemies observed, when love one another is so
little regarded! Surely you would have been loath to have dealt so unkindly with
a dead friend as not to observe his last Will and Testament; and will ye deal
thus with Christ? are these the effects of your affection? How can you prove
what you profess, that you are his friends, when he says, John 15.14. ye are
my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you? never talk of friendship unless
you obey him.

Read over that place ( not overly, but seriously) 1 John 4.20. If a man say I
love God, and hate his Brother, he is a liar. Do ye see this Christians? Who
speaks truth? God or you? You say you love God; God says you lie, for you love
not one another.

Mean ye to mock God, when ye call upon him and pray, thy will be done? is not
this his will, that ye love one another? what would you have God say Amen, and
you will not say so be it?

The second provoking Argument.
Secondly, 2 Argument.
We have Christ for an example; he lived and loved as well as suffered and
died, leaving us an example. This is all we have to do in the world, to show
forth the virtues of Christ, and to wulk as we have him for an example. We
write not after our copy, unless we live and love as Christ did.

See that remarkable inference, 1 John 4. v. 10, 11. Herein is love no, t that
we love God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation
for our sins, v. 11. He draws this inference, If God so loved us, what then?
must we love God again? nay that is not all, but, how ought we to love one
another, God having given us such an example?

Christ told the Jews Abraham's children, sons of imitation.
, that if they had made Abraham their example, they would do as Abraham did;
and surely did we propose Christ for our example, we should walk as Christ. If
a Painter tell me he is about to draw the Picture of a man, and it prove to be
lik a beast, I shall hardly believe that he had the Idea of a Man as an example
in his fancy.

Surely, while the products and results of our undertakings be so brutish and
diabolical; how can any man think that we have Christ as a pattern, unless
they judge Christ by us to be according to us, viz. malicious and envious as we
are?

Ah my Brethren! tender the honor of Christ more; he has told the World that
they may read him in you, and your obedience to his commands will give all the
world to understand that ye are his Disciples: alas, what will men think of
Christ, when they see his Disciples walk in strife and bitter envyings?

You are his Epistle to be known and read of all men; and if the copy contain
such bitter things, will they not think that the original contains the same? Ah
Beloved! why do you bring up an evil report upon the Lord Jesus?

When the streams are bitter, will any think the fountain sweet? The
Academicks, the Peripateticks, the Stoics, and Epicureans, and all the sects
of the Philosophers, were more careful to follow their leaders, then Christians
are to follow Christ.

But as Alexander said to a cowardly soldier of his called Alexander, Leave
off thy name, or fight better; never call your selves Christians, and pretend
to walk as you have Christ for an example, unless men may read that in you,
which was read in Christ, viz. love.

The third provoking Argument.
Thirdly, Love is debt. You owe love, 3 Argument. Aut hoe non est Evangelium,
aut nos non sumus Evangelici.
and should owe nothing else to one another. Christians, will ye not be honest
men and pay your debt? Romans 13.8, 9, 10. when you love one another, you fulfill
the Law, and pay your debt.

Is it not strange that Christians should be such Antinomians? this is Christ's
Law, Love one another; now you are Antinomians if ye love not one another;
certainly a man that is for love, is no Antinomian: for the Law is fulfilled in
this one word, viz. Love. Look to it Christians, you will never be out of the
danger of being arrested one by another, till you pay your debt, and love one
another.

The fourth provoking Argument.
Fourthly, 4 Argument.
Your union and communion one with another, your loving one of another, will
remove the scandals which your divisions bring upon the truth of God. There is
no such stumbling block which causes the world to wave the way of God, as the
division of Saints.

It is bad like (says the World) that they can teach us the truth, when they
cannot agree about it themselves. Blessed God! what a reproach is this? Oh that
this should be published in Askalon, and spoken in Gath!

Christians, would it not make you blush, if you should hear poor souls (as I
have heard (the Lord knows) with a sorry heart) come and tell you, that there
is nothing keeps them so much in doubt, nothing fills them so full of fears, as
the division of Saints.

Alas says a poor soul, my soul is in a strait between two, and what to do
I know not; one tells me this is Scylla, another tells me that is Charybdis; one
tells me that in that way there is a Lion, another tells me that if I lean on
that wall a Serpent will bite me, and this says the poor soul, even rends my
heart to pieces.

Ah Christians! let the sighing of these poor Babes and Infants souls,
prevail with you; yea, let them who as yet are unborne (being not newborn)
see your sweet and loving conversation, that they may be won by it.

The fifth provoking Argument.
Fifthly, 5 Argument.
Your living in love will midwife into the World, that long looked, and longed
for man-child of Reformation, with which we travel in birth to this very day.

Alas! we are like Jacob and Esau, struggling in the womb for priority and
Eldership, and so prove our selves foolish children by standing in the way of
breaking forth. Every body cries out, where is the Reformation? you promised us
a Reformation; ah, will ye not lay it to heart? undoubtedly had you not fallen
out about the way, you had come to your journeys end long since.

Nothing retards and hinders public motion, so much as division; when one goes
this way, another that. It Is spoken to the everlasting praise of Israel, Judge.
18.1. they were gathered together as one man. And ver. 8. All the people arose
as one man. So Ezra. 3.1. The people gathered together as one man. Nehe. 8.1.
And all the people gathered together as one man.

Had they been divided, how had the work gone on? Christians, shall Israel in
the flesh be as one man, and shall not Israel in the spirit? were they so
zealous for the Type, and shall not we for the Antitype? yea for the shadow,
and shall not we for the body? as you love public settlement and safety, love
one another.

The sixth provoking Argument.
6. Union and love will preserve you, 6 Argument.
but division and envy will be your ruin, Gal. 5.15. But if ye bite and
devour one another, take heed ye be not consumed one of another.

What! are Christians become like Milstones, which having no grise to grind,
set themselves on fire? that the World should hate you, and seek your ruin is
no wonder; but that your selves should hate one another, it is monstrous. Was it
ever known that any hated his own flesh? you are flesh of flesh, and bone of
bone, yea of one spirit with Jesus Christ. Oh if you were but sensible, how
sensible Jesus Christ is hereof! Think ye that it pains him not to have his
members thus disjoynted? surely he cries out, I am wounded, yea my friends
wound me.

What! Brethren sheath their Swords in each others bowels! Will ye bring that
ruin upon your selves which the Devil and his agents have attempted, but in
vain? Will ye pull our one another eyes to make the Philistius sport?

Ah take heed, lest whilst you fall out among your selves, a common enemy fall
in upon you and end the controversy, by both your ends. Surely the World hug
themselves in these hopes; and the Saints shrugge for these fears.

When Agamemnon and Achilles were fallen out, Homer brings in Nestor persuading
them to reconciliation from these two arguments.

(...),
(...).
Alas! great sadness will the Greeks possess;

Priams and Trojans joy will be no less.

The World wishes of you ( as Tacitus of the Germans) if this people cannot
love us, that they would hate one another: And will you give them their hearts
desire? must it again be said, Thy perdition is of thy self, Oh Israel! Oh
England!

It Is said of the stone Scyrus, that while it is whole, it swims on the water,
but being broken, it sinkes: Christians, there is yet hope, that being whole
and united in love, we may swim above all the waters that flow in upon us like
mighty floods; but if we break and divide, we are like to sink, every Woman's
child of us. Many other Arguments may be used, but I hope a few words will be
enough to the wise: only these three to conclude with.

First, The Beasts of the field are not only at peace with us, but at peace
among themselves: they especially who are of the same kind agree together,
Saevis futer se convenit ursis, the wild and savage Bears agree among
themselves.

What? shall the Lion lie down with the Lamb, and the Leopard with the Kid,
to teach Saints the way? the Ox and the Ass have more knowledge then my
people, said God of Israel; and may we not say of the Elephants and Stags, they
have more love then Christians? they will help and support one another, but
Christians --

Secondly, wicked men, Brethren in iniquity agree together, Luke 23.12. Look to
it Christians. That very same day Pilate and Herod were made friends together,
who before were at enmity among themselves. Can ye read this and not blush?

That very day that Christ was to be abased, enemies became friends, and at
this day when Christ is to be advanced, friends become enemies. Christians
where are your hearts?

Thirdly, The Devils agree among themselves, and as I may say, love one
another, though it be but a devilish love, Mar. 5.3. from v. 23. to 27. mark it
I beseech you, They will not cast out one another.

Do the Devils love their Kingdom so well that they will not divide it? and
do ye love ours so ill, as to divide it and break it? will it not be
bitterness in the latter end? Mat. 2.45. they go and call one another, and take
possession and dwell there; What, can Devils dwell together, and cannot
Christians? Oh! with what bleeding hearts should we think of this, that the
children of Hell should be wiser in their Generations then the children of
Heaven.

I shall conclude with that Scripture, Phil. 2. If therefore there be any
consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit,
if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye be likeminded, having the
same love, being of one accord, of one mind. Let nothing be done through
strife or vain glory, but in lowliness of mind, let each esteem other better
then himself; look not every man on his own things, but every man also on
the things of others. Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus.

Christians, I would I were able to express my self with more affection, in
beseeching you to love one another; I beseech you, yea with beseechings I
beseech you love one another. Could I but paint out before you the pantings of
my heart, and set sighs before your sight, and draw a draught of the groans
which these considerations draw from my heart. But -- All I will or can say is
love, love, love; The love of God and the God of love constrain you to love one
another: that it may at last be said of Christians as it was at first, behold
how they love one another.

FINIS.

