Military and Maritine DISCIPLINE IN THREE BOOKS.

BOOK I.

Military Observations or Tacticks put into PRACTICE for the Exercise of HORSE
and FOOT; the Original of ENSIGNS; the Postures of their Colors: With Sir
Francis Veres Directions for Officers; And a small Treatise of INVASION.

By Captain Thomas Venn.

BOOK II.

An exact Method of MILITARY ARCHITECTURE, the Art of FORTIFYING TOWNS; with
the ways of Defending and Offending the same.

Rendered into English by John Lacey, out of the Works of the late Learned
Mathematician Andrew Tacquet.

Together with Corrections made by the Count de Pag'an and St Sam. Mor^land's
Methods of Delineating all manner of FORTIFICATIONS.

BOOK III.

The COMPLETE GUNNER in three Parts, Showing the Art of Founding of GREAT
ORDNANCE; making Gunpowder; the taking of Heights and Distances either with or
without Instruments; with the nature of Fireworks.

Translated out of Casimir, Diego, Vssano and Hexam, etc.

To which is added the DOCTRINE of PROJECTS applied to Gunnery by Galilaeus and
Torricellio.

And Observations out of Mersennus and other Authors.

LONDON, Printed by E. Tyler and R. Holt for Rob. Pawlet at the Bible in
Chancery Lane, Tho. Passinger at the three Bibles on London Bridge, and Benj.
Hurlock over against Saint Magnus Church, 1672.

Military Observations, OR THE TACTICKS PUT INTO PRACTICE, Collected and
Composed for the EXERCISE BOTH OF Horse and Foot, To our present mode of
Discipline.

WITH The Original of ENSIGNS their duties, and Postures of their COLORS.

Hereunto is added Sr. FRANCIS VEARES notes of Direction for Officers.

By Capt. Thomas Venn.

LONDON, Printed by E. Tyler and R. Holt, for Robert Paulet at the Bible in
Chancery Lane, Tho. Passinger at the three Bibles on London Bridge, and
Benjamin Hurlock over against Saint Magnus Church. 1672.

TO THE Right Noble JOHN DUKE OF SOMERSET, MARQUIS and EARL OF HARTFORD,
VICOUNT BEAUCHAMP AND Lord Seymour.
May it please your Grace.
IN vacant hours my Genius guiding me to some thoughts upon Art Military, and
having made some Collections of part thereof, out of the chiefest Authors both
Ancient and Modern, but finding in them many Motions to be of little use, and
may well be spared according to our present Mode of Discipline, which is to
Exercise and fight our Horse but three in File, and the Foot six. I have
according to the several Commands for the Exercise thereof, drawn the
platforms, and directions for the performance of the same, and now they want
nothing but your Graces protection, for which, being your Servant and Tenant, I
have presumed to implore; knowing that there is in your Right Noble self,
Wisdom and Potency enough to allow hereof for the use of the young Souldrie of
this Kingdom: Sir, next to my Sacred KING be assured of my dutiful affections,
and Command the Life of him who is in all humlity

Your Graces most obliged Servant Tho. Venn.

TO All such of the Deputy Lieutenants For the County of SOMERSET That have
faithfully managed his MAJESTY'S affairs in the well ordering of the Militia of
the said County.
Right worshipful, and truly Honored.
I Am to crave your pardons for my boldness, that (being Comissionated to obey
your Commands) have presumed thus far without them; but your Honors love to
this Art, and my own experience of you, is the cause thereof; and as the
Country can testify the same, so it is my endeavor (if it were possible) the
whole world should know it: But your splendid carriages in the activeness of
your proceedings in the Militia, do shine most glorious in your effectual
managements; for your diligence has drawn obedience, your wisdom reverence,
your virtuous education makes a willingness in all to serve you, and a
readiness in your Honors (in all your actions) to equallize the same. These
Collectives are but shadows your Noble minds are adorned withal, being but
little more than the Accidence of Military Discipline, yet useful in this
Warlike age. My Lord Duke's Patronizing hereof I hope may not be denied by you
to suffer these to march and quarter within the precincts of your Honors
Commands, assuring that in quality I am

Your Honors Servant to be Commanded. Tho. Venn.

A List of the names of those worthy Gentlemen as are concerned in the affairs
of the County of Somerset, as Deputy Lieutenants, and Colonels, both of Horse
and Foot.
The Lord Fitzharding, Colonel of Horse. Lord Pawlett, Colonel of Crewkerne
Regiment, 1. Sir William Portman. Sir John Syddenham. Sir William Wyndham. Sir
Thomas Bridges. Sir Hugh Smith. Sir George Horner. Sir Edmond Windham Knight
Marshall. Sir John Coventrey Colonel of Taunton Regiment, 2. Edward Phillips
Esquire Ralph Stawell, Esquire Colonel of Bridgwater Regiment. 3. Peregrine Palmer Esquire
Henry Rogers Esquire George Speak Esquire Francis Windham Esquire Colonel of Wells
Regiment, 4. Samuel Gorges Esquire Robert Hunt Esquire Thomas Peggot Esquire Colonel of
Bath Regiment, 5.
TO THE Right worshipful, and truly honored Sir COPLESTONE BAMPFIELD Knight,
And one of the Knights of PARLIAMENT For the County of DEVON, etc.
SIR,
ALthough I am a stranger to you, yet the Gallantry of your Virtuous
inclinations, together with the nearness of affections to my never to be
forgotten Cammander Sir Hugh Wyndham Knight, late deceased, forces me to
present you with a Lively Portraicture of his worth. As to his Military
concerns, he made his Soldiers Commanders of the chiefest principles of War
(that is) to be Faithful, Obedient, Resolute to fight, loving to their Country,
and loyal to their Sovereign: So likewise in the private Exercises of his
Troops, those under his Command were as Ornaments in peace, and a guard in War:
This only was not the height of his ambition, for he made it a principle to
himself in Warlike combats, not to have many names, but many hands: And for
his deportments, I am sure none was more beloved in his Country, nor could
command more able and stouter Soldiers for his Majesty's service than himself:
And I hope the Heavens have most largely rewarded him for his blood spilt in
his late Majesty's service (of ever blessed memory.)

Sir, I humbly beg I might by your favor indicate to the world my Obligements
to his deceased person, which was accepted of by him when he was alive, as an
Epistle to my Observations for the Military Exercise of Horse and Foot. And
what I have truly said of him, your own worth falls not short; in your
Paternal affections to your Country, which has of late appeared
(notwithstanding great opposition) in their clear affections to you again,
especially in that unparalled Election of you for Knight of the Shire: And
give me leave to declare to the World your Countries further Esteems of you, to
be one of his Majesty's chiefest Cittadels (or fort Royal) for their safety:
Not that I declare this to lessen any of the beams of those other worthy
Heroes that shall join with you, when ever his Majesty shall Command.

Sir, I crave your Pardon for my boldness, and conclude (with my desired wishes
for your Worships tranquillity, the increase of Honor here, and what may be
merited for you, to make you glorious in the world to come) subscribing in the
quality of

July 29. 1671. Your Humble Servant Tho. Venn.

TO THE Truly Generous Gentlemen and CITIZENS of LONDON Practicing Arms in the
Artillery Garden.
Gentlemen,
ALthough I am a stranger to you, I must declare to the world that what I know
in this Art Military, I received, as it were from your breast; from some who
were Leaders in your ground: And it is a grief to me that I live at such a
distance from you, as not to be of your number; the least amongst you being of
ability to be Commanders in Chief, when ever his MAJESTY may require it. There
is in you strength enough to shield a just cause; and a Royal cause is able to
advance your power: give me leave to tell you there can be nothing done by you
without it; it is that which gives strength and sinews, to all your motions.

Gentlemen, you may see, by my other Epistles, what Authors I have made use of,
Elton.
and if you find some of the words of Command, one and the same with others
late before me, I could not help it, for this was finished as to the Commands
and directions above four or five years now last past, and in all that time I
never saw any thing of the Gentleman's, nor his latter piece as yet.

This you will find to be but methodical collections for the young Country
Soldier; and in our rural exercises they can draw up but twelve files, in
which I am stinted to a very small number for so great a work; if there were a
proportionableness in the Arms, the figures would have been better; yet not in
the least presuming to teach you; but I hope with your favorable constructions
you will allow it useful for us in the Country, although your abilities may
teach the world ten times more. I aimed at nothing but to show how necessary
the readyness and use of Arms is, and of men to be well exercised in them.
Which has been a benefit to Republics, as History and experience has made to
appear; for what Nation has not found safety in the expert use of them, and in
the neglect thereof ruin?

I hope there are none of you so disloyal, as not to obey your Princes
Commands; in Order to which I cannot but Commend your close order to his
Religion, (and not to be at open distances); it is that which will make your
obedience free, your affections settled, your selves renowned, and as I may in
some part say, the peace of the Kingdom secured.

I humbly crave your pardons for my boldness, and grant me not only to be in
the number of the well wishers to this Art, but also to the prosperity of your
ground, and I shall always subscribe,

March, 1671. Yours Tho. Venn.

TO ALL MY FELLOW-OFFICERS SOLDIERS AND LOVING COUNTRYMEN To whom the
Exercise of ARMS Is delightful.
Gentlemen, and Fellow Soldiers.
ALlthough there are discouragements enough to make you negligent in the
exercise of Arms, not only to see this Art so little countenanced, but our
late Enemies by sitting still, grow rich, and the Royal Sons of Mars, in all
their labors not able with one hand to wash the other; yet this one thing, in
making our selves capable to do our Gracious King and Country service, should
be the chiefest motive to labor after the Theorick part of this Art, by which
we shall be the better able to perform the Practick when we shall be called
thereunto.

But lest these few Collectives might meet with some objections, why that I
should treat of the Horse in the first place, when Antiquity allows the
precedence thereof to the Infantry; It was not to raise a dispute amongst the
Novists, but I leave such to enquire of the precedencies in a Council of War,
and who taking place there will resolve them: And it is well known to most of
you I was a Commander of Horse my self; and then having finished my weak
thoughts as to the Exercise thereof, which being viewed by some Gentlemen of
our Country, I was desired by them to set out likewise some few Collections for
the young foot Soldier.

It is true there have been many Books printed of this Art in our past ages,
and some in our present; and as Solomon says of making many Books there is no
end; yet if it had not been for Books this Art might have been buried in
oblivion. And if I should set out at full how all that we practice is not only
borrowed from Antiquity, but most of the very words of Command are kept still
in use, it would be too large, and it being not my business, I shall acquiesce
with what I intended for my private use, but being (as I have declared)
requested hereunto, When London was burnt, 1666. Sept. 3d. etc.
and now fearing that most of our books are consumed by fire, I am further
persuaded to put these introductives to public view. Let me persuade, you
fellow Soldiers, although you meet with many discouragements and scoffs in
your Country, although taxes lie heavy upon you, and your allowances do not
answer your moderate expenses, nay although not your due for your time spent
herein, yet go on; for I will boldly tell you that practical knowledge in this
Art is the highest step to preferment.

We read among the Romans of Lucullus, and in our latter age of M. Spinola, who
through maturity of judgment and great Learning became Generals as soon as
Soldiers: Intimating that it is the Prerogative of Princes to be born leaders
of Armies; But others must expect to ascend this Mountain of Honor by many and
difficult stepps. Therefore first lay a foundation of honest fame, laboring
after the practice of private virtues; Then orderly proceeding to signalize thy
self by some public achievements (which I doubt not, but every generous
spirit will endeavor the ascension thereof) you may be assured that passing
once the brunt of it, even to the hazard of life it self, you will find
delightful pleasures in following the exercises of this Art Military.

Who is it that shall think so despicably of a Soldier, or his profession so
base, as some have so accounted them? When they that are the sons of Mars and
have the true form of Military Discipline, are highly to be esteemed as
honorable, and as necessary members in a Kingdom; such as no Kingdom can be
without.

It is honorable, because it is compassed about with such reasons as that the
contemners thereof by the judicious are much reproved; for that State that is
not able to stand it out in Arms against the rage of intestine, and foreign
violence, is sure to fall into the hands of the destroyer. How can any
particular interest preserve it self without it? I will boldly say that the
Despisers of the use of Arms, are not only disloyal to their Prince but
destructive to themselves. What are the Laws and Civil Orders without defense
for the maintenance of them? I may truly term them like a Ship without a
Rudder, which being let at liberty to every gust of Wind will be ruined upon
the Rocks of Rebellion: Or like some curious Edifice erected without a roof,
which cannot withstand the violence of any storm. Constantine the Great, by
the persuasions of some peaceable Subjects cashiered his ancient Legions, by
which he overthrew the best of his Military Discipline, and so left an open gap
for the barbarous Nations to invade the Empire.

Solomon in the time of Peace provided for War. What Nation dare to meddle with
that People who are prepared, and well exercised in this Art of War?

Therefore let every one, Gentlemen and Farmours, Rich and poor, that intend to
approve themselves true English men and Loyal Subjects, not only embrace,
honor and cherish Arms, but also exercise (and be exercised) and diligently
learn this Military Art: that in case any Rebellion or treachery may arise,
they may be fit to defend His MAJESTY'S person, with all his rights and
Prerogatives: That such as our late intestine ruins may be for ever hereafter
prevented: That the Armed servant may no more command the unarmed Master: Nor
the Rebellious armed Subject his unarmed Prince.

Let us not be overwhelmed in security, but when any sudden Alarm may sound
in our ears, there may be always found such ready and fit both to command and
obey. Solomon does in effect tell us, that it is not the great number of
untrained men that are sufficient for defense when he says, A wise man is ever
strong; Pro. 14.
yea a man of understanding increases in strength; for with Wisdom must War
be taken in hand; and where there are many that give Counsel there is victory.

It is impossible for any Kingdom or Dominion to live in peace, without the
use of the Sword: As Idleness and the neglect of Warlike Discipline has been
the ruin of many States; so the Order of the ancient Romans resolved not to
lie as sluggards, nor to delight in Idle, or wanton pastimes, but at certain
times allotted them in a year for the bettering of their experience in Warlike
Exercises, they did it with delight and pleasure, so that no labor herein was
burdensome to them: and being become by the practice thereof most ready and
expert in the same, became at last, as History has declared, great and mighty
Conquerours.

I wish the same of us, that our reputation may not scornfully be laid aside,
as if we minded more our Carpets, and the following products thereof, than the
Musquett; That through the Exercise of this Military Art, we may become so
mighty and Valiant, as that we may be able to withstand any opposition both
Foreign and Domestic.

Thus wishing prosperous success in all Martial affairs that may be for the
good both of King and Country; I conclude and subscribe not only to be a
well-wisher to all Military Arts, but in the quality of

Your fellow Soldier and Servant Tho. Venn.

Introductive Collections; OR INSTRUCTIONS For the Young Soldier, IN Art
Military.
CHAP. I. Military Observations for the Exercise of Horse.
NOtwithstanding what these late Rebellious Times have made to appear, yet
there is so much of self-willed Ignorance, with more than the common sort of
people, not only to think, but to say, that in all services and Exercise of
Arms, there needs no more Action, but by these words of Command; Make ready,
Present; and Give fire: All other words of Command to be but as tendances to
them; and all other postures are by them judged to be but superfluous, and may
well be spared; or but trifles of small consequence: Whereas the life and well
being of every well ordered Troop of Horse, and Company of Foot, consists
wholly of form; and those received Ceremonies belonging to every Posture,
cannot in the least, in the prime of Exercise be neglected, but with the
hazard of Confusion; Matthew. 15.14.
Quod si coecus coecum per viam duxerit ambo in foveam cadent. The crooked
deformity of the bones is covered with the flesh, for the better adorning of
the body; so are Ceremonies which by experience (the Ancient have made
Reverent) are the life and being of a Kingdom: And here by way of digression,
give me leave to say, that which is but truth, that the neglect of Ceremonies
formerly used and commanded, proved most injurious to this Kingdom, and yet to
this day is an evident demonstration of Faction and Rebellion.

It is the ambition of many men striving to be Captains before they be
Soldiers, laboring after Command, before they know how to obey; and being
well considered, what more is the Mother of Error, but Ignorance? It is well
scited out of Vegetius, That knowledge in all things belonging to War, gives
Courage; Nemo facere metuit quod se been didioisse confidit; No man fears to
do that which he has well learned how to do: Without a true knowledge in the
single Accidence, in this Art Military, (as I may term it) you will never be
able to judge of the Syntaxis thereof; without experience in all the Postures
belonging to Horse and Foot, none can be capable of exactness in that which is
most of use in this Art; for Military Discipline (where with care it is
observed) is but a true confirmation of Soldiers in their Valor and Virtue,
and in short is performed By Exercise, Order Compulsion, and Example.


1. By Exercise: Good Instructions are nothing without they be followed by care
and diligence; for what breeds more strong and resolved gallantry in Gentlemen
than Industry? It excels nature it self: All the labor and exercise of a
Commander from time to time, is not of any value as to the Execution of this
Art, either in courage or strength in their Soldiers, without he be
industrious to teach, and they also willingly labor after a perfection in the
exercise of such Instructions as shall be commanded them; for experience with
Instruction is the best way to perfection. Vegetius says, Paucos viros natura
fortes procreat, bona Institutione plures reddit industria; Nature brings forth
very few strong men, but Industry by good Instruction breeds up many: None
ought to be called for to exercise this Art, but such, who are able to produce
what they know to action; for that Soldier that is not well taught, can never
expect the fruit of his labor (to be courageous in his Enterprises.)

Exercitium, Imports nothing else but exercising an Army, etc. And it is most
certain that the Souldery, who are often and well exercised, are much the
better; as Varro says, Exercitus dicitur quod melius fit exercitando: Thus
being willing to be exercised begets knowledge, knowledge begets courage;
courage obtained, makes perils contemned, calamities despised, and death it
self conquered.

2. By Order: There has been so much writ of this by many Authors, that I
shall only say in short, Polibius, Vegetius, etc.
It consists in dividing, disposing and placing of men so fit; that upon all
occasions they may be apt and ready to be commanded, by their Superiors as
they shall direct.

3. By Compulsion: That Soldier that makes not this Military Art his delight,
but is given to other pleasures and pastimes, (and being accustomed thereunto)
contracts an unmanly effeminacy, and degenerates from courage; as Tacitus
says, Degenerat a robore ac Virture miles assuetudine voluptatum: Now all such
Soldiers, as are vainly given, and mind pleasure more than commands, ought to
be bridled and governed by compulsion.

4. By Example,

And they are either in Reward or Punishment.


1. In Reward: That Soldier that expects advancement from his Commander, must
be so stout in his resolutions, as perfectly to perform what is commanded: And
when he shall answer his Commanders expectation, in the execution of some
singular service, he ought to receive Fame, Honor and Riches, as a reward for
it.

1. And first, That Soldier whose care is, that at all times his behavior be
such as to endeavor after all virtuous habits, and being so adorned, he ought
to have that which virtuous Soldiers most desire and labor after; That is
Good Fame: for it is the food of his reputation, and nourishes toward Honor
in the highest Achievements.

2. There is a second reward; and that is Honor: It is not the nature of a
true Soldier to hunt after Honor, or to buy it with Bribes; It is blood and
not gold, that has been the price of Honor: Therefore that Soldier that
shall thus deserve, ought not to be voyded of it, but according to his merits
and quality, ought to have his preferment.

3. And lastly; but not the least, the good, saithful, and stout Soldiers
reward is Wealth; that when they are preferred they may not be despised, but to
be in ability, as to the greatness and smallness of place, to hold up to his
Rank and advancement; without These a Soldier can neither perform nor continue
the duty of his calling; M. D. 1. p. 27.
and therefore the bestowing thereof deserves great consideration, that the
well deserving Soldier at no time should be neglected.

It must be acknowledged that Rewards are seldom seen, for Offices are more
often known to be bestowed for favor (if not for money) than for desert: What
makes many brave spirits to give up their services; but when they see their way
of Advancement cut off, and their pay it may be hard to come by; in regard that
some Pay-Masters, or Treasurers have been corrupt, that the soldier shall not
have his pay without some unknown fees? And rather than to commit any base
action in his Country, he is forced to desert the service; or when their
service is ended, without they will give one part of their just dues, that they
may have the other, they shall be delayed. etc. And this is one reason there
are so many unwilling hearts to serve their Country; and what makes a Soldier
so despicable in his Country, as to be forced to use extremity even for
necessity sake? How base a thing is it for some Deputy Chieftains that make it
their study to rob Honors Workmen of their hire? And if it be so in our
Country affairs, and in times of Peace; What can be expected from such in times
of trouble? Let such know that Honors trumpet shall never sound their praises.

But to such as shall not in the least debar it from the deserved, but (as I
may term it) are rather willing to disburthen themselves of their Soldiers
stipend; to such, I say, not only remains the obsequious diligence of their
Soldiers to serve them in all hazzardous attempts; but also the glorious title
of a faithful Steward, which draws after it both the affection of Prince and
People.

2. There are also Punishments due to those that are Vicious and Cowardly; for
nothing more holds a Soldier in his due obedience than the severity of
Discipline.

Soldiers (as Vegetius says) ought to stand more in awe of their Generals,
than in fear of their Enemies: Discipline being once infringed, either by a
slightment of Reward, or neglect of a Soldiers just pay, will cause the
Virtuous to desist, and to others 'twill prove a spur, to necessitate them to
base Actions; which with other corruptions, when seen by superior Officers,
and shall not according to Martial Law endeavor to punish such vicious
Actions; I say the Soldier instead of submitting to the Commands of his
Leader, oftentimes breaks forth into Mutinies and Rebellions. I must confess
when, and where Reward and Punishments are not slighted, the welfare of a
Country will be so supported, that no Vice shall be able to stagger it: So in
an Army, what makes a Soldier to forget obedience, more than the want of Pay
and the execution of good Laws? which being duly performed, the Soldier will
undoubtedly, the better know his Duty and Discipline.

Here, by the way, I cannot but infert some few things that are prejudicial to
the Soldier, and Army, etc.

First, When the Public Service of God is so neglected, that the whole
Souldery, under a Christian Prince are not tied to be Exercised in the same
Religion his Prince is of; for Faction amongst them will do more hurt, than
bullets against them.

Secondly, When high debauchery is not severely punished.

Thirdly, When Gaming is not most strictly forbidden; because it is not only a
waste of Maintenance, and an Introduction to Quarrels, but a Profanation of
God's holy name.

And Fourthly, When Muster-masters are so careless in their Office, as to
suffer any Captain, upon wilful absence of Soldiers, to receive some out of
other Companies, or hired men out of the Town and Country; this being well
considered will prove prejudicial both to King and Country.

And lastly, When those strict Laws against Duelling are not better observed,
that for every trivial quarrel, the life of a stout spirited Gentleman must
drop. Fol. 183. etc.
For better satisfaction, read Ward's Discourse of unjust Valor against Duels.

CHAP. II. Of the Soldier, and Officers in General.
IT is not my intention to run through the description of every particular
Officer at large, of his duty in his respective place; it being set forth at
large in several Authors: I shall therefore briefly pass them over; hoping it
will be the endeavor of all that undertake any Office Military, in the service
of his King and Country, to labor after a true form of Discipline, that is now
in exercise by Authority in general; That when it shall please our Gracious
King to call for us, we may not be incapable of Command: What greater dishonor
can there be than for a Commander to be commanded by his inferior Officers?
Therefore it behooves all in their several Capacities, who are willing to win
Honor; not to be wanting in their endeavors after the Exercise of Arms.

1. Of the private Soldier.
None were admitted Soldiers among the Romans, but such as were of an honest
Tribe, (or Family, as being more likely to labor after Victory, not only for
his Liberty, but for his goods, or estate.) As for those that were absolutely
necessitous, they might have liberty promised by their Enemies, and so betray
their Trust. Again, they would never take any Soldiers into their Armies, but
such as were well exercised beforehand; and this did their work, and obtained
them Victories against their Enemies, Vegetius, Lib. 1. Chap. 8. The private
Soldiers duty is as follows. Whenever he is commanded for service, let him
labor to be sober, and patient, enduring all hardships and travels; To know
and observe all Orders Military, Live.
Completely Armed, and expert in the use thereof; Horridum militem esse decet,
non caelato auro argentoque, sed ferro. It becomes a Soldier best to appear
terrible; not to be garnished with gold and silver, but with steel. And
Soldiers ought not only to be obedient to their Captains; but chiefly to Love
God, and Honor their King. This being the duty of a Soldier in general, there
are two particular duties belonging to him, that is, as a Sentinel and a Scout.

2. Sentinels; The further any Sentinels are set from the body of the Guard, it
is thought necessary two should be placed, and there they are to endeavor both
to hear and see, thereby to learn of their Enemy, what may be intended, and
what they have discovered; that whilst one goes to certify the Captain of the
Guard, the other may stand fixed, and observe what else might happen in his
fellows absence. A Sentinel must not alight from his Horse unless it be for
natural necessity, and but one of them at once. Near to the Body of the Guard
there may be placed but a single Sentinel, to observe the moving of the double.
If the distances be not too large, if there be any other Cross-ways or
advenues, that each Sentinel may see the other, then there may be but a single
set; for they must know that they are set there only to certify the Body of
the Guard concerning the several occurrances that may happen: Suppose a
Sentinel should be provoked by any advantageous affairs; It is resolved he must
not stir a foot; for that Sentinel that shall by day or night, remove from the
place where he was set by his Corporal, before he shall be by him fetched off
(or relieved) shall he punished with death. Polyb. lib. 1.


If the whole Troop be upon the Guard the Lieutenant is to set forth the first
Sentinels with the Corporal, according to his directive Commands received,
Directions.
and to change them, conducting them to his Guard; (but the Cornet is not to
forsake his Standard;) Then the Captain of the Guard is to go the first Round,
to see not only that all things are safe, but also whether th^se Sentinels are
vigilent: And upon his return, there are four other Rounders to be sent twice
in a night, to discover round the Quarters. Observe, that no Sentinel is to
have the Word, but Officers and Corporals.

3. Scouts; They are not only to discover the Highways, but also to scour
them: they are to be of a number, answerable to the danger of the Guard; for
the hazard of them, may prove dangerous, both to a private Guard or an Army in
General. They are to give notice of the Enemies motion, of his approach, and of
the number of them, that all sudden surprises may be prevented.

4. A Provost Martial; For the badge of his Office he is to have in his hand a
staff or Truncheon; and having the same in his hand, it is death for any
Soldier violently to lay hands on him: All Delinquents are to be delivered to
him, by the Chief in Command. He is not to enter any quarter without the leave
of the Chief Officer for any Prisoner; He is to clear all by-ways of Soldiers,
that no prejudice may be done by them in their March; He is to see all Orders
published, be duly executed; He must be an honest man, and take no Bribes.

5. A Trumpeter, ought to be a man skilful in all the sounds of the Trumpet
distinctly; He ought to deliver all Embassies, etc. He ought to observe the
Enemies Works, Guards, and Soldiers, that he may give a good account thereof
at his return: And for the better performance thereof, he ought to be a man
witty and subtle, and to manage it discreetly; He ought not in the least to
discover any thing, as may prejudice his own party; He must not fail to sound
the hours commanded: One Trumpet is to be with the Cornet, and he is to be
allowed by the Captain for him; who is to receive a list of the Guards from the
Cornet, and is privately to warn the Soldiers thereof.

6. Corporals, in a Troop of Horse, have been always allowed to be of great
use; who ought to be of a civil carriage and stout spirit; they are to be three
or more, according to the allowance of Horse, etc. They are to be assistant to
the Lieutenant in placing of the Sentinels, each in their several squadrons
when they are to perform duty: If any parties are to be sent abroad, either for
discovery, or to scour the highways, a Corporal is to be sent with them; He
is bound to keep a list of his Squadron.

7. A Quartermaster, ought to be a man of much fidelity in regard of
distributing of the Word and Billets; He is to have the Command of the Troop in
the absence of his superior Officers: Who in going to make his Billets is to
have a Soldier along with him by the appointment of the Lieutenant, who is to
return to the Troop to conduct them to their Quarters.

8. A Cornet, ought to be a man of gallant behavior and undaunted courage; His
place in the Troop upon a march is on the front of his own squadron; and to
take the Standard himself, marching through any great Town or City (or when
commanded) or into the field with it flying; and when any General shall appear
in the field he is to drop the head of his standard toward the ground in
obeisance to him. His Place when the Troop is drawn up (to the opinion of some)
is for to exercise upon the left of the Captain, somewhat behind the Captain;
But in fight or skirmish, he is to place himself in the first rank of his own
squadron; with his staff sunkt or slopt; and in danger, it is more honor to
break his Lance (or staff) himself, then to suffer his standard to be broken
and taken from him: He is to keep a list of the Troop, and wait every day upon
his Superior Officers; and such Soldiers as his Captain and Lieutenant shall
appoint he shall send to the Guard: In the absence of the Captain and
Lieutenant he is to command the Troop.

9. For the Lieutenant; The Rear is assigned him for his place, and was
anciently called Tregidux, that is a Rear Commander: And Lieutenant is a French
word signifying one which supplyeth the place of another; for in the absence of
the Captain he commands the Troop; appointing an Officer to be in the Rear: He
ought to be a man well educated in Cavalry, and in the other parts of the Art
Military. He ought to be strict to see the soldiers punctually to do their
service, and to have a care to their Horses and Arms in the field and fight. He
being in the Rear is not only to encourage the Soldiers, but to have his sword
drawn, and to kill any that shall endeavor to flee, and not to fight. He ought
to know the ability of his Soldiers, keeping the list of their names; that the
Guards may be in a readiness, with the Captains consent, and by him delivered
to the Cornet.

In the mounting of the Guard, he is to inform himself of the place for the
Guard, and of the Sentinels for to set, the ways for to be scoured, and must go
himself with the Corporal of the Guard, and see the first Sentinels placed; And
when he has the Guard himself, he must often visit them; always to be armed
and to keep his bridle day and night upon his horse's head.

When the Troop is drawn up to lodge the Standard; He is to see the
Quartermaster deliver to the Soldiers their respective Billets for their
quartering, upon that Alt before they move, for then the Soldier will know
thereby the better where to wait on the Cornet upon any occasion.

He ought to visit all Quarters, as to his list received, and see that the
Soldiers be of civil bevaviour; and if any complaints be made of any disorder,
he is to remedy it, by punishing the Offenders.

When the Trumpet sounds to Horse, he ought to be first mounted, and to cause
all immediately to do the same; He must punish all lingering and lazy Soldiers
that are not presently mounted with him. The good Examples of a Leader have
ever been observed to be of a mavelous efficacy with the Soldiers.

10. Every Captain ought to be obedient, valiant, and resolute in the execution
of all Commands with Judgment, discretion and Valor; that with virtuous
nobleness and generosity he may win the love of his Soldiers, to their King,
Country, and himself; and that by his own experience in the knowledge of
Military Discipline, he may be able to govern his Soldiers accordingly.

11. Colonels, They ought to have an high respect with all Obedience to their
higher Officers, faithfully to perform their Commands, and that with care,
valor, affection and diligence they govern their Regiments.

12. And when every General shall make his whole Army to love and fear God, and
shall govern with prudence, care, order and Justice; and knowing how to
prevent, remedy and execute, as occasions shall offer themselves, with great
skill and dexterity, will make himself no less loved than feared.

From these Officers, the Trained Bands of this Kingdom (with the Ships) are
the defense thereof (or ought to be;) but to speak of the choice of the
Soldiers, or of their being armed, or well disciplined, (as in many places is
much neglected,) and where the fault is, as I am an inferior Officer I must be
silent: Pardon me to say it would be much better if his Majesty's Deputies
would cast their eyes and commands oftener amongst them.

I could wish that our Militia instead of celebrating their Feasts to Mars, did
it not too much to Bacchus with carousing and drunkenness; which folly and
detestable vice is an Enemy to all Virtues, both of soul and body; (and to all
Military Discipline.) It is the very Nurse of Effeminacy, of Cowardice, of
Sensuality, of Rebellion, and of all other Vices that can be imagined.

This was a Foreign Vice brought in amongst us by our Neighbor Commanders,
quaffing and carousing, until as the Fleming say, Doot Dronken.

It is a sad thing that any that bears affection to Military Affairs, should
make such fruits the merchantable effects of that Discipline; I am sure he is
no true Soldier (nor Subject) that shall follow such beastly ensamples; when
it is the Command of our Sovereign to the contrary: All must know they are
bound to obey Authority; and let all true hearts take that for his Card to
steer the course of his Loyalty by.

CHAP. III. Of the Arming of the Cavalry.
THe Cavalry are required in their Persons, Arms, and Horses, to be suitable to
their several ends and Employments: There were among the Graecians and Romans
two bodies of Horse, a light-armed body, and a heavy-armed body; the
light-armed were to give the first onset to the Infantry, to make way (as I
conceive) by disordering the Enemy; then the heavy-armed Horse were to take
their advantages for Victory.

There were and are to be taken notice of five several kinds of men at Arms for
the Horse service Lanceirs, Cuirasiers, Harquebuziers, Carabiniers, Dragoniers.


1. Lanciers, they were offensive, but chiefly defensive, and were armed Capa
pe, with Swords and Peternels, somewhat longer than our ordinary Pistols now in
use, with a Lance of about sixteen or eighteen foot long. It has been adjudged
by our Royal Generals, and found by experience of late years not so
serviceable, because not so nimble for any sudden enterprises, or field
services as our light-armed Horsemen are; therefore wholly laid aside: Besides
they were not always of effectual use in a body, for execution, but in a
straight line, upon a Carreer, and where they must have both leisure, and room
enough to work their designs; which I leave to the Judicious to give their
Verdicts herein: for if men in our days should be laden with such Arms, how
would they be able to command a Lance at that length: If there were such
inconveniences in the weight of the Armor and Weapons as the then after
experienced found many; yet our men are much weaker, and wholly unable to
undergo the burden thereof; upon these considerations the use of the Lance was
then left off; so that the Horse were called

2. Curasiers, who were both for Horse and Arms in no wise inferior to the
Lanciers (his Lance excepted) and are also offensive but chiefly defensive;
but not subject to those inconveniences as the former with their Lances: He is
to have under his Armor (which is Capa pe) a good Buff coat, and good
Peternels with a Sword whose point must be stiff, and sharp, his Sadle and bitt
strong, and his bridle with an Iron chain to prevent cutting: he is to have a
boy to carry his arms, and to forage for him. These are the heavy-armed for
the Horse service which are not used amongst us, especially in our settled
Militia, nor but few of the next, which are termed.

3. Harnuebuziers, who are very serviceable and are to be armed defensive with
a good Buff coat, and to have a back, breast and pot, Pistol proof: and for
his offensive arms, he is to have a good Harquebuz, hanging on a Belt, with a
swivel, and serviceable Pistols, as is set forth in the Horse service by Act of
Parliament for the service of the Militia, but rather somewhat larger, and a
good cutting sword; His Horse should be somewhat better than the Militia
Horses, as is set forth in the said Statute, with a strong Sadle, and bitt; and
his bridle to be made with a chain that the cutting thereof may be prevented.

4. Carabiniers are to be armed defensive as the Harquebuziers, their Horses
may be somewhat lesser, but for the offensive Arms instead of the Harquebuz, a
good Carabine, hanging on a belt with a swivel, by the ring of the Carabine;
but for Pistols and Swords, they must be according to the Act of Parliament for
the Arming of a Militia Trooper, as in the said Act more at large appears.

The service of them in execution is not to be disputed; the Experienced
Soldier can testify enough of the singular benefit they are of in service;
although it is not regarded in some places in the Country, I believe it is not
their Judgments, but rather their unwillingness to put themselves (the rich
men of the Country) to such a charge, and not to walk one step further than the
bare words of the Act of Parliament will empower them.

I hope when his Grace the Duke of Somersett shall appear in the head of the
Militia of the County of Somersett all defaults of Men, Horses and Arms will
then be most regularly amended: And then the Souldrie in general and the Horse
in particular, being made complete Carabiniers, the men and horses to be one
and the same, kept, preserved, managed, and made fit for service, his Majesty
may the better trust to his Militia, who may be also capable of doing him and
their Country service. Wounds are never feared by them, who are well horsed,
well armed, and well exercised. I crave pardon of the Ingenious Reader if I
digressively propound a question or two, and I wish the guilty would answer
them by their good examples in better perfomances hereafter.

How many of those Gentlemen that should find Horses for his Majesty in the
service of the Militia, will send no other, but such as are common for all
uses? Instead of keeping them in their stables, well meating, and managing of
them fit for service, they will send them long journies, set them to plough, or
other carriages and draughts, not regarding how suddenly they may be called
for service.

How many send in their Arms restie and unfixed, not fit for service? some
have sent base pads, ordinary hackney sadles; others for covetousness have sent
their servants with snafle bridles; How many are there that borrow Horses and
Arms one of another?

And I am truly sorry to see some sufficient Gentlemen that have taken so much
pains to ride for to ease themselves, or to be freed from reasonable
assessments upon them. I wish some could clear themselves that command us,
whose Horses ought to be the first that should apear, and best equipt, from
being the worst and last, nay not at all to some Musters; for this the Country
murmurs at: And how can our returns of defaults be executed against the
Criminal, when Justice it self is guilty of the same errors? It is the good
examples of our Superiors, that should make the Inferior tremble to do amiss,
etc. I could wish that all neglects for the completing of His Majesty's
Militia might be amended hereafter, according as Authority has commanded; and
for such as must be subject thereunto, they would most willingly be obedient,
and to close with their Commanders in any thing that may advance the public
service, and not to be stupidly secure, and basely to undervalue the use of
Arms: Let such know that I do boldly affirm it for a truth to be a symptom
of disobedience and disloyalty.

5. The Dragonier. Dragoones are but Foot, (to be) on horseback and are so
mounted for the expedition of their march, who are to have large leather belts,
for the more easy carriage of their Pikes and Muskets, in some extraordinary
service, for making good of passes, linening of hedges, and other ambushments:
But if you raise any Regiments of Dragoons, and so are to march, and to be in a
readiness, for the like expedition; their Muskets are to be somewhat wider in
the bore than the Field Musket, and about two foot and nine inches in length,
and Pikes (if allowed) not to be above thirteen foot in length; his Horse must
be of a good mettle and nimble, but of a less price and stature.

And in the execution of any service (when commanded) they are to alight, and
to every ten soldiers there is one to be allowed to hold their Horses. Some
have been of an opinion that he is of such excellent service as that the duty
of the Carabinier may be wholly laid aside; whose arguments have been judged
frivolous by the judicious in this Art, that I need not trouble you any more
with them, but do declare that Musketeers on horsback to be made Dragooners
upon some special service; or that the Dragooner himself may be very useful
for expedition and enclosed Countries, etc.

I have treated of the Soldier, and of arming of him. I humbly insert; Seeing
the whole burden lies upon the Loyal hearted subject, and the discontented
party sit still, grow rich and laugh at it, therefore it has been the opinion
of some Gentlemen, that the discontented party should be armed in the Trained
Bands, and made to perform and execute all commands whatever. I am of an other
opinion, but shall not presume a determination in this place.

CHAP. IV. Of Military Signs.
IT is requisite that every Soldier should understand (or learn) all Military
signs, and directions; for experience has taught, that the neglect and error
in the right understanding of Signs, has brought great inconveniences, and
quite overthrown enterprises in hand.

There are three signs used in War Vocal Semivocal A Mute.


1. A vocal Sign is that when a Captain shall so immediately command, as that
every Soldier shall hear him distinctly; or else by some inferior officer to
the ear of the Soldier.

A Semivocal Sign is that which is distinguished by the Trumpet, or other
warlike instruments: In which as to the horse service; the Soldier is to take
notice of six points of War, which are Commands to the ear by the sound of the
Trumpet; And it ought to be performed with care and diligence. Those Commands
that are by the Trumpet sounded out to them are as follows.

The six points of war are Butte Sella Mount Chavallo A la Standardo Tucquet
Charga Anquet.


1. Butte Sella; Or Boutez-selle; when sounded is, Clap on your Sadles. The
Soldier must then make himself ready, and horse with all expedition.

2. Mount Chavallo; Or Chevall; when sounded is, Mount on Horseback. The
Soldier then bridles his Horse, leads him forth, and mounts him.

3. A la Standardo; Or A Standart; when sounded is, Repair to your Colors, or
Cornet. Upon this the Soldier must go to his Colors, in order to his march:
But when he hears it sounded in the Field he must retire to them with all
Speed.

4. Tucquet; Or, March: When this is sounded he is presently to March; in which
he is to observe his right hand man, and to follow after his Leader.

5. Charga; Or, Charge: When this is sounded, by and with the examples, or
directions of his Commander, the Soldier is to give proof of his valor in the
speedy charging of his Enemy.

6. Auquet; Or, Watch: When this is sounded at night the Soldier is to repair
to the place for mounting of the Guard for Watch; Or at the morning for
dismounting of the Guards.

I have read of another sound called Attend Hoe, for listening unto, A call
for summons, A Senate for State; and the like. This when sounded, the Soldier
is to hearken unto it, that he may the better be able to perform those Edicts
that shall be then commanded.

The third and last Military Sign is

3. A Mute; That is by signs to the eye, as by the Cornets Colors; or other
motions by the hand of the Commander, etc. You see there are two principal
senses of Advertisements, the Ear and the Eye; the true observation and use of
these signs avails much in War: for he that is negligent in either, may not
only lose himself, but be the cause of the loss of many others; so that by
being careless herein, Victory it self is often lost: How careful ought every
Soldier then to be, that by silence he may the beter hearken to all Commands;
that by the Vigilance of his eye, he may the better observe, Vide Chap. 5.
every sign that may by given. For Vegetius says, that nothing profits more
to Victory than to obey the Admonitions of signs.

CHAP. V. For the Marching and drawing up of a Troop of Horse.
EVery Troop of Horse must be furnished with a Captain, Lieutenant, Cornet, and
a Quartermaster, two Trumpeters, a Clark, a Sadler, a Surgeon and a Farrier.
And every Troop is usually divided into three equal parts; each of which is
called a Squadron; and are severally known by the Captain's, Lieutenant's and
Cornet's Squadron; acordingly there are three Corporals.

There are as great diversity of judgments almost as Authors about the
placing of some Officers either in their marchings of a single Troop, or being
drawn up into a Battalia.

Some would have the Captain and one Trumpet in the front; Then the Cornet
leading of his Squadron, and the third to be lead by the Eldest Corporal; and
the Junior Corporal in the rear, Ward fo. 26.
with the Lieutenant who has the command of a Trumpet with him.

Markham varieth something from this and but little, only the two junior
Corporals to be extravagant in the March, who are so ordered on purpose to keep
the Soldiers in their Ranks and to be orderly in their March: Both Ward and
Markham marches six in file, but Ward marches Five in Rank, and Markham Four
only: Others again differ in placing of Officers both in March and Battalia;
as, Walhawsen would have the Harquebuzier to March eight in File, and the
Cuiraster ten in File. But Markham and Ward being later Discipliners in this
Art Military, I shall only insert two platformes accordingly.

platform

platform

These of Markham and of Captain Ward are decyphered six in File; and a File so
drawn is distinguished according to their dignity of Place, a Leader, a
Follower, two Middlemen, a Follower, and a Bringer up.

The Ancient Dignity of a File.
1 Dignity of place. 1 H Leader. 2 5 h Follower. 3 4 H Middle man to the front:
4 3 H Middle man to the reere. 5 6 h Follower. 6 2 H Bringer up.

Cruso exercises eight deep, and therefore useless to our mode of fighting;
for our Custom is to make the Horse but three in File. I shall not stand to
answer the objections on both sides, but shall leave it to the most expert in
this Art; I conceive it enough that our late experience has taught otherwise;
And our present discipline being in practice to the Contrary.

Accordingly here shall follow a Troop of threescore Horse marching with each
Officer in his respective place, and also the form of a Troop drawn up in a
body. And when you march through any City or Town, Observe.
your Pistols must be loaded, and so fixed, that you may be in a readyness to
fire when ever occasion may be offered and command given; having one of your
Pistols drawn forth of your Holster, mounting your muzzel, and resting the butt
end thereof upon your Thigh.

rank and files A Troop marching to our present mode.

A Troop drawn up.



In the March some place the Quartermaster to lead up the Lieutenant's
Squadron, and the two other Corporals to be extravagant, that is to view and
see each Soldier to keep his place. In private exercises it is not denied but
the Quartermaster may lead up the Lieutenant's Squadron; But it is conceived
best to place the Quartermaster in the Reere; for it is presupposed that he is
or may be to take up Quarters, etc.

CHAP. VI. The Exercising of a Troop, as Armed with a Carabine, and Pistol.
THe Horse being in a body to exercise, and to make the Soldier more able to
handle his arms, when he shall be called forth to fight; The words of Command
shall follow.

Notwithstanding there is but little difference between the words of Command
for the Pistol with a Snaphans, and the Carabine; I shall however give them
severally.

Although Mounting to Horse is no Posture of Arms, and but a preparative to
exercise and Service, I shall presuppose the Soldiers to be dismounted, annd
stand ready by their Horses in a body; The word of Command (according to our
English mode is) To horse.

Now all being ready to Mount must be careful that his Horse be well girt, etc.
And as a preparative to Exercise there is another word of Command [Silence]
Without there be silence in the body, the Soldier in no wise can distinctly
hear, what is commanded by the chief Officer; It is the Soldiers Ear, and care
to preserve the body from fractions, and where Silence is not diligently
performed, the Soldier does not only fail in his motions, but the event will
be naught, for it is the very footstep to rashness; And it is as Livius says
(Temeritas praeterquam quod stulta est etiam infoelix) not only foolishness,
but unfortunate.

The words of Command for the Carabine.
All the Carabines being dropped (let fall) and hanging by their Swivells; The
Postures are as follows.

Silence being commanded.

1. Handle your Carabine. Postures.
2. Mount your Carabine, Some term this Order; and others against that,
because it is proper to the Pike.
placing your butt end upon your Thigh. 3. Rest your Carabine in your bridle
hand. 4. Bend your cock, to half bent. 5. Guard (or secure) your cock. 6. Prime
your Pan. 7. Shut your pan, (or fix your hammer.) 8. Sink your Carabine on your
left side. 9. Gage your flask. 10. Lade your Carabine. 11. Draw forth your
scouring stick (or Rammer.) 12. Shorten your Rammer. 13. Lade with Bullet and
Ramm home: 14. Withdraw your Rammer, (or scowring stick.) 15. Return your
scowring stick. 16. Recover and rest your Carabine in your bridle hand. 17. Fix
your Hammer, (or Steel.) 18. Free your Cock. 19. Present your Carabine. In
presenting of the Carabine, he must rest it upon his bridle Arm, placing the
butt end to the right side near the shoulder; or at length with his right hand.
20. Give fire. Note; That the Carabine is to be fired about twelve foot
distance, and to be levelled at the knees of your Enemies Horse, because that
by the strength of the Powder and motion of the Horse your shot may be at
Random. 21. Drop (or let fall) your Carabine. These Postures may serve for the
Harquebuz; but observe, when at any time you make your Approaches toward an
Enemy, your Carabine is to be mounted, with the butt end on your thigh, with
your hand above the lock; and so when you march through any Town or City;
otherwise to be dropped.
Here follow the Commands for the Pistols.
Postures.
1. Vncape your Pistols. 2. Draw forth your Pistols. This must be performed with
the right hand; the left Pistol first, and then to mount the Muzzel. 3. Order
your Pistol. Rest your Pistol a little in your bridle hand, and then
immediately take your Pistol near the middle part of it, and place the butt end
upon your thigh. 4. Sink or rest your Pistol in your bridle hand. 5. Bend your
Cock (or draw up your Cock to half bent.) 6. Secure, or Guard your Cock. 7.
Open your Pan. 8. Prime your Pan. 9. Shut your Pan, or, order your Hammer or
Steel. 10. Cast about your Pistols. Which is to be done against your left
thigh, with your muzzel upwards in your bridle hand. 11. Gage your Flasks. 12.
Lade your Pistols with Powder. For your more speedy lading of your Pistols,
there is lately invented a small powder flask, with a suitable charge; but it
is not to be denied but your Cartroaches are very serviceable. 13. Draw forth
your Rammer. 14. Shorten your Rammer. 15. Lade with Bullet and ram home. 16.
Withdraw your Rammer. 17. Shorten your Rammer. 18. Return your Rammer. 19.
Recover your Pistol. 20. Fix, or order your Hammer, (or Steel.) 21. Free your
Cock. 22. Bend your Cock, at full bent. 23. Present your Pistols. 24. Give
fire. In the firing of your Pistols, you are not to fire directly forwards, to
your Enemies horses head, but toward the right hand with the lock of the
Pistol upwards. 25. Return your Pistol, etc.
The Soldier having fired and returned his Pistol, (if time will permit him so
to do) he is to take himself to the use of the sword, (his sword being drawn
and placed in his bridle hand, near to the hilt of the sword) and having
received it into his weapon hand for service, must place the pummel upon his
right thigh, and so to raise his point to his mark, higher or lower, as
occasion serves, and therewith to endeavor to disable his Enemy, either by
cutting his Horses bridle, or other his Arms, that he serves in, which if
discreetly managed will prove perilous to them.

And further, it is very requisite that the Harquebuzier and Carabinier be
often exercised to shoot bullets at a mark, that in time they may be approved
marks-men: In order to which they are to take special care not to over-charge
their pieces with powder (as it is too much an error in many, endeavoring
more for a report, than for execution;) Wherefore there ought not to be in
proportion for any piece, but almost half as much the weight in Powder, of the
bullet; or, the Diameter and half of the piece is charge enough: And it ought
to be the special care of every Commander to see that his Soldiers be served
with good powder and well cast bullets; and that their bullets be directly fit
to their Carabines and Pistols.

I should now come to show you what is to be learned by a Soldier, for the
better demeaning of himself being joined in a body. But shall not in this place
show at large what is meant by a File, or Rank; half files or half ranks;
front, Read in the exercise of the foot, page
flanks, or rear; because it will spend too much time, and our late unhappy
differences have given some light thereunto: besides there is so much writ of
them in several Treatises of the Infantry, that it would be too much trouble
here to treat thereupon.

CHAP. VII. Of Distance.
EVery Troop consists of Ranks and Files.

Note, That in drawing up of a Troop it must be performed by files (not by
Ranks) and by squadrons; as Chap. 5.

In Order to distance, I must briefly declare what a File and a Rank is.

A File is a sequent Number certain, See Foot, Chapter 3.
standing head to crupper in a straight line from the Front to the Rear; and
according to our Mode of Discipline consists of three Persons.

1 h 2 h 3 h

A Rank is a Row of men uncertain in Number; Pouldron to Pouldron; even in
breast, be they more or less, according to the quantity of Soldiers, as it
falls out, to make a Rank.

rank

There are to be observed two sorts of distances, or orders in File and Rank.

Viz. Close and Open
Order.

Close Order in Files is three foot, or as occasion serves, closing knee to
knee: Open Order in files is six foot; Close Order in Ranks is three foot, or
as occasion serves closing to the Horses crupper: Open Order in Ranks is six
foot.

And herein you must further know, that there is a difference between the
manner of taking the distance, of the Cavalry and the Infantry: In the Foot the
distance is taken from the Soldiers body; which cannot be understood in this
place, but only of space of ground between Horse and Horse.

CHAP. VIII. Of Motions.
There be four kind of Motions, Facings, Doublings, Counter-marches, Wheelings.


BUt some of these being not of use to our present mode of Discipline;
therefore I shall treat no more of them, but what may be useful.

1. Facings are used to make the Company perfect, and to be suddenly prepared
for a Charge, on either Flank or Rear.

With 10. 8. and 6. in depth.
2. Doublings, There has been used in the Horse service these following, as

1. As to strengthen the Front.

There were used to strengthen the Flanks 1. Doublings of Ranks. 2. Doublings
of half Files. 3. Doubling of the Front by bringers up. 4. Doublings of Files.
5. Doublings of half Ranks.


The three first as to our Mode of Exercise may be wholly laid aside, in regard
they cannot be performed, the Troop being but three in depth.

It is conceived the other two may be necessary; either for Exercise sake, or
in regard of some sudden Onset, on the Flanks, thereby to strengthen them; but
I otherwise think this may be prevented by a speedy wheeling.

3. For Counter-marches, which is but the reducement of File-Leaders into the
place of bringers up, or one flank into the place of another; which is more
proper for the foot service, than useful in the exercise of the Horse: yet
because some have used it in their exercise; therefore I shall demonstrate one
Countermarch by Figure in his place.

4. For Wheelings; They are of most excellent use in the service of the Horse,
and ought to be very carefully exercised by every Commander; they serve in some
respect to execute what is to be performed by Counter-marches; which is to
bring the Frontiers, who are always supposed to consist of the ablest men,
thereby to be ready to receive the Charge of the Enemy in either Flank or Rear;
which by Counter-marches you cannot do.

Accordingly the Motions shall follow; that the untutoured Soldier may the
better apprehend them; It shall be represented by the Letter h.

motion

All Motions are to be done entirely, at one and the same time: for in our
Military Exercises they are the very life of an Army; and the only means being
truly performed that gives Victory; without which all preparations of Forces
are in vain, and avail nothing in the field to the end for which they were
levied: And this among experienced Soldiers is of inestimable reputation.

1. To the Right Hand.

motion

Note, That in all Motions, before a second be commanded (I mean in all single
Motions) the body must be reduced to his first proper form.

To Reduce them command To the left, or To your Leader, or As you were.


2. To the Left Hand.

motion

To reduce them command To the Right, or To your Leader, or As you were.


3. To the right hand about.

4. To the left hand about.

This is by turning to the left hand until their Faces front the Rear.

ranks The proper Front.



To reduce them. To the right hand about.

5. Ranks open forward to your double distance.

ranks

6. Files to the right double.

7. Files to the left double.

files

It is most convenient for the Horse to move from the right hand.

To reduce them. Ranks to the right double, or Files rank as you were.


8. Files to the right hand Countermarch.

9. Files to the left hand Countermarch.

files

Foot pa. 60.
To perform this Direct, That all the file Leaders move their Horses entirely a
little forwards, and so likewise turning off to the left hand, they march even
in rank down to the Rear; and none of the rest to turn off until he come to his
Leaders ground.

To Reduce them. Countermarch to the left.

As this is for the maintaining of the same Ground, so there may be a
Countermarch for the gaining of Ground; but I conceive them wholly useless but
where you have not ground to make your Wheels: Therefore not knowing what
necessity may force us unto; it is convenient the Soldier should be sometimes
exercised therein.

Note, That in your Counter-marches for gaining of ground, the Soldier is to
turn off the ground his Horse stands upon, and so passing through each is to
follow his Leader.

10. Ranks close forwards.

ranks

11. Files close to the left.

files

12. Files close to the left to your close Order.

files

Observe in closing to the left, the left File is to stand fixed, the next are
to move to the left.

13. Ranks close forward to your close Order.

ranks

In performance of this Command the first Rank is to stand; the second moving,
and taking its distance, stands likewise; and so the third.

It cannot be expected that any Wheeling of the Horse should be so exactly
performed in so little a compass as is taken by the foot; therefore every
Commander ought discreetly to take larger room for the compass of his motion,
so that all his Wheelings may be performed entirely without distraction.

Note, That Wheeling to the left for the Horse is the readiest way, except you
are prevented by some hindrances, etc.

14. Wheel to the left hand.

In this motion the whole body moves to the left, upon the left hand
file-leader as the center

wheeling motion

And so you may keep wheeling until you have brought them to their proper
front: So if you wheel them to the left about, the Rear then will be their
accidental Front.

15. Wheel to the right and left by Division.

wheeling motion

The Wheelings of the accidental Fronts upon both Wings into the proper Front,
and close their Divisions, will reduce them.

16. Trot large and wheel to the left.

Wheeling to the right will Reduce them, or by a circular Wheeling of them
until they are brought into their proper form.

17. Trot and wheel to the left about.

This brings the ablest men to be in the Rear for any speedy Onset; and
Wheeling to the right about will reduce them, etc.

The word Alt does signify to make a stand, and is derived from the Dutch word
Halt; which is as we say, hold, etc.
Observe that in all motions you make an Alt, that the Souldery may settle
themselves in their places, both in Rank and File, before you put any fresh
Command upon them.

18. Gallop and wheel to the left.

19. Gallop and wheel to the left about.

To reduce both these is by wheeling to the contrary: All these being performed
to reduce them to their first form; Open first your Ranks, and then your Files:
and in opening of your Ranks, the best way is to open them forwards.

CHAP. IX. Of Firings.
I Had thoughts to have treated of Encampments and Embattelings, but that being
not my work at present I shall pass them by, because it is my business to treat
only of the exercise of a single Troop: In the first place I shall set out one
firing of Walhausens; When your Enemy charge you in a full career, Cruso fol.
^9.
you are suddenly to open to the right and left, facing inwards and charge
them in the flanks, and when the Enemy is past your body, you are to wheel to
the right and left inward, and so charge him with a full career in the Rear;
but here you must observe their files to be six, and eight in depth; and so his
Figure is represented as follows.

firing files

This he commends very much, for whilst the Enemy is upon his Career, you are
but upon your Trot; and then opening to the right and left, This he speaks of
Cuirasiers.
either he must run through, and do but little execution, or else Alt in his
career, and so disorders himself, which is advantageous to you. But I am of
another opinion as to our Mode of fighting, being but three in depth; we must
rather sink than suffer any Voluntary Breach.

The same Author would have our Harquebuziers to give fire by Files, either
right or left, advancing before the Body in a full career toward the Enemy;
but many do wholly reject it, as being dangerous in Field service.

But now for the private exercise of a single Troop, which may be necessary to
bring the Soldier to a more ready and complete use of his Arms, I shall
demonstrate of Files firing in the Front and Rear, and then of firing by Ranks.
And first of Files firing in the Front.

firing files 1. Files firing in the Front.



The right hand File and the left hand File March some distance before the head
of the Troop, and Rank themselves to the right and left inward, and so Present
and Give fire; which being performed, let them wheel off to the right and left
outward into the Rear of their first Station, and so set themselves in their
respective places even with the remainder of the Body, leaving distance for
every Rank to march into his proper place, after they have once fired over.

firing files 2. Files firing in the Rear.



When they have thus fired they are immediately to fall off to the right and
left, and March forth into their places. As you observe in each firing both the
Files do rank themselves and then fire: Now a further exercise you may Command
for each File to face in opposition, and fire each to the other.

firing files Firing in the Front, and firing in the Rear.



I shall now demonstrate one platform of firing by Rank.

firing ranks

But in firing by Rank, observe the first Rank may advance upon a larg Trot
Gallop, or Carrere, as Command is given between thirty or forty paces from the
Body. The first Rank having fired wheels off to the left (if occasion will
permit) and falls into the Rear; and immediately upon the wheeling off of the
first Rank, the second advances according to Command and fireth, and so the
third.

You may fire also by divisions which is of singular use in the exercise of
Horse; either by firing by single divisions both in Front and Rear, or in
opposition both in Front and Rear also, as in firing, of the Files before
mentioned; so that I need not trouble you with any platformes of them.

After that these firings have been performed and the Soldier is grown expert
in the handling of his Arms, and well managing of his Horse; there is one thing
that ought not to be forgot by any Commander, which is of most excellent use;
That is, for the Soldier to be well exercised, both with his Carabine and
Pistol to shoot with Bullet at Marks; which if it be not well exercised and
taught, it will be to little purpose as to the Executive part of this Art.

So it ought to be the care of every Chief Officer to exercise those Troops
under his Command, sometimes, as occasion may serve, in a Regimental way;
leaving sufficient distances between each Troop, that each other may be relieved
orderly; and so to retreat in due order, to avoid Confusion.

CHAP. X. The Conclusion.
BEfore I conclude these few spent hours about the Exercise of the Horse, and
that my demonstrating of them but three in depth; I hear many brave Soldiers
(but old ones) to make some objections against me. As first, in meddling with
that which is of too high a concern for me.

My answer to that is briefly; That those that have writ Books of this Art,
although they have been gallant Soldiers if they had been in Command now, and
of late years to have seen what have been performed in the Executive part of
the Horse service, they would correct their Judgments, and amend their Mode of
Exercise, finding in it much error, and serviceable for naught, but to prolong
Execution; as if all experienced genus's in this Art should be tied up to the
Low Country services: And what I have done is but my duty if accepted, else for
my own private use, also for my friends and relations that come after me; And
because there ought to be a great deal of care had in a work of this nature, I
leave the correction hereof to the better Learned and more Experienced in this
Military Art.

And for the drawing of the Horse but three in File; I say, If the Grecian
Writers were alive, and some of our Modern Writers that have Commented upon
them and made Collectives out of them, which they have published for authentic
Maxims in this Art, would now much admire to see our Mode of Exercise so
changed for the better.

64 in a Troop.
When as our late Cruso in his Military instructions in his platformes of
Exercise demonstrates then Eight in depth, and Eight in rank: And Captain Ward
in his Drilling and exercise of Horse is six in File and twenty in Rank, Leo
Chapter 7. Sect. 81. Chapter 14. Sect. 78. 108, 109.
and alleges it for the best, and is taken out of Polibius, General of the
Achaeans Horse: Leo writes almost the same; That if there be many horse to be
exercised, they are to be ordered ten in File, and if but few no more but five,
giving this reason; That if the Body be but shallow, the Body will be so weak,
that it is subject it self to fraction: Then Livie verifieth that of Leo, and
says the Soldiers had then Spears of four and twenty foot in Length, which
was to match the Pikes of the Infantry: But in some process of time as History
makes it appear, the Macedonians found great inconveniency in the length of
those Spears, and made some of them to be fifteen foot in length; and being
then at that length, determined that five Horse in depth was too many, as to be
offensive to their Enemies: but notwithstanding these results endeavored to
make their Battalias seem to be square, and for their better advantage in show,
order ten in Rank and five in File to every Troop of Horse; And these depths
were only in those days used when the Horse fought only with Spears, and Guns
not at all used.

Now if they had the use of Guns so much as we, and should fire in Ranks, five,
six, eight or ten in depth (and our mode of fighting being but three in File)
their exercise would be so long in the performance thereof, that it would not
only be tedious but hazzardous to us; for of late years it has been
experienced, and seldom known any Troops to stand it out, as may be thought
that time, in competition for victory: for we know that the ordering of our
Horse, in making a large Front, as occasion and ground will give leave, and
thereby over-winging our Enemies Battalia, has proved Victorious.

And whereas they allege when they are six and eight in File, they can make
their body to show powerful against their Enemy by commanding them to double
their Fronts by their Middle-men (or half-file-leaders) and can if occasion
serve take away a party in the rear, and file the Enemy in their Flank, or
Flanks, etc. But this I conceive to be dangerous and of ill consequence: for
when we are settled in Battalia three deep, we are then fixed for service, and
need not be troubled in doubling of the Front, thereby we are free from
distraction, and other disturbances which are most incident by sudden motions
to the breaking of Ranks and the like, which contrariwise is with us; for our
fighting is not by wheeling off as formerly, but by charging at Pistols length,
and so to charge through; every man betaking himself to his Sword; or otherwise
as occasion shall serve: For when we assault our Enemy with our Carabines, and
if time will permit it with one Pistol, what need have we of such tedious
firing by Files or by Ranks, I showed those firings only for exercise sake.
which the experienced Soldier thinks useless; for when our Horse are in a
readiness for execution, they must fire entire, which I conceive to be most
offensive: except the Enemy retreates, and wheels off, there will be but little
use of a second Pistol.

Tacticks of Aelian. 107.
There was also among the Grecians used diverse forms of Buttalia's, called
Rombes of Horse, and a wedge of Horse.

rombes of horse The Rombes were according to these Figures.



Some were made of Files and Ranks, some neither filing nor ranking, others
ranking but not filing; as Captain Ward has set it out at large. Likewise in
those days they used the Wedge, which they accounted to be of more singular
service than the Rombes, and is thus described.

But neither of these being used in our Exercise and Mode of fighting, I shall
give you Euclid's definition of a Rombe. That a Rombe is a square figure that
has the sides equal, but the Angles not right, two of them become sharp and
two of them blunt, etc.

Thus I have passed over the several forms of the Exercise of the Horse,
briefly, both in their facings and Battalia's: and I shall conclude these
Collectives of the Cavalrie, as is needful for the Exercise of a Country
Troop; it being but one part as an Introduction to Military Art.

I need not plead any thing for this Art; In it self it is commendable.
Empiredoms, Kingdoms, Nations, Princes and People can testify enough: no
Nation can subsist without experience in it.

It being asked the question; What part of the world brought forth the most
Valiant men for War? Aelians Tacticks. 38.
Answer was made they were found to be in all places, where youth was bred up
in the shame of Vice, and had audacity to undergo any Peril for Virtues sake.

The Lacedaemonians were accounted the most valiant People of Greece; History
will tell you the reason: Therefore to conclude; None are born Soldiers, one
may have an Inclination to War more than an other, but experience comes not
without Industry; and pardon me if I boldly affirm, that the English Nation
are a Warlike Nation; which if we should neglect our duties herein, the
Commander to be industrious, and the Soldier diligent, we shall make our
selves a by word, (or scorn) to other Nations: And our Gracious Sovereign at a
loss in his designs, and expectations: The more we ingrave this Art in our
minds, the more courage we shall have, and the better enabled to fight for, and
pray,

God save the King.

I cannot but give you the saying of M. T. Cicero, in Commendation of this Art,
above any other Art whatsoever. Rei Militaris virtus, praestat caeteris
virtutibus; and further says after many other reasons to prove the same; That
all other Arts do rest in safety under the Banners of this

Art Military.

THE ART OF DRILLING Or New Mode of EXERCISING A Foot-Company.

BEING Collective Instructions Methodically composed, with their several
Figures, for the young Soldier.

By Capt. Thomas Venn.

LONDON, Printed 1672.

TO THE Honorable RALPH STAWEL ESQUIRE, One of the Deputy Lieutenants of the
County of SOMERSET, and Colonel of a Regiment of Foot in the same.
AS it has been your Pleasure to accept of the Command of a Regiment of Foot,
so it is your design to have it complete, for Officers, Men (and Arms) that
they should be well disciplined in Military Art; and being commanded to serve
you in the same, I thought it my duty to present to your view some Collections
and other Observations in the Art Military, for the Exercise of the Foot: and I
am confident of your Honors care to see what ever is, or may be amiss in your
Regiment, to be completed, not only in the certainty of your men, but also for
some certain days to be allotted over and above two or three days Musters,
(that are only for the Muster-masters due,) for your Commanders to be empowered
for to appoint some private Exercisings, for the better fitting and preparing
of your soldiers for public services: To which end I may presume to say, that
what I have presented you with, is none of the least or worst parts of Military
Order; which if it passes my Countries acceptance, by your favorable
countenancing of it, I may give it a Supplement to make it completer, not
destroying my Title, as he who did supplement Mr Elton's complete Body: Yet I
would not have the Eltonist take it amiss, that most of our Worthy Cruso's
Works are Verbatim supplemented to his complete Body of Art Military to make it
complete, etc.

Sir, I have not Embellished this with curiosity of Language, but rendered it
for the meanest capacity, that none may be wanting in the Rudiments of Military
Discipline; which diligently looked into, will make the younger sons of Mars
the better able to perform their Duty when ever his Majesty shall call for it.
And now most Noble Sir, True Heir of Honor and Virtue; your Pardon for my
boldness, and your favorable construction of my weak endeavors, commands me
to subscribe an obligement by the title of

SIR, Your faithful and Obedient Captain, T.V.

Verses.
FOr your experience in this Art of War,
With silence hear what your Instructions are.
Perform your Postures with a manly grace,
Observe your distances, and learn to face
To right, and left about, and as you were,
By Division, Entire and Anguler;
Then to your doublings of your depth and length,
When you perceive your Army wants strength:
Inverting Files, converting of your Ranks,
Brings ablest men in Front, or Rear, or Flanks:
Your Counter-marches, you must next perform
(Of dangerous use in fight in field, or storm)
The Chorean and Lacedemonian,
And the faining Macedonian:
Then last of all your motions, learn to wheel,
Which does conclude this Martial Art to Drill.
Wherein, were all our Trained Bands well skilled,
They Would leave their Ground, to march into the Field;
And not be scared and frighted with Alarms,
For want of use in Handling of their Arms;
Which Bingham, Hexham, Barriff, Elton, Ward,
And many others too (as I have heard)
Besides my self, who now have written part,
That from us all, you may learn all this Art:
And were I worthy, humbly should advise
Our Lord Lieutenant, and their Deputies,
To charge their Muster-master, when they view
Defaults of Arms, contempt of Persons too,
To see their Arms to be the Persons own,
And not then borrowed, only to be shown,
And muster in Person, to fight by spell
Against our Foes, or Traitors that rebel:
Of whom our Church, or State, cannot be afraid
With fixed Arms, and ready men well paid;
Which will Restore to England and its Crown
The Subjects Honor, and their King's Renown.
Military Observations FOR THE EXERCISE OF THE FOOT.
CHAP. I. By way of Introduction.
HAving passed some few Collectives to the service of the Horse, I was desired
to do the like for the foot; figuring out each Command, or platform after the
proportion of Six in File, which is according to our late Mode of discipline.

There have been many Books writ of this Military Art, in the Exercise of the
Foot, both ancient and Modern; but of our later writers, I referr our new
commissioned Gentlemen to the perusal of Bingham, Hexham, Barrife and Ward; I
would not have Elton (although a Parliament Officer) wholly to be laid aside;
for I have received informations of the great Worth and parts of the Gentleman.

To them whose experience have been their masterpiece, I am silent; desiring
with all submission rather to learn from such, than presume to direct.

Those Gentlemen are to be commended that will bestow time in reading of this
Art, but especially such as put in practice what they read; which is the
readiest way to make men fit for the service of their King and Country: For
what makes a man more confidently Courageous, than knowledge?

There are many Gentlemen that are greater Readers of the Wars, than
Practitioners of the same; who have had some cavelling disputes, about the
discipline thereof; not considering the great change that time has made, and
experience has found out in Martial affairs.

In the reading of the Roman and Grecian Orders, Discipline, and Government of
their Armies, I had thought to have given you a taste thereof, but deserving a
better Pen than mine to set forth the Gallantry of them, I shall be silent: And
yet if it were possible to renew them, it would never work the like effect, as
it did against their Enemies; One great cause thereof is supposed, that they
made better pay-men in those days; Vice was severely punished, Virtue most
bountifully rewarded: and when the Wars were ended, such as deserved well, were
both regarded and rewarded; or else remained enrolled in pensionary pay; so by
that means the Exercise of Arms continued. It is to be observed that where
Payment and Reward cease, there Discipline and good Order cease also.

As for the Exercise of Arms belonging to the Infantry, it is the part of the
young Soldier to learn and practice, in the first place, the Postures, and
well handling of Arms: Which I may term to be the single Accidence of this
Art, before he enters his Syntaxis: and it must be done by endeavoring to set
some time apart for the exercise thereof.

There have been many that have not only disputed, but have writ against the
many Postures now used; but being shamefully confuted by our Modern Writers I
shall be silent; and proceed to those Postures belonging to such Arms that
are now in use in the Country, which are far short of what is complete in
Exercise in the Cities of London and Westminster, and therein of those
Honorable Societies of the Artillery and Military Gardens, and also now of
late (The Criple) with out Criplegate.

CHAP. II. Of the postures of the Pike and Musket.
BEfore I give you the postures of them both, I shall give you a brief
definition of a Posture.

A Posture is a mode or Garb that we are fixed unto, in the well handling of
our Arms: In which there are motions attendant unto the same for the better
grace.

Presupposing your company to be in the Field and drawn up in a ready way for
Exercise, then the best way, is to Exercise them apart, by drawing of the body
of Pikes from their Muskets; that each may be Exercised in their particular
Postures by themselves.

Only there are some Postures of the Pike and Musket which are answerable to
each other by conformity; which ought to be performed in a Body, or upon a
March, as occasion serves: as for Example.

In Marching, All are to be shouldred; In Trooping, or in any other Motion, the
Pikes are to be advanced, and the Muskets poysed: In Porting of the Pike, the
Musket to be rested; In Trailing of the Pike, the Musket to be reversed;
which is the Funeral Posture: When the Pike is Cheek'd, the Musket is to be
rested at the Sentinel Posture; when the Musket is presented to fire, the Pike
is to be charged; And when the Pike is Ordered, most commonly; (especially in a
stand or for Exercise) the butt end of the Musket is to be set to the Ground
etc.

(...) is most proper for the Captain to Exercise the Pikes himself: I do not
deny but he may Exercise both; as he ought sometimes to do: and the Ensign and
Lieutenant are not to be negligent herein when they are commanded, or in the
absence of their superior Officer.

The next for the Exercise of the Pike, in point of Antiquity and Honor, the
Gentleman of the Pikes craveth the precedence.

I have declared in the Exercise of the Horse, what an excellent Virtue,
Silence is; which ought in the first place to be commanded; and most diligently
observed.

The Body of Pikes from their March, and standing all shouldered, Command as
follows.

1. Order your Pikes, to your 1. open 2. close
order.

This ought to be made use of always upon a stand: And in the daytime it may
serve for a Sentinel Posture: And for the abatement of the fury of the Horse,
having the butt end of the Pike on the inside of the right foot, Charge then to
the Horse, drawing your swords over your left arm, having your Pike in your
left hand, you may then receive them by Commanding; either to Charge to the
Front, Right, Left, Reere, 1. Order your Pikes. 2. Put up your swords.



This is only useful upon a stand of Pikes; and by some able Soldiers it is
not thought to be the securest charging against the Horse, or of strength to
make the greatest resistance in their full Career. Therefore it has been
thought fit to be most convenient, to close your files to your close Order, and
Ranks closing forward, and being thus semented (as it were) will be the better
able to ward any resistance.

From your Order, Advance Shoulder Port Comport Cheek Traile
your Pikes.

Order as you were.

From your Order charge to the Front, Right, Left, Reere.
Order as you were.

2. Advance your Pikes.

This is useful upon all occasions when the Drum shall beat a Troop. It is also
useful in all motions of Doublings, etc. Only remember when they are reduced
they put themselves, or be commanded into the same Posture the standing Party
was in.

From your Advance, Shoulder Port Comport Cheek Trail
your Pikes.

Advance as you were:

From your Advance, charge to the Front, Right, Left, Rear.


Advance as you were.

3. Shoulder your Pike.

This is useful and most proper upon a March: It is useful in time of fight,
provided the Pikes be upon a stand, for it does not only preserve the Pikes
from shattering, but the Soldier also.

From your shoulder, Port Comport Cheek Trail.
your Pikes.

Shoulder as you were.

From your shoulder, charge to the Front, Right, Left, Rear.


Shoulder as you were.

4. Port your Pikes.

This is useful when the Soldiers are to enter either Gate or Sally-port; and
it is an ease for the Rear half Files to Port their Pikes when the Front is at
their Charge.

From your Port, Comport Cheek Trail
your Pikes.

Port as you were.

From your Port, charge to the Front, Right, Left, Rear.


Port as you were.

5. Comport your Pikes.

This is necessary for a Soldier upon his March up a Hill, to have his Pike
Comported.

From your Comport, Cheek Trail
your Pike.

From your Comport, charge to the Front, Right, Left, Rear.


Comport as you were.

6. Cheek your Pikes.

This is useful for the Sentinel Posture.

From your Cheek, Trail your Pikes.

Cheek as you were.

From your Cheek, charge to the Front, Right, Left, Rear.


Cheek as you were.

7. Trail your Pikes.

This is useful in a Trench to move for security of any breach undiscovered;
and is seldom used else, but marching through a Wood, etc.

From your Trail, charge to the Front, Right, Left, Rear.


Trail as you were.

From your Trail, Order your Pikes.

8 Lay down your Pikes.

Oberve that if your Pikes be laid down when you begin your exercise, then your
Command must be -- 1. Handle 2. Raise
your Pike to your Open order, Order, Close order, etc.


You may observe that the Postures of the Pike, some are for convenience, and
ease to the Soldier, as to expedition either in Marchings, or other services
commanded; and the several charges serve either for defense or offense; none
ought to slight any of these Commands, but to put them into practice; for at
some one time or other they may be useful.

Here follows the Postures of the Musket, or Calliver.

In which, I do affirm, that the word of Command generally used (Make ready) is
no Posture, but a word for brevity presupposing the Soldier to be expert in
all, and does include those postures precedent to that (Present your Musket)
and so from the Presenting of your Muskets the other postures following unto
that (Give fire) which is the completement of all the rest of the Commands
given.

Therefore for the better handling of Arms no Judicious Practitioner in this
Art but will confess, it is better to be Instructed from Posture to Posture for
more comely, and swifter execution thereof.

The Musquetteer being shouldered Command

Snap-haunce. Sloop your Muskets. Let slip your Muskets. 1. Vnshoulder your
Musket, and Poyse. 2. Palm or rest your Musket. 3. Set the Butt end of your
Musket to the ground. 4. Lay down your Musket. 5. Take off your Bandeliers.
6. Lay down your Bandeliers. 7. Face about to the left and march. 8. Face about
to the right and march to your Arms, (or stand to your Arms.) 9. Take up your
Bandeliers. 10. Put on your Bandeliers. 11. Take up your Musket. 12. Rest (or
Palm) your musket. 13. Secure (or Guard) your cock. 14. Draw back your hammer,
(or steel.) 15. Clear your pan. 16. Prime your pan. 17. Put down your steel,
(or hammer.) 18. Blow, or cast off your loose corn. 19. Bring or cast your
musket about to your left side. Handle your Charger. Open your Charger.
20. Charge with Powder. 21. Draw forth your scowring stick. 22. Shorten your
scowring stick. 23. Charge with Bullet. 24. Put your scouring stick into your
Musket. 25. Rain home your charge. 26. Withdraw your scouring stick. 27.
Shorten your scouring stick. 28. Return your scouring stick. 29. Bring forward
your Musket and poise. 30. Palm (or rest) your Musket. 31. Fit your hammer,
or steel. 32. Free your cock. 33. Bend your cock. 34. Present your Musket. 35.
Give fire. 36. Palm (or rest) your Musket. 37. Clear your Pan. 38. Shut your
Pan. 39. Poyse your Musket. 40. Shoulder your Musket.
Match-lock.

I need not here insert every Command, but only add such as are used for the
Match-lock, wholly laying aside the rest.

Take your Match from between the fingers of your left hand.

Lay down your Match.

Take up your Match with your right hand.

Return (or place) your Match into your left hand.

Open your Pan. Clear your Pan. Prime your Pan. Shut your Pan.
Draw forth your Match.

Blow your Coal.

Cock your Match. Fit your Match.
Guard your Pan.

Blow the ash from your Coal.

Open your Pan.

Uncock, and return your Match.

So you are ready for a March; or in the Posture upon the first motion.

That which is called the Saluting Posture, is to be performed from the resting
(or palming) of the Musket; when he shall have an occasion: as a Soldier to
salute his Friend, or to the honoring of any other person deserving.

And the Sentinel Posture, is for the Musket to be in the Palm of the left
hand, at his Resting posture: But his Musket to be charged with Powder and
Bullet, his Cock freed, and to be secured with his Thumb, so to be ready to
execute his charge, and commands given, etc.

There is indeed a word of Command sometimes used, Reverse your Musket; which
is the marching Funeral Posture; That is to put the butt end of your Musket
upwards, under your left arm, holding it in your left hand, about the lock of
your Musket. Thus I have finished the Postures of the Musket or Caliver with
a Snap-hance, and with a Match-lock without a Rest; for your further inquiry,
if there need be, I refer you to Lieutenant Barriffe or Captain Ward.

If I should forget to say something of the excellency as to the use of the
Half-Pike and Musket, that is now of use in the Artillery Garden; Half-Pike.
first invented by Lieutenant Barriffe and Mr John Davis of London; whatsoever
is performed in the exercise thereof, it is with greater ease than the Rest and
Musket is.

And knowing how far it has been the care of many Soldiers, by invention to
make the Musquetteers, as well defensive as offensive, but none amongst many of
their Projects was received like this, all falling to the ground, and this
standing as the best, being of most excellent service; for it serves as a
Rest; as a Pallisado to defend the Musquetteer from the Horse: When the shot is
all spent they may with that Weapon, fall in among the Enemy, and in the
pursuit of an Enemy, by reason of the lightness thereof, and their nimbleness
in Action, may do great execution; and in Trenches they are good seconds for
the Soldiers preservation.

Those Soldiers that are thus Armed are the best to be commanded out upon any
Party, because they are the best able to defend themselves and offend their
Enemies: And when any hedges are to be lined with shot, West Country.
that the Musquetteers by their forced service become silent, and the ways deep
and narrow; then the Half-Pike will be of singular service.

And last of all the Sould^er so marching with his Half-Pike and Musket; It is
not only a Grace to the Soldier but a Terror to the Enemy: Besides this has
been apapproved of by some of the ablest Soldiers in this Kingdom. Vic.
Wimbaldon, Sir Tho. Genham.
If once the Country saw the practice of it, and what a strong preservation it
is against the incursion of the Horse, and in all other respects rather an
advantage to the Soldier than disadvantageous to him; it would be not only
esteemed good but carefully put into practice.

As the Musquetteer is secured by the gallant invention of the Half-Pike; Bow
and Pike.
any strange eye would think it very unjust that such Numbers of the Pike-men
should be slain by the shot, and not able to resist and offend again; I could
therefore say much for the Long Bow to be joined with the Pike, how their
showers of Arrows will gaul and terrify the Horse, wound and hurt the
Soldiers both on Horse and Foot; So if this should be duly performed all hands
would be fighting, and all in a readiness for self preservation. History is
full of the great slaughters and Achievements in those days, when the Bow was
most in use; but because it is laid aside I shall be silent, hoping the
practice will never be forgotten.

CHAP. III. The Places of Dignities both of Files and Ranks.
IN this Military Age, who would have thought that few or any could be so
ignorant of the difference between a File and a Rank; but finding in our Annual
Exercises many (Farmor like) Soldiers to be much guilty thereof, I shall speak
a a little thereunto; showing what is required to the making up of a File, and
also of a Rank, with the dignity of each as they stand both in File and Rank.

A File.
First, Know that a File is a sequent Number of men, standing one behind an
other Front to the Rear.

Or from the first which is termed a File-Leader, unto the last which is termed
a bringer up, which shall be demonstrated according to our mode of Discipline.

A Rank.
Secondly, A Rank is a Row of men be they more or less, standing or marching,
shoulder to shoulder in a direct Line from the right hand to the left, (and
from the left to the right) even a breast.

And by the way observe that in all preparations to exercise, Files must be
made up first, and being then drawn forth, and the Files joined together, Ranks
are made.

ranks and files

Both which are according to Barriffe, Ward, and others; but in giving their
Dignities to a file of eight deep there are various opinions, yet all
endeavoring after a Geometrical proportion; and it is that which Commanders
should chiefly follow as near as possibly they can.

And because the Sages of our Times do differ in their Judgments, more in this
particular than in any one thing that I know of; I shall set down what Rules I
have know or heard, leaving it to the more experienced that can command better.

Here follows the Rule of Barriffe, Ward, and others in placing the
Dignities, for six, eight, and ten, both in File and Rank.

ranks and files

I shall here insert those various Opinions of the Dignities of Soldiers eight
in File, and so for eight Companies in a Regiment; by all which you may
dignifie each Officer in his due place of Honor; either in March, or in a
Body: The consideration that there is, or ought to be an answerableness in the
Rear to the Front, in the left flank to the right, by an equitable right in
their true Dignity, is that which gives life and being to orderly Discipline;
for the worth of one must be answerable to the other in Skill, Valor, and in
Number.

This amongst the Graecians was anciently put into practice, as you may see at
large in the Notes of Captain Bingham upon the Tacticks of Aelian; and
described after this proportion. ranks and files Two and three on the left
hand, is equal in Number to four and one on the right, each making but five in
Number; as it is thus in a little Number, so it may and ought to be made good
in a greater.

ranks and files

The equality in this opposition is thus; As (1) and (4) makes five in the
Colonels Division, so (3) and (2) in the Lieutenant Colonels Division makes
five also: Then as in the first (5) and (8) makes thirteen; so the second (7)
and (6) is thirteen, which is an equal opposition.

As informed Mr. Elton's Rule.
A Second Opinion for the Dignity of eight Companies, is as follows.

ranks and files

These oppose as the first, and somewhat more in the equality of their Number;
as one and six is seven in the right Wing of the Colonels Division, so two and
five is equal to that in the right Wing of the Lieutenant Colonels Division;
and six and seven is equally thirteen, in the first, as five and eight in the
second.

But according to the Rules for the Dignity of a File, the second Captain has
lost his place of Honor.

For those of that Opinion who place the second Captain in the Lieutenant
Colonels Division, affirm that there may be a Geometrical equality (in length
and breadth) in File and Rank; yet in point of Honor according to first Rule
in the Colonels Division, the second Captain being placed loses his Dignity;
for if the eldest Captain in priority is placed upon the Head or first
Division, Body or stand of Pikes, leading the Colonels Colors, then by the
self same Rule of Equity, the second Captain Numb. (5) may and ought to be in
the head of the Lieutenant Colonels Division, Body or stand of Pikes.

To which I conclude that the second Captain has as much Honor to bring up
the Rear of the Colonels own Division of Pikes when so marched; but if marched
(entire) Regimentally, there to bring up the Rear of the whole Body or stand of
Pikes is a greater Honor, and the second Captains Dignity.

A third Opinion for the Dignity of eight Companies.

ranks and files

This is the most received Opinion of the other two of late years, and the
Reasons may be as follows: First, their opposement is more upon a direct
equality than the former, as for example, 1 and 8 stands upon the right Wing of
the Colonels Division which makes 9; now equally to oppose this there is 3 and
6 on the left Wing of the Lieutenant Colonels Division, that makes 9 also;
then upon the Right Wing of the Colonels Division there is 4 and 5 that makes
9; and to oppose that there is 2 and 7 which is 9 also; all this makes out the
justness of this opposement, and in that particular exceeds both the former,
for what can be said for the second may be alleged for this third also.

The differences in them as to their opposements may hereby be discerned, and
how that all three make equal in numbers, as in half Files and half Ranks, 18
is equal to 18, and in Rank and File making (36.)

Indeed when the Seignior Officers of a Regiment had more Soldiers in their
respective Companies, there was then great reason to stand upon an equal
opposement; or else one Wing might be too strong for the other.

All this being now laid aside and there being of Soldiers an equality of
number in each company, why then should our first rule for the dignity of a
File be laid aside for the marching of a Regiment either entire or divisional?
In the second Opinion the second Captain is placed in the Lt. Colonel's
divisions in the third he is placed in the Colonels; although I conceive he
ought to be in that Division yet he is there misplaced: for by the same rule in
the second and third Opinion, as you place the Colonel in the Dignity of a
file leader, the Lieutenant Colonel has his Dignity in the place of a Bringer
up, the Major in the place of the half File leader, the first Captain in the
place of the Bringer up to the Front half-files: Thus far all three jointly go
together, and because there is no difference in number of men, but equal in
both parties, they need not stand so much upon an equal opposement, but that
the second Captain Numb. 5. may have his just place of honor immediately next
unto his Colonel.

If it were not for this mode of Dignity according unto a File in the marching
of a Regiment, and so unto a Rank in a Body, I might as well and better require
satisfaction (the number of each Company being equal in Soldiers) why there
may not be two field officers in the Colonels Division as well as in the
Lieutenant Colonels; which I leave to better judgments.

For the proof of my assertion, as joining with Barrife, Ward and others in
apointing the second Captain, whose is the fifth place of Honor next to the
File leader, or next to the Colonels own company both in Rank and File.

Bar. pa. 17.
1. The File leader ought to be the worthiest because he has the Command of his
File, and marches first against the Enemy.

2. The Bringer up ought to be the second place of Honor, because his place of
March is in the rear; and is in most danger, should the Enemy charge on that
part.

3. The half file leader is the third place of Honor, because when the Front
half files are taken off upon any occasion, he is the leader unless he be
commanded to face about.

4. The last man (or Bringer up) of the Front half files is the fourth man in
dignity, for so he is when the Rear Division is taken of.

5. The next man to the File leader has the fifth place of honor, for one
doubling brings him into the Front.

6. The sixth place of Honor is before the Bringer up, for if the Body be faced
about, one doubling brings him into that accidental Front, or keeping of his
proper Front by once doubling he becomes bringer up to the File leader.

7. The seventh Dignity of place is his who marches next after the half file
leader, for when the half files double the Front, or march forth, then one
doubling ranks him even with the Front.

8. The eight place of Honor (the File being but eight in depth) is the third
from the front, for he may be made a File leader also, although it may be with
more trouble, for by countermarching of the Front and Reere into the midst, and
then facing to the first Front, and after doubling of Ranks makes him a File
leader also.

I desire to speak nothing here to tie up the Ingenious to any particular
fancy, when his own reason shall guide him in this Military Discipline, as may
not be irregular and contrary to the rules of Art.

Now each Soldier being well exercised in the Postures of the Pike and
Musket, and knowing their Dignity both in File and Rank, will not stand still
here, but must be laboring to march farther in this field of Military
Discipline, that by the knowledge thereof his undaunted courage might conduct
him to some higher worth or place of Dignity.

CHAP. IV. Of the Drum.
I Come in the next place to advise every Soldier to be careful and endeavor
to know the several Beats thereof, or else he may often fall short of his
Captains Commands.

There are these several Beats to be taken notice of as Military signs, for
the Soldier to walk or guide his actions by; and are termed Semivocall signs,
as you may see in the Horse service, pa. 9.

The several Beats or points of War, are 1. A Call. 2. A Troop. 3. A March.
4. A Preparative. 5. A Battalia. 6. A Retreit.


Besides these six there are two other Beats of the Drum.

7. A Ta-to. 8. A Revally.
The Ta-to is beaten when the Watch is set at the discretion of the Governor;
after which in most places or Garrisons of note, there is a Warning piece
discharged, so that none are to be out of their houses, without the word is
given them, etc.

A Revally is beaten in the morning by day light, at which time the subofficers
are to take off their out Sentinels. It is, when by reason of the great noise
of Guns, men, arms, and Horses, the Commanders voice for it can neither be
heard or obeyed without the beat of the Drum: And the action of the Soldier
whether valiant or otherwise is to be guided by it.

And For the better performance hereof it is the Captains duty to teach his
Soldiers distinctly the several beats of the Drum, that they may be the better
able to perform their respective duties, when ever they shall be so commanded
by the Drum.

CHAP. V. Of Distances.
HErein I shall show you what distance is, and the several sorts of distances:
Without distance no motion can be performed: Although distance in it self is
not motion; yet there is a motion in that action, that produces our several
distances of place, between man and man, or that space or intervall of ground,
either in File, or Rank.

And I may truly assert that the Discipline of a Foot Company, etc. consists
so much in distance, and motion, that there is great necessity of learning
this very principle; for they are not fixed in one station, but are mutually
interchanged one with another, as occasion is offered by command, and so are
all brought into Order by their distances; for if a perfect form of order be
not observed, disorder must necessarily follow; the effect of which produces
confusion*

In our Modern discipline there are these four distances in use.

1. Close Order. 2. Order. 3. Open Order. 4. and Double distance.
1. Close Order which is both in File and rank one foot and half. 2. Order
which is both in File and rank three foot. 3. Open Order which is both in File
and rank six foot. 4. Double distance which is both in File and rank twelve
foot.
There are several distances to be performed in 1. March. 2. Motion. 3.
Skirmish.


1. The distance of marching between File and File is three foot. between Rank
and Rank is six foot.
2. The distance for motion as for doubling of Files, and Ranks, for facings
and Countermarches between File and Rank is six foot. 3. Distances for entire
doublings and skirmishes between Rank and File is three Foot. 4. Distances for
prevention of Cannon shot is 12 Foot, or 24. Foot, the double double distance.

Note that the close Order is useful 1. To the Files of Pikes to the charge of
Horse. 2. Before you Command any Wheelings. 3. When the Commander is to deliver
somewhat to the Soldier that all may hear.


Observe. Before you open or close your body by command to Distance to action;
let every Captain or chief Officer Command his Soldiers to streighten their
Files, and to even their Ranks: In the next place to be silent that thereby
they may be attentive to the words of Command,

Which for the several distances are as follows.

Commands. 1. Files. to your close Order. 2. Ranks. to your close Order.
there might be abreviated into a shorter method but my intents is for plain
capacities.
1. Files open to the right. 1. To your Order. 2. To your open Order. 3. To your
double distance.
2. Ranks open forward. 1. To your Order. 2. To your open Order. 3. To your
close Order.
3. Files open to the Left. 1. To your Order. 2. To your open Order. 3. To your
double distance.
4. Ranks open to the rear, (or) backwards. 1. To your Order. 2. To your open
Order. 3. To your double distance
5. Files open to the right and left. 1. To your Order. 2. To your open Order.
3. To your double distance.
6. Ranks open to the right and left. 1. To your Order. 2. To your open Order.
3. To your double distance.



Reducements. 1. Files close to the right. 1. To your open Order. 2. To your
Order. 3. To your close Order.
2. Ranks open forward. 1. To your open Order. 2. To your Order. 3. To your
close Order.
3. Files close to the left. 1. To your open Order. 2. To your Order. 3. To
your close Order.
4. Ranks close to the rear. etc. 1. To your open Order. 2. To your Order. 3.
To your close Order.
5. Files close to the right and left inward, (or) to the midst. 1. To your
open Order. 2. To your Order. 3. To your close Order.
6. Ranks close to the right and left inward. 1. To your open Order. 2. To your
Order. 3. To your close Order.



These are useful and may be used at the discretion of the Commander.

And for your better performance in the closing and opening of Files and Ranks,
take these following Observations.

1. When Files open to the right, the left, hand File must stand fast; every
File taking his distance from the File next his left hand.

2. When they open to the left the right hand File stands fast, etc.

3. When Ranks open forward, the last rank stands; every rank taking his
distance from the rank next behind him.

4. When they open backward, (or to the rear) the first rank stands; etc.

5. When Files close to the right, the right hand file stands, the rest close
to the right, taking their distance from the right hand file.

6. And if Files close to the left, the left hand file stands; the rest of the
Files close to the left, and take their distance, etc.

7. When Files close to the right and left, then they close inward, taking
their distance from those Files within them, nearest to the midst of the Body.

8. When files close to the right and left by Division, it must be outward,
according to the fifth and sixth observation.

9. When Ranks close to the front and rear, then the first and last Ranks
stand; the other taking their distance.

10. If Ranks close to the midst then they close toward their two midlemost
Ranks.

I have not used the word [Center] in any of these Commands, because it is
conceived that the word is more proper to a circle, and not to a square, (or a
broader fronted body.)

It is not of absolute necessity that a Commander in the exercise of a private
Company shall use all these openings, and closings to those several distances
mentioned; but so many of them, as may be thought fit for his present Exercise
intended; although it cannot be denied but that they may be useful at some time
or other.

CHAP. VI. Of Marching and Drawing up of a Company.
THe Soldier being informed of the Dignity of Place, together with the several
Beats of the Drum; and their respective distances: I shall march a Company of
Foot, and draw them up: which Company shall consist of twelve Files; four Files
of Pikes, and eight Files of Musketeers.

But the Deputy Lieutenants for the County of Sommerset have allotted some
files more to each Company, and it is a rare thing to have them complete in the
Field, so that it has been too apparent, because there has not been an
equality in Files, their Companies have been wholly unfit for Exercise; but I
hope these errors will be better looked into and amended hereafter.

ranks and files A Company marching.

A Company drawing up.

Files are to be at their Order, and Ranks at their open Order.

When the Company is drawing up, the Drum is to beat a Troop, the Pikes to be
advanced, the Muskets to be poised; and being in a Body are ready for Command.



ranks and files A Company drawn up.



A number of Men being thus drawn up, and completed (consisting of Pikes and
Muskets) there is in them according to the rules of Art; a Front, a Rear, a
right and left Flank; Front half files; Rear half files; Right half ranks, and
left half ranks; there is the length and depth of the Battle, and these are
extended in their number of men.

ranks and files

The front in this Figure is first of all to be taken notice of: There are in
all exercises a proper Front and an accidental Front: the Company being drawn
up and standing in a body, with faces to their leader, makes a proper Front.

Vide Chap. of facings.
And the accidental front is as the Cheifetains shall command the face of the
whole body: In short the front is where the faces of the Company are directed
one way.

The first Rank, or row of men, they are termed File leaders; who have the
command of their respective Files, and are to Exercise them severally.

Observe, that from, and with the right hand file leader, to and with the left
hand file leader, is the extent of the Front, and is termed the length of the
Battle.

And the Soldiers standing severally from and with their File leaders in a
sequence to and with their Bringers up are termed Files, or the depth of the
Battle.

The Rear of the body is so termed, where ever the back of the Company are
turned.

Every File leader has his bringer up, that by death or other absence, next in
point of honor is to succeed them, both in Place and power: The extent and
length of the Rear (last rank or bringers up) is the same with the Frontiers.

The right and left Flanks, are the outmost Files upon either hand of the body
from the Front to the bringers up.

There is in a body drawn up front half files and Rear half files; the Front
half files extend themselves (three in depth) to and with the third Rank; and
the Rear half files is the fourth Rank to and with the last, both which have
their extents divided in the whole length, and depth of the body.

Half Ranks are from the midst of the Files so taking their length, or bounds
to the outmost man or file leader, either upon the right or left hand.

CHAP. VI. Of Facings.
SOme have thought that Facings are but of little use, so that a commander
might dispense with the Exercise thereof. There being a mistake in such, I must
declare,

That facings are very necessary, and of such excellent use, as in no wise to
be neglected; for in service, their executions are quicker than other motions,
and may be performed when other commands cannot be used both for time and place.

The Body being faced (or the faces of the Body) is termed an aspect, and being
particularly turned by command makes an accidental front, which is called a
facing.

So that in short, facing is the turning and altering of the aspect to either
hand, Front or Rear, as may appear in the several commands following.

In which we must understand that facings are either Entire or Divisional.


There are Angular facings also.

1. Entire Facing is when the aspect of the company is directed one way.

There are four entire facings, besides Angular.

Command. Face to the 1. Right. Each man is to turn upon that foot to which
hand the facing is commanded, wheeling the Body to that Aspect. When you face
to any hand, you may reduce them to the contrary.
2. Left. 3. Right about. 4. Left about.


To reduce them, Command: As you were: or, To your Leader.

Angular, facings are when directed to make their Aspects to the right or left
corner men; (that is, to the right or left Angle.) And so if you command to the
four corners, it is to face them to their four Angles, which is Divisional.

Command: Face to the Right Left
Angle.

To reduce them, Command: As you were: or, To your leader.

These Angular facings are not so much in use as formerly.

Divisional facings are contrary to the Entire, for they look diverse ways.
Which are

Command: Face to the 1. Right and left. 2. Right and left inward. 3. Four
Angles.


To reduce them: As you were: or, To your leader.

It is necessary that the half files do many of these commands by themselves,
that they may the better understand it, when the body shall come to be
subdivided. For Angular facings, they are out of use, or not so much in use as
formerly.

By most Authors facings are to be performed at open order both in Rank and
File: But it is also necessary to exercise the Soldier in these facings at
close Order: for if a Soldier should be assaulted in a straight or narrow
passage that he has neither time, nor ground to receive it, either by
doublings, Counter-marches or wheelings, they stand at their Order, or close
Order; may then by their particular facings defend themselves against any such
assault and with wore ease so charge their Enemy by some of these facings, than
by any other motion.

Facings are not to be slighted, but carefully to be observed and practiced;
they are the groundwork of Military discipline, for all motions have relation
in one respect or another to them.

There are two facings, square as follows, set down in their platformes, See
Barrife and Ward, etc.
because they are not only useful but may serve as demonstrations of the former.

Command: The two first Ranks stand; the two last Ranks face about; the rest of
the body face to the right and left, and march all.

ranks and files

To reduce them; Command. 1. Face about to the right, march and close your
Divisions. 2. Face to your leader, who stands at his proper front.


Figure 2. Command. 1. Musquetteers face to the right and left. 2. Half Files
of Pikes face about to the right. 3. March all.


ranks and files

To reduce them. Command. 1. Face all about to the right, march and close your
divisions. 2. Face all to your Leader.


By this little you may perceive much of the Nature of Facings, and how useful
they are toward the making of the Soldier apt and perfect in other motions.

I shall proceed to the Nature of doublings with the several branches, or parts
of them.

CHAP. VII. Of Doublings.
IT is allowed by the Judicious that they are most necessary and completely
useful for the strengthening any part of the Battle as occasion and discretion
shall command.

All which consist in these two Generals. 1. Doublings of Length, 2. Doublings
of Depth,
All times in quantity of Number; sometimes in Number and place.

The several sorts of doublings are as follows, 1. Of ranks. 2. Of half
files. 3. Of bringers up. 4. Of the rear. 5. Of files. 6. Of half ranks.


1. The doubling of Ranks is when every Rank double the odd. 2. Half Files are
said to be doubled, when they shall double their Ranks into the Front. 3.
Bringers up are said to be doubled, when they shall double their Ranks into the
Front. 4. The doubling of the Rear is when the Front half file doubles the
Rear. 5. The doubling of files is when even files double the odd. 6. The
doubling of half ranks is when one rank shall double the other.
And that is performed by Passing through. Countermarches. Entire, or
divisional doublings.


The doubling of Ranks, half files or bringers up into the Front is a doubling
of quantity, or number, and not of place.

But the doubling of ranks entire, or for to double the front by half files
entire, either to the right or left, or by Division; It makes not only a
doubling in quantity and of place, but lengthens the battle also.

The doubling of files and half files, or half ranks, or doubling to either
flank, is a doubling in quantity, and not of place.

But the doubling of files, and right half ranks entire, and the depth of the
left flank entire, is not only a doubling of number, but of place and depth of
the battle.

Observe, that all divisional doublings are to be at open Order both in Rank
and File.

Observe, that in all motions they must be performed in three steps; and first
by stepping forth of that foot, which is next to the place named: And for
reducement to return by the contrary hand.

Observe, that in doubling of Ranks, the doubling of Files reduces them; so in
the doubling of Files to any hand, the doubling of Ranks to the contrary hand
reduces them also.

Observe, that in all motions of doublings, that they who are to double, before
they move from their places, are to Advance and Poyse their Arms; and when they
have performed their Commands they are immediately to conform to the same
posture that those whom they double are in; whether it be at shoulder or
advance.

Observe, that all entire doublings are to be performed at Order both in Rank
and File: And in all motions observe your right hand man.

I shall not only give you the words of command for most particular doublings
that may be useful for service with directions for the performance of the same;
with their reducements: And as I have been importuned by some of the Deputy
Lieutenants to add to them their several platforms (or Figures) it is
accordingly performed.

But my chief aim is to demonstrate how a Battalia may be strengthened by
doublings.

And that is either in the 1. Front, 2. Rear, or 3. Both Flanks.


The Front may be strengthened by Entire Doublings, Divisional Doublings, Entire
Wheelings, and Divisional Wheelings.


Of these I shall proceed in their several Orders, showing how entire Doublings
do strengthen the Front.

And that is by 1. Ranks, 2. Bringers up, 3. Half Files.


1. The Front is strengthened by entire Doublings of Ranks.

1. Command. Ranks to the 1. Right or 2. Left
Doubles.

Directions for doubling to the Right, from the left, the even Ranks from the
Front move forward to the Right into the odd Ranks.

ranks and files

To reduce them Command

Files to the left double, (or) Ranks as you were.

The doubling of this Figure to the right does easily make appear what is meant
by doubling to the left, that I need not demonstrate it.

2. Command. Ranks to the right and left double 1. Outward, or 2. Inward.


1. Directions Outward. Even Ranks move outward from the Flanks with three
steps forward into the odd Ranks.

ranks and files

To reduce them: Ranks as you were: Or, Files to the right and left double
inward.

2. Directions inward. The even Ranks move inward from the Flanks with three
steps forward into the odd Ranks.

ranks and files

To reduce them: Ranks as you were; Or, Files to the right and left double
outward.

3. Command. Double your Ranks to the 1. Right 2. Left
Entire.

Directions to the right.

Even Ranks from the Front, face to the right, and march forth until they be
clear of the standing Ranks; then face them to their Leader, and double the odd
Ranks that are standing,

ranks and files If you command them to close their Ranks forward it will be
the same Figure as may be produced by commanding half files to double the front
to the right, the difference being only in quality, not in quantity, vide Fig.
3.



To reduce them Command.

Ranks that doubled, face to the left and march forth into your places.

Or,

Half Ranks of the right, face to the left and double your left Flank.

Or,

Ranks as you were.

4. Command: Double your Ranks inward entire.

Directions. Every even Rank from the Rear, face to the right and left out
wards, and march until they be clear of the standing part; then let every even
Rank from the Front (which is the standing part) move forwards into the Front.

ranks and files

5. Command Double your Ranks to the 1. Right 2. Left
Entire.

Every man placing himself on the outside of his right hand man.

This doubling, is the same in Figure with the third, they differ only in
place, the quantity being the same.
Directions. Every even Rank from the Front, face to the right and march,
placing your selves on the outside of your right hand men.

ranks and files

To reduce them Command. Right half ranks double your left flank each placing
your selves on the inside of his left hand man.

2. Entire doublings for the strengthening of the Front by Bringers-up.

6. Command. Bringers-up double your Front to the 1. Right. 2. Left.


Directions for doubling to the right: Bringers up move forwards with your
right legs, and pass through ranking themselves even with the Front, the rest
following successively and placing themselves even with the standing ranks.

ranks and files

To reduce them Command. Bringers up, or Rear half files face about to the
left, and march into your places.

OR,

Even files from the left double your depth to the left, each fall behind his
accidental bringer-up (or half file-leader.)

When they march into their places, the half file-leaders who were the last
that took their places, now in this reducement must be the first to take their
places.

7. Command. Bringers-up double your Front to the right and left 1. Outward. 2.
Inward.


This I never saw but once in a private Exercise, but I conceive it more out of
curiosity than of necessity. And because it is suitable to the second Command
of Ranks, I need not demonstrate them in Figures; as the even ranks move and
take their respective places in the second Figure, in this the bringers-up are
to be the first movers to the right and left either outward or inwards.

If outward; then it is to be performed from the midst of the Rear from the
right and left into the Front.

To reduce them Command. The odd files from the right and left flank double
your depth to the right and left inwards, every man falling behind his
accidental bringer-up.

If inwards; then it ought to be performed from the flanks to the right and
left inwards even into the Front.

To reduce them Command. The even files from each flank double your depth to
the right and left inwards, all falling behind his accidental bringer-up.

3. Entire doublings for the strengthening of the Front by half-files.

8. Command. Half files double your Front to the 1. Right. 2. Left.


Directions. If to the right, the half file-leaders must pass through (or move
forwards) to the right into the Front, and the succeeding ranks are to follow
them.

ranks and files

To reduce them Command. Even files from the left, double your depth to the
left. Or, Half files face about to the left and march forth into your places.
Or, Half files as you were.

9. Command. Half files double your Front to the right and left 1. Outward. 2.
Inwards.


What I have declared in the seventh Command, I do the same here: However I
shall demonstrate the Command by doubling outward.

1. Directions. It is to be performed from the midst of the half files to the
right and left into the Front.

ranks and files

To reduce this Command. The odd files from the right and left flank double
your depth to the right and left inward.

OR,

Half files face about to the right, and march forth into your places.

2. Directions. If the command be inward, then it is to be performed from the
flanks of the half files, marching even into the Front.

To reduce them Command. Even files from each flank, double your depth to the
right and left outward.

OR,

Half files as you were.

10. Command. Half files double your Front to the 1. Right 2. Left
Entire.

Directions to the right. Half files face to the right and march, until they be
clear of the front half files, then face them to their Leader, and march them
up even with the Front.

ranks and files

To reduce this Command. Half files face about to the right and march forth
into your places.

OR,

Half ranks of the right double the depth of your left flank entire.

11. Command. Half files double your Front inward entire.

Directions. Front half files face to the right and left outward, and march
until they be clear of the Rear half files; then face them to their Leader and
stand. Then let the rear half files march up even into the Front.

ranks and files

To reduce them. Half files upon the entire motion face about and march; Front
half files face to the right and left inward and close your Divisions.

OR,

Rear half files, double the depth of your Front half files entire, face all to
the right and left inward, and close your Divisions.

I have showed you how the Front may be strengthened by entire doublings; I
shall briefly show how it may be by divisional.

The Front is strengthened by divisional Doublings as follows.

12. Command. Double your Ranks to the right and left by Division.

To perform this, Command. Even Ranks from the Front face to the right and left
outward; march forth and double the odd.

ranks and files

To reduce this; half ranks that doubled, face to the right and left inwards,
and march into your places.

13. Command. Half files double your Front by Division.

To perform this: Half files face to the right and left outward, and march
until they be clear of the Front half files, then face them to their Leader;
then move forward and double the Front.

ranks and files

To reduce this Command. Half files face about to the Rear, and march until
they be clear of the Front half files; then, face to the right and left inward,
close your Divisions and face to your Leader.

OR,

The half files that moved double the depth of the Front half files.

14. Command. Double your Ranks to the right and left by Division, every man
placing himself on the outside of his right and left hand man.

To perform this Command. Every even Rank from the Front move forth to the
right and left outward, each man placing himself according as is commanded.

ranks and files

To reduce this Command. The half Ranks that moved double your Files to the
right and left inward; every man placing himself on the inside of his right and
left hand man.

I have hitherto showed how the Front may be strengthened by divisional
Doublings. Now follows how

The Front may be strengthened by entire and Divisional Wheelings.

15. Command. Wheel off your rear half files to the 1. Right 2. Left
Entire into the Front.

To perform this to the right, Command. Half files face about to the right, and
wheel them to the left about, until they be even with the Front.

ranks and files wheeling

To reduce this; Wheel off your half ranks, and double your left flank entire
to the left.

To perform this reducement, let them face to the right; then Command: Right
half ranks, wheel about to the right until they be even a breast with the front
half files: To your Leader.

16. Command. Wheel your Flanks into the Front.

There are diversities of Commands for the production of this Figure, and much
according to the opinion of the Commander. I shall insert them, and leave the
choice thereof to the judicious in this Art.

ranks and files wheeling Wheel your Flanks into the front. Wings into the
front. Front into the battle. Front into the midst. Rear into the flanks.




To reduce any one of them Command. Wheel your flanks into the Rear.

17. Command. Rear half files wheel and double your Front by Division.

To perform this Command. Half files face about to the right, and so wheel off
to the right and left about; moving forwards until they be even with the Front.

ranks and files wheeling

To reduce this Command. Half files that doubled, wheel about to the right and
left inward, and march into your places.

OR,

Half ranks face to the right and left outward; then wheel to the right and
left inward, and double the depth of your Front half files, and face them to
their Leader.

There is some other Wheelings, but I shall not trouble you with them, because
they are more for curiosity than for service, etc.

CHAP. VIII.
I Shall here insert the several preceding Commands for the strengthening of
the Front, wherein, in the closing of some of the Ranks, as may be seen by them
severally, the Figures are one and the same Battalia, in quantity but not in
quality; in number but not in place.

Ranks to the right Double. Command 1. Produces one and the same Figure. 1.
Bringers up double your Front to the right. Comm. 6. Half files double your
Ranks forward to the right. Comm. 8. Ranks to the right and left double first
outward and then inward Comm. 2. Produces one and the same Figure. Bringes up
double your Front to the right and left 1. Outward. 2. Inward.
Comm. 7. Half Files double your Front to the right and left 1. Outward. 2.
Inward.
Comm. 9. 2. Double your Ranks to the right entire Comm. 3. Produces one and
the same Figure. Double your Ranks to the right entire, every man placing
himself on the outside of his right hand man Comm. 5. Half Files double the
front to the right entire Com. 10. Wheel off your Rear half files entire into
the Front Com. 15. 3. Double your Ranks inward entire Comm. 4. Produces one
and the same Figure. Half files double your Front inward entire Com. 11. Double
your Ranks to the right and left by division Com. 12. Half files double your
Front by division Com. 13. Double your Ranks to the right and left by division,
every man placing himself on the outside of his right hand man Com. 14.
Produces one and the same Figure. Rear half files wheel and double your Front
by division Com. 17.

Vide Chap. 11. Chap. 14.

CHAP. IX. How Battalias may ve strengthened in the Rear.
HAving ended with most of those doublings that do strengthen the Front, I
proceed to some few that may strengthen the Rear: I might be as large in them
as the former; but the labor and pains would be of no great necessity, because
all what has been commanded in the Front may by counterchange of them be
performed in the Rear. Therefore I shall only for example sake set down four
Commands, and demonstrate them by their respective figures, and they only shall
be performed by the doubling of half Files, leaving the rest for the delightful
Artist in this pleasing exercise.

1. Command. Front half files double your Rear to the 1. Right. 2. Left.


To perform this: (to the right) Command. Front half files face about to the
left and march directly forwards to the left of the standing part in opposition
even in each rank according to their several places.

ranks and files

If this be commanded for service then face the Rear half files also about to
the left. Then

To reduce them. Face them all to their proper Front, and Command: Double your
files to the right entire advancing.

If it be for a private exercise, Command. Half files face about to the left
and march forth into your places.

2 Command. Front half files double your Rear to the 1. Right 2. Left
entire.

To perform this to the right entire, Command. Front half files face to the
right; march until they be clear of the Rear half files; then face them all to
the Rear, and march them even in breast with the Rear.

ranks and files

To reduce this, Command. Front half files, face about to the right and march
into your places.

OR,

Face all to your leader, then right half ranks double your left flank entire
advancing.

3. Command. Front half files double your Rear by Division.

To perform this, Command. Front half files face to the right and left, and
march until they be clear of the Body, then face them to the Rear, and move
down to the Rear even in breast with the last Rank.

ranks and files

If this be for service you may face them all to the Rear. If only for Exercise
you may reduce them, as they now stand; by Commanding,

Front half files face about to the right and advance forwards, until they are
clear of the standing part, then face them to the right and left inwards; and
close your Divisions.

4. Command. Front half files double your Rear to the 1. Right 2. Left
by Countermarch.

To perform this; If the Command given for the left; face the standing half
files to the Rear, and the rest Countermarch to the left and lose ground.

But if it be only for Exercise you need not face the standing part to the Rear
at all.

ranks and files

To reduce this (as being only for Exercise) Command. Front half files face
about to the left and march forth into your places.

But if it be upon service that they are all faced to the Rear, then all upon
the Reducement, are to face about to the left; and the front half files to
march into their places.

Object. But Some may object here, and say; that this is a countermarch, and no
doubling, and so ought not to be demonstrated in this place.

Answ. To which I answer; that what is done by the Front half files, in short
is a Lacedemonian Countermarch, (of losing ground;) but if it were a direct
countermarch, they ought not to stand mixed with any other part of the body, by
passing through to the Rear, but only to Countermarch into the midst and there
remain; so that now passing through into the Rear makes it an absolute doubling.

What I have mentioned in the beginning of this Chapter may be sufficient to
the ingenious Artist, having concluded what I intended for the strengthening of
the Rear.

I thought to have inserted here a strengthening of the Front and Rear, but
being in the Chapter of Wheelings, Command the tenth, the inquisitive may be
better satisfied.

CHAP. VI. Which is the last in order to show, how a Battalia may be
strengthened in both Flanks.
THe Flanks are doubled by 1. Files. 2. Half ranks. 3. Division. 4. Wheelings.


1. First by Files.

1. Command. Files to the Right or Left
double.

If to the left to perform this, Command. Every even ranks from the left, move
with three steps into the odd.

ranks and files

To reduce this, Command. Ranks to the right double.

OR,

Files as you were. In all motions observe to move that leg first, to which the
Command guides.

2. Command. Files to the 1. Right. or 2. Left.
double advancing.

To perform this, if to the right, Command. Every even file from the right
advance three steps forward and double the odd.

ranks and files

To reduce this Command. Ranks to the left double.

OR,

Files as you were.

3. Command. Files to the right and left double outward.

In doubling outward, the outmost File of each Flank stands, and the even File
each flank doubles the odd.

ranks and files

To reduce this Command. Double your Ranks to the right and left inwards.

OR,

Ranks as you were.

4. Command. Files to the right and left double Inward.

ranks and files

To reduce this Command. Double your Ranks to the right and left outward.

OR,

Ranks as you were.

5. Command. Double your Ranks to the 1. Right and 2. Left 1. Outward
advancing. 2. Inwards.



This will be performed as in the third and fourth Command, only instead of
falling behind their right or left hand men, here they are to advance before
them as in the second Command.

6. Command. Double your Files to the 1. Right or 2. Left
entire advancing.

To perform this, to the right. The even files from the right advance so far
until they be clear and double the odd files to the right.

ranks and files

To reduce this, Command. Files that doubled face about to the left and march
forth into your places.

OR,

Front half Files double your Rear to the left.

OR,

Half Files double your Front to the right.

7. Command. Double your files to the 1. Right or 2. Left
Entire advancing, every man placing himself before his leader.

To perfom this, to the right.

ranks and files wheeling

The reducement. Command. Front half Files face about to the left and march
forth into your places.

OR,

Front half files, turn off by countermarch, and double your Re ex to the
right: Face all to your leader.

8. Command. Files double your depth to the right entire.

To perform this, Command. Even files from the right face about to the right,
and march until they are clear of the Rear, placing themselves after their
bringers up; then face them to their leader.

ranks and files

To reduce this, Command. Half files double your Front to the left.

OR,

Front half files double your Rear to the right.

9. Command. Files double your depth to the right placing your selves behind
your bringers up.

To perform this Command. Every even File from the right, face about to the
right and double the remaining files behind their bringers up.

ranks and files wheeling

To reduce this Command. Bringers up double your Front to the left.

OR,

Half files double your Front to the left, each placing themselves before their
half file Leaders.

There is but a small difference between the Figures of some of the precedent
Commands, as some may at first sight guess them to be: yet if you would but
well observe them the words of Command are several, and in the Battalia there
is difference in the Dignity of place; but not in quantity (or number.)

Secondly. How the flanks are doubled by half ranks.

10. Command. Half ranks of the left, double your right flank to the 1. Right,
or 2. Left.


To perform this to the right. Left half ranks face to the right and move to
the right forward and double your right flank.

ranks and files

To reduce this Command. Face to the left and march forth into your places.

OR,

Double your Ranks to the left entire. You may face them at discretion.

I shall demonstrate another Figure to the left, showing how it may be
performed without mixture of Arms, etc.

11. Command. Half Ranks of the right, double your left flank to the right.

To perform this Command. Half ranks of the right face to the right, turn off
to the right and double your left flank.

ranks and files

To reduce the 11. Command. Ranks double to the right entire, every man placing
himself on the outside of his right hand man.

12. Command. Half ranks double your right flank to the right and left 1.
Outward. 2. Inward.


1. To perform this Outward. Face all to the right, then the left half ranks
move to the right and left outward, doubling your right flank; face to your
Leader.

ranks and files

To reduce this Command. 1. Front and Rear half files double your ranks entire
to the left flank.

OR,

Half ranks that doubled face about to the right, and march forth into your
places.

OR,

Half ranks face about to the right, and the even ranks from the midst move
forth and double your left ranks entire to the left flank; face to your Leader.

2. To perform the 12. Command inward. Face all to the right, then the left
half ranks move forwards to the right and left inwards, and double the right
flank; face all to your Leader.

ranks and files

To reduce the 12. Command inward. Front and rear half files, double your Ranks
entire to the left.

By direction, you may Command. Half files face about, and every even rank from
the front and rear move forth, and double your ranks entire to the left flank;
then face to your Leader.

13. Command. Half ranks double your right flank to the 1. Right or 2. Left
by Countermarch.

OR,

Half ranks to the right by Countermarch double your left flank.

To perform this. Half ranks of the right, It Is produces the same Figure as the
11. Command.
face to the right and Countermarch into the left flank losing ground.

To reduce this. Double your Ranks to the left entire, every man placing
himself on the outside of your right hand men, and face to your Leader.

OR,

Ranks that doubled, face to the right and march forth into your places.

In like manner if you would double the right flank by countermarch, the right
flank is then to stand, and you are to insert the left into the right flank, as
before, the right will be by this Command inserted into the left.

And by the reducement of the one by the contrary hand, you may reduce the
other also.

14. Command. Left half ranks double your right flank to the right and left 1.
Outward 2. Inwards
by countermarch.

These insertions I shall not demonstrate by Figure, because the three last
being but well observed, will give you a light to the execution of these; only
I shall briefly give you the performances and reducements thereof.

If Outward, Command. Half ranks of the right face to the right, and left half
ranks face to the left, then move forward and double your right and left flank
to the right and left outward; face to your Leader.

To reduce this Command. Front and Rear half files double your Ranks entire to
the left flank, every man placing himself, on the outside of his right and left
hand man.

By direction you may Command. The Front half files to face about, and the even
ranks from the midst, move forth to the left flank and double the odd, placing
your selves on the outside of your right hand men.

And every even rank from the rear half files, move forth and double the odd,
placing yourself on the outside of your left hand men; face to your Leader.

If Inwards, Command. Ranks face to the right and left outward, and the left
half ranks turn off to the right and left inward, moving forward, until you
have doubled the right flank; face to your Leader.

To reduce this Command. Front and rear half files double your ranks entire to
the left flank, every man placing himself on the outside of his right and left
hand man.

For direction you may Command. Half files face about, and every even rank from
the rear, move forward, and place your selves on the outside of your right hand
men, and every even rank from the front, move forth and double the odd, placing
your selves on the outside of your left hand men; face to your Leader.

15. Command. Left half ranks double your right flank entire advancing.

To perform this Command. The left flank (or the left half ranks) march forth
until they be clear of the remaining party; then face them to the right and
double the right flank, and face them to their Leader.

ranks and files

To reduce this. The left flank that doubled, face to the left, and march into
your places.

OR,

Front half files double your Rear to the right.

16. Command. Left half Ranks double entire the depth of your right Flank.

To perform this Command. The left half ranks to face about to the right, until
they are clear of the standing part; then face to the left and double the right
flank; face to your Leader.

ranks and files

To reduce this Command. Half files double your Front to the left entire.

OR,

Half files that doubled face about to the left and march forth into your
places.

3. How the Flanks may be strengthened by divisional Doublings.

17. Command. Double your Files to the right and left by Division.

To perform this Command. Half files of the even files from the right, face to
the Rear; then, even files march clear of the standing part; then move to the
right and left, and double the odd files.

ranks and files

To reduce them Command. Face to the right and left inward, march forth and
take your places, and face to your Leader.

18. Command. Half Ranks of the left double your right flank by Division.

To perform this Command. Half files of the left half ranks face about to the
right; then, Front and Rear half ranks of the left flank move clear of the
standing body, face all to the right flank, and move even in breast with the
right flank.

ranks and files

To reduce them. Front and Rear half files that doubled, face about inwards and
march into your places.

OR,

The half files that doubled may double the depth of their right flank.

Obs. You may in the Command, when they are marched clear of the standing
party, Countermarch them with this Command. Vide Com. 13.
Front and Rear half files of the left flank countermarch to the right and
left, losing of ground into the right flank, which will produce the same
Figure, Com. 18. only in place.

4. The Flanks are strengthened by Wheelings.

18. Command. Left half ranks wheel off, and double your right flank to the
Right or Left
Entire.

To perform this, Command. Right half ranks face outward; left half ranks
wheel about to the left, and keep wheeling until you have doubled the right
flank; face the moveants to their Leader.

ranks and files wheeling

To reduce them. Face them to their proper Front; then Command, Rear half files
double your Front to the left entire.

But if you countermarch them, then the reducement of the 13. Command will give
you light to it also.

19. Command: Wheel Front and Rear into the 1. Right or 2. Left
Flank.

OR,

Front and rear half files wheel off into the right Flank by Division.

To perform this, Command. Face all to the right.

Wheel off to the right and lest, and so keep moving until the Bringer up of
the right hand file, meet with the right hand file leader.

ranks and files

To reduce them if faced to the right Flank.

Wheel both Flanks into the Rear, and face them to their Leader,

But if faced to their proper Front, then Command. Wheel Front and Rear into
their left Flank, and face them to their Leader.

20. Command. Left half Ranks wheel off to the right and left, and double your
right Flank by Division.

To perform this, Command. Half ranks of the right face to the right, then the
half files of the left half rank face to the Rear.

Front and Rear half files wheel off to the right and left about; and more
forwards until you are even a breast, then double your right flank and face
them to their accidental Front.

ranks and files

To reduce them, Command. Files that doubled, double the depth of the standing
files entire to the right and left inwards.

2. If you face them to their proper Front, then to reduce them Command. The
three first and the three last Ranks double your left flank entire.

That is, The three last Ranks face about and wheel to the right, and the three
first Ranks wheel about to the left, all moving and meet in opposition in the
midst of the left flank; then face them to their Leader.

I have ended those Doublings whose Battalia's are strengthened in the Front,
Rear, and both Flanks. Although they may not be useful at all times in the
field service, yet it is not amiss for every Commander to be well grounded in
the knowledge of them, that by his experience therein he may not be silent,
when occasion serves, nor the Soldier seeking what to do, when he may be
commanded: They are so necessary, that some are delightful in private
Exercises, and most of them profitable in Field (or Garrison.) I am sure the
Ingenious if once experienced herein will confess them to be of such absolute
necessity as not in the least to be slighted by any.

And further, it is adjudged to be most convenient for all the Chief Officers
to bend their thoughts before the time of Service, to make their Commands as
short as possible may be, in order to which see Chapt. 8. and 11.

I do declare that I have heard some of our late young Eltonists to be too
tedious in their Commands and Reducements; I shall advise the young Soldier to
follow the Rules of Barriffe, Ward, Bingham and Hexham, for there is in them
enough to direct for most Services, and then they may peruse Elton at last,
whose worth (as I have been informed) is not to be laid in the dust without the
due respects belonging to a Soldier, and I hope now a Loyal Subject.

CHAP. XI.
YOu may perceive in those several Commands for the strengthening of the
Flanks, and their Figures being produced, and have closed some of their Files,
as occasion may offer it self, they are one and the same in Number but not in
Place.

As in the 8. Chapter, I have also in this set down the several Commands that
produce one and the same Figure, yet the Commands are distinct and several; all
which if the Officer please to endeavor the remembering of: How that such and
such Commands will produce such a Figure, he may in the hottest disputes take
the shortest Commands to expedite his motions, having respect to his Ground for
the execution of them.

1. Files to the right double. Command 1. Produces one and the same Figure.
Files to the right double, advancing Comm. 2. Files to the right and left
double 1. Outward. 2. Inward.
Comm. 3. and 4. Double your Ranks to the right and left 1. Outward advancing
2. Inward advancing
Comm. 5. Double your Files to the right entire advancing. Comm. 6. Double your
Files to the right entire advancing, every man placing himself before his
Leader Comm. 7. Files double your depth to the right entire Comm. 8. Files
double your depth to the right, placing your selves behind your Bringers-up
Comm. 9. Double your Files to the right and left by Division. Com. 17. 2. Half
Ranks of the left, double your right flank to the right Com. 11. Produces one
and the same Figure. Half Ranks double your right flank to the right and left
outward 3. Half Ranks double your right flank by turning off to the right Com.
11. Produces one and the same Figure. Page Command 16. Half Ranks to the right
by countermarch double your left flank Com. 13. Left half flanks double your
right flank to the right and left by countermarch 1. Outward. 2. Inward.
Com. 14. Left half Ranks wheel and double your right flank to the right entire
Com. 18. Left half Ranks wheel off to the right and left, and double your right
flank by Division. Com. 20. Left half Ranks double your right flank entire
advancing Com. 15. These Figures are much alike, only the change of Ground.
Left half Ranks double entire the depth of your right flank Com. 16. A very
good Figure is produced by the. Com. 17. Wheeling Front and Rear into the right
flank Com. 19. This being an accidental Front is the same Figure with the 5.10.
and 15. Command, for the strengthening of the proper Front by the doubling of
Ranks.

CHAP. XII.
I Shall now treat of that which is called in a more particular manner
Inversion and Conversion, showing you what is meant by them; And the nature and
use of those several Commands, most in practice belonging to each of them.

1. Inversion produces a File, or Files;

That is either by Files filing; or Ranks filing.


2. Conversion produces a Rank, or Ranks.

That is either By increase of File ranking by Even, or Uneven
Parts. Of Ranks ranking to the Right, or Left.
Of Ranks wheeling to the Right, or Left
Flank.


Observe, That in the performance of most of these Works, there must be either
a double or twice double distance of Ground. But it must be the Commanders care
so to open his Ranks or Files at such distances as the quantity of Ground will
give leave.

I shall not demonstrate the Commands in the same method, as I have the
Doublings for the strengthening of the Front, but shall insist in that method
already set down; because I find the reception hereof to be somewhat of
difficulty with some of our Rural Officers.

First, Inversion of files, or tiles filing in sequence.

Secondly, Files filing by countermarch.

1. Command. Files, file to the 1. Right. 2. Left.


ranks and files To perform this, to the right, Command. The right hand file to
march away single, clear of the body, then the File leader of the next File is
to fall in after the bringer up of the first File, and so all the rest, until
the whole Body become one single file.

To reduce this, Command. File leaders lead up you Files to to the left.

OR,

Files, file six to the left.



2. Command. Files file to the Right. or Left.
entire advancing.

ranks and files To perform this to the right. The right hand file stand, the
second from the right advances into the Front of the first, the third into the
Front of the second, and the rest successively into the Front of each other,
until they may be made one direct file.

To reduce this, Command. Face all about to the right, Files, file six to the
right into the Rear.

OR,

As they stand without facing, Command. File six to the right gathering toward
the Front.



3. Command. Files, file inward into the right Flank.

ranks and files To perform this Command. Half files face about, then file
leader and bringer up of the left flank advance forward, and each file of the
half files from the left, are to fall successively into the Rear of each file
until they have made one entire, then face them to their leader.

To reduce them Command. Rear half files face about to the left.

Front half files, file three to the left: and the Rear half files file three
to the right;

Face all to your leader, and close your divisions.



4. Command. Files file to the right and left by Division.

ranks and files To perform this, Command. The file leaders of each flank march
away with your files until they are clear of the Body, then the next file
leaders from the right and left are to fall in after the bringers up of the
first moveants, until the Body become two files upon each wing.

To reduce them, Command: File leaders lead up your files to the right and left.

OR,

Files file six to the right and left.



5. Command. Files, file inward into the right and left flank by Division.

ranks and files Figure. 5.

You may the better understand this by the directions for the third Command: But

To perform this, Command. Half files face about, then file leaders and
bringers up of each file, both from the right and left, and fall successively
into the rear of each other, until they have made two entire files on each
flank; Face to your leader.

To reduce this, Command. Rear half files face about to the right: Front and
Rear half files file three to the right and left inwards; Face to your leader
and close your Divisions.



6. Command. Files, by countermarch file to the right, every man placing
himself in the rear of the right hand file.

ranks and files Figure. 6.

To perform this, Command. The right hand file stand, the rest of the Body face
about to the left, then every particular file march forward to the left, and
place themselves behind the bringers up of the right hand file.

To reduce this, Command. Files file fix to the left, each placeing themselves
before their leader.



7. Command. Files by countermarch file to the right by division, each placing
himself before his leader and bringer up.

ranks and files To perform this; Command. Rear half files face about, the
right hand file is to keep his ground, the rest moving forwards to the right,
placing themselves before their File leaders and Bringers up.

To reduce this, Command. Front half file ^^ce about, and file three to the
right, every man placing himself before his bringer up: And the Rear half
files, file three to the left, placing your selves before your leaders.



I have with as much brevity, as conveniently I could, set forth by
demonstration the first part of Inversion which is of Files filing.

I proceed to the second part of Inversion which is of Ranks siling.

For the performance of which, observe that in all these motions, your files
are to be at their Order, or otherwise as may be thought most convenient, and
their Ranks to be opened either forwards or backwards at the discretion of the
Commander, but at twice double distance (or more) as may be required to his
number of men.

The distances being set, let every rank move according to Command.

8. Command. Ranks file to the right, placing your selves before your right
hand man.

To perform this, Command. The right hand man of each rank is to stand, the
rest are to move forwards with their right leg, and so place themselves before
their right hand men.

ranks and files 8. Figure.

Te reduce them, Command. Files rank twelve to the left:

OR,

Ranks as you were.



Observe, Ranks filing are sooner executed in the commands and reducements,
than files filing: For they will sooner be in readiness to receive any
opposition with a suitable resistance in the Front: for in files filing it will
be some long time before the file leaders will be able to do it.

9. Command. Ranks file to the right, placing your selves behind your right
hand men.

ranks and files wheeling To perform this, Direct. If they be upon a stand,
they may open backwards to their distance for the work as by example.

But if they be upon a march, then the right hand man marches first, and all
his rank so facing as to march to the right, file-wise after their leader: The
right hand man of the second rank is so to do, and fall in the rear of the left
hand man of the first Rank.

To reduce this, Command. Files rank twelve to the left:

OR,

Ranks as you were.



Aelian Tact. Chapter 30. p. 6.
10. Command. Ranks file to the right and left by Division.

ranks and files wheeling The two former are directions enough for this. And
may also be performed with the two former, either before their right hand men
or otherwise.

To reduce this, Command. Files convert into Ranks as you were.

OR,

Files Rank to the right and left inward as you were.

OR,

Files rank twelve to the right and left inward.



This Figure as by the Notes of Captain Bingham has been of great use amongst
the Graecians, and judged by our ingenious Artists not to be slighted by us for
the avoydance of the great Ordinance or showers of small shot: In Cities I have
seen it often used for lodging of the Colors: It is also a large Interval for
the reception of any Honorable Person.

Some may dislike, in this last Inversion of Ranks filing, because there is a
promiscuous mixture of Arms: This may be easily prevented by bringing both
Divisions of Musquetteers into the Front of Pikes, or otherwise upon a march at
the discretion of the Commander.

There yet remain diverse words of Command of Ranks filing; Vide Conversion.
By wheeling your Ranks into the right Flank, or into both Flanks, etc. But the
prolixity of them have made me to abbreviate, and being more out of curiosity
than of necessity.

I have showed what is meant by Inversion both in Files and Ranks, and have
demonstrated them by their Figures, so many as I conceive may be sufficient for
the knowledge thereof.

Many I have heard to use the word Inversion to some of the precedent Commands;
but I think it very convenient to be left out in the Exercisings of our Rural
Militia's; It is a word not suitable to a Rustic capacity, and a word that may
be spared.

CHAP. XIII. Of Conversion, and the several Parts thereof.
COnversion, I have declared to consist of a Rank or Ranks.

And that is performed either by 1. Increase of Files ranking by Even, or Uneven
Parts. 2. Increase or decrease of Files ranking by uneven Parts. 3. Files
ranking entire into the Front, and wheeling into the same. 4. Ranks ranking to
the right or left. 5. Wheeling into both Flanks.


And of these I shall declare unto you, as briefly as I may, that your delight
in the true understanding of them may not be neglected, by the least obscurity.
Now the reason that I have demonstrated most with Figures, is that the young
Soldier may see how many Commands produce one and the same Figure, their
difference being only in quality, and not in quantity.

1. I shall begin with Files ranking by even parts, that is when they rank two,
three, or four, keeping the same number in Rank, all being in an equal
proportion; and if more, what is wanting to make up the Ranks in the Command,
must be made good by the next Rank.

1. Command. Files rank three to the right.

ranks and files Observe, in this motion, the File leader is first to move unto
that hand the Command is given: And if six deep, the half file leader is to
advance the same way.

To reduce this, Command.

Ranks file (or invert) to the right:

Then every File-leader, lead up his File, and rank to the right:

OR,

As you were.



2. The uneven parts of Files ranking, is when there is such an increase either
of two, three, or more in each Rank so exceeding the Rank before it: (and these
exceedings are termed in Arithmetic, A Progressional Increase) Or else by the
decrease of each Rank following after.

2. Command. Files rank three first, then by increase to the right two, in each
Division of Musquetteers and Pikes.

ranks and files

These are termed half Rombes, or Wedges.

For Exercise sake you may make a Wedge, or half Rombe of all twelve by

3. Command. Files rank first two, and by increase two, from the whole Body.

ranks and files You may alter the mixture of Arms at your discretion.



4. Command [is in the nature of a Rombe.]

Files rank first two, and by increase, and decrease two in each Rank,
Divisionally both of Musquetteers and Pikes.

ranks and files

The reducement of these three last Commands is, Ranks file as you were.

These Rombes, and half Rombes or Wedges were much of use in the Grecian Wars;
Read the Tact. of Aelian, page 108. But being not now so much in use, I shall
not spend much time in them, but leave the desirous to the view of Captain Ward.

5. Command. Files rank to the Right, or Left into the Front.

and

6. Command. Files rank to the Right, or Left by wheeling into the Front.

I shall demonstrate both in this by Wheeling; only observe there must be so
much distance between each file, as will contain each in rank.

To perform them Command. Files open to the left to your double distance; Ranks
close forward to your close Order, face to the right, wheel all to the left
until the whole Body be brought into one entire Rank.

ranks and files wheeling 5. and 6. Figure.



To reduce this, Command. Face to the Rear; then the first six to the right
wheel to the right:

(When all have wheeled by sixes to the right) then face them to their Leader,
and close their Files at discretion.

7. Command. Files rank into the Front and Rear by Division.

To perform this, Command. Files open to the left to your order; Ranks close
forward to your close order; Half files face about to the right, and face to
the left, then move all into the Front and Rear, and make two entire Ranks.

When the distance is set, Observe that those in motion are to face to the
right flank.

ranks and files in motion

To reduce this, Command. Front half files face about to the left, rear half
files face about to the right, then wheel all into their respective Files, then
face them to their Leader, and close their files at discretion.

Here might be inserted for variety and curiosity some more words of Command of
Conversion, of files ranking into the midst; by Countermarches, and by
Wheelings.

But by what is demonstrated already you will find enough in them, and I must look
to be censured by some for what is done: and conceiving the remainder to be
useless, I shall omit them to avoid a further censure, and proceed to the
Conversion of Ranks ranking in equal Parts.

1. Conversion of Ranks ranking in equal Parts.

Observe, that in Ranks ranking, you may perform it with any number, more or
less, as place and occasion may serve; containing in every Rank an equality in
Number.

And it is to be understood after this manner: When there is twelve more or
less marching a breast, and by reason of some narrowness of passage, or some
other intent, the Commander causes his Soldiers to rank either two, three,
five or seven, etc. according to the place or occasion.

8. Command. Ranks, rank two to the right.

To perform this, Command. The two first in Rank, to the right advance
forwards, the next two of the same Rank in the Rear of them, until the first
Rank have made six Ranks, and in all 36 Ranks.

ranks and files

To reduce this, Command. Ranks, rank twelve to the left.

Observe, that the first rank stands, the rest are to advance, two and two,
until the whole rank of twelve be complete in one rank.

9. Command. Rank two to the right and left 1. Outward, then 2. Inward.


ranks and files To perform this outward, Command. The two outmost men, upon
the right and left hand, advance forwards, the next in the same Rank are to
follow, dividing themselves two to the right hand, and two to the left hand; so
when the Work is finished there will be eighteen Ranks in each Division.

To reduce this:

Ranks as you were.

OR,

Rank twelve to the right and left inward.

2. To perform it Inward.

Ranks rank two to the right and left inwards. Command.

The two inmost men of the right and left hand in the midst of the Battle,
advance forwards, the next in the same Rank are to follow, two from the right
hand, and two from the left, until the Work be finished, making eighteen Ranks.

To reduce this, Command.

Ranks as you were.

OR,

Ranks twelve to the right and left outward.



I shall demonstrate one Figure of Ranks ranking in unequal parts which is
rather to satisfy the curious than of any absolute necessity. Unequal Parts.


10. Command. Ranks, rank 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11. by increase and decrease as they
stand in a Body.

ranks and files To perform this.

The right hand man of the first rank march forth, then the three next of the
same rank follow in the rear of him, then five more out of the same rank to
make the third, and what is wanting in the first rank of the Body to make good
the fourth in Figure, must be taken out of the second in body, and so to
proceed in the remainder both for its increase and decrease, until your Command
be produced.

To reduce this, Command. Right hand men rank, twelve as you were.



11. Command. Ranks rank entire to the Right, or Left
into the Front.

To perform this, Let the first rank stand, every rank else face to the right,
and move away to the right successively placing themselves on the right hand of
each rank, until they all stand in one entire rank in the Front.

ranks and files Figure 11.

To reduce this, Command. Ranks rank as you were.

OR,

Ranks rank twelve to the left; the second falls into the rear of the first,
the third into the rear of the second, and so all successively until they be
reduced.



12. Command. Ranks, rank entire into the Front, every man placing himself on
the outside of his Right, or Left
hand man by Countermarch.

ranks and files To perform this, to the right hand man. The first rank stands,
the rest moves away to the right on the outside of the right hand man.

The precedent reducement will reduce this.

OR,

Ranks, rank twelve to the left, each placing himself on the outside of his
left hand man.



13. Command. Ranks, rank 1. Outward 2. Inward
into the Front.

1. To perform it outward, Command. The first rank to stand, the rest to face
to the right and left outward, the second rank to advance clear of the first,
and then to move forth even with the Front in breast, and all the rest
successively do the same, until they be all even with the Front in one entire
rank.

ranks and files To reduce this; Ranks as you were.

OR,

The first 12, or 12 middlemost stand, the rest face to the right and left
inwards; the second to move into the rear of the first rank, the third into the
rear of the second, and successively the rest into the rear of the remainder,
and being faced to their Leader, and even in their ranks, they are reduced.



2. To perform it Inwards. Command. Ranks, rank inward into the Front.

To produce it, the first rank to move to the right and left outward, and so
to keep moving, (or opening) then the second rank is to advance into the ground
of the first, and the second is then to move with the first to the right and
left outward; then the third is to advance into the place of the second rank,
so all are to do until the last rank is advanced entire into the Front.

ranks and files

To reduce this; The first six upon the right, and left hand stand; then
Command, Ranks, rank six to the right and left outward; And close your
Divisions.

Lastly, the Conversion of Ranks by wheeling into the Flanks.

14. Command. Ranks wheel to the Right, or Left
into the right Flank.

ranks and files To perform this, Command.

Every particular rank to be at double Distance in rank; and at close Order in
file: Then Wheel them to their right hand, until they have brought their Faces
(or Aspects) unto the right Flank.

After you may face them to the Front.

To reduce this, Command.

Files rank twelve to the right.

The first man is to stand, the rest is to move forward to the right
successively twelve in rank.

But if you wheel them to the left hand into the right flank, you must command
them to face about and wheel your ranks to the left hand, until their Faces (or
Aspects) be brought to the right Flank.



15. Command. Ranks of your Front and Rear half files, wheel outward to your
right Flank.

I shall put in execution but two Ranks, one in the Front half files, and the
other of the Rear half files, which is sufficient for Demonstration.

To perform this, Command. Ranks open all to your twice double distance; then
Front half files wheel to the right; and Rear half files wheel to the left. And
face to your Leader.

ranks and files wheeling

To reduce them, Command. Front half files, rank twelve to the right; Rear half
files, rank twelve to the left: Face to your Leader; march up and close
forwards to your due distance.

16. Command. Ranks of your Front and Rear half Files, wheel inwards into your
right Flank.

To perform this, Command. Front and Rear half files march clear to your twice
double distance; Front and Rear half files face about.

Front half files wheel your Ranks to the left, and Rear half files; wheel your
Ranks to the right; Face to your Leader.

ranks and files wheeling

To reduce this, Command. Front half files, rank twelve to the left: Rear half
files face about and rank twelve to the right: Face to your Leader, and close
your Divisions.

17. Command. Ranks, rank to each Flank, by wheeling to the right and left into
the same by Division.

OR,

Ranks wheel to the right and left by Division into both Flanks; advancing (or
placing) themselves before their right and left hand men.

Observe, they are to be at double distance in Rank, and at Order in File.

ranks and files wheeling Figure 17.



To reduce them, Command them to face to the Rear, and wheel into their places.

OR,

Files, rank twelve to the right and left inward into the Rear, and close them
to their order; then face them to their Leader.

But if you would avoid mixture of Arms, you may place all your Musquetteers
either in Front and Rear.

Or else, wheel only the Musquetteers first, and leave the Pikes standing.

Or else it may be performed in marching; and then the Reducement is; Ranks as
you were.

18. Command. Ranks of your Front and Rear half files, wheel outward to your
right and left Flank by Division.

They are to observe the same distance as in the former.

To perform this, Command. Half files face about. Ranks open to your double
distance, then Front and Rear half files wheel to the right and left outward
into both Flanks.

ranks and files wheeling Figure 18.



To reduce this, Command. Who being faced to their Leader. Front half files
face to the Rear, rank twelve to the right and left inwards. And Rear half
files face about and rank twelve to the right and left inward, Files close to
the midst to your order: Face to your Leader.

CHAP. XIV. Of making File-Leaders successively both of Number and Place in a
File, and so for a whole Body.
The Sweedish Mode also.
AS I have stinted my self to a set Number of Files, so I have also to a set
Number in a File, not exceeding six, being according to our present Mode of
Discipline; for if I had gone to a various Number in Files, and added two to
each File, my Figures had been more delightful to some Spectators; others I
hope will find enough in this to qualify, or make them fit to do their King
and Country service, etc.

And now the Souldery having marched sometimes together, and so loving (being
Soldiers indeed) by reason of such experiences as they have attained unto in
the exercise of this Military Art, that each Leader is willing his follower
should take his place; which is a great encouragement to an ingenious Soldier.

This ought not to be slighted, because it is profitable to a Commander to
bring what Ranks he pleases to lead in the Front, and to exchange them again,
and at last to bring the proper File-Leaders into their places; Besides the
encouragement it has in private exercises, it makes men studious, whereby they
may be able to Command in their respective Files, when they are become Leaders.

In the first place take these short Commands to produce them, as follows.

Command 1. A File-Leader. 2. Rank two to the left, and Files to the left
double. 3. Countermarch Front and Rear into the midst, and face to that part
which was the Rear. 4. Face about to the right. 5. Countermarch from the Rear
into the midst, and face to that which was the Rear. 6. Files rank two to the
right, and Files to the right double. This being performed they are reduced.


I shall demonstrate by Tables the succession of each man's Leading, and give
you some, or several Words of Command according to my own and others,
severally, that shall produce such Leader into his place, as they shall stand
in sequence, and as they shall also stand in their respective Dignities.

The Front and standings of each File as they come to be Leaders according to
various Commands.
A File 1 2 3 4 5 6.
6 5 4 3 2 1 6 5 4 3 2 1 6 5 4 3 2 1 To make the If upon a single File,
Command. 5 6 5 2 1 2 5 6 1 6 1 2 5 6 1 6 1 2 4 3 1 6 4 3 4 3 2 5 4 3 4 3 2 5 4
3 3 4 6 1 3 4 3 4 3 2 3 4 3 4 5 2 3 4 2 1 2 5 6 5 2 1 6 1 6 5 2 1 6 1 6 5 1 2 3
4 5 6 1 2 5 4 5 6 1 2 3 4 5 6 6 5 4 3 2 1 6 5 4 3 2 1 6 5 4 3 2 This I saw
July, 1671. Reducement. File Leaders stand, the rest pass through, and place
your selves before your Leaders. Ranks to the right double, and Files to the
right double. Ranks to the left double, and Files double your depth to the
left. File-Leaders stand, the rest pass through to the right, and place
themselves before their Leaders. Half double your Front to the right, and Files
to the right double. Ranks to the left double, and Files to the left double. If
more Files than one Command. Reducement. File rank to the left into the Front;
Rank file fix to the left. File rank two to the right, and Files to the right
double. Bringers-up double your Front to the left, and double your Files to the
right entire advancing. Bringers-up double your Front to the right, and double
your Files to the left entire advancing. Half double your Front to the right;
Files double your depth to the left. File rank two to the left; Files to the
left double. Reducement. Bringer-up stand, the rest pass through to the left,
and place your selves behind your Bringer-up. Rank two to the left, and Files
to the left double. Half file double your Front to the right; and Files double
your depth to the right. File rank six to the left, then, Rank file six to the
left. Front half file double your depth to the left. File-Leader with the odd
men from the Front, face about to the right, and interchange Ground. 6 5 4 3 2
6 5 4 3 2 6 5 4 3 2

The front and standing of each file as they come to be leaders in their
respective dignities
Dignity. The dignity of a file. 1 6 4 3 5 2
6 5 4 3 2 1 6 5 4 3 2 1 6 5 4 3 2 1 1. a 5. e 4. d 3. c 6. f 2. b
1 2 6 5 5 6 2 4 5 6 6 5 2 4 5 6 6 5 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 3 1 2 3 4 1 3 1 2 3 4 4 3 2
1 1 3 3 1 3 4 1 3 3 1 3 4 1 3 2 1 5 6 6 5 4 2 6 5 5 6 4 2 6 5 5 6 5 6 3 4 4 2 5
6 2 1 4 2 5 6 2 1 4 2 Dignity. I much quastion the dignity of this; how ever I
have incerted it, 6 5 4 3 2 1 Dignity 6 5 4 3 2 1 f e d c b a f e d c b a
Reducement. Files rank two to the left; files to the left double. Bringer up
double your Front to the left. Files double your depth to the left, every man
falling behind his bringer up. Half files double your Front to the right. Files
double to the left entire advancing. Files rank two to the right. Files to the
left double. Bringer up double your Front to the right, and files double your
depth to the right, every man placing himself before his leader. Front half
files double the Rear to the left. Files double to the left in tire advancing,
every man placing himself before his leader. Half files double your Front to
the left. Files double to the right entire advancing, every man placing himself
before his leader. Reducement. Ranks to the left double, files to the left
double: then, half files double your Front to the right, then, Bringers up face
about to the right and march forth into your places. File leaders stand, the
rest pass through to the left and place your selves before your leaders. Ranks
to the right double; Files to the right double. Front and Rear half files
interchange ground. File leaders and half file leaders stand, the rest pass
through to the left, and place your selves before your leaders. Bringers up
double your front to the right, and files double your depth to the right.
Reducement. Rank two to the left and files to the left double, then Front half
files double your Rear to the left entire advancing, every one placing himself
behind his leader. Face about into the right and Countermarch your Rear into
the Front. Ranks to the right double, and Files to the right double. Front half
files double your Rear to the right entire advancing. Bringers up double your
Front to the right, and files to the right double advancing, and placing your
selves before your leaders. Countermarch front and Rear into the midst. Front
and Rear half files interchange ground. N. 6. N. 5. N. 4. N. 3. N. 2. N. 6. N.
5. N 4. N. 3. N. 2. N. 6. N. 5. N. 4. N. 3. N. 2.

CHAP. XV. Of Countermarches.
WE read in the Tacticks of Aelian of three kinds of Countermarches used
amongst the Graecians and Persians;

And are termed, the 1. Chorean 2. Lacedemonian 3. Macedonian
Countermarches,

There is another Countermarch that is of use in our modern exercises and is
termed the Bastard Countermarch, and so called because it participates some
times of one, and some times of another, but always, of two, and may in many
respects be more useful than the former.

Most Authors place this amongst the other Countermarches, therefore I shall
not now alter it; although in my opinion, it may be very well ranked amongst
the doublings.

I thought to have been large in demonstrating the several natures of
Countermarches; but being conceived of all motions in this art the least
beneficial to our latest mode of discipline, I shall not be tedious to your
Patience: But if the skilful Soldier will put them into practice (especially
the Bastard Countermarch) he will not only find some of them serviceable but
all delightful in private Exercises.

Observe the Chorean Lacedemonian Macedonian
is 1. Maintaining 2. Losing 3. Gaining
Ground.

First, The maintaining of Ground is a Countermarch commanded without any
addition to it; and is termed the Chorean, or Cretan. Countermarch.

Secondly, The losing ground is a Countermarch commanded when the Soldier is
to take his ground from the Rear, and this is termed the Lacedemonian
Countermarch.

Thirdly, The gaining of ground, that is a Countermarch taking of ground next
before the front, and forsaking the ground it first stood upon, and this is
termed a Macedonian Countermarch.

In all which there is Countermarchings of Files. Ranks The Front. The Rear
half files. Half Ranks.


And these may all be performed by entire or divisional Countermarches.

1. The Countermarchings of Files is when every Soldier follows his leader.

2. The Countermarchings of Ranks is when every Soldier follows his side man.

3. The Front and Rear half Files Countermarchings is when the Soldier shall
follow their File leaders or Bringers up.

4. The Countermarchings of half Ranks is when the Soldier shall follow their
outside men.

I shall in the first place show how Entire and Divisional Countermarches are
performed by files, and Ranks.

1. Observe, That in the execution hereof your distance is to be at six foot in
rank and file.

2. When you are to Countermarch to the right, the file leaders are to step
forward with their right legs, and face about to the right, passing down to the
Rear with their respective File following them, keeping even a breast with
their right handmen, and to be sure not to turn before they be advanced to the
ground of their File leaders.

3. All Entire Countermarches of Files or ranks may be reduced by contrary
Countermarches: If the Command be to the right, reduce them to the left: And so
for Contermarchings of the Front, Rear or flanks into the midst, reduce them
back from the midst.

It shall be my endeavor to demonstrate how all Entire and divisional
Countermarches shall lie under these three heads.

Of Mantaining, Losing, and Gaining of
ground.

First, of Countermarches maintaining Ground.

In the second precedent rule it will not be amiss to cast your eye back, for
your better direction, by which you will be able to pass these Countermarches with
greater delight and Order.

1. Command. Files to the 1. Right, or 2. Left
hand Countermarch.

To perform this, Let the file leaders step forward with their right legs, and
march even in Rank to the Rear, and none to turn off until he come to his File
leaders Ground.

ranks and files

To reduce this, Command. Files to the left hand Countermarch.

2. Command. Ranks to the 1. Right or 2. Left
hand Countermarch.

To perform this, Face them to the Right; and the right hand file is to turn
off to the right, and to march even to the Ground of the left hand file.

ranks and files

You may reduce this, by Ranks Countermarching to the left.

3. Command. Countermarch your Front and Rear into the midst.

To perform this, Command. Half files, face about and turn to off the left.
Front half files turn off to the right; and face to your leader.

ranks and files

You may reduce this figure by doing the same over again.

Or else, by any other divisional Countermarch.

4. Command. Front and Rear half files countermarch to the 1. Right or 2. Left.


ranks and files

You may reduce this Figure by doing the same over again,

OR,

By Countermarching Front and Rear into the midst.

5. Command. Countermarch your Front and Rear half files to right and left from
the midst.

To perform this, Command. Front half files face about and turn off to the
right, and Rear half files turn off to your left: then, face to your leader.

ranks and files

To reduce this, Command: To Countermarch from the midst into the Front and
Rear.

The three last figures by command are several, but the figures are still one
and the same in quantity, but not in quality, or motion, as you may perceive,
etc.

6. Command. Countermarch your flanks into the midst.

To perform this, Command, them to face to the right and left outward, the
right flank turn off to the right, and left flank turn off to the left until
they meet in the midst.

ranks and files

To reduce them, Command. Countermarch from the midst to the right and left
into both flanks.

7. Command, Right and left half Ranks interchange your ground.

To perform this, Face to the right and left inward (and march all) and
interchange your ground.

ranks and files

This is of no great use except it be when the right (or left) flank has
fought, that then the reserved flank may come into service also.

You may reduce them by interchanging of them back again.

OR,

Divisionally to Countermarch their flanks into the midst of the Battle.

Secondly, Countermarches lofing ground.

1. Command. Files to the Right, or Left,
hand Countermarch placing your selves before your bringers up.

To perform this, Command. The bringers up to face about to the right, then
the file leaders with the rest successively to turn off upon the same ground he
stands; And on the same hand the Command is given, so to place themselves
accordingly.

ranks and files

You may easily reduce them by any other Countermarch of files.

2. Command. The last Rank stand the rest pass through to the 1. Right or 2.
Left
placing your selves behind your bringers up.

To perform this: As the last Rank is to stand and keep their first aspect; let
all the rest face about to the right, and march all turning successively behind
their bringers up.

ranks and files

To reduce them, you may pass them through, or else Countermarch by file into
their places.

3. Command. Front and Rear half files Countermarch to the 1. Right, or 2. Left,
From the midst, every man placing himself before his leader and bringer up.

To perform this, Command. The first rank of the front half files to stand, the
rest to face about and turn off to the right; half file leaders face about and
turn off to the left, and both to march clear of the Front and Rear, following
their half file leaders, and bringers up of the front half files.

ranks and files

To reduce this by an other Countermarch.

4. Command. Ranks to the 1. Right or 2. Left
hand Countermarch, losing ground.

To perform this to the right. As in maintaining ground, upon their turning
off, the rest march into the same place (or ground) and turn off also; as in
figure 2.

Now this of losing ground, alters only in this, the outmost file is to face
to the right about, until he has directly faced the left flank, and so to gain
so much ground upon the left flank as they have lost upon the right;

OR,

That they have placed themselves on the outside (or before) of their left hand
men.

ranks and files

5. Command. Ranks to the right hand Countermarch, each following his right
hand man; and place himself on the outside of his left hand man.

ranks and files

To perform this, Command. The left hand file to stand; the out most file to
the right turn about to the right as to make his aspect (or face) to the left,
then move forward until he be clear of the second file, losing the ground he
stood upon, and gain it again on the outside of the left flank.

To reduce this figure; may be done by a contrary Countermarch.

6. Command. The right and left hand file upon each flank face to the right and
left outward, the rest pass through, placing your selves before your outmost
files.

Observe, files become ranks by their faceing.
To perform this, Command. The right hand file to face to the right, and the
left hand file to the left, and then the rest of the body to turn their
aspects, accordingly, and place themseves before their right and left hand men.

ranks and files

To reduce them, Command, them to Countermarch to the right and left into the
midst of the Battle.

OR, Command. If they be faced to the proper Front,
The two inmost files to stand, the rest pass through to the right and left
inward, and close their divisions.

8. Command. The two outmost files of each flank face to the right and left
inward, the rest pass through to the right and left, and place yourselves
behind your outside men.

To perform this, Command. The right and left hand file of each flank face
inward, and the rest of the Body are to face to the right and left outward,
then all are to move forwards, and to place themselves behind their right and
left hand men. (Else the motion is the same as the former.)

ranks and files

To reduce this, Command. The two innermost files face to the right and left
outward, and the rest pass through to the right and left inwards, placing
themselves behind their right and left hand men, Then, face them to their
leaders.

Now if it be the Commanders pleasure to reduce them by any other word of
Command, it may be done by the precedent words of Command, or of the next
following, or of any other divisional Countermarch (except interchanging of
ground.)

8. Command. The outmost file of each flank stand, the rest pass through to the
right and left, and place your selves on the outside of your right and left
hand men.

The ninth figure is the same as this, if faced to their leader.
To perform this. The outmost files of each flank stands; the rest of the body
faceth to the right and left outward, and so passing forwards through the
intervalls into each flank, place themselves on the outside of their right and
left hand men.

ranks and files

To reduce this, may be performed by any of the foregoing Countermarches of
ranks: Or else, being faced to any of the flanks, then the Ranks, become files,
and by divisional Countermarches of files, you may reduce divisional
Countermarches of Ranks.

OR,

By Ranks files only some facings must be observed.

For the proper Reducement Command: The two inmost Ranks to stand, the rest to
face to the right and left inward, and so march into their places.

9. Command. The right and lelft hand files upon each flank stand, the rest
pass through to the right and left, and place your selves on the outside of
your right and left hand men, following your inmost files.

Observe in the performance of this the two inmost-files are to be first in
motion* But first, Command, The two outmost files of each flank to stand, and
the rest of the Body to face to their right and left outward, so moving away
first from the midst until they have successively placed themselves on the
outside of their right and left hand men: (you may close their files into the
midst to open Order.

ranks and files

The reducement of the eight figure will reduce this also.

10. Command. Front and Rear half files Countermarch to the 1. Right or 2. Left
hand interchanging ground.

To perform this, Command. Half files to face about and turn off to the right,
front half files doing the like move forwards until they be clear one of an
other, six foot; then face to their leader if you please and close their
divisions.

ranks and files

A Countermarch interchanging of ground will reduce them and then close etc.

11. Command. Front and Rear half files to the right hand interchange ground.

ranks and files

You may reduce this, interchanging of ground as they were, or by some other
word of Command.

Thirdly, Countermarches to gain ground.

1. Command. The file leaders stand, the rest pass through to the 1. Right or
2. Left,
and place your selves before your leaders.

ranks and files

The Command is so plain that there needs no directions. Only if your command
be to place your selves behind your leaders, then the file leaders are to face
about, and the rest are to execute it as the former, only in placing themselves
they are to turn their aspect behind their leaders.

And then Commanding them to place themselves before their leaders will reduce
them.

2. Command. File leaders face about to the right and stand. Bringers up with
the rest following them, pass through to the right, and place your selves
behind your leaders.

Face to your leaders.

ranks and files

To reduce this you may do it by the same Command, or by the first Command.

3. Command. File leaders stand and the rest pass through to the 1. Right, or
2. Left,
placing your selves before your file leaders, following your Bringers up.

This is the same with the second figure, only in their work they are to keep
their aspect to the Front: And the reducement the same also.

4. Command. File leaders and half file leaders stand, the rest pass through to
the right and place your selves before your file leaders and half file leaders.

ranks and files

You may reduce this by the same Countermarch, or any other Divisional
Countermarch.

5. Command. File-leaders and half file-leaders stand, the rest pass through to
the right, and place your selves behind your Leaders and half file-leaders,
following your Bringers-up.

The file-leaders and half file-leaders are only to face about to the right and
to stand, the motion is the same with the fourth Figure, but in taking their
places they are to face to the Rear. The Reducement as the former.

6. Command. File-leaders and half file-leaders stand, the rest pass through to
the right and left, and place your selves behind your Leaders and half
file-leaders, etc.

I need not demonstrate this, it being the same with the fifth and sixth, only
in the motion they are to pass to the right and left outward. And is reduced
as the former.

7. Command. File-leaders to face about, the rest pass through to the right,
and place your selves behind your Leaders and Bringers up.

To perform this, Command. The first Rank is to face about and stand; then the
two last Ranks from the Rear, ( i. e. the fourth and fifth Ranks) are to face
to the Rear and move all, etc.

ranks and files

The former Directions upon any Divisional Countermarch will reduce this.

8. Command. The outmost File of the right face to the right, the rest pass
through to the Right, or Left,
and place your selves Before, or Behind
your right hand men.

ranks and files

If your Command be behind your right hand men, then the right hand file is but
to face to the left. I shall not trouble you with them, conceiving them of no
great use. You may reduce these by a contrary Countermarch.

9. Command. The outmost File of the right hand stand, and the right hand File
of the left half Rank stand, and the rest pass through, and place your selves
on the outside of your right hand men.

Face to your Leader.

The same is done on the left hand.

And if you place them before their left hand men, then face them all to the
right, and so let them pass through observing the motion: And if you place them
behind their right hand men; then let the right hand men face about to the
left, and the rest pass through and fall behind them.

ranks and files Figure 9.



A Counter word of Command will reduce them, etc.

There are many Countermarches that produce one and the same Figure: provided
you close your Divisions, and face them to their proper Front; only they differ
in place.

First, therefore you may briefly observe that in those Countermarches that
Maintain their Ground, the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth Commands;
then in losing of ground, the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, tenth, and
eleventh Commands; and in gaining of Ground, the first, second, third, fourth,
fifth, sixth, and seventh do and will produce one and the same Figure.

Secondly, Also for maintaining of Ground, the sixth and seventh; and in losing
of Ground the sixth, seventh and eighth; and also in gaining of Ground the
ninth Commands produce one and the same Figures.

Oserve, For the Countermarchings of half Ranks, see in the doublings of the
Flanks, thirteenth and fourteenth Commands, they producing the same Figures as
the eleventh and twelfth Figures; by all which you will the better understand
the one for the other.

Although Countermarches are of great Antiquity, and used amongst the
Graecians; yet it is not much of use in our present Mode of Discipline:
Therefore to conclude, though knowledge of them be no burden, yet to be
exercised in the face of an Enemy may prove prejudicial; and the best expert in
this Art, allow that they may be best spared of any motions whatever.

CHAP. XVI. Of Wheelings.
I Am to treat of Wheelings, and the several uses of them, as to the
strengthening of the Front, Rear, and both Flanks.

Before you enter upon them, take these four Observations.

1. That you close your Ranks and Files to your Order. 3. Foot.


2. That in all your Wheelings, you keep a due distance to your Leader.

3. That in all Commands for Wheelings, such moderation is to be used in their
motions, that they on the contrary flank be not forced by running to disorder
themselves.

4. That your Arms be at such Postures as may be equivalent to each other;
(This is) If the Muskets be poysed, the Pikes are to be advanced (which are
the Postures best to be used in these Motions.)

There are two sorts of Wheelings.

First, Angular Wheelings.

Secondly, Wheelings on the midst (or Center:)

I shall not use the word Center, for it is more proper to a Circular body than
to a square.

These in their Motions (or Actions) are termed either Entire or Divisional.

1. Entire Wheelings, are for the gaining of ground upon the Enemy, or to fight
him with your best men, as occasion serves, turning the first Aspect wholly to
the Command given.

2. Divisional Wheelings, being performed, extend the Battle either in length
or depth: And may for the most part of them be called Doublings.

I have in the exercise of Doublings demonstrated some of them by Figures, and
shall not recite them here again, but quote them by their several numbers of
Commands.

First, I shall begin with Angular Wheelings.

And they so called, because the corner man to which the Aspect is commanded,
is the main hinge of the motion.

Observe, the Wheelings to the right and to the left; To the right and left
about are termed Angular. And for the Wheelings to the right and left, and to
the right and left about on the same Ground are Wheelings on the midst of the
Front, all which are Entire, the other Divisional. Center.


1. Command. Wheel your Body -- all, or your Battle to the 1. Right, Entire
Angular Wheelings.
or 2. Left.

This Wheeling moves the main Body from the Ground whereon it first stood, and
places it on the right Flank, causing the Aspects of the proper Front to be
upon the same.

Observe, that the right hand man is to move to the right hand with a very
small Motion, and every man else to remember that the farther off he is from
the Right Angle, the swifter must his motion be.

ranks and files wheeling

To reduce them. Wheel to the left.

But this will not transfer them to the same Ground: But to reduce them to
their first Aspect on the same Ground; you must face them all to the right,
then wheel them to the left, and facing them to the left, it is comple^ted.

2. Command. Wheel your Body -- all, or your Battle to the 1. Right, or 2. Left
about.

This turns the Aspect toward the Rear: Now by reason the motion is twice as
much as the former, there ought to be the greater care had in the performance
of it; observing so much the motion of the right hand man, that they fail not
of being even in Rank with him.

ranks and files wheeling

To reduce them to their first Ground, face to the right, wheel to the left
about, then face them to the left: Although to the left about may reduce them,
but not on the same Ground.

You may observe that Wheelings are the most facil for their Reducements; as
for Example, Wheel your Flanks into the Front, is reduced by wheeling your
Flanks into the Rear.

OR,

To wheel your Front and Rear into both Flanks, is reduced by Wheeling both
Flanks into your Front and Rear, etc.

Secondly, I proceed to Wheelings on the midst (or Center) of the Front, which
are Entire and Divisional, and are quicker in their motions, and performed on
less Ground.

1. Command. Wheel your battle to the 1. Right 2. Left
on the same ground. Entire.


This is termed Grove Van Nawsaw's Wheeling.

But it is a wonder to me why our Ancient and Modern Writers call these
Commands Wheelings on the same Ground, when I am sure there will be ground lost
(in the motion) from the first they stood upon: In a direct square this may be
better performed and less loss of Ground.

To perform this, Command.

ranks and files wheeling

The left Flank advance forward still wheeling to the right, and the right
flank contrariwise facing to the left, and keep falling backwards even in Rear
with the left half ranks, and so still moving unto the place commanded, face
all to the right flank.

You may wheel to the left also.

To reduce this, Wheel your Battle to the left on the same Ground.

2. Command. Wheel your Body to the 1. Right, or 2. Left
about on the same Ground.

The direction to the former will serve for the performance of this, only the
motion is double as much, and their faces are turned from the first Front
toward the Rear.

Observe in this motion, ranks and files in motion every man on the left flank
his right hand man; and the men on the right flank must keep even with their
left hand men, who are their Leaders until they have attained their Ground,
after which they are to face as before, making an even Front.

To reduce this, wheel your Battle to the left about on the same Ground.

Divisional Wheelings. Bingham 2. part Tactic. page 92.
3. Command. Wheel to the right and left from the Front, OR, Wheel off your
Front by Division. Or if you will not go so far, then wheel your Front into the
Flanks by Division.

This wheeling your Front into the Flanks by Division produces the same Figure
with Figure ^.
If upon occasion Musquetteers be on the Front of the Pikes, by this motion they
will flank their Pikes: But otherwise being to be performed in a standing Body,
the Pikes will flank the Musquetteers, and may easily he performed.

The File-leaders of the right flank with their respective Files are to wheel
about to the right, and the File-leaders of the left flank are to wheel about
to the left and close their Divisions.

ranks and files in motion

ranks and files in motion Figure performed.



To reduce them, wheel them off by Division again from the Rear, of by the
fourth Command.

4. Command. Wheel your Body inward to the Rear.

If this be to reduce the former, it is presupposed the Commander is in the
head of the first proper Front, then the Pikes will be in the midst of the
Battle, as at first again: But if reduced without this Command, the Pikes will
be in the Flanks ready to defend the Musquetteers from the fury of the Horse.

To perform this, Command, the Body to open from the midst to the right and
left, to such a distance, as they may turn off to the right and left.

This I shall not demonstrate to you in Figure, because the precedent Figure
performed will give light to the execution of this, and so for the next Command.

5. Command. Wheel off your Body from the Rear into the Front.

To perform this, face them to the Rear, then to the right and left, and wheel
them inward to the Front.

To reduce the fourth Command, and this also:

Wheel them off again to the right and left by Division.

6. Command. Wheel off your Front and Rear into the right Flank.

These Commands following will produce the same Figure.

Wheel of your Body by Division from the left Flank. OR, Wheel your left Flank
into the Front and Rear. OR, Wheel your right Flank into the midst.
To perform this sixth Command. Command them to face to the right; this done
they must wheel together about the third and fourth men in the right hand File,
the Front Division wheeling to the right, and the Rear Division to the left,
until the Bringers-up meet with the File-leader.

ranks and files Figure 6.



To reduce this, it may be performed several ways, as the Body may be faced.

If they stand faced to the right, then wheel your Flanks into the Rear; and
being faced to their proper Front they are reduced.

But if faced to the Front, then wheel the Front and Rear into the left Flank.

But for the performance of the same Command into another Figure; It is but to
pass through your Musquetteers from the left Flank to the right, then the same
Command will bring all the Pikes into the Front.

7. Command. Wheel your Body inward to the right Flank from the left.

To perform this, Command, To face to the right; then open to the right and
left to a convenient distance, etc.

ranks and files wheeling Figure 7.



To reduce this, it may be done several ways as the former at the discretion of
the Commander.

This produces the same Figure as the sixth, only it is altered in motion,
therefore I thought good to demonstrate it; although Wheelings in this nature
is difficult.

8. Command. Wheel off to the right and left inward to the Front:

ranks and files wheeling To perform this, let them open to the right and left
from the midst, and then wheel, etc.



ranks and files This Figure when performed is serviceable against the Horse,
because all the Pikes are in the Front, and stand according to this Figure.

To reduce them, is by wheeling them off to the Rear.



9. Command. Wheel your Flanks into the Front.

This is performed folio 62. Command 16. where you may see the diversity of
words of Command for the producement of it.

10. Command. Wheel your Flanks into the Rear.

The former Command folio 60. being reversed will serve for your better
intelligence herein.

11. Command. Wheel Front and Rear into the right Flank.

This is performed folio 78. Command 19.

12. Command. Wheel both Flanks into the Front and Rear.

OR,

Front and Rear half files wheel off by Division inwards into the midst of
Ranks.

To reduce it, by another word of Command. Right and left half Ranks wheel from
the midst inward to the Front and Rear.

ranks and files wheeling To perform this Command. Half files face to the Rear.
Front half files and Rear half files move all together, and wheel off your
Divisions to the right and left.



Then face them to their proper Front and close their Divisions.

To reduce them.

The reducement of the next Figure will serve for both.

13. Command. Wheel Front and Rear into both Flanks.

To perform this from the precedent Figure, Face to the right and left outward,
observing the former direction, and giving due distance for the motion.

ranks and files wheeling

There are several Commands that will produce this Figure.

Wheel off your Body by Division from the midst of the Battle into the right
and left Flank.

OR,

Wheel the midst of your Body by Division into the Front and Rear.

OR,

Wheel your right and left Flank into the midst.

OR,

Right and left Ranks wheel off by Division to the midst of Files.

To reduce this, Wheel Front and Rear into the midst of the Battle.

OR,

By Wheeling the Flanks into the midst of the Battle, if faced.

OR,

If you please to face the Body to one of the Flanks; then wheel Front and Rear
into both flanks, and face them to their proper Front, and close their
Divisions.

14. Command. Left half Ranks, wheel off to the right and left, and double your
right Flank by Division. Folio 79. Command 20.

15. Command. Front and Rear half Files, wheel off by Division. Folio 78. and
Command 19.

16. Command. Right and left half Ranks, wheel off by Division from the midst
of Files.

ranks and files To perform this, Command them to face to the right and left
inwards, and then let them move backwards to such a convenient distance as to
wheel off from the midst of Files.

To reduce them, wheel off to the right and left inwards.



I need not trouble you with more Angular Wheelings, either wheeling them
outward to the right and left about from the midst of the Battle; Part of
Aelian's Tacticks: chap. 36. 34. 46.
or inwards to the midst, because the demonstration of the former may give
light unto all such, etc. and I conceive them not of such absolute necessity.

But I must advise that those Entire and Divisional Wheelings may be diligently
learnt and practiced, as being of great use in this Military Art.

I have in all my method demonstrated the Commands by their Figures to the
right hand, you may easily command the same to the left hand, and the
Reducements accordingly.

You will find to several Countermarches and Wheelings no Reducements directed
for them, because they may be reduced the same way back as was commanded, or by
some other Command as directed.

I know but little more to be invented for the secure Exercise of a Foot
Company, (and because I would not be singular) I have demonstrated some that
may be better spared than practiced in service; however here is for all: Some
may make use of what is necessary to the fitting of the Soldier for field
services; and others at their pleasure what their fancy may guide them unto.
And thus I have passed over the Grounds of Discipline for the Foot, I expect
Censures; by the Ingenuous I submit to a correction; but for the Carper, let
him remain in his own mud, he shall never be complemented to a cleared fountain
by me.

CHAP. XVII. Of making file leaders successively both in number and place in a
file, six in depth, and so for a whole body.
THe Soldiers having passed thus many days exercise in these principles of
Art Military; and now each Soldier is loving to his Comrade; every file leader
to the rest of his file; being willing that their files should successively
demonstrate some experiences as they have attained unto, in the exercise
thereof: which will prove a great encouragement to the Ingenious: Also it is
profitable to a Commander to bring what Ranks he pleases into the Front, and
to exchange them, and to reduce them to their proper file leaders.

A File to be made file leaders successively according to Number; or by
commanding as follows.
Commanding by the file leader. 1 File leaders. -- Rank two to the left, and
file to the left double. 2 2 Ranks to the left double, and Files to the left
double. -- Countermarch Front and rear into the midst, and face to that part
which was the Rear. 3 1 3 Half files double your front to the right, and files
to the right double. -- Face about to the right. 4 4 2 4 File leaders stand,
the rest pass through to the right, and place themselves before their leaders.
-- Countermarch from the Rear into the midst, and and face to that which was
the Rear. 5 3 6 5 5 Ranks to the left double, and Files double your depth to
the left. -- Files Rank two to the right, and file to the right double: face
them about and it will reduce them. 6 6 1 1 6 6 Ranks to the right double and
Files to the right double. To Reduce -- 5 5 6 3 5 1. File leaders stand, the
rest pass through and place your selves before your Leader. 4 2 4 4 3 1 3 2 2 1

A File to be made file leaders successively according to their Dignity.
1. File leader. 1 The second man from the Front. 5 2 Bringers up double your
Front to the right, and files double your depth to the right. Bringer up to the
Front half file. 4 6 3 File leaders and half file leaders stand, the rest pass
through to the left and place your selves before your leaders. 3. Half file
leader. 3 3 6 4 Front and Rear half files interchange your ground. The second
man from the Rear. 6 1 2 5 5 Ranks to the right double, files to the right
double. 2. Bringer up. 2 5 4 1 4 6 File leaders stand, the rest pass through to
the left and place your selves before your leader. 4 5 3 3 2 To reduce them. 1
6 1 1 1. Ranks to the left double and files to the left double. 2 2 3 2. Half
files double your front to the right. 6 4 3. Bringers up face about to the
right and march forth into your places. 5

CHAP. XVIII. Of certain firings in the Front.
HAving passed over the grounds of this Art Military, I am now come to the
executive part of the Tacticks; and shall not here exceed the exercise of a
single Company, showing the Soldier the use of some few Firings, that they may
the better perform their respective duties when they shall be commanded
thereunto.

None can positively say, this or that figure shall be, or serve this day, time
or place etc. because of the diversity of forms occasioned by situation of
ground, he number of men, the order of the Enemy; with many other observable
Stratagems, for the obtaining both of Wind and Sun.

I shall therefore according to my allotment of twelve files demonstrate by
figure some Firings, which being well understood may enable such for higher
preferment as time and place may fortune them unto.

By way of digression; I am sure it is a trouble to most ingenious spirits to
see some Gentlemen chosen Captains in the Militia, that are but prisoners to
their own reasons; and instead of being experienced in this Art have been
wholly Ignorant of the least part thereof.

It is no wonder then if his Majesty may lose his expectation of a well
disciplined Militia; and the Soldier in hazard of his life and Country too.

How easily might this be remedied, if our Commanding power would but authorize
the Commission officers to meet once in a month to exercise each other, by
their respective turns, etc. where they may also discourse and consult about
Military affairs; and then for these private Commanders by their affable and
heroic persuasions to get some of their soldiers as may be for their
conveniencie to meet with their arms, and to exercise them; this would not
only be delightful but profitable both for King and Country.

And on the contrary, the neglect hereof, and also of the full number of men
and Arms in the Militia, has made it to be ill spoken of, and so little
feared; especially by those of our own inbred Enemies to the Royal Government.

these things will be better looked into hereafter.
If they will not be drawn to love and to be obedient to Royal Prerogatives,
they must be made to dread it; And I humbly conceive there is no better way to
effect the former than by having a choice Militia, of such whose spirits should
account it a baseness to abuse the Country; and make not their Musters, pass
times for debauchery; and that their Companies be not only well disciplined,
but well Armed also.

I proceed to the drawing up of files again into a body, and preparing them for
skirmish.

ranks and files

A Company of Foot being thus drawn up for service and the Colors flying in
the head of the Company, and there they are to remain, until all forlorn
firings are ended: But so soon as the Drumm shall beat his further preparatives
for a close skirmish, the Ensign is to furle his Colors and retreit to the
half files of Pikes.

Observe, That all firings are either direct, or oblique; and the manner how
they are to be performed, are either Advancing, Receiving, or Retreiting:
otherwhiles there may be firing in the Rear, marching from the Enemy; or in the
flank marching by an Enemy: and also at several places, for an Enemy may at one
and the same time charge, either in the Front or Rear, in Front and Rear, also
in Front, Rear and Flank: and of these I shall demonstrate some that I at first
learnt, and some amongst others that are most convenient to be learnt.

Now that the Soldier might be expert in his firings against the Enemy, let
him be often exercised with firings only, in the pan, falling off and on as
shall be Commanded.

All which being well performed by the Musquetteers is a full accomplishment of
what has been before taught him, by which the Commander shall be credited, and
the Soldier preferred to his merit.

Of firing by forlorn files.

1. That which is to be used in our modern exercise is two manner of ways; the
two outmost files of each flank of Musquetteers to march with two Sergeants so
far as shall be commanded, and there to stand: and the foremost ranks are to
give fire and to fall into the Rear of themselves, either by wheeling off to
the right, or to the right and left: Then let the remaining do the like and
fall into their places.

ranks and files

Those that have fired are to fall off on the inside of the Musquetteers
between them and the Pikes; and as they are thus trooping back (after firing)
to their places, the rest are in like manner to move away, and fire, and fall
in next the Pikes.

2. Accordingly as you draw out two files, so you may draw out more files to
the number of Musquetteers; and so to fire and fall into the Rear of
themselves, and places etc.

3. You may move them all clear of the Pikes, and let them open from the midst,
leaving sufficient Intervals for their wheelings in the Rear of themselves, and
then to place themselves even with their Pikes, the second having fired as
before place themselves in the Rear of the first division etc.

ranks and files

4. Advance the two outmost files by the Sergeants, who are to lead them to the
place for execution as by order received; Commanding

1. Files to rank inward; to present and give fire all together.

2. You may rank inward two Files, or more, and fire as before.

And having fired are to wheel off to the right and left by their respective
file leaders, placing themselves next the Pikes.

I proceed to a second way of firing and that is by Ranks.

First, By advancing before the Front.

Secondly, firing even with the Front.

Thirdly, firing even with the half files.

Advancing before the Front may be performed by advancing of single ranks, and
so firing in the Front; or by advancing of both flanks into the Front before
the Pikes, and so to fire by single ranks. Which is performed by Commanding

Demyhearse.

ranks and files

5. Pikes stand, Musquetteers move forward and place your selves before in the
Front of your Pikes, and close your Divisions.

I mention nothing to tie up the hand of the ingenious to any stinted form,
whose ablities may command his figures at pleasure.

Observe, that when the forlorn files or Ranks march out, they are to give fire
as upon a retreit (that is) to stand and fire, and wheel off that their
followers may do the like, unless the Enemy give ground.

And when the two last ranks were presented, the next two ranks must be ready
to march forward being fixed to present and give fire also: Thus having fired
in the Front by one single Rank, or more, they are by wheeling off to place
themselves in the Rear of their own divisions before the Pikes; the rest doing
the like until they have all fired round.

A second way of firing by this figure shall be a reducement to it.

First, The Frontiers having performed their firing are to wheel off by
division until they come down so low as to be even to the first ranks of Pikes,
and so to rank even a breast: All the Musquetteers are so to do successively
and flank themselves even with the Pikes.

In this firing you are to take ranks and files notice, when there are not
above two Ranks to give fire, the Pikes may then Port, and when all the
Musquetteers have fired they may charge, and then advancing their Pikes the
Battle stands, which brings me to the next firing which is

6. Ranks advancing from the Front of a standing Battalia.

A Sergeant from each Flank leading up the two foremost Ranks (according to
order) the first Rank is to give fire, wheel off, and place themselves in the
Rear of their own divisions: the second in order is to execute the same with
speed, being not above three foot distance from the first, being ready with his
Musquett palm'd, his Cock bent, and Muzzel mounted; so to Present and give
fire; and so to wheel off and place themselves as their Leaders had done before
them.

ranks and files

7. Ranks firing even with the Front.

The first Rank having fired and wheeled off placing themselves in the Rear of
their Divisions, the next ranks are to move forwards at three motions into
their places (making good their leaders ground) and there to present and give
fire; wheeling off and placing themselves as by the former directions. By the
way you must observe, if the body be upon a march the Pikes must be shouldered;
and when they come to charge, they are to close forward at their close order.

ranks and files

It is presupposed ere one firing or two be performed (or past) over, the
bodies are almost close; Then the Pikes are to be at their Port; and at length
to be at their absolute Charge and push home: and being so near they may do
great execution with their Muskets, firing upon the half files of Pikes as if
they were even with the Front. Which brings me to

8. Ranks firing even with the half files.

When the Pikes are charging then the musquetteers may perform this who are to
advance no further than the half files of Pikes, and there you may either fire
one Rank or more at the discretion of the Commander; and as soon as every Rank
has fired successively they are to wheel off and place themselves in the Rear
of their own leaders.

ranks and files

When the firing is ended, and each Soldier in his proper place, the
Musquetteers marching up even in breast with the Front of Pikes they are
reduced.

But in this firing the Musquetteers are to make good their leaders ground,
except it be upon a retreit, then they are to fire upon the same ground and to
wheel off, that their followers may do the like, unless the Enemy give ground.

Horn. Bat.
9. Command. Pikes stand; Musquetteers march until the bringers up rank even
with the Front.

ranks and files

You may in this as with some of the former fire two Ranks ten paces advanced
before the Front, and so whel off and place themselves in the Rear of their own
files.

OR,

Secondly, let the first Rank of Musquetteers present and give fire and wheel
off to the right and left, placing themselves in the Rear of their own files:
then the second Rank firing are to advance into their leaders place, firing and
wheeling off in the same manner, and so they are all successively to do the
like.

Then Thirdly, when they have all given fire, let them begin again, and the
file leaders having fired they are to wheel off to the right and left and flank
themselves even with the Pikes; the second Rank now is to fire upon the same
ground he stands and must not at all advance into his leaders ground as before,
and having once fired all over they are reduced.

OR,

You may reduce themby Commanding the Musquetteers to face about to the right
and march down into their respective places,

OR,

Command the Pikes to march up and even the Front with the file leaders of
Musquetteers.

A triple firing.
10. Front half files of Musquetteers double your Front of Pikes by division: 2.
Rear half files of Musquetteers open to the right and left and Rank even with
the Pikes.

To perform this, direct the Front half files to advance clear of the body of
Pikes, then face them to the right and left inwards, and so close their
divisions before the Pikes.

ranks and files

You are to observe in this firing that the Musquetteers of the Front and both
flanks are to present and give fire together; the Musquetteers of the Front
division after firing are to wheel off to the right and left between their
intervals, and place themselves even in Rank in the Rear of the Rear divisions
of Musquetteers.

Then the Musquetteers that fired in the flanks march directly down and place
themselves even in breast with the Rear of Pikes.

Thus they are reduced: Or else you may continue firing at your pleasure; and
arging of your Pikes.

11. Wheel your flanks by division into the Front.

When they have fired let them march (or pass) down through the intervals, and
place them in the Rear of their own divisions; And then upon an other firing
they may place themselves in the Rear of the Pikes. The Pikes here may charge
either at hand or foot, the Musquetteers may also fire over them.

ranks and files

To reduce them: if it be upon the first Command firing and falling off in the
Rear of their own divisions, let the Body close their Divisions, and wheel
their flanks into the Rear, and face to their Leader. But if you fire a second
time, and wheel off your Musquetteers into the Rear of the Pikes, Command the
masquetteers by division to double their Front entire, and then wheel both
flanks into the Rear, and face them to their Leader as before.

12. Command. Musquetteers, Poyze your Musquetts, and march until til they be
clear of the Body of Pikes: Then, Front half files face to the right and left
inward, close your divisions, and face to your leader; Rear half files open to
the right and: left; Front half files of Pikes face to the right and left
outward, and march even to flank the

Having fired let them wheel off to the right and left, the Front Divisions
falling in the Rear of themselves; and the flanks either in the Rear of
themselves, or else in the Rear of their Pikes, the Pikes moving forward and
maintaining the Musquetteers ground.

ranks and files

To reduce this, Command. Front half files of Musquetteers face to the right
and left outward, and march even in flank with the Rear half files of Pikes:
Then wheel your flanks into the Rear. Front half files of Pikes face in
opposiition, and march into your places. Musquetteers face about to the right
and march closing of your divisions: face all to your leader.

13. Command. Musquetteers march all until your half files be even with the
Front of Pikes; Front half files march three paces forward and stand: Rear half
files of Musquetteers face to the right and left outward and march clear of the
Front half files. Rear half files of Pikes open to the right and left outward,
and march clear of the Front Division of Pikes.

ranks and files

The first Ranks of all divisions having fired they may in the first place fall
in the Rear of their own divisions.

And for a second firing so soon as the first ranks have fired in the Front,
they are to wheel off to the right and left, and flank the Pikes as they were:
then the Rear division of Musquetteers after firing fall off to the right and
left, and place themselves even abreast with the Rear division of Pikes: Then
Rear half files of Pikes face to the right and left inwards and march into your
places: By this they are Reduced.

14. Command. Musquetteers march until your two last Ranks are equal with the
two first Ranks of Pikes. The two second Ranks of Pikes, face to the right and
march into the Rear of the right flank of Musquetteers. The two last Ranks of
Pikes face to the left and march into the Rear of the left flank of
Musquetteers.

Having fired let them whel off to the right and left falling in the Rear of
themselves; and so having fired once or twice over, they may fall in the Rear
of their own Pikes, every Musqueteer as he fireth to advance unto his leaders
place, and the Pikes to advance also, who are to be ported, and when the two
last Ranks are firing they are to charge at the discretion of the Commander;
which Figure I have here set down, because from it the fourteenth shall be
reduced.

ranks and files

The Reducement. The two ranks of Pikes upon the right flank face to the left
and march etc. then march the four ranks direct; The two Ranks on the left
flank face to the right, and place your selves as you were facing them to their
Leader, the Musquetteers to advance and flank the Pikes; they are reduced.

15 Command. Front half files of Musquetteers, and the two first Ranks of Pikes
march three foot: The four Ranks of Pikes wheel your flanks into the front by
division, and face to the right and left, and march even in the Rear of the
Front Division of Musquetteers; Then the Rear half files of Musquetteers face
to the right and left, and march them clear of the division of Pikes, facing
them to their Leader, and march up even with the flanks of Pikes.

ranks and files

Having fired and wheeled off in the Rear of their own divisions of
Musquetteers, then for a second firing let the Front divisions of Musquetteers
fire and wheel into the Rear of Pikes, the pikes porting, and charge as in the
figure and retreit; and upon the retreit the Pikes to fall all even in breast;
And the front division of Musquetteers to sleeve up even in breast with the
Rear division of Musquetteers; Then the Pikes to charge on again, and the rear
division of Musquetteers to fire, wheeling off to the right and left, and fall
into the Rear of the front division of Musquetteers: who will then stand after
this form.

To reduce them, Command. The Pikes to advance and march all to a convenient
distance, then march the middle division of Pikes six foot; then the two
divisions of pikes upon the flanks to face in opposition and close their
divisions; Then Wheel their flanks into the Rear and face them to their leader,
which being done the Pikes are reduced. The Musquetteers are to march up and
flank the Pikes.

ranks and files

Many firings the ingenious might invent to the Front more than what I have
demonstrated: I shall only mention the

Introductive, and Extraductive firings.

I must give my judgment with those who do not allow the firings by way of
Introduction to be useful in our modern Wars; nor are they secure to the
Soldier unless when the Commander shall find his Soldiers to be well
exercised, then amongst other various curiosities these may be performed.

By the word Introduction is meant a passing through, or between, and by its
motion does advance and gain ground upon an Enemy.

16. Command. Make ready to give fire by Introduction: Then Command the files
of Musquetteers to open by division to their open order, and to pass through to
the right, etc.

ranks and files

The first rank of each flank presents and gives fire, so done they stand and
make ready again. The second rank so soon as the first have fired, passes
through, and places it self before the first, and do their fire, and stand
also and make ready again. The third is to pass forward and stand in rank even
with the first, and when the second rank has fired, they must step before the
second, and having fired are to stand and make ready again; and thus every rank
is to follow his Leader successively, until the Bringers up of each Division
are to give fire, and stand in the Front of all.

Observe, in this firing you may keep your Pikes shouldered, still moving
slowly forwards (if there be no danger of Horse) and so keep even with the
Front of Musquetteers: This done twice over will reduce them.

A Second way of Introductive firing.

The first Rank is to fire and stand, as in the forementioned Figure; then the
Bringers-up (or last Rank) whilst the File-leaders are firing shall, march up
and place themselves even with the second Rank, and when they have fired, the
Bringers-up are to step before them, and immediately to present and give fire;
and when the rest have followed their Bringers-up, and fired once over, be sure
that the File-leaders fire twice; Both produce the horn battle.
who ought to be the first and the last, and so stand: the Pikes are to march
up even with the Front of Musquetteers as in the former direction and they are
reduced.

Extraductive.
17. Firing. There have been in use two Extraductive firings, I shall speak but
of one which is allowed somewhat useful, especially in narrow passages, and in
case your Enemy be too powerful, either in Horse or Foot; that then the passage
might be filled up with the Pikes: but if your Pikes be not sufficient to do it
(as you will perceive by my Figure) then double your Ranks, let your Pikes be
in such posture and motion accordingly as occasion shall offer it self.

Command. Musquetteers face about to the right, and march until you are clear
of the Body of Pikes; then face inward and close your Divisions: for the Pikes
command them to double their Ranks to the right; Or, half Files double their
Front to the right.

To perform this Command. The first rank of Musquetteers next after the Pikes,
face to the right; then to march forth file-wise, close up by the right flank
of Pikes; and when the Leader is advanced into the Front of Pikes, he is to
lead them athwart the whole Front of Pikes; after which they are all to stand,
present and give fire, and having fired they are to wheel off to the left, and
fall into the Rear of Musquetteers; and whilst the first Rank is firing, the
second is to be marching so as to be ready to fall into their Places.

ranks and files

To reduce them, Command the Pikes to advance six foot (if they be doubled
their Ranks to the right) let them now double their Files to the left; then
Command:

I could have mentioned a great many more firings to the Front: but through my
confinement to such a small number of men, and not an equality in arms, Art
completed cannot be expected from me.

Must of these firings are solid and serviceable; yet it cannot be conceived
that three Ranks can make any abidement of Battle for continuance against any
Enemy: although sometimes they may be forced to be reduced into less Numbers,
yet by showing the nature hereof you will be the better able to manage a
greater, etc.

CHAP. XIX. Of firing in the Front and Rear; And Rear alone.
BEfore I demonstrate the firings in the Rear, I thought it fit to give one
Figure of firing to the Front and Rear, which may serve also for a firing to
each Flank, when the Commander pleases.

1. Command. Front half Files of Musquetteers march until your Bringers-up be
even in breast with the Front of Pikes: Rear half Files of Pikes face about to
the right. Rear half Files of Musquetteers face about to the right, and march,
until the half File-leaders are even in breast with the Bringers up of Pikes.

ranks and files

For the first firing by this Figure, so soon as the Ranks upon each Division
have fired, they are to wheel off to the right and left, and fall into the Rear
of their own Divisions: And having so fired all over they are to wheel off and
place themselves even in breast with the Pikes, as now they stand faced; then
being faced to their Leader they are reduced.

This is not our drift of firing in the Rear; but if in a March an Enemy
eagerly pursues and assaults, then by facing about and firing in the Rear, or
by Countermarching, or Wheeling about, and so firing; these repulses orderly
performed may cause a disorder in the pursuants: And it is good sometimes as
occasion may offer to keep an Enemy in play, whilst he may advantage himself in
his Ground, either for his Embattlement, or Ambushes, or for the conveyances of
Gunns or other Carriages, etc.

2. Firing. Upon a March the last Rank is to face about, and so to give fire,
wheeling off in File by Division, and marching up toward the Front, and
placing themselves before their File-leaders.

ranks and files

1. Observing, that they rank even with the second rank of Pikes.

2. In the performance of this, you will lose one rank in the Front.

3. Observe, that whilst the rank of Musquetteers are firing in the Rear, the
next rank although he be marching, he ought to be preparing with his cock bent
and guarded, that with his three motions, he may next fire so soon as his
precedent rank is wheeled off.

4. Although you are upon a march, yet you are to fall one rank nearer to the
Rear, that the Body may be preserved entire.

5. Observe further in the performance of all this, your preparations and
firings ought to be at three motions: Cock your match, Blow your coal, Present,
etc.
Let the first be with the right leg advancing, the second with the left leg
advancing, bending your cock; then a little advancing forward with the right
foot, to present and give fire.

Now I give these Reasons for the Observations of some motions in these firings
to the Rear; because so soon as the Soldier has fired, if the last rank
should immediately face about and present, etc. there would be a present
encumbrance; This experience has discovered, and that firing upon motion to be
the most speediest and safest way for firing in the Rear.

Now for a Public Exercise, when you have fired over once, you may then face
them to their Leader, and fire in the Front.

But if you be upon a march, and should be pursued by an Enemies Horse, then
Wheel your Flanks into the Front, and face to the Rear; your Pikes will defend
your Body, so your Musquetteers may fire over them as in the 17. Figure by
extraduction, and reduced accordingly.

Secondly, In firing to the Rear, the Musquetteers may be in the Rear of the
Pikes. And first having fired they are to wheel off and place themselves
between the Front of Musquetteers and Rear of Pikes. And secondly, having fired
in the Rear they may wheel off by Division and march into the Front of Pikes,
the Body still marching. Or, if both flanks be in the Rear, they may fire and
wheel off by Division, and double both flanks.

This last has reduced it self; and for the second you may for exercise, fire
them in the Front, and in their wheeling off to flank their Pikes; or for
expedition, for the Musquetteers to open to the right and left, and march the
Pikes up in the interval, and they are reduced as at first.

You may perceive the use of firings in the Rear, and that the Soldier ought
to be very well exercised in them: For a true experience herein does not only
add to the perfection of the Soldier, but his safety also.

Before I conclude this Chapter, I shall add two Figures of firing in Front and
Rear marching.

3. Command. Front half Files of Musquetteers, march until you be clear of the
Front of Pikes; Face in opposition and close your Divisions.

So for the rear half files, face about to the right, and march until you be
clear of the Rear of Pikes; face them in opposition, and close their Divisions.

ranks and files

Having fired their first and last Ranks, they wheel off to the right and left
by Division, the Front Division are to place themselves even in Rank with the
Front of Pikes, and the Rear Division of Musquetteers are to place themselves
even in Rank with the Bringers-up, and so each Rank successively after each
other, will reduce this Figure.

4. Command. Half Files of Musquetteers, fire to your Front and Rear placing
your selves between your Divisions.

ranks and files

This firing is plain without direction, and the firing being ended they are
reduced.

CHAP. XX. Of Firings in the Flanks.
THere are reasons to be given, and Experience has found it necessary, for
firing in the Flanks: When you are upon a March, an Enemy may endeavor an
assault to molest you in your passages, that your disadvantages may be the
greater, either by ambushments laid against you, or to frustrate your designs.

Now in the performance hereof there are several circumstances that are to be
taken notice of, as the strength of your Enemy, the time, number and place; all
for your own security, or advantages against him.

I shall begin with some Exercises upon the right flank, and what is performed
there by Figure, may also be performed upon the left hand.

In order hereunto pass all your Musquetteers into your right flank by
Commanding: Musquetteers of the right Flank open to the right, and being opened
to a convenient distance, stand; then Musquetteers of the left Flank, pass
through your Ranks of Pikes to the interval of the right Flank, then stand, and
face to your Leader.

Your facings to the right or left, is that, by which the flanks become
accidental fronts, and then for the firings thereupon, you may to your
discretion use such as are most convenient; being already shown Chapter 18. I
shall not here take up any room with the demonstrations thereof, and shall show
but some few firings in the right flank, as the Body shall be marching, in all
which you are to observe the Pikes are to be shouldered.

1. Command. Musquetteers give fire to the right, and wheel after your
Bringers-up, between your Divisions.

ranks and files

And this at the discretion of the Commander is done two ways, either by
commanding to be lead into their places by their File-leader, or by their
Bringers-up, and to place themselves before them, etc.

Here by this Figure, they in the first place, as the Body is marching, face to
the right (the outmost File) presents and gives fire: after their firing, they
face to the right, and after their Bringer-up, who leads them off in the Rear
of the Musquetteers, and up into the Interval between the Pikes and Muskets,
until the Bringer-up of the File has placed himself even in breast with the
Frontiers; and so the marching Party, as Command shall be given, are to open,
that the Files of Musquetteers after they have fired may march up between the
Divisions, and so every File is successively to fire, and wheel off and place
it self. This firing being performed twice over they are Reduced: If but once,
you must countermarch your files of Musquetteers to reduce them.

2. You may secondly after they have fired, Command them to face to the right,
and to wheel off, every man placing himself before his Bringer up (or present
Leader) hereby the Bringer up will be in his due place and the file-leader in
his proper place, also.

3. A Third way of firing upon this Figure, is to fire in the right flank, and
to be lead off into their places by their respective File-leaders.

The Body marching, the outmost File faceth to the right and fires, and when
the body is marched clear of the standing file, then the next file presents to
the right and fires, and whilst he is firing, the first file that is fired
faceth to the left, and marches up between the Musquetteers and Pikes.
Observing the former directions in their march, that there may be space enough
in the Interval for the several Files successively to march into these places.

ranks and files

4. There is a fourth way of firing, that is, to give fire to the right and
gather up your Files.

The Body marching the outmost file faceth to the right, fires, then stands,
and faceth to their Leader: Then when the Body is clear of the standing file,
the second file faceth to the right, and fires and stands also, facing to their
Leader; then the first file is to advance up to the second, and so when the
first and second have fired they are to be lead up to the third. Thus having
fired, they are to be lead up even in breast to the file that last fired, and
having all fired, they are to be marched up even with the Front Pikes.

ranks and files

To reduce this, Command: Left half Ranks of Musquetteers, face to the left;
Pikes face to the right, pass through interchanging of Ground; Face to your
Leader.

How beneficial this may be to the security of the Soldier, they that will
make use of it that are ingenious will better judge: but I am of opinion it is
more fit for a private Exercise, than for public Service.

5. Command. Give fire to the right, and place your selves even in Front with
the Pikes, marching up between the midst of the Pikes.

Observe, in the performance hereof, the Pikes as they march are to open to the
right and left, and the fired Musquetteers are to be lead up according to
Command.

ranks and files

To reduce this, Command. 1. Pikes to face inwards. 2. Musquetteers face to the
right and left outward. 3. Pass all through and interchange Ground. 4. Face to
your Leader.

6. Command. Musquetteers give fire to the right, placing your selves on the
outside of the left Flank of Pikes.

ranks and files

If you will reduce this without any firing, you may Command the right half
Ranks to pass through your Ranks of Pikes.

(The Ingenious may find many ways for the Reducement.) Or, when all the
Musquetteers are on the left flank, you may fire them over again, and they are
reduced.

7. Command. Musquetteers give fire to the right and to the Rear; placing your
selves between the Pikes and your own Divisions.

Having placed your left flank of Musquetteers in the Rear, A useful firing.
then Command,

ranks and files

The outmost file upon the right flank, are to face to the right, and the last
rank of Musquetteers in the Rear are to face about, and both are to present and
give fire together; and having fired the outermost file upon the right hand
faceth to the left, and marches after their Leader in the interval between the
Muskets and the Pikes; They are to march a reasonable pace.
and the rank fired in the Rear is to wheel to the right, placing it self in
the Rear of Pikes, etc.

This is easily reduced, by commanding the Musquetteers to draw off into the
left flank again.

Observe, that flank that is farthest from the Enemy ought to be drawn into the
Rear.

8. Command. Musquetteers give fire to both Flanks (marching) and place your
selves between the Pikes and your own Divisions.

ranks and files

To perform this, the outermost file of each flank presents outward.

9. Command. The Body standing, Advance your Pikes; Musquetteers and Pikes face
to the right and left; Musquetteers present and give fire to both flanks, and
flank your Pikes.

The outermost file upon the right and left flank presents and fires, wheeling
off by Division, ranking or flanking the Pikes, as they stand faced, leaving
such a distance as the rest may securely follow them, every rank is to fire
upon the same Ground, and wheel off by Division after the same manner.

ranks and files

From this Figure as they will stand after firing, there may be produced a
great many brave Figures; but now I must leave them to the skilful Artist.

To reduce this Command. The Musquetteers to march all until they are clear of
the Pikes; then face them to the right and left inwards, and close their
Divisions, and face them to their Leader.

10. Command. Because it may easily be produced from the precedent Figure; it
shall be from the first Figure of firing in the Front and Rear, Chap. 19. the
Body being faced to the right and left will be a firing to both Flanks.

11. Command. Shall be a firing to right Flank and to the Front and Rear.

Left half Ranks double your right Flank by Division.

ranks and files

You may face the Divisions any way, which you intend for their firing.

After firing they are to wheel off into their own Divisions, every Rank moving
into his Leaders Ground.

To reduce them, face them to their proper Front, then Command half Ranks that
doubled face to the left, and so march into your places. See the doubling of
Flanks Figure 17.

CHAP. XXI. Of several Divisional Firings.
I Might here make mention of a great many Figures for firings, some
serviceable, and others not, but all left to the judicious for censure, and to
make use of the best; yet none useless for delight or Garden Exercises: The
Figures cannot be perfect because I am tied to the exercise but of twelve
Files, four of them Pikes and eight Musquetteers; it being a Number that our
Western Commanders can make use of, and no more; yet any who may be capable to
perform them, will be able to invent others; and command the production of such
like in geater Numbers, and with better delight.

1. Command. The two outmost Files upon each Flank stand; the two inmost half
Ranks of the Rear face about to the right: the two inmost half Ranks both of
Front and Rear, march until you are clear of the Body of Pikes; then half Files
rank to the right and left inwards by wheeling into the Front.

For the Pikes, open them to the right and left from the midst; then Command
the right and left hand File of Pikes to stand; the Rear half Files of the
remainder face about to the right, then both half Files rank to the right and
left inward into the Front and Rear.

This Figure in great Bodies must be performed otherways, and may be very
serviceable against the Horse; the Pikes may advance into the Front of
Musquetteers to secure them against the Horses fury if occasion shall serve.

ranks and files

After their first firing and wheeling off to the right and left in the Rear of
their own Divisions, then when the Pikes are defending them from the Horse, let
them fire over the Pikes.

This being done pass through the Musquetteers before the several Fronts of
Pikes, as they were before any firing.

To reduce them, Command. Face the Front and Rear to the right and left
inwards: The Front and Rear Ranks of Pikes file to the right and left inwards;
the right and left hand files of Pikes close to the right and left inwards; and
close all to the midst: Then Command the Front and Rear Ranks of Musquetteers,
file to the right and left inward, face in opposition and march into your
places; closing the whole Body to their close Order; and open them again to
their Order: Evening of their Ranks and streightning of their Files they are
reduced.

2. Command and Direction. Musquetteers open six foot to the right and left:
Front half Files of the right Flank of Musquetteers, Advance entire into the
Front of Pikes: The Rear Division of the left Flank of Musquetteers face about
to the right, and double entire the Rear of the Pikes: The Front Division of
Musquetteers of the left, face about to the right, and march even in breast
with the Rear half Files of Pikes: The Front half Files of Pikes face to the
right and left outward, and march until you are clear, etc. Face them to their
Leader.

ranks and files

To reduce them. The Front Division of Musquetteers face to the right, and
march into your places: Rear Division of Musquetteers face to the left, and
march forth into your places: Front half Files of Pikes face in opposition and
close your Divisions: The left flank of Musquetteers advance even with the
Front of Pikes: Musquetteers close to the right and left inward, and face them
to their Leader. And they are reduced.

3. Command. Front half Files face to the right and left, and march clear of
your Rear half Files: Face them to their Leader, and march them until their
Rear be even in Front with their Pikes: The two first Ranks of each Division
face to the right and left and march them clear of their own Divisions; face
them to their Leader: The four first Ranks of Pikes open to your open Order,
and double your Ranks to the right, the two last Ranks of Pikes face about to
the right and march clear of the Rear of Musquetteers: Face to your Leader.

ranks and files

To reduce them, Command. The first Body of Pikes to double their Files to the
left, the two last Ranks of Pikes march and close your Divisions.

The two first Ranks of Musquetteers face in opposition, and close your
Divisions.

Then the Front Divisions of Musquetteers face to the right and left inwards,
and march even to the Front of Pikes, then face them to their right and left,
and close their Divisions: Face them to their Leader: evening their Ranks and
streightning of their Files, they are reduced.

4. Command. Front half files march clear from your Musquetteers: The Rear half
files of Musquetteers face about to the right and march clear of your Pikes;
and face to your leader.

ranks and files

The Reducement. The Front Division of Pikes, face about to the right, and
march into your places; the Rear Division of Musquetteers march up into your
places.

5. Command. Wheel both your Flanks of Musquetteers into the Front, both flanks
of Musquetteers open to the right and left: Front division of Pikes march clear
of the Front of Musquetteers, and open to the right and left, until you are
clear of the Angles of the Rear half files: The two inmost files of
Musquetteers march until you are clear of the Front of Pikes: The next two
inmost files of Musquetteers face in opposition, march and close your divisions
in the Front of the Rear division of Pikes; face all to your leader.

ranks and files

To reduce this; The four middle files of Musquetteers face to the right and
left and march into your places. The files of Musquetteers in the Front face
about to the right and march into your places. Face them to their leader. The
Front half files of Pikes face in opposition, and close your divisions facing
them to the Rear and march them into their places; then close the Front of
Musquetteers as at first, and wheel the Front into your flanks etc. they are
reduced.

The two next figures are almost one and the same, and with but a little
alteration in their Commands they may be either produced, or reduced.

6. Command. Pikes stand; The Rear half files of Musquetteers face about to the
right: Musquetteers march all until you are clear both of your Front and Rear
of Pikes, face in opposition and close your divisions: The four inmost Ranks of
Musquetteers march clear of the remainder both in Front and Rear. The two last
Ranks of Pikes stand, the rest to the right and left by division march clear of
the Musquetteers, and wheel to the right and left outward.

ranks and files

Directions for firing upon this or others I must leave to the ingenious;
wishing the unskilful to fire only as the Figure lies, lest it may prove
trouble to them to reduce.

The Reducement. The two ranks upon the flanks wheel to the right and left
inwards and march into your places: Front and Rear Musquetteers face about to
the right and march forth into your places (provided they are faced to the
Rear) only then the Front Musquetteers are to face about. Then Musquetteers
face to the right and left outward, and march clear of the Pikes; face in
opposition and close your divisions, and face all to their leader they are
reduced.

It is but marching up of the two last ranks of Pikes into the Rear of the
Front division of Musquetteers, and the Musquetteers even to the Rear of the
Pikes, which produces this next figure.

ranks and files

7. Command. Half files double your Front to the right, the two outmost files
of Musquetteers of each flank march ten paces direct and stand. The two next
files of Musquetteers of each flank march to the Rear of the first, and the two
next Ranks in the Rear of the second, until they are clear of the Front of the
battle: And thus is this figure produced.

Or by Commanding. The two outmost in each flank to stand, the rest of the Body
face about to the right and march, and so leaving the two outmost files in the
Rear of the first, and the third in the Rear of the second, and the remainder
of the Body in the Rear of the third; facing all to their proper Front.

ranks and files

To reduce them, Command. Musquetteers face about to the right and march into
your places; Then half files that doubled face about to the right and march
forth into your places. Or, Even files from the left, double your files to the
left.

8. Command. Half files double your Front to the right entire, then command the
two outmost files of Musquetteers of each Flank to march until they are clear
of the Front and stand; the four inmost files march until they are clear of the
Battles also and stand.

ranks and files

To reduce them. Musquetteers face about to the right, and march forth into
your places. Then half ranks of the right double the depth of your left flank
entire.

9. Command. Pikes march clear of your body; Pikes wheel your flanks into the
Rear; Musquetteers close to the right and left inward: Half files of
Musquetteers double your Front to the right: The four innermost files of
Musquetteers face about to the right and march clear of the Rear: even your
Ranks and streighten your files both of Pikes and Musquetts: Then the four
innermost files both of Pikes and Musquetteers march ten paces direct. Then
Pikes and Musquetteers of each Flank face to the right and left, and march ten
paces; facing them to their leader.

ranks and files

To reduce this, Command. The front division of Pikes and Musquetteers face
about to the right and march even in breast with the Rear of Musquetteers of
each flank. Then face the division to the right and left inwards, and close
your divisions, then Command the Musquetteers to open to the right and left
from the midst, and the Rear divisions of Musquetteers march into the
intervails (or into your places as you were. Then Command the Pikes to wheel
their flanks into the Front, then open the divisions of Musquetteers to the
right and left, facing the Pikes about to the right, and march into their
places: so facing of them to their Leader they are reduced.

I might have added more, as the Plinthium Battle. For which and more read
Captain Bingham Chap. 42. pa. 55. as also Barrif, Ward. And Elton as I am
informed has written at large, but I never saw his works.

CHAP. XXII.
IT may be expected I should treat also of large Battalias, or great numbers of
men; demonstrating of them likewise by their several Plat-forms: But having my
Number proportioned, as you see by my several exercises, I have stretched them
as far as is convenient, that by their figures they may be so well understood,
that when larger numbers are before you, your Commands may be performed with
more delight and security.

But before the Drum beats a march to depart the field, I shall briefly
declare, That in grand Battalias (or field services) the Soldier fires by
vollies, or (as termed by some) Salves of shot; that is, when they are to fire
entirely by two or three Ranks, or more, as your number will permit, and
occasion require; thereby pouring showers of lead upon your Enemy: Now this way
of firing, and those also of gaining ground I could wish the Soldier should be
often experienced in: The Commander in taking pains with his Soldier cannot be
the worse for it, and I am sure the Soldier much the better; being fitted
thereby to meet his Enemy in any field service, when his Majesty shall have
occasion to Command him. For that Commander that is experienced in this Art
Military finds that those who know but little more than the Theory part, are
oftimes pusled (or at a stand.)

What can such who are but mere Bookleidgers do? when their Number of men is
wanting; or nature in place sparing to their advantage or intentions; such when
they are forced to action, they will fail of their expectation, and at last
must be beholding to others that are better Artists, or else it may prove a
fatal ruin to both.

Some of my friends might think that I should treat also somewhat concerning
the dignities of Officers in marching and in placing of them in field services:
but that belonging to Commanders of an higher degree, it would be presumption
in me to lay down rules for them to follow; for any Minor Officer that for his
satisfaction will be pleased to view the third Chapter of these Obsevations, he
may understand the method and mode thereof; and I hold it in my judgment, that
all dignity in marching of a Regiment is from a file; and the drawing up of
Companies for a Battalia, is from a Rank.

In the next place I come to show the necessity of the exercise of Arms, etc.

CHAP. XXIII. Showing the necessity of the Exercise of Arms with their
Antiquity.
BEcause I have heard it sounding in my ears; what needs all this trouble and
expenses, in the exercise of Arms? We are now in times of Peace what need we
to make provision, etc? I shall lay down some examples showing.

First, How Ancient the use of Arms have been.

Secondly, A complaint for want of Arms. And

Thirdly, The end and use of them.

For the first, Abraham had three hundred and eighteen men in his House fitted
for War, upon short warning. Moses showed the people how to encamp by their
Standards, under the Ensigns of their fathers Houses. Joshua and the Judges,
under whom of Reuben and Gad and the half Tribe of Manasseh were four hundred
and forty thousand, seven hundred and sixty men exercised in Wars. You may read
of David, of Solomon, of Jehosaphat, of Asa, of Vzziah, whose care in this
particular is most plentifully declared.

Secondly, Of the complaint for want of Arms. We read in the History of the
Judges, Was there a shield or a Spear seen among forty thousand in Israel? This
question is a plain negative, there was not; here is that Defectus Remedii, the
want of help: Great was their misery, but no remedy; not a Spear to offend, nor
not so much as a Shield to defend; War was at their Gates, yet neither
offensive nor defensive weapon to assist: Such an extremity as this was will
cause all to be lost; either present possessions, or in future possibilities,
so that hope and help in such extremities must be laid aside.

There was likewise a great distress in the time of Saul; when the spoilers
were come out from the Philistines, there was neither Sword nor Spear found in
any of the hands of the people that were with Saul and Jonathan (but with Saul
and Jonathan only) yet although here was a great want they had victory. It is
well known that God can give victory by small means, (and as the Apostle said
to Christ, Master, here are two Swords; he answered it is enough. He can give
your Enemies into your hands with two Swords, with one Sword, with no Sword.)
All this was to convince the Children of Israel, that God fought for them, to
move them to bless the Lord,

Fifth monarchy men.
Although some have been such audacious Rebels to think their zeal should even
beck God Almighty, or to command power and aid from him to fight for them;
therefore boldly attempted of late, saying that ten should chase an hundred and
an hundred a thousand: But through the unjustness of their undertakings (and
fewness in Number) they must sink; to convince them and all others upon any
pretense of Religion that will be such Rebellious dissenters, God Almighty will
not only fight against them, but will deliver them into the hands of Justice,
to magnify his own power in bringing such to condign punishment.

Thirdly, For the end and use of Arms; It is for the recovery of our just
rights which wrongfully have been detained; or for the preservation of them,
against any opposer either foreign or domestic: For these ends Arms may be
used, and War proclaimed; yet not by any other way or pretense, but by and with
his Majesty's consideration thereof whether just or unjust; by which we are to
be either encouraged or discouraged.

A just cause may be farther considered in the Peace of the People, the safety
of the Country, and the Glory of the Kingdom: As to the first, there was never
any War intended but to make way for Peace, (it is a base end to desire Peace,
by which to leavy a force against an unjust War) but so to desire a just War
that thereby may be settled a well grounded peace.

A second thing that may be considered is the health and safety of the
Country: some must be endangered that all may not be destroyed: I could wish
that our Chiefetains and Gentlemen with those dull, leaded spirits of our
rotten Country -- and miserable worldlings would consider for whose sakes the
worthy Soldier spares neither time nor purse in this Noble Exercise; but even
for them and theirs, theirs and their Children; yet they must be judged most
contemptible; rather than to countenance them, some will burden them in their
rates and taxes, and keep their just dues and pays from them: yet consider who
it is that must preserve your Cities and Countries, Temples and Palaces,
Trafficks and Marketts, Ships and Shops, from ruin, desolation and
destruction; but the Soldier under God.

Thirdly, The Glory of a Kingdom lies much in a people well disciplined in the
Art of War. That Prince that makes it his designs to have his people
instructed and trained up in Military exercises, will make his Enemies to fear
him both at home and abroad: And that people that shall justly be called forth
upon these principles, need not fear of being conquerours.

A just cause may be spoiled through the ill management thereof, or through
perfidious dealings.

A Rebellious Conqueror may make laws even to death it self, to maintain his
Victory; as our late Usurpation has experienced: But at last the whole world
beheld with an eye of admiration, to see how miraculously God restored his
Majesty to his Crown and Dignities; the Church and People to their just rights
and liberties.

I do affirm and truly say of Sovereign Power, Kingdoms, Laws and Armies, as
was said of Hippocrates's Twins, they laugh and weep together, they live and
die together; for as without Laws the Sovereign power and the Commonwealth
cannot subsist by reason of disorders within; so without Arms, and the
exercise of them the cannot be safe by reason of dangers without.

I shall further and briefly prove that the safety both of King and people is
much advanced by the exercise of Arms: although Solomon says In the multitude
of people is the honor of a King, and for want of people comes destruction.
Notwithstanding I may affirm that safety is not in a multitude of men without
weapons, and skill to manage them. It is asserted That Counsel and strength are
for War; Then, how shall Counsel and strength be established, Isa. 36.
without education and instruction to service? and how shall a man be
instructed without Military Exercises? There are some disadvantages that happen
in Wars, partly by reason of the suddainness of the War, and partly in respect
of the inequality and odds betwixt party and party; Now Soldiers without
dexterity and skill, can never be able to extricate themselves out of such
difficulties as may befall them: All which proves that the exercise of Arms is
to be allowed and Commanded.

And as I told you at first I have heard some say, that we live in Gospel
times, which are to be times of Peace, and not of war, therefore there needs
not those Exercises of Arms as you reason for etc. This is argued by some out
of covetousness to save their expenses; but are ready to declare when there is
occasion, then they will be in a readiness to do their best: There are others
of a Fanatic humor, He speaks not against the use of weapons or lawful
War. Whereas before Christ they were enemies, but now there shall be love etc.
unwilling to set forward any thing that may be commanded them, and argue from
that in Isaiah, They shall heat their swords into plough shares and their
Spears into pruning hooks. Nation shall not lift up a Sword against Nation,
neither shall they learn War any more.

Now in answer hereunto we must oppose it by another saying in Joel, where the
people were called upon to beat their plough shares into swords, and their
pruning hooks into Spears.

For the reconciling hereof the learned say that Isaiah was to distinguish
between the purpose and intent of Christ's coming into the world, and the other
shows the success and event which was accidental in respect of man's malice:
Again to the first of these they argue what Christ said to Saint Peter, Put up
thy Sword, for he that strikes with the Sword, shall perish by the Sword. But I
pray you observe what he says to his Disciples, That he that has no Sword,
let him sell his coat and buy a Sword.

Although the end of Christ's coming was to reconcile things in Heaven and
things on earth; I have been further taught by the Learned that this is
attained unto between God and us in our Justification; and will be accomplished
between man and man in the day of Redemption: Yet as long as there is a
Sathanical Spirit in the children of disobedience, and so long as there is a
remnant of sin in the heart of any, there will be Divisions, Familists,
Quakers, Anabaptists, Independents, and Presbyterians; All being refractory to
the present commands etc. Which shows a necessity to have a care and prepare
for the exercise of Arms; That none of these by their Usurpation may for ever
hereafter snatch the Trumpets out of Moses's hands; nor the Trumpet only, but
the Sword also, nor the Sword alone but the Crown and Scepter also: Now by this
mutual exercise of Arms I doubt not but in a litttle time God Almighty will
unite the affections of most against such as shall exalt themseves above all
that is called God.

Let me excite all to be diligent, in the use of the means, to make themselves
able and fit Soldiers and Commanders, by often Exercising, and willing to get
complete Arms, to be exercised in Martial dispipline; considering how ill it
was with Israel when there was not a shield to be found amongst 40000 men; And
consider again how worthy of praise it was to Martial Discipline in Israel,
when they had 170000 every one able to lead an Army, etc.

I must tell you we have not our peace by Patent, we know not how long it may
continue, Let war therefore be provided for, as to train up some to military
practices: If War should come, it is labor well spent; If not, it is a labor
well lost. Long preparations make a short and quick victory.

Some are apt to say we have Soldiers enough, we will all fight when occasion
shall serve; Let me tell such that they that never tried it, think it a
pleasure to fight, and they will fight strangely, if they have no weapons, and
use their weapons more strangely if they have no skill: Re Milita. lib. 1. c.
20.
It is a saying of Vegetius, Non de pugna, sed de fuga cogitant, qui nudi in
acie exponuntur ad Vulnera. Their minds are not so much on fighting as fleeing,
that are exposed to War without weapons; and a Soldier may be almost as well
without them as not to know how to use them.

Now that the Soldier may not be failing herein, and that his Majesty may
never want able Soldiers in the Country as well as in the City; I most humbly
beg, and crave pardon in presuming to present it, That the Muster master in
every Country should be a careful unbyassed person, an able Soldier, and one
whom the Commanders and Gentlemen love and affect, who should be always by
authority to attend at such times and places, as shall be thought convenient to
exercise and teach the Art of Military discipline to all that shall willingly
embrace it; And if his pay be too little for him, to make it his business and
to attend upon it: It may be then augmented without any trouble; and the
Soldier will be found much more capable for service when commanded.

There must be exercise or else men's spirits will grow restie: what turns to
putrefaction sooner than standing water? what is Virtue without Action?
Idleness does neither get, nor save; but lose: If exercise be good then those
are best that tend to the most good: The exercises of War step in to challenge
their deserved praise, which I leave to the most Judicious to give them their
due in time and place.

The ancient Gauls were said to be the most Warlike and Valiant men of all
Nations: But how became they such? It was by the continual exercise and use of
Arms; Caesar's Com. l. 5. and 7.
for it was their Custom, to come Armed to their Councils.

Their applause of any Oration was signified by clattering of their Arms, and
their Oaths taken were upon their Arms.

The Germans were wont to go Armed about their negotiations, and to their
Banquets.

The most Warlike Nations in the world have accounted it a piece of policy, to
be frequent in the use of Arms: Why should not the laudableness of such
martial exercises persuade men to love and embrace the use of them?

We read some presidents for it; of Jonathans shooting for sport that he might
be thereby fitted to War. And without doubt the Benjamites attained that
dexterity in casting stones out of a sling at an hairs breadth by frequent
exercise for recreation.

And may I not affirm, by the Exercise of Arms that Empires, Kingdoms and
Commonwealths have come to their height and Sovereignty, and have so
maintained their State in happiness and prosperity? and by neglecting of the
same, they have declined and decayed, and at last have been made Preys to their
Enemies: How were those Empires and Monarchies of the Egyptians, Medians,
Parthians, Persians and Romans, established and greatly augmented by this
Military Art; And how was the Dominion of the Grecian Empire preserved and
wonderfully enlarged by the Art and Discipline of great Alexander with small
Armies of well ordered and exercised Soldiers? How did he vanquish most great
and huge Armies of his Enemies? Nay a great part of the World even contrary
then to expectation?

Even so on the other side, the forgetting and neglecting of this Art Military,
has not been only the decay but the ruin of many Empires and Kingdoms.

Now that people that is not encouraged, or rather compelled by good Laws to
practice and exercise Arms, or any thing else belonging to this Military Art;
they will in a short time for want of such Manlike, Martial Orders and
Exercises, grow into Sloth, to Covetousness, to Drunkenness, and Vicious
Effeminacies, and to all other Evils as Nature shall incline them unto; by the
which they in a short time do become unfit to be employed in any War offensive,
and unable to defend themselves if they should be invaded.

Did not God for the sins of the Jews deprive them of understanding of this
Military Art? Among other Privileges he deprived them of, he tool from them
the valiant men of War, the Prudent and the Captains of fifty, etc. When he
made them thus incapable, then they were first of all conquered and utterly
subdued and ^^^ed by the Romans, under their Emperors Vespasian and Titus his
Son: I might tell you of many Nations and Kingdoms that have been ruined for
want of Order and Exercise: Spain by the Moors: King Don Roderigo, and many
thousands of his Nobility and people were slain by the Arabians and Moors.

And about the Year 1353. we read that the Princes of Greece, aided by the
Despote or Duke of Bulgaria did revolt against John Paleologus at that time
Emperor of Constantinople; who for his safety against those Revolters entered
into a League with Amurat the first, and third King of the House of Ottoman,
and had his Assistance with ten thousand of his Horsemen; who by their good
order and well disciplined Soldiers did prevail against his Revolters, and
brought them to obedience: But what followed? Amurat being informed of the
great riches those Graecians had, together with their weakness, by reason of
their disorder in Military Affairs, transported an Army over the Asian Seas
into Greece, and by that Invasion took many Cities and Towns, and did
afterward by battle slay the Duke of Bulgaria and Servia, with many others,
etc. and there placed himself over a great part of their Dominion: So about
fourscore years after, Mahomet the second Emperor of the Turks seeing
Constantine Paleologus then Emperor of Constantinople without any settled
Militia, and his people grown luxurious and not able to resist him by Battle,
did in the Year 1453. besiege the Emperial City of Constantinople, who within
two Months by assault won the said City, and put the Emperor, Empress, and
their young Princes, with an infinite number of Men, Women and Children to the
sword.

I might give a great many more Instances as to our own Country from the Saxons
to the Normans; and what History speaks later of our selves, I must leave that
to our Reformers to consider how useful and necessary the exercise of Arms is
to the welfare of a Nation and people.

The Emperor Alexander Severus that Excellent Prince being very skilful in
Government, both in War and Peace, speaking to his Men of War said; The
Military Discipline of our Ancestors does maintain and preserve out State and
Commonwealth; but if we do neglect the same, and make no account of the Orders
and Exercises of it, We, our name and Reputation of Romans, and therewith all
the Roman Empire, are lost and forgotten.

Though the frequent use of Arms in Exercise is most commendable, because of
the special helps it has in making us fit and serviceable Instruments of the
Public welfare: Yet I advise it with these Cautions.

First, have a respect to your particular Calling. God Almighty feeds us, as
well as defends us; so if any man under pretense of his Exercise shall waste
his time and means, to the damage or undoing of his Family; I say, such will
bring a scandal, and an ill report upon this worthy design: He that would
manage his Country Affairs with delight and profit, to his preservation and not
to his ruin and destruction, must imitate those Builders under Nehemiah, who
held their Swords in one hand, and their Trowel in the other; so mind your
Military Exercises, as not to forget your necessary Affairs at home; without
your dependances be wholly upon it, then to mind nothing more.

Yet Secondly, To have such an intent upon their private and particular
concernments, making them unfit for Employments, as to impede them in the
seeking the Public Good, or make themselves the main end of their Enterprise
in what they undertake, does degenerate so much from being true Soldiers, as
to dishonor themselves in all their Services, and will be the sole jet to
hinder preferment when it shall fall.

And lastly, Sparta's Soldiers (I have read) were Sparta's Walls, by reason of
their Concord and Unity amongst themselves; therefore let every Soldier
respectively preserve Unity in the Bond of Peace, and in so doing we shall be
the better able to pray with our Church, To give peace in our time, O Lord, for
there is none that fights for us, but only thou, O God.

CHAP. XXIV. Conclusion.
I Humbly crave pardon for what is here undertaken, knowing my own inabilities
for so great a Work; If I had seen any part of Elton's Pieces, before I had
concluded these my minor Lines; they should have been turned into oblivious
dust: But being commanded by some of our Chieftains, and desired by others of
my Friends to proceed thus far (and no farther) accordingly I have both granted
and obeyed: It is not in the least to condemn any Person that has gone before
me, or to boast in the least for what is done, or what I know: I have observed
that some are most excellent for their Pen; some in their Lingue, and others
for execution; now what I do want in either of the two first, the last with my
blood shall witness to all the true zeal I bear to my Sacred King, and
Countries good, when Commands and Occasions present themselves: In the mean
time, to him who is the great King of Kings, Lord of Lords, preserve to his
Honor, good of his People, and confusion of his Enemies.

CHAP. I. The Original and beginning of Ensigns and Colors.
OF this Subject I never thought to have spoken any thing, 1670.
but this last Summer perceiving most Ensigns (having that Honor assigned them
by Commission) knew but little what belonged to their Office; and think it a
thing of little or no difficulty, but only a Rag or Mark, which any man may
carry, so it be born up, or swung about men's cars, and sometimes in the teeth
of such which are next unto them.

And for the Election of these Officers by some new Commissionated Captains; It
is not by the greatness of his skill, but the largeness of his body; not how
able he is in his mind, but how strong he is in his Arms; not what is his
Spirit, Activity, Dexterity, but what is his wealth, and how near he is allied
to the Captain in blood, friendship, or service; or some other beholdingness to
him, for this piece of Honor: As if this Place deserved nothing else, but a
mere Man, or some Friend: For when shall you see an Ensign almost in any
Employment, more than in ordinary Marches, or standing still, and observing
other men's Actions? When shall you see either Captain or Lieutenant, teach the
Ensign his Postures, or the Dignity of his Place, his demeanor before Kings,
Princes and Potentates; and other his subjection to his Superiors; his State
and Guard to his Equals, and his Humanity and Courtesy to his Inferiors.

I am sure that some are so far from making inquiry after these discoveries
that you shall see some Ensigns let fly their Colors, when they should sink
them; and some to stoop them to Pesants or Comrades, when Superiors have gone
unsaluted: There are a great many other absurdities, but I shall hereby
endeavor a Reformation; although it may not be to the satisfaction of all, yet
I will lay open and plain what I know of these Concerns, as not to puzzle him
who is desirous to learn, nor lull asleep with amazement the weakest capacity.

Therefore in the first place I shall endeavor to declare the Original and
first beginnings of Ensigns (or Colors) in the Wars, and how they have grown
up by succession, and continue as now they are.

It Is true, that the Ancient Historians and Heathen Writers, hold diverse
Opinions, touching the first beginning of Ensigns: Some deriving of them
(especially the old Poets) from Hercules; in imitation of his Lions skin:
Others take the beginning from Perithou^, Persius.
the Companion of Hercules in Imitation of his enchanted shield; whereon was
painted the head of the Monster Gorgon; on which whosoever gazed was instantly
transformed into a stone: But these fictions are more moral than true.

There be others which suppose, that the first Ensign was born or carried
before Theseus, when he went to combat with Hippolyta, Queen of the Amazons,
whom he bravely conquered and afterward married.

Now as these, so many other Writers suppose diverse other beginners of this
Mystery: Some lay it upon Mercury, because of his Caduceus: Some upon Vulcan,
when he forged Mars a Shield, and an Armor; and some upon Jupiter, whose
Ensign was Thunder and Lightning.

But those which go much nearer the Truth ascribe the beginning of this Dignity
unto Tuhalca^n the Son of Lamech, who painted in an Ensign the whole History of
his Fathers Actions and Conquests, when he conquered (or rather tyrannized
over) his weaker Neighbors: And that after him Japhet the Son of Noah, did the
like, and caused his Actions to be painted out, and born before him in an
Ensign.

But upon the credit of these old Poets, Historians and Rabbis, we may not
rely, but must fly to the truth it self; which is ever a faithful and a
constant Warrant.

We find in holy Writ that the greatest Chieftain that ever led Army upon the
Earth was Moses, the great servant of the great God; He was truly Dux a Duke, a
Leader, such a Duke and such a Leader, as after him (Christ excepted) was never
the like seen in the World; and the Army which he lead, was the greatest,
strongest, and most fortunate in Number, Power, and in all manner of hazardous
Actions, that ever the World saw, or the Sun shined upon.

Now we find this Duke, this Prince over Israel, by the holy appointment of God
himself was the first that began true Martial Discipline; for as himself was
General over that huge Body; so for the well disposing and governing of every
particular member, he constituted and appointed several Colonels over the
several Tribes, and under every Colonel several Captains, as Commanders in
Chief over particular Companies, who as Inferiors did execute the Commands of
their Superiors, and had also executed under them, by others, whatsoever they
lawfully commanded, that was for the good and benefit of the Army. As thus he
divided the twelve Tribes into twelve warlike Bodies; so also he ordained them
several Ensigns or Banners, charged with twelve several Marks or Divisions,
under which they marched; which by solemn oath and protestation they were bound
to guard and follow in all places and all dangers.

By these Ensigns and tokens of Honor, the Tribes were first of all
distinguished and known one from another; and by the carriage of them in the
field, and their waving and prospects in their several places, was the dignity
of place and precedence of greatness first known; the Elder being distinguished
by his Ensign or Mark from the younger, the greater from the less, and the
eminent and more superior from those of lower rank and inferior.

Although we have a large Basis to superstruct our imitations upon, yet there
was not the general use of Ensigns then, as now there is; for these Ensigns
were due only to the great Colonel, or chief head of the Tribes, not to every
particular Company, but to one Tribe was allowed but one Ensign, and after one
manner and form; so as Simeon may not carry that of Levi, nor Levi that of
Judah; but were tied to their own Colors: Also if that one Tribe were divided
into many Bodies, yet did they not carry several Ensigns, but every Body the
Ensign of his own Tribe; so that Companies were not distinguished by their
Captains or Chiefs, but by their Tribes; nor could they say there goes such a
particular Commander, but there is such a Tribe; not there marches Aaron, but
there marches the Tribe of Levi; and thus of the rest.

Hence, and from this ground was taken up the use of the Ensigns, or Banners of
Kingdoms, by which several Armies display to the World their several Nations;
as with us in England, we have the Ensign of St. George, (as we term it) which
is a bloody Cross in a white field, which shows to the world not what private
Company I follow, but what King I serve, and what Country I acknowledge; for
howsoever private Captains are allowed their Ensigns for private respects or
distinctions; yet they are not allowed (or to be born on foot) without this
general Ensign of this Kingdom: for thus it holds in all Christian Kingdoms,
and amongst the Turks also, as appears by their Cressant or Half Moon in all
their Armies, as the Ensign of their Universal Monarchy.

Thus you see Moses first (and that by the Commandment of God himself) began
Ensigns, which by succession of time, descended and came down with a more
general use, unto the days of Maccabees; for the Tribes then being dispersed
far and wide, and made Kings of many spacious and fruitful Countries; they took
liberty to alter their Ensigns, according to their own fancies: The glory
thereof when it came to the cares of the Graecians and Macedonians (for
Alexander is supposed to reign in the time of the Maccabees) they took to
themselves a lawful imitation thereof, and so commanded their Captains, etc. to
carry in their Ensigns, Devices in honor of their Renown and Conquests.

Then from the imitations of the Graecians, the Romans took to themselves the
carriage of Ensigns; and because they found it the chiefest beauty and ornament
of Armies, they made it therefore the noblest and richest spoil which could
possibly be taken away from the Enemy; and so made it an hereditary right for
any man that should take (in honorable fashion) such spoils, ever after to
bear them, as his own, to him and his Posterity for ever.

The Romans first brought this custom into the Monarchy of Great Britain, when
Caesar first invaded and got footing into the same: Howsoever there is an
opinion taken that Brute, when he first conquered this Island, brought in the
Trojan Ensigns, and other Ornaments of their Wars; yet it is certain that
through Civil Dissentions, and other Foreign Combustions, all these Honorable
Marks were lost and forgotten, and only the Romans renewed and brought them
back unto memory, partly by their glory and example, and partly by their loss
when they were repulsed back; who left behind them many of these spoils to
adorn the Britains: From these times has the use of Ensigns remained amongst
us; and as the Ages have succeeded, and proved wiser and wiser, and one time
more than another, so has the alteration of these Emblems (or Ensigns) changed
and brought themselves into the form wherein they are at this instant carried;
as the Romans varyed from the old Britains, so the Saxons from the Romans, and
the Danes from the Saxons: But the French then being the most refined Nation of
all other, altering from them all; and now the English having altered all into
this present mode of Uniformity, they may display them to the World for their
Gallantry.

CHAP. II. The Definition of Ensigns.
AFter the Original, Antiquity, and first beginning has been endeavored to be
made to appear; I shall now descend to the definition and distinction of them;
and by what proper names they were called in the best and most renowned Wars of
Christendom, and for what reason they have held and retained them.

To begin with the first and most ancient name belonging to Ensigns, I think it
not amiss to borrow it from the Romans; for although the Hebrews, Chaldeans and
Graecians, were the first Inventers, yet the Names and Attributes they gave
them, were much uncertain and unconstant, and as the experience of Wars grew
great, and as the Invention dilated and spread further, so did the
signification alter; for what was proper and substantial in this Age, in the
next was utterly lost and forgotten, so as I shall not rest upon these Titles
or significations.

The first then that retained a constant and firm settled name for those
Trophies of Honor, is taken to be the Romans, who indeed being the greatest
Schoolmasters in the Art of War, are the most worthy to be held for Imitation
or Authority.

The name which the Romans first gave to the Ensign, or him that carried the
Ensign (for to the man was ever attributed the Contents of the thing he
carried) was Insigne, or Sign bearing, (and so Ensign-bearer) because they
carried in those Ensigns, Marks, Empressaes or Emblems, best agreeing with
their natures and condition, according to their own Inventions; or else the
Pourtraictures of their former Battles and Conquests; either of which was so
honorable, that indeed they were made Hereditary; descending down to their
Children* from Generation to Generation: And no more were called Signs, etc.
but Coat Armor, or the Honor of the Families; nor were they of slight or
ordinary esteem, as at first; neither had men liberty any longer to make
election of them at their own Wills, but this power was incabinated within the
breast of Emperors, Kings and Generals, who indeed (under God) are the
unbounded Oceans of Honor, they only have the liberty of bestowing and
confirming Honor at their own pleasures.

Hence it came that Ensigns thus carrying of Coat-Armours, were of such
reverend esteem, that men took it for the honourablest place that might be, to
fall near or about the Ensign; and for the defense of it, no hazard could be
too great, nor any torment insupportable: So that many times the Zeal of those
that did defend these Ensigns, etc. and the inflamed desire or greediness of
those which sought to conquer and atchieve them, was so immeasurable and
unbounded, that an infinite of blood has been shed, and many powerful Armies
overthrown, only for the purchase of one of these honorable Trophies.

This when the wisdom of the Romans perceived, and that those Insignias were
not Bugbears to affright, but rather fires, which did inflame their Enemies
courage beyond their proper natures; they forthwith forbad the carrying of any
Coat Armor or Device in their Ensigns; but only such slight inventions, as
might not make the Enemy much the richer by the enjoyment thereof, nor
themselves much the poorer by the loss.

And hence it followed that the word Insignia was put out of use, and they then
called the Ensign Antesignia, and made other Devices contrary to all
Coat Armor; intimating to the Enemy that whatsoever they got by those
purchases, was dishonorable rather than any way worthy of Triumph: And from
this word Antesignia, or Antesigne, (for it has been so written in ancient
Records) it has been judged that this word Ancient in many places used amongst
us, and given to our Ensigns, has been corruptly retained by us; for it has
no coherence in signification, nor can any way be alluded unto this Officer,
more than to his Antiquity and long standing in the Wars.

But this did not quench any flame in the Enemy, for the Romans found them
every way as eager in pursuit of these weak and fained Devices, as the greatest
hereditary Coat Armor they could carry; for when in any skirmish Fortune made
them Masters thereof, they took as great Pride, as if they had subdued whole
Armies, and bare them with as much Pomp and Triumph, as if they had got all
Rome in subjection: which the wisdom of the Romans, and other Nations looking
into, it presently became a custom among all their Armies, that thence forth,
no Foot Company or Chieftain of the Infantry should carry in his Ensign any
Coat Armor or other Device what ever, more than the mixture, or true
composition of two colors, together with the general Ensign of the Kingdom in
the most eminent corner thereof. And after this time the Romans called their
Ensign-bearers no more Antesignia, Read Markham's Soldiers Accidence.
or Antesigne; but of late only Signifier, from Significo, to to signify a
thing, as being men of special note and regard; and that the thing signifying
was only a Mark of much Honor, etc.

The Spaniards and Italians that took all their imitation from the Romans, who
were their great Lords and masters, do at this day call this Officer Alferes,
and make account of him next unto their Captains, not suffering any second to
step in between them.

The Dutch call this Officer Vandragon, or Vandragar, which holds with the
same significations.

And we of England properly call him Ensign, and in some Countries Ancient: The
first from the thing he carries, and the latter from the Honor and Antiquity
of the Institution: And both may well be agreeing with the first Titles,
conceiving better cannot be invented.

CHAP. III. The Original of Horse and Horse Colors.
HAving treated of the definition and signification of the several names which
belong to the Ensigns of Foot, I will now take leave to speak a little to the
Colors or marks of Honor that are born on Horseback; which I find by
experienced Soldiers to be full as ancient or rather more than those which
belong to the Foot Companies.

But omitting all profane Opinions and vain circumstances, I find when the
children of Israel passed through the Red Sea, how they were pursued by
Pharaoh, and all his Host, which did consist most of Charriots (which in those
days were accounted Horsemen) and very properly too) because being drawn by
the violent force of Horse, and laden with the strongest and best experienced
Soldiers, they had a double power to enter into Battalias to disrank and break
their array, and to make their Enemies to run into a rout and confusion; and
though they had not the use of our Discipline, nor the true managing of the
Horse as we have, yet all their purposes and intents in the use of their
Charriots, were to the same ends, to which at this day our Horse are applied.

To these Chariots belonged Colors, or Ensigns of Martial Honor; which were
called Standards or Standarts, or the Kings Emperial Trophie: Indeed these were
nothing so general, as those on Foot, but more precious and reserved, as an
Attribute only belonging to the King and not to any other.

These Standards were charged with the Kings Emperial Coat Armor, and usually
born by a Prince or some man of high place and dignity, the imitation whereof
we still pursue and follow at this day, giving it a superiority above all other
Ensigns.

After the use of Chariots was found out, the use of Elephants a warlike beast
and of all other the strongest; for these cerried cartain little artificial
Houses (in the form of Castles) on their backs in which were some few
experienced Soldiers (...) with warlike Ensigns, and weapons by which they
overthrew the Foot Comp^^^ and made passage through them in despite of all
opposition; as you shall read in the History of Porus King of India.

Not long after the Exercise of Elephants, was found out the use of the single
Horse, in those Countries where Horses were most frequent, as in Arabia,
Parthia, Persia, and Scythia, for the Asian parts; in Barbary, Egypt and
Carthage, for the parts of Africa; and with us in Europe, in Russia, Muscovia,
Poland, Hungary, Italy, but principally and above all the rest in France, who
were accounted in ancient time the flower of warlike Horsemen, both in number
and discipline; therefore from them has been taken our Authority and examples:
But now I conceive we may not go so far for either, referring for satisfaction
to the present mode of Discipline in England, for his Majesty's Horse now in
Command it is thought none can exceed them.

I have read of a Guydon used with the light Horse in former times: Antiquity
tells us of Gentlemen at Arms, Launciers and light Horsemen.

In the old Wars the Gentlemen at Arms belonged to the Kings own person, or in
his absence to his General only; And the Empresa of honor that they followed
was the Kings Standard Royal, being Damask and charged with his Coat Armor.

The Launciers they had their Cornet to follow, which had Devices in them
according to their commanders pleasures.

And then the Light-hors-men had their Guydon which was somewhat long and sharp
at the end but with a slit which made it double pointed much like to our late
Dragooners; but for these Guydons I need not stand upon, only to show all along
there were Horse Colors, as Ensigns of honor used. And now the Cornets being
most in use with us in England, for the Horse service I need not decypher the
length or breadth of them.

CHAP. IV. Of the Dignity of Ensigns.
1. THe Dignity and estimation of Ensigns in all ages has been held most
Venerable, and worthy; they have been esteemed the glory of the Captain, and
his company; and indeed they are no less, for where they perish with disgrace
there the Captains honor fails, and the Soldier's in hazard of Ruin; for
if the loss proceed either from their Cowardice (or misgovernment) it has been
death by the law of Arms to all that survive; and the best mercy that can be
expected is that every Soldier shall draw a lot for his life (file by file) so
that one out of every file perishes for it.

2. The next Dignity of the Ensign is, that every Soldier as soon as he is
enrolled and has received either pay or impress, they anciently took a solemn
Oath to be faithful to their Colors, to attend them carefully, and to defend
them valiantly; And that upon all summons, of the Trumpet or Drum, or Command
of their Officers, to repair to them, wheresoever they shall be lodged, stand,
or be; and not to depart or stragle from them until they have received orders.

3. The Ensign has another dignity, that whenever he shall enter into City,
Town, Garrison, Camp, or other Randesvouze of abode, he is to be first lodged,
before any other Officer or Soldier; And not in any mean place, but the best
and most spacious for the drawng up of the Soldiers upon any Alarm; and his
Quarter ought to be the most secure from danger.

4. The Ensign has Dignity of place according to the Antiquity of his (...)
But in one particular case, it has been judged to be greater than his Captain,
(...) lends place to him; as thus, no Captain can receive his antiquity from
his inrollment, but from the first hour in which his Colors flew; for if two
be enrolled upon one day, and the latter marches before the face of his Enemy
with his Colors flying, in this case the first has lost his priority, and the
latter for ever after shall preceed him.

I have read of another resolve; Three Captains (or more as occasion happens)
were all enrolled upon a day, and all their Colors flying; presently upon a
Truce, Composition or other occasion there is some small cessation of Arms,
and these new enrolled Captains are Casheer'd (or dismissed) for the present
service: Now the two first that had priority of place not only by inrollment
but by flying of their Ensigns, because they would not be out of action (to a
Soldier the taste of gain is pleasant) took upon them the Commands as
Lieutenants of two Colonels Companies etc. which are Captains places in
courtesy, retaining those titles, and in some Courts of War have had their
Voices; Now the third all this time takes upon him no place, but remains in
Statu quo prius; And in revolution of time all these three Captains aforesaid
are again Commissionated for three new Companies of their own, the Question was
whose Ensign should fly first, and which of these three shall have the
priority of place? It was thus answered and adjudged by the old Earl of Essex
and Sir Francis Vere, etc. that the two first who had taken upon them
Lieutenancies had utterly lost their Superiorities, and the third whose Honor
slept, but diminished not, had precedencie of place, and his Ensign flew before
the other ever after.

5. The Ensign has this Dignity to have a Guard ever about it, which no other
Officer has; neither is it to be disimbogued, or unlodged, without a special
Guard, attending upon it both of Musquetteers and Pikes; (And so for a Cornet
with his own Squadron of Horse.) Also in the field if it be in particular
Discipline or otherwise upon an Alt, or stand, at such time as the Army or
Company are to refresh themselves with victuals or other rest, in this case the
Ensign shall by no means lay his Colors upon the ground, or put them in
unworthy or base hands, but he shall first furle and fold them up and set the
butt end on the ground supported with the Sergeants Holbearts, and the Ensign
himself shall not go from the view thereof, unless he shall leave a sufficient
guard for them.

6. An other dignity of an Ensign is, If a Noblemen or an Esquire will take
upon him the Command of a private Company and have no other superior place in
an Army, and a mean Gentleman has the like equal Command but a great deal more
ancient, although there ought to be a respect if they should happen in company
unto the worth and quality of the person; yet the meaner Gentleman's Colors
shall fly before the other.

As this has been the ancient practice in the Wars, how then do those Captains
debase themselves, and their Ensigns, to suffer young Captains to step in,
(either by greatness in quality or favor) to fly their Colors before them,
etc.

7. Every Ensign has his Dignity, although he is wholly to be at the Captains
Command, yet in justice no Captain, nor other Officer can command the
Ensign-bearer from his Colors, for they are as man and wife, and ought not to
endure a separation; nor can he be commanded with his Ensign to any base
(dishonorable) place or Action: And hence it is that to this day this place,
and mark of Honor is held in such a venerable and worthy estimation amongst
the Spaniards and Italians that they will not allow of any second between him
and the Captain, as the name of a Lieutenant to be amongst them, thinking it to
be a superfluous charge and command, because it is in their judgments a
lessening and a bateing of the Ensigns Honor.

But in this although we esteem an Ensign very honorable, we in England differ
from them, owning the place of a Lieutenant to be honorable and necessary, who
ought to be a man of most approved experience; for he takes from the Captain
those heavy burdens, which otherwise would make the Captains trouble
insupportable, nor can the Ensign discharge them unless he neglects his care
and duty to his Colors.

8. As for the dignity of the Ensign in England (not meddling with the Standard
Royal) to a Regimental dignity; The Colonels Colors in the first place is of a
pure and clean color, without any mixture The Lieutenant Colonels only with
Saint Georges Arms in the upper corner next the staff; The Majors the same,
but in the lower and outmost corner with a little stream Blazant, And every
Captain with Saint Georges Arms alone, but with so many spots or several
Devices as pertain to the dignity of their respective places.

But with us in England, placing and displacing is left to the Generalissimo,
etc. and so to his substitutes, or deputies: It is to me a ridle that any
person who cannot be stained with the least blemish should lose his advancing
honor; But kissing goes by favor.

CHAP. V. Of Disgraces to the Ensign.
THere are as many disgraces that belong to the Ensign as dignities; I shall
for brevity sake mention but some few: all which must proceed from mistakes in
one of these three, Unskillful composure, Negligent government, or Rash actions.

1. Touching Unskillful composure, either in false making, or bearing of
Ensigns; and that you may be informed for the composures thereof, I cannot
better it than to declare to you Markhams own words out of his Soldiers
Accidence page 31. He says, There must be in Military honor nine several
faces, or complexions, that is to say, two which be called Metals, as Yellow
and White, figuring gold and Silver; and seven which are called proper colors,
as Black, Blew, Red, Green, Purple, Tunnis and Ermine.

And here it is to be noted that no metal is to be carried upon metal: And
for the signification of those colors you shall understand that

1. Yellow betokens honor, or height of Spirit, which being never separated
from Virtue, of all things is most jealous of disgrace, and may not endure the
least shadow of imputation.

2. White signifies Innocence, or purity of conscience, Truth, and upright
integrity without blemish.

3. Black signifies Wisdom, and sobriety, together with a severe correction
of too much Ambition, being mixed with Yellow, or with too much belief or
lenity being mixed with White.

4. Blew signifies Faith, Constancy, or Truth in affection.

5. Red signifies Justice, or Noble worthy Anger in defense of Religion, or
the oppressed.

6. Green signifies good hope, or the accomplishment of holy and honorable
actions.

7. Purple signifies fortitude with discretion, or a most true discharge of
any Trust reposed.

8. Tunnis or Tu^^y, signifies merit, or desert, and a foe to Ingratitude.

9. Ermine, which is only a rich Furr, with curious spots, signifies Religion,
or holiness, and that all aims are not divine objects.

Now from these colors and their mixtures are derived many bastard and
dishonorable colors, as Carnation, Orange tawny, Popengie, etc. which
signify Craft, Pride and wantonness. So that all Commanders are left at their
own pleasure for their mixtures, but with these considerations; As,

1. Not to put in his Ensign his full Coat Armor.

2. Not to bear one black spot and no more in his Ensign, for it shows some
blemish in the owner, if the spot be round, square, or of equal proportion.

3. If the spot be unequal, it signifies a Funeral or deadly revenge.

4. Not to carry words in his Colors without a Device; nor a Device without
words; but Device with words, and the words not to exceed four in number, for
if there be more it shows imperfection.

5. Not to carry more Colors than two; except it be for some special note, or
the Ensign of several Kingdoms, it is a Surcharge and esteemed folly.

2. Having showed the true Colors, and the disgraces that may arise in the
composure of them, as mentioned by Mr. Markham, I come to the next disgraces
which proceed from Negligence in Government; as in carrying his Colors furled
(or folded) up when they should be flying, or to let his Colors fly, when they
should be folded up; or to display (or flourish them) when they should be
carried without any hand motion; or to carry them without motion when they
should be displayed; or to veil them when they should be advanced, or to
advance them when they should be veiled.

To lodge or dislodge Colors without a Guard; or to suffer any man to handle
them that has not a lawful authority. Now the avoydance hereof is sufficient
to keep any man from gross errors.

3. The last disgrace as to the dignity of the Ensign is

1. From the rashness and unadvisedness of Actions; when he is in safety out of
a fantastical bravado to thrust himself into danger; as to charge the Enemy
when he should stand still: It is not only a disgrace; but the offense has
been adjudged worthy of death, although he may obtain victory by that forward
action.

2. If in a March, Battalia, or setting of the Parade, or upon any other
Military employments, he shall misplace himself, it is a disgrace.

3. If in a battle, skirmish, or fight where the Ensign is put to retreit, his
Colors shall be surled (or folded) up, or shouldred and not flying and held
forth and extended with the left arm, and his Sword advanced in his right hand,
his Colors are disgraced and such retreit is base and unworthy.

4. If the Ensign-Bearer shall happen either in battle or skirmish to be slain,
and so the Colors fall to the ground, if those, or some of them next adjoining
threreunto do not recover and advance them up, it is not only a disgrace to the
Ensign, but an utter dishonor to the whole Company; as I have declared, that
if the Colors be lost, there must be a severe account given for them: And
indeed a greater act of Cowardice cannot be found, than to suffer the Colors
to be lost.

There is an ancient president, but fresh in memory, that in great defeats when
Armies have been overthrown, scattered and dispersed so that particular safety
has made men forget general observations; even then, the Ensign being wounded
to death, and desperate of all relief, has stripped his Ensign from the staff
and wrapped or folded it about his body, and so perished with it: This Ensign
cannot be said to be lost, because the honor thereof was carried with his
freed Soul into Heaven, to the possession of the eternal fort for ever: Now in
this particular the Enemy cannot boast of any Triumph if then purchased, more
than every Sexton may do when he robs the dead of his winding sheet.

Thus it has been reported that Sebastian King of Portugal dyed at the battle
of Alcazar: And I have read of many of our brave English that thus dyed at the
renowned Battle at Newport, and have heard that many have so done in the Army
of our late Sovereign of ever blessed memory.

5. And lastly, If any man shall recover the lost Ensign and bring it away
flying, etc. no matter how low in condition the man is, if the Captain upon any
after considerations bestow those Colors upon some other man; it is a disgrace
both to the Captain and his Ensign, for he does injury to Virtue and discourage
Valor.

Obj. But some may object that upon composition with the party deserving, the
Captain may dispose of his Colors where he pleases: I confess it true, but if
this composition be forced it is injurious; And if it come by a voluntary
consent of the party, it is base and most unworthy in him also.

CHAP. VI. Of the right use and ordering of the Ensign or Colors; with the
Postures and Flourishes thereunto belonging.
AS to my best Remembrance, I have given you a Catalogue of the Disgraces, so I
shall here insert as to my knowledge the true use of the Ensign, whereby those
injuries may be avoided.

1. And first, you shall understand that in all extended Marches (and not drawn
into a Body) as when they march either into a Friends or Enemies Country; or
otherwise are conducted to some remote Randesvouz; here the Ensign (or Colors)
ought to be half furled (or folded) up, and half flying, shall be shouldred and
born a little cross the Ensign-bearers neck, with his hand extended a good
distance from his body, and his left hand upon his side or hilt of his sword;
this is termed a marching in State.

2. If he shall enter into any City or great Town; then he shall unfold or open
his Colors, and let them fly at full length, and carry them in his right hand
close under the hose, with a lofty hand and extended arm: This is a marching in
Triumph; but if the wind blow stiff, or there is a weakness or wearisomness in
the Ensign-bearer, then he may set the butt end against his waste and not
otherwise; and is to have but one hand upon his staff in any march whatever.

3. In all Troopings the Ensign shall ever be furled and carried in the same
Postures as the Pikes ought to be.

4. When the Company is drawn up into a Body, the Colors must be flying; and
by the Way, in case the General or supreme of the Wars, or any Noble Stranger
worthy of respect, do come, immediately upon his or their approach, the
Ensign-bearer in all humility is to bow the head of his Colors, waving them
with the bow of his body, and to raise both it and himself up again: And as the
said person shall pass away, the Drum shall beat, and the Colors shall be
displayed: This also the Ensign shall do in all Marchings, or other motions of
Civil Exercises, where your Superiors pass by you, or you by them: Nay it is
expedient and fit so to be done to any Gentleman, that is your familiar; for it
is no more but as the vailing of your hat, or giving your friend a courtesy.

5. Now when the Body is drawn up into Battalia and the Enemy within view
thereof, then every man being in his place is to express all the Gallantry he
can, and especially the Ensign-bearer either in displaying his Colors
standing, marching, charging and retreiting (or retiring;) and all these ought
not to be done at one time, but when the bodies are joining, and they must be
done with great respect, for to use the Postures directly to the motion or
standing of the Body; and not to do as I have seen some in ordinary Militia
Discipline, that have but one or two motions of their Colors, upon and for all
occasions; as if true Honor had such weak inventions; this without doubt is
most base and unworthy.

To proceed to the Postures of the Ensign.

They are in general as follows, so well as I can express them; for they are
better in execution, and to be taught by example, than any pen can describe
them.

1. To change them with a plain wave from hand to hand.

2. To change them with lofty turns from hand to hand; each hand performing
their turns before you deliver them, as from the right to the left, and from
the left to the right, as at first,

3. From the right hand with a wave and lofty turn jutting the Colors upon the
left shoulder, and raising up with the same hand again, and with lofty turns to
deliver it into the left hand, that so thereby you may execute the same upon
the right shoulder, and after the turns, to deliver it into the right hand, as
at first.

4. With (and from) the right hand with lofty turns throw your Colors under
the left arm, recovering them speedily back with conceived Florishes, you
deliver them into the left hand: you may execute the same with the left hand.

5. With turns or flourishes you bring the butt end of the staff to your left
hand turning the palm of your left hand outward (but not for the reception of
it) and with the same hand only throw it off upon its turn with a flourish to
deliver it into the left hand, and to perform the same with the left hand, and
deliver the Colors into the right hand, as at first.

6. With lofty turns bring the Colors over the head down right (but not too
low) before, and raising it again, with the fore-turn and back-turn over the
head, changing of hands and delivering as before.

7. From the right hand deliver into your left hand with the palm of your hand,
uppermost, the butt end of your staff turning it backwards upon the left
shoulder; and turning it over the head with the same hand, you deliver it into
the right hand after the same manner, which being performed with the right hand
you proceed to the next.

8. From the right hand with lofty turns, fore-turns and back-turns, you
deliver your staff into your left hind, and wheel it with the same hand on the
same side, and after your recovery to deliver it into the right hand,
performing of the same and proceed.

9. From the right hand upon the left shoulder, raising it and turning with its
back-turn into the neck; with its returns and lofty florishes over the head you
deliver the Colors into the left, and with the left hand upon the right
shoulder you execute the same, delivering them into your right hand as at first.

10. It Is by some termed the Figure of eighth; that is with the right hand the
half wheel on the left side, and so back on the right side, and then delivering
it into the left hand to perform the same.

11. To turn it round the head oftentimes upon the palm with your fingers of
your right hand, so recovering it, with lofty florishes you deliver it into
your left hand to perform the same, and so delivering of them into the right
hand.

And if it be your pleasure to be complete in the Exercise of them, you go back
to the tenth, and so conclude with the first.

And in your conclusion I have seen some to furl them up as they display them,
and so to open them again.

But to furl them up in the field it is most ridiculous.

Others there are that I have seen to round them oftentimes about their
middles, but I cannot justify it upon any Military account.

Others I have seen, that thinking to display their Colors bravely delivered
them from hand to hand under leg; I must boldly inform such as use it, that
it is a debasement to the Captains Colors, and an unworthy Act in the
performers of it.

I told you of some particular Postures and proper for the Ensign-bearer to
observe.

1. Standing, when the Body stands, you are to display the Colors, to and fro
in a direct circle, and changing from hand to hand, and no more, without you
are commanded to show the excellency of your parts; but be sure to be well
guarded when you shall be so commanded.

2. In marching, the Posture is to display the Colors with the right hand
only, casting the Ensign still forwards, waving it close over and by the right
shoulder, never crossing the Body, but still keeping it flying on the outside
of the right shoulder.

3. The charging Posture is to carry the staff extended straight forward before
your body, waving it to and fro as high as your bosom, being ready to give the
assistance or aid with the left hand for the preservation of your Colors, or
to offend the Enemy if occasion require.

The retiring or retreiting posture is a mixture compounded of the three
former; for in the first retreit, or drawing away of the Company, he shall use
the posture of marching: but if the Enemy press near upon him, he shall stand
upon his guard, and use the posture of charging; and in fine, having quit
himself of danger, he shall use the standing posture a little, and then march
or troop away, according to the directions of the commander.

And lastly, when the Ensign returns from the field, and is to be lodged; in
former times the Lieutenant had the Vanguard; but that I shall not insist upon,
because I have observed it to be left off by able Soldiers.

The Captain leading them out of the field, and coming near the place intended
to lodge his Colors, Converts the ranks of Musquetteers of both divisions to
the right and left outward and joins them; and being so fixed, the body of
Pikes stand in the rear, and the Ensign in the head of them, the Captain before
the Colors, with the Drums and Serjants guarding the Colors on each side, and
the Lieutenant behind, the Ensign bearer, and all being advanced, shall troop
up with the Colors furled to his lodging or quarters; and as he approaches
thereto, he shall with a bow to his Captain carry in his Colors; then the word
shall be given to all the Musquetteers to make ready; that being done, they
shall all present, and upon the beat of Drum, or other word of command, give
one entire Volley; and then command every Officer to go to their quarters, and
to be in readiness upon the next summons, either by Drum or Command.

It may fall out, that time will not permit this large circumstance; then the
whole company being drawn up in a body shall troop up to the place, where the
Ensign shall quarter, to see the colors safely lodged, which being effected,
the Musquetteers shall with one entire Volley discharge their Muskets, and so
depart to their respective quarters; commanding all upon the next summons to be
in readiness, etc.

And I might here add the funeral posture: if for a private soldier; the
Ensign-bearer is to march in his place on the head of the Pikes, with the Pikes
trailing reversed, but the Colors furled and reversed only: But if it be a
commander that is to be interred, he is then to march just before the Hearse,
with his Colors reversed, etc.

If I have writ any thing amiss, or omitted any thing as may prejudice the
honor of the Ensign, I beg your better advice, for it was in the years 1641.
and 1642. that I minded any of these military actions; therefore for any error
herein, let the length of time plead my excuse: However, I could wish that
every Ensign would but observe these rules, he would then the better know his
own worth, and what duty lies incumbent upon him; and being careful in the
performance of them, his own honor will be displayed in his Colors.

Sir Francis Vear's notes of Direction how far every man's office in a Regiment
does extend, and the duty of every Officer.
1. The Office of a Colonel.
1. EVery Colonel is to command all his Officers, Captains and other; And all
Soldiers, and men of War, of what degree soever they be, that do put
themselves, or are by superior authority put and ranked under his Regiment, are
all to respect his commands, and obey him as fully as they would the chiefest.

2. Also, He shall see all orders, commands and directions, which are delivered
him, by the public officers of the Army, for Guards, Watchings, or any thing
else, for matter of justice, or for ordering of the Troops, executed.
Furthermore, If he himself find any mutiny, or discontented humors tending to
mutiny, or extreme outrages, or disorders, or shall by any of his Captains,
Officers or Soldiers be informed of any such, he shall forthwith advertise the
Generals. And if he find any other fault, negligence or swerving from either
directions given, or the policy of the Army set down; he shall straightway
acquaint them, by whom such directions did come, or were brought unto him, or
some other superior Officer, if he can conveniently acquaint them with it, and
shall produce the party so offending, with the Witnesses and Proofs, that order
may be given forthwith, and justice done; and if he fail to give this
information of any thing he knows or hears, he shall be deeply faulty: Or if
any such thing pass without his knowledge, he shall be thought of worse
Government than were fit for a man of his place and charge.

3. Also, In Lodging, every Colonel ought to lodge as near as he can in the
midst of the quarter assigned for the Regiment, because he may best give
directions for the whole.

4. In marching, he shall be at the end of the Regiment that is nearest the
Enemy (that is to say) in the head of a Regiment going toward an Enemy, and in
the rereguard going from the Enemy; and he shall not go from thence except it
be for ordering of his Regiment or some extraordinary occasions.

5. Once every week the Colonel shall call together all his Captains, and shall
enquire of all offenses in his Regiment; and examine the nature and quality of
such offenses, to prepare the causes for a more speedy hearing in a Court
Martial.

6. All Colonels shall repair to a Court Martial, as often as they shall be
warned, and shall be assistant to the Lord Martial, in the causes that shall be
there in question; or belonging to the justice of the Army.

2. The Office of a Lieutenant Colonel.
1. The Lieutenant Colonel, when the Colonel is in presence, is to assist and
obey him, in seeing all the directions that are delivered by any public
Officer, or such as shall be within the Authority of a Colonel to command,
executed. And in the absence of the Colonel, he shall have the command that the
Colonel has himself.

2. He is to lodge ever on the right hand of his Colonels lodging, as near to
the end of the quarter as conveniently he may.

3. In marching or imbattailing, Read Markham's decads fo: 146. and Ward, fo:
200.
whenever the Colonel is in the head of the Regiment, he shall be in the
rear; and when the Colonel shall be in the rereward, he shall be in the head.

3. Of the Office of a Serjant-Major.
2. He shall in the presence of his Colonel or Lieutenant Colonel be assistant
to them, or either of them, in seeing all orders, and directions executed and
performed, and in the absence of them both, to have the same authority as the
Colonel himself: He shall lodge on the left hand of the Colonel, as near the
end of the quarter as may be with convenience.

2. In marching or imbattailing he shall keep as near the end of the Regiment
as he can, sometimes on the side, that so he may overlook the order of the
March.

3. He shall come to the Serjant-Major-General to receive the word from him, if
there be no extraordinary cause to hinder him; And when he has received the
word, he shall deliver the word over to the Serjants of every company in the
Regiment, who are to come to him for it.

4. As he does receive directions for marching, imbattailing and placing of
guards from the Major General; so he is to deliver the fame to the Captains of
the Regiment, and call those to whom it does pertain, and see them executed.

5. Every night he is to visit all the guards of that Regiment, and to keep
turn of Watches, marches and going to the Wars; or sending Troops (or
companies) upon service, to the end that both the labor and honor may be
equally divided.

By the way you may observe: whereas the Serjants of every company are to be
assistant to the Serjant-Major of that particular Regiment for the dividing of
their several Corporalships or squadrons, files or half files, for the making
up of any body, form or figure according to directions, etc.

So the Serjant-Majors of Regiments, are to assist the Serjant-Major of an
Army, to bring in what divisions or bodies soever shall be called for; and the
Serjant-Major General is so to do to the Martial of the Field: And that his
duty may be performed with all careful severity, the Serjant-Major is allowed
his Hakney to speed it from Company to Company, to see that every Company be in
his true form; and not to suffer any man whatever through Pride, Stubborness,
Neglect, Covetousness of Pillage, or by any other dilitory, and weak excuse, to
break out of his rank, or to disproportion any part of the body, by any rude or
uncomely posture, but severely to rebuke the same, and compel a speedy
reformation.

But out of an Army, both in field or otherwise, then the office both of a
Serjant-Major and Marshal shall be in himself; he shall summon Courts of War,
with the assistance of his Captains, to proceed to trial against offenders, he
shall proportion all allodgments, encampings, and with his best skill fortify
the same; and shall upon fight draw the battle (yet with this limitation, to
take directions from his superior Officer, etc.

And as you see he is to take care of all Watches and Guards about that
Regiment: so if there be no greater Officer than himself, there to give the
word, and to appoint the Court of guard and Sentinels; but if there be a
superior Officer, then the Serjant-Major shall receive it from him, and so give
it to the Captains and other such inferior Officers as shall have the guard
that night.

In short, a Serjant-Major ought to be dutiful to all his Superiors by whom he
is to be directed: he ought to be an experienced Soldier, and of a valiant and
undaunted behavior.

4. The Office of a Quartermaster.
1. He shall in all changing of lodging, attend the Quartermaster General, and
take the place assigned by him for the quartering of the Regiment, in such form
as the Quartermaster General shall direct him, and there he shall appoint
lodgings to the Colonel and the Officers according to their places that they
are to take in the Regiment, both in town and field.

2. He shall lodge suttlers of that Regiment in the hindermost part of the
quarter, at such distance as the Quartermaster General shall appoint.

3. His place is to lodge on the back side of the Quarter, behind the lodgings
of the Lieutenant Colonel.

4. The Office of the Provost.
1. He shall see all Proclamations, Orders, or Decrees that shall be published
by the Provost-Martial of the Army, likewise to be published in the Regiment
whereof he is Provost.

2. Also he shall keep all the Prisoners committed to him; and once a week give
notice to the Provost-Martial-General of all the Prisoners within his charge,
and of the cause of their committance.

3. Furthermore, He shall oversee all the Victuallers of the Regiment, that
they shall neither at unreasonable prices, nor at unlawful hours sell their
victuals, and shall on the other side be watchful that no wrong be done, and if
any be, that forthwith the party doing wrong, shall be brought before some
officer that has Authority to yield redress, and to that end he shall go about
the Quarters once every forenoon, once in the afternoon, and once in the dead
time in the night, if it may be conveniently performed.

4. He shall have an account given him every night of the Victualer, what
victual is in the quarter, and he shall carry the notes thereof to the
Provost-martial of the Army.

5. He shall when preys (or booties) are brought in, after the Provost-martial
general has divided them to the Regiments, divide them to the several
Companies he is Provost-martial of.

6. He is to see the quarters kept clean and sweet; all garbage and filth
buried; nothing that may annoy the quarters suffered to be at such a distance
as shall be appointed by the Provost-martial of the Army.

7. He shall lodge in the midst of the Victuallers of the Regiment.

8. He shall come to the Carriage-master for directions where the baggage of
that Regiment shall march, where they shall assemble, and what ways they shall
go, which directions he shall perform: and after he has given the first place
to the Colonels baggage he shall place by turn the rest as the Companies do
march.

9. Also he shall see the ways made for the Carriages accompanied with men
sufficient, and with instruments to help and amend every thing that is amiss in
the ways, or Carriages, and if any carriages be unable to go, he shall provide
that it may be no hindrance to the rest.

The Officers of a Foot Company.
1 The Office of a Captain.
1. He has proportionably the same Command over his Company, as a Colonel has
over his Regiment; and so also all his Officers and Soldiers are to obey him.

2. When he receives his Company and his Arms he is to chose his men and to
sort them to his Arms as he thinks fit, etc.

3. He shall chose his Officers such as either have had the like place before
or are of Experience and good government, or such as have made themselves known
to be fit for the like.

4. He shall divide his Company into Corporalships.

5. He shall take care and labor to teach all his Soldiers the carriage and
use of their Arms, to keep their order in marchings and imbattailings, and to
understand all manner of motions and the beat of the drum, and to this end he
shall have usual times of Exercising, which shall be once a day at least, till
his men be perfect.

6. In the marching of his Company alone he shall be in the head of his Company
going toward the Enemy, and in the Reer-ward coming from an Ennemy.

7. In Marching with the Regiment, he is to receive his directions from the the
Serjant-major of the Regiment, (and to carry the several sorts of weapons as
shall be by him directed: and to every one of the divisions of his Company
appoint such an officer as the Serjeant-major shall direct:) and for his place
it shall be where the Serjeant-major shall assign.

8. In imbattailing he is to order his Company as the Serjeant-major shall
direct him, and to be himself where his Colonel or superior Officer shall
appoint him.

9. In lodging he shall take that according to his degree and place in the
Regiment, and see that be ordered according to direction.

10. He shall have his quarter kept sweet for healthfulness, for quiet, for
order, especially in the night.

11. If his whole company be to march he shall draw off his company and stand
in arms, attending the directions of the Serjeant-major.

12. When he is brought to the place of his guard, he is to take the direction
of the Serjeant-major of the Regiment, for the placing the Corpse du guard;
setting his Sentinels, and sending forth his rounds, and to see his directions
performed, and not to abandon his Guard till he be returned, or whatsoever is
discovered or brought to the Court of Guard where he is, shall by himself be
sent to the C. -- of the Watch; and he shall make good his if he be not by a
Superior Officer commanded to retire.

13. If he hear or know of any mutiny, or discontented humor tending to
mutiny, outrage, or disorder committed by any of his company, or within the
quarter, he shall forthwith advertise the Colonel of it, or if he be in the
way, some public Officer of the Army, and shall arrest and bring forth the
party so offending, and all such witness and proofs as are to be produced, of
which if he fail and know it, he shall be held very faulty, and if such escape
him he shall be held unworthy of his place.

14. He shall see those of his Company that do better than their fellows,
advanced and encouraged accordingly, and to all he shall do right, both in
their place, and things that are due unto them, and shall as far as in him
lies take care for the comforting and preserving them that are hurt and sick.

15 In matter of service he shall do all that is commanded by any superior
Officer, that has authority over him, in the best sort he can; without either
exceeding his Commission or doing less.

16. When he is alone with his Company, he shall be very diligent and careful
both in his march and lodgings, and if he be put to any extremity, he must look
to make an account; therefore he shall do his uttermost both by judgment and by
valor to free his Company, etc.

2. The Office of a Lieutenant.
1. He shall when the Captain is present be assistant to him in seeing all
directions performed, that are commanded by a superior Officer, or all such as
his Captain has authority to command; And in the absence of the Captain he
shall have the same authority as the Captain has.

2. In a march if there be no Company but his own, he shall be at one end of
the Company when his Captain shall be at the other, and if the Company shall
march with the Regiment he shall take such place as spuperiour Officers shall
assign.

3. He is to lodge on the right hand of the Captain as near the end of the
quarter as may be convenient; And shall in all service, and at all times help
to keep the Soldiers in discipline and obedience; and shall perform all things
commanded him, or upon occasion necessary to be done with valor and judgment.

3. The Office of an Ensign.
1. He shall when the Captain or Lieutenant be present be assistant to them, or
either of them, and in their absence he has the same authority the Captain
has.

2. In his march he is to carry the Ensign, and to take such place as shall be
assigned him; and if his Company be alone, he shall upon entering the quarter,
going out of his quarter, going upon the guard, or upon the sight of an Enemy,
carry his Ensign advanced and flying; and if he march with the Regiment, he and
all other Ensigns of the Regiment shall do as the Colonels Ensign does.

3. In fight he shall never carry his Ensign Advanced and flying, without
offering to use it in any kind of offense, being a sign for a Company to gather
by, and therefore to be preserved, for which cause he may use his sword.

4. If he march with other Ensigns he shall take the place as shall be
assigned him.

5 The Ensign shall never turn his face out of his order, or start from any
danger, or forsake his Ensign upon pain of death.

6. Whenever the Drum shall beat for the Companies gathering, he shall be in
the place and shall see the Ensign well guarded, or be ready to march or do any
thing for the service.

4. The Office of a Sergeant.
1. If all the Officers before named be out of the way by any accident, the
Eldest Serjant is to Command the Company next.

2. In assembling the company he shall set every man in his place, and if any
be missing he shall seek them out, and have power to correct them (in the
absence of his superior officer) and if any be defective and cannot be found he
is to acquaint his Captain (or chief officer) of it.

7. When the Company are assembled and set in order, he shall march on the
outside, where he may best see the order of the march, and take care and charge
of their several Corporalships.

4. Though it be usual to understand the use of Arms, and all things that
belong to a Soldier, and though by custom he is to lead the Musquetteers to
fight especially in a lone Company, (in all which cases he is to follow the
directions of his Captain or the superior Officer in his absence,)

5. Yet for his more particular directions how to lead his Musquetteers after
he has brought them up to that ground, and in that number, and order, that his
Captain, or superior officer has commanded him; he shall make every man to
come up close to him, and he shall see that they take their level and discharge
to good purpose; And he shall see that they keep their order, as well in going
on as retiring.

6. If he be joined with other Companies, he shall follow the directions of him
that commands in chief, and carefully look to that part on which he is assigned
to attend.

7. The Eldest Sergeant shall lodge in the skirt of the quarter right behind
the Captain, and the other in the same sort right behind the Lieutenant, and if
more, right behind the Ensign: And in their Quarter they are to visit the
Soldiers and their Lodgings, and to see them orderly and quiet.

8. He is to fetch the Word from the Serjeant-major of the Regiment and to
deliver it to his Captain, Lieutenant, Ensign, and Corporal that is of the
watch; and if the whole Company watch he is to attend, and to see the place
where the Sentinels are put out, and to visit them all: If they watch by
divisions or Corporalships, then he shall lead them, and bring them to their
Guard, where he shall also attend upon any extraordinary accasions by the
Command of the Captain of the watch.

9. And while he is there, to advertise the Captain of the watch if any
extraordinary discovery or accident of importance happen.

10. He shall deliver such Munition either of Victuals, or of War to the
Corporals of the Company, as he shall receive from the Serjeant-Major of the
Regiment.

The Office of a Corporal.
1. Though it very seldom happens that he has the charge of the Company, yet
if such an accident should fall out that all the superior Officers of a
Company should be absent, then the Command does belong to him.

2. To his place belongs properly the charge of one division or squadron of
the Company; he is to see them well exercised in their Arms, and that his
deportment with them may be Soldier like: he is to deliver them Munition of
Victuals or Arms, he is to govern the Watch, and to divide the labor of his
Soldiers equally, either in watch, work or service, and to take care in every
respect to do the duties of a good Soldier.

3. When the Drum beats to gather the Company together the Corporals are
immediately to be in a readiness themselves, and to call together their
Divisions, and with them he shall repair to their Ensign, and if any of them be
wanting without leave, they shall give notice thereof to the Captain and shall
prosecute their said absence to the puishment of them.

4. He shall have a third part or a fourth in his division, which being divided
into files he shall himself be leader of the chief file; and is with the same
always to take place on the right hand of his division.

5. He shall in any case of default either of leaders or bringers up see that
they be supplied by the next.

6. In marching or fighting the Corporals of a Company have no Command, but of
the file that each of them leads: they are to see the opening of their files,
or ranks, or to double the same, to follow the sound of the Drum, and to
observe every other motion that shall be commanded by the chief Officer;
Always provided that he start not out of his place nor use any Command of
himself.

7. He is to observe the beat (or sound) of the Drum, and shall see them fully
furnished of their Arms, Powder, Bullets, Match (or Flints) and all things else
that shall be necessary for the Arms they carry: whereof the Sergeant is to
supply them.

8. He is to be lead by a Sergeant to the place of his watch, and from him to
receive the word, and directions in what manner and where he shall place his
Sentinels, as well by day as in the night, which he is to see performed.

9. His Sentinel being placed he is to let none to pass his Guard without the
Word, unless it be to the Captain of the watch, or the Serjeant-major, to whom
after he knows them, he is to deliver the word to the first Round. He shall
direct the Sentinels that every one do the like; he shall see them changed at
due time, and shall now and then visit them unlooked for.

10. He must warn his Sentinel to give no false Alarms, but with as small a
noise as is possible to advertise his said Corporal, who upon an extraordinary
occasion shall put his division in Arms and give notice of the danger
discovered to the next Guards, and to the Captain of the watch.

11. He shall make good the place of his guard until he be called from thence,
and not to suffer any of the Corporalships to leave the same till he be
relieved; And he shall fulfill all commandments for the entering or going forth
of any Soldiers.

12. At the coming of his relief he shall put all the Soldiers in his division
into Arms, and stand ready to receive them, and when his Sentinels are
relieved, march to his quarter.

13. If during the time of Watch, any of the Soldiers under his Corporalship
shall offend, he is to commit him, or to acquaint his chief officer therewith.

14. If by any occasion the Company remove, and he be drawn from the guard
before the twenty four hours be expired; and that the same Companies lodge
again within the same time; then shall the said Corporal with his Soldiers be
in readiness to watch out the residue of the time, and in such place as shall
be appointed.

15. As a Corporal is next in degree to a Sergeant, so in behaving himself well
he may pretend to the place of a Sergeant when by any accident it may be void.

The Office of Lansprizado.
1. Next to the Corporal is the Lansprizado, who is in the absence of the
Corporal to do his office.

2. His own proper place is to lead the left hand file of the same division and
to have his own and the files adjoining to the same in care observing their
orders, as is specified in the Corporals office.

The Office of a Drum.
There ought to be two Drummers at least in a Company, both of them perfect in
every necessary beat (or sound) thereof, which by turns are to do all the
service belonging to their place; and therefore in the field or Garrison, one
of them is to give attendance to the Quarter, though the Company were at that
time free from any duty.

2. The Drum having warning to beat for the gathering of the company; shall go
beating from one end of the quarter to the other, twice; and then he shall
repair to the Ensigns lodgings.

3. While the Company march the one must beat constantly and by turns ease each
other.

4. When the Company shall be joined with others, the Drums shall take place by
the appointment of the Drum-major, and shall beat the same point of War, and
observe the same time that Drum does, that is next to the Colonel or Chief
Officer.

5. It is the Office of a Drum; when any of the Company are taken prisoners, to
inquire after them, and carry their Ransom, which he may do boldly, after he
has received a Passport from the General, or Commander in Chief of the Army
where the Company is: And when he shall come near any place of the Enemies, he
must beat (or sound) thrice, and not approach too near till he be by some of
the Enemy fetched in.

6. He is only to make his errand known, and not to discover any thing of the
estate of the place from whence he was sent which may be prejudicial to him.

A Military discourse, Whether it be better for ENGLAND To give an Invader
present battle, or to temporise and defer the same.
AS it is familiar and common amongst men to be diverse and contrary in
opinion; especially in every doubtful and questionable matter, according to the
old saying, so many men so many minds: every man must therefore prepare himself
with a good and equal contentedness to endure what others do censure and judge
of his position, as either their reason shall lead them or their sense and
humor carry them. Neither ought any man challenge greater prerogative to his
opinion than he brings with him authority of reason for the same: And seeing
that reason, joined with experience, is the only guide to direct us in all
affairs of Action, whereunto all our opinions and judgments must be
restrained, we must submit our private conceits to be ruled by reason and
experience. In things of great importance and weight, as it behooves us to be
very considerate, before we resolve and set down a certainty which we intend to
pursue; so in this matter of War, are some points so difficult as may minister
occasion and question of long debate, unless those controversies be commended
to men of stayed and approved Judgment, who are not carried away with corrupt
and common opinion, but advised and persuaded by the greater strength of
reason, confirmed by experience, and presidents of the like examples: And by
the way give me leave to declare my opinion, that no man can set down in
writing a rule or method, precisely to be observed in War, the same being
rather to be printed by a long practice and experience in a Soldiers breast,
to be executed, as time, matter and place may minister, that upon the accident
of any (in which there may be then required a new form and order to be used
accordingly) It is held for a maxim That a Prince cannot any way more
dangerously hazard his Realm and Country, than by giving an Invader Battle at
his first landing, as has been heretofore an usual custom.

And since it is amongst things of the greatest importance that may concern a
Prince and his kingdom, a people, their liberty and goods, it is to be
considered and resolved upon beforehand by what means an Army Royal coming to
invaid and conquer, might be best prevented and defeated.

The accustomed Order has been by firing of the Beacons to put the Shire in
Arms, Short answers to the old accustomed Orders.
and presently all the forces to repair to the landing place, and these without
delay to give them battle.

But because there are other opinions, the reasons of each opinion shall be set
down, and then a resolve with submission to better Judgments shall follow.

Such as hold (or maintain) this old accustomed order allege (besides the good
success that many times it has taken) in reason also it is the best dealing
with the Enemy at his landing, before he has firm footing, and before he shall
have leisure to rank his men in due order of battle, and before he shall be
able to land his Ordnance, Horse and Carriages, It might be so if the Enemy
would acquaint you before where he would land.
and that a very few men thus in time shall be able to give greater annoyance,
and do greater service upon the Enemy than ten times so many, when the Enemy is
landed and settled in strength and order with all his Horse, Ordnance and
Carriages.

They also add these reasons ensuing for confirmation of their custom.

The Reasons.
First, The greater fury, the lesser reason; therefore to be suppressed in an
Army, as a breach of Order, and not to be inflamed.
The fury of the Country upon the first firing of the Beacons is great; every
man (pro aris and focis) violently running down to the Sea side, to repel the
disordered Enemy at the first confused landing; which fury, if suffered to grow
cold, we shall not so easily inflame again.

Secondly, While the Enemy is landing, He is a silly Invader that upon a
difficulty will make a retreit.
if he find any difficulty or danger (being in boats) they are ready to retire
to their ships again: But if they be once landed with their Artillery, etc. it
is not then possible for them to retire to their Ships again, without extreme
danger of their lives upon the retreit, and the dishonorable loss of their
Munition, etc. And therefore necessity compelling them to fight, and all hope
of escape by flight being then taken away from them, they become ten times more
dangerous Enemies to deal withal than before.

Thirdly, Every man knows what great advantage they have, It is no great
difficulty to land men both strongly and orderly.
that have a firm footing on land, to encounter an Enemy that must land out of
boats, in confused straggling manner, and therefore ever, and speedily will go
to enjoy the benefit of this advantage; whereas, if we suffer the Enemy to
land, and put himself in Military order, he becomes more terrible unto us.

Fourthly, It is not the fight of the Enemy which will cause them to discover
themselves, but his prosperous success upon the first combat, which for that
respect is to be avoided.
There is in this Realm (as in all States divided in Religion) no small number
of Traiterous minds, who having time to confer, and seeing an enemy of force
then landed, may and then will discover their Malice, which on the sudden they
dare not nor cannot.

Another Opinion.
Some others hold this old custom of running to the Sea side to be but a
barbarous custom, void of Order, and Warlike Discipline, very perilous to our
selves, not hurtful to the Enemy, but rather a means to lose all; and therefore
wish by special Command that order of repair to the Sea side be restrained and
the Enemy suffered to land quietly: Suffered to land quietly because the Enemy
would land whether you would or no.
and in the mean time to drive and carry away all Cattle, Victuals, Forage,
Carriages, etc. and certain places of Randesvouze appointed, (some distance
from the Sea side) from whence they may march in a Warlike manner and Order;
and so by carrying away all victuals and fortifying of Streights and Passages
to weary the Enemy in time.

The Reasons of the Second Opinion.
First, It is said the invading Enemy brings a select Company of Disciplined
and well trained Soldiers whom we seek to encounter with a confused multitude
of men untrain'd, in which match there is no comparison, but loss certain.

Secondly, It is said an Enemy of force meaning to land will do it in despite
of us, and then the Country offering to repel them, and finding themselves not
able, grow much more fearful, than if quietly without resistance we had
suffered the Enemy to land.

Thirdly, Where we suffer the Enemy to land we may drive away all provision and
Cattle further into the Country, and then maintain streights and passages well
fenced and fortified; so as the Enemy shall be enforced to approach us upon our
own strengths and fortifications to his great peril and danger.

Fourthly, They say, in this manner we keeping Victuals from him by land, and
his Majesty's Navy also in the mean time keeping the Seas, the Enemy for want
of Victuals only shall be forced to retire, and glad to withdraw himself if he
can.

Further, It is alleged how doubtful a thing Battle is, and how dangerous a
thing for a King to commit his Crown upon it, and therefore is that temporizing
course extolled.

These are thought most effectual reasons to impugn the speedy repair to the
Sea side, and to maintain the other Opinion for suffering the Enemy to land
quietly, and by driving and carrying away Victuals, and forage and fortifying
the streights and passages, by time and famine to weary the Enemy.

But having weighed the reasons on both sides, and by experience of former
invasions examining the success and sequel of the like attempts, it is adjudged
not safe, and therefore not to allow of confused and disorderly running to the
Sea side, to encounter a select well trained Enemy invading; and secondly,
neither is it safe to suffer the Enemy quietly to land all his forces,
munition, etc. It is by some conceived that a middle (or a mean) course far
more serviceable than either of them both may be taken, whereby the benefit of
that old custom may be embraced, and the disorders of the other (well noted)
may be reformed, and no advantage to annoy the invading Enemy omitted, as by
these following reasons may be judged.

Reasons and Resolutions against the second Opinion.
It is subject to invasion notwithstanding: it is not meant but our Navy should
annoy them both before, and in landing if they can.
First I say one of the chiefest forces of this famous Island of England
consists in this, that it is fortified naturally with such a Trench (or
ditch) as the Sea is, whereby it is not so subject to invasion as other
Countries lying on the main; which singular benefit and peculiar advantage to
our Country is utterly lost if we suffer the Enemy to land all his forces,
etc. and take firm footing on the Main.

A reason made where there is no contradiction.
Secondly, Whereas this noble Island has such a number of Mariners and good
Shipping both of his Majesty's Royal Navy, and also of Merchants, as may hope
with good success to encounter on Sea the force of any foreign Enemy: Now if
we suffer the Enemy quietly to land, and then temporize afterward (according to
the second opinion) we lose a great part of this our strength.

Rather by supposition than by experience.
Thirdly, There is no man of any experience, but knows with what danger men
land out of boats, if there be any ordinary force (before landing) to resist
them; for if any storm arise the Sea alone fights for us, and with but small
resistance on land may drown great numbers of our invading Enemy.

Fourthly, No small work to entrench all the landing places about England.
Any small Trench on land shall lodge Musquetteers enough, to spoil as many of
our Enemies as in boat shall offer to land, before they can approach the shore.

Also, In landing, True, if the Enemy would not resist you with a far greater
force than can possibly be gathered together on such a sudden to encounter him.
before they can have time to put themselves in Order, what an execution may a
far less number of well armed men do on them, before they shall have time to
unite their forces.

Again, After the Remnant shall land, if they be not all drowned slain, or
repel'd in or before their landing, how easy a matter shall it be for a few
well Armed Soldiers, to put such a confused, dispersed, scattered, Sea-beaten
Company to the sword, A strong Imagination upon a weak supposition.
before they shall be able to advance a Standard, or put themselves in order of
battle?

Besides all this, No intendment but our Navy should impeach them upon all
assays.
if his Majesty's forces should not in time be assembled of such strength as to
be able before landing to give them battle, yet any mean force (assailing their
Ships while their men are in landing) cannot but greatly annoy them, if not
utterly defeat them.

Again, An Invador will both forecast and prevent those dangers.
In most places if (except the Enemy bring his tide justly with him) he cannot
land, and then if part land, and any mean resistance made to give impediment to
the rest, till the tide pass, their divided forces may more easily be defeated.

Also, You grant him victuals enough if he can land, you say he shall find
houses, and Barns full.
It is no small time that is requisite to land an Army with Horse, Carriage,
and Ordnance, Munition, and Victuals: without which an Invader shall never be
able to prevail: And then if any mean resistance be made at the landing, it
much prolongeth the same time, so as any storm happening, the Winds, Tides,
Shelves, Rocks, Bars, and Seas fight for us, (in our favor, and to the ruin
of our Enemies;) and therefore I utterly disallow that opinion, to give an
Enemy leave quietly to land, and then by device to temporize afterward. It
behooves an Invader to be as wary of burning and spoiling as your self, lest he
make himself odious to his own party.


Further, If any such resolution by the Prince and people be taken, that the
invading enemy should be suffered to land quietly to spoil and burn at his
pleasure; and the inward forces of the Country not permitted, even at the
first landing to come to their rescues, Let the Company come down to the
Randesvouze as fast as they can so they give no battle.
it would cause (no doubt) the Inhabitants of the Coasts to abandon their
Towns, and leave the Frontiers desolate; which the wise Kings and grave
Counselors of this Land have everto sought to make populous, by granting many
privileges and immunities to allure Inhabitants on the Frontiers.

But touching driving, or carrying away of Victuals, No great difficulty,
though not easily done as wished.
and leaving the Country waste, thereby to famish our landed Enemies, it is a
thing more easily wished than performed. By which retreiting and driving away
of Victuals and keeping of streights and passages they starve and weary them
that follow them.


I confess in Ireland where most of their substance consists of Kine, it is
easily done.

But in this rich and wealthy Country of England it is not possible but that
the Enemy (if he be once landed with all his force) shall find houses full of
provisions, and barns full of all kind of Forage, That is where the prince is
a Tyrant otherwise he shall be obeyed in all things that tend to the
preservation of the Country.
and Corn all the Country over, unless the King should command all to be wasted
with fire, which president we see seldom or never put in use, neither in the
Wars in France, Flanders, nor in any former invasion that we read of, for it
will make the Prince odious, and alienate the Subjects minds, therefore not to
be used but upon a great extremity, when all other means fail: and here in
England above all other Countries it may worst be done, for our Towns be poor,
weak, and unprovided and unfortified; the Country full of habitations,
populous, rich, and abundance of all commodities. In the Low Countries by
reason of their great store of strong well fortified Towns, they might much
more easily drive and carry to their Cities (at hand) all victuals and forage,
etc. And yet when the great Army of the States and Don John were in the Field,
I grant for Forage because they came in harvest, but all other victuals came
out of the Towns behind their backs.
notwithstanding all the Boars and Country People were fled and retired, to the
next walled Town, and had knowledge long before of the approaching of the
Armies, yet were they not able so to drive and carry away their Victuals and
forage, but that the Enemy found Barnes full in every place, as the Enemy was
never forced to forage four miles from their Camp: So difficult, or rather
impossible a thing it is to carry away our victuals or forage, or leave the
Enemy a wast Country. But if here in England we should drive or carry away our
Victuals or Forage to the next walled Towns, Here he speaks as if the Enemy
by his landing were straight master of the Field, and no place left us but
walled Towns to guard our Cattle and Victuals.
the Enemy being quietly landed with all his Munition should have his chief
desire, knowing not only how weak and unfortified our Towns are, but also how
unprovided of all necessaries to abide a Siege; as if fortification on a
sudden could be made.

Wherefore it is wished that all provident means should be used to give the
Enemy all possible annoyance before and at his landing. By reasons and
presidents it is proved that an invadours landing cannot be prevented.
And by no means to suffer him to land quietly, or to trust to that
temporising course, which is rather to be practiced when all other means fail,
than to be relied upon at the beginning. Too late to shut the Stable when the
Steed is stolen.
It is granted perilous for a defendant Prince to hazard his Crown upon a
Battle, and more dangerous for men untrayned to encounter expert Disciplined
Soldiers, and most perilous to us that have no strong Towns to make head if we
lose the Battle: Therefore it is no part of judgment to wish our Prince to
give an invading Enemy Battle with all our forces, how well prepared and
ordered soever they be; but the meaning is to have such provisions in every
Shire, as we may be able readily on a sudden to give the Enemy all annoyance
possible before, and at his landing, whilst the inward forces of our Country
may the better assemble, and put themselves in Military order to proceed after
as shall be most convenient.

A Reply to the reasons aforesaid.
Now to come to the question, and matter propounded, whether it be better to
fight with an Enemy at his landing or to defer battle.

A Distinguisher betwixt an Enemy Invador, and an Enemy Borderer.
I will first distinguish between an Enemy Invador, whom we do presuppose would
be a conqueror to alter and change the state; and another Enemy Borderer, who
either to procure a new quarrel, or to revenge an old wrong, may support some
small company by shipping (or dwelling upon the maine) and make incursion into
a Country only to burn, and spoil some part thereof, such an Enemy may be
fought withal at his first appearance or landing, because there is a means and
likelihood to repulse him again, with the only aid and strength of the Frontier
forces, as has been already alleged, Viz. That if the Enemy should intend but
to land and burn some houses, and villages near the Sea coast; for the
prevention thereof as much as may be, it were good to appoint only those, that
dwell within two or three miles of the Sea side to repair thither to make
resistance, These may be termed the forelorn hope.
and for their succor to appoint the Horse men to draw down to the Plains next
adjoining, who may also give them stop for straggling far into the Country, and
though you should receive a foyl, there is no danger, for his intent is not to
dwell and tarry by it. But for an Invadour as there is difference of his
intention and force, so must you make also a difference in the encounter and
prevention accordingly, who if he cannot be defeated by our Navy (is always
preferred by the first trial, although it be hardly gathered to the contrary
against me) which either I say might by contrary winds or other accidents
happen to miss each other, and so the Enemy come undiscovered upon our Coast,
As the Earl of Warwick did out of Normandy in Edward the fourths time.
or otherwise might land in despite of our shipping, then my opinion was to
restrain the Countries disorderly running down to the Sea Coast, as a thing
very dangerous, being not able to withstand their landing; first, because it
was said, such an Enemy would land more men within three hours, than would be
meet in reason for you to fight in three days; such a while will it be, before
the Country can come down to the Sea side, as has been seen by many false
Alarms given to the Country for trial of the readiness thereof.

Next because it is Impossible so to man the Sea coast round, as that an Enemy
(meaning to land and burn only) might be prevented, for that he will make show
to land in one place, and (the Country being drawn down thither) may suddenly
weigh Anchor and Sail further in few hours, than your Army that you have
provided in a readiness, can march well in two days.

As for example, How your prepared forces may be prevented.
The French made a show in King Henry the eighth's days as though they would
Land in the Isle of Wight or Portsmouth, and finding the Country drawn down
thither by means of the Kings being there, hoysed Sails, landed and burnt at
Brighthmesteed in Sussex, and in the Downs in Kent, and after returned and
landed in the Isle of Wight. Then seeing the Enemies remove from place to
place, is so speedy, and his landing place so uncertain, and the knowledge
thereof before hand impossible; I would fain know how strong a resistance the
Country can be able to make upon the sudden, against an Invadour, that will
land a thousand or two, at one instant, or rather which has imbarqued his men
invessels of so small draught, as the men may leap a shore out of them.

The Opponent meaning to sail safely betwixt the two Rocks of Scylla and
Charybdis, imagines he goes clear when as he strikes upon both; who seeing to
dislike of giving Battle, would have the Country drawn down to make resistance
and impeach their landing. I would thereupon ask this question; if the men you
send down be once in fight, whether you think it not requisite to second them,
and if you second them, what do you else, but engage your self to Battle; if
you will not second them, then do you most barbarously expose your men to the
slaughter and butchery of your Enemy: How great a discouragement that would be
to your people, and what inconvenience might follow, I leave to your Judgment
to consider.

But from whence proceeds this opinion of the necessity or convenience of a
rash and sudden encounter with an Enemy at his landing, but from an excessive
fear and doubtfulness conceived beforehand that all the Realm should be in
hazard to be lost, if the Enemy were but once suffered to land, and have firm
footing. Which imagination grows for want of skill and judgment in Martial
actions, and therefore we seek to prevent that by a desperate and disorderly
fight, which we might more safely remedy by a defensive, and less dangerous
course, as may appear by the examples of a weak Ship, and a battered Town;
which both by suffering themselves to be entered and assaulted, the one by her
close fights, the other by new intrenchments, do give the entered Enemy the
greater foil, even then when they think themselves possessed of all.

Besides a King that is in his own Country may be supplied with infinite
Numbers of Pioniers, who in few hours may rear earth works to triple his force
against an Invadour (as is well known to him that is a Soldier) whereof he
should be utterly deprived, by that most barbarous custom heretofore used and
yet maintained; I mean of that disorderly running down to the Sea side, to give
an Invading Enemy battle, at his first landing.

What reason had Spain to attempt the Conquest and subversion of this Realm,
but that they presumed, The only hope of an invador is to prevail by Battle.
we would assuredly rely upon our old Custom of giving them Battle at their
landing: which if we should do, there would be great likelihood; first that we
should lose the same, and next having lost the Battle, I fear that the
subversion of this famous Island would ensue. For an aspiring King that has a
great faction within a Contry may presume beforehand to carry the same, if he
be assured, that the people thereof will give him battle at his first landing.
Therefore if you will avoid an Invasion and the danger of a Conquest, let it be
known to the world that it is an error, whereby you might embrace those
advantages, and the benefit that our Country affords, and you shall undoubtedly
avoid the trouble of the first, and be free from the danger of the last.
Scanderbegg against the Turk.
We read that Scanderbegge (never theless that he expected the Invasion of so
puissant an Enemy, as was the Turk) thought it not good to leave any great Army
of Force to give him Battle; but only certain select bands (or Companies of
Foot) with Troops of Horse, and the foot too lightly armed, and causing all the
frontiers to withdraw themselves, their Cattle, Corn and Substance into the
strong and fortyfied places of the Country; did with such select forces face
the Enemy on the frontiers, by keeping of streights and passages, making
sudden attempts in the night, and such other times as by Spies he found the
Enemy careless, and so with a few people (or small force) by time, famine and
expenses he wearied the Enemy and caused him to retire, that otherwise in
Battle might have gotten the victory, and so in short time commanded the whole
Country. Wherefore I would not wish any Prince to adventure his Kingdom that
way, unless he be weary of the same Battle being the only thing for an Invadour
to seek; and on the contrary for the invaded to avoid and shun, for the one
does hazard but his people, and has a lot to win a Kingdom, and the other in
losing of the Battle endangereth his Crown.

The Opponent disalloweth of a confused disorderly running down to the Sea
side, and yet would fight with them in their landing, which is a thing
impossible. For if you tarry time to put men in order, (which you must of
necessity do by reason of the Countries slack assembly) then will the Enemy
land in the mean time and frustrate your purpose, unless you were made
acquainted long beforehand, when and where he intended to land, and where you
may make your supposed Trenches you have declared, to lodge your men in. There
be some also that conceive a great advantage of the Enemies weakness coming
from the Sea, and of their landing out of Boats disorderly, which when it
shall happen to come to trial, it will easily appear how far they are deceived
of both: for who knows not that even all men coming near the shore, and
smelling land, become well and sound again of their Sea sickness. Also, what
numbers of men will be landed at one instant in Boats, Galleys and other
Vessels of small draught, and that safe enough, those that have been employed
in like actions, can testify. And as touching Rocks, Shelves, contrary Winds,
etc. which is said may fight for us, we must not build upon such uncertainties,
for an Enemy will beforehand so set down, and lay his plot, where he will make
his descent, as that none of all those accidents shall give any impedement to
the same. What other advantages our Country men may have either of their
Courage, or goodness of their cause, Strength and courage avails much being
joined with skill and order to dispose of them.
without knowledge, and order, how to dispose thereof, will rather be an
occasion of their overthrow, than means of the Victory. But especially a few to
fight against many, disordered against ordered, Country men against
experienced Soldiers; the odds that the Enemy has of you therein, will be
much greater than your imagined advantages. And albeit that I confess, our
Country men have a show of desire to fight, (as having as great, natural help
of strength, courage and ability as any other Nation) yet can it not be denied,
but that in the Artificial we must needs be defective, for want of use and
Practice, therefore not to be suffered to run down to the Sea side, in that
confused and accustomed manner unless it might be done with a complete number
of choice men; conducted by a skilful leader that knows how to make his fight
upon the best advantages, and to retire them orderly again to their least hurt
and discouragement; otherwse I do altogether disallow, of that general repair
to the Sea side. But rather to make your assemblies five or six miles distant
with all your Foot forces, and to attend them in the plains, with your Horse;
for whatsoever men resolve with themselves before hand, and what minds soever
they may seem to put on, when they shall be driven to make their ways through
the vollies of shot, having never been acquainted with the game before, it may
either make them pinch courtesy through the strangeness thereof, or at least
having tasted of that sauce (and finding it bitter) may spread rumors to
discourage a whole Army; for oftentimes the same and brute of a repulse makes
others as fearful that but hear of it, as those that have been in the Action
and born the blows themselves. How unlikely then it is, that you should profit
your selves by that means or impeach your Enemy, may easily appear.

But let us come to examples, for it is not sufficient to say by experience of
former invasions, etc. not alleging any. Where can it be remembered that a
strong Enemy proffering to land, has been prevented by the Frontier forces? I
think few or none, who be avouched, The Priest of Saint Margaret with his Bow
and Arrows.
unless the president of the Priest of Saint Margarets near Dover shall be
admitted for one, of whom the old Fletchers retain a memorial in honor of
their Bows; who is said with his Bow and Sheaf of arrows to have kept down the
French men that offered to land in a narrow passage up the Clift near Dover,
Who came for fresh water as was supposed.
where they found a gate fast barred and locked to stop the same. And he
standing over them, on the top of the Clift, played a tall Bow man's part, when
as in these days the French had not any shot but some few Cross-bows, that
could not deliver an Arrow half way up the Clift to him; and so it was given
out that he kept them down till the Country was come down to the Sea side to
repel them back to their Boats; or rather I suppose (my self knowing the
place) when they saw the gate was so fast, as they could not suddenly break it
open, they returned before their coming. But yet I must confess the Bow bare
the bell, before the Devil (I suppose) sent the musket, etc. out of Hell.

But here lest the Author be mistaken, he prefers the force of the Harquebuz
and Musket, far before the Bow, yet in judgment does not disallow the Bow but
rather judge the same to be a serviceable and warlike weapon, as well in Town
as Field, and although it be not greatly pertinent to this question, yet it may
be convenient to consider here, how and wherein good use may be made of this
weapon: first in the field against the Horse men, The use of the bow how
serviceable.
though it be shot at the highest random, only with the weight of the fall it
galleth both Horse and Man; and though the wound be not mortal, yet both Horse
and man are hereby made unserviceable then and long after; if they escape
death. Secondly, in rainy weather when men come near together it is a good
weapon. Thirdly in the night time it is a ready and a secret shot, etc. and the
use of it may be good in the forcing of the Enemies Trenches, in fallying out
of Town: or else, Fourthly, at an assault when all the defenses are taken away
in any Town, you may deliver your Arrows over the wall and shroudly gall your
Enemy with the fall of them. Fifthly to shoot Arrows with wild fire, to burn
gate or draw bridge, to fire thatched or shingled houses. When our English Army
was before Paris those of our Commanders wished they had brought Bow men over
with them; and I see no reason it should be wholly laid aside, for the worst
Bow man that can but draw his Bow is better than a bad fire man.

But if we should not make use of our Bow in any of our warlik enterprises; it
should be every Commanders care to choose good fire men, for Ammunition is much
wasted by the unskifulness of the Musquetteer, and execution not to
expectation; Mustermasters cure.
and as we have an order established for our Musket bore, I could wish the
Mustermaster in every County would look so to it, that they may not be too big,
as well as too little.

But now touching landing let us see what may be conceived out of the former
experience. Examples and presidents of landing.
Did not the Earl of Warwick notwithstanding the Duke of Burgundies great and
puissant Navy which he had provided to join with Edward the fourth, for the
impeaching the Earls landing from out of France; and the fleet being before the
Haven in Normandy, out of the which the Earl must come; the Duke having also
warned the King, into what part and Port of England the Earl meant to make his
descent, whereby in all likelihood he was or migt have been provided
sufficiently to withstand the same; yet (I say) did it not so fall out that the
Earl of Warwick escaped, their Fleet landed in England, and drove the King to
flee for succor into the Low Countries, and enlarged Henry the sixth, and set
him in his former estate? After this did not Edward the fourth with some small
aid from the Duke of Burgundy given him, Edward the fourth relanded in England
and deposed Henry the sixth.
and that under hand, both of shipping men and money, transport himself into
England again, and in Battle slew the Earl of Warwick, and his adherents,
deposed Henry the sixth, resuming again unto himself the Kingdom of England?

Have not the Kings of England many times entered France, by Navy; and
Scotland during the time of Wars betwixt them? Queen Mary landed 5000. in
Britany and burnt Conquet.
Did not Queen Mary land 5000 men in Brittany one of the most popular parts of
all France, and there sacked and burnt Conquet, and other places, our men
remaining on shore two days and a night, burning and spoiling, and were not,
or rather could not be resisted upon the sudden?

Have not our English (though but small) forces in Queen Elizabeth's days
landed in the Indies, English landed in the Indies.
at sundry times, sacked, and ransacked their Towns, brought away their
Munition, with other great spoils and riches, yet at their landing were not
withstood? English in Spain and Purtugal.
And did not our Army land in Spain and Portugal at sundry times, and in sundry
places; they having knowledge a long time before of their coming, whereby the
Country was or might have been in that readiness themselves would have desired,
and yet by a temporizing course used against them they were driven to retire;
both feeble and broken: whereas if they had been fought withal at their
landing, and had won the field, there had been a great hope, they might have
prevailed in that enterprise? The Spanish Forces landed in Portugal.
Did not the Spanish forces also land in Portugal and his other Army by land,
under the conduct of the Duke of Alva who by wining the Battle won the Kingdom
withal, and drove the King quite out of his Country? The French in Terceras.
And did not the French forces likewise land in the Terceras in despite of the
Country? And did not the Spanish forces after reland, slay and drive all out
again?

The Spanish relanded there.
Infinite are the presidents of landing, and a rare matter to find any example
of an Army coming to invaid, to be prevented of landing, by the Countries fury,
and running down to the Sea side; and what Soldier (or man of War) would not
undertake to land even a few men in comparison of a royal Army in any Princes
Realms and Dominions, spoil and burn at his pleasure, until such time they
had assembled greater forces than the inhabitants of the Coasts.

Whatsoever a man cannot resist, he must give way unto. Reason and experience
do plainly prove, that it cannot be withstood, but that a forceable Enemy will
land. Therefore the best remedy will be to give him way, and withal to remember
to do all things like wise men and Soldiers as has been said already, by
driving and withdrawing the Countries cattle and provisions that your Enemy may
not be relieved and nourished.

Duke of Alva against the Prince of Orange.
Did not the Duke of Alva defeat the Prince of Orenges great Army, by
forbearing to fight with him, and leaving him a vast Country to walk and way
himself in? Did not the Constable of France defeat the Emperors attempt upon
Province, France against the Emperor.
by this only temporizing course? Did he not burn the Mills, destroy the Ovens,
spoil the fruit, etc. himself retiring to Avignon; there to join with his
forces after that he had provided for the frontier Towns; leaving nothing but a
wast Country, for his Enemies to spend themselves in; whereby he drove the
Emperor in the end to make a most dishonorable retreit? Monsieur de Langey
does allege that example of the Constable of France, proving greatly his
device and policy therein. Notwithstanding there were diverse who did not stick
to blame him for that he did not seek to stop the Enemies passage, through the
mountains, which they supposed he might have done very easily, and with few
men. But he foreseeing the mischief that might grow by a small foyl or loss
received at the first, thought it the safest way to prevent all dangers, by
temporizing, until his forces were assembled in full strength and his Enemies
weakened; saying moreover, that it is a great point of wisdom for a Prince, or
Captain General, to defer fighting when the Enemies are entered in his Country!
for says he, if the battle should be lost through the encountering of them, the
Country would also be in hazard to be lost, and this may appear by diverse
examples.

First, The King of Hungary against the Turk.
the King of Hungary being assailed by the Turk in the year 1562. thought it
better to hazard the Battle and to fight with the Turk at his arrival, than to
forbear and stand upon his guard, which was the cause he himself was slain, and
a great part of his kingdom lost. William the Conqueror, and Henry the seventh
got the Crown of England by Battle.
And did not William the Conqueror and King Henry the seventh become kings of
England by reason the defendent gave them battle at their landing, and lost the
same.

Obj. But some may here object, that the Parties and Factions within the land,
were cause thereof. And does any man think that a Foreign Prince is so void of
Judgment as that he thinks to prevail by way of Conquest without a party?
The Duke of Burgundy won the Country of Leigh by Battle.
Did not the Duke of Burgundy get the Country of Leidge, by reason of some
Battle he won against the the people thereof? Philip de Comines says, that a
man ought greatly to fear to hazard his estate on a Battle, when he may
otherwise avoid the same: for faith he, of a small number of people lost there
follows a great change to him that loses them, not so much by the fear they
conceive of the Enemy, as in the little estimation they will have of their
Master afterward, being ready still to enter into mutinies, demanding things
more boldly than they were wont; alleging further, that one Crown before, will
do more with them, than three will do after. Whosoever will read the Book of
the actions of Lewis the eleventh King of France (who was both a very wise and
valiant Prince) shall find, Lewis the eleventh aginst Charles the Duke of
Burgundies Son.
that after the great encounter between him and Count Charles the Duke of
Burgundies son at Mountleyrre, notwithstanding, that the conflict went so
indifferent, as neither side knew almost by the space of three or four hours
after who had the Victory, so soon as each party had rallied their broken
Troops, etc. having some good means so to do by reason of a great ditch and
long hedge that was between their two Armies, where the fight first began,
although the Kings power remained still great, by reason of so many Princes, as
he had assembled together, yet then, and ever after he determined, no more to
venture so great a Kingdom as France was, upon the uncertain event of a Battle.
And therefore the night following he dislodged and retired to Corbel; after
which time he carried all his Wars, with such a Temporizing course, as thereby
he wearied his Enemies, and became a mighty Prince, making his Army so great as
his adversaries at no time after durst attempt to give him Battle. Although
Philip de Comines does write that our Nation has been wonderfully fortunate in
Battle, and are much addicted thereunto; yet he does more allow of the
politic and wise temporizing of Lewis the French King in forbearing to fight
with Edward the fourth when he entered France, proffering him Battle near
Amyens. Lewis against Edward the fourth.
The King considering how dangerous an adventure it was to his estate, If it
should not succeed well with him, looking also back to the great thraldom and
subjection, that his predecessors had brought the Kingdom of France into,
under the English Nation, by such like rash acceptance of Battle, he determined
to temporize, though it were to his charges, thereby to weaken the King of
England, the winter season drawing then on: In the mean time sending great
presents to those that were near about the King, and Victuals of free-gift to
relieve his Army; condescending also to pay a yearly sum of 50000 Crowns into
the Tower of London, thereby to hasten the peace, and to get our Nation to
return. After all was concluded and the King returned home; one of the King of
Englands men being with Phillip de Comines in discourse, he told him he had
been at the winning of nine Battles, and how many said Phillip have you been at
the losing? Only one said he; and that was at the last forbearance of my Master
to fight with yours at Amyens; whereby we have gotten more shame unto our
selves than honor by the first nine. When Lewis the King heard of this speech,
he said, this is a shrewd boy, and sent for him to dine with him, and after
gave him 1000 Crowns with other great promises to the intent he should be a
means to entertain the peace, begun between the two Kings. What success had the
French at the Battle at Poytiers and Cressey, The Battles of Poytiers and
Cressey.
who although they were in number far greater than the English, and in the
heart of their own Country, yet they tasted nothing but the bitter effect of a
lost field. And we by other such manifold examples might be warned not to
commit the good estate of a Realm to so tickle and dangerous a trial as is the
uncertain sway of a Battle. Spanish Fleet defeated. 88.
And now never to be forgotten, did not our English Navy defeat the great
Spanish Fleet by this temporizing course? which had been so easy (as it was
thought) to have been performed by main force, in boarding them at the first.
Yet some would have this temporizing course not to be used at the beginning,
but when all other means do fail: and then it may be too late to temporize when
you have fought and received the foyl; and it is against the name of the word
and thing it self to use it in the end when time is past. Infinite are the
examples to confirm these temporizing courses, by means whereof great and
huge Armies have in a short time been dissolved and come to nothing. As namely
the Germans sundry times in France, Duke of Pama's Army
and the Duke of Parma's Army in France, when he came to the relief of Paris
Anno. 1590.

Lastly, The better to remove this old impression of rash encountering of an
Enemy Invador, remember the unadvised encounter of the Duke of Burgundy who
besieged a certain Town in the Savoy, The Duke of Burgundies fall.
called Granson, with a very great Army, to the relief whereof came certain
Switzers, (though not great in number;) the Duke hearing of their approach,
sent some forces to them to give them all annoyance possible, as also to
prevent their entry and descent into the Country (for the passage they should
enter by was through a certain narrow straight betwixt certain Mountains) and
himself followed with some greater forces to second them. And this was done by
the Duke, contrary to the advice of his counsel who persuaded him, rather to
attend their coming with all his forces in the place where they were; for the
place both by Nature and also by Art was strongly enramped, and it was so that
in all reason he could sustain no danger. To make it short, the Dukes Vanguard
was not able to withstand the Swittzers entrry, but retired; the Dukes
rere-guard seeing this, supposing they had fled began also to fly; in fine his
whole Army retired toward the Camp, although some behaved theselves very well
in this retreit, yet when they came into the Camp they durst not defend it; but
all betook themselves to flight, leaving their rich and pompous Camp and their
Artillery to the spoil of the poor Swittzers, who slew but very few of his
people for want of horsemen to follow the chase. The Duke, who the day before
was lifted up to the skies in pride, through the seeking to himself so many
great States and Princes, that desired to allie and confederate themselves with
him in league and freindship, presently after the loss of this Battle found a
great deal of alteration and change, for there fell from him four sorts of
people, who became his Enemies. The rage of the Duke was still so great that he
would not thus give over, but would try a second Battle at Morat: Upon the
loss whereof diverse others of his Allies fell from him also. And lastly after
the Battle of Nansey where he himself was slain, a great part both of his own
proper Dominions, and of Burgundy it self, fell from his house also. Thus you
may see what a long and evil tail a lost Battle has; as Lewis the French King
was wont to say. If you desire examples of greater Antiquity, you are referred
to the reading of the Roman Histories; but because brevity is required, I will
remember you only of this one; Namely of Caesar, who never could attain to the
sole government of Rome, until Pompey (opposing himself against it, on the
behalf of the State and Senate of Rome) gave him Battle and lost it: after
which he was driven to fly into Egypt, where Ptolomy the King sent his head
unto Caesar, whereby there were left none able to withstand. By the which he
got not only the absolute government for himself, but also brought and reduced
the free State of Rome to a Monarchy.

But if the defendant chance to win the Battle, then indeed he removes the
cause and ends the danger. As the Moors against the King of Portugal, The
Moors against the King of Portugal.
who landed without any resistance: But the defendants finding themselves the
stronger as well in Foot as in Horse, thought it no danger to give Battle,
which grew by temporizing, until their power was come together: for it is most
certain, that as long as you abstain from coming to fight, the Enemies shall
always be held in doubt of winning, and you shall be in no hazard of losing
the Country, and your malcontents and evil disposed persons will be kept from
revolt, who no doubt will see a Battle fought before they will show themselves
open Enemies; yea, whatsoever they had promised beforehand, as the Portugals
did to Don Antony, and performed it not. By which dilatory manner of
proceeding, you may be at choice either to accept or refuse the Battle, as
shall be most for your advantage, when by time you have made your selves strong
and your Enemies weak. And this defensive War, and these temporizing courses,
we see that all Princes and men of War that are, or have been of late of
Judgment do imitate and follow. As whosoever will Look into the Duke of Parma's
actions shall seldom see that ever he came to fight a set battle, but when all
other means did fail to accomplish that which he intended. And no less noble
and glorious is that victory holden, which is obtained by Counsel, device and
policy, than that which is won by the sword, violence and Blood.

I have now answered to the question first proposed. and given the reasons on
both sides, leaving my superiors to their better judgments. Although the
people of this Nation heretofore ran headlong upon the invador to the Sea side,
without sufficient arms, advice or command; such furious actions the discreet
Soldier is against. But in these our later days the people being more
civilized, better armed and disciplined; and the whole Nation in a better
posture of defense; If any advantage is offered not to temporize.
it may now be granted that in some cases, to defer and delay your fight may be
dangerous, as in letting slip some notable advantage; from which you are not
restrained but only to be advised in this case, not to join Battle rashly and
unadvisedly with the Enemy. The which (besides the danger of rash attempts)
does cut you off from advantages and supplies, that may be had, by time,
deliberation, and counsel; for their is nothing in which true fortitude may be
showed more than in this action: for to fight, courage does not naturally
provoke; but to refrain upon good cause, is the advice of wisdom; and he that
will fight upon every call of the Enemy when offered, shall be sure to do it to
his disadvantage; and thereby shall show that he has no experience of Wars,
and is ignorant of the chances and mutability of fortune, or as I may say more
aptly, knows not how to use his fortune: yet what is the common voice of the
Country? which heat and fury as it rises suddenly, so may it be cooled
quickly again. But that which increases and confirms courage best and makes
men resolute and constant indeed, is when they shall see themselves accompanied
with numbers able to resist, instructed with knowledge how to use their arms
and weapons, and fortified with order to be able to withstand and repel an
Enemy: This is it, which will make a coward valiant: For as one says, the
fierce and disordered men, are much weaker than the fearful and ordered; for
that order expels fear from men, and in the end disorder abateth fierceness;
so then it is not fury that prevails in War, but good discipline and order.

The chief scope is to persuade a restraint of the violent and disorderly
running down of the Country to the Sea side to fight and give Battle to the
Enemy at his landing after the old custom, showing the danger and
inconvenience that may follow. And for the other part it is granted by all that
it is perilous for a defendant Prince to hazard his Crown at a Battle; and
more dangerous for men untrained to encounter expert disciplined Soldiers. Put
the case that Battle be given, and loss received; then if we have no strong
Towns adjacent to give the Enemy stop, to make head and rally again, it will
prove most perilous to us. Therefore moderately it may be concluded dangerous
(unless advantage might be obtained) for any Prince to give an invading Enemy
Battle.

And here by the way (occasion being offered) to speak of strong Towns; some
there be of that opinion that a Country well peopled, that has no, or few
strong Towns, is in less danger of conquest than that Realm that has many:
because (say they) an Enemy cannot any way nestle himself, but that you may at
all times force him to Battle at your pleasure. To that may be answered that a
Battle being the thing that an invadour is most desirous of, and which a
defendant ought to shun; your strong Towns in that case are most available for
the defendant Prince in his own Country against an Invador; because he may
only with one strong Town weary an Invadours Army and consume it: especially
if he be but able with a small force to encamp near his Town besieged: for the
Invador is thereby restrained from assaulting the same, for fear the defendants
Camp should assail him in the mean time. The which works all for the
defendant, in winning of time to the weakening and ruin of his Enemies Army: the
date whereof (as by daily experience is found) is not above twelve or thirteen
weeks continuance; so as your strong Towns avail wholly for the defendant; In
our late Wars.
and are dangerous only in Civil and Intestine Wars, for that such Towns
revolting work the like contrary effect against their Lord and Master, as they
did before for him: for examples and presidents of this, you may behold what
the strong holds of France, and the Low Countries, and England it self did
against their Lords and Sovereigns: Insomuch as we may truly say of them They
are a dangerous good: Wherefore I think it matter of Joy to all loyal hearts
that our most Gracious Sovereign has a Kingdom so well replenished with a
warlike people, whereby to be enabled at all times to front and give a stop to
an Enemy Invadour: And as touching a rebellious number, I hope we shall never
doubt or fear them, as long as they shall want skillful leaders and Governors
to direct them; pay, armor, Munition, and other necessaries to uphold them;
wherewith His now most Royal Majesty is plentifully furnished; the want whereof
shall force Rebels in a few days to disperse themselves, who being once broken
may presently be followed in gross; in such sort as they shall never be able to
assemble and make head again. And what leader of skill and judgment will
undertake such an enterprise in these days; and not forecast that a power and
force assembled cannot long stand without rich and strong Towns to supply their
wants; or at leastwise, without so much as is requisite to retain and keep an
Army together in due order and obedience; without which there can grow nothing
but confusion and ruin; be their numbers never so great.

THE CONTENTS.
For the service of the Horse.
Chapt. 1 Introductive Collections for the exercise of the young Soldier in
the Art Military. folio 1 Chap. 2. Of the Soldier and Officers in general. 4
Chap. 3. Of Arming the Cavalry. 7 Chap. 4. Of Military signs. 9 Chap. 5. Of
marching and drawing up of a Troop of Horse. 10 Chap. 6. Of exercising a Troop
as armed with Carabine and Pistol. 13 Chap. 7. Of Distance. 15 Chap. 8. Of
Motions. 16 Chap. 9. Of firings. 21 Chap. 10. The conlusion for the Horse
Service. 23
For the service of the Foot.
Chap. 1. By way of introduction. 33 Chap. 2. Of the postures of the Pike, and
of the Musket. 34 37 Chap. 3. Of places and dignities both of files and ranks.
Some Objections answered in dignities etc. 40 43 Chap. 4. Of the Drum. 45 Chap.
5. Of distances. ibid Read Chap. 7. for the Horse Service. Chap. 6. Of Marching
and drawing up of a Company, Decyphering their Dignities in place. 48 49 Chap.
6. Of Facings. 50 Chap 7. Of doublings. 53 How the Front is strengthened, 1. By
entire doublings of Ranks. 54 2. By Bringers up. 57 3. By half files. 58 4. By
divisional wheelings. 61

Chap. 8. Showing that several Commands produce one and the same figure. 63
Chap. 9. How the Rear may be strengthened. 65 Chap. 10. How the Flanks are to be
strengthened 1. By Files. 67 2. By half ranks. 72 3. By divisional doublings.
77 4. By Wheelings. 78
Chap. 11. Showing how that several Commands produce one and the same figure.
81 Chap. 12. Treating of Inversion. 1. Of files filing. 84 2. Of Ranks filing.
90
Chap. 13. Of Conversion, etc. 93 Chap. 14. Showing also their several commands
producing one and the same figure. 106 Chap. 15. Of Countermarches. 110 1. Of
maintaining ground. 111 2. Of losing ground. 115 3. Of gaining ground. 122
Chap. 16. Of Wheelings. 127 Chap. 17. Of file leaders to be made successively
six deep. 136 Chap. 18. Of firings, and firing in the Front. 137 Chap. 19. Of
firing in the Front and Rear: and Rear alone. 151 Chap. 20. Of firings in the
flanks. 153 Chap. 21. Of divisional firings. 160 Chap. 22. An excuse for not
proceeding farther. 169 Chap. 23. Showing the Necessity of exercise of arms,
with their Antiquity. ibid. Chap. 24. The Conclusion. 174 Chap. 1. The Original
and being of Ensigns and Colors. 175 Chap. 2. The definition of Ensigns. 177
Chap. 3. Of Horse and Horse Colors. 179 Chap. 4. Of the dignity of Ensigns.
180 Chap. 5. The disgraces to the Ensign. 182 Chap. 6. The use of the Ensign
with the postures and flourishes. 184 Sir. Francis Veares notes of directions
how far a man's Office and duty in a Regiment does stand. 186
FINIS.
HOC MVNIMINE TVTVIS VERO NIL VERIVS WF fec.


He yt hears ye sound of ye Trumpet and will not be warned if ye sword come
to take him away, his blood shall be upon his own head for he heard ye sound
of ye Trumpet and would not be admonished; but he yt receives warning shall
save his Life.

MILITARY OBSERVATIONS Or ye TACTICKS PUT INTO PRACTICE, BY "TV" (monogram of
Thomas Venn)

MILITARY ARCHITECTURE, OR THE ART OF Fortifying Towns; Together with the ways
of DEFENDING AND BESIEGING THE SAME.

By ANDREW TACQVETT, of the Society of JESUS, and Translated out of the Latin
by J. L

LONDON, Printed by S. Simmons, for Robert Pawlet, Thomas Passenger, and
Benjamin Hurlock, MDCLXXII.

To the Right Honorable AVBREY de VERE, Earl of Oxford; Baron Bolebec,
Samford, and Badlesmere; Chief Justice, and Justice in Eire of all His
Majesty's Forests, Chaces, Parks, and Warrens on the South Side of Trent;
Colonel of His Majesty's Royal Regiment of Horse-Guards, Lord Lieutenant for
His Majesty in the County of Essex, Knight of the most Noble Order of the
Garter, and One of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
I Shall not be tedious in informing Your Lordship of the reasons which induced
me to this Dedication. Your most Heroic Ancestors being always the truest
defenders of Loyalty, and eminentest Patterns of Valor; your Lordships
particular disposition and affection to Martial acts, the Experience you have
had in the Fortifications abroad, have Entitled you to the Patronage of these
my Addresses, and given you the undoubted right to be a fit Judge of all
Military designs whatsoever. And though the particular favors and kindnesses
which I have received from your Honorable Family (as owing my Education to the
bounty of it) have sufficient force to oblige me to a most humble and grateful
acknowledgment, yet in this case I laid aside those considerations, and had
respect only to your Lordships self as a Soldier, furnished with all that may
render you capable to examine either this, or any other Martial Treatise.

I am confident, My Lord, the Book in it self, how meanly soever by me
Translated out of the Latin, will not be unworthy your Lordships favorable
aspect, it being the Easiest and Exactest of that Nature that ever yet was
Extant, having been compiled from all Authors that have treated of that Subject
by Andrew Tacquett of the Society of Jesus, for the use of his Pupil Count d'
Horn of Flanders. The new Corrections of the Count d' Pagan, and Van Ruse,
that we all so admire, but no body practices, is not here so much as spoke of;
he thinking it best that men should be well grounded in the old ways;
afterward for divertisement they may follow what Novelties they please. I
shall not insist further on the praises of the Author, or obtrude him upon your
Lordship by numerous commendations: If at your vacant hours you shall vouchsafe
to cast an Eye upon him, I do not doubt but you will give him the esteem he
deserves, and favorably accept the poor Endeavors of him who is willing to
omit no opportunity of testifying himself,

MY LORD, Your Honors most Obliged humble Servant John Lacy.

THE FIRST PART OF Military Architecture TREATING OF REGULAR FORTIFICATION.
CHAP. I. Wherein is contained the Definition, Beginning, Progress, and
Perfection of Military Architecture, etc.
MIlitary Architecture is a Science how to defend and fortify any place
against the force of an Enemy.

Towns and Castles (says Vegetius) are either fortified by Nature, or by hands,
or else by both. By Nature as being situate in some high abrupt place, or being
encompassed with the Sea, Lakes, or Rivers. The Mountains about Cilicia in
Asia, and Helvetia of Germany, almost render them inaccessible.

The Rock Aornis baffled the force of Hercules and Alexander.

The Castles of Namur, and Hermenstein, and many others in Europe, are almost
invincible by reason of the Rocks which lie underneath them. Venice,
Straltsound, Custrine, and almost all Holland, are defended by the waters that
flow about them. So that you may see Nature in her fortifying of Towns, either
casts about them the Element of Earth or Water. And Art imitating Nature (as it
uses to do) placed Walls and Rampars instead of Rocks and Mountains; and Moats
or Ditches, where the Sea or Rivers have been wanting.

Curtius reports the walls of Babylon were 32 feet broad. But this Structure
had two faults in it, and both of them very dangerous. The first was that the
defendants standing on their wall without any covert lay open to their Enemy.
The other was that the Enemy approaching under their wall, was so secured by
the wall it self, that he could not be hurt by the defendants that stood on
high over him.

These Errors at length they endeavored to remedy, by building throughout
upon their wall a brestwork B C Z, the top of their brestwork they
distinguished with Battlements Z Z Z, not joined together, but left open at
certain distances, so that the defendants, covered with these Battlements,
could beat off the enemy through their open intervals; so was the first Error
in some manner sublated.



Nor yet were these inconveniences perfectly taken away, for the Enemy lying
within the triangles D E F, G K H, would escape the shot of the Townsmen.

Therefore they began to look on a flancquing or side defense, and still
keeping

Pioneers, besides the flancquing defense F C, D E, could scowr only one point
of the round Towers, B C A, because round bodies cannot be touched by right
lines but in one point only.

At last Art conquered it self, and found out that way of defense which we now
use, turning the Walls into Rampars, and the round Turrets into Bulwarks fitted
with face and flancque; and enclosed the whole Fortification with right or
straight lines. To conclude, it is brought so to pass, that the Enemy let him
stand where he will, shall lie open to the Shot of the defendants, and all the
parts of the Fortification mutually defend one another.

Being about to treat of this last manner of fortification, I will keep such
Order, that when I shall have expounded the terms that are used in this matter,
I shall then propose the Rules and Principles of the Art; and thus instructed,
at last, God willing, we will fall upon the practice it self.

CHAP. II. The Terms of Military Architecture are Expounded.
1. A Fortification is a Place having such a Circumference, whose each part
receives from other parts a Flancquing or side Defense, besides the fore-right
Defense they yield themselves. So that all parts mutually scowre one another.
One part is said to scowr or flanque one another,

2. To delineate a Fortification, is to describe the out-lines of the
Fortification.

3. A Regular Fortification is built upon a Regular Figure, has all its parts
equal and like placed.

4. A Regular Figure, is that which has equal sides and angles; such is the
Figure H K R P M N, all whose sides K R, R P, P M, M N, N K, and angles N, M,
P, R, K, are equal among themselves: About this a Circle may be circumscribed,
that shall have the same Center H, as the Figure has. The Angle of the Center
is that which is contained between two Semidiameters K H, R H. The Angle of the
Circumference, or of the Figure, is that which was contained between the sides
of the Figure, as M, P, etc.

5. An Irregular Fort, is that which is built on an Irregular Figure; an
Irregular Figure is that which has neither Sides nor Angles equal.

6. A Bulwork or Bastion,

7. A C, B D, Are the flanques of the Bulwork.

8. D H, C G, The face of the Bulwork.

9. B F, M F, The gorge or neck of the Bulwork.

10. F H, E G, The Capital lines.

11. A B, The Courtine.

12. If the flanque of the Bulwork be divided in the point 2, and on the inside
you take 5, 3, equal to 2, B, and join the points 2, 3, the part 3 D, or that
curved Line within it is called Orillon, or ear of the Bulwork; and the rest
of it 3, 5, is called the Flancque Couvert; but the use of these Orillons are
almost out of date.

13. C Q. The flanque prolonged.

14. Q G, The front or surface.

15. B G, The fichant line of defense,

16. R G, The flanquing line of defense.

17. K B, The flanque of the Courtine, called by the French, the second
Flanque; it is that part of the Courtine which lies betwixt the flanque of the
Bastion D B, and the flanquing line of defense KG.

18. E F, the side of the inward Polygon or Figure.

19. G H, The side of the outward Polygon, or the distance of the Bastions.

20. P E, P F, The Radius of the inward Polygon, or Figure.

21. P G, P H, The Radius of the outward Polygon.

22. E P F, The Angle of the Center. Vide def. 4.

23. A E O, The Angle of the Figure. Vide def. 4.

24. N G C, The Angle of the Bulwork, called in French Angle Flancque.

25. K C A, I D B, The Angle of the flanque, and flanquing line of defense,
called in French, Angle de laflancquant and du flancque

26, C K A, D I B, The Angle of the flanquing Line of Defense and Courtine,
called in French, Angle flancquant interieur.

27. A C G, The Angle of the flanque and face.

28. G T H, The Angle of defense, in French, angle flancquant exterieur; Angle
de tenailles.

29. D S H, The Angle determining the flanque. Angle form flanque

There are several sorts of Fortifications, as to their Magnitude.

30. A Fort Royal, Is that whose fichant line does not exceed a Musket Shot,
and is used most in fortifying Cities and great places.

31. The middle sort of Fort Royal, Is that whose fichant line is less than
Musket Shot, but the distance of the Bulworks more.

32. The lesser sort of Fort Royal, Is that whose Bulworks are distant just
Musket Shot.

Those that are less, are called Castles, Forts, etc. We shall expound the
Orthographical terms, or the Profile, commonly called the uprights, in the 7th
Chapter following.

CHAP. III. The Canons or principal Rules of Fortification.
1. THe end of Fortification, is that few may resist many.

2. The form of the Fort must be such, that all its parts may receive an
oblique flanquing-side defense, beside the fore-right defense they afford
themselves.

3. Therefore each part of the Fortification, must flanque and be flanqued. The
manner of flanquing is this: The face, which is the weakest part of the
Fortification, is defended by the flanques of the Bulwork and Courtine, as also
by the opposite Vid. fig. 5.





Note. When we shall make mention of feet, you must understand them to be
Rhyneland feet.

6. Above all, care must be taken to make the flanquing parts of the
Fortification as large as you can.

7. Therefore let the flanque of the Bulwork be of a just bigness, and make the
second flanque as large as you can: For that Fort is far the strongest, which
keeping the Rest of the Maxims, has also flanques in the Courtine.

8. Let the Courtine be of a just length, let it be more than the face, and the
flanques of the Bulwork joined, because it is the strongest part of the Fort.



10. A Right Angle for the Bulwork is the best, but to gain it you must not
omit or cut away too much of the second flanque.

11. The Angle of the Flanque and Courtine C A K,

12. Let the Gorge or neck-line A C, F H, be large,

13. Let the quantity of the Bulwork be such as may receive a sufficient number
of armed Men, and yield room enough for the traversing Guns, and performing
other Military duties.

The Bulwork is chiefly straightened for these reasons; if you lessen the Face,
and keep the same Angle for the Bulwork, and consequently increase the
Flanques: Or if you retain the same Flanques, and increase the Angle of the
Bulwork.

14. At length, that I may contract the Rules abovementioned, and many others
into one, that form of a Fortification will be the best, that has the largest
Flanques in the Bulwork and Courtine, the Gorge Lines very spacious, the Angle
of the Bulwork a Right Angle, or near a right Angle; and the Fichant Line, at
most, not to exceed a Musket Shot.

That this form may be had in Regular Figures, the proportion of the Courtine,
Face, Flanque and Neck, will be as follows.

15. Let not the Face be less than half the Courtine, nor bigger than the whole.

16. The Flancque must not be less than a fourth part of the Face, nor bigger
than half the Face.

17. The Gorge Line must not be less than the Flanque.

In these three Dogen and Goldman agree: The reason of them you may see in the
Account of the Fifth Chapter.

CHAP. IV. Being an Explanation of the foregoing Maxims.
ALL the reason and proportion of our Fortification will rely on the Rules
delivered in the last Chapter. Therefore 'twill be here necessary more fully to
declare them; especially those which sometimes all Ingineers did not approve
of. The first, second, and third want no exposition.

About the 4th and 5th, although now no body disagree, yet there was a time
when men did doubt them. Some Military Architects, those chiefly that flourisht
in the former Age, did order such a distance for the Bastions, that the Fichant
Line, or the longest Line of defense, should not a little exceed a Musket
shot. The Reason they brought was, that the place might better be defended with
great Guns than with Muskets: And therefore, because great Guns cannot be so
well levelled against an Enemy that is near, they required a greater distance for
their Bulworks, and so the charge would be the less, the Town being defended
with fewer Bulworks. But this way, by all modern Ingineers, is neglected, who
with one consent remove the Bulworks to such a distance, that the Fichant Line
might be measured with a Musket Shot. What reason our former Architects
brought for their opinion, is plainly none at all. For both by Reason and
Experience it is evident, Towns may be better defended with Muskets than with
Cannons; for the use of great Guns is very costly, slow, difficult; the
execution they do, very rare and uncertain, so that it is become a Proverb, He
is cursed in his Mothers belly, that is killed with a Cannon bullet. And if a
great Gun should be made useless, by being dismounted, or by the death of the
Gunner, or some other mischance, all the Flanquing defense is lost, to the
great encouragement of the Besiegers. On the contrary, the use of Muskets is
not costly, but easy, ready, quick, and sure. For who will deny, that an Enemy
may not better be beat off with a thousand small Shot than one great Gun? A
thing so clear needs no more arguments. Therefore let stand what we have
appointed, the Fichant line to be measured by a Musket Shot.

Nor do we exclude the use of great Guns from our defense; for in this modern
way of Fortification, they may and ought to be admitted usefully: We only
persuade, that the chief of the defense may rather be committed to Muskets
than to Cannons.

What we ordered in the 6th. and 7th. Rules, is the chiefest concern in the
whole business of Fortification. The Faces of the Bulworks, because they lie
farther out than any of the other parts, are the weakest parts of the
Fortification: The Flanque and Courtine are the strongest, for they lie farther
from the Enemy, and being near to one another, stoutly defend themselves. Since
then the Face is a place weaker than the rest, and which the Enemy most usually
attaques, we ought with our chiefest care to help it.





The latter the Dutch first received, and made use of; who judged it best for
their advantage to add to their defense second Flanques in the Courtine, though
with the loss of a right Angle even in a Duodekagon. Neither is there any
doubt, but this method is far better than the former, since it does not only
sufficiently provide for the Angle of the Bulwork, which it never makes less
than 60 degrees, but also increases the defense of the Faces often to twice as
much as the former.

The Reason of the 8th Rule, which bids the Courtine be of a just length, is,
that among all the parts of the Fortification the Courtine is the strongest:
For it lies distant from the Enemy farther than any other of the parts, and
placed betwixt two Bulworks, is very strongly defended. Now it is very agreeable
to reason, that the strongest parts of the Fortification should be longer than
the weaker: Yet do not extend the Courtine so far as to make the Fichant line
above Musket Shot, for that is against the 5th Rule. The fittest proportion
will be, if with Dogen or Fritach, you give it 432 feet, or with Goldman 480
feet.

The 9th and 10th Cannon treats of the Angle of the Bulwork; where a right
Angle is preferred before any other, provided it do not too much obstruct the
rest of the Rules.

For the better understanding the Reason of this Rule, you must note, that
right and obtuse Angles do resist the Cannon shot with their whole bodies, but
an Acute one does not with all his body. Q. are both perpendicular to B O, by
supposition, in the same point B they will make one strait Line R B Q. by the
14. l. 1. Euclide. From whence it is manifest, that the side of a right angled
Bulwork B Q, objects its whole self against the perpendicular shot R B: and so
consequently a right-angled Bulwork does with his whole bulk oppose and resist
all the perpendicular shots R S.

The same thing may be demonstrated by stronger reason in an obtuse Angle:

These things being known, it is plainly manifest why a right Angle should be
preferred before an acute Angle; that is, if it can be had without prejudice to
the rest of the Maxims: And why it should rather be chosen than an obtuse one.
These are the Reasons.

The first is, that keeping the same Hancques Q P, O F,

The other and chiefest reason is, that the obtuser the Angle is, the lesser
will be the Flanque of the Courtine, or else all lost.

Therefore a Right Angle, or one near a Right Angle, must be given to the
Bulwork as often as may be, but so that one clause in the Rule be not neglected,
which forbids you to spoil the second Flanque for the desire of a right Angle:
And because in a Hexagon, and the figures following to a Duodekagon, a Right
Angle in the Bulwork will cut off the second Flanque in the Courtine, we judge
it better, with most of the famous Engineers of this Age, to detract something
from the Angle of the Bulwork, keeping notwithstanding a due strength for him,
than to want the Flanque in the Courtine to the prejudice of our defense, which
will be so much lessened. Barleduc and others followed the contrary; but most
people now a days being taught by Experience, the School-mistriss of all
things, have forsaken them.

The reason and sense of the rest of the Rules is so plain, that they need no
farther Explanation.

CHAP. V. The constitution of Regular Fortifications.
THe Definitions and Principles of the Science being now expounded, we will
come to the thing it self.

That the Constitution of a Fortification may be found, Data once ordered, the
proportion of the rest of the parts follows sure and determined according to
the Reason of the things given. Therefore 'twill be the part of a skilful
Ingineer to choose those Data which may best agree with the Rules established
in the third and fourth Chapters, and make the parts agree which depend on them.

Furthermore, because these Data may be varied without any prejudice to our
Maxims of Fortification, the Constitution also of Fortification will be
various. I shall choose and propose six of the best and most approved. The
proportion of the Lines will serve for any form, the quantity for the Royal
only.

The First Manner
Is Goldmans. Let the Face be half the Courtine in what Figure soever.

Feet The Courtine 480. The Face 240. The Flancque in A4 Ang. in A5 Ang.
60. That is of the Face. 80. That is of the Face.

In the rest of the Figures up to a nine-angled Polygon 10 feet are always
added to the flanque, till in a Nonangle the Flanque becomes 120 feet, that is
1/^ the face, which quantity is retained for the flanque in all the following
figures.

The Angle of the Bulwork is made of half the Angle of the Figure, increased
with 15 degrees. Therefore it will be Degr. 4 60. 5 69. 6 75. 7 79. 179. or in
decimals 79, 286 In a 8 angled figure 82. 30. or 82.5. in decimals. 9 85. 10
87. 11 88. 38. 11. or 88. 63.64. in decimals 12 90. or a right Angle, which is
retained in all figures following.

From these Data, or things given, the proportion of the rest of the lines will
arise, which the following Table shows you.

Radius. Capital. Gorge. Flanque 2. Fichant. IV 494.5.5.8. 172.6.9.9.
109.7.0.6. 256.0.7, 7 722.2.2.2. V 595.2.9.3. 197.9.1.1. 109.9.0.2. 254.0.8.7
724.1.5.7. VI 713.4.8.6. 209.9.7.6. 116.7.5.3. 262.7.2.1 724.9.0.9. VII
833.8.5.8. 222.0.5.6. 121.7.9.3. 262.0.1.1. 726.2.5.4. VIII 955.6.6.1.
233.9.6.4. 125.7.1.3. 256.9.4.2. 728.0.7.4. IX 1078.5.0.8. 245.6.2.8.
128.8.7.0. 249.4.8.2. 730.3.1.7. X 1212.6.0.7. 246.5.9.2. 134.7.1.7. 258.9.8.8.
729.6.3.3. XI 1347.0.8.3. 247.5.4.3. 139.5.2.1. 266.3.2.1. 729.0.3.5. XII
1481.8.8.6. 248.4.6.0. 143.5.4.0. 272.1.5.4. 728.5.1.5.

In this Table the figures before the separating line are Rhynland feet; the
rest are 10ths, 100ths, 1000ths, parts of a foot, etc.

In this first manner of Fortification there are four things given besides the
species of the Figure. Viz. The Courtine, the Face, Flanque, and Angle of the
Bulwork, who themselves agree with our Rules, and also the rest of the Lines
which follow from them; as the Gorge, second Flanque, and the flanquing and
fichant lines of defense, which you will find to be true, if by the help of the
Trigonometrie you calculate the quantities of each of the parts out of the
Data, or things given; of which we shall speak in the following Chapter. I
shall here only mention two things: That is, the second Flanque in this way
will be larger than in any other, so as to exceed half the Courtine. And the
Gorge line be always above a 100 feet.

The Second Manner
Is Dogens. The face is 24 perches, or 288 Rhynland feet.

The Courtine 36 perches.

Therefore the proportion of the Courtine to the face is sesquialter or as 3 to
2. which is observed in all the following methods.

The Angle forming the flanque is 40 degrees always.

The Angle of the Bulwork is the Angle of the figure increased with 15 degr. as
in the first manner. Goldman, Marolois and Fritach, agree in the Angle of the
Bulwork.

Note, that the Perch we speak of contains 12 Rhynland feet.

The Third Manner
Is Dogens second. It differs from the second in the last datum only, for it
makes the Angle of the Bulwork equal to two thirds of the Angle of the figure,
therefore 'twill be degr. 4 60 5 72 In a 6 Angle 80 7 85. 42. 51. or 85.71428
in Decimals. which will serve in all that follow. 8 90.

Rad. Capital. Gorge. Flanque 1. Flanque 2. Fichant. IV. 38. 50 19. 73 9. 23 7.
74 7. 10 60. 80 V. 49. 05 20. 40 10. 83 9. 09 8. 03 61. 10 VI. 60. 00 21. 10
12. 00 10. 07 8. 33 61. 34 VII. 70. 80 21. 75 12. 9 10. 83 8. 41 61. 54 VIII
82. 66 22. 32 13. 63 11. 44 8. 39 61. 72 IX. 93. 08 23. 15 13. 83 11. 61 11. 10
61. 74 X. 103. 62 23. 83. 14. 62 11. 76 12. 91 61. 70 XI. 114. 26 24. 40 14. 19
11. 91 14. 19 61. 68 XII. 124. 97 24. 88 14. 34 12. 04 15. 15 61. 66

The numbers in this Table before the points are perches of Rhynland that
contain 12 feet, the rest are 10ths. 100ths. of a perch,

The Fourth Manner.
Is Dogens third, Fritachs first.

Let the Courtine be 36 perches.

The face 24 perches.

The Angle of the Bulwork 1/^ the Angle of the Figure increased with 20 degr.

Perches 4 6.72 5 7.84 6 8.96 The Flanque in a 7 Angle is 9.108 8 10.12 9
11.132 10 12. 144 which is kept in all the following Fig.

The Fifth Manner
Is Fritach's second.

Let the Courtine be 36 perches.

The Face 24.

The Angle of the Bulwork half the Angle of the Figure increased with 15 degr.
as in the first manner and the second.

Perches 4 8.96 5 9.108 The Flanque in a 6 Angle is 10.12 7 11.132 8 12.144 the
same always in the following Fig.

Out of these Data, the proportion of the rest of the parts that follows, which
the Table underneath will show you.

Rad. Capital. Gorge. Flanque 2. Fichant. IV. 38.14 20.01 8.97 6.14 little
exceeding 60 Rods or Perches. V. 48.08 21.03 10.26 10.51 VI. 58.19 22.15 11.08
11.86 VII. 68.47 23.31 11.71 12.03 VIII. 78.60 24.48 12.16 11.67 IX. 90.31
24.64 12.89 12.95 X. 101.84 24.66 13.47 13.90 XI. 113.38 24.76 13.95 14.63 XII.
124.77 24.85 14.29 15.22

The numbers before the points are perches, the rest are 10ths. 100ths. of a
perch.

The Sixth Manner
Is Dogen's Fourth.

Let the Courtine be 36 perches.

The face 24.

The Angle forming the Flanque always 40 degr.

The Angle of the Bulwork as in the fourth manner. Therefore it will be degr. 4
65. 5 75. 6 80. In a 7 Angle 84. 17.9 8 87. 30 9 90. And so always after.

All these several ways of Fortification agree with the Canons delivered in the
3d. and 4th. Chapters. The Fourth seems least in use (so I gather out of
Fritach page 15.) The Fifth is more used. The Second and Third are much alike.
Betwixt these ( viz. the second and third) and the fourth, the Sixth is a mean,
which according to Dogen is to be preferred before them. The First goes beyond
all the rest for the largeness of the second Flanque, and comes short of all
the rest in the first Flanque, the neck, the faces, and in the Angle of the
Bulwork. Whence it is consequent, he should have his Bulworks less than any of
the rest. His Courtine is larger than the others by 48 feet. This seems to be
less in use than any of the other.

The Data, or things given in the second and fifth, differ about the, Flanque,
which in the fifth is bigger: For which reason it has its Gorge line and
second Flanque lesser. The third and fourth in their Data's differ about the
Angle of the Bulwork and the Flanque. The Flanque in the fourth is lesser: the
Angle of the Bulwork is bigger, except in a Hexagon. Where, etc.

But all these ways are approved; let every one take that which pleases him
best.

And so have we ordered the constitution of each way in Fortification: But by
what Art the quantities of the rest of the Angles, and Lines depending on the
things given, are found out of each of the things given; that is, by what
method the Tables above were made, we must seek for in the following Rules.

How to find the Angles.
1. The Angle of the Center of any Regular Figure is had, Fig. 6.
if you divide 360 degr. by the number of its Angles. See the Scholium of the
16 Propos. of the fourth of Euclid. set out by me.

The Angle of the IV V VI VII VIII IX X XI XII Center. 90. 72. 60. 51, 43, 38.
45. 40. 36. 32, 43, 38. 30. Figure. 90. 108. 120. 128. 34, 17. 135. 140. 144.
147, 16, 22, 150.

2. The Angle of the Figure, or of the Circumference is found, if you substract
the Angle of the Center from the right Angles, that is 180 degrees. For the
Angle of the Center P, together with the Angles P E F, P F E, makes two right
ones. 32. 1. but these are half the Angle of the Figure, and so joined together
make up the whole Angle of the Figure. Therefore the Angle of the Center, with
the Angle of the Figure, makes two right ones. Therefore, etc.

3. The Angle of the Bulwork is found after this manner: By the foregoing Rule
find the Angle of the Figure, and add to its half 15 degr.

4. The Angle G K A or C K A, will be discovered, if you deduct half the Angle
of the Bulwork from half the Angle of the Figure. For because G H, E F are
parallel, the Angle E G Q is equal to P E F; and G K A equal to C G Q.
Therefore, etc.

5. The Angle A C K is had by substracting the Angle last found C K A, from 90
degr. For since C A K is a right Angle; A C K, C K A, must make another right
Angle.

6. The Angle G T H will be found after this manner. Double the Angle C K A,
which substract from 180 degr. the remainder is the Angle I T K, or G T H. For
the Angles C K A, D I B, are equal by construction; therefore C K A doubled, is
equal to them both. Now these two Angles being known in the Triangle I T K, the
third also will be known, Euclid. 32. 1. and the Angle I T K is proved equal to
G T H, by the 15. 1.

7. The Angle A C G is discovered, if you substract A C K from 180 degr. for A
C K, and A C G, make two right Angles. Eucl. 13. 1.

8. To find the Angle G E A, substract P E F, half the Angle of the Figure
found in the second Rule, from 180 degrees: For P E F, G E A, are equal to two
Right Angles. 13. 1.

How to find the Lines.
1. The Lines AK, C K.

Fig 6.
In the Right angled Triangle A C K the Flanque A C is given, and the Angles C
and K are found by the fifth and fourth Rules. Therefore the Sides AK, C K,
will be found by Trigonometrie.

2. The Flanque in the Courtine, and the flanquing Line of defense.

The Face which is given being added to C K found out last, gives the flanquing
Line of defense G K; and A K one of the Lines last found, being deducted from
the Courtine that is given, leaves the Flanque in the Courtine B K.

3. The Lines G Q, Q C.

In the right angled Triangle G Q C, the Face G C is given; and the Angles are
already found in the fourth Rule. For Q G C is equal to G K A; therefore G Q, Q
C will be found.

4. The outward side of the Polygon G H.

To G Q doubled, add the Courtine which is given.

5. The Line A Q.

To the Flanque which is given, add the Line Q C, found out in the third Rule.

6. The Capitals G E, G Z.

In the right angled Triangle G Z E, the Angle E G Z is found; for it is equal
to P E F, half the angle of the Figure; and the side Z E, or Q A, is found by
the fifth Rule; therefore G E, G Z, are found.

7. The Gorge Line A E.

Substract G Z, found in the sixth Rule, from G Q, found in the third Rule, and
there remains Z Q, or E A.

8. The side of the inward Polygon E F.

Add the Courtine which is given to the Gorge line doubled, found out in the
foregoing Rule.

9. The Radius P E, Y P.

In the right angled Triangle E Y P, the side E Y is found (for it is half the
side of the Figure found out in the last Rule) and the Angle P E Y found in the
second Rule of Angles, therefore the sides E P, Y P, will be found.

10. The bigger Radius G P.

Add the Capital to the lesser Radius.

11. The Fichant line of defense B G.

Out of the sum of the Squares of G R, B R, extract the Root, and that shall
give G B. The demonstration is from the 47. 1. of Euclid. R B is found out in
the fifth Rule. G R is had, if to Z R, or E B, the sum of the Courtine and
Gorge line you add G Z, found in the sixth Rule.

And so you have the complete constitution of Fortification. Nor will it now be
difficult for one that is not altogether unskilful in Trigonometrie, which I
have have taught in the third Chapter of my first Book of Practical Geometry,
to find all the Lines and Angles by the like method out of what Data soever.

CHAP. VI. The delineation of Regular Fortifications, either on Paper, or in
the Field.
SInce that in the foregoing Chapter the quantities of the Lines and Angles of
Fortifications are determined; to delineate the same either on Paper or in the
Field, there is nothing more required than what I have taught in my Practical
Geometry. Therefore in the tenth Chapter of my Practical Geometry you will find
what you desire digested into ten Problems.

CHAP. VII. An Explanation of the Orthographical Terms.
HItherto I have delivered the delineation of Regular Fortification: That is, I
have described the out-circuit of the Rampar only: But now I pass to the
Orthography, in which all the parts of the Fortification, as to their height
and thickness, are contained. The beginning, as it uses to be, is drawn from
the Explication of Terms.

The Horizontal Line is A E S V Z.

The Orthography of a Fortification, Fig. 8.
is a Section of a Fortification made by a place per pendicular to the Horizon,
showing the height, thickness and position of each part in the Fortification:
It is shown in the eighth Figure.

The Rampar A L I K E is a body of Earth surrounding the whole Fortification,
it includes also the Bulworks.

The breadth or thickness of the base of the Rampar A E.

The thickness of the top of the Rampar L 3.

The outward sloaping, or rectination of the Rampar 3 E, called in French
penchant du Rempar Exterieur.

The outward Talu, or Line forming the sloap of the Rampar E F, called in
French le Talu Exterieur du Rempar.

The inward sloaping or rectination of the Rampar A L, Penchant du Rempar
Interieur.

The height of the Rampar B L, Haulteur du Rempar.

The brestwork of the Rampar, in French called Parapett, 4 G I K 3. It is a
bulk of earth surrounding the whole Fortification raised upon the Rampar to a
man's height.

The thickness of the base of the Brestwork D 3.

The thickness of the top of the Brestwork O K: You must take no notice of the
little line intercepted betwixt I T, I D.

The sloap or inclination of the top of the Brestwork I K.

The outward sloaping or rectination of the Brestwork K 3; it is in a direct or
strait line with the outward sloap of the Rampar E 3.

The outward Talu, or Line forming the slope of the Brestwork 32; Talu
Exterieur du Parapett.

The inward Sloap or rectination of the Brestwork T D, penchant interieur du
parapett.

The inward Talu or Line forming the inward Sloap of the Brestwork D T, Talu
Interieur du parapett.

The Step of the Brestwork D G, called in French Banquet.

The plain or Walk upon the Rampar L 4, in french Terreplein.

The Fauss Bray, or Parapett des Rondes, 5 N P Q R, it is a Brestwork raised
round the Fort at the foot of the Rampar, principally used for the defense of
Moats or wet Ditches, and in all things like to the upper Brestwork.

The plain or walk of the Fauss Bray E. 5. or Chemin des Rondes.

The Bank-side of the Ditch R S, Lisier.

The Ditch S 87 V, Le Fosse.

The inward sloaping descent of the Ditch S 8, Escarpe.

The inward Talu or Line forming the inward sloap of the Ditch, S H, Talu
interieur du Fosse.

The outward sloaping descent of the Ditch V 7, Contrescarpe.

The outward Talu, of Line forming the outward Sloap of the Ditch, V 5, Talu
exterieur du Fosse.

The lower width of the Ditch, 87.

The upper width of the Ditch, S V.

The depth of the Ditch 8 H, 75. profundeur du Fosse.

The Couvertway, N 6, Chemin Couvert Corridor.

The Brestwork of the Couvert way 6 X, Y Z, parapett du chemin Couvert.

Its Base O Z, peid ou base du parapett de chemin couvert.

Its outward sloaping, Y Z.

Note, that this Orthographical Section is not drawn by the Courtine, but by
the Face of the Bulwork; and so the Lines 87, S V, do represent the width of
the Ditch or Moat that washes the Bulwork, which you must always understand,
when there shall any mention be made of the width of the Ditch.

CHAP. VIII. Wherein are determined the Orthographical dimensions or the
Profiles of Fortifications, and first, those of the Rampar, and Brestwork
raised upon the Rampar.
THe sole and main business of the delineation hitherto expounded, was truly to
constitute or form the Rampars circumference, completed with Faces, Flanque
and Courtine, which indeed is the fundamental and principal work of all Martial
Structures. But now to prescribe the dimensions of the Rampar it self, and the
rest of its parts, as to their height and thickness, is the business of
Orthography. Every Fortification consists almost of these parts, (viz.) Rampar,
Brestwork, Fauss bray, Ditch or Moat, the Couvert way, and an out-Brestwork.
Yet if the Ditch be dry, the Fauss-bray both may, and is wont to be omitted. In
this Chapter we shall speak of the dimensions of the Rampar and Brestwork.

The Spartans in former times would not defend their City with Walls and
Ditches: and King Agesilaus showing his armed citizens to one that asked why
Sparta wanted Walls, said, that those were the Walls of Sparta. This was
plainly a foolish and empty ostentation of strength, relying on no sound
council, but only rashness; which the experience of all nations has condemned,
and which the Spartans had almost found fatal to themselves in the Theban War.
But leaving this we will come to the purpose.

I. For the Stuff or matter to make the Rampar.
The Rampar must not be made of wood nor stone, but Earth; this is every where
at hand, and ready to come by, and is easily heaped up to such a thickness that
the Rampar may be Cannon Proof, besides, Earth by its yielding and giving way
does sooner master and break the force of the Shot. Yet I do not prefer a bare
Earthen Rampar before one cased with stone, of which I shall speak hereafter.

II. The Height of the Rampar.
There is hardly any thing so destructive to a Fortification as a high Rampar.
This error has been committed in most of the ancient Fortifications,
especially those of the most famous cities in Europe; for these high Rampars
flatter the sight, and make a show of Strength where there is none, when indeed
they spoil the whole defense, and betray the Town to the Enemy; and least so
great mischief might be had gratis, the Treasury must be also drained to obtain
it.

The fault of high Rampars consists chiefly in this, that they shelter the
enemy when he draws near them from the Shot of the Townsmen. This to its own
great loss, Breda has taught us, when it was last besieged by the Hollanders.

Prince Maurice had fortified this Town with great care and expense, so that it
might seem to be reckoned one of the compleatest Fortifications of Europe; but
the height of the Rampar flattering his sight, as I said, deceived him. The
Inhabitants of Breda being afterward besieged by Frederick, Mauritius his
Brother, were not able from their high Rampar with all their Cannon to remove
the enemy approaching nearer unto them; nor his Blinds stealing by degrees upon
them; whence they were forced to cut holes in several places of their high
Rampar that was raised at such great charges, and pull it down, and level it,
to make a place for lower Batteries, from whence they might surer hit and break
the fatal Blinds of the Enemy. But these high Rampars cannot be so mended, but
they will be marred worse in another point; for while they are cut in many places,
the binding together and joynting of the work is loosned, so that 'twill easily
fall if battered with the Enemies Cannon.

But a Rampar that rises to an indifferent height has not this deadly
inconvenience, Fig. 9.
as is manifest in it self; nay and Musket Shot does more Execution from a low
Station than from a high one; For let there be two heights, A B the bigger, A C
the lesser, and let the Line D E at the height of a man stand perpendicular
upon the Horizon: Now it is clear the line or Shot which is directed from C to
E, shall fall beyond that line or Shot which shall be directed from B to E, and
intercepts a larger space on the Earth D F; whereas the other from B passing
through E, intercepts only the space D G: Therefore more ground may be scowred
from a low place than from a higher.

But perhaps those that are the Patrons of high Rampars will say they cannot be
so easily climbed, and that the Enemies approaches may better be discovered
from them.

I answer the inconvenience now alleged must prevail, for an ordinary height
will sufficiently hinder the ascent of the Enemy; and for discovering his
approaches you may raise Cavalliers in the Bulworks.

III. The Height is determined.
Therefore let not the height of the Rampar exceed 18 Rhynland feet, nor be
less then 10 feet, for this would expose the City to the Enemies Shot; the
other suffices, more would make you fall into the error spoken of before in the
second number.

Engineers by reason of the several magnitudes of Fortifications, prescribe
several heights, but merely by guess.

In IV. V. VI. VII. VIII. etc. The height of the Rampar. feet 12. 14. 15. 16.
18

If Hills should hangover the Town, you must not for that reason raise your
Rampar above 18 feet, but raise Cavalliers in your Bulworks, or praeoccupate
those higher places with Outworks.

IV. The Talu of the Rampar or Line forming the Sloape.
The Rampar must be so built that both without and within it may be sloaping,
for a body of Earth cannot like a Wall rise to a perpendicle.

Fig. 8.
The inward Talu A B, must be always equal to the height B L, that upon any
sudden occasion the Soldiers might easily run up to their Rampar.

The outward Talu E F, is most commonly half the height, and it would be
requisite to make it less if the Earth be firm: If the ground be very loose, it
may be made equal to two thirds of the height; but if the outward Talu be too
big, it gives the Enemy an easy ascent, as appeared in the memorable taking of
the Fort of Schenkin.

V. The upper thickness of the Rampar.
Fig. 8.
The upper thickness of the Rampar L 3, must not be only such is may bear the
force of Cannon, but ought to be so big, that after its Brestwork is set on,
whose lower thickness must be 24 feet, (else not Cannon Proof,) together with
the step or Banquet D 4 three feet broad, yet it may also have remaining a
plain or walk called in French Terreplein 4 L, large enough for the traversing
great Guns. Therefore 'twill be most an end 51 or 57 Rhynland feet; a thickness
much exceeding this will be superfluous, and for no other use than draining the
Exchequer. And here also your Engineers for the diversity of the figures
prescribe several thicknesses, and merely again by guess.

In IV. V. VI. VII. VIII. IX. The upper thickness of the Rampar. feet 36. 39.
44. 48. 51. 57.

And because Rampars and their Brestworks ought to be Cannon proof, I will
briefly add, how much ground a Shot can penetrate. A whole Cannon at 400 feet
distance, with a Ball of 48 pound, shall strike 20 feet deep into firm Earth. A
Demy-Cannon at the distance of 300 feet with a Ball of 24 l. shall enter 12
feet of firm ground. A Field piece at the distance of 200 feet, with a Ball of
12. l. shall pass through about 7 feet of firm ground. This Goldman reports.
But if the ground be loose, it will penetrate far deeper. Dogen denies that 20
feet of any ordinary Earth can be pierced with whole Cannon Shot.

VI. The lower thickness of the Rampar.
Fig. 8.
The lower thickness of the Rampar is found, if to the upper thickness L 3 or B
F, you add the outward and inward Talu's A B and F E: It Is therefore for the
most part six or seven perches, that is 72 feet, or 84 feet; but then the
outward Talu E F, will be somewhat less than half the height. For the Quality
of the Figure Authors order again by guess

In IV. V. VI. VII. VIII. IX. The lower thickness of the Rampar. feet 54. 60.
66. 72. 78. 84.

VII. Of a Rampar Cased with Stone.
A Rampar cased with Stone is to be preferred before a bare one, 1. because it
chiefly hinders nocturnal invasions, and sudden attempts, since the enemy
cannot mount it without Ladders, the providing of which will be very
troublesome, and the use as uncertain. 2. Because it hinders an open assault,
since it cannot be attempted but by Ladders, which will be to no purpose, or by
the ruins of the wall thrown down with Mines. 3. Because it is a stable and
everlasting work; whereas a bare Rampar, unless it be continually repaired,
falls to the ground.

They that disagree, reason after this manner. 1. That Walls battered with
Cannon sooner fall than the bare Earth. 2. Their Stones beaten down fill up the
Ditch. 3. That the pieces or Splinters of the stones flying about will hurt the
defendants. The first I deny, if the Walls be very thick, or if (as I ordered)
propt with an earthen Rampar. As to the second, 'twill be the same thing, or
rather worse in a bare Rampar. The third is avoided, if you do not raise the
wall to the top of the Rampar, which is observed in the Wall of Antwerp. This
inconvenience will be much less if you make the walls of Brick.

VIII. The Brestwork of the Rampar.
Upon the Rampar there is always a Brestwork built 4 G, I K 3, Fig. 8.
whose dimensions are these following.

1. The inward height T 4 must be always 6 feet, that it may conveniently
shelter the Soldiers, who seldom exceed this measure.

2. The outward height 2 K must be feet, for so not only the field and the
out-Brestwork, but also a great part of the Ditch will be defended by the
Rampar; and you may know how much, if you can come to the knowledge of C ph,
which will be found after this manner; as I O is to O K, so is I C to C ph. The
three first terms are known, therefore the fourth C ph must be known. Now from
C V known, take C ph known, there will remain ph V also known.

3. The inward Talu D I must be always 1 foot; there is no need of a greater,
since it lies from the Enemy, and is propt up sufficiently by the Step or
Banquet G 4 D, neither is it exposed to the feet of men always running up it,
as the inward side of the Rampar.

4. The outward Talu 2 3. must be always 2 feet; for since the outward side of
the Brestwork K 3 lies in a straight Line, with the outward side of the Rampar
3 E, and K 2, 3 F, are parallel. It Is evident that the Triangles 2 K 3, F 3 E,
are like Triangles. Therefore since in the fourth number we ordered the outward
Talu of the Rampar E F, to be half the height of the Rampar F 3, 32 will also
be half the height 2 K: But 2 K was appointed to be always 4 feet, therefore 32
will be always 2 feet.

5. The upper thickness O K, must be Cannon proof, therefore since a whole
Cannon will scarce strike through 20 feet of Earth, 21 feet may suffice.

6. The lower thickness D 3 is composed of the two Talues D T 32, and the upper
thickness O K; the two Talues taken together, make 3 feet, and the upper
thickness 21 feet, so that the lower thickness will be 24 feet.

And here again our Engineers sport it, and for the variety of the Figures
alter the thicknesses after this manner.

In IV. V. VI. VII. VIII. IX. etc. Lat. sup. 9 11. 12. 15. 17 21 feet. Lat.
inf. 12 14 15 18 20 24 feet.

The Step or Banquet is built at the foot of all Brestworks on the inside, and
is 3 feet thick or broad, and 1 feet high.

IX. The Terreplein or Walk upon the Rampar.
The Walk on the Rampar L 4 is found, if from the upper thickness of the Rampar
L 3 you substract the lower thickness of the Brestwork D 3, and the thickness
or breadth of the step D 4; wherefore since D 3 in number 8. was ordered to be
24 feet, and D 4 to be 3 feet, and in the 6 number L 3 was ordered to be 51
feet, or 57 feet, there remains for the Walk 24 feet or 30 feet. But if you
have a mind to sport with the Engineers above, it will be In IV. V. VI. VII.
VIII. IX etc. The breadth of the Terreplein. 21. 22. 25. 27. 28. 30. feet

X. The Bank of the Ditch.
If the Rampar want a Fauss-bray, there will be left a Bank-side, or a space of
Earth 6 feet broad from the feet of the Rampar to the Brink of the Ditch R S.

CHAP. IX. The Orthographie of the Fauss-bray.
I. The End and necessity of a Fauss-bray.
EXperience has taught us in the taking of many Towns in Holland, that so soon
as the Outworks are taken in, the Moat without any great difficulty will be
covered with Galleries, and so conquered; for the water in the Moat hindering
the sallies of the besieged, the Builders of the Galleries can only be called
from the opposite flanques, being safe before by reason of the necessary height
of the Rampar which protects the Enemy lying so near under it from the Shot and
sight of the besieged. Against so deadly an inconvenience the Brestwork 5 N P Q
R is built, at the foot of the Rampar, which is called commonly Fauss-bray, or
parapet des Rondes: And in this alone consists the safety of a Moat or wet
Ditch. For from this the besiegers are beat off on all sides, with Shot almost
quite level or Horizontal; And therefore surer to do Execution, as I showed in
the eighth chapter, number the second. Therefore the only End of a Fauss-bray,
is the defense of a Moat, which help, a dry ditch does not stand in need of, as
shall be taught hereafter.

II. Its height and Structure.
Some Architects sharply contend, that such a height ought to be given to the
Fauss-bray, as might make it able to command the Outworks. But the defense of
the Outworks will better be performed by the Rampar it self; and as much as
you shall add to the height of the Fauss-bray, so much will you diminish from
the defense of the graft: Therefore let it not exceed humane stature. The rest
of its Structure is the same in all things, as that of the Brestwork of the
Rampar, delivered in the eighth Chapter, numb. 8.

III. The Walk of the Fauss-bray. Chemin des Rondes.
Betwixt the Rampar and the Fauss-bray is left a space E 5, fit for the
Besiegers to Plant and Traverse their great Guns, which we call the Walk of the
Fauss-bray; Its greatest breadth is equal to two Rhynland Perches, and the
least is equal to one. When upon occasion a Fauss-bray shall be drawn about the
ancient Rampar of Cities, to be defended only by Musketeers, the breadth of
the Walk may be taken somewhat less than a Perch. If you have a mind to
proportion it to the Polygons, you may order it after this fashion.

In IV. V. VI. VII. VIII. IX The walk of the Fauss-bray, with its step or
banquet. 15. 18. 20. 24. 24. 24. etc.

This Width will serve to plant Guns in, but not the biggest.

IV. The Bankside or Lisier.
At the foot of the Fauss-bray toward the Ditch, is left a space of six feet R
S, for the strengthening and keeping up of the work, least any of the Earth
should fall into the Ditch.

CHAP. X.
I. Whether a dry Ditch or Graft be better than a Moat.
THere is not a question more frequent amongst Engineers; and many now prefer
the dry one. The inconveniences of a Moat are these; it keeps the besieged in
like Prisoners, that they cannot sally out upon the Enemy, unless a Covert way
and Out-brestwork be raised beyond it at very great expenses: And when the
Out-brestwork shall be taken, it cannot defend it self, since there is no going
on it but by little boats. Therefore the Galleries are easily brought over the
Moat unto the Rampar, as Experience has often taught the Hollanders, the water
hindering the besieged, that they cannot run down into the Ditch, with handy
blows to throw down the Fatal Engine. This defect however, is supplied by
building a Fauss-bray, Ravelins and Half-moons, at vast expenses, and the
entertainment of a far greater Garrison. Therefore a Moat is both of it self
weak, and keeps the Townsmen in like Prisoners, so that they cannot come to
beat off the Enemy any other way than by firing at a distance, though they see
him spring his Mines, and bring the last destruction to the Town; besides, the
Fauss-bray is built only for the security of the Moat, as is the Out-brestwork
and the Couvert way, and in fine, all sorts of Outworks; and it requires a far
greater number of Soldiers to defend it.

A dry Ditch, safe in its own strength, does not need these chargable
Outworks, especially an Out-brestwork it never wants: For as the Moat keeps in
the Soldiers like Prisoners, the dry Ditch conveys them safe and unseen on the
Enemy. Neither have these that sally any need of a Couvert-way, since the Ditch
can hide them in its own bottom; nor have they any need of an Out-brestwork,
since the outside of the Ditch it self, viz. if it have steps made to it, is
able to supply the place of an Out-brestwork. Nay, there is no sort of Out-work
required, since they are raised only to keep the Enemy from the Ditch and
Rampar, which will be better performed by Sallies, which may be made safely
through the dry Ditch. Again, a dry Ditch makes an easy and safe retreat for
those that sally, when they are wholly pursued by the Enemy: But a wet Ditch
would either exclude or drown them; for there is no passage from Out-work to
Out-work, or from the Outworks to the principal Rampar, but what is made by
little narrow wooden bridges, which can receive but few at a time; and if they
are crowded too much, as commonly in such cases it happens, they yield to their
weight, and are broken: As it fell out when Breda was last besieged, in the
taking of Ginekens Horn-work, with the great loss of their stoutest Soldiers
perishing in the waters. To conclude, since a dry Ditch can safely be without
Half-moons, Ravelins, Horn-works, and Out-brestworks, and all other Outworks,
or at least may neglect them far safer than a wet Ditch can; we must confess
that the Town, if it were besieged, would be defended with a far less Garrison.

It plainly appeared at the siege of Mastreicht, the sharpest of all the Dutch
Sieges, how far a dry Ditch is to be preferred before a wet one. The ditches of
the Town being partly wet, partly dry, the Prince of Orange consulted with his
Captains which was best to fall upon; who resolved to attempt the dry one; but
the taking of it was so slow and so difficult, that the Prince confessed his
error, and resolved, after that, never to try the taking of a dry Ditch before
a wet one: That I may omit the rest of the action; in this most valiant
defense. The Townsmen from the Ditch it self brought forth their Mines, to blow
up the lines of Approaches, with such facility and success, that the Enemy was
forced to spend five weeks to gain a Line of five Perches: Then with
Skirmishes, Works and Countermines, they so tired the Dutch that besieged them,
that the Prince despairing to bring his Line over the dry Ditch, was
constrained to carry a Mine into the Town, under the bottom of it, which was
very near forty feet lower than the level of the Town.

Notwithstanding, it is to be confessed, the nocturnal attempts and surprises of
the Enemy are better kept off by a wet Ditch than by a dry one; yet there is
great danger from the water it self being once frozen, unless the Ice be always
broke; as appeared in the taking of Wachtendonch by the Dutch, and Philipsbourg
by the Emperialists, by a surprise in the dark, over their Moats that were
frozen.

Whilst these things are controverted on both sides, This is my opinion, that a
dry Ditch is best against open Assaults, and the wet one best against
Surprises: But because all surprises and sudden attempts may be prevented by
the care and vigilance of the Officers and Soldiers, but open force no other
way but by force, it seems to me the dry Ditch is absolutely to be chosen, if
the nature of the ground will permit it: Especially since a great deal of money
is spared, which otherwise would have been spent in building the Fausse-bray
and the Outworks.

II. The making of the Ditch.
Let the solidity of the Ditch be equal to the solidity of the Works that are
to be raised, viz. to the Rampar, the Brestwork on the Rampar, the Fauss-bray,
and the Out-brestwork, added together; therefore you must not take more earth
out of the Ditch than will serve for making the said Works: For which reason
all the dimensions of a Ditch cannot be determined, before the solidity of all
the Works to be raised is known.

III. The upper Width.
The upper Width of the Ditch about the Bulwork S V must at least exceed the
tallest trees, otherwise the Enemy would lay bridges over it, 120 132, 144 feet
will be large enough; but if you will vary it according to the diversity of the
Figures, you may order it after this manner.

In IV. V. VI. VII. VIII. IX. X. 72. 84. 96. 108. 120. 132. 144. feet.

IV. The Talu of the Ditch SH, V 5, or Lines forming the Sloap.
The outward Talu V. 5 of a wet Ditch, and the inward S H, must be equal to the
depth of it, which is now to be determined, so consequently the Angle H S 8
will be half a right Angle.

V. The Depth 8 H (...).
For the most part it is ordered to be ten or twelve feet; but it cannot be
less than six feet, otherwise a wet Ditch might be waded over, and a dry Ditch
would not cover a man standing. But why a Ditch having the Width s
above-determin'd, and its depth ten feet, should supply earth enough to raise
the Rampar and its Brestwork, the Fauss-bray and Out-brestwork: Thus I
demonstrate. Measure the Orthographical Sections of the Rampar and its
Brestwork A LIKE, the Fauss-bray 5 N P Q R; and of the Out-brestwork 6 X Y Z,
and multiply their sum into the principal Perimeter of the Fortification, which
will be known, if all the Courtines, Faces, Flanques, be added among
themselves. But the Orthographical Sections, and the Perimeter of the
Fortification must be measured with one and the same measure, and the product
shall give a solid almost equal to the aggregate of the Rampar, and its
Brestwork, the Fauss-bray and Out-brestwork. In like manner, the Ditch will be
almost equal to the solid that shall be produced out of the multiplication of
the Orthographical Section of the Ditch S 8 7 V, into the Perimeter that
passes through the middle point of its Width a: Therefore because the Ditch
ought to be equal to the aggregate of the Works, 'twill be by the Corrol. of
the 34th of the 11th of Euclide. As the Perimeter passing by a, is to the
principal Perimeter of the Fortification; so is the sum of the Sections of the
Rampar, etc. to the Section of the Ditch S 8 7 V, which is consequently known,
because it is a fourth proportional to three quantities known. Now because S V
is known, and its half S a, that is a b for since S H is equal to H 8, S a will
be equal to a b, by the 4. 6. Euclid. Therefore b a multiplied into S a shall
give the Triangle S b V; from which substract S 8 7 V, already known, and there
will remain the Triangle 8 b 7 also known. Then as the Triangle S b V is to the
Square of a b, so is the Triangle 8 b 7 to the Square of p b; wherefore since
three terms are known, the fourth also will be known, which is the Square of p
b, whose root is the Line b p, which subtracted from b a (that is S a) shall
give a p the depth of the Ditch, which this way is found to be near ten feet.
If you need any more Earth to raise batteries for Cannon and Cavaliers, make
your Ditch something deeper about the Bulworks: If there be no Faus^-bray, nor
Out-brestwork, yet 'twill be requisite to make the Ditch ten feet deep,
especially if you intend it a dry one; the Earth that shall be over and above,
will serve to raise Cavaliers and other Works, of which there is great use.

VI. The Width at the bottom of the Ditch 8, 7.
This follows from the upper Width, the Angle forming the sloap, and the depth
being already determined.

In IV. V. VI. VII. VIII. IX. 52. 64, 76. 84. 96. 108. feet.

VII. The Properties of a dry Ditch.
1. It ought to be something deeper than a wet one.

2. Its inward Talu S H must be less than a wet one half the depth, that is six
feet, that it may be harder for the Enemy to climb up.

3. But it must not be less than six feet, least the Rampar fall down.

4. You Will make the Enemy a great deal of work, if in the middle of the great
Ditch you dig a less (...) 16, 18, 20, feet broad, and 4 or 5. feet deep.

5. The outside of the Ditch 7 V must be made after the fashion of a Brestwork
that may cover a man, and have two steps or Banquets for the easier getting up
to it.

6. Sally-ports must be made in the Rampar, for the Townsmen to descend into
the Ditch.

CHAP. XI. The Out-brestwork and Covert-way.
I. Its Use.
A Dry Ditch may safely be without an Out-brestwork; but a wet one altogether
wants it: For since a wet Ditch does not keep out the Enemy more than it keeps
in the Townsmen, when upon occasion they should sally out upon the Besiegers,
a Covert-way V 6 was found necessary to be made beyond the Ditch, and a
Brestwork to protect it; by which means the Defendants could sally safely out
of their City over the Moat; and so the Enemy was kept from the Town, but the
Townsmen were not hindered, when they pleased to fall upon the Enemy.

II. The breadth of the Covert-way.
Most commonly it is made equal to the walk of the Fauss-bray 24 or 21 feet;
for so much almost will be required here for traversing great Guns, and
performing other Military duties. If you have a fancy to vary it according to
the diversity of the Figures, use this Table.

In IV. V. VI. VII. VIII. IX. 12. 15. 15. 17. 21. 24. feet.

III. The making of the Out-brestwork.
1. Its height PS Y must be six feet.

2. The inward Talu must be one foot, as in the rest of the Brestworks.

3. The outward sloap of it Y Z must be so inclined, that being produced, it
may pass through 1. the top of the Brestwork of the Rampar. There are many and
great advantages from this form; for so all of it will be scowred from the
Brestwork of the Rampar, which would not have been, if the inclination had
fallen from Y in 10. for so all the Triangle PSY 10. is obscured from the sight
and shot of the Brestwork of the Rampar.

4. To find this sloap or inclination, the base PS Y must first be known; which
is after this manner: The Lines I C and C 9 are known; and therefore 9 I is
known, and T 3 is also known, or C F and F l is known; therefore C l, or 9 Y is
known, and so is Y l known; then by the 4. lib. 6. Euclid. as I 9 is to 9 Y, so
is Y l to l Z, to which if you add one foot, the whole base l Z will be known.

The Perimeter of this Brestwork, or the Lines of it surrounding the whole
Fortification, whether they be inward or outward, must be drawn parallel to the
Faces only, so that they meet at a point opposite to the middle points of the
Courtine, and make outward Angles; but if Ravelins are built before the
Courtines, the Brestwork is drawn about them, but not about the Horn-works, if
any should be built.

IV. Whether it be expedient to make a Ditch about the Out-Brestwork.
Some affirm it, and stand to it: But they do not consider, when they think to
make this Brestwork stronger, that they quite overthrow the end it was made
for; which was, that the besieged might safely sally out upon the Enemy, and in
their return enjoy a safe retreat; both which will be hindered by a Ditch made
about it: Insomuch that if the Townsmen do not make it, 'twould seem fitter
for the Enemy to make.

CHAP. XII. An Orthographical Table of Regular Fortifications.
This Table is collected out of the doctrine of the four foregoing Chapters.

Max. Med Min. Rhynland feet. The breadth of the base of the Rampar A E. 84 72
60 The inward Talu, or line forming the Sloap AB. 18 6 14 The outward Talu E F.
9 8 7 The height of the Rampar B L. 18 16 14 The breadth on the top of the
Rampar L 3. 57 48 39 The breadth of the base of the Brestwork 3 D 24 18 14 The
inward Talu of the Brestwork D T. 1 1 1 The outward Talu of the Brestwork 32. 2
2 2 The inward height of the Brestwork T I. 6 6 6 The outward height of the
Brestwork 2 K 4 4 4 The breadth of the top of the Brestwork K O. 21 15 11

The rest of the foregoing Table.

Max. Med. Min. Rhynland feet. The breadth of the step or Banquet D 4 3 3 3 The
height of the step or Banquet 4 G 1 1 1 The Terrepleine or Walk on the Rampar 4
L 30 27 22 The walk of the Fauss-br., or chemin des Rondes E 5 21 17 15 The
Fauss-bray with its Banquet The border or bankside. Lisier R S 6 6 6 The upper
width of the Ditch S V 132 108 84 The outward and inward Talu's of the ditch SH
V 5 12 12 10 The depth of the Ditch H 8, (...) 12 12 10 The Width of the bottom
of the ditch 87 108 184 64 The Covert way V X 21 17 15 Its step or banquet The
base of the out-brestwork l Z 79 70 69 Its height 6 6 6

For the base of the Out-brestwork, working according to the Rules delivered in
the 11. Chap. number. 3. I find it to be Max. Med. Min. 82. 75 69.

Therefore Dogen and Fritach are out in their account.

The first Column shows you the largest and strongest Orthography, which is
able to sustain the greatest force of the Besiegers. The second is able to bear
an indifferent Siege. The third is made against the least strength which is
usually sent against Towns. But here we only treat of the Forts themselves; I
shall hereafter give you the Orthography of Castles and Outworks. And again, I
had no proportion or respect to the diversity of the Figures or Polygons, as
many Engineers have; who for no reason, as I can tell, give to a Pentagon a
different Orthography from that which they give to a Hexagon or a Nonagon. For
a stronger or weaker Orthography is to be given a Fortification, not as it has
more or less Angles or Bulworks, but as it ought to resist a greater or less
strength of an Enemy.

Note, If the Fortification be made without a Fauss-bray, the Out-brestwork
will have another Base, for it will be a fourth proportional to the three terms
I 9, 9 Y, Y l, but the mean or middle term 9 Y will be less by the space E R,
if the Fauss-bray be wanting, and then the base of the Brestwork l Z will be
max. med. 65 50

CHAP. XIII. Of the raising of Outworks.
A Fortification formed according to its essential parts, is made stronger if
it be surrounded with some Outworks. The chief of which is a Raveline, a
Half Moon, a Horn-work, a Crown-work, and Tongs. I shall treat of each of them
distinctly in the following propositions.

PROP. I.
I. The definition and form of a Raveline or Target.
A Raveline is a Bulk of Earth almost like a Bulwork cut off, Fig. 10.
except that it wants flanques; it is surrounded with water, and separated from
the Fortification by the breadth of the whole Ditch. Such an one is F E G H, in
the 10th. Figure, its faces are F E, G E. It wants, as I said, for the most
part flanques, yet it admits of them when it is built before Gates, which then
will be about 8 or 9 perches. Toward the Enemy it is built with a Rampar and
Brestwork, and lies open toward the Fortification, least it might shelter the
Enemy when he has possessed it, it is raised but a little height above the
level of the ground, that it may be better defended from the main
Fortification, and the plains the better scowred by it.

Its Angle must not be less than 60 degr. nor more than a right Angle. The
length of the faces is determined in Regular Fortifications, numb. 3. If they
are applied to the covering of a Courtine that is above its just length,
observe this, that the faces must not be longer than the faces of the Bulworks,
therefore they may be about 40, 50, or 60 paces.

II. Concerning their place, and how they are defended.
For the most part it is raised before Gates and Courtine, but never before the
Bulworks. The 10th. Figure shows the Situation of it, as it lies before a
Courtine; it is best to have it of such a breadth as might cover the Courtine
only, and not the flanques, for then it is defended by the faces and flanques of
the Bulworks that it lies betwixt.

III. The making of it
Is various; but this is most approved. Fig. 10.
Raise an infinite perpendicle from the middle point of the Courtine S, from
this Line on the other side of the Ditch cut off H E equal to or or of the
Face; then from the point E draw straight Lines either to the ends of the
Courtine A, B (and this will be the best form for the Raveline, for the whole
Courtine is covered by the Raveline, and the Raveline it self not only scowred
and defended by the Faces, but by the flanques of the Bulworks also) or to some
other point of the flanque, or to the ends of the flanque C D; those parts of
these strait lines F E, G E, cut off from the Bank-side of the Ditch toward E,
are the Faces of the Bulworks.

1. Another way. On the Centers A B, the extreme points of the Courtine, with
the distance of the same Courtine, describe two Arches intersecting one another
in E.

2. Produce the marginal lines of the Ditch ph 1, M L till they meet at the
point H; then from the ends of the flanques C D draw strait lines to the point
E, that may cut the marginal lines of the Ditch in F G, and F E G H shall be
the perfect delineation of the Raveline; the faces are F E, G E, the Gorge
Lines are F H, G H.

1. Another way, bisect the Gorge Lines of the Bulwork A R, B Q in the points
O, P; then draw strait lines from the points O, P, by the ends of the flanques
C, D till the^y meet one another in the point E.

2. Then produce the out-lines of the Ditch ph I, M L, till they meet in H, and
cut the former lines in F G, so shall F E G H be the Ravelin required.

IV. The Orthographie and Ichnographie, or the Profile and Plain.
This Table following shows the height and breadth of each part. The third
column shows the Orthographie of the Outworks of Breda; The first and fourth
shows the Orthographie of the largest; The second and fifth of the middle size;
the sixth shows the least; the four last Columns are taken out of Dogen. This
Table does not serve only for Ravelins, but for all manner of Outworks.

A Table for the building of Outworks. Rhynland feet. Max. Med. Bred. Stab.
Min. st. Temp. The lower breadth of the Ramp. 40 36 44 36 24 20 The outward
Talu of the Ramp. 3 2 6 3 2 2 The inward Talu of the Ramp. 6 4 8 6 4 4 The
height of the Rampar. 6 4 8 6 4 4 The upper thickness of the Ram. 31 30 30 27
18 14 The base of the Brestwork. 15 15 16 13 10 8 The outward Talu of the
brestw. 2 2 3 2 2 2 The inward Talu of the Brestw. 1 1 1 1 1 1 The outward
height of the Breast. 2 2 5 4 4 4 The inward height of the Brestw. 6 6 6 6 6 6
The upper thickness of the Breast. 15 12 12 10 7 5 The height of the step. 1 1 1
1 1 1 The breadth of the step. 3 3 3 3 3 3 The Walk on the Ramp. 12 10 10 1/^
11 5 3

The rest of the foregoing Table. Rhynland feet. Max. Med. Bred. Stab. Min. st.
Temp. The border at the foot of the Ram. 3 3 6 3 3 2 The width of the Ditch. 48
30 42 30 24 16 The outward Talu of the Ditch. 10 8 7 8 6 4 The inward Talu of
the Ditch. 10 8 7 8 6 4 The depth of the Ditch. 10 8 7 8 6 6 The width of the
bottom of the D. 18 14 28 14 12 8

PROP. II. Of the Half Moon or Helmet.
I. Its definition and place.
HAlf-moons for the most part do not differ from Ravelins, unless it be in
bigness; perhaps they had this name given them, because those which are built
before Bulworks are Arched in the form of a crescent, on that side which lies
toward the Bulwork. They are placed upon the Covert-way which is beyond the
Ditch, so that their Capital line produced, cuts the Courtine into two equal
parts. They are built also before the Angle of Bulworks (as I said) but the
greatest use of them is in Irregular Fortification, as I shall show hereafter.

II. Their Form.
Let not their Angle be less then 60 degr. nor more than 90 degr. Let their
height be but indifferent, and not distant from the Rampar above Musket Shot,
that they may be defended by the Rampar. When they are built on the Covert-way,
their faces must be 25 or 30 paces; let the thickness of their Rampar be 15 or
20 feet, and they must be so large as to receive 100 or 150 Soldiers.

III. Their Delineation.
1. In the Angle of the Fauss-bray V as in a center, with the distance of the
breadth of the Ditch V M, describe an Arch, and produce the Capital line
infinitely, cutting the Arch in a.

2. On the other side of the Ditch cut off a X from the Capital Line produced,
which is of the Face of the Bulwork, and from the points H and l where the
Gorge lines of the Ravelins intersect one another, draw unto l the lines H X, l
X.

3. Produce the faces of the Fauss-bray ph V, ph V, till they cut the lines H X
l X, in (...) and the Arch in (...) or the Fichant lines of the Fauss-bray
continued on 2 V, 3 V, may determine these Intersections. So have you a
half moon delineated, placed before a Bulwork, whose faces are X z, X ^, and
its flanques (but open) are (...),

The delineation of other half-moons is like that of Ravelins.

The Orthographie and Ichnographie, is had out of the foregoing proposition,
Chap. XIII. numb. 4.

IV. Its Use and Convenience.
It Is the weakest of all the outworks, since it cannot entertain a good
quantity of Soldiers to defend it by reason of its straits, and is also with
more difficulty defended from the Fortification. Therefore these half-moons
seem to be hurtful to the Fortification unless they be armed with these
cautions; to wit, that Ravelins be built on both sides, and that they consist
only of Faces, being altogether without flanques (otherwise being possessed by
the Enemy, they cannot be hot from the Ravelins) and at last let them be every
where within Musket Shot. Yet if all this were performed, 'twill be still
doubtful whether they are useful or not: Wherefore they seem not to be built
without peculiar necessity.

PROP. III. Of the Horn-work.
I. Its Definition and Kinds.
Fig. 10.
THat Outwork that runs farthest into the field with two strait sides objecting
to the Enemy two half-Bulworks, is called a Horn-work: The tenth Figure shows
an example of it. There are three kinds of Horn-works; the first has its sides
inclining to one another toward the Field; the second toward the
Fortification; and the third's are parallel.

II. Its Place and Form.
They are built opposite to the Courtine, or the Angle of the Bulwork, beyond
the Out-brestwork: Yet they are better defended if they cover the Courtine,
than if the Bulwork, especially if the sides, are parallel: For when they cover
the Bulworks with parallel sides, they receive no other defense than from the
Courtine, and that to little purpose, since at so great a distance; besides,
after this manner the work would be too narrow: Yet if they are to be placed
before Bulworks, it is altogether necessary the sides should incline to one
another toward the Bulworks, that so they may not take in all the faces, but
exclude some part of them from which they may be defended. See the Construction
in Dogen, page 160, 161.

If they are built before the Courtine, let their sides be rather parallel, and
perpendicular on the Courtine. If they cover the whole Courtine (as some will
have it, and as we have expressed in the Figure) their defense will be from the
faces of those Bulworks that the Courtine lies betwixt. If it does not cover
the whole Courtine, as others will have it, the defense of the sides will be
the greater; to wit, both from the faces of the Bulworks, and from part of the
Courtine. Betwixt the Horn-work and the Courtine, there is commonly raised a
Raveline; nay, before the work it self, betwixt each of its Horns, a Raveline,
or rather an Half Moon may be built. To conclude, you will add a great deal of
strength to this work, if you make some Retrenchments: But of that afterward.

III. Its Delineation.
1. Let there be drawn two parallels E I, F K, for the sides of the Horn-work,
from the Out-brestwork toward the field, at such a distance, that if they were
produced toward the main Work, they might fall in a strait Line with the
flanques of the Bulworks; or if you desire a less breadth for the Horn-work,
let them fall within the flanques on the Courtine it self. But the ends of
these sides must not be above Musket Shot from the Rampar, wherefore they must
not run beyond the Rampar above sixty Rhynland Perches: Yet these sixty
Rhynland Perches use to be counted from the Out-brestwork, that so the
approaches of the Enemy might be the more infested.

Join E F, on which make the Angles F E G, E F H twenty five degrees each; then
bisect one of these F E G; with the right Line E L meeting with F H in C; then
from E G cut off E D equal to F C, so will F C, E D, be the faces of the half
Bulworks.

3. From the point D and C draw D A and C B, equal and parallel to E I and F K,
for the flanques of the Horns, and join the Courtine A B, the proportion of the
flanques D A and C B, to the faces, will be almost the same as uses to be in
Regular Fortifications.

Also after this manner following, the Capital and Gorge lines, the Flanques
and Courtine will be with more ease determined: For of E F gives the Capitals E
N and F M; also of M N or E F gives the Gorge lines N A, M B, and there remains
for the Courtine A B also; the right Lines M E, N F, will determine the length
of the Flanques raised from A and B; and so also the faces E D, F C will be
found.

These things being done, a Horn-work is delineated, such as uses to be
stretched before the Courtines in a Regular Fortification; the delineation of
the rest will be performed almost by the like method, having always a respect
to the place.

Note. That here is a twofold Practice in building Horn-works; 1. That the
Courtine might be determined by the Faces. 2. The faces by the Courtine.

IV. Its use.
If Ravelins, Half-moons and Horn-works, are built about a fortified place, the
Fortification is accounted most complete and perfect, whose use consists most
in this; 1. They keep off the Enemy far from the Fortification. 2. They are
taken with a great deal of difficulty; for they are defended from the Courtine,
from the Bulworks, and from the adjacent Works, and some Lines from the
Out-brestwork it self. 3. Being taken and possessed, they can hardly be kept,
because they lie open toward the Fortification. 4. Horn-works are most
destructive to the approaches of the Enemy, and under their shelter the
besieged may work counter, as occasion shall offer, etc.

PROP. IV. Of the Tongues, in French Tenailes.
I. Their Definition and Kinds.
THey are Outworks that differ from Horn-works almost only in this, that
instead of two half Bulworks they have only an external Angle; and this sort is
called the single one: It it called the double one, when it has two outward
Angles with one Inward. The twelfth Figure shows the single one; the thirteenth
the double one.

Now this outward Angle is that which is without the Figure, and whose sides
incline inwards. The inward is that which is within the Figure, with its sides
running outward.

II. Their Place.
The same as that of the Horn-works: Yet it will hardly be expedient to lay
them before Bulworks, by reason of their weakness. Of which Number. 4.

III. Its Delineation.
Fig. 12.
You must describe a single one after this manner. Draw the sides A C, B D after
the same manner as in the delineation of Horn-works, which is already
prescribed, unless these are wont to be shorter, viz. than forty or fifty
Perches.

2. Join C D, which bisect in F; and from F let fall the perpendicular F E
equal to of C D, and join C E and D E; so have you the simple external Angle.

Fig. 13.
Draw the double one after this manner: Having drawn the sides A C, B D, as
above, join C D; which being bisected in G, from G raise the perpendicular G E
equal to of C D, and join C E and D E.

2. Produce E G to F, till G F be the half of G E; and the right Lines C E, D E
being bisected in K and H, join F K and F H; so will A C K F H D B be the
double Tongues, or double external Angle.

IV. Its strength and use.
They are much inferior to the Horn-works, insomuch that they seem only then
to be made use of, when some sudden occasion urges.

Moreover, the defect of these Tongues, and of all external Angles, is this;
that about its very Angle it affords the Enemy a certain Quadrangular space,
within which he need not be exposed to the shot of the Defendants; this space
is determined, if the outward sloaping surface of the Brestwork be conceived to
be produced till it cut the field; its capacity is almost equal to twenty three
Rhynland Perches, which will be easily computed. Since then this sort of
building is so much against the first Laws of Architecture, 'twill be almost
necessary to raise a Raveline before it.

The Double Tongues, since they have a double external Angle K and H, will
likewise double the defect already spoken of; wherefore they are less used.

PROP. V. Of the Crown-work.
I. Its Definition.
THat work is called a Crown-work, that has on both sides two half Bulworks,
Fig. 14.
and in the middle one or more whole ones. Therefore it is the part of some
Regular Fortification; and seems to have this name given it, because it does,
as it were, incompass part of the Fortification.

II. Its Place
Is the same as that of Horn-works; though the Crown-work can cover more of the
Fortification than the Horn-work, and sometimes they are drawn about
Horn-works. Their chiefest use is to enclose neighboring places, that might
insest the Town, as Hills, etc. and so prevent the Enemy.

III. Its Delineation.
Since it is most an end the part of some Regular Fortification, let the
Engineer look, what Fortification is fittest for the place of the Polygon that
is to be encompassed; which when he has found, let him delineate so many
Bulworks of that Fortification which is built on the observed Polygon, as the
place requires; only this let him observe, that the Angles of the half Bulwork
be not less than sixty, nor more than ninety degrees. Its Bulworks are wont
sometimes to be less than those of the main Work. But let us expound more
especially the construction of a Crown-work having one whole Bulwork.

The whole description is made after this manner. Let the Capital of the
Bulwork be produced infinitely; or if the Crown is to be set before the
Courtine, from the middle point of the Courtine raise an Infinite
perpendicular; on the Capital produced set off from B to D forty Rhynland
Perches; on the perpendicular of the Courtine you may reckon sixty or seventy;
for so the sides of the Crown-work will be yet within the shot of a Musket
coming from the Bulworks of the main Fort.

Then at the point of D, of the right line B D, make the Angle B D I, half of
some Multangle or Polygon, and on the other side the Angle B D K; then in the
sides of these Angles from D to I and K, reckon 40 or 50 perches, at most 60;
and laying a Ruler by the point I, to the flanque of the Bulwork F, as also
from the point K to the other flanque E, draw strait lines till they meet with
the Out-brestwork in M and L, so will the sides of the Crown-work be determined
by the Out-brestwork.

But if the sides M I, L K, exceed 60 perches, that is, a Musket Shot, the
Angles B D I, B D K, must be made less, (Yet so that the whole I D K may remain
bigger than a right Angle) or certainly (which is thought best) the Line B D
must be shortened.

Then see what Regular Figure's Angle is equal, or comes near to the Angle K D
I: say for Example an Heptagon or seven-angled figure; therefore make within K
D I one whole Bulwork and two half Bulworks of an Heptagon, by the help of your
Tables.

If you would place more whole Bulworks in the middle, let the sides of the
Horn-work be drawn forth, so that they do not exceed Musket Shot, and within
these build part of a Regular Fortification, as has been said above.

General Rules concerning Outworks.
1. Let them be within Musket Shot of the main work. 2. Let not their height
be more than what may conveniently serve to scowr the ground possessed by the
Enemy. 3. Let the Remotest be lower than the nearest. 4. Let a dry graft have
no outworks, unless Horn-works, if you see occasion; let the wet one have
Ravelins and Horn-works, but it will hardly admit of Half-moons without
Damage.
THE SECOND PART OF Irregular Fortifications.
SInce most Cities are of an Irregular figure, it is evident what great use or
rather necessity there is like to be of this Part; I shall comprehend all the
matter briefly in the following Chapters.

CHAP. XIV. The Parts of Irregular Fortification.
THese works following serve for the fortifying Irregular places, Ordinary
Bulworks, double and Triple Bulworks, Forked Bulworks, Plain Bulworks, Half
Bulworks, Ravelins, Half moons, Horn-works, Crown-works, Tongues, External
Angles, Angular Tongues, Plain Moles, half plain Moles, the middle Defense or
toothed, Retrenchments.

Some of these (viz.) those that are wont to be used in strengthening Regular
Fortifications, we have already expounded. And although their manner of
building there delivered, be proper to Regular Fortifications, yet out of this
it is easily understood how they are to be fitted to an Irregular place. Now
these that are over and above, are to be explained in this Chapter.

1. The Double or Triple Bulwork, is a Moat or Bulk of Earth composed of
several Bulworks placed one above another; it is shown in the 15th. figure, and
is built commonly in steep places, such as the sides of Hills, that when the
Enemy coming up can be no longer touched from the lowest, he might be hot from
the second, and lastly from the third; these are seldom used.

2. Forked or cut Bulworks, I call those whose Angle E is cut off, and changed
into an external Angle F K G, after this manner in the 16th figure is the Mole
or Bulk A C FK G D B; they are of use when the Angle of the Bulwork is too
acute.

3. Half-Bulworks, you have in the Horn-work, fig. 10. and in the Crown-work,
fig. 14. They are not only to be used in Horn-works and Crown-works. but also
in many other places, as we shall say afterward. Observe that the Angle of
these be not too acute, and take care that their plain side be not destitute of
defense.

4. The external Angle, Fig. 17.
is that which is made by two lines running inwards toward the Center of the
place called in French angle retire; on the contrary, the Inward Angle is that
which is made by the sides running forth toward the field from the Center of
the place, called in French angle Avance. In the 17th. figure the outward
Angles are, A, L, C, E, G, etc. The inward B, D, F, etc. The outward Angle, if
it be not too obtuse, seems strong enough, since its sides do mutually scowr
one another; and from this is had the defense of the Tongues and Forked
Bulworks. We have above showed its defect.

Some people extol this so, as to think a place surrounded with outward and
inward Angles, to be equal in strength to one that is fortified with Bulworks,
but they are not to be heard.

1. For first, it always happens, that when a place is enclosed with External
and internal Angles set alternately, some of the outward will be too blunt or
obtuse; as A L, and some of the inward too acute, either of which is very
hurtful. The last in this, that its Angle is liable to be cut off by the
Enemies Canon. The other, in that it looses so much the more of its scowring
defense the nearer it comes to a strait line.

2. The outward Angles likewise have this Essential inconvenience, that the
Enemy drawing near the Angle it self, cannot be hot within a notable space, as
we have shown above, which fault the Bulworks are without.

3. These External Angles do lessen the Area of the place, and increase the
circumference, both which is faulty.

5. Angular Tongues, are wont to be used in fortifying an acute external Angle,
Fig. 18, 19.
or a right one; but not so conveniently an obtuse one: with help of these you
may mend the second fault spoken of above; you must build it after this manner.

Produce A B, E B, the sides of the Angle, 8 or 10 paces to K and N, and join K
N; then draw K E, N G parallel to B A, B E, likewise C E, D G parallel to B E
and B A, which may meet with the former in E and G. If all the space contained
within the Lines C E K N G D be emptied and cleared, you have the Tongues sought
for.

Some build it after this manner, omitting the Line K N, Fig. 19.
and slighting the Triangle F B N, they empty only the spaces C E F B, B N G D;
yet the first seems to be preferred, because in it the defense is not only had
from the flanques E K, G N, but also from K N, which is as it were a little
Courtine; but the other wants this defense, and its sides B F, B N are almost
useleless for defense. But if they are to be built with a wall, (as for the
most part they ought to be) the labor is doubled and without profit, because F
B and B N are bigger than F N, and as I said unuseful. On the ends of the sides
of the Angle which is strengthened with the Tongues, half-Bulworks, X, Z, are
always wont to be made.

6. Plain Moles, serve for the strengthening obtuse outward Angles, Fig. 20.
less fit for acute and right ones: you shall build them after this manner.

From the sides of the outward Angle E B D cut off the right lines B A, B C 25
or 30 paces, and raise the Perpendicles A H, C I equal unto them, and join H I;
so will A H I C be the Plain Mole, whose flanques A H and C I, will scowr the
sides of the Angle A E, C D, and these will be scowred by them. But the Front H
I will be scowred by N E, M D the segments of the sides which the Front
produced cuts off on both sides. Therefore the sides of the Angle ought to be
so long that they may cut the Front prolonged on both sides, and the parts N E,
M D, must be of a considerable quantity, least otherwise the Front want its
defense.

This work is better then the Tongues, because it enlarges the places, and is
capable of great Retrenchments.

If you desire Orillons to it, or Ears, take H K, I L 1/^ of the flanques, and
on these you must build them. The rest of the parts A K, L C, being each ^/3 of
the flanques, will give the Covert flanques.

7. The 21 figure shows, The half plain Mole; Fig. 21.
it is of use when one side B E of the External Angle is longer than the other,
and so much longer that it exceeds Musket Shot.

Fig. 22.
8. Inward Angles, angles avance's, may be taken in stead of Angular Tongues or
the plain Mole, for the defense of External Angles, whether they are acute or
obtuse. In the example let there be the outward Angle B A C: here it will be
conveniently fortified by building the inward Angle D F E, where observe this,
that the parts of the sides intercepted A D, A E must be always of such a
bigness, that the remaining segments of the sides may not exceed Musket Shot.

Fig. 23. 24.
9. The middle or simple defenses, are shown in the 23, 24. figures They are of
use when any side of a Fortification will not admit any other defense. Also in
some peoples judgments, they may be used to purpose, about the out-Brestwork.
Others had rather be without these middle or simple defenses, because C D, E F,
etc. are each of them scowred but by one flanque, C B or E D, etc. far
otherwise then it is in Courtines, which are placed between two Bulworks.

Fig. 25.
10. Retrenchment is a part cut off from the whole work, which can be no longer
defended, and it is like the whole. The 25 figure shows the Retrenchment of
Hornworks and Bulworks, after whose Idea the rest may be perfected.

Fig. 26.
11. Now there remains that we should expound the construction of plain
Bulworks. Those are said to be plain Bulworks, that are not made upon Angles,
but upon a right Line, and are used in the strengthening River-sides, and
Courtines that are over long etc. Though when they are applied to the
fortifying of Courtines, their construction will be somewhat different from the
rest, as will be said afterward.

This Table serves for their construction to be made three several ways, the
first is due to an Hexagon, the second to an Octogon, the third to an Enneagon,
or those bigger than an Enneagon.

Courtine. Gorge. Flanque. Manner 1. 480.0.0.0. 169.7.0.6. 90.0.0.0. Manner 2.
480.0.0.0. 169.7.0.6. 110.0.0.0. Manner 3. 480.0.0.0. 169.7.0.6. 120.0.0.0.

The construction will be after this manner.

Let there be given the right line A Z to be fortified after the second manner.

1. First look in the Table for the Courtine, you will find it 480 Rhynland feet,
which cut off from A Z, and let them be A B. In like manner look in the Table
for the Neck line, you will find it to be 169, 706. feet, which cut off twice from
B Z, and let them be B C, C D; and mark the point C. Then again cut off the
Courtine D E, and the Neck-lines E F, F G, and so proceed for the number of
Bulworks you shall want.

2. In the Table seek the flanques, you I find them 110 feet, which raise
perpendicularly from B to D, and let them be B K, D L, and join K L, which
bisect in N, and from N raise the perpendicular N I equal to the Neck line C B;
at last join K I, L I, and you will have the plain Bulwork B K I L D, whose Angle
at I is a right one. In like manner the rest will be made, the proportion of
the rest of the parts will arise from this construction, which the Table
underneath shows.

The Face. The flanque of the Courtine. The flanquing line of defense. The
fichant line of defense. The angle of the Bulwork. 1. Manner. 240 390 367.
2.7.9. 699. 6.8.9. 90 d. 2. Manner. 240 370 795. 5.6.3. 707. 3.5.3. 90 d. 3.
Manner. 240 360 409. 7.0.5. 711. 3.7.0. 90 d.

CHAP. XV. How an Irregular place may be regularly Fortified.
IRregular places may be strengthened two ways, viz. Regularly and
Irregularly. An Irregular place is said to be Regularly fortified, when it is
so changed, as that it may become Regular; or if it cannot be produced to
Regularity, a Regular Figure is circumscribed about it. But an Irregular place
is fortified irregularly when the Figure of the place is not reduced to a
Regular one.

PROBLEM I. Let it be proposed to fortify an Irregular place Regularly.
1. Describe the plain of the place to be fortified, and observe what Regular
Figure it comes nearest to, and reduce it to that you find nearest. The
Reduction must be so, that all those parts of the old circumference that can be
used, must be retained: The restare to be excluded with a new circumference, if
the place be large; or included rather, if the place be only of a mean
capacity. Now a place reduced after this manner, will be fortified according to
the laws of Regular Fortifications.

2. But if the Figure of the place be so Irregular, as not to be reduced to a
Regular, 'twill behoove you to circumscribe about it a Regular Figure. But that
you may know how many sides the Figure circumscribed is to have, measure the
largest Radius of the place you intend to enclose, then turn to the Tables of
Regular Fortifications, and observe what Figures Radius, your Radius is equal
to, or nearest; and what Figures Radius you find it to be, that Figure you must
circumscribe.

CHAP. XVI. How an Irregular Place having fit Sides and Angles, is to be
Irregularly fortified.
SOme Angles of Irregular Place are said to be fit, others unfit; as likewise
some of the sides are fit, and some unfit.

That is a fit Angle that is not less than ninety degrees; that which is less
is unfit; for the Angle of the Bulwork set upon it would be less than sixty
degrees, if a due proportion were kept of the rest for the parts. The external
Angles also are reckoned among the unfit.

That side is fit, that leaves for the Courtine not less than three hundred
feet, nor more than five hundred feet, when the two Gorge lines belonging to a
Square shall be cut off on both sides. That side is unfit that leaves more than
five hundred, or less than three hundred feet. Dogen pronounces one side to be
unfit, that is less than the side of a square Regular Figure: Therefore look in
the Tables for the Neck-lines of a square Fortification, and cut them off at
each end from every particular side; and if the remainder be no less than three
hundred feet, or more than five hundred feet, the side are fit.

PROB. I. Let there be given an Irregular place Z, having fit Sides and Angles,
Fig. 27.
which were required to be Irregularly fortified.
1. FInd out by help of an Instrument the least Angle of the Place, which let
be A; then observe what Regular Figure's Angle of the Circumference is equal to
this least angled, or next less. Let us order it to be the Angle of a Square.

2. Seek therefore in your Tables (Chap 5.) the Neck-lines that serve for a
Square, which let be A H, A H, cut off from the sides: Seek also the flanques
of a Square, which being raised perpendicularly from H, H let be H G, H G. Then
bisecting the Angle A, with an infinite Right line A Q, cut off from it the
Capital line of a Square A F, likewise found in the Table, and join F G, FG: so
you have H G F G H the Bulwork of a square Fortification. Where note, that if
the least Angle be 100 degrees, or betwixt 110 or 108, you must give to the
Flanques seventy feet.

3. If on the rest of the Angles you make Bulworks belonging to a Square, the
Fortification will be complete and perfect.

4. If the Courtine, and flanques in the Courtine, be in some places too
little, there make the Bulwork of a Regular Figure next less, till your
Courtine be long enough; you may also lessen the Angle of the Bulwork if the
Flanques are too short, still preserving its just bigness spoke of in the
Maxims, On the contrary, you may increase the Angle of the Bulwork, if the
flanque of the Courtine be very big.

5. Very great Angles, to wit, such as are bigger than 150 degrees, shall be
fortified as right sides; that is, you shall so fortify each side of the
Angle, as if it were one Courtine: The manner will be delivered afterward.

6. The Bulworks being built after this form, by help of the least Angle; if
the Courtine, and flanques of the Courtine, be of that length, that that they
may be shortened, still preserving their due quantity, then 'twill be lawful to
increase the Angle of the Bulwork by increasing either the Flanques or
Neck-lines, or both together; and so will you take, away any inconvenience that
might be in this way; neither will there be any thing that Dogen can condemn;
nor such need of that troublesome new invention of Lines, found by the Rule of
Proportion.

PROB. II. To do the same thing another way.
1. ME sure each Angle of the place, and see what Regular Figure's, angles each
angle is equal to, or next bigger.

2. On each Angle of the given place build Bulworks, with their Neck-lines,
Flanques, Capital, taken from those Figures, unto whose Angles of
circumference, the Angles of the given place shall come nearest.

The business shall be illustrated with an Example. Suppose the Angle A to be
found next less than the Angle of a Square, on this build the Bulwork of a
Square; then let the Angle B, be next bigger than the Angle of an Hexagon;
therefore you must build on B the Bulwork of an Hexagon; and so for the rest.

3. But if, when the Bulworks shall be built after this manner, that is to say,
Fig. 27.
on B that of an Hexagon, on C that of a Pentagon, it happens that the Courtine
L K is notably less than 300 feet, you must build on B the Bulwork of a
Pentagon, and on C the Bulwork of a Square. If the Courtine be not yet 300
feet, you must also make on B the Bulwork of a Square; but if yet the Courtine
be less than 300 feet, the side C B will be unfit.

PROB. III. To do the same yet another way.
1. THe third manner is this; Fig. 27.
if the Angle of the Place differ notably from the Angle of the next Regular
Figure, then with the same Data as are in any of the six manners of the fifth
Chapter, find for each of the Angles A, B all the Angles and Lines as we did
there in Regular Fortifications. Dogen, in page 204. seems to prefer for this
purpose the third manner delivered in the fifth Chapter.

2. On the Angle A, make a Bulwork with his Neck-lines, Capital, Flanques,
which you found for the Angle A; in the like manner on the Angle B make a
Bulwork, taking the Neck-lines, Capital and Flanques, which you found for the
Angle B, and so in the rest of the Angles C D E.

3, If, after the Bulworks are thus ordered, the Courtine be found too short,
you must help that fault almost after the same manner, as in number. 3. Prob. II.

4. At last, the Figure being fortified after this manner, according us the
several circumstances may require, the proportion of the Flanques, Faces, and
of the Angle of Bulwork, may be freely changed and altered, etc. provided you
do not transgress the Canons established in the third Chapter: Dogen has
Tables of this after page 200. This way is taken out of Dogen.

CHAP. XVII. How an Irregular place, having unfit Sides and Angles, ought to be
fortified.
PROB. I. To fortify the unfit Angles of the Irregular Place A.
Fig. 28.
1. IF the Angle S I B be only little less than a right one, build on it the
Bulwork of a Square, and cut off its Angle Q, for it is less than it should be,
and make a pair of Tongues, or the outward Angle N O P. Others, when the Angle
is betwixt eighty and ninety degrees, had rather build before it a Horn-work. I
judge it best to do both.

2. If the Angle B C H were less than eighty degrees, but bigger than sixty,
surround it with a Crown-work. Others cut away the Angle it self, if it be near
sixty degrees, and turn it to a pair of Tongues D F E: He does best for a
Fortification that joins both.

3. If any Angle, as S G H, be less than sixty degrees, let the Figure of the
place be changed, by drawing a new side G R C, that may make Angles of a just
quantity with both the sides S G and B C.

4. 'Twill be lawful also to change an unfit Angle, provided not less than
sixty degrees, into a whole Bulwork or half Bulwork, or into a Raveline, or
Half Moon; or else to cut it off, and change it into Tongues or a Horn-work.

PROB. II. To fortify the external Angles of an Irregular Place.
Fig. 29.
LEt there be given the outward Angle of an Irregular Place A B C, to be
fortified.

1. If the ends of the Sides A and C are not distant from one another, neither
less than 518 feet, nor more than 826, build whole Bulworks on A and C; as we
taught in Chap 16. Prob. 1, 2. etc.

2. If the distance of the ends A and C be more than 826 feet, you must build
before the outward Angle either a Raveline, or Hornwork, or else both. Likewise
you may make in the sides middle or toothed defenses (of which see Chap. 14.
number. 9.) building over and above a Raveline.

Fig. 30.
3. If the distance of the ends A and C be less than 518 feet, make two half
Bulworks for the defense of the sides A S and C R: But before the outward Angle
you must build a larger sort of Raveline.

4. The best way of all to fortify external Angles, Fig. 28.
is to enclose them within the Figure, by drawing a new side G C; and then the
Angles B C G, S G C, and the side G C, may be fortified after the manner
delivered in Chap. 16. if they are fit; if unfit, according to the method,
partly already delivered in this Chapter, and partly to be delivered.

PROB. III. To fortify the sides of an Irregular Fortification.
1. LEt the side that is too long be A B, measure the least Angle of the place
A, Fig. 31.
and observe as above what Regular figures Angle of the circumference it comes
nearest to; Let us suppose it comes nearest to the Angle of a Pentagon, and
bisect the side A B in G; also cut off the Neck-lines of the Pentagon A O and B
N, because we supposed the least Angle at A to be nearest that of a Pentagon.
This being done, if the remainder G O, G N, be not less than 300 feet, or more
than 500, you shall build on the middle point of the Courtine G, a plain
Bulwork, according to the Method delivered Chap. 14. numb. 11. In which alter
only this, that the Neck-lines G I, G H be taken equal to the Neck-lines A O, B
N of the Bulworks set on the neighboring Angles.

2. If any side as A L be of so great a length, that being it self divided into
equal parts L (...) A, and having its Neck-lines cut off, A (...), L (...),
does leave its Courtines (...), not less than 300 feet, nor more than 500, you
shall build more plain Bulworks on the side A L.

3. That side for which two Bulworks are too little, and three are too much,
must be rather fortified with two great ones, than three little ones.

4. If the side too long will not admit of one plain Bulwork, the Courtine must
be fortified with Ravelins and other works, but their Profile must be longer
than ordinary.

Note, That universally sides either too long or too short, may be corrected or
not; they may be corrected when the sides that are too long, can be cut
shorter; or when those that are too short can be produced. Besides you may make
a new Angle on the side that is too long, that shall yield two sides of a fit
quantity.

PROB. IV. To fortify the sides of an Irregular place that is too short.
1. IF several sides are less than 300 feet, you must change the figure and
fortify it after some manner already delivered.

2. If the figure of the place will not admit of a change, either the Courtines
must be fortified with Ravelins built before them, whose profile must be more
than ordinary, or the Angles must be surrounded with Crown-works; they may be
also changed into Tongues or Hornworks, or else they may be sheltered with one
whole Bulwork.

3. If the side to be fortified, having on each end the Neck-lines belonging to
a square cut off, be less than 300 feet, Bulworks must not be built on the
Angles adjacent to the second side, although they be fit, but shall be
fortified with other Outworks; and if the Angles are betwixt 90 and 120
degrees, you must build before them Horn-works; or if more then 120 degr. you
must object before the angles in the Ditch it self either Ravelins, or
Retrenched Bulworks.

4. The side that is too short, and those too long may be also mended; if you
make Irregular Bulworks, whose Neck-lines are almost all set off on the longest
side.

PROB. V. How Ancient Cities are to be Fortified.
1. AN ancient Rampar if it be strong and surrounded with a Wall and Towers,
must not be demolished; therefore you must enclose it with a new fortification,
which must be Regular, if possible, or as near a Regular as might be.

Betwixt the New Fortification and the old Ditch there must be left a large
Po^^rium fit for Military uses.

2. If the ancient Fortifications be of Earth, or can be mended without much
cost and labor, then proceed according to the Rules of Irregular Fortification
already delivered. Many French and Dutch Cities are fortified with Ravelins,
Halfmoons, Hornworks, and other sort of works: which sort of building since
it is to supply the place of Bulworks ought to be stronger than usual. They are
likewise frequently fortified with a Fauss-bray, and the Brestwork of the
Covert-way, and sometimes with a Ditch about this Out-brestwork, and with
Stakado's.

Corollary.
Out of these three foregoing Chapters, it is understood by what Method all
Irregular places are to be fortified, whether they labor with all the defects
above mentioned, or not with all. Moreover, this is to be observed in the
Fortification of every Irregular place, that you have the Plane of the place
described on paper, that so you may the better see, what form of Fortification,
and what works may best agree with the given place; and as the figure that is
to be fortified proves Irregular, so commonly its Bulworks, Hornworks,
Ravelins, etc. will have an Irregular figure, the place so requiring.

CHAP. XVIII.
SOmething of what is now to be said is also common to Regular places, but we
shall conveniently dispatch them all together in this place.

1. Those places over which rising Hills or neighboring Mountains domineer,
are unfit to be fortified. Either therefore the Hill is to be enclosed within
the circuit of the walls, or if it cannot be enclosed, all care must be taken
that the Enemy do not possess it: Which, will be done by setting a new and
strong Fortification upon it; or when this cannot be done, it must be by
raising of Cavaliers or batteries in the Bulwork or Courtine, over which the
Hill seems to hang. If Castles or Cities are built upon Mountains where there
may be danger of Mining, you must fortify the foot of the Mountain with works.

2. The most convenient and safest place for the Gates, is betwixt the two
Bulworks in the middle of the Courtine, for they can be defended in no other
place with so much security and facility. For the same reason Rivers cutting
through a City, are received betwixt the two Bulworks.

3. To keep great Cities in their duty and obedience, there is nothing fitter
than to join a Citadel to that place which may most command the Town.

Concerning their building and situation observe this, 1. Let them possess the
strongest part of the City; wherefore if there be a Rock or Hill within the
Town, there let them be built. So they have done at Namur, Cambray, Naples, and
other places. 2. Let them be set against the chiefest avenues of the Towns, and
let the gates be liable to their command. 3. Let them be Pentagons, for this
figure is fittest; for the square is weaker, and not so capacious: The rest of
the figures above a Pentagon, are larger than needs, and are too costly.
Antwerp, Turin, Amiens, Vitri, Phallzbourg, Stenay, and many other Towns, have
Pentagonal Cittadels; Millain, Perpignan, and Casall, have Hexagons; Manheim,
Verdun, Blavett have septangular ones. 4. They are so to be placed that they
turn two of their Bulworks toward the Town, three to the field; And so that
one of the Cou tines of the City A B, meet with the Courtine of the Citadel T,
betwixt the two Bulworks C and G, one of which looks toward the City, the
other toward the Enemy, Fig. 32.
as you have it expressed in the 32 Figure. This last is not of little moment,
for so the Bulwork G is stoutly defended from the Courtine of the Town; and the
Courtine it self of the Town is scowred and defended by the Citadel. From
whence it appears, they very much err, who remove the Cittadels far from the
Towns. 5. Let them have at least two gates, one toward the Town, another
toward the field, to receive in succors upon occasion. 6. Betwixt the
Citadel and the houses of the Town let there be a plane of a sufficient
bigness. Antwerp shows you an example of a Citadel complete and perfect with
all its numbers; for this commands the City with two Bulworks, with two more
scowrs the Scald that flows by it; and with three, proudly domineers over the
field, and it is furnished with all the rest that my either appertain to its
form or situation.

4. The sides of Cities that are washed with Rivers, may be fortified with
slight works, to wit, with a single External or internal Angles, or with middle
defenses, terminated with half-Bulworks. You shall fortify the sides with
Hornworks fitted for the place, vid. fig. 33. Not only the mouths of Havens,
Fig. 33.
but the sides that are longer then ordinary, are to be strengthened with
Fortifications. If the city be distant from the River a Musket Shot, it must
be joined to it by building a Citadel.

5. The Banck opposite to the Town, if it be within Musket Shot, and in a
friends Country, may be fortified with less Works; To wit, with an half
sexangular Star, or with a plain Bulwork. But if it be in an enemies Country,
or in a friends, out of Musket Shot, you shall fortify it with half a Regular
Hexagon, whose sides must be protected with Hornworks and other works. You have
an example in Fig. 34. The neglect of this was the loss of Nimmeghen on the
Vahal. Of all this you may see farther in Dogen Lib. 2.

These few Rules following shall put an end to Irregular Fortification, of
which there is great use in this Business.
I. Let the Irregular Fortification be reduced altogether to a Regular one, or
as near it as can be.

II. Let it be round about as equal as possible can be, or equally firm.

III. A Fortification that is larger with the same circumference, is to be
preferred before a less.

IV. Sides that bend inwards, that is, those that contain an External Angle,
must be avoided, because they lessen the place, and are built at greater
expense.

V. The Bulworks may be Irregular, and unlike; for that sort of Fortification
is counted handsomest that is strongest.

VI. The least distance of the Bulworks (according to Dogen page 188.) must be
60 Rhynland perches, the greatest 80.

VII. The Angle of defense on the Angle of the Tenailles, must be as often as can
be, opposite to the middle point of the Courtine.

VIII. Against Hills that hang over the Town, or against Rivers that flow into
the Moat, rather object the Courtine than the Bulwork, for that is stronger
than this.

THE THIRD PART. Of besieging Towns, and how to defend them.
THere are five Acts proper to the Seige; Circumvallation, The Lines of
approach and Batteries for Cannons, The Sappes, or the cutting through the
out-brestwork, The Gallerie, and the breaking of the Bulwork by a Mine.

1. First, therefore the place that is to be besieged is to be so enclosed
round about with a Rampar, fortified with all sorts of works, that no going
out, nor coming in, may lie open to it. 2. You come to the out-brestwork under
the favor of trenches depressed beneath the Horizon, and drawn with various
windings, so that they cannot be scowred from any part of the place besieged.
3. The out-brestwork in cutting through, you must no longer use trenches drawn
obliquely, but it must be done by the shortest cut, that is by a Line drawn
directly. 4. The Graft must be filled with a bank made of earth and stones and
Faggots, carried on thorough it to the Rampar, on which at last the Gallery is
laid. If the Ditch be dry, sometimes the Gallery is carried under ground to the
place appointed for the Mine. 5. Through the Gallery that is now finished, the
Pioneers advance without any danger to the Rampar, where they dig a hole, and
put in such a quantity of Gunpowder as may serve to break the great Bulk of
earth that stands over it; which at last being set on fire, and the Rampar
broken, the Soldiers are led on through the Gallery to the breach, to enter
the City that lies open before them. This is the Sum of the Siege, whose parts
I shall briefly expound, and every one distinctly by it self.

CHAP. XIX. Of Circumvallation.
CIrcumvallation consists in Camps, Trenches, and works of all sorts. The very
Camps also being a lesser kind of Circumvallaiion, do comprehend the two last,
to wit, Trenches, and variety of Works.

PROP. I. The disposing of the Camp or Quarters.
1. THe Camp is to be formed in those places that seem most convenient to let
in an External Enemy.

2. It must not be made in a place that may be drowned.

3. Let there be so many, that relief may be readily sent from them, to all
parts of the Circumvallation.

4. Let them be above Cannon shot from the Town, or at least so far off, as
that they may fear little damage from their Guns.

5. Let them be placed, if you can, by a River side.

6. The Camp, as likewise all the rest of the Circumvallation, must be
fortified with Trenches, that is, with a Rampar round about it, and several
other works.

PROP. II. Of the Lines commonly called Trenches.
THese Lines of the Siege are a continual kind of Rampar, which surround as well
the Camp, as all the rest of the places about the Town besieged. Concerning
these, Observe this.

1. Let them be twofold, one inward, built against the besieged, to keep them
in, least with their Sallies they hurt the Besiegers; the other outward, to
keep off any enemy that should attacque the Camp from without. Let the outward
be stronger than the inward; nay, when there is but a small Garrison in the
Town, these inward ones may be spared, or at least very slightly built.

2. These Trenches, especially the outward one, must not be extended above 750
feet upon a right Line: After every 750 feet, they must be fortified with
several works cast before and betwixt them. These are wont to be used, Redoubts
or little Turrets, Middle or toothed defenses, outward and inward Angles,
Little Tongues, Stars, square Forts with whole Bulworks, various Forts with half
Bulworks, whole plain Bulworks, and half ones, Ravelins, half moons, Hornworks,
Crownworks.

All this Trade of Works so various and so manifold, was used in no time more
than in our age, nor in no place oftener than in Holland, at the Siege of
Hartogen Bosch, at both the Sieges of Breda, Mastricht, and many others; most
of those are already delivered in the foregoing propositions: we will expound
those that remain in the following.

3. The Profiles and Ichnography of these Trenches is various, in respect of
their place and danger; I Will give you three sorts of them used at the siege of
Hartogen Bosch.

The Base of the Brestwork. 7. 7. The outward Sloap or Talu. 2. 3. The inward
Sloap. 1. 1. The inward height. 6. 6. The outward height. 5. 5. The upper part.
4. 3. The width of the Step. 3. 3. The height of the Step... The Border or
footing on the outside. 3. 3. The width of the Ditch. 12. 8. The outward Talu
or Sloap of the Ditch. 4. 2. The inward Sloap of the Ditch. 4. 2. The depth of
the Ditch. 5. 2. The width at the bottom of the Ditch. 4. 4.

At the coming of the Royal Army, the Dutch made their Circumvallation
stronger, they increased the Base of their Brestwork to 9 feet, making three
Steps, whose widths added together made 9 feet; the height of the brestwork was
likewise 9 feet, the width of the Ditch was 15 feet.

PROP. III. To build a Redoubt or Turret.
IT is a most easy thing, since their form is simply square. Therefore
describe on the earth a Line of 48 feet, and on it delineate a square; and what
you require is done. The Ichnographie and Profile is after this manner.

Its Base. 14. or 20. Its width a top. 4. or 6. Its height. 8. or 10. Its
border or footing. 2. or 3. The width of its Ditch. 15. or 24. The depth of the
Ditch. 5. or 6.

There is usually added to the Brestwork two or three Steps gradually placed
over one another.

PROP. IV. To delineate a Star.
Fig. 35.
To delineate a quadrangular one, work after this manner.

1. DEscribe on the field a Line of 48 or 50 feet, and on it describe a square.

2. Bisect the side A B in C, and from C raise the perpendicular C D equal to
of A C, or 1/^ of the whole A B.

3. Join A D, D B, if this construction be made round all the sides, you will have
a quadrangular Star.

Fig. 36.
To have a Pentagonal Star, work after this manner.

Describe a Regular Pentagon; and from the side A B bisected in C raise the
perpendicle C D equal to of A C or of A B. Join A D, D B, and if you do the
same round the figure, you will have a Pentagonal Star.

For a Sexangular one.

Describe A C E etc. a Regular Hexagon, Fig. X.
let each of its sides A C etc. be equal to about 104 paces, at the ends of C H
etc. make the Angles D A C, D C A, etc. 30 degrees each; And D A, D C will be
each about 60 paces.

Their Ichnographie and Profiles are the same as that of Redoubts.

Your larger Stars are not in use.

PROP. V. To delineate a square Fort with half-Bulworks.
1. DEscribe the square A B C D, whose sides must not be less than 120 feet,
Fig. 37.
nor more than 180.

2. Trisect the sides in E, F, L, M, Q, S, T, V.

3. To each of the sides add B I, DN, C O, A H; but for the Neck-lines take in
the sides themselves, to wit, BL, D Q, C T, A E.

4. From the ends of the Neck-lines raise the perpendicular LK, QR, TX, EG,
each of which must be of the side.

5. Draw the right lines I K, N R, O X, H G.

So have you a Fort with four half-Bulworks.

PROP. VI. To delineate a Fort on a Rectangular Paralellogram with
half-Bulworks.
1. TRisect one of the lesser sides A B, Fig. 38.
and cut off 1/^ of it from all the sides for the Neck-lines A F, BG, C O, D Q.

2. Add also to each of the sides A K, B L, CP, DS, equal to 1/^ of A B.

3. On the ends of the Neck-lines raise the perpendicles F I, G M, O N, Q R,
equal to of the same A B.

4. Join K I, LM, PN, SR. I say it is done.

PROP. VII. To delineate another sort of Quadrilateral Fort, with half Bulworks
and double Tongues.
1. TAke the third part of the sides of the square A B C D, Fig. 39.
for the Neck-lines CP, A M, BN, RD.

2. Add to the side C D on both sides C I, D K, but to the sides C A, D B
likewise add A S, B T.

3. From the ends of the Neck-lines raise perpendicles equal to P X, M L, N V,
R Z, and join I X, S L. T V, K Z.

4. Bisect the side C D in E, and thence cut off E G, E H equal to of the side;
and thence again raise the perpendicle E F equal also to 1/^.

5. Join G F, H F, you have your purpose.

Fig. 40.
There are built also square Forts with two whole Bulworks, and on the opposite
side the double Tongues. See Fig. 40.

PROP. VIII. To delineate a three-sided Fort with half Bulworks.
Fig. 41.
1. DEscribe an equilateral Triangle A B C, whose sides must be less than those
of a Square.

2. Cut off from the sides the third part A I, B L, C K, for the Neck-lines.

3. From the end of the Neck-lines raise perpendicularly the sixth part of the
sides I H, L M, K G.

4. Add to the sides of the third part B D, C E, A F, and join F H, D M, E G.
you have your purpose,

The four Forts described in the foregoing Propositions, are not to be built
promiscuously, and for varieties sake, but with choice, and with respect to the
place: And although they are much weaker than Forts with whole Bulworks,
nevertheless they are conveniently made use of.

As to their Profile and Ichnography, you may give them the same as to Redoubts
and Stars; or if they require a greater, you may give them that which was used
in the siege of Hartogen Bosch; in which the base of the Rampar was 27 feet,
the height 6, the upper breadth of the Rampar 18, the base of the Brestwork 8,
the upper breadth of the Brest-work 4, the height of the Brest-work 6, the
width of the Ditch 30 feet.

CHAP. XX. Of Batteries for great Guns, and of the Approaches.
THe Circumvallation being finished, which is the first act of the Siege,
delivered in the foregoing Chapter, you raise batteries for great Guns in
certain places, and go toward the Out-brestwork, covered in oblique Trenches.
Of these therefore in this present Chapter.

PROP. I. To build an Offensive and Defensive Battery.
THere is a twofold Battery, offensive and defensive; Fig. 42.
the last is directed toward the enemy without; the first toward the
besieged. You shall build an Offensive one after this manner.

1. Multiply the number of Guns that are to be mounted by 12; the product shall
give in feet the length of the Battery, for each Gun is distant from another
12. feet, and the two at the ends are distant from the Brestwork 6 feet each.

2. You Will have the, breadth A D, if, to the length of a Gun mounted in his
carriage, you add the space A F, ten or twelve feet for the recoiling of the
piece; and the space F D, for traversing and passage.

3. Let the platform of the Battery be made sloaping downwards toward the
Enemy, that when the Guns are recoiled they may with more ease be brought back
to their places: Let its entry behind be I, K; the way leading to it must not
be very steep, but gently rising, that the Guns may with more ease be got in.

4. That part of the Battery that faces the Enemy, must be fortified with a
Brestwork, whose Base you may make 12, 15, or 18 feet, its height 6; for the
sides A D, B E a less width will suffice.

5. Let there be so many Ports in the Brestwork as there are Guns; let their
height be three feet, their outward width four, their inward two; the outward
width is more than the inward, that the Guns may scowr more of the field.

6. Behind the Battery you must describe a space D S N E equal and like the
Battery; in it make a square hole, as M, whose side must be ten or twelve feet;
in which the powder must be kept, and you must cover the mouth with leather,
least any sparks should fall in. To conclude, as well about the Battery it self
A E, as the space D N, you must make a Ditch eight or ten feet wide, six feet
deep.

7. The first Batteries are wont to be raised at a Musket Shot from the Town,
afterwads near the very ditches; the general rule may be this, that the nearer
they are the place, they do the greater execution.

8. The Defensive Batteries are not so full of work; their Brestwork, if it be
made of earth, may be six or seven feet thick; the height is sufficient, if it
cover a Gun in its carriage; instead of an earthen Brestwork they use commonly
great wicker Baskets filled with earth.

PROP. II. To direct the Lines of Approaches to a place Besieged.
1. ABout the distance of a thousand feet from the Town open the Trench (...),
Fig. 43.
which you must carry on obliquely toward the place besieged, so that it may
not be scowred from any part of it; which being continued some space you must
dig a new one the other way, as (...), with the same obliqueness; and so by
several turnings you proceed to the Out-brestwork it self, where at length the
Approaches are finished, drawing two Trenches (...) longer than ordinary, and
parallel to the place besieged. These two last Lines cover the Besiegers like a
Brest-work, so that being so near at hand they frighten away the Defendants
from guarding their Graft and Rampar.

2. Although the Approaches ought so to be carried on, that they may never be
scowred from the Enemies Rampar, yet the Engineer shall take good heed he make
them no more obliquer than needs, to the loss of time and expenses. I think
with two turnings you may always come to the out-brestwork, a far shorter way
than if more oblique lines had been made: For let there be drawn from the point
where you began your Approaches, the right line (...), which continued may fall
a little without the Angle of the brestwork, and if another line be produced
from b, which goes without the Angles of the out-brestwork, you will arrive at
the out-brestwork in two turnings (...): but why this way of Approaches is less
used, I think this to be the reason: That your long lines of Approach, if
attempted, may be sooner carried and demolished by the Enemy, than those that
are cut in and out with several windings.

3. At the end of every Line you must build Redoubts, after such a manner, that
two may be flanqued by one; for this is the best situation of Redoubts: If one
of the Lines be drawn longer than ordinary, you may also build Redoubts in the
middle for its defense, all which the 43 Figure sufficiently expresses.

4. The earth which is cast out is thrown toward the Enemy, that it may be
instead of a Brestwork to the Pioneers.

Let its Tower width be six feet, its upper twelve or fifteen, its least depth
must be such, that may cover a standing man, with the height of its Brestwork
joined to it. The nearer they advance to the Town tht deeper they must be: The
width also must be increased, if there is occasion to bring stuff for the
Gallery thorough the Trenches: They use frequently to make three steps to the
Brestwork.

6. For the security of the Approaches, Batteries are to be built in convenient
places.

CHAP. XXI. The Sapp, or the cutting thorough the Out-brestwork.
Fig. 43.
1. THe Approaches being advanced to the out-brestwork, two longer Trenches, as
I said before, ought to be drawn parallel to the place that is besieged, the
Brestwork being built toward the Enemy; in these Musketeers are to be placed,
that they may hinder the Enemy from showing his head above the Rampar.

2. These things being done, when you can no longer draw your Lines obliquely,
it is necessary that from that longer Trench, which is parallel to the place you
intend to attaque, you cut a strait Channel L H, commonly called a Sap,
thorough the out-brestwork, to the very ditch of the Fortification. Without
doubt this work is full of dangerous chances: But the danger seems to be
lessened by these means. 1. The Soldiers being placed in the Trenches (...),
by their continual firing hindering the Defendants. 2. The Brestwork and
flanques of the Rampar are now so battered by the Cannon, that the Defendants
can scarce stand upon their Rampar.

3. This Channel is made deeper than the rest of the Approaches, and is covered
above with boughs, straw, hides, and other things necessary; that if a man
cannot be protected by it from the shot, yet at least the Pioneers may be by
this means withdrawn from the sight of the besieged.

4. This Channel is to be directed to that part of the Fortification which is
designed for the Mine; wherefore, if you besiege a Regular Fortification, you
must not direct it toward the Courtine, or the Angle of the Bulwork, but to
either of the faces of the Bulwork; For whosoever attaques the Courtine, is
liable to shot from both the Bulworks, and they very near; and whosoever
attempts the Angle of the Bulwork, is also liable to the shot of two Bulworks,
though they lie farther off: Whilst he that attaques the face can be hurt but
from one only. But if the Courtine has not on both sides its full defense, as
it often happens in Irregular places not perfectly fortified, the Sap and the
attaque may be carried on to the middle point of the Courtine.

CHAP. XXII. Concerning filling the Ditch, and carrying over the Gallery
advanced.
THe Sap L H being advanced thorough the out-brestwork and covert way unto
the Ditch, Fig. 43.
all that remains is that you fill the Ditch with a solid bank of earth carried
on quite over it, and that the Gallery be built upon this bank.

1. The Ditch whether it be wet or dry is filled with stones, boughs, faggots,
logs, and with sacks full of earth; but this Rubbidge that is cast in must be
so ordered, that the bank may rise quite over, the Ditch as high as the foot of
the Rampar, and have such a breadth that the Gallery may conveniently be set
upon it.

2. The bank being now finished, there is commonly so much earth brought
thorough the Sap and cast down on the bank, as may serve to make a kind of
little hill betwixt the face of the Bulwork and the besiegers; then casting,
with shovels longer than ordinary, the lower part of this heap of earth over
the upper, this hill is turned over and over, and is rouled on by degrees to
the face of the Bulwork.

3. This hill being rolled on some space, there are two gates erected at a
little distance from one another; which are so joined together with planks, as
well on each side as at top, that no part of them lies open. On that side which
regards the Enemies Bulwork so much earth is cast up, as may make it
Cannon-proof: The other side does not need so much covering. Also the upper
part will be sufficiently fortified against fire, if it be covered with a foot
or a foot and half of Earth. In like manner the rest of the parts of this
Gallery shall be continued till they come to the Rampar. The width of these
gates is either 9 or 10 feet, the height 10 feet, the thickness of its beams or
timbers 6 or 7 inches, half a foot.

4. This is the Theorie of Galleries, which you will hardly describe easier than
build. In the universal affair of the Siege there is nothing more dangerous
than this enterprise: Nevertheless the danger seems to be lessened by these
means. 1. That rolling hill of earth betwixt the face of the Bulwork and the
Workmen, keeps their front safe. 2. The opposite flanque, as well that of the
Bulwork as that of the Courtine, is so battered with Cannon, that the side of
the Gallery cannot be broken from thence by the Guns of the besieged. Also from
the Trenches of (...), the Musketeers that guard the builders of the Gallery,
are continually firing on every part of the Rampar. 3. They work most commonly
in the night. 4. They secure their sides with faggot which they set upon
cleftwood, commonly called candlesticks, by which means they escape many shots,
and hide themselves from the sight of the Enemy.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Mine.
Fig. 43.
THe Ancients also used Mines, but to a different end, and after a different
manner. In this Age now that this Art may seem to have attained its perfection,
the business is done almost after this manner.

1. The Gallery A A being brought over to the face of the enemies Bulwork, you
design the place where you intend to put the powder. Then digging two or three
turnings C E, E F, you come to the place appointed K by the conduct of a
needle; the channel C E F G is made winding, that the powder might not so
easily get out toward C. It is 4 feet or 4 1/^ feet deep, 4 feet or 3 1/^ feet
wide, yet it is made narrower the nearer you come to the place appointed.

2. When you come to the place appointed K, there you dig a place to lodge the
powder, whose height is commonly 6 or 7 feet, the side of its base 4 or 5 feet;
here you put your Barrels of powder so as to set them close together in the
place, for so the powder will be all lighted in a shorter time; and therefore
does it effect the stronger. This also experience has taught us, that the
earth of the broken Bulwork will fall toward that part, toward which the
greatest space was left between the Barrels and the Superficies of the place
where they are put; therefore if you would have the Earth fall toward the
Enemy, you shall put the powder nearer the side ph N, if toward etc.

3. One Barrel of powder will blow up 12 feet of earth; hence gather how many
Barrels are to be put in. The powder must not be long carried in before you
intend to put fire to it, otherwise it would grow moist, and be spoiled.

4. The mouth of the Mine C must be diligently stopped, only leaving in it a
Trunck or hollow pipe full of powder for the Train, reaching the powder in K,
that putting a match to it you may blow up the Mine at the time appointed.

As for the Attacque it self, which is ordered when the Mine is sprung and the
breach made, I leave that to the Officers and Soldiers, to whom these things
belong.

CHAP. XXIV. Of defending Towns.
1. THe first beginning is to keep the enemy from the Town as far off and as
long as you can. Therefore whatsoever without the works can put a stop to the
Enemy, the Besiegers must possess and defend as long as they can.

2. They must use all their endeavor to hinder the approaches of the Enemy;
therefore let them sally frequently (but warily, least they fall into snares to
the irreparable loss of the Town) and rout and kill the Pioneers and Soldiers;
Let them throw down the Lines that are finished, and if they cannot carry away
their Guns, they must spike them up, by driving Nails in their Touch-holes.

3. Those outward works which they can keep no longer must be retrenched, (see
what we said before of Retrenchments) but if they are utterly like to be lost,
they must be blow'n up together with those that possess them.

4. The sapping of the out-brestwork must be intercepted by a counter and
transverse Sap.

5. The filling of the Ditch and the building of the Gallery must be hindered
at a distance by the continual firing of Muskets, great Guns, hand Grenades,
and other fireworks; nor is there any other way if the Ditch be full of water.
But if the Ditch be dry, then they must fall upon the builders of the Gallery
with handystroaks, as well as with all that which I declared above. And the
Gallery it self must either be destroyed by fire, or blown up with a Mine.

6. But if notwithstanding all this, the force of the Enemy prevailing, the
Gallery is brought over to the Bulwork, and the Bulwork it self be undermined.
Against this plague no remedy remains, but to find out the place of the Mine.
To do this they use several practices. Some by the motion of Pease leaping on a
Drum-head well braced, do conjecture at the place of their digging; others
boaring a very long Augur into the ground suspected, and applying their ear to
it, think to hear the strokes of their digging; others use other ways to
discover it. The most certain way is by countermining to search the foundation
of the Bulwork. The Mine being found, the powder must be carried out; but if
the streightness of time will not permit, it must be wetted, and a passage
opened for the fire.

7. The Bulworks being blown up, if the Besieged have no inward works
remaining, the last refuge is, that since they can no longer resist the Enemy
with wall and Rampar, that they stop his passage with arms and hands as he is
breaking in at the breach. Which since they are rather the parts of Captains
and Soldiers than the Engineers, I leave the rest to them, and put an end to
this treatise.

FINIS.
A New, Exact, and most Expeditious METHOD Of Delineating all manner of
FORTIFICATIONS (Regular and Irregular) As well from the INTERIOR, as from the
EXTERIOR POLIGONE; Being comprehended within the Two Faces or Superficies of a
MEDALL.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1672.

A New, Exact, and most Expeditious METHOD Of Delineating all manner of
FORTIFICATIONS Regular and Irregular, (as well from the Interior, as from the
Exterior Poligon;) being comprehended within the Two Faces or Superficies of a
MEDALL.
The use of the First Face or Superficies of the MEDALL as represented in Fig.
A.
THe first Face or Superficies of the Medall serves to delineate all manner of
Fortifications from the Base or Exterior Poligon; And that 1. From a Pentagon
to a Right Line, as being the more perfect 2. From a Square to a Pentagon, as
being the less perfect
Figures.

1. From a Pentagon to a Right Line.
Having divided the given Base or Exterior Poligon A A (as in Fig. C,) into two
equal parts in the point D; from that point D erect a Perpendicular D E of a
sufficient length. Then take any measure whatsoever, (be it a Chain, Pole,
Staff, or Stake out of a Hedge) and mark out 3, or 6, or 9, or 12, or 15, or
18, or 21, or 24, or 27, or 30 Lengths upon the Line A D in the point B; from
which raise a Perpendicular B C equal to of A B, so is C a visual point,
through which is to be drawn the Line A F, cutting the Perpendicular D E in the
point E; And E a visual point, through which is to be drawn the Line A N.

Which done, divide the Perpendicular D E into eight equal parts, and make
either of the Lines E N and E F equal to nine of those parts. And then from the
points N, and F, of the Lines A N and A F, let fall the Perpendicular N O, till
it cut the Line A F in the point O. And so likewise the Perpendicular E P, till
it cut the Line A N in the point P. Lastly, join the points A O N F P A, and so
you have A O, and A P for the two Faces; N O, and F P for the two Flancks, and
N F for the Curtain of that Fortification. And observing the same Method from
all the Bases, the Fortification becomes entire, as in Fig. C.

2. From a Square to a Pentagon.
The Method of delineating from a Square to a Pentagon, is the very same with
that from a Pentagon to a Right Line; Only instead of marking out three
Lengths upon the Half-Base, you are to mark out 15 for the Line G H. And
instead of (1) you are to allow (4) for the Perpendicular H I. And lastly,
instead of dividing the Perpendicular K L into eight parts, you are to divide
it into five; and of those parts you are to set off seven both upon the Line L
M, and upon the Line L R. And this is all the difference, as may be clearly
seen in Fig. D.

The use of the Second Face or Superficies of the MEDALL, as represented in
Fig. B.
THe second Face or Superficies of this Medall directs how to delineate any
Fortification by the Interior Poligon; And that from a Square to a Right Line:

For Example.

The Interior Poligon D F O being given (as in Fig. E) first draw the Capital
Lines A G, K T, and M Q of a sufficient length. Then by the foregoing
Directions, describe a Fortification inward upon this Interior Poligon (as
though it were an Exterior;) Which done, continue the Courtains, and so you
have given you the two Lines A C, and K M, which you are to divide equally in
the points B, and L. And from those 2 Points to draw the four Lines B D, B F, L
F, and L O: As likewise from the two points, E and N, you are to draw the four
Lines E G, E H, N T, and N Q; so as E G, may be parallel to B D, E H to B F, N
T to L F, and N Q to L O; Or (which is the very same thing) make the Angle D E
G, equal to the Angle A B D; the Angle F E H, to the Angle C B F; the Angle F N
T, to the Angle K L F; and the Angle O N Q, to the Angle M L O.

Lastly, from the four points of Intersection, viz. G, H, T, and Q, draw the
Lines G H, and T Q, which are the two Bases sought; upon which, by the
foregoing Method, describe a Fortification Inward, and the Work is done.

Only whenever the Bases (and consequently the two Faces of a Bastion) do not
meet in a point, (as very rarely they will) the Face of the less Half-Bastion
cuts off the Face of the greater Half-Bastion; which has this good property
among many other, that it often opens or enlarges the Angle of the Bastion very
considerably. Thus in Fig. E, the Face R H cuts off the Face P T in the point S.

There is one thing observable in the Method both of the first and second Face
of this Medall, which is this, That instead of taking three Lengths of any
Measure for the Line A D, in Fig. C, and then setting off (1) for the
Perpendicular B C, I might divide the Half-Base A D into 3 or 6, or 9 equal
parts, and take thereof for the Perpendicular D E, because the Line D E bears
the same proportion to the Line A D, as the Line B C does to the Line A B. So
likewise, instead of taking 15 or 30 Lengths upon the Half-Base G K in Fig. D,
for the Line G H, and setting off 4 or 8 of those parts in the Perpendicular H
I, I might as well have divided the Half-Base G K into 15 or 30, and set off 4
or 8 for K L. For as K L is to G K; so is H I to G H.

But forasmuch as this last way is more difficult and tedious than the other
before mentioned, That was made use of, and This laid aside.

FINIS.
A

A PENTAGONO AS LINEAM RECTAM INTROSVM. PRO QVADRATO

B

A QVADRATO AD LINEAM RECTAM. EXTRORSVM.

C

A PENTAGONO, ad Lineam Rectam, Introrsum.

D

Pro QUADRATO, Introrsum.

E

A QUADRATO, ad Lineam Rectam, Extrorsum.



A SECOND METHOD (Not inferior to the former) Of Delineating any
FORTIFICATION, By the INTERIOR POLIGONE given.
LEt the Interior Poligone given be (A C) in the opposite superficies of a
Medall or (D F N V) in the adjoining Figure.

Having delineated a Fortification inwards, and thereby gotten the second
Interior Poligone according to the foregoing Direction, Page 2. continue the
Distance B E to a sufficient length: For as the length of A C in any number of
Parts, is to the Distance B E, so is the length of D F (being divided into the
same number of Parts to the Distance E G. Then draw a Line X Y through the
Point G parallel to D F, which Line X Y is the true Base, upon which is to be
erected a Fortification by the Directions of Page 1. And this Method being
continued from each respective Poligone given, the Fortification becomes
perfectly delineated. For as H K, is to I L; so is F N, to M O. And so likewise
as P R, to Q S; so is N V, to T W. Than which nothing can be more evident, as
to the matter of truth and demonstration; or more expeditious, as to the real
practice and performance.

A Caveat to the Reader.
BUt to prevent any mistake, which some persons, either out of ignorance, or
inadvertency, may run into, it will be convenient, to let the Reader
understand, That although in Fig. C, Page 3. the middle Base (or Poligone) A A,
is much longer than that on the left hand, and almost double to that on the
right, that so it might appear to the eye to be sufficiently Irregular, and
also that it might resemble the Fortification in Fig. E, where, without such an
inequality of Bases, the Method of one Face cutting another, could not be so
plainly expressed, or so clearly discerned. (Otherwise it had been more easy
to have made all the Bases equal within that very same Figure C, than it was to
make them so in this opposite Figure F.) Yet notwithstanding this new Method
takes it for granted, That all who pretend to make use of it, be so far
instructed in the first Principles of Fortification, as to know, That when ever
an Exterior Poligone, or rather a Ground-Plot, is given them, they are so to
design and contrive it, That, if possible, all the Bases, (if not the Angles)
may be equal, That so there may be a perfect Harmony and Symmetry in all the
parts thereof. This new Rule does likewise suppose, that he already knows,
That, if it be practicable, each of his respective Bases, (or Exterior
Poligones) ought to be about 1150 Feet; but never less than 1024. nor yet more
than 1280. That so the Lines of Defense may not be too short on the one hand,
nor exceed the Port of a Musket on the other. As likewise, that the Angle of
his Bastions be in no case whatsoever less than 60 Degrees. But now, where
either the situation of a Place, or the old Walls or Ramparts of a Town, or
City, admit not any such equality, either of Bases, or Angles, there the
Hercotectonick Laws do permit the Engineer, either to open, or sharpen his
Angles, or else to lengthen, or shorten his Lines, as he shall find it
necessary.

A QVADRATO AD LINEAM RECTAM EXTRORSVM



THE COUNT of PAGAN'S METHOD Of Delineating all manner of FORTIFICATIONS
(Regular and Irregular) FROM THE Exterior Poligone.

REDUCED TO English Measure, And converted into HERCOTECTONICK-LINES,

By S. M.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1672.

ICHNOGRAPHICK Terms: OR Words of Art for Lines in Fortification, necessary to
be known.
Lines English. Latin. French. German. B D Side of the Exterior Poligone. Latus
Multanguli Exterioris. Poligone Exterieur. Beite der Bollwercks puncten. K N
Side of the Interior Poligone. Latus Multanguli Interioris. Poligone Interieur.
Die Seite der Burgh. S B or S E Radius of the Exterior Poligone. Radius
Multanguli Exterioris. Le grand demidiameter. Des eussersten Bieleks halbe
Mittellinie. S K or S P Radius of the Interior Poligone. Radius Multanguli
Interioris. Le petit demidiameter. Der Bestung halbe Mittellinie. K B Capital
Line. Capitalis. Ligne Capitale. Haupt-linie. B F Face. Facies Propugnaculi. La
Face. Gesicht-linie. F L Flanck. Ala Propugnaculi. Flancq. Die Streich. L Q
Curtain. Cortina, and Chorda. La Courtine. Ball. B Q Line of Defense. Linea
Defensionis. Ligne de Defense. Behrlinie. C M Distance between the Ext. and
Int. Polig. Distantia Multangulorum. Distance des Poligones. Die weyts der
beyden Biel-eck. K L Shoulder. Collum. La Gorge. Hals Keel-linie. B C
Half-Base. Semi-Basis. Demi-Base. H Q Compliment. Complimentum. Complement.

ICHNOGRAPHICK Terms: OR Words of Art for Angles in Fortification, necessary to
be known:
Angles English. Latin. French. German. K S N Angle of the Center. Angulus
Centri. Angle du Center. Mittelpunets eck. O K N Angle of the Figure. Angulus
Figurae. Angle du Poligone. Keelpunct. R B F Angle of the Bastion. Angulus
Prepugnaculi. Angle Flancque Bolwercks eck. B H D Angle Flancking. Angulus
Defendens. Angle Flanquant. Der Schutzwinckel. B F L Angle of the Face and
Flanck. Angulus Faciti and Alae. Angle du Flancq and de la Face. Der winckel
der Streichen und Gesich-linie.



1. From a Pentagone, to a Right-line.
HAving divided the given Base (or Exterior Poligone C D in Fig. I. which
suppose to be 575 English Feet) into two equal parts, in E; From the Point E
raise a Perpendicular E L of a sufficient length. This done, enter the Number
of the Half-Base (viz. 575) in the first Column of the Hercotectonick Table,
(over which is D. Base, and look what number answers to it in the second
Column, (over which is Perp.) and finding it to be 192. take from off your
Sector or Scale 192, and set it on the Perpendicular E L, where it will
terminate in the Point F. And then from either Point D and C of the given Base
C D through the Point F, draw the Lines C G and D H of a sufficient length.

In the next place, enter the number of the same Half-Base, (viz. 575) in the
third Column of the Table, (at the head whereof is D. Base) to which you will
find the Number 351 answers in the fourth Column (over which is the word Face).
This likewise you must find upon your Sector or Scale, and by it, determine the
two Lines C I, and D K.

Lastly, enter the aforesaid Number 575 in the fifth Column of the Table, which
you will find answered by 204 for the Compliment; which Compliment (or 204 1/^)
must determine the two Lines F G and F H. Which done, join the Points C I H G K
D; so have you C I and K D for the two Faces; H I and G K for the two Flancks;
and H G for the Curtain of that Fortification. And observing the very same
method from each Base, the Fortification becomes perfectly delineated; as in
Fig. I.

2. For a Square.
THE Method for delineating a Fortification upon a Square, is the very same
with that from a Pentagone to a Right-line; only the Proportions, and
consequently the Numbers expressing those Proportions are different, as may be
better seen in the second Part of the Hercotectonick Table, compared with Fig.
II.

I.



II.



But now forasmuch as in Fortifying Cities, and other Irregular places, it
often happens that the Engineer is constrained to make use of the old Walls and
Ramparts, and consequently the Courtines must be the same with those Walls:
Therefore the Count de Pagan thought it would be some help, to give a Rule to
find the Distance between the two Poligones; which Distance is also found in
the 8th. and 16th. Columns of the Table. For example, in Fig. I. E L (or the
Distance between H G and C D) is 257 Feet, and four Inches; And in Fig. II. M N
(or the Distance between O P and Q R) is 207 Feet, and eight Inches: But as to
this last particular, namely of Fortifying from the Interior Poligone, the New
Method comprised in a MEDALL, is much more exact and expeditious.

Hercotectonick Table LINEAE HERCOTECTONICAE NOVAE, Augustisimo Principi CAROLO
II Magnae BRITANNIAE, etc. REGI; humillime oblatae a Samuele Morlando Equite
Aurato et Baronetto, nec non Camerae Regis Privatae Adjuncto. Anno Salutis
MDCLXVI


Of the Dimensions of the Bastions, Ramparts, Ditches, Half-Moons,
Counterscarps, etc.
AS concerning the Measures and Dimensions of the Count de Pagan's Bastions,
Ramparts, Ditches, Half-Moons, Counterscarps, etc. it would require more time
than I can at this present afford, and a larger Volumn than I have designed for
this Treatise; forasmuch as the Count has given Names to many things, quite
different from those in other Authors. I shall therefore leave the comparing
those differences to those who are more at leisure, and only content my self to
have set down some few of his Proportions, which are adjoined to the opposite
Table of Plain-Angles, which Table is of Excellent and Universal use.

The use of the Table of Plain-Angles.
WHen you would measure an Angle of any Field or Plot of ground; As for
example, let the Angle to be measured be C A B in Fig. C. Take a Chain and
measure 30 Links (it matters not of what length those Links be, so they be
equal one to another) from A to C, and so from A to B. And at B and C stick up
two sticks: And then measure with the same Chain, the distance between C and B,
and finding it to be 20}, seek 20} in the Table in one of the Columns over
which is the word (Bases) and the Number of the next Column answering to it, is
the true Number of Degrees and Minutes of the Angle sought, viz. 40 00. After
the same manner, because the distance between I and K is 55 Links, the opposite
Angle is 132 55.



Again, suppose you desire to lay out an Angle of 100 05. I first stick down
two sticks at the two ends or Terms of any given Line F E, (divided into 30
equal parts) in the Points F and E. Then fastening a Chain of 30 Links (equal
to those 30 equal parts) at F, and one of 60 Links at E, I enter the Table of
Angles with 100 05; and finding 46 to answer to it, wherever the Chain of 30
Links, and 46 of the Chain of 60 meet, (as in G.) thence draw the Line F G, and
you have what you desire. And after the same manner may any Angle be laid out
most exactly and expeditiously from 10 Minutes to 180 Degrees.

^ES BASTIONS, DES RAMPARTS, ET DES FOSSEZ
Largeur des Ramparts 45 Largeur des Parapets 19 Hauteur de la 3 casematte, du
fond du sosse 38+ Hauteur des Parapets au dedans 6+ Hauteur des Parapets au
dehors 5+ Largeur de Grand Fosse 102 Profondeur du Grand Fosse 19 La largeur du
Fosse, compris enter le premier et 2 Rampart du Bastion est diverse selon la
Fortification, and le Poligone, et sa profondeur 13 Reds, ou plus. Et la
largeur du Flanc retire, 77 Pieds

DES DEMI: LUNES, ET DES CONTRESCARPES
1 Method Pieds d'Angl: Demiegorge de la Demi-Lune 192 Face de la Demi-Lune
320 Largeur de la Grande Contrescarpe 320 Largeur de son Fosse 77 Largeur de la
Petite Contrescarpe 26 La Demi-Lune se form tousiours sur l'Angle Rentrant de
la Contrescarpe. 2. Method Pieds d'Angl: Largeur de la Grande Contrescarpe 161
Largeur de son Fosse 77 Largeur de la Petite Contrescarpe 26 Demi-gorge de la
Demi-Lune 128+ Face de la Demi-Lune 217+ ^es Flanes de la Grande Contrescarpe
comprennet Parapets, et peuuent ainsi contenir 9 Pieces de Canon.

LIGNE DES ANGLES PLANS tousiours compris par deux costez de trente Pieds.
Angles Bases 1 2 3 4 10 5 6 7 8 9 20 10 11 12 13 14 30 15 16 17 18 19 40 20 21
22 23 24 50 25 26 26 28 29 60 30 31 32 33 70 34 35 36 37 38 80 39 40 41 90 42
43 44 45 100 46 47 48 110 49 50 51 120 52 53 130 54 55 140 56 57 150 58 160 59
170 180 60

The Figure of a most useful Instrument, by the help whereof any Poligone, from
a Square to a Dodecagone, (which is as much as is required in any
Fortification) may be described, not only with greater expedition, but likewise
much more exactly than by any Sector, Scale, or other Instrument or Method
whatsoever.
THE use of this Instrument, is only to lay it upon your Paper, and holding it
fast with your left hand, to mark out any Poligone therein contained with the
point of a Needle, by its respective Figures, and so join the Points. And if
you desire to describe a Poligone larger than the Instrument, (as is the
Dodecagone in this Figure) it is easy to continue the Lines from the said
Pricks to the Circumference: And if it be desired to have a Poligone less than
the Instrument, the reason is the same.



ARCHITEC: MILIT.
1

2

3

4

5



ARCHITEC. MILIT.
6

7

8

9



ARCHITEC. MILIT.
10



ARCHITEC. MILIT.
11

12

13

14

15

16



ARCHITEC. MILIT.
17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24



ARCHITEC. MILIT.
25

26

27

28



ARCHITEC MILIT.
29

30

31

32

33

34



ARCHITEC. MILIT.
35

36

X

37

38

39

40



ARCHITEC. MILIT.
41

42

43



THE Complete Gunner, IN THREE PARTS.

PART I. Showing the Art of Founding and Casting Pieces of Ordnance, with the
composition of Metal thereunto necessary.

The Composition and Matters of Gunpowders, the Several Sorts, Colors, and
Operation.

PART II. Discovers the necessary Instruments, and variety of Instructions to
the completing of a Gunner, with a Table of Squares and Cubes serving for the
Resolution of Questions of Gunnery and other Arts.

AS ALSO The way of taking Heights, Distances and Profundities, either with or
without Instruments.

PART III. Shows the Nature of Fireworks, the manner of Composing many that
are Excellent and Useful both for Sea and Land, for the defense of our selves
as well as the offense of our Enemies.

Translated out of Casimir, Diego, Vffano, Hexam, and other Authors.

To which is added the Doctrine of Projects applied to Gunnery by those late
famous Authors Galilaeus and Torricellio, now rendered into English. TOGETHER
WITH Some Excellent Observations out of Mersennus and other famous Authors.

LONDON, Printed for Rob. Pawlet, Tho. Passinger, and Benj. Hurlock. 1672.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
AMong Arts and Sciences Mathematical Gunnery will not deserve the least
respect which has been practiced for many years (as you may read in the first
Chapter of this Book where we treat of its Original) and from time to time
Necessity and Art together have produced many new Invention: so that some may
judge it almost impossible to add more unto this Art; and are ready to say of
this as of other Studies, Nil dictum quod non dictum prius. But we have not
only endeavored the inquisition into the most knowing Professors of these Arts
both German, Italian, Frenchmen, Netherlander, etc. from whence we have drawn
the more Excellent and useful parts which were never before in our English
Tongue; but may boldly adventure to call some things in it new: And finding the
great Occasion which these present times do require in the knowledge of these
things made me the readier to compose this Work, adjudging it a very great
injury to our Countrymen to be deprived of the knowledge of such things which
are of so great importance in this very juncture of time. I did therefore
encourage my self in this Work, hoping my endeavors in the same will show my
willingness to serve my Contrymen: And as it is the part of wise men not to
censure any thing, without a good consideration and a perfect knowledge of the
subject upon which they ought to ground their judgment: So also I hope you will
not blame my Endeavors, when you have judiciously examined the same. I have
divided it into three Parts, endeavoring that it might be imperfect in nothing
that is necessary to this Art, or useful for a Gunner to know. I will assure
you that I have no other end in publishing this Treatise, than what I have
mentioned before.

I shall only crave your pardon for the faults that may be committed in the
Printing, as being not there present at the Correction of any part of it, my
occasions calling me other ways: yet I hope their care was so much that the
faults are not material, or at most not so much but your Courtesy may supply
that defect. So I recommend this Work to your good reception, and bid you
farewell.

W.T.

THE Complete Gunner.
CHAP. I. Treating of the Earth necessary in making of Molds for the Casting of
Pieces of Ordnance, with the manner of Casting, etc.
WE will not dispute of the first Invention of Guns, that is, whether it came
from Archimedes, as the Italians do report, or from an Englishman, or from a
Monk, for this knowledge matters not much to the Art, nor is it of any
profitable signification to the Artist; especially considering, that Authors do
not really consent in this thing. Our intent is therefore not to trouble the
ingenious Students with vain uncertain repetitions, but to compose a complete
Piece of Gunnery, and therein to discourse from the beginning to the end, all
that is necessary to be known or learned (after the knowledge of common
Arithmetic) by one that intends to be a perfect Proficient in the said Art. We
do suppose it therefore necessary for a Master Gunner to know first the making
of Molds and casting of Pieces. Therefore I shall first begin to discourse of
the property and Nature of the Earth fit for casting, or making Molds; for this
is of great moment, considering that many, or indeed most Earths are not for
this purpose; for the Earth fit for the casting of Pieces of Ordnance must be
such as will not be melted or fuse, although it be put into a very great fire,
but must remain firm and hard: and these Earths are generally of a Reddish, or
Iron-like color, which is well known to many Potters, especially such as make
Chemical Vessels. The Earth being obtained, it must be sifted and cast up after
the usual manner, as men do in the making of Mortar; then let it be moistened
with an Alchalated Water (especially such as is made of Niter) for that
purpose, and make it like paste; then, as is usual, let it be beaten up
strongly with an Iron Bar; the more it is beaten the better it is: in the
beating add one sixth part of Horse dung, and a proportionable part of Flox or
Hair, and let it again be well beaten and incorporated, always keeping a Moity
of this Earth, without Hair or Flox, which is for Groundwork; and these
Compositions or Earth thus incorporated, you must reserve for the making your
Molds for Pieces of Ordnance, according to the Rules prescribed in the next
Chapter.

CHAP. II. Of making Molds, and Casting Pieces of Ordnance, with the mixture of
Metals, and allowance of Powder for proof.
AS a Master Builder when he intends the Building a Ship, makes first a Mold or
Moddel of the same; so the Master Gunner, or he that takes in hand the business
of Casting Guns, must have a form or Model of his Piece intended made of wood,
or such other matter he may think most convenient, which then being brought to
the Founder with an intent to be Cast, must first be smeered all over with Palm
Oil, or instead of that, our Lard or Hog's Grease, then first cover it over
with the said earth thinly, and let it dry leisurely, then lay on more,
increasing it to such a thickness, as you may judge convenient for your
purpose; and it must be so made that it may be taken into several parts, so
that the pattern may be taken out, and the Mold again exactly closed, and the
outside strengthened with Iron plates as long as the Chase of the Piece is, and
hooped together with Iron hoops to knock on and off. Then must there be made
(with the same earth upon a square Bar of Iron, bound round with a Cord that
the clay may stick well) a form exactly round, of the fashion of the concave of
your Piece (whether you intend it a Cylender or a Chamber-board Piece)
proportioned both in length and diameter, and it must be placed exactly in the
middle of the concave; and when all is well joined together, be sure it be well
pollished and smoothed, that the Metal may run the better, and be the clearer
from flaws, holes, or clefts.

In the beginning of your work take care that your Mold be exactly
proportionable as to height and substantialness of Metal, according to the
nature of the Piece you intend. That is, the Canon double-fortified must be so
cast that the Diameter at Muzzle be but 7/18 of the Diameter at Britch. The
lesser Cannon at Britch to be so big as the greater Cannon 9/18 at Trunions,
and 1/18 at Muzzle, whereas ordinary fortified Cannons have at the Touchhole
7/8 at the Trunions 5/8 and at the Muzzle 1/8, all lesser Pieces in that kind
have 18/18 at the Touchhole 25/^8 at Trunions, and 9/18 at Muzzle; and the
ordinary fortified Culverins are fortified every way like the double fortified
Cannon, and the lesser Culverin like the ordinary fortified Cannon in all
respects.

Great care must be taken in the Casting of Pieces of Ordnance, that they be
equal every way in proportion of Metals, that is, that the Cylender be in the
very middle of the Metal, that it may be truly bored, otherwise your Piece
will fail the Artist that shall use it, until the error be known.

In the next place let the Trunions be exactly placed in a Diagonal line with
the Axis of the Piece; and they may be placed in their proper distance from the
Muzzle and Britch, if you observe these Rules. Take the length of the bore of
the Piece from Muzzle to Britch, divide that measure by seven, and multiply
that sum that comes of the Quotient by three, the Product will show you how
many inches the Trunions must stand from the lowest part of the concavity of
the Piece.

And farther note, that the Trunions ought to be placed so, as of the
Circumference of the Piece, may be seen in that place where the Trunions are
set.

When all additional Patterns, as Britch, etc. be made and Luted in their
proper place, all things at pleasure being neatly added to the pattern, let the
Mold then be fixed or placed so as is most convenient for the pouring in the
Metal; so when the Metal is cast, the perfect impression will be made upon the
superficial part of the Piece, and the Cylender will keep the bore proposed
according to what you have prescribed, the length of the Piece and its Diameter
of the bore may be found by the following Table in the next Chapter. For the
Metals generally used for those Guns, generally called brass Guns, they are
mixtures, and many times varied as experience will give leave. Some of the
chiefest do approve of this mixture, that is, to every hundred Weight of Copper
24 pounds of Tin, and 6 pounds of Lattin. Others to 100 l. of Copper, add 8 l.
of Tin, and 10 l. of Lattin. Others to ever 100 l. add 20 l. of Bell-Metal,
which is 25 l. of Lead and Tin to every 100 l. of of Copper. Some add Tin,
Lead, Copper, and Lapis Calaminaris together; so every one follows such ways
of Composition as does most please his own Experience. The Copper and other
better Metals being once melted, the Tin and Lead is added for the better and
quicker fusion; and the higher the Metal is in fusion, the more solid and
compact your Metal will run and settle. The Lattin does incorporate and cause
the Piece to be of a good color, and the Tin does strengthen and bind the
other matters together. Now a Piece of Ordnance being Cast, before it comes to
Service, it must be put to trial; for which purpose there is used for proof,
according to the weight of the shot, about two thirds, or four fifths of that
weight in Powder, and for smaller Pieces more.

CHAP. III. The Names of the principal Pieces of Ordnance used in England,
their Weight, Length, Diameter of the Bore, Height and Weight of the Shot,
allowance of Powder.
THe greatest in use is the Cannon Royal, which is in weight of Metal about
8000 l. in length about 12 foot, carries a Shot of 7 inch. Diameter, and its
weight is 58 l. of Iron, its bore is 8 inches, requires for her charge in
Powder, 32 l. 8 z.

Demi-Cannon of the greater size, called by some Cannon of Seven, whose weight
of Metal is 7000 l. in length about 12 foot, carrying a Shot of 6 inch.
Diameter, and its weight of Iron is 42 l. 10 z. the Diameter at bore is 7
inches, requires for her charge in Powder 20 l.

Demi-Cannon great size, it is weight of Metal is 6000 l. in length about 12
foot, carrying a Shot of 6 inch. Diameter, and its weight in Iron is 34 l. the
Diameter at bore is 6 inch. requires for her charge of Cannon Powder 18 l.

Demi-Cannon ordinary, its weight of Metal is 5600 l. in length 11 foot,
carrying a Shot of 6 1/^ inch. Diameter, its weight in Iron is 32 l. the
Diameter at bore is 6 inch. requires for her charge in Powder 17 pounds.

The lowest Demi-Cannon, whose weight of Metal is 5400 l. being in length
sometime 10 and sometimes 12 foot, it carries a Shot of 6 inches, the weight of
that Shot in Iron is 30 l. the Diameter of the bore is 6 inch. it requires for
charge in Powder 14 l.

Culverin of the largest size, weighs about 4800 l. being in length 10 or 12.
foot, it carries a Shot of 5 ^/^ inch. Diameter, the weight of that Shot in
Iron is 20 l. the Diameter of the bore is 6 inch, it requires for charge in
Powder 12 l. 8 z.

Ordinary whole Culverin weighs about 4500 l. being in length about 12 foot, it
carries a Shot of 5 inches Diameter, the weight of that Shot of Iron is about
17 l. Diameter at bore is 5 inch. it requires for charge in Powder 11 l. 6 z.

Culverin of the least size, weighs about 4000 l. being in length about 12
foot, it carries a Shot of 4 inch. Diameter, the weight of that Shot of Iron is
15 l. Diameter, at bore is 5 inch. charge of Powder is 10 l.

Demi-Culverin of the greatest size weighs about 3000 l. being in length 10 or
12 foot, carries a Shot of 4 inch. Diameter, the weight of that Shot of Iron is
12 l. 11 z. Diameter of the bore 4 inch. charge of Powder is 8 l. 12 z.

Demi-Culverin ordinary, weighs about 2700 l. being in length 10 or 12 foot,
carries a Shot of 4 inch. Diameter, weight of that Shot of Iron is 10 l. 12 z.
Diameter of the bore 4 inch. charge of Powder is 7 l. 4 z.

Demi-Culverin lower than ordinary, weighs about 2000 l. being in length 9 or
10 foot, carries a Shot of 4 inches Diameter, weight of that Shot 9 l. Diameter
of the bore 4 inch. charge of Powder is 6 l. 4 z.

Saker of the oldest sort, of 1800 l. weight, being in length 9 or 10 foot,
carries a Shot of 3 inch. weight of that Shot 7 l. 5 z. Diameter at the bore 4
inches, charge of Powder 5 l.

Saker ordinary, of 1500 l. weight, in length about 9 foot, carries a Shot of 3
1/8 inch. Diameter, weight of that Shot 6 l. 0 z. Diameter at the bore 3
inches, charge of Powder 4 l.

Saker of the lowest size, of 1400 l. weight, in length about 8 foot, carries a
Shot of 3 inch. weight of that Shot 4 l. 12 z. Diameter at the bore 3 inches
and a half, charge of Powder 3 l. 6 z.

Minion of the largest size, of 800 or 1000 l. length 8 foot, height of the
Shot 3 inches, weight of the Shot 3 l. 2 z. height of the bore 3 inches, and
one quarter, the charge of Powder, if of 800 l. two pounds and a half, if of
1000 l. three pounds and a quarter.

The ordinary Minion of 750 l. in length 7 foot, height of the Shot 3 inch.
weight of the Shot 3 l. 4 z. height of the bore 3 inches, charge of Powder 2
pounds.

Faucons of 750 l. length 7 foot, height of the Shot 2 inch. weight 2 pounds,
height of the bore 2 inch. charge in Powder 2 pounds.

Fauconet of 400 l. in length 6 foot, height of the Shot 2 1/8 inch. weight 1
l. 5 z. height of the bore 2 inch. charge 1 l. 4 z. of Powder.

Rabnet of 300 l. length 5 foot, height of the Shot 1 1/3 inch. weight 8 ounces
of Iron, height of the bore 1 inch. charge of Powder 12 ounces.

Base of 200 l. length 4 foot, height of Shot 1 inch, weight 5 ounces, height
of the bore 1 inch. charge of Powder 8 ounces.

There are other Pieces in use in our Nation, which are called Bastard Pieces;
of which you shall have a particular account in its proper place.

CHAP. IV. The Names of the Principal parts of a piece of Ordnance.
IT is necessary for him that intends to be a Gunner to understand, after the
knowledge of the Piece in general, to know and learn every part and member of a
Piece of Ordnance; for well understanding the same take these Instructions
following.

All the outside of the Piece round about is called the superficial part of the
same, or Surface of the Piece; the Inner part is called the concave Cylinder,
and Soul of the Piece.

The full length is called the Chase of the Piece; so much of the Cylinder or
concave of the Piece as contains the powder and Shot is called the Chamber or
charged Cylinder, the remaining part to the small end of the Gun is called the
vacant Cylinder.

The Spindle standing out, or Ears by which the Piece must hang in the
Carriage, is called the Trunions; the space between the Trunions, the gravity
of the Center.

The Pumel or Button at her Coyl or Britch-end is called the Casacabel or her
Deck, the little hole the Touchhole, all the metal behind the touchhole the
Breach or Coyl, the greatest ring at her touchhole the Base Ring, the next
ring or circle the reinforced Ring, the next the Trunion Rings, the next before
the Trunions is called the Cornish Ring, the foremost next the Muzzle is called
the Muzzle Ring, Lastly, all the rings, Circles, Eminencies, at her Muzzle, and
so those behind the base Ring, are Prizes.

Let the Piece with its several names be placed by this Chapter. Fig. 1.

CHAP. V. The Mounting of a Piece of Ordnance in its Carriage.
THe Gunners upon Land-Service, for the convenience of mounting a piece of
Ordnance, that is by any means whatsoever dismounted, have for their principal
Services, a Screw, and a Ghynne, and their appurtenances (which you will find
in their proper place) by whose help they are able to mount a Piece, and place
him in his Carriage, whereby he may be able to perform the work intended. Which
to perform artificially, observe these Rules.

Before you endeavor to mount your Piece, above all things have a great and
diligent care that the Ghynne be very firmly set, so that it may not slip any
way; but so placed, that the Pully or Truckle coming down from the head, fall
just between the Trunions, or gravity of the Piece, whereof to be assured you
may let fall down from the head of the Ghynne a Plummet with a Line, or for
want of a Plummet any stone made fast to a Line, and so moving the Ghynne until
the said Plummet fall just upon the Center of Gravity, which is between the
Ears of the Piece, that the metal may fall near equal, or that an easy hand
may poize it; and this care must be the more, if the Ground whereon the Ghynne
stands be sandy or loose Ground, or the Earth be boggy soft, so that the feet
may fail or sink in or give way, according to the greatness of the weight. For
sometimes it may be necessary to put planks or some solid thing under the
Ghynne and Pins to stay them; but this as necessity shall require.

Now the Ghynne firmly placed and settled, the Gunner must get up by the Ladder,
or some Steps, to the head or top of it, having the Rope in his hand, shall put
it through the uppermost truckle of the head, and let it fall down to another
man again, that he may catch it, that he may put it through one side of the
Piece to fasten it into the Ears of the Piece, and so having put it through
them he may draw it up, until he can give it him that is above, and then put it
through the other hole of the Truckle, and give it to him that is under him,
who must reach it again to him that is above, and so fasten it to the head of
the Ghynne, giving it some turns until it come under the uppermost Truckle.

This done, he must fasten it with great diligence to the lower Truckle, by
putting the Ears as through the Ring which is under the said Truckle; after
this begin to Hoyse your Piece, and in the Hoysing put a spar or some such
thing into the mouth of the Piece, so that thereby it may be governed, and may
not sway from one side to the other, which would be dangerous; for if it should
strike against the Rouler or any one of the feet of the Gynne, it may break
all, and so spoil both the work and the men tending upon it. Therefore I say,
be sure that those who stand by the Spar be careful in guiding the Piece and
keeping it steady and right, until the weight of the Piece is well settled, a
diligent Eye being had all this while, that neither the feet of the Gynne, nor
Rope give way; and be sure every part of the Rope draw equal, and that there be
no Knicks, or that they be not tangled one amongst another; and for that
purpose, when they begin to hoyse the Piece, blows must be given upon the
Tackling until it be set tort, and all bear equal.

But if you should perceive that the Ghynne or any part give way, presently let
your Piece sink, and underlay and settle well the feet of the Ghynne, and that
as gently as may be, to the end the Cross beam or Rouler may not be disjoined
or broken.

Then wind it up carefully and very gently by the help of two men only, and in
such a manner, as when one of the Leavers is brought down, it must be held
there fast until the other has got purchase, and then must this other also be
brought down; this must be reiterated so often until it be so high that the
Carriage may be placed under it, so that the Trunions may fall into the
Sockets, or holes of the Carriage, and then Guide the Piece by the Spar, so
that it fall easily in, and so rest it self in the Carriage, and then let it be
well clasped over, and then locked in and fastened with Forelocks, and so you
may draw away your Piece where you please. On board Ships this Ghynne is not of
use, it being the Boatswains business to fix a Tackle that may be able to hoist
up any Piece into its Carriage, the Slings one part must come about the
Casacabel, and the other part about a Billet, so made that it may fit in at the
Muzzle, and by strength of hands, or by help of a Windless, or Capstain, it may
be hoysed up so that the Carriage may be brought under; so that the Gun being
Loared, its Trunions may fall into the holes of the Carriage, which then clasp
over with its Iron Clasps; let them be Forelocked, and then with Hand-Tackles
be brought where you please.

See the Figure of the Gynne, and the Field, and Ship-Pieces mounted in the
Figure 11.

CHAP. VI. The way to draw a Piece of Ordnance, with the necessary things
thereunto belonging both for Land and Sea.
SEeing we have discovered the way of Casting a Piece, and Mounting it in its
Carriage, it follows in the next place that in this Chapter we treat of, and
show the manner of drawing them from place to place, for Service; where care
must be taken what the way is that you are to pass, for if the way be foul,
moorish, and dirty, there is then required as many more Horses as in good
ways. That is,

For a whole Cannon of 8000 l. you may use 15 couple of Horses, besides the
Tyllar.

For a Demi-Cannon of about 6000 l. you may use 11 couple of Horses, besides
the Tyllar.

For a Piece of 4000 l. weight, you may use 8 couple of Horses, besides the
Tyllar.

For a Field Piece of about 3000 l. use 6 couple of Horses, besides the Tyllar.

For a Saker of 1800 l. weight, you may use 4 couple of Horses, besides the
Tyllar.

For a Piece of 1500 l. weight, you may use 3 couple of Horses, besides the
Tyllar.

For a Faucon, two couple of Horses, besides the Tyllar. For a small Drake of
about 250 l. one Horse will serve: and by the same Rule you may find how many
Horses will draw any weight whatsoever.

Many times when Horses are wanting, men are made use of: Upon such occasions,
you must divide your men into three drawing files, according to the greatness
of the Piece; now to the end the Ranks may spread, and every man may draw
equally alike, fasten to the end of the Carriage a Cross beam or bar, to which
you must fasten the drawing Ropes, equally at such distance, that one may not
impead the other, and let there be besure one to steer the Piece when you come
to any winding or turning. If the drawing Ropes be long, it is necessary to
cross it with Ropes, or some light pieces of wood like a Ladder, with two or
more cross pieces; let them be made fast for the better and more steady
drawing, and to every there must be a Neckline fastened to the Ropes, and so to
cast over every man's Sholders, in manner as is used to draw our Western Barges:
And you must know your proportion of men fit to draw any Piece of Ordnance, and
that must be regulated according to the goodness or badness of the way, and so
more or less men, allowing every man to draw about 50, 60, or 80 pounds; for
it is supposed a man may draw in ordinary way 50 or 60 pounds, but in very good
way more than 80 pounds; however it is good to have men enough. Let the Sponge,
Ladle, etc. be made fast along the Piece to the Ring and Britch end. Sometimes
by reason of the unevenness, steepness, or other defects of the way, it
sometimes happens, that you may be forced to dismount your Piece, and remount
it again; there it is necessary every Gunner have with him a Ghynne, a Wynche,
and all appurtenances necessary thereunto. As to the Sea Gunner on board Ship,
their occasions require no more than the Wynch; and their Piece being mounted
according to the directions given in the former Chapter, then with one or two
Tackles he bring the Piece to the place desired, where it ought to be well
fastened in its place; for which purpose there is thereunto required Tackles and
Britchins; and in case of foul weather, or that any of the Geer or Tackling be
suspected, or by my much tumbling every thing hanging upon the Nail, for fear
any Bolts should give way or draw, it is usual to nail down to the Deck with
Spikes, one Coin behind each Truck, or at least the after Trucks, which to
great Pieces are commonly dead Trucks; so that each Piece may have little or no
play.

But in case any thing should give way in foul weather, then with all speed
dismount the Piece as soon as possible you can, for fear of further mischief;
for which purpose put in his way as he runs from side to side, Rugs, Pillows,
Beds, etc, and stand ready with Crows and Handspikes, and with Tackles, to
hitch or ketch him close and fast to any Ring by the Ship side, or such other
place as best presents. As for the length of the Tackles useful, it is usually
known thus; see how long the Piece is, and make the Tackles four times as long,
and let the Britchin be twice the length of the Piece, and something more. The
manner of drawing of Pieces by Man and Horse, you will see in the third Figure.

CHAP. VII. To Grove or Examine the goodness of a Piece of Ordnance, whether it
be Flawed, Hony-Combed, Cracked, Chamber-bor'd, etc. With the difference of
Common, Legitimate, and Bastard Pieces.
IT remains necessary for this Chapter to treat, or show the way to know,
whether a Piece be serviceable or no, which is usually done in the first proof
by Powder, which we intend not to Write of here, having mentioned it before,
and more will be said, when we have showed the composition of Powder. That
knowledge of a Piece we here intend, is to examine a Piece, bought, or to be
taken into Service, whether good or serviceable, or out of many Pieces to make
choice of the best, or such as are freed from holes, flaws, cracks, honycombs,
etc. And first to know if a Piece be free from crack, or have holes through,
take a long stick, longer than the Piece, made of a Hoop-stick or otherwise,
slit it at one end, so that you may put a short piece of Candle in it, then
light the Candle, and put it into the Piece, and so putting it along easily,
whilst another laying his Eye close to the Piece, do go along equally with the
Candle, until the whole Piece be viewed, and so by help of the Light within
side, the Eye without side will perceive whether there be any Flaws, Cracks,
etc.

This may be done by the reflection of the Sun beams in at the Muzzle of a
Piece, by help of a Looking-glass, or pollished Steel; but many times a Piece
may be Flawed or Hony-combed, and cannot be discerned through the Piece, and
then the best way to find them out is thus; make the usual search with two or
three Springs, or in case you have them not, bend the Iron point of a Half
Pike, then put it into the Piece up to the Britch end or bottom of the
Cylinder, turning it round carefully and gradually, as you pluck it out, and if
there be any Honey-combs, Cracks or Flawes, the end or bended point of the Half
Pike will stick or catch at them.

To know whether the Piece be Chamber-bor'd, take a priming Iron that is small,
or a piece of Wire, bend it a little at the end, but so that it may go down at
the Touchhole, and put it down so far as it will go; Then at the Touchhole
close by the Metal of the Piece, make a mark upon the Wire; then gently pluck
it up upon one side of the Touchhole, until the bended point stop upon the
Metal or upper side of the Chamber; and then make another mark upon the Wire,
just by the Touchhole; then draw out the Wire, and the distance between these
two marks, is the height of the Chamber or bore of the Piece at Britch: take
the height of the bore at Muzzle, and if this height at Muzzle agree with that
taken at the Britch of the Piece, then is the Piece full bored; but if they
differ, so much as the difference is, shows the tapering of the Piece, and
according to this must your former be made for your Cartredges. There is
another way to know whether a Piece be Chamber-bor'd, or Tapering, by the
disparting of a Piece; which way we shall show in its proper place, where we
treat of disparting a Piece of Ordnance.

Now although we have mentioned in the former Chapters the most usual Pieces of
Ordnance; yet, as I have said, there are other Pieces which are longer, or
shorter, which are used, and are generally called by the name of Bastard
Pieces, and they are distinguished from the common Legitimate Pieces thus; The
Legitimate Pieces have their due length of Chase, and are proportioned
according to the true height of their bore. Bastard Pieces are shorter Chases,
such as the proportion of their bore does require, and are therefore called
Cuts of the same nature of the Piece they agree with in the bore; as those of
Demi-Culverin bore, are called Demi-Culverin Cuts, etc. There are also Pieces
called Extraordinary, which are such whose Chaces are longer than is usually
for that bore.

Now we have well and duly understood how, not only to make, but also to
examine and prove a Piece of Ordnance; in the next place shall follow their
use, set down in due order: Wherein first it is necessary for us to treat of the
nature of Gunpowder, and its various Compositions, with the Materials
necessary thereunto, and afterward show its use.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Materials used in the Composition of Gunpowder; and first
we will treat of the Original of Saltpeter.
IT is believed by many in these latter times, that the Saltpeter now in use,
is not the Niter of the Ancients, but a new Invention used or found our for the
Composition of Powder; And that theirs was only a Niter generated by nature, or
that Salt that is coagulated of it self, without any humane Artifice, in the
Caverns of the Earth, from whence they took it which nevertheless they divide
into four different Species, to wit, Armenian, Affrican, Roman, and Egyptian;
and this Egyptian holds its name by a certain Region in Egypt, in which is
found great abundance. Serapian delivers to us, that the places from whence
they drew their Niter were all one and the same, like them where common Salt is
formed, in which the water running does congeal, and condenseth like a vulgar
Stone, from hence came it to be called stonified Salt, or Sal-Peter. The same
Author does affirm, that Niter was found of diverse colors, viz. White,
Reddish, Livid, or Lead-like, and all other colors it was able to take; he
says likewise that it was found in different forms; for some was found full of
holes or caverns like a Sponge; others on the contrary were firm, close,
sollid, shining, and Diaphanous as Glass, which being let fall easily will
split in thin leaves, and is fryable in beating; and from its various
appearances is judged its manifold virtues, in one more powerful than another,
which is known by its operation.

From hence we see that which is to be found from the testimony of the best
received Authors about the Mineral Niter, and in none is any mention made of
Artificial Saltpeter, or such as we at present make use of generally, which is
called properly Saltpeter, Sal Nitre, or Halinitre; yet is there very little
difference between the Natural that uses to be brought to us, and the
Artificial, for if we compare the virtues and operations of the one, we shall
find them in our uses no way d ffering, as Scaliger testifies, saying that the
ancient Niter is not much different from ours, particularly if we consider its
tenuity and subtle part.

There is of the ancient Niter found upon the superficies of old Walls, exposed
to the humidity; but particularly in Cellars and deep Caves, and in covered
Vaults; it resembles perfectly a certain Brine, or white Gelly, or fine Meal,
or in more proper speaking, fine Sugar, and is many times white as Snow; and
this thus had, the virtues are to be commended, which I my self have taken the
pains to collect, in the imitation of many others which I have often seen;
which if now it be desired to prepare this Salt according to the method, of our
Art; It will be congealed into small little long Christals like Isicles, and it
will be like that of the Ancients. But as it is impossible to find so great a
quantity, as the continual use does consume, and necessity does excite to this
day for the supply of all Wars, which have been great, and in few years
consumed many great and vast places of the Universe: We are therefore
constrained to this new subject, and are forced even to study and invent in
these latter ages a new way to supply the want of the former, which being made
with much labor and industry from the bowels of the Earth, and then purified
and washed diverse times to separate it from its more gross and Terrestrial
parts, and taken from its first crudity, that its may show its likeness of its
Mother, it is in the end perfectly purified and brought to such a height, that
it differs nothing to he of the same form and virtue of the ancient Saltpeter.

Wherefore if I may be admitted to speak my thoughts upon it, I shall say
openly and plainly, leaving none in doubt, the Ancients did indeed find natural
growing Niter, which came out of it self at the tops of Rocks, filling the
clefts and holes, and there condensing into small Icicles, it hardens and
petrefies. This Niter is natural; but since Art is the Imitator of Nature, as
it is allowed by all, then you may not think it strange, if we can by a little
of her aid, and by force of industry, attain to the perfection of her
productions; nay, (if I may be bold to say it) such as shall surpass by far,
the more perfect of her works. Do we not daily see an infinite of very
principal Works brought to light, after a long and painful travel, which is not
permitted nature to imitate, although she did employ at the best all her secret
and full strength to come to perfection. It may from hence herefore be
concluded that our Salt made by the Art of Fire, is such as is every way
agreeing with that of the Ancients, not any way differing one from the other;
especially as to those uses we intend here. For if according to our method
given in the next Chapter, I dare affirm, in all our uses it will truly
imitate the natural, but the more, if it be purified and purged many times: So
that at last it will come to be more excellent than the Ancient and natural
Saltpeter; which is plainly seen in the ordinary way of purifying Common Salt
or Sugar, which by Art is so purged, that it comes to be far purer and whiter
than 'twas before, in its first natural dress. And this we do suppose to be a
sufficient argument, or reason, for us to judge that our Artificial Saltpeter
is not only as good, but far more excellent than the natural: Which being thus
allowed, we will add only a few words of the properties of Niter, and so pass
to its Artificial preparation. And first of the spetting quality and noise it
makes in the fire, which Scaliger would have to be caused by its terrestrity
that it holds in it self, which we cannot allow of, but rather judge otherwise;
for if the Earthy part were the subject that made it make such noise, then the
Earth it self might be adjudged to make a far greater noise, seeing it is also
mixed with this Element, and yet we find it cracks not at all, being put in the
fire; therefore by consequence this reason is void. Well then, is it of its
rarity, which Aristotle calls (...) and (...). This cannot pass for a truth,
since daily experience does let us see that the Mushrooms, or Toad-stools, and
many other things which are of a most rare thin nature, yet make no noise when
put upon burning coals. Neither is the hardness that is joined to these more
subtle parts, the cause of the cracking; For we see that the Pumice-stone will
not spet nor crack, nor make any noise in the fire, although it be of a
substance sufficiently spungy and hard. There must therefore be another thing
that must be the cause of this spetting, and all the noise that is made by
Nitre, when it is embraced by the fire. The Divine Praeceptor, in the 11
Section of his Questions says, that the Salt cracks in the fire, because it
contains in it much moisture, which being attenuated by the fire, and rarefied
in a high degree, converts all into Spirits, and an Airy nature; For in it
there is contained more of a Spirit, than watery matter, which being brought to
the fire, the two fiery Spirits mutually attract each other, and joining
together, do become Master of the lesser part the Water; for the fire of the
Niter being fortified and put into action by the common fire, the Water is
constrained from its bonds, and can stay no longer there, but must of a sudden
depart, and in its way, by the violency of its departure, overthrows all such
obstacles as come in its way: And in this action the external air being
strongly and violently agitated, by their refraction, it breaks with
impetuosity or great violence, and from thence by consequence follows that
hideous and fearful noise which commonly and ordinarily happens, in the
combustion of Saltpeter, and other Compositions mixed with it, whereof
Saltpeter is the greatest part.

CHAP. IX. The way of Preparing Saltpeter from a Nitrous Earth.
THe Earth and matter of Saltpeter is found commonly in great abundance, in
obscure shadowed places, where no Rain nor any fresh water does penitrate, nor
likewise where the Sun by his rays can communicate his heat; it is likewise
drawn from Horse dung under Stables, and from covered places where great and
small Cattle are shut up; likewise in such places as men use to piss in, or
Jaqueses, or the like places; or in places where has been made great Fights, or
where has been laid up together many dead Bodies, and earth thrown upon them:
For from thence in few years may much Saltpeter be drawn. I shall declare
three several ways whereby to ground your judgment with more certainty,
concerning the goodness of the place from whence one would draw the Saltpeter,
which is most necessary to be known by all Saltpeter men, or such as intend to
manage these Affairs.

The first is, that such Earth as you suspect to hold Saltpeter, be put upon
the Tongue, and if it prick a little sharply, it is a most certain sign you
will not loose your labor in taking it to task; but on the contrary if it be
not biting, or a little corrosive, it will not well answer your money and
labor in preparing of it.

The second way to know a good Nitrous Earth is this: make a hole in the Earth
with a sharp pointed thing, either of Wood or Iron, and in it put a piece of
Iron red hot; after having stopped the hole, let it stand until it be quite cold,
then draw it out, and if you find a little after about this Iron some Citrine
marks, inclining a little after to a whiteness, you need not doubt that earth;
but further assure your self it is very good to put to work.

The third way is, throw a little of that Earth upon burning Coals, and if you
perceive it make any noise, and that it spets in the fire, or that clear and
shining sparks come from it, you may from thence judge that that Earth holds a
forcible matter of that nature.

After you have found a proper Earth to draw Saltpeter from, and that by some
of these proofs you have testimony of its goodness and worth, let be taken of
it a great quantity, or as much as you please; let it be carried to a place
appointed for this purpose, then prepare to burn a good quantity of Wood,
either of Oak, Ash, Elm, Maple, or other sorts of hard Wood, that you may have
Ashes; then take two parts of these Ashes, one part of quick Lime, mix them
well, and put this mixture by it self, for such uses as I shall show you anon.

Take then Vessels of Wood, or Pipes, or Hogsheads cut in two parts, for they
must be able to hold a good quantity of Water, make a hole at the bottom about
one or two fingers breadth, put into the hole a small wicker thing, or you may
whelm over it an Earthen Dish, after put Rushes all over the bottom (not
excepting the hole) or in its place clean straw; this Vessel being thus fitted,
dispose of it in this manner; Set it so, that under may stand a lesser Vessel
of Wood to receive the Liquor that shall distill down from the upper Vessel;
after put into the upper Vessel about the height of a hand of this Saltpeter
Earth, which has been before for some time dried in the Air; upon this Earth
put the height of three or four fingers of the mixture made of Ashes and quick
Lime, and then again of the Saltpeter Earth, after of the Ashes about the same
height as before; and continue this fashion, putting Earth upon Ashes, and
Ashes upon Earth, until the Vessel be full within a hands breadth at the top,
to hold the Water that is put in; this done put upon it fresh Water as much as
shall be necessary, viz. so much as must surmount the Earth two or three
fingers breadth, and look that it pass through all the Earth, and run drop by
drop through the hole at bottom of the Vessel into the Tub standing under, and
you shall have a Nitrous Lixivium, according to the quantity of Water as you
poured into the Vessel; which if you judge is too little, you must reiterate
the infusion, and the second time also the water passing through the Earth will
carry with it a substance; And so the third time.

This done, put all the Lixivium into a Kettle of a sufficient bigness, and let
it be boiled upon the fire very easily, and moderately at first; after increase
the fire to the consumption of the Liquor, or a little more, keeping
continually skimming it all the time it boyls. And when it is thus consumed,
pour it into wooden Vessels that are broad, and cover them over with Clothes,
and let them stand until the pure part Christalize into white Salt, and the
feculent or more terrestial part settle to the bottom. In the mean time
continue pouring in of the Lixivium again into the Kettle, boiling and skimming
it as before; and this do until all your Lixivium be boiled up and poured into
wooden Vessels to Christalize.

Then from the wooden Vessels, inclining them gently, pour all the Lixivium
(leaving the settling at bottom by it self) into your Copper as before, and
boil it up again with a good fire until half be consumed, or until it begin to
thicken, or until by putting a little upon a stone or piece of board, it do
immediately congeal.

Then take it from the fire, and when it is a little cooled, pour it as before
into wooden Vessels or Boles, and put into each about a hand in height; then
cover each Vessel with course clothes, put it into a cool place, and two or
three days after you will find your Saltpeter congealed and thrust together
in small Christals, like transparent Ice, sticking to the sides of the Vessel,
and likewise upon some sticks for that purpose, provided the rinds being taken
off and placed in the wooden Vessels before the pouring in of the Liquor; get
diligently together the Peter, as well that which sticks to the sides of the
Vessel, as that to the sticks, in a Vessel of wood proper to receive it, and
cover it, and keep it dry. The remaining water you must boil up, as before, not
forgetting to separate it from its residence.

Whilst it is boiling, it happens sometimes that the Liquor may rise and boil
over the Cauldron; to prevent that danger, have in readiness other Lixivium,
made of three parts of Ashes, and one part of quick Lyme, as we spoke before,
in which is dissolved Roch Alum, allowing to every hundred weight of Lixivium,
four pounds of Alum; and when it begins to rise, pour in a little of this from
time to time; And by this means you will see that the water that was hastening
to come over, will fall down; and that the common Salt and more terrestrial
part will settle to the bottom.

The Earth remaining in the Wooden Tubs from whence the salt was drawn, must be
put in some covered place made for that purpose, where neither Sun, Rain, nor
any other water may come; and there it must be spread all abroad about a foot
high: Then you must have in readiness Horse dung or the Excrements of all sorts
of Beasts, great and small, and put off this upon the other, about the height
of three or four foot; then take all that was skum'd from the Lixivium in
boiling, and the water that is left and will not shoot, and the bottoms that
are left in the wooden Vessel, where the Saltpeter did shoot, and throw them
away, as hurtful and useless, upon the Dunghill; throw likewise every day, or as
often as you can, the Urine of men, and let it lie two years, and you shall
have your Earth filled with Saltpeter as before, with a greater abundance:
You may likewise throw upon your Dunghill, the Horns, Claws, and Hooss of
Beast, and then from this Earth it will be very easy to draw good Saltpeter
by the method we have prescribed.

CHAP. X. To Clarify and Refine Saltpeter.
TAke as much Saltpeter as you please, and being put in a Copper, pour upon it
so much fair water as will dissolve it, that is about eight of Water, and three
of Salt; and pour upon the same of the former Lixivium, prepared of Ashes,
Quick-lyme, and Roch Alum; boil it upon the fire until all the Saltpeter be
dissolved; that being done, have in readiness a Vessel of Wood sufficiently
big, and so disposed, that another may stand under the same: which must, before
it be so set, be peirced in the middle, and the hole covered over with an
Earthen Dish: Let the uppermost Tub be filled five or six inches with fine
clean sand; then let the Tub be covered over with a course cloth, and pour
through the same into your Sand-Tub your dissolved Saltpeter, and so it will
distill by little and little into the Vessel which stands under; and so passing
through the Sand, it will be discharged of all its superfluities, and will
leave the most terrestial part, and such as is useless, in the Sand, which
water again put into the Cauldron, and boil it up as formerly, until it may be
fit to congeal, and in the end pour it into wooden long flat Vessels as before,
and in two or three days 'twill be shot into Christals as formerly; which if
you would have purer, you must reiterate this work once more, or you may put
upon this Peter, Lyme-water, filter it and boil it up according to Art, and it
will be pure.

Saltpeter may be purified thus; put your Saltpeter in a Vessel of Copper,
Iron, or Vernish't Earth (I like a Crucible best) which being put to a small
fire, augment it gradually until all the Salt be melted and boiled; then take
common Sulphur finely pulverised, and throw it upon the liquified Saltpeter,
which will quickly take fire and burn, and by the same means consume all the
gross and viscous humors, with the terrestrial Salt remaining useless amongst
the Saltpeter, before the rectification; besides you may reiterate this work
by putting on fresh Sulphur many times, until such time all the strange humors
be quite consumed; in the end, the Saltpeter being well melted and well
purified, pour it upon well polished Marble or Plates of Iron, or Copper, or
glazed Earth, and let it cool, and you will have a Saltpeter congealed, almost
resembling in color and hardness the true Alabaster.

CHAP. XI. How Saltpeter Meal is made without any beating, for the making of
Gunpowder.
Saltpeter well purified, must be put in a Kettle, upon a furnace over a fire,
then moderately increase the fire with Bellows to such a degree of heat, until
it begin to smoke and evaporate, until the Salt begin to lose its humidity, and
obtain a whiteness, and so keep continually stirring it with a wooden or Iron
Ladle, for fear it should return into its pristine form, and hereby will be
taken away all its fatty greasiness that may be commixt. This being done, pour
so much water into the Kettle as will cover the Saltpeter, and when it shall
be dissolved, and it has obtained the consistence of a thick Liquor; then with
a wooden stick or Ladle keep continually stirring it without any intermission,
until all its humidity be evaporated, and all be reduced into most dry white
Meal.

CHAP. XII. To make Saltpeter with the flower of Old Walls, of Caves, Cellars,
Vaults, etc.
GAther together a good quantity of this Flower, which you may find upon the
Surface of Old Walls, which are in moist places under the Earth; you may also
make provision with a certain Salt which sticks to Lyme, or upon ruinated
Walls; which Peter, one Sardi a Roman took notice of, was always well
practiced at Bruxells in Brabant, as he confesses in his fifth Book of
Artillery, Chap. 49. First, see how much Saltpeter matter you have; then take
one fourth part so much of quick Lyme, pour upon it warm water, boil it well,
and clarify it according to custom, then put your Saltpeter matter into a Tub
with a tap in it, and a little Earthen Dish before the hole of the tap within,
pour into this Tub the Lie, and stir it well with a stick until all the Salt
Peter be dissolved in the Water; then let it distill leisurely into a Vessel
that stands under the tap; and at last being all dissolved and run out, put
this water into a Kettle, and boil it over the fire, until so much be consumed,
that the remainder being dropped upon a Tyle-stone or Board, do congeal, and be
of hardness, but not too hard; for if it be very hard, the water is burnt; but
if too soft, not enough. When it is well boiled and scummed, take it from the
fire, and proceed with it as in the tenth and eleventh Chapters.

CHAP. XIII. How to examine the goodness of Saltpeter.
PUt upon a Wooden Table, or any clean and smooth Board, a little Saltpeter;
then give fire to it with a live coal, and observe these Rules following, viz.

If it make the same noise in burning as the common Salt does when it is thrown
upon live coals, it is a sign it holds yet much common Salt.

If it hold a thick and fat scum, it is a sign it is fatty and viscous.

If after the Salt be consumed, there rests yet crass and filthy matter upon
the board, it is an infallible sign that the Salt contains yet a quantity of
earthy matter, and so much the more, if you see much dregs after the combustion
of the Saltpeter is past; and therefore the less powerful and active.

But by contraries, if it render a clear long flame divided into many streams,
and that the superficies of the board remain neat without any filth; or that it
be consumed so that nothing is left, but a white clean ash, without making much
noise, or great trembling, you may then conclude that the Saltpeter is good,
and well cleansed, and in its perfect preparation.

CHAP. XIV. The true way to purify Saltpeter, and separating it from all
offending and superfluous matter; as common Salt, Vitriol, Alum, and all fatty
and viscous humors.
TAke Two pound of Quick-Lyme, Two pound of common Salt, One pound of
Verdigrease, One pound of Roman Vitriol, One pound of Sal-Armoniack, beat them
all together; after put them into an Iron Vessel, and pour upon them a good
quantity of Vinegar, or in default of them, good clear water; and make a
Lixivium, which you shall let rarifie and clarify of it self, standing the
space of three days; after put your Saltpeter in a Kettle, and pour upon the
same as much of this Lixivium as will well cover the Saltpeter; put it upon a
fire sufficiently moderate at first, increasing it until it boil to the
consumption of half; take it then away from the fire, and pour it by gentle
inclination into a wooden Vessel, and throw away all the dregs and Salt which
remains in the bottom of the Kettle: That done, let the Saltpeter water
cool, and continue your preparation as we have given before, where we treated
of refining Saltpeter.

CHAP. XV. How to clarify common Sulphur, and to know its goodness.
WE experience often, and without contradiction, that not only Saltpeter is
filled with terrestrial qualities, but Brimstone also, which is not only of a
fatty and certain oleganious humor, but likewise a noisome quality which is in
the compound, common to one and the other of its matters; from hence (if we
desire to be curious in our work) we judge it may be necessary to purify
Sulphur, and to procure to it by power of clarification, a nature most sublime,
subtle, fiery and volatile. The order and method that ought to be used in
this, is thus; in Vessels of Iron or Copper, melt your Sulphur with a very
gentle fire over Coals, well lighted, and not flaming; and when it is melted
with a Ladle, skim neatly off all that rises on the top and swimmeth upon the
Sulphur; then not long after, let it be taken from the fire, and strained
through a double Linen Cloth into another Vessel, pouring it through at
leisure; thus all the Oily matter and crassy substance remains in the Cloth;
but under in the Vessel will be a pure Sulphur, such as we have before spoken
of.

To know the goodness of Sulphur you must do thus: Press it between two Iron
plates, that are hot, and if in the running it appear yellow, without any bad
odor, and that which remains be of a reddish color, one may believe it is
natural and excellent; so likewise it is a good sign, if when it is set on fire,
it do freely burn all away, leaving little or no resident matter. For if
Sulphur be pure and good, we do find that there is such a sympathy between it
and fire, that the fire is desirous of the Sulphur for its nutriment, and that
reciprocally the Sulphur is pleased likewise to be thus devoured and consumed
by the Element of fire; so that if some fragment of it be put about some pieces
of Wood, if this shall feel the fire at some distance, it seems as if it did
attract it to it self, and does sometimes unawares at a distance catch or take
fire, if great care be not taken.

There is a certain kind of Sulphur which will not burn so freely as other
Sulphur, nor send forth any ill scent, but being put upon the fire, melts no
otherwise than common Wax; and this Sulphur is found abundantly near Mount
Aetna, as Carniola of Libavius reports, in his first Book of the Apocap.
Hermel. but this Sulphur is commonly red, as also is that which is found in the
Heil des Heim (as Agricola mentions in his first Book, Chap. 22.) And upon the
testimony of John Johnson, Adm. Not. Clas. 4. Chap. 13. Sulphur is found
likewise of diverse other colors, as pale, Yellow, Green, as is many times to
be seen and found sticking about Stones and Rocks: So, that a man may, without
any great difficulty, take it from thence, and make it into a Mass.

That which is clear, perfectly yellow, not very hard, nor too much shining, is
the very best. Yet there is another Sulphur which looks greenish, and has
never past the fire; and this is called Sulphur Vivum, and by some Virgin
Sulphur, by reason Women and Maids had a custom to compose with it a certain
fucus or Paint, with which they used to adorn their faces.

CHAP. XVI. Of the third Principal in Composition of Gunpowder, viz. Coal, and
its Preparation.
IN the Month of May or June, when all sorts of Trees are easy to peel, by
reason in that time there comes out a sap, and they are fuller of humors than
at any other time of the year, Cut then a great quantity of Hazle or Ash, the
length of two or three foot, of the bigness of half your fist, taking away from
them with a Bill all that is Superfluous, then take away the rind likewise; and
of these make little bundles, and make them very dry in a warm Oven; then in a
place chosen for that purpose, that is plain and even, set them upright one by
another, and set them on fire; and after you see the fire well lighted, and
that the fire has reduced them all into burning Coals, cover them closely and
diligently with watered earth, so that it may have no respiration, or that no
Air may pass in; then, the flame being thus stifled upon the Coals, they will
remain pure and whole, without being charged with much Ashes; then 24 hours
after, you may take them away and keep them for to serve you in your business,
and put them to such uses as we shall write of hereafter.

But if you have occasion for a small quantity only, take then of the Arms and
Limbs of such Trees aforesaid, that is of Teil wood, of Juniper, of Ash, etc.
Cut them in small pieces, and dry them well; then shut them in an Earthen
Vessel, and lute the Cover on the top with Clay; then place Coals round about
the Pot, and let it be all covered with Coals, leaving them so the space of a
good hour, continuing the fire all this while in the same degree of heat; at
last let it cool of it self, and when it is cold, open the pot, and take out the
Coals for your use.

CHAP. XVII. The ways of Compounding or Making Gunpowder.
THe ways of Compounding of Gunpowder have been so commonly known, that not
only such as are conversant in fireworks do understand the same, but others
also; so that it is made a particular Trade: nay, that which is more strange,
the Country people in Polonia have learned to prepare it with their own hands,
without the use of any Artificial Engine, or Chemical Vessel. For I have seen
many of the People of Podolie, and the Vkrains, which we call now the
Cossaques, who prepare their Powder quite contrary to the common way, or that
which is used by Fire-Masters. For they put Sulphur, Saltpeter, Charcoal, all
together in an Earthen Pot, a certain proportion of each; (which proportion one
to the other they have learned by experimental practice) upon which they pour
fair fresh water, which they boil upon the fire until all the water is
evaporated, and the matter become thick; then they take it from the fire, and
dry it in the Sun, or in some warm place, as a Stove, or the like; then they
pass it through a Hair Sieve, and reduce it into small Grains. There are others
that take these Materials, and grind them upon a smooth flat Stone, or a smooth
Earthen Dish, and then having moistened it, by their Skill they bring it into
Grains; which powder brought to this degree of perfection, they serve their
occasions with as much utillity and profit, as if it had been made by the hand
of one of the most knowing or skilful Powder-makers in the world.

It is in my judgment, labor lost to speak more of these superficial ways;
but come to the order and method which is necessary and usually observed in the
preparing of Gunpowder: It shall likewise suffice me to propose in this
Chapter some Compositions most excellent and best approved; which are these,
Compositions for Cannon Powder. Compositions for Musquet-Powder. Compositions
for Pistol-powder. The first. The first. The first. Salt Peter 100 l.
Saltpeter 100 l. Saltpeter 100 l. Sulphur 25 Sulphur 18 Sulphur 12 Coals 25
Coals 20 Coals 15 The Second. The Second. The Second. Saltpeter 100 l.
Saltpeter 100 l. Saltpeter 100 l. Sulphur 20 Sulphur 15 Sulphur 10 Coals 24
Coals 18 Coals 8

You must first finely powder these compositions or mixtures, for Cannon or
Musket Powder, and after moisten them with fair fresh water or Vinegar, or
with Aquavitae; but if you will have your Pistol Powder stronger and more
violent, you ought to stir it up several times whilst it is in the Mortar, with
this following liquor; that is, a water distilled from Rinds of Oranges,
Citrons, or Lemons, by an Alymbeck, or any other Chemical Vessel; then let all
be beaten and well brayed 24. hours, and then in the end reduce it into very
fine small grains.

A Liquor for this purpose may likewise be made of twenty parts of Aquavitae,
and 12 parts of distilled Vinegar made of Whitewine, and four parts of Spirit
of Saltpeter, and two parts of water of Sal-armoniac, and one part of Camphire
dissolved in Brandy-wine, or reduced into Powder with powdered Sulphur, or
reduced with Oil of sweet Almonds.

To Corn Powder well, you must prepare a Sieve with a bottom of thick
Parchment, made full of round holes; then moisten the Powder that must be
corned with its water, and make it up in Balls as big as Eggs; which put into
the Sieve, and with it put a wooden Bowl, and when you have so done, sift the
Powder so, as the Bowl rouling about the Sieve, may break the Clods of Powder,
and make it pass through those little holes into Corns.

It is observed by Fire-Masters and Gunners, that Powder when it is Corned, is
of much greater force and power, than in Meal; from hence it is concluded, that
powder when it is put into a Piece of Ordnance, ought not to be pressed or
beaten home too hard in the Piece; for thereby it will loose its form of
grains, and thereby loses a great part of its strength that it had, and is
therefore not able to throw out the Bullet with so great a violence, as if the
Powder had been gently thrust home to the Britch end.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the several Colors which are to be given to Powder.
KNow first that all the blackness which you see in Gunpowder comes from the
Coal; not that this color is absolutely necessary to be conjoined to its
nature, or that it is absolutely necessary to be given to it, for its
meliorating or making it more vigorous; this is not so; but by contraryes you
may be permitted to give unto it any such colors as you shall think fit,
without prejudice or hinderance of the Powder and virtue of it. For if instead
of Coal you take rotten dried wood, or Sawdust well dried, or white paper
moistened and dried in a Stove and powdered, or indeed any other thing of a
combustible nature, or that is well disposed to take fire (such as you read
hereunder) and to this you may add a color according to your fancy and
pleasure; and you will infallibly have a Powder that will make the same Effect
as the black powder. And for this purpose I shall lay down in this Chapter
certain mictions, with which I served my self many times, and therefore known
to be experimental truths.

White Powder. Take Saltpeter six pounds, Sulphur one pound, of Sawdust of the
Elder Tree well dried and powdered one pound, these mixed according to the
directions in the former Chapter, there will be made a Powder of a white
color. Or thus,

Take Saltpeter ten pounds, of Sulphur one pound, of the woody part when the
Hemp is taken away, one pound, etc. Or thus,

Saltpeter six pounds, Sulphur one pound, of Tartar calcined until it be
brought to a whiteness, and the Salt extracted for use, one Ounce.

Red Powder. Take of Saltpeter twelve Parts, of Sulphur two parts, of Amber
one part, of Red Sanders two parts, etc. Or,

Take Saltpeter eight pounds, of Sulphur one pound, of dried powdered Paper
boiled up in a Water, wherein is Cinaber or Brazil Wood, and then again dried,
one pound.

Yellow Powder. Take Saltpeter eight pounds, Sulphur one pound, Wild or
Bastard Saffron boiled in Aqua Vitae, after dried and powdered, two pounds, etc.

Green Powder. Saltpeter ten pounds, of Sulphur one pound, dried Wood or
Saw-dust boiled in Aqua Vitae with some Verditer, then dried and powdered, of
this two pounds.

Blew Powder. Saltpeter eight pounds, of Sulphur one pound, of the Saw-dust of
the Teil Wood boiled in Brandy Wine with Indigo, and after dried and powdered,
one pound.

CHAP. XIX. Still Powder, or Powder without Noise.
THere are several that do Write many strange things concerning this Still
Powder, or Powder, without noise, or as some do give it the name, Deaf Powder,
whereof they have treated prolixly; the which I think not convenient to do, by
reason I am loath to tire the Reader with any such Discourse, as tends not much
to Edification: I shall therefore put down certain mixtures, which I have known
to be more excellent and best approved.

First way, Take Common Powder two pounds, Venus Borax one pound; these being
well powdered, mingled and incorporated together, must be made up into Corn
Powder.

Second way, Take common Powder two pounds, Venus Borax one pound, of Lapis
Calaminaris half a pound, of Sal-armoniack half a pound; powder and mix them
well, and make them up into Grains.

Third way, Take common Powder six pounds, of Live Moles burnt in an Earthen
Pot, of Venus Borax half a pound, mix them as before, etc.

Fourth way, Take Saltpeter six pounds, Sulphur eight pounds and a half,
powder of the Second Bark of Elder Tree half a pound, common decripitated Salt
two pounds; make Corn Powder of these according to the precedent order, or
accustomed method.

To these known things, I shall add here a thing whereof you may make
experience if you please; it being only taken from the Books of Authors,
without any trial made by me; which you may also find written in the natural
Magic of John Baptista Porta, which is in our English Tongue, where he says,
that if you add burnt Paper in the Composition of Gunpowder, or the double
quantity of Hay seed well beaten; these will take away a great part of the
strength, and will hinder it from making so great flame and noise.

Some do say that the Gall of a Pike does the same effect, if it be mixed and
mingled with the same; but we shall leave the belief of these things to the
faith of such Authors as have experimented the same.

There are some wise and knowing men in this Art, attribute the cause of this
noise, or as some do express it, this horrible noise, produced by a Cannon
after the firing, not to the Powder, but to the beating and contusion of the
Air which is enraged, or in a passion, by being so furiously endeavored to be
stifled or choked by a strange and extraordinary movement, of which we have
spoken more at large in the former Chapter, where we treated of Saltpeter. Yet
in favor of the Sons of Art, we shall nevertheless give you the opinion of
Scaliger, taken out of his his fifteenth Book, in his Exer. Exoter. against
Cardan of Subtle. Exer. 25.

Long pejus illud cum sonitus causam a bellicis machinis editi, attribuis Sal
Petrae; nam tenuissimum in pulverem comminutum cavernulas amisit.

CHAP. XX. The Proof or Trial of Gunpowder.
IT is accustomary for men skilled in these Arts, to try Powder three several
ways; that is, by sight, by touch, and by fire: And first, for the trial by
sight; it is thus,

If the Powder be too black, it is a manifest sign of too much humidity, or too
much coal; now if it contain too much, as you suppose, rub it upon white Paper;
if it black the Paper more than other good Powder use to do, it is a sign there
is more coal in it than ought: for such Gunpowder as is of a fair azure
color, or a little obscure, something bordering upon red, is the best sign, and
the most assured testimony of good Powder.

Secondly, Gunpowder its goodness is known by the touch, in this manner, crush
some Corns under your fingers ends, and if they easily break and return to Meal
without resisting the touch, or without feeling hard, you may assure your self
from thence, that your Powder has in it too much Coal.

If by pressing it a little hard under your fingers upon a smooth hard board,
or upon a stone, you feel amongst it small grains harder or more sollid than
the rest, which do in a manner prick the ends of the fingers, and do not yield
to the finger but very difficultly, or hardly, you may infer from hence that
the Sulphur is not well incorporated with the Saltpeter, and by consequence
the Powder is not well and duly prepared.

You may draw infallible proofs or conjectures of the goodness of Powder by its
burning, if after you have made little heaps of Powder upon a clean and even
Table, distant one from another about a hands breadth, you then put fire to one
of them only; and if it take fire alone, and burn all away without lighting the
others, and make a small thundering noise, or make a white clear smoke, and that
it rise with a quickness, suddenly, almost imperceptible, and if it rise in
the Air like a circle of smoke, or like a small Crown; this is an infallible
sign the Powder is good, and perfectly well prepared.

If after the burning of the Powder there remain some black marks upon the
Table, this then signifies that the Powder contains too much Coal, which has
not been enough burnt.

If the board looks greasy, then the Sulphur and Saltpeter is not enough
cleansed, and by consequence it retains much of their terrestrial matter and
oily natures which were naturally conjoined to their matters. If you find small
grains, white and Citrine, it is a testimony that the Saltpeter is not enough
cleansed, and by consequence it retains much of its terrestrial matter, and of
common Salt, and besides, the Sulphur has not been well powdered, nor
sufficiently incorporated with the two other matters of its Composition.

If two or three Corns of Gunpowder be laid upon a Paper, distant about a
fingers breadth one from the other, and you put fire to them, if the fire be
good and strong, they will fire at once, and there will remain no grossness of
Brimstone, or of Saltpeter, nor any thing but a white smoaky color in the
place where they were burnt, nor will the Paper be touched. If small black
knots, which will burn downward in the place where proof is made, remain after
firing, they do show that the Gunpowder has not enough of Peter, and that it
is of little force or strength.

Good Gunpowder will not burn your hand, if it be set on fire there.

Gunpowder that is very sharp or eager in taste, is not well purified, and will
turn moist.

Amongst many sorts of Powder, to know the best, make a little heap of every
sort at a distance one from another; observing well when you fire each heap,
which of them does soonest take fire, for that which soonest takes fire, smoaks
least and clearest, and rises quickly up close and round, and leaves little or
no sign behind it, is the best Powder.

There are Instruments likewise invented for the trial or proof of Powder,
which the most part of Fire-Masters and Gunners are accustomed to use, which
are described at large by other Authors; therefore we shall not here repeat the
same; considering likewise, that we have found by experience a great fallacy in
the same, for that one and the same Powder, in the same measure and quantities,
has raised the cover to different degrees of height.

CHAP. XXI. To fortify weak Powder, and amend that which is spoiled, and bring
it to its full strength again; and to preserve good Powder from decaying.
WE call such Gunpowder weak, which has much degenerated from its first
strength, and the force which it did acquire in its first preparation; as such
as has taken wind, wet, or air; for these do diminish the quantity of
Saltpeter, and actually separate the Sulphur and Coal.

There are two different ways that these accidents do happen; that is, by
being many years made, or lying in a moist place long; for in time the
Saltpeter alters and separates it self, being naturally subject to alter, and
return into its first matter; for Saltpeter in its beginning or original being
engendered of water, or of a certain Saline humor, no otherwise than other
Salts are produced of their own proper Brines, does at last, or in a long time,
separate it self from the Coal and Sulphur, and so return to a Brine water
again, as it was in the original, and so abandons the other two matters that
adhered to it, the Sulphur and Coals loosing nothing of their weight, seeing
that no humidity that is attracted, can be able to dissolve them; but rather by
the contrary, the Coal does attract greedily, and becomes more ponderous.

If for the reasons aforesaid you desire to repair and restore the strength of
Gunpowder that begins to alter, or that has quite lost its force, its defects
may be amended three several ways, etc. viz.

The first is thus, make a Lie of two parts of Aqua vitae, and one part of
clarified Saltpeter made into fine Powder, of good Vinegar made of good Wine
half a part, of Oil of Sulphur one eighth part, and as much Camphire dissolved
in Brandy; these put together, do make a Lixivium, which must be strained
through a large Strainer, and then with it you may amend your powder that is
decayed, by moistning it with the same, very often, and drying it by the Sun in
Wooden Vessels, and then putting it up in a dry place, free from any humidity
or air, and then it will not in a long time again be damnified.

The second way to repair Powder is thus, examine how much your Powder weighed
when it was first put into the Cask or Barrel, then see how much it does now
weigh after it is damnified (it being first dried if it chance to be wet) then
see the difference between these two weights, and add so much Saltpeter to
your decayed powder, mix it well, and make it up into Corns again, and preserve
it as before.

The third way to restore the strength of Gunpowder, is such as is most plain
and commonly used amongst the Powder-men; they put upon a Sale-cloath or smooth
place or board, a portion of damnified Powder, to which they add an equal
weight of that which is new made, and then with their hand or wooden Shovel
they mingle it well together; then they dry it in the Sun, and put it up into a
Barrel again, and keep it in a dry and proper place.

Yet there is another way may be allowed, but this is almost the same with
making new Powder, and it is thus; Take what quantity of decayed Powder you
please, put it into Earthen or Wooden Vessels, pour upon the same three times
so much hot water, stir it well about, and when it begins to be cold, or has
stood one hour or two, strain the water away, and to the feces put more water,
stirring it well about, then let it stand and settle as before, and strain it
from the feces, this do a third time, and you will have drawn out all the
Saltpeter; put these waters in a clean Kettle, and boil it away until so much
be consumed, as that a drop dropped upon a Stone or Iron do congeal, then pour
it into some wooden Vessel that it may congeal into Saltpeter; and that water
as remains, you must boil up again as before; and if need be, you must in the
boiling skum what rises on the top of the water. Having by this Art obtained
the Saltpeter out of the decayed Gunpowder, you may according to the
proportions given in the Composition of Powder, mix it with its remaining
Sulphur and Coal, or fresh Sulphur and Coal, which is better; and after it is
well mixed, Corn it according to the given Rules; then let it be well dried,
and put up into dry Powder Barrels, and let it be conserved in a dry place from
Air or any Moisture.

Some do mend their Powder in this nature, they moisten it with Vinegar or fair
water, beat it fine, and sift it and dry it, and to every pound of Powder they
put one Ounce of Mealed Saltpeter; then moisten and mix them well, so that
neither may be discerned one from the other, but that they be perfectly
incorporated, which you may know by cutting the Mass with a Knife, or breaking
it: When it is well compounded, let it be Corned in manner as we have before
prescribed.

If your Composition of Powder be made up with Aqua vitae, and so made up into
great Balls, and well dried in a Stove, or in the Sun, and put into glazed
earthen Pots, and close covered, you may keep it as long as you please, for age
will not decay it.

There ought always a care to be taken by Gunners or Fire-Masters, or such as
have the charge of Gunpowder, to choose if they can such places as are dry, and
stand upon the best ground, free from dampness of the Air or any water possibly
coming near. Every Gunner, etc. ought to take care that his Barrel be turned
upside down, or any Carthredge ready filled; for if the Powder attract air, the
Peter with the moisture it has attracted, will in time separate from the other
matters, and sink to the bottom; so that the Powder in the upper part will
loose its strength, which is prevented by turning and shaking them every
fourteen days, and airing them at the Sun at convenient times. And as it is
necessary a Gunner should have Carthredges filled for present Service, those
ought also to be turned out and filled again every fourteen days more or less,
as the Gunner in his judgment shall allow of.

CHAP. XXII. Of the property and particular office of every Material in the
Composition of Gunpowder.
WE ought infallibly to believe that Gunpowder was not found out casually, or
by fortune; but invented by a true knowledge, and by reasonable speculation in
Natural Philosophy; considering that to this day no man has opposed
(notwithstanding many persons have made it their endeavor) or could find any
other Materials like unto these, or of such a nature, which being well united
and incorporated together, they are able to produce a fire so vigorous,
fearful, powerful, and above all, so inextinguishable that the whole Universal
matter is consumed in a moment; which is the more to be believed, since we make
not much difficulty, particularly in this our Age wherein we live, to add many
things to the invention of others, and that (as the Physicians say) all that
had a beginning does pass from imperfection to perfection. We desire therefore
it may be permitted (since the Inventors have left us nothing in Writing) to
propose here some Observations of Speculative truths, drawn from Experiment,
which have been made about the strength, nature, effects, and Office of all the
matters comprehended in the Composition of Gunpowder, as well of the
particulars, as all made up into one body. For I believe, that having
insinuated into a perfect knowledge of the properties, and the affections, as
well specificated as general, of all its Ingredients, no body more will fall
into those Errors which are too often committed in the Art of Pyrotechny.

We must therefore know, that Gunpowder was not without reason composed of
these three materials, to wit, Saltpeter, Sulphur, and Coal, but to the end
that one might remedy or supply the defaults of the others. And this is it
which is easy to be comprehended in the effect of Sulphur; for this is
naturally the very aliment of the fire, seeing it joins with it so willingly
and freely, and having once taken fire, is most difficult to put out, being no
otherwise rightly than a flaming fire, or, to express it better, a pure flame;
and therefore has an aptitude to inflame the Saltpeter, by its activity, more
than any other kind of fire. But as the Saltpeter lighted does go promptly
into certain windy exhalations, it has thereby such a strength in it, that it
would by its ventosity put out the flame which the Sulphur has conceived, and
by consequence deny it self of that which the Sulphur communicates to it;
hereby you may see, if one had made a simple composition of these two things
only, that is, of Sulphur and Saltpeter compounded well together, if fire were
then applied, they would in truth be suddenly enflamed, but they would soon
after go out, that is, the fire will not continue to the Conflagration and
Consumption of the whole matter, the reason whereof we have given a little
before. It was therefore by good reason adjudged, that Coal well dried and
powdered, being adjoined to these two materials in a certain proportion, was an
excellent remedy for the supplying of this defect, seeing that Coal is of such
a property and of such a nature, that if it be held to the fire, it will soon
light and be reduced to a fire without any flame; And from hence it comes to
pass, that the more it is agitated by the Air, or by wind, the more the fire
augments, and will not go out, but conserve it self until the matter that
nourishes it is totally consumed, a little ashes only excepted. From hence it
was concluded that a Composition made of these three Ingredients, such as is
our Gunpowder, will conceive fire, and will be conserved, enflamed and consumed
unto the last Atome. For it is most certain, that if we approach fire with it,
the Sulphur which the fire extremely loves is soon taken with it, and holds
the same and introduces it, not only into the Saltpeter, but the coal also at
the same moment, without producing any flame. Now this fire (as we have said
before) cannot be suffocated by wind, but on the contrary is enflamed the more,
and takes new strength by the agitation of the Air. And as this Sulphur is a
great neighbor of the fire either with or without flame, so it cannot hinder
it from taking fire; and it is the flame of the Brimstone embraces the
Saltpeter, and the Coal continues it. And by consequence these three materials
joined together, and well incorporated, and then lighted, produces a fire,
until all its aliment and substance be universally consumed and annihilated:
Yet there must care be taken that none of these substances have any accidental
defaults, either in humidity or disproportion, either more or less. We will
conclude then all that we have said, that the true office of Sulphur in the
Powder is to conceive the flame or receive the fire, and having received it, to
communicate it to the other matters; and that the Coal has a particular care
to retain and consume it, and to hinder the fire (after it is once introduced
by the Sulphur) from suffocating or going out by any windy Exhalation and great
violence caused by the Saltpeter; and lastly, that the most notable and
particular office of the Saltpeter is to produce and cause a most vehement and
powerful ventosity or windy Exhalation. And in this which I have said, lies
all the truth of the strength, power and expulsive motion and activity of the
Gunpowder; and by consequence Saltpeter alone is the first and principal
cause of all the admirable and astonishing Effects produced by Gunpowder; and
consequently, the two other materials are alliated with the Saltpeter for no
other end than to make it break forth into fire and wind. For proof of this, if
any one will make a Composition of Sulphur and Coal only, and with it charge a
Piece of Ordnance, he will find that this will not move or thrust out a Shot of
Iron or any other metal; the reason of this weakness is easy to be understood
by our foregoing discourse, because the violent expulsion depends absolutely in
the Saltpeter, and in this only expulsive faculty, and not in any of the other
matters. Yea I believe that one may prepare Gunpowder without Brimstone or
Coal, rather than without Saltpeter; or that a man may without much difficulty
prepare other matters, that the one may do the office of Sulphur in kindling
the matter, and the other that of Coal in Conserving it and keeping it without
flame. But any other thing that has such hidden natural properties to cause
such a ventous Exhalation, so violent and capable to produce such prodigious
Effects, as Saltpeter, may not be produced.

CHAP. XXIII. How to prepare Eommon Match and Extraordinary Match, that is such
as will render no Smoke nor bad scent.
FIrst there must be made Cords of coarse hemp, or rather of Tow, about the
bigness of half your thumb, or a good finger in Diameter; then take the ashes
of Oak, Ash, Elm, or Maple, three parts, of quick Lyme one part, and make
thereof a Lie after the usual manner; which being done, add to it of the Liquor
drawn from Horse-dung neatly strained and leasurely exprimed through a
strainer, or linen Cloth, two parts, of Saltpeter one part, and being all
well mixed, put into a Copper your Match Cords, and pour upon them your
Lixivium, and make a small fire under the same, augmenting it gradually, until
it be great, which you must keep boiling two or three days continually; not
boiling it dry, as some of our Writers prescribe, but supplying it continually
with fresh Lixivium, for fear both Match and Kettle burn for want of Liquor; in
the end having taken out the fire, take the Cords out of the Liquor, and wring
them hard in your hands, rubbing off the moisture from them with a piece of
Cloth, that comes forth in the wringing; then hang them in the Air or Sun upon
long Poles to dry, and when they are well dried, make them up in bundles, and
carry them into a commodious place to keep for use.

But to make Match that will never have bad scent nor smoke, you must get a
certain quantity of red Sand, or Gravel well washed, and purged from all its
filth; put it into an Earthen pot that is not varnished, then put into the pot
upon the Sand, your common Match, or any other made of Cotton, or the like
matter, and coil it in such manner, that there be half a fingers breadth of
interval between every coyl of the Match, to the end they may not touch each
other, but that the Match in its turning or Coyles have its sides equally
distant one from the other; then throw again upon that a good quantity of Sand,
and coyl in the Cord again as before: Continue thus your work until your pot be
full, then cover the pot with a cover of the same earth, and close well the
joints with Lute made of fat Earth that no Air may enter; This being well and
surely done, put lighted coals round about the pot, and let it stand in this
posture some time, then take it away and let it stand until it be quite cold
before you open it; When it is perfectly cold, take off the Cover, pour out the
Sand, and draw out the match, for it is prepared, and will burn as we have said.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Square and Cube Roots.
WE have already in the Second Chapter of this Book shown the way of molding
and casting pieces of Ordnance; if well understood, you cannot be ignorant in
the way of Casting Shot. Therefore to avoid any thing that might be tedious or
unnecessary to the Students of this art, we will come to the most necessary
things concerning Shot, that is, such as every Gunner ought to know. But
because most of the propositions depend upon the knowledge of the Square and
Cube Roots, which many (though otherwise knowing in most common Arithmetic) do
not understand, I thought it good therefore to show the Extraction of the
Square and Cube Roots after a very easy way; with the necessary propositions
in Gunnery, thereunto belonging.

A Table of Squares and Cubes. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. -- Roots. 1. 4. 9.
16. 25. 36. 49. 64. 81. -- Squares. 1. 8. 27. 64. 125. 216. 343. 512. 729. --
Cubes.

The Extraction of the Square Root.
Set down any number of figures as you shall think good, as, 2735716, then
begin at your first right hand figure that is at 6, and make a prick under it,
and so along every other figure as you may see here already done; and seeing
the first prick to the left hand falls to be under 2, therefore seek in the
Table above in the rank of Squares for this number 2, ^
or the nearest number less, which here we find to be 1, and over it we find
the Root to be 1, which must be placed in the quotient, and likewise under the
first prick to the left hand, then having 1 for a Divisor, and 1 for the
quotient, say but the common Rule of Division, 1 times 1 is one, 1 from 2 and
there remains 1; which sent over the 2, then double the quotient and it makes
2, which place between the two first pricks to the left hand that is under 7;
then say how many times 2 in 17, (here you must be very cautious not to take
too many) which here may be six times, place the 6 in the quotient as before,
and under the second prick that is under 3, and divide as before, then double
the quotient which is now 16 and it makes 32, place the 2 between the second
and third prick, viz. under 5, and the 3 before it under the 6, so the 32 will
stand under the 175 which is above; then say how many times 3 in 17, which you
will find to be 5, place it in the quotient and under the third prick, and
divide as before, always setting the Remainder over the head of its proper
figures; then double the quotient again, which is now 165 and it makes 330,
place the 0 between the two pricks as before, and place the figures before it
to the left hand, as you see above, and the first figure to the left will be 3
which stands under 13; then say how many times 3 in 13, which will be 4, which
place in the quotient, and under the fourth or last prick, and divide as
before; so you will find no Remainder, which assures the number given to be a
square number. The proof of these is known by multiplying the square Root found
in it self (taking in the remains if any be) and it must produce that given
number, otherwise it is false. Note how many pricks you have, and so many
numbers must the quotient consist of.

If the number given be not a true Square, then a fraction will remain, which
fraction you may find out the value thereof to a tenth, hundredth, or a
thousandth part; etc. Doing thus set next to the right hand after the Sum
proposed, two, four, or six ciphers, or more (for the more ciphers you put, the
less is your Error) and every two ciphers will produce a fractional figure more
than the Integers belonging to the proper quotient, which are tenths,
hundredths, or thousand parts of a Unite, according to the number of ciphers
added; that is, if you add two ciphers, then you find the tenths of a Unite
etc. But the Square Root being not of so much use in Gunnery, as the Cube Root,
we shall proceed no farther to Exemplify the same, supposing it to be done
already in the Treatise of Military Discipline.

The Extraction of the Cube Root.
Begin at your right hand, (as you did in Extracting the Square Root) and set
pricks under every fourth figure, that is, leave two figures unprickt, or
between the pricks, and so proceed to the left, until you have done as here you
see, 7 5 6 7 8 7 3 2 (the number of pricks show the number of figures that will
be in the quotient.

Then see by the Table before in this Chapter the nearest Cube to the numbers
standing over the first prick to the right hand, which is 75, I search in the
Table of Cubes and find the nearest number to it in the Table of Cubes to be
64, and its Root 4, which must be set down in the quotient, and likewise its
Cube 64 under the prick; and if that number does not amount to so much as the
number standing over the prick, then substract it from the same, and set the
Remainder overhead.

Then triple the quotient, and that triple you must set under the next number
to the right hand, before that prick where you did last end.

Multiply that tripled number by the quotient, and set it down under the first
triple, and that number let be your Divisor.

Then (as in common Division) must you look how many times the Divisor in the
figures is standing over them, and place that in the quotient.

This done, Multiply your quotient by your Divisor; and set it under your
Divisor, with a Line between.

Then multiply the last figure in the quotient by it self, and then in the
triple, and set that figure under the former, one figure more to the right hand.

Lastly, Multiply the last figure cubically, and set that Sum also one figure
to the Right hand; then add all these three multiplications together, and
substract it out of figures standing over the first and second prick, and the
Remainder set over them.

This done, again triple the quotient, and proceed exactly as before etc.

If your number be not an exact Cube, but some numbers remain whereof you
desire to find the exact fraction, that is as near as possible may be, viz. to
a tenth, hundredth, or a thousandth part etc. To find the tenths add three
ciphers, the hundreds 6 ciphers, the thousands nine ciphers, at the Right hand
of your figures, according to the directions given in finding the fractional of
a square. But these Rules being something tedious to many men, we will for their
encouragement and ease add a Table of Squares and Cubes whereby any man may
find, by inspection only, the Square and Cube of any number of Inches, and
parts of an Inch, to a tenth part, provided your number exceed not 100 inches,
which will be found very necessary, and save much labor, as will appear by the
following Examples. But first we will present you with the Table it self.

A Table of Squares and Cubes, very useful for the speedy Extracting of Square
and Cube Roots, for the Resolution of Questions in Military Affairs: Whether
for the Ordering of Battalions, or Gunnery, etc.
R Aq Ac 1 1 1 2 4 8 3 9 27 4 16 64 5 25 125 6 36 216 7 49 343 8 64 512 9 81
729 10 100 1000 11 121 1331 12 144 1728 13 169 2197 14 196 2744 15 225 3375 16
256 4096 17 289 4913 18 324 5832 19 361 6859 20 400 8000 21 441 9261 22 484
10648 23 529 12167 24 576 13824 25 625 15625 26 676 17576 27 729 19683 28 784
21952 29 841 24389 30 900 27000 31 961 29791 32 1024 32768 33 1089 35937 34
1156 39304 35 1225 42875 36 1296 46656 37 1369 50653 38 1444 54872 39 1521
59319 40 1600 64000 41 1681 68921 42 1764 74088 43 1849 79507 44 1936 85184 45
2025 91125 46 2116 97336 47 2209 103823 48 2304 110592 49 2401 117649 50 2500
125000 51 2601 132651 52 2704 140608 53 2809 148877 54 2916 157464 55 3025
166375 56 3136 175616 57 3249 185193 58 3364 195112 59 3481 205379 60 3600
216000 61 3721 226981 62 3844 238328 63 3969 250047 64 4096 262144 65 4225
274625 66 4356 287496 67 4489 300763 68 4624 314432 69 4761 328509 70 4900
343000 71 5041 357911 72 5184 373248 73 5329 389017 74 5476 405224 75 5625
421875 76 5776 438976 77 5929 456533 78 6084 474552 79 6241 493039 80 6400
512000 81 6561 531441 82 6724 551368 83 6889 571787 84 7056 592704 85 7225
614125 86 7396 636056 87 7569 658503 88 7744 681472 89 7921 704969 90 8100
729000 91 8281 753571 92 8464 778688 93 8649 804357 94 8836 830584 95 9025
857375 96 9216 884736 97 9409 912673 98 9604 941192 99 9801 979299 100 10000
1000000 101 10201 1030301 102 10404 1061208 103 10609 1092729 104 10816 1124864
105 11025 1157625 106 11236 1191016 107 11449 1225043 108 11664 1259712 109
11881 1295029 110 12100 1331000 111 12321 1367631 112 12544 1404928 113 12769
1442897 114 12996 1481544 115 13225 1520875 116 13456 1560896 117 13689 1601613
118 13924 1643032 119 14161 1685159 120 14400 1728000 121 14641 1771561 122
14884 1815848 123 15129 1860867 124 15376 1906624 125 15625 1953125 126 15876
2000376 127 16129 2048383 128 16384 2097152 129 16641 2146689 130 16900 2197000
131 17161 2248291 132 17424 2299968 133 17689 2352637 134 17956 2406104 135
18225 2460375 136 18496 2515456 137 18769 2571353 138 19044 2628027 139 19321
2685619 140 19600 2744000 141 19881 2803221 142 20164 2863288 143 20449 2924207
144 20736 2985984 145 21025 3048625 146 21316 3112136 147 21609 3176523 148
21904 3241792 149 22201 3307949 150 22500 3375000 151 22801 3442951 152 23104
3511808 153 23409 3581577 154 23716 3652264 155 24025 3723875 156 24336 3796416
157 24649 3869893 158 24964 3944312 159 25281 4019679 160 25600 4096000 161
25921 4173281 162 26244 4251528 163 26569 4330747 164 26896 4410944 165 27225
4492125 166 27556 4574296 167 27889 4657463 168 28224 4741632 169 28561 4826809
170 28900 4913000 171 29241 5000211 172 29584 5088448 173 29929 5177717 174
30276 5268024 175 30625 5359375 176 30976 5451776 177 31329 5545233 178 31684
5639752 179 32041 5735339 180 32400 5832000 181 32761 5929741 182 33124 6028568
183 33489 6128487 184 33856 6229504 185 34225 6331625 186 34596 6434856 187
34969 6539203 188 35344 6644672 189 35721 6751269 190 36100 6859000 191 36481
6967871 192 36864 7077888 193 37249 7189057 194 37636 7301384 195 38025 7415875
196 38416 7529536 197 38809 7645373 198 39204 7762392 199 39601 7880599 200
40000 8000000 201 40401 8120601 202 40804 8242408 203 41209 8369421 204 41616
8489664 205 42025 8615125 206 42436 8741816 207 42849 8869743 208 43264 8998912
209 43681 9129329 210 44100 9261000 211 44521 9393931 212 44944 9528128 213
45369 9663597 214 45796 9800344 215 46225 9938375 216 46656 10077696 217 47089
10218313 218 47524 10360232 219 47961 10503459 220 48400 10648000 221 48841
10793861 222 49284 10941048 223 49729 11089567 224 50176 11239424 225 50625
11390625 226 51076 11543176 227 51529 11697083 228 51984 11852352 229 52441
12008989 230 52900 12167000 231 53361 12326391 232 53824 12487168 233 54289
12649337 234 54756 12812904 235 55225 12977875 236 55696 13144256 237 56169
13312053 238 56644 13481272 239 57121 13651919 240 57600 13824000 241 58081
13997521 242 58564 14172488 243 59049 14348907 244 59536 14526784 245 60025
14706125 246 60516 14886936 247 61009 15069223 248 61504 15252992 249 62001
15438249 250 62500 15655000 251 63001 15813251 252 63504 16003008 253 64009
16194277 254 64516 16387064 255 65025 16581375 256 65536 16777216 257 66049
16974593 258 66564 17173512 259 67081 17373979 260 67600 17576000 261 68121
17779581 262 68644 17984728 263 69169 18191447 264 69696 18399744 265 70225
18609625 266 70756 18821096 267 71289 19034163 268 71824 19248832 269 72361
19465109 270 72900 19683000 271 73441 19902511 272 73984 20123648 273 74529
22346417 274 75076 20570824 275 75625 20796875 276 76176 21024576 277 76729
21253933 278 77284 21484952 279 77841 21717639 280 78400 21952000 281 78961
22188041 282 79524 22425768 283 80089 22665187 284 80656 22906304 285 81225
23149125 286 81796 23393656 287 82369 23639903 288 82944 23887872 289 83521
24137569 290 84100 24389000 291 84681 24642171 292 85264 24897088 293 85849
25153757 294 86436 25412184 295 87025 25672375 296 87616 25934336 297 88209
261980 298 88804 26463592 299 89401 26730899 300 90000 27000000 301 90601
27270901 302 91204 27543608 303 91809 27818127 304 92416 28094464 305 93025
28372625 306 93636 28652616 307 94249 28934443 308 94864 29218112 309 95481
29503629 310 96100 29791000 311 96721 30080231 312 97344 30271328 313 97969
30664297 314 98596 30659144 315 99225 31255875 316 99856 31554496 317 100489
31855013 318 101124 32157432 319 101761 32461759 320 102400 32768000 321 103041
33076161 322 103684 33386248 323 103329 33698267 324 104976 34012224 325 105625
34328125 326 106276 34645976 327 106929 34965783 328 107584 35287552 329 108241
35611289 330 108900 35937000 331 109561 36264691 332 110224 36594368 333 110889
36926037 334 111556 37259704 335 112225 37595375 336 112896 37933056 337 113569
38272753 338 114244 38614472 339 114921 38958219 340 115600 39304000 341 116281
39651821 342 116964 40001688 343 117649 40353607 344 118336 40707584 345 119025
41063625 346 119716 41421736 347 120409 41781923 348 121104 42144192 349 121801
42508549 350 122500 42875000 351 123201 43243551 352 123904 43614^08 353 124609
43986977 354 125316 44361864 355 126025 44738875 356 126736 45118016 357 127449
45499293 358 128164 45882712 359 128881 46268279 360 129600 46656000 361 130321
47045881 362 131044 47437928 363 131769 47832147 364 132496 48228544 365 133225
48627125 366 133956 49027896 367 134689 49430863 368 135424 49836032 369 136161
50243409 370 136900 50653000 371 137641 51064811 372 138384 51478848 373 139129
51895117 374 139876 52313624 375 140625 52734375 376 141376 53157376 377 142129
53582633 378 142884 54010152 379 143641 54439939 380 144400 54872000 381 145161
55306341 382 145924 55742968 383 146689 56181887 384 147456 56623104 385 148225
57066625 386 148996 57512456 387 149769 57960603 388 150544 58411072 389 151321
58863869 390 152100 59319000 391 152881 59776471 392 153664 60236288 393 154449
60698457 394 155236 61162984 395 156025 61629875 396 156810 62099136 397 157609
62570773 398 158404 63044792 399 159201 63521193 400 160000 64000000 401 160801
64481201 402 161604 64964808 403 162409 65450827 404 163216 65939264 405 164025
66430125 406 164836 66923416 407 165649 67419143 408 166464 67917312 409 167281
68417929 410 168100 68921000 411 168921 69426531 412 169744 69934528 413 170569
70444997 414 171396 70957944 415 172225 71473375 416 173056 71991296 417 173889
72511713 418 174724 73034632 419 175561 73560059 420 176400 74088000 421 177241
74618461 422 178084 75151448 423 178929 75686967 424 179776 76225024 425 180625
76765625 426 181476 77308776 427 182329 77854483 428 183104 78402752 529 184041
78953589 430 184900 79507000 431 185761 80062991 432 186624 80621568 433 187489
81182737 434 188356 81746504 435 189225 82312875 436 190096 82881856 437 190969
83453353 438 191844 84027672 439 192721 84604519 440 193600 85184000 441 194481
85766121 442 195364 86350888 443 196249 86938307 444 197136 87528384 445 198025
88121125 446 198916 88716536 447 199809 89314623 448 200704 89915392 449 201601
90518849 450 202500 91125000 451 203401 91733851 452 204304 92345408 453 205209
92959677 454 206116 93576664 455 207025 94196375 456 207936 94818816 457 208849
95443993 458 209764 96071912 459 210681 96702579 460 211690 97336000 461 212521
97972181 462 213444 98611128 463 214369 99252847 464 215296 99897344 465 216225
100544625 466 217156 101194696 467 218089 101874563 468 219024 102503232 469
219961 103161709 470 220900 103823000 471 221841 104487111 472 222784 105154048
473 223729 105823817 474 224676 106496424 475 225625 107171875 476 226576
107850176 477 227429 108531333 478 228484 109215352 479 229441 109902239 480
230400 11059200 481 231361 111284641 482 232324 111980168 483 233289 112678587
484 234256 113379904 485 235225 114084125 486 236196 114791256 487 237169
115501303 488 238144 116214272 489 239121 116930269 490 240100 117649000 491
241081 118370771 492 242064 119095488 493 243049 119823157 494 244036 120553784
495 245025 121287375 496 246016 122023936 497 247009 122763473 498 248004
123505992 499 249001 124251499 500 250000 125000000 501 251000 125751501 502
252004 126506008 503 253009 127263527 504 254016 128024064 505 255025 128787625
506 256036 129554216 507 257049 130323843 508 258964 131096512 509 259081
131872229 510 260100 123651000 511 261121 133432831 512 262144 134217728 513
263169 135005697 514 264196 135796744 515 265225 136590875 516 266256 137388096
517 267289 138188413 518 268324 138991832 519 269361 139798359 520 270400
410608000 521 277441 141420761 522 272484 142236648 523 273529 143055667 524
274576 143877824 525 275625 144703125 526 276676 145531576 527 277729 146363183
528 278784 147197952 529 279841 148035889 530 280900 148877000 531 281961
149721291 532 283024 150568768 533 284089 151419437 534 285156 152273304 535
286225 153130375 536 287296 153990656 537 288369 154854153 538 289444 155720872
539 290521 156590819 540 291600 157464000 541 292681 158340421 542 293764
159220088 543 294849 160103007 544 295936 160989184 545 297025 161878625 546
298116 162771336 547 299209 163667323 548 390304 164566592 549 391491 165469149
550 302500 166375000 551 303601 167284151 552 304704 168196608 553 305809
169112377 554 306916 170031464 555 308025 170953875 556 309136 171879616 557
310249 172808693 558 311364 173741112 559 312481 174676879 560 313600 175616000
561 314721 176558481 562 315844 177504328 563 316969 178453547 564 318096
179406144 565 319225 180362125 566 320356 181321496 567 321489 182284263 568
322624 183250432 569 323761 184220009 570 324900 185193000 571 326041 186169411
572 327184 187149284 573 328320 188132517 574 329476 189119224 575 330625
190109375 576 331776 191102976 577 332929 192100033 578 334084 193100552 579
335241 194104539 580 336400 195112060 581 337561 196122941 582 338724 197137368
583 339889 198155287 584 341056 199176704 585 342225 200201625 586 343396
201230056 587 344569 202262003 588 345744 203297472 589 346921 204336469 590
348100 205379000 591 349281 206425071 592 350464 207474688 593 351649 208527857
594 352836 209584584 595 354025 210644871 596 355216 211708746 597 356409
212776073 598 357604 213847192 599 358801 214921799 600 360000 216000000 601
361201 217081801 602 362404 218167208 603 363609 219256227 604 364816 220348864
605 366025 221445125 606 367236 222545016 607 368449 223648543 608 369664
224755732 609 370881 225866529 610 372100 226981000 611 373321 228099131 612
374544 229220928 613 375769 230346397 614 376996 231475544 615 378225 232608375
616 379456 233744896 617 380689 234885113 618 381924 236029032 619 383161
237176659 620 384400 238328000 621 385641 239483061 622 386884 240641848 623
388129 241804367 624 380376 242970624 625 390625 244140625 626 391876 245314376
627 393129 246491883 628 394384 247673158 629 395641 248858189 630 396900
250047000 631 398161 251239591 632 399424 252435968 633 400689 253636137 634
401956 254840104 635 403225 256047875 636 404496 257259456 637 405799 258474853
638 407044 259694072 639 408321 260917119 640 409600 262144000 641 410881
263374721 642 412164 264609288 643 413449 265847707 644 414736 267089984 645
416025 268336125 646 417316 269586136 647 418609 270840025 648 419904 272097792
649 421201 273359449 650 422500 274625000 651 423801 275894415 652 425104
277167808 653 426409 278445077 654 427716 279726264 655 429025 281011375 656
430336 282300416 657 436649 283593393 658 432964 284890312 659 434281 286191179
660 435600 287496000 661 436921 288804781 662 438244 290117528 663 439569
291434247 664 440896 292754944 665 442225 294079625 666 443556 295408296 667
444889 296740963 668 446224 298077632 669 447561 299418309 670 448900 300763000
671 450241 302111711 672 451584 303464448 673 452929 304821217 674 454276
306182024 675 455625 307546875 676 456976 308915776 677 458329 310288733 678
459084 311665752 679 461041 313046830 680 462400 314432000 681 463761 315821241
682 465124 317214568 683 466489 318611987 684 467856 320013504 685 469225
321419125 686 470596 322828856 687 471969 324242703 688 473344 325660672 689
474721 327082769 690 476100 328509000 691 477481 329939371 692 478864 331373888
693 483249 332812557 694 481633 334255384 695 483025 335702375 696 484416
337153536 697 485809 338638873 698 487204 339068392 699 488601 341532099 700
490000 343000000 701 491401 344472101 702 492804 345948408 703 494209 347428927
704 495616 348913664 705 497025 350402625 706 498436 351895816 707 499849
353393243 708 501264 354894912 709 502681 356400829 710 504100 357911000 711
505521 359425431 712 506944 360944128 713 508369 362467097 714 509796 363994344
715 511225 365525875 716 512656 367061696 717 514089 368601813 718 515524
370246232 719 516961 371694959 720 518400 373248000 721 519841 374805361 722
521284 376367048 723 522729 377933067 724 524176 379503424 725 525625 381078125
726 527076 382657186 727 528529 384240592 728 529984 385828362 729 531441
387420499 730 532900 389017000 731 534361 390617891 732 535821 391223168 733
537289 393832837 734 538756 395446904 735 540225 397065375 736 541696 398688256
737 543169 400315553 738 544644 401947272 739 546221 403583419 740 547600
405224000 741 549081 406869621 742 550564 408518488 743 552049 410172407 744
553536 411830784 745 555025 413493625 746 556516 415160936 747 558009 416832723
748 559504 418508992 749 561001 420189741 750 562500 421875000 751 564001
423564751 752 565504 425259008 753 567009 426957777 754 568516 428661064 755
570025 430368875 756 571536 432081216 757 573049 433798093 758 574564 435519512
759 576081 437245479 760 577600 438976000 761 579121 440701081 762 580644
442440728 763 582169 444184947 764 583696 445933744 765 585225 447687125 766
586656 449445096 767 588289 451207663 768 589824 452974832 769 591361 454746609
770 592900 456533000 771 594441 458314011 772 595984 460099648 773 597529
461889917 774 599076 463684824 775 600625 465484375 776 602176 467288576 777
603729 469097433 778 605284 470910952 779 606841 472729139 780 608400 474552000
781 609961 476279541 782 611524 478211768 783 613089 480048687 784 614656
481890304 785 616225 483736625 786 617796 485587656 787 619369 487443403 788
620944 489303872 789 622521 491169069 790 624100 493039000 791 625681 494913071
792 627264 496793088 793 628849 498677257 794 630436 500566184 795 632015
502459875 796 633616 504358336 797 635209 506261573 798 636804 508169592 799
638401 510082399 800 640000 512000000 801 641601 513922402 802 643204 515849608
803 644809 517781627 804 646416 519718464 805 648025 521660125 806 649636
523606616 807 651249 525557943 808 652864 527514112 809 654481 529475129 110
656100 531441000 811 657721 533411731 812 659344 535387328 813 660969 537367797
814 662596 539353144 815 664225 541343375 816 665856 543338496 817 667489
545338513 818 669124 547343432 819 670761 549353256 820 672400 551368000 821
674041 553387661 822 675684 555412248 823 677329 557441767 824 678976 559476224
825 680625 561515625 826 682276 563559976 827 683929 565609283 8^8 685584
567663552 829 687241 569722789 830 688000 571787000 831 690561 573856191 832
692224 575930368 833 693889 578009537 834 695556 580093704 835 697225 582182875
836 698896 584277056 837 700569 586376253 838 702244 588480472 839 703921
590589719 840 705600 592704000 841 707281 594823321 842 708964 596947688 843
710649 599077107 844 712336 601211584 845 714025 603351125 846 715716 605495736
847 717409 607645423 848 719104 609800199 849 720801 611960049 850 722500
614125000 851 724201 616265051 852 725904 618470208 853 727609 620650477 854
729316 622835864 855 731025 625026375 856 732736 627222016 857 734449 629422793
858 736164 631628712 859 737881 633839779 860 739600 636056000 861 741321
638277381 862 743044 640503928 863 744769 642735647 864 746496 644972544 865
748225 647214625 866 749956 949461896 867 751689 651714363 868 753424 653972032
869 755161 656234929 870 756900 658503000 871 758641 660776311 872 760384
663054848 873 762129 665336617 874 763876 667627624 875 765625 669921875 876
767376 672121376 877 769129 674526133 878 770884 676836152 879 772641 679151439
880 774400 681472000 881 776161 683797841 882 777924 686128968 883 779689
688465387 884 781456 690807104 885 783225 693154125 886 784996 695506456 887
786769 697864103 888 788544 700227072 889 790321 702595369 890 792100 704060000
891 793881 707247971 892 795664 709732288 893 797449 712121957 894 799236
714516984 895 801025 716917375 896 802816 719323136 897 804609 721734273 898
806404 724150792 899 808201 726572699 900 810000 729000000 901 811801 731452701
902 813604 733870808 903 815409 736314327 904 817216 738763264 905 819025
741217625 906 820836 743677416 907 822649 746142643 908 824644 748613312 909
826281 751089429 910 828100 753571000 911 829921 750058031 912 831744 758550528
913 833569 761048497 914 835396 763551944 915 837225 766060875 916 839056
768575296 917 840889 771095213 918 842724 773620632 919 844561 776151559 920
846400 778688000 921 848241 781229961 922 850084 783777448 923 851929 786330467
924 853776 788889024 925 855625 791453125 926 857476 794022776 927 859329
796597983 928 861184 799178752 929 863041 801765089 930 864900 804357000 931
866761 806954491 932 868624 809557568 933 870489 812166237 934 872356 814780504
935 874225 817400375 936 876096 820025856 937 877969 822656953 938 879844
825293672 939 881721 827936019 940 883600 830584000 941 885481 833237621 942
887364 835896888 943 889249 838561807 944 891136 841232384 945 893025 843908625
946 894916 846590536 947 896809 849271123 948 898704 851971392 949 900601
854670349 950 902500 857375000 951 904401 860085351 952 906304 862801408 953
908209 865523177 954 910116 868250664 955 912025 870983875 956 913936 873722816
957 915849 876467493 958 917764 879217012 959 919681 881974079 960 921600
884736000 961 923521 887503681 962 925444 890277128 963 927369 893056347 964
929296 895841344 965 931225 898632125 966 933156 901428696 967 935089 904231003
968 937024 907039232 969 938961 909853209 970 940900 912673000 971 942841
915498611 972 944784 918330048 973 946729 991167317 974 948676 924010424 975
950625 926859375 976 952576 929714176 977 954529 932574833 978 956484 935441352
979 958441 938313739 980 960400 941192000 981 962361 944076141 982 964324
946966168 983 966289 949862087 984 968256 952763904 985 970225 955671625 986
972196 958585256 987 974169 961504803 988 976144 964430272 989 978121 967361669
990 980100 970299000 991 982081 973242271 992 984064 976191488 993 986049
979146657 994 988036 982107784 995 990025 985074875 996 992016 988047936 997
994009 991026973 998 996004 994011992 999 998001 997002999 1000 1000000
1000000000

CHAP. XXV. The Use of these Tables in Gunnery.
QUEST. I. By knowing the Diameter and Weight of any one Shot, to find the
Weight of another Shot, being both of one and the same Metal.
THe Shot whose weight we know not, we must have in Diameter likewise, which is
found thus, Gird the Shot with a Line, then divide that into twenty two equal
parts, and seven of those is the Diameter or the height of the Shot.

But if you have a pair of Callapars by you, the best way is to take the
Diameter with them. The fashion and form of taking the Diameter of a Shot, is
as here you see in the figure following.

calipers measuring a shot Cube each Diameter, then multiply the Cube of the
Shot whose weight is requited by the Diameter of the given Shot, and that Sum
divided by the Cube of the known Diameter, the quotient is the Diameter of the
Shot required.

If an Iron Shot of 4 Inches Diameter weigh 9 l. what shall a Shot weigh whose
Diameter is twice as much, that is, 8 Inches.



Example.

Inch. l. Inch. l. If 4 weigh 9 what 8 Answer 72. 12 l. 4 512 8 4608 (72 The
weight of the Shot of 8 Inches Diameter. 16 18 64 644 4 459 8 6 64 4608 512

This question may also be performed by the former Table of Cubes, if you
search in the Collum of Roots until you find your Diameters in a right Line
with the same under the word Cube, you will find the Cube answerable to the
number given, thus; you will find the Cube of 4 to be 64, and of 8 to be 512,
and this 512 multiplied by the weight of the known Bullet, viz. 9 l. it makes
4608, which divided by 64, gives the weight of the Bullet to be 72 l. which was
to be known.

QUEST. II. Knowing the Diameter and weight of one Shot, to find the Diameter
of a Shot that weighs twice as much.
Suppose the known Shot was 4 Inches Diameter, and weigh 9 pound, and it were
required to find the Diameter of a Shot, whose weight is twice as much, that is
^8, find the Cube-Root of each Shots weight, then multiply the Diameter of the
Shot whose weight is known, by the Cube of the Diameter of the Shot whose
weight is required; and that Sum divided by the Cube of the Diameter of the
known Shot and the quotient is the Diameter required. Example. By the former
Rule, or by the Table, the Cube of the pounds will be found to be 2,08, and the
Cube of 18 will be 2, 62, now multiply this last number by 4, and it makes 9,
48, which divided by 2, 08 will give in the quotient 5, 03 for the Diameter
required.

This question may very easily be wrought by the Line of numbers, thus; divide
the distance between 9 and 18 into three equal parts, and that extent will
reach from 4 Inches to 5, 03 Inches, the Diameter required.

QUEST III. How the former question may be Resolved Geometrically.
Make a Square of the Diameter of the lesser Bullet, then draw a Line from
Corner to Corner, and this Line thus drawn shall be the Diameter of a Shot
twice the weight of the other; which if you divide into two equal parts,
setting one foot of your compasses in the middle, you may draw a Circle, and
that circumference will represent unto you a Bullet twice the weight of the
lesser Diameter.

This work may be proved Arithmetically thus; the Diameter of the lesser Bullet
is 4 Inches, the Square thereof 16, which being doubled is 32; and the square
Root of this 32 is 5, 65, and so much is the Diameter of the greater Bullet,
which weighed 18 l. There arises here a difference between this way and the
former, but this way is the most true; not but that both Rules are true in
themselves, but the former depending upon finding the Cube Roots, which cannot
be found much more exacter than what I have done, and so working by them, and
they not being exact, causes the difference in the work,

QUEST. IV. How to find the Diameter for the Weight of any Shot assigned.
Suppose a Shot of 27 l. be 6 Inches Diameter, how many Inches Diameter is a
Shot of 64 l.

Find the Cube of 64 in the Table, and it will be found to be 4; which multiply
by 6, and it makes 24; which divided by 3, the Cube of 27, and it gives 8
Inches for the Diameter of the Shot or Bullet which was required.

QUEST. V. How this Question may Geometrically be resolved.
Mr. Gunter in his first Book, Section 4. has showed how to make a Line of
Solids on his Sector; but this Rule shows us the proportion of the Diameters in
Weight, having a Shot of one pound, two pounds, three pounds weight of Metal,
or stone, etc. For if the given Shot be one pound, divide the diameter of that
Shot into 4 equal parts, and 5 such parts will make a Diameter of a Shot of the
said Metal, as is proposed, that shall weigh just twice as much. And divide the
Diameter of a Shot that weighs just two pounds into seven equal parts, and
eight such parts will make the Diameter of a Shot of 3 pounds weight. And
Divide the Diameter of a Shot of 3 pounds, into 10 equal parts, and 11 of such
parts will give a Shot of 4 pounds weight. And divide a Shot of 4 pounds weight
into 13 parts, and 14 such parts will make a Shot of 5 pounds in weight. And
divide the Diameter of a Shot of 5 pounds weight, into 16 equal parts, and 17
such parts will make a Diameter of a shot that will weigh 6 pounds. And so
dividing the Diameter of a shot 6 pounds weight into 19 equal parts, and 20
such parts will make a Diameter of a shot that will weigh 7 pounds. Thus
dividing each next Diameter into three equal parts more than the next less
Diameter was divided into, and with one part added to the Diameter of a shot it
will weigh just one pound more, and so may proceed infinitely.

A second way to Perform this work.

Find exactly the Diameter of a shot whose weight is just one pound, then
describe a Circle whose Diameter shall be equal thereunto, and divide it into
four equal parts, as a b c d, and draw the two Diameters a c and d b crossing
the Center, and then take the distance d c in your Compasses, and lay it off
from e to 2, and this will be a shot of two pounds weight.

Then take the distance d 2, in your Compasses, and set it off from e to 3, so
will that distance be the Diameter of a shot of three pounds weight; and so you
may proceed in the same manner at your pleasure; as you may see by the
projection.

diameter of a shotLikewise having the Diameter of a Shot of any weight, the
double of the Diameter is the Diameter of a Shot that weighs eight times as
much. So that if a Shot of four Inches Diameter weigh nine pounds, a Shot of
eight inches Diameter will weigh seventy two pounds; as you may see by this
following Table of the weights of Shot.

QUEST. VI. If a Shot of three Inches and a half weigh six pounds, what will a
Shot of seven inches and three quarters weigh.
You may for 3 put 3, 50. and for 7 put 7, 75. then you may Cube them the
common way; then multiply the second by the third number, and divide by the
first, the Quotient gives the content.

You may more easily work it by the Table of Cubes aforegoing; that is, against
the Root 3, 50. you will find its Cube to be 42, 875; and against the Root 7,
75. you will find its Cube to be 46, 548. and this multiplied by 6, and divided
by 42, 875, will leave 65, 14. that is 65 pounds and 14/100 parts of a pound.
In this nature may any Fractions be wrought, even as easy as whole Numbers,
especially if you reckon your Fractions the Decimal way, or bring them into
Decimal Fractions by Reduction.

QUEST. VII. The Proportions between Bullets of Iron and Bullets of Lead or
Stone, that is, by knowing the Weight of an Iron Shot, to find the Weight of a
Shot of the same Diameter made of Lead or Stone.
The Proportion between Lead and Iron is as 3 to 2, so that a Shot of two pound
of Iron is the same Diameter as a Shot of 3 pounds of Lead.

Example.

If a Shot of Iron of 3^/^ Inches Diameter weigh 6 pounds, what will a Shot of
Lead of the same Diameter?

For 3 Inches put 3, 5, and say, if 2 give 3, 5, what will 3 give?

35 1 15 105 52 pounds. 9 22 105

This 52 pounds is the weight of a Shot of Lead of 3 Inches and a half Diameter.

The proportion between Iron and Stone is as 3 to 8, so that a Shot of 12 pound
of stone is as big, or the same in Diameter, as the like Shot of Iron that
weighs 32 pounds; but some say the proportion between Marble and Iron is as 15
to 34.

A Bullet of Lead to the like of Marble is in proportion as 4 to 1.

The proportion between Lead and Brass is as 24 is to 19.

The proportion between Iron and Lead, as some say, is as 19 to 28.

The proportion between Iron and Brass is as 16 to 18.

By these Rules we may Calculate a Table very easily, to know if an Iron Shot
be wanting, and a Shot of any of the other metals to be had, what height and
weight either Shot of Lead Brass or Stone ought to be, to fit any piece of
Ordnance; and by the same method we have here Calculated a Table, which does
show the weight of any Shot of Iron, Lead or Stone; from 2 Inches to 9 Inches.

This is worthy to be observed, that you ought not to have so much Powder to
Load a Piece that must discharge a Marble Shot, as an Iron Shot; but the
proportion must be abated as the proportions between Stone and Iron does allow
of.

A Table of the Diameter and Weight of all such Shot as are generally used in
England, from one to eight Inches Diameter, with the length of every Piece
fitting to carry such a Shot.
The Names of the Pieces of Ordnance. Diameter of the Bore. Length of the Gun.
Weight of the Gun in pounds. Breadth of the Ladle. Length of the Ladle. Weight
of the Powder. Diameter of the Shot. The weight of the Shot. He shoots point
blank. The Parts. Inches. Inches. Feet. Pounds. Parts. Inches. Parts. Inches.
Ounces. Pounds. Parts. Inches. Ounces. Pounds. Paces. [8 [8 [8 [8 [8 A Base.
1:2 4:6 200 2:0 4:0 0:8 1:1 0:5 60 A Rabanet. 1:4 5:6 300 2:4 4:1 0:12 1:3 0:8
70 Fauconets. 2:2 6:0 400 4:0 7:4 1:4 2:2 1:5 90 Faucons. 2:6 7:0 750 4:4 8:2
2:4 2:5 2:8 130 Ordinary Minion. 3:0 7:0 750/108 5:0 8:4 2:8 2:7 3:4 120 Minion
of the largest size. 3:2 8:0 1000 5:0 9:0 3:4 3:0 3:12 125 Saker the lowest
sort. 3:4 8:0 1400 6:4 9:6 3:6 3:2 4:12 150 Ordinary Sakers. 3:6 9/9:0 1500 6:6
10:4 4:0 3:4 6:0 160 Sakers of the oldest sort. 4:0 10:0 1800 7:2 11:0 5:0 3:6
7:5 163 Lowest Demiculvering. 4:2 10:0 2000 8:0 12:0 6:4 4:0 9:0 174 Ordinary
Demiculvering. 4:4 80/11:0 2700 8:0 12:6 7:4 4:2 10:11 175 Elder sort of
Demiculvering. 4:6 12/13:0 3000 8:4 13:4 8:8 4:4 12:11 178 Culverings of the
best size. 5:0 10/13:0 4000 9:0 14:2 10:0 4:6 15:0 180 Ordinary Culvering. 5:2
12/13: 4500 9:4 16:0 11:6 5:0 17:5 181 Culvering of the largest size. 5:4
12/10:0 4800 10:0 16:0 11:8 5:2 20:0 183 Lowest Demicanon. 6:2 11:0 5400 11:4
20:0 14:0 6:0 30:0 156 Ordinary Demicanon. 6:4 12:0 5600 12:0 22:0 17:8 6:1/^
32:0 162 Demicanon of great size. 6:6 12:0 6000 12:0 22:6 18:0 6:5 36:0 180
Canon Royal, or of 8:0 12: 8000 14:6 24:0 32:8 7:4 58:0 185

QUEST. VIII. How to make a Shot of Lead and Stone together (the Stone being
first put into the middle of the Mold, in which the Lead must be afterward
Cast round about the Stone) to be of the like Diameter and Weight as an Iron
Shot is of.
It is found by Experience that if you take five parts Lead, and one part of
Stone, it will come very near the matter. By these Rules have we Calculated
this Table.

It is found by experience, that if Inches. Quart. Lead. Poun. Ou. Stone. Poun.
Ou. Both together. Poun. Oun. 1 0 1 0 0 0 2 1 2 0 6 0 1 0 8 2 0 14 0 4 1 2 2 2
0 12 0 8 2 4 3 3 2 0 10 3 12 3 2 5 0 1 0 5 0 4 7 7 1 8 8 15 4 2 10 8 2 2 12 10
5 14 7 2 14 17 5 5 2 19 4 3 12 23 0 6 25 0 5 0 30 0 6 2 32 0 6 0 38 0 7 40 0 8
0 48 0 7 2 48 0 10 0 58 0 8 59 0 12 0 71 0 you take 5 parts Lead, and one part
Stone, it will come very near the matter, wanting not above 3 Ounces, which is
nothing, respecting the difference you shall find in Pibble Stones. Here you
have a Table how much Lead, and how much Stone must be together, to make the
equal of Iron Shot, from 1 inch, and to every half in the first and second
Column to 8 Inch. Diameter; the third Column is how much Lead, the fourth how
much Stone, the fifth how much weight both together.

Its use is thus; knowing the Diameter of the intended Shot, enter the Table in
the first and second Columns, and against them, in the third and fourth
Columns, you have the Weight of Lead and Stone, that will make a Shot of the
same Diameter with a Shot of Iron, whose weight is in the fifth Column.

Example.

An Iron Shot of 2 inches Diameter, will weigh 1 pound, 2 ounces; If I enter
this Table with 2 inches, in the first Column against it, I shall find that I
must have 14 ounces of Lead, and 4 ounces of Stone, and this will make a Shot
of 2 inches Diameter equal to the weight of the Shot of Iron.

QUEST. IX. To find the sollid Content, and thereby the weight of any Iron Shot.
By the former Table or otherwise, find the Cube of the Diameter, which if you
multiply by 11, and divide by 21, gives the sollid Content of that Bullet in
inches and parts.

Now to know how many pounds weight any such body does contain, multiply the
sollid Content by 4, and divide that Sum by 16, it will show how many pounds of
Iron that Bullet weighs, for an inch square of cast Iron weighs 4 ounces.

CHAP. XXVI. Questions about Pieces of Ordnance.
BEfore we come to work what we intend concerning a Piece of Ordnance, it is
necessary to understand these Propositions following.

PROP. I. Having the Diameter of a Circle, to find the superficial Content.
Multiply the square of the Diameter of any Circle by 785 398, and the product
that shall come of that Multiplication is the Superficial Content.

PROP. II. Having the Diameter of any Circle, to find the Circumference thereof.
The common way of proportions is, as 7 to 22, so is the Diameter to the
Circumference; but more exactly it is done, if you multiply the Diameter by 3,
14, 16, or it may be done thus, as 113 is to 355; so is the Diameter to the
Circumference.

PROP. III. Having the Circumference of a Circle, to find the Superficial
Content.
Multiply the Square of the Circumference by 079, 578 will give the Superficial
Content, or Multiply the Diameter by half the Circumference, and that Sum is
the Superficial Content.

PROP. IV. Having the Circumference of any Circle, to find the Diameter.
Multiply the Circumference by 318 308, gives the Diameter of that Circle.

PROP. V. To measure the Frustrum of a Cone or Pyramid, knowing both the
Diameters and length of the said Frustrum.
Multiply the Diameters one by the other, and add to them both their Squares,
and that Sum divided by 785 39, the one third part of the Remainder is the
Content of the Cone.

PROP. VI. By knowing the weight of any one Piece of Ordnance, to find the
weight of any other Piece of Ordnance.
If a Saker of 4 inches Diameter weigh 1400 l. how much will a Cannon of 8
inches Diameter weigh, supposing they be equally fortified, (otherwise this
Rule will not hold true) Cube each Diameter, or seek in the foregoing Table,
and you will find the Cube of 4 to be 64, and of 8 to be 512, then say as 64 is
to 1400 l. so is 512 to 12919 pounds, and this is the weight of a Cannon that
is able to carry a proportionable Charge.

PROP. VII. To find the sollid Content of the Concavity, Cylinder, or Soul of a
Piece of Ordnance.
By the Rules given in the first of these Propositions, find the Superficial
Content or Ayrea of the end of the Cylinder, which multiplied by the length,
will give the sollid Content.

PROP. VIII. To find the sollid Content of the Soul or Concave of a Piece of
Ordnance, if it be Tapering, or the Section of a Cone.
The working of this Proposition is the same as in the fifth Proposition, or
you may for brevities sake, add both the Diameters together, and the half of
that may be accounted the mean Diameter, by which you may find the Superficial
Content by the first Proposition, which multiplied by the length, gives the
sollid Content.

PROP. IX. How by knowing the weight of any one Piece of Ordnance, to find the
weight of any other, being of the same shape.
With your Crallapars take the greatest thickness of the Piece whose weight you
know, and likewise of the Piece whose weight you know not; then by the former
Table find the Cube of each Diameter, then say, as the Cube of the Diameter of
the Piece whose weight is known, is to the weight of the same Piece, so is the
Cube of the Diameter of the Piece whose weight is unknown, to its weight sought.

But if the Pieces be not of one and the same Metal, after you have found the
weight, supposing it to be the same Metal, then you must by the Rules given in
the 24 Chapter, proportion the weight according to the Metal the Piece is of,
whose weight you know not, and if the Piece whose weight you know, do differ in
proportion, as if one be of Iron, the other of Brass, the proportion is as 16
to 18, etc.

PROP. X. By knowing the weight of any one Piece of Ordnance, to find the
weight of any other Piece of Ordnance, although differing in shape or form,
knowing the Diameters at Britch, Muzzles, and length of the Pieces.
By the Rules given in the ninth Proposition, find the sollid Content of the
Piece whose weight you know, supposing it to be a sollid body without a Chamber.

Then take the sollid Content of the Concave part, by Rules given in the
seventh Proposition, if it be a Cylinder; or by the ninth Proposition, if it be
Tapering. This latter Content that is of the Concave being deducted from the
former Content of the whole Piece, gives the sollid Content of the whole Metal
in the Piece.

Observe the same Rule in finding the sollid Content of the Piece whose weight
is unknown; Cube both the sollid Contents, and say, as the Cube of the sollid
Content of the Piece whose weight is known, is to his weight; so the Cube of
the sollid Content of the Piece whose weight is unknown, is to his weight; but
if they be not of one and the same Metal, we must work by proportions,
according to the Rules given in the 24th. Chapter.

By these Rules, when Weights and Scales have been wanting, have I found out
the weight of several Pieces of Ordnance; and if exact account be taken with
good judgment and consideration had, of the difference of the Trunions and
Britch end, especially if there be any great difference in the Pieces, you
cannot err much; for the Rule being demonstratively true, the operation truly
done, cannot err.

PROP. XI. To find the weight of any Piece of Ordnance, where we have no other
Piece of Ordnance, whose weight is known.
Find the sollid Content of the Metal according to the Rules given in the tenth
Proposition; then multiply that by 4, and dividing that Sum by 16, will give
the weight of the Piece, supposing it to be Iron; for it is generally allowed
that one inch square of Iron will weigh just four ounces.

If the Piece whose weight you seek be not of Iron, but of some other Metal;
then work by the Rules given in the 24th Chapter, for the difference of the
weight of Metals.

CHAP. XXVI. To know the Allowance or Proportion of Powder proper for any Piece
of Ordnance.
THe general way is to allow for such Brass Pieces as are above 4000 l. five
ounces and a half of powder to a hundred weight of Metal.

But for Culverin of Brass fortified of above 4000 l. about 3 ounces and a half
complete; yet there is used also generally for the proof of Shot three fourths
or four fifths of the weight of the Iron Shot, but for the Service not above
half the weight of the said Shot.

For Culverin, the whole weight of their Shot for proof and for action, is two
thirds of its weight.

The Saker and Faulcon four fifths, the weight of their Shot; and for lesser
Pieces the whole weight, and one third more for proof; but for action just its
weight: but when they grow hot, a part must be abated according to discretion.

You must note, if you know how much Powder will Load a Brass Piece, three
quarters so much will Load an Iron Piece of Ordnance.

SECT. I. If Weights and Scales be wanting, and Ladles and the Cartredge not
marked, yet to judge a reasonable Charge for any Piece of Ordnance.
The Allowance that may be made for Cannon is two thirds, the Diameter of the
Cylinder for Culverin three Diameters, for the Saker three and a half
Diameters, and for lesser Pieces four Diameters of the Cylinder, which length
will also serve for the Cartredge.

SECT. II. By the weight of Powder for any one Piece, to find the weight of
Powder proper to any other Piece of Ordnance.
To perform this work you must find by the foregoing Table the Cube of the
Diameter of the bore of the Piece, whose allowance of Powder you know; also the
Cube of the Diameter of the bore of the Piece, whose allowance of Powder you
desire to know: Then say, as the Cube of the known Piece is the quantity of
Powder known, so is the Cube of the Diameter of the unknown Piece to the
quantity of Powder proper to the unknown Piece.

SECT. III. Practical Experiments concerning the Allowance of Powder necessary
to any Piece in time of Service.
It is always necessary to take care in time of Service of over-loading a
Piece, which Error many run into, only minding the bore of a Piece, and not
minding whether the Metal will bear it, and so endanger themselves and other
standers by. To avoid such errors observe these experienced Rules.

To a Demy-Cannon fortified of Brass about 4400, or a little more, there is
allowed by the Tower 5 ounces and a half of Powder to every hundred weight of
Metal; yet in time of Service Gunners do allow but 3 ounces to every hundred
weight of Metal, which does amount to 10 l..

Demy-Cannon Drake of Iron about 3800 l. is allowed by the Tower 3 ounces and a
half of Powder to every hundred weight of Metal, which will be durable in time
of Service; but there are Drakes of 4400 l. which must be allowed more,
according to the proportion of their weight.

Culverin fortified Brass of 4600 l. is allowed by the Tower 3 ounces and a
half of powder complete to every hundred weight of Metal, which may be burnt in
time of Service with very little abatement.

Culverin Drakes of 40000 l. or thereabouts of Iron, for these Pieces may be
allowed in time of Service 3 ounces to every hundred weight of metal, but
proportionably must be allowed for Pieces of greater or lesser weight.

The 12 Pounders fortified of Brass of 3200 l. for Guns of this weight and
nature is usually allowed 3 ounces and a half for every hundred weight of Metal.

Demy-Culverin Brass of 3300 l. there is allowed by the Tower for Pieces of
Ordnance of this nature 3 ounces and a half and something more, to every hundred
weight of Metal, the which is approved a very sufficient Allowance.

Demy-Culverin Drakes of 2900 l. is allowed by most two ounces three quarters
to each hundred weight of metal, which will be durable in time of Service.

Saker fortified Brass of 2000 l. is allowed 3 ounces and something more for
every hundred weight of Metal, but there may be a small abatement in time of
Service.

CHAP. XXVII. To know whether a Piece of Ordnante be truly bored or no.
YOu must provide a Pike-staff, about a foot longer than the bore of the Piece,
and at the end thereof fasten a Rammer head, that will just fill all the bore
to the touch hole; and at the other end of the staff, you must bore a hole big
enough to put through a Rod of Iron, which must hang from the same; and at the
other end of the Rod must be made a weight about the bigness of a Saker Shot,
this is done to make the Pike-staff and Rammer head to lie with the same side
upward when they are taken out of the Piece, as they did when they were within
the Piece; then you must put your Instrument thus prepared into the Piece,
letting the Iron Ball (that is at the end of the Rod, which is put through the
hole bored a cross the Pike-staff) hang perpendicular; then take your priming
Iron, or some other bodkin, and put it down the touch hole to the Rammer head,
making a mark therewith; this done, draw out your Instrument, and lay the same
on a long Table, with the Iron Ball hanging off the end perpendicular, as it
did when the Instrument was in the Piece; then observe, whether the mark you
made upon the Rammer head when it was in the Piece, be just upon the uppermost
part of the same, if it be, the bore of the Piece lies neither to the right
hand nor to the left; but if you find it any thing to the right or left hand,
so much lies the bore either to the right or left, and the Piece in Shooting
must be ordered and charged accordingly.

But if you would know whether the bore lie more upwards or downwards, then
bend a Wire at the very end, so that it being put in at the very touch hole,
may ketch at the metal when it is drawn out, then put the Wire down the touch
hole till it touch the bottom of the metal in the Chamber, then holding it in
that place, make a mark upon the wire just even with the touch hole, after draw
up the wire until it ketch at the metal on the top of the Chamber, and holding
it there, make a mark as before; the difference between the two marks is the
just wideness of the Chamber, and the distance between the first mark and the
end of the Wire (having half the Diameter of the Chamber of the Piece
subtracted from it) will leave half the Diameter of the Piece, if the Piece be
true bored; but if the Piece's number be more than half the Diameter of the
Piece, the bore lies too far from the touch hole, and the upper part of the
metal is thickest, but if lesser, the lower part of the metal is thickest or
has most metal.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the necessary Instruments for a Gunner, with several other
necessary things.
A Master Gunner intending upon service, ought most chiefly to be prepared with
these Instruments, as Calabers, Compasses, height board, Sight Rule, Gunners
Scale, and a Gunners quadrant; to divide as well into 12 as 90 equal parts,
with a Geometrical Square, to make Montures, Levels, heights, Breadths,
Distances, and Profundities, (of which you shall read more in the Second Part;)
also with a little brass Level, Scales, Weights, Priming-Irons, Moulds to make
Cross-bar Shot for Muskets, a Book of Accounts, and an Iron wire or Spring,
and a Transome to dispart a Piece of Ordnance; that the Transome may go up and
down according to the Diameter and thickness of the Piece, let the Transom be
long enough to reach the base Ring, from the touch hole. In the next place he
ought to be very expert in the knowledge of cutting out, making up, and
finishing all sorts of Ladles, Spunges, Rammers, Cartredges, etc. For which
purpose you may have Recourse to the foregoing Table. And because it may
sometimes happen by reason of the steepness, badness and unevenness of the way,
you may be driven to dismount and remount your Piece, e're you get up to the
top of a Hill; therefore you must carry with you a Gynn and a Wynch, with all
the appurtenances thereunto belonging; as wind Ropes, an Iron Goats-foot, with
a Crow, Pins, Truckles, Pullies to help you at a dead lift.

CHAP. XXIX. The making of Rammers, Spunges, Ladles, and Cartredges, Formers,
Carriages, Wheels, Trucks etc. with the Height of Shot fit for any Piece.
FOr the better expedition of this work we have in the former Table showed the
length and breadth of each Ladle, always remembering that you cut each Ladle
somewhat longer, that is, allowing so much more as must be fastened to the
staff, or so much as the staff goes within the Plate.

The Buttons or heads of the Ladles must be near the height of the shot.

For Spunges, the bottoms and heads must be of soft wood, as Birch and Willow,
and to be one Diameter and three quarters in length, and three quarters or very
little less of the height covered with Sheeps skin, and nailed with Copper
nails, so that together they may fill the hollow of the Piece; Let the bottoms
and heads of the Rammers be made of good hard wood, and the height, one
Diameter of the Shot, and the length one third of the Diameter of the Shot.

To make Ladles for Chamber bored Pieces, open your Compasses to the just
Diameter of the Chamber within one eighth part of an Inch, Divide that measure
in two equal parts, then set the measure to one of them, and by that distance
upon a flat or paper draw a Circle, the Diameter of that Circle is one fourth
part shorter than the Diameter of the Chamber; Take three fifths of that Circle
for the breadth of the Plate of the Ladle. But for Cannon, the length ought to
be twice and two third parts, to hold at twice the just Diameter of the Powder.
As for Example,

The Diameter of a Circle drawn for a Cannon whose Chamber bore is 7 Inches,
contains six and three quarters, the circumference whereof is 21 Inches 6/7,
and three fourth parts thereof is 12, and so much ought the Ladle to be in
breadth, and in length 18 parts. By this Rule you may make a Ladle for any
Taper'd Piece.

Take notice for a general observation, that a Ladle 9 balls in length, and two
balls in breadth, will near contain the just weight in Powder, that the Iron
Shot for any piece weighs.

Lastly, for Cartredges, they are generally made of paper Royal or Canvas. Take
the height of the bore of your piece without the vent of the Shot, and cut the
cloth or paper of 3 such heights, for the Cannon in length 3 Diameters, for
the Culverin 4 Diameters, for the Saker and Faulcon etc. half of the height of
their proper bores, and leaving in the midst at the top or bottom one other
such height, to make a bottom for the Cartredge, cutting each side something
larger for Sewing, glewing, or pasting them together; you must have a great
care to augment the goodness of your powder, and likewise the heating of your
Piece, and so augment or diminish the quantity of Powder.

Let your Former be made to your Ordnance to the height of your Shot, and a
convenient length longer than the Cartredge ought to be, and tallow it over
first that the paper may slip off, and then put your paper on your Former. If
you make your Cartredge of Canvas, half a Diameter more is allowed for seams,
but if you make it of paper, half or three quarters of an Inch overplus for
pasting will serve, being lapt once about the Former; having the bottom fitted
upon the end of the Former, which must be hard and close pasted by the lower
side of the Cartredge, then let the lower end of the Cartredge be pasted down
hard round about the bottom, and let them be well dried before you fill them,
and mark them how high they must be filled.

And if you have no Scales nor weights by you for Cannons, put two Diameters
and a half for the height the powder must come, for Culverin 3 Diameters, for
Saker 3 and a half Diameters, for lesser Pieces four Diameters of the Cylinder.

For Carriages of Pieces of Ordnance for Land service the Rules are given thus,
one and a half the length of the Cylender is the length of the Carriage, and in
depth four Diameters of the bore of the Piece at the fore end, in the middle
three and a half, and at the end next the ground two and a half, let the
thickness be the Diameter of the Shot, the wheels should be one half of the
length of the Piece in height, but for Saker and Minion you must exceed the
former proportion by one twelfth part, the Faulcon and Faulconet by one sixth
part.

The Naves, the Cheeks called Limbres, and wheels, are usually made of Elm, but
the Transoms, Axeltreees, Fore-Carriage and Cross beams, are made of Oaken
Timber.

For drawing of Guns by men in case horses be wanting, there is usually allowed
to every sixty, eighty, or a hundred weight of metal to one man, according to
the nature of the ground whereon they are to be drawn.

As for Sea Carriages, they are so well known to every Carriage-maker that they
need not to be spoken of.

As for fitting Shot to each Piece, it is the opinion of most Gunners, that
every Piece of Ordnance ought to have its Shot within one quarter of an Inch of
the Diameter of the bore; others do say, that the one and twentieth part of the
Diameter of the Piece's Cylender is more proper and correspondent for all sorts
of Pieces whatsoever; Every man may make choice of that which by experience he
finds best.

CHAP. XXX. How a Gunner ought to charge a Piece of Ordnance.
HAving showed the complete making of Pieces of Ordnance, and the preparing of
powder and Shot, with the due allowance of powder fit for every Gun, with all
the Instruments and Materials necessarily belonging to a Piece, as to its
Rigging and Loading; It remains now, that we go Artist like to work to charge a
Piece, and order all things for the best convenience, and that the less danger
may follow when you come to Action or Service; and for that purpose having
planted your Piece upon the platform, have in readiness powder, Bullets,
Linstocks, Scowrers, Rammers, and the rest of your things. Stick up your
Linstock to Leeward of you; then to work with your Piece. First, clear your
Piece within with the Scowrer, and see that the touch hole be clear, and not
stopped, and so clear, that no dirt or filth be in the same; Then let him that
is by to assist, (for a Piece cannot be managed by less than two) bring the
Budg-barrel with the powder just before the mouth of your Piece, put then your
Ladle into the same and fill it, and if it be over-full, give it a little ^og,
that the overplus may fall down again into the barrel; after this, put it
gently in at the mouth of the Piece, even until the end of the Ladle be thrust
up to the Britch end of the Piece; then must you turn the Ladle gently and
softly, and let it lie within the Chamber of the piece, drawing out your Ladle
almost to the Muzzle of the Piece, put it back again to take up the loose
corns, which were spilt by the way, and to bring them up to the Charge of
powder; this done, the Gunner must draw out this Ladle, and take out of the
Budg-barrel a second Ladle full, (by our former Rules given he must know the
quantity of powder that his Piece will require) and so putting it in the Piece
up to the former Ladle-full, then you may draw it out, and do as you did
before, that no loose corns may lie in the bottom of the Piece; and in drawing
out his Ladle, he must have a care that he let not fall any powder upon the
ground; for it is a thing uncomly in a Gunner, to trample powder under feet.
Then take a wisp of Straw, Hay, or any other thing, and put it hard in at the
mouth of the Piece, then turn your Ladle end for end to come to the Rammer,
thrust it into the Piece after the wisp, and drive it up with it, and it will
carry all the loose corns which possibly may be scattered in the Mold of the
Piece; having driven the wad up to the powder, give it two or three gentle
shoves to make it lie close only, but drive it not too hard least you break
your powder too much, which would hinder its force; The wisp or wad being close
to the powder, draw out the Rammer and put in the Bullet, which roll gently in
the Piece up to the wad that was before put in to keep up the powder, the Shot
being in, put in a second wad after the Bullet, and thrust it also home to the
Bullet. Always remembering whilst the powder is putting in and wadding up, one
be ready at the touch hole and keep it stopped with his thumb, that no powder fly
out at the touch hole, but that it be likewise filled with powder, which may be
supplied out of his powder-horn.

The Gunner that Loads a Piece is to be very careful, and endeavor always not
to stand before the muzzle of his Piece whilst he is loading the Piece, but on
one side of the same, least a danger or mischief might happen to him. And thus
the Piece having its due Charge of Powder and Bullet, he must cover the
touchhole with an Apron made of Lead, or for want of that, with dried
Sheep-skin; then let him level his piece and set away the Budg-barrel of powder
with the rest of his things, in some hollow place under the ground covered over
safe; he must then attend the Gentleman of the Ordnance, or other chief
Commander, their Order or Command, before he give fire.

Touching the Charges of Pieces, I have given full instructions necessary
thereunto, with the weight of powder and Shot for any piece. But to say
something here touching the quantity of powder, proper for a Load; we do find
some difference amongst Authors; Some whereof do maintain, that there ought to
be allowed to every Piece for its Charge so much powder as half the weight of
the Bullet; others are of the opinion, that the more powder is put into a
Piece, the swifter and farther the Bullet will fly, urging many reasons to
prove it. But experience, the Mistress of this Art instructs us better, for
if a Piece be laden with two thirds of the weight of her Shot in powder, it
sends the Bullet or Shot going more swiftly, and will carry it farther, which
has been very many and often times tried, so that at this time, it is without
contradiction.

Again, others do maintain, that if one should forcibly Ram the Bullet, then
the powder might take fire before it cast forth the Bullet, and then would
cause the Bullet to fly farther than otherwise it would do; but you must
consider in so doing, you either endanger the breaking of the piece, or else
the making it crooked and unserviceable; because your ordinary Pieces will not
bear so great a Charge of powder. This has been tried by the Sea side before
his Excellency Prince Maurice, of famous memory, where first one and the same
Piece was Laden with ten pound of fine powder, to see how far She would carry
the Bullet; the place being marked where the Bullet rested. The Piece was
laden again with nine pounds of powder which shot as far as when the Piece was
Laden with ten pounds of powder. But last of all, this piece of Ordnance being
Laden or Charged with 7 pounds of the same powder, it carried her Bullet
further than the two former Shots; whence one may observe that a piece of
Ordnance may be Overcharged, and therefore a good Gunner ought to have a
singular care to give unto his Piece her due measure and Charge.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Office and Duty of a Gunner, with all his Properties,
Endowments and qualifications.
HE that intends to be a Master Gunner, and would not abuse himself nor others
of the same profession, must be qualified according to our Instructions
following, viz.

He ought to be well skilled in Arithmetic, and to understand the Extraction
of the Square and Cube Roots, and to have knowledge in Geometry, according to
our Instructions in the second part, whereby he may be able to take heights,
depths, breadths and lengths, and to draw the plot of any piece of ground, to
make Mines and Countermines, Rampars, Baskets of earth, and such like things
used in time of war, as well offensive as defensive.

He ought most chiefly upon Land-Service to be well skilled in the making
Plat-formers, with Defenses, Troniers, Gabbions, Loops, Parapets of Earth, and
Faggots of 23 or 24 foot high; two foot high of Earth, bed upon bed, unto
eleven foot high, and after three foot Terra plene, to raise the Tronniers and
Loops, so that for the Cannon it be three foot wide in the Barbe, and within
twelve foot wide, without the lower part thereof to descend Scarp-wise, the
better to discover the Enemies avenues and offend them more freely, for
avoiding the blast and Smoke and ruin it would else make: for Culverin two
foot and a half within, and nine foot without will serve; and for less Pieces
the less measure.

If the Battery be to be made with Gabbions, they being filled with Earth
without Stones, moistened and Rammed 7 foot in Diameter, three Ranks between two
Pieces, if the place will permit, or two at least; and three Rows also one
before the other, setting one between two, so that if one Rank will have three,
the second will have two, and the third one; but it will be hard to make a safe
Battery with Gabbions, Cannon or Culverin proof.

Concerning Plat-forms. Let the platform for a Cannon have thirty foot for
reverse, and 27 foot for a Demy-Cannon, and he ought to see that his plat-forms
be even, or rising one foot for 20 foot backward the better to stay the
Reverse, and facilitate the bringing the piece when Laden to the Loop. The
platform ought to be made clean, that no stones or other things lie in the way
for the wheels to run upon, whereby may be hindered the true intent of his Shot.

He must before any service is, examine his Piece of its goodness or defect;
according to our former Instructions given in this behalf, he must also be
furnished with all necessary things for his Artillery, the particulars thereof
we have mentioned in the 29 Chap. but because it takes not up much paper we
will repeat them here again, viz.

Wheels, Trucks, Axeltrees, Ladles, Rammers, Spunges, Worms, Tampions,
height-board, Auger-bit, fitness and roundness of the Shot, Chane-Shot,
Cross-bar Shot etc. Canvas or strong paper for Cartredges, Calabers, Compasses,
Sight Rule, Gunners Scale, Quadrant, Scales, Weights, priming-Irons, and Aprons
to cover the Touch hole.

Before he come upon Service, he ought to examine and prove the goodness of his
Powder and Match, and examine it according to the Rules given where we treat of
the Examination of the goodness of Powder.

A Gunner ought to be most careful to see that the Powder be placed safely from
danger of his own, as also the Enemies Ordnance, and to be furnished with
artificial Torches, Dark Lanthorns, with all sorts of Fireworks, of which you
shall have a particular account in the Treatise of Fireworks at the end of
this Book.

He must have by him his Gyn and Winch, Hand-Spikes, Crows, to mount and
dismount Guns at pleasure as occasion may serve, also Coins, Budge-Barrels,
Powder Baskets to carry Shot to your Piece, to keep his Linstocks well armed
with good Match.

He must always have by him a Ruler, Scale, Compasses, to measure the
Diameters or Bore of every Piece, and likewise the length of the Cylinder
within, the better to fit her with due Shot and Proportion of Powder.

He must learn by such Instructions as we have already given, the Names,
Length, Weight, and Fortification of every Piece about the Chamber, and to tell
readily how much Powder is a due Charge for every Piece, and what Shot is
necessary. How many Persons must attend in time of Service, how many Horses or
Oxen will draw a Piece of Ordnance, and in case they be wanting, how many men
will serve. How many pound weight of Shot one man may drive before him in a
Wheel-barrow from place to place.

A Gunner ought chiefly to Charge and Discharge a Piece of Ordnance Artist
like; and when he opens, or orders to be opened the head of a Powder Barrel,
let no Iron Tool be used thereunto for fear of taking or striking fire; for
that purpose therefore it is usual to have wooden Mallets, which will prevent
such dangers.

Every Gunner before he begins to make a Shot, ought to consider that a wad
of Hay, or of untwisted Ropes, will make the Shot shoot wide of the Mark.

He ought to consider whether the Trunions be placed in their due place in the
Carriage, whether the Carriage have its due length, whether one wheel be not
higher than the other, or whether one wheel does not reverse quicker or sooner
than the other, for these will cause the Piece to err, and to shoot wide of
the Mark.

Every Gunner ought to consider, that if his Piece lie point blank or under
Metal, then he ought to put in a sufficient wad after the Shot, to keep it
close to the Powder; for if it should not be close, great danger might follow;
for if the Shot should lodge any distance from the Powder, then in the firing
of that Piece it would break off in that very vacant place between the Shot and
the Powder, and so do damage to himself for standers by. If your Piece be
mounted, you then use no wad at all after the Shot.

Every Gunner ought to have standing by him some Tubs of water to wet his
Spunges in, whereby to cool his Piece in time of Service, as also to be ready
upon occasion to put out any Fire that might happen in time of Service.

Every Gunner ought to try whether his Piece is truly bored or not; if it be
not, he is to take it into consideration, and to order his proportion of
Charge, according to the thinnest part of the Metal, to prevent all danger.

A Gunner ought to take his Observation of the Mark or place he intends to
direct his Shot to, just over the middle of the bore within the Piece, for by
this means he may be able, by his Skill, to make a true Shot in a bad Piece.

A Gunner, that he may the better direct his Shot to the place desired, ought
to consider the difference of the Metal of the Piece at Britch and Muzzle, and
thereby truly how to dispart a Piece, be in either true bored or not. Of
disparting a Piece, I shall show how it may be done several ways in the
following or second part of this Gunnery; where we come to the practical part
of the Art in handling a Piece of Ordnance upon all occasions.

THE Complete Gunner. THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. I. The Description and use of the Geometrical Quadrant, for the taking
Heights, Distances, Depths, etc.
FIrst, you must make a common simple large Quadrant thus with your Ruler, draw
the Line A B, and with the Distance A B in your Compasses upon the Center A
describe the Arch B D, then with the Distance A B, setting one foot of your
Compasses in B, set it off upon the Arch B D, and it will reach to L, divide
the Arch B L into two equal, parts and that will be at F; The distance O L,
being set upwards from L, will reach to D, so then drawing the Line A D, will
make the Quadrant A B D, and the Arch B O L D will be divided into three equal
parts; now every one of those parts must again be divided into three equal
parts, and every one of them into 10 equal parts, so will your Quadrant be
divided into 90 equal parts, called Degrees.

scale of degrees

Of the Scale.

From any part of the Lines A B and A D, at equal distance from the point A, as
at g and h, raise two perpendicular Lines which will meet in the point m, which
we divide here into 12 equal parts, but may be divided into 100 or a 1000 equal
parts at pleasure, and the more parts they are divided into, the more exact
will your work be; let these Lines g m and h m be marked into the Divisions
from the point A.

Let two sights of Brass be placed upon the Limb of your Quadrant, at the
places marked E and F.

Let the Division upon the Line b m, being next the sights, be termed right
shadow, the Division upon the side g m, left or contrary shadow.

Let a Line with a Plummet be fitted to your Quadrant falling from the Center
A, as you see in your Figure.

CHAP. II. The Use of this Quadrant in taking the Perpendicular or direct
height, by help of the Suns shadow.
COnvey the left side of the Quadrant Geometrically toward the Sun, the Thread
and Plummet having their free course, moving it up or down until both your
sights have received the Sunbeams; then if your Thread be found in the twelfth
part, all things that are upright or truly perpendicularly elevated, are equal
in height with their shadows.

If the Thread with the plummet be observed to cut any of those parts next the
sights, called right shadow, between m and h, then every upright thing is more
than the shadow, by such a proportion as 12 exceeds the parts where the Thread
was found.

If the Thread fall upon the first division, then 12 times the shadow is the
height. If it fall upon the second Division, 6 times the shadow is the height.
If it fall upon the third Division, 4 times the shadow is the height. If it
fall on the fourth Division, 3 times the shadow is the height. In the fifth
Division twice and two fifths of the shadow is the height. In the sixth twice,
in the seventh once, and five sevenths in the eighth Division, one and a half
in the ninth, one and a third in the tenth, one and a fifth part in the
eleventh, once and the eleventh part of the shadow is the height on the twelfth
part, then the length of the shadow is the height, as we said before.

Or in few words it may be done thus, Multiply the length of the shadow by 12,
the product divided by the parts in which you found the Thread, your quotient
shows the height.

But if the part cut be on the contrary shadow, that is, if the Thread fall
between g and m, augment then the length of the shadow by the parts declared by
the plummet, and the increase divide by 12, and the product is the Altitude.

degrees of shadows

Example.

In the Foregoing figure it is plainly to be perceived, when the figure falls
upon the 12 Division, the shadow is equal with the thing it self; In the 6 of
the right, it is but half, in the 6 of the contrary it is twice the height, and
so to conclude, as the side in the right exceeds the parts, so does the
Altitude the shadow; and the contrary in the contrary shadow. Behold the figure
6 where you will find the Thread cutteth 6 parts of the contrary shadow upon
the Quadrant, the shadow B C then being 210 foot, multiply (as I have said) the
length of the shadow 210 foot by 6, the parts cut by the Thread, and it makes
1260, and that divided by 12 rises 105, which is the Altitude of such a body,
that casts a shadow of 210 feet.

Also the height of any unknown thing may be known by taking the length of its
shadow, and the length of the shadow of any staff set upright whose length is
known, saying, as the length of its shadow is to its height, so the length of
the shadow of the unknown thing is to its height.

CHAP. III. Without Shadow or any Supputation by your Quadrant Geometrical, to
take heights approachable.
LIft up ingeniously your Quadrant exactly made toward the thing to be
measured, looking diligently through both sights backward or forward, as
occasion is given, until you see the top, so that your Line or Thread fall just
upon the middle or 12 Division; now if you measure your distance from you to
the foot of the Object, which is the point directly under the top, then have
you the Altitude of the highest summitie to the right point or base in
heightequal with our standing, adjoining with it the height of your eye
downwards.

degrees of shadows

CHAP. IV. With the Aid of two Stations to find out Inapproachable heights.
SEek two Stations going hither and thither, yea, toward or from the thing you
intend to measure, so that in the one place the thread may fall just in 12, and
at the other Station in 6 points of a right shadow; then if you double the
Distance of both places, the Summitie shall appear from that part of the thing
measured, which is equal in height with your Eye; or if your standing be even
with the Base, joining to that double distance the height of your eye, you have
the whole Altitude from the ground, etc. If the one Station cause the Thread to
fall in 12, and the other in 8 of a right Shadow, then triple the Distance
between the two Stations, so have you the height also: Or if the one be in 12,
and the other in 9 of right shadows, then quadruple the distance, the one under
12, and the other under 6 of the contrary shadow, and the place between both
Stations is equal with that you measure, ever understanding from your Eye
upwards.

degrees of shadows

CHAP. V. How by the Quadrant, with Calculations, speedily to find all heights
accessible.
YOur Quadrant, as in the former Figure, handsomely elevated against or toward
the thing to be measured, perceiving through both sights just the top, mark
well the Division or points crossed by your Thread, whether it be of the right
shadow, then multiply the distance between you and the foot of the Object by
12, and divide that Sum by the parts cut upon your Quadrant, which your Thread
manifests; and the remainder is the height of the Object from your Eye.

But if the Thread fall upon contrary shadows, work contrarily, that is,
augment it by the part, and divide that Sum by 12; Remembering ever to add the
height of your eye downward to your quotient; so have you your desire, the Base
being equal with your standing.

degrees of shadows

Example.

Admit the Thread with the plummet note 6 parts of contrary, as you may see in
the foregoing figure, the distance from the base A to your standing B 115 foot
multiplied by 6, so have you 690, which divided by 12 yields 57 foot; to this
adjoyn 5 foot (being the height of your eye from the ground) and so find the
Altitude to be 62 foot.

To find what part of your Altitude is Level with your Eye.

Cause the Plummet and Thread to fall upon the side of your Quadrant where the
Degrees begin, which you will find before in the Description of the Quadrant to
be the side A B, and then searching through the Sights that part, that which
you can spy of your Altitude (the plummet hanging upon the said Line A B) is
level with your Eye, the height whereof from the base compared with the
Altitude of your Eye, discovers the inequality or difference of the ground,
that is to say, how much higher or lower the base of the thing to be measured
is than the ground at your Station, which difference, as you shall see cause,
added or subtracted from your heights found as is before declared, yields
most exactly the true Altitude: And thus you may be assured never to err, how
unequal or uneven soever the ground be.

You may also by two things of one length joined thus in a right Angle, find
the Altitude of any thing.

Let the end C be applied to your Eye, then go right angle backward or forward
as you shall see cause, till you can espy the top and Base of your Altitude by
the Extremes A B; and in so doing, the distance between your foot and the Base
is equal to the height, without adjoining the Altitude of your eye, which in
all the rest before showed is required. Only here you must take heed so to
couple A B and C D, that in beholding the Altitude, your Line A B may depend
perpendicular or parallel to the height. In like sort may you mete the distance
of any two things in sight, and that exactly, if you use discretion in placing
A B, that it be always parallel to the thing measured, which may easily be done
by help of a Line and Plummet upon the side A B.

CHAP. VI. To Measure the Distance any place is from the top of a Castle or
Work.
THis Work is Performed as the former in the 2d. Chap. only here with a Plummet
and Line we take the height or depth from the top of the Castle A, to the foot
of the Castle B; and suppose that to be equal to the distance there taken, and
the distance B C equal to the height, and then work by the Rules there given,
and you will find the distance C B. This is so plain there needs no Example.

CHAP. VII. To get the Length or Distance of any place or Mark in sight, be it
never so far, without Instrument.
AMongst many practices I find this the onliest way to obtain our desire
without the help of an Instrument, yet in this is necessarily required to have
ground enough at liberty on one side. Then begin thus; at the beginning of your
Length set up a staff or mark that may be seen afar off, then go from it
Orthogonal or Square-wise on which side you will 200 foot; the more ground the
better; Put up there a staff also: now convey your self to the first staff or
mark, going back from it 300 foot, more or less, at your pleasure, set up there
a third staff so, that the first mark or staff and it agree all in a straight
Line from your sight to the farthest part of your length by the judgment of
your eye; now go side-wise from thence as far in a right Angle, until the
second mark offer it self aright between the extreme part of your length and
sight, and there put the fourth staff. All this performed, seek out the
distance between the first staff and the Second, and that name your first
distance; then the distance between the first and third, name your second
distance; Again, the distance between the third and fourth staff is the third
distance. Deduct your first distance from the third, so remains the Divisor;
then multiply your third distance by your second, and the product divide by
your Divisor, the quotient shows the true length from the third staff to the
fortress or mark desired: for plainness behold the figure.

measure of distance

Example.

Here this Letter A represents the Castle, being the distance to be measured; B
is your first staff; C the second staff, differing from B the first Orthogonal
100 foot; D the third staff, being distant back from the first in a Right line
with the mark A 133 foot; E is the fourth staff, running sidewise Orthogonally,
or in a Square, from the third, until the farthest part of your length A, is
perceived in a right Line with the second staff at C; and this distance D E let
be 120 foot. Now by Substraction take 100 from 120, there remains for a
Divisor 20; then multiply 133 by 120, so rises 15960, which divided by 20, and
there comes 798 foot, the true distance between D and A, from which if you
abate A B 133, there remains B A your propounded distance.

But forasmuch as this conclusion is to be done without Instrument, and here
Orthogonal motions sidewise is required, it shall be requisite also to declare
how an Orthogonal or Right angle is upon a sudden to be made; ye shall
therefore (according to Pythagoras's Invention mentioned among the Definitions
at the beginning of this Book) take 3 Staves, Cords, or such like, making the
one 4 such parts, as the other is 3, and the third 5; This done, conjoyn their
ends together, and the angle subtended of the longest staff is a right, which
first placed at B, and after at D, directing one of his comprehending sides to
A, the other shall guide you to C and E; or if you desire with more expedition
to dispatch, and not to tarry the proportioning of Cords, or such like, to this
Pythogarick Rule, take any 3 Staves, Sticks, or Threads, and conjoyn them,
making a Triangle, it matters not of what form or fashion they be, then placing
one angle thereof at B, turning one side to A, direct your self sidewise to the
other, always remembering to place the same angle at D, and departing sidewise
again in like manner, in all the rest do as before is declared. Thus using any
mean diligence, yuo shall most exactly measure any distance.

CHAP. VIII. With Halbeards, Pikes, or any Staves, having no other Instrument,
you may measure the Distance between any two Towers, Castles, or other Marks,
lying in a right line from you, not coming near any of them.
YOu must first (as we have declared in the last Chapter) prepare a Triangle,
with joining any three Staves, or such like, together, which you must (at your
standing) place in such sort, that one of the sides containing the Angles, may
lie directly toward the Mark: Then setting up a Staff, Pike, or other Mark
there, depart sidewise, as the other side of your Angle shall direct you, so
far as you list, the more ground the better, and there set up your second Staff
or Mark; then go directly back from your first Staff (always keeping it
exactly between your sight and the Mark) as many score again, or Pike lengths,
as you list, setting up a third staff; this done, you shall place the same
Angle you used at your first Staff now again at your third staff, in all points
as it was before; the one side of the Angle lying directly toward the first
Staff, the other side will show you whither you shall go to place your fourth
Staff; for passing still in a right line with that side of your Angle, you
shall at the last find the second justly situated between you and the farthest
Mark, and there set up the fourth Staff; then remove your Angle again to the
second Staff, and placing there as before, the one side even with the first
Staff, pass on in a right line with the other, until you come directly between
your nearest Mark and the fourth Staff, and there pitch up the fifth.

measure of distance

Now you must measure how many Paces, Halbeards, or Pikes length, are between
your first and second Staff, deducting that from the distance between the third
and fourth, and this Remainder shall serve you for a Divisor; then multiply
your distance between the second and fifth Staff by the distance between the
third and fourth, the product divide by your reserved Divisor, and it yields
in the Quotient the true distance between these two Marks. See the foregoing
Figure.

Example.

Let A B be the two Marks, whose distance I would measure; my standing place
where I set up my first Staff, I; in the middle, my Triangle made of three
Staves, Halberds, Bills or any such like things, K L M; the Staves or Halberds
of which I make my Triangle N, which I first place at C, secondly at D, thirdly
at E; and note, at C and D the situation of the Triangle is all one, but at E
it somewhat differs, as you may behold in this Figure, which I would have you
note, lest happily you be deceived in your practice.

C E the distance between the first and third, deducted from D F the distance
between the second and fourth, there remains H F your Divisor; which measured,
I admit 50 Halberds lengths, the distance between G E 30 Halberds lengths, the
space between D F 100 Halberds length, now 100 multiplied in 30 produces 3000,
which divided by 50, leaves in the Quotient 60. I conclude therefore the
distance between A and B to be 60 Pikes lengths.

This one thing is to be taken notice of especially, that whatsoever you mete
the space G E withal, that you use the same in measuring H F; and as for D F
it matters not what you measure it withal, for your Quotient shall bear the
same denomination. Preciseness is to be used in placing of your Triangle, and
in measuring E G, and H F, otherwise error may ensue; especially if D F be but
a small distance, and the Angle at B very sharp. There needs in this matter
no further admonition, small Practice will resolve all doubts.

CHAP. IX. To measure the distance between any two Forts, Castles, or other
places, howsoever they be situated, though there be Rivers, or such like
Impediments between, that you cannot approach nigh any of them; and that
without an Instrument also.
LEt your Angles, as before has been said, be prepared of any three Staves,
etc. you shall first at pleasure set up one Staff, and applying thereunto your
Angle in such sort, that the one containing side lie directly to one of the
Marks (which here for distinction sake I will call the first) go backwards too
and fro until you find your second Mark precisely covered with your Staff,
noting what part of the line or side subtending the Angle it cuts by your line
visual, and there make a fine notch or mark upon that subtending Staff; which
done, you shall go sidewise from the first erected Staff, as the other
containing side of your Triangle will direct you, so far as you list, and then
set up your second Staff; yet pass on from thence in a right line with that
containing side of your Angle that rises from your Staves, and comes somewhat
toward the Mark, and go so far until you spy your self justly between your
third Staff and your first mark, there set up your fourth Staff, then resort to
your Angle again, and standing behind the second Staff, note whether a right
line from the Angle to that notch (before made on the subtendent Staff or side
of the Triangle) will direct you, for that way precisely shall you go on until
you come in a right line with the second and third Staff, and erect there the
fifth Staff; this done* measure the distance between the second and third
Staff, reserving that for a Divisor; then multiply your distance between the
first and third Staff, by the distance between the fourth and fifth Staff, the
product divide by your reserved Divisor, and it yields in the Quotient the
true distance between the two marks.

geometric figure

Example.

Let A B be the distance I would know, C my first Station where the first Staff
is erected; I my Triangle made of three Staves, and placed at the Station, and
directed with one of the containing sides to A which is the first mark, as you
may see in the Figure, and with the other side to D and E the second and third
Staves; H is the notch or mark upon the side subtended to the Angle, where the
line visual from passes to the second mark B; my Triangle now I situate at D,
as it was before at C, the one contained side lying even with the erected
Staves, the other directed to my fourth Staff F, placed in a right line with E
the third Staff, and A the first mark. Again, my line visual proceeding from D
to H, the notch in the subtended side of the Angle is extended to my fifth
Staff G, situated exactly between E the third Staff, and B the other mark:
This done, I measure the distance between my second and third Staff, finding it
20 foot, likewise between the fourth and fifth Staff, and find it 72 foot,
finally between the first and third Staff 65 paces; so that according to the
Rule before given, multiplying 65 by 72, I have 4680. which divided by 20,
yields in the Quotient 234, and so many paces is there between A and B.

I have not set out the Figures in just proportions answering to these numbers,
for that is not requisite, but in such form as may best open and make manifest
the situation of the Staves and Triangle, wherein consists all the difficulty
of this Practice.

CHAP. X. How you may readily find out the distance to any Tower, Castle,
Forts, etc. by help of the former Quadrant.
LEt the Quadrant be made upon a square Board as is there marked A D B Q. Let D
B be divided into 90 Degrees or equal parts; and instead of the 12 equal parts,
or right and contrary shadows, g m and h m, let the two sides D Q and B Q be
divided each into 1200 equal parts, or as many as you please, and marked from
the Center A, and have a Ruler or Index to be moved round upon the Center A,
having two sights upon it, set just upon the feducial line of the Index, and
let it be divided into such equal parts as the Lymb B Q, or D Q.

Let this Instrument thus fitted be handsomely placed upon its Staff, or
otherwise, lay the feducial of your Index upon the beginning of the Degrees of
the Quadrant, and turn your whole Instrument (the Index not moved) till you may
espy through the sight your mark, then remove your Index to the contrary side
of the Quadrant, placing the line feducial on the side line where the degrees
end, and look through the sights, and in that very line set up a mark a certain
distance, the farther the better; this done, take away your Instrument, and set
up a Staff there, and remove the Instrument to the mark you espied; set your
Index on the beginning of the Degrees, moving your whole Instrument, till you
find through the Sights the Staff at the first Station, then remove your Index
(your Quadrant keeping its place) till you may again espy through the Sights
your mark; which done, note the Degrees cut by the line feducial, and then work
thus, upon some even smooth Superficies, whether it be Board, Plate, or Paper:
Draw first a straight line, and open your Compasses to some small distance,
call that space a score, and make so many such divisions upon your Line as
there is scores between your Stations; then upon the end of your line raise a
perpendicular, and fixing one foot of your Compasses at the other end, opening
it to what wideness you please, draw an Arch rising from the same line that
represents your Stationary distance, and dividing it into 90 equal parts or
Degrees (as you was taught in the making your Quadrant) extend from the Center
to the number of Degrees cut by your feducial line, a right line, until it
concur with the perpendicular before erected; then see how much of that space
(which represents the score in dividing your Stationary distance) is
contained in the perpendicular; so many score is the mark off from your first
Station, and by dividing the Hypothenusal line, you may find the Distance from
the second Station.

Example.

A the first Station, C the second, D the mark, A C 80 paces, Degrees of the
Quadrant cut by the line feducial at the second Station is 71 d., and H is the
unity or measure representing one score, E F 4 parts, G F 12, G E 12, or
thereabouts: Thus may you conclude the mark to be distant from the first
Station 12 score paces; the Hypothenusal line or distance of the mark from the
second Station, 12 score and 13 paces.

See the Figure.

measure of distance

To perform this Work by Calculation.

In the foregoing Figure, B is the place to be measured, A the mark where I
first disposed my Instrument, from it I go Orthogonally to C, the Index,
suppose cuts there 400. In the right side of your square, the distance between
B and C, I have supposed 80 paces; wherefore multiply. 1200 by 80, and there
comes 96000, whfch divided by 400, declares unto me 240 paces, the true
length from A to B. Or by dividing 1440000, the square of 1200, with 400 the
parts cut, you shall produce in the Quotient 3600, your proportionable part
found by the Rule of Reduction, which augmented in 80, yields 288000, and
that divided by 1200, brings in the Quotient 240, which is the length A B
agreeing with the former operation.

But if you would find C B, or the Hypothenusal line being the distance between
the second Station and the mark; then by the former Table of Squares, or with
your Pen, find the Square of A C, and the Square A B the distance already found
from the first Station, these two Squares added together, the Square Root of
that Sum is the distance C B, viz. 253 paces; or if the Sum of the Square of A
B and A C be sought for in the Table of Squares, you will find against it 253
paces, the length of C B, which was to be found; for the Square of A B more, A
C is always equal to the Square of C B, and the Square of C B less, the Square
A C is equal to the Square of A B.

CHAP. XI. To measure the distance between any two marks that lie in one right
line from the Eye.
THis may be resolved by the former Proposition, measuring how far either
distance is from your self, and then deduct the one from the other; or thus,
another way, the side of your Geometrical Square directed toward them, depart
Orthogonally, as is before declared, 100 or 200 paces at your pleasure, but the
more the better; then place your Instrument again, turning the side of it
toward the first Station, remove then the Index to either marks, noting what
parts at either place the Index does cut of the Scale; and if the Index at both
times falls on the left side, deduct the lesser from the greater; with the
number remaining, augment this distance between your Stations, and dividing by
the whole side of the Scale, your Quotient is the distance. If the Index fall
on the right side at either time, then must you by the Rule given in the Ninth
Chapter, reduce them into proportional parts; or if at one time it fall on the
left side, and at another time on the right, then shall you only reduce the
parts cut on the right side; which done, deduct as before is said, the lesser
from the greater, and with the remainder multiply your distance Stationary, the
product divided by 1200, yields how far one mark is beyond another.

Behold the Figure.

measure of distance

Example.

Admit A B the marks in a right line from C your first Station, D the second
Station Orthogonally situated from C, where your Square being placed, suppose
your Index first cut 800 parts on the left side, and after 900 parts on the
right side; you must divide the Square of 1200 by 900, as was taught in the
former Chapter; so will your Quotient amount to 1600, from which if you
withdraw 800, the parts cut on the left side, there will remain 800, which
multiplied by 200 paces, the distance Stationary C D, there amounts 160000,
this divided by 1200, yields in the Quotient 133; therefore the distance from
A B, your mark, is 133 paces, 1 foot, and 8 inches.

CHAP. XII. To measure the Distance between any two marks lying in one plain
level ground, howsoever situated, without Arithmetic.
THis at two Stations may be done, as we have done before; but we will here
suppose but one Station, knowing the distance from that Station to each place,
and the Angle it makes with each Station; then by help of a pair of Compasses,
and any line of equal parts, this is most easily wrought, as is well known to
small Practitioners in this Art, it being also the 4th Question in Right-lined
Oblique Triangles.

I did intend to show the working of every one of these Questions by
Logarithms; but considering a Gunner has not always such Tables by him (and
if he have them and understands right-lined Triangles, doubtless he may easily
apply them to this work) I therefore thought what I have done in this case to
be sufficient.

CHAP. XIII. The Description of an Instrument, whereby to plot out any Coast,
Country, City or Garrison, and to take the distance to every Remarkable Object.
THis Instrument is four square, with a Circle in the middle, divided into 360
equal parts or degrees. Let the division of the square be from 1 to 100, or as
many as you can; you must also have fixed to it an Index, with sight upon the
same, as you may see by the Figure following in the next Page. It is called a
Circumferenter or Geometrical Square.

To draw a Plot of any Coast or Country in such sort that you may readily tell
how far any place is distant from you, or one from another.

YOu must ascend some high Tower, Hill, Cliff, or other place, from whence you
may commodiously behold on every part those places you intend a Plot of, there
set up your Instrument upon its staff, and in such sort place it by help of
your Needle, that the four Semi-Diameters stand due East, West, North, and
South; then turn your Index to Town, Village, Haven, Road, or such like,
espying through the Sights the middle or most notable mark in them, noting
withal in a Table by it self the degrees cut by the Index in your Instrument,
which we call the Angles of position, and so make a Table of the first Station.
Then search out plot of distance with your Eye, viewing round about, some other
lofty place, from whence you may behold again all these places, for that shall
be your second Station, and turning thereunto the Index of your Instrument,
note what degree it touches; this done; remove your Instrument thither, and
place it in all respects as 'twas before, and turning the Diameter or Index of
your Instrument to every place, espying through the Sight all such marks as you
saw before, noting again the degrees cut, or Angles of position, writing the
names of every place, and its degree by it; so have you a Table also of your
second Station; with these Tables you shall resort to some plain smooth
superficies of Board, Parchment, Paper, or such like, and thereon describe a
large Circle, divide it into 360 degrees, like to the Circle of your
Instrument; then from the Center thereof to every degree noted in your first
Table, extend straight lines, writing upon every one of them the name of his
place; and upon that line that represents your second Station fix one foot of
your Compasses, opening the other at pleasure; and draw another Circle, and
divide it also into 360 degrees, and from the Center thereof extend right lines
to every degree noted in your second Table, writing as before upon every one of
them the name of their places or marks; finally, you shall note diligently the
concourse or crossing of every two like lines, making thereon a star or such
like mark, with the names of the places thereunto belonging. Now if you desire
to know how far every of these Towns, Villages, etc. are distant from each
other, you shall do thus, measure the distance between your Stations by
Instrument or otherwise, as you have been before taught, and divide the right
line between the Centers of your Circles into so many equal parts or portions
as there are Miles, Furlongs, or Scores, between your Stations; then opening
your Compasses to one of those parts, you may measure from place to place,
always affirming so many Miles, Furlongs, or Scores (according to the
denomination of that one part whereunto you opened your Compasses) to be
between place and place, as you find by measuring there are parts.

Example.

There is a Sea Coast having sundry Harbors, Towns, Villages, Castles, and
such like situated thereon, whose Plot in due proportion I require, with the
exact distances of every place one from the other.

Having therefore elected a lofty seat, from whence I may behold all these
places (my Instrument situated as is declared) removing the Index to a Castle
that is farthest, being a Castle standing in the mouth of a Haven, having
received it through my Sights, the line fiducial of my Index cutteth 30
degrees; then I remove it to the next, being a Village or Fish Town, and the
Index cutteth 50 degrees, and so round to all the rest; and thus I shall have
the Table of my first Station, as follows, The Table of my first Station.
Degrees. The Castle. 30 The Village. 50 The City. 75 The Eastern Head of the Bay.
95 The Western Head of the Bay. 97 The Fort within Land. 130.

This done, I behold another Hill or high place; from whence I may in like
manner view all those places, and turning my Index thereunto, I find the Line
fiducial lying upon 180 Degrees; then carrying my Instrument thither, and
placing it in all points there, as it was at the first Station, I turn my Index
again to my first Mark or Castle, and find it to cut in 15 Degrees, at the
second 25, etc. as you may see in this second Table.

The Table of my second Station.
Degrees. The Castle. 15 The Village. 25 The City. 40 The Eastern Head of the Bay.
50 The Western Head of the Bay. 55 The Fort within Land 80.

With these Tables I repair to a Paper, Parchment, etc. and by the former Rules
draw the Figure following.

scale of distance

Having thus completed your Plot, and found the distance between A and B to be
5 miles, make a Scale according to that distance, divide it into miles and
parts, and with it you may measure your distance from place to place, or the
distance from any of your Stations to each place, according as you have
occasion.

Thus passing or changing your Station, you may make several Plots, containing
the true proportion and distance of Towns, Villages, Ports, Roads, Hills,
Rivers, and all other notable places throughout a whole Realm.

Thus I suppose we have writ all such propositions of measuring of heights,
distances, and profundities, etc. as may be necessary to our work. We will next
come to the more Practick part, of mannaging a Piece of Ordnance to do the best
Service.

CHAP. XIV. The Description and use of the Gunners Scale.
THis Scale is made according to the Diameter of our English Ordnance, not
above 8 inches long, being the Diameter of a Cannon Royal; they are generally
made of Box, Pear Tree, or Brass, any well seasoned Wood that will not warp may
serve: Upon one side I have set the names of all sorts of Ordnance; and in the
Angle of meeting with the names, is the Angle at the Bore; and between that and
the next less Diameter, is the common length of such a Piece; and upon the step
of breadth is the number of paces these Pieces shoot point blank; and right in
the Angle of meeting, betwixt the two Diameters, with the Angle of meeting with
the names, is first the weight of the Gun, the breadth of the Ladle, the
length, weight of the Charge of Powder, the Diameter of the Shot, weight of the
Shot, and a line of inches, and tenth parts of an inch. The Backside is also
divided into inches and quarters of inches, and over them is showed the weight
of every Iron Shot answerable to those inches, with the gunners' scale Edward
Fage in Hosier Lane Londini Fecit
weight of the like Bullet in Lead and Stone; each being distinguished. You may
also if you please have upon this side the Gunners Quadrant, and such other
things as you shall think fit, as you may see in this Figure following, where
all things are distinguished by their Names, and need no more Explanation.

You will observe by this Instrument, that the Ladle is but 3 Diameters of the
Shot in length, and 3/5 part of the Circumference, from the Cannon to the whole
Culvering, and the charge of Powder will be found to be about 2 Diameters of
the Piece; from the Culvering to the Minion, the Charge may fill 2 Diameters
and a half; and from the Minion to the Base 3 Diameters; but of this matter we
have spoke at large in the first part of this Book; but there having left out
the Table of Periors and Drakes, I thought good here to insert it.

A necessary Table of Periors and Drakes proportioned.
Names of Pieces. Height of the bore in inches. Length in Diameter. Weight in
met. pound. Weight of Powder. Length of the Ladle. Canon Perior. 9. 10. 12. 8
3500 3, 3 4 3 D. Canon Drake. 6 16 3000 9 pound. 4 ^/2 Culvering Drake. 5 16
2000 5 4 D. Cul. Drake. 4 16 1500 3 4 Saker Drake. 3 18 1200 2 4

CHAP. XV. How to make a true Dispart of any true bored Piece of Ordnance.
KNow first, that to dispart a Piece of Ordnance, is no otherwise than to bring
the Diameter at Muzzle to be equal to the Diameter at the Base Ring; in true
founded Ordnance, half of the Diameter of the Cylender is the dispart; but more
generally it may be done thus, Gird the Piece round about the Britch with a
thread, after do the like by the Muzzle Ring, lay these two strings straight
upon a Table at length, and make two marks for the length of each string;
divide the distance between each of these two marks into 22 equal parts with
your Compasses, and 7 of them are their Diameters; then measure how much each
Diameter is in length, and substract one Diameter from the other, then take the
just half of the difference, and that is the true dispart of your Piece in
inches, and part of an inch.

But these Diameters are better and more artificially taken with a pair of
Crallipars, as we have showed before in taking the Diameter of a Shot, and then
measured upon your Scale of inches and parts, will give you the true Diameters
of the Piece both at Britch and Muzzle, with which work as above.

Also you may find the true dispart of a Piece thus; Put a small Wire or
priming Iron in at the Touchhole of the Piece to the bottom of the Concave;
then mind what part of that Iron is even with the Base Ring, and make a mark
there; then take it out and apply it to the Muzzle, and place it upon the lower
edge of the Concave of the Piece as upright as you can, and mind what part of
the Iron or Wire is even with the upper part of the Muzzle Ring, and there make
a mark; for the difference between these two marks, is the true dispart of the
Piece: or after you have placed your Iron upon the Muzzle as before, cause a
dispart to be raised so high as that mark which was made upon the Iron when
'twas put down the Touchhole.

If from the top of the dispart a fine thread or line be carried to the Muzzle
Ring, you will see how high you may make a dispart at the Trunions.

Or thus a dispart may be made at the Trunions; lay a piece of soft Wax upon
the Trunions, and let one raise it high, or depress it, until that the Metal at
the top of the Base Ring, the Wax between the Trunions, and the dispart of the
Muzzle, be all three of one height precisely; but the former way with a thread
is more exact.

A Piece of Ordnance may be disparted thus; take two sticks (each of them must
be longer than the Piece) and also make a Plummet of Lead to hang in a small
thread made fast to one end of the stick, which lay cross the top of the Base
Ring, to and fro, until the Plummet descending from the end thereof, may just
touch the side of the Metal of the said Ring; then keeping fast the stick in
that place, hang your Plummet down by the other side of the stick, until it on
the otherside just touch the Metal of the Base Ring; when you have done, cut
off the stick just in that place by which the Plummet descended,
perpendicularly, and this length is the just Diameter of the Base Ring; after
this manner you must proceed to take the Diameter at the Muzzle. Then lastly,
set these two sticks together even at one end, and mark their difference in
length or height; for just half of that difference is the dispart of that Piece.

I would advise all Sea Gunners upon some occasions to use Disparts between the
Trunions of their Pieces, made of a just height, on purpose to serve that
place, by the method we have even now prescribed, and let them be tied about
the Piece with a twine, because else at every Shot they will be to seek, when
upon a sudden they should use them, and they will much avail and stand them in
great stead. I could express other ways, only I think these sufficient.

CHAP. XVI. How to give Level with a Piece of Ordnance to make a Shot at any
Mark assigned.
SEt your dispart on the Muzzle Ring, just over the Center of the mouth of the
Piece, which you may best do by putting a stick cross the bore, and dividing it
into two equal parts; then with a Plumb line hanging over the mouth of the
Piece, being guided by the divided stick, you shall have good aim where to set
your Dispart; this being done, go to the Base Ring, if the Piece be true bored,
then find which is the highest part, and middle of that Ring; but if the Piece
be not true bored, then find which part of the Base Ring is just over the
Cylender, and take that for your true line: when you have found out the
dispart, and placed it, and also found what point in the Base Ring is to answer
to it, then make some very small mark on the Base Ring in that place, hold your
head about two foot from the Base Ring, and there you may best observe, as the
Piece is traversing, when you are in a direct line with the mark; this done,
give one of your men order to raise and fall the Piece with his Hand-spike as
you shall appoint him, until you can, holding your head two foot from the
Britch of the Piece, with your eye perceive the mark at the Base Ring, and the
top of the dispart in a direct line with the mark you must shoot at; at that
instant stop the motion of the Piece with a Coin, that it may remain as you
have directed it; then Prime your Piece, and give fire.

finding level

Before you place your Dispart, you are to take notice whether the ground be
Level whereon the Wheels of the Gun stand, or if they be not one higher than
the other, and if the Trunions stand just over the Axeltree of the Wheels or
no; whether one Trunion lie higher on the Carriage than the other: whether the
Gun be truly placed in the Carriage or not; that is, that it be not nearer one
side than the other: whether the Carriage be truly made according to the
direction we have already prescribed in the first part; whether the Axeltree be
placed just cross the Carriage or not.

CHAP. XVII. How, if a Shot do carry to the right or to the left, under or over
the mark, by reason of some known fault, to amend it in making the next Shot.
AFter you have made one Shot, and find the Piece carry just over the mark,
then do all that has been taught again, and when your Piece lies directly
against the mark, observe how much the last stroke of the Shot is above the
mark, so much longer make your dispart, that the top of it may be just seen
from the Britch of the Piece, in a direct line with the stroke of the Shot;
when it is of this length, then level your Piece with this new dispart to the
assigned mark, Give fire, and without doubt it will strike the same.

If the first Shot strike under the mark, then bring the Piece in all points as
before to pass, mark how much of the dispart is over the stroke of the Shot,
and cut it just so short, as being at the Britch you may discern the top of it,
with the mark on the Base Ring and stroke of the Shot in a just right line, and
when you perceive it is of such a length, level the Piece to the assigned mark,
as at the first, then Prime and Give fire.

If the first Shot strike on the right hand of the mark, to mend it you must
level the Piece as formerly; you standing behind the Britch of the Piece,
observe the stroke of the Shot over the dispart, and that part of the Base Ring
as you at that instant look over in a right line toward the dispart, and the
stroke of the Shot, set up in that place a Pin with a little soft Wax on the
Base Ring; so this Pin will be in a right line with the dispart and stroke of
the Shot: This being done, level your Piece to the mark assigned by this Pin
and the dispart, and without question you will make a fair Shot; for when you
level by the Metal of the Base Ring where the Pin is placed, and the mark of
the Piece standing at that direction, look over the top of the dispart from the
notch in the Base Ring, and you shall find it to lie just so much to the left,
as the former Shot struck to the right, from the assigned mark, which should in
all likelihood now strike the mark.

But if a Shot be both too wide and too low, then you must use both the
directions above taught, to make the next Shot: first regulate the dispart by
cutting it shorter, according as the Shots mark is lower than the assigned
mark; when this is done, then proceed to my directions to mend shooting wide,
and these things performed with care and diligence, cannot choose but mend a
bad Shot.

CHAP. XVIII. Of shooting at Random at a Mark beyond the right line of the
Pieces reach, or right Range of a Shot; and the way of framing a Table of
Randoms, by help of the Gunners Quadrant.
FOr the effecting of this matter, we must have a Quadrant with a Thread and
Plummet (which is described in the first Chapter of this second Section) to one
side of this Quadrant; so that one end of the Ruler may go into the Cavity of
the Piece, and let a Piece of Lead be fastened to the end of the Rule, to make
it lie close to the bottom of the Metal within, the Quadrant hanging without,
and the Plumb-line swaying or hanging down from the Center of the Quadrant,
perpendicular to the Horizontal line; for the Quadrant being thus placed, you
may mount a Piece to what degree you shall find fit to shoot by.

Now every one that will learn to shoot at Random, must draw his Piece on a
level ground, where first shooting level, he must observe that distance in feet
or paces, then mount his Piece to one degree, and mark where that shall graze;
thus finding the distance of every degree from the level to the tenth degree,
by these distances make a Table, to which annex the degrees against the
distance; by which Table you may (using the Art of Proportions) find how far
another Piece will convey her Shot from degree to degree, and in Loading your
Piece for this work you must have your Powder exactly weighed, and likewise the
Wad, and let the Piece cool of it self, and this you must do every time; and if
the Piece be mounted, there needs no Wad after the Shot; also you must have a
special care of the strength of the Powder, and let the Powder equally, and
with the same force and strength be pressed home, as near as possible you may.

CHAP. XIX. An effectual way to make a Shot out of a Piece of Ordnance at
Random.
HE that intends to be expert at these things, ought principally to endeavor,
at one time or another, to obtain so much liberty of his Superior Commanders,
as to make two, three, or more Shot with the Piece he chooses, or intends for
most Service; then must he measure the distance from the Platform to the first
graze of the Shot; and must apply it to the Table, which I have here inserted,
being the experience of such as have been knowing Gunners. But first I shall
set down Mr. Nigh of Worcester's Experiment, not as he is Mathematician, as he
writes himself (which Title none of our Learned Mathematicians of England do
assume) but as he was a Practical Gunner, and made these several experiments
upon four several degrees of Mounture, viz. 1 degrees. 5 degrees. 7 degrees. 10 degrees. from
thence was found these Randoms.

At 1 degree, the Shot did light from the Piece or place of standing 225 paces.

At 5 degrees, the Random was 416 paces.

At 7 degrees, the Random was 505 paces.

At 10 degrees the Random was 630 paces.

And by these Experiments a Table may be framed according to this Rule. As the
known degree of Mounture, is to the number of paces the Piece carries; so is
the number of degrees proposed, to the distance required.

The use of this Table will plainly appear in one only Example.

A Table of Randoms.
Degrees. Paces. 0 206 1 225 2 274 3 323 4 370 5 416 6 461 7 505 8 548 9 589 10
630

Suppose you make trial of your Piece of Ordnance, according to the method
prescribed in the last Chapter, and find that at 6 degrees of Random upon a
level ground, the Shot is conveyed 619 paces, and you are to ply your Piece
against a place which lies beyond the point blank, the distance being 498
paces, to know the degree the Piece must be elevated too, do thus; in this
Table of Randoms against 6 degrees, there is 461 paces; then say as 619 paces
is to 461, so is 498 to 375; which number, or the nearest to being sought, in
this Table is 370, and stands against 4 degrees, but because it is not exactly
the same number, you must find out the part of a degree or minute, by a Table
of proportional parts; but if the mark you shoot at be lower or higher than
your Platformer, then you must add or substract so many degrees or minutes from
the degrees and minutes found, and the remainder is the degree you ought to
mount your Piece to.

Now that we may be understood-well, we must know that there are two sorts of
Ranges or Motions of a Shot, of which you may see more in Chap. 20. the one is
called the Right Range, and the other is termed the Curved or Crooked Range,
and these two there termed a Compound Range, is called the Dead Range; that is
to say, the whole distance from your Platform from whence the Shot was made, to
the place where the Bullet first grazes; yet the perpendicular descending of
the Bullet is also called the Natural motion, as you may see by the figure
hereafter placed. Captain Hexham in his Book of Gunnery, shows how by finding
out the Random of a Cannon for the first degree of Mounture to find the Random
for every degree to 45 degrees, which is the utmost Random, after this manner;
First, find out how many paces the Cannon will shoot, being laid level by the
Metal (which he accounts for one degree of Mounture) divide this distance by
50, then multiply the Quotient by 11, and that will bring out the number of the
greatest digression or difference between Range and Range, which being divided
by 44, the Quotient will show the number of paces which the Bullet will loose
in the other Ranges from degree to degree. Example. A Battering Cannon being
laid by the Metal, will shoot his Bullet (as he says) 1000 ordinary paces, two
foot and a half to each pace; which being divided by 50, the Quotient will be
20, which multiplied by 11, is 220 paces, which is the number of the next
digression made in the second degree: which 220 divide by 44, the number of the
remaining degrees yields 5, which is the number of paces to be diminished in
each degree; and by this Rule this Table is framed.

A Table of Randoms to 45 Degrees, accounting 2 Foot to the Pace.
Paces diff. The Degrees of Mounture. 0 0775 225 1 1000 220 2 1220 215 3 1435
210 4 1645 205 5 1850 200 6 2050 195 7 2245 190 8 2435 185 9 2620 180 10 2800
175 11 2975 170 12 3145 165 13 3310 160 14 3470 155 15 3625 150 16 3775 145 17
3920 140 18 4060 135 19 4595 130 20 4325 125 21 4450 120 22 4570 115 23 4685
110 24 4795 105 25 4900 100 26 5000 95 27 5095 90 28 5185 85 29 5270 80 30 5350
75 31 5425 70 32 5595 65 33 5560 60 34 5620 55 35 5675 50 36 5725 45 37 5770 40
38 5810 35 39 5845 30 40 5875 25 41 5900 20 42 5920 15 43 5935 10 44 5945 5 45
5950

But this Table of Alexander Bianco for all sorts of Ordnance, I do account as
one of the best.

A Table of Randoms for the six points of the Gunners Quadrant.
1 2 3 4 5 6 Faulconet. 375 637 795 885 892 900 Faulcon. 550 935 1166 1254 1309
1320 Minion. 450 765 954 1026 1071 1080 Saker. 625 1062 1325 1425 1487 1500 D.
Culvering. 725 1232 1537 1653 1725 1740 Culvering. 750 1275 1590 1710 1785 1800
Demi-Canon. 625 1062 1325 1425 1487 1500 Canon of 7. 675 1147 1431 1489 1606
1620 Double Canon. 750 1275 1660 1710 1785 1800

The use of this Table is thus; having resolved upon what point of Mounture,
look in this Table for the name of the Piece, and right under that point
against the name of the Piece, that is in the common Angle, you shall find the
number of paces of her Random sought.

CHAP. XX. How to find the right Range of any Shot Discharged out of any Piece,
for every Elevation by any one right or dead Range given for the Piece assigned.
THe right Range of every Piece being discharged in a level, or parallel to the
Horizon, is allowed by some not to exceed 185 paces, that is 5 foot to a pace,
yet some reckon much more, but then they account ordinary steps or paces of two
foot and a half; and Batteries made with such Pieces are usally made at 100 or
120 such paces, at which distance they do the best execution.

The utmost Random likewise of any Piece that is from the Platform to the first
graze of the Bullet, I find by some to be about ten times the distance of the
right Range; and accordingly I have so set it down in the Table.

As for the Ranges to the other degrees and points of the Quadrant, I find
these Tables in Good Authors.

This Table is rather proportional A TABLE OF Right Ranges, or Point Blanks.
Randoms, or the first Graze. The Degrees of the Pieces Mounture. 0 The Right
Range in Paces, 5 Foot to a Pace. 192 The Degrees of Mounture. 0 The Paces of
the Random, 5 Foot to a Pace. 192 1 209 1 298 2 227 2 404 3 244 3 510 4 261 4
610 5 278 5 722 6 285 6 828 7 302 7 934 8 320 8 1044 9 337 9 1129 10 354 10
1214 20 454 20 1917 30 693 30 2185 40 855 40 2289 50 1000 50 2283 60 1140 60
1792 70 1220 70 1214 80 1300 80 1000 90 1350 90 than real, and does best agree
with greater Ordnance; but by help of it, working by the Rule of proportion,
you may know the Random of any Piece of Ordnance; by first (as we have said
before) making one Shot, and measuring from your Platform that distance. You
may make a Table for your Piece thus,

Suppose a Saker being mounted to 5 degrees, shoot the Bullet 416 paces, how
far will it shoot being mounted 10 degrees?

As 722 the Tabular distance for 5 degrees of Mounture, is to 416 paces the
distance found,

So is the Tabular distance for 10 degrees of Mounture, 1214. to the distance
required, which will be found to be 699, 5 paces.

Now if you desire to know how much of the Horizontal line, is contained
directly under the right line of any Shot, called the right Range, made out of
any Piece at any elevation.

First, know that in plain Triangles, the violent motion or right line of a
Shot is supposed to be the Hypothenusal, the Angle of Mounture to be the Angle
at Base; these are given, and the Horizontal line is the Base which is to be
found, there the proportion will run thus;

As the Radius 90 degrees. is to the number of paces in a right Range;

So is the Sine Complement of the Angle of Mounture, to the Horizontal Base, or
the right line which lies parallel to the Horizon under the way of the Shot.

CHAP. XXI. Of the violent, crooked, and natural motion or way of a Shot, from
the time he is discharged, until it is descended.
BY the third and fourth propositions of the second Book of Tartagilia, his
Nova Scientia, he shows that every body equally heavy, as a Shot in the end
of the violent motion thereof, being discharged out of a Piece of Ordnance, so
it be not right up or right down, the curved Range shall join with the right
Range, and to the natural course and motion betwixt them both, which distinct
motions you may see in the last foregoing figure.

In the 17 proposition of the same Book, he proves that every Shot equally
heavy, great or little, equally elevated above the Horizon, or equally oblique
or level directed, are among themselves like, and proportional in their
distance, as the figure following shows, as A E F is like and proportional in
right and crooked Ranges unto H I, and in their distances or dead Ranges A F
unto A I.

And in his 4th and 6th propositions of the same Book, he proves that every
Shot made upon the level has the mixed or crooked Range thereof equal to the
Arch of a Quadrant 90 degrees; and if it be made upon an elevation above the
level, that then it will make the crooked Range to be more than a Quadrant: And
if that be made imbased under the level, that then the crooked Range thereof
will be a Quadrant.

And in his 9th proposition of the same Book, he shows, that if one Piece be
Shot off twice, the one level, and the other at the best of her Random at 42
degrees. Mounture, that the right Range of the length is but the of the dead range
of the best Random. He that desires a further Demonstration of these
Propositions, may peruse his said second Book de Nova Scientia.

distance of shots

CHAP. XXII. The making of a Gunners Rule, which will serve for the elevation
of a Piece, which is sometimes better than a Quadrant; and the dividing it into
degrees by help of a Table, fitting it for any Piece from 5 foot to 14 foot
long.
BEcause the Quadrant cannot be conveniently used at all times, especially when
the wind blows hard, and, being near the Enemies Guns, the Plumb-line is too
long before it stands still; to remedy this, the Gunners Rule was invented, the
figure hereof is as follows; it must be 12 or 14 inches long, according as
the Gun will require, it must have a long slit down the middle thereof like the
Eye-Vane of a Quadrant or back Staff, the head thereof make circular or a
little hollow, as you see in the figure the Instrument is described standing,
at it is to be placed upon the Britch of a Piece of Ordnance; in the middle of
the small narrow slit you must place a Lute string or a well twisted Silk with
a Bead running upon the same to be set to any number of inches and parts, or to
such a degree of the Quadrant, as you must mount your Gun unto; and on the one
side of the slit you must place a division of inches, and let every inch be
divided into 10 parts, and then it will serve for all sorts of Guns; but if it
be for a particular Gun, then on the other side you may place the degrees and
parts, when you shall find by the length of your Piece, how many inches and
parts of an inch goes to a degree; but to use it with all sorts of Ordnance,
let it only be divided into inches and parts.

ruler

To fit this Rule for one Gun only, here is the Rule for the decimation of the
degrees; note, this Table has 11 Columns, the first shows the length of the
Piece in feet and half feet, the other 10 Columns in the head are 10 degrees,
and under is inches and the 100 parts of an inch, from 1 degree to 10 degrees;
and so you may take them out of the Table, and put them on your Ruler.

The len. of the Piece. 1 Degree. 2 Degrees 3 Degrees 4 Degrees 5 Degrees 6
Degrees 7 Degrees 8 Degrees 9 Degrees 10 Degr. Feet and Feet. Inch. 100 Inch.
100 Inch. 100 Inch. 100 Inch. 100 Inch. 100 Inch. 100 Inch. 100 Inch. 100 Inch.
100 4 Foot long. 1 3 2 6 3 8 4 11 5 14 6 16 7 19 8 82 9 25 10 28 5 Foot and
half. 1 14 2 28 3 42 4 56 5 70 6 84 7 98 9 12 10 26 11 40 6 Foot long. 1 22 2
44 3 66 4 88 6 10 7 38 8 58 9 78 11 8 12 29 6 Foot and half. 1 36 2 72 4 8 5 44
6 80 8 17 9 53 10 89 12 25 13 63 7 Foot long. 1 47 2 94 4 41 5 88 7 35 8 82 10
30 11 77 13 24 14 73 7 Foot and half. 1 58 3 14 4 71 6 28 7 85 9 42 10 99 12 55
14 14 15 71 8 Foot long. 1 68 3 36 5 4 6 72 8 40 10 8 11 76 13 44 15 12 16 82 8
Foot and half. 1 79 3 58 5 37 7 16 8 95 10 74 12 53 14 32 16 12 17 92 9 Foot
long. 1 89 3 79 5 68 7 58 9 47 11 37 13 27 15 18 17 8 18 98 9 Foot and half. 2
00 4 0 6 0 8 0 10 0 12 10 14 2 16 3 18 4 20 4 10 Foot long. 2 10 4 20 6 30 8 40
10 30 12 61 14 73 16 84 18 56 21 8 10 Foot and half. 2 21 4 41 6 69 8 88 11 81
13 28 15 48 17 68 19 89 22 10 11 Foot long. 2 31 4 62 6 93 9 24 11 56 13 88 16
22 18 51 20 82 23 14 11 Foot and half. 2 42 4 48 7 26 9 68 12 10 14 53 16 95 19
37 21 80 24 21 12 Foot long. 2 53 5 6 7 59 10 12 12 65 15 18 17 72 20 25 22 78
25 33 12 Foot and half. 2 63 5 20 7 89 10 52 13 15 15 78 18 41 21 4 23 67 26 33
13 Foot long. 2 74 5 48 8 82 10 96 13 70 16 44 19 48 21 92 24 68 27 40 13 Foot
and half. 2 84 5 68 8 52 11 36 14 20 27 4 19 88 22 72 25 56 28 42 14 Foot long.
2 95 5 90 8 85 11 80 14 75 17 70 20 65 23 60 26 56 29 53

The use of this Table in graduating the Rule is very plain; for if your Piece
of Ordnance be 8 foot long, and you would mount your Piece two degrees, seek
for 8 foot under the title length of the Piece, and in the common Angle against
the length of the Piece under two degrees you will find 3, 36, to make a
degree; that is 3 inches and 36 parts of an inch, divided into 100 parts, and
to this you may set your Bead.

The use of the graduated Rule is thus: having loaded your Piece, and brought
your Piece of Ordnance in a right line with your mark, the dispart being placed
upon the Muzzle Ring, in like manner place your Rule upon the Base Ring, and
let one standing by hold it, for the foot of it let it be fitted round to the
Gun; so you may be sure to place it right, and you may estimate on its
perpendicular well enough; now having before the distance to the mark you
intend to shoot at, and admit you have found it to be 461 paces, and the first
Shot you made for practice out of that Piece conveyed her Shot at two degrees
of Mounture 274 paces; then by our former Rules and the Tables of Randoms,
there I find 461 against 6 degrees, which is the degrees I must mount my Piece
to reach 461 paces.

Then to find by this Table how many inches and hundred parts of an inch 6
degrees will require, look in the Table above, and find on the left hand in the
first Column the length of the Piece, and just under the degrees (as is
aforesaid) you shall find the inches and parts of Mounture, to which set your
Bead on your string, that is in the sight, to so many inches and parts as the
Table gives; then mount the Piece higher or lower, until you bring the Bead to
the top of the dispart and mark, all in one line; stop then the Piece in such a
position with a Coin, then prime and give fire.

If you will shoot by the Metal of the Piece without a dispart, then substract
the height of the dispart out of the inches found by the Table, and to the
remainder mount your Piece.

If you have no Quadrant nor a Ruler, and would make a good Shot, look in the
Table, and find the length of the Piece and the inches that you ought to raise
your Piece unto, then cut a piece of stick just of that length, and set it upon
the Base Ring, and bring the top of that stick, the top of the dispart, and the
mark, all in a right line with your eye, and you will make as good a Shot as if
you had a Rule and Bead, or Quadrant.

If you will have no dispart, take your dispart and measure it upon the
aforesaid stick at the Base Ring, and from it cut off the length of the
dispart, and the remainder use upon the Base Ring.

But if the Mounture should be so small that the inches of the dispart should
be more than the inches answerable to the degrees of Mounture; then cut off
from the dispart so much as it is longer than the other, and place it upon the
Muzzle Ring, and bring the upper part of the Base Ring, the dispart, and mark,
in a right line with your Eye, and you will this way make a level with a stick
without Instrument, as well as if you had Ruler or Quadrant.

CHAP. XXIII. How to make a Shot at the Enemies Light in a dark night, and to
make at a Company of Horsemen or Footmen passing by, and also to make a good
Shot at a Ship Sailing; and how a Shot lodged in a Piece, so that it will not
be driven home to the Powder, may be shot out without hurt to the Piece.
TO shoot by night at the Enemies Lights, dispart your Piece with a lighted and
flaming Wax Candle, or with a lighted Piece of Match, that with your Eye you
may bring the Base Ring, the fired Match on the Muzzle Ring, and the Enemies
Light, in a right line, or mark; then give fire, and you will make a good Shot.

If you make a Shot at a Company of Horse passing by, take a Piece that will
reach the way the Horse or Foot are coming in a right line, then let your Gun
be so loaded with Powder as it may presently take fire, and let your Shot be
fit for your use; then take notice of some Hillock or some turning cross way
for the mark, and when the Enemy comes near to that way in a right line with
your Gun, give fire; but for shooting at a Ship upon the River, you must put
your Piece to some eminent mark on the other side of the River, and when the
Head of the Ship shall begin to be between the Piece and the mark, then give
fire.

But if by some mischievous accident a Shot is lodged in the concavity of a
Piece, and there sticks, and will not go home to the Powder, or come out; then
the Gunner, to save his Piece from breaking, must imbase the mouth of the
Piece, or put it under the line of level, then put in at the Touchhole fair
warm water at several times, so that it may run out at Muzzle or Mouth of the
Piece; and when all the Saltpeter is washed from the Powder, which is known by
the taste of the Water, then let the Gunner clear the Touchhole, and put in as
much Powder as possible he can, and prime and give fire, and it will serve to
draw out the Shot.

But when a Shot has lain long in a Piece until he is grown rusty, and so
sticks fast, put strong Vinegar warm into the mouth of the Piece, and with the
Rammer strike the Shot until it does move; then put in Vinegar until it run
clear through the Powder and Shot; prime as before, and give fire with good
Powder, and if it do not run through after it has stood three days, clear the
Touchhole, prime and give fire.

A man may also shoot farther than ordinary in one and the self same Piece, if
the Powder be gently driven home, and wadded accordingly; then the Shot being
compassed with Paper, Leather, Oakam, or such like, to fill close to the Powder
with a good Wadd, putting after it a Tampion of Cork, and with a Sponge moisten
it with Oil, anoint the vacant Cylender, and so Barricado the Piece that it
may not reverse in the Discharge.

CHAP. XXIV. A Discourse by way of Dialogue between a General and Captain,
concerning the Assaulting a Town or Work, etc.
General. HAving brought your Approaches near unto a Town or a Fortress,
whether would you choose a Bulwark or a Curtain to be battered with your
Ordnance?


Captain. A Town may be assaulted in diverse places; sometimes you assault one
side, when as you make your Battery on another; sometimes you choose a Bulwark,
otherwhiles a Curtain to be battered, with this intention, to take in the Town
as soon as possible may be. As for me, if I were to take in a great Town which
is populous, I had rather choose to batter a Curtain, than a Bulwark, which
has a high catt, or mount upon it: especially, seeing that in great Towns the
Bulwarks lying one far from another, they do show the skirt of the Curtain very
open.


Genesis Why would you rather choose a Curtain than a Bulwark?


Capt. Because your Bulwarks are always stronger, and better fortified than
your Curtain, and being it is the principal strength of a place, and better
furnished with Platforms* Flanks, etc. it will require more time, labor, and
charge to batter, than your Curtain.


Genesis But what General is so ill experienced, as to labor to batter a Curtain,
having two strong Bulwarks on both sides of him, to flanker him when he is to
put over his Gallery, and to give an assault upon the Curtain: peradventure for
his labor and pains, he may be well beaten.


Capt. Soft (Good Sir,) Suppose that after a great deal of labor and pains you
have battered a Bulwark, and falling up to the breach to assault it, you find
it cut off, an Enemy lodged in it, must you not then begin to sap forward
again, to make a new battery? whereas on a Curtain there is not that means of
cutting it off, as upon a large Bulwark.


Genesis Have you ever seen the experience of it?


Capt. Yes Sir, the Prince of Orange took in the Bosch by a Bulwark, and also
Breda, but Mastrick was taken in by making a breach, and springing of a mine,
upon the Curtain between Jonger Port and a Bulwark; howsoever the Town of
Cortes upon the frontiers of Franee, was first battered by the Archduke of
Austria upon the point of a Bulwark, near unto the very joint of the Curtain,
where a high and a strong turret stood, which did annoy us much, so that we
could not advance forward, but were constrained to leave off our approach on
that side, and began to make a new Battery for a breach in a Curtain on the
Field-side, where there lay a strong Bulwark to defend it, which did our men a
great deal of harm; but howsoever, with great difficulty and much ado, we took
in the Town that way, by lodging our selves in the Curtain. Likewise the City
of Cambray was battered, and taken in upon a Curtain, for all there were two
strong Bulwarks that flankered it, which if we had run our line upon a Bulwark,
we should not have forced it so soon; yea such an occasion might present it
self, that a General may be forced to batter both the one and the other, or to
find out some secret way by undermining a wall, and blowing it up with powder.


Genesis This is for your great Towns; but what say you to a Castle, a Citadel,
or some narrow Fortress, how will you go to work to take in those with the best
advantage?


Capt. As for your Forts, and Castles, it is much better to batter them upon a
mount or a Bulwark, than upon a Curtain: my reason is this, that in these your
Bulwarks lying close one by another, will flank one another with the greater
force, and hide the Curtain much better to defend it, so that one cannot so
easily force it, if the said defenses be not taken away.


Genesis Go to then; a Town then being to be battered, either upon a Curtain or a
Bulwark, how many Pieces of Ordnance would you have to do it, and, how and in
what manner would you place, and plant your Ordnance upon your batteries to
make a good breach?


Capt. To effect this, I would have 18 Pieces of Canon and half Canon, ( for
lesser Pieces for Battery are now grown out of use.)


Genesis Whether would you choose more whole Canon or half Canon?


Capt. To batter a place well either upon a stony or earthy wall, you may
assure your self, the more whole Cannon you have, the greater and the more
sufficient your breach will be: for your great battering Pieces do spoil and
beat down any thing, which does meet with their great force and violence:
Howsoever of late years experience has taught at diverse Seiges that your half
Canon which are more portable, having good store of them, will do the business
as well as your whole Canon.


Genesis But at what distance would you make your Batteries, for these 18 Pieces
of Canon, and how near unto the place, which you intend to Batter.


Capt. I would counsel a General to approach as near unto that place as
possible may be, and make his Batteries some two or three hundred paces one
from another, and that if it were possible to advance covertly the Approach and
sap, even up to the Counter-scharfe, and very brink of the Moat, to prepare a
way for his Gallery: not only to Batter that place being at hand with the
greater force, but also to keep in, and hinder an Enemy from Sallying out upon
the Besiegers, to discover and dismount their Ordnance in Casemates, or if they
have sunk any in their Walls or False-bray, and so to terrify them, that they
dare not stir out.


Genesis I am also of your opinion, and hold it for good, yet I fear this will not
be so soon done, and is sooner spoken, than executed, and that before you can
bring your approach and sap so far, it will cost you warm blood, and a great
many men's lives, if you have a stout Enemy within to deal withal, and one that
is very Vigilant, and careful to stand upon his Guard, and his defense.


Capt. It Is true, this cannot be done without danger, and the loss of men, but
he that is fearful must stay at home, and not come into the Wars where there is
neither place nor time, which does free or exempt him from danger: yet the
danger is not always so great, especially in such places, where you have Earth
enough to work with, to cast up your sapps, and to heighten and deepen your
Approaches, which will show you the way, for the more higher you find the
ground in Approaching to the edge of the moat, the deeper Trenches you may
make, and cover your self by casting up of blinds continually, to keep you from
the sight of the Besieged; and it is better, when you have brought your
approach as it were under them, than if you were 200 or 300 paces distant from
them.


Genesis I pray you Good Sir, how would you plant, and divide these 18 Pieces of
Canon?


Capt. I would make a great Battery with 8 of them to beat upon a right line,
either upon a Curtain, or the point of a Bulwark (which the General shall find
fittest) Two Batteries with each 3 Canon to play slope-wise from the great
Battery; as the ninth plate and 28 and 29 figures shows, and two Batteries,
with two half Canon a Piece, to play as it were cross-wise upon the breach. And
thus you see your 18 Pieces planted upon 5 Batteries, as you may observe in the
9th. Plate, and the two Figures of a Curtain and of a Bulwark following.


Genesis Good Sir tell me I pray you how many shot will these 18 Pieces of Canon
make in 10 hours, and how much powder will they require.


Capt. In 10 hours they may make some 1500 shot, and will require a matter of
25000 pound weight of powder, that is 150 barrels full, each barrel containing
160 pound weight in it.


Genesis You make your account then that every Piece in the space of 10 hours is
to shoot 80 shot, that is 8 shot an hour for every Piece.


Capt. You may make 10 shot in an hour if you please, if your Pieces be
renforced; but as for your ordinary Pieces, they have not metalline substance
enough to bear it: considering also that after you have made 40 shot out of a
Piece, it will be so heated, that it must have a cooling time, which must be at
least an hour, for otherwise your Piece being grown over hot, it may cause
danger.


Genesis Methinks that 80 shot for a Piece in so long a time were too little,
having often heard, that in that while, a Piece may well be shot off 130 times;
can you give me your resolution upon this?


Capt. I will tell you Sir what happened once in the Island of Bomble, Anno 1599.
we planted a Piece by a mill, by which we did annoy the Enemy very much, so
that they were forced to make a Battery, and planted a whole Canon, and a
demy-Canon upon it, seeking to dismount ours. Now shooting with this Piece from
four of the clock in the morning, till eleven toward noon, this Piece had a
cooling time the space of two hours, and about one of the clock we began to
play with it again, and continued shooting with it till 4 a clock in the
afternoon; but this Piece being not able to endure the force and heating of so
many shot, we were constrained to leave off with it: and yet ceased not
shooting with our other Pieces from another Battery by command from Don Jews
de Valasco, General of our Ordnance, and shooting cross-wise with some other of
our Pieces, we put the Enemies two Pieces to silence in the space of an hour; a
Soldier of ours standing by, was curious to keep a tally of the number of all
the shot we made from the morning till four a clock in the afternoon, and
showed me 80 notches, which deducting the two hours cooling, our Piece planted
at the Mill made 8 shot in an hour, which was as much as could be required of
it.

Senior Diego Uffano give your Translator leave to interrupt you a little, and
so to conclude this discourse. If you remember at the Seige of Ostend, which
you mention ofttn in your Chapters and Dialogues, you were without, and I was
within the Town, that on the seventh of January, Anno 1602. Stilo Novo, After
Sir Francis Vere of famous memory (who defended and kept the Town against you)
had deluded you with a Parley, only to gain time, and to make up our Canon and
Sea-beaten works along the skirt of the old Town, his Highness the Archduke
resolved to assault us, and that morning began to batter Sand-hill and
Schotenburgh, to make a breach for you against that night, with intent to
Assault us (as you did) and to have entered the Town, and have put us all to the
Sword, the Relation whereof you shall hear in the end of this Book. Now you had
placed and planted your 20 Pieces of Cannon to batter them in this manner, 8
from your Battery at the foot of the Downs, 8 from a Battery on the right hand
of the Downs, 6 from your pile Battery, 6 more which you had made upon the
Sand, and as it were raised out of the Sea: the first shot upon the breach in a
right line, and the other two slopewise, as your two figures following do
demonstrate. These 20 Pieces of Canon toward noon had a cooling time, for a
matter of some 2 hours, just as you have said; and afterward you began to
batter the breach and old Town again, till it was almost twilight, and then
they cooled again, till you were ready to give us an assault; and before you
fell on, as I do well remember, you shot off one of your Cannons with a hollow
Bullet, which flew over the Town and made a great humming noise, as a warning
Piece to the Count of Bucquoy, who lay on the East Side, that you were then
ready to fall on, and that he should do the like, this was your Signal. Now
General Vere knowing well your intent, gave order to the Gentleman of our
Ordnance who had the guard upon Sand-hill, that he should keep a true Tally,
and an account of all the shot you made that day, with your 20 Pieces of Cannon
upon the breach and the old Town, which being cast up, there were found to be
made that day from morning till night 2200 shot, which was found to be an 110
shot for every Piece, and 11 shot an hour for every Piece, which is more than
8; but I verily believe your Pieces were renforced. This by the way, and so I
return again to your own Dialogue.


Genesis (Good Sir) I pray show me how you would batter the point of a Bulwark (as
the figure 28 following demonstrates,) and give me some reasons as well defensive
as offensive.


Capt. I am willing to give your Lordship content, and say, If I were to batter
the point of a Bulwark or a Bastion, I would have the same number of battering
Canon, and planted in the same form and manner as they were for the Curtain,
and to shoot sloap and cross-wise also; and if your approaches were advanced so
far, they should be planted upon the very brink of the moat and upon the
Counterscharfe, I would plant 4 of them so, that they should dismount the
Enemies Canon in their Casemates, or any, if they had sunk them in their
Falsebray, which should wait upon that occasion.


Genesis I am of your mind, and prefer such a batter before all others, who are of
the opinion that they had rather choose a Curtain than a Bulwark to be battered.


Capt. You have heard my reasons for that, and see the figures following traced
out to you. But as for your Bulwark the besieged may cut it off (as you may
mark in the figures of Retrenchments and Cuttings off in the second part of
this book) for indeed it will be a hard matter to force an Enemy out of a
Bulwark, who is resolved to loose it by peecemeal and degrees; and there is not
so much danger in assaulting of a Curtain, which being once well battered and
beaten down with your Ordnance, you have an easier way and entrance to fall on
with your Troops of men, to enter the Town or Fortress; but for the defense
which is made from your Flanking Bulwarks, or your Casemates, you must make
Batteries upon the brink of the moat against them, (as is said) to dismount the
Enemies Pieces, and to flanker with your Ordnance the Parapets of the Bulworks
to beat them about their ears, that the Bulworks may lie the more open to you,
and I think this way is the least danger.


Genesis But the Besieged, their cuttings off, may they not be made as well upon a
Curtain as upon a Bulwark.


Capt. No, for the Rampire being thinner, you have neither so much ground, nor
the like accommodation in a Curtain as in a Bulwark; and indeed, a Governor of
a Town, or of a Fortress, if he were put to his choice, had rather to be
assaulted on a Bulwark (than on a Curtain) by cutting it off into the form of a
half moon, that he might make a new resistance, and defend it with a less
number of men. Besides, in a Bulwark the Besieged have this advantage over the
Assailants, which is very dangerous for them, that they may make a Mine within
the bowels of their Bulwark when an Enemy shall attempt to assault it, and
thinking to enter the Breach and take the Town, they may be blown up into the
Air by a Countermine; the like also may happen to the Besieged, the Assailants
springing their Mine also in a Bulwark, when they think they stand upon their
best defense.


Genesis May not the like be done also in a Curtain?


Capt. No, it will not take the like effect as in a Bulwark; for a Breach being
once made in a Curtain, for as an Enemy may assault it at large, so they may
bring a greater number of men to fight, to help to defend it; whereas in a
Bulwark they are penned up and straightned in a narrow place, which may be cut
off, and will require a fewer number of men to defend it, whereas those which
are to force it, must be constrained to bring up a great many men to assault,
who in an instant may be in danger of blowing up.


Genesis Your reasons (Good Captain) are not to be slighted; but as for me, I hold
it safer, to batter and assault the breach of a Bulwark, than of a Curtain. For
though the besieged may cut it off, and defend it with a fewer number of men,
yet the Assaulters have this advantage over the Besieged defendants, that they
have more place and elbow room, and may find a less resistance than in a
Curtain, seeing that one may make as a great a breach in a Bulwark as in a
Curtain, because your Ordnance may beat it flat, and level with the ground; and
choosing rather a Bulwark: I will herewith conclude this discourse, and now
show you the figures both of the one, and of the other in this following plate.


CHAP. XXV. Containing the demonstration of Morters, and the use of them.
YOur great and small Morters, are not only serviceable in a War offensive, by
shooting and casting of great Grenades, as of 100, 150, 170 pound weight, and
smaller of 40, and 50 pound; but also by casting of Fireballs, Stones, old
Rubbidge, and Pieces of Iron, into Cities, Towns, and Fortresses; and may be
used also defensively, to be shot from Towns and Forts into any Enemies works,
and approaches; especially they are of singular use, when an Enemy has
covertly approached, and lodged himself under some Bulwark, Tower, or Turret,
and is a beginning to undermine them; which if they do, you may plant one of
these Morters at a reasonable distance, on the inside of your Wall, and
shooting your Granado, as it were bolt upright into the air, by its natural
fall, it may light just into the Enemies works, and there with great violence
breaking among them, it will make them cry, fly, and forsake the place; you may
also fire them out of a place, by casting good store of Hand Grenades down
among them, and so annoy them, that the work will be too hot for them.

Two of these Morters are represented unto you, in the Plate and Figures
following number. Now for the shooting away of your great Grenades or
Fireballs, you must ever remember, but to take or 2/7 parts of fine Powder of
the weight of your how to bombard a courtine How one must Batter a Courtine

how to bombard a bulwark How one must Batter a Bulwark

Granado or thing which you shoot; but if you are to shoot away a Bullet
without any Fireworks in it, or some massy stone, or such like solid thing,
then you must take but half the weight of it in fine Powder, which, having
given fire to the Mortar, will send it going merrily.

The use of them is not to shoot in a right line, as other Ordnance do, but in
an oblique line, as you may see by the two Figures following, unless your
Mortar be mounted to 90 degrees, mounting them usually above 45 degrees, namely
to 60, 70, 80, and sometimes more or less, as the distance and fall of your
Granado or Shot shall require.

Having before shown you the making and use of the Quadrant, it remains now
that I come to the charging and use of a Mortar; now before you put in your
Powder, it must be well sponged and cleared, whether you charge it with loose
Powder, or Cartouch, turning the mouth almost bolt upright; the Powder being
put into the Chamber, you must stop it with a Wadd either of Hay or Oakam, and
after a Tampkin of some soft wood, and this with the Powder that was put in
first, it must fill up the whole Chamber thereof, that there may be no vacuity
between the Powder and the Wadd, or between the Wadd and the Shot; this done,
the shot shall be put in at the mouth, with another Wadd after it; but you must
have a care that your Mortar be not much mounted, lest your shot flies out too
soon, and the Wadd between the Tampkin and the shot will not only save the shot
from the Tampkins breaking of it, but also is to avoid vacuities which may
endanger the breaking of the Piece by second expansions.

Now then having resolved of the premises, touching your Piece, Shot, and
Powder, as abovesaid, and upon the distance and mounture of your mark, as the
Rules and Tables following shall direct you, then for the bending and disposing
of it to the assigned mark; lay first a straight Ruler upon the Mouth of your
Mortar, and upon it place a Quadrant (as you may see by the Figures) or some
other Instrument cross-wise, to set the Mortar upright, for shuning of wide
shooting, and then placing them fore-right to elevate it into the resolved
degree of Mounture, to avoid short or overshooting, accordingly as the Tables
following will teach you; for having made one shot, you may thereby proportion
the rest, considering whether you are to shoot with or against the wind, or
whether it blows toward the right or the left hand, whether weakly or
strongly, and so accordingly to give or abate the advantage, or disadvantage,
which judgment and discretion will induce you thereunto, and the help of the
Rules following.

Now we will come to the use of a Mortar, and that in this example following;
Suppose an Enemy be approached to the Basis, or foot of a Wall or a Bulwark,
and there is a rooting, and begins to make a Mine, and having Chambred his
Powder, intends to blow it up, and that there is no other means left you, to
repulse and hinder their egress and regress into it; but by shooting out of
your Morters some Grenades, Fireballs, Stones, and Rubbish among them, or at
least by casting many Hand-Granadoes down upon them. To do this either by force
or policy, it behooves a good Canonier or Fire-worker, to know first (as has
been taught) how far his Mortar will carry a Granado, or any solid thing else,
which shall be shot out of it, being set upon such and such a degree and
elevation as the Mortar Figure will show you. As for Example, take your aim
level with the mould or mouth of your Mortar, noted A upon the Quadrant, and it
will carry 200 paces, where you see the Granado falls upon the letter A; but
your mortar being elevated to the mark B, it then will carry its Bullet 487
paces; if to the second C, then 755 paces; if to the third D, it will carry 937
paces; if to the fourth E, then 1065 paces; if to the fifth elevation F, then
1132 paces; if to the sixth G, which is in the midst of the Quadrant, and lies
then upon its highest elevation, it will carry 1170 paces, as you may see by
the several falls of the Bullets upon every Letter. The second Figure shows you
a Mortar casting a Granado upon a Castle, as you may see by the Example.

Another Table of Diego Uffanoes for Mortar Pieces, with their Randoms made for
every degree, between the Level and 90 degrees, as follows.
Degrees. Pac. Degrees. 0 100 89 1 122 88 2 143 87 3 364 86 4 285 85 5 204 84 6 224 83
7 243 82 8 262 81 9 280 80 10 297 79 11 314 78 12 331 77 13 347 76 14 363 75 15
377 74 16 392 73 17 406 72 18 419 71 19 432 70 20 445 69 21 457 68 22 468 67 23
479 66 24 490 65 25 500 64 26 510 63 27 518 62 28 524 61 29 526 60 30 534 59 31
539 58 33 543 57 34 549 56 34 552 55 35 558 54 36 562 53 37 568 52 38 573 51 39
477 50 40 580 49 41 582 48 42 583 47 43 584 46 44 582 45 582

mortar shooting castle A Mortar Shooting upon a Castle

paths of falling mortars How you are to use the Quadrant before described for a
Mortar, as you may see by the falling of the Granado upon the Lettors



THE Complete Gunner THE THIRD PART. OF ARTIFICIAL FIREWORKS.
THe number of artificial Fireworks which are practiced as well in Armies upon
Land in the attacquing and defense of places, as in defense of Ships at Sea,
whereby warlike Executions may be performed, are many and various, according to
the ingenuity of the Fire-Master: And the ways of preparing them are so many,
as it is impossible for us in this room we have allotted to prescribe all that
are known. We shall therefore be contented to make choice of some of the best
and principal things among so great a number, but more particularly of some
most admirable inventions; and we shall give a Chapter to every kind of
Fire-work, considering they differ among themselves both in fashion and effect,
and every one has its name which is particularly applied to it. But before we
begin with our composition we shall begin with the particulars, and their
preparation unto this work, whereby they may be the more exalted, and have the
greater efficacy. The more principal materials, that is, Peter, Charcoal and
Sulphur, are mentioned at large in my first part of Gunnery, and therefore we
shall proceed.

CHAP. I. To prepare Oil of Sulphur.
TAke a good quantity of clarified Sulphur, (the way of Clarification we have
showed before) melt it over a very gentle fire in an Earthen or Copper Vessel,
then take old red Tyles that have been already used in buildings, or if you
cannot find such, take new Tyles that are well baked, and that have not taken
dirt, break them in pieces as small as a Bean, and throw them into melted
Brimstone, then mingle your Brimstone with the remaining fragments of the
Bricks, until they have drank up all the Sulphur, then let them be put into a
Limbeck upon a Furnace to distill, and after the Oil is drawn according to a
Chemical order it will be very excellent, and above all, have a very
combustible quality, proper to the Compositions of artificial fires.

To prepare Oil or Balsam of Sulphur.

Fill a long body of Glass full of Sulphur well powdered, then pour upon it Oil
of Turpentine, or Oil of nuts, or Juniper, in such a quantity that the oil with
the Sulphur may fill but the half part, place it in an Iron Kettle, with Sand
round about it, and a small heat for 8 or 9 hours, and you will see that the
Oil of Turpentine will convert the Brimstone into a red Oil, as fiery and
combustible as before.

There are those that take the following matter to the preparing the oil of
Sulphur, to the end it may be rendered more combustible, viz. Sulphur 1 l. of
quick Lyme half a pound, of Sal-armoniac 4 ounces.

Above all this, the Chemists know how to prepare a certain oil of Sulphur,
(which they call a Balsam) of which the virtues are so admirable, that they
admit not any body, either living or dead, to be touched with putrefaction, but
will conserve it in so perfect and entire state, that neither the pernicious
Influences of the celestial bodies, nor that corruption which the Elements
produce, nor that which reduces things into their Principles, can any way
damnifie it, if anointed with it. There is also from it prepared a certain fire
(as Tritemius teaches) with flowers of Sulphur, Borax and Brandy-wine, which
will remain many years without extinguishing of it self. Others that are
knowing, do attest that a Lamp may be filled with such like Oil, from whence
all that are within the Light of it, will appear as if they had no heads.

There is another way of making Oil of Sulphur which is very admirable and
excellent, which is prepared thus. Incorporate well together an equal
proportion of Sulphur and Saltpeter, reduce them into most subtle Powder, and
pass it through a fine sieve, then put them into an Earthen Pot that has never
been used, and pour upon them Vinegar made of White Wind or Aqua-vita, as much
as will cover the Powder; Close the Pot in such manner that no air may any wise
enter, and put it thus in any hot place so long time until all the vinegar be
digested and vanished. Lastly, take that matter which rests in the Pot, and
draw from thence an oil, by Chemical Instruments proper to this work.

CHAP. II. The preparation of the Flowers of Benjamin.
TAke Benjamin a certain quantity of ounces, put it into a Gourd or a Limbeck
glass, and close it well with a blind head (as they call it) then have in
readiness an earthen vessel, set it upon a Tresfoot, or for the more certainty
upon a small Furnace, place it in your glass body, and compass it well about
with fine Sand or ashes so high as the matter is in the glass; after make a
moderate fire under it, for fear the Limbeck heat too soon, and be too hot, for
that will make the flowers become citrine or yellow, when they ought to be as
white as Snow. Observe when you see the flowers begin to raise a vapor or
small fume, continue your fire in that same degree the space of one quarter of
an hour; after you shall see the flowers risen unto the internal Superficies of
the blind head, then take it away carefully, and put to it another that shall
be quite cold, and put that which you have taken off upon a white paper until
it be cold, then gently with a Feather or wooden Spatula, cause the flowers to
come forth of the blind head, and gather them together carefully: thus you may
add a third or fourth blind head, and in time many, until all the Benjamin
cease to fume.

Benjamin may be made into flowers another way, thus; put into a glazed pot a
certain quantity of ounces of Benjamin, and place it upon warm ashes, and when
you see it begin to fume, cover the vessel with a Cornet of paper made in the
form of a Cone, and a little larger than the orifice of the pot, leave it there
about one quarter of an hour, after take off the Cornet, and take the flowers
and gather them together; then put upon the vessel another Cornet of paper, and
let it stand as long as before; take it off, and gather the flowers to the
former, and continue thus putting Cornet after Cornet, until your flowers be
entirely evaporated.

CHAP. III. The preparation of Camphire.
TAke Juniper Gumm (which is called sometimes) Sandarach, white varnish, or
Mastick most subtly powdered 2 l. white distilled vinegar as much as is
necessary to cover the Gumm in a glass, set it deep in horse-dung the space of
20 days; then take it and pour it forth into another glass Vessel with a wide
mouth, and let it stand thus in digestion a whole month, and in it you shall
have Camphire congealed in form of a Crust of bread, and which has in some
measure the resemblance of the veritable or true Camphire. The Camphire has
such a love for the fire, that being once lighted, it goes not out until it be
quite consumed. The flame that comes from thence is very clear, and of a very
agreeable odor; after it has remained suspended in the air some time it
vanishes insensibly. The cause that produces all these rare effects from
Camphire, is by reason its parts are extreme subtle and airy.

I do add to all this, that it may be easy to reduce Camphire into Powder, to
make it useful in artificial fireworks; if a man crumbles it and beats it
gently, rouling it with Sulphur. The oil of Camphire, which serves also for the
same effect, is made by adding a little of oil of sweet Almonds, and stir them
well together in a brass Mortar, and pestle of the same metal, until all be
converted into oil of a greenish color.

Or a man may put it into a Glass Viol which must be close stopped, provided
also that the Camphire be true and natural, and not a Cheat; then put that
Glass into a warm Furnace, and draw it out, when you shall see all the Camphire
turned into a pure clear oil, which will burn with an admirable vivacity.

CHAP. IV. Water of Sal-armoniac.
TAke Sal-armoniac 3 ounces, Saltpeter 1 ounce, reduce them into a most subtle
Powder, and mix them well together, after put them into a Limbeck, and then
pouring on them some of the best and strongest Vinegar, you may distill the same
into a water with a small fire.

CHAP. V. Of a certain artificial water which will burn upon the Palm of your
hand without doing any harm.
TAke Oleum Petroli, and of Terebinthi, and of Calx vive, of Mutton fat, and of
Hogs Lard, of each equal parts, beat them well together, until they be well
incorporated, then cause them to be distilled in warm ashes, or upon burning
coals, and you shall draw from thence an excellent oil.

CHAP. VI. To prepare Fire-Spunges.
TAke of the oldest and greatest Toad-stools which grows at the Root of Ash,
Oak, Birch, and Fir Tree, with many other Trees which produce them freely; get
a good parcel, string them, and hang them in the Chimney, and leave them to
macerate; being well mortified and macerated, take and cut them in pieces, and
then beat them with a wooden Mallet; this done, boil them over a small fire in
a strong Lie, and a sufficient quantity of Saltpeter, until all the humidity
be evaporated: At last, having put them upon a Plank or even board, put them in
a warm Oven, and let them well dry there; having drawn them from thence, you
must beat them with a wooden Mallet as before, until it become wholly subtle
and soft; being thus prepared, you must keep them in a commodious place to
serve you upon occasion.

CHAP. VII. How to prepare Match or Tow for Artificial Fires.
MAke Cords of Tow, Hemp, or Cotton, which you please, of two or three twists,
not made too hard, put them in a new Earthen pot Vernished, pour upon them
Vinegar made of good white Wine four parts, of Urine two parts, of Aqua vitae
one part, of Salt Peter purified one part, of Cannon Powder reduced to Meal one
part: Make all these Ingredients boil together upon a great Fire, to the
Consumption of all the Liquor; then spread upon a great smooth Plank or Board,
the Meal or Flower of the most excellentest Powder that you can get. Having
drawn your Match out of the Pot, roll them in the Powder, and then dry them in
the shade or Sun, for it matters not which, and the Cords or Match that are
thus prepared will burn very quick.

Francis Iouchim Prechtelin, in his second part of his Fireworks Chap. 2.
describes a certain Match, which is extreme slow in burning, and is thus made;
take Mastich two parts, Colophonia one part, Wax one part, Saltpeter two
parts, Charcoal half a part, then, having melted all and mixed them well upon
the fire, take a Match made of Hemp or Flax of a sufficient bigness, and draw
it through this Composition, making it go down to the bottom of the Vessel,
drawing it often through, until it has gotten the bigness of a Candle, and
when you desire to use it, light it first, and when it is well lighted blow it
out, and there remains none but a burning Coal.

CHAP. VIII. Of certain Antidotes excellent and approved against the burning of
Gunpowder, Sulphur, hot Iron, melted Lead, and other like accidents, drawn
from the particular Experiments of Cozimu Nowicz.
SECTION. I.
Boil Hogs grease in common water, over a most gentle fire, the space of some
time; then take it from the Fire, and let it cool, and after expose it to the
fair and clear weather three or four nights; after having put it into an
Earthen pot, melt it again upon a small fire, and being melted, strain it
through a Cloth into cold water, after wash it many times with good clean and
fresh water, until it come as white as snow; this done, put it into a glazed
pot to serve you at your occasions. The use is thus, you must anoint the burnt
part as soon as you can, and you will see a quick and admirable effect.

SECT. II.
Take Plaintain water, Oil of Nuts of Italy, of each as much as you please.

SECT. III.
Take Mallows water, Rose water, Plume Alum, of each as much as is necessary,
and mix them well together with the white of an Egg.

SECT. IV.
Take a Lixivium, made of Calx Vive and common water, add to it a little Oil of
Hempseed, Oil Olive, and some whites of Eggs, mingle all well together, and
anoint the burnt place with this Composition. All these Ointments cure
burnings without causing any pain. These I have often experimented upon my self.

Some Receipts from diverse Authors.
Take Oil of Olives, Oil of sweet Almonds, Liquid Vernish, each one part, juice
of Onions two parts, with these chase the part affected.

If there be already blisters raised and Ulcerations in the parts, this
following Ointment is most excellent.

Boil a great quantity of the second Rind of Elder tree, in Oil of Olive, then
pour it through a Linen cloth; add to it a little after two parts of Cerus or
burnt Lead, of Lytharge of Gold, of each one part, put them into a Leaden
Mortar, and then stir them about and mix them so, that they become in the form
of a Linament.

Take melted Lard, pour it into two Ounces of Morrel water, and one Ounce of
Oil of Saturn, then mingle them well together: this Remedy is sovereign.

Take the Mucilage of the Roots of Henbane, and of the Flowers of Poppies, of
each one Ounce, Salt Peter one Ounce, mingle them all with Oil of Camphire, and
make a Linament according to Art.

Or take the juice of Oynions roasted in embers two Ounces, Nut Oil one Ounce,
mingle them all well together.

Or take of the Leaves of Ivy two m. or handfuls well beaten up with Plantain
water, Oil Olive one pound, make all boil with four Ounces of good white Wine,
until the Consumption of the whole Wine, at the end of the decoction add Wax as
much as is necessary, to give him the form and consistency of a Linament.

Again, take old Lard, let it be melted over the flame, and poured into two
Ounces of the juice of Beets and Rue, of the Cream of Milk one Ounce, Mucilage
of Quinceseeds and Gum Tracanth, of each an Ounce and a half, mix them well
together, and make thereof a Linament. This remedy is none of the worst, we
took it from Joseph Quercetanus, in libro Sclopetrio.

CHAP. IX. Of Hand Grenades.
THe Hand Grenades respecting their form, are Globically or perfectly round
and hollow in their interior part in manner of a Sphere; they are called Hand
Grenades, or Handy Grenades, because they may be grasped in the hand, and
thrown to the Enemies; and if we should dwell upon the denominations of the
Latin, we may call them as they do, Granades Palmares, they are commonly of
the bigness of a Bullet of Iron of 5, 6, and 8 l. they weigh sometimes 1 l. and
sometimes one pound and a half, some are of two pounds, and others of three
pounds; there is given to these sort of Globes the names of Grenades, by
reason of the great resemblance they have with the Fruit Punique, which we call
Pom-granad; for as these do shut up in their rinds a great quantity of grains;
so our Military Globes are filled with a number of Grains of Powder, almost
innumerable, the which having received the Fire, do break into a thousand and a
thousand shivers, leaping against the Enemy, and piercing if it could all such
things as it meets opposing its violence. They are generally made of Iron or
Copper, carrying in its Diameter about three Ounces, being about the length of
a Barley Corn in thickness of Metal; they are filled commonly with Gunpowder,
and sometimes of other Compositions, there is added to its Orifice a small Pipe
commonly called a Fuse, which is filled with a matter or Composition that is
slack or slow in burning, but nevertheless very susceptible of the Fire, and
capable to hold fire some time, for fear that it should break in the hands of
those that manage it, and intend to throw it.

There is amongst Fire-Masters accounted three sorts of Hand Grenades, the
first and most common are made of Iron; others are made of Brass, allayed with
other Metals in the melting; the third sort is of Glass.

If you cause them to be made of Iron, take such as is most fragile, and as
little wrought as possible you can get; if you will cast them of Copper, you
must allay six pound of Copper, with two pounds of Tyn, and half a pound of
Marcasite, or you may put one part of Tyn with three parts of Lattin or of
Auricalque. Those that are made of Iron are in thickness about the ninth part
of the Diameter; those that are made of Brass must have one tenth part of the
Diameter in thickness of Metal. Lastly, such which you cause to be made of
Glass, must have one seventh part of their Diameter in their thickness.

The largeness of the Orifice in which you must put in your Fuse made of Wood,
whose upper part must be about 2/9 the Diameter of the Granado, and the small
hole in the Fuse should have the largeness of 1/18 of the same Diameter, the
rest of the capacity of the Shell must be filled with well grained Powder, the
length of the Fuse must be about of the Diameter, and the top must be broad,
and a little rounding like a Hemisphere, the hollow and inner part of the Fuse
must be about 1/9 Diameter at the small or inner end, and at the outer end: Men
do generally fill the void place with Powder ground most subtly, which must
be moistened with Gum-water, or dissolved glue, that it may join the better. As
for the Fuses, they must be filled or charged with one of the Compositions
hereunder written; afterward you must fasten it well and close with Tow or
Okham, and the Pyrotechnian Lute which the Germans call Kit, which is made of
four parts of Ship Pitch, two parts of Colophonia, one part of Terrebinthe, and
one part of Wax; you must put all these Ingredients in a glazed Vessel, and
melt them upon a small fire, then mix and mingle them well together.

Compositions for Charging the Fuses of the Hand Grenades.
Powder 1 l. Saltpeter 1 l. Sulphur 1 l. Powder 3 l. Saltpeter 3 l. Sulphur 1
l. Powder 4 l. Saltpeter 3 l. Sulphur 2 l. Powder 4 l. Saltpeter 3 l. Sulphur
1 l.

Another sort of Grenades.

I shall here represent you with a Hand Granado, which may be hid at the
entering of a passage, or any such place where we suppose the Enemy must come:
This Granado has two holes opposite, passing just cross the Diameter, in which
must be fastened a Fuse of Wood or Metal with holes in several places, and all
about it within let there be beaten Powder, and through it you must pass a
common match, lighted at one end, and at top let there be a third hole, by
which it must be charged with a good grained Powder, which must be close stopped
again with a Tampion, and then is your Granado prepared. I suppose it not
necessary to say much of the use of this Granado, and since it is so easy to
be understood by what we have said, and that the occasion you will have of such
things will forge your Inventions enough to put them in practice.

CHAP. X. How and where a man ought to heave Hand-Granadoes.
ACcording to the definition which we have given of them, it is most evident,
and I suppose no body will doubt, that they are to be taken in the hand, and
that we must grasp them to throw them at the Enemy. It is said before that this
kind of Arms is as well defensive as offensive; therefore we shall not rest
upon the proof of these things; those that have been at the managing of them
must instruct them that are ignorant.

We shall say only this, that the Places where these Hand Grenades are used at
Sea, are where Ships are Board and Board to clear the Enemies Decks, so that
the way may be cleared there. Upon Land Service they are used immediately after
the good and happy success of a Mine which has made a great overture in a
Rampire, overthrowing one part of the Wall, Bulwark, or Bastion, to give place
to the Assailants, to do their endeavor to get into the breach; it is there
that the Besieged as well as Besiegers may make use of these Hand Grenades;
it is there where you shall see the more generous of both sides armed with Fire
and Flames, defending valiantly the quarrel of their Prince, the interest of
their Party, their Liberties and their Lives. They are employed also upon other
occasions, to wit, when the Besiegers are come up to the Walls of the Rampire,
and so well placed, that making winding Stairs in the thickness of the
Platform, they mount insensibly by retact; so that the Besieged cannot any way
hinder by the defense of their Flanks, nor be kept safe by the Rampires
themselves. Upon these occasions I say, the Besieged ought to pour down a a
quantity of Hand Grenades from aloft, or from the top of the Walls, upon their
under-miners.

And sometimes they are also thrown at a distance greater than ordinary,
according to the occasion; but when this cannot be done by the natural strength
of a Soldier, without the aid of some artificial Instrument, the Masters in
this Art have invented certain small Engines, made like unto one of our
Ducking-Stools, with a Rope at one end to pluck it down by force, and at the
other end a hollow place to lay the Balls in that are to be thrown, and with
this Engine well contrived, one may throw upon the Enemy, not only Hand
Grenades; but also a quantity of other Artificial Military Fires, as glistring
or shining Globes, Bombards, Fire-pots, and many other such like things, of
which we shall speak in their place, may be thrown at a greater distance than
is possible by the hand only.

This Instrument is not very difficult to make, it may easily be comprehended
by what we have said. I shall only advertise you of one thing, that the longer
the arm of the Engine is on that side that is to hold the Grenades, more than
the other part to which the Rope is fastened, the greater force the Engine will
have; but you must understand this measure to be made from Axes or Iron Rolls,
upon which the Arm moves.

CHAP. XI. Of glistring or bright shining Fireballs.
DIssolve upon the fire in a Brass or Earthen Vessel an equal portion of
Sulphur, black Pitch, Rozin, and Turpentine; then take a Ball of Stone or Iron,
that the Diameter be far less than the Diameter of a Cannon, or Mortar Piece,
for which you intend this Globe; plunge this Shot in this melted matter until
it be all over covered with the matter about its exterior part, draw it from
thence, and role it gently in Corn Powder, that done, cover it all over with a
Cotton Cloth; then plunge it again in your Composition, and reiterate the
rolling it in Powder, as before, then cover it a second time with another
Cotton Cloth; and thus continue dipping your Bullet, and wrapping it about
with Cloth, until your Shot has acquired a just bigness, exactly to fill the
Orifice of the Engine, remembering that the last Coat of the Shot must be of
Corn'd Powder: Being then thus prepared, it must be put into the Cannon or
Mortar Piece naked, without any other thing compassing it, immediately upon the
Powder in the Chamber, which must make the Bullet come forth; Then give fire
freely to your Piece, to throw the shot where you intend it.

CHAP. XII. Of Balls which Cast forth so great a smoke, that they blind
whomsoever they come near.
IT is accustomed to do great execution by favor of the night, in occurrences
of War, as well as in many other occasions: I mean not here to speak of the
darkness of the night, for that is naturally effected by the first Causer of
all things, from the order that he has established amongst the Beings; but I
intend only here to treat of the darkness that is made Artificially, and
particularly such as may be produced and made to last a little time in a close
or narrow place, according to the Rules of our Art, to be made for the blinding
of the Enemy, which would force into our beings, and would attaque us by main
strength, in a design to take away our Lives, Honor, and Goods; or when we
have a design to facilitate the passage for the Assailants, in confounding or
oppressing the Besieged in their Forts, with a cloudy and thick fume, in such a
sort that one may take them as amazed Fish in troubled waters. For this purpose
are Globes prepared, which whilst they are on fire, produce a smoke so
vehement and unpleasant, and in so great abundance, that it is impossible to
withstand the incommodity without bursting asunder; see here the Method. Take
Ship Pitch in the Stone 4 l. Liquid Pitch 2 l. Colophonia 6 l. Sulphur 8 l.
Saltpeter 36 l. melt all these Drugs upon burning Coals in any vessel
whatsoever, adding after 10 l. of Coal of Sawdust made of the Pine or Firr-Tree
6 l. Crude Antimony 2 l. incorporate and mix them very well together; then put
into this melted matter Tow, Hemp, and Linen Clothes a great quantity, and
boil them well in this Composition, and when they have drank up all the matter,
then form them into Balls of such a bigness as you please, so that it may be
cast with the hand, or with the Engine mentioned in the last Chapter, according
as you shall find most convenient. And this is our true way to make Night at
Noonday, to obscure the Sun it self, and to blind the Eyes of the Enemies for
some time. And this is the most lawful way that one may follow, because it
shows its original from natural things, and we may believe that it is always
sufficient justice, so that the Wars where such things are practiced, be not
unjustly enterprized.

CHAP. XIII. Stink Balls.
STinking Globes are made to annoy the Enemy by their stinking vapors and
fumes disagreeable to Nature; nay so unsufferable to the Nose, and to the Brain
it self, by its most violent stink, that by no means it can be endured. The
preparation is as follows, Take of Powder 10 l. of Ship Pitch 6 l. of Tar 20
l. Saltpeter 8 l. Sulphur Colophonia 4 l. make all these Ingredients melt at
the fire by a small heat, in an Earthen or Copper vessel, and all being well
melted, throw into the melted matters 2 l. of Coal dust, of the cuttings or
filings of Horses Hoofs 6 l. Assafoetida 3 l. Sagapenum 1 l. Spatula foetida
half a pound. Mingle and incorporate them well together; then put into this
matter Linen or Woolen Cloth, or Hemp or Tow, so much as will drink up all
the matter, and of these you may make Globes or Balls of what bigness pleases
your self best, according to the method and order as we have heretofore
prescribed.

The Globes or Balls may be made Venomous or Poisonous, if to their Composition
be added these things following, viz. Mercury sublimate, Arsenick, Orpiment,
Cinaber, to which may also be added many other Poisonous matters, which I shall
forbear to mention, considering every one by Nature is apt enough to learn to
do that which is mischievous.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Shooting of Shot made red hot in the Fire.
IT is a practice that has been practiced in former times to shoot red hot
Fireballs, and was counted of great defense, as you may find amongst many
other things in the Works of Diodorus Siculus, where he says, Tyrios immisse
in Alexandri Magni machinamenta massas magnas ferreas candentes: Out of many
Authors may be proved the customary use in former times of Shooting red hot
Pieces of Iron, which we shall not dwell upon, but come to the Practice. First,
you must Charge the Piece of Ordnance according to the customary manner, his
due proportion of Powder, upon this Powder you must put a Wooden Cylender or
Fidd, of a just and equal wideness with the bore of the Piece, which must be
driven very stiff home to the Powder, and for your better security, you must
put upon this another wad made of Straw, Hay, or of Oakam, or Tow; this being
done, let the Piece be laid a little under Metal, and then cleanse the vacant
place or hollow of the Piece with a Sponge, so that all the Grains of Powder
that are there, may be taken away. This being done, lay your Piece to bear with
the place you intend to shoot at, according to the method we have given in the
second Part of Gunnery, and let your Piece thus remain until you have put in
your red hot Bullet: your Bullet must be sure to be exactly round, and not so
high, but that it may run freely down in the Piece to the wad, the Shot being
red hot, take it out of the fire with a pair of Tongs made for that purpose,
and put it into the Piece, and give an attentive Ear, for as soon as the Shot
is supposed to be up to the Wad, give immediately Fire to your Piece of
Ordnance.

There are others which put into their Pieces Boxes made of Plate, of Iron or
Copper. Others do put into their Pieces Potters Clay, and upon them the fiery
Bullet, which with a quick hand they thrust home with a Rammer, which ought to
be defended from fire by lining the Rammer head with Copper. But these are more
perilous; and therefore we account that method above to be the best, and most
free from danger.

CHAP. XV. To Arm Pikes to defend a Ship or any other place.
TO arm Pikes, to defend a ship, or breach, or to enter the same, or to stick
in the sides of a ship, or other place, take strong Canvas, and cut it in
length about a foot, or 14 inches, and six inches high in the Center, and let
the ends be both cut taper-wise, then fasten the Canvas at both ends with
strong twine, and fill it with this receipt.

Powder bruised 8 parts, Peter in Roch 1 part, Peter in meal 1 part, Sulphur in
meal two parts, Rozen Roch three parts, Turpentine 1 part, Verdigrease part,
Bole-armonick part, Bay salt part, Colophonia part, Arsnick part, mix them very
well together, and try them in the top of a Brass Candlestick, when the fire
does burn furiously with a blew and greenish color, then fill the Canvas, and
roll it over, being first armed with strong twine all over, with this liquid
mixture molten in a pan, Pitch four parts, Linseed Oil 1 part, Turpentine part,
Sulphur 1 part, Tarr part, Tallow one part; and as soon as this is cold, bore
two holes in each of the same next the Iron an inch deep, with a sharp Iron
Bodkin, filling the same with fine bruised powder, and putting in every hole a
little stick of two inches long, which are to be taken out when you would fire
the same; this composition will burn furiously.

And remember you cut off the staff some three inches from the work, and put
thereon a brass socket of five or six inches long, and then cut the end of your
staff to fill the socket, for when you fire your work, you may stick it in the
side of a ship, and pull the staff out again, so will not the work be so easily
avoided, as when the staff was on, and hangs at length, because the very weight
of the staff, and length thereof, will be a means to weigh down the work, or
that the enemy may come, and thereby pull it out, or beat it off quickly; let
the Composition and work contain in weight about 7 pounds, then will it do
execution, and work a better effect, than if it were of less weight, by much,
by reason the composition else would be wasted, before it comes to effect its
Execution.

To burn the sayls of Ships a pretty distance, or to fire Thatched houses,
Cornstacks, or any other combustible matter apt to burn, when you cannot come
to the same; it is good to have certain strong Cross-bows to bend with Racks or
Gaffels, and so shoot Arrows armed at the heads with Wildfire, made of the
composition as above, and about three inches in length, and one inch and a half
in the Diameter, tapred as before in all points: or you may have long bows, but
then let your Arrows be also longer, which for diverse services may do great
good.

CHAP. XVI. To charge Trunks with Balls of Wildfire.
TO charge Trunks to shoot little Balls of wildfire, either to offend or
defend, you must first charge him with two inches of good Powder, and then with
a Ball of wildfire a little lower than the concave of the Trunk, let the Ball
be bored through cross-ways, and primed full of fine powder. Lastly, with slow
receipt, then with powder, then with a Ball again as aforesaid, until you have
filled the same within of an inch of the mouth, which would be filled up with
fine powder and receipt mixed together. Some do use to have at the mouth two
Iron stirts to stick them in the side of any thing, or to defend ones self from
the Enemy from taking it off with a thrust while they do Execution.

To make the Ball.
The Ball of Wildfire must be thus made, Take untwisted Match, Tow, and Hemp,
the which would be moistened in Aqua-vitae, or boiled in Saltpeter water: then
take of bruised Powder six parts, of Saltpeter one part, of Brimstone finely
beaten one part, of coal made of light wood moistened with a little Linseed-oyl
and Turpentine wrought together, one part: then lay the Tow or Oakam, abroad in
thickness of the back of a knife, and as broad as a great Oyster-shel, put into
the same as much as you can grasp together in your fist, and tying the same
hard with a pack-thread, coat it over with molten Brimstone, and when you would
use the same, bore it through with a Bodkin, and fill the holes full of fine
powder bruised.

To make Bullets of Wildfire to shoot out of a Trunk, which will be as hard as
a Stone.
Take Sulphur in meal six parts, of Rozen in meal six parts, melting the same
in some Pot over a slow fire: then take stone pitch one part, of hard wax one
part, of Tarr part, of Aquavitae part, of Linseed Oil part, of Verdigrease
part, of Camphire part, melting all these together. Likewise stir into the same
of Peter in meal two parts, and taking it from the fire, put therein four parts
of bruised powder, working the same well together in your hands, and roll it
round of the bigness you mean to make your balls of, boring two holes through
the same cross-ways, which must be primed with bruised powder. These balls
being cold, will grow very hard, and fired will burn furiously.

To make Hedg-hogs.
To make Hedg-hogs, or balls, you must fill them with the same receipts you do
your Arrows, and Pikes, and let them be five inches in the Diameter, and well
armed with twine before you coat them, and after boared two holes, and primed
with fine powder: then put in two sticks, and using them, pull them out again,
and at the said holes fire them. The spikes end of Iron must be like Deaths
Arrow heads, five or six stirts a piece to hang in the sayls, or stick in or
upon any place assigned; and remember in the arming, to leave a noose to throw
him being fired, out of your hand.

To make Powder-pots.
They are made of black Potters clay, or thick glass, round Bottles with ears
to tie matches, lighted at both ends, the pots or glasses are to be filled with
dry fine powder, and thrown upon the decks, or other where, which will much
prejudice the Enemy, and many times fire their own Powder-chests.

ARTIFICIAL FIREWORKS FOR RECREATION.
AMongst all Artificial fires that have been put in practice many years, the
Fuzees (which the Latins call Rochetae, and the Greeks Pyroboli) have always
had the first Rank; (nevertheless this Greek word does not well agree with the
Etymology of the word Rochetae) seeing that (...) signifies properly Tela
ignita, that is, burning darts or Arrows, the Italians call them Rochetae and
Raggi, the Germans Steigen de Kasten, Ragetten, and Drachetten, the Poles Race,
the French Fuzees, the English Rockets, or Serpents. If we consider the
invention of them, it has been of so ancient standing, that the construction
is now very common and familiar amongst all the Pyrobolists and Fire-masters;
the which, although it appears very easy in it self, yet there is in it
labor, and requires that he that applies himself to this work should not be
careless, but on the contrary take all the care and diligence that possibly he
can have for the preparing of such perilous things, considering likewise the
expenses and losses are irreparable after the experiment made; and seeing that
nothing can be put in practice in public Recreations without these Fuzees,
therefore I think I am something obliged here to show the true way of preparing
them, with their particular use.

CHAP. I. How to make Rockets.
I Intend not here to write the Construction of Moulds fit for this purpose,
but rather leave the more curious Students herein to the works of Casimier
Siemienowicz, Lieutenant General of the Artillery in the Kingdom of Polonia,
in his great Art of Artillery written in the French Tongue and Printed at
Amsterdam, and also in our Contrymen Mr. Bate and Mr. Babington etc. That
which I intend to do, is to teach you how they may be made by hand, or by help
only of a Rouler to Roll the Paper upon; let it be turned to the thickness you
intend, only let the Rouler be 8 times the Diameter in length. If it be three
quarters of an inch in thickness, the length will be three inches. Roll your
Paper hard on the Rouler until the thickness be one inch and a quarter Rouler
and all; then glue the uppermost paper, and the Case is made. On the choking
or contracting the paper together at one end, within one Diameter of the end,
except only a little hole, about one quarter the Diameter of the bore thereof,
to contract these Cases on this manner, do thus, wet the end about one inch in
water, then put the Rouler in again, and tie a great packthread about the wet
within three quarters of an inch of the end, put another thing almost of the
same Diameter with the Rouler in at the wet end about half an inch, hold it
there, get some other body to draw the packthread together, you holding the
Rouler and Rammer, one put down to the end within one inch, and the Rammer
which must be little less than the Diameter to meet with that end within half
an inch, in which the contract or choking must be; the packthread having drawn
it together, tie it fast on that place, take out the Former, let it dry, and it
is done; when the hole is contracted together, make it so wide as is before
taught, with a round bodkin, which you must provide for that purpose.

CHAP. II. How to make Compositions for Rockets of any size.
THese ways which I will teach you I take them not upon trust out of every
Author, but such as are men of known experience, as that Casimier before spoken
of, and others of the like repute. And first, for Rockets of 1 ounce, you must
use only Cannon-powder dust being beaten in a Mortar, and finely sifted, and
this will rise swift, and will make a great noise, but carries no tail: Those
of most beauty in their operation are made of 1 ounce of Charcoal-dust, eight
ounces of Powder, this Composition will hold for Rockets of one, two, or three
ounces; but for those of four, take three ounces of Charcoal-dust, to one pound
of Cannon-powder dust, continuing that Rule until you come to Rockets of ten
ounces, and from thence to Rockets of a pound; for there used to be one pound
of Powder-dust to 4 ounces of Charcoal-dust. But for better satisfaction
observe these Rules.

For Rockets of one pound. Take Powder 18 l. Saltpeter 8 l. Charcoal 4 l.
Sulphur 2 l,

For Rockets of two or three pound. Take of Saltpeter 60 l. Coal 15 l. Sulphur
2 l.

For Rockets of four or five pound. Take of Saltpeter 64 l. Coal 16 l. Sulphur
8 l.

For Rockets of six seven or eight pound. Saltpeter 35 l. Coal 10 l. Sulphur 5
l.

For Rockets of nine or ten pound. Saltpeter 62 l. Coal 20 l. Sulphur 9 l.

For Rockets from eleven to fifteen pound. Saltpeter 32 l. Sulphur 8 l. Coal
16 l.

For Rockets from sixteen to twenty pound. Saltpeter 42 l. Coal 26 l. Sulphur
12 l.

For Rockets from thirty to fifty pound. Saltpeter 30 l. Coal 18 l. Sulphur 7
l.

For Rockets from sixty to a hundred pound. Take Peter 30 l. Sulphur 10 l. Coal
10 l.

CHAP. III. To fill the Rockets with this Composition.
PLace the mouth downwards where it was choked, and with a knife put in so
much as you can of the receipts provided for that size at one time; then put
down your Rammer, which must be longer and narrower than the Former or Rouler
upon which you made the Cases, and with a hammer of a pound weight, give three
or four indifferent knocks, then put in more composition with your knife, until
it be full, at every time knocking the like as before with the Rammer, until
the composition come within one diameter of the bore of the top, there put down
a piece of pastboard, and knock it in hard, prick three or four little holes
therein, then put fine pistol powder in almost to the top, and upon that
another cap of paper, upon which put a piece of leather, that it may be tied on
the top of the Rocket, and fast glued on, then get a straight twig, and bind it
upon the Rocket with strong packthred; it must be no heavier, than being put
upon your finger, two or three fingers breadths from the mouth of the same, it
may just ballast the Rocket; then it is prepared for use.

CHAP. IV. How to give fire to one or more Rockets.
SEt your Rockets mouth upon the edge of any piece of timber, battlement of a
wall, top of the Gunners carriage wheel, or any dry place whatsoever, where the
rod or twig may hang perpendicular from it, then lay a train of powder that may
come under the mouth thereof, give fire thereunto, and you have done. But if
you would fire more Rockets than one, that as one descends, the other may
ascend by degrees, make this composition following of Roch peter 8 ounces,
Quick Brimstone 4 ounces, and fine Powder dust 2 ounces, which lay in a line
from one Rocket to another, they being placed ten inches or a foot one from
another, give fire to this composition, and it will work your desire, by
causing one to mount into the air when the other is spent; but before you place
your Rockets, remember to prick them with the bodkin.

CHAP. V. Diverse and sundry Compositions for Stars.
A Composition for Stars of a blew color mixed with red.

TAke of Powder mealed 8 ounces, Saltpeter 4 ounces, Quick Brimstone 12
ounces, Meal all these very fine, and mix them together with two ounces of
Aqua-vitae, and half an ounce of Oil of Spike, which let be very dry before you
use it.

Another Composition which makes a white and beautiful fire.

Take Powder 8 ounces, Saltpeter 24 ounces, Quick Brimstone 12 ounces,
Camphire 1 ounce, Meal these Ingredients and incorporate them: Now to meal your
Camphire, take a brass pestle and mortar, wet the end of the pestle in a little
of the Oil of Almonds, and it will meal to powder, then keep it close from the
air, else it will become of no use.

Another white fire which lasts long.

Take Powder 4 ounces, Saltpeter 16 ounces, Brimstone 8 ounces, Camphire 1
ounce, Oil of Peter 2 ounces, Meal those that are to be mealed, and mix them
according to the former directions.

CHAP. VI. The manner of making Stars; and to use them.
TAke little four square pieces of brown paper, which fill with the composition
you approve of best, of the three last taught: so double it down, rouling it
until you make it round, about the bigness of a nut, or bigger, according to
the size of your Rocket, that you intend them for, prime them, withdrawing
through them Cotton-week, and they are prepared.

You may also make them after this manner, you must have a rouler which must be
as big as an ordinary arrow, which shall be to roll a length of paper about it,
and with a little glue past it round; when it is dry draw out the rouler, and
fill it by little and little, with a thimble; still thrusting it down, every
filling of a thimble, with the rouler; which being filled, cut it in short
pieces, about half an inch long; then having in readiness either hot glue, or
size, mingled with red lead, dip therein one end of your short pieces, lest
they take fire at both ends together, and because that it may not so easily
blow out: these being thus finished, set them to dry until you have occasion to
use them: and then putting the open end in powder on the top of the Rocket, in
that place after the first pastboard, or cover, is placed in a Rocket; next the
composition, where I taught you before to put powder for to make a report:
which now you must leave out to place in these Stars; after this manner make
two or three holes in that pastboard, which prime with powder-dust: and
thereupon put a little Pistol powder, to blow the Stars out when the Rocket is
spent: after the powder, put as I have said before, the open ends of these
Stars, down upon that powder: when you have put them so close as they can stick
one by the other, put a little small corned powder on the top of them, to run
between them, and put another tire of Stars upon that, and in like manner a
third tire upon them, till you come to the top of the Rocket-case, there put a
paper over the head of it, and tie it close about the top, that none of the
powder come from under or between the Stars.

How to prepare the Cotton-week, to prime the first sort of Stars.

Take Cotton-week, such as the Chandlers use for Candles; double it six or
seven times double; and wet it thoroughly in Saltpeter water, or Aqua-vitae,
wherein some Camphire has been dissolved, or for want of either in fair water,
cut it in diverse pieces, roll it in mealed powder, dry it in the Sun, and it is
done.

CHAP. VII. How to make silver and golden Rain, and how to use them.
NOw I show you the order of making golden Rain, which is after this manner;
you must provide store of Goose-quills, which being provided, you must cut them
off so long as they are hollow, the composition to fill these must be made
thus; two ounces of cole-dust to one pound of powder well mixed; having filled
many of these quills, you shall place them in the same place as I taught you to
put the powder and Stars, first putting a small quantity of Pistol powder under
them, to blow them out when the Rocket is spent: upon this put your quills, as
many as will fill the top of the case, with the open end downwards; so soon as
the Rocket is spent, you shall see appear a golden shower, which by some is
called golden Rain: The like way you may make silver Rain, filling the quills
with the Composition for white Stars.

CHAP. VIII. How to make Fisgigs, which some call by the name of Serpents, and
to use them.
YOu must provide a small rouling pin, about one quarter of an inch in
thickness, upon which roll seven or eight thicknesses of paper: fill them four
inches with powder dust, sometimes putting between the filling a little of the
Composition for Rockets of 10 ounces: and at the end of four inches choke him;
fill two inches more with Pistol powder; then choke the end up: at the other
end put in a little of the mixture for Stars, and choke between that and the
composition, and you have done: put diverse of these with the Starry end
downwards, upon the head of a Rocket, as you did the quills, with powder to
blow them out; when the Rocket is spent, they will first appear like so many
Stars; when the Stars are spent, taking hold of the powder dust, they will run
wrigling to and fro like Serpents; and when that Composition is spent, they
will end with every one a report, which will give great content. I shall have
occasion to speak of these Fisgigs in other Fireworks.

CHAP. IX. How to make Girondels, or (as some call them) Fire-Wheels.
A Fire-Wheel is often required in great Works for pleasure, and therefore I
have thought fit and necessary, to set down their description, as well as of
all other sorts of Fireworks; First, you must make a Wheel of Wood, so big as
you please, to make Girondels, and unto these bind Rockets very fast of a mean
bigness, with the mouth of one toward the tail of another, thus continuing
until you have filled your Wheel quite round, which done, cover them with paper
pasted very curiously, that one taking fire, they may not take fire all
together; and daub Soap upon them quite round, leaving the mouth of one of them
open to give fire thereto; for the first Rocket having burned, will give fire
to the next, keeping the Wheel in continual motion, until they be all spent:
there may be bound fire Lances to these Girondels, either upright, or near,
overthwart, which will make to appear diversity of fiery Circles; Your care
must be, to place the Girondels at a convenient distance, from other
Fireworks, lest they should cause confusion, and spoil all your Work.

CHAP. X. How to represent diverse sorts of Figures in the Air with Rockets.
I Have taught you to make a report upon the head of a Rocket, and also to
place golden or silver Hair or Rain, or Stars, or Fisgigs, which when you have
diverse Rockets to make for a great Fire-work, let one be with a report, the
next with Stars, another with Gold Hair, or Rain, one with Silver Hair or Rain,
for standing just under the Rocket it appears like Rain, but being aside
hand, like Golden or Silver Hair: and upon the head of another Rocket place the
Fisgigs, which when the Rocket is spent will first appear like so many Stars,
after they are ended, they will show like Serpents wrigling to and fro, and
lastly, give every one his report.

It is a rare thing to represent a Tree or Fountain, in the air, which is made
by putting many little Rockets upon one great one, passing all the rods of the
little ones through wires, made on purpose upon the sides of the great one, or
some other way, as your industry will discover; now if the little ones take
fire while the great one is mounting up, they will represent a Tree, but if
they take fire as the great one is descending or turning down again toward the
ground, then they will be like a fountain of fire; if there be two or three
little Rockets amongst others, that have no rods, they will make diverse motions
contrary to the rest, very pleasing.

If before you put the Fisgigs upon the head of a great Rocket, you with a
small string tie them together, a foot of line between; when they are on fire
in the Air you will see very great variety of Figures, because as they wriggle
to and fro, they will pull one another after them, to the speculators great
content: it will be pleasant if you tie them not altogether, but three or four,
which will in the firing of them, be distinguished from the rest, with great
variety.

CHAP. XI. How to make a Rocket, which firing it out of your hand, shall
continually be in agitation, either on the earth, or in the air.
HAving prepared a Rocket with a report in the head, such as I taught you first
to make, tie it to a bladder, so that the end of the Rocket may come to the
mouth of the said bladder, and bind it over very strongly, then firing it out
of your hand, cast it away from you, it matters not which way, so it will come
to the ground; there, by reason of the bladder, it cannot stay, but presently
rebounds upwards, moving to and fro, until all be spent: there is another sort,
and that is a small rocket, put into a bladder, and so blown up round about it,
and tied about the neck thereof, which will have delightful motions.

CHAP. XII. Of the many defects in Fuzees, how they may be avoided, and of such
things as ought to be observed in their good Construction.
THe first and most notable defect which is observed in Fuzees, is that after
they are lighted or risen into the Air the height of 1, 2, or 3 Perches, they
break, and do dissipate without making their entire effects.

The second, which is little better, is after it is remaining suspended upon
the nail it consumes but very leisurely, without going away or raising it self
in the Air.

The third is, when they are raised in the Air, they describe only an Arch of a
Circle like a Rainbow, and return upon the earth again before the Composition
in the Fuzee be consumed.

The fourth is when it moves in a spiral manner, whirling in the Air without
observing an equal motion; that is not right as it ought to be.

The fifth is when it mounts sloathfully and negligently, as if it disdained or
refused to elevate it self into the Air.

The sixth and last is, that the Case or Cartouch remains hanging upon the Nail
quite empty, and the Composition does rise and dissipate alone into the Air.
There is many other vexations and inconveniences which may give trouble to the
Practitioners in these Arts with vain expense, which would loose too much time
to repeat: It will be sufficient if you take notice of these which are
principal, whereby, if by ill fortune you be fallen into any of these defaults,
you may correct your error easily, and then immediately correct those faults.
And for this purpose, observe the rules given in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XIII. Infallible Rules by which you may make Fuzees, or Rockets, without
any default.
FIrst, that they have their height proportionable to the Diameter of their
Orifice, as we have before declared.

Secondly, the Cartouch ought to be of wood, or glued or pasted paper, not too
thick, nor too thin.

Thirdly, they ought to be made of strong paper of indifferent dryness,
properly rouled and well compacted close upon the Former.

Fourthly, the necks ought to be bound about very strongly and firm, in such a
sort, that the knot of the thread, and the folds of the Cartouch, may not lie
amiss one upon the other.

Fifthly, all the Materials of the Composition must be exactly weighed
according to the proportion of the Orifice of the Fuzee that you would charge,
and also well beaten and sifted particularly; after, having weighed them again,
and mixed them in one body well together, you must pound them again, and pass
them through the Sieve as you did before.

Sixthly, that the Saltpeter and Sulphur be powdered and clarified as much as
possible may be, and the Coal perfectly well burned and exempted from all
humidity, and made of wood that is light and soft, as the Teile, the Hazle, and
the branches of the Willow Tree; and on the contrary, it is necessary to have a
care, that you make not use of such Coals as are made of Birch, Oak, nor Maple,
because they contain in them much weighty and terrestial matter.

Seventhly, matters for Rockets or Fuzees ought to be prepared immediately
before they are intended for use, and not before.

Eighthly, the matters of Composition ought to be neither too dry nor too
moist; but moistened a little with some Oliganious matter, or with a little
Brandy wine.

Ninthly, there must be put into the Cartouch always an equal quantity of the
Composition at a time, and so beat it down alike; and thus do until it be
filled.

Tenthly, you must beat the Composition always with the Rammer right up, or
perpendicularly, and take care that in the beating it be not made crooked.

Eleventhly, You must strike down the Composition with a wooden Mallet, that is
of heft proportionable to the bigness and thickness of the Rocket, and always
with an equal strength, and just number of strokes, every time you put in any
of the Composition.

Twelfthly, in Cartouches made of paper, you must put in round pieces of wood
hollowed; but in those that are made of wood, you must put such as are smooth,
without any channel or hollowing, to the end that it join the better to the
sides of the Fuzee, where it must join firmly, as well without as within.

13. The Fuzee must be peirced with a Bit or Awl that is convenient, in such a
sort that the hole be not too big nor too straight, nor too long nor too short.

14. The hole must be made the most straight and perpendicular that may be
possible, and just in the middle of the Composition, to the end that it lean
not to any one side, more than to the other.

15. The Fuzee must not be peirced before it be intended for use, and after it
is pierced you must handle it tenderly, only with the ends of your fingers, for
fear of deforming it.

16. The Perch or Stick to which you fasten the Fuzee, ought to be
proportionable as well in length as weight; it must not be crooked nor winding
in any manner, neither unequal, nor full of knots, but straight as possible can
be made, and must therefore be made smooth, and straightened with a Plain, if
need requires.

17. After they are Charged, they must not be laid into too dry a place, nor in
a place too moist, for the one or other of those accidents may hurt them;
therefore let the place be temperate.

18. When you would use them and put them into action, hang them upon a nail
perpendicular to the Horizon.

19. You must not think to raise a bundle of a great weight, or that has too
great a disproportion to their strength, you must adjoyn them together so
rightly, that all together may have a proper form, and reasonable to pass into
the Air, and to elevate it self on high without any difficulty, and in such a
sort, that those bundles may not by any means give hinderance or stoppage to
their rising in a straight line; and take care most exactly that the Fuzee be
not so big, but that they may retain as near as you can a Pyramidal or Conical
form, when all its weight that may be is adjoined to it.

20. Men ought to shun as much as possible those nights that are rainy, moist,
and when the Sky is darkened with black clouds, as being very incommodious and
offensive to the Fuzees. And more than that, avoid impetuous Stormy winds, and
the Whirl-winds hinder no less than the first.

21. You may not reject above other causes, the different effects which are
produced by sundry Fuzees (although they be charged with one and the same
Composition) no otherwise than thus, that they were not made with an equal
diligence either in the Charging or Peircing, or in the other Circumstances,
which you were obliged to observe; or in this, that it may be some may have
been kept in a more moister place than the others, where they have acquired too
much moisture, which causes to them, effects much different one from another,
as well in Rising as in Consuming.

22. If you would make appear in the Air streams of fire, or a quantity of
burning sparks or stars, or long large rays to dart from the Fuzees; there is
accustomed to mix with the Composition some small quantity of powdered Glass
grossly beaten, filings of Iron, Sawdust. One may also represent fire of diverse
colors, as we have showed before in the fifth Chapter; but more particularly
thus; if you put a certain portion of Camphire in your Composition, you will
see in the Air a certain fire which will appear, white, pale, and of the color
of Milk; if you put Greek Pitch, which is a light yellow Pitch used in
Plasters, called Pix Burgundy, it will represent unto you a red flame, and of
the color of Brass; if you put in Sulphur, the fire will appear blew; if
Sal-Armoniack, the fire will appear Greenish; if from Crude Antimony, the flame
will be Red, Yellowish, and of the Color of Honey; if the filings of Ivory be
added, they will render a Silver-like, White and shining flame, yet something
inclining to a Livid Plumbous color; if the powder of Yellow Amber be added,
the fire will appear of the same color, with the Citrine; lastly, if black
Pitch be added, it will throw forth an obscure smoaky fire, or rather a smoke
that is black and thick, which will darken all the Air.

CHAP. XIV. Of Odoriferous Aquatick Balls.
CAuse to be made by a Turner, Balls of wood, hollow within, about the bigness
of a Wild Apple, which you must fill with some one of these Compositions
hereunto annexed, and they being all prepared and charged, you may throw them
into the water after they are lighted, but it ought to be done in a Chamber or
close place, that the fume may be the better kept together, and this must be
done with some small end of our Match made of prepared Flax or Hemp, to the end
that the Composition which is shut up in the Globe may take fire with the
greater facility.

The Compositions are these that follow, viz.

Take Saltpeter, Storax Calamite, one Dram; Incense one ounce, Mastick one
ounce, Amber half an ounce, Civet half an ounce, of the Sawings of Juniper wood
two ounces, of the Sawings of Cypress wood two ounces, Oil of Spike one ounce;
Make your Composition according to the Art and Method given. Or,

Take of Saltpeter two ounces; of Flower of Brimstone, Camphire, half an
ounce; powder of yellow Amber half an ounce, Coals of the Teile tree one ounce;
Flower of Benjamin, or Assa sweet, half an ounce; Let the matters that may be
beaten be powdered, afterward well mingled and incorporated together.

CHAP. XV. Compositions to Charge Globes or Balls, that will burn as well under
as above water.
FIrst, take Saltpeter reduced into fine meal 16 l. Sulphur 4 l. of the
sawings of wood which has been first boiled in a Nitrous water, and afterward
well dried, 4 l. Of good Corned powder half a pound, of the powder of Ivory 4
ounces. Or thus,

Saltpeter 6 l. Sulphur 3 l. of beaten powder 1 l. Filings of Iron 2 l. of
Burgundy pitch half a pound. Or thus,

Saltpeter 24 l. of beaten powder 4 l. Sulphur 12 l. of Sawdust 8 l. of yellow
Amber half a pound, of Glass beaten in gross powder half a pound, of Camphire
half a pound. For that which concerns the manner of preparing all these
Compositions; it differs nothing from what we have prescribed in the making of
Rockets, only it is not necessary that the materials be so subtly beaten,
powdered nor sifted, as for those Fuzees, but nevertheless to be well mixed one
among another. Care must be taken that they be not too dry when you charge the
Globes or Balls, and for that purpose they may be moistened with Linseed-oyl,
Oil of Olives, Petrole, Hempseed, Nuts, or any other fatty humor that is
receptible of fire.

Note, that amongst all these Compositions of matters that will burn in the
water, which I have here proposed from my own particular experience, every one
may make them as pleases himself best, provided he always take the materials
in proportion one to the other, as they ought. But nevertheless I shall counsel
you to experience from time to time your Compositions, for the greater surety,
before you expose them to the public view of the world. It is also amongst the
rest very necessary that you learn the force and strength of every material you
put into the Compositions, whereby you may at your pleasure know how to alter
and vary your proportion, as you shall judge fit.

CHAP. XVI. Of Stars and fiery Sparks, called by the Germans Stern-veuer and
Veuerputzen.
I Have showed the Composition of Stars in Chap. 5. I have also showed the way
of making them up, and their use, and also I have showed the manner of giving
to them various Colors, as in the 22 Rule of the 13 Chapter, where I had an
intent to say no more of these things: But finding in Master Cazimier's
Artillery these Compositions, which I judge may prove very excellent; therefore
I thought good to insert them, that I might leave out nothing that might make
more perfect any thing we treat of.

First, you must know that between fiery Sparks and Stars there is this
difference, that the Stars are greater, and are not so soon consumed by the
fire as the Sparks are, but do subsist longer in the Air, and do shine with
greater substance, and with such a light, that by reason of their great
splendour, they are in some manner comparable with the Stars in the Heavens.
They are prepared according to the following Method.

Take Saltpeter half a pound, Sulphur two ounces, Yellow Amber powdered one
Dram, Antimony Crude one Dram, of beaten Powder three Drams. Or,

Take Sulphur two ounces and a half, Saltpeter four ounces, Powder subtly
powdered four ounces, Olibanum, Mastick, Crystal, Mercury sublimate, of each
four ounces, White Amber one ounce, Camphire one ounce, Antimony and Orpiment
half an ounce; All these materials being well beaten and well sifted, they must
be mixed together with a little Glue or Gum-water, made with Gum-Arabick or
Tragacant; then make them into small Balls about the bigness of a Bean or small
Nut, which being dried in the Sun, or in a Pan by the fire, may be kept in a
convenient place for such uses as we have spoken of in the fifth Chapter of
this Book. You must only remember, that when you would put them into Rockets or
Recreative Balls, they must be covered on all sides with prepared Tow, of which
we have showed the way of preparing in the seventh Chapter of the first Part of
our Fireworks.

Sometimes Fire-Masters are aecustomed to take in the places of these little
Balls, a certain proportion of melted matters, of which we have spoken in the
first Part of Fireworks; But if these do not please you, by reason of their
swarthy color, but you rather desire to see them yellow, or inclining somewhat
to white, then take of Gum-Arabick or Tragacant four ounces, powder it and pass
it through a Sieve, of Camphire dissolved in Aqua-vitae two ounces, Saltpeter
a pound and a half, Sulphur half a pound, Glass grossly powdered four ounces,
White Amber an ounce and a half, Orpiment two ounces, make all these
Ingredients into one mass, and make Globes of them as before. I Learned this,
says my Author, from Claude Midorge.

For the method of making Sparkles in particular, it is thus; Take Saltpeter
one ounce, of this Liquid matter half an ounce, of beaten Powder half an ounce,
of Camphire two ounces; after you have beaten all these materials into powder,
every one by it self, put all of them into an Earthen Pan, and put upon them
the Water of Gum Tragacanth, or Brandy-wine, wherein you have dissolved some
Gum Tragacanth or Arabic, until it be of a good consistency; that done, take
an ounce of Lint, which has first been boiled in Brandy-wine or Vinegar, or in
Saltpeter, and after dried again, and the threads drawn out; then put it into
the Composition, and mix them well together, so well and so long until it has
drank up all the matter; of these Compositions make little Balls in the form of
Pills, and of the bigness of great Peace, which you must roll in mealed
Gunpowder, and dry them, whereof you may serve your self, according to the
method we have prescribed.

Besides these, there are certain odoriferous Pills prepared, which are
employed in small Engines and fiery Inventions, which are showed in Chamber
Roams, or close Cabinets, these are commonly prepared of Storax, Calamite,
Benjamin, Amber, white and yellow, and of Camphire, of each one ounce,
Saltpeter three ounces, of Coals made of the Teil Tree four ounces; beat all
these Ingredients to powder, then incorporate them well together, and moisten
them with Rose Water, in which is dissolved Gum-Arabick or Tragacanth, to make
thereof little Balls; at last, having fashioned them, expose them to the Sun or
to the fire to dry.

THE DOCTRINE OF PROJECTS APPLIED TO GUNNERY.

By those late famous Italian Authors GALILAEUS AND TORRICELLIO. Now rendered in
ENGLISH.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1672.

THE PREFACE.
GALILAEUS in his 4th. Dialogue of Motion, has largely treated of aequable and
accelerate or increasing Motions, as also of that of Projects, or things shot,
and thence derived several Propositions or Conclusions, and has likewise made
several Tables touching the Amplitudes or Base Lines, and the Altitudes or
Heights of the Semiparabola's or Curves described by the Motion and Ranges of
Projects. The which Doctrine the late Famous Torricellio of Florence, having
with great Judgment much advanced and facilitated, applying the whole to the
Art of Gunnery; that the benefit of his pains might redound to the English
Reader, that is especially Delighted or Exercised in the Affairs of Mars, it
was thought fit to render the same into English.

THE DOCTRINE OF PROJECTS APPLIED TO GUNNERY.
PROPOSITION. The Impetus B A (that is, as much as is that of the moveable
naturally falling from B to A by the Which Definition is; when we name an
Impetus given, we determine it in spaces, according as Galilaus uses; Exemp.
Great. When we say, let the Impetus given be A B, then we mean, let the Impetus
given be so much as is requisite to throw the Project from A to the highest
point of the perpendicular B; or, which is the same, as much as is the Impetus
of a moveable naturally falling from B to A.
Definition) as also the Direction A I, according to which the Projection is to
be made with the said Impetus being given: it is required to find the
Amplitude, Altitude, and the whole future Parabola of this Projection.
Through A and B draw the Horizontal projection measurement lines A D, and B L,
and describe the Semicircle A F B about the Diameter A B, which shall somewhere
cut the line A C, seeing that A D is a Tangent. Let the Section be in F, and
draw the Horizontal line F E, and prolong F G equal to F E; then by G let fall
the perpendicular L G D; then about the Diameter G D, by the points G and A,
describe the Parabola A G, which can be but one, by the precedent Which Lemma
was; that about the Diameter G D, thorough the Vertex G, and any assigned point
A, there cannot be described more than one Parabola. Lemm. of Propos. VIII.
Lemma; nor can there any other Parabola be described about the Diameter (...)
this is the Parabola sought. For the directive line of this Parabola is A I,
seeing that it touches the Parabola in A, for E G, or A D, is double to F G by
construction; and therefore D G, and G I are equal: wherefore A I is the
Tangent to the Parabola.

Again, I say, that this Parabola is described by the Impetus given, for A E, E
F, and E B, or those three lines equal to D G the Altitude, G F the Semi-base,
and G L are in continual proportion. Wherefore G L is the sublimity, by the V.
Proposition of De metu Projectorum.
Galilaeus, and its Corollary.

Then thus: the Impetus of the Parabola A G in the point A, is as much as that
of the Cadent naturally falling from L to D, (by X. of Galilaeus) that is, from
B to A, or of the Project ascending from A to B: therefore the Parabola has in
the point A the Impetus that was given: wherefore that is done which was
required.

But because this Proposition is of great moment, for clearing of those that
follow, we will prove it another way.

Let the same Impetus A B, and the same direction A F C be given: the Parabola
made by this projection is sought, describe as before, a Semicircle about the
Diameter projection measurement A B, which shall cut A C! seeing that A D is a
Tangent. Let it cut it in F, and drawing the Horizontal line E F G, so as that
E F and F G may be equal, describe, or conceive a Parabola to be described
along by the points A and G about the Diameter G D. I say, that this is the
Parabola of the Project, if it be thrown from the point A, according to the
Direction A C, with the Impetus A B. Now if the moveable do not run along this
same Parabola it will run along some other; as suppose A P: let the Vertex, or
the highest point of this Parabola A P be found, and let it be P.

First, it is manifest that the point P cannot be in the line L D; because
since the line A C touches each Parabola, that I D the common Axis should be
cut into two equal parts in two points by the Vertex's of the Parabola, is
absurd. Nor can it be in the line E G: for drawing the Diameter, suppose M N,
thorough the Vertex, that M N should be cut into two equal parts by the line E
G, is absurd* for only I D, of all the lines parallel unto it in the angle C A
D, can be cut into two equal parts.

Now let the point P fall any where at pleasure, and draw the Horizontal line P
R S: for as much as P N and P M are equal, by the II of Which second
Proposition is, that the sublime point of the Range of any Project [P] does cut
the Perpendicular [M] intercepted betwixt the Horizon and line of direction,
into two equal parts.
this, N R and R A, P R and R S shall be equal. And because the Parabola A P
has the Impetus B A; that is, O M, the Point O shall be its sublimity: and for
that reason the lines O P, P R, and P M shall be in continual proportion; and
the Rectangle O P M equal unto the square P R: and changing the lines with
their equals, the Rectangle B S A shall be equal to the square S R: therefore
the R is in the point Periphery of the Semicircle: which is absurd; for the
right line A F shall meet with the Periphery in two several points: wherefore,
etc.

COROLLARIES.
FIrst, Hence is manifest, that the Impetus of projection measurement any
Machine being given, as for example E A, if there be described about E A the
Semicircle A D E, one may assign the Altitudes and the Amplitudes of all the
projections that can be made by the same Machine. For example; the Impetus E A
remaining still the fame, let projections be made along the lines of several
elevations A C, A D, and A B. The projection made according to the direction A
C, shall ascend as high as to the Horizontal line F C prolonged: and the
projection made along the direction A D, shall have its Apex in the line H D
prolonged: and of the projection made according to the line A B, the greatest
Altitude shall be in the Horizontal line G B prolonged.

2. In the Book of Galilaeus de motu naturaliter accelerato, it is proved, that
projects thrown with the same Impetus out of A, if born up by plains of several
inclinations, do always arrive unto one and the same Horizontal plain. But
here it appears, that the several ascensions of projects do vary when they
are thrown thorough the pure Air, without any fulciment put under them,
according to several elevations. For the moveable shall less ascend, which is
emitted along the line A B less elevated, than that which shall be projected
along A D more elevated.

3. It is manifest also, that no Altitude can in such sort ascend, as that it
may reach unto the Horizontal parallel that is drawn through E the highest point
of the perpendicular projection.

4. It is also manifest, that all Amplitudes do always increase from that
projection which is called the point blanck Randon, until you come to the
projection made at the Semi-right Angle. And from the Semi-right unto the
perpendicular, they always diminish until they come to nothing; which happens
in the perpendicular projection, which has no Amplitude.

5. From whence we may observe, that the Amplitudes of each Parabola made by
the same Impetus, the elevations of which are equi-distant from the Semi-right,
are equal to each other. For, since the lines A B and A C are equi-distant from
the Semi-right elevation, the Arches D B and D C projection measurement shall
be equal, as subtending equal Angles: and consequently the B A and C E, the
remainders of their Quadrants shall be equal: therefore also the Sines of them,
B G and C F, shall be equal. And for the same reason, the whole Amplitudes of
each Parabola, which are Quadruple to the Sines B ^ and C F, shall be equal.

6. It is manifest likewise that the Altitudes and Sublimities of projections
equi-distant from the Semi-right, are reciprocally equal to one another, that
is, the Altitude of the one is equal to the sublimity of the other.

projection measurement7. We will therefore make a Corollary of that which to
Galilaeus was an arduous Theorem, to wit, that the Semi-right Or Randon.
projection is the greatest of all those made by the same Impetus. For, if you
suppose the Angle C A D to be Semi-right, C D shall be the Semi-Diameter; that
is the greatest of all the Sines that can be given in the Semicircle.

8. It is manifest also, that the whole Amplitude of the Semi-right Parabola is
double to the line of the Sublimity, or the Impetus A B: for it has been
demonstrated to be Quadruple of the right line C D, that is double to A B.

PROP. II. The Impetus and Amplitude being given, I incite this Proposition, as
being also cited in the ensuing Discourse.
to find the direction according to which the Parabola was made; as also to
find the Altitude.
LEt the given Impetus be A B, and let A D be the fourth part of the Amplitude
given. About A B describe the Semicircle A C B, and erect D C E, (which
projection measurement if it shall not fall in the Semicircle, the the Problem
is impossible) and let it cut the Semicircle in the points C and E. I say,
that either the direction A C or A E, if the given Impetus A B be retained,
shall describe a Parabola, whose Amplitude shall be Quadruple to the line A D,
this is manifest from the things preceding. For projections made with the
Impetus A B, according to the directions A C, or A E, have an Amplitude
Quadruple to G E, or F C or A D, which are equal to one another; and the
Altitude may in the one be A F, as also in the other A G, as appears, etc.

In this place I have thought fit to insert the Tables following: the first
Classis of which contains three Tables, the same with those of Galilaeus,
which we placed Part. I. Dial. 4. Page 241. of this present Tome, but different
in many of the Numbers, as being desumed from the Tables of Sines and Tangents,
whereas Galilaeus Calculateth his with much labor, according to the Principles
of his Doctrine of Projective motion, laid down in that his fourth Dialogue.
The second Classis consists of two Tables added by Torricellius, the one of
Durations, the other of Elevations or Randons: the Explanations and
Calculations of which are annexed to them by the Author, but here omitted on
the account of brevity.

TABLE I. The Amplitudes of the Semi-Parabola's described by the same Impetus.
The greatest Amplitude is supposed to be of 10000 parts; and the Numbers of the
Table are double to the right Sines of the arches of the elevation. Degr. of
Elevat. Ampl of Semi-P. D. of Elev. 1 349 89 2 098 88 3 1045 87 4 1392 86 5
1736 85 6 2079 84 7 2419 83 8 2756 82 9 3090 81 10 3420 80 11 3746 79 12 4067
78 13 4384 77 14 4695 76 15 5000 75 16 5299 74 17 5592 73 18 5870 72 19 6157 71
20 6428 70 21 6691 69 22 6947 68 23 7193 67 24 7431 66 25 7660 65 26 7880 64 27
8090 63 28 8290 62 ^^ 8480 61 30 8660 60 31 8829 59 32 8988 58 33 9135 57 34
9272 56 35 9397 55 36 9511 54 37 9613 53 38 9703 52 39 9781 51 40 9848 50 41
9903 49 42 9945 48 43 9976 47 44 9994 46 45 10000 45 TABLE II. The Altitudes of
the Semi-Parabola's, whose Impetus is the same with that of the precedent
Table. The greatest Altitude is supposed to be of 10000 parts; and the Numbers
of the Table are double to the halfs of the versed Sines of the Arches of the
Elevation. D. of Elev. Altit. of Semi-P. D. of Elev. Altit. of Semi-P. 1 3 46
5174 2 12 47 5349 3 27 48 5523 4 49 49 5696 5 76 50 5868 6 109 51 6040 7 149 52
6210 8 194 53 6378 9 245 54 6545 10 302 55 6710 11 364 56 6873 12 432 57 7034
13 506 58 7192 14 585 59 7347 15 670 60 7500 16 760 61 7650 17 855 62 7796 18
955 63 7939 19 1060 64 8078 20 1170 65 8214 21 1284 66 8346 22 1403 67 8470 23
1527 68 8597 24 1654 69 8716 25 1786 70 8830 26 1922 71 8940 27 2061 72 9045 28
2204 73 9145 29 2350 74 9240 30 2500 75 9330 31 2653 76 9415 32 2808 77 9494 33
2966 78 9568 34 3127 79 9636 35 3290 80 9698 36 3455 81 9755 37 3622 82 9806 38
3790 83 9851 39 3960 84 9891 40 4132 85 9924 41 4304 86 9951 42 4477 87 9973 43
4651 88 9988 44 4826 89 9997 45 5000 90 10000 TABLE III. The Altitudes and
Sublimities of (...) Semi-Parabola's, whose Amplitudes (...) equal, Viz.
always 10000 parts; (...) Altitudes are the halfs of the Tangents of the
Angles of the Elevations and the Sublimities are the halfs of the Tangents of
the Complements of the Elevation. D. of Elev. Altitudes. Sublimiies. D. of
Elev. Altitudes. Sublimities. 1 87 286450 46 5178 4828 2 175 143186 47 5362
4663 3 262 95406 48 5553 4502 4 350 71503 49 5752 4346 5 437 57150 50 5959 4196
6 525 47572 51 6175 4049 7 614 40722 52 6400 3906 8 703 35577 53 6635 3768 9
792 31569 54 6882 3633 10 882 28356 55 7141 3501 11 972 25723 56 7413 3373 12
1063 23523 57 7699 3247 13 1154 21657 58 8002 3124 14 1247 20054 59 8321 3004
15 1340 18660 60 8660 2887 16 1434 17437 61 9021 2772 17 1529 16354 62 9404
2659 18 1625 15388 63 9813 2548 19 1722 14521 64 10252 2439 20 1820 13737 65
10723 2332 21 1919 13025 66 11230 2226 22 2020 12375 67 11779 2122 23 2122
11779 68 12375 2020 24 2226 11230 69 13025 1919 25 2332 10723 70 13737 1820 26
2439 10252 71 14521 1722 27 2548 9813 72 15388 1625 28 2659 9404 73 16354 1529
29 2772 9020 74 17437 1434 30 2887 8668 75 18660 1340 31 3004 8321 76 20054
1247 32 3124 8002 77 21657 1154 33 3247 7699 78 23523 1063 34 3373 7413 79
25723 972 35 3501 7141 80 28356 882 36 3633 6882 81 31569 792 37 3768 6635 82
35577 703 38 3906 6400 83 40722 614 39 4049 6175 84 47572 525 40 4196 5959 85
57150 437 41 4346 5752 86 71503 350 42 4502 5553 87 95406 262 43 4663 5362 88
143186 175 44 4828 5718 89 286450 87 45 5000 5000 90 Infinita. 00 TABLE IV. The
Durations or Impetus of Projects made by the same Impetus compared to the
Horizon. The greatest Duration or Impetus is supposed to be of 1000 parts; and
the Numbers of the Table are the right Sines of the Elevations. Degr. of
Elevat. Dur. of Impet. D. of Elev. Dur. of Impet. 1 75 46 7193 2 349 47 7314 3
523 48 7431 4 698 49 7547 5 872 50 7660 6 1045 51 7771 7 1219 52 7880 8 1392 53
7986 9 1564 54 8090 10 1736 55 8192 11 1908 56 8290 12 2079 57 8387 13 2250 58
8480 14 2419 59 8572 15 2588 60 8660 16 2756 61 8746 17 2924 62 8892 18 2090 63
8910 19 3256 64 8988 20 3420 65 9063 21 3584 66 9135 22 3746 67 9205 23 3907 68
9272 24 4067 69 9336 25 4226 70 9397 26 4384 71 9455 27 4540 72 9510 28 4695 73
9563 29 4848 74 9613 30 5000 75 9659 31 5150 76 9703 32 5299 77 9744 33 5446 78
9781 34 5592 79 9816 35 5736 80 9848 36 5878 81 9878 37 6018 82 9903 38 6157 83
9925 39 6293 84 9945 40 6428 85 9962 41 6561 86 9976 42 6691 87 9986 43 6820 88
9994 44 6947 89 9998 45 7071 90 10000 TABLE V. The Degrees of Elevation to
which the Piece is to be mounted, that the Amplitude of the Projections may be
made of the given measure. We suppose all the Projection to have the same
Impet. that is to be made by the same Piece, and that the greatest is 4000
paces. Spaces, or equal increases of the Projection. Spaces. Degrees. of Elevat.
Complement. Spaces. Degrees. of Elevat. Complement. 10 00 17 89 43 510 15 20 74 40
20 00 34 89 26 520 15 40 74 20 30 00 52 89 08 530 16 00 74 00 40 1 09 88 51 540
16 21 73 39 50 1 26 88 34 550 16 41 73 19 60 1 43 88 17 560 17 02 72 58 70 2 00
88 00 570 17 23 72 37 80 2 18 87 42 580 17 44 72 16 90 2 35 87 25 590 18 05 71
55 100 2 52 87 08 600 18 26 71 34 110 3 09 86 51 610 18 48 71 12 120 3 27 86 33
620 19 10 70 50 130 3 44 86 16 630 19 22 70 26 140 4 01 85 59 640 19 54 69 06
150 4 19 85 41 650 20 16 69 44 160 4 36 85 24 660 20 39 69 21 170 4 54 85 06
670 21 02 68 58 180 5 11 84 49 680 21 25 68 35 190 5 29 84 31 690 21 49 68 21
200 5 46 84 14 700 21 13 67 47 210 6 04 83 56 710 22 37 67 23 220 6 21 83 39
720 23 02 66 56 230 6 39 83 21 730 23 27 66 33 240 6 57 83 03 740 23 52 66 08
250 7 14 82 46 750 24 18 65 42 260 7 32 82 28 760 24 44 65 16 270 7 50 82 10
770 25 11 64 49 280 8 08 81 52 780 25 38 64 22 290 8 26 81 34 790 26 06 63 54
300 8 44 81 16 800 26 34 63 26 310 9 02 80 58 810 27 03 62 57 320 9 20 80 40
820 27 33 62 27 330 9 38 80 22 830 28 03 61 57 340 9 56 80 04 840 28 34 61 26
350 10 14 79 46 850 29 06 60 54 360 10 33 79 27 860 29 36 60 21 370 10 51 79 09
870 30 14 59 46 380 11 10 78 50 880 30 50 59 10 390 10 29 78 31 890 31 27 58 33
400 11 47 78 13 900 32 05 57 55 410 12 06 77 54 910 32 45 57 15 420 12 25 77 35
920 33 28 56 32 430 12 44 77 16 930 34 13 55 47 440 13 03 76 57 940 35 02 54 58
450 13 22 76 38 950 35 54 54 06 460 13 42 76 18 960 36 52 53 08 470 14 01 75 59
970 37 58 52 02 480 14 21 75 39 980 39 16 50 44 490 14 40 75 20 990 40 57 49 03
500 15 00 75 00 1000 45 00 45 00

The use of the Precedent TABLE.

SUppose that the greatest Range, namely the Range made at the elevation of the
sixth point of the Quadrant by a Culverin, be, for example, 4000 Geometrical
paces, I desire with the same Piece to make a shot in such manner that its
Range may be just 2360 paces long. I take the fourth part of 2360, which is
590, and I look upon the Table, and find against that Number, that the
elevation to be given to the said Piece is 18 Degrees and 5 Minutes, or Gr. 71.
and Min. 55, its Complement. And I say, by the things demonstrated, that the
forementioned Piece with one of these two Elevations, shall carry the Ball 2360
paces distance above the Horizon. But those Elevations which exceed the sixth
point of the Quadrant, are not inserted for the use of That is, all long Pieces.
Artillery, but only for Morter-Pieces, Rams, and Grenades. It is to be noted,
therefore, that with that same first Elevation the Ball will make a low Range,
projection elevation but swift, as the line marked A, and with a great
Horizontal Impetus, proper to make breaches in Walls, or give other lateral
impulses. But with the other Elevation it shall describe the Range B, which
shall be slow in its Horizontal motion, but with sufficient perpendicular
Impetus at the last, proper to batter Vaults, Roofs, and to make other breaches
perpendicular to the Horizon; or to cast things to any determinate mark, as, v.
gr. little Baggs imbaled with Cord, full of Sulphur, Salt-Peeter, or Meal, or
Balls with Letters or other things within them. In a word, both those
Elevations that are equally distant from the sixth point, will carry the Ball
unto the same place: but yet with this difference, that with the first and
least Elevation it shall fall to the Earth (as Gunners speak) Grazing; and with
the second and greater Elevation, it shall descend almost plumb, or
perpendicular.

I know that its very seldom, and perhaps neverfound, that the greatest Range
of a Piece of Ordnance is just those 4000 Paces, as it seems to have been
supposed in the Calculating of our Table, and also in those of Signiore
Galileo, so that the said Table might seem unuseful: but we shall show, that
the supposed number of 4000 does not therefore serve to any great particular
Machine, to the end it might serve to all in general. It is necessary therefore
to take notice, that that same suppositious Number of 4000, is not of Paces, or
of Else, or of Yards, or of any other determinate measure, but of abstracted
parts, such yet, whatever they are, as being convertible into any kinds of
possible measures, they do make the Table general, as well for the Culvering,
as for the Mortar-Piece or Cross-Bow. And to give an example how it may be
adapted and applied to all the Species of Artillery, and how the Abstract parts
may be reduced into Geometrical paces, we will do thus.

The greatest Range of a Canon, by experiment made thereof, is found to be,
suppose 2300 paces; and I would with the same Piece make a shot that should be
860 paces, I do thus: If the greatest Range 2300 give 860, I ask what the
number 1000, the greatest of the Table will give? I work and find 374: which
number being sought in the Table, is found to be betwixt 370 and 380. Therefore
taking the part proportional according to my Judgment, I find the Arch of its
Elevation ought to be Grad. 11. very near, or its Complement gr. 79. And thus
it is certain, that that same Piece which being mounted to six points did carry
2300 paces, being elevated gr. 11. or 79. of the Quadrant, shall carry 860
paces, as we did desire.

PROBLEM. How by a Shot made casually, one may find the greatest Range of an
Ordnance.
LEt a Piece be directed according to the Mounture AC; of which let the
Elevation be the Angle BAC, whatever it is. And the said Angle being measured
with the Quadrant, let it projection elevation be found; for example, gr. 30.
then let off the Piece, and let the Shot reach to the point B: and let the line
AB be carefully measured, which suppose to be v. gr. 2400 Geometrical Paces, I
say that these two things being given, namely the Elevation, and the length of
the casual Range AGB, you have therewithal given the line AD, which is the half
of the greatest Range, according to what has been demonstrated in the last
Corollary of the first Proposition, De Motu Projectorum.

The Angle of Elevation CAB gr. 30, being given, the right Angled Triangle EAC
shall be given in Specie: and because AB is given in paces, AE shall be given,
which is the fourth part thereof, namely 600 paces. Let us therefore, to find
the quantity of AD, work in this manner by Calculations and Sines.

Say, if as the Right Sine 86602 of the Angle ACE, gr. 60. that is, of the
Complement of the Elevation, is to the side AE, which is 600: so is the whole
Sine 100000 to a fourth number 693: and thus the Hypothenuse AC shall be 693
Paces. But because that the right angled Triangle ACD is given in Specie, begin
again and say, as the right Sine 50000 of the angle ADC, which is equal to the
angle given of the Elevation EAC, is to the right Line AC, which is found to be
693 paces, so is the whole line to a fourth number 1386. And thus the right
line sought AD, shall be 1386 paces. But because AD, being the line of Impetus
or Sublimity, is equal to half the greatest Range; if we double 1386, we shall
make the number of 2772 paces; for so much shall be the length of the desired
greatest Range of that Gun, which being elevated to the Randon of gr. 30, is
found to carry 2400 paces.

But with much more brevity, and at one single working, we may perform the same
thus. Suppose the whole Sine to be CF, then FA and FD shall be the Tangents,
one, of the angle of elevation, and the other of its Complement. Say,
therefore, as the whole Sine is to CF, which is 600: so is 230940 (which is the
sum of both those Tangents) to a fourth number 1386. And thus the right line AD
is found, as before, 1386 paces: which being doubled, will give the measure of
e the Semirect, or greatest Or the best of the Randon.
Randon, as you well call it.

COROLLARIES.
1. BY way of Corollary it may be advertised, that this is the manner of
arguing from any Range of a Piece, how much the same should be to shoot upwards
by a perpendicular line; which shall be as much as the line AD found out by way
of Calculation.

2. The same line AD, directs us from what Altitude it would be requisite to
let fall a Cannon Bullet, that it may arrive at the Earth with the same Impetus
that the Cannon it self conferreth, always allowing for the impediment which
the Crassitude of the Air may occasion, which acknowledge must be sensible for
to vary the demonstrated Propositions of Ranges, but much more for to obstruct
this effect.

PROBLEM. How with the sole Table of Sines we may know the greatest Altitude,
to which the Ball has attained passing through the Air in a Range, the
Elevation and length of the said Range being given.
IN the precedent Figure, let there be given the angle of the Elevation CAB,
and the length of the Range AB: it is required to know the greatest Altitude to
which the Ball has arrived thorough the Air: and this shall be EC. Take again
AE 600 projection elevation paces, that is, the fourth part of the whole length
AB: and then say, as 86602 the Sine of the Angle ACE, the Supplement of the
Elevation, is to AE, 600 paces, so is 50000, the Sine of the Elevation EAC to a
fourth number: and we shall find 346 paces for measure of the Altitude CE, that
is, of the greatest Altitude to which the Ball had attained in its passage
through the Air.

It is to be noted, that great Guns are not always used so as that the Ball
goes to determine in the same Horizontal plain from which it did depart, as
Galileo's and our Tables do suppose. Therefore being to shoot upon the side of
a Hills declivity or aclivity, as also being to shoot from the summity of a
Rock upon the Horizontal plain that is below, there has no man as yet reduced
the measures of these Ranges to an Art. The Table of them might be calculated,
but every one will perceive, that it being to be composed by every grade of the
Pieces Elevation or Mounture, and by every grade of the Hills inclination, and
by every pace of the Hills Altitude, the Multiplication would be almost
infinite. We will therefore only give you the general Rule for calculating
those Ranges when they shall occur.

A Piece with the direction AB, makes the Range ACD: but I would shoot along
the inclined plain AC; and I desire to know what AC, the length of the Range of
that shot upon this plain, shall be. projection elevation Draw BD by the point
D, and HF by the point C, perpendiculars to the Horizon; and draw a line from F
to E; which by the things demonstrated, is parallel to AB. Measure with some
Instrument the angle DAE, that is the Hills Elevation, and, by the Table of
Amplitudes, you shall find the length of the Horizontal Range AD. Then say, as
DB the Tangent of the angle of the Pieces, Elevation is to BE, which is the
difference of the Tangents of the two angles DAB and DAE known, (one being the
Elevation of the Piece, the other the Elevation of the Hill above the Horizon)
so is DA known, in paces, to a fourth number: and the right line FA shall
befound in paces. Then say again, as the whole Sine is to that fourth number,
which is the measure of AF in paces, so is AC the secant of the angle FAC, to a
fourth number: and thus you shall know the number of paces that measure the
line AC, that is, the length of the Range that that Piece will make upon the
plain AE, when you shoot upwards.

projection elevationBut when from the point A it is required to shoot
downwards by a descending Hill, as A B, we shall find the quantity of the Range
A B, that is, the place where the Ball falls, in this manner. Let the
direction A E, that is, let the angle of the Pieces Elevation be given; also
let there be given the angle of the Hills inclination C A B. Let us imagine the
Horizon to be A C, and let us draw B E and H D F perpendiculars to the same:
and conjoyn or draw a line from C to H, which line shall be parallel to A E.
Now upon the Table of Amplitudes we shall find how many paces AD is, but we
seek the quantity of A B. Therefore make the calculation thus; as FD the
Tangent of the angle of the Pieces Elevation is to DH, the Tangent of the
inclination of the plain; so is AD, known in paces, to a farther number. And
this shall be the measure of DC in paces; and thus the whole line AC shall be
known in paces. Then say again, as AC the whole Sine is to AC known in paces,
so is AB the Secant of the angle CAB to a fourth number: and this last number
shall be the measure sought of the right line AB in paces; that is, the length
of the Range upon the descending plain AB. It happens also many times, that
we are to shoot at plains perpendicular to the Horizon, as at the Walls of
Cities, or Towers, or other ways; therefore also in this case we will subjoyn
the Computation for finding the Altitude of that point in the said Wall where
the Ball is to hit.

projection elevationLet the Direction of the Piece be the Line AB, and the
Horizon AC, and the Wall of the Tower DE perpendicular to the Horizon: and let
the distance AD be known in paces. Let us suppose that the Ball passes freely
without hitting the Wall, and falls upon the Horizon in C. The Table of the
Amplitudes gives the quantity of AC, but we seek the Altitude DE. Draw CB
perpendicular to the Horizon, and DF parallel to AB, and then draw a line from
F to A, which shall pass through the common Section of the Parabola, and of the
Wall, as may be collected from the things already demonstrated. Now say, as CA
the length of the Horizontal line is to CD the difference betwixt the lines AC
and AD already known, so is BC the Tangent of the angle of the Elevation of the
Piece, to CF the Tangent of the angle FAC. Again say, as the Sine Total is to
AD known in paces, so is the last found Tangent of the angle FAC to a fourth
number: which shall be the desired measure of the right line DE in paces. And
thus we have found the point E in which the said shot would stick. The same
calculation may be also deduced. Although the Wall DE be not perpendicular, but
scarfed, as those of the modern Fortresses; but fearing to procure you more
trouble than benefit, I will refer the care of that to the Geometrician that
has a mind to undertake it.

The Amplitudes of the Parabola's, of which Galileo, and also we do treat,
suppose that the Range terminates not upon the plain of the Field, but in that
Horizontal plain that passes by the Muzzle of the Piece. The other is only
true when the Piece is placed with its Carriages in a Trench, so that the mouth
of the Piece lies exactly level with the ground. But because this is not
usual, and because the Ranges do determine in the Horizon that touches the
lower parts of the Wheels, we will Geometrically enquire how much a level
Range, or Horizontal Range may be prolonged by means of the Altitude of the
Muzzle of the Piece above the plain of the Field. It seems that the
Semidiameter of the wheels, and the thickness of the Metal do cause the Muzzles
of ordinary Artillery to be above the Horizontal Site about two Braces. I
suppose therefore the Muzzle of the Culvering to be at A, and let the Horizon
be B C; and let the Altitude of the Muzzle be the right line A B, supposed to
be two Braces; and let the Range A C D be the level Range. The right line BC is
sought; let the Semirect Range, or the best of the Randon of the same Piece, be
the Parabola A E F; and let it be supposed that AF be 5000 Geometrical paces,
that is a 15000 Florentine Braces. Describe the usual Semicircle of the first
Proposition A H I, and having drawn A L equal to A I apply L D. The right line
A I, by the things demonstrated, shall be the Imperus of the Parabola A E F, or
of A C D (for they are Ranges of the same Piece) therefore A L shall be the
fourth part of the right side of the Parabola A C D: therefore L D shall be
double of L A: but A F has been demonstrated to be also double of A I;
therefore L D and projection elevation Al^ are equal; and there are three lines
given, that is, LA 7500. LD 15000. and AB 2. And therefore, working by the Rule
of three, as the right line LA is to AB known; so is the square of the right
line LD to another number: we shall find 60000; which shall be the square of
the right line BC; and extracting the Square root thereof, we shall find the
line BC to be 245 Braces. We conclude therefore that that Machine which makes
its greatest Range of 15000 Braces, in case it shall have its Muzzle raised
above the Horizon, will make its level Range, that is, without any Elevation or
Mounture, to be in all 245 Braces long. Next, how much every other Range not
level, but inclined upwards or downwards, by occasion of the Altitude of the
wheels, or of a Bastion, or of a Mount, or of any other situation that raises
it above the Horizontal plain, may be prolonged, shall be found thus.

It is certain, that being to shoot from the top of a Rock, or of a Castle
placed in the top of an Hill, or from any whatever high place above the
Horizontal Plain of the Field that lies below, the Ranges will prove much
longer than those noted upon the Table of Amplitudes; and this difference shall
be so much greater, by how much the situation of the Artillery shall be higher
above that Horizontal plain in which the Balls are to hit, and the Ranges to
determine.

projection elevationLet the height of the Hill or other place be GF, and from
the point F, let a line be drawn upon the plain of the Field GE: and let us
suppose the Horizon to be FB: now having made the Range FCBE at an Elevation,
the measure of GE is sought.

By the Table of Amplitudes, we find the quantity of AB, and by the Table of
Altitude, we find AC, the height of the Parabola. And for the working of the
Computation, it may be performed sundry ways.

Let the number of AB be squared, and divide that square by AC, and the Quotus
shall be the right side of the Parabola FCB: Then multiply that Quotus by CD,
and the square Root of the Product shall give DE.

Or we may work thus:

Draw the number DC into CA, and the square Root of the product shall be the
mean proportional betwixt DC and CA. Then say, as CA is to the forementioned
Root, so is A B to another number. And this fourth number shall again be DE.

Or lastly, in this manner:

Say, as the number CA, the Altitude of the Parabola in the Table, is to the
number CD, the Altitude of the Parabola and Range together, so is AB the
Semi-Amplitude of the Parabola in the Table to another fourth number.

Then take the number that is mean-proportional betwixt that last number and
AB, for that mean-proportional shall give you the said DE. And for as much as
DG, equal to AB is known, the whole line GE shall be known.

But some might allege, that from the Mount GF, it may perhaps be required to
play with Guns oftener downwards than upwards; therefore it would be necessary
to know by a Geometrical Rule, the length of Ranges, which is done in this
manner. Let the Range to be made downwards be that marked FH, with any whatever
angle of inclination beneath the Horizon: GH is sought. Imagine with your self
that the Range is to be made above the Horizon with the self same inclination;
and by the precedent Rules, the quantity of DE is found as above, or DH, from
which if we take the part already known FA, or DG, there shall remain known the
quantity required G H. But if gr. 40 being given for the Elevation of the Range
ABC, and the Base AC 1600 Paces, we would know all the different Altitudes of
the Ranges of the Ball upon any point of the line AC, work thus: Having divided
AC in the projection elevation midst, and erected DB, this shall be the Supreme
Altitude, and shall be found in the Table of Altitudes and Amplitudes working
in this manner. In the Table of Amplitudes right against gr. 40. of Elevation,
I find the line AD to be 9848 parts: but in the Table of Altitudes I find the
line BD to be 4132 parts. Then, by the Rule of Three, I say; if AD 9848 give
800 paces according to the supposition, how many paces shall DB, which is 4132
parts, give? and I find, that the right line BD is 336 paces. Now let any point
be proposed, as E, over which you would know the Altitude of the Range of the
Ball, that is the line EH. Let the right line AE be supposed 1000, and EC 600:
and work the Rule of three again, in this manner. If the square of AD, which is
640000, give the Rect-angle of the right lines AE and EC, which is 600000, what
shall the number BD (which was found to be 336) give? and I find 315 paces.
Therefore the Altitude of the Parabola over the point E, was 315 paces; which
is that that was sought.

It shall suffice to have hinted this little for the Calculating of some
varieties that may happen about these Ranges. Other cases may be put, like to
these, and particularly those of their conversions; but from the knowledge of
these, those may easily be deducted: and the Ingenuity of any Geometrician,
applying himself thereto, shall find less difficulty in resolving many of these
Problems of himself, than in undergoing the length and obscurity of our
explanations. Therefore we will proceed to the making of the Quadrant, the
which seems really appropriated, nay, made by Nature on purpose for to
measure Scientifically and Geometrically the Ranges of Projects.

Of the Quadrant.
LEt us now come to practice; and by help of an Instrument, let us resolve some
of the Propositions above demonstrated. We will make a Military Quadrant, which
with invariable certainty shows (at least to Geometrical Philosophers, if not
to practical Gunners) what Mounture or Elevation ought to be given to any
Piece, to the end that the length of the Range may prove to be of such a
certain measure. We will also resolve, by help hereof, all Problems that can be
framed about the shooting of Artillery, which were heretofore promised by
Tartaglia, and reduced into Tables by Galileo, with something over and above.
Military Industry did find that the use of a Machine so noble, and of so great
consequence as the Canon, would be too much confined, and of too little
benefit, if it could not be made use of save only at that small distance to
which it carries a point blank, or in its level Range, without giving it with
the Quadrant the advantageous assistance of some elevation. It was therefore
enquired how a man might do that with the same Piece, which of it self did not
carry more than 200 or 250 Geometrical paces, he might shoot 400 and also 600
paces, and more and more, until he come to the length of the greatest Range
that can be made by that Piece. The Invention was thus: They began to help the
Piece by Elevation, that is, they directed it not straight upon the object
which it was to hit, but, holding it in the very vertical of the object, they
elevated it above that right line which goes from the Piece unto the object:
and this they did sometimes more, and sometimes less, according as the force of
the Shot was to be greater or lesser: An Artifice that from the very beginning
of the world has been known even to artless Boys. We see that when they with
a Ball of Snow, or other matter, do aim to hit a mark that is very near, they
throw it directly at the mark: but being at another time to aim at one which
stands farther off, or being to throw Stones at each other, they do not throw
Horizontally, or directly at their Adversaries, but turning the cast half way
into the Air, without having ever had any other consideration, they do all
throw at the elevation of the fifth, and also of the sixth point of the
Military Square to them unknown: But Gunners, in process of time, have found an
Instrument, that does with facility measure these Elevations.

Nicolo Tartaglia of Brescia, a famous Mathematician, did invent a Square with
unequal sides joined together with the Quadrant, which has for more than a
hundred years past, been generally used, and is still the only Regulator of
Gunners, not only to manage great Guns, and to raise them to those Mountures
which they call Randons, but also to level them in the Point Blank Ranges;
Tartaglia divided that Quadrant into 12 equal parts, beginning the Numeration
of them from the lesser [or shorter] side; he also subdivided each of those
into other 12 equal parts, naming those first Points, and these second Minutes
of the Quadrant. We will insert the figure of the Quadrant, and show how it
measures the Elevation [Mounture or Randon] of the Piece.

Let the Canons Her Concave, Cilinder, or Bore.
Soul be A B, fixed at some certain Mounture: put into the Muzzle thereof the
greater of the Quadrant C A: so that it be applied to the lower side of the
said Soul, and let the Plummet fall in D. I say that the Angle E C D, that is
the elevation measurement arch E D, is the measure of the Elevation of the
Piece, Draw an Horizontal line AF, the angles at the point G shall be right:
But the angle ACF is also right. Therefore the angles CAF, and FCG are equal by
the 8 of the sixth of Euclid. Or thus; Draw thorough C the Horizontal line. If
H I now from the right angles HCD and ACE there be taken the common part ACD,
there shall remain the Angle E C D of the Quadrant, equal to the angle of the
Piece under the Horizon HI, or above the Horizon AF, which is the same as being
alterne.

By the help of this Quadrant Gunners have with long observations composed such
a Praxis, as that they know how many points they are to mount v. gr. a
Culvering of 40 pound Ball to hit a mark distant; for example, 700 Geometrical
paces, or at any other distance.

But the truth is, the observations are so fallible, and the Gunners so few
that have made them, and made them exactly, that the use of Artillery, taking
from it the Range of Point Blank, must needs have very little of certainty in
it.

If one would collect some certain Science touching the ordinary Quadrant, it
would be necessary to make the Experiments not only with all sorts of Balls,
and with all the varieties of Powder, but in all kind of Pieces, as also in all
those that being the same in specie, are of different grandeur; and lastly, at
all possible degrees of Elevation. A Multiplication that almost runs up into
infinity. And we observe that these Experiments ought to be all made one by
one; for it is not true, that by way of proportion one may from three or four
Ranges of a Canon made at several elevations, argue to any others, no not of
the same Canon, laden with the same Powder and Ball. That this is so, may be
demonstrated by help of the Tables made by Signiore Galilaeo, and by us. For
example, That Canon which being elevated at the sixth Point, curryeth its shot
4000 paces, elevated at one Point, ought to curry the sixth part, at two points
the third, and at three points the half of that Range. But the thing falls out
far otherwise: For being elevated to one point, it curryeth 1032 instead of
666, which is the sixth part of that same greatest Range 4000: at the second
point (and note that with this Mounture, Pieces carry always the half of the
greatest Range) in our case will curry 2000 in stead of 1333, which is the
third part: At the third point it will curry 2824, instead of 2000, which is
the half of the greatest Range: at the fourth point it will curry 3464 instead
of 2666: At the fifth point it will curry 3860, in stead of 2333, which are 5
sixths of that greatest Range: See therefore how that increasing equally the
Mountures of the Piece, that is shooting first at one point only, then at two,
three, four, etc. unto the sixth, the increases of the lengths of the Ranges do
not increase equally, that is with the same proportion wherewith the Or
Mountures.
Randons increase. But the first point currying 1032, the second increases
above it 968, the third increases 824, the fourth 640, the fifth 396, the
sixth 140. Therefore to derive some rule from the Experiments, it were
necessary to make them exactly, at all the Grades of Randons, in all sorts of
Pieces, with all varieties of Powders, and different matters of Balls; and
happily one might say, it were necessary also that every Gunner made them by
himself. Things almost impossible to reduce unto Rules, from which any
certainty might be gathered, if the Theorick and Geometry had not given us a
manifest Science thereof, by means of that one sole Proposition of Galileo, in
which first of all men he has advertised and taught us, That Pro ects do all
move in a Parabolical Line. Upon this supposition we will ground the Instrument
promised: and though by the impediment of the medium the Parabola's become too
deformed, or by many other accidents the Ranges prove very inconstant, yet it
suffices us to have given indubitable satisfaction to the School of
Mathematicians, if not to that of Gunners.

Before we set down the making of our square, which consists only in
describing one single Semicircle, we will divide the ordinary Quadrant into
unequal points, so as they may not measure the Randons of the Piece, but the
lengths of the Ranges, which is that that serves to our purpose. Thus we shall
be assured, that the Gun, if it shall be elevated to one point of the said
Quadrant, shall carry to such a distance, whatever it be: and elevated to two
points, shall precisely double that Range: and if to three, it shall carry
three of those spaces; if to four and a half, it shall carry four and a half;
if to five and a quarter, it shall carry five and a quarter; and thus until you
come to the sixth point, shall the points of the Quadrant in the Instrument,
and the spaces of the Ranges in the Field, always increase in the same manner,
and with the same proportion, and from the sixth to the twelfth point, they
shall go in the same manner decreasing. The construction and demonstration is
Geometrically taken from the proposition which we have made the First of this
our Book of Projects, which by the Amplitude given, teaches us to find the
Elevation. And it serves in common for whatsoever sort of Artillery and Mortar
Pieces, and for any sort of Ball or Powder.

Let the sides of the Quadrant be A B the greater and A C the lesser; then
making A the Center, describe the Quadrant C D E, upon which the unequal points
are elevation measurement to be marked or set off: and about the Diameter AC
draw the Semicircle AFC; and having drawn FG perpendicular to AB, and Tangent
to the Semicircle, divide AG into six equal parts to find the six points of
the Quadrant, and then again, each part into 12 to find the Minutes, (if the
size of the Instrument shall admit of this second division) now let one of the
six parts be GH. Draw HMI parallel to GF, cutting the Semi-diameter in the
points M and I, and then from the Center A, draw the right line AFD, and D
shall be the sixth point of the square: draw AIL, and L shall be the fifth
point of the square: draw AMN, and N shall be the seventh point; and so of all
the rest. Note, that the division will be the more exact, if after you have
found the 1, 2, 3, etc. points, you do by the Transportation or setting of them
off, design the ninth, tenth, and eleventh. The half points, quarter points,
and Minutes, are found in the same manner by subdividing each of the portions
of the line AG into two, into four, or into twelve parts, which raising
perpendiculars from the points of the Divisions: Those perpendiculars shall cut
the Semicircle, and by the points of the Sections shall the Diameters be drawn
in the Quadrant, and these shall cut the Quadrant in the parts desired, of Half
points, Quarter points, or Minutes.

Now it is manifest by our I. Proposition, that if the line of the Of Mounture.
direction, or of the elevation of the Piece shall be AO, or AP, the Amplitude
or length of the Range shall be as the Quadruple of the SO; and if the
direction shall be AM, or AN, the Range shall be as the Quadruple of RM: and if
the elevation were according to the line AFD, the Range shall be as the
Quadruple of QF: but the lines SO, RM, and QF, by our construction do equally
exceed: And, therefore, likewise their Quadruples, or the Ranges aforesaid,
shall equally exceed one the other.

The use of the aforementioned Division made in the ordinary Quadrant.
LEt there be propounded any Piece of Artillery, or Mortar-Piece; and with it
let there be one single Experiment made, that is, let it be elevated to any
point, as for example to the fifth. Let it off, and measure the length of the
Range, and let it be found, verbi gratia, to be 2000 parts; this done we may
know how far the same Piece will carry, being charged in the same manner, and
elevated to any whatever other Point or Minute: which shall be easy by the
Rule of three, the points in this Instrument, as well as the length of the
Ranges, being proportional. The Praxis is this; I desire to know how far the
sixth point carries, I thus say, If five points give 2000 paces, how much
shall six points give? and I find 2400 paces. I say then that the shot of that
Piece at the sixth point, that is at the greatest Range, will curry 2400 of
those parts, at which of the fifth point it curried 2000.

And take notice by the way, that instead of performing this operation with the
points 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12, It may be done with their Complements, which
are 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, and 0.

But if it were required (which imports much more) that we should elevate the
aforesaid Piece in such sort, that the length of the Range ought to be; for
example, 1300 paces, we are to work thus. If 2000 paces were made by 5 points,
or to say better, by 60 Minutes of the Quadrant, by how many points shall 1300
paces be made? the working will be 2000. 60. 1300. 39, and we shall find that
for to make the Range of 1300 paces, it would be necessary to give the Piece
the Mounture of 39 Minutes of the Quadrant, or of three points and a quarter.

The manner how to Compose our Square.
BUt if we would frame an Instrument, which shall not only measure the length
of the Ranges made at several Randons, but also the Altitude of the Parabola,
the duration or time of the flight [or Range] the sublimity, and the other
things demonstrated in the aforesaid Book of Projects, all this shall be
performed with the sole and simple Semicircle of I. Proposition. But let us
proceed to the making of it.

semicircle and squareTake the Rect-angled Plate ABCD, of Brass, or other
solid Matter, having the side AE long, for the applying of it to the Piece.
Upon the Diameter AB, draw a Semicircle AFB, which shall be the Semicircle of
Proposit. I. De Projectis; and in B place the Thread and Plummer, and divide the
Semicircle AFB into 90 equal parts, which shall be the 90 degrees of the
Quadrant; or into 144 equal parts, which shall be the equal Points and Minutes
of the ordinary Quadrant. Let us now demonstrate Geometrically, that this
square is convenient to measure, with exceeding plainness, the lengths and the
Altitudes of the Ranges, the times of their Durations, the sublimities of the
Parabola's, and the Elevations of the Pieces. And then we will set down the
Division of the Lines thereupon, without the need of any Table for the using of
the same.

Let us, as in the subsequent Figure, place the square aforementioned EABCD in the
mouth of any Piece, E A at pleasure, and let the Plummet fall upon the point F
of the Semicircle AFB, divided into 90 equal semicircle and horizon parts. It
is certain, in the first place, that the Arch BF measures the Elevation of the
Piece EA above the Horizon. For we having by the Division of the Semicircle
into 90 parts only, valued every two degrees for one; we have made the Arch BF
to be the measure of the Angle BAF, that is, of the Elevation of the Piece
above the Horizon; which Horizon shall ever be the line AF. I say moreover,
that if we should suppose the line AB, Diameter of the Semicircle, to be the
Impetus of the assigned Piece, or the half of the greatest Range, the line FH,
perpendicular to the Diameter, shall be the fourth part of the Amplitude or
length of the Range; BH shall be the supreme Altitude of the Parabola: AH shall
be the sublimity; and BF shall be the time of the Ranges Duration.

That this is so, shall thus be demonstrated (having reference to the I.
Proposition of Projects, and its Corollaries.) Let the line of the direction
ABI be prolonged indefinitely, as also the perpendicular FBL; then by
imagination take BL of such a length, that it may be really equal to half the
greatest Range of our present Piece. And about the Diameter BL, let there be
imaginarily drawn the great Semicircle BIL; cutting the Circumference BY in
any point I; and draw the Horizontal line IM. It is manifest, by the
afore-cited Propos. I. of Projects, that the line MI shall be the real fourth
part of the length of the Range; as also, that DM shall be the (not imiginary,
but) real Altitude of the said Range; and so the other measures in the
Semicircle BIL, shall be all true and real. Now observe, that the Triangle HBF
is like to the Triangle BIM, as being right-angled, and having two angles at
the Point B. Therefore the same Proposition shall be between all the small and
imaginary measures of the square AC, as is between all the true measures in the
imaginary and great Semicircle BIL; that is, the lines, AB, BF, FH and HB,
shall be to one another in the same proportion respectively as LB, BIIM, and M
B. Therefore, as to arguing in the proportions, we may without any error, as
well make use of those feigned proportions upon the square, as of the true
ones, imagined in the Amplitude of the Air.

It remains now that we show how this Doctrine, which has hitherto been a mere
Speculation, may now be reduced to Manual practice, and that with facility.
Every one sees that for our obtaining knowledge of the quantity of the lines
AB, BF, FH, and HB, and their proportions in the precedent Figure, it would be
necessary that all the aforesaid lines were divided into most Minute parts with
some common measure. To this purpose, therefore, we will divide the Diameter
AB, and Semi-Diameter ED, into equal and very small parts, as appears in the
following Figure; (upon which let us describe the imaginary square) and then
let us give to each division of the circumference, its guides parallel to those
Diameters, that so in them the number and quantity of the lines which shall be
Indices of the length and Altitudes of the Ranges, may be read or found: And in
the point of the angle of Semicircle B, place the Thread and Plummet.

As to the number of parts into which the Diameter AB is to be divided, it
shall be left to the choice of every one; but yet it will be convenient to make
choice of the number 2000, for that it will facilitate the Arithmetical
operation.

It is to be noted, that if any one will make a square, as has been said, on
purpose for one kind of Artillery only, he shall without the least trouble of
Calculation, have the measures of all its Ranges.

The Division of this square is to be made a posteriori, in this manner. Make
an Experiment of the greatest Range of that same Piece to which you would have
the square to be adapted, and let it be found v. gr. to be 3000. Then divide
the Diameter of the square into 1500 parts, and the perpendicular Semi-diameter
into 750 equal parts; that is, imagine that the Diameter AB 1500, is the half
of the greatest Range 3000; as also, that the perpendicular Semi-diameter ED
750, is the fourth part of that greatest Range. And thus, every of the other
Elevations being afterward given, as soon as we shall apply this Square to the
Muzzle of the Piece, we shall immediately see how many paces is the length, and
how many the Altitude of the Range, etc. And this square made v. gr. for a
Canon of 60 pound Ball, would be also good for every other Canon of 60 pound
Ball, that should be the same in length, and other proportions, with that.

It Is true indeed, that if we would make the square universal, to serve
indifferently for all Species and Magnitudes of Artillery, we must then do
thus. Divide the Diameter AB in the precedent figure in 2000 equal parts: also
let the Semi-Diameter ED be divided into 1000 equal parts, (we by reason of the
smallness of the figure have divided it only into 100, taking the parts by ten
and ten.) This done, let there be drawn by the Divisions of the Circumference,
cut into equal degrees, as is usual, the guides parallel unto the Diameters,
that so one may upon those Diameters read or find the quantity of the right
lines, as they shall happen to be.

Now let a Piece of Ordnance FG, unknown, be given. Then make the previous
Experiment in this manner. Apply the square to the Muzzle of it, and let the
thread shooting range fall in any place, as in I. Then find by the means of its
guide, the quantity of IO upon the divided Semi-Diameter, and keep it in mind,
and then shoot off the Gun, and measure the Range, which suppose to be, for
Example, 1250 paces: charge the Piece again in the same manner, and give it a
different Mounture, so that the thread may fall elsewhere, as in M: the length
of this Range is sought. Say thus: If the number of IO give the length 1250
paces, how many paces shall the number of ML, that is found upon the divided
Semi-diameter give? and you shall in like manner find the length of that Range
numbered in paces.

If you desire the Altitudes, and not the lengths of Ranges, then make the same
working as before, but not with the lines IO and ML, which give the lengths,
but with HO and HL, which give the Altitudes. And if we would have the
sublimities, it would be necessary to work with GO and GL. But, which more
imports, if any one after the previous Experiment has been made, shall
desire that the same Piece may make an assigned Range, in length, v. gr. 2200
paces, we are to find what elevation ought to be given to the Piece. Work thus:
If the 1250 paces of the previous Experiment give IO numbered, what shall the
2200 paces give? and you shall find a number, which suppose for example, to be
ascribed on the square unto the line ML. the Piece Therefore is to be raised to
such a Randon, that the thread may pass through the point M; and then the Range
shall be 2200 paces.

The times or durations of the Ranges are given by the Lines HI and HM: and to
find the Quantity of these it may be done two ways. First, by way of
calculation: For the square of the time HI (in the precedent shooting range
Figure) is always equal to the two squares of the Altitude HO, and of the
fourth part of the length IO. Secondly, by making to all the Divisions of the
Perifry B, C, D, (in the present Figure) from the Center A the circular guides
BE, CF, DH: for AH being thus divided into very small equal parts, it shall
measure all the right lines, AB, AC, and AD, which are the times of the Ranges.

Yet we confess as to Military use, the Amplitudes or lengths of Ranges, only
seem to Import; and they are of great moment: the rest are all accessory
curiosities, which serve much more to the pleasures of Geometry, shooting range
than to the occasions of War; therefore he that would have the square made only
for this respect of Longitudes, may take the Semicircle ABC of Brass (as in the
present Figure) having its side AD, and with the Semicircle EB, divided into
most minute and equal parts, beginning the numeration from the point E; and may
give moreover to all the points of the Perifry F, G, H, I, their guides GH, and
FI parallel to AC: And thus he has divided and numbered upon EB all the lines
FN, and GO, which serve for the Amplitudes or Longitudes of the Ranges.

A Table which shows how many Degrees and Minutes of the Ordinary Quadrant
inserted Page 20. each Point of one Square, the Points of which are unequal,
does contain.
Points unequal of the Square Degrees of the ordinary Quadrant half 02 23 I 04
48 half 07 15 II 09 44 half 12 19 III 15 00 half 17 50 IV 20 54 half 24 18 V 28
13 half 33 14 VI 45 00 half 56 46 VII 61 47 half 65 42 VIII 69 26 half 72 10 IX
75 00 half 77 41 X 80 16 half 82 45 XI 85 12 half 87 37 XII 90 00

For Example, It is demanded where the Division of the one seventh unequal
point does fall. Look upon the present Table, right against the number VII, and
you find that it falls upon gr. 61. and min. 47. of the ordinary Quadrant.

BUt since we are fallen upon the consideration of the Motion and Impetus of
Projects, we cannot balk the occasion of adding something concerning the variety
of their Forces in battering upon resisting Superficies, sometimes with greater,
and sometimes with lesser Angles of Inclination. Galilaeo considers the
Impetus of these Projects in every Point of their Parabola, and measures how
much it is in its self, that is, in respect of that Plane in which it does
perpendicularly hit.

We presupposing that an Impetus, when it is upon the act of striking, is, as
to it self, always the same, will consider and measure how much it is in
respect of the resisting Plane, varyed only by the diversity of the Angles of
Incidence. There is no Gunner so unskilful, but he knows that Cannon Bullets
in hitting a Wall, have always lesser and lesser force (if all things else be
alike) by how much the Angle of Incidence is more and more acute. So that if
the said Cannon with sixty pounds of Iron, and forty of Powder, not only
pierces, but beats down a Courtin, with its perpendicular Range, it shall
scarce hurt it (though it have the same Charge, and the same distance) with the
Projection of the Range, which they call Di ^^riscio.
Grazing. The Problem, for any thing that I know, is unhandled. Therefore if
we shall produce something that is less subsistent, and not purely Geometrical,
either admit it till some others shall better handle the Doctrine, or wholly
reject it, it matters not which.

SUPPOSITIONS.
1. WE will speak only of the Ranges of Great Guns; therefore, Let us suppose,
that that portion of the Line which the Ball makes a little before, and a
little after its blow, be as it were a Right Line. I know that we treat of a
Line really curved; but being (if it were entire) in length more than ranges of
guns three thousand Geometrical paces, we may take a yard, or a foot, or an
inch thereof, without any sensible error, to be a Right Line.

2. Let us suppose secondly, Galil. 2. de Motu aequabili.
that the Forces or Impetus's of Projects are as the Spaces which they pass or
curry in the same Time; that is, If the Spaces A, B and C shall be past by the
Moveable in the same Time; the Impetus's or Forces in striking, shall be as the
Spaces A, B and C respectively.

3. But if the same Space shall be past by the Moveable in diverse Times, Galil.
3. de Motu aequabili.
the Impetus's or Forces of the Moveable in battering shall have the Proportion
reciprocal of their Times. That is, if the same Space D shall be past one while
in the Time E, and another while in the Time F; the Force of the first shall be
as F, and of the second as E.

4. Let us suppose, in the next place, that all the Ranges ranges of guns have,
as to themselves, the same Impetus: which will happen if the Piece being fixed
always in the same place with the same Charge, the same Mounture, and
Distance, etc. The obliquity of the Wall be only varied.

This supposed; when a Cannon Bullet approaches to the opposed Wall, the Line
and Direction of the Range is either perpendicular to the Wall, or not. If it
be perpendicular, the Percussion operateth with such a certain force: which we
will prove to be the greatest that that Range can have. If it shall be at
Oblique Angles, as the Line AB unto the Wall BC, I do note that in respect to
the Wall BC, there are in the ranges of guns Line of the Project AB, two
Motions compounded together: that is, one of approximation perpendicular to the
Wall, the other of passage lateral, or parallel to the same. The perpendicular
Motion is both represented and measured by the Line AC; the parallel Motion by
the Line CB: for both the Spaces AC and CB are passed by the Ball at the self
same Time.

Now observe, that of these two sorts of Impetus, one only is to the purpose,
for increasing the Forces to make a breach in the Wall, and to drive the Ball
into it; to wit, the Impetus of the perpendicular Lation AC. The other,
although it were infinite, will never increase the force of the Project against
the Resistance of the Wall, unless the perpendicular Lation be withal
accelerated. Nay, if the Horizontal Motion were simple and alone, without any
mixture with the perpendicular Motion, what other would the Ball do but run
equi-distant unto the Wall, without ever touching it, so far would it be from
breaking it, although it were a very thin Glass? When therefore, the Direction
of any Projection being given, we shall know how much of this perpendicular
Impetus enters into the Composition of the Motion, we shall also know the
Activity or Moment of the Project toward the Resistance of the opposite Wall.

Let the Line of any Incidence at pleasure be AB upon the Plane BF taken with
any whatever Inclination: but withal, let the portion AB be so small, that it
may be composition of motion taken for Right. Draw AC perpendicular to the
Plane, and conjoyn CB. So much, therefore, of Parallel Motion shall be in the
Line AB, in respect of the Wall BF, as is the Line CB. But of this we make no
account; for being multiplied, it does not help, and diminished it does not
weaken the Moment, if the other Impetus do remain unaltered and the same. Of
Perpendicular Motion in the same there shall be as much as the Line AC: and the
force of the percussion shall be greater and lesser, according as AC, greater
or lesser, shall be past in the same Time.

Let us suppose, now, that the force of the Evidence AB be as AC. To know the
force of any other Incidence DB, let DB be taken equal to BA, and having drawn
DE perpendicular unto the Plane, the force of this Incidence shall be as that
same Line DE. For if AB and DB are equal, and are the Ranges of the same Piece,
they shall be past in the same Time. By Supposit. 2.
Therefore AC and DE, are also past in the same Time: Therefore the Impetus's,
as to the Wall, are as AC to AD. We will therefore infer, that,

PROPOSITION. The Activities or Moments of Ranges differently inclined, are as
the Right Sines of the Angles of Incidencies.
COROLLARIES.
1. IT is deduced from hence as a Corollary, that the Perpendicular Incidence
AB, has greater Force than all others, the force of it being as the Whole
Sine. And the parallel Projection shall have no force, its force being as the
No-Sine. The Incidence DB at the Angle of gr. 30. has half of the total force,
its Sine being the half of the Semi-diameter. The others, likewise, according
as they shall have greater or lesser Right Sine, shall have greater or lesser
force.

2. The Forces of Projections have reciprocally the same proportion that the
Sides of the Triangle have, which shall be formed upon the Plane by the Lines
of the Incidencies.

Let a Projection be made along the Line projection AC, and another along the
Line AB. And let the P'ane of the Triangle ABC be perpendicular to the Wall.
Because now the Space AC is past by the Ball in the Time AC; and the Space AB,
that is (the parallel Motion deducted) the same Space AC, is past in the Time
AB, the Forces shall be reciprocal to the Times: that is, the force along AC
shall be as AB, and along AB, shall be as AC. By Supposit. 3.


3. Projects shall then have the same force in battering, when the Impetus's
shall be as the Secants of the Complement of the Incidencies.

Let the Impetus along projection the Perpendicular AB, be as AB; and let it
have such a certain force. To the end that the Impetus along the Inclined AC
may have the same force, I say that the Impetus along AC, ought to be unto the
Impetus along AB, as AC is to AB: which AC is Secant of the Angle BAC,
Complement of the Or rather of the Incidency.
Inclination.

For if the Impetus's along AB and AC shall be as the Spaces AB and AC, the
Movables shall, in the same Time, pass the two Lines AB and AC, that is, By
Supposit. 2.
the same perpendicular Approximation AB. Therefore they shall have the same
force against the Wall.

4. Moreover, if with such a Piece, and along the Line CB, the Ball shall but
just enter wholly into the Wall, then along projection all the more elevated
Lines, it shall not only wholly immerge into the Solidity, but shall still make
deeper impression or entrance, because it has greater force. But because each
of the less elevated shall have lesser force, none of them shall enter wholly
into the Wall, nay some shall rebound and fly back.

Yet let all this be spoken abstracting from a certain Effect of Pliancy or
Refraction that Projects produce in passing with Inclination from the Rare
Medium to the Dense, the Line incurvating contrary to that of the Refraction of
Light, and visible Species.

FINIS.
TO THE INGENIOUS Student.
IT being well known among the Learned, that the late famous Mersennus of
France, a most diligent Collector and Publisher of the choicest Mathematical
inventions of that time, has among his Physico-mathematical Reflections, and
Mechanics, diverse material Experiments and Theories relating to the Art of
Gunnery, it was thought fit for the Readers benefit to cause the same to be
translated, and submitted to his censure.

Moreover that Author giving all his distances in feet, or paces of three feet,
or fathoms of six foot; It was thought likewise expedient to put the Reader
into a capacity of reducing the same to our English measure, to which purpose
there being an accurate experiment, made some time since by the most learned
and Reverend Doctor John Wallis Savilian Professor of Geometry at Oxford, take
an account thereof, as the Doctor communicated the same to a friend of his
here, namely, that he has formerly compared the French and English foot very
exactly, both measures being as he was assured very exact to the Standards of
each Nation, and he found the French foot to contain of ours 12 Inches (not
missing so much as 1/100 part of half an Inch.)

OF THE Swiftness OF SOUND. The swiftness of Sound is greater than the
swiftness of Bullets shot off, and finishes 230 fathoms in the space of one
second minute.
WHosoever would try the swiftness of Sounds by night, and by day, either in
valleys, woods, or mountains, either with or against the wind, or when it is
rainy or fair weather, shall find in all respects as I have tried it, that
there will be always the same swiftness of Sound.

But after that you have searched out a second by 230 fathoms, he that shoots
off a lesser Gun, may again retire 230 fathoms, so that he may be gone back
from you 460 fathoms, the same or the like Sound in passing over that way will
spend two seconds; which when it shall be five times multiplied by us, that we
should hear the Sound 1150 fathoms, the flash by night breaking forth from the
mouth of the Gun is always seen at that distance before the Sound is heard
five seconds of time. And seeing we make a French league to be 2500 fathoms,
and the circuit of the Earth 7200 of such leagues, you may easily conclude in
what time the sound does pass over one whole or several leagues, for the
swiftness of the sound is not diminished by its debility, whenas the last part
of the Sound that may be heard does emulate the swiftness of the first.

The Sound of the Gun therefore will pass over a league in the space of 11
seconds, seeing a league contains 11 times 230 fathoms (the space passed over
in a second minute) less only by 30 fathoms, which are here scarce worth
consideration, because that they are passed over by the Sound in the seventh
part of a second.

From which many things may be gathered; first, that a Soldier attentive my
decline or shun the shot of a Gun at one hundred fathoms, is he foresaw the
flash of it; which I thus demonstrate: It is evident from observation, that a
Bullet in flying 100 fathoms does at the least spend a second of time, and the
Sound of it in passing of them does at the most spend but half a second.
Therefore the Soldier from the fire seen (if Vision can be in an instant) has
a whole second wherein he my easily go three or four paces before that the
bullet can fly so far; also there remains to him half a second from that point
of time in which he hears the Sound, until the coming of the Bullet: although I
would not advise any one to try that, unless he first fortify himself with a
shield, helmet, and all other kind of Armor, that he may be out of all danger.
But any one may try it behind a wall, to which the Sound will come before the
Bullet.

Secondly, from the Sound and fire observed, may be known how much the Guns are
distant that are shot off against the besieged, or besiegers, even as to the
ingenious Gunners there will not be wanting matter to promote their Art.

Thirdly, by hearing the Sound of Thunder, and seeing the lightning go before
may be known how far it is off, so that if the Thunder be not changed from the
place where the lightning was seen; for how many seconds (whether measured by
the pulse, which exactly continues a second, or by a Pendulum or any other
Watch) there are between the Lightning and the Sound, so many 230 fathoms are
to be reckoned; so that if you number five seconds it may be distant from you
half a league; if ten seconds a whole league, whether the distance shall be
upright, or side-wayes and oblique, for it matters nothing.

Fourthly, If by the turnings and windings or Circles in the air a sound in the
same manner may be considered, and caused, as we see circles extended in the
water struck with the finger or a little stone, as all almost believe, and if
from the swiftness of bodies in like manner moved we my ghess at their
crassitude, thickness and weight, we may say that water is 1380 times thicker
and heavier than air; for as much as the Semidiameter of Circles of the Water
in any manner struck, which is made in a second of time, scarce exceeds a foot,
in which time the semidiamiter of Circles in the air, made also by any
percussion is 1380 foot, that is 230 fathoms; which proportion of gravities
come very near to observations by him mentioned. There is yet one thing that
may cause some doubt, which is, that the Sound of greater Guns moves more
slowly than of lesser, whereas our Geometer in the siege at Theodonis observed
that their Sound was heard, from the fire seen, after thirteen or fourteen
seconds of time, when yet he was scarce half a league distant from those Guns;
And the Sound according to that which has been before said, may pass over a
whole league and more in that time: Wherefore the Sound of those Guns does seem
to be different from that of lesser Guns.

The Author having by this discourse argued that the Sound of Guns is heard at
the distance of above 16 miles a minute (which is almost as swift as the
Copernicans suppose the Earth to move in its diurnal revolution about its Axis)
it was thought fit to subjoyn hereto the Authors latter thoughts of the same
Argument, published three years after.

OF THE SWIFTNESS OF SOUND, And force of Bullets shot out of Guns.
WHen I have oftentimes considered that the Sound passes over 230 fathoms in
the time of a 2d or sixtieth part of a minute; and that there seem to arise
someed doubt, whether there should be that Swiftness of the Sound of greater
Guns, as there is of lesser, with which I tried; at length it was observed that
in the space of eleven seconds, the Sound of the greater Guns of the Kings
Armory, have passed from the same Armory, after the flash was seen, as far as
our house, or the Vicennian Convent, whilst for obtaining the surrender of
Pouploon the Guns were shot off by night.

But when with a fathom I found that it was 3524 fathoms from Port Saint
Anthony to the gate of the aforesaid Convent, where the ear was, and to the
wall of the Vicennian Castle first meeting it, near 2500 fathoms, it is certain
first that it is a just league of 2500 fathoms from the Garden walk of the
Armory, from whence the Guns are wont to be shot off, to that Castle: for if
any thing in the passage must be diminished that distance will well enough
equal it, whereby the corner of the Garden is more distant, or the walk by
Sequana nearer from the Castle, than Port Saint Anthony.

It is evident therefore that the Sound runs over more than 230 Fathoms in each
second, to wit, 320 in every second, which make 1920 foot; which since any one
can prove by his own experiments, I need not say more thereof.

But some may imagine that hence perhaps must be concluded that greater Sounds
pass more swiftly, which disagrees with diverse observations. But when sometimes
these experiments shall be repeated, that I may number the seconds, I shall
advertise, for as much as I conjecture that there is no swiftness of sound
greater than that, which I have proved of 230 fathoms for a second; for in
these small matters I do not approve that common saying, He that acts by
another, seems to act by himself; who want not opportunites may observe for
their own satisfaction.

But now we shall add some thing concerning the swiftness of Bullets shot out
of Guns. When therefore at the Marquess of Doraisons four leagues from the
Sextian waters, I commanded a Brass Gun nine foot long, whose name was the
Marchioness, commonly called la Marquise, (whose Bullet was two pounds and an
ounce, but quantity of Powder, such as is wont to be in the use of lesser Guns,
the weight of one pound) to be levelled horizontally, with a plum line I found
that the Bullet shot off Horizonitally, in the time of five seconds had passed
over 630 fathoms or 3780 foot, and had reached the horizon, or fell to the
ground, as was evident by the huge quantity of dust raised by the blow.

Moreover that point of Earth which was first struck by the Bullet was
depressed under the horizon of the Gun 27 fathoms, for otherwise the Range
should not have been so great before its fall to the earth, which meets so much
the more slowly by how much it is the more depressed under the Horizon of the
Gun shot off, and I presume I have attributed a lesser swiftness to the Guns
than is just, unless yet the Bullets of the greater Guns shot off with very
fine powder, which we used, may exceed the swiftness of Bullets shot from
Harquebuzes; of which thing I do not yet pass judgment, till experiment, shall
bring some further evidence: but I shall propound some things newly observed.

Now therefore of the Bullet which I made trial of, I affirm that the swiftness
was so great that, at least, in each second minute it could pass over 126
fatho^:

I said, at least, because the observers know that the force on the Bullet does
go before the excussion or flash of the powder, and the perceiving thereof; so
that half a second may well be attributed to this time. Moreover in the first
second the Bullet passes more swiftly, in which time I doubt not but it passes
over 150 fathoms; Lastly, if by reason of that tarrying which happens between
the smiting of the Earth until the dust is seen to rise, we should augment that
swiftness by so many fathoms as it could pass over in half a minute, to wit 70,
and that the swiftness be supposed almost equal for the time of five seconds,
and in each second of that time that it passes over 140 fathoms, that is, if
the point of the Earth first struck were 700 fathoms distant from the Gun, it
would reach it in the time of five seconds. Then the swiftness of the Bullet
may be determined from what has been said, to be 130 fathoms, at least, in the
time of a second: which also agrees with the experiments of Bullets shot from
lesser Guns: to wit, they pass an hundred fathoms in the same time as the Sound
of the Gun has the same passage.

For if, behind a wall that is to be struck by the Bullet, the ear be
attentive, in the same instant the sound and the percussion of the Bullet is
heard, as if the very Bullet had caused that Sound; which doubtless you shall
find to be true as I did if you try: although it will be worth the labor to
prove it, not only with that most refined powder, which they are wont to use
who shoot at a mark for a wager, but also with the courser sort of Powder for
great Guns, that it may be observed whether it causes any sensible difference
of the swiftness.

Whatsoever powder you use, the least swiftness of the Bullet, may be defined
in the first second an hundred, the greatest 150 fathoms, if you put but so
much Powder into the Gun as is necessary for a good shot; for if you put in but
a few grains which can scarce shoot the Bullet off, another thing is to be said.

I add that a Bullet shot vertically or Perpendicularly upright from the
aforesaid Gun in its ascent and descent, spends 36 seconds: which if it spend
so much time in its Rise as in its fall, and that a heavy body descending in
the time of 18 seconds always keeps the same proportion in hastening its
descent which it keeps in the four first seconds, the Vertical ascent shall be
648 fathoms, forasmuch as a Bullet of six pound Weight of that Gun, which the
Illustrious Knight Hugenius caused to be shot off at the Hague upon my request,
in its ascent in the time of 16 seconds passed over 512 fathoms, which falling,
pierced three foot into the Earth.

But two things there are which may lessen the space of the ascent; first, that
perhaps the bullet may not spend so much time in its ascent as in its descent,
because Arrows in ascending pass over the same way in three seconds of time
that in descending they do in five seconds: furthermore should we imagine to
shoot with the mouth of the Gun toward the Earth, the Bullet would pierce
deeper into the Earth, than by its mere fall, as it happens in Arrows: whence
there arises in me no small suspicion that the eyes in the ascent of the Bullet
are deceived, to wit that the Bullet was even falling when it was yet esteemed
to ascend: which also may be imagined of Arrows, which perhaps had began to
descend when they should seem to be inverted, that the point which went before
ascending should likewise descending antecede: which you may conclude of from
the small blow of the Bullet descending, unless you may contend that the stroke
made by the Bullet shot upright from the mouth of the Gun and falling upon the
Earth very near, is greater indeed than the stroke of the same Bullet shot from
the greatest height, and that not by reason of the greater swiftness, but by
reason of the air so unawares intercepted and oppressed, that it may much
better turn over or bore through the Earth, than when it is prepared for the
last motion by the Bullet falling slowly.

Which indeed can be known by Rocks and Mountains 600 fathoms high, to wit, one
standing on the top shall observe what time the Bullet that is shot off at the
foot of the Mountain, shall spend in coming to the top or any other place of
the Mountain, and a sign being given shall warn the leveller of the Gun of the
time, or from it shall learn the time of the ascent and descent: from which
cutting off the time of the ascent shall conclude how much shorter it shall be
in the time of the descent; which also may be observed by an iron Bullet
red-hot shot off in the night, whilst it can be seen light to the greatest
height: however it is I think fit to add the observation of that Holland Gun,
which being levelly or horizontally shot off, carried a Bullet of six pounds
398 paces, before it first touched the Earth, taking a pace for three foot;
after this Space it made eight leaps, and at length it ceased at 1750 paces: we
have here expressed the distance between each leap, as likewise the distance of
each grazing from the Gun.

Paces. The passage in the air was -- 398 392 The first leap -- 790 275 The
second leap -- 1065 179 The third leap -- 1244 150 The fourth leap -- 1394 81
The fifth leap -- 1475 73 The sixth leap -- 1548 73 The sixth leap -- 1548 78
The seventh leap -- 1626 124 The eighth leap -- 1750

Moreover a middle range of 45 degrees was 3225 paces, whose half if we take it
for an upright or vertical shot, will be 3225 foot, or 537 fathoms, for which
before we counted only 512. Hence it comes to pass that we may judge that a
vertical shot in the ascent does not proceed by the same or equal and
proportionable degrees of swiftness, by which it falls in its descent, for at
least there are wanting 25 fathoms, by which 512 differ from 537, although that
way of him that levelled the Gun, in counting by common paces, restrained to no
rule, cannot be so certain, but that the other may differ from it, so that it
cannot with undoubted certainty be reduced to our defined fathoms.

Whoever therefore would certainly try, let him have a chain or wheel for
counting of fathoms or any other determinate measures, as is done in the
passage of the league of 2500 fathoms from the Bastilian Tower erected right
over against Port Saint Anthony as for as the walls of the Vicennian Castle
that first meet.

There remains one thing that may diminish the upright height, to wit, that
the Bullet spends more seconds in the descent than it ought, after it comes to
the point of equality, after which it does not any more augment its own
swiftness: so that not only 16 seconds are to be reckoned for the descent of
the Holland Bullet, but perhaps 20, and 12 are to be counted for the ascent.

For although in moderate heights of 40 or 50 fathoms, the access to the point
of equality, in leaden Bullets may not be sufficiently observed, it does not
thence follow that it comes not to such a point, in greater heights of an
hundred or more fathoms; yea experience proves the Contrary.

Let there be taken a Corken Bullet which is at least 70 times lighter than a
leaden one, yet both them almost in the same time make a three foot space,
although perhaps the Cork attains its point of equality within 50 foot.

But whether a leaden Bullet 70 times heavier, can pass over a seventy fold
space, that is, 3500 foot, before it comes to its point of equality, which
little differs from the height to which Bullets arrive that are vertically shot
out of Guns, although I cannot yet conclude, yet it seems probable enough to
me. Moreover the force will never be augmented after the arival at that point,
if the greater force shall be argued from only the greater swiftness. But note,
it has been observed by a Noble man who related it to me, that a field Gun 18
foot long, and cut shorter foot by foot, did always curry its shot the
further till it came to be eleven foot long, and then it began not to give so
great a Range.

To which may be added from the experience of some in small Guns, that if it be
over charged with Powder, part of the Powder will blow out of the Gun without
firing. Morever if the Bullet be not quite rammed home it will pierce the
further, and the Gun recoyle the more.

Also that where the Gun is found most to furr with many shootings off with
Powder, there it ought to be cut off, the remainder being the proper length
requisite.

It has been related that a ship becalmed and tormented with the Cushee Piece
of a Galley, that lay in a manner out of shot, was at the last reached by the
industry of a Mariner, who wrapping up a much lesser sized Bullet than the Bore
of the Gun made use of required, in a good Wad did shoot as far as the Galley,
thereby retaliating the Injury received.

Of the Depression of shot below the Mark.
I Have often took care that a Gun should be shot off commonly called an
Harquebuz, at the space of an hundred fathoms from the mark, that is, six
hundred foot, which make three hundred common paces, and found that the Bullet
was depressed under the mark-line eight or ten foot, which would scarce have
made a greater space, if it had fallen perpendicularly down at the same moment
of time it was left off.

Again at the the Marquess of Doraisons, a Bullet shot off, in the space of
five seconds of time fell 27 fathoms beneath its horizontal line or mark; and
whereas perchance the rising of the dust, and the perceiving of it might make
us lose a second of time, and that we retain only four seconds, then in each
second the Bullet should be carried 157 fathoms (surely not more) yet it ought
to have descended 32 fathoms, if it descends so much horizontally shot off as
it would naturally fall were it not shot off, and therefore it either loses
some thing of its descent by reason of its being shot off, or in running 360
fathoms, it spends not so much as four whole seconds of time, but rather about
3.

We add that something is by this means abated from the swiftness of the fall
for the space of 27 fathoms which the Bullet in shooting off did descend, or
fall below the mark: so that all things considered, I would not as yet start
from that opinion, which holds that two heavy bodies, to wit, two Bullets,
whereof one may fall perpendicularly from its place above the Horizon, Of this
there is a controversy between Borellius who published a Treatise de vi
percussionis, the which was writ against by Honorato Fabri in his Dialogues of
Motion.
and the other be forced horizontally, shall both in the same moment of time
arrive at the ground or Horizon: for example, if the pit of the aforesaid
Marquess be 27 fathoms deep, as indeed it is, if I rightly remember, or also a
little deeper, 32. a Bullet shot into the fields enclosed between the Sextian
waters, will hit the horizon, the same moment, that the like Bullet falling,
shall the superior superfice of the aforesaid point of the water.

There is another thing that I may suspect, whether or no the surveyour has
accurately enough measured the horizontal depression; however it be, you see
with what difficulties experiments are hedged in, and how much natural
knowledge is indebted to them, who are enriching the same with exact
Observations.

But note that the air that meets the bullet that is shot off does so much
hinder or diminish its motion, as much as a wind of the same swiftness with the
Ball, blowing continually against the same in a vacuum.

For is it not the same impediment, or destruction of the same force, if the
bullet beats the air or is beaten of it? But when I said it was known by
experience, that water does so much the more descend, by how much the slower it
moves horizontally, and the same may seem to be concluded of other projected
heavy bodies; I advertise that observations are not yet made so exact as that
any thing of this nature should be too positively asserted.

Of the Impediment of the Air.
IN regard that Bullets shot from Guns do about the end of their motion utter a
more vehement noise or hissing than about the middle or onwards; there is no
doubt to be made but that they move more slowly, and the force decreasing as
the swiftness, Mersennus concludes that the Curved range line described by a
Bullets motion cannot exactly describe a Parabola, but however the Theory is
tolerable, admiting the first violence to move in the touch line of a Parobola,
and it is likely the greater Mountures cause the greatest difference, because,
there is so much the more Air beaten and removed by the passage of the shot.

But yet it is most hard to find out, how much the Air hinders; for although it
seems to hinder so much, as the wind agitating the air with the same swiftness,
strikes upon the Bullet shot off; yet we are Ignorant of the force of that wind
compared with the force of the Bullet shot off; unless we may appeal to our
other experiments in which is shown that the air is at least a thousand times
lighter than water: and seeing that a leaden Bullet is eleven times heavier
than water of the same bulk, a leaden Bullet will exceed the weight of the air
11000 times; and therefore the air agitated by the same swiftness of the
Bullet, meeting with the bullet, seems to take away the 1100 part of the
swiftness from the Bullet shot off.

Which impediment truly is so light, that in the description of the Parabole it
scarce ought to be considered.

Those things are very excellent which the famous Torricellius has set forth
in his approved Treatise, to which Mersennus referrs his Reader.

Experiments OF SHOOTING. Wherein is explained various observations concerning
Guns; And what might happen to bullets shot off in a vacuity, diverse ways
compared with those which are obstructed in the Air.
WHenas I made trial about the shooting of Bullets in Guns only of an
indifferent bigness (which we commonly call Harquebuzes) which in the ascent
and descent together spend 22, 23 or 24 Seconds of time, Peter Petil a man most
skilful and accurate in observations whilst he lived at Francopolis, found (at
my request) the Range of a shot, out of a great gun, at the elevation of 22
degrees, whose iron Bullet weighed 33 pounds and, to be 1900 fathoms, which the
Bullet flew or passed over in the space of 20, 21 or 22 seconds; the Gun being
placed at 8 fathoms in the Castle above ground or Horizon; from which place a
Bullet of 12 pounds which so many pounds of gun-pouder shot off at the
elevation of 16 degrees above the horizon, spent in the air 16 seconds.

Besides, a Culverine of 12 foot long and horizontally levelled being 6 fathom
high above the Horizon of the ocean and shot off, the Bullet, whose diameter
was almost five Inches, continued 8 seconds of time in the air; when yet
another Bullet whose diameter was 6 Inches and, also horizontally shot off out
of an other Gun 12 ^^ot and long, spent only 6 seconds in the air; another Gun
shot off at the Elevation of 1^ degrees, its Bullet spent 24 seconds in the Air.

An Iron Culverine of 10 foot long, whose Bullet, had a diameter of almost four
inches, horizontally levelled, and standing 9 fathoms above the surface or brim
of the Sea, spent only three seconds, in its horizontal Range, after which
grazing five times above the Ocean, spent four other seconds.

Three days also before the taking of Theoud, Robervallus our Geometer
observed, the Bullets of Guns shot off from the City against our Soldiers, for
the most part to spend only 14 seconds of time in the air, after which there
was a hissing increased more and more until the force and motion of the Bullet
was almost quite extinguished, and that after the shot had flew almost half a
league.

Which being supposed it may be Theorically concluded, how great the shoots
ought to be at whatsoever elevation above the horizon, if they be in such
Proportion one to another, as shots in a Vacuity, no Medium hindering; that is,
for example, if the range of 45 degrees be double the height of the
Perpendicular or vertical shot in a space not hindering, so is the range of 45
in the air to the vertical in the air, and so of the rest; which observations
only will teach; which yet are most difficult in the greater sort of Guns or
Bows, especially the perpendicular, whose height we can scarce certainly know,
unless some ^ock might be found high enough, to whose top, or some certain
place, the Bullet or Arrow may come, the height of which top or place we may
afterward measure.

No Towers surely are high enough; and by the time of the descent or fall of
the Bullet, to conclude a place may be found to which bullets, darts, or other
things that are cast upright or vertically ascending, do come, does therefore
fail, because they do not observe the same rule of swiftness in descending; as
is evident from darts, to which seeing it happens in their ascent or rise of 50
fathoms to be slackned in their descent or fall, something like this may be
also thought to happen to Bullets, to wit, when they descend from the height of
a thousand fathoms.

But you may avoid these difficulties: for if from that rock in the Dolphinate,
whose height it is said is 600 fathoms or more, a stone or bullet of Iron or any
other matter be let fall, Experiments of this kind the Reader will doubtless
find, as also others about Pendulums in the Opuscula Posthuma of I. Bap.
Batiani.
the time of its falling being noted, as for example, if in the space of 18
seconds it fall from the height of 648 fathoms (as truly it should fall, if the
spaces be in Duplicate ratio, or as the square of the times in the whole
descent) then we have rightly judged before of the vertical altitude or
perpendicular shot (which the Bullet of an indifferent Gun reaches) that is the
height of 288 fathoms; which yet I cannot credit; otherwise the middle shot or
range of 45 degrees of that Gun at least would be double to that perpendicular
or vertical one, that is to say, it would be 576 fathoms, whenas I found it not
400 fathoms.

Besides these observations I shall add those which the industrious Galeus an
Engineer to diverse Dukes in whose presence he made them, writ with his own hand
and gave me, which that you may more easily understand, let the greater Gun K,
which we commonly call a Cannon, be parallel to the Horizon, and let the eye be
taking aim by the points I and O, the horizontal shot being supposed O P, or in
the figure beneath, S X, or, T V, he says that the remainder of the rang which
bends till it touches the horizon in the point l, is almost equal to the
horizontal shot, that is, that there is almost as much space made by the bullet
from that point, from which it begins to bend toward the horizon, until it
touch it, as it had made before the bending of it.

cannon range

But now let us suppose that horizontal shot OP, or TV, removed to the lower
figure in which let AB be the horizontal plain, and let the the aforsaid
horizontal shot be AI, Galeus contends that the middle range of 45 degrees,
which is the longest of all, is eleven fold the length of the horizontal shot
OP, or AI: And in those Guns which are half the weight of the foregoing greater
Guns, to be in respect of AI, as 10 and is to 1, and in lesser Guns as 10 to 1
that is our figure, as A B in respect of A I; in which the middle range is
AGEB; for that is the middle range which passes through the middle of the
quadrant ph 5, which they call the sixth point, because it is the middle part
of the half circumference A, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, divided
into 12 equal parts; which joined to the quadrant ph 5, may be useful for
levelling the gun at any elevation above the horizon, if it shall be divided
not only into 12 parts, but also into an 180 degrees.

And hence he concludes that the dead or exact Horizontal Shot or range, that
is in the figure, R l I to be in Proportion to the middle range as 1 to 6; or
in lesser Guns, as one to five; which dead Horizontal ranges is to the range of
an Elevation of one degree, as five to six, or more exactly as 55 to 67, or as
14 to 17.

But when the recoyling of the greater Gun is hindered, the dead Horizontal
range will be greater by a seventh, eighth, ninth, or tenth part, than that
range which is made with recoyling; in lesser Guns it will be a twelfth or a
fifteenth part less.

Moreover he asserts that the middle range A 6 E does proceed righton without
arching by the line A G, which may be almost equal to A 5, that is, almost 5
fold or 4 the Horizontal shot: then not only that it does ascend to the point
D, so that the greatest height of the middle range may be fourfold the
Horizontal, and be over the line AC sixfold the same which some affirm; but he
by observation says is false against Tartaglia; affirming that the greatest
altitude must be F E, answering the point 7, that is seven distances of
Horizontal range from the gun A, that FE may be almost five fold the Horizontal
range.

Galeus did likewise well conjecture that the Curve for the middle range does
come near to the Curve of an hyperbolical or parabolical line, and that not by
force of reason, but only from observations. Moreover the greatest range at
forty five degrees elevation he makes 16200 foot, that is 2700 of the French
fathoms; who because he used feet less than ours, you might account it for 2500
fathoms, that the said range may answer to our league, and that the bullet
might pass through the air in near half a minute, or 30 seconds of time: and
because the dead Horizontal range may be 1/^ of the utmost, it will be 2700
foot or 450 fathoms, which being supposed the Horizontal range will scarce
exceed 200 fathoms.

Mersennus in this place has published a table of ranges made by the said
Galeus, but it being apprehended that the same is not so near the truth as that
of Torricellio, or another here published in English by the ancient well known
Teacher of the Mathematics Mr. Henry Bond; that the same may be preserved and
become more common in use we have inserted the same.

Two Tables of RANGES According to Degrees of MOVNTVRE. By H. Bond.
The first Table.
degrees degrees 1 8758 47 2113 2 7813 48 2150 3 7077 49 2189 4 6482 50 2230 5 5991 51
2272 6 5581 52 2317 7 5234 53 2363 8 4932 54 2412 9 4669 55 2463 10 4440 56
2516 11 4237 57 2572 12 4055 58 2633 13 3889 59 2695 14 3741 60 2762 15 3606 61
2832 16 3483 62 2908 17 3370 63 2989 18 3266 64 3075 19 3279 65 3168 20 3080 66
3268 21 2996 67 3376 22 2978 68 3493 23 2845 69 3621 24 2776 70 3762 25 2712 71
3916 26 2651 72 4086 27 2593 73 4276 28 2538 74 4489 29 2486 75 4732 30 2437 76
5006 31 2391 77 5303 32 2344 78 5690 33 2300 79 6263 34 2260 80 6641 35 2221 81
7274 36 2183 82 8059 37 2146 83 9061 38 2111 84 10430 39 2077 85 12330 40 2044
86 15140 41 2012 87 19850 42 1981 88 29250 43 1952 89 37480 44 2007 90 00000 45
2041 46 2076 Finis. The Second Table.
degrees degrees 1 1.142 47 4.736 2 1.280 48 4.653 3 1.413 49 4.570 4 1.543 50 4.487 5
1.669 51 4.403 6 1.792 52 4.318 7 1.911 53 4.234 8 2.028 54 4.148 9 2.142 55
3.062 10 2.253 56 3.976 11 2.361 57 3.889 12 2.467 58 3.800 13 2.572 59 3.712
14 2.674 60 3.622 15 2.774 61 3.532 16 2.872 62 3.440 17 2.968 63 3.347 18
3.063 64 3.253 19 3.156 65 3.158 20 3.248 66 3.061 21 3.339 67 2.963 22 3.428
68 2.864 23 3.516 69 2.762 24 3.603 70 2.659 25 3.689 71 2.554 26 3.774 72
2.448 27 3.858 73 2.339 28 3.941 74 2.228 29 4.024 75 2.114 30 4.105 76 1.998
31 4.186 77 1.880 32 4.267 78 1.758 33 4.347 79 1.634 34 4.426 80 1.506 35
4.505 81 1.375 36 4.584 82 1.241 37 4.662 83 1.102 38 4.740 84 0.960 39 4.818
85 0.812 40 4.895 86 0.661 41 4.972 87 0.504 42 5.050 88 0.342 43 5.127 89
0.174 44 4.985 90 0.000 45 4.902 46 4.819 Finis.

The use of the first Table, by Example.

1. Suppose a piece curry a shot 763. paces at 13. degrees of Mounture, What is
the Horizontal Range? Multiply the Number against 13. degrees, which is 3889.
by 763. and from the product cut off 2 figures toward the right hand, leaves
the paces of the Horizontal Range desired.

The use of the second Table, by Example.

2. Suppose a piece Curry a shot 374 paces at the Horizontal Range; How many
paces shall it Curry at 16. degrees Mounture? Multiply the Number against 16.
degrees, which is 2.872 of this second Table, by 374. and from the product cut
off 3. figures toward the right hand, leaves the Number of paces desired.

3. Having the paces of any degree of Mounture to find how far that shall curry
a shot at a greater degree of Mounture. Example.

Suppose a piece Curry a shot 543 paces at 11. degrees Mounture; How may paces
shall it curry at 19. degrees Mounture? First multiply the Number against 11.
in the first Table, which is 4237, by 543. and Multiply that product again by
the Number found in the second Table against 19. degrees, which is 3.156. And
from the Last product cut off 7. figures toward the right hand, and the
remainder are the Number of paces desired.

1. By the pieces Mounture, and the paces she curries a shot at that Mounture,
to know how many she curries at level Range, by the direction aforesaid.

2. Having the level Range of a piece, to find how many paces that shall curry
at a Mounture given, by the directions aforesaid.

3889 763 11667 23334 27223 296 (7307 2.872 374 11488 20104 8616 1074 (128

3. Having the paces that a piece Curries at one Mounture, to find how many
paces it should curry at a greater Mounture, by the directions aforesaid.

4237 543 12711 16948 21185 2300691 2300691 3.156 13804146 11503455 2300691
6902073 726 (0980796

The Ranges of Spouts or Squirts compared with the Ranges of Bullets shot out
of Guns.
FOr as much as a Bullet spends a greater time in its fall than its rise, like
darts; or the descent is not so swift, that it should always hasten in that
degree whereby in three or four seconds, we have found its swiftness to be
increased, which I suppose to be confirmed from this reason, because a bullet
descending cannot have so great a power to smite, as it has ascending, so that
approaching the Earth it is not so swiftly moved, as when it comes from the
mouth of the Gun, for when the swiftness of any thing projected is equal, it
equally strikes.

Therefore I account Spouts useful, seeing they bring us to the knowledge of
shooting, of which otherwise we could not judge, by reason of the difficulty of
trial which is most easily discerned in tubes: for because any one may compare
in a little time what ever shot he pleases with another, to wit, Former Figure.
a middle Range with a vertical, or Perpendicular one as to time and height,
that this may be the better understood, in the following figure let the Cock be
A above the Horizon A B, and let the altitude of the tube be A 12, whose
vertical Squirt is A ph, Experience teaches us that the length of the middle
Squirt A B, is double to the Vertical A ph.

But to what height the middle Squirt ranges, whether to D or E, which also you
may understand of Bullets shot from Guns, there is none hitherto has observed:
but it is one half of the vertical ph A, wherefore the point D or E is higher
than it ought to be, and whatever is said by the ingenious, may be corrected by
spouts.

There are other things also that want inquiry into; for example, how it can
come to pass, that a bullet shot out of the mouth of a Gun from O to P comes
right on, when in that time it flying along the line O P a hundred fathoms
ought to fall toward the center of the Earth 12 foot, if the horizontal motion
of a thing violently projected hinders not its natural motion, as many imagine
in a vacuity or place that does not impede.

For although that can partly be explained by the diversity of the lines, which
is found in Guns, to wit the line R X Y, which follows the outside of the Gun,
and that which they call Linea animae S Z, which passes thorough the axis of
the hollow M N to the aforesaid side, is in no wise parallel: because, to wit,
the bullet K or H levelling at L may ascend to the side line I L, or the point
S passing to Z may ascend to the point X of the side line R Y: yet another
thing is to be added, when what is aforesaid is not true, when the eye of the
shooter takes not aim by the line I L or R X but by the line M N or S X: for
then the bullet K does not descend so much, as it would if it were left to it
self in the air.

Add, that the water out of the Cock fitted to the Horizontal Squirt does not
descend so much, as it would if left to it self; for it is manifest by
Experience, that the Horizontal Squirt of 30 foot, which continues two seconds,
descends not so much as eight foot, when according to the law of bodies of
equal weight, it should be 48, or at least by reason of the resistance of the
air breaking the water it ought to descend 30 foot.

FINIS.
men raising a wall VERSTERCKTE VESTING Uytgevonden In velerley voorvallen, en
geobserveert in dese laeste Oorloogen, so in de VEREENIGDE NEDERLANDEN, als in
VRANCKRYCK, DVYTS-LANT, ITALIEN, DALMATIEN, ALBANIEN, en die daer aengelegen
landen, door HENRJCK RVSE, Ingenieur, en Capitein over even Compagnie
voetknechten der Stadt Amsterdam.

to AMSTERDAM, By JOAN BLAEV. MDCLIIII.



To the Honorable, etc. Dr FRANCIS BANNING KOCK, Knight of the Order of S.
Michel, Lord of Purmerlandt, and Ilpendam, etc. CORNELIUS BICKER, Lord of
SWIETEN, etc. JOHN HUYDEKOOPER, Knight, Lord of Maerseveen, etc. Dr NICHOLAS
TULP: RULING BURGAMASTERS Of the City of AMSTERDAM. AS ALSO To the Honorable
LORDS, CORNELIUS DE GRAFF, LORD of Zuydt-Polsbroeck, etc. NICHOLAS CORVER,
Treasurers and old Burgamasters of the said City. AND ANTHONY OETGENS VAN
WAVEREN Knight, Lord of Waveren, etc.

Dr. GERARD

Dr GERARD SCHAEP, Lord of Koerte-hoef, etc. Dr CORNELIUS WITSEN, JOHN VAN DE
POLL; Old Burgamasters.
MY LORDS,
IF this little Treatise which I humbly present to your Lordships, may be
favorably accepted as a pledge of my grateful Acknowledgements, and may beget
in your Lordships a firm belief that my real intentions are to employ my best
endeavors in the discharge of that Trust your Lordships have reposed in me, I
have obtained the utmost of my desires; beseeching your Lordships to consider
more the matter therein contained (which the greatest and wisest of men in all
ages have esteemed as one of the most noble Sciences, and the most necessary
for the settlement and preservation of a flourishing Commonwealth) then the
rough and unpolished style of the Writer, remembering that Soldiers and persons
of my profession (as your Lordships very well know) ought much rather to ponder
their Actions, then to study the needless ornament of Words; as likewise to
rest assured, that the continuation of your Lordships affection toward me,
will not only encourage me to a steadfast and unwearied perseverance in my zeal
for your Service, but likewise to proceed to some other undertakings of the
like nature, for the good and benefit of your City, and of the whole
Commonwealth. And so I remain,

My Honorable, etc. Your Lordships most devoted Servant, H. RUSE.

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
IN the year of our Lord 1639. (being the Fifteenth of my age) having a great
inclination to the Wars, and my Genius leading me principally to the studies of
Fortification, Artillery, Fireworks, Mines, and the like; I was first of all
entertained in the service of the States, where I continued about four years;
during which time I observed with great diligence the Manners and Customs used
in these Countries, as well in the business of Encamping and Retrenching, as in
Erecting their Fortifications. But hearing very much of the French and other
Nations, for their mavelous Address and Dexterity in all Warlike Affairs, I
was extremely desirous to be better acquainted with their ways, as promising my
self to see wonders done by them: Wherefore I went with a Regiment of Walloons
from Mastricht to France, in quality of a Lieutenant; which Regiment was joined
to the Army of the Duke d' Enguin (who was then General of the French) and so
they kept together till the Battle of Frybourg in Brisgow, 1644. where the said
Regiment was wholly routed, and I with many other miserable Wretches shared
together in our Misfortune; however with that Army we reduced the Palatinat by
the Rhyne, Frankendal only excepted. Being since returned into France, I had
the advantage of seeing there many places well Fortified, as also in Burgundy,
Lorraine, and Germany, and did examine very curiously their Principles of War,
together with the various Methods of Fortifying, attacquing, defending, and
embattailing their Armies, which often happened between the French and Germane,
against the Imperialists and Bavarians, to which we were not altogether
strangers. Thus having seen whatever I thought necessary in those Countries, I
assisted at the Battle of Nortlingen, in and near the Village of Alderheym
1645. where the Duke d' Enguin was General of the French, V. C. Tureyn of the
Waymarians, and Merci of the Bavarians, which last was slain in the Fight.
After this, having assisted in the Battle of Herbrausen near Mariedal, I
resolved to seek my fortune in some other Country, to see what was there to be
done, the French and German Customs and Warlike practices being sufficiently
known to me already. Consequently in the year 1646. hearing that the Turks had
invaded Candia, and declared War against the Venetians, I had great
inclinations to follow that War, (besides the curiosity I had to see those
Countries) as being against the most inveterate and irreconcilable enemy of
Christendom. Whereupon I left the German Camp (for I was then come from the
French to the Waymarians) where I had served for the space of three years, in
diverse employments, and endured many hard and tedious Marches, hazarded my self
often in bloody Battles and famous Rencounters, with the loss of most of my
Comrades and Fellow Soldiers, who were either slain in fight, or otherwise
lost their lives in the Service. From thence I first steered my course to
Helvetia, and being arrived at Zurich, I met with the Venetian Ambassador, and
other German Officers, with whom I made an agreement to levy German Soldiers,
and to lead them over the Alps into Italy (Bergamo in Lombardy being the place
appointed for our Rendezvous) where having been a while, and observed the most
eminent Fortifications on the Continent, we got Letters to go to Venice, from
whence some of us were sent for Candia, others for Corfu, and I with some
German Forces for Dalmatia, which was already invaded and taken by the Turks of
Bosna, Macedonia, and the Grecians, who made great preparations to assault the
Strongholds in those parts. Here, by the entreaty of Foscolo the Venetian
Ambassador, I took upon me the employment of Engineer, and had many strange
Adventures, too numerous to be here recited. About five years after, Lunardo
Foscolo, then General in Dalmatia, was chosen Generalissimo in Candia, who
desired me to accompany him thither. But when we came to Venice, his journey
was retarded, and I employed my time in curing some Distempers I had gotten in
the Wars, in the Paduan Baths; and afterward returned to Venice, where I found
the General, having got leave from the Senate, resolved to continue that summer
at Venice. Whereupon being desirous to visit my friends and relations in my
native Country, I took my leave, and went for Germany, and by the way had an
opportunity of seeing some Fortifications of the Duke of Bavaria, and some
others, which before I might not, because I served their enemies. Being in the
Low Countries, I had an opportunity of offering my service to my Lords the
Burgamasters of Amsterdam, in whose service I am at present employed, and hope,
as occasion shall offer, I shall be able so to improve my talent, as to bring
to light that which may be for the advantage of this great City, and the whole
Country. In the mean time I shall begin with this small Treatise, the Subject
whereof is the doctrine of Fortifications; not that I intend to discourse of
the first Rudiments, but only to manifest unto those who understand this
Science, the weakness of Modern Fortifications, and how the defects may be
supplied, and the Works made incomparably stronger, as well the Royal
Fortresses, as the Outworks, and all this with as small cost as ordinarily
other Works are erected. Which expedients are no Chimeras or idle Fancies, but
such as have been sufficiently disputed of and thoroughly examined. For I have
made it my business to observe very strictly the proper function of each
distinct part of a Fortification, and that not in a Closet, but abroad, and in
the Field, together with the manifold ways of improving them; and have
discoursed and debated the same with the most excellent Engineers of this our
age. I do not mean with such who attacque Cities by a fireside or in a
chimney-corner, but with such who have been trained up among the Canons and
Muskets: nor do I mean with our ordinary Mathematicians, who think that Wars,
and all affairs of this world ought to be regulated unchangeably after their
rules. Neither do I hereby in any wise despise or under value Mathematical
Learning; for on the contrary, I lay that for my foundation and groundwork,
having for my own particular studied it with great affection and delight. But
because I have found by experience, that the Principles of War are not always
limited to Mathematical Rules, therefore I do not begin this Treatise with
Demonstrations, but declare my opinion to the lovers of this kind of learning
as plainly and as briefly as I can; not thinking it necessary to show how to
erect a Fortification, but only to point at some general Amendments, which
will, I doubt not, be very grateful to all ingenious Students. And in case
there be any thing found which they cannot approve of, they will highly oblige
me whenever they please to declare the same, and to propound expedients for the
reforming of whatever is amiss. But forasmuch as I do not doubt but that this
little Treatise will find acceptance, I shall God willing communicate unto the
world my particular reflections and observations, for Attacquing, Defending,
Artillery, Mines, Counter-Mines, with all other things relating thereto, as
likewise for the ordering and forming of Battles; all which have been found to
be practicable, and of great use in the late Wars.

THE STRENGTHENING of STRONGHOLDS: INVENTED On several Occasions, and
practiced during the late WARS, as well in the United Provinces, as in France,
Germany, Italy, Dalmatia, Albania, and the Neighboring Countries.

By HENRY RUSE, Engineer, and Captain of a Foot-Company belonging to the City
of AMSTERDAM.

Translated out of the Low-Dutch-Copy, by His Majesty's Command.

In the Savoy, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1668.

THE STRENGTHENING OF STRONGHOLDS: INVENTED On several Occasions, and
practiced in the late Wars, as well in Holland, as in France, Germany, Italy,
Dalmatia, Albania, And the Neighboring Countries;
BY HENRY RVSE.
AFter I had thoroughly considered the best Methods of Fortification practiced
in the Countries before mentioned, I found that none of them had made better
use of Situations (as to the Artificial part) then the United Provinces.
Forasmuch as they have not only very well designed and contrived their
Fortresses, but have also placed them so advantagiously, that by the
overflowing of Waters (which they can by the opening of Sluices let in or out as
they please) they have rendered the greatest part of the Works impregnable. I do
not say but that in other Countries are also found very sufficient Fortresses,
and well contrived; but there has been a necessity in these Provinces (where
they have had to deal with so potent an Enemy) to use greater caution and
circumspection then elsewhere, and to make choice of the best Fortifications,
and yet with no great charge, being made of Earth only, which of all Materials
I hold to be the best for this purpose; whereas in other Countries, especially
in Italy, they are of opinion, that the outsides of their Works ought to be
altogether of Stone, and afterward cut or pared, which cannot be done without
excessive charge. And yet notwithstanding all their endeavors, they have not
been able so to contrive their Strongholds, but that the best of them, if
accessible, are taken in a short time, being hardly tenable for three Months,
to the astonishment of the World, as examples do abundantly testify. This has
been the cause why many Military Architects have tried all ways and means to
supply those Defects, of which I have seen many Conceits, but in my judgment
altogether impracticable; which has encouraged me to improve my own
Observations in all Occurrences, and earnestly to mind each part of the
Fortification, of what use it might be, and whether it were able to perform
that, for which it was ordained and intended. And having discovered very many
Errors, especially in the Modern Flanques and Outworks, I did debate my
Observations very particulary with many Engineers of the greatest Practice and
Renown; but never met with any whose judgment I so well approved, as that of a
certain noble Italian, who having had several Employments, as well in Germany
and the Low Countries, as likewise in the French Wars, had carefully improved
all opportunities and advantages of gaining Knowledge and Experience. With this
Gentleman I therefore made a particular Acquaintance and Friendship, and we did
mutually communicate and compare together our Observations, till such time as
we had found out, and agreed upon such a Method, as seemed to us to be of all
other the safest, and yet practicable with the least expense; according to
which Method, almost all considerable Fortifications might without difficulty
be redressed. The truth is, this Method is something near that which shall
hereafter be discoursed of: For having looked yet more narrowly into this
matter, and examined it with greater diligence and curiosity, I did only (as I
found cause) alter something of that our first design. I do not here undertake
to make Accessible places impregnable, since all that is made by man, may by
man be again destroyed; for the Attacques being carried on upon a sure foot,
and the Approaches being managed with skill and judgment, if in the mean time
no relief come, even the strongest places must at length yield up to the
Besiegers. My intention is only so to contrive Works, that they may resist
much longer then ordinarily they do, that so the Besiegers may be wasted and
consumed, either by ill weather or some other accidents. (For by lengthening of
time, opportunity is given to the Besieged to get relief; or in the mean while
to Attaque some other places in the Enemies custody, and so to make him quit
his design;) which will be a sufficient recompense for the pains and charge,
which I conceive to be but little more then ordinary, in case the Work be
managed by an experienced Artist, as will sufficiently appear by what hereafter
follows. In the mean time I shall propound some general Rules or Principles of
Fortifications, approved and owned by many skilful Captains and Engineers.

The Maxims or general Rules which are observed in the Modern Fortifications.
1. There ought to be no point of the whole Fortification undiscovered or
unflanqued, and that from several places of Defense.

2. The Lines defending ought to be longer then the Lines defended, or at least
as long.

3. A Regular Fortification is very much stronger then an Irregular.

4. The more Bastions a Regular place has, the greater is its Strength and
Defense.

5. A Fortress ought to command all places whatsoever round about.

6. Those parts of a Fortress which are nearest to the Center, ought to command
those that are more remote.

7. Those parts of a Fortification which are at greatest distance from the
Center, ought always to be Commanded by those that are nearest the Center.

8. The Line of Defense Fichante, ought not to be much longer then 60 Rods,
that being the distance ordinarily allowed for the Port of a Musket.

9. The larger the Flanques and Gorges are, the better and stronger they are,
provided the other parts are not prejudiced thereby.

10. Of second Flanques, and Courtine-Flanques, the larger is the better, in
case it cause no disproportion in the other parts of the Fortification.

11. As for the Linea Stringens, (or Line of Defense Secant, which is continued
from the Face to the Courtine) the shorter it is, the better, if the Flanques
be not too much lessened by it.

12. That opening of the Angle of a Bastion is the best, which gives a right
length to the Flanque, second Flanque, and Gorge.

13. The Angle of a Bastion ought not to be less then 60 degrees, nor greater
then a Right Angle, or 90 degrees.

14. The Angle of the Poligone ought not to be less then 90 degrees.

15. The Angle of the Face and Flanque ought to be at least 150 degrees.

16. The Angle of the Courtine and Flanque ought to be evermore 90 degrees, or
a Right Angle.

17. The outward Angle of Defense (or Angle Flanquant) cannot well be too Acute.

18. The inward Angle of Defense ought not to be less then 25 degrees.

19. The proportion between the Courtine and the Face ought to be as 3 to 2, or
as 36 to 24.

20. The Faces should never be longer then the Courtine, nor shorter then one
half of the Courtine.

These are the Maxims and Rules for the structure of most of the Modern
Fortifications, which I hold to be exceeding good and necessary, all but the
16th, which says, That the Angle of the Flanque and Courtine must always be a
Right Angle. As for the reason of that Position, we shall see more hereafter.
For I do assert the contrary, and say, That it ought always to exceed 90
degrees: which Angle is the only thing that makes the difference in the form
of my Ground-Lines from those now in use; besides that, I take greater Parts,
and other Profiles. The truth is, the Flanques are the most considerable parts
of a Fortification, and those wherein lies its chiefest Strength, and therefore
the Structure of those is of so much the greater consequence. But now the
reasons of those who would have the Flanque evermore perpendicular to the
Courtine, are these that follow, viz.

Because all Shots coming from thence fly parallel to the Courtine; and that
by night all parts of the Courtine may be better defended; and that when it is
very dark, the Soldiers holding their Muskets in a right Angle to their
Breasts, must needs hinder the Enemy from approaching the Courtine, as may be
seen in Fig. 1.

These reasons being well scanned and examined, appear so weak, that they are
scarce worth the answering; nevertheless I shall briefly refute them. The first
reason is, because the Shots fly all parallel with the Courtine: whereupon I
say, whether the Flanque be perpendicular to the Courtine or no, the Shots may
for all that fly parallel with the Courtine; for the Soldiers know not how to
make a Right Angle in setting their Muskets. I do also affirm, That only one
Musqueteer can with one Shot clear the whole Courtine at once, and all the rest
must incline to it; for if they do fly parallel, then those who give the
Assaults must have Wings likewise, that so they may be shot in the Air, in case
those within are to defend the upper part of the Wall, or else the Shots must
fly only the height of four or five foot above the Horizon (as out of the
Faussebray) that so they may keep parallel to the Horizon; whereas
contrariwise; the Flanques in these Fortifications are eighteen or twenty foot
high, and all Shots go downwards, and therefore hit the Horizon in one place
only. The principal duty of a Musqueteer is, that by nightime he turn
himself with his Musket toward the place where he hears a noise, or sees
fire, or something else; to which neither the Perpendicularity nor the
Obliquity of Flanques can give any advantage, or become the least hindrance.
And these parallel-shots are only Imaginary, found out upon the Ground-Lines,
which in the Profile come far otherwise, as Fig. 1. Number. 1. shows. The
Musquetteer A standing upon the Flanque, which is Perpendicular to the
Courtine, clears the upper part of it: in case the Musquetteer B do the same,
and Shoots parallel with A; but then his Bullet flies so far from the Wall,
as he himself stands off from his fellow; and so likewise all the rest that
stand along in the same Line. Whence it follows, That those who assault, must
be upon the Wing, or in the Air, or else are not to be hit by these
parallel-shots: but let the others without the Point A, as C, D, etc. not Shoot
parallel with A, then their Shots cannot hit either the Courtine or Moat, or
Bridge, but in one place only; which in an Oblique Flanque of an equal height,
will be the same. Now as for my Flanques, I order them after another Method,
and therefore they are of far greater Advantage then the former, or any other
that were ever yet in use, which any Artist may easily conceive, when he
vieweth only the Figure, although no Explanation or Animadversion were made
upon it, in case he will but declare his judgment without partiality,
according to right reason, and the practice of War.

The Flanques or Defending-Lines are the chiefest part of the Fortification,
and ought therefore to be considered in the first place. They have been altered
several times already, but never with any advantage comparable to what is
obtained by these; which advantage is distributed and has an influence upon all
the parts of the Fortification. The Flanques with Casematts are odious in the
United Provinces, because their Orillons could not stand, unless they were
Walled up with Stone, which is too chargeable; as likewise by their Cutting and
Retiring of the Flanques mounted with Canon, the entrance of the Bulworks came
to be too little, which in my Work is otherwise. Those who view my Bulworks,
and do not understand the Profiles, may also imagine, that they are made with
Casematts; but it is very far from that, and there is something else in it,
which hereafter shall be sufficiently declared and explained: only let no man
flatter himself with an opinion, that forasmuch as so many brave Captains and
Engineers have employed the best of their understandings and endeavors to
arrive at the utmost perfection of this Art of Fortification, it cannot be, but
that they have attained unto it: Whereas in the late Wars it has been
observed, and is daily seen, that the best Fortresses, made after the manner
aforesaid, can scarce resist so much as two Months; and it is altogether
needless to produce Examples of that which so many Histories do attest.

Besides all this, we are to know, that the bravest Captains and Engineers of
this Age knew very well the imperfection of the Modern Flanques, and therefore
they have made it their business to think of it, and the truth is, many have
conferred with me about it; but I did not find the Inventions propounded by
them, practicable in all places: and in this Country it has not been minded,
because the Spanish did seldom or never Attacque any place of consequence with
an industrious force; but being Besieged in any of their own places, did easily
Surrender it, without troubling themselves much with the knowledge of
Engineership. But I shall leave this Subject, and come to my purpose, which is
not to teach the Grounds or first Rudiments of Fortification, but only to
Instruct the Ingenious Lovers of that Art, how to reform those errors which in
these late furious and industrious Wars have been rightly discovered in the
Modern Fortifications. I style them furious and industrious, because no History
gives a relation of any War that was carried on with greater fury, or of any
Cities that were taken with greater industry.

In the sequel of this Discourse, I shall manifest the Errors of Modern
Fortification, and in order thereunto, I shall begin first from the
Ground-Lines, and propound a part of a Regular Fortress of Eleven Bulworks,
according to the practice of Friday and other Modern Mathematicians, whose
Method I esteem to be much better then those of former Ages. But before I
proceed, the Enemies of Strongholds ought in the first place to be known,
which are Sappes, Spades, Pikes, Canon, Mines, and Muskets, managed by
Soldiers, and Commanded by skillful Captains and Engineers: And forasmuch as
the very same things are to be made use of for Defense, it is necessary that
the Fortresses, to the end they may be convenient for use, should be prepared
for it long before. Now this cannot be practiced in small Works, where after
the springing of one Mine, all is lost. It is also necessary, that the Works
should outwardly be defended, as well with Canon as with Muskets, by a greater
number of men, and from more places of Defense, then can be done by the Enemy
conveniently in his Attacques; And herein consists the virtue of a
Fortification: For if the Enemy do find place to make a Battery of six or eight
Pieces, to break the Flanques; we ought to have a commodious place to plant
Twenty eight or Thirty pieces in Contra-Battery, which will soon ruin the
Enemies Battery, being greater in number, and standing already in advantageous
places; whereas the Enemy must first raise his Battery under the danger of
those Canon-shots. All which being premised and well considered, let us now
inquire whether our Modern Fortresses have this convenience; and if not, where
the difference lies. For example, see Fig. 2. Number. 2. which is part of a Work
of eleven Bastions, and Fortified after the best Modern Method and Practice,
(being Fryday's second Way) and according to the measure of these following
Lines.

A B Polygone exterior 78.13 Long. F G Polygone interior 64.93 Long. F E
Demy-Gorge 14.19 Long. A G Capital-Line 24.40 Long. A C Face 24.00 Long. C D
Flanque 11.91 Long. D E Courtine 36.00 Long. A E Line of Defense Fichante 61.68
Long. A H Line of Defense Secant 48.85 Long.

These Lines have indeed a mutual proportion; but let us now see, what is the
office of each of them respectively. It is evident, that in case this Place
were to be Attacqued, it must be done either by the Faces, or by A C. or B I.
or by some other place at pleasure; for the Courtine D E. cannot be assaulted,
but by breaking in between the two Bulworks, which are as two strong Castles,
which would be too difficult an Enterprise. Therefore it is taken for granted,
that the Face is the weakest part of the Fortification, being most exposed to
the Enemy; and therefore the more Defense it has, the stronger it is. In this
Work the Face is Twenty four Rods, and the Lines that must defend this Face,
being the Flanque and Second-flanque, are the Flanque 11. 91. and the
Second-flanque 14. 19. to be understood upon the Ground-Lines, which are yet
something diminished, when the Wall is raised, by reason of its slooping.
Suppose now, that the bringing over of a Gallery should be hindered by the
Canon where the Moat is full of water, (for where it is dry, they go to work
after another manner) seeing it cannot be done by Muskets only. If therefore
I plant Canon along the whole Flanque D C. because every Piece ought to be
distant from the other Twenty foot (for every Merlon ought to be at least so
thick) there may be placed Six Pieces, it being in all One hundred and nineteen
footlong. It is my opinion, That upon the second Flanque the Canon cannot be
lodged conveniently, by reason of the obliquity of the Muzzel-gates, and the
little Earth, which the Merlons (this is the Mass of earth that is left between
two Gun-holes) have about their ends: For if a Canon-bullet should come against
them, it stops the Holes, and ruins the Parapetts, so that in a short time the
Canon upon this Line are left naked and useless: but if they were there placed,
let graph of wall fortifications Fig 11

us suppose there might stand four; however this place is better for the
Musketeers. And thus upon these Defending Lines of the great Wall, I find
place for Ten Pieces of Canon, which are all of an equal height, and are
discovered from the whole Field that lies over against them; and the Enemy may
Plant against them as many Pieces as he pleases, to Dismount them, which has
been always done in these late Attaques, before ever they came to the Moat; and
after they were past the Counter-scarp, they met with no more stops, but now
and then a Shot by stealth coming either out of the Fausse-bray, or from some
part of the Wall: And therefore the Galleries were brought over with surety,
because it was not possible to make any further resistance; and it is now come
to this, that a place is looked upon in a manner lost, after the Counterscarp
is once gained. What signify then all the charges and expenses of so feeble
and so weak a Work? since it hinders not, but that the Enemy with small pains
may pass the Moats, and undermine the Bulworks; which Mines the Enemy, by
reason of the ill contrivance of the Modern Fausse-brays, can make where he
pleases, after he has got over the Moat; and by reason of the thickness of
the Wall, the Mines can hardly be prevented before they do Execution; (as I
shall make good hereafter.) After which, the Bulwork inwardly is unfit to cut
out sufficient Retrenchments, because it is too little, and closes too
narrowly behind, or else it must be performed with great labor and charges,
and more slowly then can be permitted; for all things ought then to be done
with great expedition: And if the Cut be made about the Gorge, the Front grows
too little, besides that no just form can be given unto it; with many other
inconveniences, too long to be here rehearsed, etc.

The Modern Engineers refer themselves much to the strength of their Outworks,
whereof some nevertheless are very Murthering-Holes, more troublesome then
useful; as I shall prove in due time: but for the present shall only show, how
the faults of Modern Fortifications may be Rectified according to my Method.

It is notorious to every one, who understands Fortifications, according to the
Maxims abovementioned, that the longer the Defending Lines are, the better
they are; and that according to Axiom 9. the longer Flanques and Gorges, are
much the stronger; always provided, they may be made without prejudice to other
parts, or that they be weakened thereby: As also, that the great Bulworks are
better then the little ones, because Retrenchments and Counter-mines may be
made within them; and because more Pieces of Canon and Musketeers may be
placed there, for the defense of the next Bulwork; and because it is fitter for
all other Warlike actions. It is also notorious, that the longest Polygones and
Regular Fortresses contain most room, and therefore ought to be preferred
before the shorter, in case the Lines of Defense in the Fortification do not
exceed the reach of a Musket, that is, 60 or 70 Rods; for after this manner
more space is included with fewer Bulworks, and therefore with less charges.
The other Maxims are also very strictly observed in my Fortifications.

Now to obtain all these Advantages, I describe in Fig. 2. Number. 2. the
Ground-Lines of part of an Eleven-angled Work, according to Friday, as also
part of an Eleven-angled Work, according to my own practice, both of them
Fortified after our second Methods of Fortifying. Which is the most commodious,
and the fittest for Cities of an ordinary extent: but to Fortify very great
Towns, it will be better to make use of the third Method. I shall therefore
show first the difference of Lines in our two Methods, and afterward the
manner of applying the whole Work unto practice. See Number. 2. Fig. 2.

The Length of Lines in an Eleven-angled work Fortified after Fryday's second
Method.
A B Exterior Polygone 78.13 F G Interior Polygone 64.38.... The little
Semi-diameter 114.26 F E The Gorge 14.19 A G The Capital-Line 24.40 A C The
Face 24.00 C D The Flanque or Shoulder 11.91 D E The Courtine 36.00 A E Line of
Defense Fichante 61.68 A H Line of Defense Secant 48.85 E H Second Flanque
14.19

The Length of Lines, according to my second Method, in a Figure of Eleven
Angles.
A B 90.00 F G 74.03... 131.36 F E 24.00 A G 28.32 A C 27.69 C D 16.00 D E
27.00 A E 64.50 A H 54.00 E H 12.00

Here the difference of Lines is clearly seen; and that my Figure of eleven
Angles contains in the Circuit of its exterior Polygones, 130. 57 more than
that of Fryday's; for his eleven Polygones are 859.43 in length, and my eleven
990, and my Line of Defense is no more than 2.72 longer than his, which is
little or no difference; my Flanques, Gorges, and consequently whole Bulworks
are much larger, and more convenient. My Bulworks-Angle, (or Angle Flanqued) is
equal to his; as also the Angle of the Polygone, and the Angle of the Tenaille,
and the Faces are as long as the Courtines. My Flanques defend the next
Bulworks, Faces and Moats, at right Angles: So that all parts do mutually
defend themselves with great conveniencie. Here it is to be observed, That I do
include very near as much space with nine of my Bulworks, as Friday does with
eleven of his, keeping very near the same Line of Defense; which eases the
Charges very considerably, besides the great Symetry of the Work. And this is
all that concerns the Ground-Lines; the virtue of this Work will be seen by
that which follows. I shall proceed now to the Structure of these
Fortifications, and how the proportions of Lines are to be found. I doubt not,
but there be many Theorici, which understand the use of Fortifications no
otherwise than upon the Paper, who will imagine, that this Work cannot be good,
seeing the Flanques do not (according to the profound Error before mentioned)
stand Perpendicular to the Courtines; not considering what strength the
Bulworks have by this Obliquity, not only those that are next, but also those
that are situated on the other side. For hereby the Bulworks gain at the
entrance upon each Gorge, the length D I, being 8 twice, which is 16 Rods
gained upon both the Gorges, so that the entrance of the Bulwork comes to be
48 Rods. This affords place enough to Lodge upon the Flanques the supposed
Artillery and Soldiers, which I esteem necessary. It affords also room for
the making of Retrenchments, and the Flanques come to be much longer after this
manner, as is proved by the 47 of the first of Euclid. It makes also the great
Line of Defense to keep its due measure, not surpassing the length of 64, which
is the true reach of a Musket. Although my Polygones be considerably longer,
yet the Lines of Defense are not sensibly longer than those of Fryday's, and
others. I am also of opinion, That the Modern Flanques are more for an
imaginary beauty, than to make good the Defense, which notwithstanding is the
main end for which they are made, and wherein consists the strength of
Fortresses.

The Calculation of my great Fortifications, consisting in the little, mean,
and great Royal.
TO do this, I state first my exterior Polygones, after which I regulate the
proportions of the whole Work. For the exterior Polygone of the little Royal, I
take 80, for that of mean Royal 90, and for the exterior Polygone of the great
Royal 100; and I follow the same proportions in the Calculating of my Lines,
which Friday has, that is, making the Courtine to the Face, as 36 to 24, or as
3 to 2; but the difference is, that I take my parts greater, and redress them,
after the first Position is done. This Calculation is done only by the Rule of
Three, thus: Admit there is a place to be Fortified with a Regular
Fortification of four, five, six, or more Angles, and that after the first,
second, or third of my Methods; I take then the Lines of such a Polygone, as
the Fortress should be, that I intend to make, out of Fryday's Tables. For
example, I would make a Square after my first Method; I take then out of the
Tables the length of the Lines; as 24 for the Faces; 36 the Courtines; for the
Gorges 9.23; for the Capital 19.73; for the Flanque 7.74; and so for all the
Lines: these Lines I lay before me, and say, by the Rule of Three, If the
exterior Polygone of a Square of Fryday's, being 82.36, gives me the Courtine
36, what does my exterior Polygone of 80 after the first Method in the great
Royal, give me for my Courtine? and the answer is, 34.97.

Item, the exterior Polygone gives for the Face, according to Friday, 82.36 --
24.

What gives the Polygone of 90? -- Answer. It gives 23.31

graph of wall fortifications Fig. 11.



And so observing the same Rule for a Square, whose exterior Polygone is 80
Rods (as in the Figure of Numb. 1.) there will arise the following proportions
of the Lines, viz.

H G The Courtine 34.97 A I The Face 23.31 C H The Gorge 8.96 C A The
Capital-Line 19.16 H I The Flanque 7.52 H L The second Flanque 6.77 C D The
interior Polygone 52.88 H B The great Line of Defense 59.05 D M The little
Semi-diameter 39.37

N. B.

He who is disposed to Calculate, or who has not these Tables at hand, he may
find out himself, by Calculation, the chief Angles of every Figure, and
afterward by the Tables of Sines, or Trigonometry, the length of the Lines,
etc.

These Lines and others that may be required, being found by the foregoing
Rules, I delineated the Figure (whether it be a Fortress of five, ten, eleven
or more Angles) according to Art, as here in the Figure Numb. 1. the Square,
which I hold to be the first Figure capable of being Fortified. This being
drawn according to the Modern Practice, I redress the Ground-Lines according to
my Method, very easily thus: I lengthen the Faces at pleasure, as here A I, N
C, of which I N, is the Line of Defense Secant. Upon this C A, I let fall a
Perpendicular-line, touching the extremity of the Face B K, in K, and I take
the Line F K, for the Flanque; and thus I do round about the whole
Fortification; and this from a Square, to a Figure of twelve sides inclusive.
In such Fortresses, as have more than twelve Polygones, I keep always the same
Courtines. And so the form of a Square with its Ground-Lines is sufficiently
seen in Numb. 1. and the Structure of it showed before. From this alteration
arise these Advantages; First, That the Gorges are lengthened by F G, and H E,
and therefore the Bulworks at their entrance become wider and fitter for
Retrenchments, and the use of necessary Artillery; as may be seen in the
Profile of the Flanques. But the Gorges remaining at the length of D G, the
said Artillery cannot be duly Lodged. This lengthening of the Gorges makes
also the Flanques E I, F K, longer than the former Flanques K G, and I H, were:
This Obliquity of Flanques causes also the Faces A I, and K B, together with
the Moats lying before them, to be Defended at Right-angles, and that the Lines
of Defense F A, and E B, become shorter. And lastly, This manner of Structure
gives sufficient room for the Cutting or Retiring of the Flanques. And
concerning the Angle-flanqued, or Angle of the Bulwork, which in a Square is 60
degrees; he who desires to have it greater, let him draw a Line from the Point,
where the Flanque and Courtine meet together, by the extremity of the opposite
Flanque; as by 5 to Q, which is the Line D 5 Q, and so at the other side. Thus
the Faces become something shorter, and the Angle something greater, according
to the 21 of the first of Euclid. But the Second Flanque is lost, which in a
Square signifies but little. And this in my opinion, is sufficient as to the
alteration of the Ground-Lines, and the finding of them; and the more Bulworks
in any Figure keep their just distance, the more considerable will be the
advantage gained by their Alteration.

Of the Fausse-bray.
THe Modern Engineers draw the Fausse-bray parallel, round about the foot of
the Wall, at such a distance, that between the Parapet of the Fausse-bray and
the Wall is left a hidden way of between 15 and 25 Foot. This Parapet is made
to defend the Moat, when the Enemy is passed the Counter-scarp, and intends
to carry over the Gallery. I make also Fausse-brays, but after another manner
than the Modern, viz. thus: I draw a Parallel-Line with the Flanques, as in
Numb. 1. X W, parallel with the Flanque 6 V, at the distance of five Rods; so
that the place may be capable to hold Canon; afterward I lengthen the Faces of
the Bulwork, as B V, till they cut the parallel X, W; this done, I draw a
parallel with the Courtine, at the distance of 3 or 4, as X Y; so that the
Lines V, W, X, Y, 2, 3, make the Fausse-bray; and this I do round about the
Fortress, only before the Flanque and Courtine, and not before the Faces. The
reasons hereof are these: First, It is found by experience, that the
Fausse-brays are more hurtful than advantageous before the Faces; because they
are not of service, before the Enemy comes to Lodge upon the Esplanade or
Parapet of the hidden way, and then they are to oppose him, which they cannot
possibly do: And this so much the less, because the Enemy may plant his Canon
there for the Destroying and Dismounting of them. Which is easily done, seeing
it is but a bare Parapet, which is soon thrown down; so that in this part
before the Faces, which are Attacqued, no body can remain for Defense, by
reason of the playing of the great Guns from the Batteries, which may be made
as need requires; as here Fig. 11. Numb. 1. is intimated by the Letters A, B,
and C; where from the Battery A, the Face of the Bulwork D, and its Fausse-bray
is pierced Perpendicularly, and from the Battery B Obliquely; but the Battery C
cutteth and clears the Earth away, which is shaken by the two others; so that
by these Batteries and Musquet-shots, coming from the Lines and Cors de Guards,
the Faces, as well of the Fausse-bray, as of the great Wall, are soon ruined
and left without Defense, so that no body may be seen upon these Lines without
being hit; whence it follows, That they cannot hinder the coming over of the
Gallery, but it must of necessity be done from the opposite Flanque. Item, That
so soon as this part of the Fausse-bray, lying before the Face, is discovered,
it is presently made useless to the Defenders; and not only so, but it does
them this hurt and disadvantage, that so soon as the Gallery comes over, the
Miners are able to Undermine the Faces of the Bulwork, where they please, and
at several places together. The Mines being blown up, the Enemy may set Footing
upon the space where the Fausse-bray lies, not only to Assault the Breach, but
he may run along the Foot of the Wall through the Fausse-bray, to fall on at
more places at the same time. To this it might be replied, That the Fausse-bray
ought to be Cut with Trenches, to hinder this running about. But every one who
has experience in these Actions, knows very well, what slender Opposition these
Trenches are able to make, especially, when the Earth, which is raised by the
Mine, falls down, and sometimes buries the Defenders alive. This place is also
of Advantage for the Enemy, when the Breach is Retrenched, and he will make new
Attacques upon it, and by that means will lodge himself conveniently in the
Fausse-bray, and further in the Breach; whereas otherwise, where there is no
Fausse-bray before the Faces, he finds very inconvenient Lodging against the
slooping of the Wall, seeing no other place is found to fix upon. The Miners
are forced to make their Mines about the place, where the Gallery comes on;
besides that the Faces, which are surrounded with these Fausse-brays, being
Attacqued by Canon and Mines, all the Ruins of them remain lying in the same,
and afford an easier Ascent unto the Enemy; whereas otherwise, where they are
not, the Ruins roll down into the Moat, and the Breach remains clear, and
the Enemy finds little Earth to Retrench himself. By all which it is easy to
understand, That this part brings more advantage than hurt unto the Enemy. To
what end is it then, to be at such Charges to our Prejudice, and to cumber the
Moat before the Bulworks with this needless Parapet? Therefore to conclude, I
say, That the Faces of a Bulwork being Attacqued, can make little Opposition of
their own; but ought to be Defended from the Flanques and parts of the
Courtine; and the more eaven and neatly the Faces lie, the better may they be
Flanqued. That part of the Flanque of the Fausse-bray D, hinders also, that the
Face a G from being defended at the bottom from the opposite Flanque. Some
Engineers are of opinion, That the Fausse-brays ought to run out after the
shape of Ravelins in the middle, before the Courtine. I think this needless,
where the Lines of Defense are of a just length, not much exceeding 60 Rods;
but where they be longer, this must be practiced. At Breda, it is done before
some long Courtines. And this is enough as to what concerns the Ground-Lines of
the Fausse-bray, in the Profiles: I shall show hereafter, how the Work is to be
raised. It remains now, that I speak of the Ground-Lines of the Counter-scarp
and hidden way, and how it may be made, that it may defend it self with great
Advantage, without the great Wall; and that these Counter-scarps are as strong,
yea stronger, than the Modern Fortresses themselves.

N. B.

In those Fortresses, where the exterior Flanquing-angle (or, as the French
call it, Angle de Tenaille) comes to be less than 120 degrees, (but it is never
made less than 90 degrees) the Faces may be lengthened upon the Ground-Lines,
till they meet together; and in such Figures the Fausse-bray may be made upon
these Lines, that is, upon the Line of Defense Secant, without running parallel
with the Flanque, as may be seen in Numb. II. by the three Figures 5, 6, 7. But
when it happens, that the Lines of Defense Secant meet one another within the
Courtine, or just before it; then a Parallel-Line is to be drawn before the
Courtine at the distance of three Rods, to have a Communication; as the
understanding Reader will easily perceive, and is seen in the Figure of Numb.
II, etc.

Of the Counter-scarp, or hidden Way.
THe Modern Engineers do strengthen the outward Brink of the Moat (or
Counter-scarp in Italian,) with Ravelins and Half-moons, leaving a hidden way
with a Ditch about it, and without this hidden way they make sometimes another,
without a Ditch; as may be seen at Breda: Which latter I hold to be very good,
because not only great Defense may be made from thence, but they are also very
convenient for Sallying out, both on Foot and on Horseback; for the Moat does
not hinder it, and the Enemy does not know from what side he must expect the
Sally: Those who thus Sallyout, being driven back, may always retire hither,
and presently be in a posture of Defense again behind this Parapet; whereas
otherwise they are many times driven into the Ditch of the hidden way, with
great loss and disorder. This hidden Way (or Esplanade) costeth little, for in
places where the ground is something dry, it is cut in above half its height
under the Horizon, that is, three or four Foot, that it may be the better
flanqued from the first Esplanade which is behind it; as also, that the Shots
may fly more Horizontally, etc. I do Fortify my Moat with another kind of
Work, and I shall show first the manner how I do it, and afterward give
reasons why it is so much better than the Modern Works. And at the same time I
shall discover the Defects, which the Modern Works are subject unto.

See Fig. 4. Numb. 3. which is part of a Regular Seven-angled Figure after my
little Royal, where the exterior Polygone is 80 long: Now to draw my
Counter-Guards (for so I call them instead of Counter-Scarps, this name being
improper) about it, and to give them such a form, as may fit them for that
service I expect from them; I lengthen the Half-diameter K, O to A, or further
at pleasure; then I measure upon the lengthened Half-diameter from the brink of
the Moat O to I, thirty Rod or more, according as I would have the Flanques N 5
and 4 R short or long. Then I draw from of the Face, as from K the Line K, G 5,
as also on the other side the Line L, R, M, from the Point where these two Lines
meet, which should be before the middle of the Courtine; as here from G, I draw
the Perpendicular G H, which is the Capital-Line of the Ravelin W, G, P, H;
then I measure from N to L, as also from G to P, upon the Lines K, G, on
the other side L, G, such a distance as I need for my retired Flanques: from
these Points, viz. from N and 4, I draw N 5 Perpendicular to L, M, and 4 R,
Perpendicular to K 5, as is clearly seen in the Figure, and wants no further
explanation as to the Delineation of it. I make further upon the Line 5 R an
equilateral Triangle, as 5 R, R, which gives a Ravelin, whose Angle at the
Point R is 60 degrees: He who desires the Angle to be greater, may make it so,
without prejudice to the other Work. About this Work I draw a Parallel-Line at
the distance of five Rods, viz. M R G 5 2; which is the Ditch about the
Counter-Guard, so that the Ravelins lying before, become little Islands. At the
brink of this Ditch I make a hidden way or Esplanade, whose sloping is
regulated according to the Wall of the Counter-Guard, without Ditches, with
small cost, which becomes a great benefit. This I continue about the whole
Fortress; and all is clearly seen in the Figure, how the Work must lie
according to the scale and measures. These are all the Outworks, which I look
upon as necessary for a good Defense; and I make no Hornworks, etc. unless
extreme necessity do require it, when perhaps there is some height; and then I
make them after another manner than the Modern, as the nature of the place does
require.

Of the Virtues and Defects of the Modern Outworks.
THe Modern Outworks are Ravelins, Half-moons, hidden Ways, Crownworks,
Hornworks, Tongues, Kettles, etc. and are made about the Fortresses, as Fig. 5.
Number. 3. shows; where the Figures marked with C are called Half-moons, those
with B Ravelins, D is a Crownwork, such as are laid before the Courtines,
before which there lies a single Tongue; E is a Crownwork lying before a
Bulwork, being strengthened with a double Tongue, and at the side of it there is
represented the form of a Hornwork. This Figure is part of a Regular
Seven-angled Work, according to the most Modern practice, as well the Outworks
as the Royal Work. The Virtues and Defects of the Royal Work are in part
manifested already. But now I shall show those of the Outworks; and first

Of Ravelins.
THe Ravelins, marked with B, I count very necessary, seeing they multiply very
much the Defense, especially of the Outworks: But because they do in a manner
stand instead of a Royal Work in Modern Fortresses, they have this Defect, that
their Flanqued Angles are too small, and the Points may be easily broken, as
also the Faces, as may be seen in Fig. 5. where the Ravelin B being Attacqued
from the Batteries A, A, is easily made useless. There may be more Batteries
placed to Attacque these Ravelins, as it is required, because it is seen from
the whole Field I A L. These Works being Attacqued, it is very difficult to
succor them, and no less difficult for the Defenders to retire when it is
taken; and being once taken, it becomes, as it were, a Knife to cut the Throat
of the whole Fortress.

Of the Modern Half-Moons.
THese Half-Moons marked Fig. 5. Numb. 3. with C, I look upon as Works of
little use, because they can make but poor Defense, and are Defended but
weakly; since they have no other Flanque, than from the Faces of the next
situated Ravelins; which Defense being broken (which is easily done, as I have
showed by the Ravelins, and appears by the Figure) they remain to the use of
the Enemy, to make in it the Battery H, whereby the opposite Flanques of the
Bulworks are ruined, and the Galleries are brought over with surety; all which
is clearly showed.

N. B.

The Faces of the Half-Moons cannot be seen from the Flanque of the great Wall,
the Ravelins being in the way; ergo, they cannot be Flanqued from thence, etc.

Of the Modern hidden Way, or Counter-scarp, as they call it.
THese hidden Ways are very advantageous before Fortresses; for lying low by
the Horizon, they make all the Shots that come from thence, to Mow and Clear
the Horizon: neither can they well be broken by the Canon, but must for the
most part be taken by storm, and they are commanded from the great Wall: This
is a work which covers much the defects of the Modern Fortifications. They
favor also the Sallying out, when they have no Ditches; but here in these
United Provinces they have almost all of them their Ditches; which fault being
discovered, it has been remedied by another hidden Way, running about the
Ditch of the first, and being cut in, part of it, according to the nature of
the ground, under the Horizon, and the surface of the Parapet of this hidden
Way, loses it self, sloping into the Field, without a Ditch.

Of Crown-works, and Horn-works.
IT is many times necessary to make these or the like Works to take in any
heights or suburbs, according as the place requires it. They are made after
the manner and practice of the great Fortresses, and according to the same
proportion, excepting only, that their parts are smaller, and they have but
half-Bulworks on either side, which are very weak; and yet their strength may
be much increased by an understanding Engineer. They ought, in my judgment, to
be made so, that they need not to rely upon the Defense of the great Wall; but
that they be sufficient to defend themselves, especially those that lie before
the Courtines, as in Fig. 5. may be seen by the Crownwork D, whose Wings have a
very weak and oblique defense from the Faces of the Bulworks, and being
Attacqued by night, the Lines E E cannot be well defended from the Faces of the
Bulworks. Yea, in such occasions the Defense of the great Wall is but
troublesome to these or the like Works; for the Musketeers of the great Wall,
shooting by night only upon the Alarm of the Assaulters of the Outworks, do
hit as well within as without, and wound as well the Defenders as the
Adversaries. They ought nevertheless to lie open toward the City; and to be
made so, that being taken, they may be little able to hurt it.

Of single and double Tongues.
THese are very slight Works, and never ought to have other Profiles, then
those of ordinary Trenches; for else, if the Wall should be high, they were not
able to defend their own Front. Neither are they but seldom made otherwise than
Trenches, or to hinder the Approaches; as also the Kettels marked with H. Hence
it may be seen, wherein the strength of the Outworks now in use does consist,
which the Modern Engineers make such boast of. Let us now examine the Outworks
according to my Practice.

OF OUTWORKS, ACCORDING To the latest METHOD and PRACTICE.
First of the Counter-Guard.
OF these Outworks it might be said, That they take in much place, which is a
truth; but when we shall have showed what benefit comes by them, I doubt not
but that will outweigh any inconvenience that shall be occasioned be the great
space and place which these Works take in more than other Works usually do.
Neither is the difference so very great: For admit, that about the Modern
Seven-angled Work Fig. 5. Numb. III. there should be made another hidden Way
about that which is there already, or that it should be strengthened with two
hidden ways; the Semi-diameter of my Heptagone Fig. 4. is but five Rod longer
then that of the other. In recompense whereof it is to be considered, That my
exterior Polygones of the Heptagone are 80 Rods; whereas those of the other (or
Modern) Heptagone are but 70 Rod long, which in the whole makes 70 Rod
difference, which is an entire Polygone. Wherefore to include the place of my
Heptagone after the Modern manner, there would be required eight Bulworks; so
that I do include and Fortify more place with fewer Bulworks than now is
usual, which understanding men will easily conceive, by comparing the one with
the other. To show then, what good this Counter-guard does, let us suppose,
That the Fortress Fig. 4. is also Attacqued by the Approaches O O. Now skilful
Artists know, That it is best for the Enemy to Attacque the Point D, and after
he has gained the Counter-scarp, to pass the Ditch of the Counter-guards of 5
Rods. To do this, it is needful for him to render first the Flanque of this
Work D, and the Face of the Ravelin F incapable of Defense: but if he would
break the Flanque of the Counter-guard D, he finds no other place for his
Battery than by the letter C, where but five Pieces can be placed, graph of
wall fortifications Fig 4

Fig 5

to Dismount the lowest Flanque; and further in the Field about G there might
be planted 3 or 4, to throw down the uppermost Parapets of the Retired
Flanques, so that nine Pieces of Canon may be used; whereas those of the
Retired Flanques may bring 17 or 18 Pieces in Counter-battery, and from the
part H, 4 or 5 Pieces, for the Defense of the Face of the Counter-guard;
therefore the Defenders are able with more ease to break the Battery of the
Assaulters, than they to break the Flanques of the Defenders. That which
hinders, that no greater place is found for the Battery of the Assaulters, is
the Ravelin F, and the Angle of the Flanque of the Counter-guard I. Let us see,
whether there be no where else a place to make a Battery, to break the Retired
Flanques withal, and to Dismount the Canon standing upon the same. Suppose
there be a Battery by B, from thence with the Line B one might boar in between
the Ravelin F, and the Angle I, but not so, as to touch the lowest and first
Flanque; yet this shot (which cannot be done by more than one Piece of Canon)
would come obliquely against the last Shooting-hole of the second Retired
Flanque, and cannot Dismount the Canon that stands there, because the shot
hitteth the Parapet obliquely in the forepart. No more can it be done from the
Battery A, against which Batteries upon the Line D E, every where
Counter-batteries may be made. Put the case, That the Enemy not regarding all
these difficulties, do with great loss pass the Ditch by D, and undermine the
Point of the Counter-guard, (which would also be very hard to do, seeing the
Walls are made so, that one cannot well put a Spade into the Ground without
being discovered) and make a Breach. In this case, I can first with small
labor cut off this Point by the Retrenchments 1 and 2, till the great
Retrenchments by 3 and 4 be finished, which are duly defended from the Flanques
6 and 7, as also from the Bulworks-point 8; besides that they succor and
defend one another. And in case the Besiegers mean to pass between the
Retrenchments toward the Bulworks-point, without gaining before the two Lines
marked with 3 and 4, they will find hot work. But suppose they force one of
these Lines, then there is within, two or three Rods after them, another ready,
and those that lie before are Undermined, which Mines are blown up, when the
Enemy once thinks to lodge there; and this is a thing that may be done with
great advantage. There needs not one Rod of ground be lost, but what is gained
with abundance of blood, and also with great toil and labor. Being forced, we
have always a free retirement into the Ravelins marked with K and L. And in case
there be but men within a Fortification made after my Method, who understand
the Work, it seems impossible to gain it any other way, than by length of time,
and with the loss of many men. This Work helps it self, nothing being in the
way that hinders; and all parts are so contrived, that they are provided
against all inconveniences. Hence the understanding Reader may easily
conceive, what advantage these Outworks have before the Modern. They are
Flanqued within and without with Canon and Muskets from the great Wall; there
may be made in haste, and with small pains, as many Retrenchments as is
desired, which are all enfiled within and without from the great Wall; and the
more obstacles are cast in the way, the more the strength of these Works is
discovered. This is enough as to the form and advantage of my Outworks, which
each according to his judgment and place may apply: In my opinion, it would be
needless to propound these things in a plainer manner, seeing all
particularities may be observed by the Figures. It might be said, That these
Outworks would cost more, than those that are now in use: the contrary of which
is true; for the Parapet of the Modern hidden Way having a Base of 60 or 70
Foot, costeth as much as my Counter-guards-wall, whose Profile I do make so,
that it is just Canon-proof. I shall not add here the charges of the Modern
Crownworks, Hornworks, etc. but I put my two Ravelins against the Modern
Half Moon and Ravelin; the Counter-guard against the Counter-scarp now in use,
my outward hidden Way without Ditches (which is made with small charges)
against the Modern second hidden Way, being also without Ditches. And although
this Work should cost much more, yet the charge is sufficiently balanced by the
benefit that is had thereby: For the Fortresses made after this manner, have
quite another Defense, and are, besides their Out and Inworks, provided against
all Occurrences, with 2, 3, a 4, double Flanques, made as well for Canon, as
for Muskets. If any body thinks, that I propound new and strange things, as
doubtless those will do, who are possessed with the Modern practice of
Fortifying, and never did search after more convenient means, or examine the
strength of every part of it distinctly; or what may be the cause, why
Strongholds are lost so soon, neither understand the force of the Maxims of
War now in use: To those I reply, That if they will consider these new things
judiciously, they will find, that the practices of War now in use, ought to be
preferred before those old things; and that the Work is very proper and capable
of making a good Defense; and that these things were not practiced
conjecturally in a Closet, but in occasions of Besieging, or being Besieged;
and that in several countries and grounds, and in such places where indeed flew
swift Bullets, not Sugar-plums, or roasted Capons. Many things may be projected
upon Paper; but we ought to look, whether they be practicable in the open
Fields, The Latin proverb, Facile est inventis addere, might be applied here, I
do confess, but it has not been done as yet by others. I have been about this
a long time; but always observing more and more, whether any thing might hinder
it, which perhaps I had not considered of; and possibly there may be some such
thing, but whatever it be, it may with ease be rectified by time and practice.
All things devised by men, do not immediately come to perfection. Let them who
please to use this way, first consider the Work well; and if there be any thing
that they do not like, let them practice the Latin proverb abovesaid. There are
yet many Particularities in this Work, which I do not describe here, but keep
them for my use, and propound only the Generals. It is true, That the Art of
Fortifying is highly improved in these United Provinces, by reason of the
continual exercise in it: But here have been but few alterations or diversities
of Attacques, seeing they are almost all of them made after the same manner; as
also the Defenses of the Spaniards, who were furnished most commonly with
ignorant Engineers, and their places ill Fortified; so that being Besieged, and
much pressed, they wanted many things that were most necessary. Here in these
parts they have been a while at a stand, without practicing any thing at all,
which might serve to rectify their Errors; although understanding men saw well
enough, that there was something wanting, and that the Work did want another
Form; and this proceeds chiefly from the impression which many had, and still
have, that the Fortifications were at perfection, contrary to experience and
matter of Fact in the late Wars. In this opinion they were confirmed by the
curious searches, experiences and amendments, made by His Excellency Prince
Maurice, and His Highness Friderick Henrick, Princes of Orange, of glorious
Memory: These indeed did in those days reform many things exceeding well; but
the manner of Attacquing being much altered since, the Fortifications ought
also to be strengthened against them. The Practitioners have only joined to
the first Inventions, those things which serve to establish Fortifications upon
sure Rules, according to the Mathematics, to which we ought not to be tied too
close; however it is necessary to take their assistance in this Science. The
question is not, Whether the Fortifications do lie exactly according to the
Rules of Mathematics; but whether the Lines be well Flanqued, and all things
ordered for most convenience. I confine my self indeed to these Rules and
Calculations, for so much as the first Ground-Lines do require; but upon these
I make my Observations afterward: so that my Work receives no small benefit
from thence, by reason of the firm and well-contrived Flanques, and the giving
of little advantage and place to the Enemy to erect his Batteries against them.

Many places (though well Fortified) are also lost in a short time, for want of
skillful Officers and Governors. For although a man had the best Sword he
could wish for, and yet did not know how to use it for his advantage, the worst
would be as good for him as the best. Let the best Fortress be defended by a
Governor, who knows it not, that Fortress shall be gained sooner than a mean
place Commanded by an experienced Officer. This has been sufficiently made
good in these late Wars, which also Histories do testify abundantly. For,
Retrenchments, Cuts, Counter-approaches, Counter-mines, besides the ordering of
Sallies at due times; as also the managing of Fireworks, contrived by an
expert person and skillful Architect, are all very advantageous for Places, and
detain the Enemy long. And yet they cannot well be known, before there is
Attacque made; and then they may easily be so ordered, as to be made more
advantageous for the Enemy, then for the Place it self: Hereof there are
examples enough, and these Works cannot have a good success, unless they be
directed by a skillful Architect, who has not only a perfect knowledge in
Fortification, but understands also the power of Artillery and Fireworks, as
also the manner of managing them, and how Mines ought to be made upon all
occasions. And this I think sufficient for the designing of Ground-lines, and
have described only three Figures more of three Regular Hexagones Fortified;
see Number. IIII. one of them, after the great Royal, whose exterior Polygone is
100; another after the mean Royal, whose exterior Polygone is 90; and a third
after the little Royal, the exterior Polygone being 80.

NOTE.
No body is confined to these lengths of Polygones, but they may be taken
shorter or longer; only care must be had, that the Lines of Defense be not too
long.

The lengths of the Lines of these three Demy-Hexagones are of several
Quantities; viz. the first, whose outward Polygone is 80.35, and is equal to
the Modern Polygones of an Hexagone, according to Friday: the second is of 90:
the exterior Polygones of the third are of 100 Rods, and the proportion of the
Courtines to the Faces (which is to be understood in the first design, which
afterward is altered) Sesquialter, or as 3 to 2.

Lengths of the Lines according to the first Calculation.
Lengths of the Lines after the first manner, where the outward Polygone C D is
always 80.35 Rod in length, in a Regular Hexagone. Lengths of Lines after the
second manner, where the out ward Polygone is always 90 Rods long, in a Regular
Hexagone. The outward Polygone being 100 Rod, in a Hexagone. Lengths of the
Lines, after my alteration, in an Hexagone, as follows: The I. The II. The
III. manner. The Courtine F I 36.00 40.44 44.82 29 30 33 Face C M 24.00 26.88
29.86 the same. Gorge G F 11.36 12.72 14.43 14 17 19 Capital G C 21.26 24.20
26.89 the same. Flanque F M 9.54 10.68 11.87 11 12 13.5 Second Flanque F N
12.98 14.53 16.16 8.5 10 10 Line of Defense Fichante CI 61.11 68.44 76.05 58
63.5 69 Interior Polygone G L 58.73 65.89 73.09 the same. Distance of Polygones
F E 18.72 20.96 23.29 the same.

The Intelligent Reader will see all things better in the three Figures, Numb.
I I I I. and may measure it by the Scale that is joined to them, by which all
three of them are made; and it is to be observed, that these Lines serve only
for an Hexagone. But if any one would Fortify another Figure, he must first
calculate the Lines, and afterward alter the work according to the directions
heretofore mentioned. By the first Figure are showed three several manners of
Counter-guards, being all three very good and commodious, and may be very fitly
applied to places, that are already Fortified; as also the Royal Work, and the
great Wall may be redressed in such places, with little charge, after this way.
The second and third manner of Counter-guards I count better, when the place
and occasion permits it, to make them so large, for they are extraordinary
Advantageous; but for brevity sake, I shall not rehearse here all their
Advantages and Conveniences. Some will say perhaps, That the Ground which
these Outworks take in, being so large, the same would cost very much to buy it
from the owners, in such places where it is required. To these I answer, That
in this case there is not graph of wall fortifications (...) me health, till I
bring to light the other parts ( viz. of Attacques and Defense, of Undermining,
Counter-mining, Fireworks and Artillery, when it may be done most
conveniently) then the advantages of this manner of Fortifying will be better
conceived and understood; for the quality of every part of a Fortification
shall there be declared one by one separately and distinctly.

Of Irregular Fortresses.
I Shall say only this, That it would be too long to show here particularly
the manner of working, which I esteem as needless, seeing that Irregular
Fortresses are made up out of parts of Regular ones: The calculation thereof
may be done after the Modern practice, and the parts afterward reformed
according to my way; as has been showed in the Regular. There are many
Engineers, who think it an Art to Fortify any places altogether Irregular,
although they might well enough alter them. I do not glory in this; but am very
well content, when I meet with such an unfit Figure, to reform it after the
Regular, as near as the place will permit. A Regular place, besides that it
has its Defense more equal, is also the fitter, and takes in with the same
Lines more space, which I prove thus: Let there be a Right-angled Square, each
of whose sides is 12 Rod, and the four together 48 Rod, whose content is 144
square Rod: Let there be another Irregular Square or Rhomboides, having also
four straight Lines each of 12 Rod, that is, the four of 48 Rod; let this
Rhomboides be made of two Equilateral Triangles, then the shortest Diameter is
12 Rod, and the longest 20 Rod, and 8 foot, whose content is therefore 124
square Rods, and 8 square Feet; From whence it appears, That the Rhomboides
contains 19 Rod, and 2 square Feet less than the Quadrat; and the more the
Rhomboide recedeth from Regularity, the less is the content of it, etc. But
this is true of Irregular Fortifications, That the Rules and Maxims of the
Regular being known, the good or bad Form, as also the strength or weakness
depends wholly on the knowledge and experience of the Engineers, etc.

SOME QUESTIONS That might be moved concerning this manner of Fortifying;
together with the Answers to the same: by which the use of this Work may be the
better understood.
I. Question.
FOr what are the Flanques not drawn Perpendicular or Right-angled upon the
Courtine or inward Polygone, in this Way of Fortifying; but Right-angled upon
the Line of Defense Secant: For it is esteemed more graceful after this manner,
and the Ground-lines may be found more easily by Calculation; it being also
believed, that being thus made, they defend the Outworks the better?

Answer.
I Give this Obliquity to the Flanques for the Reasons following. See Numb. II.
the Figure being Calculated and stated after the foregoing manner and
proportion, or being measured in the Fields, the longest Defence-line would
exceed a Musket Shot; whereas now the said Line by this Obliquity is brought
to its due length; whereby I reap this advantage, that with fewer Bulworks than
the Modern do use, I can include a far greater space. Examples have been before
alleged. And with an Octogone of my great Fortification I do include as much
place, wanting only about half a Polygone, as the Modern do with an
Hendecagone, or Fortress of Modern Bulworks; whereby so much charge is saved,
and the Lines of Defense remain within Musket Shot. Item, By this Delineation,
the Gorges gain on each side in length 8 Rods in an Hendecagone, whereby the
Bulworks get the desired opening at their entrance, which makes place for the
Retired Flanques, and affords convenience for the making Retrenchments
speedily and easily. By this Obliquity the Flanques do likewise become also
longer, and therefore fitter to lodge a competent number of Canon and
Musketeers upon them. This Obliquity causes also the Gunholes not to stand
Obliquely, and that the Moats are Right-angled and defended from the Flanques.
And whereas they say, that the Perpendicular Flanques defend the Outworks the
better, this does not stand to reason; but it is known, that the Oblique ones
do it better, seeing they come more flat against them, and the Outworks are
better seen from the Oblique Flanques, when they are made after this manner,
etc.

II. Question.
FOr what are there three Flanques and the great Wall, set at the top of one
another, and yet below a Fausse-bray's Flanque; whereas nevertheless the Canon
being placed thus above one another, the uppermost cannot be discharged
conveniently, without prejudice to those that are in the lower Batteries.
Besides that, the flame coming out of the upper Canon, and falling upon the
lower, might give Fire to them also sooner than would be desired?

Answer.
THese three or four Flanques, I make at the top of one another, not to plant
them all full of Canon; but to fit the uppermost with Musketeers and
Falconets, as occasion requires. But if need should require, that I must have
a strong Counter-Battery upon the Flanques, or that much Canon must be there,
to hinder the coming over of the Galleries: then put the case, that all four
Flanques are filled with Canon; what should hinder me from using them at
pleasure, without endamaging the lower, or giving fire to the lower Canon
before the due time, if I go to work after the manner following? At one side of
these Retired Flanques, I place a skilful person, either an Officer of the
Artillery, or some other. This Officer, when they are upon Discharging,
commands the men in the lower Flanques, to retire themselves at the side of
the Battery into the Way, by which the Canon is let into the Flanques, till
such time as the uppermost have Discharged; which Shooting begins from the
last Retired Flanque, where the longest and heaviest Canon may most
conveniently be used. When these have Discharged, they Charge presently again,
and then those of the second Retired Flanque give Fire; which being done, they
also Charge again with all possible expedition: For those that have Discharged
(beginning from the hindermost) cannot be prejudiced by the following
Canonadoes; and this continues, till the Flanque of the Fausse-brays (being
the last to give Fire) has also done. In this time the hindermost can have
almost Charged and Levelled; so that after this manner one may orderly Charge
and Discharge the Canon, as if it were a Band of Musketeers, without hindering
or prejudicing another. These Canon-shots are alternatively favored by
Musquet-shots, coming from the second Flanques; (where I would Lodge no Canon,
except there were great need, for the reasons before mentioned) as also from
the second Flanque of the Fausse-bray, and also from the half of the great
Walls Flanque and Faces, etc. Concerning what is objected, That the lower Canon
might be kindled by the upper before its time; for this, no other remedy needs
to be used, but to cover the Holes with a Plate of Lead, as they do in Ships.
Now it may be considered, Whether it be easy or no, to bring a Gallery over a
Moat, that is seconded by such a Hail of Canon and Musket Shot.

III. Question.
SInce here is mention of so many Canons, there must be great number of them,
to furnish one of these Fortresses with Artillery: For besides that the great
Wall (or Royal Work) requires much Canon, the Outwork ought to have part of it
too, seeing it defends it self, as well as the great Work, with Artillery and
Muskets; and according to the number of Gun-holes, there must upon the four
heightened Flanques on each side of every Bulwork be at least 20 Pieces, which
is 40 Pieces for each Bulwork; which in a Fortress of seven Bulworks amounts to
208 Pieces, for the entire Fortress only. Now in the Outworks there is by the
joining Half-moons of the Counter-guard, on each side place for 12, 13, or 14
Pieces: If it be 14, it is for every Courtine 28, which for the Counter-guard
of an Heptagone comes to 196 Pieces of Artillery, and so the whole Work to 476;
to which Ammunition being added proportionally, all other things necessary, the
charge would be extraordinary.

Answer.
IN this my Fortification I want no more, or at least very few more Canon, than
in the Modern; which I prove thus: In a Modern Heptagone there must be at least
eight Pieces for every Bulwork, when a Siege is expected; namely 3 upon every
Flanque, and two upon the Bulworks Point, that is 4 Demy-Canons, two Pelicans
shooting a Bullet from 3 to 8 pound, and two half or whole Dragons as occasion
requires. Whereunto are commonly joined 4 or 6 whole Canon, to be used upon
Counter-Batteries; these being reckoned together make up 56. It is an old
custom, to keep in Fortresses that are considerable, twice as many Pieces in
the Arsenal, as are upon the Wall, to fill up the places of those that shall
happen to be Dismounted or to crack, or to become useless by any other
accident; as also to be used upon the Crown, and Hornworks: This number is in
all 188; which the Modern Engineers appoint in their Works. These I distribute
in my Fortification, when there is no Siege, after this manner: Upon every
middle Flanque of the great Wall two, and upon every Bulworks-point two, which
is 6 for every Bulwork, and so for the Royal Work 42: In the Counterguard none
are required, but however, in case one would Plant them there, there might be
set near every joining Half Moon, two, which makes 4 for every Courtine, that
is 28 for seven Courtines, in all 70 Pieces; and then the place is furnished
round about with Artillery, as well for the Inworks as Outworks. But instead of
lodging these 28 Pieces upon the Flanques of the Counter-guards, I think it
more convenient to use them upon the next Ravelin, because I keep there the
outward Centries, or Cors de Guards, which do Flanque the Counter-guards from
within, and hit the Enemy from behind, in case he should undertake to pass the
great Moat. But in time of Siege, I distribute my Canon quite otherwise, and do
as follows. At the first coming on or surrounding, I take my lightest Canon and
place them upon the points of the Counter-guards, to keep off the Enemies
Quarters, as far as it is possible; yet, the Quarters being closed, and I
perceiving whereabout they open their Approaches, whether they bring on 2 or 3,
although they make seldom more than two, and have sometimes a third, only for
diversions sake: Admit, they carry on two Approaches, by which they intend to
Attacque two Bulworks; to promote these Approaches, it is needful for the
Besiegers to raise Batteries, under whose favor they may make their Laborers
work with more surety. Against these Batteries I raise Counter-batteries (that
is, when they come near, within 150 or 200 Rod,) these Counter-batteries I can
raise every where, as well in the outmost Ravelin before the Counter-guard, as
upon the Faces of the Counter-guards themselves, whereto I use some heavy
Pieces: upon the other Bulworks or Outworks there is then little need of any
Pieces, but only of Falconets, or other small Guns. Now the Besiegers being
after all difficulties, come so far with their Approaches, that they are ready
to pass the Ditch of the Counter-guards, then I use no where any Pieces more to
defend the Outworks, but only upon the Flanques of the Counter-guards, where
in Fortresses according to the great Royal, might be used 14. Yet in case two
Bulworks be Attacqued at once, the Ditches and Faces may also be defended by
two opposite Flanques, upon which two there must then be 28 Pieces. If three
Bulworks be Attacqued, there must be 42. These Pieces I can always retire again
from the Flanques into the joining Ravelin, and from thence into the
Fausse-bray of the great Wall, and further upon the Flanques of the great Wall,
which are opposite to the Faces Attacqued; and upon all occasions there need be
no more upon these Flanques than 14, seeing the Enemy cannot place any more
against them with advantage, but 10, unless they come to stand one in another
way. Suppose one would have 18 upon every Shoulder or Flanque, this would make
54 Canons for three Flanques, which being also trebled, the whole number
amounts to 162. Whence it appears, That in my Fortification no more Canon is
required than in the Modern; and one might in time of need very well make shift
with a third part, that is with 54, in a Fortress of seven Bulworks, if a
skilful Governor had the management of it: But for want of such men, the best
Strongholds are soon lost; For let a place be Fortified with as much
providence as it will, in case he who Commands it, has no skill, it signifies
nothing.

IV. Question.
WHat may this way of Fortifying cost more than the Modern, seeing they are far
larger in their parts; and much more is spent for the retired Flanques, than
for the simple ones, as well to make the Shooting-holes, as also the paved
Batteries: The Wall of the great Work, or of the Fortress must also needs be
something higher, than that of the Modern, so it may command the better over
the Wall of the Counter-guard; and with these Counter-guards much Field is also
taken in, which is chargeable, in places where it must be bought from the
Commonalty or Owners?

Answer.
THis Work being well considered, it will be found, that the charges differ
little from the Modern: For I with my Pentagone take in as much or more place
than the Modern with an Hexagone; my Line of Defense Fichante remaining still
within Musket Shot, whereby the charges of one whole Courtine and a Bulwork in
a Pentagone are saved. Concerning the charges of the retired Flanques, against
them I put the two Faces of the Modern Fausse-brays, which I do not make; as
also the charges that are required for the digging of the Moat before the
Courtine, where in my Fortification out of that part of the Moat nothing near
so much Earth is taken.

N. B.

It is not necessary, that these Flanques should be brought presently into this
order round about the Fortress, when they are made. One may make up the first
paved Flanque of the great Wall, which falls upon the Ground-line, something
higher then usually, and lay 2 or 3 Benches behind the Parapet, and putting
Palisadoes at the top of the Parapet, which come to be so high as the great
Wall; and being Besieged, whilst the Outworks are disputed, there is time
enough to bring all things into order.

Concerning the great compass of the Counter-guards, the charges bestowed that
way are little, seeing in time of Peace, (as is said before,) the enclosed Land
and Wall, and all may serve for civil uses as well, as if these Walls were not
there at all: Besides, that these being compared with the Modern Outworks, as
Half-moons, Horn and Crown-works, etc. as are about many Strongholds, it will
be found, that these my Counter-guards do not enclose so much place, nor do not
cost so much. It might be further said, that these my Fortresses would require
more men for Defense than the Modern: In order whereunto, it is to be
considered, How the Garrisons ought to be ordered in time of an Attacque? I
shall only answer this, That the Outworks ought first to be Defended well; and
to do that well in my Fortifications, no more men are required, than in one of
the Modern, having but one Bulwork more than one of mine; for by my Method, I
include more place with fewer Bulworks. I shall only tender this, That the
Flanques being well furnished, the Fronts are easily defended; for herein
consists the strength of Fortresses: which may be compared with a man that
has strong and long arms; it is evident, that such a one can better defend
himself, than another who has short and stiff arms. Thus I conclude this
little Work, hoping that it will be acceptable to the Lovers; and stir them up,
in case it do not please them, to bring to light something better.

TO please those who desire to study Engineership, I have added an Abridgment,
which shows how all Calculations necessary for this Science may be made with
little pains, only by Decimals, without being subject to the intricacies of
Fractions; as also the most usual manners of Working with ease, by Compasses,
etc.

Arithmetique in Decimals.
THis Calculation does not differ from the ordinary Method, only in the
understanding of the Signs of the Fractions, and how to place them rightly,
which is as follows:

First take a Rod, (which is the usual measure of the Country where you are,)
or what measure you please, and call that an Integer; this divide into ten
equal parts, and take one part for a Foot; this Foot divide again into ten
parts, and one of them take for an Inch; the Inch divide again into ten parts,
and call one of them a Grain; the Grain divide again into ten, one of which
call a first Scruple; and that divide again into ten, and let one of those
parts be called a second Scruple; and so on to the tenth Scruple; which tenth
Scruple is 1/10000000000 part of a Rod, and is so small, that it cannot be
comprehended otherwise, than by understanding the following Signs:

A Rod, or Integer, Foot, Inch, Grain, First Scruple, Second Scruple, Third
Scruple, Fourth Scruple, Fifth Scruple, Sixth Scruple, and so on to the Ninth
Scruple.

Addition in Decimals.
OBserve here the same manner, as in the Addition of Integers; but have a care,
that the Signs of the Fractions of one sort, do stand under one another; as
Rods under Rods, Inches under Inches, etc.

Example.

THere are to be added Rods, Feet, Inches, Grains, Scrup. Scrup. Scrup. 2 3 4 7
0 2 3 to Rods; 89 2 3 4I place then Rods under Rods, as 2; under 89, and the
other Signs also under one anoother; as may be seen ^ and where the Signs want,
fill up the places with 0, and put the last Signs of the Fractions behind them
in a crooked or round stroke; which shows, how many places or kinds of
Decimals there be, as is seen in the Example, and the Sum is 91. 581023, that
is, 91 Rods, 5 Foot, 8 Inches, 1 Grain, 0 First Scruple, 2 Second Scruple, etc.
and the Sign of the Fractions being, therefore six Figures are to be counted
from the last toward the left hand; and so many kinds of Decimals there be.

Substraction in Decimals.
PUt here also the Signs of one sort under one another; and where they fail,
fill up the place with 0.

Example.

There are 56. 32 to be subtracted from 982. 345, therefore put 982. 345, and
56. 32 underneath, so that 56.320 Rods come to stand under Rods; so the
remainder is 926. 025, and so forth in all cases, fill the places of the Signs
with 0, where they are not.

Multiplication in Decimals.
HEre follows also the common rule; but you must add the Signs of the Fractions
together.

Example.

53. 26 4.3 21 53 26 10652 15978 21044 231 13646

Division in Decimals.
THis is also done the ordinary way; but here the Sigh of the Divisor must be
subtracted from the Signs of the Dividend, or the Number to be divided: and in
case the Number to be divided, be less than that by which it must be divided,
join so many 0 to it, till it come to be equal to it.

Example.

THere are 5.76 to be divided by 3482; here the Divisor is greater than the
Dividend; therefore add so many 0 to it, till it come to be as great or
greater; as here 0000 Ciphers, and there will be 5. 670000, this divide by
3482, as is usual in common Divisions; and put the Signs as ^ here is seen, and
the Quotient is 165; Now to know what kind of parts they be, substract the
Signs of the Fractions, as 4 from 6, and there remains 2, and this 2 is the
Sign of the Quotient, as may be seen; and this is a general way: There remain
yet 772, of which if you desire to have yet smaller parts; then put so many
Ciphers behind it as you desire. N O T A.

If you put one 0 behind it, or Multiply it by 10, that is all one; and by so
doing it is brought to 10 lesser parts, etc.

The Rule of Three in Decimals.
THis is performed after the same manner, as in the Integers: and forasmuch as
it consists of Multiplying and Dividing, observe the foregoing Rules.

Example.

^

The proof make thus: Say 7 gives 116, what then dos 3 give? There arises by
Multiplication 348, to which adding 2 which remained, the whole is 350 these
divided by 7, the Quotient 50, and putting away the 0, as signifying nothing,
there remains the sign, and then the Quotient is as above 5, and the Work is
right.

To extract the Square Root in Decimals.
TO find the Root of a Number given, even in its smaller parts, put after the
Number given toward the right hand, as often two Ciphers, or 0 0, as you
desire parts, and half the Number of the Ciphers is the Sign of the Fractions
that belongs to the Root; as may be seen in the Example.

Example.

20345, Out of this Number I desire to have the Square Root, to the second
Scruple, or nearer; therefore I put as often two Ciphers to it, as I desire to
have parts, as here 4; wherefore I join eight Ciphers to it, and work, as is
usual in Integers; as may be seen here beneath.

1 28 0 1 10 68 67 31 1 7 81 24 31 78 19 2 03 48 00 00 00 00 1 4 2 6 3 5 9 22
88 48 22 67 0 22 88 55 2 22 8

The Root is 142 Rod, 6 Foot, 3 Inches, 5 Grains, and 9 First Scruples or tenth
parts of Grains; the Signs of the joined Ciphers, or their Number is 8, the
half of 8 is 4, which is the sign of the Fractions, and is written thus 142.
6359, here remain yet 3119 parts: if you desire to have the Root still nearer,
add again two Ciphers, as often as you desire to have smaller parts, etc.

geometric figures

To extract the Cube-root in Decimals, or Fractions.
OPerate in the same manner, as in Integers, and look how many Fractions you
desire, so often put 3 Ciphers behind it; and this wants no further
declaration, etc. Having thus showed the Arithmetic in Decimals, I proceed to
show some Draughts and Operations with the Compasses, which any one may use at
pleasure.

How a given Circle is to be divided into equal parts, and the Polygones of all
Regular Figures, necessary for Fortification, are to be inscribed within it.
LEt the given Circle be A, B, F, E, Numb. VIII. Fig. 1. through which draw the
Diameter AB; and where it touches the Circumference, as in A and B, put one
foot of the Compasses, and make the two Intersections, C and D; and from the
Points, where they cut, draw a straight Line CD, falling Perpendicular upon the
Diameter A, B: these two Lines A, B and C, D divide the Circle into four
equally, and A, E is a side of a Square.

Taking F for the Center, and drawing at the distance F, G an Ark H, G, I, and
then a right Line from H to I; where this Ark cutteth the Circumference, as H,
I, this is a side of an Equilateral Triangle, which may be inscribed within
this Circle. The half of this Line, as H, K, is a Polygone of an Heptagone, and
the distance IB is the side of a Dodecagone; Take K for the Center, and at the
distance A, K describe the Ark A, L, the Line drawn from the Section L to A is
a side of a Pentagone, the Line G, L is the side of a Decagone; G, N of an
Hexagone; E and B are the Centers of the Arks G, M, which Line divides the
fourth part of the Circumference into two, and N, B is the side of an Octogone;
divide the Ark H, F, I into three equal parts, and one third, as H, O is the
side of an Enneagone; from L to P is the side of an Hendecagone; E, L is the
Polygone of a Figure of 16 sides.

Another way to find the Sides of every Regular Figure, that may be inscribed
within a Circle.
THis is done thus; Divide the Circumference into four equal parts, and then
one fourth part of the Circle into so many equal parts, as the Figure should
have sides; and take four of those parts, and that will be the length of the
Polygone of such a Figure as you seek.

Example.

THe Circle Q, P, V, R, in the Plate Numb. VIII. Fig. 2. is first divided into
four equal parts by the two Diameters Q, V, and P, R; part Q, P is divided into
ten equal parts, four of those parts is the side of a Decagone, viz. the length
K, P, which being set off ten times about the Circumference, describes a
Regular Decagone; after the same manner do with all other Figures, dividing
always of the Circle into so many parts, as you desire sides; and four of these
parts being taken with the Compasses, make up the side. This manner may be also
proved by Arithmetic.

N. B.

In the making of Geometrical Figures, the Compasses ought always to be set
perfectly upon the Lines, and marks made softly with the feet, to do the work
with more perfection.

There are many other ways, which we pass over for brevity sake.

To divide a Line with the first opening of the Compasses, into as many parts
as you desire.
LEt the given Line be D, E, which you desire to divide into ten equal parts;
therefore draw an undetermined Line B, H, and open the Compasses at pleasure,
and with that opening set off as many parts upon the Line as you desire, (as
here ten from B, to H;) so the tenth part reaches to H; upon this Line B, H
make an equilateral Triangle B, A, H, and from A draw the Lines AI, AK, AL, AM,
etc. Thus you have by the parts of the Line B, H, a Triangle, which is divided
proportionally: then take with the Compasses the given Line D, E, and set it
off from A to G, and also from A to P, and draw the Line P, G, equal to D, E,
which by the intersecting Lines is divided into 10 equal parts; as also the
Line F, G, if it be required, and so with all other Lines whatsoever.

To let fall a Perpendicular upon a given Line.
THe given Line is G, F, and upon the point G we let fall the Perpendicular G,
H; therefore set one foot of the Compasses in G, and open the other at pleasure,
as here to I; from thence make the Circumference H, G, F; and where this
cutteth the Line G, F, (as in F) from thence draw a Line just by the Center,
till it touch the Circumference in H, and from the Point H draw the Line H, G,
which stands right-angled or Perpendicular to G, F. There are many other
ways, which I here omit for brevity sake.

From a given Point in a Line, to raise a Perpendicular.
THe given point is A, and the Line B, C, in Fig. 5. Set one foot of the
Compasses in the point A, making with the other the Ark B, C; upon these Points
set one foot of the Compasses, opening the other at pleasure, as to D, and make
from these Points the intersection of the Arks in D, at the distance D, C, and
draw a Line from the intersection by the given point A, to the Line B, C, which
is Perpendicular to B, G.

To make an Equilateral Triangle.
UPon the Line B, H, in Fig. 6. set one foot of the Compasses in B, and with
the other take the distance B, H, and with that make an Ark about A; as also out
of H: where these Arks intersect one another, there is the third Point of the
Triangle; and draw from thence the Lines A B, and A H, and so the Triangle is
made.

To make a Triangle of three right Lines given, whatever they be, provided that
two of them be longer than the third.
THe Lines are AB, CD, OF; take with the Compasses the length of one of the
three, which you would have to be the Base, (which is here A, B) and mark two
Points, one in H, and the other in L; from the Point L describe the length of
the Line C, D with an Ark in K, and from H the length of the Line E, F, and cut
the former Ark in K, and there is the third Point: from K draw the Line K, H,
equal to E, F; K, L, equal to C, D; and L, H, equal to A, B, etc.

Three Points being given, and not standing in a right Line, to draw a
Circumference, which shall pass through all three.
THe Points are O, P, Q; make the equal sections on both sides of the Center,
as from P and also from Q, which is done in V; as likewise from O, which
falls in 5, Perpendicular upon Q, P, and P, O. Where these touch one another,
there is the Center (as is seen in Fig. 7. Numb. VIII.) of the Circular Ark O,
P, Q, which being drawn, etc.

The same manner observe in the finding of the Center of a Circular Ark, or a
whole Circle.

To divide a given Circle into 360 degrees, and to make an instrument from it
which Geomemetricians call a Theodolit, or Astrolab.
THis Instrument is of great use in the Mathematics; for by the same all
inaccessible distances, heights and depths are measured, the use of which I
shall declare in its own place in the following parts, and it is divided thus:

The Circle A, B, C, D being first divided into four equal parts by the two
Diameters A, B and C, D, take with your Compasses the exact length of the half
Diameter; as A, E or E D, by which the Circle is divided into six equal parts,
and after the manner following into 12; with this opening of the Compasses set
one foot in C, and with the other make upon the Circumference marks on both
sides in F and G, likewise from D in H and L, etc. Thus the Circumference is
divided exactly into 12 equal parts. The part D, A, or a quarter of a Circle,
contains 90 degrees, as a quarter of 360 degrees; F, C being a sixth part, 60
degrees; and D H as a twelfth part, 30 degrees; then divide a twelfth part, as
D, H or D L into two, as in O and P, and such a part holds 15 degrees; then
divide one of these parts into 3, and one of them will hold 5 degrees, of which
one being exactly divided into 5, one of these is a degree, of which 360 make
up the whole Circumference of every Circle, whether it be great or small, and
are always proportional, viz. the least Circle that can be made, to the
greatest Circle of the Sun, or any other Astronomical Circle: For if you draw
several Circles out of one Center, and from the same Center several
Semidiameters to the utmost Circle, the Arks intercepted in the innermost
Circles contain as many degrees, as those in the outmost, etc.

Each degree contains 60 Minutes, a Minute 60 Seconds, a Second 60 Thirds, a
Third 60 Fourths, and so on; and they are written thus, 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.''''
which is as much, as 4 Degrees, 5 Min. 6 Seconds, 7 Thirds, 8 Fourths.

How all kind of Ovals may be drawn by the Compasses, is to be seen by the
marks 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and needs in my opinion no further declaration, seeing
the manner of working appears enough by the Figures. By 6 is an Oval, which
can be made by a Cord and 2 or 3 Nails: This manner is of much use in
Architectura civili, to make oblique Vaults. By 7 and 8 are seen two sorts of
spiral Lines, whose structure may also be perceived by the Figures.

And thus I have showed the principal Draughts with Compasses, serving for
Geometrical use.

END.
For the Bookbinder, To place the Prints of the Copper Plates.
Numb. after Fol. II. 8 I. 12 III. 22 IV. 28 V. 30 VI. 34 VII. 36 VIII. 48

TABULA Numerorum QVADRATORVM Decies millium, una cum ipsorum Lateribus ab
Unitate incipientibus and ordine naturali usque ad 10000 progredientibus.

(...). Quadratus fit numero aliquo in se multiplicato, qui numerus Latus
quadrati vocatur. DIOPHANTUS Lib. 1. Defin. 1. A TABLE Of Ten thousand SQUARE
NUMBERS, Namely, Of all the Square Numbers between 0 and 100 Millions; And of
their SIDES or ROOTS, Which are all the whole Numbers between 0 and Ten
thousand.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Ratcliffe, and Nath. Thompson, and are to be sold by
Moses Pit at the White Heart in Little Britain, 1672.

A Table of whole Numbers, and their Squares.
0.. 1.. 2.. 3.. 4.. 5.. 6.. 7.. 8.. 9.. 00 0 1 0000 4 0000 9 0000 16 0000 25
0000 36 0000 49 0000 64 0000 81 0000 01 1 1 0201 4 0401 9 0601 16 0801 25 1001
36 1201 49 1401 64 1601 81 1801 02 4 1 0404 4 0804 9 1204 16 1604 25 2004 36
2404 49 2804 64 3204 81 3604 03 9 1 0609 4 1209 9 1809 16 2409 25 3009 36 3609
49 4209 64 4809 81 5409 04 16 1 0816 4 1616 9 2416 16 3216 25 4016 36 4816 49
5616 64 6416 81 7216 05 25 1 1025 4 2025 9 3025 16 4025 25 5025 36 6025 49 7025
64 8025 81 9025 06 36 1 1236 4 2436 9 3636 16 4836 25 6036 36 7236 49 8436 64
9636 82 0836 07 49 1 1449 4 2849 9 4249 16 5649 25 7049 36 8449 49 9849 65 1249
82 2649 08 64 1 1664 4 3264 9 4864 16 6464 25 8064 36 9664 50 1264 65 2864 82
4464 09 81 1 1881 4 3681 9 5481 16 7281 25 9081 37 0881 50 2681 65 4481 82 6281
10 100 1 2100 4 4100 9 6100 16 8100 26 0100 37 2100 50 4100 65 6100 82 8100 11
121 1 2321 4 4521 9 6721 16 8921 26 1121 37 3321 50 5521 65 7721 82 9921 12 144
1 2544 4 4944 9 7344 16 9744 26 2144 37 4544 50 6944 65 9344 83 1744 13 169 1
2769 4 5369 9 7969 17 0569 26 3169 37 5769 50 8369 66 0969 83 3569 14 196 1
2996 4 5796 9 8596 17 1396 26 4196 37 6996 50 9796 66 2596 83 5396 15 225 1
3225 4 6225 9 9225 17 2225 26 5225 37 8225 51 1225 66 4925 83 7225 16 256 1
3456 4 6656 9 9856 17 3056 26 6256 37 9456 51 2656 66 5856 83 9056 17 289 1
3689 4 7089 10 0489 17 3889 26 7289 38 0689 51 4089 66 7489 84 0889 18 324 1
3924 4 7524 10 1124 17 4724 26 8324 38 1924 51 5524 66 9124 84 2724 19 361 1
4161 4 7961 10 1761 17 5561 26 9361 38 3161 51 6961 67 0761 84 4561 20 400 1
4400 4 8400 10 2400 17 6400 27 0400 38 4400 51 8400 67 2400 84 6400 21 441 1
4641 4 8841 10 3041 17 7241 27 1441 38 5641 51 9841 67 4041 84 8241 22 484 1
4884 4 9284 10 3684 17 8084 27 2484 38 6884 52 1284 67 5^^4 85 0084 23 529 1
5129 4 9729 10 4329 17 8929 27 3529 38 8129 52 2729 67 7^^9 85 1929 24 576 1
5376 5 0176 10 4976 17 9776 27 4576 38 9376 52 4176 67 8976 85 3776 25 625 1
5625 5 0625 10 5625 18 0625 27 5625 39 0625 52 5625 68 0625 85 5625 26 676 1
5876 5 1076 10 6276 18 1476 27 6676 39 1876 52 7076 68 2276 85 7476 27 729 1
6129 5 1529 10 6929 18 2329 27 7729 39 3129 52 8529 68 3929 85 9329 28 784 1
6384 5 1984 10 7584 18 3184 27 8784 39 4384 52 9984 68 5584 86 1184 29 841 1
6641 5 2441 10 8241 18 4041 27 9841 39 5641 53 1441 68 7241 86 3041 30 900 1
6900 5 2900 10 8900 18 4900 28 0900 39 6900 53 2900 68 8900 86 4900 31 961 1
7161 5 3361 10 9561 18 5761 28 1961 39 8161 53 4361 69 0561 86 6761 32 1024 1
7424 5 3824 11 0224 18 6624 28 3024 39 9424 53 5824 69 2224 86 8624 33 1089 1
7689 5 4289 11 0889 18 7489 28 4089 40 0689 53 7289 69 3889 87 0489 34 1156 1
7956 5 4756 11 1556 18 8356 28 5156 40 1956 53 8756 69 5556 87 2356 35 1225 1
8225 5 5225 11 2225 18 9225 28 6225 40 3225 54 0225 69 7225 87 4225 36 1296 1
8496 5 5696 11 2896 19 0096 28 7296 40 4496 54 1696 69 8896 87 6096 37 1369 1
8769 5 6169 11 3569 19 0969 28 8369 40 5769 54 3169 70 0569 87 7969 38 1444 1
9044 5 6644 11 4244 19 1844 28 9444 40 7044 54 4644 70 2244 87 9844 39 1521 1
9321 5 7121 11 4921 19 2721 29 0521 40 8321 54 6121 70 3921 88 1721 40 1600 1
9600 5 7600 11 5600 19 3600 29 1600 40 9600 54 7600 70 5600 88 3600 41 1681 1
9881 5 8081 11 6281 19 4481 29 2681 41 0881 54 9081 70 7281 88 5481 42 1764 2
0164 5 8564 11 6964 19 5364 29 3764 41 2164 55 0564 70 8964 88 7364 43 1849 2
0449 5 9049 11 7649 19 6249 29 4849 41 3449 55 2049 71 0649 88 9249 44 1936 2
07^6 5 9536 11 8336 19 7136 29 5936 41 4736 55 3536 71 2336 89 1136 45 2025 2
1025 6 0025 11 9025 19 8025 29 7025 41 6025 55 5025 71 4025 89 3025 46 2116 2
1316 6 0516 11 9716 19 8916 29 8116 41 7316 55 6516 71 5716 89 4916 47 2209 2
1609 6 1009 12 0409 19 9809 29 9209 41 8609 55 8009 71 7409 89 6809 48 2304 2
1904 6 1504 12 1104 20 0704 30 0304 41 9904 55 9504 71 9104 89 8704 49 2401 2
2201 6 2001 12 ^801 20 1601 30 1401 42 1201 56 1001 72 0801 90 0601 50 2500 2
2500 6 2500 12 2500 20 2500 30 2500 42 2500 56 2500 72 2500 90 2500 51 2601 2
2801 6 3001 12 3201 20 3401 30 3601 42 3801 56 4001 72 4201 90 4401 52 2704 2
3104 6 3504 12 3904 20 4304 30 4704 42 5104 56 5504 72 5904 90 6304 53 2809 2
3409 6 4009 12 4609 20 5209 30 5809 42 6409 56 7009 72 7609 90 8209 54 2916 2
3716 6 4516 12 5316 20 6116 30 6916 42 7716 56 8516 72 9316 91 0116 55 3025 2
4025 6 5025 12 6025 20 7025 30 8025 42 9025 57 0025 73 1025 91 2025 56 3136 2
4336 6 5536 12 6736 20 7936 30 9136 43 0336 57 1536 73 2736 91 3936 57 3249 2
4649 6 6049 12 7449 20 8849 31 0249 43 1649 57 3049 73 4449 91 5849 58 3364 2
4964 6 6564 12 8164 20 9764 31 1364 43 2964 57 4564 73 6164 91 7764 59 3481 2
5281 6 7081 12 8881 21 0681 31 2481 43 4281 57 6081 73 7881 91 9681 60 3600 2
5600 6 7600 12 9600 21 1600 31 3600 43 5600 57 7600 73 9600 92 1600 61 3721 2
5921 6 8121 13 0321 21 2521 31 4721 43 6921 57 9121 74 1321 92 3521 62 3844 2
6244 6 8644 13 1044 21 3444 31 5844 43 8244 58 0644 74 3044 92 5444 63 3969 2
6569 6 9169 13 1769 21 4369 31 6969 43 9569 58 2169 74 4769 92 7369 64 4096 2
6896 6 9696 13 2496 21 5296 31 8096 44 0896 58 3696 74 6496 92 9296 65 4225 2
7225 7 0225 13 3225 21 6225 31 9225 44 2225 58 5225 74 8225 93 1225 66 4356 2
7556 7 0756 13 3956 21 7156 32 0356 44 3556 58 6756 74 9956 93 3156 67 4489 2
7889 7 1289 13 4689 21 8089 32 1489 44 4889 58 8289 75 1689 93 5089 68 4624 2
8224 7 1824 13 5424 21 9024 32 2624 44 6224 58 9824 75 3424 93 7024 69 4761 2
8561 7 2361 13 6161 21 9961 32 3761 44 7561 59 1361 75 5161 93 8961 70 4900 2
8900 7 2900 13 6900 22 0900 32 4900 44 8900 59 2900 75 6900 94 0900 71 5041 2
9241 7 3441 13 7641 22 1841 32 6041 45 0241 59 4441 75 8641 94 2841 72 5184 2
9584 7 3984 13 8384 22 2784 32 7184 45 1584 59 5984 76 0384 94 4784 73 5329 2
9929 7 4529 13 9129 22 3729 32 8329 45 2929 59 7529 76 2129 94 6729 74 5476 3
0276 7 5076 13 9876 22 4676 32 9476 45 4276 59 9076 76 3876 94 8676 75 5625 3
0625 7 5625 14 0625 22 5625 33 0625 45 5625 60 0625 76 5625 95 0625 76 5776 3
0976 7 6176 14 1376 22 6576 33 1776 45 6976 60 2176 76 7376 95 2576 77 5929 3
1329 7 6729 14 2129 22 7529 33 2929 45 8329 60 3729 76 9129 95 4529 78 6084 3
1684 7 7284 14 2884 22 8484 33 4084 45 9684 60 5284 77 0884 95 6484 79 6241 3
2041 7 7841 14 3641 22 9441 33 5241 46 1041 60 6841 77 2641 95 8441 80 6400 3
2400 7 8400 14 4400 23 0400 33 6400 46 2400 60 8400 77 4400 96 0400 81 6561 3
2761 7 8961 14 5161 23 1361 33 7561 46 3761 60 9961 77 6161 96 2361 82 6724 3
3124 7 9524 14 5924 23 2324 33 8724 46 5124 61 1524 77 7924 96 4324 83 6889 3
3489 8 0089 14 6689 23 3289 33 9889 46 6489 61 3089 77 9689 96 6289 84 7056 3
3856 8 0656 14 7456 23 4256 34 1056 46 7856 61 4656 78 1456 96 8256 85 7225 3
4225 8 1225 14 8225 23 5225 34 2225 46 9225 61 6225 78 3225 97 0225 86 7396 3
4596 8 1796 14 8996 23 6196 34 3396 47 0596 61 7796 78 4996 97 2196 87 7569 3
4969 8 2369 15 9769 23 7169 34 4569 47 1969 61 9369 78 6769 97 4169 88 7744 3
5344 8 2944 15 0544 23 8144 34 5744 47 3344 62 0944 78 8544 97 6144 89 7921 3
5721 8 3521 15 1321 23 9121 34 6921 47 4721 62 2521 79 0321 97 8121 90 8100 3
6100 8 4100 15 2100 24 0100 34 8100 47 6100 62 4100 79 2100 98 0100 91 8281 3
6481 8 4681 15 2881 24 1081 34 9281 47 7481 62 5681 79 3881 98 2081 92 8464 3
6864 8 5264 15 3664 24 2064 35 0464 47 8864 62 7264 79 5664 98 4064 93 8649 3
7249 8 5849 15 4449 24 3049 35 1649 48 0249 62 8849 79 7449 98 6049 94 8836 3
7636 8 6436 15 5236 24 4036 35 2836 48 1636 63 0436 79 9236 98 8036 95 9025 3
8025 8 7025 15 6025 24 5025 35 4025 48 3025 63 2025 80 1025 99 0025 96 9216 3
8416 8 7616 15 6816 24 6016 35 5216 48 4416 63 3616 80 2816 99 2016 97 9409 3
8809 8 8209 15 7609 24 7009 35 6409 48 5809 63 5209 80 4609 99 4009 98 9604 3
9204 8 8804 15 8404 24 8004 35 7604 48 7204 63 6804 80 6404 99 6004 99 9801 3
9601 8 9401 15 9201 24 9001 35 8801 48 8601 63 8401 80 8201 99 8001 10.. 11..
12.. 13.. 14.. 15.. 16.. 17.. 00 100 0000 121 0000 144 0000 169 0000 196 0000
225 0000 256 0000 289 000 01 100 2001 121 2201 144 2401 169 2601 196 2801 225
3001 256 3201 289 3401 02 100 4004 121 4404 144 4804 169 5204 196 5604 225 6004
256 6404 289 6804 03 100 6009 121 6609 144 7209 169 7809 196 8409 225 9009 256
9609 290 0209 04 100 8016 121 8816 144 9616 170 0416 197 1216 226 2016 257 2816
290 3616 05 101 0025 122 1025 145 2025 170 3025 197 4025 226 5025 257 6025 290
7025 06 101 2036 122 3236 145 4436 170 5636 197 6836 226 8036 257 9236 291 0436
07 101 4049 122 5449 145 6849 170 8249 197 9649 227 1049 258 2449 291 3849 08
101 6064 122 7664 145 9264 171 0864 198 2464 227 4064 258 5664 291 7264 09 101
8081 122 9881 146 1681 171 3481 198 5281 227 7081 258 8881 292 0681 10 102 0100
123 2100 146 4100 171 6100 198 8100 228 0100 259 2100 292 4100 11 102 2121 123
4321 146 6521 171 8721 199 0921 228 3121 259 5321 292 7521 12 102 4144 123 6544
146 8944 172 1344 199 3744 228 6144 259 8544 293 0944 13 102 6169 123 8769 147
1369 172 3969 199 6569 228 9169 260 1769 293 4369 14 102 8196 124 0996 147 3796
172 6596 199 9396 229 2196 260 4996 293 7796 15 103 0225 124 3225 147 6225 172
9225 200 2225 229 5225 260 8225 294 1225 16 103 2256 124 5456 147 8656 173 1856
200 5056 229 8256 261 1456 294 4656 17 103 4289 124 7689 148 1089 173 4489 200
7889 230 1289 261 4689 294 8089 18 103 0324 124 9924 148 3524 173 7124 201 0724
230 4324 261 7924 295 1524 19 103 8361 125 2161 148 5961 173 9761 201 3561 230
7361 262 1161 295 4961 20 104 0400 125 4400 148 8400 174 2400 201 6400 231 0400
262 4400 295 8400 21 104 1441 125 6641 149 0841 174 5041 201 9241 231 3441 262
7641 296 1841 22 104 4484 125 8884 149 3284 174 7684 202 2084 231 6484 263 0884
296 5284 23 104 6529 126 1129 149 5729 175 0329 202 4929 231 9529 263 4129 296
8729 24 104 8576 126 3376 149 8176 175 2976 202 7776 232 2576 263 7376 297 2176
25 105 0625 126 5625 150 0625 175 5625 203 0625 232 5625 264 0625 297 5625 26
105 2676 126 7876 150 3076 175 8276 203 3476 232 8676 264 3876 297 9076 27 105
4729 127 0129 150 5529 176 0929 203 6329 233 1729 264 7129 298 2529 28 105 6784
127 2384 150 7984 176 3584 203 9184 233 4784 265 0384 298 5984 29 105 8841 127
4641 151 0441 176 6241 204 2041 233 7841 265 3641 298 9441 30 106 0900 127 6900
151 2900 176 8900 204 4900 234 0900 265 6900 299 2900 31 106 2961 127 9161 151
5361 177 1561 204 7761 234 3961 266 0161 299 6361 32 106 5024 128 1424 151 7824
177 4224 205 0624 234 7024 266 3424 299 9824 33 106 7089 128 3689 152 0289 177
6889 205 3489 235 0089 266 6689 300 3289 34 106 9156 128 5956 152 2756 177 9556
205 6356 235 3156 266 9956 300 6756 35 107 1225 128 8225 152 5225 178 2225 205
9225 235 6225 267 3225 301 0225 36 107 3296 129 0496 152 7696 178 4896 206 2096
235 9296 267 6496 301 3696 37 107 5369 129 2769 153 0169 178 7569 206 4969 236
2369 267 9769 301 7169 38 107 7444 129 5044 153 2644 179 0244 206 7844 236 5444
268 3044 302 0644 39 107 9521 129 7321 153 5121 179 2921 207 0721 236 8521 268
6321 302 4121 40 108 1600 129 9600 153 7600 179 5600 207 3600 237 1600 268 9600
302 7600 41 108 3681 130 1881 154 0081 179 8281 207 6481 237 4681 269 2881 303
1081 42 108 5764 130 4164 154 2564 180 0964 207 9364 237 7764 269 6164 303 4564
43 108 7849 130 6449 154 5049 180 3649 208 2249 238 0849 269 9449 303 8049 44
108 9936 130 8736 154 7536 180 6336 208 5136 238 3936 270 2736 304 1536 45 109
2025 131 1025 155 0025 180 9025 208 8025 238 7025 270 6025 304 5025 46 109 4116
131 3316 155 2516 181 1716 209 0916 239 0116 270 9316 304 8516 47 109 6209 131
5609 155 5009 181 4409 209 3809 239 3209 271 2609 305 2009 48 109 8304 131 7904
155 7504 181 7104 209 6704 239 6304 271 5904 305 5504 49 110 0401 132 0201 156
0001 181 9801 209 9601 239 9401 271 9201 305 9001 50 110 2500 132 2500 156 2500
182 2500 210 2500 240 2500 272 2500 306 2500 51 110 4601 132 4801 156 5001 182
5201 210 5401 240 5601 272 5801 306 6001 52 110 6704 132 7104 156 7504 182 7904
210 8304 240 8704 272 9104 306 9504 53 110 8809 132 9409 157 0009 183 0609 211
1209 241 1809 273 2409 307 3009 54 111 0916 133 1716 157 2516 183 3316 211 4116
241 4916 273 5716 307 6516 55 111 3025 133 4025 157 5025 183 6025 211 7025 241
8025 273 9025 308 0025 56 111 5136 133 6336 157 7^36 183 8736 211 9936 242 1136
274 2336 308 3536 57 111 7249 133 8649 158 0^49 104 1449 212 2849 242 4249 274
5649 308 7049 58 111 9364 134 0964 158 2^64 184 4164 212 5764 242 7364 274 8964
309 0564 59 112 1481 134 3281 158 5^81 184 6881 212 8681 243 0481 275 2281 309
4081 60 112 3600 134 5600 158 7600 184 9600 213 1600 243 3600 275 5600 309 7600
61 112 5721 134 7921 159 0121 185 2321 213 4521 243 6721 275 8921 310 1121 62
112 7844 135 0244 159 2644 185 5044 213 7444 243 9844 276 2244 310 4644 63 112
9969 135 2569 159 5169 185 7769 214 0369 244 2969 276 5569 310 8169 64 113 2096
135 4896 159 7696 186 0496 214 3296 244 6096 276 8896 311 1696 65 113 4225 135
7225 160 0225 186 3225 214 6225 244 9225 277 2225 311 5225 66 113 6356 135 9556
160 2756 186 5956 214 9156 245 2356 277 5556 311 8756 67 113 8489 136 1889 160
5289 186 8689 215 2089 245 5489 277 8889 312 2289 68 114 0624 136 4224 160 7824
187 1424 215 5024 245 8624 278 2224 312 5824 69 114 2761 136 6561 161 0361 187
4161 215 7961 246 1761 278 5561 312 9361 70 114 4900 136 8900 161 2900 187 6900
216 0900 246 4900 278 8900 313 2900 71 114 7041 137 1241 161 5441 187 9641 216
3841 246 8041 279 2241 313 6441 72 114 9184 137 3584 161 7984 188 2384 216 6784
247 1184 279 5584 313 9984 73 115 1329 137 5929 162 0529 188 5129 216 9729 247
4329 279 8929 314 3529 74 115 3476 137 8276 162 3076 188 7876 217 2676 247 7476
280 2276 314 7076 75 115 5625 138 0625 162 5625 189 0625 217 5625 248 0625 280
5625 315 0625 76 115 7776 138 2976 162 8176 189 3376 217 8576 248 3776 280 8976
315 4176 77 115 9929 138 5329 163 0729 189 6129 218 1529 248 6929 281 2329 315
7729 78 116 2084 138 7684 163 3284 189 8884 218 4484 249 0084 281 5684 316 1284
79 116 4241 139 0041 163 5841 190 1641 218 7441 249 3241 281 9041 316 4841 80
116 6400 139 2400 163 8400 190 4400 219 0400 249 6400 282 2400 316 8400 81 116
8561 139 4761 164 0961 190 7161 219 3361 249 9561 282 5761 317 1961 82 117 0724
139 7124 164 3524 190 9924 219 6324 250 2724 282 9124 317 5524 83 117 2889 139
9489 164 6089 191 2689 219 9289 250 5889 283 2489 317 9089 84 117 5056 140 1856
164 8656 191 5456 220 2256 250 9056 283 5856 318 2656 85 117 7225 140 4225 165
1225 191 8^25 220 5225 251 2225 283 9225 318 6225 86 117 9396 140 6596 165 3796
192 0996 220 8196 251 5396 284 2596 318 9796 87 118 1569 140 8969 165 6369 192
3769 221 1169 251 8569 284 5969 319 3369 88 118 3744 141 1344 165 8944 192 6544
221 4144 252 1744 284 9344 319 6944 89 118 5921 141 3721 166 1521 192 9321 221
7121 252 4921 285 2721 320 0521 90 118 8100 141 6100 166 4100 193 2100 222 0100
252 8100 285 6100 320 4100 91 119 0281 141 8481 166 6681 193 4881 222 3081 213
1281 285 9481 320 7681 92 119 2464 142 0864 166 9264 193 7664 222 6064 253 4464
286 2864 321 1264 93 119 4649 142 3249 167 1849 194 0449 222 9049 253 7649 286
6249 321 4849 94 119 6836 142 5636 167 4436 194 3236 223 2036 254 0836 286 9636
321 8436 95 119 9025 142 8025 167 7025 194 6025 223 5025 254 4025 287 3025 322
2025 96 120 1216 143 0416 167 9616 194 8816 223 8016 254 7216 287 6416 322 5616
97 120 3409 143 2809 168 2209 1^5 1609 224 1009 255 0409 287 9809 322 9209 98
120 5604 143 5204 168 4804 195 4404 224 4004 255 3604 288 3204 323 2804 99 120
7801 143 7601 168 7401 195 7201 224 7001 255 6801 288 6601 323 6401 18.. 19..
20. 21.. 22.. 23.. 24.. 25.. 00 324 0000 361 0000 400 0000 441 0000 484 0000
529 0000 576 0000 625 0000 01 324 3601 361 3801 400 4001 441 4201 484 4401 529
4601 576 4801 625 5001 02 324 7204 361 7604 400 8004 441 8404 484 8804 529 9204
576 9604 626 0004 03 325 0809 362 1409 401 2009 442 2609 485 3209 530 3809 577
4409 626 5009 04 325 4416 362 5216 401 6016 442 6816 485 7616 530 8416 577 9216
627 0016 05 325 8025 362 9025 402 0025 443 1025 486 2025 531 3025 578 4025 627
5025 06 326 1636 363 2836 402 4036 443 5236 486 6436 531 7636 578 8836 628 0036
07 326 5249 363 6649 402 8049 443 9449 487 0849 532 2249 579 3649 628 5049 08
326 8864 364 0464 403 2064 444 3664 487 5264 532 6864 579 8464 629 0064 09 327
2481 364 4281 403 6081 444 7881 487 9681 533 1481 580 3281 629 5081 10 327 6100
364 8100 404 0100 445 2100 488 4100 533 6100 580 8100 630 0100 11 327 9721 365
1921 404 4121 445 6321 488 8521 534 0721 581 2921 630 5121 12 328 3344 365 5744
404 8144 446 0544 489 2944 534 5344 581 7744 631 0144 13 328 6969 365 9569 405
2169 446 4769 489 7369 534 9969 582 2569 631 5169 14 329 0596 366 3396 405 6196
446 8996 490 1796 535 4596 582 7396 632 0196 15 329 4225 366 7225 406 0225 447
3225 490 6225 535 9225 583 2225 632 5225 16 329 7856 367 1056 406 4256 447 7456
491 0656 536 3856 583 7056 633 0256 17 330 1489 367 4889 406 8289 448 1689 491
5089 536 8489 584 1889 633 5289 18 330 5124 367 8724 407 2324 448 5924 491 9524
537 3124 584 6724 634 0324 19 330 8761 368 2561 407 6361 449 0161 492 3961 537
7761 585 1561 634 5361 20 331 2400 368 6400 408 0400 449 4400 492 8400 538 2400
585 6400 635 0400 21 331 6041 369 0241 408 4441 449 8641 493 2841 538 7041 586
1241 635 5441 22 331 9684 369 4084 408 8484 450 2884 493 7284 539 1684 586 6084
636 0484 23 332 3329 369 7929 409 2529 450 7129 494 1729 539 6329 587 0929 636
5529 24 332 6976 370 1776 409 6576 451 1376 494 6176 540 0976 587 5776 637 0576
25 333 0625 370 5625 410 0625 451 5625 495 0625 540 5625 588 0625 637 5625 26
333 4276 370 9476 410 4676 451 9876 495 5076 541 0276 588 5476 638 0676 27 333
7929 371 3329 410 8729 452 4129 495 9529 541 4929 589 0329 638 5729 28 334 1584
371 7184 411 2784 452 8384 496 3984 541 9584 589 5184 639 0784 29 334 5241 372
1041 411 6841 453 2641 496 8441 542 4241 590 0041 639 5841 30 334 8900 372 4900
412 0900 453 6900 497 2900 542 8900 590 4900 640 0900 31 335 2561 372 8761 412
4961 454 1161 497 7361 543 3561 590 9761 640 5961 32 335 6224 373 2624 412 9024
454 5424 498 1824 543 8224 591 4624 641 1024 33 335 9889 373 6489 413 3089 454
9689 498 6289 544 2889 591 9489 641 6089 34 336 3556 374 0356 413 7156 455 3956
499 0756 544 7556 592 4356 642 1156 35 336 7225 374 4225 414 1225 455 8225 499
5225 545 2225 592 9225 642 6225 36 337 0896 374 8096 414 5296 456 2496 499 9696
545 6896 593 4096 643 1296 37 337 4569 375 1969 414 9369 456 6769 500 4169 546
1569 593 8969 643 6369 38 337 8244 375 5844 415 3444 457 1044 500 8644 546 6244
594 3844 644 1444 39 338 1921 375 9721 415 7521 457 5321 501 3121 547 0921 594
8721 644 6521 40 338 5600 376 3600 416 1600 457 9600 501 7600 547 5600 595 3600
645 1600 41 338 9281 376 7481 416 5681 458 3881 502 2081 548 0281 595 8481 645
6681 42 339 2964 377 1364 416 9764 458 8164 502 6564 548 4964 596 3364 646 1764
43 339 6649 377 5249 417 3849 459 2449 503 1049 548 9649 596 8249 646 6849 44
340 0336 377 9136 417 7936 459 6736 503 5536 549 4336 597 3136 647 1936 45 340
4025 378 3025 418 2025 460 1025 504 0025 549 9025 597 8025 647 7025 46 340 7716
378 6916 418 6116 460 5316 504 4516 550 3716 598 2916 648 2116 47 341 1409 379
0809 419 0209 460 9609 504 9009 550 8409 598 7809 648 7209 48 341 5104 379 4704
419 4304 461 3904 505 3504 551 3104 599 2704 649 2304 49 341 8801 379 8601 419
8401 461 8201 505 8001 551 7801 599 7601 649 7401 50 342 2500 380 2500 420 2500
462 2500 506 2500 552 2500 600 2500 650 2500 51 342 6201 380 6401 420 6601 462
6801 506 7001 552 7201 600 7401 650 7601 52 342 9904 381 0304 421 0704 463 1104
507 1504 553 1904 601 2304 651 2704 53 343 3609 381 4209 421 4809 463 5409 507
6009 553 6609 601 7209 651 7809 54 343 7316 381 8116 421 8916 463 9716 508 0516
554 1316 602 2116 652 2916 55 344 1025 382 2025 422 3025 464 4025 508 5025 554
6025 602 7025 652 8025 56 344 4736 382 5936 422 7136 464 8336 508 9536 555 0736
603 1936 653 3136 57 344 8449 382 9849 423 1249 465 2649 509 4049 555 5449 603
6849 653 8249 58 345 2164 383 3764 423 5364 465 6964 509 8564 556 0164 604 1764
654 3364 59 345 5881 383 7681 423 9481 466 1281 510 3081 556 4881 604 6681 654
8481 60 345 9600 384 1600 424 3600 466 5600 510 7600 556 9600 605 1600 655 3600
61 346 3321 384 5521 424 7721 466 9921 511 2121 557 4321 605 6521 655 8721 62
346 7044 384 9444 425 1844 467 4244 511 6644 557 9044 606 1444 656 3844 63 347
0769 385 3369 425 5969 467 8569 512 1169 558 3769 606 6309 656 8969 64 347 4496
385 7296 426 0096 468 2896 512 5696 558 8496 607 1296 657 4096 65 347 8225 386
1225 426 4225 468 7225 513 0225 559 3225 607 6225 657 9225 66 348 1956 386 5156
426 8356 469 1556 513 4756 559 7956 608 1156 658 4356 67 348 5689 386 9089 427
2489 469 5889 513 9289 560 2689 608 6089 658 9489 68 348 9424 387 3024 427 6624
470 0224 514 3824 560 7424 609 1024 659 4624 69 349 3161 387 6961 428 0761 470
4561 514 8361 561 2161 609 5961 659 9761 70 349 6900 388 0900 428 4900 470 8900
515 2900 561 6900 610 0900 660 4900 71 350 0641 388 4841 428 9041 471 3241 515
7441 562 1641 610 5841 661 0041 72 350 4384 388 8784 429 3184 471 7584 516 1984
562 ^384 611 0784 661 5184 73 350 8129 389 2729 429 7329 472 1929 516 6529 563
1129 611 5729 662 0329 74 351 1876 389 6676 430 1476 472 6276 517 1076 563 5876
612 0676 662 5476 75 351 5625 390 0625 430 5625 473 0625 517 5625 564 0625 612
5625 663 0625 76 351 9376 390 4576 430 9776 473 4976 518 0176 564 5376 613 0576
663 5776 77 352 3129 390 8529 431 3929 473 9329 518 4729 565 0129 613 5529 664
0929 78 352 6884 391 2484 431 8084 474 3684 518 9284 565 4884 614 0484 664 6084
79 353 0641 391 6441 432 2241 474 8041 519 3841 565 9641 614 5441 665 1241 80
353 4400 392 0400 432 6400 475 2400 519 8400 566 4400 615 0400 665 6400 81 353
8161 392 4361 433 0561 475 6761 520 2961 566 9161 615 5361 666 1561 82 354 1924
392 8324 433 4724 476 1124 520 7524 567 3924 616 0324 666 6724 83 354 5689 393
2289 433 8889 476 5489 521 2089 567 8689 616 5289 667 1889 84 354 9456 393 6256
434 3056 476 9856 521 6656 568 3456 617 0256 667 7056 85 355 3225 394 0225 434
7225 477 4225 522 1225 568 8225 617 5225 668 2225 86 355 6996 394 4196 435 1396
477 8596 522 5796 569 2996 618 0196 668 7396 87 356 0769 394 8169 435 5569 478
2969 523 0369 569 7769 618 5169 669 2569 88 356 4544 395 2144 435 9744 478 7344
523 4944 570 2544 619 0144 669 7744 89 356 8321 395 6121 436 3921 479 1721 523
9521 570 7321 619 5121 670 2921 90 357 2100 396 0100 436 8100 479 6100 524 4100
571 2100 620 0100 670 8100 91 357 5881 396 4081 437 2281 480 0481 524 8681 571
6881 620 5081 671 3281 92 357 9664 396 8064 437 6464 480 4864 525 3264 572 1664
621 0064 671 8464 93 358 3449 397 2049 438 0649 480 9249 525 7849 572 6449 621
5049 672 3649 94 358 7236 397 6036 438 4836 481 3636 526 2436 573 1236 622 0036
672 8836 95 359 1025 398 0025 438 9025 481 8025 526 7025 573 6025 622 5025 673
4025 96 359 4816 398 4016 439 3216 482 2416 527 1616 574 0816 623 0016 673 9216
97 359 8609 398 8009 439 7409 482 6809 527 6209 574 5609 623 5009 674 4409 98
360 2404 399 2004 440 1604 483 1204 528 0804 575 0404 624 0004 674 9604 99 360
6201 399 6001 440 5801 483 5601 528 5401 575 5201 624 5001 675 4801 26.. 27..
28.. 29.. 30.. 31.. 32.. 00 676 0000 729 0000 784 0000 841 0000 900 0000 961
0000 1024 0000 01 676 5201 729 5401 784 5601 841 5801 900 6001 961 6201 1024
6401 02 677 0404 730 0804 785 1204 842 1604 901 2004 962 2404 1025 2804 03 677
5609 730 6209 785 6809 842 7409 901 8009 962 8609 1025 9209 04 678 0816 731
1616 786 2416 843 3216 902 4016 963 4816 1026 56^6 05 678 6025 731 7025 786
8025 843 9025 903 0025 964 1025 1027 2025 06 679 1236 732 2436 787 3636 844
4836 903 6036 964 7236 1027 8436 07 679 6449 732 7849 787 9249 845 0649 904
2049 965 3449 1028 4849 08 680 1664 733 3264 788 4864 845 6464 904 8064 965
9664 1029 1264 09 680 6881 733 8681 789 0481 846 2281 905 4081 966 5881 1029
7681 10 681 2100 734 4100 789 6100 846 8100 906 0100 967 2100 1030 4100 11 681
7321 734 9521 790 1721 847 3921 906 6121 967 8321 1031 0521 12 682 2544 735
4944 790 7344 847 9744 907 2144 968 4544 1031 6944 13 682 7769 736 0369 791
2969 848 5569 907 8169 969 0769 1032 3369 14 683 2996 736 5796 791 8596 849
1396 908 4196 969 6996 1032 9796 15 683 8225 737 1225 792 4225 849 7225 909
0225 970 3225 1033 6225 16 684 3456 737 6656 792 9856 850 3056 909 6256 970
9456 1034 2656 17 684 8689 738 2089 793 5489 850 8889 910 2289 971 5689 1034
9089 18 685 3924 738 7524 794 1124 851 4724 910 8324 972 1924 1035 5524 19 685
9161 739 2961 794 6761 852 0561 911 4361 972 8161 1036 1961 20 686 4400 739
8400 795 2400 852 6400 912 0400 973 4400 1036 8400 21 686 9641 740 3841 795
8041 853 2241 912 6441 974 0641 1037 4841 22 687 4884 740 9284 796 3684 853
8084 913 2484 974 6884 1038 1284 23 688 0129 741 4729 796 9329 854 3929 913
8529 975 3129 1038 7729 24 688 5376 742 0176 797 4976 854 9776 914 4576 975
9376 1039 4176 25 689 0625 742 5625 798 0625 855 5625 915 0625 976 5625 1040
0625 26 689 5876 743 1076 798 6276 856 1476 915 6676 977 1876 1040 7076 27 690
1129 743 6529 799 1929 856 7329 916 2729 977 8129 1041 3529 28 690 6384 744
1984 799 7584 857 3184 916 8784 978 4384 1041 9984 29 691 1641 744 7441 800
3241 857 9041 917 4841 979 0641 1042 6441 30 691 6900 745 2900 800 8900 858
4900 918 0900 979 6900 1043 2900 31 692 2161 745 8361 801 4561 859 0761 918
6961 980 3161 1043 9361 32 692 7424 746 3824 802 0224 859 6624 919 3024 980
9424 1044 5824 33 693 2689 746 9289 802 5889 860 2489 919 9089 981 5689 1045
2289 34 693 7956 747 4756 803 1556 860 8356 920 5156 982 1956 1045 8756 35 694
3225 748 0225 803 7225 861 4225 921 1225 982 8225 1046 5225 36 694 8496 748
5696 804 2896 862 0096 921 7296 983 4496 1047 1696 37 695 3769 749 1169 804
8569 862 5969 922 3369 984 0769 1047 8169 38 695 9044 749 6644 805 4244 863
1844 922 9444 984 7044 1048 4644 39 696 4321 750 2121 805 9921 863 7721 923
5521 985 3321 1049 1121 40 696 9600 750 7600 806 5600 864 3600 924 1600 985
9600 1049 7600 41 697 4881 751 3081 807 1281 864 9481 924 7681 986 5881 1050
4081 42 698 0164 751 8564 807 6964 865 5364 925 3764 987 2164 1051 0564 43 698
5449 752 4049 808 2649 866 1249 925 9849 987 8449 1051 7049 44 699 0736 752
9536 808 8336 866 7136 926 5936 988 4736 1052 3536 45 699 6025 753 5025 809
4025 867 3025 927 2025 989 1025 1053 0025 46 700 1316 754 0516 809 9716 867
8916 927 8116 989 7316 1053 6516 47 700 6609 754 6009 810 5409 868 4809 928
4209 990 3609 1054 3009 48 701 1904 755 1504 811 1104 869 0704 929 0304 990
9904 1054 9504 49 701 7201 755 7001 811 6801 869 6601 929 6401 991 6201 1055
6001 50 702 2500 756 2500 812 2500 870 2500 930 2500 992 2500 1056 2500 51 702
7801 756 8001 812 8201 870 8401 930 8601 992 8801 1056 9001 52 703 3104 757
3504 813 3904 871 4304 931 4704 993 5104 1057 5504 53 703 8409 757 9009 813
9609 872 0209 932 0809 994 1409 1058 2009 54 704 3716 758 4516 814 5316 872
6116 932 6916 994 7716 1058 8516 55 704 9025 759 0025 815 1025 873 2025 933
3025 995 4025 1059 5025 56 705 4336 759 5536 815 6736 873 7936 933 9136 996
0336 1060 1536 57 705 9649 760 1049 816 2449 874 3849 934 5249 996 6649 1060
8049 58 706 4964 760 6564 816 8164 874 9764 935 1364 997 2964 1061 4564 59 707
0281 761 2081 817 3881 875 5681 935 7481 997 9281 1062 1081 60 707 5600 761
7600 817 9600 876 1600 936 3600 998 5600 1062 7600 61 708 0921 762 3121 818
5321 876 7521 936 9721 999 1921 1063 4121 62 708 0244 762 8644 819 1044 877
3444 937 5844 999 8244 1064 0644 63 709 1569 763 4169 819 6769 877 9369 938
1969 1000 4569 1064 7169 64 709 6896 763 9696 820 2496 878 5296 938 80^6 1001
0896 1065 3696 65 710 2225 764 5225 820 8225 879 1225 939 4225 1001 7225 1066
0225 66 710 7556 765 0756 821 3956 879 7156 940 0356 1002 3556 1066 6756 67 711
2889 765 6289 821 9689 880 3089 940 6489 1002 9889 1067 3289 68 711 8224 766
1824 822 5424 880 9024 941 2624 1003 6224 1067 9824 69 712 3561 766 7361 823
1161 881 4961 941 8761 1004 2561 1068 6361 70 712 8900 767 2900 823 6900 882
0900 942 4900 1004 8900 1069 2900 71 713 4241 767 8441 824 2641 882 6841 943
1041 1005 5241 1069 9441 72 713 95^4 768 3984 824 8384 883 2784 943 7184 1006
1584 1070 5984 73 714 4929 768 9529 825 4129 883 8729 944 3329 1006 7929 1071
2529 74 715 0276 769 5076 825 9876 884 4676 944 9476 1007 4276 1071 9076 75 715
5625 770 0625 826 5625 885 0625 945 5625 1008 0625 1072 5625 76 716 0976 770
6176 827 1376 885 6576 946 1776 1008 6976 1073 2176 77 716 6329 771 1729 827
7129 886 2529 946 7929 1009 3329 1073 8729 78 717 1684 771 7284 828 2884 886
8484 947 4084 1009 9684 1074 5284 79 717 7041 772 2841 828 8641 887 4441 948
0241 1010 6041 1075 1841 80 718 2400 772 8400 829 4400 888 0400 948 6400 1011
2400 1075 8400 81 718 7761 773 3961 830 0161 888 6361 949 2561 1011 8761 1076
4961 82 719 3124 773 9524 830 5924 889 2324 949 8724 1012 5124 1077 1524 83 719
8489 774 5089 831 1689 889 8289 950 4889 1013 1489 1077 8089 84 720 3856 775
0656 831 7456 890 4256 951 1056 1013 7856 1078 4656 85 720 9225 775 6225 832
3225 891 0225 951 7225 1014 4225 1079 1225 86 721 4596 776 1796 832 8996 891
6196 952 3396 1015 0596 1079 7796 87 721 9969 776 7369 833 4769 892 2169 952
9569 1015 6969 1080 4369 88 722 5344 777 2944 834 0544 892 8144 953 5744 1016
3344 1081 0944 89 723 0721 777 8521 834 6321 893 4121 954 1921 1016 9721 1081
7521 90 723 6100 778 4100 835 2100 894 0100 954 8100 1017 6100 1082 4100 91 724
1481 778 9681 835 7881 894 6081 955 4281 1018 2481 1083 0681 92 724 6864 779
5264 836 3664 895 2064 956 0464 1018 8864 1083 7264 93 725 2249 780 0849 836
9449 895 8049 956 6649 1019 5249 1084 3849 94 725 7636 780 6436 837 5236 896
4036 957 2836 1020 1636 1085 0436 95 726 3025 781 2025 838 1025 897 0025 957
9025 1020 8025 1085 7025 96 726 8416 781 7616 838 6816 897 6016 958 5216 1021
4416 1086 3616 97 727 3809 782 3209 839 2609 898 2009 959 1409 1022 0809 1087
0209 98 727 9204 782 8804 839 8404 898 8004 959 7604 1022 7204 1087 6804 99 728
4601 783 4401 840 4201 899 4001 960 3801 1023 3601 1088 3401 33.. 34.. 35..
36.. 37. 38.. 39.. 00 1089 0000 1156 0000 1225 0000 1296 0000 1369 0000 1444
0000 1521 0000 01 1089 6601 1156 6801 1225 7001 1296 7201 1369 7401 1444 7601
1521 7801 02 1090 3204 1157 3604 1226 4004 1297 4404 1370 4804 1445 5204 1522
5604 03 1090 9809 1158 0409 1227 1009 1298 1609 1371 2209 1446 2809 1523 3409
04 1091 6416 1158 7216 1227 8016 1298 8816 1371 9616 1447 0416 1524 1216 05
1092 3025 1159 4025 1228 5025 1299 6025 1372 7025 1447 8025 1524 9025 06 1092
9636 1160 0836 1229 2036 1300 3236 1373 4436 1448 5636 1525 6836 07 1093 6249
1160 7649 1229 9049 1301 0449 1374 1849 1449 3249 1526 4649 08 1094 2864 1161
4464 1230 6064 1301 7664 1374 9264 1450 0864 1527 2464 09 1094 9481 1162 1281
1231 3081 1302 4881 1375 6681 1450 8481 1528 0281 10 1095 6100 1162 8100 1232
0100 1303 2100 1376 4100 1451 6100 1528 8100 11 1096 2721 1163 4921 1232 7121
1303 9321 1377 1521 1452 3721 1529 5921 12 1096 9344 1164 1744 1233 4144 1304
6544 1377 8944 1453 1344 1530 3744 13 1097 5969 1164 8569 1234 1169 1305 3769
1378 6369 1453 8969 1531 1569 14 1098 2596 1165 539^ 1234 8196 1306 0996 1379
3796 1454 6596 1531 9396 15 1098 9225 1166 2225 1235 5225 1306 8225 1380 1225
1455 4225 1532 7225 16 1099 5856 1166 9056 1236 2256 1307 5456 1380 8656 1456
1856 1533 5056 17 1100 2489 1167 5889 1236 9289 1308 2689 1381 6089 1456 9489
1534 2889 18 1100 9124 1168 2724 1237 6324 1308 9924 1382 3524 1457 7124 1535
0724 19 1101 5761 1168 9561 1238 3361 1309 7161 1383 0961 1458 4761 1535 8561
20 1102 2400 1169 6400 1239 0400 1310 4400 1383 8400 1459 2400 1536 6400 21
1102 9041 1170 3241 1239 7441 1311 1641 1384 5841 1460 0041 1537 4241 22 1103
5684 1171 0084 1240 4484 1311 8884 1385 3284 1460 768^ 1538 2084 23 1104 2329
1171 6929 1241 1529 1312 6129 1386 0729 1461 5329 1538 9929 24 1104 8976 1172
3776 1241 8576 1313 3376 1386 8176 1462 2976 1539 7776 25 1105 5625 1173 0625
1242 5625 1314 0625 1387 5625 1463 0625 1540 5625 26 1106 2276 1173 7476 1243
2676 1314 7876 1388 3076 1463 8276 1541 3476 27 1106 8929 1174 4329 1243 9729
1315 5129 1389 0529 1464 5929 1542 1329 28 1107 5584 1175 1184 1244 6784 1316
2384 1389 7984 1465 3584 1542 9184 29 1108 2241 1175 8041 1245 3841 1316 9641
1390 5441 1466 1241 1543 7041 30 1108 8900 1176 4900 1246 0900 1317 6900 1391
2900 1466 8900 1544 4900 31 1109 5561 1177 1761 1246 7961 1318 4161 1392 0361
1467 6561 1545 2761 32 1110 2224 1177 8624 1247 5024 1319 1424 1392 7824 1468
4224 1546 0624 33 1110 8889 1178 5489 1248 2^89 1319 8689 1393 5289 1469 1889
1546 8489 34 1111 5556 1179 2356 1248 9156 1320 5956 1394 2756 1469 9556 1547
6356 35 1112 2225 1179 9225 1249 6225 1321 3225 1395 0225 1470 7225 1548 4225
36 1112 8896 1180 6096 1250 3296 1322 0496 1395 7696 1471 4896 1549 2096 37
1113 5569 1181 2969 1251 0369 1322 7769 1396 5169 1472 2569 1549 9969 38 1114
2244 1181 9844 1251 7444 1323 5044 1397 2644 1473 0244 1550 7844 39 1114 8921
1182 6721 1252 4521 1324 2321 1398 0121 1473 7921 1551 5721 40 1115 5600 1183
3600 1253 1600 1324 9600 1398 7600 1474 5600 1552 3600 41 1116 2281 1184 0481
1253 8681 1325 6881 1399 5081 1475 3281 1553 1481 42 1116 8964 1184 7364 1254
5764 1326 4164 1400 2564 1476 0964 1553 9364 43 1117 5649 1185 4249 1255 2849
1327 1449 1401 0049 1476 8649 1554 7249 44 1118 2336 1186 1136 1255 9936 1327
8736 1401 7536 1477 6336 1555 5136 45 1118 9025 1186 8025 1256 7025 1328 6025
1402 5025 1478 4025 1556 3025 46 1119 5716 1187 4916 1257 4116 1329 3316 1403
2516 1479 1716 1557 0916 47 1120 2409 1188 1809 1258 1209 1330 0609 1404 0009
1479 9409 1557 0916 48 1120 9104 1188 8704 1258 8304 1330 7904 1404 7504 1480
7104 1558 6704 49 1121 5801 1189 5601 1259 5401 1331 5201 1405 5001 1481 4801
1559 4601 50 1122 2500 1190 2500 1260 2500 1332 2500 1406 2500 1482 2500 1560
2500 51 1122 9201 1190 9401 1260 9601 1332 9801 1407 0001 1483 0201 1561 0401
52 1123 5904 1191 6304 1261 6704 1333 7104 1407 7504 1483 7904 1561 8304 53
1124 2609 1192 3209 1262 3809 1334 4409 1408 5009 1484 5609 1562 6209 54 1124
9316 1193 0116 1263 0916 1335 1716 1409 2516 1485 3316 1563 4116 55 1125 6025
1193 7025 1263 8025 1335 9025 1410 0025 1486 1025 1564 2025 56 1126 2736 1194
3936 1264 5136 1336 6336 1410 7536 1486 8736 1564 9936 57 1126 9449 1195 0849
1265 2249 1337 3649 1411 5049 1487 6449 1565 7849 58 1127 6164 1195 7764 1265
9364 1338 0964 1412 2564 1488 4164 1566 5764 59 1128 2881 1196 4681 1266 6481
1338 8281 1413 0081 1489 1881 1567 3681 60 1128 9600 1197 1600 1267 3600 1339
5600 1413 7600 1489 9600 1568 1600 61 1129 6321 1197 8521 1268 0721 1340 2921
1414 5121 1490 7321 1568 9521 62 1130 3044 1198 5444 1268 7844 1341 0244 1415
2644 1491 5044 1569 7444 63 1130 9769 1199 2369 1269 4969 1341 7569 1416 0169
1492 2769 1570 5369 64 1131 6496 1199 9296 1270 2096 1342 4896 1416 7696 1493
0496 1571 3296 65 1132 3225 1200 6225 1270 9225 1343 2225 1417 5225 1493 8225
1572 1225 66 1132 9956 1201 3156 1271 6356 1343 9556 1418 2756 1494 5956 1572
9156 67 1133 6689 1202 0089 1272 3489 1344 6889 1419 0289 1495 3689 1573 7089
68 1134 3424 1202 7024 1273 0624 1345 4224 1419 7824 1496 1424 1574 5024 69
1135 0161 1203 3961 1273 7761 1346 1561 1420 5361 1496 9161 1575 2961 70 1135
6900 1204 0900 1274 4900 1346 8900 1421 2900 1497 6900 1576 0900 71 1136 3641
1204 7841 1275 2041 1347 6241 1422 0441 1498 4641 1576 8841 72 1137 0384 1205
4784 1275 9184 1348 3584 1422 7984 1499 2384 1577 6784 73 1137 7129 1206 1729
1276 6329 1349 0929 1423 5529 1500 0129 1578 4729 74 1138 3876 1206 8676 1277
3476 1349 8276 1424 3076 1500 7876 1579 2676 75 1139 0625 1207 5625 1278 0625
1350 5625 1425 0625 1501 5625 1580 0625 76 1139 7376 1208 2576 1278 7776 1351
2976 1425 8176 1502 3376 1580 8576 77 1140 4129 1208 9529 1279 4929 1352 0329
1426 5729 1503 1129 1581 6529 78 1141 0884 1209 6484 1280 2084 1352 7684 1427
3284 1503 8884 1582 4484 79 1141 7641 1210 3441 1280 9241 1353 5041 1428 0841
1504 6641 1583 2441 80 1142 4400 1211 0400 1281 6400 1354 2400 1428 8400 1505
4400 1584 0400 81 1143 1161 1211 7361 1282 3561 1354 9761 1429 5961 1506 2161
1584 8361 82 1143 7924 1212 4324 1283 0724 1355 7124 1430 3524 1506 9924 1585
6324 83 1144 4689 1213 1289 1283 7889 1356 4489 1431 1089 1507 7689 1586 4289
84 1145 1456 1213 8256 1284 5056 1357 1856 1431 8656 1508 5456 1587 2256 85
1145 8225 1214 5225 1285 2225 1357 9225 1432 6225 1509 3225 1588 0225 86 1146
4996 1215 2196 1285 9396 1358 6596 1433 3796 1510 0996 1588 8196 87 1147 1769
1215 9169 1286 6569 1359 3969 1434 1369 1510 8769 1589 6169 88 1147 8544 1216
6144 1287 3744 1360 1344 1434 8944 1511 6544 1590 4144 89 1148 5321 1217 3121
1288 0921 1360 8721 1435 6521 1512 4321 1591 2121 90 1149 2100 1218 0100 1288
8100 1361 6100 1436 4100 1513 2100 1592 0100 91 1149 8881 1218 7081 1289 5281
1362 3481 1437 1681 1513 9881 1592 8081 92 1150 5664 1219 4064 1290 2464 1363
0864 1437 9264 1514 7664 1593 6064 93 1151 2449 1220 1049 1290 9649 1363 8249
1438 6849 1515 5449 1594 4049 94 1151 9236 1220 8036 1291 6836 1364 5636 1439
4436 1516 3236 1595 2036 95 1152 6025 1221 5025 1292 4025 1365 3025 1440 2025
1517 1025 1590 0025 96 1153 2816 1222 2016 1293 1216 1366 0416 1440 9616 1517
8816 1596 8016 97 1153 9609 1222 9009 1293 8409 1366 7809 1441 7209 1518 6609
1597 6009 98 1154 6404 1223 6004 1294 5604 1367 5204 1442 4804 1519 4404 1598
4004 99 1155 3201 1224 3001 1295 2801 1368 2601 1443 2401 1520 2201 1599 2001
40.. 41.. 42.. 43.. 44.. 45.. 46.. 00 1600 0000 1681 0000 1764 0000 1849 0000
1936 0000 2025 0000 2116 0000 01 1600 8001 1681 8201 1764 8401 1849 8601 1936
8801 2025 9001 2116 9201 02 1601 6004 1682 6404 1765 6804 1850 7204 1937 7604
2026 8004 2117 8404 03 1602 4009 1683 4609 1766 5209 1851 5809 1938 6409 2027
7009 2118 7609 04 1603 2016 1684 2816 1767 3616 1852 4416 1939 5216 2028 6016
2119 6816 05 1604 0025 1685 1025 1768 2025 1853 3025 1940 4025 2029 5025 2120
6025 06 1604 8036 1685 9236 1769 0436 1854 1636 1941 2836 2030 4036 2121 5236
07 1605 6049 1686 7449 1769 8849 1855 0249 1942 1649 2031 3049 2122 4449 08
1606 4064 1687 5664 1770 7264 1855 8864 1943 0464 2032 2064 2123 3664 09 1607
2081 1688 3881 1771 5681 1856 7481 1943 9281 2033 1081 2124 2881 10 1608 0100
1689 2100 1772 4100 1857 6100 1944 8100 2034 0100 2125 2100 11 1608 8121 1690
0321 1773 2521 1858 4721 1945 6921 2034 9121 2126 1321 12 1609 6144 1690 8544
1774 0944 1859 3344 1946 5744 2035 8144 2127 0544 13 1610 4169 1691 6769 1774
9369 1860 1969 1947 4569 2036 7169 2127 9769 14 1611 2196 1692 4996 1775 7796
1861 0596 1948 3396 2037 6196 2128 8996 15 1612 0225 1693 3225 1776 6225 1861
9225 1949 2225 2038 5225 2129 8225 16 1612 8256 1694 1456 1777 4656 1862 7856
1950 1056 2039 4256 2130 7456 17 1613 6289 1694 9689 1778 3089 1863 6489 1950
9889 2040 3289 2131 6689 18 1614 4324 1695 7924 1779 1524 1864 5124 1951 8724
2041 2324 2132 5924 19 1615 2361 1696 6161 1779 9961 1865 3761 1952 7561 2042
1361 2133 5161 20 1616 0400 1697 4400 1780 8400 1866 2400 1953 6400 2043 0400
2134 4400 21 1616 8441 School 2641 1781 6841 1867 1041 1954 5241 2043 9441 2135
3641 22 1617 6484 1699 0884 1782 5284 1867 9684 1955 4084 2044 8484 2136 2884
23 1618 4529 1699 9129 1783 3729 1868 8329 1956 2929 2045 7529 2137 2129 24
1619 2576 1700 7376 1784 2176 1869 6976 1957 1776 2046 6576 2138 1376 25 1620
0625 1701 5625 1785 0625 1870 5625 1958 0625 2047 5625 2139 0625 26 1620 3676
1702 3876 1785 9076 1871 4276 1958 9476 2048 4676 2139 9876 27 1621 6729 1703
2129 1786 7529 1872 2929 1959 8329 2049 3729 2140 9129 28 1622 4784 1704 0384
1787 5984 1873 1584 1960 7184 2050 2784 2141 8384 29 1623 2841 1704 8641 1788
4441 1874 0241 1961 6041 2051 1841 2142 7641 30 1624 0900 1705 6900 1789 2900
1874 8900 1962 4900 2052 0900 2143 6900 31 1624 8961 1706 5161 1790 1361 1875
7561 1963 3761 2052 9961 2144 6161 32 1625 7024 1707 3424 1790 9824 1876 6224
1964 2624 2053 9024 2145 5424 33 1626 5089 1708 1689 1791 8289 1877 4889 1965
1489 2054 8089 2146 4689 34 1627 3156 1708 9956 1792 6756 1878 3556 1966 0356
2055 7156 2147 3956 35 1628 1225 1709 8225 1793 5225 1879 2225 1966 9225 2056
6225 2148 3225 36 1628 9296 1710 6496 1794 3696 1880 0896 1967 8096 2057 5296
2149 2496 37 1629 7369 1711 4769 1795 2169 1880 9569 1968 6969 2058 4369 2150
1769 38 1630 5444 1712 3044 1796 0644 1881 8244 1969 5844 2059 3444 2151 1044
39 1631 3521 1713 1321 1796 9121 1882 6921 1970 4721 2060 2521 2152 0321 40
1632 1600 1713 9600 1797 7600 1883 5600 1971 3600 2061 1600 2152 9600 41 1632
9681 1714 7881 1798 6081 1884 4281 1972 2481 2062 0681 2153 8881 42 1633 7764
1715 6164 1799 4564 1885 2964 1973 1364 2062 9764 2154 8164 43 1634 5849 1716
4449 1800 3049 1886 1649 1974 0249 2063 8849 2155 7449 44 1635 3936 1717 2736
1801 1536 1887 0336 1974 9136 2064 7936 2156 6736 45 1636 2025 1718 1025 1802
0025 1887 9025 1975 8025 2065 7025 2157 6025 46 1637 6116 1718 9316 1802 8516
1888 7716 1976 6916 2066 6116 2158 5316 47 1637 8209 1719 7609 1803 7009 1889
6409 1977 5809 2067 5209 2159 4609 48 1638 6304 1720 5904 1804 5504 1890 5104
1978 4704 2068 4304 2160 3904 49 1639 4401 1721 4201 1805 4001 1891 3801 1979
3601 2069 3401 2161 3201 50 1640 2500 1722 2500 1806 2500 1892 2500 1980 2500
2070 2500 2162 2500 51 1641 0601 1723 0801 1807 1001 1893 1201 1981 1401 2071
1601 2163 1801 52 1641 8704 1723 9104 1807 9504 1893 9904 1982 0304 2072 0704
2164 1104 53 1642 6809 1724 7409 1808 8009 1894 8609 1982 9209 2072 9809 2165
0409 54 1643 4916 1725 5716 1809 6516 1895 7316 1983 8116 2073 8916 2165 9716
55 1644 3025 1726 4025 1810 5025 1896 6025 1984 7025 2074 8025 2166 9025 56
1645 1136 1727 2336 1811 3536 1897 4736 1985 5936 2075 7136 2167 8336 57 1645
9249 1728 0649 1812 2049 1898 3449 1986 4849 2076 6249 2168 7649 58 1646 7364
1728 8964 1813 0564 1899 2164 1987 3764 2077 5364 2169 6964 59 1647 5481 1729
7281 1813 9081 1900 0881 1988 2681 2078 4481 2170 6281 60 1648 3600 1730 5600
1814 7600 1900 9600 1989 1600 2079 3600 2171 5600 61 1649 1721 1731 3921 1815
6121 1901 8321 1990 0521 2080 2721 2172 4921 62 1649 9844 1732 2244 1816 4644
1902 7044 1990 9444 2081 1844 2173 4244 63 1650 7969 1733 0569 1817 3169 1903
5769 1991 8369 2082 0969 2174 3569 64 1651 6096 1733 8896 1818 1696 1904 4496
1992 7296 2083 0096 2175 2896 65 1652 4225 1734 7225 1819 0225 1905 3225 1993
6225 2083 9225 2176 2225 66 1653 2356 1735 5556 1819 8756 1906 1956 1994 5156
2084 8356 2177 1556 67 1654 0489 1736 3889 1820 7289 1907 0689 1995 4089 2085
7489 2178 0889 68 1654 8624 1737 2224 1821 5824 1907 9424 1996 3024 2086 6624
2179 0224 69 1655 6761 1738 0561 1822 4361 1908 8161 1997 1961 2087 5761 2179
9561 70 1656 4900 1738 8900 1823 2900 1909 6900 1998 0900 2088 4900 2180 8900
71 1657 3041 1739 7241 1824 1441 1910 5641 1998 9841 2089 4041 2181 8241 72
1658 1184 1740 5584 1824 9984 1911 4384 1999 8784 2090 3184 2182 7584 73 1658
9329 1741 3929 1825 8529 1912 3129 2000 7729 2091 2329 2183 6929 74 1659 7476
1742 2276 1826 7076 1913 1876 2001 6676 2092 1476 2184 6276 75 1660 5625 1743
0625 1827 5625 1914 0625 2002 5625 2093 0625 2185 5625 76 1661 3776 1743 8976
1828 4176 1914 9376 2003 4576 2093 9776 2186 4976 77 1662 1929 1744 7329 1829
2729 1915 8129 2004 3529 2094 8929 2187 4329 78 1663 0084 1745 5684 1830 1284
1916 6884 2005 2484 2095 8084 2188 3684 79 1663 8241 1746 4041 1830 9841 1917
5641 2006 1441 2096 7241 2189 3041 80 1664 6400 1747 2400 1831 8400 1918 4400
2007 0400 2097 6400 2190 2400 81 1665 4561 1748 0761 1832 6961 1919 3161 2007
9361 2098 5561 2191 1761 82 1666 2724 1748 9124 1833 5524 1920 1924 2008 8324
2099 4724 2192 1124 83 1667 0889 1749 7489 1834 4089 1921 0689 2009 7289 2100
3889 2193 0489 84 1667 9056 1750 5856 1835 2656 1921 9456 2010 6256 2101 3056
2193 9856 85 1668 7225 1751 4225 1836 1225 1922 8225 2011 5225 2102 2225 2194
9225 86 1669 5396 1752 2596 1836 9796 1923 6996 2012 4196 2103 1396 2195 8596
87 1670 3569 1753 0969 1837 8369 1924 5769 2013 3169 2104 0569 2196 7969 88
1671 1744 1753 9344 1838 6944 1925 4544 2014 2144 2104 9744 2197 7344 89 1671
9921 1754 7721 1839 5521 1926 3321 2015 1121 2105 8921 2198 6721 90 1672 8100
1755 6100 1840 4100 1927 2100 2016 0100 2106 8100 2199 6100 91 1673 6281 1756
4481 1841 2681 1928 0881 2016 9081 2107 7281 2200 5481 92 1674 4464 1757 2864
1842 1264 1928 9664 2017 8064 2108 6464 2201 4864 93 1675 2649 1758 1249 1842
9849 1929 8449 2018 7049 2109 5649 2202 4249 94 1676 0836 1758 9636 1843 8436
1930 7230 2019 6036 2110 4836 2203 3636 95 1676 9025 1759 8025 1844 7025 1931
6025 2020 5025 2111 4025 2204 3025 96 1677 7216 1760 6416 1845 5616 1932 4816
2021 4016 2112 3216 2205 2416 97 1678 5409 1761 4809 1846 4209 1933 3609 2022
3009 2113 2409 2206 1809 98 1679 3604 1762 3204 1847 2804 1934 2404 2023 2004
2114 1604 2207 1204 99 1680 1801 1763 1601 1848 1401 1935 1201 2024 1001 2115
0801 2208 0601 47.. 48.. 49.. 50.. 51.. 52.. 53.. 00 2209 0000 2304 0000 2401
0000 2500 0000 2601 0000 2704 0000 2809 0000 01 2209 9401 2304 9601 2401 9801
2501 0001 2602 0201 2705 0401 2810 0601 02 2210 8804 2305 9204 2402 9604 2502
0004 2603 0404 2706 0804 2811 1204 03 2211 8209 2306 8809 2403 9409 2503 0009
2604 0609 2707 1209 2812 1809 04 2212 7616 2307 8416 2404 9216 2504 0016 2605
0816 2708 1616 2813 2416 05 2213 7025 2308 8025 2405 9025 2505 0025 2606 1025
2709 2025 2814 3025 06 2214 6436 2309 7636 2406 8836 2506 0036 2607 1236 2710
2436 2815 3636 07 2215 5849 2310 7249 2407 8649 2507 0049 2608 1449 2711 2849
2816 4249 08 2216 5264 2311 6864 2408 8464 2508 0064 2609 1664 2712 3264 2817
4864 09 2217 4681 2312 6481 2409 8281 2509 0081 2610 1881 2713 3681 2818 5481
10 2218 4100 2313 6100 2410 8100 2510 0100 2611 2100 2714 4100 2819 6100 11
2219 3521 2314 5721 2411 7921 2511 0121 2612 2321 2715 4521 2820 6721 12 2220
2944 2315 5344 2414 7744 2512 0144 2613 2544 2716 4944 2821 7344 13 2221 2369
2316 4969 2413 7569 2513 0169 2614 2769 2717 5369 2822 7969 14 2222 1796 2317
4596 2414 7396 2514 0196 2615 2996 2718 5796 2823 8596 15 2223 1225 2318 4225
2415 7225 2515 0225 2616 3225 2719 6225 2824 9225 16 2224 0656 2319 3856 2416
7056 2516 0256 2617 3456 2720 6656 2825 9856 17 2225 0089 2320 3489 2417 6889
2517 0289 2618 3689 2721 7089 2827 0489 18 2225 9524 2321 3124 2418 6724 2518
0324 2619 3924 2722 7524 2828 1124 19 2226 8961 2322 2761 2419 6561 2519 0361
2620 4161 2723 7961 2829 1761 20 2227 8400 2323 2400 2420 6400 2520 0400 2621
4400 2724 8400 2830 2400 21 2228 7841 2324 2041 2421 6241 2521 0441 2622 4641
2725 8841 2831 3041 22 2229 7284 2325 1684 2422 6084 2522 0484 2623 4884 2726
9284 2832 3684 23 2230 6729 2326 1329 2423 5929 2523 0529 2624 5129 2727 9729
2833 4329 24 2231 6176 2327 0976 2424 5776 2524 0576 2625 5376 2729 0176 2834
4976 25 2232 5625 2328 0625 2425 5625 2525 0625 2626 5625 2730 0625 2835 5625
26 2233 5076 2329 0276 2426 5476 2526 0676 2627 5876 2731 1076 2836 6276 27
2234 4529 2329 9929 2427 5329 2527 0729 2628 6129 2732 1529 2837 6929 28 2235
3984 2330 9584 2428 5184 2528 0784 2629 6384 2733 1984 2838 7584 29 2236 3441
2331 9241 2429 5041 2529 0841 2630 6641 2734 2441 2839 8241 30 2237 2900 2332
8900 2430 4900 2530 0900 2631 6900 2735 2900 2840 8900 31 2238 2361 2333 8561
2431 4761 2531 0961 2632 7161 2736 3361 2841 9561 32 2239 1824 2334 8224 2432
4624 2532 1024 2633 7424 2737 3824 2843 0224 33 2240 1289 2335 7889 2433 4489
2533 1089 2634 7689 2738 4289 2844 0889 34 2241 0756 2336 7556 2434 4356 2534
1156 2635 7956 2739 4756 2845 1556 35 2242 0225 2337 7225 2435 4225 2535 1225
2636 8225 2740 5225 2846 2225 36 2242 9696 2338 6896 2436 4096 2536 1296 2637
8496 2741 5696 2847 2896 37 2243 9169 2339 6569 2437 3969 2537 1369 2638 8769
2742 6169 2848 3569 38 2244 8644 2340 6244 2438 3844 2538 1444 2639 9044 2743
6644 2849 4244 39 2245 8121 2341 5921 2439 3721 2539 1521 2640 9321 2744 7121
2850 4921 40 2246 7600 2342 5600 2440 3600 2540 1600 2641 9600 2745 7600 2851
5600 41 2247 7081 2343 5281 2441 3481 2541 1681 2642 9881 2746 8081 2852 6281
42 2248 6564 2344 4964 2442 3364 2542 1764 2644 0164 2747 8564 2853 6964 43
2249 6049 2345 4649 2443 3249 2543 1849 2645 0449 2748 9049 2854 7649 44 2250
5536 2346 4336 2444 3136 2544 1936 2646 0736 2749 9536 2855 8336 45 2251 5025
2347 4025 2445 3025 2545 2025 2647 1025 2751 0025 2856 9025 46 2252 4516 2348
3716 2446 2916 2546 2116 2648 1316 2752 0516 2857 9716 47 2253 4009 2349 3409
2447 2809 2547 2209 2649 1609 2753 1009 2859 0409 48 2254 3504 2350 3104 2448
2704 2548 2304 2650 1904 2754 1504 2860 1104 49 2255 3001 2351 2801 2449 2601
2549 2401 2651 2201 2755 2001 2861 1801 50 2256 2500 2352 2500 2450 2500 2550
2500 2652 2500 2756 2500 2862 2500 51 2257 2001 2353 2201 2451 2401 2551 2601
2653 2801 2757 3001 2863 3201 52 2258 1504 2354 1904 2452 2304 2552 2704 2654
3104 2758 3504 2864 3904 53 2259 1009 2355 1609 2453 2209 2553 2809 2655 3409
2759 4009 2865 4609 54 2260 0516 2356 1316 2454 2116 2554 2916 2656 3716 2760
4516 2866 5316 55 2261 0025 2357 1025 2455 2025 2555 3025 2657 4025 2761 5025
2867 6025 56 2261 9536 2358 0736 2456 1936 2556 3136 2658 4336 2762 5536 2868
6736 57 2262 9049 2359 0449 2457 1849 2557 3249 2659 4649 2763 6049 2869 7449
58 2263 8564 2360 0164 2458 1764 2558 3364 2660 4964 2764 6564 2870 8164 59
2264 8081 2360 9881 2459 1681 2559 3481 2661 5281 2765 7081 2871 8881 60 2265
7600 2361 9600 2460 1600 2560 3600 2662 5600 2766 7600 2872 9600 61 2266 7121
2362 9321 2461 1521 2561 3721 2663 5921 2767 8121 2874 0321 62 2267 6644 2363
9044 2462 1444 2562 3844 2664 6244 2768 8644 2875 1044 63 2268 6169 2364 8769
2463 1369 2563 3969 2665 6569 2769 9169 2876 1769 64 2269 5696 2365 8496 2464
1296 2564 4096 2666 6896 2770 9696 2877 2496 65 2270 5225 2366 8225 2465 1225
2565 4225 2667 7225 2772 0225 2878 3225 66 2271 4756 2367 7956 2466 1156 2566
4356 2668 7556 2773 0756 2879 3956 67 2272 4289 2368 7689 2467 1089 2567 4489
2669 7889 2774 1289 2880 4689 68 2273 3824 2369 7424 2468 1024 2568 4624 2670
8224 2775 1824 2881 5424 69 2274 3361 2370 7161 2469 0961 2569 4761 2671 8561
2776 2361 2882 6161 70 2275 2900 2371 6900 2470 0900 2570 4900 2672 8900 2777
2900 2883 6900 71 2276 2441 2372 6641 2471 0841 2571 5041 2673 9241 2778 3441
2884 7641 72 2277 1984 2373 6384 2472 0784 2572 5184 2674 9584 2779 3984 2885
8384 73 2278 1529 2374 6129 2473 0729 2573 5329 2675 9929 2780 4529 2886 9129
74 2279 1076 2375 5876 2474 0676 2574 5476 2677 0276 2781 5076 2887 9876 75
2280 0625 2376 5625 2475 0625 2575 5625 2678 0625 2782 5625 2889 0625 76 2281
0176 2377 5376 2476 0576 2576 5776 2679 0976 2783 6176 2890 1376 77 2281 9729
2378 5129 2477 0529 2577 5929 2680 1329 2784 6729 2891 2129 78 2282 9284 2379
4884 2478 0484 2578 6084 2681 1684 2785 7284 2892 2884 79 2283 8841 2380 4641
2479 0441 2579 6241 2682 2041 2786 7841 2893 3641 80 2284 8400 2381 4400 2480
0400 2580 6400 2683 2400 2787 8400 2894 4400 81 2285 7961 2382 4161 2481 0361
2581 6561 2684 2761 2788 8961 2895 5161 82 2286 7524 2383 3924 2482 0324 2582
6724 2685 3124 2789 9524 2896 5924 83 2287 7089 2384 3689 2483 0289 2583 6889
2686 3489 2791 0089 2897 6689 84 2288 6656 2385 3456 2484 0256 2584 7056 2687
3856 2792 0656 2898 7456 85 2289 6225 2386 3225 2485 0225 2585 7225 2688 4225
2793 1225 2899 8225 86 2290 5796 2387 2996 2486 0196 2586 7396 2689 4596 2794
1796 2900 8996 87 2291 5369 2388 2769 2487 0169 2587 7569 2690 4969 2795 2369
2901 9769 88 2292 4944 2389 2544 2488 0144 2588 7744 2691 5344 2796 2944 2903
0544 89 2293 4521 2390 2321 2489 0121 2589 7921 2692 5721 2797 3521 2904 1321
90 2294 4100 2391 2100 2490 0100 2590 8100 2693 6100 2798 4100 2905 2100 91
2295 3681 2392 1881 2491 0081 2591 8281 2694 6481 2799 4681 2906 2881 92 2296
3264 2393 1664 2492 0064 2592 8464 2695 6864 2800 5264 2907 3664 93 2297 2849
2394 1449 2493 0049 2593 8649 2696 7249 2801 5849 2908 4449 94 2298 2436 2395
1236 2494 0036 2594 8836 2697 7636 2802 6436 2909 5236 95 2299 2025 2396 1025
2495 0025 2595 9025 2698 8025 2803 7025 2910 6025 96 2300 1616 2397 0816 2496
0016 2596 9216 2699 8416 2804 7616 2911 6816 97 2301 1209 2398 0609 2497 0009
2597 9409 2700 8809 2805 8209 2912 7609 98 2302 0804 2399 0404 2498 0004 2598
9604 2701 9204 2806 8804 2913 8404 99 2303 0401 2400 0201 2499 0001 2599 9801
2702 9601 2807 9401 2914 9201 54.. 55.. 56.. 57.. 58.. 59.. 60.. 00 2916 0000
3025 0000 3136 0000 3249 0000 3364 0000 3481 0000 3600 0000 01 2917 0801 3026
1001 3137 1201 3250 1401 3365 1601 3482 1801 3601 2001 02 2918 1604 3027 2004
3138 2404 3251 2804 3366 3204 3483 3604 3602 4004 03 2919 2409 3028 3009 3139
3609 3252 4209 3367 4809 3484 5409 3603 6009 04 2920 3216 3029 4016 3140 4816
3253 5616 3368 6416 3485 7216 3604 8016 05 2921 4025 3030 5025 3141 6025 3254
7025 3369 8025 3486 9025 3606 0025 06 2922 4836 3031 6036 3142 7236 3255 8436
3370 9636 3488 0836 3607 2036 07 2923 5649 3032 7049 3143 8449 3256 9849 3372
1249 3489 2649 3608 4049 08 2924 6464 3033 8064 3144 9664 3258 1264 3373 2864
3490 4464 3609 6064 09 2925 7281 3034 9081 3146 0881 3259 2681 3374 4481 3491
6281 3610 8081 10 2926 8100 3036 0100 3147 2100 3260 4100 3375 6100 3492 8100
3612 0100 11 2927 8921 3037 1121 3148 3321 3261 5521 3376 7721 3493 9921 3613
2121 12 2928 9744 3038 2144 3149 4544 3262 6944 3377 9344 3495 1744 3614 4144
13 2930 0569 3039 3169 3150 5769 3263 8369 3379 0969 3496 3569 3615 6169 14
2931 1396 3040 4196 3151 6996 3264 9796 3380 2596 3497 5396 3616 8196 15 2932
2225 3041 5225 3152 8225 3266 1225 3381 4225 3498 7225 3618 0225 16 2933 3056
3042 6256 3153 9456 3267 2656 3382 5856 3499 9056 3619 2256 17 2934 3889 3043
7289 3155 0689 3268 4089 3383 7489 3501 0889 3620 4289 18 2935 4724 3044 8324
3156 1924 3269 5524 3384 9124 3502 2724 3621 6324 19 2936 5561 3045 9361 3157
3161 3270 6961 3386 0761 3503 4561 3622 8361 20 2937 6400 3047 0400 3158 4400
3271 8400 3387 2400 3504 6400 3624 0400 21 2938 7241 3048 1441 3159 5641 3272
9841 3388 4041 3505 8241 3625 2441 22 2939 8084 3049 2484 3160 6884 3274 1284
3389 5684 3507 0084 3626 4484 23 2940 8929 3050 3529 3161 8129 3275 2729 3390
7329 3508 1929 3627 6529 24 2941 9776 3051 4576 3162 9376 3276 4176 3391 8976
3509 3776 3628 8576 25 2943 0625 3052 5625 3164 0625 3277 5625 3393 0625 3510
5625 3630 0625 26 2944 1476 3053 6676 3165 1876 3278 7076 3394 2276 3511 7476
3631 2676 27 2945 2329 3054 7729 3166 3129 3279 8529 3395 3929 3512 9329 3632
4729 28 2946 3184 3055 8784 3167 4384 3280 9984 3396 5584 3514 1184 3633 6784
29 2947 4041 3056 9841 3168 5641 3282 1441 3397 7241 3515 3041 3634 8841 30
2948 4900 3058 0900 3169 6900 3283 2900 3398 8900 3516 4900 3636 0900 31 2949
5761 3059 1961 3170 8161 3284 4361 3400 0561 3517 6761 3637 2961 32 2950 6624
3060 3024 3171 9424 3285 5824 3401 2224 3518 8624 3638 5024 33 2951 7489 3061
4089 3173 0689 3286 7289 3402 3889 3520 0489 3639 7089 34 2952 8356 3062 5156
3174 1956 3287 8756 3403 5556 3521 2356 3640 9156 35 2953 9225 3063 6225 3175
3225 3289 0225 3404 7225 3522 4225 3642 1225 36 2955 0096 3064 7296 3176 4496
3290 1696 3405 8896 3523 6096 3643 3296 37 2956 0969 3065 8369 3177 5769 3291
3169 3407 0569 3524 7969 3644 5369 38 2957 1844 3066 9444 3178 7044 3292 4644
3408 2244 3525 9844 3645 7444 39 2958 2721 3068 0521 3179 8321 3293 6121 3409
3921 3527 1721 3646 9521 40 2959 3600 3069 1600 3180 9600 3294 7600 3410 5600
3528 3600 3648 1600 41 2960 4481 3070 2681 3182 0881 3295 9081 3411 7281 3529
5481 3649 3681 42 2961 5364 3071 3764 3183 2164 3297 0564 3412 8964 3530 7364
3650 5764 43 2962 6249 3072 4849 3184 3449 3298 2049 3414 0649 3531 9249 3651
7849 44 2963 7136 3073 5936 3185 4736 3299 3536 3415 2336 3533 1136 3652 9936
45 2964 8025 3074 7025 3186 6025 3300 5025 3416 4025 3534 3025 3654 2025 46
2965 8916 3075 8116 3187 7316 3301 6516 3417 5716 3535 4916 3655 4116 47 2966
9809 3076 9209 3188 8609 3302 8009 3418 7409 3536 6809 3656 6209 48 2968 0704
3078 0304 3189 9904 3303 9504 3419 9104 3537 8704 3657 8304 49 2969 1601 3079
1401 3191 1201 3305 1001 3421 0801 3539 0601 3659 0401 50 2970 2500 3080 2500
3192 2500 3306 2500 3422 2500 3540 2500 3660 2500 51 2971 3401 3081 3601 3193
3801 3307 4001 3423 4201 3541 4401 3661 4601 52 2972 4304 3082 4704 3194 5104
3308 5504 3424 5904 3542 6304 3662 6704 53 2973 5209 3083 5809 3195 6409 3309
7009 3425 7609 3543 8209 3663 8809 54 2974 6116 3084 6916 3196 7716 3310 8516
3426 9316 3545 0116 3665 0916 55 2975 7025 3085 8025 3197 9025 3312 0025 3428
1025 3546 2025 3666 3025 56 2976 7936 3086 9136 3199 0336 3313 1536 3429 2736
3547 3936 3667 5136 57 2977 8849 3088 0249 3200 1649 3314 3049 3430 4449 3548
5849 3668 7249 58 2978 9764 3089 1364 3201 2964 3315 4564 3431 6164 3549 7764
3669 9364 59 2980 0681 3090 2481 3202 4281 3316 6081 3432 7881 3550 9681 3671
1481 60 2981 1600 3091 3600 3203 5600 3317 7600 3433 9600 3552 1600 3672 3600
61 2982 2521 3092 4721 3204 6921 3318 9121 3435 1321 3553 3521 3673 5721 62
2983 3444 3093 5844 3205 8244 3320 0644 3436 3044 3554 5444 3674 7844 63 2984
4369 3094 6969 3206 9569 3321 2169 3437 4769 3555 7369 3675 9969 64 2985 5296
3095 8096 3208 0896 3322 3696 3438 6496 3556 9296 3677 2096 65 2986 6225 3096
9225 3209 2125 3323 5225 3439 8225 3558 1225 3678 4225 66 2987 7156 3098 0356
3210 3556 3324 6756 3440 9956 3559 3156 3679 6356 67 2988 8089 3099 1489 3211
4889 3325 8289 3442 1689 3560 5089 3680 8489 68 2989 9024 3100 2624 3212 6224
3326 9824 3443 3424 3561 7024 3682 0624 69 2990 9961 3101 3761 3213 7561 3328
1361 3444 5161 3562 8961 3683 2761 70 2992 0900 3102 4900 3214 8900 3329 2900
3445 6900 3564 0900 3684 4900 71 2993 1841 3103 6041 3216 0241 3330 4441 3446
8641 3565 2841 3685 7041 72 2994 2784 3104 7184 3217 1584 3331 5984 3448 0384
3566 4784 3686 9184 73 2995 3729 3105 8329 3218 2929 3332 7529 3449 2129 3567
6729 3688 1329 74 2996 4676 3106 9476 3219 4276 3333 9076 3450 3876 3568 8676
3689 3476 75 2997 5625 3108 0625 3220 5625 3335 0625 3451 5625 3570 0625 3690
5625 76 2998 6576 3109 1776 3221 6976 3336 2176 3452 7376 3571 2576 3691 7776
77 2999 7529 3110 2929 3222 8329 3337 3729 3453 9129 3572 4529 3692 9929 78
3000 8484 3111 4084 3223 9684 3338 5284 3455 0884 3573 6484 3694 2084 79 3001
9441 3112 5241 3225 1041 3339 6841 3456 2641 3574 8441 3695 4241 80 3003 0400
3113 6400 3226 2400 3340 8400 3457 4400 3576 0400 3696 6400 81 3004 1361 3114
7561 3227 3761 3341 9961 3458 6161 3577 2361 3697 8561 82 3005 2324 3115 8724
3228 5124 3343 1524 3459 7924 3578 4324 3699 0724 83 3006 3289 3116 9889 3229
6489 3344 3089 3460 9689 3579 6289 3700 2889 84 3007 4256 3118 1056 3230 7856
3345 4656 3462 1456 3580 8256 3701 5056 85 3008 5225 3119 2225 3231 9225 3346
6225 3463 3225 3582 0225 3702 7225 86 3009 6196 3120 3396 3233 0596 3347 7796
3464 4996 3583 2196 3703 9396 87 3010 7169 3121 4569 3234 1969 3348 9369 3465
6769 3584 4169 3705 1569 88 3011 8144 3122 5744 3235 3344 3350 0944 3466 8544
3585 6144 3706 3744 89 3012 9121 3123 6921 3236 4721 3351 2521 3468 0321 3586
8121 3707 5921 90 3014 0100 3124 8100 3237 6100 3352 4100 3469 2100 3588 0100
3708 8100 91 3015 1081 3125 9281 3238 7481 3353 5681 3470 3881 3589 2081 3710
0281 92 3016 2064 3127 0464 3239 8864 3354 7264 3471 5664 3590 4064 3711 2464
93 3017 3049 3128 1649 3241 0249 3355 8849 3472 7449 3591 6049 3712 4649 94
3018 4036 3129 2836 3242 1636 3357 0436 3473 9236 3592 8036 3713 6836 95 3019
5025 3130 4025 3243 3025 3358 2025 3475 1025 3594 0025 3714 9025 96 3020 6016
3131 5216 3244 4416 3359 3616 3476 2816 3595 2016 3716 1216 97 3021 7009 3132
6409 3245 5809 3360 5209 3477 4609 3596 4009 3717 3409 98 3022 8004 3133 7604
3246 7204 3361 6804 3478 6404 3597 6004 3718 5604 99 3023 9001 3134 8801 3247
8601 3362 8401 3479 8201 3598 8001 3719 7801 61.. 62.. 63.. 64.. 65.. 66. 67..
00 3721 0000 3844 0000 3969 0000 4096 0000 4225 0000 4356 0000 4489 0000 01
3722 2201 3845 2401 3970 2601 4097 2801 4220 3001 4357 3201 4490 3401 02 3723
4404 3846 4804 3971 5204 4098 5604 4227 6004 4358 6404 4491 6804 03 3724 6609
3847 7209 3972 7809 4099 8409 4228 9009 4359 9609 4493 0209 04 3725 8816 3848
9616 3974 0416 4101 1216 4230 2016 4361 2816 4494 3616 05 3727 1025 3850 2025
3975 3025 4102 4025 4231 5025 4362 6025 4495 7025 06 3728 3236 3851 4436 3976
5636 4103 6836 4232 8036 4363 9236 4497 0436 07 3729 5449 3852 6849 3977 8249
4104 9649 4234 1049 4365 2449 4498 3849 08 3730 7664 3853 9264 3979 0864 4106
2464 4235 4064 4366 5664 4499 7264 09 3731 9881 3855 1681 3980 3481 4107 5281
4236 7081 4367 8881 4501 0681 10 3733 2100 3856 4100 3981 6100 4108 8100 4238
0100 4369 2100 4502 4100 11 3734 4321 3857 6521 3982 8721 4110 0921 4239 3121
4370 5321 4503 7521 12 3735 6544 3858 8944 3984 1344 4111 3744 4240 6144 4371
8544 4505 0944 13 3736 8769 3860 1369 3985 3969 4112 6569 4241 9169 4373 1769
4506 4369 14 3738 0996 3861 3796 3986 6596 4113 9396 4243 2196 4374 4996 4507
7796 15 3739 3225 3862 6225 3987 9225 4115 2225 4244 5225 4375 8225 4509 1225
16 3740 5456 3863 8656 3989 1856 4116 5056 4245 8256 4377 1456 4510 4656 17
3741 7689 3865 1089 3990 4489 4117 7889 4247 1289 4378 4689 4511 8089 18 3742
9924 3866 3524 3991 7124 4119 0724 4248 4324 4379 7924 4513 1524 19 3744 2161
3867 5961 3992 9761 4120 3561 4249 7361 4381 1161 4514 4961 20 3745 4400 3868
8400 3994 2400 4121 6400 4251 0400 4382 4400 4515 8400 21 3746 6641 3870 0841
3995 5041 4122 9241 4252 3441 4383 7641 4517 1841 22 3747 8884 3871 3284 3996
7684 4124 2084 4253 6484 4385 0884 4518 5284 23 3749 1129 3872 5729 3998 0329
4125 4929 4254 9529 4386 4129 4519 8729 24 3750 3376 3873 8176 3999 2976 4126
7776 4256 2576 4387 7376 4521 2176 25 3751 5625 3875 0625 4000 5625 4128 0625
4257 5625 4389 0625 4522 5625 26 3752 7876 3876 3076 4001 8276 4129 3476 4258
8676 4390 3876 4523 9076 27 3754 0129 3877 5529 4003 0929 4130 6329 4260 1729
4391 7129 4525 2529 28 3755 2384 3878 7984 4004 3584 4131 9184 4261 4784 4393
0384 4526 5984 29 3756 4641 3880 0441 4005 6241 4133 2041 4262 7841 4394 3641
4527 9441 30 3757 6900 3881 2900 4006 8900 4134 4900 4264 0900 4395 6900 4529
2900 31 3758 9161 3882 5361 4008 1561 4135 7761 4265 3961 4397 0161 4530 6361
32 3760 1424 3883 7824 4009 4224 4137 0624 4266 7024 4398 3424 4531 9824 33
3761 3689 3885 0289 4010 6889 4138 3489 4268 0089 4399 6689 4533 3289 34 3762
5956 3886 2756 4011 9556 4139 6356 4269 3156 4400 9956 4534 6756 35 3763 8225
3887 5225 4013 2225 4140 9225 4270 6225 4402 3225 4536 0225 36 3765 0496 3888
7696 4014 4896 4142 2096 4271 9296 4403 6496 4537 3696 37 3766 2769 3890 0169
4015 7569 4143 4969 4273 2369 4404 9769 4538 7169 38 3767 5044 3891 2644 4017
0244 4144 7844 4274 5444 4406 3044 4540 0644 39 3768 7321 3892 5121 4018 2921
4146 0721 4275 8521 4407 6321 4541 4121 40 3769 9600 3893 7600 4019 5600 4147
3600 4277 1600 4408 9600 4542 7600 41 3771 1881 3895 0081 4020 8281 4148 6481
4278 4681 4410 2881 4544 1081 42 3772 4164 3896 2564 4022 0964 4149 9364 4279
7764 4411 6164 4545 4564 43 3773 6449 3897 5049 4023 3649 4151 2249 4281 0849
4412 9449 4546 8049 44 3774 8736 3898 7536 4024 6336 4152 5136 4282 3936 4414
2736 4548 1536 45 3776 1025 3900 0025 4025 9025 4153 8025 4283 7025 4415 6025
4549 5025 46 3777 3316 3901 2516 4027 1716 4155 0916 4285 0116 4416 9316 4550
8516 47 3778 5609 3902 5009 4028 4409 4156 3809 4286 3209 4418 2609 4552 2009
48 3779 7904 3903 7504 4029 7104 4157 6704 4287 6304 4419 5904 4553 5504 49
3781 0201 3905 0001 4030 9801 4158 9601 4288 9401 4420 9201 4554 9001 50 3782
2500 3906 2500 4032 2500 4160 2500 4290 2500 4422 2500 4556 2500 51 3783 4801
3907 5001 4033 5201 4161 5401 4291 5601 4423 5801 4557 6001 52 3784 7104 3908
7504 4034 7904 4162 8304 4292 8704 4424 9104 4558 9504 53 3785 9409 3910 0009
4036 0609 4164 1209 4294 1809 4426 2409 4560 3009 54 3787 1716 3911 2516 4037
3316 4165 4116 4295 4916 4427 5716 4561 6516 55 3788 4025 3912 5025 4038 6025
4166 7025 4296 8025 4428 9025 4563 0025 56 3789 6336 3913 7536 4039 8736 4167
9936 4298 1136 4430 2336 4564 3536 57 3790 8649 3915 0049 4041 1449 4169 2849
4299 4249 4431 5649 4565 7049 58 3792 0964 3916 2564 4042 4164 4170 5764 4300
7364 4432 8964 4567 0564 59 3793 3281 3917 5081 4043 6881 4171 8681 4302 0481
4434 2281 4568 4081 60 3794 5600 3918 7600 4044 9600 4173 1600 4303 3600 4435
5600 4569 7600 61 3795 7921 3920 0121 4046 2321 4174 4521 4304 6721 4436 8921
4571 1121 62 3797 0244 3921 2644 4047 5044 4175 7444 4305 9844 4438 2244 4572
4644 63 3798 2569 3922 5169 4048 7769 4177 0369 4307 2969 4439 5569 4573 8169
64 3799 4896 3923 7696 4050 0496 4178 3296 4308 6096 4440 8896 4575 1696 65
3800 7225 3925 0225 4051 3225 4179 6225 4309 9225 4442 2225 4576 5225 66 3801
9556 3926 2756 4052 5956 4180 9156 4311 2356 4443 5556 4577 8756 67 3803 1889
3927 5289 4053 8689 4182 2089 4312 5489 4444 8889 4579 2289 68 3804 4224 3928
7824 4055 1424 4183 5024 4313 8624 4446 2224 4580 5824 69 3805 6561 3930 0361
4056 4161 4184 7961 4315 1761 4447 5561 4581 9361 70 3806 8900 3931 2900 4057
6900 4186 0900 4316 4900 4448 8900 4583 2900 71 3808 1241 3932 5441 4058 9641
4187 3841 4317 8041 4450 2241 4584 6441 72 3809 3584 3933 7984 4060 2384 4188
6784 4319 1184 4451 5584 4585 9984 73 3810 5929 3935 0529 4061 5129 4189 9729
4320 4329 4452 8929 4587 3529 74 3811 8276 3936 3076 4062 7876 4191 2676 4321
7476 4454 2276 4588 7076 75 3813 0625 3937 5625 4064 0625 4192 5625 4323 0625
4455 5625 4590 0625 76 3814 2976 3938 8176 4065 3376 4193 8576 4324 3776 4456
8976 4591 4176 77 3815 5329 3940 0729 4066 6129 4195 1529 4325 6929 4458 2329
4592 7729 78 3816 7684 3941 3284 4067 8884 4196 4484 4327 0084 4459 5684 4594
1284 79 3818 0041 3942 5841 4069 1641 4197 7441 4328 3241 4460 9041 4595 4841
80 3819 2400 3943 8400 4070 4400 4199 0400 4329 6400 4462 2400 4596 8400 81
3820 4761 3945 0961 4071 7161 4200 3361 4330 9561 4463 5761 4598 1961 82 3821
7124 3946 3524 4072 9924 4201 6324 4332 2724 4464 9124 4999 5524 83 3822 9489
3947 6089 4074 2689 4202 9289 4333 5889 4466 2489 4600 9089 84 3824 1856 3948
8656 4075 5456 4204 2256 4334 9056 4467 5856 4602 2656 85 3825 4225 3950 1225
4076 8225 4205 5225 4336 2225 4468 9225 4603 6225 86 3826 6596 3951 3796 4078
0996 4206 8196 4337 5396 4470 2596 4604 9796 87 3827 8969 3952 6369 4079 3769
4208 1169 4338 8569 4471 5969 4606 3369 88 3829 1344 3953 8944 4080 6544 4209
4144 4340 1744 4472 9344 4607 6944 89 3830 3721 3955 1521 4081 9321 4210 7121
4341 4921 4474 2721 4609 0521 90 3831 6100 3956 4100 4083 2100 4212 0100 4342
8100 4475 6100 4610 4100 91 3832 8481 3957 6681 4084 4881 4213 3081 4344 1281
4476 9481 4611 7681 92 3834 0864 3958 9264 4085 7664 4214 6064 4345 4464 4478
2864 4613 1264 93 3835 3249 3960 1849 4087 0449 4215 9049 4346 7649 4479 6249
4614 4849 94 3836 5636 3961 4436 4088 3236 4217 2036 4348 0836 4480 9636 4615
8436 95 3837 8025 3962 7025 4089 6025 4218 5025 4349 4025 4482 3025 4617 2025
96 3839 0416 3963 9616 4090 8816 4219 8016 4350 7216 4483 6416 4618 5616 97
3840 2809 3965 2209 4092 1609 4221 1009 4352 0409 4484 9809 4619 9209 98 3841
5204 3966 4804 4093 4404 4222 4004 4353 3604 4486 3204 4621 2804 99 3842 7601
3967 7401 4094 7201 4223 7001 4354 6801 4487 6601 4622 6401 68.. 69.. 70.. 71..
72.. 73. 74.. 00 4624 0000 4761 0000 4900 0000 5041 0000 5184 0000 5329 0000
5476 0000 01 4625 3601 4762 3801 4901 4001 5042 4201 5185 4401 5330 4601 5477
4801 02 4626 7204 4763 7604 4902 8004 5043 8404 5186 8804 5331 9204 5478 9604
03 4628 0809 4765 1409 4904 2009 5045 2609 5188 3209 5333 3809 5480 4409 04
4629 4416 4766 5216 4905 6016 5046 6816 5189 7616 5334 8416 5481 9216 05 4630
8025 4767 9025 4907 0025 5048 1025 5191 2025 5336 3025 5483 4025 06 4632 1636
4769 2836 4908 4036 5049 5236 5192 6436 5337 7636 5484 8836 07 4633 5249 4770
6649 4909 8049 5050 9449 5194 0849 5339 2249 5486 3649 08 4634 8864 4772 0464
4911 2064 5052 3664 5195 5264 5340 6864 5487 8464 09 4636 2481 4773 4281 4912
6081 5053 7881 5196 9681 5342 1481 5489 3281 10 4637 6100 4774 8100 4914 0100
5055 2100 5198 4100 5343 6100 5490 8100 11 4638 9721 4776 1921 4915 4121 5056
6321 5199 8521 5345 0721 5492 2921 12 4640 3344 4777 5744 4916 8144 5058 0544
5201 2944 5346 5344 5493 7744 13 4641 6969 4778 9569 4918 2169 5059 4769 5202
7369 5347 9969 5495 2569 14 4643 0596 4780 3396 4919 6196 5060 8996 5204 1796
5349 4596 5496 7396 15 4644 4225 4781 7225 4921 0225 5062 3225 5205 6225 5350
9225 5498 2225 16 4645 7856 4783 1056 4922 4256 5063 7456 5207 0656 5352 3856
5499 7056 17 4647 1489 4784 4889 4923 8289 5065 1689 5208 5089 5353 8489 5501
1889 18 4648 5124 4785 8724 4925 2324 5066 5924 5209 9524 5355 3124 5502 6724
19 4649 8761 4787 2561 4926 6361 5068 0161 5211 3961 5356 7761 5504 1561 20
4651 2400 4788 6400 4928 0400 5069 4400 5212 8400 5358 2400 5505 6400 21 4652
6041 4790 0241 4929 4441 5070 8641 5214 2841 5359 7041 5507 1241 22 4653 9684
4791 4084 4930 8484 5072 2884 5215 7284 5361 1684 5508 6084 23 4655 3329 4792
7929 4932 2529 5073 7129 5217 1729 5362 6329 5510 0929 24 4656 6976 4794 1776
4933 6576 5075 1376 5218 6176 5364 0976 5511 5776 25 4658 0625 4795 5625 4935
0625 5076 5625 5220 0625 5365 5625 5513 0625 26 4659 4276 4796 9476 4936 4676
5077 9876 5221 5076 5367 0276 5514 5476 27 4660 7929 4798 3329 4937 8729 5079
4129 5222 9529 5368 4929 5516 0329 28 4662 1584 4799 7184 4939 2784 5080 8384
5224 3984 5369 9584 5517 5184 29 4663 5241 4801 1041 4940 6841 5082 2641 5225
8441 5371 4241 5519 0041 30 4664 8900 4802 4900 4942 0900 5083 6900 5227 2900
5372 8900 5520 4900 31 4666 2561 4803 8761 4943 4961 5085 1161 5228 7361 5374
3561 5521 9761 32 4667 6224 4805 2624 4944 9024 5086 5424 5230 1824 5375 8224
5523 4624 33 4668 9889 4806 6489 4946 3089 5087 9689 5231 6289 5377 2889 5524
9489 34 4670 3556 4808 0356 4947 7156 5089 3956 5233 0756 5378 7556 5526 4356
35 4671 7225 4809 4225 4949 1225 5090 8225 5234 5225 5380 2225 5527 9225 36
4673 0896 4810 8096 4950 5296 5092 2496 5235 9696 5381 6896 5529 4096 37 4674
4569 4812 1969 4951 9369 5093 6769 5237 4169 5383 1569 5530 8969 38 4675 8244
4813 5844 4953 3444 5095 1044 5238 8644 5384 6244 5532 3844 39 4677 1921 4814
9721 4954 7521 5096 5321 5240 3121 5386 0921 5533 8721 40 4678 5600 4816 3600
4956 1600 5097 9600 5241 7600 5387 5600 5535 3600 41 4679 9281 4817 7481 4957
5681 5099 3881 5243 2081 5389 0281 5536 8481 42 4681 2964 4819 1364 4958 9764
5100 8164 5244 6564 5390 4964 5538 3364 43 4682 6649 4820 5249 4960 3849 5102
2449 5246 1049 5391 9649 5539 8249 44 4684 0336 4821 9136 4961 7936 5103 6736
5247 5536 5393 4336 5541 3136 45 4685 4025 4823 3025 4963 2025 5105 1025 5249
0025 5394 9025 5542 8025 46 4686 7716 4824 6916 4964 6116 5106 5316 5250 4516
5396 3716 5544 2916 47 4688 1409 4826 0809 4966 0209 5107 9609 5251 9009 5397
8409 5545 7809 48 4689 5104 4827 4704 4967 4304 5109 3904 5253 3504 5399 3104
5547 2704 49 4690 8801 4828 8601 4968 8401 5110 8201 5254 8001 5400 7801 5548
7601 50 4692 2500 4830 2500 4970 2500 5112 2500 5256 2500 5402 2500 5550 2500
51 4693 6201 4831 6401 4971 6601 5113 6801 5257 7001 5403 7201 5551 7401 52
4694 9904 4833 0304 4973 0704 5115 1104 5259 1504 5405 1904 5553 2304 53 4696
3609 4834 4209 4974 4809 5116 5409 5260 6009 5406 6609 5554 7^09 54 4697 7316
4835 8116 4975 8916 5117 9716 5262 0516 5408 1316 5556 2116 55 4699 1025 4837
2025 4977 3025 5119 4025 5263 5025 5409 6025 5557 7025 56 4700 4736 4838 5936
4978 7136 5120 8336 5264 9536 5411 0736 5559 1936 57 4701 8449 4839 9849 4980
1249 5122 2649 5266 4049 5412 5449 5560 6849 58 4703 2164 4841 3764 4981 5364
5123 6964 5267 8564 5414 0164 5562 1764 59 4704 5881 4842 7681 4982 9481 5125
1281 5269 3081 5415 4881 5563 6681 60 4705 9600 4844 1600 4984 3600 5126 5600
5270 7600 5416 9600 5565 1600 61 4707 3321 4845 5521 4985 7721 5127 9921 5272
2121 5418 4321 5566 6521 62 4708 7044 4846 9444 4987 1844 5129 4244 5273 6644
5419 9044 5568 1444 63 4710 0769 4848 3369 4988 5969 5130 8569 5275 1169 5421
3769 5569 6369 64 4711 4496 4849 7296 4990 0096 5132 2896 5276 5696 5422 8496
5571 1296 65 4712 8225 4851 1225 4991 4225 5133 7225 5278 0225 5424 3225 5572
6225 66 4714 1956 4852 5156 4992 8356 5135 1556 5279 4756 5425 7956 5574 1156
67 4715 5689 4853 9089 4994 2489 5136 5889 5280 9289 5427 2689 5575 6089 68
4716 9424 4855 3024 4995 6624 5138 0224 5282 3824 5428 7424 5577 1024 69 4718
3161 4856 6961 4997 0761 5139 4561 5283 8361 5430 2161 5578 5961 70 4719 6900
4858 0900 4998 4900 5140 8900 5285 2900 5431 6900 5580 0900 71 4721 0641 4859
4841 4999 9041 5142 3241 5286 7441 5433 1641 5581 5841 72 4722 4384 4860 8784
5001 3184 5143 7584 5288 1984 5434 6384 5583 0784 73 4723 8129 4862 2729 5002
7329 5145 1929 5289 6529 5436 1129 5584 5729 74 4725 1876 4863 6676 5004 1476
5146 6276 5291 1076 5437 5876 5586 0676 75 4726 5625 4865 0625 5005 5625 5148
0625 5292 5625 5439 0625 5587 5625 76 4727 9376 4866 4576 5006 9776 5149 4976
5294 0176 5440 5376 5589 0576 77 4729 3129 4867 8529 5008 3929 5150 9329 5295
4729 5442 0129 5590 5529 78 4730 6884 4869 2484 5009 8084 5152 3684 5296 9284
5443 4884 5592 0484 79 4732 0641 4870 6441 5011 2241 5153 8041 5298 3841 5444
9641 5593 5441 80 4733 4400 4872 0400 5012 6400 5155 2400 5299 8400 5446 4400
5595 0400 81 4734 8161 4873 4361 5014 0561 5156 6761 5301 2961 5447 9161 5596
5361 82 4736 1924 4874 8324 5015 4724 5158 1124 5302 7524 5449 3924 5598 0324
83 4737 5689 4876 2289 5016 8889 5159 5489 5304 2089 5450 8689 5599 5289 84
4738 9456 4877 6256 5018 3056 5160 9856 5305 6656 5452 3456 5601 0256 85 4740
3225 4879 0225 5019 7225 5162 4225 5307 1225 5453 8225 5602 5225 86 4741 6996
4880 4196 5021 1396 5163 8596 5308 5796 5455 2996 5604 0196 87 4743 0769 4881
8169 5022 5569 5165 2969 5310 0369 5456 7769 5605 5169 88 4744 4544 4883 2144
5023 9744 5166 7344 5311 4944 5458 2544 5607 0144 89 4745 8321 4884 6121 5025
3921 5168 1721 5312 9521 5459 7321 5608 5121 90 4747 2100 4886 0100 5026 8100
5169 6100 5314 4100 5461 2100 5610 0100 91 4748 5881 4887 4081 5028 2281 5171
0481 5315 8681 5462 6881 5611 5081 92 4749 9664 4888 8064 5029 6464 5172 4864
5317 3264 5464 1664 5613 0064 93 4751 3449 4890 2049 5031 0649 5173 9249 5318
7849 5465 6449 5614 5049 94 4752 7236 4891 6036 5032 4836 5175 3636 5320 2436
5467 1236 5616 0036 95 4754 1025 4893 0025 5033 9025 5176 8025 5321 7025 5468
6025 5617 5025 96 4755 4816 4894 4016 5035 3216 5178 2416 5323 1616 5470 0816
5619 0016 97 4756 8609 4895 8009 5036 7409 5179 6809 5324 6209 5471 5609 5620
5009 98 4758 2404 4897 2004 5038 1604 5181 1204 5326 0804 5473 0404 5622 0004
99 4759 6201 4898 6001 5039 5801 5182 5601 5327 5401 5474 5201 5623 5001 75..
76.. 77.. 78.. 79. 80.. 81.. 00 5625 0000 5776 0000 5929 0000 6084 0000 6241
0000 6400 0000 6561 0000 01 5626 5001 5777 5201 5930 5401 6085 5601 6242 5801
6401 6001 6562 6201 02 5628 0004 5779 0404 5932 0804 6087 1204 6244 1604 6403
2004 6564 2404 03 5629 5009 5780 5609 5933 6209 6088 6809 6245 7409 6404 8009
6565 8609 04 5631 0016 5782 0816 5935 1616 6090 2416 6247 3216 6406 4016 6567
4816 05 5632 5025 5783 6025 5936 7025 6091 8025 6248 9025 6408 0025 6569 1025
06 5634 0036 5785 1236 5938 2436 6093 3636 6250 4836 6409 6036 6570 7236 07
5635 5049 5786 6449 5939 7849 6094 9249 6252 0649 6411 2049 6572 3449 08 5637
0064 5788 1664 5941 3264 6096 4864 6253 6464 6412 8064 6573 9664 09 5638 5081
5789 6881 5942 8681 6098 0481 6255 2281 6414 4081 6575 5881 10 5640 0100 5791
2100 5944 4100 6099 6100 6256 8100 6416 0100 6577 2100 11 5641 5121 5792 7321
5945 9521 6101 1721 6258 3921 6417 6121 6578 8321 12 5643 0144 5794 2544 5947
4944 6102 7344 6259 9744 6419 2144 6580 4544 13 5644 5169 5795 7769 5949 0369
6104 2969 6261 5569 6420 8169 6582 0769 14 5646 0196 5797 2996 5950 5796 6105
8596 6263 1296 6422 4196 6583 6996 15 5647 5225 5798 8225 5952 1225 6107 4225
6264 7225 6424 0225 6585 3225 16 5649 0256 5800 3456 5953 6656 6108 9856 6266
3056 6425 6256 6586 9456 17 5650 5289 5801 8689 5955 2089 6110 5489 6267 8889
6427 2289 6588 5689 18 5652 0324 5803 3924 5956 7524 6112 1124 6269 4724 6438
8324 6590 1924 19 5653 5361 5804 9161 5958 2961 6113 6761 6271 0561 6430 4361
6591 8161 20 5655 0400 5806 4400 5959 8400 6115 2400 6272 6400 6432 0400 6593
4400 21 5656 5441 5807 9641 5961 3841 6116 8041 6274 2241 6433 6441 6595 0641
22 5658 0484 5809 4884 5962 9284 6118 3684 6275 8084 6435 2484 6596 6884 23
5659 5529 5811 0129 5964 4729 6119 9329 6277 3929 6436 8529 6598 3129 24 5661
0576 5812 5376 5966 0176 6121 4976 6278 9776 6438 4576 6599 9376 25 5662 5625
5814 0625 5967 5625 6123 0625 6280 5625 6440 0625 6601 5625 26 5664 0676 5815
5876 5969 1076 6124 6276 6282 1476 6441 6676 6603 1876 27 5665 5729 5817 1129
5970 6529 6126 1929 6283 7329 6443 2729 6604 8129 28 5667 0784 5818 6384 5972
1984 6127 7584 6285 3184 6444 8784 6606 4384 29 5668 5841 5820 1641 5973 7441
6129 3241 6286 9041 6446 4841 6608 0641 30 5670 0900 5821 6900 5975 2900 6130
8900 6288 4900 6448 0900 6609 6900 31 5671 5961 5823 2161 5976 8361 6132 4561
6290 0761 6449 6961 6611 3161 32 5673 1024 5824 7424 5978 3824 6134 0224 6291
6624 6451 3024 6612 9424 33 5674 6089 5826 2689 5979 9289 6135 5889 6293 2489
6452 9089 6614 5689 34 5676 1156 5827 7956 5981 4756 6137 1556 6294 8356 6454
5156 6616 1956 35 5677 6225 5829 3225 5983 0225 6138 7225 6296 4225 6456 1225
6617 8225 36 5679 1296 5830 8496 5984 5696 6140 2896 6298 0096 6457 7296 6619
4496 37 5680 6369 5832 3769 5986 1169 6141 8569 6299 5969 6459 3369 6621 0769
38 5682 1444 5833 9044 5987 6644 6143 4244 6201 1844 6460 9444 6622 7044 39
5683 6521 5835 4321 5989 2121 6144 9921 6302 7721 6462 5521 6624 3321 40 5685
1600 5836 9600 5990 7600 6146 5600 6304 3600 6464 1600 6625 9600 41 5686 6681
5838 4881 5992 3081 6148 1281 6305 9481 6465 7681 6627 5881 42 5688 1764 5840
0164 5993 8564 6149 6964 6307 5364 6467 3764 6629 2164 43 5689 6849 5841 5449
5995 4049 6151 2649 6309 1249 6468 9849 6630 8449 44 5691 1936 5843 0736 5996
9536 6152 8336 6310 7136 6470 5936 6632 4736 45 5692 7025 5844 6025 5998 5025
6154 4025 6312 3025 6472 2025 6634 1025 46 5694 2116 5846 1316 ^000 0516 6155
9716 6313 8916 6473 8116 6635 7316 47 5695 7209 5847 6609 ^001 6009 6157 5409
6315 4809 6475 4209 6637 3609 48 5697 2304 5849 1904 ^003 1504 6159 1104 6317
0704 6477 0304 6638 9904 49 5698 7401 5850 7201 ^^04 7001 6160 6801 6318 6601
6478 6401 6640 6201 50 5700 2500 5852 2500 6006 2500 6162 2500 0320 2500 6480
2500 6642 2500 51 5701 7601 5853 7801 6007 8001 6163 8201 6321 8401 6481 8601
6643 8801 52 5703 2704 5855 3104 6009 3504 6165 3904 6323 4304 6483 4704 6645
5104 53 5704 7809 5856 8409 6010 9009 6166 9609 6325 0209 6485 0809 6647 1409
54 5706 2916 5858 3716 6012 4516 6168 5316 6326 6116 6486 6916 6648 7716 55
5707 8025 5859 9025 6014 0025 6170 1025 6328 2025 6488 3025 6650 4025 56 5709
3136 5861 4336 6015 5536 6171 6736 6329 7936 6489 9136 6652 0336 57 5710 8249
5862 9649 6017 1049 6173 2449 6331 3849 6491 5249 6653 6649 58 5712 3364 5864
4964 6018 6564 6174 8164 6332 9764 6493 1364 6655 2964 59 5713 8481 5866 0281
6020 2081 6176 3881 6334 5681 6494 7481 6656 9281 60 5715 3600 5867 5600 6021
7600 6177 9600 6336 1600 6496 3600 6058 5600 61 5716 8721 58^9 0921 6023 3121
6179 5321 6337 7521 6497 9721 6660 1921 62 5718 3844 5870 6244 6024 8644 6181
1044 6339 3444 6499 5844 6661 8244 63 5719 8969 5872 1569 6026 4169 6182 6769
6340 9369 6501 1969 6663 4569 64 5721 4096 5873 6896 6027 9696 6184 2496 6342
5296 6502 8096 6665 0896 65 5722 9225 5875 2225 6029 5225 6185 8225 6344 1225
6504 4225 6666 7225 66 5724 4356 5876 7556 6031 0756 6187 3956 6345 7156 6506
0356 6668 3556 67 5725 9489 5878 2889 6032 6289 6188 9689 6347 3089 6507 6489
6669 9889 68 5727 4624 5879 8224 6034 1824 6190 5424 6348 9024 6509 2624 6671
6224 69 5728 9761 5881 3561 6035 7361 6192 1161 6350 4961 6510 8761 6673 2561
70 5730 4900 5882 8900 6037 2900 6193 6900 6352 0900 6512 4900 6674 8900 71
5732 0041 5884 4241 6038 8441 6195 2641 6353 6841 6514 1041 6676 5241 72 5733
5184 5885 9584 6040 3984 6196 8384 6355 2784 6515 7184 6678 1584 73 5735 0329
5887 4929 6041 9529 6198 4129 6356 8729 6517 3329 6679 7929 74 5736 5476 5889
0276 6043 5076 6199 9876 6358 4676 6518 9476 6681 4276 75 5738 0625 5890 5625
6045 0625 6201 5625 6360 0625 6520 5625 6683 0625 76 5739 5776 5892 0976 6046
6176 6203 1376 6361 6576 6522 1776 6684 6976 77 5741 0929 5893 6329 6048 1729
6204 7129 6363 2529 6523 7929 6686 3329 78 5742 6084 5895 1684 6049 7284 6206
2884 6364 8484 6525 4084 6687 9684 79 5744 1241 5896 7041 6051 2841 6207 8641
6366 4441 6527 0241 6689 6041 80 5745 6400 5898 2400 6052 8400 6209 4400 6368
0400 6528 6400 6691 2400 81 5747 1561 5899 7761 6054 3961 6211 0161 6369 6361
6530 2561 6692 8761 82 5748 6724 5901 3124 6055 9524 6212 5924 6371 2324 6531
8724 6694 5124 83 5750 1889 5902 8489 6057 5089 6214 1689 6372 8289 6533 4889
6696 1489 84 5751 7056 5904 3856 6059 0656 6215 7456 6374 4256 6535 1056 6697
7856 85 5753 2225 5905 9225 6060 6225 6217 3225 6376 0225 6536 7225 6699 4225
86 5754 7396 5907 4596 6062 1796 6218 8996 6377 6196 6538 3396 6701 0596 87
5756 2569 5908 9969 6063 7369 6220 4769 6379 2169 6539 9569 6702 6969 88 5757
7744 5910 5344 6065 2944 6222 0544 6380 8144 6541 5744 6704 3344 89 5759 2921
5912 0721 6066 8521 6223 6321 6382 4121 6543 1921 6705 9721 90 5760 8100 5913
6100 6068 4100 6225 2100 6384 0100 6544 8100 6707 6100 91 5762 3281 5915 1481
6069 9681 6226 7881 6385 6081 6546 4281 6709 2481 92 5763 8464 5916 6864 6071
5264 6228 3664 6387 2064 6548 0464 6710 8864 93 5765 3649 5918 2249 6073 0849
6229 9449 6388 8049 6549 6649 6712 5249 94 5766 8836 5919 7636 6074 6436 6251
5236 6390 4036 6551 2836 6714 1636 95 5768 4025 5921 3025 6076 2025 6233 1025
6392 0025 6552 9025 6715 8025 96 5769 9216 5922 8416 6077 7616 6234 6816 6393
6016 6554 5216 6717 4416 97 5771 4409 5924 3809 6079 3209 6236 2609 6395 2009
6556 1409 6719 0809 98 5772 9604 5925 9204 6080 8804 6237 8404 6396 8004 6557
7604 6720 7204 99 5774 4801 5927 4601 6082 4401 6239 4201 6398 4001 6559 3801
6722 3601 82.. 83.. 84.. 85.. 86.. 87.. 88.. 00 6724 0000 6889 0000 7056 0000
7225 0000 7396 0000 7569 0000 7744 0000 01 6725 6401 6890 6601 7057 6801 7226
7001 7397 7201 7570 7401 7745 7601 02 6727 2804 6892 3204 7059 3604 7228 4004
7399 4404 7572 4804 7747 5204 03 6728 9209 6893 9809 7061 0409 7230 1009 7401
1609 7574 2209 7749 2809 04 6730 5616 6895 6416 7062 7216 7231 8016 7402 8816
7575 9616 7751 0416 05 6732 2025 6897 3025 7064 4025 7233 5025 7404 6025 7577
7025 7752 8025 06 6733 8436 6898 9636 7066 0836 7235 2036 7406 3236 7579 4436
7754 5636 07 6735 4849 6900 6249 7067 7649 7236 9049 7408 0449 7581 1849 7756
3249 08 6737 1264 6902 2864 7069 4464 7238 6064 7409 7664 7582 9264 7758 0864
09 6738 7681 6903 9481 7071 1281 7240 3081 7411 4881 7584 6681 7759 8481 10
6740 4100 6905 6100 7072 8100 7242 0100 7413 2100 7586 4100 7761 6100 11 6742
0521 6907 2721 7074 4921 7243 7121 7414 9321 7588 1521 7763 3721 12 6743 6944
6908 9344 7076 1744 7245 4144 7416 6544 7589 8944 7765 1344 13 6745 3369 6910
5969 7077 8569 7247 1169 7418 3769 7591 6369 7766 8969 14 6746 9796 6912 2596
7079 5396 7248 8196 7420 0996 7593 3796 7768 6596 15 6748 6225 6913 9225 7081
2225 7250 5225 7421 8225 7595 1225 7770 4225 16 6750 2656 6915 5856 7082 9056
7252 2256 7423 5456 7596 8656 7772 1856 17 6751 9089 6917 2489 7084 5889 7253
9289 7425 2689 7598 6089 7773 9489 18 6753 5524 6918 9124 7086 2724 7255 6324
7426 9924 7600 3524 7775 7124 19 6755 1961 6920 5761 7087 9561 7257 3361 7428
7161 7602 0961 7777 4761 20 6756 8400 6922 2400 7089 6400 7259 0400 7430 4400
7603 8400 7779 2400 21 6758 4841 6923 9041 7091 3241 7260 7441 7432 1641 7605
5841 7781 0041 22 6760 1284 6925 5684 7093 0084 7262 4484 7433 8884 7607 3284
7782 7684 23 6761 7729 6927 2329 7094 6929 7264 1529 7435 6129 7609 0729 7784
5329 24 6763 4176 6928 8976 7096 3776 7265 8576 7437 3376 7610 8176 7786 2976
25 6765 0625 6930 5625 7098 0625 7267 5625 7439 0625 7612 5625 7788 0625 26
6766 7076 6932 2276 7099 7476 7269 2676 7440 7876 7614 3076 7789 8276 27 6768
3529 6933 8929 7101 4329 7270 9729 7442 5129 7616 0529 7791 5929 28 6769 9984
6935 5584 7103 1184 7272 6784 7444 2384 7617 7984 7793 3584 29 6771 6441 6037
2241 7104 8041 7274 3841 7445 9641 7619 5441 7795 1241 30 6773 2900 6938 8900
7106 4900 7276 0900 7447 6900 7621 2900 7796 8900 31 6774 9361 6940 5561 7108
1761 7277 7961 7449 4161 7623 0361 7798 6561 32 6776 5824 6942 2224 7109 8624
7279 5024 7451 1424 7624 7824 7800 4224 33 6778 2289 6943 8889 7111 5489 7281
2089 7452 8689 7626 5289 7802 1889 34 6779 8756 6945 5556 7113 2356 7282 9156
7454 5956 7628 2756 7803 9556 35 6781 5225 6947 2225 7114 9225 7284 6225 7456
3225 7630 0225 7805 7225 36 6783 1696 6948 8896 7116 6096 7286 3296 7458 0496
7631 7696 7807 4896 37 6784 8169 6950 5569 7118 2969 7288 0369 7459 7769 7633
5169 7809 2569 38 6786 4644 6952 2244 7119 9844 7289 7444 7461 5044 7635 2644
7811 0244 39 6788 1121 6953 8921 7121 6721 7291 4521 7463 2321 7637 0121 7812
7921 40 6789 7600 6955 5600 7123 3600 7293 1600 7464 9600 7638 7600 7814 5600
41 6791 4081 6957 2281 7125 0481 7294 8681 7466 6881 7640 5081 7816 3281 42
6793 0564 6958 8964 7126 7364 7296 5764 7468 4164 7642 2564 7818 0964 43 6794
7049 6960 5649 7128 4249 7298 2849 7470 1449 7644 0049 7819 8649 44 6796 3536
6962 2336 7130 1136 7299 9936 7471 8736 7645 7536 7821 6336 45 6798 0025 6963
9025 7131 8025 7301 7025 7473 6025 7647 5025 7823 4025 46 6799 6516 6965 5716
7133 4916 7303 4116 7475 3316 7649 2516 7825 1716 47 6801 3009 6967 2409 7135
1809 7305 1209 7477 0609 7651 0009 7826 9409 48 6802 9504 6968 9104 7136 8704
7306 8304 7478 7904 7652 7504 7828 7104 49 6804 6001 6970 5801 7138 5601 7308
5401 7480 5201 7654 5001 7830 4801 50 6806 2500 6972 2500 7140 2500 7310 2500
7482 2500 7656 2500 7832 2500 51 6807 9001 6973 9201 7141 9401 7311 9601 7483
9801 7658 0001 7834 0201 52 6809 5504 6975 5904 7143 6304 7313 6704 7485 7104
7659 7504 7835 7904 53 6811 2009 6977 2609 7145 3209 7315 3809 7487 4409 7661
5009 7837 5609 54 6812 8516 6978 9316 7147 0116 7317 0916 7789 1716 7663 2516
7839 3316 55 6814 5025 6980 6025 7148 7025 7318 8025 7490 9025 7665 0025 7841
1025 56 6816 1536 6982 2736 7150 3936 7320 5136 7492 6336 7666 7536 7842 8736
57 6817 8049 6983 9449 7152 0849 7322 2249 7494 3649 7668 5049 7844 6449 58
6819 4564 6985 6164 7153 7764 7323 9364 7496 0964 7670 2564 7846 4164 59 6821
1081 6987 2881 7155 4681 7325 6481 7497 8281 7672 0081 7848 1881 60 6822 7600
6988 9600 7157 1600 7327 3600 7499 5600 7673 7600 7849 9600 61 6824 4121 6990
6321 7158 8521 7329 0721 7501 2921 7675 5121 7851 7321 62 6826 0644 6992 3044
7160 5444 7330 7844 7503 0244 7677 2644 7853 5044 63 6827 7169 6993 9769 7162
2369 7332 4969 7504 7569 7679 0169 7855 2769 64 6829 3696 6995 6496 7163 9296
7334 2096 7506 4896 7680 7696 7857 0496 65 6831 0225 6997 3225 7165 6225 7335
9225 7508 2225 7682 5225 7858 8225 66 6832 6756 6998 9956 7167 3156 7337 6356
7509 9556 7684 2756 7860 5956 67 6834 3289 7000 6689 7169 0089 7339 3489 7511
6889 7686 0289 7862 3689 68 6835 9824 7002 3424 7170 7024 7341 0624 7513 4224
7687 7824 7864 1424 69 6837 6361 7004 0161 7172 3961 7342 7761 7515 1561 7689
5361 7865 9161 70 6839 2900 7005 6900 7174 0900 7344 4900 7516 8900 7691 2900
7867 6900 71 6840 9441 7007 3641 7175 7841 7346 2041 7518 6241 7693 0441 7869
4641 72 6842 5984 7009 0384 7177 4784 7347 9184 7520 3584 7694 7984 7871 2384
73 6844 2529 7010 7129 7179 1729 7349 6329 7522 0929 7696 5529 7873 0129 74
6845 9076 7012 3876 7180 8676 7351 3476 7523 8276 7698 3076 7874 7876 75 6847
5625 7014 0625 7182 5625 7353 0625 7525 5625 7700 0625 7876 5025 76 6849 2176
7015 7376 7184 2576 7354 7776 7527 2976 7701 8176 7878 3376 77 6850 8729 7017
4129 7185 9529 7356 4929 7529 0329 7703 5729 7880 1129 78 6852 5284 7019 0884
7187 6484 7358 2084 7530 7684 7705 3284 7881 8884 79 6854 1841 7020 7641 7189
3441 7359 9241 7532 5041 7707 0841 7883 6641 80 6855 8400 7022 4400 7191 0400
7361 6400 7534 2400 7708 8400 7885 4400 81 6857 4961 7024 1161 7192 7361 7363
3561 7535 9761 7710 5961 7887 2161 82 6859 1524 7025 7924 7194 4324 7365 0724
7537 7124 7712 3524 7888 9924 83 6860 8089 7027 4689 7196 1289 7366 7889 7539
4489 7714 1089 7890 7689 84 6862 4656 7029 1456 7197 8256 7368 5056 7541 1856
7715 8656 7892 5456 85 6864 1225 7030 8225 7199 5225 7370 2225 7542 9225 7717
6225 7894 3225 86 6865 7796 7032 4996 7201 2196 7371 9396 7544 6596 7719 3796
7896 0996 87 6867 4369 7034 1769 7202 9169 7373 6569 7546 3969 7721 1369 7897
8769 88 6869 0944 7035 8544 7204 6144 7375 3744 7548 1344 7722 8944 7899 6544
89 6870 7521 7037 5321 7206 3121 7377 0921 7549 8^21 7724 6521 7901 4321 90
6872 4100 7039 2100 7208 0100 7378 8100 7551 6100 7726 4100 7903 2100 91 6874
0681 7070 8881 7209 7081 7380 5281 7553 3481 7728 1681 7904 9881 92 6875 7264
7042 5664 7211 4064 7382 2464 7555 0864 7729 9264 7906 7664 93 6877 3849 7044
2449 7213 1049 7383 9649 7556 8249 7731 6849 7908 5449 94 6879 0436 7045 9236
7214 8036 7385 6836 7558 5636 7733 4436 7910 3236 95 6880 7025 7047 6025 7216
5025 7387 4025 7560 3025 7735 2025 7912 1025 96 6882 3616 7049 2816 7218 2016
7389 1216 7562 0416 7736 9616 7913 8816 97 6884 0209 7050 9609 7219 9009 7390
8409 7563 7809 7738 7209 7915 6609 98 6885 6804 7052 6404 7221 6004 7392 5604
7565 5204 7740 4804 7917 4404 99 6887 3401 7054 3201 7223 3001 7394 2801 7567
2601 7742 2401 7919 2201 89.. 90.. 91.. 92.. 93.. 94.. 95.. 00 7921 0000 8100
0000 8281 0000 8464 0000 8649 0000 8836 0000 9025 0000 01 7922 7801 8101 8001
8282 8201 8465 8401 8650 8601 8837 8801 9026 9001 02 7924 5604 8103 6004 8284
6404 8467 6804 8652 7204 8839 7604 9028 8004 03 7926 3409 8105 4009 8286 4609
8469 5209 8654 5809 8841 6409 9030 7009 04 7928 1216 8107 2016 8288 2816 8471
3616 8656 4416 8843 5216 9032 6016 05 7929 9025 8109 0025 8290 1025 8473 2025
8658 3025 8845 4025 9034 5025 06 7931 6836 8110 8036 8291 9236 8475 0436 8660
1636 8847 2836 9036 4036 07 7933 4649 8112 6049 8293 7449 8476 8849 8662 0249
8849 1649 9038 3049 08 7935 2464 8114 4064 8295 5664 8478 7264 8663 8864 8851
0464 9040 2064 09 7937 0281 8116 2081 8297 3881 8480 5681 8665 7481 8852 9281
9042 1081 10 7938 8100 8118 0100 8299 2100 8482 4100 8667 6100 8854 8100 9044
0100 11 7940 5921 8119 8121 8301 0321 8484 2521 8669 4721 8856 6921 9045 9121
12 7942 3744 8121 6144 8302 8544 8486 0944 8671 3344 8858 5744 9047 8144 13
7944 1569 8123 4169 8304 6769 8487 9369 8673 1969 8860 4569 9049 7169 14 7945
9396 8125 2196 8306 4996 8489 7796 8675 0596 8862 3396 9051 6196 15 7947 7225
8127 0225 8308 3225 8491 6225 8676 9225 8864 2225 9053 5225 16 7949 5056 8128
8256 8310 1456 8493 4656 8678 7856 8866 1056 9055 4256 17 7951 2889 8130 6289
8311 9689 8495 3089 8680 6489 8867 9889 9057 3289 18 7953 0724 8132 4324 8313
7924 8497 1524 8682 5124 8869 8724 9059 2324 19 7954 8561 8134 2361 8315 6161
8498 9961 8684 3761 8871 7561 9061 1361 20 7956 6400 8136 0400 8317 4400 8500
8400 8686 2400 8873 6400 9063 0400 21 7958 4241 8137 8441 8319 2641 8502 6841
8688 1041 8875 5241 9064 9441 22 7960 2084 8139 6484 8321 0884 8504 5284 8689
9684 8877 4084 9066 8484 23 7961 9929 8141 4529 8322 9129 8506 3729 8691 8329
8879 2929 9068 7529 24 7963 7776 8143 2576 8324 7376 8508 2176 8693 6976 8881
1776 9070 6576 25 7965 5625 8145 0625 8326 5625 8510 0625 8695 5625 8883 0625
9072 5625 26 7967 3476 8146 8676 8328 3876 8511 9076 8697 4276 8884 9476 9074
4676 27 7969 1329 8148 6729 8330 2129 8513 7529 8699 2929 8886 8329 9076 3729
28 7970 9184 8150 4784 8332 0384 8515 5984 8701 1584 8888 7184 9078 2784 29
7972 7041 8152 2841 8333 8641 8517 4441 8703 0241 8890 6041 9080 1841 30 7974
4900 8154 0900 8335 6900 8519 2900 8704 8900 8892 4900 9082 0900 31 7976 2761
8155 8961 8337 5161 8521 1361 8706 7561 8894 3761 9083 9961 32 7978 0624 8157
7024 8339 3424 8522 9824 8708 6224 8896 2624 9085 9024 33 7979 8489 8159 5089
8341 1689 8524 8289 8710 4889 8898 1489 9087 8089 34 7981 6356 8161 3156 8342
9956 8526 6756 8712 3556 8900 0356 9089 7156 35 7983 4225 8163 1225 8344 8225
8528 5225 8714 2225 8901 9225 9091 6225 36 7985 2096 8164 9296 8346 6496 8530
3696 8716 0896 8903 8096 9093 5296 37 7986 9969 8166 7369 8348 4769 8532 2169
8717 9569 8905 6969 9095 4369 38 7988 7844 8168 5444 8350 3044 8534 0644 8719
8244 8907 5844 9097 3444 39 7990 5721 8170 3521 8352 1321 8535 9121 8721 6921
8909 4721 9099 2521 40 7992 3600 8172 1600 8353 9600 8537 7600 8723 5600 8911
3600 9101 1600 41 7994 1481 8173 9681 8355 7881 8539 6081 8725 4281 8913 2481
9103 0681 42 7995 9364 8175 7764 8357 6164 8541 4564 8727 2964 8915 1364 9104
9764 43 7997 7249 8177 5849 8359 4449 8543 3049 8729 1649 8917 0249 9106 8849
44 7999 5136 8179 3936 8361 2736 8545 1536 8731 0336 8918 9136 9108 7936 45
8001 3025 8181 2025 8363 1025 8547 0025 8732 9025 8920 8025 9110 7025 46 8003
0916 8183 0116 8364 9316 8548 8516 8734 7716 8922 6916 9112 6116 47 8004 8809
8184 8209 8366 7609 8550 7009 8736 6409 8924 5809 9114 5209 48 8006 6704 8186
6304 8368 5904 8552 5504 8738 5104 8926 4704 9116 4304 49 8008 4601 8188 4401
8370 4201 8554 4001 8740 3801 8928 3601 9118 3401 50 8010 2500 8190 2500 8372
2500 8556 2500 8742 2500 8930 2500 9120 2500 51 8012 0401 8192 0601 8374 0801
8558 1001 8744 1201 8932 1401 9122 1601 52 8013 8304 8193 8704 8375 9104 8559
9504 8745 9904 8934 0304 9124 0704 53 8015 6209 8195 6809 8377 7409 8561 8009
8747 8609 8935 9209 9125 9809 54 8017 4116 8197 4916 8379 5716 8563 6516 8749
7316 8937 8116 9127 8916 55 8019 2025 8199 3025 8381 4025 8565 5025 8751 6025
8939 7025 9129 8025 56 8020 9936 8201 1136 8383 2336 8567 3536 8753 4736 8941
5936 9131 7136 57 8022 7849 8202 9249 8385 0649 8569 2049 8755 3449 8943 4849
9133 6249 58 8024 5764 8204 7364 8386 8964 8571 0564 8757 2164 8945 3764 9135
5364 59 8026 3681 8206 5481 8388 7281 8572 9081 8759 0881 8947 2681 9137 4481
60 8028 1600 8208 3600 8390 5600 8574 7600 8760 9600 8949 1600 9139 3600 61
8029 9521 8210 1721 8392 3921 8576 6121 8762 8321 8951 0521 9141 2721 62 8031
7444 8211 9844 8394 2244 8578 4644 8764 7044 8952 9444 9143 1844 63 8033 5369
8213 7969 8396 0569 8580 3169 8766 5769 8954 8369 9145 0969 64 8035 3296 8215
6096 8397 8896 8582 1696 8768 4496 8956 7296 9147 0096 65 8037 1225 8217 4225
8399 7225 8584 0225 8770 3225 8958 6225 9148 9225 66 8038 9156 8219 2356 8401
5556 8585 8756 8772 1956 8960 5156 9150 8356 67 8040 7089 8221 0489 8403 3889
8587 7289 8774 0689 8962 4089 9152 7489 68 8042 5024 8222 8624 8405 2224 8589
5824 8775 9424 8964 3024 9154 6624 69 8044 2961 8224 6761 8407 0561 8591 4361
8777 8161 8966 1961 9156 5761 70 8046 0900 8226 4900 8408 8900 8593 2900 8779
6900 8968 0900 9158 4900 71 8047 8841 8228 3041 8410 7241 8595 1441 8781 5641
8969 9841 9160 4041 72 8049 6784 8230 1184 8412 5584 8596 9984 8783 4384 8971
8784 9162 3184 73 8051 4729 8231 9329 8414 3929 8598 8529 8785 3129 8973 7729
9164 2329 74 8053 2676 8233 7476 8416 2276 8600 7076 8787 1876 8975 6676 9166
1476 75 8055 0625 8235 5625 8418 0625 8602 5625 8789 0625 8977 5625 9168 0625
76 8056 8576 8237 3776 8419 8976 8604 4176 8790 9376 8979 4576 9169 9776 77
8058 6529 8239 1929 8421 7329 8606 2729 8792 8129 8981 3529 9171 8929 78 8060
4484 8241 0084 8423 5684 8608 1284 8794 6884 8983 2484 9173 8084 79 8062 2441
8242 8241 8425 4041 8609 9841 8796 5641 8985 1441 9175 7241 80 8064 0400 8244
6400 8427 2400 8611 8400 8798 4400 8987 0400 9177 6400 81 8065 8361 8246 4561
8429 0761 8613 6961 8800 3161 8988 9361 9179 5561 82 8067 6324 8248 2724 8430
9124 8615 5524 8802 1924 8990 8324 9181 4724 83 8069 4289 8250 0889 8432 7489
8617 4089 8804 0689 8992 7289 9183 3889 84 8071 2256 8251 9056 8434 5856 8619
2656 8805 9456 8994 6256 9185 3056 85 8073 0225 8253 7225 8436 4225 8621 1225
8807 8225 8996 5225 9187 2225 86 8074 8196 8255 5396 8438 2596 8622 9796 8809
6996 8998 4196 9189 1396 87 8076 6169 8257 3569 8440 0969 8624 8369 8811 5769
9000 3169 9191 0569 88 8078 4144 8259 1744 8441 9344 8626 6944 8813 4544 9002
2144 9192 9744 89 8080 2121 8260 9921 8443 7721 8628 5521 8815 3321 9004 1121
9194 8921 90 8082 0100 8262 8100 8445 6100 8630 4100 8817 2100 9006 0100 9196
8100 91 8083 8081 8264 6281 8447 4481 8632 2681 8819 0881 9007 9081 9198 7281
92 8085 6064 8266 4464 8449 2864 8634 1264 8820 9664 9009 8064 9200 6464 93
8087 4049 8268 2649 8451 1249 8635 9849 8822 8449 9011 7049 9202 5649 94 8089
2036 8270 0836 8452 9636 8637 8436 8824 7236 9013 6036 9204 4836 95 8091 0025
8271 9025 8454 8025 8639 7025 8826 6025 9015 5025 9206 4025 96 8092 8016 8273
7216 8456 6416 8641 5616 8828 4816 9017 4016 9208 3216 97 8094 6009 8275 5409
8458 4809 8643 4209 8830 3609 9019 3009 9210 2409 98 8096 4004 8277 3604 8460
3204 8645 2804 8832 2404 9021 2004 9212 1604 99 8098 2001 8279 1801 8462 1601
8647 1401 8834 1201 9023 1001 9214 ^801 96.. 97.. 98.. 99.. In this Table, To
find the Square of any Whole Number less than Ten Thousand.

2. To find the Side of any Square Number less than 100 Millions

Imitate these following Examples.

I desire the Square of 9738; That is, of 9700 and 38. (For so every Side in
this Table is parted into two Portions.) A Column bearing 97.. on the head of
it, is found only in this 28. Page, and another in the 29. In the Margin of
this 28. page I find 38. A right Line running from this 38, crosses the column
marked 97.. at the number 94828644. This 94828644 is the Square of 9738.

But the Square of 9756 is not found in this page because 56 is more than 49.
In the margin of page 29, I find 56. A right line, running from this 56,
shows you the number 95179536, in the column on whofe top stands 97.. This
95179536 is the Square of 9756.

Thus in p. 24, you see 67551961 in the right Line running from the Marg. 19,
to the column whose Vertical is 82.. Then say, 67551961 is the Square of 8219.
And so I find 70829056 to be the Square of 8416. In page 9. you have 7080921
the Square of 2661. And in page 2, you have 675684 the Square of 822. As in
page 3, you find 70756 the Square of 266.

That First opening, in Page 2. and Page 3, contains all Square Numbers less
than a Million, and all Sides less than 1000. And the first Column of those two
Pages [2 and 3] has the Square of every Number less than 100; That is to say,
It has all square numbers less than 10000. Wherefore the Square number 62821476
being given, and its Side being sought, you may cut off the two last Figures
[76] and may find all the rest of the Figures in that First Opening; thus,

Page 2. 62 is the Square of 7 and more.

Page 3. 6282 is the Square of 79

Page 3. 628214. is the Square of 792

This sends you to seek a Column, whose head bears 79 which is in Page 22. and
23. In Page 22. you may find the entire number 62821476. to be the Square of
7926.

00 9216 0000 9409 0000 9604 0000 9801 0000 01 9217 9201 9410 9401 9605 9601
9802 9801 02 9219 8404 9412 8804 9607 9204 9804 9604 03 9221 7609 9414 8209
9609 8809 9806 9409 04 9223 6816 9416 7616 9611 8416 9808 9216 05 9225 6025
9418 7025 9613 8025 9810 9025 06 9227 5236 9420 6436 9615 7636 9812 8836 07
9229 4449 9422 5849 9617 7249 9814 8649 08 9231 3664 9424 5264 9619 6864 9816
8464 09 9233 2881 9426 4681 9621 6481 9818 8281 10 9235 2100 9428 4100 9623
6100 9820 8100 11 9237 1321 9430 3521 9625 5721 9822 7921 12 9239 0544 9432
2944 9627 5344 9824 7744 13 9240 9769 9434 2309 9629 4969 9826 7569 14 9242
8996 9436 1796 9631 4596 9828 7396 15 9244 8225 9438 1225 9633 4225 9830 7225
16 9246 7456 9440 0656 9635 3856 9832 7056 17 9248 6689 9442 0089 9637 3489
9834 6889 18 9250 5924 9443 9524 9639 3124 9836 6724 19 9252 5161 9445 8961
9641 2761 9838 6561 20 9254 4400 9447 8400 9643 2400 9840 6400 21 9256 3641
9449 7841 9645 2041 9842 6241 22 9258 2884 9451 7284 9647 1684 9844 6084 23
9260 2129 9453 6729 9649 1329 9846 5929 24 9262 1376 9455 6176 9651 0976 9848
5776 25 9264 0625 9457 5625 9653 0625 9850 5625 26 9265 9876 9459 5076 9655
0276 9852 5476 27 9267 9129 9461 4529 9656 9929 9854 5329 28 9269 8384 9463
3984 9658 9584 9856 5184 29 9271 7641 9465 3441 9660 9241 9858 5041 30 9273
6900 9467 2900 9662 8900 9860 4900 31 9275 6161 9469 2361 9664 8561 9862 4761
32 9277 5424 9471 1824 9666 8224 9864 4624 33 9279 4689 9473 1289 9668 7889
9866 4489 34 9281 3956 9475 0756 9670 7556 9868 4356 35 9283 3225 9477 0225
9672 7225 9870 4225 36 9285 2496 9478 9696 9674 6896 9872 4096 37 9287 1769
9480 9169 9676 6569 9874 3969 38 9289 1044 9482 8644 9678 6244 9876 3844 39
9291 0321 9484 8121 9680 5921 9878 3721 40 9292 9600 9486 7600 9682 5600 9880
3600 41 9294 8881 9488 7081 9684 5281 9882 3481 42 9296 8164 9490 6564 9686
4964 9884 3364 43 9298 7449 9492 6049 9688 4649 9886 3249 44 9300 6736 9494
5536 9690 4336 9888 3136 45 9302 6025 9496 5025 9692 4025 9890 3025 46 9304
5316 9498 4516 9694 3716 9892 2916 47 9306 4609 9500 4009 9696 3409 9894 2809
48 9308 3904 9502 3504 9698 3104 9896 2704 49 9310 3201 9504 3001 9700 2801
9898 2601 50 9312 2500 9506 2500 9702 2500 9900 2500 This table of Sides and
Squares may be continued by Addition of all the Odd numbers greater than 19
997. Thus.

When the difference of two Sides is an Unite, The difference of their Squares
is the sum of those Sides.

Sides. Squares. 9999 99980001 19999 10000 100000000 20001 10001 100020001
20003 10002 100040004 etc. etc.

If it be continued to the Square of 100000, it may be printed like the
foregoing Table. Every page may have six columns; then 300 pages will hold
90000 Squares. And so the whole Table of 100 thousand Squares may end in page
329. A Book of 168 leaves is not an inch thick.

But without such a Book, the numbers in these 29 pages, may be made use of.

1. To find the Square of any whole number less than 100 thousand. Thus, A 2
9947 9 4706 B 2 9940 9 4700 C 5 9887 18 9406 D 7 6 E 41 9209 113 6436 F 89640
3600 89 6809 0000 G 89682 2809 89 6922 6436 A The given Number: Of 5 figures D
The fifth or last figure of A. B Remainder, after substract. D from A. C The
Sum of A and B E C multiplied by D F The Square of B. 00 after a Tabular G The
Sum of E and F. The Square of A.

2. To find the Side of any Square number, of more than 8 figures.

From the end of the given number, Cut off as many pairs of figures as may
leave 7 or 8 figures. From these substract as great a Tabular number as you
can. Note the 4 figures of the Side of that Tabular square, etc.

As 2 9 9 4 7 9 4 7 0 6 8 9682 2809 89 6922 6436 8 9640 36 89 6809 00 41 9209
113 6436 5 9887 18 9406 41 9209 113 6436 0 0

51 9314 1801 9508 2001 9704 2201 9902 2401 52 9316 1104 9510 1504 9706 1904
9904 2304 53 9318 0409 9512 1009 9708 1609 9906 2209 54 9319 9716 9514 0516
9710 1316 9908 2116 55 9321 9025 9516 0025 9712 1025 9910 2025 56 9323 8336
9517 9536 9714 0736 9912 1936 57 9325 7649 9519 9049 9716 0449 9914 1849 58
9327 6964 9521 8564 9718 0164 9916 1764 59 9329 6281 9523 8081 9719 9881 9918
1681 60 9331 5600 9525 7600 9721 9600 9920 1600 61 9333 4921 9527 7121 9723
9321 9922 1521 62 9335 4244 9529 6644 9725 9044 9924 1444 63 9337 3569 9531
6169 9727 8769 9926 1369 64 9339 2896 9533 5696 9729 8496 9928 1296 65 9341
2225 9535 5225 9731 8225 9930 1225 66 9343 1556 9537 4756 9733 7956 9932 1156
67 9345 0889 9539 4289 9735 7689 9934 1089 68 9347 0224 9541 3824 9737 7424
9936 1024 69 9348 9561 9543 3361 9739 7161 9938 0961 70 9350 8900 9545 2900
9741 6900 9940 0900 71 9352 8241 9547 2441 9743 6641 9942 0841 72 9354 7584
9549 1984 9745 6384 9944 0784 73 9356 6929 9551 1529 9747 6129 9946 0729 74
9358 6276 9553 1076 9749 5876 9948 0676 75 9360 5625 9555 0625 9751 5625 9950
0625 76 9362 4976 9557 0176 9753 5376 9952 0576 77 9364 4329 9558 9729 9755
5129 9954 0529 78 9366 3684 9560 9284 9757 4884 9956 0484 79 9368 3041 9562
8841 9759 4641 9958 0441 80 9370 2400 9564 8400 9761 4400 9960 0400 81 9372
1761 9566 7961 9763 4161 9962 0361 82 9374 1124 9568 7524 9765 3924 9964 0324
83 9376 0489 9570 7089 9767 3689 9966 0289 84 9377 9856 9572 6656 9769 3456
9968 0256 85 9379 9225 9574 6225 9771 3225 9970 0225 86 9381 8596 9576 5796
9773 2^96 9972 0196 87 9383 7969 9578 5369 9775 2769 9974 0169 88 9385 7344
9580 4944 9777 2544 9976 0144 89 9387 6721 9582 4521 9779 2321 9978 0121 90
9389 6100 9584 4100 9781 2100 9980 0100 91 9391 5481 9586 3681 9783 1881 9982
0081 92 9393 4864 9588 3264 9785 1664 9984 0064 93 9395 4249 9590 2849 9787
1449 9986 0049 94 9397 3636 9592 2436 9789 1236 9988 0036 95 9399 3025 9594
2025 9791 1025 9990 0025 96 9401 2416 9596 1616 6793 0816 9992 0016 97 9403
1809 9598 1209 9795 0609 9994 0009 98 9405 1204 9600 0804 9797 0404 9996 0004
99 9407 0601 9602 0401 9799 0201 9998 0001

Omnis Quadrati numeri Nota postrema esto, 1, 4, 5, 6, vel 9. Posteriores
binas, ternas, quaternas exhibent haec tria Cribra Synoptica.
22 Endings of Square numbers in 2 figures. 0 1 4 5 6 9 159 Endings of Square
numbers in 3 figures. 00 01 04 09 16 21 24 25 29 36 41 44 49 56 61 64 69 76 81
89 96 9 9 0.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9. 0.1.2.3.4.5.6 7.8 9 9 0 1.2.3.4.5 6.7 8.9 9
0.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9 0.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9 0.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9 9
0.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9 9 0.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9 0.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9 0 1.2.3.4.5.6.7
8.9 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 7 7 7 6 6 6 6 6 4.5.6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 5 5 5 5 5 4 4 4 4 4 4
4 4 4 3 3 3 3 3 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 0.1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1044
Endings of Square Numbers in 4 Figures.
0 000 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 241 0 2 4 6 8 496 1 3 5 7 9 744 0. 1. 2. 3.
4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 001 0 2 4 6 8 244 2 500 0 2 4 6 8 756 0 2 4 6 8 004 0. 1. 2.
3. 4. 5. 6. 7 8 9 249 1 3 5 7 9 504 0. 1. 2. 3. 4 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 761
0.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9 009 0 2 4 6 8 256 0 2 4 6 8 516 1 3 5 7 9 764 0 2 4 6 8 016
1 3 5 7 9 264 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 521 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 769
1 3 5 7 9 024 0 2 4 6 8 276 1 3 5 7 9 524 1 3 5 7 9 776 0.1 2.3.4 5 6 7.8.9 025
0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 281 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 529 0 2 4 6 8 784
0 2 4 6 8 036 1 3 5 7 9 284 1 3 5 7 9 536 1 3 5 7 9 796 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
8. 9 041 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 289 0 2 4 6 8 544 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
8. 9 801 1 3 5 7 9 044 1 3 5 7 9 296 1 3 5 7 9 556 0 2 4 6 8 804 0. 1. 2. 3. 4.
5. 6. 7. 8. 9 049 0 2 4 6 8 304 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5 6. 7. 8. 9 561 0. 1. 2. 3. 4.
5. 6. 7. 8. 9 809 1 3 5 7 9 056 1 3 5 7 9 316 0 2 4 6 8 564 0 2 4 6 8 816 0 2 4
6 8 064 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 321 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8 9 569 1 3 5
7 9 824 1 3 5 7 9 076 0 2 4 6 8 324 0 2 4 6 8 576 0 2 4 6 8 836 0. 1. 2. 3. 4.
5. 6. 7. 8. 9 081 0.1.2.3 4.5.6.7 8.9 329 1 3 5 7 9 584 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
8. 9 841 0 2 4 6 8 084 0 2 4 6 8 336 0 2 4 6 8 596 1 3 5 7 9 844 0. 1. 2 3. 4.
5. 6. 7. 8. 9 089 1 3 5 7 9 344 1 3 5 7 9 600 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 849
0 2 4 6 8 096 0 2 4 6 8 356 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 601 1 3 5 7 9 856 0 2
4 6 8 100 0.1.2.3 4 5.6.7.8.9 361 1 3 5 7 9 604 0 2 4 6 8 864 1 3 5 7 9 104 1 3
5 7 9 364 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 609 1 3 5 7 9 876 0 2 4 6 8 116
0.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8 9 369 1 3 5 7 9 616 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 881
0.1.2.3.4.5 6.7.8.9 121 1 3 5 7 9 376 0 2 4 6 8 624 0 2 4 6 8 884 1 3 5 7 9 124
0 2 4 6 8 384 0 5 625 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 889 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
8. 9 129 1 3 5 7 9 396 1 3 5 7 9 636 0 2 4 6 8 896 1 3 5 7 9 136 0 2 4 6 8 400
0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 641 0 2 4 6 8 900 0 2 4 6 8 144 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
6. 7. 8. 9 401 0 2 4 6 8 644 1 3 5 7 9 904 1 3 5 7 9 156 0 2 4 6 8 404 0. 1. 2.
3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 649 0 2 4 6 8 916 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8 9 161 0 1. 2.
3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 409 0 2 4 6 8 656 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 921 0 2 4 6
8 164 0 2 4 6 8 416 1 3 5 7 9 664 1 3 5 7 9 924 0.1.2 3.4.5.6.7.8.9 169 1 3 5 7
9 424 0 2 4 6 8 676 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 929 0 2 4 6 8 176 0 2 4 6 8
436 0.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8 9 681 1 3 5 7 9 936 1 3 5 7 9 184 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
8. 9 441 1 3 5 7 9 684 0 2 4 6 8 944 0 2 4 6 8 196 1 3 5 7 9 444 0.1.2.3
4.5.6.7.8.9 689 1 3 5 7 9 956 0.1.2.3.4.5 6.7.8.9 201 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
8. 9 449 1 3 5 7 9 696 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 961 1 3 5 7 9 204 1 3 5 7 9
456 0 2 4 6 8 704 0 2 4 6 8 964 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 209 0 2 4 6 8 464
1 3 5 7 9 716 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 969 1 3 5 7 9 216 1 3 5 7 9 476 0.
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 721 0 2 4 6 8 976 0 2 4 6 8 224 0.1 2.3 4.5.6.7.8 9
481 0 2 4 6 8 724 1 3 5 7 9 984 0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8 9 225 0 2 4 6 8 484
0. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 729 0 2 4 6 8 996 1 3 5 7 9 236 0 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
6. 7. 8. 9 489 0 2 4 6 8 736

This Synopsis may seem too short. See them all at large in the next leaf.

Every Square Number ends in 0.1.4.5.6 or 9. None ends in 2. 3. 7 or 8.

Every Square number has one of these two and twenty endings 00. 01. 04. 09.
16. 21. 24. 25. 29. 36. 41. 44. 49. 56. 61. 64. 69. 76. 81. 84. 89. 96.

Every Square number has one of these 159 Endings.

000 044 100 161 216 276 329 396 444 500 561 609 664 724 784 844 900 961 001
049 104 164 224 281 336 400 449 504 564 616 676 729 796 849 904 964 004 056 116
169 225 284 344 401 456 516 569 624 681 736 801 856 916 969 009 064 121 176 236
289 356 404 464 521 576 625 684 744 804 864 921 976 016 076 124 184 241 296 361
409 476 524 584 636 689 756 809 876 924 984 024 081 129 196 244 304 364 416 481
529 596 641 696 761 816 881 929 996 025 084 136 20^ 249 316 369 424 484 536 600
644 704 764 824 884 936 036 089 144 2^4 256 321 376 436 489 544 601 649 716 769
836 889 944 041 096 156 26^ 264 324 384 441 496 556 604 656 721 776 841 896 956
Every Square number has one of these 1044 Endings.
0000 0304 0641 0969 1296 1641 2001 2321 2644 2976 3316 3649 4004 4324 0001
0321 0644 0976 1316 1649 2004 2324 2649 2996 3321 3664 4009 4329 0004 0324 0649
0996 1321 1664 2009 2329 2656 3001 3329 3681 4016 4336 0009 0329 0656 1001 1329
1681 2016 2336 2676 3009 3344 3684 4025 4356 0016 0336 0676 1009 1344 1684 2025
2356 2681 3024 3361 3689 4036 4361 0025 0356 0681 1024 1361 1689 2036 2361 2689
3025 3364 3696 4041 4369 0036 0361 0689 1025 1364 1696 2041 2369 2704 3041 3369
3716 4049 4384 0041 0369 0704 1041 1369 1716 2049 2384 2721 3044 3376 3721 4064
4400 0049 0384 0721 1044 1376 1721 2064 2400 2724 3049 3396 3729 4081 4401 0064
0400 0724 1049 1396 1729 2081 2401 2729 3056 3401 3744 4084 4404 0081 0401 0729
1056 1401 1744 2084 2404 2736 3076 3409 3761 4089 4409 0084 0404 0736 1076 1409
1761 2089 2409 2756 3081 3424 3764 4096 4416 0089 0409 0756 1081 1424 1764 2096
2416 2761 3089 3441 3769 4100 4436 0096 0416 0761 1089 1441 1769 2100 2436 2769
3104 3444 3776 4116 4441 0100 0436 0769 1104 1444 1776 2116 2441 2784 3121 3449
3796 4121 4449 0116 0441 0784 1121 1449 1796 2121 2449 2801 3124 3456 3801 4129
4464 0121 0449 0801 1124 1456 1801 2129 2464 2804 3129 3476 3809 4144 4481 0129
0464 0804 1129 1476 1809 2144 2481 2809 3136 3481 3824 4161 4484 0144 0481 0809
1136 1481 1824 2161 2484 2816 3156 3489 3841 4164 4489 0161 0484 0816 1156 1489
1841 2164 2489 2836 3161 3504 3844 4169 4496 0164 0489 0836 1161 1504 1844 2169
2496 2841 3169 3521 3849 4176 4516 0169 0496 0841 1169 1521 1849 2176 2500 2849
3184 3524 3856 4196 4521 0176 0516 0849 1184 1524 1856 2196 2516 2864 3201 3529
3876 4201 4529 0196 0521 0864 1201 1529 1876 2201 2521 2881 3204 3536 3881 4209
4544 0201 0529 0881 1204 1536 1881 2209 2529 2884 3209 3556 3889 4224 4561 0209
0544 0884 1209 1556 1889 2224 2544 2889 3216 3561 3904 4225 4564 0224 0561 0889
1216 1561 1904 2225 2561 2896 3225 3569 3921 4241 4569 0225 0564 0896 1225 1569
1921 2241 2564 2900 3236 3584 3924 4244 4576 0241 0569 0900 1236 1584 1924 2244
2569 2916 3241 3600 3929 4249 4596 0244 0576 0916 1241 1600 1929 2249 2576 2921
3249 3601 3936 4256 4601 0249 0596 0921 1249 1601 1936 2256 2596 2929 3264 3604
3956 4276 4609 0256 0601 0929 1264 1604 1956 2276 2601 2944 3281 3609 3961 4281
4624 0276 0609 0944 1281 1609 1961 2281 2609 2961 3284 3616 3969 4289 4641 0281
0624 0961 1284 1616 1969 2289 2624 2964 3289 3636 3984 4304 4644 0289 0625 0964
1289 1636 1984 2304 2641 2969 3296 3641 4001 4321 4649 The 4 Last Notes of
Square numbers.
4656 5044 5441 5809 6196 6569 6964 7344 7729 8116 8489 8889 9264 9649 4676
5049 5444 5824 6201 6576 6969 7361 7744 8121 8496 8896 9281 9664 4681 5056 5449
5841 6209 6596 6976 7364 7761 8129 8516 8900 9284 9681 4689 5076 5456 5844 6224
6601 6996 7369 7764 8144 8521 8916 9289 9684 4704 5081 5476 5849 6225 6609 7001
7376 7769 8161 8529 8921 9296 9689 4721 5089 5481 5856 6241 6624 7009 7396 7776
8164 8544 8929 9316 9696 4724 5104 5489 5876 6244 6641 7024 7401 7796 8169 8561
8944 9321 9716 4729 5121 5504 5881 6249 6644 7025 7409 7301 8176 8564 8961 9329
9721 4736 5124 5521 5889 6256 6649 7041 7424 7309 8196 8569 8964 9344 9729 4756
5129 5524 5904 6276 6656 7044 7441 7324 8201 8576 8969 9361 9744 4761 5136 5529
5921 6281 6676 7049 7444 7341 8209 8596 897^ 9364 9761 4769 5156 5536 5924 6289
6681 7056 7449 7344 8224 8601 8996 9369 9764 4784 5161 5556 5929 6304 6689 7076
7456 7349 8225 8609 9001 9376 9769 4801 5169 5561 5936 6321 6704 7031 7476 7356
8241 8624 9009 9396 9776 4804 5184 5569 5956 6324 6721 7039 7481 7376 8244 8641
9024 9401 9796 4809 5201 5584 5961 6329 6724 7104 7489 7381 8249 8644 9025 9409
9801 4816 5204 5600 5969 6336 6729 7121 7504 7389 8256 8649 9041 9424 9809 4836
5209 5601 5984 6356 6736 7124 7521 7904 8276 8656 9044 9441 9824 4841 5216 5604
6001 6361 6756 7129 7524 7921 8281 8676 9049 9444 9841 4849 5225 5609 6004 6369
6761 7136 7529 7924 8289 8681 905^ 9449 9844 4864 5236 5616 6009 6384 6769 7156
7536 7929 8304 8689 9076 9456 9849 4881 5241 5625 6016 6400 6784 7161 7556 7936
8321 8704 9081 9476 9856 4884 5249 5636 6025 6401 6801 7169 7561 7956 8324 8721
9089 9481 9876 4889 5264 5641 6036 6404 6804 7184 7569 7961 8329 8724 9104 9489
9881 4896 5281 5649 6041 6409 6809 7201 7584 7969 8336 8729 9121 9504 9889 4900
5284 5664 6049 6416 6816 7204 7600 7984 8356 8736 9124 9521 9904 4916 5289 5681
6064 6436 6836 7209 7601 8001 8361 8756 9129 9524 9921 4921 5296 5684 6081 6441
6841 7216 7604 8004 8369 8761 9136 9529 9924 4929 5316 5689 6084 6449 6849 7225
7609 8009 8384 8769 9156 9536 9929 4944 5321 5696 6089 6464 6864 7236 7616 8016
8400 8784 9161 9556 9936 4961 5329 5716 6096 6481 6881 7241 7636 8025 8401 8801
9169 9561 9956 4964 5344 5721 6100 6484 6884 7249 7641 8036 8404 8804 9184 9569
9961 4969 5361 5729 6116 6489 6889 7264 7649 8041 8409 8809 9201 9584 9969 4976
5364 5744 6121 6496 6896 7281 7664 8049 8416 8816 9204 9600 9984 4996 5369 5761
6129 6516 6900 7284 7681 8064 8436 8836 9209 9601 5001 5376 5764 6144 6521 6916
7289 7684 8081 8441 8841 9216 9604 5009 5396 5769 6161 6529 6921 7296 7639 8084
8449 8849 9225 9609 5024 5401 5776 6164 6544 6929 7316 7696 8089 8464 8864 9236
9616 5025 5409 5796 6169 6561 6944 7321 7716 8096 8481 8881 9241 9636 5041 5424
5801 6176 6564 6961 7329 7721 8100 8484 8884 9249 9641

How long soever a Number be, if its ending be not found in its proper place in
Page 31 or 32, It is no Square. You have 4 numbers, of which you tell me
nothing, but that one of them ends in 2, another in 35, another in 789, and the
last ends in 6796. Page 31. 32. tell me, that no square number can end so. I
therefore tell you, that none of your 4 numbers is a Square. But of these
896824656. 896835044. 896845441. 8969305809. 8969416196. 8969426569, I find
the 4 last figures in the uppermost line of this page, and yet I must not say
that any of them is a true Square; Page 29 makes me see they are not.

Having the two, three or four last figures of any Square number, to exhibit as
many of the last figures of its side, is a New Question: To which, the just
Answers are manifold and not obvious. A particular account of them is ready for
the Press, when it shall be desired.


