portrait of Sir Peyton Ventris, Knight Sr Peyton Ventris Knt.
Late one of the Justices of the Court of Com^on Pleas.
I: Royly pinx.
H: White sculp.
blazon of the Ventress family

THE REPORTS OF Sir Peyton Ventris Knight. Late One of the JUSTICES of the
COMMON PLEAS.

In Two Parts.

The First PART Containing Select CASES Adjudged in the King's Bench, in the
Reign of K. CHARLES II.

WITH Three Learned ARGUMENTS, One in the King's Bench, by Sir Francis North,
when Attorney General; and Two in the Exchequer, by Sir Matthew Hale, when Lord
Chief Baron.

With Two TABLES; One of the Cases, the other of the Principal Matters.

The Second PART Containing choice CASES Adjudged in the Common Pleas, in the
Reigns of K. CHARLES II. and K. JAMES II. and in the Three first years of the
Reign of His now Majesty K. WILLIAM and the late Q MARY; while he was a JUDGE
in the said Court: With the Pleadings to the same.

ALSO Several CASES and PLEADINGS thereupon in the Exchequer-Chamber upon Writs
of ERROR from the King's Bench.

Together with many remarkable and curious Cases in the Court of Chancery.

Whereto are added Three exact TABLES; One of the Cases, the other of the
Principal Matters, and the third of the Pleadings.

With the Allowance and Approbation of the Lord Keeper and all the Judges.

LONDON: Printed by the Assigns of Richard and Edward Atkyns, Esquires; for
Charles Harper and the Flower-de-Luce, and Jacob Tonson at the Judges-Head,
both over against St. Dunstan's Church in the Fleetstreet, MDCXCVI.

WE all knowing the Great Learning and Judgment of the Author, do (for the
Benefit of the Public) approve of and allow the Printing and Publishing of
this Book, Entitled, The Reports of Sir Peyton Ventris Knight. Late One of the
Justices of the Court of Common Pleas.

J. Som^ers, C.S. J. Holt, Geo: Treby, Ed: Nevill, Joh. Powell, W. Gregory, N.
Lechmere, Tho. Rokeby G: Air, Jo: Turton, John Powell, Sam. Air.

April the 20 th, 1695.
THE FIRST PART OF THE REPORTS OF Sir Peyton Ventris Knight. LATE One of the
Justices OF THE COMMON PLEAS.

CONTAINING Select CASES Adjudged in the COURT of King's Bench, in the Reign of
King CHARLES II.

WITH THREE LEARNED ARGVMENTS, One in the King's Bench, by Sir FRANCIS NORTH,
when Attorney General: And Two in the Exchequer, by Sir MATTHEW HALE, when Lord
Chief Baron.

With Two exact TABLES; One of the Cases, the other of the Principal Matters.

With the Allowance and Approbation of the LORD KEEPER and all the JUDGES.

LONDON: Printed by the Assigns of Richard and Edward Atkyns, Esquires; for
Charles Harper at the Flower-de-Luce, and Jacob Tonson at the Judges-Head, both
over against St. Dunstan's Church in the Fleetstreet, MDCXCVI.

TO THE READER.
THE Name of the Reverend and Learned JUDGE, who was the Compiler of these
REPORTS, will be a sufficient Invitation to the Understanding Reader, not only
to cast his Eye upon; but seriously to peruse them.

And as my Lord Coke in his Commentary upon Littleton (fol. 249. b.) says, That
for the most part the latter Resolutions and Judgments are the surest, and
therefore best to Season Students with at the Beginning, both for the settling
of their Judgments, and retaining of them in Memory, and easier to be
understood than the Ancient: So it is to be hoped that these following REPORTS,
Collected with Care, Diligence and Experience, by the Learned Author thereof,
will fully answer these Directions given by that beforementioned Famous Lawyer.

The Author of these REPORTS was so Eminent in his Profession of the LAWS, that
should I presume to give a Character of him, it would come very short of His
great Worth; and therefore I shall only commend him to the Courteous Reader,
where he will find his own Character given by himself.

Vale.
THE NAMES OF THE CASES.
IN THE FIRST PART.
A
ABram v. Cunningham p. 303 Adams v Guy 109 Amhurst's Case of Gray's Inn 187
Anger v. Brewer 348, 350 Anonymus's 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 17, 18, 20,
21, 24, 26, 28, 31, 32, 33, 34, 37, 38, 39, 40 41, 42, 43, 45, 46, 48, 49, 51,
53, 54, 55, 59, 60, 61, 63, 65, 69, 71, 74, 75, 87, 89, 92, 93, 98, 100, 105,
107, 108, 109, 111, 114, 115, 117, 120, 126, 127, 132, 133, 135, 142, 143, 146,
165, 166, 191, 211, 212, 213, 214, 222, 233, 234 236, 239, 247, 248, 249, 252,
253, 256, 257, 258, 259, 261, 262, 264, 265, 266, 267, 268, 272, 274, 276, 292,
293, 295, 296, 298, 306, 308, 309, 310, 315, 323, 325, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331,
332, 333, 335, 336, 337, 338, 343, 344, 345, 346, 348, 349, 350, 352, 353, 355,
356 357, 359, 361, 362, 366, 367, 369 Astree v. Ballard 315 Atkyns (Sir Robert)
v. Holford Clare 399 Auberie v. James 70 Aubin (St.) v. Cox 180 Austin's Case
183 Austin's (Katharine) Case 189
B
BAins versus Biggersdale 5 Baker v. Bulstrode 255 Baker v. Bakers 313 Baldway
and Ouston 71 Baltinglasses (Lady) Case 64 Barber v. Fox 159 Barkly v. Pain 28
Barnard v. Mitchel 114, 126 Barnes v. Bruddel 4 Barnes v. Hughes 8 Barrett v.
Milward and al' 75 Bateman 's ( Sir Anthony) Case 166 Bates 's (William) Case
41 Batmore and Vx' v. Graves 260 Bailey v. Murin 244 Beasly 's Case 301 Bedniff
and Vx' v. Popli and Vx' 220 Bell v. Thatcher 275 Bellew (Monsieur) Norman sen'
and Norman jun' 254 Bernard v. Bernard 72 Berry v. Bows 360 Best v. Yates 268
Billingham and Vavasor 6 Biron 's (Lord) Case 100 Blackamore v. Mercer 221
Blackman 's Case 304 Blake v. -- 240 Bolton v. Cannon 271 Bosvile v. Coats 58
Bourne v. Mason and al' 6 Bovye 's ( Sir Ralph) Case 193, 211, 217 Bradnox 's
Case 195 Braithwaite 's Case 19 Brell v. Richards 165 Brown 's (John) Case 243
Brown v. London 152 Brown v. Wait 299 Bulmer v. Charles Pawlet Lord St. John
160 Burfoot v. Peale 262 Burgen 's (Thomas) Case 13 Borough 's Case 305
Burwell 's Case 48 Butcher v. Cowper 183
C
CAptain C 's Case 250 Cabell and Vaughan 34 Calthorpe v. -- 108 Cartwright v.
Pinkney 272 Castilian v. Platt 190 Catterel v. Marshal 99 Chester v. Wilson 78
Chesters (Lady) Case 207 Clarke v. Phillips and al. 42 Clarke 's Case 327
Clayton v. Gillam 363 Clerk v. Cheney 13 Clipsham v. Morris 9 Clue v. Baily
240 Cole v. Levingston 224 Colepepper 's Case 349 Collet v. Padwel 93
Collingwood v. Pace 413 Cook v. Fountain 347 Coriton ( Sir John) and Harvey
versus Lithby 167 Cotton ( Sir Robert) v. Daintry 29 Cousin 's Case 69 Cox v.
Matthews 237, 239 Crawfoot v. Dale 263 Crispe and Jackson v. The Mayor and
Commonalty of Berwick 58, 90 Cross v. Winter 22 Crossing v. Scudamore 137
Curtis and al' v. Collingwood 297 Curtis v. Inman 364 Cuts v. Pickering 197
D
DAcon 's Case 107 Dacres v. Duncomb 235 Davenant v. The Bishop of Salisbury
223 Davis v. Wright and al' 120 Davis v. Price 317 Davison v. Hoslip 152 Day v.
Pitts 10 Day v. Coppleston 356 Dean and Chapter of Durham v. The Lord
Archbishop of York 225 Debt 233 Denison v. Ralphson 365 Dier v. East 42, 146
Dighton 's Case 77, 82 Dionise v. Curtis 211 Dorrel v. Jay 149 Drue v. Baily
275 Duncomb v. Walter 370 Dunwel v. Bullock 304 Dutton v. Poole 318, 332
E
EAton v. Barker 133, 134 Elpicke v. Acton 114 Ely v. Ward 55 Emerson v.
Emerson 187 Ent v. Withers 315, 321 Error 108, 113, 256 Evans, etc. 211 Exeter
(Bishop of) v. Starr 166
F
FAwkener v. Annis 264 Fisher v. Batten 155 Fitzgerald v. Marshall 206
Fitzharris 's Case 354 Foot v. Berkley 83, 88 Fortescue v. Holt 213 Foxwith v.
Tremaine 102 Freeman v. Barnes 55, 80 Freeman v. Boddington 185 Fry 's ( Lady
Anne) Case 199
G
GAmage 's Case 368 Gavell and his Wife v. Burket 53 Gifford v. Perkins 77
Gilman and Wright 11 Gilmore v. -- 330 Girling v. Alders 73 Girlington v.
Pitfield 47 Glyn v. Smith 46 Goff v. Loyd 191 Goffe 's Case 216 Green v. Cubit
70 Gregory v. Eads 27, 39 Griesley 's ( Sir Thomas) Case 4 Gybbons v. North 75
H.
HAll v. Phillips 62 Hall 's (Jacob) Case 167 Hanslap v. Cater 243 Hanway v.
Merrey 28 Harrington 's Case 324, 327 Harvey v. James 92 Harwood 's Case 178
Hawley 's (Lord) Case 143 Hayman v. Trewant 101 Heath v. Pryn 14 Hedgeborrow v.
Rosenden 253 Heeley v. Ward 2 Henley ( Sir Andrew) v. Dr. Burstal 23, 25
Herbert v. Merit 7 Herne v. Brown 339 Herring v. Brown 368, 371 Heskett v. Lee
73 Hicke 's ( Sir William) Case 154 Hill v. Langley 50 Hinchman v. Isles 247
Hocking v. Matthews 86 Hodgkins v. Robson and Thornborow 276 Hodson v. Cook
369 Holland v. Ellis 278 Horn v. Ivy 47 Hornsey ( Administrator of Jane Lane)
and Dimmocke 119 Horsam v. Turget 111 Hoskins v. Robbins 123, 163 How ( Sir
John) v. Woolley 1 How 's Case 209 How v. Whitfield 338, 339 Howlet v.
Carpenter 311
I.
J -- 's Case 323 Jackson v. Gabree 51 James v. Pierce 269 James v. Richardson
334 Jay v. Bond 222 Jay 's Case 302 Jemey v. Norris 105 Jenning v. Hunking 263
I Will 's Case 143, 153 John (St.) v. Moody 274 Jones v. Powell 98 Jones ( Sir
Samuel) v. The Countess of Manchester 197 Jordan v. Forett 76 Ironmongers
(Company of) v. Nailer 311 Isaac v. Ledgingham 167 Ju^ado v. Gregory 32
K
KAtharines (Case of St.) Hospital 149 Kent v. Harpool 306 Kent v. Derby 311
Kerle ( Sir John) v. Osgood 50 King v. Melling 214, 225 The KING v. Always and
Dixon 170 -- v. Armstrong, Harrison and al' 304 -- v. Atkins 35, 78 -- v. Bates
85 -- v. Benson 33 -- v. Burford 16 -- v. Clapham 110 -- v. Sir Thomas Fanshaw
331 -- v. Green and al' 171 -- v. Humphreys and al' 302 -- v. Jane D -- 69 --
v. Ledgingham 97, 104 -- v. Marlow 316 -- v. Mead 328 -- v. Monk and al' 43 --
v. Nelson 37 -- v. Plume 326, 346 -- v. Ring 23 -- v. Saunders 39 -- v.
Sergeant 23, 25 -- v. Sergeant and Annis 181 The KING v. Webb 17 -- v. Wright
169
L
LAmpereve (Adrian) and other Frenchmens Case 63 Large v. Cheshire 147 Lee v.
Edwards 44 Lee 's (Dr.) Case 105 Leech v. Widsley 54 Leicester 's (Earl of)
Case 278 Lewyn v. Forth 185 Lincoln (the Bishop of) v. Smith 3 Lion v. Carew 91
Littleton 's ( Sir Thomas) Case 270 Lomax v. Armorer 267 LONDON (Case of the
City of) and Coats 115 -- (Mayor and Comminalty) v. Dupester 261 -- (the City
of) v. Goree 298 LONDON (Case of the City of) concerning the Duty of Water and
Bailage 351 Love v. Wyndham 79 Loyd v. Brooking 188 Lucy v. Levington 175
M.
MAddy 's Case 158 Maleverer and Redshaw 39 Martyn v. Delboe 89 Matthews v.
Cross 119 Maynard 's Case 182 Mekins v. Minshaw 212 Meredith 's Case 217
Methyn and the Hundred of Thistleworth 118, 235 Mewes ( Sir William) v. Mewes
66 Miller v. Ward 92 Molyn v. Cook and al' 298 Monk v. Morris and Clayton 193
Monk 's Case 221 Monnington v. William 108 More v. Lewis 27 Moreton 's (Mr.
Justice Case) 30 Morris 's (Theodore) Case 146 Morse (Simon) v. W. Sluice 190,
238 Mosdel, the Marshal of the Court, v. Middleton 237 Matteram v. Jolly 271
N
NOell v. Nelson 94 Nokes and Stokes v. -- 35 Norris and Cuffuil 14 Norton v.
Harvey 259 Nurstie v. Hall 10
O
OEle v. Dittlesfield 153 Osborn v. Beversham 322 Owen v. Lewyn 223
P
PAge v. Denton 354 Paget v. Dr. Vossius 325 Parker v. Welby 85 Parker 's Case
331 Parrie 's Case 46 Parris 's Case 49 Parsons v. Perus 186 Pellow v.
Kingsford 126 Pepis 's Case 342 Peril v. Shaw 49 Perrie 's Case 17, 35 Perrot
v. Bridges 221 Peter's v. Opie 177, 214 Peterborough (Earl of) v. Sir John
Mordant 59 Pettus 's ( Sir Thomas) Case 110 Peyton 's ( Sir Robert) Case 346
Phillips v. Kingston 117 Pibus v. Mitford 372 Pierce v. Win 321 Pierson v.
Ridge 105 Pigot v. Bridge 292 Player ( Sir Thomas) Chamberlain of London and
Jones 21 Playters v. Sheering 64 Plomer ( Sir Walter) v. Sir Jeremy Whitchcot
314 Polexfen and Ashford v. Crispin 122 Polexphen v. Polexphen 133 Polus v.
Henstock 97 Pomfret v. Ricroft 26, 44 Potter and Sir Henry North 383 Prettyman
's (Lady) Case 208 Prior v. Shears 100 Prior v. -- 207 Proctor v. Newton 184
Prydyerd v. Thomas 96 Puckle v Moor 191 Putt v. Vincent 76 Putt v. Nosworthy
135
R
RAdly and Delbow v. Eglesfield and Whital 173 Read v. Wilmot 220 Reive v.
Cropley 347 Reynell v. Heal 122 Richardson v. Disborow 291 Richmond (Duke of)
v. Wise 124 Robinson v. Pulford 43 Robinson v. Woolly 306, 319 Robson 's Case
107 Rumsey v. Rawson 18, 25 Rushden v. Collins 44
S
SAcheverel v. Frogate 148, 161 Sands v. Rudd 186 Sard v. Ford 98 Saunders v.
Williams 319 Seaman v. Dee 198 Shaftsbury (Earl of) v. Cradock 363 -- v. Graham
and al' 364 Sherman 's Case 210 Silly v. Silly 260, 262 Skier v. Atkinson 22
Skinner and Gunter, etc. 12, 18 Skinner v. Webb 168 Skirr and Sikes 34 Smith 's
Case 66 Smith ( Sir William) v. Wheeler 128 Smith v. Butterfield 184 Smith v.
Tracy 307, 316, 323 Southampton (Case of the Heirs of the Earls of) 142 Sparks
v. Martyn 1 Stanlack 's Case 181 Steed v. Berrier 341 Sterling ( Sir Samuel) v.
Turner 206 Stone 's Case 16, 29 Suffil 's Case 2 Sympson and Quinley 88
T
TAilour v. Fitzgerald 137 Tarlour and Rous v. Parner 88 Tailor 's Case 293
Thodie 's Case 234 Thomas v. Butler 217 Thomlinson v. Hunter 53 Thrower 's Case
208 Thynne ( Sir Henry Frederick) v. Sir James Thynne 51 Toll v. Dawson 184
Tothill v. Ingram 314 Twisleton v. Hobbs 3
V
VAughan and Loyd 7 Vere v. Smith 121 Virtue v. Bird 310
W
WAldron v. Ruscarit 170 Walker v. Wakeman 294 Walter v. Channer 21 Ward v.
Rich 103 Ward v. Forth 210 Watkins v. Edwards 174 Watson v. Snead 238 Webb
(Doctor) v. Batchelour and al' 273 Wells v. Wells 40 Welsh v. Bell 36 Weyman v.
Smith 88 Whaley v. Tancred 241 Wharton and Brook 21 Wilbraham and Snow 52
Wildman v. Norton 249 Williams v. Gwyn 60 Wilson v. Armorer 77, 87, 106 Wilston
and Pilkney 242 Wingate and Stanton, the Bail of William Stanton 38 Wise 's
Case 69 Wood v. Coat 195 Woodward v. Aston 296 Wortley (the Lady) v. Holt 31
Wright v. Johnson 64
Z
ZOuch v. Clay 185
ADVERTISEMENT.
Note, That the Author of these Reports, has referred to Croke's Elizabeth as
the first Part, and Croke's Charles as the third Part of those Reports, except
in the first thirty Sheets of the First Volume, in which thirty Sheets he
referred to Croke's Charles of the first Edition as the first Part, and Croke's
Elizabeth as the third Part of those Reports.

TERMINO Sancti Michaelis, Anno 20 Car. II. in Banco Regis.
Sparks, etc. versus Martyn.
JONES moved for a Prohibition to the Court of the Admiralty, for that they
Libelled against one for Rescuing of a Ship, and taking away the Sails of it
from one that was executing the Process of the Court against the said Ship: and
for that in the presence of the Judge and face of the Court he Assaulted and
Beat one, and spoke many opprobious Words against him. Now seeing that these
Matters were determinable at Law, the Ship being infra corpus Comitatus; and
they could not adjudge Damages to the party, or Fine or Imprison; He prayed a
Prohibition.

But the Court denied it, (absentibus Windham and Moreton); 1 Cro. 216.
For they may punish one that resists the Process of their Court and may Fine
and Imprison for a Contempt to their Court, acte^ in the face of it, though they
are no Court of Record; but if they should proceed to give the party Damages,
they would grant a Prohibition quoad that: And of that Opinion was Wyndham, the
Case being afterward put to him by the Chief Justice. But the parties
afterward put into their Suggestion. That the original Cause upon which the
Process was grounded, was a Matter whereof the Court of Admiralty had no
cognizance: Wherefore a Prohibition was granted; For then the Rescous could be
no Contempt.

Sir John How versus Woolley, an Attorney of the Court.
IT was Moved, That Woolley should put in special Bail, being an Attorney at
large, and having dicontinued his Practice. But the Court said, Attorneys at
Large have the same privilege with the Clerks of the Court, and are to appear
de die in diem. And they were not satisfied that he had discontinued his
Practice.

Suffil's Case.
IT was Moved to quash the Return of a Rescous against Suffil and diverse
others, who rescued a person taken upon Mesne Process; because the Rescuers
being particularly named it is said rescusserunt, and not added quilibet little
rescussit. And for that Case was cited in the 2 Cro. where the Sheriff returns
an Exigent against diverse quod non comperuerunt, upon the Quinto exacti, and
does not add nec aliquis little comperuit; and for that cause it was Reversed in
a Writ of Error, notwithstanding, Twisden being only in Court, held it to be
well enough, it being in the Affirmative.

Anonymus.
A Prohibition was prayed to the Ecclesiastical Court, for that a Parson
Libelled against one there for talking of him Knave, and 'twas granted, it not
appearing to relate to any thing concerning his Function: And a Case was cited
to be Adjudged 24 of the Queen, the Suit being in the Ecclesiastical Court for
these words, (viz.) Sir Priest, you are a Knave; and a Prohibition was granted.

Note, If a man be taken in Execution, he cannot be bailed, though he brings a
Writ of Error.

Anonymous.
IN Debt upon a Lease for years, the Defendant may plead Entry into part, upon
which follows Suspension, and it does not amount to the General Issue.

Heely versus Ward.
ERror to Reverse a Judgment given in the Court at Hull, where the Plaintiff in
an Assumpsit did declare. That at such a place, infra Jurisdictionem Curiae,
the Defendant in consideration that the Plaintiff had assumed to pay him so
much a yard, promised to deliver him so many yards of Kersey; and it was
assigned for Error, That the delivery is not laid to be at a place infra
Jurisdictionem Curiae; and indeed there is no place at all. And of that Opinion
was Twisden, (he being only in Court) and cited a Case, where in an Assumpsit
in the Marshalsey, upon a Promise to make a Lease of a House in Middle Row, and
after Judgment it was held Erroneous, because Middle Row was not laid to be
infra Jurisdictionem Curiae.

The Bishop of Lincoln versus Smith.
THe Bishop of Lincoln sued in the Court holden before his Chancellor for a
Pension, to which he entitled himself by Prescription, and a Prohibition was
prayed for Smith the Defendant there; for that being by Prescription that Court
had no cognizance of it: And for that my Lord Coke's Opinion was cited, 2 Inst.
491. especially he could not sue for it in his own Court.

But it was resolved by Keeling and Twisden (the other Justices being absent)
that Pensions, though they were by Prescription, might be sued for in that Court;
for having cognizance of the Principal, that shall draw in the Accessory. As if
one Libel for a Modus decimandi, if they allow it, they may try it; and Coke's
Opinion they said was not warranted by the Books, and Fitzh. N.B. 524. is
against it, 2 Cro. 483.
and the Court being held before the Chancellor, and not the Bishop himself, he
might sue there: Vide Hob. 87. Conusans of Pleas granted to be holden before
the Steward of the Grantee, licet the Grantee fuerit pars.

Anonymus.
AN Attachment was prayed against one, who being arrested upon a Latitat, gave
a Warrant of Attorney to Confess a Judgment, and presently after snatched it
out of his hand to whom it was delivered, and tore off the Seal: And the Court
seemed to incline, in regard it was to Confess a Judgment in this Court that it
was a Contempt, upon which an Attachment might be granted.

Anonymus.
A Prohibition was prayed, to stay a Suit in the Court Christian for Tithes,
upon the suggestion of a Modus, which was alleged in this manner: That the
Proprietors and Occupiers of such a Manor, or any parcel thereof, should pay a
Groat to the Parson for Herbage Tithes.

The Court held his this could not be, for if a man had but two or three Foot
of Ground in the Manor he should pay a Groat; but it ought to have been laid:
That the Proprietors and Occupiers of such a Manor, for themselves and their
Farmers, had paid Four pence.

Twisleton versus Hobbs.
ACtion for these Words, [You are a Forger of Bonds, a Publisher of Forgery,
and Sue upon forged Bonds.]

The Jury found the Defendant Not Guilty, as to the first Words, and resolved
the last Words were not Actionable, if not being laid that he knew of the
Forgery.

Sir Thomas Griesley's Case.
INformation against him for stopping the Highway, the word was Obstupabat. It
was proved in Evidence, that he plowed it up; and Resolved it did well maintain
the Information.

Anonymus.
IN Debt, If the Defendant wage his Law, the Oath of the Eleven which are Sworn
de credulitate, may be dispensed with by the Plaintiffs assent. Vid. Mag.
Charta, c. 28.

Note, It was Adjudged in the King's Bench, 19 Car. II. That if a Prisoner
escape by the permission of the Sheriff, yet he may be taken by the party at
whose Suit he was condemned; for it may be the Sheriff is Insufficient; and it
is no reason that his own Act should damnifie the Plaintiff. Vide Hob. 202.

Termino Sancti Hillarij, Anno 20 and 21 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Barnes versus Bruddel.
ACtion for these Words, alleged to be spoken of the Plaintiff, (viz.) She was
with Child by J. S. whereof she Miscarried; and concludes, That by reason
thereof she was so brought into her Fathers displeasure that he turned her out
of Doors, and that she was brought within the Penalty of the Statute of 18
Eliz. And in Maintenance of this Action a Case was cited out of Roll's 1st Part
35. inter Meadows and Boyneham, an Action was brought for calling of one Whore,
Per quod consortium amisit Vicin' suorum; and held it would lie. And in Anne
Davie's Case, 4 Co. 17. it is held, That since the Statute of the 18 Eliz. cap.
3. to say, One had a Bastard, would bear an Action.

But notwithstanding the Opinion of the Court was, That such an Action would
not lie unless a special Damage had been alleged, as to say, She had lost her
Marriage, as in Anne Davies's Case; and the Reason upon the Statute alleged in
the Case, was said by Twisden to be of my Lord Coke's putting in; for Justice
Jones affirmed to him, there was nothing said thereof in the Case.

Anonymus.
IF a Tradesman contract Debts and after gives over Trading, he may be
afterward a Bankrupt within the Statute in respect of the Debts contracted
before: And so it was said to be Ruled in Sir Job Harvies Case.

Anonymus.
A Warren may pay Tithes by Custom: So of Doves in a Dove-house, or Fish in a
River.

Note, It was said by Twisden, That if a Libel be in the Ecclesiastical Court
for a thing whereof they have cognizance, although the party intitles himself to
it by Custom, no Prohibition lies.

Anonymus.
A Prohibition was prayed, for that they Cited him to answer Articles in the
Ecclesiastical Court, and did not deliver a Copy of the Articles; and it was
granted quousque they should deliver the Copy: But the Prohibition which was
taken out was absolute, which the Court being informed of, they did not think
fit to grant a Consultation, but to discharge that Prohibition by a
Supersedeas. Whereupon they proceeded and Excommunicated the party for default
of Answering: Who again moved the Court for a Prohibition, and one was granted
with a Mandamus in it, to absolve him, if it were for not Answering before they
gave him a Copy of the Articles.

Bains and Biggersdale.
ERror to Reverse a Judgment in an Action of Debt upon a Bond, in Rippon Court;
because it was entered upon the Record, Assid' damna ultra misas and custagia ad
10 l and does not say, Occasion detentionis debiti, or Occasion praedicta;
and the Judgment was, Quod recuperet damna praedicta, and does not say, Per
Juratores assessa: Yet notwithstanding the Judgment was affirmed.

Billingham and Vavasor.
ERror to Reverse a Judgment in Debt, in the Court of York: Assigned,

First, In the Variance between the Count and Plaint; for the Plaint was
Entered, Ad hanc Curiam venit and queritur de Placito deb' super demand' 14 l
and the Count was for 12 l but it was Answered, That the certainty of the Sum
needed not to be expressed in the Plaint, and so Surplusage. But otherwise it
is of a Variance between the Original and the Count; for the Writ must
comprehend the certainty of the Debt; and 2 Cro. 311. was cited where Debt was
brought in the Common Bench for 40 s and after the Return of the Pluries Capias
the Entry was, Quod Querens obtulit se in plito deb' 40 l and assigned for
Error, and disallowed. But to that it was said, That that was but a Misprision
in the Entry of a Continuance which had a former Record to warrant it: And
here, though the certainty of the Sum need not to have been expressed; Vid. 3
Cro. 619.
yet when it is, the Plaint must not vary from it. Et adjornatur.

Bourne versus Mason and al'.
IN an Assumpsit, the Plaintiff declares, That whereas one Parrie was indebted
to the Plaintiff and Defendants in two several Sums of Money, and that a
Stranger was indebted in another Sum to Parrie; that there being a
Communication between them, the Defendants in Consideration that Parrie would
permit them to sue in his Name the Stranger for the Sum due to him, they
promised they would pay the Sum which Parrie owed to the Plaintiff; and
alleged, that Parrie permitted them to Sue, and that they Recovered. After Non
assumpsit pleaded, and a Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of
Judgment, That the Plaintiff could not bring this Action, for he was a Stranger
to the Consideration.

But in maintenance thereof a Judgment was cited in 1658. between Sprat and
Agar, Vid. 3 Cro. 619.
in the King's Bench, where one promised to the Father, in Consideration that he
would give his Daughter in Marriage with his Son, he would settle so much Land.
After the Marriage the Son brought the Action; and it was Adjudged
maintainable. And another Case was cited of a Promise to a Physician, That if
he did such a Cure, he would give such a Sum of Money to himself, and another to
his Daughter; and it was Resolved, the Daughter might bring an Assumpsit. Which
Cases the Court Agreed: For in the one Case the parties that brought the
Assumpsit did the Meritorious act, though the Promise was made to another; and in
the other Case, the nearness of the relation gives the Daughter the benefit of
the consideration performed by her Father; but here the Plaintiff did nothing
of trouble to himself, or benefit to the Defendant, but is a mere Stranger to
the Consideration; wherefore it was adjudged quod nihil capiat per billam.

Herbert versus Merit.
A Prohibition was prayed to the Ecclesiastical Court, for that the Defendant
Libelled against the Plaintiff there, for calling of her Impudent Whore, which
was said to be only a word of Passion; and the later Opinions have been, that
unless some Act of Fornication were expressed that Prohibitions should be
granted.

But the Court denied it in this case, it being an offense of a Spiritual
Cognizance, and Eaton and Ailoffes Case, 1 Cro. 78. and Pewes Case 329, were
cited.

The Sheriff may Sell Goods, he takes in Execution by a Fieri facias, at any
Rates, if the Defendant denies to pay the Money.

Nota, No Action of Debt lies against the Sheriff when the Party escapes, who
is taken upon a Mesne Process, but an Action upon the Case only,

Vaughan and Loyd.
IN an Audita Querela, the Party appeared upon the Sciri Facias, and demurred,
for that the Sciri Facias bore Date the 23 day of October, and the Audita
Querela the 3 of November after. To which it was said, that this fault in the
Mesne Process is aided by Appearance; but if an Original should bear Date upon
a Sunday or the like, the Appearance of the Party would not help it. But on the
other side it was said, That the Party had no day in Court by the Audita
Querela, and this was a default in the first Process against him, and compared
it to a Sciri Facias upon a Judgment, in which such a fault will not be cured
by Appearance: To which the Court agreed. For there the Sciri Facias is the
Foundation, and quasi an Original, and the Judgment is given upon it; 2 Cro.
424.
but here the Sciri Facias is only to bring in the Party to answer, and in the
nature of a Mesne Process, and the Judgment is given upon the Audita Querela;
wherefore they disallowed the Demurrer.

Barnes versus Hughes.
DEbt tam pro Domino Rege quam pro seipso, upon the Stat. of 5 Eliz. cap. 4.
for exercising of the Trade of a Grocer in Salisbury, not being bound
Apprentice thereunto. The Defendant pleads Nil debet, and being tried by Nisi
prius, and a Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment,
that this Action could not be brought in this Court, for by the Stat. 21 Jac.
cap. 4. It is Enacted that all offenses against any penal Statute, for which an
Informer may lawfully ground any popular Action, Bill, Plaint, Suit or
Information before Justices of Assize, Nisi prius or Jail-deliver, Justices of
Oyer and Terminer, or of the Peace in their General Quarter Sessions, shall be
Commenced, Sued, etc. before the said Justices, they having power to hear and
determine the same and not elsewhere; which Negative words, as it was said,
take away the Jurisdiction of this Court: And whereas 31 Eliz. restrained not
the Kings Attorney, because it only made mention of Common Informers; the Kings
Attorney is expressly named in this Statute, and the Cases in, 2 Cro. 85.
between Bean and Druge, and Moyl and Taylours Case, 2 Cro. 178. were quoted.
And the Statute would be to little purpose, if it did not extend to Actions of
Debt, as well as Informations and Indictments. But it was said on the other
side, That it could not extend to Actions of Debt, for they could not be
brought before Justices of Assize, or the other Justices named in the Act, and
it shall only extend to such Suits as an Informer might lawfully Commence
before them. And it has been resolved, that this Act did give no new
Jurisdiction, as 1 Cro. 112, Farrington and Keymer's Case, in an Information
upon the Statute of 23 H. 8. cap. 4. for selling of Beer at an unlawful price,
which gives the forfeiture to be Recovered in Courts, where no Protection or
Wager of Law shall be allowed in any Suit grounded upon it; extends only to the
Courts at Westminster, as 6 Co. in Gregory's Case it was resolved. That no
Information for an offense against this Statute could be commenced before the
Justices of Assize or Peace at the Sessions, notwithstanding the Act in 21 Jac.
which ordains, That Suits for offenses against Penal Laws shall be before them
and the rest there mentioned; for the Act only extends to those offenses, for
the which an Informer might lawfully ground any popular Action before them, and
it was never held that that Act gave any new Jurisdiction. Now if this Action
cannot be brought in this Court, the Statute must Repeal a great part of the
Remedies given by 5 Eliz. against this offense, and only leave it to be
punished by Indictments and Informations, which certainly was never the intent
of the Statute, and would be very mischievous; for if the Offender goes out of
the Country after the offense committed, he cannot be punished; for the
Justices named in the Statute cannot award Process out of the County, and
therefore for that reason there should be remedy in a Court of General
Jurisdiction, and since 21 Jac. there have been many Presidents of like
Actions; all which would be Reversed, if that Act should take away Actions of
Debt in this Court. And for these Reasons the Case being moved diverse times,
the Court gave Judgment for the Plaintiff. Still. 340.

Anonymus.
IN Debt upon an Obligation the Defendant pleads, That he delivered it as an
Escrow, and hoc paratus est verificare. This Plea is vicious, for he ought to
show to whom he delivered it; and also he ought to conclude his Plea, and
issint nient son fait.

Anonymus.
A Lease for Years is made to A. and then another Lease is made for Twenty
years, to commence after the Expiration of the former Lease, if B. and C. shall
so long live, with a reservation of several things, and reddend' 3 l nom'
Hariotte after the death of B. or C. B. dies during the continuance of the
first Lease. The 3 l must be paid; for it is not in the nature of a Rent, but a
Sum in gross.

Clipsham and Morris.
THe Plaintiff in an Assumpsit declared, That J. S. being indebted unto him in
50 l gave him a Note, directed to the Defendant, requiring him to pay the
Plaintiff the said Sum of 50 l then he says, That the Defendant upon view of
the Note, in Consideration that the Plaintiff would accept of his Promise for
the Money, and stay a Fortnight for the same, he did assume to pay him.

To which the Defendant demurs for the Insufficiency of the Consideration; it
being nothing of trouble or prejudice to the Plaintiff, or benefit to the
Defendant, for he might Sue his Debtor in the mean time; neither is it
alleged, that the Defendant was indebted to J. S. But if it had been in
Consideration, That the Plaintiff would accept of the Defendant for his Debtor,
that might have been good; for that is an implied Discharge of the other, whom
if he had sued, the Defendant might have had an Action, Roll's 1st Part 29. And
for this Reason the Opinion of the Court was against the Plaintiff. And this
Point was said to be Adjudged between Newcomen and Lee in this Court, Paschae
1650. Rot. 62. Still. 249.

Anonymus.
A Man was Indicted for saying, The Justices of the Peace had nothing to do
with the Excise: And it was quashed by the Opnion of the Court; for such an
Information could not make a man Criminal.

Nurstie versus Hall.
THe Grantee of a Reversion brings a Writ of Covenant against the Lessee for
years, for non-payment of Rent. The Question was, Whether it ought to be laid
where the Lease is alleged to be made; or, where the Land lies? It was said,
That the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 34. which gives the Action of Covenant to the
Assignee of the Reversion, says, That they shall have such Actions in like
manner, as the Lessors should have had. Now if it had been brought by the
Lessor it had been transitory, and so in the Case of an Assignment by
Commissioners of Bankrupt, the Assignee of the Commissioners of Bankrupt shall
bring Debt as the first Creditor should have done.

But it was said on the other Side, That the Statute intended not to assign it
as a bare Chose en Action, but to knit it to the Reversion; and where it says,
The Assignee shall have Remedy in like manner; that is, the same Remedy in
substance: And in the case of the Bankrupt's Debt the Contract is only
assigned. And in the 42 Ed. 3. cap. 3. it is said, That an Action of Covenant
lay for the Assignee at the Common Law. But because the Court was not full, it
was thought fit this Case should be Adjourned till the next Term.

Note, It was said in this Case, the Word- Reddendum makes a Covenant.

Day and Pitts.
A Prohibition was moved for to stay a Suit in the Spiritual Court, upon a
Suggestion, that it was for calling one Old Thief, and Old Whore; and if there
were any such Words spoken, they were spoken at the same time: Which Suggestion
was not good; for the Words ought to have been fully confessed. And it was said
by the Court, That this Matter ought to have been pleaded there, and if they
had not admitted the Plea, then to move for a Prohibition, and not before.

Gilman and Wright.
BUrgh moved against Wright (Steward of Havering Court in Essex) for refusing
to admit Gilman an Attorney in this Court, to Appear for a man in an Action
sued against him there; alleging, That the Attorneys of the Courts of
Westminster might Practice in any Inferior Court; neither had they a
Prescription or Charter to have a certain Number of Attorneys of their own, and
to exclude others.

But because it was the general Usage of those Inferior Courts to admit none
but their own Attorneys, though the Court seemed to incline, That they ought not
by Law to refuse Others; and it was said to be so Adjudged in the 15th of Car.
1. in one Darcie's Case; yet they would be Advised until the next Term.

Note, One who is Subpoena'd for a Witness, may have a Writ of Privilege to
protect him from Arrests in going and returning.

Anonymus.
A Prohibition was granted to the Court of the Marches of Wales, for that Lands
being descended to an Infant, which were subject to a Trust, they had not only
enjoined the possession of those Lands, but of other Lands descended to him.
And it was said by the Court, That they could not Sequester Lands at all, for
the performance of a Decree of their Court to pay Money. For they can only
agere in personam, and non in rem.

Termino Sanctae Paschae, Anno 21 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Anonymus.
THe Sheriff Returned Non est inventus to a Writ brought against his own
Bailiff, and delivered to him. But the Court Amerced him Forty shillings, and
he was ordered to amend his Return.

Anonymus.
TRover and Conversion was brought against Baron and Feme, for that they ad
usum proprium converterunt and disposuerunt; and held not to be good, because
the Wife cannot Convert with her Husband.

Skinner and Gunter, etc.
A Bill in the nature of Conspiracy was brought against Three, for that they, 2
Cro. 667. Hob. 205, 266.
Conspiratione inter eos habita, caused the Plaintiff to be Arrested in London,
on purpose to vex him and have him Imprisoned, knowing that he was not able to
find Bail, whereas they had no cause of Action. The Defendants pleaded Not
guilty, and the Issue was found only against one of them.

It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, That the Declaration was Insufficient,
because it was not declared that the first Action was determined; as no
Conspiracy lies upon an Indictment before Acquittal.

But the Court inclined to disallow this; for here the ground of the Action, is
the caussess troubling of him to put in Bail: But when a man is Indicted, he
lies under the scandal of the Crime until he is acquitted.

Another Exception was, That this Bill being in the nature of a Writ of
Conspiracy, there being One only found Guilty, the Action fails. But it was
said, True, it is so in case of Conspiracy to Indict One of Felony; but here
it is rather in nature of an Action upon the Case, and the Conspiracy alleged
by way of aggravation. Fitz. N.B. 116. Et Adjornatur.

Anonymus.
AN Indictment was removed hither the last Term out of Middlesex, against
Edward S. of Perjury, and he was named Edward all along in the Indictment unto
the Conclusion, and then it was, and sic praedictus Johannes commisit
perjurium. The Court was moved that this might be amended, and it was said,
Indidictments removed out of London have been amended by the Original, for they
do not certify that, but only a Transcript; and a Jury have been resummoned to
amend an Indictment found in this Court; and in this case, if by Examination of
the Clerk of the Peace it appeared, the Indictment certified varied from the
Original, it might be amended; sed Curia advisare vult.

Nota, If a Venire Facias be returned and not filed, a new one may be taken out.

Thomas Burgen's Case.
AN Indictment was brought against Thomas Burgen, for selling Ale in Black Pots
not marked, and does not conclude contra formam Statuti, and held to be good
enough, for the Common Law appoints just Measures; and though the Statute adds
this circumstance, yet the Crime being at the Common Law, the conclusion is as
it ought to be.

Where a Statute makes an offense more Penal, (as that which deprives one that
Steals the value of Five shillings, out of a dwelling house in the day time, of
his Clergy,) yet the conclusion of an Indictment in that case is not contra
formam Statuti.

Nota, Where one is sued by a name with an Alias, the Addition must ever be
expressed after the first name.

Clerk and Cheney.
IN Trespass for breaking of his Close, the Defendant justifies by reason of a
way from his House thorough the place where, usque a^tam viam regiam in
parochia de D. vocat. London Road, and Issue was joined upon the way, and found
for the Plaintiff; Vid. Hob. 189.
it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that there was no Issue joined, for the
incertainty of the terminus ad quem, whether this way should lead, and one that
justifies for a way, if he alleges the place from whence, and to which, and
that it leads over the place where, it is sufficient, though he mistake the other
mean passages of it, and though this be the Defendants own Plea, yet he may take
exceptions to it, not being certain enough to make an Issue.

Sed non allocatur, for in regard it is found he had a way over the place
where, it is not material to the justification whither it leads, it being after
a Verdict, when the right of the case is tried: And it is aided at last by the
Statute of Oxford, 16 Car. And so Twysden said, it was the Opinion of all the
Judges at Sergeants Inn, he putting the Case to them at Dinner.

Norris and Cuffuil.
IN an Action upon the Case the Plaintiff declared, That the Defendant in
consideration of six pence paid in hand the 13 of Jan. 17 Car. and that the
Plaintiff would pay him 20 s a Month, he promised to serve him in his
Glass-house after the first Iourny of Glass; and sets forth quod primum iter
vitrij tunc prox. sequens aggreamentum praedictum fuit, 21 Feb. 17 Car. which
was the year before, and that the Defendant did not come to serve him.

After Verdict for the Plaintiff it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, That the
Plaintiff had not declared sufficiently of any Iourny of Glass after the
Agreement, but that alleged appears to be the year before. Et Adjornatur: This
Case being moved again, Twysden said he had put it to the Judges at Sergeants
Inn, and they were all of Opinion that it was well enough after a Verdict.

Heath versus Pryn.
IN an Ejectione Firmae of the Rectory of Westbourn in Chichester, upon Not
Guilty pleaded, it appeared upon the Evidence that the Plaintiffs Title was as
Presentee of the Grantee of the next Avoidance from the Lord Lumly, and Letters
of Institution under the Seal of the Ordinary were produced; but by reason of
the times (the Ordinary Parson and Patron being Sequestered,) no Induction
followed thereupon, until the Kings Restoration; this Institution was 1645.
Soon after the Defendant was placed in this Church by an Ordinance of
Parliament, and has enjoyed it ever since; and there was an Act of Parliament
made, 12 Car. 2. which confirms Ministers in their Possessions of any Benefice
with cure, though they came not in by Admission, Institution and Induction, but
according to a Form used in those times, in which Act there is also a Clause of
Restitution of sequestered Ministers, to such Benefices as they had been seized
of by taking the profits.

It was alleged on the Defendants side, that the Plaintiff proving nothing of
a Presentation, the Institution could not be admitted as Evidence of it,
especially in this case, where the Induction was so long after; to which the
Court did incline: And then the Oath of the Grantee of the next Avoidance was
offered, which was not admitted, although his Interest was executed by the
Presentment. And it was said, that an Assignor might be sworn a Witness to the
Assignment of a Lease, where there were no Covenants. It was also said, that
the Plaintiff was not within the clause of Restitution, of the Act of 12 Car.
because he was never seized by taking the Profits, which cannot be until
Induction, according to Hare and Bicklers Case, in the Commentaries, quod suit
concessum.

To which it was replied, That neither was the Defendant within the clause of
Confirmation, because the Rectory in question was not a Benefice with cure, for
there is belonging to it a perpetual Vicaridge Endowed, and the Vicar comes in
by Admission, Institution and Induction, who performs Divine Service, pays the
Synodals and Procurations, repairs the Chancel; and therefore it has been
adjudged, that such a Vicar shall have Arbores in Coemiterio: And it was said
that the Statute of 21 Hen. 8. against Pluralities, does not extend to
Rectories, where there are Vicaridges Endowed. And Linwood describes a Benefice
without cure, cujus cura Vicariis perpetuo exercenda est: Otherwise, where the
Vicar is Temporal and removeable. And the difference is inter curam actualem
and habitualem. And it is the Cure that the Rector has, and so has every
Bishop in his Diocese; who when he gives Institution says, accipe curam tuam
et meam; but the Act only extends to the first.

It appeared also on the other side, That the Parson had come once or twice a
year, Preached and Administered Sacraments; and that without the Vicars leave,
and also paid First Fruits: Upon all this matter the Opinion of the Court was,
That the Parson had a concurrent Cure with the Vicar, and resembled it to the
case where there are two Incumbents in one Church, and coming in by Admission,
Institution and Induction, the Vicar could not discharge him of the cure of
Souls. But Donatives, which are conferred by Laymen are sine cura.

Note, The Plaintiffs Counsel would have denied the Act of 12 Car. to be an Act
of Parliament, because the were not Summoned by the Kings Writ; but the Judges
would not admit it to be questioned, and said, That all the Judges resolved,
that the Act being made by King, Lords and Commons, they ought not now to pry
into any defects of the Circumstance of calling them together; neither would
they suffer a point to be stirred, wherein the Estates of so many were
concerned. Vid. Hob. 109. 33 H. 6. 19.
Notwithstanding all this, the Jury found for the Plaintiff. It seemed by the
Court in this case, that Letters of Institution must be under the Episcopal
Seal; sed vide Cro. lib. 1. 249. Vid. postea.

The King against Burford.
HE was Indicted, for that he scandalose and contemptuose propalavit and
publicavit verba squentia, viz. That none of the Justices of Peace do
understand the Statutes for the Excise, unless Mr. A. B. and he understands but
little of them, no, nor many Parliament men do not understand them upon the
reading of them. And it was moved to quash the Idictment, for that a man could
not be Indicted for speaking^ of such words; and of that Opinion was the Court:
But they said he might have been bound to his Good Behavior.

Stones Case.
A Writ of Privilege was prayed for Stone, an Attorney of the Court, who was
Copyholder of a Manor, where the Custom was, for the Homage to choose one of
the Tenants to collect the Lords Rents for the year following; and they elected
him. But it was said, that this might be taken to be parcel of his Tenure for
the Lords, use to seize the Land for not executing of it; and his Privilege
ought not to deprive the Lord of the Service of his Tenant. 1 Cro. 422.
In the Book of H. 6. The Archbishop of York being bound by Tenure to Collect
the Tenths, pleaded the Kings Letters Patents in discharge thereof, and they
were disallowed; and though Attorneys have had their privilege where they have
been pressed Soldiers, as in Venables Case, 1 Cro. 8. Co. Entries, 436.
Springs Case, and 1 Cro. 283. and where by Custom it came to an Attorneys turn
to be Constable, vid. Rolls 2. part 276. yet these are public Services to
which every one is bound; but Privileges may be allowed to exempt particular
persons, as the King may grant to one, that he shall not be of a Jury.

But the Court inclined to grant the Writ; for it did not appear that it was
parcel of his Tenure, but rather imposed upon him by the Custom of the Manor;
and if Attorneys shall be discharged of the Service of the Commonwealth a
fortiori of any private Service. Vid. postea.

The King versus Webb.
IN an Action brought against him for imbesiling of the Kings Goods, which was
laid in the Declaration to be in London; it was moved for the King, that the
County might be changed: And the Court held the King might choose his County,
and might wave that which he had seemed to have elected before, as he may wave
his Demurrer and join Issue, and contra.

Perries Case.
IN an Information of Forgery against him, being an Attorney of the Common
Pleas, it was alleged, That he had framed a certain Writing in the Form of a
Release at Sherborn, and that he published and gave it in Evidence at
Dorchester, and the Venue came out of Dorchester; whereas it was said, it ought
to have come out of both places. To which it was answered, That the publishing,
and not the framing, was the Crime. But notwithstanding it was held to be a
Mis-trial, and being in an Information it was not aided by any Statute. Postea.

Anonymus.
IN Trover and Conversion, amongst other things the Plaintiff declared de sex
bovibus, instead of bobus. Upon Not guilty pleaded, and found for the
Plaintiff, and entire Damages assessed,

It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, That the Jury ought to have given no
Damages for bovibus, being a word insensible, and entire Damages being given,
it was naught for all. To which it was answered; That if the word be
insensible, notwithstanding the Anglice, the Jury shall not be intended to have
regarded it in the giving of Damages; and if it has a signification, then it
is well enough. And it was said, bovibus was an old Latin word, and is found in
Plautus, and it is bobus only by contraction. It was also said, That the
Plaintiff brought this Action as Executor, and the Trover was laid in the
Testators time, which was not sufficient, though the Conversion was alleged in
his own.

But the Court held neither of these Exceptions sufficient to Arrest Judgment.

Rumsey versus Rawson.
IN Replevin, The Defendant Avowed for Damage Feasant.

The Plaintiff replies, That the Parson of such a Parish and all his
Predecessors have had time out of mind Common in the place where, etc.
belonging to his Glebe, and that the Beasts of the Plaintiff were Levant and
Couchant upon the Glebe, and he put them into the Common by the License of the
Parson.

The Defendant Traverses that they were Levant and Couchant, and found for the
Plaintiff. And it was moved in Arrest of Judgment,

That the Plaintiff had not alleged matter sufficient to justify his Beasts
going in the Common; for no other Beasts ought to be put in the Common, but
those of the Tenant of the Land, to which it is appendant, or those which he
takes to Compester his Land, Fitz. N. Br. 180. b. and that though the Common be
claimed for a certain number.

And the Opinion of the Court was, That the Defendant might have demurred in
this case. But after a Verdict the Court shall intend they were Beasts which
the Parson procured to Compester his Land, and the right of the case is tried,
so aided by the Statute of Oxford. But they gave further time to show cause.
Postea.

Anonymus.
AN Action was brought for these words, [Thou have received Stolen Goods, and
knew they were Stolen. Alice S. Stole them, and thou were partner with her.] For
the first words the Court held them not Actionable; for they might admit for a
justifiable construction, as if the Goods were waived. But the last were holden
sufficient; for Partner with her must intend Partner in the Felony.

Skinner versus Gunter and al.
THe case was moved again by Pomberton, and alleged in maintenance of the
Action, that it was but in the nature of an Action upon the Case; for at the
Common Law no Writ of conspiracy lay but for indicting one of a capital Crime;
and that after an acquittal by Verdict. But since the Statute of 33 Edw. 1. de
Conspiratoribus, Actions have been brought for conspiring to Indict one of
Trespass, or to Sue one maliciously without cause of Action, as this case is,
and so is Br. tit. Consp. pl. 2. and by F.N.B. 116. Such an Action in the
nature of Conspiracy lies against one. And the Title of the Action in this Case
is In placito transgr. super casum; and for these Reasons all the Court were of
Opinion for the Plaintiff. Vid. Ante.

Braithwaites Case.
BRaithwaite brought a Mandamus to the Mayor, Bailiffs and Burgesses of the
Town of Northampton, to be restored to his place of Alderman there,

They make a Return, and in their Return set forth the Letters Patents of 16
Car. by which they were Incorporated; and power is given them of holding a
Common Council, consisting of a Mayor, 2 Bailiffs and 48 Burgesses, and that
the Mayor, Bailiffs, and such Burgesses as had been Mayors, (commonly called
Aldermen) should have power upon just Cause to amove any Common Council Man
from his place there; and then they set forth how Braithwaite was a Member of
the Common Council, and had committed diverse Offenses, which they expressed in
particular. Whereupon, the 18 of Dec. 17 Car. the Common Council assembled
together, and summoniri procuraverunt the said Braithwaite; and he not coming
to answer, was the same day amoved ab officio suo and loco suo in Communi
Concilio per Majorem and Burgenses authoritate and secundum Chartam praedictam.

It was also set forth, That they had a command from the Kin and Council to
amove him. Upon this Return there were four Exceptions taken.

First, That it did not appear that he was summoned; for it ought to have been,
qui quidem Braithwaite postea summonitus fuir, and not summoniri procuraverunt.
Sed non allocatur, for it was held clearly to be all one. Otherwise, if it had
been quod procuraverunt J.S. eum summonire.

A Second Exception was, That their proceedings were too quick; for they amoved
him the same day wherein he was summoned. Sed non allocatur, for it appearing
he lived in the same Town, and refused to come to make his defense, they might
immediately amove him.

A Third Exception was, That they had exceeded their power, which was only to
amove him from his place in the Common Council, and they had amoved him from
his Office. Sed non allocatur; for it is that wherein his Office consists, and
indeed it was so averred in the Return.

But the main Exception was, For that they had not (as was alleged) pursued
their Authority; for the Mayor, and such Burgesses who had been Mayors, have
power given them to amove. And here the Amotion is said to be per Majorem and
Burgenses, so that it might be by the Mayor and Burgesses which never had been
Mayors; and if in regard it was indefinite, it should be intended, that all the
Burgesses were there, and it may be the Amotion was by the Vote of such
Burgesses as have not been Mayors, they being the greater number, and the
others might dissent; as if the Mayor and Court of Aldermen in London were
empowered to do a thing, and this is done per Cives Londini, it cannot be good.
Sed non allocatur. For

First it shall be intended, That all the Burgesses were there, and that they
all agreed in the amoving of Braithwaite. And if the truth were, that the
Burgesses which were qualified dissented, which must not be presumed, they
might bring an Action upon the Case for the false Return: And further, to
enforce the intendment as before it is said, to be per Majorem and Burgenses
secundum Chartam: If it had been returned, that he was amoved secundum Chartam
generally, that had not been good, for there must be the manner returned, That
the Court may adjudge whether the Authority be pursued.

Nota hoc.
It was further declared by Keeling, Rainsford and Moreton, That the King and
Council might Disfranchise any Member of a Corporation. And it was said by
Rainsford, that the Walls of Northampton were ordered to be pulled down by the
King and Council, a fortiori, an Alderman might be displaced upon just Cause;
and here was no Exception to the Causes returned. But to this Twisden said
nothing.

Anonymus.
Vid. 5 Co. 32.
UPon a Fieri facias to Levy a Debt recovered against an Executor, the Sheriff
returned nulla bona; whereupon, after a Testatum, etc. a Writ was awarded to
the Sheriff to enquire, etc. who returned that Goods to the value of the Debt,
came to the Executors hands, and elongavit, vendidit, disposuit and ad proprium
usum suum convertit. And Issue was taken by the Party, who came in upon a Scire
facias, quod non elongavit, etc. and the Jury found for the Plaintiff. And it
was moved by Saunders in Arrest of Judgment,

That there was no proper Issue, neither did it appear that there was any
Devastavit; for the Executor may eloigne and sell the Goods; therefore the
Return and Issue ought to have been quod Devastavit.

Sed non allocatur; for this tantamounts; and the Presidents are so, as it is a
good Warrant for a Capias in Withernam, when the Sheriff returns, that the
Defendant in Replevin has eloigned the Beasts; so the Executor ought to be
charged de bonis propriis upon his Return.

Wharton and Brook.
IN an Action for Words, the Plaintiff declared, That she was and had been a
long time a Midwife, and got diverse Gains; and that the Defendant, to
scandalize her in her Profession, said of her, She is an Ignorant Woman, and of
small Practice, and very unfortunate in her way: There are few that she goes
to, but lie desperately Ill, or die under her hands.

The Court held the Action maintainable.

But Twisden said, this has been Adjudged, Where one brought an Action,
declaring she was a Schoolmistress, and taught Children to Write and Read, by
which she got her Livelihood; and that the Defendant said of her, She was a
Whore, and that J. S. kept her as his Whore: That to slander one in such a
Profession was not maintainable without special Damage.

Sir Thomas Player (Chamberlain of London) and Jones.
REsolved by the Judges, That the By-Law in London, whereby the Number of Carts
were restrained, was a good By-Law.

Walter and Chauner.
IN Trespass the Defendant Iustifies for Damage feasant. The Plaintiff in his
Replication prescribes for Common, in the place where, etc. in this manner:

Until the Field was sown with Corn; and after it was sown, and post blada illa
messa, until it was sown again. To which the Defendant Demurs.

And it was said, That this Prescription was unreasonable, viz. To have Common
in Land sown. To which it was Answered and Resolved by the Court, That as the
Prescription was laid, the Common was not claimed until after the Corn was
reaped.

Nota, Upon a Fieri facias the Sheriff Returned, That he had taken Goods, and
that they were rescued from him by certain Persons: And it was held to be no
Return, and that he was to be Amerced.

Anonymus.
ONe recovers Debt, and then brings a new Action of Debt upon the Judgment: The
Defendant pleads, Tender of the Money before the Action brought, and uncore
prist, and the Plaintiff could have no Costs.

If the Defendant plead in Abatement of the Writ, and the Plaintiff Demurs, and
it is Adjudged against the Defendant, it shall be only quod respondeat ulterius.

But if he allege any thing in Abatement whereupon Issue is joined, and tried
and found against the Defendant, there the Plaintiff shall have his Judgment to
recover his Debt.

Skier and Atkinson.
IN an Action upon the Statute of 8 H. 6. of Forcible Entry, the Secondary
craved the direction of the Court before he could tax Costs; and they were
doubtful in it, and rather inclined, that the Plaintiff was to have no Costs:
But upon the view of Pilford's Case in 10 Co. and the Books there cited, they
resolved that he should have Treble Costs.

Cross and Winter.
IN an Action for these Words, Thou art of Thievish Rogue, and did steal
Plate from Wadham College in Oxford.

The Defendant Justified, for that he did steal the College Plate.

The Plaintiff Replied, De injuria sua propria. The Words were alleged to be
spoken in London, and thither the Venire facias was awarded, and there was a
Verdict for the Plaintiff.

It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, That there was a Mis-Trial, for the Jury
ought to have come out of Oxford; for the Issue is joined upon the Matter in
the Justification, and the Words are confessed: Hob. 76.
And with this agrees Ford and Brooke's Case in 3 Cro. 361. expressly.

But it was Resolved by the Court, That this was aided by the late Statute made
at Oxford, being tried by a Jury of the proper County where the Action is laid,
though the Issue upon pleading may arise out of another place and County.

Note, An Act of Parliament was made to continue for Three years, and from
thence until the end of the next Session of Parliament, Vid. Hob. 78.
and no longer. And it was Resolved, that this must be intended a Session,
which commences after the Three years expired: For if a Session should be
within the Three years, and continue for many years after, the Act would
continue.

Note, It cannot be called a Session of Parliament unless the King passes an
Act.

The King and Sergeant.
UPon a Certiorari to remove a Conviction of Forcible Detainer by the View of
two Justices, upon the Statute of 15 R. 2. The Record Returned was, Questa est
nobis Jana Wood Vid', quod quidem pacis Domini Regis perturbatores in domum
mansional' existens liberum tenementum ipsius Janae manu forti ingressi sunt,
etc.

Exception was taken to it, because it was not adtunc existens liberum
tenementum ipsius Janae.

To which it was Answered, That although in an Indictment of Forcible Entry it
must appear that the place was the Freehold of the party at the time of the
Entry with Force, because upon the finding of it a Restitution is to be
awarded, and where it is generally existens liberum tenementum, it may be
referred as well to the time of the Indictment, as to the Entry; yet here it is
not material, because no Restitution is to be awarded, but the Malefactors
being convicted by the View of the Justices, are to be Fined and Imprisoned:
And the President in Mr. Dalton's Book of Justice of the Peace, fo, 356. makes
no mention of whose Freehold at all: But however here existens liberum
tenementum shall be referred to the Complainant, though there be not adtunc, and
of that Opinion were the Court: But Twisden was of Opinion, that it was not
necessary to be alleged in this Case at all. Postea.

Sir Andrew Henley versus Dr. Burstall.
IN an Action upon the Case the Plaintiff declared, That he being a Justice of
Peace, the Defendant had Indicted him for rescuing of a Vagabond out of the
Constables hands, who brought him before him, so that the Law could not be
executed against him.

It was said, To Indict a man for such a Crime in the Execution of his Office,
was Actionable; and it has been often Resolved, That an Action would lie for
Indicting a man of Barretry, and in the Book of Assize 13. for Indicting one
for Trespass. And to this the Court did incline; but they would further Advise.
Postea.

The King versus Ring.
ERror to Reverse a Judgment in an Indictment of Forgery against Ring upon the
Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 4. for that he Scienter subdole and falso fabricavit
quoddam falsum factum and scriptum Indentatum Barganiae and venditionis, which
was said to be Enrolled, per quod Harrison Keymer and Henry Keymer did sell to
J.S. such Lands; and then sets forth the Indenture verbatim, and quod postea
praedict' Ring praedict' Chartam esse falsam and contrafactam, vi and armis
pronunciavit and publicavit; and this was ea intention ad perturbandum statum,
and titulum and interesse of Harrison and Henry Keymer, and their Heirs.

The first Error assigned was, That the Indictment was for Forging of a Deed of
Bargain and Sale; and the Indentures set forth were a Lease and Release. Also
it did not appear in what Court it was Enrolled; and it must be Enrolled at one
of the Four Courts at Westminster, or before the Justices of the Peace at the
Sessions to be a Bargain and Sale; and whereas the Indictment is for Forgery of
a Deed, per quod Harrison and Henry Keymer did sell, only one of them was party
to the Deed set forth. And it ought to have been in quo continetur that they
did sell, and not, They did sell, whereas the Deed was Forged, which as was
said, is oppositum in objecto. And where it is that Sciens praedictam Chartam
esse falsam vi and Armis pronunciavit and publicavit, it was said it ought to
have been, Vi and armis praedictam Chartam pronunciavit and publicavit: And for
this Vauxes Case in 4 Co. was cited, where it is Nich. nesciens praedictum
potum cum veneno fore intoxicatum, sed fidem adhibens dictae persuasioni dicti
W. recepit and bibit; and because it was not praedictum venenum recepit and
bibit, it was held insufficient; for Indictments must have precise certainty,
fo. 44.

Another Exception was, That this Forgery was said to be ea intention ad
perturbandum statum titulum and interesse of them and their Heirs, and it did
not appear that they had a Freehold; and the punishment inflicted by the
Statute is more severe when the Forgery is to disturb the Freehold, than when
it only concerns a Chattel: Also it ought to appear in whom the Freehold was at
the time of the Forgery, as an Indictment of Forcible Entry upon the Statute of
8 H. 6. must express in whom the Freehold was at the time of the Force. Et
Adjornatur.

Anonymus.
UPon Process against one, the Sheriff returned a Non est inventus, and an
Affidavit was made, That the Defendant was one of the Sheriffs Bailiffs; and
the Sheriff was amerced.

Anonymus.
IN Trover and Conversion against Baron and Feme, the Plaintiff declared, Quod
ad usum proprium converterunt, which was naught, because it must only be ad
usum of the Husband; and yet it may be converterunt if she were present; yet
whatever she does is the act of her Husband. 1 Cro.

Sir Andrew Henley and Dr. Burstall.
THe Case was move^ again, and spoken to in Arrest of Judgment, That no Action
would lie for proceeding against a man by Indictment; and it would discourage
all legal Prosecutions of Offenses; and 4 Co. 14 b. was cited, where it is
resolved, That no Action lies for Exhibiting of Articles to a Justice of the
Peace against one, though the matter he false; nor for preferring a Scandalous
Bill in the Star Chamber, concerning things whereof the Court had Jurisdiction.
But an Action upon the Case, or Conspiracy, lies where Life or Member are
brought in jeopardy by a malicious Indictment.

But notwithstanding the Court Resolved, That the Plaintiff should have
Judgment. Though 'twas further alleged, That there was no Issue joined; for in
the Pleading and Joining of the Issue the Defendants Christian Name was
mistaken; but the Court would amend that, it being rightly named before in the
Record. Ante.

The King and Serjent.
AN Indictment of Forcible Entry and Detainer was preferred against Serjent;
and the Jury found as to the Detainer with Force, Billa vera; but as to the
Entry, Ignoramus: And it was moved to quash this Indictment, because they ought
to have found all or none; and of that Opinion was the Court. Ante.

Rumsey and Rawson.
THe Case was moved again by Mr. Solicitor, That the Plaintiff having Entitled
the Parson to Common for 200 Sheep, levant and couchant, and that these Beasts
were levant and couchant, and that he put them in by the License of the Parson.
He ought to have shown, That the License was by Deed, being to take a Profit in
alieno solo; and the Statute (which gives remedy after Verdict, when he does
not say, Hic in Curia prolat') does not aid this: And it is necessary to plead a
thing by Deed, whose nature requires it.

But to this it was Answered by Jones, 2 Cro. 424
That a Parol License was sufficient in this Case, being only to take the
Profit unica vice, there passing no Estate in it: And the Plantiff had Judgment.

Pomfret versus Ricroft.
IN Covenant the Plaintiff declares, That the Defendant demised unto him a
certain Message, excepting a piece of Ground whereupon a Pump stood; and
grants, that he shall have the free use of the Pump during the term; and
Covenants, that he should enjoy dimissa praemissa; and assigns a Breach, in
that he suffered Antliam praedictam esse fractam and totaliter spoliatam. And
to this the Defendant Demurs.

And it was said in Maintenance of the Action, That the Defendant having
granted the free use of the Pump, was bound to do all things necessary to make
his Grant effectual to the Plaintiff, or else he broke his Covenant of
Enjoying; and if the Plaintiff should come to Repair it he would be a
Trespasser: And of this Opinion was Keeling. But Twisden conceived, That an
Action of Covenant would not lie, there being no express Covenant to Repair it:
Otherwise if he had taken away the Pump; and here he might bring an Action upon
the Case, because he lost the use of it; and they Two being only in Court, it
was Adjourned. Postea.

Anonymus.
A Presentment was made in a Leet for Erecting of a Glass-House, which was said
to be ad magnum nocumentum, per juratores Jurat' pro Dom' Rege, and Dom'
Manerii, and tenentibus. It was said, A Man ought not to be punished for
erecting of any thing necessary to the exercise of his lawful Trade; but it was
Answered, that this ought to be in convenient places, where it may not be a
Nuisance. For Twisden said, He had known an Information Adjudged against one for
Erecting of a Brew House near Serjeants-Inn: But the other Justices doubted,
and agreed, that it was unlawful only to Erect such things near the King's
Palace.

But this Presentment was clearly Ill, because it was not ad commune
nocumentum: And it was said further, That the Leet was the King's Court, and
therefore it ought not to be Jur' pro Dom' Rege, and Dom' Manerii, and
tenentibus. But the Court held it Surplusage for tenentibus, and good for the
King and the Lord of the Manor: For Leets are granted to the Lords as derived
out of the Tourn, 2 Cro. 382.
for the ease of the Resiants within its Jurisdiction.

More versus Lewis.
IN an Assumpsit the Plaintiff declares upon Two Promises; One was, That in
Consideration that he had done him multum and gratissimum servitium, the
Defendant promised to pay him Ten Pounds a year.

The Consideration of the other was, That he had done him multa beneficia.

Upon Non Assumpsit pleaded, and found for the Plaintiff, as to both the
Promises and entire Damages given; it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that
neither of these Considerations were sufficient, especially the last; for there
ought to have been some Service particularly expressed.

To which it was Answered, That this being after a Verdict, the Court must
intend, that the Plaintiff gave in Evidence something that he did, which was
Consideration sufficient, otherwise the Jury would have give no Damages. And a
Case was cited in Hutton's Rep. 84. where the Plaintiff in an Assumpsit
declared, That in Consideration that she had served the Defendant and his Wife,
and done them loyal Service, that he would give her 13 s 4 d And a Verdict
being found for her, she had Judgment. Sed nota, In the Book nothing was said
to be moved in Arrest of Judgment, but the Insufficiency of the Consideration,
in respect that it was executed and laid to be done at the Request of the
Defendant.

But the Court held clearly, that nothing being particularly expressed in the
Consideration of the Second Promise, in this case it was merely void, and
entire Damages being given, the Plaintiff could not have his Judgment. And
thereupon Judgment was Entered, Quod querens nihil capiat per Billam.

Gregory versus Eads.
ERror to Reverse a Judgment given in the Court at Warwick, in an Assumpsit,
where the Plaintiff declared of Three Promises, whereof one was found for the
Plaintiff, and as to the other two, that the Defendant Non Assumpsit; and
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff for that which was found for him; but no
Judgment was given as to the other, that the Plaintiff should be amerced pro
falso clamore, or quod Defendens eat inde fine die. And it was assigned for
Error, that this Judgment was defective, and ought to be Reversed. To which it
was answered, That the Judgment ought to stand for so much as was good; Vid.
con. 2 Cro. 424.
and 2 Cro. 343. was cited, where in an Action for Words spoken at diverse times
the Jury found the Defendant guilty as to all, and gave several Damages;
whereupon there was Judgment, and a Writ of Error brought and assigned, in that
the Words spoken at one of the times were not Actionable. Which being agreed,
the Court Resolved, that Judgment should be reversed only quoad them, and
should stand for the residue; for utile per inutile non vitiatur. And Slocomb's
Case (1 Cro. 319.) where a Writ of Error was brought to Reverse a Judgment,
given in an Action for Words, and assigned, in that it was Entered, Concessum
fuit quod querens nihil capiat, etc. whereas it should have been Consideratum:
Yet because the Words were Insufficient, the Court (though they held the manner
of the Entry erroneous) ordered Judgment to be given, Quod querens nihil capiat
per Billam. Et Adjornatur. Postea.

Note, It was said by Sergeant Maynard, That after all the Evidence given in an
Information, the Kings Council may, without the parties Consent, withdraw a
Juror and try it over again: And so he said it was done by Hobart, Attorney
General, 5 H. 7. and in the Exchequer by Noy, in King Charles the First's time.

Barkly versus Pain.
IN an Assumpsit in an Inferior Court, the Consideration was, That the
Plaintiff should solicit a Cause in Chancery.

The Court Reverst the Judgment for want of Jurisdiction. It had also another
fault, for it was Defendens in misericordia and capiatur.

Anonymus.
IT was moved to quash a Return of Rescous, for that it was Vi and armis in
Ballivum meum affraiam fecerunt and e custodia mea adtunc and ibid'
rescusserunt, and not Vi and armis rescusserunt. Sed non allocatur; for by
reason of adtunc and ididem, vi and armis mentioned at first shall be applied
to all.

Hanway versus Merrey.
THe Case was, The Defendant had Covenanted to pay the Plaintiff a Sum of Money
the 24th of June next; whereupon the Plaintiff takes out a Latitat, Test 3
Maii, Returnable the last day of Trinity Term following, and Arrested the
Defendant upon it: Which being made appear to the Court, they discharged the
Arrest. For though it is allowed a man may take out a Latitat before the Money is
due; Yet the party must not be Arrested upon it before: And this differs from
an Original, which if it bears Test before the Money be due, it is abateable;
but the Latitat is only to bring him in custodia, that the Plaintiff may
declare against him by Bill, and after that the proceedings upon the Latitat
cease.

Note, By the Custom of London, Hob. 86. 2 Cro. 667.
the Debtor may be Arrested before the Money is due, to make him find Sureties.

It was also moved, That the Defendant might have Costs, being put to the
charge of motions to be discharged; but the Court would grant none, it being
but for taking out of the Process of the Court.

Stones Case.
THe Case being moved again, The Court (absente Moreton, and dubitante
Rainsford) granted a Writ of Privilege although he were obliged by his Tenure to
be the Lords Reeve, for the Privilege is presumed more Ancient than the
Creation of the Tenure, or at least shall be preferred, in as much as it
concerns the Administration of Justice. And Keeling said, An Attorney could not
be amerced for not doing Suit to his Lords Court, at such time as his
attendance is required at Westminster. Ante.

Sir Robert Cotton versus Daintry.
IN Trover and Conversion for Goods and Money assigned by Commissioners of
Bankrupt, upon Not guilty pleaded, the Quemon of Fact before the Jury was;
Whether Sir A. B. (whose the Goods were) was a Bankrupt?

The Plaintiff proved, That he had Silk and other Merchandise in his Warehouse
to a very great value; and that upon the Credit of them he took up diverse Sums
of Money, and afterward sold them, but could not prove that they were brought
in after the Debts contracted, or that he had Exported any thing at any time
after, or a good while before.

To this the Court delivered their Opinions, That the selling of such
Merchandise, if they were but the Effects of his former Trading, (for he had
been a Turkey Merchant) which he could not put off immediately upon his ceasing
to Trade, could not make him a Trader; for the Statute only extends to those
that Live by Buying and Selling. It was also proved, That he had a 16th part in
a Coalship, which at present Traded to Newcastle, but brought no present profit
to the Owners, she being much in Debt for Repairs. It was said to be resolved
in one Crashaws Case, That the having a part in a Ship did not make a man a
Trader; but that was a Merchant Ship, which the Owners let out to Freight; but
the Owners Fraighted this Ship themselves, and were to have an account of
profit and loss, and that if an Owner refused to Freight he was Compellable.
But in regard it could not be proved that Sir A. B. had Fraighted, or that he
had received any account of profit, Keeling and Twisden were of Opinion that it
did not make him a Trader. Rainsford and Moreton doubted. Wherefore it was
offered the Plaintiffs Council to have found it Specially; but they declined
it, and the Jury found a general Verdict for the Plaintiff.

The day after motion was made for a new Trial, Affidavit being made, that the
Foreman of the Jury was Brother in Law to one of the Creditors of Sir A. B. The
Court was also informed, that the Plaintiff after the Verdict had paid the Jury
4 l a man, whereas the Rule of Court is, that they coming but out of
Hartfordshire, should have but 20 s a man.

Moreton and Rainsford held neither of these Reasons sufficient. For the first,
it was their own Laches that they did not challenge upon it. For the other,
they thought the breach of the Rules of Court ought to be punished, but did not
think fit to set aside the Verdict for it.

Twisden for the last treason held a new Trial was to be granted, and that it
was fit to be made an Example to other Juries: For if the Parties may give what
they will, it is to be presumed, the ability of one or other will much incline
the Jury to find for him, from whom they may expect the greatest reward.

Keeling held both reasons sufficient for a new Trial; which could not be, in
regard the Court was divided; whereupon Judgment was entered for the Plaintiff;
and Execution taken out, and a Writ of Error was brought, which was sealed
about an hour before Execution executed. Whereupon it was moved, That the
Sheriff might bring the Money into the Court, for that the Writ of Error was a
Supersedeas; for though the Sheriff shall not be in Contempt, if he makes
Execution after the Writ, if no Supersedeas be Sued out, for that he had no
notice; yet the Writ of Error immediately upon the sealing forecloses the
Court, so that the Execution made after is to be undone; of which Opinion was
the Court, and Ordered the Money to be brought in, and not delivered to the
Plaintiff.

Mr. Justice Moreton's Case.
HE brought Debt as Executor upon the 2d of Edw. 6. for not setting forth of
Tithes due to the Testator, Upon non debet pleaded, and a Verdict for him, it
was moved in Arrest of Judgment, That this being a forfeiture given by the
Statute for a Tort done to the Testator, it could not be brought by the
Executor. To which it was answered, That this Action was maintainable within
the equity of the Statute of the 4th of Edw. 3. that gives the Executor
Trespass de bonis asportatis in vita testatoris. So an Ejectione firmae lies
upon an Ejectment done to the Testator and Trover and Conversion, where the
Conversion was in the time of the Testator. 1 Cro. adjudged, that an Executor
may bring an Action upon the Case against the Sheriff, for an Escape upon Mesne
Process suffered in his Testators life time. And the Court were clear of
Opinion for the Plaintiff, and said it had been formerly resolved so in the
Exchequer Chamber.

The Lady Wortley versus Holt.
A Writ of Error was brought to Reverse a Judgment given in Dower in the
Common Pleas, which being affirmed in this Court, a Writ of Error was brought
returnable in Parliament, which was discontinued by the Prorogation of the
Parliament.

Another Writ of Error was brought Test the last day of the Session of
Parliament, viz. 1 March. Returnable 19 November, the day to which it was
Prorogued.

The Court resolved, That though the first Writ of Error was not discontinued
by any Act of the Party, yet this second should be no Superseas. First, It was
doubted, whether this Writ of Error bearing Test the last day of the Session
was not determined by the Prorogation? And it was held clearly, That A Writ of
Error returnable ad proximum Parliamentum could not be good: But here the
Parliament was Prorogued to a day certain. But however all the Court held, That
in regard of the length of time in the Return it should be no Supersedeas. And
Twisden cited a Case between Limmerie and Limmerie, where a Writ of Error was
brought Test 28 Nov. Returnable 28 Nov. proxime sequent' in Parliament', and
resolved to be no Supersedeas, 2 Cro. 341.
by reason of the length of the Return.

Anonymus.
AN Information was exhibited against A. B. for causing to be framed, printed
and published a Scandalous Libel, Entitled, etc. thereby scandilizing of one
C. D. Upon Not guilty pleaded, It appeared upon the Evidence, that after the
discovery of the Libel, there were Warrants from the Lord Arlington, Principal
Secretary of State, to search the Lodgings of the Defendant, who was suspected
to be the contriver of it, where were found two of these Libels printed.

The Opinion of the Court was, That this was no Crime within the Information,
though he gave no account how they came there; 5 Co. 125. B.
and the having of a Libel and not delivering of it to a Magistrate, was only
punishable in the Sarchamber, unless the Party maliciously published it.

Anonymus.
Hob. 192, 300, 301.
IF the Jury upon an Issue joined in a Prohibition upon a Modus Decimandi find a
different Modus, yet the Defendant shall not have a Consultation, for it
appears he ought not to Sue for Tithes in Specie, there being a Modus found.

Termino Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno 21 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Jurado versus Gregory.
THe Case was this, There was a Contract of Malaga concerning the Lading of a
Ship, and for breach of this which was laid to upon be the Sea, (viz.) That he
would not receive 40 Butts of Wine into the Ship according to the Agreement,
there was a Libel in a Foreign Admiralty, and Sentence that the Wine should be
received into the Ship; which being refused, another Libel was commenced in the
Admiralty here in England, Reciting the former Sentence and charging the
Defendant with the breach of it; and a Prohibition was prayed, because it
appears the Contract was made upon the Land.

Vid. Latch. 234.
Against which it was objected by Finch Solicitor, that where Sentence is
obtained in a Foreign Admiralty, one may Libel for Execution thereof here,
because all the Courts of Admiralty in Europe are governed by the Civil Law,
and are to be assistant one to another, though the matter were not Originally
determinable in our Court of Admiralty; and for this he cited a Judgment, 5
Jac. Rolls Tit. Courts, Sect admiralty. And this the Court agreed. But here was
no complete Sentence in the Foreign Admiralty, but only an Award, that the Wine
should be received; and now for breach thereof he Sues here, which is in the
nature of an Original Suit, and to have Execution of the Sentence; and this
ought not to be, though the breach were at Sea, it being of a Contract made
upon the Land, wherefore they granted a Prohibition.

The King Grants bona and catalla felonum, the Grantee shall not have Felons
Debts, nor bona and catalla Felonum de se.

Anonymus.
A Conviction was certified of one, for carrying of a Gun, not being qualified
according to the Statute, where the words in the Statute are, Upon due
Examination and proof before a Justice of the Peace.

The Court resolved, That that was not intended by Jury, but by Witnesses; and
no Writ of Error lies upon such Conviction.

And an Exception was taken, because it was before such an one Justice of the
Peace, without adding Nec non ad diversas Felonias, Transgressiones, etc.
audiend assign'. And the Court agreed, so it ought to be in Returns upon
Certiorari's, to remove Indictments taken at Sessions. But otherwise of
Convictions of this nature, for it is known to the Court, that the Statute gives
them Authority in this Case.

The King versus Benson.
IN an Information against him for Extortion, an Issue was joined the day the
Jury were returned, and the King sent a Writing under his Sign manual, to Sir
Thomas Fanshaw Clerk of the Crown, to enter a Cesser of Prosecution: And Palmer
Attorney General affirmed, that the King might stay proceedings; yet
notwithstanding, the Court proceeded to swear the Jury, and said they were not
to delay for the great or little Seal; whereupon the Attorney entered a Noli
prosequi.

Anonymus.
TRover against Baron and Feme, and laid quod ad usum proprium converterunt;
and it was alleged, proprium might be applied only to the Husband; so also if
it had been ad usum suum. But the Court held neither had been good; so it was
prayed that Judgment might be entered, quod Querens nihil capiat per billam: For
if it had been quod Defendens eat inde sine die, the Plaintiff could not have
brought an Action de novo.

Note, A man is Outlawed in Middlesex, A Capias utlagatum may be sued out
against him into any other County, without a Testatum.

Anonymus.
IN Trespass, the Defendant justifies by reason of Common in the place where,
for Cattle Levant and Couchant upon his Land, and does not aver the Beasts were
Levant and Couchant. This is aided after a Verdict.

A Judgment in Debt is had in the Kings Bench, and a Writ of Error is brought;
it still remains a Record of the Kings Bench; and an Action of Debt may be
brought upon the Judgment.

In a Writ of Error, if the Defendant dyed, the Writ is not abated: Otherwise
if the Plaintiff die. And the Secondary informed the Court of a Case between
Sir H. Thyn and Corie, where a Scire facias ad audiend. Errores went against
the Executors, when the Defendant in the Writ of Error dyed.

Note, The Exchequer Chamber does not award a Scire facias ad audiend. Errores;
but notice is given to the Parties concerned.

Skirr and Sikes.
IN Trespass upon the Stat. of 8 H. 6. the Plaintiff had Judgment. It was
moved, whether a Writ of Error would lie of this into the Exchequer Chamber.
For though Trespass be one of the seven Cases where the Statute gives it; yet
it might intend Common Trespasses only, and not where the Action is founded
upon a Statute; as Actio de Scandalis Magnatum is not within the Statute. And
the Court would advise.

Cabell and Vaughan.
5 Co. Whelphdales Case, He cannot plead non est factum
IN an Action of Debt upon a Bond against one, and it appears another was
jointly bound with him; wherefore the Defendant Demurrs. But it was adjuged for
the Plaintiff; for the Defendant cannot Demurr in such case, unless the other
Obligor be averred to be living, and also that he sealed and delivered the
Bond, 3 Cro. 494, 544. Ascue and Hollingworth's Case, 28 H. 6. 3. And if one be
bound to two, one Obligee cannot Sue unless he Averrs the other is dead. In
B.R. 1651, 1068. Levit and Staneforth.

Perries Case.
IN an Information of Forgery against him, there was a Mistrial. And it was
moved, That this was aided by the Statute of 21 Jac. the general Purview
whereof is extended to any Action, Suit, Bill or Plaint. Then there is a
Proviso, which excepts Indictments and Informations upon Penal Statutes; and
this being an Information at Common Law, was not within the Proviso; and it may
be taken within the word Suit, for it is Secta Domini Regis.

But the Court held it not remedied, either by the words or intention of the
Act. Vid. Ante.

Nokes and Stokes versus....
THey two brought an Action of Debt upon a Bond. The Defendant pleads the
Release of one of the Plaintiffs. They pray Oyer of the Release, which was of
all Actions, Suits, etc. that he had against the Defendant upon his own
account; and pleads that this Bond was not upon his own account; and upon this,
Issue is taken, and found for the Plaintiff.

Now it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, That this Issue was frivolous. And
upon the whole matter it appears, that the Plaintiffs have no cause of Action;
for the Release of one Obligee discharges the Bond; and it must be upon his
own account.

But the Court Seriatim delivered their Opinions for the Plaintiffs; for he
might take this Bond as a security of a Debt, with which he was entrusted for
another. And the truth of the case upon the Evidence was, That the Defendant
being charged with the payment of diverse Legacies to Strangers, was requested
by one of the Plaintiffs to enter into Bond to him, and the other Plaintiff
(who afterward made the Release) that should be Conditioned for the payment of
the Money Bequeathed to the Obligees, to the use of the Strangers, which not
being done, the Defendant was Arrested at the Suit of the Plaintiffs; this
being made known to the Plaintiff, who was absent at the taking of the Bond,
and knowing nothing of the Suit, was contented to Release all Actions he had
against the Defendant upon his own account.

King versus Atkins.
DEbt upon a Bond of 2000 l The Defendant demands Oyer of the Condition, which
was, That whereas the Plaintiff was bound with the Defendant to the King, that
the Defendant should give a true account of such Moneys, as he should receive
for the Excise and Chimney Money, And that the Defendant should save him
harmless from all Payments, or Suits upon that Bond; and pleads that no Suits,
Process or Execution was against the Plaintiff upon that Bond, and issint he
saved him harmless. The Plaintiff replies a Scire facias issued against him out
of the Exchequer upon the Bond, and that he was forced to retain an Attorney,
and that he paid 1 s for his Appearance. To this the Defendant Demurrs.

Because he did not allege that he gave him notice. And this was said not to
be like Broughtons Case, 5 Co. For there the Defendant knew the Money was to be
paid at the day, and it was to save him harmless from the single thing; but
here from a great many, so that it was requisite he should have notice. Where
the Mesne is bound to acquit the Tenant, the Tenant shall not recover Damages,
unless he gives the Mesne notice that he is distrained, so that he may Replevy
the Beasts.

But it was said, That no notice ought to be given, where the thing is an Act
of a third person, as to pay Money when J. S. comes into England.

To which it was answered, That did not lie in the Conusance of either Party;
but this was in the notice of the Obligee. But that which seemed most against
the Demurrer in this case was, That the Defendant having pleaded no Process,
etc. he takes upon him the knowledge of it: Vid. 1 Cro. 54.
And if in the Replication the Plaintiff had alleged notice, and the Defendant
had Traversed it; it would have been a departure; and the Court advised until
the next Term. Postea.

Welsh versus Bell.
TRespass quare clausum fregit, and taking of two Horses out of his Cart: The
Defendant justifies the taking of them, as a Distress for Rent due to him. And
to this the Plaintiff Demurrs.

First, He could not sever the Horses, but ought to have distreined Cart and
all, according to the Book of 20 Edw. 4. 3. Distress of a Cart laden with
Corn, Rolls 270. 3 Cro. 783.
and four Horses in it; adjudged not excessive, because he could not sever the
Horses. And in 3 Cro. 7. a Difference is taken between Distress for Rent, and
Damage Feasant to this purpose. And the common ground is, that a Distress must
be taken so as it may be returned in the same plight, 1 Inst. 47. a.

Secondly, It appeared also in the Declaration, That there was a Servant of the
Plaintiffs in the Cart, by reason of which it was alleged, that the Cart and
Horses were privileged; for a Horse cannot be distrained upon which a Man is
Riding, 3 Cro. 549, 596. Ed Adjornatur.

Twisden cited a Case adjudged before Rolls Chief Justice in Trespass, for
taking of his Trunk. The Case was, the Defendant distrained it for Rent, and
being Informed that there were things of Value in it, he caused it to be Corded
to prevent damage. And for that he was adjudged a Trespasser ab initio.

Anonymus.
AN Action on the Case was brought against the Defendant, for taking and
keeping of the Plaintiffs Wife from him: And upon Issue joined the Court was
moved to defer the Trial, the Case being that the Wife was Daughter of the
Defendant, and taken from him by the Plaintiff without his Consent, and as the
Plaintiff affirmed, Married to him. Now this Marriage was questioned in the
Court Christian: And the Court thought it reasonable that the Trial should be
delayed until the Marriage was determined there. But they were Informed on the
other side, that the Court were ready to give Sentence, That the Marriage was
good, and the Defendant had Appealed. Wherefore they thought fit that the Trial
of the Cause should proceed.

The King versus Nelson.
AN Order for the keeping of a Bastard Child being removed by Certiorari, it
was moved to have it quashed, because it was ad Sessionem pacis in Com' praed',
and does not say, Tent' pro' Com' praedict'.

Sed non allocatur: For such strictness is not required in an Order. But
Twisden said, it ought to be so in an Indictment.

It was further alleged, that it ought to appear, That the Child was likely to
be chargeable to the Parish; which was agreed. But that was sufficiently set
forth in the Order; for upon Reading of it, it appeared, that he was ordered to
pay such Charges as the Parish had been at.

Wherefore the Court confirmed the Order, and awarded, that he should pay such
Costs as the Parish had been at for Contesting of it; as was done formerly in
one Haslefoot's Case: And besides, the Court Committed Nelson.

Anonymus.
DEbt upon a Bond, Conditioned to perform Covenants: If the Defendant pleads
performance without demanding Oyer of the Indenture it is a good cause of
Demurrer.

Anonymus.
IN Covenant the Plaintiff declares, That he let the Defendant a House, and
that he Covenanted to Repair it. The Defendant pleads, That it was sufficiently
Repaired before the Action brought.

The Plaintiff Demurs, because he does not plead, That he Repaired it; for it
may be the Plaintiff himself did it.

Keeling and Raynsford inclined against the Demurrer; because if it were
Repaired, be it by any Body, the Plaintiff has no Damage nor cause of Action.

But Twisden doubted, and afterward the parties waived their Demurrer and went
to Issue.

Anonymus.
AN Information was brought upon the Statute of Usury, for taking the 30th of
May, in the 20th year of the King, 42 s pro deferendo 25 l for three Quarters
of a year, (viz.) from the 30th of August, Anno 19. Upon Not Guilty pleaded, it
was found for the King, and moved in Arrest of Judgment, that this was not
within the Statute, which extends only where there is an Usurious Contract in
the beginning, and there it makes the Security void: Or if there be an
Agreement after the Money lent for Forbearance, upon Consideration of paying
more than the Statute allows for Interest, which is punishable in an Indictment
or Information; but the Money is not lost: But in this case, the time of
Forbearance was past, and the party might give what he pleased in recompense
for it, there being no precedent Agreement to enforce him to it.

Sed non allocatur: For the Court said, They would expound the Statute
strictly; and if liberty were allowed in this case, the Brokers might oppress
the People exceedingly by detaining the Pawn, unless the party would give them
what they would please to demand for the time after failure of payment.

Wingate and Stanton, the Bail of William Stanton.
IT was Resolved, That where a Scire facias goes against the Bail in this
Court, an two Nichils are Returned, and Judgment is had thereupon, no Writ of
Error can be brought in the Exchequer Chamber, but in the Parliament only.

Also, after such a Return it cannot be Assigned for Error, that there was no
Capias awarded against the Principal. But in that case the Bail is relievable
only by Audita querela. But if the Sheriff Returns a Scire feci, they may plead
it. Fitz. N.B. 104. I.

Nota, A man cannot Release a Debt by his Will.

The King versus Saunders.
SAunders was Convicted before two Justices upon the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap.
6. for carrying of a Gun. Which being removed by Certiorari, was quashed,
because it was coram nobis Justiciariis Domini Regis ad pacem suam conservand',
wanting the word assignatis.

Anonymus.
AN Indictment was quashed, because it was Justiciarii ad pacem conservand'
assign', and not ad pacem Domini Regis; neither would ad pacem publicam serve.
And for another Reason, because it was ad Sessionem in Com' tent', and not pro
Com': But if it were ad Sessionem in a Borough Incorporated, it were good, though
it were not pro Burgo.

Maleverer and Redshaw.
DEbt upon a Sheriffs Bond; The Defendant pleads, that there was an Attachment
issued out of Chancery against him, Returnable Octab' Sanctae Trin'; and the
Condition of this Bond was, that he should appear Crast. Sanctae Trin. and so
he pleads the Statute of 23 H. 6. against it; for that it was taken for
Easiamento and favore.

The Plaintiff Replies, That the Writ was Returnable Crastino Sanctae Trin. And
Traverses, That the Bond was taken for ease and favor. To which the Defendant
demurs, Vid. 11 Co. 10. a.
supposing that he should have Traversed, that the Writ was Returnable Octab.
Sanctae Trin. which is the Matter of the Defendants Bar, and the other is but
the consequence or Conclusion. Et Adjornatur.

Gregory versus Eades.
ERror to Reverse a Judgment given in an Inferior Court, where an Assumpsit
was brought, and the Plaintiff declared upon three several Promises, and the
Jury found two for him, and the other non Assumpsit: And Judgment was given for
the two, that he should recover: but no Judgment for the third, that he should
be amerced pro falso clamore, or that the Defendant eat inde sine die. And for
this Cause Error was assigned.

But Powys Argued for the Defendant in the Writ of Error, that the Judgment
should be affirmed as to the Two Promises, for which it was perfect, and cited
Miles and Jacob's Case in Hob. 6. and 2 Cro. 343. where an Action was brought
for Words, declared to be spoken at several times, and several Damages given,
and Judgment, and a Writ of Error brought, and assigned for Error, that the
Words spoken at one of the times were not Actionable; which though they were not,
yet the Judgment was Reversed quoad them only.

But the Court said, That it was not like this Case, for here the Judgment was
altogether Imperfect; and so were inclined to Reverse it; but gave further
time. Ante.

Anonymus.
IN Replevin the Defendant avows for Rent Arrear. Upon non concessit pleaded,
the Jury find for the Avowant. The New Statute says, That the Defendant may
pray that the Jury should enquire what Rent is arrear, and that he shall have
Judgment for so much as they find.

Now the Court was moved, that this might be supplied by a Writ of Enquiry; as
if they omit to enquire of the Four Points in a Quare Impedit, it may be so
supplied, 10 Co. Cheney's Case But the Court held this could not be so; for the
Defendant loses the advantage of it by not praying of it: As where a Tales is
granted, if it be not Entered ad requisitionem Querentis, or Defendentis, it is
not good; wherefore he was bid to take his Judgment, quod returnum habeat
averiorum, at the Common Law.

Anonymus.
FOur Executors, two of them are under Age; quaere, Whether they shall all sue
by Attorney.

Note, An Infant may bring an Action against his Guardian, which pleads any
thing to his prejudice: Not so of an Attorney.

Wells versus Wells.
IN an Assumpsit the Plaintiff declares as Administratix to her Husband, who in
his Lifetime agreed with the Defendant, That they should be Partners in making
of Bricks for J. S. and after his Death the Defendant promised the Plaintiff in
Consideration, That she had promised him to relinquish her Interest in the
Partnership, that he would pay her so much Money as her Husband had been out
about the Brick. And upon non Assumpsit pleaded it was found for the Plaintiff.

It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that here was no Consideration; for the
Plaintiff had no interest in the Partnership, which being joint, must survive
to the Defendant; and she ought to have shown how she relinquished her Interest.

But the Court held it a good Consideration; for it may be there were
Covenants, that there should be no Survivorship; (and the Court will intend,
after a Verdict, that there were) which though they do not sever the joint
Interest in Law, yet they give Remedy in Equity, which to debar her self of is
a good Consideration, and being laid by way of Reciprocal Promise, there needs
no averment of performance.

Termino Sancti Michaelis, Anno 21 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
William Bate's Case.
A Prohibition was prayed to the Commissary of the Archdeacon of Richmond, to
stay a Suit against Bates a Schoolmaster; who, as it was alleged, taught
School without the Bishops License; and it was granted, because they
endeavored to turn him out; whereas they could only Censure him, he coming in
by the Presentation of the Founder.

In a Feoffment of Tithes and Lands, where there is no Livery; if they do
adjudge the Tithes to pass, notwithstanding there is no Livery, a Prohibition
will lie.

In Debt upon a Lease at Will, there must be an Averment that the Lessee
occupied the Lands. But it is otherwise upon a Lease for Years.

Anonymus.
THe Court was moved to grant an Attachment against a Justice of the Peace, who
upon Complaint refused to come and view a Force: But the Court denied it, and
directed the party to bring an Action of Debt for the 100 l Forfeiture given by
the Statute in that case.

It was said by the Court, That in an Execution upon a Statute Merchant there
is no need of a Liberate, as there is upon a Statute Staple: And in the Case of
a Statute Staple, the Conusee can bring no Ejectment before the Liberate;
neither can the Sheriff upon the Liberate turn the Terre-Tenant out of
possession, as he is to do upon an Habere facias possessionem.

Dier versus East.
AN Action was brought against the Defendant upon an Indeb' pro diversis
Mercimoniis venditis and deliberatis to the Wife, to the use of her Husband, it
being for her wearing Apparel. And after Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was
moved in Arrest of Judgment, that this Declaration being laid, That the Sale
was to the Wife, though it was to the use of the Husband, it was not good; as if
it had been sold to the Servant of the Plaintiff.

Nevertheless the Court were of Opinion, That it being for her Apparel, and
that suitable to her Degree, the Husband was to pay for it: as had been
Resolved in this King's time, in Scot and Manby's Case in the Exchequer
Chamber, and that the Declaration was well enough.

Anonymus.
THe Defendant in an Action of Debt upon a Bond, sued out an Injunction in
Chancery; where after the Case had depended for two years, the Court was moved,
that the Plaintiff might accept of his Principal, Interest and Charges.

The Court said, If the Defendant comes before Plea pleaded, and makes such a
proffer, they are ex debito Justitiae to allow it: But now he having delayed
the Plaintiff in Chancery two years, it was in their discretion. And the other
three, against the Opinion of Keeling, thought fit to deny it.

Clarke versus Phillips and al'.
UPon the Trial in an Ejectment, the Title of the Plaintiff's Lessor appeared
to be by a Remainder limited to him, for Life upon diverse other Estates, and
that there was a Fine levied, and Proclamations passed; but he, within the Five
years after his Title accrued, sent two persons to deliver Declarations upon
the Land, as the course is upon Ejectments brought.

The Court Resolved, that this was no Entry or Claim to avoid the Fine, he
having given no express Authority to that purpose; and the Confession of Lease,
Entry and Ouster, by the Defendant, should not prejudice him in this respect.
In this Case Keeling and Twisden were of different Opinions in this Point,
(Viz.) If he that has power of Revocation over Lands, etc. makes a Lease for
Life, whether it suspends the Power only, as a Lease for years would do, or
extinguisheth it as a Feoffment?

The King versus Monk and al'.
IN an Information for a Riot, it was concluded contra formam Statuti 13 H. 4.
which appoints Justice of the Peace, upon complaint of Riots, to View and
Record them. And after Verdict it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that this
Information was not good, it being grounded upon this Statute, which only
mentions Riots, and appoints them to be punished in the manner there expressed.

But the Chief Justice Keeling was of Opinion, that it being a Crime at the
Common Law, and mentioned in this Statute, the Information was well concluded:
But the other Justices inclined to the contrary.

Anonymus.
DEbt upon a Bond Conditioned to perform Covenants in an Indenture. The
Defendant pleaded, That there were no Covenants contained in the Indenture on
his part to be performed. The Plaintiff demands Oyer of the Indenture, which is
Entered verbatim, and then Demurs; which he could not well do before the Entry
of it, whereby it becomes part of the Bar; so the cause of the Demurrer appears.

Then it was alleged by Saunders, (whose Hand was to the Plea) That the
Plaintiff could not have Judgment, because he had set forth no Breach. But the
Court was much offended with him: For they held the Plea in Bar merely for
delay, and advised against the Statute of Westminster. 1.

Robinson versus Pulford.
IN an Assumpsit the Plaintiff declared, That the Defendant in Consideration
that the Plaintiff would deliver such silver Threads, and other Wares into the
Shop of J. S. that he should require, that he would see him paid.

Now, after an Assumpsit pleaded, and Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved
in Arrest of Judgment, That the Plaintiff had not averred in his Declaration
that J. S. had not paid for the Goods: For the promise to see him paid, was no
more than if he had said, If J.S. does not pay you, I will; in which Case such
Averment must have been.

But the Court Resolved, that a Promise to pay, and to see him paid, was all
one, and the Averment unnecessary.

Rushden versus Collins.
IN an Assumpsit the Plaintiff declared the Consideration to be, pro opere
preantea facto. After Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of
Judgment, that opere was too general, and might intend so inconsiderable a
matter as would not amount to a Consideration for the Plaintiff: But they gave
Judgment; for they said labor or servitio had been adjudged sufficient.

Lee versus Edwards.
IN an Assumpsit the Plaintiff declared, That in Consideration that he would
employ his skill and pains, and provide Medicaments for, and Cure a certain
person of a Pthysick, that he would pay what he deserved; and lays another
Promise at the same time in Consideration as aforesaid, and alleges the
Promise somewhat varying from the first; and concludes with an Averment, That
he had bestowed his pains, and cured accordingly.

Upon Non Assumpsit pleaded, and a Verdict for the Plaintiff, the Court was
moved to stay Judgment, because the Plaintiff had made no Averment of the Cure
upon the first Promise, and entire Damages were given; so it was ill in all.
But the Court were of Opinion, That in regard he had Averred it upon the second
Promise; so as it appeared upon Record that the Cure was done, it aided the
omission of it in the first, especially being after a Verdict.

Nota, There is an Inquisition upon every ones death that dies in the
King's Bench, by the Master of the Crown-Office and Coroner.

Pomfret versus Rycroft.
IN a Writ of Covenant the Plaintiff declared, That the Defendant demised to
him a House, with the use of a Pump, and that he suffered it to be so out of
Repair, that it became Useless. To this Declaration the Defendant demurs; and
Counsel being heard on either side diverse times, the Court delivered their
Opinions severally.

Keeling, Rainsford, and Moreton held, that the Action did lie, the Use of the
Pump being part of the things demised, which Words make a Covenant, as in 4 Co.
Noke's Case, and in 5 Co. Spencer's Case; If a man let an House together with
Estovers, to be taken in the Wood of the Lessor, and afterward the Wood is
stubbed up, there Covenant lies for the Lessee. And Rainsford put this Case: If
a man's Lets the Middle Rooms of his House to one, and the Upper to another, and
lets the Roof of the House decay, he conceived Covenant would lie for the
Lessee of the middle Rooms. And if a Parson makes a Lease, and then Resigns, he
is liable to Covenant, as in 12 H. 4. And the Lessee would be at a mischief,
for he should be a Trespasser to Enter and Repair; and if the Lessor ousts the
Lessee of any of the things demised, it is clear the Covenant lies; and this is
as much an ouster as can be in this case, where the Lessor is possessed
himself. And so Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, against the Opinion of
Twisden, who held strongly to the contrary; for he said he might have an Action
upon the Case, and so remedy for his Damage. Also he held clearly, That he
might Enter and Repair, as if one License another to lay Pipes in his Ground to
convey Water, he may justify an Entry to Repair the Pipes. And he cited a Case
adjudged in 9 Jac. where one by License erected a Cock of Hay in another
Ground: And it was held, That the Owner of the Soil might put in his Beasts
into that Ground; but he that had the License, might by virtue of that License
also fence in his Hay. Quando aliquid conceditur, conceditur and id sine quo
res ipsa uti non potest; and he said that he never met with a Case where
Covenant would lie but upon an actual ouster, either by a Stranger that has
eigne Title, or the Lessor himself: And this was a non feasans, and in that he
differenced it from the Case of Estovers, being an actual Tort to stub the Wood
up; and in Covenant upon an ouster of a Term, if it be not incurred, Judgment
shall be to recover the Term it self, as F. N. B. 145. which cannot be in this
Case, for the Sheriff cannot put him into possession of the use of the Pump;
neither is it fit that he should recover Damages for all the Term, for it may
be the Pump will be presently repaired. And he conceived, that if the Lessor
Cuts down Trees growing upon the Land Demised, no Covenant lies, yet the Trees
are Demised with the rest. Ante.

Anonymus.
A Draws a Bill upon B. to the use of C. and Upon Non-payment C. Protests the
Bill; he cannot Sue A. unless he gives him notice that the Bill is Protested;
for A. may have the Effects of B. in his Hands, by which he may satisfy
himself.

Note, It was said, if an Action to recover Lands of which a Fine was Levied,
were brought and discontinued by the Demandant, this would not amount to a
Claim.

Glyn versus Smith.
A Scire facias upon a Record in the Kings Bench, where the Action is brought
by Original, must allege a place where the Court was holden; because it is
Ambulatory, and the Writs returnable there are coram nobis ubicunque tunc
fuerimus in Anglia. But it is otherwise upon Records in the Common Pleas, for
that is confined to a certain place by Magna Charta.

Anonymus.
IT was moved to quash a Return of a Rescous, because it was Mandavi Ballivis,
who took him virtute Warr' praed' And it was said, Mandavi did not imply that
it was in Writing. But the Exception was disallowed by the Court.

Anonymus.
IF the Party that brings an Audita Querela be out of Prison, the Court will
Bail him, though grounded upon a surmise of a matter of Fact, as payment, etc.
But if he be in Prison, not, unless there be a Specialty.

Parries Case.
Diverse Deeds and Evidences were shown to Counsel for his Opinion of the Title
to certain Lands which were to be sold.

He delivers them to one Parry a Scrivener, by the consent of the Parties.
Parry finding a Deed to concern the interest of a third person, gives it to
him, and upon complaint to the Court, they commanded him to produce the Deed,
that it might be delivered back again to the Parties, they conceiving it an
abuse in his practice, which was under the Regulation of this Court.

Anonymus.
IN Replevin, in the Court at Canterbury, the Defendant avowed for Rent.

Afterward this was removed by the Plaintiff into the King's Bench, and the
Defendant prayed a Procedendo; because Canterbury was a County of it self, and
no Assizes there, and so the Cause could not be tried: But the Court denied it,
saying, it was their own fault that they had not the Assizes there, and every
Subject had the liberty of removing his Suit into a Superior Court. Twisden
said, He had formerly known it to be denied in an Ejectment.

Girlington versus Pitfield.
IN an Action upon the Case, for maliciously prosecuting of an Indictment of
Perjury against him, of which he was acquitted; upon Not guilty pleaded, it
appeared upon the Evidence, that the Defendant was a Justice of the Peace, and
procured some as Witnesses to appear against him, and his own name was endorsed
upon the Indictment to give Evidence.

The Court agreed that this did not make him a Prosecutor; for if a Justice of
the Peace knows any person that can give Evidence against one that is indicted,
he ought to cause him to do it. But it was proved on the Defendant's side, That
this Indictment was drawn up by an Order of the Sessions. Wherefore Keeling
Chief Justice said, That the Plaintiff deserved to be bound to his Good
Behavior for bringing of this Action.

Horn versus Ivy.
IN Trespass for taking of a Ship and Sails, the Defendant justified by a
command from the Governors and Society of the Trade into the Canaries, who
were Incorporated by that name, and had the sole Trade granted to them, with a
Forfeiture of all such Goods as should be imported hither from thence, by any
person not of their Company; and that the Ship of the Plaintiff brought Goods
from thence. To this the Plaintiff Demurred.

His Counsel did not much insist upon the validity of the Patent, because it
was a Monopoly; though it was said to be also against diverse Statutes, to
Prohibit Merchants free trading to foreign parts, as 9 E. 3. cap. 1. 25 Ed. 3.
cap. 2. 11 R. 2. cap. 7 and that there could grow no Forfeiture of Goods by
Patent, at least not before Conviction. Neither were the words of the Patent
very full to this purpose, for they were only, That they should forfeit such
Ships and Goods, and be imprisoned as by Law could be inflicted upon the
Contemners of the Kings Authority, 8 Co. 125. Noy 183. And the Court said the
question was, Whether the King could Prohibit the Importation of Foreign Goods;
for if he might, the Importation of them would cause them to be forfeited; And
the Chief Justice said, The Ship also in which they: were shipped: But no
Forfeiture of English Goods could grow by Letters Patents. And admitting all
this for the Defendant, yet it was said the Plea was naught. First, Because he
justified by a Command from a Corporation, and did not allege it to be by
Deed: And it was agreed, that a Corporation might employ one in ordinary
Services without Deed, as to be Butler, 18 Ed. 4. 8. Br. Corp. 59. or the like:
But one could not appear in an Assize as a Bailiff to a Corporation without
Deed, Pl. Com. 797. 12 H. 7. 27. Neither can they License one to take their
Trees without Deed, nor send one to make a Claim to Lands, 9 Ed. 4. 39. They
cannot make themselves Disseisours by their assent without Deed, or Command one
to Enter for a Condition broken, 7 H. 7. 9. Rolls Tit. Corp. 514. Again it was
said, The Plea was double, for that the Patent Prohibits the Trading thither,
and also Importing from thence; and it is laid that he loaded Wines there and
brought them hither, so an offense respecting both Parts, and one would have
served. But of these matters the Court would be advised.

Burwells Case.
UPon complaint to two Justices about a Bastard Child; they by the 18 Eliz.
order one Reynolds to keep the Child: Upon this Reynolds appeared at Sessions;
where they vacated the Order, and referred it back again to the Justices, who
do nothing.

The next Sessions after Burwell is judged the reputed Father, and ordered to
pay so much a Week to the Parish, until the Child was 12 year old. This was
removed into the Kings Bench by Certiorari.

And they resolved, That the referring back again to the Justices, by the
Justices at the Sessions, was not warranted; and that the last Order was
insufficient, because it was that he should pay the Parish due time until the
Child was 12 year old, whereas the Father might take it away when he pleased;
but it ought to have been, that he should allow so long as it should be
chargeable to the Parish; wherefore they bound the Parties to appear at the
next Sessions by Recognizance.

Anonymus.
A Man has a Message and a Way to it through another Freehoold, and it is
stopped, then the House is aliened, the Alienee can bring no Action for this
Nuisance before request.

If a Man lets a House reserving a Way thorough it to a Backhouse, he cannot
come thorough the House without request, and that too, at seasonable times.

Anonymus.
IF the Husband and Wife be Arrested in an Action that requires Special Bail,
and the Husband puts in Bail for himself, he must put in Bail for his Wife
also; but if he lies in Prison, the Wife cannot be let out upon Common Bail.
But it is otherwise, if the Husband absconds himself and cannot be Arrested.

Anonymus.
IF a Man brings Debt for Rent, and upon his own showing he demands more than
is due, and upon non debet pleaded, the Jury find for him, he may remit the
overplus, and have Judgment for the residue.

Note, One was Committed for sending of a Note to a Juryman, (after a privy
Verdict was given,) to know what Verdict they gave.

Parris's Case.
AN Information was brought against him, for that he fraudulenter and deceptive
procured one Ann Wigmore to give a Warrant of Attorney to confess a Judgment.

To this he pleaded Not guilty, and upon the Trial it was debated, whether she
might be admitted to give Evidence against the Defendant; for if he were
Convicted, the Court said they should set aside the Judgment. Nevertheless she
was sworn, by the Opinion of 3 Judges, against Twisden, This Suit being for the
King. Upon his Trial he was found Guilty, and fined 100 Marks, and ordered to
come with a Paper on his Hat expressing the offense.

Note, No Writ of Error to reverse a Judgment given in an Action, qui tam, etc.
lies into the Exchequer-Chamber, because the King is Party; so also upon the
Statute de Scandalis Magnactum, 1 Cro. Lord Says Case.

Peril versus Shaw.
A Scire facias was brought against the Bail, who plead that before the Return
a Capias was issued out against the Principal; and that he was taken at D. and
detained in Prison quousque postea he paid the Money; The Plaintiff pleads non
solvit. Then the Defendant Demurrs.

And it was adjudged for the Plaintiff; for the Defendants Plea was vicious,
because there is no place alleged where the Money was paid; and it is not
necessary to be intended to be paid where he was Imprisoned: And though the
Plaintiff did not Demurr, but replied; yet when there is a Demurrer, the first
fault is fatal.

Sir John Kerle versus Osgood.
AN Action was brought for these words, spoken of him being Justice of the
Peace, He is a forsworn Justice, and not fit to be a Justice of Peace; if I did
see him I would tell him it so to his Face.

After Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, That
these words were not actionable, because forsworn does not necessarily intend
any judicial Perjury, and there was no Communication of his Office. One said of
a Justice of Peace, He is a Blood-sucker and seeks after Blood; if one will
give him a couple of Capons he will do any thing, and held not actionable;
because there was nothing to make them relate to his Office, Rolls 56, 29.
Nevertheless, the Plaintiff had his Judgment by the Opinion of all the Court;
for the calling of him forsworn Justice, shows he intended Perjury relating to
his Office; to which an Oath is annexed.

Manwood brought an Action for calling of him A corrupt Judge, 4 Co. Cases of
Slander. 1 Cro. for calling of an Attorney A cheating Attorney. And Sir John
Masham recovered for calling of him Half-eared Justice. Vid. Rolls 53. pl. 4.
and 4 Co. Stucleys Case. And here the latter words, viz. That he is not fit to
sit upon a Bench, Shows that he intended the Scandal in his Office; and words
shall not be taken in mitiori sensu, so far as to draw them from the general
Acceptance; and sermo refert ad conditionem personae.

Twisden cited a Case, where a Man brought an Action for saying, He was a
Debaucht Man, and not fit to be a Justice of the Peace; and not maintainable,
because spoken of the time past: If it had been, He is Debauched, he said the
Action would lie.

Hill versus Langley.
DEbt upon a Bond to perform an Award. After nullum fecere Arbitrium pleaded,
The Plaintiff replies and sets forth, That they submitted to the Award of 4, so
that they made it by the 16th of Nov. and signified it under the Hands and
Seals of two of them, and then alleges the Award under two of their Seals; to
which the Defendant demurred, conceiving the Award to be void, because the
submission was to four. But the Court gave Judgment for the Plaintiff,
according to the Cases in 2 Cro. 276. and 400.

Anonymus.
IN an Indictment for the using of a Trade contrary to the Statute of 5 Eliz.
It was said, That to keep a Shop within a Country Village was not within the
Statute; and it were very inconvenient, that the Inhabitants must go to some
great Town upon every occasion. And it was also Juratores dicunt super
Sacramentum suum, and not adtunc and ibidem jurati.

If a Statute appoints an Indictment to be taken at the Quarter Sessions, the
Caption must be Entered ad Quaterial' Session', etc. for ad General' Session'
pacis will not serve.

Jackson versus Gabree.
JAckson took out a Capias ad satisfaciend' against Gabree and his Wife; the
Jailer lets the Husband escape. The Court was moved, that the Wife might be
discharged; alleging that the Husband took no care of her, but let her lie
there in a very necessitous Condition. They were doubtful what to do in it at
the first motion, but did afterward resolve, That unless the Plaintiff would
get the Husband taken again, as he might do, they would discharge the Wife; and
they said, the Escape of the Husband was the Escape of the Wife.

Anonymus.
AN Infant brought an Assumpsit by his Guardian, and declared, That whereas the
Defendant entered into his Close and cut his Grass, that in consideration that
he would permit him to make it Hay, and carry it away, he promised to give him
six pounds for it; and he also declared for six pounds Debt more that he ought
him.

Upon this Declaration the Defendant demurred, supposing it to be no
Consideration; for the Infant was not bound by his permission, but might Sue
him notwithstanding; and then the promise to pay six pounds Debt was not good,
because not declared how indebted. But the Court gave Judgment for the
Plaintiff.

Sir Henry Frederick Thynne versus Sir James Thynne.
PAsch. 13 Car. 2. B.R. Rot. 448. Upon a Special Issue directed out of
Chancery, the Case was thus, One was seized in Tail of the Manor of B. and of
two Closes, which in reality were not part, but reputed part thereof, and
suffered a Recovery only of the Manor with the Appurtenances; and whether the
Recovery was a Bar as to the two Closes, was the Question. And in the 16 year
of this King, it was resolved by all the Court, and Hide Chief Justice
delivered the Opinion of the Court, That the Lands reputed parcel of the Manor
should pass, by reason of the Deed of Covenants to lead the uses, which
explained the intent, Dier 223. 1 Cro. Sir George Symond's Case, Hob. 177. Dier
376. Long 5 to E. 4. 303. 6 Co. Sir Moyle Fynch's Case. Modern Rep. 250.

Termino Sancti Hillarij, Anno 21 and 22 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Wilbraham versus Snow.
IN an Action of Trover the Plaintiff declares, That he was Owner and possessed
of certain Goods, and sets them forth particularly, and that they came to the
Defendants Hands, who converted them, etc. The Defendant pleaded Not guilty,
and the Jury find this Special Verdict.

That the Plaintiff was Sheriff, and that he took the Goods into his Possession
by force of a Fieri facias; and that the Defendant (who was also Defendant in
the Execution) took them away. And then they demand the Judgment of the Court,
if the Plaintiff could maintain this Action.

It was said that he might, Because he was answerable over to the Plaintiff in
the Execution at whose Suit he took them; and could not return that they were
taken away: And if he returns, that he has taken Goods sufficient, and after
looses them, he is bound to answer the value as returned. A Bailee of Goods
shall bring Trespass, quare bona sua cepit; And Rolls 5. a Carrier from whom
Goods are taken may bring Trover. But it was argued on the other side, That the
property is in the Defendant, notwithstanding the seizure, Dier 99. a. and
Yelverton 44. And the Sheriff had but an Authority in Law to Sell, as
Commissioners of Bankrupt have of the Estate of the Bankrupt per 13 Eliz. 7. or
Executors upon a Devise, that they shall Sell Land, etc. but Trespass he might
bring, because of the Possession, but Trover cannot be maintained without
property.

But the Court held that the Action was maintainable; And that the reason was
the same, as in the Case of the Carrier; and also held that the Defendants
Property ceased by the Seizure: And also, that if a Man becomes a Bankrupt
after that the Commissioners have granted over his Goods, he cannot meddle with
them, 1 Cro. 106. So by the Opinion of Keeling, Rainsford and Moreton,
haesitante Twisden, Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Gavell and his Wife versus Burket.
AN Action was brought for these Words spoken of the Wife, You are a Pimp, and
a Bawd, and fetch young Gentlewomen to young Gentlemen, and Declared of a
Special Damage. The Jury gave a Special Verdict, and found the Words spoken;
but not the Damage, as the Plaintiff had Declared. Now, whether the Words were
Actionable of themselves, was the Question.

And it was Agreed, that no Action would lie for calling one Bawd or Pimp, 1
Cro. 286 Dimock's Case, Rolls 44. pl. 10. But to say one keeps a Bawdy House,
it will lie, 27 H. 8. 14. an Indictment lies for Keeping of a Bawdy House,
because it is a Common Nuisance; but here the subsequent words expound in what
sense the former words should be taken, that is, To bring Gentlewomen to
Gentlemen for Bawdry, which is as much as keeping a Bawdy House; and 1 Cro. was
cited where Judgment, was given for these words, Thou keep a House worse
than a Bawdy House, and keep a Whore in thy House. And in 3 H. 7. it is
said, that Constables ought to apprehend Bawds.

But the Court inclined, that the Action would not lie; for a Bawd was not
punishable in our Law, unless for Keeping of a Bawdy House, it being a Crime of
Ecclesiastical Conusans. Sed Adjornatur.

Thomlinson versus Hunter.
TRespass, Quare clausum fregit and arbores succidit ad valentiam december
librarum. 5 Co. Player's Case.
To which the Defendant Demurred generally. The Plaintiff prayed Judgment for
Breaking of his Close; but as to the other, the Declaration was Insufficient,
because not expressed what kind of Trees.

Anonymus.
A Writ of Error was brought upon a Judgment given in Ireland. It was held that
a Day ought to be given by Rule of Court to the Plaintiff, to assign his
Errors, or else to Nonsuit him; Dyer 76. b.
for the Defendant could have no Scire facias into Ireland.

Leech versus Widsley.
IN an Action of Trespass for Chasing of his Sheep, and Impounding of them, and
there detaining of them until he gave him 12 d per quod one of the Sheep died.
The Defendant pleads, that J.S. was seized in Fee of the place Where, and that
the Sheep were there Damage feasant, and that he by the Command of J. S.
leniter chaceavit eas, and Impounded them until he gave him satisfaction, quae
est eadem Transgressio. The Plaintiff in his Replication entitles himself to
Common there. The Defendant Rejoyns, and says, that the place Where was parcel
of a great Waste, wherein the Plaintiff had Common appurtenant, and that the
Lord Enclosed the place Where, and that the Plaintiff had tempore quo, etc. and
semper postea, sufficient Common for all his Sheep levant and couchant. To
which the Plaintiff Demurs,

First, For that the Bar was Insufficient; for the Plaintiff charge him with
detaining them until he paid him a Shilling; and he pleads, that he detained
them until he gave him satisfaction; sed non allocatur.

Vid. 3 Cro. 384. Hill and Prideaux's Case; but here the Plaintiff has waived
that Advantage by pleading over.
Again, He does not answer to the killing of the Sheep; sed non allocatur; for
he pleads leniter chaceavit; so that if the Sheep did dye he is not answerable;
neither does the Plaintiff declare of any extraordinary Chasing; but alleges
the dying of the Sheep only in aggravation of the Damages, coming after the Per
quod, and that is not traversable: As in an Action for Beating of his Servant,
per quod servitium amisit, the loss of the Service cannot be traversed.

But that which was most insisted on was what he alleges in his Rejoinder,
(viz.) That the Plaintiff had Common sufficient left him for his Sheep levant
and couchant upon the Tenements Whereas he ought to have said, Sufficient ad
tenementa praedicta. For it may be the Ground was understocked. Also, it is not
set forth, that he had free Egress and Regress; the Words of the Statute of
Merton are, Tantam pasturam habeant quantum sufficit ad tenementa sua, and quod
habeant liberum ingressum; sed non allocatur, for his Sheep levant and
couchant, is intended as many as the Land will maintain, and if there were no
Egress or Regress, it ought to come on the other side. So Judgment was given
for the Defendant, nisi causa.

Anonymus.
AN Infant Executor brings an Action. It was said by Twisden, That it had been
Adjudged, that he ought to sue by Guardian.

Ely versus Ward.
IN a Writ of Error to Reverse a Judgment given in the Court at Hull; upon an
Assumpsit the Plaintiff declared, That it was Agreed between them at a place
infra Jurisdictionem Curiae, That upon Request, etc. and that he Requested him
at a place infra Jurisdictionem Curiae.

It was assigned for Error, That this Action ought not to have been brought in
Hull, because the Request was not appointed to be made within the Jurisdiction
by Agreement. Sed non allocatur, As long as the Agreement and Request were made
there, though the Request might have been elsewhere.

Another Error was assigned, in that the Precept to the Sergeant at Mace for
Returning of the Jury was, Probos and legales homines qui null affinitat', etc.
attingen', whereas the Form of the Venire is, attingunt. Sed non allocatur: For
it was held to be as well. Though Twisden said, The Form of a Writ ought not to
be altered into another Expression of the same signification.

Then the Entry was, Ad quem diem venerunt the Plaintiff and Defendant, and
Juratores; and it should have been, Veniunt; sed his non obstantibus the
Judgment was affirmed.

Anonymus.
IT was held, That if the Sheriff Returns a Cepi Corpus upon a Capias, although
he has not his Body in Court at the day of the Return, yet no Action can be
brought against him, but he is to be amerced for it at the Common Law. One so
taken could not be Bailed, but by a Homine Replegiando; and now the Statute of
the 23th of H. 6. obliges the Sheriff to take Bail, however the Return is as at
the Common Law, Cepi Corpus.

Freeman versus Barnes.
TRin. 20 Car. 2. Rot. 554. Error to Reverse a Judgment given in Communi Banco
in an Ejectment; where, upon Not Guilty pleaded, the Jury found a Special
Verdict to this effect: Tenant in Fee makes a Lease for an hundred years, in
Trust for himself, to wait upon the Inheritance; the Lessee enters, Cestuy que
Trust enters and takes the Profits, and makes several Leases, all which being
expired, he makes a Lease for 54 years, and for the corroborating of it Levies
a Fine with Proclamations; the Lessee enters, 5 years pass. And Tyrrel and
Archer (they being the only Judges in the Common Plea then) gave Judgment, That
the Fine should bar the Lessee for an hundred years. Upon which a Writ of Error
was brought in this Court, and Argued this Term by Levins for the Plaintiff in
the Writ of Error; and Finch, Solicitor for the Defendant.

And for the Reversing of the Judgment, Levins Argued, That this Lease by the
Cestuy que Trust, and the Entry of his Lessee, did not dispossess the former
Lessee; and then the Fine and Non-claim could not prejudice his Interest, which
was not put to a right: For first, the Cestuy que Trust was at least Tenant at
Will. So is Littleton, Sect. 464. Cestuy que Use may enter, and hold at the
Will of his Feoffees; then his Lease can be no Disseisin, because the
Inheritance was in himself. It Is true, in some Cases a man may do an Act which
shall divest his own Estate: As if a Stranger disseises Tenant for Life to the
use of him in the Reversion, and he assents, Co. Lit. 180. b. the Law shall not
construe a Disseisin against the parties Intention, Rolls 661. He that enters
by color of a void Lease is no Disseisor, 1 Cro. 188. nor any one that enters
by Consent, 15 E. 4. 5. b. Neither shall the Interest of the Lessee be divested
but at his Election; for this Lease works in point of Contract, and not so
violently upon other men's Interests as Livery does. In Latche's Rep. 75. Sir
Thomas Fisher's Case, Tenant for years lets at Will, the Lessee makes a Lease
for years; this works no dispossession. If a Copyholder makes a Lease for years
without License, the Entry of the Lessee is no Disseisin to the Lord, and he
may choose whether he will take it as a Forfeiture, Rolls 830. Lease for years,
upon Condition to be void upon Nonpayment of Rent, a demand is made, the Lessor
may make a new Lease of the Land, the former Lessee being still in possession.
And Blunden and Baugh's Case was cited in 1 Cro. to the same purpose; and that
a Fine does not bar an Interest which is not divested. He quoted also the 1
Inst. 388. 9 Co. 106. and 5 Co. Saffin's Case, where a Fine and Non claim shall
bar the Interest of a Term; yet it appears in 2 Cro. 60. that two Judges were
against that Judgment given by the other three, 2 Cro. 659. Tenant at Will
makes a Lease for years, and it was held to be no Disseisin volens nolens to
him that had the Inheritance. And for Isham and Morris's Case, 1 Cro. 74. it
was the Judges Opinion upon Evidence, and there a Fine was levied of the
Inheritance, which passed the Trust inclusively; but this Fine was only to
establish an Interest for 54 years. Then he Argued, that the Inconvenience
would be very great to Purchasers, who often keep such Leases and Interests on
Foot, though they buy the Inheritance, if they should be all barred by Levying of
the Fine.

The Solicitor e contra, He agreed that a Fine could not bar any Interest,
which was not divested at the time of the Fine. He Argued first, That the
Cestuy que Trust was not Tenant at Will; for a man shall not be Tenant at Will
against his own Conveyance, unless by Construction of Law, to avoid a Tort; as
in Littleton's Case, where the Cestuy que Use enters upon his Feoffee. But though
the Lessor has a right to the possession before the Entry of his Lessee for
years; yet when the Lessee Enters, as it is found in out Case, he does as much
as declare, that Cestuy que Trust shall not be Tenant at Will. Indeed the
Bargainee of an Estate for years, is in actual possession by force of the
Statute; yet the Bargainor (in case of a Mortgage) may Enter to hold at Will,
because there was no Act done to express his dissent. He agreed also, that no
Disseisin was wrought; but there may be an Expulsion without a Disseisin, as
Hob. 322. where it is said, If the Lessor puts out his Lessee for years, there
is no Disseisin committed; and yet the Lessee has lost his Estate, and has
but a Right to it, and that whether he will or no: And if he were Tenant at
Will, he by making this, and diverse Leases before, has absolutely determined
his Will; if Tenant at Will be ousted by a Stranger, and he in Reversion
disseised he may enter again; not where he is the Wrong-doer himself, for that
were to make him Tenant at Will against his Will. If Tenant at Will makes a
Lease for years, and the Lessee enters, the Tenant at Will is the Disseisor, 2
Cro. 660. 3 Cro. 830 5. E. 42. and Tenant at Will is entrusted with and has
power over the possession. And where it was said, it should be in the Election
of the Lessee for 100 years, to take this for an Ejectment or no, he Argued
that it ought clearly to be in the Election of the Lessor.

For, first, it was his own act, and therefore he could best explain quo animo
hoc fecit, and that his antecedent Acts had sufficiently done, especially being
Cestuy que Trust, and having also the Inheritance in him; and he insisted very
much upon the Notice that the Law takes of such an Interest, though relievable
only in Equity, 7 H. 5. 3. Cestuy que Use of a Manor, to which an Advowson was
appendant, was Outlawed, the Church became void; the King brought a Quare
Impedit, 2 Cro. 512. A Trust of a Chattel, resolved to be forfeit by Attainder,
Hob. 214. in that case the King shall have the Land it self, and Process shall
issue out of the Exchequer to seize the Land it self, which shows that it has
a legal influence upon the Land; therefore, he and not the Trustee, ought to
have the Election. If Cestuy que Use had made a Lease for years, this had been
a Disseisin, until 1 R. 3 5 H. 7. 56. 8 H. 7. 8. A Lease of two Acres, habendum
the one for Life, that other in Fee, to the use of another; shall not the
Cestuy que Use determine in which the Inheritance shall be: Again, It is agreed
that this Fine conveys away the Trust; shall the Law strain to save the
Interest of the Trustee, to occasion a Chancery Suit? And the Judges ever
Expounded the Statute of 4 H. 7. strictly, to bind the Right of Strangers,
Leonard 99. It was the Chief Baron Manwood's Opinion, That he that had a future
Interest to Lands, of which a Fine was Levied, ought to have five years after
his Interest came in esse, neither is there any reason to favor long Leases.
By the Ancient Law, a Lease for above 40 years was void, Mirror 164, 293. 1st
Inst. 46. they are never without suspicion of Fraud: and 3 Co. Twyne's Case,
that which is called a Trust, is in plain English a Fraud; and as this is
found, it appears by the Circumstances to be almost Fraud apparent. And as to
the Inconvenience which was alleged would come to Purchasors, who desire to
keep Leases on foot, he Answered, That might be prevented by claiming within
five years; and it would be mischievous to Purchasors if it were otherwise, to
have such Leases set up against their Titles. Postea.

Note, One makes a Lease, wherein the Lessee Covenants to Repair, and then
bargains and sells part of the Reversion; He shall have an Action of Covenant
per 32 H. 8.

Bosvile versus Coats.
IN Debt upon a Bond with Condition, That the Obligor should bring in the Son
and Daughter of J.S. at their full Age, to give such Releases as a Third person
shall require. The Defendant pleads, That the Son is alive under Age at
Doncaster. To which the Plaintiff demurs, and held he might; for it must be
taken at their respective Ages. Vid. 5 Co. Justice Wyndham's Case.

Crispe and Jackson versus The Mayor and Commonalty of Berwick.
IN a Writ of Covenant, the Plaintiffs declared upon an Indenture of Demise of
an House from the Defendants, wherein they Covenanted, That the Plaintiffs
should enjoy it without the Interruption of any Persons whatsoever; and
assigned for Breach, That J. S. entered and dispossessed them at Berwick. Upon
which the Defendant takes Issue. Whereupon the Plaintiff suggests, That such a
place in Northumberland is the next to Berwick; and the Venire is awarded to
the Sherriff accordingly, and a Verdict was found for the Plaintiff.

It was moved by Jones in Arrest of Judgment, That here was a Mis-Trial, not
aided by any Statute; for the last Act, which is the largest, remedies all
Trials, so as they be in the proper County; but this is not so: And he said, It
ought to have been tried where the Action was laid. As when an Action is
brought upon a Chartr-Party, and a Breach is assigned in a Foreign Kingdom, it
shall be Tried where the Charter-Party is dated; and here the Covenant bore
Date at the Castle of York, and there the Trial ought to have been, 6 Co.
Dowdale's Case; and Berwick is part of Scotland, and bound by our Acts of
Parliament, because Conquered in Edward the Fourth's time: But the course is to
name it expressly, because it is out of the Realm, and not like to Wales, where
the Trials in such Cases shall be out of the prochein County, 19 Hen. 6.12. for
that is a Member of England: Vid. 7 Co. Calvin's Case. But two Presidents being
shown, where the Trials were as it is here, and one of them affirmed in a Writ
of Error; also the Case in Rolls tit. Trial, 597. A Writ of Error was brought
to Reverse a Judgment given in Ireland, and an Error in Fact was assigned and
tried in a County next to Ireland: The Court Ruled the Venire to be well
awarded.

Twisden said, The Reason why an Ejectment would not lie of Lands in Jamaica,
or any of the Kings foreign Territories, was, Because the Courts here could not
command them to do Execution there; for they have no Sheriffs.

This Case having remained two or three Terms since the Postea was Returned,
and no Continuances Entered, one of the Plaintiffs died, and it was doubted
whether Judgment could be now Entered: And the Secondary said, That they did
Enter up Judgments two Terms after the Day in Bank, as at the Day in Bank,
without any Continuances. And of this Matter the Court would be Advised. Postea.

Anonymus.
IF one, upon Complaint to two Justices, 1 Cro. Prigeon's Case.
be Ordered to keep a Bastard Child, and this upon an Appeal to the Sessions is
revoked, that Person is absolutely discharged; and unless a Father can be
found, the Court said, the Justices of Peace must keep it themselves.

The Earl of Peterborough versus Sir John Mordant.
IN an Action upon the Statute de Scandalis Magnatum, for speaking these Words
of the Plaintiff, I do not know but my Lord of Peterborough sent Gybbs to take
my Purse. After Judgment, by Default, and a Writ of Enquiry of Damages
returned, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that no Action would lie for
these Words.

First, He does not positively charge him with it.

Again, The Words do not import a Felonious taking, Hob. 326. Mason's Case, I
charge him with Felony, for taking Money out of the Pocket of H. Stacie;
adjudged not Actionable. And in 1 Cro. 312. Thou did set upon me and take my
Purse; go before a Justice and I will charge you with Felony. It was held there
that no Action would lie.

But the Court gave Judgment for the Plaintiff. As to the first, it was held as
much as a direct Affirmation; for otherwise one might slander another, and by
such a slight Evasion escape an Action.

Twisden said, He knew these Words adjudged Actionable, He hides himself for
Debt, and for ought I know is a Bankrupt.

And for the Words the Court said, Three was difference between an Action
grounded upon the Statute de Scandalis Magnatum, and a Common Action of
Slander. The Chief Justice said, The Words in the one case shall be taken in
mitiori sensu, and in the other in the worst sense against the Speaker, that
the Honor of such Great Persons may be preserved. More 55. The Earl of
Leicester had Judgment for these words, My Lord of Leicester is a Cruel Man, an
Oppressor, and an Enemy to Reformation, Leon. 33. The Lord Abergavenny sued for
these words, My Lord Abergavenny sent for us, and put some of us into the
Stocks, some to the Coalhouse, and some to the Prison in his House called
Little Ease. And Recovered. Vide Crompton's Jurisdiction of Courts, 13. and
Leonard, 336.

Anonymus.
AN Indictment was, Compertum fuit per Sacramentum duodecim proborum and
legalium hominum, etc. and quashed, because it was not jurat' and onerat'. And
the Clerk of the Crown-Office Informed the Court, that that was always the
Course; also it must be, Adtunc and ibidem jurat', where the Caption is recited
to be taken.

Williams versus Gwyn.
ERror to Reverse a Judgment given in Dower in the Grand Sessions in Wales. It
appeared by the Record, that the Tenant appeared upon the Summons Returned, and
Day was given over, and adtunc venit per Attornatum and nihil dicit in barram:
Whereupon, Consideratum est quod tertia pars terr' and tenemen' capiatur in
man' Domini Regis, and Day was given ad audiend' Judicium; at which Day
Judgment was given quod recuperet.

It was Assigned for Error, that the Court here had awarded a Petit Cape, and
yet the Defendant appeared, whereas they should have given Judgment upon the
Nient dedire; for a Petit Cape is always upon default after appearance, and
only to answer the Default: The Grand Cape is before appearance, to answer the
Default and the Demand, Vet. N. B. 97. So it was said, the Court had erred in
Judgment; and though it were in advantage of the Tenant by the delay, yet not
being by his Prier as an Essoign granted, where none ought to be, is not Error,
but the act of the Court, as if they should Enter a Misericordia for a
Capiatur, it were Erroneous.

But the Court answered, That the reason of that was, Because it is parcel of
the Judgment, and the King should lose his Fine; But this was only the awarding
of Process more than should be, and in advantage of the Tenant, wherefore they
resolved that they could not Reverse it for Error. And Twisden said, Admitting
it were Erroneous, they might then give Judgment in this Court.

Anonymus.
A Prohibition was prayed to the Arches for Libelling against one there, for
calling Whore and Baud, because they were but words of Heat; also the Party
lived in the Diocese of London, so against 23 H. 8. to Cite him there. But the
Court would not grant it; for though formerly there has been diverse Opinions
touching these words, yet Twisden said ever since 8 Car. the Law has been
taken, that they may punish such words, pro reformatione morum. And for the
other, it appeared Sentence was given, and that it was too late to pray a
Prohibition, when it appears they have Jurisdiction of the Cause, as the
Superior Court; and he that would have the benefit of the Statute against
citing out of the Diocese, must come before Sentence, 1 Cro.

Anonymus.
FInch Solicitor, moved for a Prohibition to the Ecclesiastical Court, to stay
a Suit for Tithes of Hopps, commenced there by the Vicar, upon a Suggestion,
that they had paid for all Tithe Hopps so much an Acre to the Parson, time out
of mind. But it was denied; for there could be no such Composition time out of
mind, Hopps not being known in England until Queen Elizabeth's time; for then
they were first brought out of Holland, though Beer is mentioned in a Statute
in Henry the Fourth's time.

But it was said by the Court, That perhaps the Vicaridge was Endowed time out
of mind of the small Tithes, of which nature Hopps were. Then the prescription
of paying of Modus to the Parson, shall not take them from him; for it shall be
taken to have commenced since the Endowment.

Note, If the Matter concerns the whole County, it is to be Tried in another
County which is indifferent.

Hall versus Philips.
AN Information was brought for the forfeiture of a certain quantity of Brandy,
and sets forth the two Acts, 13 and 14 Car. 2. c. 23 and 24. of Excise upon
that and other Liquors, and then the additional Act of 15 Car. cap. 11. wherein
it is Enacted, That no Foreign imported excisable Liquours shall be Landed,
etc. before due Entry be first made thereof, etc. or before the Duty of Excise
due and payable for the same be fully satisfied and paid; and that every
Warrant for the Landing or Delivery of any such Foreign Liquors, shall be
Signed by the Hand of the said Officer, etc. upon pain that all such Foreign
Liquors as shall be landed, etc. contrary to the true intent and meaning
thereof, or without the presence of an Officer or Wayter for the Excise, or the
value thereof, shall be forfeited and lost, the one Moiety to the King, the
other to him which shall seize, inform, etc. And avers that this Brandy was
Landed, the Duty not fully satisfied and paid, and without the presence of an
Officer or Wayter for the Excise; but does not aver, that a due Entry was not
first made thereof,

Whereupon it was moved, after a Verdict for the Informer, in Arrest of
Judgment; that if either the Duty were paid, or Entry made, or the Landing were
in the presence of an Officer, it satisfied the Act, which is in the
Disjunctive, and, or shall not be taken Conjunctive, unless the words are of
like nature, as 1 Mar. cap. 3. Maliciously or Contemptuously disturb Preachers;
especially in a Penal Law. Besides, if the Act required these three things
should be done, then payment would not suffice, without the presence of an
Officer at the Landing; the like words are taken Disjunctively in Renigers
Case, Pl. Com.

But it was said on the other side, That the word or, must be taken here in the
Conjunctive, and that for the apparent inconvenience that would follow; and
that the Statute intended all three should be performed, and that an Entry
should not suffice without payment, or agreement with the Officer, which
Tantamounts: For otherwise, this Act which was made to be further remedial to
the King, would rather disappoint this Revenue of Excise given by former Acts,
which did also require an Entry to be made; but this Act adds the Penalty for
Non-entry, and this Entry is to be made for a check upon the Officer, that he
accounts right to the King. 2 Cro. 322.
Also it appoints Landing in the presence of the Officer, that it may be
observed whether more be Landed than is contained in the Warrant for Landing;
but never meant that Entry should suffice without payment; for so if Party be a
Foreigner or Insolvent, the King loses his Duty.

And the Court gave Judgment for the Informer: But said they would have stayed
until the next Term, but that great mischief might be done in the interim, if
it should be known that such a doubt sticks here; and they would not give any
encouragement to the lessening of the Kings Revenue.

Anonymus.
IN an Indictment upon the Act, for coming within five Miles of a Corporation.

It was moved, that no Indictment lay upon it, because the Act appoints a
Penalty of 40 l to be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information.

Sed non allocatur, For when a Statute makes an Offense, the King may punish it
by Indictment; but an Information will not lie, when a Statute does barely
prohibit a thing, vid. 2 Cro. 643. 3 Cro. 544.

Note, It was resolved at Sergeants Inn, That when a Penalty is to be divided,
(viz.) To the King, the Poor and the Informer. If the King along Sue, so that
there is no Informer, yet the Poor shall have their part.

Adrian Lampereve and other Frenchmens Case.
A Motion was made by the Solicitor, upon a Special Direction from the King, in
behalf of the said Lampereve and others Frenchmen, to have a Certiorari to
Bedford Gaol, where they were committed for Robbery.

Keeling Chief Justice, I lately attended his Majesty about this matter, and I
thought he had been satisfied with what I then said and now repeat, (viz.) That
if we should remove them now, we should discharge his Majesty's Justice; for
there is no Indictment found, and none can be found but at Bedford, and the
Prosecutors and Witnesses are there; but he might have it Tried at the Bar if
he pleased, so the only way is to let them stay at Bedford till the Assizes;
and then if Prosecutors appear not, or an Ignoramus be found, they will be
discharged by Proclamation; and if the Indictment be found, then the Judge may
take a new Recognizance of the Prosecutors to appear and Prosecute here; and
you may have a Certiorari now to deliver there, or you may have it there from
my Brother Rainsford, who goes that Circuit, to remove all up hither.

Solicitor. I suppose this will satisfy.

Curia. We must acquit our selves of the Kings Justice.

In Easter Term following they were brought up hither, and being Arraigned upon
the Indictment, they pleaded Not guilty; and some of them desired to be Bailed,
and the Court said they might, but it must be done in the Court, because the
Bail must be bound Body for Body; and they required 4 Men to be Bail, each
worth 300 l Body for Body, and in no sum certain.

They were afterward Tried per medierat' linguae, and some of the Aliens were
not Frenchmen, and most of them dwelt in Middlesex.

Lady Baltinglass's Case.
THe Court denied a Trial at the Bar, because the Costs were not paid upon
other Trials, which went against her in other Courts; which the Court here
would take notice of.

Articles were exhibited against a Register of an Ecclesiastical Court, for
Misdemeanors done by him in his Office.

He moved for a Prohibition; but it would not be granted, unless they examine
him concerning the Articles upon his Oath.

Wright and Johnson.
Assmpsit, To deliver a Gelding in as good plight as he borrowed him; and
Avers, that he did not deliver him at all. A Verdict was had for the Plaintiff
yet; Judgment was given against him, because the Breach was not laid as the
Promise is.

Playters versus Sheering.
IN a Replevin (removed by Recordari,) There was a Nonsuit for want of a
Declaration, and thereupon the Defendant made a Suggestion, and took out a Writ
of Enquiry upon 17 Car. 2. cap. 7. The Plaintiff moved that this might be set
aside, because the Nonsuit hapened, through the sudden Sickness of the person
employed to Prosecute.

Curia, This new Statute having taken away the Writ of Second Deliverance, has
made the Plaintiff remediless, unless we help him; therefore we will endeavor
it as far as we can. Let the Defendant show Cause, why he should not accept of
a Declaration upon payment of Costs.

Termino Paschae, Anno 22 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Anonymus.
IF there be several Contracts between A. and B. at several times, for several
sums, Prohibition
each sum under 40 s and they do all amount to a sum sufficient to Entitle the
Superior Court; they shall be there put in Suit, and not in a Court which is
not of Record. And so it was resolved in the Case of the Savoy Court, and
Stanford 24. C. 2. Also it was said, That if a Man at diverse times Steals
things, all which amount to above 12d it is Felony Capital.

In an Account after a Quod computet, the Court Assigns Auditors, and they sit
upon and return the Account when they will; for day is not given them, and they
give the Parties in the interim what time they please; but if the Defendant
delays, they return it to the Court, and Process goes out against him.

Nota, Memorandum, On Tuesday April the 26th, Steven Mosdel, to whom Mr.
Lenthal had granted the Office of Marshal of the King's Bench for life, was
sworn Marshal. The Oath was this, (Viz.) You shall swear, that during the time
of your being Marshal, you shall well and truly use, exercise, and behave your
self in the said Office; you shall increase no Fees, and in all things shall do
your Duty in the said Office, etc.

It was resolved, That the said Stephen Mosdel could not afterward practice as
an Attorney of this Court; and that Mr. Lenthall Marshall in Reversion had no
Privilege.

Anonymus.
A Promise was made to give 1000 l to one for curing of his Eyes; and an
Assumpsit is brought.

Upon this, the Jury may give less than 1000 l Damages, if they think fit.

Sir W. Mewes versus Mewes.
A Title of Land was tried out of the proper County, upon a feigned Wager,
Whether well conveyed or no, (this is the Course of Issues directed out of
Chancery.)

Note, In this Case a Bill in Chancery was given in Evidence against the
Complainant, though held to be but of slight moment.

Smiths Case.
SMith and other Commissioners of Sewers which sat at White-Chappel, were
brought in upon an Attachment awarded against them, for a Contempt of this
Court. And the Case was thus.

A Certiorari was lately sent and delivered to them out of this Court, (upon
Special direction and recommendation by the King and Council, before whom the
Business had been agitated) to remove hither Certain Orders and Proceedings of
theirs, in order to a Trial of the Right of the Matter in Question.

At first they did not allow the Certiorari, but afterward having allowed it,
they proceeded de novo upon the same Matter; and made an Order again, which
certain persons (being the same persons who procured the Certiorari,) refusing
to obey, the Commissioners fined them 10 l apiece.

Then a second Certiorari was taken out and delivered to them; after which they
imprisoned persons for not executing and obeying of a Warrant made upon their
second Order, and for speaking Contemptuous words of the Commissioners, and
fined them 5 l apiece. Being now questioned by the Court, concerning these
Contempts and Misdemeanors, They said, they did this wholly by the advice of
their Counsel Mr. Ofley, (who being in Court received a severe Reprimand
therefore;) and the Commissioners were committed to Prison.

About the Fortnight afterward, having made and Filed their Return, they were
brought into Court, to receive the Sentence of the Court. And then it was said
by them and Coleman their Counsel; that they would not urge any thing in
justification of their not returning their Proceedings, they only offered, that
what they did was by the advice of their Counsel; and that the Clause in 13
Eliz. cap. 9. was so penned as to give a great occasion of doubt in this
particular, which Clause upon their desire was read; And is this,

And be it further Enacted, etc. That from henceforth the said Commissioners of
Sewers, nor any of them shall not be compelled, or compellable to make any
Certificate, or Return of the said Commissioners, or any of them, or of any of
the Ordinances, Laws or doings, by the Authority of any of the said
Commissions, nor shall not have any Fine, Pain or Amerciament set upon them, or
any of them, or any ways to be molested in Body, Lands, or Goods for that
Cause, and after the reading thereof, the Court delivered themselves seriatim,
as follows,

Moreton. This is a great Offense and Contempt; The Commissioners of Sewers and
their Proceedings are subject to the Jurisdiction of this Court. Sir Henry
Mildmayes Case, 2 Cro. 336. and Sir H. Hungates in our Memory: If Commissioners
of Sewers, or any other inferior Jurisdiction exceed their Commission, we may
reform and restrain them, and it; nay we prohibit them in Cases where They have
no Jurisdiction of the matter: Many presidents are with us in the present Case.
And we cannot answer our Duty to the King, without taking notice of and
punishing this Offense. Therefore my Opinion is, That for their not obeying of
the first Writ, they be fined 40 Marks apiece, and for their not obeying of the
second Writ 20 Marks apiece.

Rainsford: This is indisputably an Offense and Contempt; and the greater for
that it was seconded. It is aggravated too; in that the Commissioners proceeded
after they had allowed the Certiorari, and that they fell upon, and showed
their Indignation against those persons, who only pursued the Kings Authority;
and that this was in a Case, which was recommended by the King and Council, to
which Recommendation the Commissioners were Privy; they had contrary advice
from other Counsel then there, but they would hearken to that advice which
pleased them best: Obedience is that Ligament of the Government, without which
all will be turned into Anarchy and Confusion. Without betraying the Trust
reposed in us by the King, and violating of our Oaths, we cannot omit to punish
this, therefore I agree the Fines: The Reason of the Fines, is the disobeying
of the Writs; the Reason of their disproportion, is to resemble the Measures
the Commissioners observed toward those persons whom they unduly fined.

Twisden. It was resolved in 23 Car. That this Statute has no reference to
this Court, and that this Clause extends only to Certificates and Returns into
Chancery; the Statute speaks of Supersedeas, etc. which issue out of the Court
of Chancery only; for this Court does not, nor ever did send out Supersedeas's,
but this Court sends out Certiorari's, which are to bring the business before
the King here, and the words of them are, quia coram nobis terminari volumus
and non alibi. What should move that Gentleman to give such advice (as he did)
I cannot imagine: I suppose there is more in the matter than we know, and it is a
strange thing, that these Commissioners should ask Counsel, whether they should
obey the Kings Writ or no? Especially when it went out upon such particular
direction and recommendation. It Is some mitigation, that they had such advice
of Counsel; otherwise, I should not stick to fine them 100 l apiece. We are
bound to take care of the support of the Government. I agree the Fines.

Keeling Chief Justice. It is provided by 23 H. 8. cap. 5. that the Laws, Acts,
etc. to be made by the Commissioners of Sewers, should stand good and
effectual, etc. no longer than the Commission endured, except they were
Engrossed in Parchment, and certified under their Seals, into the Kings Court
of Chancery; and then the Kings Royal Assent to be had to the same, etc. But
that was altered by this of 13 Eliz. whereby it is Enacted, That their Laws,
etc. should stand and continue in force, without any such Certificate to be
made thereof into the Chancery; and then a little after in this Statute follows
the Clause which has been read, and that refers wholly to Certificates, or
Returns to be made into the Chancery, for the purpose aforementioned. It Is
plain, the Clause refers not to this Court, for it speaks of returning their
Comissions; now their Commissions were never returnable into this Court; this
Court cannot be ousted of its Jurisdiction without special words; here is the
last Appeal, the King himself sits here, and that in person if the pleases, and
its Predecessors have so done; and the King ought to have an account of what is
done below in inferior Jurisdictions. It Is for the avoiding of oppressions and
other mischiefs. To deny and oppose this, and to set up uncontrolable
Jurisdictions below, tends manifestly to a Commonwealth; and we ought, and we
shall take care that there be no such thing in ours days. I know there is a
great clamor, so soon as an inferior Jurisdiction is touched; and it is thought
we deal hardly with them: But unless we will suffer this Court to be dissolved,
and the Prerogative of the King to be encroached upon, we must oppose our
selves to these Proceedings.

I have a great respect for these persons the Commissioners, but it is but usque
ad aras. When the Jurisdiction of the Crown, the Justice of the Kingdom, and
the Duty of my place is concerned, I ought not to spare my best Friends. Some
Presidents have been cited in this Case, and many more might; there are two
memorable Records cited, 1 Cro. concerning persons which contemned the Kings
Writ and their Penalties. I agree the Fines, and hereby we do not go so high as
our Predessours have gone Hundreds of years ago.

Nota, This Proceeding and Sentence of the Court, was upon Confession of the
Commissioners; the Court forthwith making an Entry and Record of their
Confession.

In an Assize only, where the Writ is Returnable into this Court, it is apud
Westmonaster'; but in all other cases, where Writs are Returnable out of
Chancery into this Court, they are Returnable Ubicunque, etc.

The King versus Jane D --.
SHe was Indicted for Stealing of several things, and pleading Not Guilty, and
a Jury sworn to try her; the Witnesses not appearing, were suspected to be
tampered with by the Prisoner; and the Jury were discharged, and the Trial put
off. Vid. 1 Inst. 227. b.

Wise's Case.
AN Order of the Justices of the Peace, for the maintenance of a Poor Woman,
was Confirmed, though it appeared she was able of Body to work: But the Justices
of the Peace are Judges of that.

Cousin's Case.
ERror to Reverse a Fine for Infancy; Now 'twas moved, that the party being in
Court she might be inspected, and the Inspection Recorded; and there was
produced and read a Copy of the Register Book, sworn to be a true one, and
several Affidavits of her Age.

Curia: Let the Inspection be now Recorded; the Issue of her Infancy, may be
tried at any time hereafter, though she comes of Age.

Nota, A Prisoner in the King's Bench that lies in the Common Side, pays no Fees
for his Lodging.

Anonymus.
IT was said by Twisden, That if two submit to an Award, this contains not a
Reciprocal Promise to perform; but there must be an Express Promise to ground
an Action upon.

Nota, A Fine which was set two or three Terms since, was this Term set aside,
because of some surreptitious Practice and Misinformation to the Judge.

Auberie versus James.
ASsault, Battery and Wounding: The Defendant Justified; for that he being
Master of a Ship, commanded the Plaintiff to do some Service in the Ship, which
he refusing to do, he moderate castigavit the Plaintiff, prout ei been licuit.

The Plaintiff maintains his Declaration absque hoc quod moderate castigavit,
and Issue was taken thereupon.

Negativum infinitum.
After Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment that the
Issue was not well joined; for non moderate castigavit does not necessarily
imply that he did Beat him at all, and so no direct Traverse to the Defendants
Justification, which immoderate castigavit would have been: But, De injuria sua
propria absque aliqua tali causa would have been the most formal Replication.

But the Justices held, that it would serve as it was, after a Verdict, though
the Statute at Oxford 16 Car. 2. the last and most aiding Act of Jeofails be
(Which was a mistake.)
expired, and that de injuria sua propria, not adding absque aliqua tali causa,
has been held good after a Verdict.

Green versus Cubit.
ERror to Reverse a Judgment, given in the Court at Norwich, in Debt upon a
Bond; where the Plaintiff declared, that the Defendant per scriptum suum
Obligatorium, at a certain place there became bound, etc.

The Defendant pleaded, that he was in Prison, and scriptum praedictum was
obtained by Duress; which was found against the Defendant, and Judgment given
accordingly.

The Errors assigned were first, Because he declares of a Writing Obligatory,
and both not say sigillo Defendentis sigillat', 3 Cro. 571. Declaration in
Covenant was held Insufficient for the same cause.

Secondly, There is no place where the Defendant alleges himself to be in
Prison; and being in an Inferior Court, it shall not have any aid of
Intendment.

But the Court Overruled the first, because the Plea of the Defendant
confesses the Deed; and the second, because the Imprisonment must of necessity
refer to the place where the Plaintiff declares the Bond to be made: For the
Defendant pleaded, that he was then in Prison; wherefore they affirmed the
Judgment, 3 Cro. 55. 2 Cro. 420. 3 Cro. 737. 19 H. 6. 15. 19.

Baldway and Ouston.
DEbt upon a Bond, the Condition was, That the Defendant should pay such Costs
as should be stated by two Arbitrators by them chosen.

He pleaded, that none were Stated.

The Plaintiff Replied, That the Defendant did not bring in his Bill.

To which it was Demurred: For though if the Defendant were the cause that no
Award was made, it was as much a forfeiture of his Bond, as not to perform it
would be; yet here there was a precedent act of the Plaintiffs necessary,
(viz.) To choose an Arbitrator, which he ought to have shown before any Fault
could be assigned in the Defendant, in not bringing in of his Bill. And to this
the Court did not incline: Sed Adjornatur.

Nota, It was said. Though every Innkeeper may detain an Horse until he is paid
for his Meat, yet he cannot sell him; for that was good only by the Custom of
London.

Anonymus.
A Custom was alleged in the City of Norwich, That in regard they maintained a
Common Key, for the Unlading of such Goods as were brought up the River in
Vessels to the said City, that every Vessel passing through the same River, by
the said Key, should pay a certain Sum.

It was held a void Custom as to those Vessels which did not unlade at the said
Key, nor any other place in the City; there being no benefit redounding to them
from the Maintenance of the Key, they only passing by, and were bound for
another place, and therefore could have no Imposition upon them: But if they
had Received their Freight at the said Key, it might extend to them.

And Coleman said, The last Session of Parliament there was Complaint made
against the Governor of Gravesend, who would have prescribed to have Two
shillings and Six pence of every Boat that passed by the Fort there: And it was
held to be Unreasonable.

Anonymus.
TRover and Conversion for a pair of Curtains and Vallence was held
Insufficient, for the uncertainty of what was meant by a Pair in this case.

Bernard versus Bernard.
ERror to Reverse a Judgment in the Court of Hull, upon an Assumpsit, where the
Plaintiff declared upon two Promises; the first was upon an Indebitatus infra
Jurisdictionem Curiae, for Money lent.

The Error assigned was, That the Loan did not appear to be within the
Jurisdiction; but upon view of the Record it was adtunc and ibidem.

The other Promise was, That there being Communication between the Plaintiff
and Defendant concerning a House, which was said to be at Hull-Bridge, which
the Plaintiff sold him, the Money being unpaid, and the Defendant unable; in
Consideration that the Plaintiff would release to him the said Debt, he
Promised to deliver him up the Possession of the House by a certain Day. Then
he Avers, That though he Released him, yet the Defendant had not delivered him up
the Possession, licet saepius requisitus.

It was assigned for Error, That the House was not expressed to be within the
Jurisdiction; for the performance of the Promise must be as well within the
Jurisdiction; as the Promise it self: But it is not material, though there be
other foreign Circumstances in the Case; as Assumpsit upon a Promise to
Re-deliver an Horse at Hull, which the Plaintiff lent the Defendant at Hull, to
Ride to Beverly: This that Court had Conusans of, though Beverly was out of the
Jurisdiction. And though the House were alleged to be at Hull-bridge, that shall
be intended a Vill by it self, and no part of Hull: And of that Opinion was
Twisden; but Keeling otherwise.

Another Error was assigned, That there was no Request laid, which ought to
have been, being a Collateral thing, (viz) To deliver up Possession of an House.

Sed non allocatur: For being to be done at a time certain, there was no need
of Request; but if no time had been set, he would have had time during his
Life, unless hastened by Request.

Another Error assigned was, That the Style of Court was, Placita coram Majore,
etc. virture Literarum Patentium, H. 6. yet the issuing out Process, and filing
Bail, was Entered secund' consuetud' Cur': And for this 1 Cro. 143. Long and
Nethercote's Case was cited, where the same Matter was held to be Error; for
the Court being Erected within time of Memory, could have no Custom to warrant
their proceedings. Sed non allocatur: For it is according to Law, and the just
Course of their Court.

But Twisden said, If it had been secund' consuerud' Cur' de temps d'ont
memory ne court, it had been Is It.

Girling versus Alders.
IN a Prohibition to the Court of the Honor of Eye, the Case was, One
Contracted with another for diverse parcels of Malt, the Money to be paid for
each parcel being under Forty Shillings, and he levied diverse Plaints thereupon
in the said Court. Wherefore the Court here granted a Prohibition; because though
they be several Contracts, yet forasmuch as the Plaintiff might have joined
them all in one Action, he ought so to have done, and Sued here, and not put
the Defendant to an unnecessary Vexation, no more than he can split an entire
Debt into diverse, to give the Inferious Court Jurisdiction in fraudem Legis.

Heskett versus Lee.
PAsch. 21 Car. 2. Rot. 408. Error to Reverse a Common Recovery had in the
County Palatine of Lancaster, against an Infant.

The first Error was assigned in a Variance between the Writ and the Count; the
Writ was of Lands in Bikerstaffe, and the Count was Bickerstaffe, (5 Rep. 46.
Isfeild for Iffeild; but there the Court suffered it to be amended, being the
default of the Clerk:) Sed non allocatur, quia idem sonant.

Another Error was assigned in the Entry of the Admission of the Guardian.
Which was thus: Concess' est per Cur' quod Johannes Molineaux Armig', sequarur
pro Thoma Heskett Armig', ut Guardian' praedict' Thomae in plito terrae versus
Lee: Whereas it was said it should have been, ad comparendum and defendendum,
and this is ad sequendum, which is a Form proper only for the Demandant, and so
is the 2d Cor. 641. And the Reason why Infants are bound by Recoveries when
Guardians are assigned them, is, Because if they suffer any Wrong, they have an
Action against the Guardian, in whose default it was: Whereas if the Infant
should bring an Action in this Case and declare against Molineux, That he was
admitted as Guardian, to defend for him; if Issue were taken upon it by this
Record, the Trial would be against him.

Again, It is sequatur pro Thoma ut Guardians, and ut is but similitudinary.

Another Error was assigned in the Entry of the Appearance, which was,
praedict' Thomas Heskett per praed' Johannem Molineux qui specialiter admissus
est per Cur' ad sequend' pro praedict' Though venit in propria persona and
defendit jus suum: Where it was said, It must be taken that the Tenant appeared
in Person, and not the Guardian, and a Recovery suffered by an Infant where he
appears by Attorney, or in proper Person, is Erroneous, Rolls 731. But
notwithstanding these Errors the Court affirmed the Recovery.

For the Admission of the Guardian ad sequend' is proper enough; for it
signifies no more than to follow the Cause: And in many Cases the Tenant or
Defendant does Prosecute, as in Voucher, praying Tales, carrying down Trials by
Proviso, etc. and in Replevin the Avowant is Actor, and in Suffering of a
Recovery the Tenant is the main Agent, being to his use in no other be
declared. And it was an Error assigned in the Lord Newport and Mildmay's Case,
as appears by the Record; yet it seems it was taken to be so plain, as not
fit to be insisted on: Wherefore there is nothing of it in the Report of the
Case 1 Cro. 224. yet there was all endeavor imaginable used to Reverse that
Recovery; and diverse other Presidents there are of the same manner of Entry:
And if it can appear to the Court, that there was a Guardian admitted, the Form
of the Entry shall not be so severely Examined, as in the 4 Rep. 53. where
there was no Entry of any Admission of the Guardian by the Court at all; yet it
appearing quod venit per Guardianum, the Court would not Reverse the Judgment
for Error. And for the Book of the 2 Cro. 641. there were other Reasons which
Reversed the Judgment, and the Admission (ad prosequendum) was not mentioned,
until the Court upon the other Matters had Resolved the Reversal: And the Books
there cited do not at all prove it to be Error. And ad sequend' ur Guardianum
is not at all amiss; for Ut many times notes an Identity; Seisitus ut de feodo,
makes Conusans ut Ballivus, etc. And for the Entry of the Appearance, it may be
taken, that the Guardian came in proper Person, and so it ought to be: But if
propria persona refers to the Infant, he must have Reversed the Recovery during
his Nonage. And so Twisden says, it has been resolved in this Court lately.
Vid. Roll's 1st Part 171, and 2d Part. 573.

Anonymus.
SCroggs, the King's Sergeant, moved to have at Trial at Bar, in an Indictment
of Perjury, and for some further Time, urging that it was the King's Case.

The Chief Justice said, The King was no otherwise concerned in it, than in
maintenance of the Common Justice of the Realm: It was usually the Subjects
Interest, and His Prosecution, and therefore must not deviate from the Course
in Civil Causes, and not to be resembled with Causes wherein the King is
concerned in point of Interest.

Anonymus.
A Prohibition was prayed to stay a Suit for Tithes of Wood. The Plaintiff
suggested, That he had a House in the Parish, and that the Wood was cut for
Fuel burnt in his House.

But the Court said that this would not serve, unless it were expressed* that
the House was for maintenance of Husbandry; by reason of which the Parson had
Uberiores Decimas.

Barrett versus Milward. and al.
A Scire facias was awarded against the Defendants upon a Recognizance, which
they entered into as Bail for a Plaintiff in a Writ of Error, that he should
prosecute it with effect, or pay the Money if the Judgment were affirmed.

They plead, That he did prosecute it with effect, and that the Judgment was
not yet affirmed.

The Plaintiff Replied, Protestando, that they did not Prosecute with effect,
Pro placito, that the Judgment was affirmed by the Justices of the Common
Bench, and Barons of the Coif, Et hoc paratus est verificare per Recordum. To
which the Defendants Demurred generally.

Because it was not alleged, That there were Six Justices and Barons present
when the Judgment was affirmed: For 27 Eliz. c. 8. which gives them Authority,
requires, that there should be Six at the least.

Sed non allocatur: For the Defendant should then have pleaded Null tiel
Record'; for if there were not Six, their Proceedings were coram non Judice.

Nota, If a Certiorari be not Returned, so that an Alias be awarded, the Return
must be as upon the first Writ, and the other must be Returned quod ante
adventum istius brevis, the Matter was certified.

Gybbons versus North.
IN an Assumpsit the Plaintiff Declared, That whereas at the Defendants Request
he was bound with him in a Bond of 200 l he in Consideratione inde promised to
save him harmless, and obliged himself, his Heirs and Executors in 200 l to the
performance of it; and the Money not being paid, the Defendant did not save him
harmless: But, per debitum legis processum, he was forced to pay the Money.

The Defendant Demurred, because he did not allege, That he did not pay him
200 l For obliging of himself in the penalty of 200 l to save him harmless, He
has election either to save him harmless, or pay 200 l

But the Court gave Judgment for the Plaintiff; for there is no Election in
this case, being no more than an ordinary Promise to Save harmless: And this
Action is brought upon the Plaintiffs Dampnification, which is a Breach, and he
does not demand the 200 l Also a Verbal Contract cannot create a Penalty to
oblige the Heir.

Jordan versus Forett.
ERror to Reverse a Judgment given against an Executor in Debt in the Common
Pleas, where the Executor pleaded diverse Judgments formerly obtained against
him; and the last he pleads thus: That one Eliz. H. in eadem Curia
implacitasset, etc. and Recovered in Trinity Term, but expresses not in what
Year; and there, upon a general Demurrer, Judgment was given for the Plaintiff,
and it was assigned for Error.

That this Incertainty in respect of Time, was good at least upon a general
Demurrer.

But the Court affirmed the Judgment: For if such Pleading should be allowed,
it would be very inconvenient to the Plaintiff, and very difficult to find out
the Record, and then how should he plead that it was kept on foot by Fraud, or
such like? But if it had been ascertained when the Plea commenced, though no time
alleged when the Judgment was obtained, yet that would have been good; for the
Continuances would have directed to the finding of it.

Twisden said, That the Course in this Court was a in Scire facias upon a
Judgment, to say quod cum recuperasset, without alleging any Time: But in the
Common Pleas they set forth the Term.

Putt versus Vincent.
IN Debt for 3900 l the Plaintiff declared upon Articles of Agreement, wherein
Putt Covenanted to Convey certain Lands to one Nosworthy; and there are also
certain Covenants from Nosworthy to the Plaintiff, and from the Defendant
Vincent; who after Imparlance pleads, that Nosworthy sealed the Deed, and is
still alive.

To which the Plaintiff Demurred.

And it was alleged by Jones, That this being after Imparlance, could not be
pleaded, it being only in Abatement, and that he Commences his Plea Actio non,
as if it were a Plea in Bar.

And the Court inclined that it was insufficient for both Causes: But then it
was said, It appears by the Deed to which Nosworthy was a party, that the
Plaintiff could not sue the Defendant alone, and so of his own showing he could
not have Judgment. But it was answered, That it did not appear, that Nosworthy
ever Sealed the Deed. Et Adjournatur, Postra.

Gifford versus Perkins.
IN Debt upon a Bond entered into Eliz. Perkins, who was the Plaintiffs Wife,
and he as her Administrator brings this Action. The Defendant pleads, That he
delivered the Bond to one Eliz. Perkins his Sister, quae obiit sola and
innupta, absque hoe that he delivered it to Elizabeth Perkins the Plaintiffs
Wife; And to that the Plaintiff Demurres Specially. For if it be taken that
there are two of the name, the Defendant should have pleaded non est factum;
for it amounts to no more. Or at least he ought to have induced his Plea, that
there were two Elizabeth Perkins. But this Traverse is designed to bring the
Marriage in question, which is not to be tried now. Wherefore the Court gave
Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Twisden said, If the Issue be, Whether the Wife of such a Man or no? This is
to be tried per Pais: For if she be a Wife de facto, it serves upon the Issue:
But Loyalty of Matrimony is to be tried by the Certificate of the Bishop only,
2 Cro. 102.

Dightons Case.
A Mandamus was prayed to the Corporation of Stratford super Avon, to restore
Dighton the Town Clerk.

They returned their Letters Patents of Incorporation, whereby they had
Authority to Grant the Office of Town Clerk Durante been placito; and that he
was amoved from his Office by the Mayor and Burgesses.

It was said, that here appeared no Cause of amoval upon the Return, which was
manifestly needless, having Authority to turn them out at their Pleasure. But
Twisden said, It has been held, that where any such like Power is to choose one
into a Judicial Office, as an Alderman, whose place concerns Judicature; that
they cannot amove him without Cause: But this was in a Misterial Office.

It was further moved, That it did not appear, that they had discharged him by
any matter in Writing under Seal; and it could not be by Parol. Sed non
allocatur; for it is returned to be done by the Mayor and Burgesses; and a
Corporation cannot do any thing by Parol. Post.

An Executor obtained Judgment in Debt in this Court, and was afterward upon
an Information here convicted of Forging the Will; It was also made void by
Sentence in the Ecclesiastical Court. Whereupon the Court was moved to vacate
the Judgment, which they ordered accordingly, and the Cause of Vacuteing
thereof to be entered upon the Record. Vide Ante in Paris's Case.

King versus Atkins.
IN Debt upon a Bond, the Condition recited, That whereas the Plaintiff was
Bound with the Defendant being an Excise-Man, that he should render a true
Account in the Exchequer; that the Defendant should save him harmless at all
times, etc. The Defendant pleaded non fuit damnificatus. The Plaintiff replied,
That a Scire facias issued out against him, etc. To which the Defendant
demurred, because he did not allege that he gave notice.

This being spoken to diverse times, the Court thought notice not requisite in
this Case, no more than upon a Promise to pay so much at the others Marriage,
or return into England. vid. Hob. 112, 113. 1 Bulst. 12 and 13. Where it is
held upon a Promise notice is not necessary, otherwise upon a Bond, because of
the penalty. Ante

Chester versus Wilson.
TRin. 21 Car. 2. Rot. 498. The Case was two Ioyn-tenants, the one Grants
Bargains and Sells all his Estate and Interest to the other. It was held
clearly by all the Court, That this amounted to a Release; but it must be
pleaded quod relaxavit; for one Ioyn-tenant cannot grant to another.

Wilson versus Armorer.
IN Debt against the Heir, upon the Bond of his Ancestor, who pleaded riens per
descent; the Jury find a Special Verdict to this effect,

That the Father was seized of a Manor in Fee, and made a Feoffment of it,
excepting two Closes, for the life of the Feoffor only, and refered it to the
Judgment of the Court, whether these Closes descended to the Defendant or not.
So that the Question was, Whether the Closes were well excepted, or passed by
the Feoffment.

And it was argued by Levins for the Plaintiff, That by these words, the two
Closes were Totally excepted, and that the Law should reject the latter words;
because they cannot take effect according to the Parties intention, to reserve
to the Feoffor a particular Estate. If one surrendered a Copyhold to the use of
J. S. and his Heirs, which Estate to begin after his death, adjudged in 2 Rolls
261. a present Fee simple passed, 3 Cro. 344. A Man said to his Son being upon
his Land, Stand forth, Eustace my Son reserving and Estate for mine and my
Wifes Life, I do give you this Land, to you and your Heirs. Resolved there that
this is a good Feofment, Moor 950. Popham 49. A Man possessed of a Term in an
House in the right of his Wife, granted it, excepting the Cellar, pro usu suo
proprio, and held that by these words it was altogether excepted out of the
grant, 1 Anderson 129.

Sergeant Turner e contra, For that it is but one Sentence, and cited 38 H. 6.
38. An Addowson was granted, saving the Presentation to the Grantor during his
life, and held void, and Pl. Com. 156. where it is said, if a Termour granted
his Term after his Death, it is void. But if in two Sentences, as to grant his
Term, Habendum after his Death, there the Habendum is only void. Er Adjurnatur.
Postea.

Love versus Wyndham.
AN Action upon the Case, upon an Issue directed out of Chancery; upon a
Special Verdict, the Case was, George Searl being seized of the Manor of N.
Demised the same to Nich. Love for 99 years, if 3 Lives should so long live. N.
Love devised it to Dulcibell his Wife, the remainder to Nich. his Son for life,
and if he the said N. the Son should dye without Issue, then to Barnaby Love,
the Plaintiff. The Executor assented, and whether the Devise to Barnaby were
good, was the Question. Jones for the Plaintiff, this is a good possibility. I
shall make two points.

First, If a Termor Devise first to one and then to another, whether he may
Devise it over.

Secondly, Whether the Limitation here after the Death without Issue, be a good
Limitation over.

First, He may make a third Limitation, which is a Possibility upon a
Possibility; at least he may make 2 or 3 such Limitations over. I cannot
certainly say where it will end. It cannot be denied, but that a Termour may
Devise first to one for life, and after to another, 8 Co. 95. But I say he may
go further, and that will appear by Reason and Authority.

First, By Reason. The Reason given, why the Executory Devise in the first case
is good, is, because it is in Construction of Law, as much as if he had Devised
it to the last first, (if the first Man should dye within the Term) and then
had Devised, that the first should hold during life; and without such a
transposition it cannot be good. Now this being the way of Operation, there is
no reason why he may not Devise it to one, after the death of two, as well as
after the death of one. This would be so in Grants, were it not that a
certainty is required in them, 1 Cro. 155. which is not required in Devises.

Termino Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno 22 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Freeman versus Barnes.
EError to Reverse a Judgment in an Ejectione firmae in the Common Pleas; the
Case upon a Special Verdict was thus.

The Marquess of Winchester being seized in Fee of the Lands in Question the 8
of July, 9 Jac. Lets them to Sir An. Maynee for 100 years, in Trust for the
Marquess and his Heirs, and to wait upon the Inheritance. The Lessee enters,
afterward the Marquess enters, and Lets it to the Lord Darcy for 7 years, and
then Lets to the Spanish Ambassador for 7 years, which Leases being expired,
Sir A.M. Demises to Freeman for a Term yet unexpired (this Demise is not found
to be upon the Land.) Afterward the Lord Marquess Demises to Germin for 54
years, upon Consideration of Money, and Reserves, a Rent, and Covenants, to
Levy a Fine for the assurance of the Term, which was afterward done with
Proclamation. Germin enters, and five years passed without any Claim made;
which Lease by mean Assignment came to Wicherly, the Lessor of the Defendant,
who was Plaintiff in the Common Pleas, and there had Judgment.

The only Question upon this Special Verdict was, Whether the Fine and Non
Claim, should bar the interest of Sir A. M. the Lessee in Trust.

This Case having been argued three several times at the Bar; The Court did
this Term deliver their Opinons, and did all agree, that the Judgment ought to
be affirmed.

It was considered quid operatur, by the entry of the Marquess, and they all,
except Moreton, held, that Prima facie, he was Tenant at Will, as Littleton
Sect. 463. is, where the Feoffor enters upon the Feoffee to his use; but that
the Entry of Germin his Lessee did ouft Freeman the Assignee of Sir A.M. which
Assignment, though not found to be upon the Land, 2 Cro. 660.
was good, as the Chief Justice held, because the two former Leases made by the
Marquess were expired, so he became Tenant at Will again; but them he making of
another Lease, and the Lessee entering, this must work an ouster, and so the
Fine would bar the Right: For they agreed, that a Fine regularly shall not work
upon an Interest which is not divested; though in some Cases it does, as upon
the Interest of a Term, according to Safins Case, 5 Co. which yet cannot be
divested; but though the first Entry make but a Tenancy at Will, yet taking
upon him to make Leases, that is enough to declare his intent to dispossess his
Lessee in Trust. Besides he reserves a Rent, and Covenants for quiet Enjoyment,
and to make further assurance, which could not stand with the Interest of the
Lessee in Trust: And for the Cases that were objected as Blunden and Baughs, 1
Cro. 220. Where it is adjudged, That the Entry of the Lessee for years of
Tenant at Will, should be no disseisin, nolens volens, to him that had the
Freehold, for there was no intention of the Parties to make it so; and here the
Law shall rather give the Election to him which had the Inheritance to make it
a devesting, than the Lessee; or rather, as the Chief Justice said, the Law
construes such Acts to amount to a divesting, or not divesting, as is most
agreeable to the intention of the Parties; and the right of the thing which
distinguishes it also from the Case of Powsley and Blackman cited in Blunden
and Baughs Case; where the Mortgageor held at the Will of the Motrgagee^, and
let for years, the Lessee entered, and held notwithstanding, that the Mortgagee
might Divest. So Sir Tho. Fishes Case, in Latches Rep. Where Tenant for years
Lets at Will, and the Lessee makes a Lease for years, and then the remainder is
granted over; This Grant is held to be good; which, whether by the remainder
there be understood, the interest of the Lessee, or the Fee-simple; yet it is
no more than my Lord Nottinghams Case, and not like the Case in Question, For
there the Lessee held the interest in his own Right, and here but in Trust; and
for the Case in Noyes Reports 23. Twisden said, he wholly rejected, that
Authority; for it was but an Abridgment of Cases by Sergeant Size, who when he
was a Student borrowed Noyes Reports, and abridged them for his own use.

The Case was this; Tenant in Fee makes a Lease for years, then Levies a Fine
before Entry of the Lessee: It is held there, though five years pass the Lessee
is not barred, which is directly against the Resolution of Saffins Case; and
for Authority in this Case, they relied upon the Case of Isham and Morris, in 1
Cro. 781. Where upon Evidence it was resolved by the Justices, That if the
cesty quo Trust of a Lease for years, Purchases the Inheritance, and Occupies
the Land, and Levies a Fine, that this after five years shall bar the Term,
which is not so strong as this Case; because there were no Leases made, and
Entry thereupon; and the Trust must pass inclusively by the Fine, as is
resolved in diverse Books; especially in this Case, where it is to wait upon the
Inheritance, which though it arises but out of a Term, yet it shall follow the
Land, and go to the Heir.

And for the inconveniences which were objected, That if any Man purchased Land
by Fine, that he could not keep on Foot Mortgages and Leases, which it is often
convenient to do. The Chief Justice declared his Opinion, That in that Case the
Fine should not bar, there not being any intention of the Parties to that
purpose.

And as to the other, that where the Mortgageor continuing in Possession,
Levies a Fine, this should bar the Mortgagee; he denied that also, and grounded
himself upon Fermours Case, in 3 Cro. And Twisden agreed.

Dighton's Case.
HE brought a Mandamus to be restored to his place of Town Clerk of Stratford
super Avon. The Corporation returned Letters Patents, whereby they were
empowered to choose one into the Office of Town Clerk, Durante been placito, and
that they removed him from his Office.

Jones prayed that he might be restored notwithstanding, because no Cause of
his removal was returned, nor that they had ever Summoned him, whereas if they
had, he might peradventure have showed such Reasons as would have moved them to
have continued him; and he cited Warrens Case, 2 Cro. 540. who was restored to
his Aldermanship, where the Return was as here.

But the Court held, that they could not in this Case, (although) they
confessed they knew the Merits of the Person) help him. And the Chief Justice
said, The Case of the Alderman differed, for he is a part of the Corporation,
which is a continuing Body, and no Member thereof can be displaced at the will
of the rest; but it is otherwise in Case of such an Office as this; the Cases
cited agree, if it had been a Common Council Man, as was returned at first.

And here they said it were fit a Scire facias went out of Chancery, to Repeal
these Letters Patents as unreasonable. If they had been to choose a Town Clerk
generally, it had been for his life; or if to choose one, provided they might
turn him out at their Will and Pleasure; yet they could not have done so
without Cause, as Twisden said: But here the Authority is absolute, to choose
him Durante been placito, which it was said was not so much to be admired at,
for the Offices of Judicature in the Courts at Westminster are so determinable.

Foot versus Berkley.
Pas. 19 Car. 2. Rot. 1618. In a Writ of Error to Reverse a Judgment, given in
an Ejectione firmae in C. Banco. The Case upon a Special Verdict was this, The
Prior of Bodmin was seized in Fee, and 29 H. 8. demised to John Monday and
others for 96 years, at the Rent of 60 l per annum.

The Possessions of the Priory afterward came to the Crown, and descended to
Queen Eliz. Who in the 42 year of her Reign granted to John Monday for 30
years, Habendum after the end of the former Term, under the same yearly Rent.
The Inheritance was afterward conveyed to diverse in Trust for the late Queen
Mother; who in 14 Car. 1. demised to Francis Godolphin in this manner, reciting
that Queen Eliz. in the 32 year of her Reign, (whereas it was the 42) demised
to J.M. (and did not recite for what Term) to Commence after the Expiration of
the Term for 96 years, granted by the Priour, reserving 60 l Rent, did Demise
to the said Francis for 21 years, to Commence after the end of the Term
granted, by the said recited Letters Patents of Queen Eliz. They find no Lease
made in the 32 year of the Queen, etc. Now whether Godolphins Lease should
begin from the making, (which if it should, it is for some year expired,) or to
expect while the Lease made in 42 Eliz. should determine, was the sole Question.

And by the Opinion of the Court of Common Pleas, ( Tyrrel only to the
contrary,) It was adjudged, That the Lease should Commence presently upon the
making: And a Writ of Error being brought, after diverse Arguments at Bar, it
was this Term argued by the Court, And resolved, that the Judgment should be
affirmed.

They held that every Lease for years must have a certain beginning and a
certain end, either expressed, or referred to something which they make it so:
And here it is referred to a Lease, whereas there is not any such Lease,
therefore it is to begin presently; as if it had been to Commence from an
impossible date; Co. Litt. 46. B. A Lease made from the 30 of February shall
Commence presently; and it is the same thing, when to begin from the end of a
Lease misrecited, for it is no more than to refer it to nothing, Br. Leases 62.
1 Cro. 220. Miller and John's Case, Dier 116. 2 Roll 55. 4 Rep. 53. Palmers
Case, Bendlowes Rep. 35. 1 Anderson 3. Leonard Mounts Case. And whereas it was
objected in this Case, That the Date is not material, and that there was enough
expressed, to ascertain what Lease the Parties intended; and the Case in Hob.
129. was cited, Where one made a Lease, Habendum a festo purificationis, and
then reciting by his Deed, that he had made a Lease to Commence a festo
Annuntiationis, granted the said Reversion; The Court held this there a good
Grant.

It was answered, That the Lease here was tied up by such precise words, to
begin upon the Determination of the Lease granted by the said recited Letters
Patents, that this cannot be referred to a Lease which varies in the Date,
though agreeing in other Circumstances; (yet the certainty of the Term is not
recited neither,) And though a Lease is good without a Date; yet when a Lease
is recited to be of one Date, a Lease which bears another Date cannot be said
to be the said recited Lease. And the Case in Hobart is very different from
this Case; for in the Grant of the Reversion, the misrecital of the particular
Estate is not material in the case of a common person, so long as he has a
Reversion in him: But here on Term is recited to give a certainty of
Commencement to another; and if here be none such, it must begin presently; so
that however, the Grant is good also here, either to pass the Reversion with
Attornment, or being by Indenture to take effect, upon the forfeiture, etc. of
the former Term, Pl. Com. 433.

Twisden said, Walter Chief Baron reported, this Case to be adjudged, where one
made a Lease to begin from the Nativity of our Lord last past, It was resolved
it should begin presently, and not from Christmas, for that was the feast of
the Nativity; and to take it from the Nativity, the time would have been
effluxed many times over, and that in the Kings Case, such a Lease would be
void. But here, if the Case were thus, that A. had made a Lease to B. for 30
years, to Commence from the 1st of March, and then A. reciting the former Lease
to be made the 1st of May for 30 years, had made another Lease, to Commence
from the end of B's. Lease; the Lease should have Commenced after the former
ended. But it cannot be so in the Case in Question, Because tied up to the said
recited Deed.

Another Objection was, Because this being by Indenture, the Parties should be
estopped to say, that there was no such Lease; and this was much insisted on by
Sergeant Maynard, in his Argument for the Plaintiff.

To which it was answered, That this being by Recital, could work no Estopel.

Again, the Question is not now between the Parties to the Lease; and though
they and their Assignees might be bound in pleading; yet being in a Special
Verdict, the Court shall judge according to the Truth. And so is Isham and
Morrice's Case, 1 Cro. 77. And Rawlins Case, 4 Rep. is between the Parties
themselves. So they all resolved, that Judgment should be affirmed.

The King versus Bates.
ERror to Reverse a Judgment given in an Information at the Assizes in Norwich,
because the Information was Exhibited before Justice Moreton and Justice
Rainsford; and the Trial and Judgment was at the next Assizes before two other
Judges.

And it was Objected by Pemberton. That their Commission of Oyer and Terminer
does not empower them to determine any thing which was not Commenced before
them; and so is Bro. tit. Commission 24. And in the 4th Inst. my Lord Coke
says, that the Statute of Edward the 6th extends only to Justices of
Jail-deliver; sed non allocatur.

For the Court said, the Statute extends to has; and so has been the constant
Practice.

Secondly, There was no good Trial; for there is an Award of a Venire facias,
but no Writ certified. But this was also Overruled; for it is the Course of the
Assizes not to make out any Writ.

Thirdly, Issue is joined by the Clerk of Assize, which the Court said ought to
be; for he is Attorney General there.

Parker versus Welby.
THe Plaintiff brought an Action upon the Case against the Defendant, and
Declared, that he Sued out a Latitat against a third Person, directed to the
Defendant, being Sheriff; who thereupon Arrested him, and after let him go at
large: And then he Returned a Cepi Corpus and paratum habuit, ubi revera, he
had not his Body at the Day.

To this Declaration the Defendant Demurred, supposing that no Action would lie
for this False Return; for the Statute of 23 H. 6. obliges the Sheriff to let
to Bail; and if he has not the Body at the Day, he is to be amerced.

But the Court were of Opinion for the Plaintiff: For it shall be intended that
he let him go without Bail; and if he did not, he ought to have pleaded the
Statute of 23 H. 6. which is a Private Law: And at the Common Law a man could
not be let at large in such case, without a Homine Replegiando.

Or else he might have pleaded Not Guilty, and given the Statute in Evidence:
And so it is Adjudged in Layton and Gardiner's Case, 3 Cro. 460. So Moor
placito 996. 2 Cro. 352. and 3 Cro. 624. Where the Defendant pleaded, That he
let to Bail according to the Statute; and the Plaintiff was barred.

Twisden cited a Case in this Court, Paschae 21 Car. 1. Rot. 616. between
Franklyn and Andrews; where the Plaintiff Declared, as in this Case. And the
Defendant pleaded the Statute, and that he let him at large upon Sureties, and
traversed absque hoc, that he returned his Writ Aliter aut alio modo: To which
the Plaintiff Demurred.

It was Resolved,

First, That the Sheriff could Return nothing but Cepi Corpus: And he was then
amerced, because he offered to make a Special Return.

Secondly, That where the Sheriff let the parties out to the Bail, and he made
such Return; that it was no False Return, and therefore he should not have
traversed Absque hoc, that he Returned Aliter vel alio modo: As in Maintenance,
where the Defendant Iustifies, for that the party could not speak English, and
therefore he went with him to instruct his Counsel: He shall traverse Absque
hoc, that he maintained Aliter; because that he maintained [Would not do,] though
it be justifiable. So in that case the Court ordered it to be Entered upon the
Roll, that Judgment was given for the Plaintiff quia Traversia fuit mala.

So here they Ordered it to be Entered, because the Defendant did not plead the
Statute of 23 H. 6.

Hocking versus Matthews.
AN Action upon the Case was brought for Maliciously Impleading, and causing
him to be Excommunicated in the Ecclesiastical Court; whereby he was taken upon
an Excom' Cap', and Imprisoned, until he got himself absolved.

The Defendant pleaded Not Guilty, and found against him: And it was afterward
moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the Declaration was not good; for no Action
will lie for suing a man in the Spiritual Court, though without cause, no more
than in Suing in the Temporal Courts. For Fitz. N. B. is, That a man shall not
be punished for bringing the Kings Writs. So Hob. Waterer and Freeman's Case.
And it has been lately held, that no Action will lie for an Indictment of
Trespass, though falso; but an Action of the Case will lie for suing in Court
Christian for a Temporal Cause.

But the Court in this Cause gave Judgment for the Plaintiff: For though in an
Action between party and party in the Ecclesiastical Court; where (if the
matter goes for the Defendant) he shall have his Costs, no Action will lie if
the Court has Jurisdiction: Yet where there is a Citation ex Officio, and that
is prosecuted malicously without ground, the Party shall have his Action; for
in such Suit he can have no Costs: And so is Carlion and Mills's Case Adjudged,
1 Cro. 291. And this shall be so intended after the Verdict, or otherwise the
Defendant should have showed it to be otherwise, and Justified. And Rainsford
said, without Cause, shall be understood, without any Libel or Legal
Proceedings against him.

Anonymus.
IN Debt upon an Obligation to perform an Award, which was to pay the Rent
mentioned in such an Indenture: He that pleads performance of this Award, needs
not set forth the Indenture, but refer generally to it: But if it be to be paid
in such manner, and at such times as is expressed in the Indenture, then it
must be set forth at large.

The like of an Award of payment of Money given by a Will.

Wilson versus Armorer.
THe Case was Argued again this Term by Coleman for the Plaintiff, who Argued,
that the Exception takes the two Closes wholly out of the Grant, and that no
modification can be annexed to it, 3 Cro. 657. and Moor Pl. 747. A Lease was
made for certain Lands, excepting a Close, and Covenants were for quiet
Enjoyment of the Premises. The Lessee disturbed the Plaintiffs possession in
the Close excepted, yet he could not bring a Writ of Co-venant; for by the
Exception it is as much as if it had been never mentioned; and in this Case the
Livery being secundum formam Chartae, could not work upon these Closes. The
Case of Hodge and Cross; cited in Hob. 171. was this: A man gave Lands to
another, Habendum to him and his Heirs after the death of the Feoffor, and
Livery secundum formam Chartae: Resolved a void Feoffment, and relied upon the
Case in 1 Anderson 129. as full in the Point, A Lease of an House, excepting a
Chamber pro usu suo proprio and occupatione: It was held, that he might assign.

Weston e contra. This Exception is altogether void; for it cannot be for the
Life of the Feoffor only, Bro. tit. Reservation 13. and it shall not except the
whole Fee against the Intention of the Parties; for then the Ill wording of his
Exception should give him above twice as much as otherwise be should have had;
and it is but one entire Sentence, and taking it altogether it must have an
effect, which the Law does not admit, and is therefore to be wholly rejected:
As where a man grants his Term after his death, the Grant is void. Otherwise
where he grants his Term habendum after his death; for there the last Sentence
is rejected, Hob. 171. The Case of the Exception of the Chamber is not alike;
for excepting it for his own use, are apt words to give him power to dispose of
it at his pleasure.

Keeling, Rainsford and Moreton held the Exception good for the entire Fee.

Twisden, That it was wholly void, because one Sentence. Plus Postea

Sympson versus Quinley.
TRin. 20 Car. 2. Rot. 719. A Custom, that Lands should descend always to the
Heirs Males, (viz) To the Males in the Collateral Line, excluding Females in
the Lineal, was held good. Which it was said was allowed anciently in the
Marches of Scotland, in order to the Defense of the Realm, which was there most
to be looked to; though it is said in Davis's Reports, That the Custom of
Gavelkind, which was pretended in Ireland and Wales, to divide only between
Males, was naught. But the former Custom was adjudged good in this Court, Hill.
18 Car. 2. Rot. 718.

Foot versus Berkly.
BErkly had Judgment in an Ejectment in Communi Banco, and Execution of his
Damages and Costs: Foot brings Error, and the Judgment is affirmed. Whereupon
Berkly prays his Costs for his delay and charges; but could not have them.

For no Costs were in such case at the Common Law, and the Statute of 3 H. 7.
cap. 10. gives them only where Error is brought in delay of Execution; so 19 H.
7. cap. 20. And here, though he had not Execution of the Term, yet he had it of
his Costs.

If one has Judgment in a Formedon in Remainder, and before Execution the
Tenant brings Error, the Judgment is affirmed; yet he shall pay no Costs,
because none were recoverable at first, 1 Cro. Ante.

Weyman versus Smith.
A Prohibition was prayed to the Mayor and Court of Bristol, Suggesting, that a
Plaint was Entered there for 66 l and that the Cause of Action arose in London,
and not in Bristol, and so out of their Jurisdiction.

Note, An Affidavit was also made thereof, and this is upon Westminster. cap. 35. and
so is F.N.B. 45. Unless the party pleading in Bar, or Imparling, admits the
Jurisdiction of the Court, 2 Inst.

Tarlour and Rous versus Parner.
AN Account brought by the Plaintiffs, as Churchwardens, against the Defendant
the former Churchwarden, for a Bell, etc.

The Defendant pleads, That it lacked mending, and that by the Assent of the
Parishioners it was delivered to a Bell Founder, who kept it until he should be
paid. To which the Plaintiff Demurred.

For this Plea is no bar of the Account, but a good Discharge before Auditors.
But it was said on the other side, That the Matter pleaded showed that the
Defendant was never Accountable, therefore it might be in Bar. The contrary
whereof is Adjudged in the same Case in terminis, 1 Rolls 121. between Methold
and Wyn; and so was the Opinion of the Court here.

But then it was alleged, that the Declaration was not good, for there were
two Plaintiffs, and yet it is quod reddat ei compotum, and it is de bonis
Ecclesiae, whereas it should have been, bonis Parochianorum.

For the first, the Court said that it should be amended; for it was the
default of the Clerk.

But the other was doubtful: For the Presidents were affirmed to be both ways;
but they rather inclined, that the Declaration was not good for that cause.

Anonymus.
AN Indictment of Forcible Entry in unum Messuagium vel domum Mansional', (
quaere, if not uncertain) and other Lands and Tenements, tent' ad voluntat'
Dom' secundum consuetudinem Manerii, and does not express what Estate.

For which the Court held, it ought to be quashed; for the Statutes 8 H. 6. and
R. 2. extend only to Freeholds, and the Statute in King James's time, to Leases
for years and Copyholds. And here, though he says, at the Will of the Lord,
according to the Custom of the Manor; yet it is not sufficient, because he
says not, by Copy of Court Roll. And it was Adjudged in 1653, in this Court,
that none of the Statutes extended to Tenants at Will.

Martyn versus Delboe.
IN an Assumpsit the Plaintiff Declared, That he was a Merchant, and the
Defendant being also a Merchant, was Indebted to him in 1300 l And a
Communication being had between them of this Debt, the Defenant promised him in
Consideration thereof, That he should have Share to the Value of his said Debt,
in a Ship of the Defendants, which was then bound for the Barbados; and that
upon the Return of the Ship he would give him a true Account, and pay him his
proportion. And sets forth, That the Ship did go the said Voyage, and returned
to London; and that after the Defendant, with some other Owners, had made an
account of the Merchandise returned in the said Ship, which amounted to 9000 l
and that the Plaintiffs Share thereof came to 1700 l which he had demanded of
the Defendant, and he refused to pay it, etc.

To this the Defendant pleads the Statue of Limitations, and the Plaintiff
Demurred.

Alleging, that this Action was grounded upon Merchants Accounts, which were
excepted out of the Statute. Though if an Action be brought for a Debt, upon an
Account stated between Merchants, the Statute is pleadable, as was Adjudged in
this Court last Hillary Term, between Webber and Perit; yet here there being no
Account ever stated between the Plaintiff and Defendant, it is directly within
the Statute: And of that Opinion were Keeling and Rainsford.

But Twisden inclined otherwise, because the Plaintiff declares upon an Account
stated, and though between Strangers, yet he bringing his Action upon it admits
it. Et Adjornatur.

Nota, Every Parish of Common Right ought to Repair the Highways, and no
Agreement with any person whatever can take off this Charge which the Law lays
upon them.

Crispe and Jackson versus The Mayor and Commonalty of Berwick.
IN Covenant, after Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of
Judgment, that there was a Mis-Trial, the Venire being awarded to an adjoining
County: Which the Court, after Hearing of Arguments in it, Ruled it to be well
enough; but one of the Plaintiffs died before the Court had delivered their
Opinions.

It is prayed notwithstanding, that Judgment might be Entered, there be no
default in the Plaintiffs; but a delay which came by the act of the Court; and
that it was within the Statute of this King, That the death of the Party
between Verdict and Judgment should not abate the Action, and that it was in
the discretion of the Court, whether they would take notice of the Death in
this case; for the Defendant has no Day in Court to plead, there being no
Continuances entered after the Return of the Postea, 1 Leon. 187. Isley's Case
Latches Rep. 92. And the Court were of Opinion, that Judgment ought to be
Entered, and there being no Continuances, it may be as if immediately upon the
Return of the Postea. Ante.

Lion versus Carew.
THe Case was: A Lease was made to two for 99 years; if three Lives should so
long live, and this to commence after the end of a Lease for Life, Reddend' a
certain yearly Rent, and two Work-days in Harvest, post principium inde, and
reddend' inde 3 l nom' Harriotte, post mortem of the Lessees, or either of
them, and reddend' two Capons at Christmas, post principium inde. One of the
Lessees died before the Lease for Life determined, whereupon the Lessor brings
Covenant for the 3 l and sets forth this Matter in the Declaration.

To which the Defendant Demurred, supposing that the 3 l was not to be paid
unless the Death had happened after the Term had commenced. And the Court having
heard it spoken to diverse times by Counsel on both sides, by the Opinion of
Twisden, Rainsford and Moreton, Judgment was given for the Defendant.

For all the other Reservations but this were expressly post principium termini,
and Clauses in Companies are to expound one another, as it is said in the Earl
of Clanrickard's Case in Hobart. It is in the nature of a Rent and Reservation,
which it is not necessary that it should be Annual. And in Randall and Scories
Case, 1 Cro. such a Duty was distrained for, and it shall attend the Reversion,
Rolls 457. And he that has but an interesse termini, is not to pay the Rent
reserved; for there is no Term, nor no Reversion, until it commences.

If A. lets to B. for 10 years, and B. redemises to A. for 6 years, to commence
in futuro; in the mean time this works no suspension of either Rent or
Condition. The Intention of the Parties is to be taken, That it should not be
paid until then. However, Reservations are to be taken most strongly against
the Reserver: As Palmer and Prowses Case, cited in Suffeild's Case, 10 Co. is:
The Reversion of a Lease for years was granted for Life, reserving certain Rent
cum reversio acciderit; a Distress was made for the Rent arrear ever since the
Grant.

Resolved, that it was good for no more than was incurred since it fell into
possession.

Keeling Chief Justice held strongly to the contrary: For he said the words
were so express in this Case, that they have left no place for Construction,
which other Clauses or the Intention of the Parties may direct, when the
Expression is doubtful. He took it for a Sum in gross; for Distrained for, it
could not be being reserved upon the Death of the Lessees, or either of them;
which was also the limitation of their Lease: And that Interpretations were not
to be made against the plain sense of words, He relied upon Edriches Case, 5
Co. where the Judges said, They would not make any Construction against the
express Letter of the Statute; yet there was much Equity in that Case to
incline them to it. And he said, As well as a Fine is paid upon the taking of
such Lease before it begins, why may not something be paid also when their
Interest determines? And in some Countries they call such Payments, A fair
Leave.

Miller versus Ward.
TRespass for breaking of his Close on the 1st of August, and putting in his
Cattle. The Defendant Iustifies for Common, which he prescribes for in this
manner; (viz.) That two years together he used to have Common there, after the
Corn reaped and carried away until it was sown again, and the Third year to
have Common for the whole year; and that that Year the Plaintiff declares for
the Trespass was one of the years the Field was own, and quod post grana messa,
etc. he put in his Cattle, absque hoc that he put them in aliter vel alio modo.

The Plaintiff Demurs, which it was Ruled he might; for the Defendant does not
answer to the Time wherein the Trespass was alleged; and the Traverse will not
help it; for aliter vel alio modo does not refer to the time.

Anonymus.
AN Administrator brings Debt upon an Obligation. The Defendant pleads payment
to himself. Upon which it was found for the Defendant.

Coleman prayed that he might have Costs: As where an Executor brings an Action
sur Trover and Conversion in his own time, and found against him; it was Ruled
in Atkyes Case, 1 Cro. that he should pay Costs; and hereof his own knowledge
he had no cause of Action, the Money being paid to himself.

But the Court Resolved, That there ought to be no Costs in this Case; for the
Action of Trover in his own time might have been brought in his own Name, so it
was needless to name himself Executor or Administrator; but the Action here is
merely in right of the Intestate.

Harvey versus James.
AFter Verdict at the Assizes, the Clerk delivered the Postea to the Attorney,
by whose negligent keeping it came to be eaten with Rats. But the Court
Examining the Clerk of Assize, it appeared that he had Entered the Jurors Names,
Verdict and Tales in his Book, and according to that, the Court suffered the
Verdict to be entered on Record.

Anonymus.
IN an Action of Battery against Baron and Feme the Jury find the Feme only
Guilty and not the Baron.

It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, That this Verdict was against the
Plaintiff; for he ought in this Case to have joined the Baron only for
conformity, and he declaring of a Battery by both, the Baron being acquitted,
he has failed of his Action; and so is Yelverton 106. in Drury and Dennys Case.

But here the Court gave Judgment for the Plaintiff, and said that that in
Yelvetron was a strange Opinion.

Anonymus.
A Certiorari was prayed to remove an Indictment of Manslaughter out of Wales;
which the Court at first doubted, whether they might grant, in regard it could
not be tried in an English Country: But an Indictment might have been found
thereof in an English County, and that might be tried by 26 H. 8. cap. 6. vid.
1 Cro. Soutley and Prices Case, and Chedleys Case.

But it was made appear to the Court, That there was a great cause to suspect
Partiality, if the Trial proceeded in Wales; for the Party was Bailed already,
by the Justices of Peace there, (which Twisden said it was doubtful, whether
they had power to do for Manslaughter.) They awarded a Certiorari, and took
Order, that the Prosecutor should be bound by Recognizance to prefer an
Indictment in the next English Country.

Collect versus Padwell.
IN Debt upon a Bond to perform an Award, which was* That one should make a
Lease to another before the 21 of October, which was 2 or 3 Months after the
Award, and that the other upon the making of the Lease, should pay him 50 l

The Question was, Whether notice in this Case ought to be given, when he would
make the Lease; for otherwise it was said; the other must have 50 l always
about him, or be in danger to break the Award.

And it was resolved by the Court, That no notice was necessary.

Noell versus Nelson.
MIch. 21. Car. 2. Rot. 745. Error to Reverse a Judgment given in the Common
Pleas, where the case was thus. Nelson brings Debt against Noel, as Executor of
Sir Martyn Noel, who pleads plene administravit. The Plaintiff confesses the
Plea, and prays Judgment, de bonis Testatoris quae in futoro ad manus
Defendentis devenirint; and upon a Suggestion of Assets afterward, he had a
Scire facias against Noell, and Judgment thereupon.

Noell brings a Writ of Error, and assigned it in this, that the Plaintiff
confessing the Plea of fully Administered, ought to have been barred.

And it was argued by Wynnington for the Plaintiff, and Sympson for the
Defendant.

Wynnington, Where an Executor pleads falsely or deceitfully, Judgment is to be
given against him; as upon ^he unques Administer come Executor, Judgment shall
be de bonis propriis: But where he Pleads truly, it is the Reason the Plaintiff
should be barred; and the Plaintiff confessing his Plea, It is as strong as if
found by a Jury, or rather more; for Verdicts may be false, and therefore
Attaints are provided; and such express confession as here is, is much stronger
than an implied Confession sur Demurrer. Indeed if upon plene Administravit
Assetts are found for part of the Debt, Judgment shall be for the whole, 8 Rep.
134. Shipley's Case, Because the Plea was false: But if an Executor should be
liable to be Sued, and have Judgment given against him when he had fully
administered, it would put a great inconvenience upon him, as to be put to
charge to defend the Suit, and to be in Misericordia.

And whereas it was objected, That if the Plaintiff should be barred in such
Case, he would yet have no advantage by Commencing his Suit, of having his Debt
paid before other Debts in pari gradu; he answered, this inconvenience is not
to be matched with that, that the Executor should be liable to; besides the Law
will ever favor the Executor; for if an Executor be Sued, and the Plaintiff
Nonsuit, he shall have Costs; but an Executor Plaintiff shall pay no Costs upon
a Nonsuit, 3 Cro. 503. vid. Hob. 83. Lawneys Case. Also a Man may be presumed
to know whether an Executor has Assetts or no, for he may consult the
Inventory.

And for the Cases that might be objected, as that of the Warrantia Chartoe
against an Heir, who Pleads Riens per descent, or that the Plaintiff is not
impleaded, the Plaintiff may pray Judgment presently, F. N. B. 134.

He Answered it is true, the Writ may be brought quia timet, for he may be after
impleaded in an Action wherein he cannot Vouch; yet if he be after impleaded in
a Praecipe he must Vouch, and this is a line real, and the Heir merely in loco
patris; whereas, when an Executor has fully Administered, the Executorship is
as it were determined. And for the Case where Debt is brought against the Heir,
who Pleads riens per descent; the Plaintiff may pray Judgment presently, to
have Execution of Assetts, as shall afterward descend, he said he knew no
particular Authority where it was so done; but if it be so as it is said in
Shipleys Case, yet not to be resembled to this Case; for the Heir is charged as
for his own Debt, and the Action is in the Debet, and Detinet, Com. 443. and if
the Heir Pleads riens per descent, and found against him, the Judgment is
general, not so so of an Executor; so where the Judgment is, sur nihil dicit,
Moor 522. Dier 81. 344. 2 Rolls 67. Tit. Heir, so where he confesses the
Action; but if an Executor after pleading Plene Administravit confess the
Action, the Judgment shall be de bonis Testatoris, Hob. 178. And for the
Opinion in Shipleys Case, 8 Rep. which is according to the Judgment here, he
said it was obiter; but he relied upon Cro. Dorchester and Webbs Case; where
that Opinion is denied, and said there, that all the Presidents are, that the
Plaintiff is in such case to be barred, Rastals Entries, 323, 324.

Sympson contra, The nature of the Plea is to be considered, it both not deny
the Cause of Action, but goes only to take away the present effect of it;
remoto impedimento resurgit Actio vel Executio, 34 H. 6. 23. Prisot says, If
an Executor Pleads ne unques Executor, and found against him, Judgment is to be
de bonis propriis. But otherwise, If he Pleads Plene Administravit, for then be
does not put the Party from his Action for ever. He said the Case of the Action
of Debt against the Heir was the same, for he is bound only by reason of the
Land descended, 1 Rolls 929. If an Executor Pleads Plene Administravit, and the
Plaintiff takes Issue, and found against him, he is to be barred, for he (as
the Book says) has waived his advantage; he cited also the Book of the Office
of Executors, 3 Cro. 887.
(supposed to be written by Doderidge) lib. 7. cap. 15. and relied pricipally
upon Shipleys Case, 8 Co. 134. which is cited and allowed in Hob. 199. And upon
a President in this Court, Trin. 13 Jac. Rot. 1104. between Perryman and
Westwood, where Judgment was just as in this Case, and Mich. after Rot. 206.
Upon Suggestion of Assets, a Scire facias was taken out, and Issue taken and
tried at Guild Hall, before my Lord Coke; where Assetts were found for part,
and Judgment to Recover so much, and the residue if Assetts should come after;
which as to the latter Judgment, was somewhat further than the principal Case.

Keeling, Rainsford and Moreton, Held clearly, that Judgment ought to be
affirmed, chiefly for the great inconvenience it would be to one that had
Commenced an Action, and yet his Debt should have no preference before others
of the same sort; and many times the Testator leaves a great Estate in Bonds
and Specialties, which yet are no Assetts until the Money is paid: Whereas the
Case of the Heir is much stronger, in regard of the improbability of his having
Assetts in futoro.

In 16 H. 7. 10. it is said, if an Executor Pleads Plene Administravit, it is
but a Temporal bar. A Rent is granted in Fee, provided that it shall cease
during the minority of the Heir, the Wife brings Dower, the Heir being under
Age, she shall have Judgment, sed cesset Executio.

Vid. Hutton 128. the case reported without any such Opinion.
Twisden stuck much to the Authority of Dorchester and Webbs Case, but at
length consented, that Judgment should be affirmed.

Note, The Judgment was in Misericordia, and the Court doubted at first,
whether it were not Erroneous for that Cause; but it appeared, that the
Executor did not come in primo die, wherefore notwithstanding they affirmed the
Judgment. Ante.

Termino Sancti Michaelis, Anno 22 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Prydyerd versus Thomas.
A Writ of Error was brought upon two Judgments, given in an inferior Court,
and they returned two Records between the same Parties, but it seems not those
which the Plaintiff intended, and this was complained of to the Court; and it
appeared, that those which the Plaintiff brought his Writ of Error upon, were
not determined, for Writs of Enquiry of Damages were returned, but no Judgments
entered.

Curia, If there be diverse Records between the same Parties, the inferior
Court may remove which they please, they being warranted by the Writ so to do;
and if Judgment be given after the Test, and before the Return of the Writ of
Error, the Record shall be removed; but if Judgment be entered after the Writ is
returnable, the Writ is only to be returned, and that no Judgment is yet given;
and here was an omission in the Plaintiff, that he did not see that Judgment
was entered; for after a Writ of Enquiry of Damages returned, the Court is to
give Judgment at the prayer of either Party, and not without.

Note, If the Record vary from the Writ of Error, yet the inferior Court ought
to remove it.

The King versus Ledgingham.
IN an Inormation against him for the King, the Court took a privy Verdict, and
so it was said was the usual course at the Assizes. But it cannot be so in case
of Felony and Treason, as is said in the 1 Inst. 227. b.

In cases of Life and Member, if the Jury cannot agree before the Judges
depart, they are to be carried in Carts after them, so they may give their
Verdict out of the Country.

Polus versus Henstock.
IN Trespass for impounding of 11 Oxen. The Defendant Pleads, That Sir H.
Vernon was seized of a Close called the Cowes Lesowe in Fee, and Let it to him
for 99 years; and that the Cattle came upon the Close, and so justifies for
Damage Feasant.

The Plaintiff Replies, confessing Sir H. V's. Estate, and the Lease and says,
that Sir H. V. was seized of another Close adjoining, called Browns Close, and
alleges a Custom in Peplow, (in which Town both the Closes are;) that all the
Occupiers of the Cowes Lesowe had maintained a Fence against Bowmers, and that
the Cattle came upon the Land in default of the Fence, etc. and Issue taken
upon the Custom, and found for the Plaintiff.

It was moved in Arrest of Judgment. First, That this was in the nature of a
Prescription, and not of a Custom; for a Custom cannot be laid in a Ville, and
applied to a particular place, or Inhabitant therein, unless in case of a
Coppyholder; where it is necessary, in regard he cannot prescribe 4 Co. 113.

Secondly, If it had been alleged by way of Prescription, it should be laid in
him that had the Inheritance. And if it be objected, that it is hard to drive a
Stranger to discover that; then it ought to be alleged quod omnes Tenentes;
but not as it is here, omnes Occupatores, 1 Cro. Baker and Breremans Case.

Thirdly, By the Unity this Duty of Fencing is extinguished, and shall not
revive though the Closes come after into several Hands. In Dier 295. b. it is
left a Quaere. But in Popham 172, it is clearly held so, where it is said,
things of necessity shall revive, as a Way to Market or Church; but not so of
Easments, 1 Cro. Baker and Breremans Case.

And of this Oppinion were the Court.

Jones versus Powell.
THe Plaintiff declared that he was an Attorney, and the Defendant to
Scandalize him in his Profession said of him, That he could not read a
Declaration; By reason of which many of his Clients left him. And the Opinion
of the Court inclined against the Plaintiff.

For the Allegation of Special Damages will not maintain the Action, unless the
words import some Slander, which these did not, unless brought in by some words
precedent, touching his knowledge in his Profession; for the Declaration might
be so written, that he might not be able to read it, without any Imputation of
Ignorance.

Sard versus Ford.
MIch. 21. Car. 2. In an Action upon the Case the Plaintiff declared, That he
was seized of the Manor of Newton Abbot, and that he, etc. had kept a Market
there every Wednesday, and used to have the profits of Stallage, etc.

That the Defendant had erected a new Market, at a place 7 miles distant from
the Plaintiffs, held every Tuesday, etc.

Jones excepted to this Declaration, for that it could not be to the hindrance
of the Plaintiff's Market which was 7 miles off, and kept upon another day, 22
H. 6. 14. 2 Rolls 140. It appears that an Action was brought against one that
levied a Market not above 5 miles distant, and upon the same day.

Curia contra, The Writ of ad quod damnum does not express the Market to be
erected the same day, and notwithstanding it will hinder recourse to the other
Market.

Anonymus.
A Dean and Chapter made a Lease of Tithes for years; the Lessee assigned over
his Interest, and afterward the Dean and Chapter bring Debt against him for
the Rent: Who Pleads, That the Plaintiffs accepted the Rent, due since the
Assignment from the Assignee, to which the Plaintiffs Demurr.

Jones, This is no Rent, but a mere Sum in gross due upon the Contract,
therefore in the 5 Rep. in Jewels Case it appears, that such a Rent cannot go
to the Successor of a Bishop, for the Successor of a Sole Corporation cannot
Sue upon a Personal Contract to his Predecessor.

If the Reversion be granted over, the Grantee cannot bring Debt, 2 Rolls 447,
451. 1 Inst. 47. a. By the same Reason the Assignee of the Lease is not liable.

Again, The Acceptance is not well pleaded, for it is only Acceptaverunt.
Whereas a Corporation aggregate cannot accept but by Bailiff, and an
Acquittance must be given.

Saunders contra. This is not a mere Sum in gross, but in the nature of a Rent,
as is held in Valentine and Dentons Case, 2 Cro. 111. If it were a sum in
gross, no Action could be brought until all the days of payment were incurred,
1 Inst. as upon a Bond to pay Money at several days.

Also the pleading of Acceptaverunt is good, for it being such a Corporation as
can accept, necessary circumstances are ever implied, as Livery in a Feoffment;
such a Corporation in an Assumpsit shall declare of a Promise made to them,
which yet must be by means of their Bailiff or Attorney.

The Court held this last Matter to be most doubtful. And Twysden and Rainsford
said it might be questioned, whether after acceptance of the Assignee, the
Lessor might not resort to his Lessee for his Rent. It is delivered in Walkers
Case thus, fuit dit, not as a Resolution, 3 Co. Et Adjurnatur.

Catterel versus Marshal.
ERror to Reverse a Judgment in an Assumpsit, brought by Marshal in the
Common Pleas; wherein he declared, that he being sued in the Kings Bench,
retained Catterel for his Attorney; who in Consideration of 30 s given him, and
that he would enter into a Bond with sufficient Penalty to save him harmless,
promised to get Bail filed for him; and Avers, that he did give him Bond with a
great and sufficient Penalty, etc. The Defendant Pleads Non Assumpsit, and
found for the Plaintiff, and he had his Judgment.

Now it was assigned for Error, that he did not express of what Penalty the
Bond was, that it might appear to the Court to be sufficient; as if one avow
for a distress upon a Copyholder for a reasonable Fine, the value of the Land
must be set forth, and the certainty of the Fine, that the Court may judge of
it. Austin and Gervases Case, Hob. 69, 77. In Consideration that he should give
him Bond for 10 l the Defendant promised, etc. and pleads, that he offered him
Bond for the said sum, etc. and upon Issue Non Assumpsit, it was found for the
Plaintiff. But he could not have Judgment, because the sum wherein he offered
to become bound was not expressed, so that it might appear to the Court to be
sufficient.

Jones contra. This differs from the Case in Hob. for there the sum being
certain for which the Bond was to be given, the Court may well judge what
Penalty will secure it. But it is not so in this Case, for it does not appear
to what value the damnification may be; so there is nothing, as in the other
Case, whereunto to Proportion the Penalty of the Bond.

The Court held, that it would not have been good upon a Demurrer; but being
after a Verdict, and the Statute of Jeofails made at Oxford, (which Twisden
styled an omnipotent Act,) they gave Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Lord Birons Case.
THe Lord Biron was Plaintiff in an Action, and upon a Nonsuit five pounds
Costs were taxed against him; and he brought another Action for the same
matter, which was said to be merely for vexation; and that he refused to pay
the Costs; neither could he be compelled being a Peer, and in Parliament time.

Wherefore the Court gave day to show Cause, why this Action should not stay
until he had paid the Costs in the former.

Anonymus.
IF a Writ of Error be brought in the Exchequer Chamber, and that being
discontinued, another is brought in Parliament; this second Writ is a
Supersedeas. But if a Writ of Error be brought in Parliament, and that abates,
and the Plaintiff brings a second; this is no Supersedeas, because it is in the
same Court.

Prior versus Shears.
IN a Writ of Error to Reverse a Judgment given in the Palace Court in an
Assumpsit, where the Plaintiff declared sur indebitatus pro Naulo, and upon Non
Assumpsit, etc. had Judgment.

It was assigned for Error, That it was not ascertained how the Defendant was
indebted; and that Freight was usually contracted for by Charter party, and if
so, the general Indebitatus would not lie for a Debt by Specialty.

Notwithstanding the Judgment was affirmed; for, for ought appears there was
not any Deed in the Case; and it shall not be intended; and it is no more than
the Common Action, pro mercimoniis habitis and venditis.

Note, It was further objected, That this appears to be for Mariners Wages for
Sailing to some Foreign parts, which must needs be out of the Jurisdiction of
the Marshalsea, and though the Argreement were made within it, yet the thing
being to be done elsewhere, they could not hold Plea: As if a Carrier should
agree within the Limits of the Court, to carry Goods from thence to York; no
Action could be brought there upon it; which was agreed.

But the Court said here, It does not appear they were to Sail to any place out
of the Jurisdiction, and they have laid all the Matter to be infra
Jurisdictionem Curiae. And therefore the Judgment was Affirmed.

Hayman versus Trewant.
TRin. 22 Car. 2. Rot. 710. In an Action upon the Case, for that the Defendant
bargained with him such a day and year for the Corn growing upon such Ground,
affirming it to be his own, whereas he knew it to be the Corn of J. S. and
postea adtunc and ibid. fraudulenter vendidit and Warrant', etc.

The Defendant pleads, That the Plaintiff had another such Action depending for
the same Cause, and demands Judgment of the Writ.

The Plaintiff Replies, that that Action was commenced for another Cause, and
not for the same; absque hoc, that it was for the same Cause. To which the
Defendant Demurs specially; because the Plaintiff having denied what the
Defendant affirmed, ought not to have added a Traverse, but to have concluded
to the Country: As the Case of Harris and Phillips, 3 Cro. 755. was Adjudged,
Where in an Audita Querela, to avoid the Execution of a Recognizance the
Plaintiff sets forth, that it was defeazanced upon payment of diverse Sums of
Money at certain days; and that he was at the place appointed, and tendered the
Money, and that the Defendant was not there to receive it. The Defendant
pleaded Protestando, that the Plaintiff was not there to pay it, and that he
was there ready to receive it; absque hoc, that the Plaintiff was ready to pay
it.

Which being specially Demurred to, the Court held the Plea naught, and that
there being an express Affirmative and Negative, there should have been no
Traverse; for so they may traverse one upon another in infinitum.

Notwithstanding the Traverse was here held good, which was allowed for putting
the Matter more singly in Issue: And it appears that Phillips's Case was
Adjudged upon another matter; For that the Plea in Bar was not entered as the
Defendant's Plea, but was entered thus: Pro placito Bush, a Stranger, dicit,
Yelv. 38.

Then it was moved, That (as the Plaintiff has declared) here it appears, that
the Warranty was subsequent to the Bargain: For it is said, that he bargained
for the Corn, knowing it to be the Corn of J.S. postea adtunc and ibidem
vendidit, which is repugnant. Sed non allocatur; for where it is said first,
That he bargained, that shall intended a Communication only, and the
Consummation of it after, when the Warranty was given, which is also said to be
adtunc and ibidem. So alleged well enough.

Foxwith versus Tremaine.
TRin. 21 Car. 2. Rot. 1512. Five Executors bring an Action sur Indebitat'
Assumps. The Defendant pleads in Abatement, That two of them are under the Age
of 17. and that they appeared by Attorney. And to this the Plaintiffs Demur.

They who Argued for the Defendant made two Questions:

1. Whether they ought all to join in the Action? And it was said, they ought
not; for one under Age cannot prove the Will. And in Smyth and Smyth's Case;
Yelv. 130. it is Resolved, they must be all Named, so that their Interest may
be reserved unto them; but are not to be made parties to the Action. And for
this the Case between Hatton and Mascue, which was Adjudged in the Exchequer
Chamber, was cited: Where in a Scire facias it was set forth, That A. being the
Executor of B. made his Will thus:

I Devise all my Personal Estate to my two Daughters and my Wife, whom I make
my Executrix: And that they had Declared in the Ecclesiastical Court, that this
made them all three Executrixes, and that the Will was proved; and that the
Wife brought this Scire facias, to have Execution of a Judgment obtained by A.
the Testator. And the Defendant Demurred, because not brought in all their
Names; and it was Resolved in the King's Bench that the Action was well brought,
and affirmed upon a Writ of Error in the Exchequer Chamber: But if in the Case
at Bar they ought to join, they must appear by Guardian.

It having depended diverse Terms, It was now Resolved by Rainsford and Moreton,
that the Action was well brought; and they relied upon the Case in Yelverton;
and they said, the Case of Hatton and Mascue was no Authority against it, for
there they were named; and where some are of Age, no Administration durante
minori aetate is to be granted.

They held also, that the appearance ought to be by Attorney, because they join
with others; and so in auter droit; and so is 3 Cro. 377. the Countess of
Rutland's Case, and 541. Resolved, that an Infant Administrator shall sue by
Attorney. See 1 Roll. 288: and 2 Cro. 420, and 421. Cotton and Westcote's Case.
The difference is taken where an Infant Executor is Defendant, and where
Plaintiff, and Judgment given for him; in which last Case only the appearance
by Attorney is said to be good.

Twisden contra. An Infant cannot in any wise sue or defend by Attorney.

First, Because he cannot make an Attorney.

Secondly, If it should be allowed, he might be amerced pro falso clamore, and
no way to avoid it but by bringing a Writ of Error.

Thirdly, He might be injured by the Attorney's Plea, and could not remedy
himself, as he may against his Guardian; as if in Debt the Defendant should
plead a Release, and the Attorney confess it. And he cited a Case in this
Court, Mich. 1649. between Colt and Sherwood, Where an Administrator brought an
Action, and it appeared by the Record, that he was above 17; yet it was Ruled,
he ought to sue by Guardian. For though by the Civil Law he was of Age to
undertake the Administration; yet the manner of his Suing was to be determined
by our Law, and that could not be by Attorney until the age of 21.

Another Case be cited between Peyton and Dorce, adjudged in the Court upon a
Writ of Error, out of the Petit Bag; where Peyton sued as Administrator, and
the Entry was Quod queritur, and did not express, whether per Attornat',
Guardianum, or how; and had Judgment; and Error was brought in this Court, and
these Four Points were Resolved:

First, That a Writ of Error did lie out of the Petit Bag into this Court, upon
an Error in Fact.

Secondly, That the Entry being General, it should be taken that the appearance
was in propria persona.

Thirdly, That the Plaintiff being an Infant, though an Administrator, could not
sue or appear, but by Guardian or Prochein amy.

Fourthly, That the Statute of Jeofails did not aid this Case, which expresses
only the Defendant's appearing by Attorney.

As to the other Point, He inclined that the Action brought by them all was
well enough: But he acknowledged that much might be urged against the Case of
Hatton and Mascue; for the naming of them could signify nothing, not being
made parties to the Action. But he was not so much swayed by that Authority,
because he held, that the Cause did not come well into the Exchequer Chamber,
being a Scire facias, upon which he said no Writ of Error lay thither, though
upon a Judgment, no more than upon a Recognizance, and said, They did join
here, as it were, for Conformity. As if a Feme Infant be made Executrix, and
Marries, the Administration durante minori aetate ceases, though she be under 17,
and she and her Husband shall Sue.

The Chief Justice was absent, being Sick; and so the Plaintiff had Judgment by
the Opinion of Rainsford and Moreton.

Ward versus Rich.
WArd brought an Action against Hatton Rich de uxore abducta, and keeping of
her from him, usque such a day, which was sometime after the exhibiting of the
Bill, and concluded contra formam Staturi.

After Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, and the
Declaration was held good notwithstanding the impertinent Conclusion of contra
formam Statuti, there being no Statute in the Case.

Secondly, The Court Resolved, that Judgment should be stayed; for the Jury
shall be intended to give Damages for the whole time mentioned in the
Declaration: As in Trespass, with a Continuando, to a day after the Writ
brought, the Plaintiff shall not have Judgment after Verdict, which gives
Damages by Intendment for the whole time declared for.

And Twisden said, These two Cases were Resolved: A Tradesman brought an Action
in an Inferior Court, for slandering of him in his Trade, by which he lost his
Custom within the Jurisdiction of that Court, and alibi; and it was held
maintainable notwithstanding the alibi.

The other was an Action brought upon the Sale of several things for diverse
Sums of Money quae quidem pecuniarum summae attingunt ad 10 l whereas rightly
computed they came but to 9 l The Jury gave Damages less than 9 l and it was
held good: But if the Verdict had been for 10 l it had been naught.

The King versus Ledgingham.
AN Information was brought against Ledgingham, for that he being a man of an
unquiet Spirit, communis perturbator and oppressor vicinorum and tenentium, had
taken excessive Distresses of diverse of his Tenants.

After Verdict for the King at the Assizes, it was said, That no Judgment could
be given upon this Information, which was said to be defective both in matter
and form.

It has been often Ruled, that Communis oppressor, or such like General words,
without particularizing Offenses, was insufficient in an Indictment or
Information, unless the word Communis Barrectator, which is of known
signification in Law, and comprehends diverse Crimes; and Twisden said, is as
much as Common Knave, 9 Ass. 2. Communis latro, not good: Vid. Roll. 79. Moor
451. neither can an Information be exhibited for taking of excessive
Distresses; for that was not punishable until the Statute of Marlebridge, cap.
4. which says, that he that so Distrains shall be amerced, whereas upon an
Information he must of necessity be fined, 2 Inst 107.

Again, It ought to have been expressed upon what Tenants the Distresses were
taken, with their Names, otherwise it is too uncertain. One was Indicted, for
that he serving upon such a Grand Enquest, did reveal the Secrets of the King
and himself. It was Resolved to be ill, because not expressed what Secrets,
Moor 451. and of this Opinion was the Court in omnibus. Ante.

Pierson versus Ridge.
IN Replevin, the Defendant made Conusans as Bailiff to a Lord of a Manor, who
had a Court Leet by Prescription, and laid a Custom for such a Township to send
one to be sworn Constable there, which not being done, a Fine was set, and this
Distress taken for it. Upon which it was Demurred; because no Custom was
alleged to warrant the Distress: For though of common Right a Distress may be
taken for a Fine in a Court Leet, that is, where it is imposed for such things
as are of common Right incident to its Jurisdiction, as for Contempts, or the
like: Yet where Custom only enables them to set a Fine, it cannot be Distrained
for without Custom also, 11 Co. Godfrey's Case: And to this Opinion did the
Court incline. Sed Adjornatur.

Anonymus.
TWo Actions of Account were removed into this Court by Habeas Corpus, and
Special Bail put in. And it was moved, that the Bail might be discharged, and
Common Bail filed; because in an Account Special Bail is not to be put in. But
it was said, the Plaintiff had declared in one in an Action upon the Case, and
so prayed that the Bail might stand quoad that.

But it was Ruled, That the Bail should be discharged; and if the Plaintiff
would have Special Bail, he must Arrest the Defendant again in an Action upon
the Case.

Doctor Lee's Case.
DOctor Lee having Lands within the Level, was made an Expenditor by the
Commissioners of Sewers; whereupon he prayed his Writ of Privilege in this
Court; and it was granted. For the Register is, Vir militans Deo non implicetur
saecularibus negotiis; and the ancient Law is, Quod Clerici non ponantur in
Officia; F.N.B. Clergymen are not to serve in the Wars.

Jemey versus Norris.
ERror to Reverse a Judgment in an Assumpsit, upon a Quantum meruit for diverse
things sold.

It was assigned for Error, that the Declaration amongst the rest was for unum
par Chirothecarum, and did not express what sort of Gloves they were, which are
of much different prices, according to the different Leather they are made of.
And Playter's Case, 5 Co. was cited, where Trespass for taking of his Fishes,
was held not good, because not ascertainedb of what kind: Sed non allocatur.

Another of the things declared for was una parcella fili, which (as it was
said) was utterly uncertain; and that was held to be naught. Though it was said,
an Action was brought for taking away unum cumulum. Foeni, Anglice a Rick of
Hay, and not alleged how much it contained; yet held good. But in Webb and
Washburn's Case an Action was brought for a pair of Hangings, and it was
Adjudged against the Plaintiff, for the Incertainty.

Jones contra, and cited a Case in this Court 24 Car. 1. Green and Green, in
Trover for six parcels of Lead, and notwithstanding the Incertainty the
Plaintiff had Judgment. So in Trover for a Trunk de diversis Vestimentis, and
did not say what Garments; and yet held good. But admitting it should not be
good in Trover; yet it is well in this Action. It Is the Common course to
declare sur Indebitatus pro mercimoniis, and never express what they are.

And the Court were of Opinion, that the Plaintiff was to have Judgment; for it
is an Action much of the same nature with an Indebitatus.

And Twisden said, Where the Promise is to pay Quantum meruit, he knew not why
the Plaintiff might not declare upon an Indebitatus in a certain Sum, and that
he might prove the value upon the Evidence; and if such a Case came to be tried
before him, he would have a Special Verdict found in it.

The Court said, Such an uncertain Declaration would hardly be good in Trover
or Replevin, and held the Case of the six Parcels to be strange; and for the
Trunk, that an Action lies; for that the things contained in it were alleged
but as matter of aggravation of Damages.

Vid. the Case of Taylour and Wells, ante: Trover de december paribus velorum and
tegularum, Anglice, Ten pair of Curtains and Vallance.

Wilson versus Armorer.
IN Debt against the Heir, and Reins per descent pleaded, the Case upon Special
Verdict was thus: The Ancestor made a Feoffment of a Manor to diverse uses,
excepting two Closes for the Life of the Feoffor only; and whether those two
Closes did descend, was the Point referred to the Judgment of the Court.

And it was Adjudged, That they did descend, either for that the Exception was
good; though the latter part of the Sentence, (viz.) for the Life of the Feoffor
only, was void, and therefore to be rejected; or, if the whole Exception were
void, because one entire Sentence.

Yet they all agreed, that there was no Use limited of those two Closes which
were intended to be excepted; for the Use was limited of the Manor exceptis
praeexceptis, which excluded the two Acres. For although there were not
sufficient words to except them, yet there was enough to declare the intention
of the Feoffor to be so.

Anonymus.
AN Indictment for Erecting of a Cottage for Habitation, contra Statut' 31
Eliz. cap. 7. was quashed, because it was not said that any had inhabited in
it; for it is no Offense before, per Rainsford and Moreton, caeteris absentibus.

Termino Sancti Hillarij, Anno 22 and 23 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Robson's Case.
A Prohibition was prayed to a Suit for Tithes by the Parson, upon a Suggestion
of a Modus paid to the Vicar, and that the Vicaridge had time out of mind been
Endowed.

Coleman moved for a Consultation, because the Endowment of the Vicaridge was
not proved by two Witnesses within six Months, according to the Statute.

But it was denied; for that part of the Suggestion is not to be proved by
Witnesses, but only the payment of the Modus. And it was said, If the
Suggestion consisted of two parts, it was sufficient to produce one Witness to
the one, and another to the other.

Dacon's Case.
DAcon was presented in the Court Leet, for refusing the Office of Constable,
and Fined.

It was moved to quash it, because it expressed the Court to be held infra unum
mensem Sancti Michael' (viz.) 12 November, and so the Day shown above a Month
after Michaelmas. And it is necessary to set down the precise Day, for it may
else be upon a Sunday, and yet within a Month after Michaelmas; and for this
cause the Court held, that it must be quashed.

Error.
AN Outlawry was Reversed, for that the Proclamations were Returned to be ad
comitat' meum tent' apud such a place in Com' praedict', and not said, pro
Comitatu: For anciently one Sheriff had two or three Counties, and might hold
the Court in one County for another.

Calthorpe versus....
IN Debt for Rent the Plaintiff declared, that he let the Defendant such Land,
anno 16 of the King quamdiu ambabus partibus placeret; and that anno 16 the
Defendant entered, and occupied it pro uno anno tunc proxime sequent': and
because the Rent was behind pro praedict' anno finit' 18 he brought the Action.
Upon which it was Demurred.

Because the Rent is demanded for the Year ending 18, and it is not shown that
the Defendant enjoyed the Land longer than anno 17. And in Debt for Rent upon a
Lease at Will, Occupation of the Tenant must be averred.

To which it was Answered,

That it is said, Pro praedicto anno, which refers to the Year mentioned
before, which was next following the Lease, and it might be said finito anno
18, for so it was ended then, or at any time after.

And the Court said, It would be clearly good after a Verdict: But being upon a
Demurrer they would Advise.

Anonymus.
AN Indictment for not performing an Order of the Justices of the Peace,
concerning a Bastard Child.

It was moved to quash it, because it did not conclude contra pacem. But it was
held, that ought not to be, it being but for a Non feasans.

An Indictment of Forcible Entry was quashed, because it alleged the party to
be seized and possessed, and so uncertain which.

Monnington versus William.
IN a Replevin the Defendant avowed for a Rent charge, and set forth, That the
Plaintiff granted a Rent to J. S. in Fee, who granted, bargained and sold it
una cum arreragiis to him, and showed the Indenture to be Enrolled within six
Months, virtute cujus, and the Statute of Uses, he was seized, and for a years
Rent since the Assignment avowed.

The Plaintiff replies, and Traverses the Grant of J. S. prout, and found for
the Avowant, and moved in Arrest of Judgment by Jones,

First, That here is an impossible Issue, which comprehends as well the Grant
of the Arrears (which cannot be) as the Rent.

Secondly, He Intities himself by Bargain and Sale, and the Statute of Uses,
and does not show that it was in Consideration of Money; and otherwise the Rent
cannot pass without Atturnment, 3 Cro. 166.

But the Court gave Judgment for the Avowant.

As to the first, The pleading the Arrears to be granted is altogether void,
and does no harm, in regard the Avowry is expressly for Rent Arrear after the
Grant.

And for the second, The Court held the pleading good after a Verdict; and it
shall be intended, that Evidence was given of Money paid. As a Grant of a
Reversion pleaded, without Attornment; or a grant of a Rent, and not expressed
to be by Deed; yet a Verdict will help those defects, Huttons Rep. 54.

Note, Twisden said, where a man in pleading sets forth his Title by a
Conveyance, in which are the words Give, Grant, Release, Confirm, Bargain,
Sell, etc. he must express to which of them he will use it.

Addams versus Guy.
ERror to Reverse a Judgment given in the Court at Bristol, in Debt against the
Defendant as Executor to J.S. who declared upon a Mutuasset of him so much,
because Debt lies not against an Executor upon a simple Contract.

Sed non allocatur, He agreeing to the Action, and suffering Judgment to pass
against him.

Secondly, That he set forth, that the Testator Mutuasset, which properly
signifies to lend and not to borrow, and it ought to have been Mutuatus esset.

But the Court affirmed the Judgment; and held, that either might be expounded
to borrow.

Anonymus.
AN Administrator brought Trover and Conversion, and declared, That the
Intestate at the time of his Death was possessed of diverse Goods, and that
after his Death, and before Administration committed, they came to the
Defendants hands, who converted them.

Upon Not guilty it was found for the Defendant, and prayed that he might have
Costs; and the Court held that he ought to have them, the Conversion being
since the Death of the Intestate.

Sir Thomas Pettus Case.
IT was moved to quash an Indictment of Manslaughter against him, for that it
is said to be taken coram Coronatoribus Comitatus and Civitatis Norwici, at
Bucthorp in the County of the City, per Juramentum hominum de Civitate Norwici.

Whereas the Jury ought to have come from the County and City of Norwich, for
they shall not be intended to be coexistent, especially in an Indictment.

As if the Caption of an Indictment be at Dale, and the Jury come de Parochia
de Dale, it is good cause to quash it; yet in an Action they should be intended
the same: So it is sufficient to put the County in the Margin of the
Declaration in an Action, but not so in an Indictment, 1 Cro.

Again, By the Statute de Coronatoribus, the Jury ought to come from the four
next Vills.

Of the first Exception the Court doubted.

But to the second Twisden said, it need not be returned upon the Indictment,
that the Jury came from the four next Vills.

But they would not quash the Indictment upon Motion, for they said it was not
their course to do so in Case of Manslaughter; but ruled the Party to Plead to
it, though it was shown he had been Tried at the Assizes upon an Indictment of
Murder, for the same Killing, and found Guilty of Manslaughter.

The King versus Clapham.
A Mandamus was prayed to the Lord President, and Council of the Marches to
admit Clapham to the Exercise of the Office of Deputy Secretary.

And it was returned quod tempore receptionis brevis non fuit constitutus
Deputatus.

It was said, That one which claimed to be Deputy, his Authority being
revocable, could not pray a Mandamus.

But to that it was answered, That the Mandamus was at the Suit of Mr. Win; and
it set forth how he had the Office of Secretary, exercend' per se vel
sufficientem Deputatum suum; and that they had refused this Clapham, whom he
had appointed his Deputy.

And it was resolved, That the Mandamus was well awarded, for he had no other
remedy to have his Deputy admitted. And whereas it was said, being an Officer
belonging to the Court, they are to judge of his sufficiency, and so have power
to refuse him.

It was answered to, and so resolved, That then they ought to have returned,
that he was insufficient.

And it was also resolved by all the Court, That the Return being, that non
fuit tempore receptionis brevis Deputatus constitutus, was naught; for if he
were made his Deputy before, the Return was true, unless he made him his Deputy
at the very instant of the Receipt of the Writ; and Returns must be certain,
because there is nothing can be pleaded to them.

Anonymus.
AN Indictment for not performing an Order of the Justices, for payment of a
Poors Rate.

It was moved to quash it, because it did not conclude, Contra pacem: Sed non
allocatur, because it was not for a Male Fesans, but a Non Fesans.

Horsam versus Turget.
MIch. 22 Car. 2. Rot. 687. Debt upon a Bond.

The Defendant demands Oyer of the Condition, which was to perform an Award;
and sets forth, that there were diverse Accounts, etc. between J. S. Testator of
the Plaintiff, and the Defendant; and they submitted all Controversies to the
Award of such an one, and that he awarded, that the Plaintiff should deliver
certain Goods, of which the Testator died possessed, to the Defendant; and that
the Defendant should pay unto the Plaintiff 320 l And then sets forth the
custom of Foreign Attachments in London; that if a Suit were commenced against
the Executor of any person, any Debt which was due to the Testator tempore
mortis suae might be attached; and then sets forth according to the common
form, how this 320 l was attached, etc. and Avers, that there were no other
Controversies, Differences or Matters between the Plaintiff and Defendant, but
what concerned the Testator of the Plaintiff and him as his Executor only.

The Plaintiff replies, That the Defendant had not paid the 320 l according to
the Award, etc. upon which the Defendant Demurred.

And whether this Money were Attachable as a Debt due to the Testator, tempore
mortis suae was the Question.

It was argued by Winnington, That it was. For it appears by the Averment, that
it was awarded to be paid merely upon the Testators account, and it is but as
it were a reducing the Testators Debt to a certainty; for an Award being no
Record or Specialty will not alter the nature of the Debt; and that clearly it
should be Assets in the Executors Hands; and the Custom of London was to have a
liberal Construction.

Pemberton contra. It does not appear, That there was any Debt due to the
Testator: There might be Covenants, or other Matter between them, which shall
be rather intended than Debt, as strongest against the Plaintiff; if there
were, the nature of the Debt is altered, for an Award may be pleaded in Bar to
an Action brought upon the Original Debt.

Also this must have been sued for in the Debet and Detinet, and not in the
Detinet only; so it is not a reducing the Debt to a certainty; as where an
account is made upon Debts by simple contracts, or where an Executor gives time
for payment of a Bond due to the Testator, this is still Attachable, 1 Rolls
551.

He denied it to be Assets. If it were, the Administrator de bonis non might
sue for it after the Executors death, which clearly he could not do; and the
Executor was chargeable only in proportion to the Debt extinguished, and not
according to the Sum Awarded, or at least it could not be Assets before
recovered; if it were Assets it did not follow it should be Attachable, for if
an Executor Recovers in Trespass, for taking away the Testators Goods, the
Damages shall be Assets; yet they are not Attachable: So Damages recovered upon
Covenant made to the Testator.

He said it would be very inconvenient that this Money should be attached, for
the Executor was liable to a Devastavit upon this matter, and yet should have
no remedy for the Sum Awarded.

Again, It would be Attachable in two respects, both as the Executors Debt,
(for so clearly it is) and as the Testators Debt, and the Bond for performance
would be Attachable for the Executors Debt, and the Sum Awarded for the
Testators. He said all Customs ought to be taken strictly, and this was clearly
out of the words, as being no Debt due to the Testator tempore mortis suae. And
here it is pleaded, That it was Commanded by the Court to the Officer to Attach
the Defendant by a Debt due to the Testator at the time of his Death, so no
Authority to Attach this Debt; and if it were by Law Attachable, the Command
ought to have been Special.

The Court were all of Opinion, That this was not Attachable as the Testators
Debt; for then the Administrator de bonis non might Sue for it. And they held
it to be like the Cases where the Executor takes Bond for a Debt due to his
Testator, or where he sells the Goods, the Money for which they are sold cannot
be Attached; and here the Award is made of this Sum, in Consideration of
conveying to the Defendant the Goods of the Testator, and releasing of his
Debts, which seems to be all one with the other Cases.

And so they gave Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Termino Paschae, Anno 23 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Error.
A Judgment out of an inferior Court was reversed, because being by default
the enquiry of Damages was only by two Jurors, and Custom alleged to Warrant
it.

And it was resolved by the Court, That there cannot be less then twelve,
though the Writ of Enquiry says only per Sacramentum proborum and legalium
hominum, and not duodecim as in a Venire.

Note, There were diverse Recognizances take before the Lord Chief Justice
Keeling; who died before his Hand was set to them.

It was moved by Coleman, that they might be Filed.

But the Court said a Certiorari must go to his Executors to certify them, and
doubted whether they were complete Records.

If a Warrant of Attorney be given after the continuance day, to enter up a
Judgment as of the Term preceding; this may be well enough, if it be dated
within the Term; but it cannot be so, if such a Warrant be given to confess a
Judgment generally, and dated after the Term.

Anonymus.
A Prohibition was prayed by one, who being a Churchwarden, was tendered an Oath
by the Court Christian, to present according to the Bishops Articles, which he
refusing to take, was Excommunicated.

Now, for that some of the Articles were to present Filthy Talkers, Revilers
and Common Sowers of Sedition amongst Neighbors, which were general Terms, and
might be understood to comprehend things out of their Jurisdiction, the Court
conceived a Prohibition ought to go as to them.

But he should have first pleaded there, quod non tenetur respondere as to
those matters, and upon their refusal to have prayed a Prohibition.

Elpicke versus Action.
AN Action of Trover was brought de diversis vestimentis.

And held not to be good, because not expressed what kind of Garments.

But 7 Jac. Emery's Case, where Trover was brought for a Library of Books, and
held to be good without expressing what they were; because to set down the
particular Books, would make the Record too prolix. Vid. 3 Cro. 164. and Pl.
Com. where a man pleaded that he was chosen Knight of the Shire, per majorem
numerum, and held to be good.

Barnard versus Michel.
IN an Action of Debt, the Plaintiff declared upon a Deed comprehending diverse
Covenants, for the performance of which the Defendant obliged himself in the
penalty of 40 l and sets forth that the Defendant had broke the Covenants.

The Defendant pleaded non est factum, and it was found for the Plaintiff.

And it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, That though the Issue was found for
the Plaintiff; yet he having assigned no Breach, no Cause of Action appeared
upon the Record; so he could have no Judgment.

For if the Declaration be insufficient, let the Defendant plead what he will,
yet Judgment shall not be given against him.

Indeed if the Action had been brought upon a Bond Conditioned for the
performance of Covenants, and non est factum had been pleaded; no Breach needed
to have been assigned, for then the Declaration is only upon the Bond, without
mentioning any thing of the Condition.

But here the Breach of the Covenant is, as it were a Condition precedent, to
Entitle him to the Penalty; and here the declaring that he broke the Covenants
without showing which, or how, is altogether insufficient, though the Defendant
who pleads in the Negative, might have pleaded non infregit conventiones. Vid.
Rastals Entries 162. Pl. Com. 5. A President just agreeing to this Case.

But the Opinion of the Court inclined for the Plaintiff here. Sed Adjornatur.
Vide Postea.

Anonymus.
A Mandamus was prayed to the Ecclesiastical Court, to Swear two Churchwardens
elected by the Parish, surmising that so was the Custom in that place; but that
the Bishops Officers had refused to admit them, upon pretense that the Parson
ought to choose one.

And it was granted. Vid. 2 Rolls 106, 107. 3 Cro. 551, 589. such a Writ
granted.

The Case of the City of London and Coats.
Coats who was Imprisioned in Newgate, by the Court of the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen, brought an Habeas Corpus, and the Sheriffs returned, that the Custom
of the City was, That if any Freeman has Forestalled any Fish, coming to any
Market within the City, and complaint made thereof to the Court of Aldermen,
and he appearing there confessing the same, and they ordain that he shall
desist from such Forestalling, and he will not promise to obey; but declares in
Court, That he will not obey their Order, That the Court there had time out of
mind used to Commit such Freeman, until he signified to the said Court, that he
would conform himself.

Then it is Returned, That complaint was made to the said Court, that this
Coats had Forestalled a great number of Lobsters; whereupon they caused him to
appear, which he did, and confessed the same, and they ordained, that he should
desist from such Forestalling; but he said Obstinately and in Contempt of the
Court, That he would not obey their Order; whereupon they committed him to
Newgate, until he should signify to the Court, that he would conform himself,
or otherwise he delivered by due course of Law.

The Return being Filed.

It was moved by the Attorney General, That is was insufficient; for a Custom
to commit a man for Forestalling is void, and that Offense was always Bailable,
and so it appears by the Register; But here the Commitment is to remain in
Prison, without Bail or Mainprise.

Also the Commitment is upon a Complaint without Oath, which ought not to be;
neither ought they to extort a Promise from him, to observe their Order,
admitting it to be Legal, for an Oath cannot be imposed upon a Man to keep the
Law.

Besides, The Custom is absurd, to Commit a Man to Prison until he submits to
the Court; whereas a Man in Prison cannot come into Court to make such
Submission; and then suppose they will keep no Court, must a Man lie in Prison
whilst they do?

Then the Custom as it is laid, reserves the discharge of him only to
themselves; for it is said, or by due course of Law.

This Imprisonment looks in the Face of Magna Charta, which says nullus liber
homo Imprisonetur, etc. in all Offenses Finable, the Imprisonment is only to be
until the Fine is paid; if the Fine be tendered, there is to be no Imprisonment
at all, and so resolved in Parliament, Br. tit. Imprisonment 100.

To this it was answered by Jones on the other side, That the Imprisonment in
this case was not for Forestalling, but for the Contempt to the Court.

It is returned that he confessed the Fact, and yet declared that he would not
conform himself to the Order of the Court; the Proceeding is very mild, not to
punish for an Offense unless committed after an Admonition in Court. It is
implied in the Custom, That he may be delivered by due course of Law, it is
sufficient to express that in the Commitment, and so it is.

Also he cannot be prejudiced by the deferring of Courts, for the Custom is
returned to keep the Court of Aldermen twice a Week.

It is not that he shall come in person and submit to the Court, but that he
shall signify his conformity to the Court, which may be done by Letter or
Message; and it is returned, that he did not by any means submit himself.

Twisden, The Custom does not here come in Question, The Commitment is returned
to be for a Contempt to the Court; It must be allowed they have such power, for
they are a Court of Record. Langham was Committed, for refusing to take the
Oath usually administered to Sheriffs; and resolved to be good, because it
concerned the Government. The City has the Regulation of Trade, and Orders
made by them, that one Man should not use the sign of another, and for
distinguishing Trades, (Viz.) That a Plaisterer should not use the Trade of a
Bricklayer, and such like, have been allowed.

Wherefore the Court remanded the Prisoner, he promising to make submission at
the next Court, and the Sheriff promising he should be discharged thereupon.

Phillips versus Kingston.
HIll. 22 and 23 Car. 2. In an Action of Slander the words were, He has broke
three or four of his Fathers Ribbs, of which he shortly after died, and I will
complain to a Justice of him: He may be hanged for the Murder although it were
done twenty years since.

After Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that he
did this hurt to his Father against his will, as it might be intended; and though
the Defendant said he might be Hanged for it, that is but his Judgment and
Collection thereupon. As Jacob and Mills's Case, 2 Cro. 343. where the words
were, Thou have poisoned Smith, and it shall cost me an hundred pounds but I
will have you hanged for it. And it was Resolved that an Action did not lie,
because it might be unwillingly done, Hob. 6.

Also it is not averred that the Father was dead, and that is necessary; for
otherwise it shall be taken that he is alive, and then it is no Slander; and so
is Yelverton 21 and Hob. 6.

But the Court held, That the Plaintiff must have his Judgment; for taking all
the words together, the Defendant must necessarily intend a murdrous Killing;
and for the not averring that he was dead, Twisden said, the latter Opinions
have all been, that this is not necessary; and the Action lies, unless it
appears upon the Record that the party is alive.

Anonymus.
IN an Action for Words, the Plaintiff declared that he was a Woollen Draper;
and the Defendant said of him, You are a cheating Fellow, and keep a false Book.

After Verdict for the Plaintiff it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the
words might not be intended to relate to his Trade; for they were capable of
another sense, and there was no colloquium of his Trade.

Sed non allocatur: For they must be intended of a Debt-Book which Shopkeepers
keep, and to say such an one keeps a False Book it is a great slander to him in
his Trade. Vid. 1 Cro. 403.

Twisden cited a Case, Where Roberts an Attorney brought an Action for saying,
Go tell the black Knave Roberts, That I will teach him, or any Attorney in
England, to sue out a Writ against me, and he had Judgment; for it was as much
as to call him Knave Attorney, Hill. 22 and 23 Car. 2. Rot. 1426.

Methin and the Hundred of Thistleworth.
AN Action was brought upon the Statute of Winton.

The Defendants pleaded, that they made Hue and Cry, and that within 40 Days
they took one Dudley, which was one of them that did the Robbery, and had him
in custody.

The Plaintiff Replied, That Dudley was not taken upon their fresh pursuit modo
and forma.

And upon this Issue the Jury find a Special Verdict to this effect:

That the Hundred made Hue and Cry, and that Sir Joseph Ash finding Dudley in
the presence of Sir Philip Howard, a Justice of the Peace of Westminster, at
his House in Westminster, the said Sir Joseph being an Inhabitant in the
Hundred of Thistleworth, charged Dudley with this Robbery before Sir Philip,
who promised he should appear at the Sessions at the Old Baily.

And whether this be such a Taking as is put in Issue, they referred to the
Judgment of the Court.

Jones for the Plaintiff Argued, That in this Case there does not appear to be
any Taking at all, but only a Discourse between Sir Joseph Ash and Sir Philip
Howard. As admitting the Issue were, Whether a man were Arrested or no; and it
should appear upon Evidence that one should come to the Sheriff and declare,
That he had a Writ against such a man then present; and upon this the Sheriff
should say, I will take his word for his Appearance; this clearly could not be
taken for an Arrest.

Again, The Issue is, Whether he were taken upon the fresh pursuit of the
Hundred; and it does not appear by the Verdict that there was any Hue and Cry
made this way, and it might be ceased before this time: But it seems rather,
that Sir Joseph Ash found him by accident.

But the Opinion of Hales Chief Justice, Twisden, Rainsford and Moreton, was,
that Judgment ought to be given for the Defendant: For the charging of Dudley
with the Robbery in the presence of a Justice of the Peace was clearly a Taking
within the Statute.

For being in the presence, which the Law construes to be under the Power or
Custody of the Magistrate, it would have been vain and impertinent to have laid
hold of him; and it shall be intented, that this was upon Fresh pursuit: For
when the Verdict refers one Special Point to the Judgment of the Court, all
other matters shall be intended.

And the Chief Justice said, That if the Hue and Cry was made toward one part
of the County, and an Inhabitant of the Hundred apprehended one of the Robbers
within another, yet this was a Taking within the Statute.

Hornsey (Administrator of Jane Lane) versus Dimocke.
THe Plaintiff, as Administrator of Jane Lane, brought an Assumpsit, and
declared, that he had formerly deposited such a Sum in the Defendants hands,
for the use of the Intestate Jane Lane; in Consideration whereof the Defendant
promised to the Plaintiff, that he would pay it her; or if she died before 18
years of Age, that he would pay it to her Executors: And shows, that she died
before 18, and that he had not paid it to the Plaintiff, her Administrator,
licet saepius requisitus.

Upon non Assumpsit, a Verdict was for the Plaintiff.

It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the Plaintiff brought this Action as
Administrator, which ought to have been in his own right; for the Promise was
made to him.

Sed non allocatur: For if a man names himself Executor or Administrator, and
it apears the Cause of Action is in his own right, it shall be well enough, and
he calling himself Executor, etc. is but Surplusage. But here it seems Jane
Lane might have brought an Assumpsit, because she was the party to whom the
Money was to be paid. So it is good either way.

It was further Objected, That it was not averred, that the Defendant did not
pay the Money to Jane Lane during her Life.

Sed non allocatur: For it is aided by the Verdict. As the Chief Justice said a
Case was Adjudged, where an Assumpsit was brought upon a Promise to pay Money
to two or either of them; and declared that the Money was not paid to the two,
and not said, or either of them; yet Resolved to be good after Verdict.

Matthewes versus Cross.
IN Debt for Rent the Plaintiff Declared, That by an Indenture made in the
Parish of St. Mary Undershaft, London, he Let an House to the Defendant,
situate in parvo Turris monte, reserving so much Rent, etc.

The Defendant pleads, That before the Rent incurred, the Plaintiff entered into
a certain Room of the said House, apud parvum Turris montem praedict', and so
suspended his Rent, upon which it was Demurred.

And it was shown for Cause, That no place was alleged where the Entry was,
but said to be at Little Tower Hill, which cannot be intended a Vill. And a
Case was cited of an Indictment in this Court, of a Fact laid to be done at
White Hall, and quashed for want of Place. And to this the Court inclined; but
the Matter was ended by Comprimise'.

Anonymus.
A Prohibition was prayed to a Suit for a Pension in the Ecclesiastical Court,
surmising that the Lands out of which it was demanded were Monastery Lands,
which came to the King; and that he granted the Lands, etc. under which Grant
the Plaintiff claims; and that he Covenanted to discharge the said Lands of all
Pensions, etc. and this upon the Statute of 34 H. 8. cap. 19. which appoints
the Suit to be for Pensions in such cases in the Court of Augmentations, and
not elsewhere.

But the Court would not grant it, until the Letters Patents of Discharge were
produced, being a matter of Record.

But where the Surmise is of matter of Fact, it is sufficient to suggest it.

And it was said by the Court, That Pensions, whether by Prescription or
otherwise, might be sued for in the Ecclesiastical Court; but if by
Prescription, then there was also Remedy at the Common Law. F.N.B. 50. 1 Cro.
675.

Davis versus Wright and al'.
HIll. 22 and 23 Car. 2. Rot. 701. In an Assumpsit the Plaintiff declared, That
his Father gave him by his Will, 3 l per annum during his Life, and that he was
about to Sue for it; and that the Defendants being Executors to the Father, in
Consideration that the Plaintiff would forbear to commence a Suit against him
for it, promised to pay him.

The Defendants plead, That the Testator was indebted in diverse Sums, and ultra
to pay them he had no Assets.

To this the Plaintiff demurred; for that by this Promise the Defendants have
made it their proper Debt.

But it was said on the other side, That if there were no Assets, there was no
cause for the Plaintiff to have commenced a Suit: And to stay a caussess Suit
can be no Consideration; 1 Cro. 804. Yelv. 84.184.
as the Case of Smith and John's, 2 Cro. 257. where one having married an
Executrix, after her decease promised J. S. that if he would forbear a Suit
against him for a Legacy, he would pay it.

It was held to be a void Promise, being in no wise liable to be sued after the
Death of his Wife: And the Opinion of my Lord Coke, 9 Rep. 94. in Bane's Case
is, That an Executor shall not be charged with such Promise, unless he has
Assets.

But the Court Resolved for the Plaintiff: For it is not material whether the
Defendants had Assets or no at the time of the Promise; for by the Promise they
caused the Plaintiff to desist, who peradventure at that time was prepared to
prove Assets; and relying upon such Promise might be much to his prejudice, if
he could not afterward recover upon it.

But the Chief Justice said, If it had appeard upon the Declaraton that there
were no Assets, the Plaintiff by showing that would have destroyed his Action.

Vere versus Smith.
IN Debt upon an Obligation.

The Condition recited, that the Defendant served the Plaintiff as a Brewer's
Clerk, and that if he performed such Covenants, etc.

The Defendant pleads, performavit omnia.

The Plaintiff Replies, That one of the Covenants was to give the Plaintiff a
true Account of all such Moneys as the Defendant should receive, etc.
whenever he should be thereunto requested; and alleged, that 30 l came to
his hands, and that he requested him to give an account of it, which he refused
to do.

The Defendant Rejoyns, confessing the Receipt of the said Money, but says,
That before Request made by the Plaintiff, he laid it up in the Plaintiffs
Warehouse, and that certain Malefactors (to the Defendant unknown) stole it
away, and hoc paratus est verificare. And to this the Plaintiff Demurs
generally.

And Jones Argued, That the matter contained in the Rejoinder was a Departure
from the Bar, for it does not amount to an Account, but rather an Excuse or
Discharge of himself, why he should not account.

Again, He ought not to have averred his Plea, but to have concluded to the
Country. For the Plaintiff in his Replication having alleged, That he gave no
Account; and the Defendant in his Rejoinder setting forth, That he did give an
Account, there is an Issue joined; wherefore it ought to have been concluded,
and de hoc ponit se super Patriam.

But these Matters were Overruled.

For as to the first, the Court held it no Departure, but a Fortification of
the Bar; for showing that he was Robbed, is a giving an Account.

And as to the second, the Conclusion is proper; because the Defendant alleges
New Matter, and therefore ought to give the Plaintiff liberty to come in with a
Surrejoynder and answer to it; for he does not only say, that he gave an
Account, but sets forth the Special Matter, how.

Wherefore the Court gave Judgment for the Defendant.

Note, A Clerk of the Court must appear de die in diem, to any Matters against
him on the Crown side, as well as on the Plea-side.

Reynell versus Heal.
AN Information was brought upon the New Statute against Conventicles; for that
the Defendant being a Justice of the Peace in Devonshire, and Complaint being
made to him by Reynell of a Conventicle, he refused to go to the place to
suppress it; and sets forth three Omissions of that kind, and that the Statute
Enacts, That a Justice of Peace, for every such neglect of doing his Duty,
shall forfeit 100 l the one Moiety to the King, the other to the Informer; and
unde actio accrevit for 100 l to the King and himself.

The Defendant pleads non debet the said 100 l to the Informer, nec aliquam
inde parcellam, and de hoc ponit se super Patriam, and praedict' Reynell
similiter.

And upon this Issue Verdict was given for the Informer.

Jones moved in Arrest of Judgment, That he conceived there were no words in
the Act to oblige the Justice of the Peace upon such Information, to go in
person to the Place where such Meeting is; and it is not said here, that he
refused to grant a Warrant, or the like.

But he did not much insist upon that, but moved that the Issue was not well
joined; for it is only between the Informer and the Defendant, and so the Plea
is quod non debet to the Informer, and no mention of the King; whereas the
Action is qui tam, and the Act gives the Moiety of the Penalty to the King.

The Court said nothing to the first matter, but held clearly that the Issue
was misjoyned; and said, that a Repleader ought to be awarded.

Polexfin and Ashford versus Crispin.
HIll. 22 and 23 Car. 2. Rot. 225. The Plaintiff brought Trespass, Quare pisces
suos cepit in separali Piscaria.

Upon Not Guilty pleaded, and Verdict for the Plaintiffs, it was moved in
Arrest of Judgment, that the Plaintiffs ought not to have called them Pisces
suos, unless they had been in a Trunk or Pond: For there is no more property in
Fishes in a Several Piscary, than in a Free Piscary.

In an Action for taking of Conies in a Warren, 5 Co. 34. b. F.N.B. 192, 193. 2
Cro. 195.
he shall not say Cuniculos suos; and this is such a default as the Verdict
shall not aid. Sed non allocatur.

For the Chief Justice said, it might be intended a Stew Pond, which is a man's
Several Piscary; and after a Verdict the Court shall admit any Intendment to
make the Case good.

And Twisden cited a Case which was in Trespass, Quare Phasianos suos cepit,
and the Plaintiff had Judgment after Verdict; for it shall be intended they
were dead Pheasants. And the Case of Child and Greenhill, 3 Cro. 553. is the
same with this.

But the Court held, that it had been good upon a Demurrer, by reason of the
local Property: And so is the Register.

Hoskins versus Robbins.
IN Replevin the Defendant avowed for Damage feasant.

The Plaintiff Replies and says, That the place Where is parcel of the Waste
of such a Manor, within which Manor there are Copyholds demisable time out of
mind; and that the Copyholders have had time out of mind the sole Feeding of
the said Waste; and that J. S. being a Copyholder of the said Manor, Licensed
him to put in his Cattle.

The Defendant traverses the Prescription, and it was found for the Plaintiff.

Levins moved in Arrest of Judgment that Prescription to have the sole Feeding,
1 Cro. 434. 2 Cro. 256.
whereby the Lord shall be excluded from all the benefit of his Soil, is not
allowable; and the Lord cannot in this case ever make any profit of the Mines,
for he may not Dig.

It Is true, a Prescription may be, to have the sole Feeding from such a Day;
for there the Owner has his time also.

Again, He alleges a Custom of Dimising Copyholds, and does not say for what
Estate, neither does he name any Copyholders. Also, he should have averred,
that the Beasts were levant and couchant.

One prescribed to have omnes Spinas, yet laid them to be spent in a certain
House. And the Verdict shall not help the Defect, as this Case is; but if the
Copyholder had pleaded so himself, it should: For after a Verdict it is
intended they were levant and couchant; but that cannot be in case of a
Stranger Justifying by License.

He took another Exception also, That a License was pleaded here, and not shown
to be by Deed, as it appears it ought to be, 2 Cro. 575.

As to the first it was Answered, That this Prescription did not take all the
Profit from the Owner of the Soil, for there might be Trees and Bushes growing;
and if any one should Dig the Soil and discover Mines, the Lord should recover
Damage in respect of the Mines. Such an Interest as this might commence by
Grant, and therefore lies in Prescription. The same Objection might be made
against the sole Feeding for some part of the Year: for the property of the
Soil remains in the Lord at that time also, when the Profit is divided from
him, and it may be as well allowed for a longer as a shorter time; this is no
more than the Herbage or Vesture of the Land. And Prescription to dig Turves
cuts as deep into the Profits; and yet that may be in one, and the Soil in
another.

As to the second, It is not needful to show for what Estates the Copyholds
have been demised; for it is not laid by way of Prescription in them (for then
it would be material to show that they had such Estates, as might supports a
Prescription;) but as a Custom in the Manor; and to have named them would have
made a Repugnancy, (viz.) that such particular Copyholders had the sole Feeding
time out of mind, 3 Cro. 311.

Yelv. 187.
Neither is it needful to allege, that the Beasts were levant and couchant, in
regard that he claims the sole Feeding, which may therefore be with what Beasts
he pleases.

And it is not needful, that the License should in this case be by Deed; for it
passes no Interest, and serves but for an Excuse of Trespass; and it is for no
certain time, but only pro hac vice.

The Opinion of the Court inclined for the Plaintiff. Sed Adjornatur. Vide
postea.

The Duke of Richmond versus Wise.
IN an Ejectment the parties had a Trial at Bar, and a Verdict for the
Plaintiff.

The Court were moved to set aside this Verdict, upon an Affidavit made of
these Misdemeanors in the Jury, (viz.) That they had Bottles of Wine brought
them before they had given their Verdict, which were put in a Bill together
with Wine and other things, which were eat and drank by the Servants of the
Jury, and the Tipstaves that attended them at the Tavern where they were
consulting their Verdict.

That this Bill (after the Verdict given) was paid by the Plaintiffs Solicitor;
and that after they had given up their Privy Verdict, they were Treated at the
Tavern by the Plaintiffs Solicitor, before their affirmance of it in Court.

Counsel being heard on both Sides, as to these matters, the Court delivered
their Opinions seriatim, that the Verdict should stand.

They said they were not upon a discretionary setting aside of the Verdict, as
when the Jury goes against Evidence; but whether these miscarriages shall avoid
it in point of Law.

They all agreed, That if the Jury eat or drank at the charge of the party for
whom they find the Verdict, it disannuls their Verdict; but here it does not
appear, that the Wine they drank was had by the order of the Plaintiff, or any
Agent for him.

It Is true, in regard his Solicitor paid for it afterward, it does induce a
presumption that he bespoke it; but that again is extenuated, by its being put
into a Bill with other things that were allowable; and if the Verdict should be
quashed for this Cause, it must be entered upon the Roll, 1 Cro. 616.
that it was for drinking at the Plaintiffs charge, and it is not proved, that
this Wine was provided by him.

And as to the other matter, That they received a Treat from the Plaintiff
after their Privy Verdict given, and before it was given up in Court, that
shall not avoid their Verdict.

But if the Defendant had treated them, and they had changed their Verdict, as
they might have done in Court, it should then have been void, Co. Lit. 227. b.
It after the Jury be agreed on their Verdict, (which the Chief Justice said
must be intended, such an Agreement as has the signature of the Court put upon
it, (viz.) (A Privy Verdict,) They eat and drink at the charge of him for whom
they do pass it, It shall not avoid the Verdict, and if it should, The Court
said most Verdicts given at the Assizes would be void; for there it is usual for
the Jury to receive a Collation after their Privy Verdict given, from him for
whom they find. But such practice ought not to be, and if any of the Parties,
their Attorneys or Sollicitors speak any thing to the Jury, before they are
agreed relating to the Cause, (viz.) That it is a clear Cause, or I hope you
will find for such an one, or the like, and they find accordingly, it shall
avoid the Verdict; but if words of Salutation, or the like pass between them,
(as was endeavored to be proved in this Case) they shall not. Also if after
they depart from the Bar any matter of Evidence be given them, as Depositions
or the like, though the Jury swear they never looked on them, yet that shall
quash their Verdict. But they all held in this Case, that though there was great
matter of Suspicion, yet there was not matter of clear proof (as there ought to
be) sufficient to disannul this Verdict; but they said it was a great
Misdemeanour in the Jury, for which they ought to be fined; and that the
Plaintiffs Solicitor had carried himself with much blame and indiscretion; and
the two Tipstaves which attended the Jury, for that they were not more careful,
but connived at these matters, were fined, the one 40 shillings, (who appeared
to be most in fault) and the other 20 shillings.

Barnard versus Michell.
HIll. 22. and 23 Car. 2. Rot. 865. The Case was moved again, and by the
Opinion of all the Court, Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, being after a
Verdict.

For though the pleading, that he brake all the Covenants, would not have been
good upon a Demurrer, as they said, for two Reasons;

First, For that it would have been double, in regard that the breach of any
one of them would have entitled the Plaintiff to the penalty.

Secondly, For that some of the Covenants were such as he ought to have
assigned a special breach upon, that it might have been in the Judgment of the
Court; yet now the Verdict has aided these defects.

Pellow versus Kingsford.
IN an Action of Debt sur l'Estatute 2 E. 6. for not setting out of Tithes.
After Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment.

Vid. 2 Cro. 68. Yelv. 63.
That the Lands out of which the Tithes were demanded, were shown in the
Declaration to lie in two Parishes; so that the Plaintiff ought to have made
several Titles, and also have shown how the Tithes should have been set out
upon the Land, (viz.) how much in one Parish, and how much in the other.

But it was held to be well enough, for this Action is but in the nature of
Trespass, and to punish the Tort in not performing the Statute.

Anonymus.
IN an Information upon the Statute of Usury. After Verdict at the Assizes for
the King, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, That the Venire was not well
awarded, for it was entered ideo ven' inde jur'; whereas it should have been
praeceptum est Vicecomiti, etc.

The Court commanded to search Presidents, and were informed that they were
generally so.

Anonymus.
A Prohibition was prayed on the behalf of a Churchwarden to the Ecclesiastical
Court, for that they tendered him an Oath upon these Articles following.

First, Whether any Person within his Parish, has Encroached upon the
Churchyard?

Secondly, Whether any Person within his Parish were an Adulterer, or Filthy
Talker, Sower of Sedition, Faction, or Discord amongst their Neighbors?

Thirdly, Whether there were any which did not resort to their Parish Church,
receive the Sacraments, etc.?

It was said to the first of these, That it concerned Matter of Freehold. But
this was Overruled, for they may take notice of Encroachments upon the Church
yard.

And to the second, Sowing of Sedition amongst Neighbors, is inquitable in the
Leet, and the Bishops Court has nothing to do with it. Besides, This Oath
would oblige him to charge himself Criminally; for it is whether any person
within the Parish, etc. so that himself is included.

And as to the Sowing of Discord, The Court held it did not belong to them.

But they held, That the general words would not extend to the Churchwarden
himself; but intended to relate only to the rest of the Parish.

But upon examination of the matter it appeared, That the Oath tendered was only
in general words, (Viz.) To make Presentations according to the Kings
Ecclesiastical Law. And these Articles were offered only by way of direction,
and quasi a charge. Wherefore the Court denied the Prohibition.

Anonymus.
IN Replevin of Beasts taken at D. the Defendant pleads in Abatement, that they
were taken in another place; absque hoc, that they were taken at D. Et pro
Return' habend', he Avows for Rent reserved upon a Lease. The Plaintiff
replies, and Traverses the Lease, which should not be; for though the Defendant
when he pleads such a Plea in Abatement, must also Avow to have a Return; yet
the Plaintiff cannot answer to it, 1 Cro. 896.
but must take Issue upon the other Matter.

Sir William Smith versus Wheeler.
IN Error upon a Judgment in the Common Pleas in Ejectment, for the Rectory of
Hadnam in the County of Bucks, where the Jury found as to a third part of the
Rectory, the Defendant Not guilty.

And to the other two parts, a Special Verdict to this effect.

That Simon Maine was possessed of the two parts of the Rectory for 80 years,
and in the year 1643 made by Indenture, an Assignment of them to Crook and
Bleak upon these Trusts following, (viz.) In trust for himself for Life, and
after his Decease for the payment of his Debts, and for the raising of several
Sums to be paid to diverse of his Kindred. Proviso, That if he shall at the time
of his Death leave a Child, or his Wife Enseint, then that it shall be to such
Trust and Use as he shall limit and appoint by his Will, and if he made no such
appointment, then to be in Trust for such his Issue. Provided further, That if
Simon Maine should be minded, or willing at any time to make void the Present
Indenture, or to Frustrate any Use or Trust therein, or create any new, or to
dispose the Estate to any other person, or any other way, and such his purpose
shall declare by Writing, under his Hand and Seal before Witness, etc. that
then, and thenceforth the Trusts therein, etc. or so many of them, etc. should
be void, etc.

Then they find that in 1644 he had Issue a Son, and that he took the profits
thereof during his Life, and made several Leases of the Premises.

That the Assignees had no notice of this Trust during his Life, and that after
his Death one of them assented, and the other dissented to it.

They find that in 1648 he committed Treason, and was thereof Attainted.

They find the Act of 12 Car. nunc, cap. 30. Whereby it is Enacted, That all
Manors, Lands, etc. Leases for years, etc. which he or any to his use, or in
trust for him had, 25. Mar. 1646. or a^ any time since, shall stand and be
forfeited, etc. and also all Rights and Conditions, etc.

They find that the said Simon Maine died in 1661, and that the King made a
Grant to Sir William Smith the Plaintiff.

It was adjudged for Wheele^ in the Common Pleas, Pas. 20 Car. 2. by Tinel and
Archer, who were then the only Judges in the Court; and Sir William Smith
brought a Writ of Error in this Court, and after diverse Arguments at the Bar,
the Judgment was affirmed this Term, by the Opinion of the whole Court.

Moreton. I shall say nothing to the marks of Fraud found in the Verdict; for
though at first the Counsel of the Plaintiff insisted, that the Court ought
thereupon to adjudge the Settlement fraudulent; yet it has been since by them
declined, wherefore I shall wave that,

The matter is, whether there be any thing forfeited longer than the Life of
Maine.

It has been objected, That in regard Simon Maine had a power of altering the
Trusts, and disposing of them otherwise, that this should amount to an implied
Trust in him of the whole Term; but that cannot be, for after his Decease, the
Trust is expressly limited to others.

It Is true, he had a power of disposing, but that was to be executed at
Election, and by such Circumstances as were individually privy to himself.

For it was to be done by his Will, according to the first Proviso. And by the
second, to be done by Writing under his Hand and Seal; so not like to
Englefields Case, in the 7 Co. 1.1. b. where the power of Revocation was to be
executed by the tender of a Ring, which any one might do as well as the party
himself.

But indeed this is the same case, with the D. of Norfolks cited in the same
Report; and the Statute of the 33 H. 8. of Forfeiture upon that Attainder, was
penned as amply as this of 12 Car. and the Case of Warner and Harding, Latch.
25. is very like this: W. Shelley enfeoffed diverse to the use of himself for
Life, and afterward to diverse others upon Condition, that if a Ring were
delivered by the said William Shelley, declaring that he intended those uses
should be void, that then, etc. it was resolved, that nothing was forfeited,
but during his Life.

Rainsford. I shall speak nothing to the Fraud, because that is a pure matter
of Fact, which is to be found by the Jury, and cannot in any Case be presumed
by the Court.

I am of Opinion, that the Judgment ought to be affirmed.

The power of altering the Trusts reserved by the first Proviso, is inseparable
from the person of Simon Maine, for it is to be by his Will; in Moor 193. the
Lord Pagetts Case, It is resolved, that inseparable Powers are not forfeited
upon like words as are in this Act, and so the second Proviso limits to him a
double Power.

First, Of revoking the old Trusts.

Secondly, Of limiting new. But this is to be done by Writing, under his Hand
and Seal in the presence of two Witnesses, so the performance of this also is
personal.

The D. of Norfolks Case is the very same, unless for that it is there under
his proper Hand and Seal, and here under his Hand and Seal, which certainly is
all one.

But admitting this Power were forfeited, yet it is not found, that ever it was
executed after it come to the King, which must be before any Estate could come
to the King; therefore in Englefields Case it was found, that a Ring was
tendered in the behalf of the Queen.

And whereas it was objected, That he had jus disponendi, and therefore might
Forfeit, as a Man shall a Term which he has in right of his Wife, as Dame
Hale's Case in Plowden is resolved. I answer, That here he has not jus
disponendi, but rather potestatem disponendi, but that is qualified, and to be
executed by certain Circumstances, which must be performed to give it effect.

Twisden. As to the Fraud, I cannot see how the Jury could have found this
fraudulent Settlement, made to prevent a Forfeiture enacted by Parliament 20
years after, which surely could not be without the Spirit of Prophecy.

I am of the same Opinion, as to the matter, with my two Brothers.

That Simon Maine had only a Trust in him during his own Life; and if he had
brought a Bill in Equity, he could have had the Estate executed no further, and
therefore can Forfeit no more by this Act; and it is not always, that a Man
that has power over Land has a Trust, as we may see in Cranmers Case, Dier
308, 309. there were as large words in the Act of his Attainder as here.

Indeed the Argument in Englefields Case, 7 Co. rules this; for if a Trust had
been implied in the power of Revocation, they needed to have argued, that it
should have been forfeited as a Condition; so the D. of Norfolks Case; for though
the word Use is in that Act, and not Trust as in this, yet it makes no
difference, for an Use was then the same with what a Trust is now; and though the
word Power had been in this Act, yet there should have been no Forfeiture in
this case, because the Execution of it is so personal and individual.

Neither is there found, that ever there was any Execution, and at most the
Forfeiture could only be of what was in Simon Maine; neither can Smith Execute
it by virtue of his Grant from the King, for the Kings Patent conveys nothing
by implication, and shall never work to a double intent.

Hale Chief Justice of the same Opinion.

First, Crook is a good Lessor, for the other Trustees disagreement makes the
Estate wholly his.

Secondly, For the Circumstances of Fraud, they are not material to be
considered.

Thirdly, The Trust is wholly disposed of after the Death of Simon Main, so
that he had nothing but during his Life.

Fourthly, Then what is operated by the Attainder? Why the Trust during Life is
forfeited. Vid. the E. of Somerset's Case, Hob. 214. 2 Cro. 512. But then this
Trust must have been executed by the Court of Revenue. It Is true, the Act does
not only give the Trust, but the Term it self to the King, that is, during the
Life of Simon Maine; so that by this Act, so much of the Term is drawn out of
the Trustees, as served the Trust which S. M. had, but leaves the residue of
the Term to serve the other Trusts; so that the possibility of the Term returns
to the Trustees, after the Death of S. M. and this appears by the body of the
Act.

Also this appears by the saving in the Act. The first saving, which saves all
the Conveyances, made by the Feoffor before the 29 of Sept. 1659. indeed might
not help, because Conveyances made to the Wives, Children, or Heirs, are
therein excepted. But there the other Proviso saves the Right, Interest, etc.
of all persons whatsoever, does in Law and Equity, not derived form the
offenders since, 25 Mar. 1646. and therein the Interest of Wife, or Children
and all are saved; now this Estate was created before, (viz.) 1643. I come now
to the Provisoes.

The first Proviso determins nothing till the time of Simon Maine's Death; and
consequently this can revest no more to M. than he had before. For the
Condition is in expectation till he have a Son living at the time of his Death;
why then, by this there comes nothing to S.M. so much as in point of Execution
during his Life: By his Will he might have limited new Uses, but he made none;
and it is personal: No other Man can make his Will.

Why then all stands as it did, and nothing is made void till the time of his
Death, and then all is immediately executed to the Son, by force of the first
Conveyance. But if the Proviso had been, That if S.M. had a Son, there all had
revested in S. M. and might have been forfeited.

The last Proviso does not create a Trust to him, for if he had not been
Attainted, the Trust should not have gone to his Executors, etc. No, it creates
a personal power of fetching back the former, and declaring new Trusts,
observing the circumstances; upon the same reason, that this Estate can be
forfeited, a bare Executor. (I mean, without a Devise of the residue) might
forfeit his Estate; this is a Power, yea, and it is a manacled Power, it is a
kind of Trust that he may revoke.

The D. of Norfolks Case is the same with this: So Harding and Warners Case
which was adjudged in C. Banco, though there there were two to two, and it was
confessed by the Kings Attorney in Scaccario, and the Kings Attorney does not
use to confess Judgment in Cases of great moment, without consultation with the
Judges. This power was not, nor could be passed to the King by general words of
all Land, etc. Conditions, etc. 3 Co. 2. a. b. much less could it pass from the
King, (if it could pass at all) by general words; but I rest upon this,

First, That it is a Power or kind of Trust to revoke, but no Condition.

Secondly, At least, not such a Condition as is given to the King.

Thirdly, If it were, it ought to have been executed by the same means, as it
should have been by S. M.

In Englefields Case there was no pretense to have more than to execute the
Condition; it ought here to have been executed in the Life of S. M. and so it
appears to be done in Englefields Case, and Harding and Warners Case, for I
caused the Cases to be searched: This is like the Case of the Statutes of 15 R.
2. cap. 5. 1 R. 3. cap. 1. 19 H. 7. cap. 15. these Statutes give the same
advantage to Lords, etc. where persons have Uses in Lands respectively, as if
they had the very Lands; but the Lord's, etc. cannot thereby claim any greater
Interest than the cestuy que Uses had respectively in the Uses.

Now in this Case, The Body of the Act and the Proviso fetch back and save the
Trusts for all but S.M. As to the Execution for the Kings Debts it differs for
the Process; for they ever did, and do run de terris de quibus illi aut aliquis
ad eorum usum, etc. It Is true, in Sir Charles Hattons Case it was resolved,
That the Kings Debr should be executed upon Land, wherein he had a power of
Revocation. Vid. Chirtons Case, 11 Co. 92. And so Judgment was affirmed per
toram Curiam.

Termino Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno 22 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Anonymus.
IN Debt upon a Bond. After Verdict for the Plaintiff, the Judgment was entered
quod recuperet the Sum pro misis and custag' instead of pro debito praed'. But
this was ordered to be amended, as the default of the Clerk, though in another
Term; The Court having power over their own Entries and Judgments.

Anonymus.
IN an Account, it was held by the Court, that if a man delivers Money to his
Bailiff or Factor, to lay out for him in Commodities, he cannot bring an
Assumpsit, but only his Action of Account.

For the Chief Justice said, that he knew such an Action once brought, and the
Jury that were to try the Cause informed him, That if they should Examine all
the Accounts which were between the Plaintiff and Defendant, it would take up
three or four days time. So that it has been always holden, that in such case
he should be driven to his proper Remedy, which is an Action of Account; and it
may be the Factor has laid out more Money that he received.

Eaton versus Barker.
IN an Action upon the Statute of 17 Car. nunc, for residing in a place where
he had formerly kept a Conventicle, and demands the 40 l penalty.

After Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that
there was no Costs or Damages given: For it was said, that where a Statute gave
a certain Penalty, if this be not paid upon demand, he that sues for it shall
recover his Costs and Damages; as North and Wingate's Case in the 3 Cro. 559.
is.

But the Court held, that they ought not to be given in Actions Popular,
whether the Forfeiture be certain or not; but where a certain Penalty is given
to the party grieved, there he shall recover his Costs and Damages, 10 Co. 116.
Vide postea.

Polexphen versus Polexphen.
IN a Prohibition; the Case was, that Henry Polexphen died Intestate.

Andrew his Brother gets Letters of Administration in the Inferior Diocese.

One who pretended to be the Wife of H. surmizing Bona notabilia, procured
Administration from the Prerogative Court.

Andrew appeals to the Delegates, and dies.

Henry his Son and Heir comes in, and gets the Administration (committed in the
Prerogative Court) Repealed, and has Letters granted to himself.

Upon this the Wife prayed a Prohibition, supposing that the Delegates could
not proceed after the death of Andrew; but that their Commission was
determined: For their Authority is by that, to proceed in a Case between such
parties, one of which is dead.

To which it was Answered, That the Commission is to hear and determine the
Cause. And both in the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law, the Suit shall continue
after the death of either party for those which shall be concerned, as appears
by the Bishop of Carlisle's Case in 2 Cro. 483. and in the 1st Leonard 117, and
178. it is said, That if one party dies ante litis conrestationem, then it
shall abate; but if after, it is otherwise. And there are a number of
Presidents of this nature both in the Arches and Admiralty Courts, etc. And in
this very Case Henry Polexphen having obtained Administration de bonis non of
his Uncle Andrew in the Country, the now Plaintiff got it set aside by the
Delegates, because granted while an Appeal was depending, and that upon full
debate before them, who would yet now suggest, that the Appeal was determined
by the death of Andrew.

The Court were of Opinion, that no Prohibition was to be granted, and that the
Delegates Authority to proceed in that case continued, notwithstanding the
death of Andrew: For the Commission is to proceed in causis Administration,
etc. una cum suis incidentibus vel annexis qualitercunque, etc. Summarie and
juxta Juris exigentiam. So that the Ecclesiastical Law is appointed to be their
Rule, by the course of which a Suit does not abate by the death of the parties.

And Hale said, The Appeal is to the King in Chancery, and it is by reason of
his Original Jurisdiction, and thereupon he grants a Commission to hear it. Now
if he could hear it in Person, none could object, but that he might determine
the Cause after the death of the parties; and by the same Reason they may, to
whom he has delegated his Authority.

But the Attorney General coming in, and desiring to be heard in it for the
Plaintiff, the Court gave further time.

Eaton versus Barker.
THe Case was now moved again upon the Statute, for coming to a place where he
had formerly Preached in a Conventicle. And Exception was taken to the
Declaration.

For that it was not averred, that the Defendant was in Holy Orders: For the
words of the Statute are, That if any one that has been Parson, Vicar,
Lecturer, etc. or within Holy Orders; and have taken upon them to Preach, etc.

But to this it was Answered, that there is another Clause in the Act, That all
such persons as shall take upon them to Preach, etc. which is general, and
extends to all men, whether in Orders or no, which have been Preachers. And of
that Opinion were the Court.

It was also Objected, That there was no Averment: That the Defendant was not
there upon Summons Sub poena, etc. of if so, then it is no Offense by the Act.

To which it was Answered, that if the Body of the Act were, That all persons
which should resort to such place, which were not Summoned or Subpoena'd
thither, should forfeit, etc. then it is true, it must be averred. But that
matter comes, in a Proviso of the Act, (viz.) That it shall not extend of such
Cases; and therefore if there were any such thing, the Defendant is to plead it.

Wherefore the Court ordered Judgment to be Entered for the Plaintiff. Ante.

Anonymus.
IN an Action of Trover and Conversion: After Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was
moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the Action was commenced in Hillary Term, and
the Conversion alleged to be the 3d of February in the same Term; and the Bill
filed relates to the first day of the Term, so before the Cause of Action.

But it was Resolved by the Court, that if the Bail were Entered after the 3d
Day of February, it is well enough; for it is that which gives this Court
Jurisdiction.

So an Ejectment may be brought upon a Lease made in the same Term: So the
Statute of Limitations may be pleaded to an Action, if the time be elapsed
before the Day wherein the Bail is filed, though not before the 1st Day of the
Term wherein the Action is brought: For the Action shall not be said to be
depending until the Bail is filed. And upon Search it was found, that the Bail
was filed the last Day of the Term.

Putt versus Nosworthy.
IN Debt, the Plaintiff declared upon certain Articles, whereby the Plaintiff
Covenanted to convey certain Lands to the Defendant, and in Consideration
thereof the Defendant Covenanted to pay a certain Sum to the Plaintiff.

After a General Imparlance the Defendant prayed Oyer of the Deed, whereby it
appeared that the Defendant and one Vincent Covenanted, that he or Vincent
should pay the said Sum. And he avers, that Vincent sealed and delivered the
Deed, and demands Judgment of the Bill, and si actionem poterit habere versus
eum solummodo.

To this the Plaintiff Demurred; which was Entered thus: Et dicit quod ab
action praedicta praecludi non debet, quia materia insufficiens, etc.

And the Defendant joins, Quod materia praeallegat' sufficiens, etc. praedict'
le Plaintiff ab action praedict' praecludere.

Jones moved for the Plaintiff, that the Defendant's Plea being in Abatement,
could not be admitted after an Imparlance, and that a peremptory Judgment ought
to be here given; because he had concluded in Bar, as well as Abatement. For he
does not only demand Judgment of the Bill, but says, actionem habere non
debet; and the Demurrer is joined, as upon a Plea in Bar.

And it was agreed, that if a man concludes a Plea in Abatement, as in Bar; if
it be against him that pleads it, Judgment peremptory is to be given. But here
the Conclusion is not actionem habere non debet; but it is added, versus eum cum
solummodo, So if a man begins a Plea in Abatement, actio non, etc. Judgment
peremptory ought to be thereupon given.

But then it was said, That although it were too late to urge this Matter, in
Abatement; yet it appeared upon the Deed shown, that the Plaintiffs Declaration
was insufficient: For it being, If the Defendant, or one Vincent should pay;
and the Plaintiff alleging, that the Defendant had not paid, is not enough to
entitle him to his Action, albeit that Vincent were no Covenantee, or had ever
Sealed and Delivered.

To which it was Answered, and so Resolved by the Court, that it appeared by
the frame of the Deed, that Vincent was as well party, as the Defendant; and it
is too late now to averr, that he did Seal and Deliver; so it shall be taken
that he did not, and then it remains the sole Covenant of the Defendant.

And though the words, are That the Defendant or Vincent shall pay; that is no
more than the Law would have implied, if Vincent had Sealed.

And the Chief Justice cited one Cartwright's Case in Debt for Rent, where the
Indenture of Lease was a Demise from Cartwright, and another Ioyntenant with
him, reserving a certain Rent to them both; but the other never Sealed.
Cartwright brought Debt, and declared of a Demise of the Moiety, and
Reservation of the Moiety of the Rent. And upon Nil deber the Matter aforesaid
was Specially found: And it was moved,

First, That the Lease being by Indenture, whether the whole Rent were not well
reserved to Cartwright, as by Estoppel; or whether it were not good to him, as
to a Stranger, for one Moiety? or whether it should not be good to him as an
entire thing, which was reserved to him as well as the other?

But the Court Resolved, that it was good only for a Moiety as he had declared:
For there being an Expectation of the others Sealing, which never was done; the
Deed, as to one Moiety of the Land, and the Rent reserved, had no effect. And
where one Declares against one upon a Deed, whereby it appears that another was
bound with him, it shall not be intended that the other Sealed, unless averred
on the Defendants Side. Otherwise where the Declaration is upon Matter of
Record.

And it was held by the Court, That if the Declaration were defective in this,
yet it was but in Matter of Form: For he says, that the Defendant did not pay,
sed adhuc injuste detinet, which is an Averment, though unformal, that the Money
is not yet paid neither by the one nor other. And so it has been held, where
in Debt against an Executor it is averred, that the Executor did not pay it,
and adhuc injuste detinet, and not averred, that the Testator had not in his
life time; that after a Verdict this is aided.

And they held, that a Judgment ought to be given quod respondeat ouster for
the joining Demurrer as upon a Plea in Bar, is not material; besides the Fault
begun on the Plaintiffs part.

Tailour versus Fitzgerald.
ERror upon a Judgment given in the King's Bench in Ireland, in Ejectment;
where the Plaintiff declared, that J. S. demised to him per quoddam Scriptum
Obligatorium, etc. habend' a die datus Indenturae praedict'.

And upon Not guilty pleaded, it was found for the Plaintiff, and he had his
Judgment.

It was assigned for Error, that there was no time when this Lease should
commence; for it was Habend' after the Date of the aforesaid Indenture, and
there was none before, it being Scriptum Obligatorium, and not Indenturam.

But the Court Resolved, that the Writing shall be intended an Indenture, and
though called Scriptum Obligatorium, which is improper; yet it may be said every
Deed obliges, or if it shall not be intended Indented, then the Lease shall
commence presently, as if it had been Habend' from the 40th of September.

Crossing versus Scudamore.
IN Trespass, Quare clausum fregit, the Defendant pleaded that the place Where
was the Freehold of Sir Thomas Hook, and that by his Command he entered.

The Plaintiff traverseth, That it was the Freehold of Sir T.H. And thereupon
this Special Verdict was found:

That Nicholas Heal was seized in Fee, and that 16 Dec. 1640. he made a Deed
to Jane Heal, Enrolled within six Months, by which the said Nicholas did ( for
and in Consideration of Natural Love, augmentation of her Portion, and
preferment of her in Marriage, and other good and valuable Considerations)
give, grant, bargain, sell, alien, enfeoff and confirm unto the said Jane
Heal, and her Heirs. Then they found there was a Covenant, that the said Jane
Heal should, after due Execution, etc. quietly enjoy, etc. and also a special
Clause of Warranty. And that the Deed was Enrolled within six Months, and that
there was no other Consideration of making the Indenture, than what was
expressed. And if it were sufficient to convey the Premises to the said Jane,
they found for the Plaintiff; if not for the Defendant.

And it was Argued by Winnington for the Plaintiff. He agreed that it could not
take the effect as a Bargain and Sale, because no Money was paid; but Argued,
that the Deed should enure as a Covenant, to stand seized.

It is a Ground in the Law, that the intention of the parties ought to guide
the raising of Uses, and the Construction how they shall enure, Co. Lit. 49.
Rolls 2d part 789. and to give the effect the words shall be disposed to other
Construction than what otherwise they would import. As if a man demises, grants
and to Farm-lets certain Lands in Consideration of Money, and the Deed is
Enrolled; this is a good Bargain and Sale. So if a man Covenants in
Consideration of Money, to stand seized to the use of his Son, 8 Co. 93. Foxes
Case, 2 Rolls 789. it is said, Nota per Cur', if it appears that it was the
Intent of him that made the Deed, to pass the Estate according to Rules of Law,
it shall pass though there be not formal Words.

Again, the Consideration expressed in this Deed, is purely applicable to a
Covenant to stand seized, and a Deed shall enure upon the Consideration
expressed rather than upon one that is implied. As in Bedell's Case, 7 Co. 40.
If the Father in Consideration of 100 l paid, Covenants to stand seized to the
use of his Son, and the Deed is not Enrolled, nothing shall pass: But where
there are two Considerations expressed, there the Use may arise upon either. As
if the Father, in Consideration of Blood and 100 l paid by the Son, Covenants
to stand seized, etc. and the Deed is not Enrolled; yet the Use shall arise as
upon a Covenant to stand seized, Pl. Com. 305. And so it was Adjudged between
Watson and Dicks in the Common Pleas, 1656. The Father by Deed, in
Consideration of Love and 100 l paid by the Son, conveyed Land to him, with a
Letter of Attorney in the Deed to make Livery; in that case the Son has his
election to take by the Enrolment or Livery, which shall be first Executed, 2
Rolls 787. pl. 25.

But it has been Objected here, that there is a Clause of Warranty in the
Deed, which shows that the parties intended a Conveyance at the Common Law; for
if it enure by way of Covenant to stand seized, the Warranty can have no effect
but to Rebut. Also there is a Covenant, for quiet Enjoyment after Sealing and
Delivery of the Deed, and due Execution of the same; which shows the parties
had a prospect of Executing it by Livery, etc.

To which he Answered, That such remote Implications as those shall never make
a Deed void against an express Consideration, upon the which an Use may arise.
It Is true, if there had been a Letter of Attorney in the Deed it might have
been void, unless Livery had followed. As if the Father by Deed grants Land to
the Son, and a Letter of Attorney in it to make Livery; if none be made,
nothing passes, Co. Lit. 49. a. The Authorities which have been cited on the
other side are, first, Pitfields and Pierce's Case, 2 Roll. 789. where the
Father by Deed Poll, in Consideration of Blood, did give, grant, etc. (as in
our Case) to his Son Habend' after his decease, and a Proviso in it, That the
Son should pay a Rent during the Father's Life.

It was Adjudged, That the Lands should not pass in that Case by way of
Covenant to stand seized. But in that Case the Conveyance was repugnant to the
Rules of Law, for that it was Habend' the Land after the death of the Grantor,
and also repugnant in it self. For notwithstanding that it reserves the Land to
the Father during his Life, yet it provides for a payment of Rent to him;
wherefore the Law would not help out a Deed so contradictory and repugnant by
way of raising an Use.

The other Case relied upon, is between Foster and Foster, Hill. 13. of this
King, in this Court, in Ejectment. The Case was; The Mother, for diverse good
Considerations and 20 l paid, did by a Deed, which was Entitled, Articles of
Agreement, demise, grant, bargain, sell, assign and set over, to the Son and
his Heirs for ever, certain Lands; the said Margery the Mother quietly enjoying
the Premises during her Life.

The Court Resolved, that it should not amount to a Covenant to stand seized;
for they were but intended as Articles of Agreement, and preparatory for a
further Conveyance. So the Case differs very much from ours, as also that it
reserves the Land to the Mother during her Life.

The Case also of Osborn and Bradshaw in 2 Cro. 127. has been cited, Where the
Father, in Consideration of Love which he hears to his Son, and for Natural
affection to him, bargained and sold, gave, granted and confirmed Land to him
and his Heirs; the Deed was Enrolled. It was held, the Land should not pass
unless Money had been paid, or the Estate executed. This Case cannot be urged
as any great Authority; for it appears that the Son was in possession.
Therefore the Court Adjudged, that the Deed should be a Confirmation: and it
being clear that way, they had not much occasion to insist upon or debate the
other Point. And he relied upon Debb and Peplewell's Case, as an Authority in
the Point, 2 Rolls 78. 6. where there was a Clause of Warranty in the Deed, and
an Enrolment within six Months, as in the Case at Bar: But they Resolved there,
If a Letter of Attorney had been in the Deed, it should not have been construed
a Covenant to stand seized; and therefore he prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Finch, Attorney General, contra. The Lands here cannot pass by Bargain and
Sale, there being no Money paid, which I find is admitted by the other side;
neither shall it amount to a Covenant to stand seized. There are Five things
necessary to raise an Use by way of Covenant:

First, A Sufficient Consideration.

Secondly, A Deed; as in Callard and Callard's Case, in 3 Cro. and in Popham's
Reports; and has been often Resoved since.

Thirdly, A Seisin in the Covenantor of the Lands at the time of the Deed: For
a man cannot Covenant to stand seized to an Use of Lands, which he shall after
purchase.

Fourthly, A Clear and apparent Intent.

Fifthly, Apt and proper Words. And the two last things are wanting in our Case.

I agree, the word Covenant is not necessary, so there be other Words
sufficient in Law, and to declare the parties Intent; for all Words will not
serve. A man Covenanted upon good Consideration, that his Feoffees should stand
seized: It was Resolved, that no Use should anise upon it, 1 Cro. 856. So Sir
Thomas Seymor's Case, Where a Covenant was upon good Consideration to levy a
Fine to certain Uses, and no Fine was after levied: It was Resolved, that the
Covenant did not raise any Use, Dyer 96. Therefore it is usual to express in
such Deeds of Covenant, that if the Conveyances therein contained be not
executed, that then the party shall from henceforth stand seized. And where it
is said in Vivian's Case, Dyer 302. One having given, granted and released to
his Brother and his Heirs certain Manors, and no Livery made, that Plowden
would have averred that the Deed was made pro Fraterno amore, and so should
raise an Use. Under the Favor of the Court I deny that Opinion of Plowden to
be Law. And in Debb and Peplewell's Case it is said, That the Land was enjoyed
against the Release. And in Moor, pl. 267. One Covenanted in Consideration of
Marriage, to let his Land descend, remain or come to his Daughter: It was
Resolved, no Use did arise thereupon.

In this Conveyance there are not any Words that sound in Covenant; the only
word that looks toward an Use is the word Bargain and Sell. and in Ward and
Lambert's Case, in 3 Cro. 394. it is held, That if one gives, or bargains and
sells Land to his Son, it shall not amount to a Covenant to stand seized, for
want of apt words.

Now the other are all words of Common Law, Give, Crant, Alien, Enfeoff and
Confirm. There is also a clause of Special Warranty in the Deed, and a Covenant
to make further assurance by Fine, Recovery, etc. as great a preparation at
Common Law as could be. And if the Parties intend the Land shall pass at the
Common Law by Transmutation of Possession, there shall no use arise; Co. Lit.
49. Charter of Feoffment to the Son, it shall raise no use if no Livery be made.

The word Dedi in this Deed, imports a General Warranty, which is not qualified
by the Special Warranty after; yet if the Land pass by way of use, there can be
only a Rebutter, and so no use of the General Warranty. The Authorities since
have not been concurrent with Debb and Poplewells Case, but contrary to it. And
I rely upon the Cases of Pitfeild and Pierce, and Forster and Forster in this
Court, which have been remembered on the other side; but no answered. And
whereas it is said, That the Habend, is after the Death of them which conveyed
the Land; they are in that respect stronger than the Case at Bar; for by that
it appears, they could not intend a Conveyance at the Common Law, which does
not allow such kind of Limitations, therefore it must be by way of use, or no
way: Yet it was resolved they should not pass so.

It would introduce universal ignorance and carelessness, in such as draw
Conveyances, if the Court should apply their Art to give them effect however
they were penned; and it is a Rule Politia legibus, non leges Politiis
adaptantur.

The Court after heaving the Case twice argued, were all of Opinion, That the
Land should pass by way of Covenant to stand seized; and Hale cited Hob. 277.
who does there commend the Judges who are curious, and almost subtle to invent
reasons and means to make Acts effectual, according to the just intent of the
parties.

They all held clearly, That words proper for a Conveyance at Common Law would
raise an Use, as Demise and Grant have been adjudged to amount to a Bargain and
Sale without other words; And they said Pitfields and Pierces Case, was
adjudged upon the absurd contrivance of the Conveyance, and so Foster and
Fosters Case in this Court; and for that in that case the Deed was Articles of
Agreement, preparatory to what the party intended after, and the case in Moor
Pl. 267. where there was a Covenant in Consideration of Marriage, to suffer the
Land to remain, descend or come to the Daughter; no Use did arise there, for
the incertainty how it was intended the Daughter should take.

And they said, That if they should not construe an Use to arise by such
Conveyance, as in the case at Bar, it would overthrow all Conveyances by Lease
and Release.

And for the Objection of the Warranty in the Deed, it is well known there is
so in most Conveyances to Uses. Wherefore they gave Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Note, This Judgment was afterward affirmed upon Error, brought in the
Exchequer Chamber.

Anonymus.
AN Indictment was brought, for using of a Trade to which he had not been bound
an Apprentice.

It was moved to quash it, because it was not alleged, that he did not use the
Trade 5 Eliz. for if he did, he is excepted out of the Statute.

But the Court did not much regard that exception, Though they said it had been
often allowed; but it cannot here be intended, it being so long since the
Statute was made.

Secondly, It was for using the Trade Aromatarij, without an Anglice; so it
could not be known what Trade was meant, and though that word is often used for a
Grocer, yet it must be so Englished, or else it shall not be taken for that
Trade more than another.

And for this Cause, the Court quashed the Indictment.

Note, If a Man be taken upon a Warrant de securitate pacis, or any criminal
cause, he is not to be charged with Actions, unless the Court gives leave,
which they will rarely do.

The Case of the Heirs of the Earl of Southampton.
KIng James by his Leters Petents Enrolled in this Court, granted to the E. of
Southampton, all Deodands within the Manor of Ditchfield.

An Inquisition was certified here, that a Deodand was forfeited within the
said Manor, and Process went out thereupon.

The Court were moved in behalf of the Daughters and Heirs of the Earl, whether
they should be driven to set forth their Title in pleading; for if so, the
charges would far exceed the value of the Deodand, and it would be very
inconvenient, that every new Heir should be forced to plead upon every Deodand
that happens.

But the Court said, in regard the Letters Patents are here Enrolled, and that
it appeared by the Inquisition, that this Deodand was forfeited within the
Manor, it should suffice without pleading, if the Heirs satisfied the Office
of their Title without pleading, as where Conusans of Pleas have been once
allowed; it is sufficient in another Action to show the former Roll where it
was alallowed.

Note, An Indictment for a Nusans in the Highway. The Court will not quash
this Indictment upon Motion, unless certified that the Nusans is removed.

But they will Reverse it upon a Writ of Error, (if their be Error in it)
without any such Certificate.

Isles Case.
A Mandamus was prayed to the Churchwardens of the Parish of Kinsmere in
Hampton, to restore John Isles to the place of Sexton there, and it was granted.

And so the Court said has been for a Parish Clark, Churchwardens, a Scavenger.

But it was denied to one, who pretended to be Master of the Lord Mayors
Waterhouse; for that they said was not an Office, but a Service.

Anonymus.
A Fine was levied of Lands in Blandford Forum.

Resolved, That this should not pass Lands in a Hamlet of that Town, there
being Constables distinct in Blandford Forum, from others that were in the
Hamlet; so that they were as two Vills.

But if a Fine be levied of Lands in a Parish, it shall extend to all the Vills
within the Parish.

The Lord Hawley's Case.
A Mandamus was granted, to restore him to the Recordership of Bath.

The Corporation returned, That they were Incorporated by Letters Patents of
Queen Elizabeth, which empowered them to choose probum and discretum hominem in
legibus Angliae peritum to be their Recorder, and to hold a Court twice every
Week before the Mayor, Alderman and Recorder, or any two of them, whereof the
Mayor to be one.

That the 1st of August 15, of this King he was made Recorder by the Committee,
upon the Act of this King for regulating of Corporations; and that he continued
in the Office, Secundum locationem illam until the 25 of December 21 of the
King, and that from the 1 of August 15, of the King, to August 21 he absented
himself, by the space of five years without any reasonable Cause, and that he
is nullo modo peritus in lege; and that at a Court August the 21, they summoned
him to appear some days before, and he not coming, they amoved him from his
Office, the 30 day of the said August.

After this Return filed it was moved.

First, That it was repugnant, for they returned, That the Lord Hawley
continued in his Office until the 25 of December 21 of the King, and after that
they amoved him in August 21 of the King. To which it was answered, That in
regard upon the whole return it appears, that he was amoved, though it be said
he continued after, that is not material but surplusage. As where a Jury gives
a general Verdict, and yet discloses special matter disagreeing to it; the
Court judges according to the special matter; or else they might mean that
though he were turned out, yet he did continue exercising it de facto. And the
Court were of Opinion, that the contradiction in the Return was not material:
For Hale said, If it shall be taken that he is yet in, then there is no need of
a Mandamus.

Again it was said, That the matter of absence was not sufficiently returned;
for it appears by the Charter, that the presence of the Recorder is not
necessary to the holding of the Court; for it is to be held before the Mayor,
Aldermen and Recorder, or any two of them, whereof the Mayor to be one; then
they have not returned, that they held a Court in all that time, neither have
they returned, that any mischief, or inconvenience happned to them by his
absence.

A Park-keeper shall not forfeit his Office for Non-attendance, unless a Deer
be killed or the like in his absence. Also it is returned from the 1 of Aug.
15. Car. to the 1 of Aug. 21. he absented himself for five years, and he might
be out of Town five years in six years time, and yet be there every Court day.

And for the other cause of removal, that he was not peritus in lege; It was
said, That the Corporation being Laymen, could not return a thing whereof they
were not Judges: That the Return was too general, nullo modus peritus; but
ought to have set forth some special Fact, whereby it might appear to the Court.

Also, They could not remove him for a Cause which they could not examine; he
was put in by Commissioners, authorized by Act of Parliament, which it was said
did capacitate implicitly him, at least their Act supplied the Election of the
Town, which if it had been, would have dispensed with his disability. And the
Case of Bernardiston, Recorder of Colchester was much relied upon, who in 1655,
brought a Mandamus to be restored to his Office. And it was returned, That he
was not learned in the Law, and that one being indicted before him, upon the
Statute of 1 Jac. of having two Wives, and convicted he denied him Clergy; and
also they returned, That he absented himself for nine Months; and
notwithstanding, by the Judgment of the Court he was restored.

It was said by Sir William Jones on the other side, That the absence as it was
returned, was sufficient Cause to remove him; for it is returned, That without
any reasonable Cause seipsum elongavit, by the space of five years, which must
be intended five years continued, and not made up by Fractions; (and so held
the Court in that Case) and executionem officij sui totaliter neglexit: Now,
though his Presence be not of absolute necessity to the holding of the Court, yet
it is highly convenient that he should be there, seeing the Charter gives such
large Jurisdictions, to determine all Causes, (excepting such as concern
Freehold) according to Law.

The Court here also must judicially take notice, That the Office of Recorder
is concerned in other matters, besides the Administration of Justice in the
Court; for he is as it were the Common Counsel of the Corporation.

And whereas it has been objected, That it is not returned, that they had held
a Court during his absence, or that any prejudice had ensued.

Also, That it must be intended that there were Courts, when they have returned
the Charter, which empower them to hold one twice every week; and it is
returned, That he absented himself in Regiminis Civitatis detrimentum, etc. and
'its apparent they must suffer prejudice by so long absence. If a Park-keeper
should desert his Office for five years, it would make a Forfeiture without
Special Damage.

The other matter returned also, That he is nullo modo peritus in lege, is good
Cause; for the Charter appoints them to Elect such an one; so one that is not
so qualified is not capable; and the Act of this King authorizes Commissioners
but to do what the Corporation might have done.

It is apparent, That the Office requires skill in the Law; he has no power to
make a Deputy by the Statute of 21 Jac.

Causes in many Cases are not to be removed out of Corporation Courts, where
they are held before an Utter Barrister; so that it is far better for the
Corporation to have such an one their Recorder.

Twisden said, The case of Bernardiston differed, (besides that he apprehended
he had much of the favor of the times in it;) for he that was tried before him
for having two Wives, was arraigned before him, not as Recorder of Colchester,
but as a Commissioner of the Gaol delivery; neither was it returned, That he
was Summoned, (which was said not to be material, because they could not have
examined the matter.) It was returned also, That he absented himself for nine
Months; but not set forth that any Court was held during that time, or any
occasion for it.

He said, That Cholmley Recorder of Lincoln was turned out of his place, for
trying the Accessory before the Principal; and although there be no Special Fact
returned here, yet it may be tried in an Action upon the Case.

The Court said, They would look upon Bernardistons Case. Et Adjornatur.

Anonymus.
A Prohibition shall not go to the Admiralty to stay a Suit there for Mariners
Wages, though the Contract were upon the Land. For,

First, It is more convenient for them to sue there, because they may all join,

Again, according to their Law, if the Ship perish by the Mariners default,
they are to lose their Wages; therefore in this special Case the Suit shall be
suffered to proceed there.

Dier versus East.
WHere by the Statute of Ed. 6. It is ordained, That striking in the
Churchyard shall be Excommunication Ipso facto; this though it takes away the
necessity of any Sentence of Excommunication, yet he that Strikes does not
stand Excommunicated, until he be thereof convicted at Law, and this
transmitted to the Ordinary.

Theodore Morris's Case.
HE was indicted of Murder in Denbigh, and obtained a Certiorari to remove it
into this Court, in order to have it tried in an adjacent English County.

And it was moved whether by Law it might be.

The Statute of 26 H. 8. cap. 6. empowers the next English County, to take
Indictments of Treasons and Felonies committed in Wales, and to try them; but
here the Indictment was taken in a Welsh County. Herbets Case in Latch was
cited, who was indicted at Montgomery, and tried at Salop; and Plowden, Matters
del corone avenants a Salop; and Southley and Prices Case, 3 Cro. is, That the
Statute does not extend to a Trial upon an Appeal. In Chedleys Case a
Certiorari was granted, as here, to remove an Indictment found in Anglesy,
which was afterward tried in the next English County, 3 Cro. 331.

And the Court held, that so it might be here.

Large versus Cheshire.
HIll. 22. and 23 Car. 2. Rot. 520. In Covenant the Plaintiff declared upon
Articles of Agreement, between him and the Defendant, whereby the Defendant
covenanted to pay him such a Sum; the Plaintiff making to him a sufficient
Estate in such Lands before the Feast of St. Thomas next ensuing the date of
the Deed; and then he says that licet he the Plaintiff, semper a tempore
confectionis scripti paratus suit ad performand' all the Agreements of his part
usque ad diem Exhibitionis bille, the Defendant had not paid the Money.

The Defendant pleaded, quod ipse obtulit solvere the Money aforesaid, apud
Derby, si le Plaintiff faceret ei bonum and sufficient' Statum de and in
Premissis, etc.

The Plaintiff replied, Protestando That the Defendant did not offer the Money;
pro placito that he the 21 of December. apud Derby fecit and sigillavit quandam
Chartam Feoffamenti, whereby he conveyed the Premises to the Defendant, and
that he came to the Premises an hour before Sunset, the same day paratus ad
deliberand' seisinam, etc. and quod Desendens nec aliquis ex part illius venit
ad recipiend', etc. to which the Defendant demurred, and adjudged for him.

It was held, That these words ipso faciente bonum statum, were a Condition
precedent to the payment of the Money; therefore the Plaintiff in his
Declaration should have averred the performance of it particularly, and not by
such general words, that he had done all on his part.

And it differs from the Case, where in Assumpsit the Plaintiff declared, That
the Defendant in Consideration the Plaintiff should permit him to enjoy such
Land for seven years, that he would pay him pro quolibet anno 20 s and the
Action was held well brought within the seven years, for that it was Executory
contract for every of the years, according to the intention of the Parties.

It was resolved also, That the Replication was insufficient; for that the
Plaintiff having Election to make what Conveyance he pleaded, he ought to have
given notice to the Defendant, that he would execute this Charter of Feoffment
by Livery, for it might have been by Enrollment. But Hale said, The time when
in this Case was not necessary to be in the notice, because the Charter was
sealed and delivered upon the extreme day limited by the Agreement, so the
Defendant knew it must be upon that day; so for the place, because it is a
local thing, and must be done upon the Land.

But because he had set forth no notice given to the Defendant, that he would
make Livery, the Replication is insufficient; as if a Man be bound to Levy a
Fine, he must show whether he will do it in Court, or by Dedimus; and the Court
said, if the Defendant had refused to accept of Livery, the Plaintiff might as
well have brought the Action as if he had actually made it.

Sacheverel versus Frogate.
IN Covenant, the Plaintiff declares, That Jacinth Sacheverel was seized in
Fee, and demised to the Defendant certain Lands for 21 years, rendering to him,
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns 120 l Annually during the Term: By
force of which Lease the Defendant entered, and that J. S. Devised the Reversion
to the Plaintiff, and died; and for Non-payment of Rent accrued since his Death
he brought the Action, and to this Declaration the Defendant demurred.

And it was argued by Winnington, That the Rent determined by the Death of the
Lessor, as where the Lessor reserves the Rent only to himself, 1 E. 4. 18. 27
H. 8. 19. Dier 45. Com. 171. the Heir shall not have it, for reservations are
taken strongliest against the Lessor; so where the reservation is to the
Lessor, his Executors and Assigns, it continues but for his Life, Co. Lit. 47.
a.

It Is true, Here is also added Durante Termino; and in Mallories Case, 5 Co.
where the reservation was to the Abbot, or his Successors during the Term, it
went to the Successor; but that was because they expounded, or as a
Conjunctive, for if Successor had been left out, I suppose it would have been
resolved otherwise. Richmond and Butchers Case, 1 Cro. 217. is in point, that
the Heir shall not have it. So 2 Rolls 451. And Doderidge gives the Reason,
That the Party by his words has abridged what otherwise the Law would make;
and so it is held in Bland and Inmans Case, 3 Cro. 288. where a Man possessed
of a Term for a 100 years, did join in a Lease with his Wife, solvendo so much
Rent during the Term to him and his Wife, and the Survivor of them; that the
Executors should not have this Rent.

Hunt contra. In the Reservation of a Rent, there is no need of words of
Limitation: If the words are Yiedling and Paying Generally, without saying to
whom, it is a good Reservation to all those to whom the Reversion shall come;
so if two Joynt-tenants reserve a Rent generally it is good to both.

Here are sufficient words to declare the intent that the Rent should continue,
and then they shall not be restrained by any affirmative words after; and where
Executors, Administrators and Assigns are named, that shall be taken as an
Enumeration of some particulars, without any intent to exclude others, as where
a man made one his Executor of all his Corn and moveable Goods; this gave him
an Interest; as Executor, in all his Chattels, as well as in those which were
named, 3 Cro. 292. Rose and Barlett's Case, 8 Co. Whitlock's Case. If the
Reservation be to such persons to whom the Reversion shall come, this is good
to the Heir and all others. If a Lease be made, excepting a Chamber, to the
Lessor; this remains excepted after the death of the Lessor, 7 H. 8. 19.

Hale: If this were res integra, it might be a strong Case for the Plaintiff;
but the Authorities go the other way. Sed Adjornatur. Vide postea.

Termino Sancti Michaelis, Anno 23 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Dorrel versus Jay.
THe Plaintiff declared, that Communication being between J.S. and the
Defendant, of the last Will of John Row Esquire, deceased, that the Defendant
said of the Plaintiff, He has forged his Uncle Rows Will.

After Verdict for the Plaintiff it was moved by Sergeant Ellis in Arrest of
Judgment, that it is not averred that John Row was dead at the time of the
speaking of the words. Sed non allocatur.

For it is said, there was a discourse of the Will of John Row Esquire
defuncti, and there defuncti goes to the description of his person, and
expresses that he was then dead, and not only when the Action was brought.

Besides, the words imply it; for if he were not dead, he could not forge his
Will. Vid. ante Phillips and Kingston's Case, Pasch. 23 Car.

The Case of St. Katherines Hospital.
THe Case, as it appeared upon the Evidence at a Trial at Bar in Ejectment, for
part of the Lands of the Hospital, between the Lessee of Sir Robert Atkins the
Queens Solicitor, and George Mountague Esquire, was this.

Elianor, Queen Dowager of Henry the Third, in the year 1273. Founded (or at
least amply Endowed) this Hospital, reserving to her self, during her Life, and
Reginis Angliae nobis succedentibus, the Nomination of the Master to this
Hospital; which was Incorporated, and her Grants to it confirmed by the King's
Letters Patents.

In the Year 1660, Henrietta Maria, Queen Mother, granted the Mastership of
this Hospital to H. Mountague for Life; and the King in the same year reciting,
his Mothers Grant, and that the Right of it belonged unto her, Confirmed it by
his Letters Patents; and did further by the same Letters Patents grant unto the
said H.M. the said Mastership.

Afterward the King married Katherine the now Queen Consort, and she granted
the Mastership to Sir Robert Atkyns for his Life.

It was urged on the part of the Plaintiff, that the Right of appointing the
Master was only in the Queen Consort; for Queen Elianor reserved it to her self
and her Successors, Queens of England; and Queen of England is not Queen
Dowager; but Queen Consort. And though Land cannot be limited to descend in such
manner without Act of Parliament, as is Resolved in the Prince's Case in 8 Co.
yet such a Desultory Inheritance (as this was called) may be created of a thing
de novo: As a Rent may be granted and appointed to cease during the Minority of
the Heir; or upon the first Foundation of a Church, the Patronage may be
reserved to A. and if he Presents not within four Months, then to B. So in the
Book of E. 3. it was limited, that the Chapter should present while the Deanery
was vacant. And to prove, that this Clause had been construed only to intend
the Queen Consort, a Record was shown of a Case between Luttishall and Basse,
in 4 E. 3. Where

Luttishall exhibited a Petition to the King, which was Entitled, To our Lord
the King and his Counsel. Which Petition was sent into the King's Bench under
the Great Seal, in which Luttishall sets forth, That Queen Isabel, Mother to
Edward the Third, had granted him the Mastership of the Hospital for his Life,
and that he was disturbed by Basse; and Process was issued out against Basse,
who appeared and pleaded a Grant from Queen Philip. Wife to Edward the Third;
and a Writ came from the King, reciting, That the Nomination of the Master did
belong to Queen Isabel. And so three Writs more came after to the same purpose,
and expressing that the Matter was delayed ad inestimabile damnum Consortis
nostrae: And in that Record, Isabel (though living) is styled nuper Regina, and
Luttishall that claimed under her was barred.

On the other side, Diverse Grants were produced during the time that there were
no Queens, by the King, and sometimes by a Queen Dowager, during the time that
there was a Queen Consort. And these Points following were agreed by all the
Court:

First, That an Inheritance might be limited in this manner in a thing de novo.

Secondly, That this Reservation being to Queen Elianor, and her Successors,
Queens of England, did not exclude Queen Dowagers, and extend only to Queen
Consorts. For,

1. A Dowager Queen is Queen of England, and (as Hale said) has the
Prerogative to Sue in the Exchequer.

2. When once she is so qualified to have the Estate vest in her, it shall
continue, though she does not remain in the same Capacity.

As where one has power to Limit an Estate to his Wife, it may very well
continue in her after the Coverture.

Thirdly, It was much observed and relied upon, that Queen Elianor was only
Dowager at the time of the Foundation, and so could never be intended to
exclude such Queens as should succeed her in that Capacity.

Fourthly, During such time that there should be no Queen, it was held, that
the King was to constitute the Master; for he is Heir to Queen Eleanor. And
whereas it was urged for the Plaintiff, That the King had not power to dispose
of the place, but only by way of provision till such time as a Queen should be;
so as to commit the Care of the Poor to one, but not the Interest of the
Mastership.

It was clearly Resolved, that the King might grant it, and that the Estate of
the Grantee should continue, though the King's Interest devolved upon the
succeeding Queen. And it was Resembled to the Case of the Duchy of Cornwall: If
the King, while there is no Prince of Wales, makes a Lease of Lands belonging
to that Duchy, this shall determine upon the Birth of that Prince; but if he
Presents to a Church, the Incumbent shall not be removed; as in case where the
King presents to a Church by reason of the Temporalties of a Bishopric, the
Bishop after Created shall not remove the Clerk.

And the Chief Justice said in this case, that the Interest of the Mastership
did not properly pass from the King, so as it should have a dependence upon the
King's Estate; for the King does but Nominate, and the Master is Entitled as
from the first Foundation and Constitution.

It was further agreed, that a thing of this nature could not be granted in
Reversion; for it is not like an Office, but rather as a Prebendary or
Incumbency of a Church; and the Master, as Head of the Corporation, with his
Brethren, has the whole Estate in him.

As to the Record in 4 Ed. 3. it was said, Note, For Evidence.
and so shown out of Speeds Chronicles, produced in Court, That at that time
Queen Isabel was under great Calamity and Oppression, and what was then
determined against her was not so much from the Right of the thing, as the
Iniquity of the Times; neither has it been heard, that one who had been Queen
of England, should be called nuper Regina in her Life time: So that that
Authority was much invalidated from the Circumstance of the Time.

The Plaintiffs observing the Court thus clearly for the Defendants Title, was
Nonsuit.

Note, It was not Resolved, whether if there had been a Queen Consort at the
time of this Grant, it had been good to the Defendant? But the Judges rather
inclined that it should.

Davison versus Hoslip.
IN an Assumpsit the Plaintiff sets forth, That J. S. owed him 20 l for the
Arrear of an Annuity, and that the Defendant was Receiver of the Rents of J. S.
and appointed by J. S. to pay the Plaintiff his 20 l

That the Defendant, in Consideration that the Plaintiff would forbear him
adtunc Receptor' and serv' J.S. to such a time, that then he would pay him, if
he lived and continued Receiver.

To this the Defendant pleaded non Assumpsit, and a Verdict was found for the
Plaintiff.

It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that it did not appear that the Defendant
had at the time of the Promise any of the Rents of J. S. in his hands; and then
the forbearing of him could be no Consideration, because not liable to any
Suit. And though in case of an Executor's Promise there need be no Averment of
Assets; for notwithstanding that he may be Sued, and the Plaintiff may have
Judgment to recover when Assets shall come, yet it is not so in this Case. Sed
non allocatur.

For it being shown, That he was Receiver at the time of the Promise, and
averred, That he so continued; it is a strong Intendment that he had Effects in
his hands, especially after a Verdict.

It was also said, That the taking of this Promise did not discharge the
Principal Debtor; but that there might be resort to him so long as the Money
was unpaid.

Brown versus London.
IN an Action upon the Case, the Plaintiff declared upon the Custom of
Merchants, that J. S. drew a Bill of Exchange upon the Defendant, to pay to the
Plaintiff; which he accepted, and has not paid him.

And declared further sur Indebitat' upon such a Sum; for that the Defendant
accepted a Bill of Exchange from him, etc.

Upon non Assumpsit a Verdict was f^und found for the Plaintiff, and entire
Damages given.

And it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that an Assumpsit sur Indebitat' did
not lie upon his matter, but only an Action upon the Case, as it was laid in
the first part of the Declaration, where the Custom of Merchants is set forth,
and that the Defendant by reason thereof is chargeable; and this is not to be
involved in a general Indebitatus assumpsit.

And of that Opinion were Hale and Rainsford, who said it had been so Adjudged
in the Exchequer since the King's Return.

But they said, If A. delivers Money to B. to pay to C. and gives C. a Bill of
Exchange drawn upon B. and B. accepts the Bill, and does not pay it, C. may
bring an Indebitatus assumpsit against B. as having received Money to his use:
But then he must not declare only upon a Bill of Exchange accepted, as the Case
at Bar is.

So by their Opinions the Judgment was stayed, haesitante Twisden; for he
conceived that the Custom made it a Debt for him that accepted the Bill.

Ile's Case.
A Mandamus was prayed to restore a Sexton. The Court at first doubted whether
they should grant it; because he was rather a Servant to the Parish, than an
Officer, or one that had a Freehold in his Place. But upon a Certificate shown
from the Minister, and diverse of the Parish, That the Custom was there to
choose a Sexton, and that he held it for his Life; and that he had 2 d a Year
of every House within the Parish; They granted a Mandamus, and it was directed
to the Churchwardens.

Twisden said, that it was Ruled in 1652. in this Court, That a Mandamus did
not lie to be restored to a Stewardship of a Court Baron, but of a Court Leet
it did; for there the Steward is Judge, but of a Court Baron the Suitors are
Judges.

But Hale said, He was of another Opinion; for the Steward is Judge of that
part of the Court which concerns the Copyholds, and is Register of the other.
Ante.

Oble versus Dittlesfield.
IN an Assumpsit the Plaintiff sets forth, That J.S. was Indebted to him in 40
l and that the Defendant was Indebted in the like Sum to J. S. and that J. S.
did appoint him to receive this 40 l from the Defendant in satisfaction for the
Debt due to him from J.S. Which he signifying to the Defendant, he in
consideratione praemissorum, and that the Plaintiff would forbear him a Quarter
of a year, promised that he would then pay him.

To this the Defendant pleaded non Assumpsit, and a Verdict was found for the
Plaintiff.

It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that here was no sufficient Consideration;
for it does not appear that the Defendant was party to this Agreement, whereby
he should become chargeable by the Plaintiff, and then the Forbearance is not
material, and in the mean time he is Suable by J.S. his Creditor. And Clipsham
and Morris's Case was cited, which was Adjudged in this Court Hill. 20 and 21
Car. 2. where the Plaintiff in an Assumpsit declared, that J. S. was Indebted
to him in 50 l and gave him a Note, directed to the Defendant, whereby he
required the Defendant to pay him; who upon view of the Note, in Consideration
that the Plaintiff would accept of his Promise, and forbear him a Fortnight,
promised to pay him the Money. There (after Verdict for the Plaintiff) Judgment
was Arrested, because that was held no Consideration. Sed non allocatur.

For Hale said, When Assumpsits grew first into practice, they used to set out
the Matter at large (viz.) in such a Case as this, Quod mutuo aggreatum fuit
inter eos, etc. and they should be discharged one against the other; but since
it has been the way to declare more concisely. And upon the whole Matter here
it appears, that the Defendant agreed to this Transferring of the Debt of J. S.
to the Plaintiff; and that it was agreed, that he should be discharged against
J. S. And he said, that the Case of Davison and Haslip (hoc Termino ante) was
to the same effect: And for Clipsham's Case, that was said to be good Law; for
there it did not appear that the Defendant was at all Indebted to him that sent
the Note.

Sir William Hicks's Case.
DEbt was brought against him by the Name of Sir William Hicks, Knight and
Baronet.

He pleaded in Abatement, that he was never Knighted.

The Plaintiff moved, that he might Amend, an that he had put in Bail by the
Name of Knight and Baronet, so that he was concluded to allege this Matter;
which the Court agreed if it were so: But it was found to be Entered for William
Hicks, Baronet only. So they said, they could not permit any Amendment; but the
Plaintiff must of necessity Arrest him over again.

Fisher versus Batten.
A Bill was Exhibited in the Duchy Court, to be relieved against the
Forfeiture of a Mortgage of Lands lying within the County of Lancaster.

The Defendant prayed a Prohibition; Surmizing, that the Lands in question were
not the Kings Lands, or holden of him, and therefore he ought not to Answer in
the Duchy Court. And the Court appointed to hear Counsel on both Sides,
whether or no this Prohibition were to be granted.

And it was Argued by Sir William Jones for the Prohibition, That a Court of
Equity must begin by Prescription or Act of Parliament.

That there can be no Prescription in this Case; for both the Duchy and County
Palatine of Lancaster began within time of Memory. Henry, Father of John of
Gaunt, was the first Duke of Lancaster, and he was made so in Edward the
Third's time, and then Lancaster was made a County Palatine.

The Act of Parliament upon which this Case must depend, is that of 1 Ed. 4.
which takes notice, that the Duchy and County Palatine of Lancaster were
forfeited to the Crown by the Attainder of H. 6. and Enacts, That they shall be
separate and distinguished from other Inheritances of the Crown; and appoints a
Chancellor for the County Palatine, and a Chancellor for the Duchy, and that
each should have his Seal; so that the Chancellor of the Duchy is not to
intermeddle in the County Palatine, which has a Chancellor of its own for
Matters there.

Counties Palatine had their Original from a Politic Reason, and Lancaster,
Durham and Chester were made so probably, because they were adjacent to Enemies
Countries; (viz.) the two first to Scotland; and Chester to Wales; so that the
Inhabitants having Administration of Justice at home, and not being obliged to
attend other Courts, those parts should not be disfurnished of Inhabitants,
that might secure the Country from Incursions.

It Is true, of a long time the Chancellorship both of County and Duchy have
been in one Person; but it is the same thing as if there were two, for the
several Capacities remain distinct in him.

The first Patent that made it a County Palatine, Ordained that it should have
Jura regalia ad Comitatum Palatinum pertinen' adeo libere and integre sicut
Comes Cestriae, Com. 215.
infra eundem Comitat' Cestriae dignoscitur obtinere, etc. So that by that the
Jurisdiction ought to be exercised within the County.

They have shown indeed a multitude of Presidents, but I can hear but of One,
for the first Fifty years after 1 Edw. 4. most of the other are of Personal
things; and of the rest, diverse began in the County Palatine, and were
transmitted to the Duchy Court: As they may send Causes out of the Courts
there, to be Argued in the Kings Bench; but doubtful whether the Court here can
give Judgment.

They have very few Presidents of Causes which commenced Originally in the
Duchy Court, which is but a Court of Revenue, 4 Inst. The Court of Requests
had a multitude of Presidents, but could not thereby gain it self any
Jurisdiction, 4 Inst. 97. Holt's Case Hob. 77. A Bill was Exhibited to be
relieved against the Penalty of a Bond, which concerned an Extent of Lands
within the County Palantine, and a Prohibition was granted; for the Duchy
Court is said there to have nothing to do, but with the Kings Land, and his
Revenue. Vid. Rolls -- accordingly.

Weston contra: We cannot pretend to a Court of Equity by Prescription; but we
have Presidents of above Two hundred years last past, as well of Bills
retained, which commenced Originally here, as of those transmitted; and that of
Transmission is agreed on the other side, which proves the Jurisdiction. For if
a Certiorari, or Corpus cum causa, should go out of the King's Bench, Conusans
of Pleas might be demanded, and so to stop the Removing of the Cause out of the
Inferior Court.

We maintain our Jurisdiction upon the Statute of 1 Ed. 4. before which the
County Palatine and Duchy of Lancaster were distinct, as they were 1 H. 4. by
which Act they were both severed from the Possessions of the Crown: But now 1
Ed. 4. makes one Body of these distinct Bodies, and gives a superiority to the
Duchy over the County Palatine; for that is annexed unto, and made parcel of
the Duchy, as the supreme Name of Corporation.

The Words of the Act are: That our Liege and Sovereign Lord, King Edward the
Fourth, and his Heirs, have as parcel of the Duchy the County of Lancaster,
and County Palatine; and there is a Chancellor and Seal appointed for the
County Palatine, and a Seal also for the Duchy, and a Chancellor there for the
keeping thereof; and Officers and Counselors for the Guidance and Governance
of the same Duchy, and of the particular Officers, Ministers, Tenants, and
Inhabitants thereof.

So that the Act having Constituted a Chancellor indefinitely over the Duchy,
and not circumscribing his Power, it is not reason to exempt any part of the
Duchy, and that the County is by force of this Act. In the 4 Inst. 119. it is
said, that seeing there has been time out of mind a Chancellor of the
Exchequer, that there should be also in the Exchequer a Court of Equity. So the
Book of the 2d of H. 8. and Rolls Tit. Prohibition to the Chancery, that where
there is a Chancellor time out of mind, a Court of Equity follows of
consequence, 4 Inst. 212. It is said, that the Chamberlain of Chester has the
Jurisdiction of a Chancellor within the County Palatine of Chester; as the
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster has lawfully used and executed within
the County Palatine of Lancaster.

Hale Chief Justice. The County Palatine of Lancaster is by Act of Parliament,
and therefore Outlawry there is a good Plea in disability; but an Outlawry in
Chester is not pleadable here, for that is a County Palatine by Prescription.

The Possessions of the Duke of Lancaster were not made a Ducatus, until 2 H.
5. in the Parliament Roll, for that year it is entered Quod sigilla pro Ducatu
Lancastriae allocentur, and that it should be governed per Ministros Ducatus.

By the Parliament Roll, 39 H. 6. amongst the Tower Records it appears; that
there was appointed a Chancellor of the Duchy, an Attorney, Auditor, a
Steward, and a General Receiver; also a Chancellor and the like Officers for
the County Palatine.

So that before the Statute of 1 Ed. 4. there was a Chancellor of the Duchy.

I do not think the hare granting of a Chancellor, will incidently give a Court
of Equity, nor is such a Court incident to a County Palatine, though there is a
general grant of Jura regalia; but the main matter is upon the Statute of the 1
Ed. 4. which Enacts, That the County of Lancaster be a County Palatine, (which
perhaps would have otherwise determined by the Attainder) and that it be parcel
of the Duchy, and that there be Officers and Counselors for the guiding of
the same Duchy, and of the particular Officers, Ministers and Tenants, and
Inhabitants thereof, in as great, ample and large Form, as Henry calling
himself King Henry the 5, at any time herein had used and enjoyed lawfully; and
further, That in the same Duchy be used, had and occupied all such Freedoms,
Liberties, Franchises, Privileges, Customs and Jurisdictions as were used
therein lawfully. These words would not of themselves give a Court of Equity,
but are relative to what was formerly; and the Presidents that have been
produced, are an Evidence that there was such a Jurisdiction exercised before
this Act, which is confirmed and established by it.

We have no full account of its original, but there are such Prints and
Footsteps of it, that we must presume it lawful; or otherwise, it is not to be
thought that the Act should refer to it, Holts Case agrees, that they have a
Court of Equity, and so as it is reported in Rolls, though there is a mistake in
the Report, where it is said, that the Duchy have no Jurisdiction of such Lands
as lie out of the County Palatine, though holden of the King; but possibly they
may extend their Jurisdiction too far, when they retain Bills concerning Lands
lying out of the County Palatine, within the precinct of the Duchy, but not
holden. But that matter is not now in question.

I think no Prohibition ought to go in this Case.

First, Because the Statute of the 1 Ed. 4. makes the County Palatine parcel of
the Duchy.

Secondly, For that the Statute refers to the Jurisdiction formerly exercised,
and appoints the Tenants and Inhabitants of the Duchy to be under the same
Regulation. And for that, there are such multitude of Presidents of Proceedings
in this nature, (and allowing transmission of Causes yields them a
Jurisdiction) for the space of 200 years, and so many Men's Estates depend upon
their Decrees, which have been made with the assistance of so many Learned
Judges, which at all times have been called to assist in this Court, that it
would be very unreasonable and inconvenient to unsettle them.

Upon a Quo Warranto, the matter might be more strictly examined, than it is
fit to do upon a Prohibition.

And Twisden and Rainsford concurred, That no Prohibition ought to go.

It was then objected, That this Bill was not well exhibited, for it was
directed Cancellario only; whereas the Court is holden coram Cancellario and
Concilio.

Hale said, That would not be material, for in Ed. 1. time the Style of the
Kings Bench was coram Rege and Concilio, and the Writ de Ideota examinando,
commands the Ideor to be brought coram nobis and Concilio nostro apud Westmon',
and anciently Bills were so directed in Chancery, but since have been altered.

Maddys Case.
JOhn Maddy was indicted, for that he ex malitia sua praecogitat' felonice
murdravit Franc' Mavers, upon which he was arraigned at the Assizes in
Southwark, and pleaded Not guilty; and the Jury found a Special Verdict, by the
direction of Justice Twisden then Judge of Assize there, which was to this
effect.

That Maddy coming into his House, found Mavers in the act of Adultery with his
the said Maddys Wife, and he immediately took up a Stool and struck Mavers on
the Head, so that he instantly died.

They found that Maddy had no precedent malice toward him, and so left it to
the Judgment of the Court, whether this were Murder or Manslaughter.

The Record was this Term removed into the Kings Bench by Certiorari, and Maddy
brought by Habeas Corpus. And the Court were all of Opinion that it was but
Manslaughter, the provocation being exceeding great, and found that there was
no precedent Malice; and it was taken to be a much stronger Case than Royley's
Case, 2 Cro. 296. Where the Son of Royley coming home with a Bloody Nose, and
telling his Father that such an one beat him in such a Field, to which Field
(which was a mile off) the Father immediately run, and found him that had beat
his Son there, and killed him, all which was found upon a Special Verdict; and
resolved to be but Manslaughter.

But Twisden said there was a Case found before Justice Jones, which was the
same with this, only it was found, that the Prisoner being informed of the
Adulterers familiarity with his Wife, said he would be revenged of him, and
after finding him in the Act, killed him, which was held by Jones to be Murder.
Which the Court said might be so, by reason of the former declaration of his
intent; but no such thing is found in the present Case.

Barber versus Fox.
TRrin. 22 Car. 2. Rot. 855. In an Assumpsit the Plaintiff declared, That the
Ancester of the Defendant became bounden to him in a certain Sum, and
afterward died, and that he demanded it of the Defendant being his Heir; and
the Defendant in consideration, that the Plaintiff would forbear to Sue him for
such a time, promised he would pay him.

To this the Defendant pleaded Non Assumpsit, and a Verdict was found for the
Plaintiff.

It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, for that at the time of the Promise there
does not appear, that there was any cause of Suit against the Heir; for it is not
set forth, that the Ancester did bind his Heirs, and the Consideration is not
here to forbear to Sue generally, but to stay a Suit against the Defendant,
whom he could not Sue.

To which it was answered, That after a Verdict it shall be intended, there was
cause of Suit, as Hob. 216. Bidwell and Cattons Case. And Attorney brought an
Assumpsit upon a Promise made to him, in Consideration that he would stay the
Prosecution of an Attachment of Privilege; and there held that it need not
appear, that there was cause of Suit, for the Promise argues it, and it will be
presumed. And here it is a strong intendment, that the Bond was made in Common
Form, which binds the Heirs.

But Judgment was given against the Plaintiff; for the Court said it might be
intended, that there was cause of Action, if the contrary did not appear, which
it does in this Case, for the Bond cannot be intended otherwise than the
Plaintiff himself has expressed it, which shows only, that the Ancestor was
bound. And whereas it was said by the Plaintiff's Counsel, that this would
attaint the Jury, they finding Assumpsit upon a void Promise.

Hale said there was no color for that conceit, The Plaintiff having proved
his Promise, and Consideration as 'twas laid in the Declaration, which is the
only thing within their charge upon Non Assumpsit, modo and forma.

Bulmer versus Charles Pawlet, Lord Saint John.
IN an Ejectment upon a Trial at Bar this question arose upon the Evidence.

Tenant for Life Remainder in Tail to J. S. join in a Fine. J.S. dies without
Issue, whether the Conusee should hold the Land for the Life of the Tenant for
Life.

Sergeant Ellis pressed to have it found Specialy, though it is resolved in
Bredons Case, that the Estate of the Conusee shall have Continuance; but he
said it was a strange Estate, that should be both a Determinable Fee, and an
Estate pur auter vie; and he cited 3 Cro. 285. Major and Talbots Case, where in
Covenant the Plaintiff sets forth, that a Feme Tenant for Life, Remainder in
Fee to her Husband, made a Lease to the Defendant for years, wherein the
Defendant covenanted with the Lessors, their Heirs and Assigns to repair; and
they conveyed the Reversion to the Plaintiff, and for default of Reparations,
the Plaintiff brought his Action as Assignee to the Husband: And resolved to be
well brought, because the Wives Estate passed as drowned in the Fee.

The Court said, Bredons Case was full in the point; but the Reason there
given, Hale said, made against the Resolution; for it is said, that the
Remainder in Tail passes first, which if it does the Freehold must go by way of
Surrender and so down; but they shall rather be construed to pass insimul and
uno flatu, Hob. 277 In Englishes Case, it was resolved, it Tenant for Life
Remainder in Tail to an Infant join in a Fine, if the Infant after Reverse the
Fine, yet the Conusee shall hold it for the Life of the Conusor, 1 Co. in
Bredons Case, and he resembled it to the Case, in 1 Inst. a Man seized in the
right of his Wife, and entitled to be Tenant by the courtesy joins in a
Feoffment with his Wife, the Heir of his Wife shall not avoid this during the
Husbands Life.

Nevertheless he told Ellis, That he would never deny a Special Verdict at the
request of a Learned Man; but it appearing, that he Plaintiff had a good Title
after the Life should fall, the Defendant bought it of him, and the Jury were
discharged.

Sacheverel versus Frogate.
PAs. 23 Car. 2. Rot. 590. In Covenant, the Plaintiff declared, That Jacinth
Sacheverel seized in Fee, demised to the Defendant certain Land for years,
reserving 120 l Rent. And therein was a Covenant; that the Defendant should
yearly, and every year, during the said Term, pay unto the Lessor, his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns the said Rent; and sets forth, how that
the Lessor devised the Reversion to the Plaintiff, an for 120 l Rent since his
decease he brought the Action.

The Defendant demanded Oyer of the Indenture, wherein the Reservation of the
Rent was yearly during the Term to the Lessor, his Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, and after a Covenant prout the Plaintiff declared, and to this the
Defendant demurred.

It was twice argued at the Bar, and was now set down for the Resolution of the
Court, which Hale delivered with the Reasons.

He said they were all of Opinion for the Plaintiff. For what interest a Man
has, he has it in a double capacity, either as a Chattel, and so
transmissible to the Executors and Administrators, or as an Inheritance, and so
in capacity of transmitting it to his Heir.

Then if Tenant in Fee makes a Lease, and reserves the Rent to him and his
Executors, the Rent cannot go to them, for there is no Testamentary Estate. On
the other side, if Lessee for a 100 years should make a Lease for 40 years,
reserving Rent to him and his Heirs, that would be void to the Heir.

Now a Reservation is but a Return of somewhat back in Retribution of what
passes; and therefore must be carried over to the Party which should have
succeeded in the Estate if no Lease had been made, and that has been always
held, where the Reservation is general.

So, though it does not properly create a Fee, yet it is a descendible Estate;
because it comes in lieu of what would have descended; therefore Constructions
of Reservations have been ever according to the Reason and Equity of the thing.

If two Joynt-teants make a Lease, and reserve the Rent to one of them, this is
a good to both, unless the Lease be by Indenture; because of the Estoppel,
which is not in our Case, for the Executors are Strangers to the Deed.

It Is true, if A. and B. join in a Lease of Land, wherein A. has nothing,
reserving the Rent to A. by Indenture, this is good by Estoppel to A. But in
the Earl of Clare's Case it was resolved, That where he and his Wife made a
Lease reserving a Rent to himself and his Wife and his Heirs, that he might
bring Debt for the Rent; and declare as of a Lease made by himself alone, and
the Reservation to himself; for being in the Case of a Feme Covert, there could
be no Estoppel, although she signed and sealed the Lease.

There was an Indenture of Demise from two Joint tenants reserving 20 l Rent to
them both; one only sealed and delivered the Deed, and he brought Debt for the
Rent, and declared of a Demise of the Moiety, and a Reservation of 10 l Rent to
him. And resolved that he might. Between Bond and Cartwright (which see before)
and in the Common Pleas, Pas. 40. Eliz. Tenant in Tail made a Lease reserving a
Rent to him and his Heirs, It was resolved a good Lease to bind the Entail, for
the Rent shall go to the Heir in Tail along with the Reversion, though the
Reservation were to the Heirs generally. For the Law uses all industry
imaginable, to conform the Reservation to the Estate. Whitlocks Case, 8 Co. is
very full to this, where Tenant for Life, the Remainder over so settled by
Limitation of uses, with power to the Tenant for Life to make Leases, who made
a Lease reserving Rent to him, his Heirs and Assigns,

Resolved, That he in the Remainder might have the Rent upon this Reservation.

So put the Case, That Lessee for a 100 years should let for 50, reserving a
Rent to him and his Heirs during the Term; I conceive this would go to the
Executor. It Is true, if the Lessor reserves the Rent to himself; it is held, it
will neither go to the Heir or Executor: But in 27 H. 8. 19. where the
Reservation is to him and his Assigns, It is said, that it will go to the Heir.
And in the Case at Bar the words Executors and Administrators are void; then
it is as much as if reserved to him and his Assigns during the Term, which are
express words declaring the intent, and must govern any implied construction,
which is the true and particular Reason in this Case.

The Old Books that have been cited have not the words during the Term. Vid.
Lane 256. Richmond and Butchers Case indeed is judged contrary in point, 3 Cro.
217. but that went upon a mistaken ground, which was the Manuscript Report 12
E. 2. Whereas I suppose the Book intended was, 12 E. 3. Fitz. Assize. 86. for I
have appointed the Manuscript of E. 2. (which is in Lincolns Inn Library) to be
searched, 6 Co. 62.
and there is no such Case in that year of E. 2. The Case in the 12 E. 3. is, A
Man seized of two Acres, let one, reserving Rent to him, and let the other,
reserving Rent to him and his Heirs; and resolved, that the first Reservation
should determine with his Life, for the Antithesis in the Reservation makes a
strong Implication that he intended so. In Wotton and Edwins Case, 5 Jac. the
words of Reservation were Yiedling and Paying to the Lessor, and his Assigns.
And resolved, that the Rent determined upon his Death. In that case there
wanted the effectual and operative Clause during the Term.

The Case of Sury and Brown is the same with ours in the words of Reservation;
and the Assignee of the Reversion brought Debt, Lane 255.
and did not aver the Life of the Lessor. And the Opinion of Jones, Croke and
Doderidge was for the Plaintiff; Latches Rep. 99.

The Law will not suffer and Construction to take away the energy of these
words, during the Term.

If a Man reserves a Rent to him or his Heirs, it is void to the Heir, 1 Inst.
214. a. But in Mallorys Case, 5 Co. where an Abbot reserved a Rent during the
Term to him or his Successors, it was resolved good to the Successor.

It is said in Brudnels Case, 5 Co. that if a Lease be made for years, if A.
and B. so long live, if one of them dies the Lease Determines, because not
said, if either of them so long lives. So it is in point of Grant. But it is
not so in point of Reservation, for Pas. 4 Jac. in the Common Pleas between
Hill and Hill, The Case was, a Copyholder in Fee, (where the Custom was for a
Widows Estate) made a Lease by License, reserving Rent to him and his Wife
during their lives, (and did not say, or either of them,) and to his Heirs: It
was resolved,

First, That the Wife might have this Rent, though not party to the Lease.

Secondly, That though the Rent were reserved during their lives, yet it should
continue for the life of either of them; for the Reversion, if possible, will
attract the Rent to it, as it were by a kind of Magnetism.

Hoskins versus Robbins.
A Replevin for six Sheep. The Defendant makes Conusance, etc. for Damage
Fesant: The Plaintiff replied, That the place where, was a great Wast, parcel
of such a Manor, within which there were time out of mind Copyhold Tenants,
and that there was a Custom in the Manor, that the said Tenants should have
the sole and several Pasture of the Wast, as belonging to their Tenements, and
shows, that the Tenants licenced him to put in his Beasts.

The Defendant Traverses the Custom, and found for the Plaintiff. The
exceptions moved in Arrest of Judgment, were now spoken to again.

First, That the Custom to have the sole Pasture, and thereby to exclude the
Lord, is not allowable. It has been ever held, That such a Prescription for
Common is not good, and why should the same thing in effect be gained by the
change of the name?

That Prescription for Pasture, and Prescription for Common is the same thing.
Vid. 3 Cro. Daniel v. Count de Hertford 542. and Rolls tit. Prescription 267.
It is held, a Man may claim Common for half a year, excluding the Lord; and
that one cannot prescribe to have it always so, is not because of the
Contradiction of the Term; for if the sole Feeding be but for half a year, it is
as improper to call it Common; but the true reason seems to be, because it
should in a manner take away the whole profit of the Soil from the Lord, and he
should by such usage lose his greatest Evidence to prove his Title; for it
would appear that the Land was always fed by the Beasts of others; and it would
be very mischievous to Lords, who live remote from their Wastes, or that seldom
put their Beasts there, (as many times they do not) so that by the Tenants
solely using to feed it, they should lose their Improvements provided for the
Lords by the Statute, and so come at last for want of Evidence to lose the Soil
it self.

Secondly, This Custom is laid, To have the sole Feeding belonging to their
Tenements, and it is not said for Beasts levant and couchant, or averred that
the Beasts taken were so, 15 E. 4. 32. and Rolls tit. Common 398. Fitz. tit.
Prescription 51. A Man cannot prescribe to take Estovers as belonging to his
House, unless he Avers them to be spent in his House, Noy 145. So 2 Cro. 256.
though the Prescription was there to take omnes Spinas, for it is necessary to
apply it to something which agrees in nature to the thing, Brownlow. 35.

Thirdly, Here the Plaintiff justifies the putting in his Beasts by a License,
and does not say it was by Deed, whereas it could not be without Deed; and so
is the 2 Cro. 575.

Fourthly, Those defects are not aided by the Verdict, for they are in the
right and of substance. But the Court were all of Opinion for the Plaintiff.

First, They held the Prescription to be good, (and being laid as a Custom in
the Manor, it was not needful to express the Copyhold Estates) it does not
take away all the profit of the Land from the Lord; for his interest in the
Trees, Mines, Bushes, etc. continues. Co. Inst. 122. a. is express, that a
Prescription may be for sola and separalis pastura'; and if it may be for half
a year, upon the same reason it may be for ever. An interest of this nature
might have commenced by grant, 18 E. 3. the Lord granted to the Tenant that he
would not improve; though it may be such a Grant were not good at this day.

The Court were agreed in this point, in the Case between Porter and North,
brought here about three years since; the principal doubt in that Case was,
whether the Freeholders and Copyholders could in pleading allege a Joint
Prescription for the Sole Pasture; and for the mischief alleged, that this
might be obtained from every Lord, that had not of a great many years used his
Common, Hale said, It would not be sufficient to prove an Usage for the sole
Pasture, to show that the Tenants had only fed it; unless it were proved also,
that the Lord had been opposed in putting in his Cattle, and the Cattle
Impounded from time to time.

To the Second Objection: They held that Levancy was not material in this case,
because the sole Feeding is claimed. So where Common for a certain number of
Beasts is claimed, it is possible between the Tenants there may be some
proportioning of it, that one may not eat up all from the rest; but it is not
material to the Owner of the Soil. And Twisden said, it was Resolved in this
Court, between Stonell and Masselden, that want of averment of Levancy and
Couchancy was aided by a Verdict.

Thirdly, Though the License is not shown to be by Deed, they Resolved it was
well enough. It Is true, if the License were to make Title against the party
which gave it, there would be greater question: For it is nothing to the
Plaintiff, who it appears had not Damage; at the most, it is but a Mispleading
aided by 32 H. 8. And the Plaintiff waved this matter, and took Issue upon the
Custom, which is the material Point, Vid. 2 Cro. 377.
and it is found against him. There might have been more color upon a
Demurrer. Ante.

Anonymus.
A Prohibition was granted to a Suit for Fees in the Ecclesiastical Court by an
Apparitor, upon a Suggestion that there were no such Fees due by Custom.

For that it tryable at Law, and not by a Decinaria or Vicenaria praescriptio,
which is allowed in their Courts: But they may Sue there for their due and
customary Fees.

Brell versus Richards.
ERror upon a Judgment in the Common Pleas, in an Ejectment against Eight
Defendants, and the Writ was, Ad grave dampnum ipsorum; the Judgment was only
against Three, and the other Five were acquitted. The Error was assigned in the
Nonage of the Three.

It was moved, Whether the Writ of Error was well brought; or whether the
Judgment should reversed in toto?

The Court Resolved, that the Writ was good, Hob. 70. Yelv. 209.
though it might be also ad damnum only of those Convicted: But being only in the
nature of a Commission, whereby the King commands the Errors to be examined,
this matter is not material.

And Twisden said, that the constant Practice is; for all to join: And they all
held, That the Judgment ought to be Reversed against all.

Sir Anthony Bateman's Case.
UPon a Trial at Bar, the Question was, Whether he were a Bankrupt, or no?

It was proved that he was a Turkey Merchant, and Traded in the Year 1656; but
it was not proved, that he had afterward Imported or Exported any thing, but
having the Effects of his former Trade by him to a great Value, he showed them
to several, and obtained the Loan of diverse Sums of Money upon the Credit of
them.

The Court held, that this brought him within the Statute, for such Debts as he
Contracted after 1656, otherwise the Mischief would be great; for Men cannot
take notice when another withdraws his Trade, or when he Commands his Factors
beyond Sea to Deal no further for him; but they seeing great quantities of
Goods and Merchandise in his hands are apt to Trust him: Wherefore it is fit
that they should be Relieved by the Statute.

Anonymus.
AN Administrator brought a Writ of Error upon a Judgment given in an Ejectment
against the Intestate.

It was held, that he should pay no Costs, though the Judgment were affirmed, and
the Writ brought in dilatione Executionis.

The Bishop of Exeter versus Starr.
IN Debt upon a Bond, the Condition recited, That whereas the Obligor was
Excommunicated for not coming to Church, and that the now Plaintiff at his
Instance and Request had absolved him: That if he should obey all the lawful
Commands of the Church, that then, etc.

The Defendant Demurred, supposing the Condition to be against Law, and so the
Bond void.

Hale said, If a man were Excommunicated, there was a Writ De cautione
admittenda; and sometimes they took an Oath of the party, Ad parendum omnibus
Ecclesiae mandatis licitis and honestis, and that was called Cautio juratoris;
and sometimes Cautio pignoratitia was given.

1 Bulstr. 122.
He said also, It was held 8 Car. in Com. Banco, that where the Ecclesiastical
Court took a Bond of an Administrator, to make distribution of what remained of
the Intestates Estate after Debts and Legacies satisfied, or to dispose so much
to Pious uses, that the Bond was void; for they presumed the party in such
cases to be under a kind of Coertion. Et Adjornatur.

Isaac versus Ledgingham.
IN a Replevin, the Defendant avowed for Suit of Court.

The Plaintiff Replies, and confesses himself Tenant of the Manor; and says,
That there are very many Tenants of the Manor, and that there is a Custom,
That if those Copyholders which live remote from the Manor, pay Eight pence to
the Steward of the Court for the Lord, and 1 d to himself for the Entering of
it, that they should be excused of doing their Suit for One year after the said
payment; and alleges, That he lives 10 Miles from the Manor, and that he
tendered the 8 d and 1 d and both were refused.

To this the Avowant Demurred:

First, The Custom is unreasonable; for by means of it no Court can be kept, if
so be all the Tenants live remote.

Secondly, The Plaintiff has not brought himself within the Custom; for that
is to be discharged upon payment, and not upon tender and refusal: And the
Construction of Customs is always strict to the Words, and not with that
latitude as is used in Contracts.

Hale: It Is Custom gives the Suit, and consequently may qualify it: The Doubt
arises, because the Plaintiff has not alleged, that there are any Tenants
live near or within the Manor; or whether that ought to be shown on the other
side, if it be not so; because the Intendment is strong, that there are.
Therefore a By-Law in a Manor binds the Tenants without notice; because they
are supposed to be within the Manor.

For the other matter they all held, that Tender and Refusal, was as much as
Payment.

And Twisden said, It was Resolved, 8 Co. 76. 1 Inst. 203. 1 Rolls 129. 9 Co.
79.
where an Award was made that A. should pay B. 10 l and that B. super
receptionem december librarum should Release: That he was bound to release it, if
the Money were offered, though he should refuse it, Wherefore they gave Judgment
for the Plaintiff.

Sir John Goriton and Harvey versus Lithby.
PAsch. 22 Car. 2. Rot. 331. In an Action upon the Case the Plaintiffs
declared, that there were Four ancient Mills within a Manor.

And that J.C. was seized in Fee of Two of the Mills, and J. H. of the other
Two; and laid a Prescription in each. That they had kept the Mills in Repair,
and found Grinders, to the intent that the Tenants of the Manor might Grind at
them; and that Time out of mind the Tenants had Ground omne frumentum, to be
spent in their Houses, at the Mills of J. C. or at the Mills of J. H. And for
that the Defendant spent Corn which was ground at neither of the Mills, they
brought this Action.

To this Declaration the Defendant Demurred:

First, For that they join in the Action, and so the one shall recover Damages
for not Grinding at the others Mill, which is no loss to him.

Secondly, The Prescription is for Grinding all the Corn to be spent in the
Houses of the Tenants, which is unreasonable; for a great deal of Corn is used
which is not proper to Grind. So it was said to be Adjudged between Aylett and
Charlesworth 1654. in B.R. that the Prescription ought to be laid for all Corn,
triturandum and consumendum in their Houses. And this last Exception was held
to be material by all the Court.

But they conceived the Action might be brought by both; for otherwise there
could be no remedy upon the Prescription. For singly they could not bring it;
because Grinding at any of the Mills would excuse the Defendant.

But Hale said, the Declaration was naught; because it is, That the Defendant
ought to Grind at the Mills of J. C. or J. H. which is true, if either of them
has an ancient Mill, although the other has no pretense or right upon the
Prescription: And therefore it ought to have been laid thus; That such Corn,
etc. as was not Ground at the Mills of J, C. ought to be Ground at the Mills of
J. H. and then have Averted, That the Defendants Corn was Ground at neither of
them. It was Adjudged for the Defendant.

Skinner versus Webb.
Scire facias.
THe Case was this: A Judgment was recovered in this Court in an Action upon the
Case upon a Bill of Exchange, and a Scire facias was brought Quare execution',
etc. and a Judgment upon that; upon which a Writ of Error was brought in the
Exchequer Chamber, and the Judgment was affirmed; after which the Defendant
died, and a Scire facias (reciting the Judgment, and Affirmance of it in the
Exchequer Chamber) was brought against the Administrator, and Judgment had upon
that; and the Administrator brought Error upon the Judgment in the last Scire
facias.

The Court were moved, not to allow this Writ of Error, or at least not to
supersede Execution, by reason of its being a second Writ of Error.

And the Court held, that this Writ of Error did not lie into the Exchequer
Chamber; though it has been Resolved, that such Writ of Error lies in the
Exchequer Chamber, (by the Statute of the 27th of Eliz.) upon a Judgment in a
Scire facias, recovered upon a Judgment in an Action brought by Bill in this
Court; because it is in Execution of the Judgment, and is (as it were) a piece
of the first Action. Otherwise of a Judgment in a Scire facias upon a
Recognizance, or the like.

Now this Scire facias is brought upon a Judgment affirmed in the Exchequer
Chamber, which therefore is privileged from any other Writ of Error to be
brought upon it there: So that this Writ of Error can be brought only upon the
Judgment given in the Scire facias; and therefore it does not lie into the
Exchequer Chamber.

Jacob Hall's Case.
COmplaint was made to the Lord Chief Justice by diverse of the Inhabitants
about Charing Cross, that Jacob Hall was erecting of a great Booth in the
Street there, intending to show his Feats of Activity, and Dancing upon the
Ropes there, to their great Annoyance, by reason of the Crown of idle and
naughty People that would be drawn thither, and their Apprentices inveigled
from their Shops.

Upon this the Chief Justice appointed him to be sent for into the Court, and
that an Indictment should be presented to the Grand Jury of this matter; and
withal the Court warned him, that he should proceed no further.

But he being dismissed, they were presently after informed, that be caused his
Workmen to go on. Whereupon they Commanded the Marshal to fetch him into Court:
And being brought in and demanded, How he durst go on in contempt of the Court;
He with great Impudence affirmed, That he had the King's Warrant for it, and
Promise to bear him harmless.

Then they requited of him a Recognizance of 300 l that he should cease further
Building; which he obstinately refused, and was Committed: And the Court caused
a Record to be made of this Nusans, as upon their own view (it being in their
way to Westminster); and awarded a Writ thereupon to the Sheriff of Middlesex,
Commanding him to prostrate the Building.

And the Court said, Things of this nature ought not to be placed amongst
Peoples Habitations, and that it was a Nusans to the King's Royal Palace;
besides, that it straightened the Way, and was insufferable in that respect.

The King versus Wright.
AN Indictment was against him for suffering of two persons to escape, qui
commissi fuerunt by the Justices of the Peace, for an Offense against the
Statute of 8 H. 6. of Forcible Entry.

After Verdict for the Plaintiff, and Judgment, a Writ of Error was brought,
and assigned for Error, That it was not expressed how the Commitment was,
whether upon View of the Justices, or Verdict upon an Indictment; so that it
does not appear that they were legally Committed, nothing of the Proceedings
being set forth, and it is not so much as said, debito aut legitimo modo
commissi fuerunt. If a man be Indicted of Perjury in his Oath sworn before a
Master in Chancery; it must be shown, that the Master had an Authority to take
an Oath.

And the Court doubted at first, and commanded the Clerk of the Crown to search
Presidents, and he found that they were most debito modo commissi; but some
without that Clause: And the Court held, it being but inducement to the Offense
whereupon this Indictment is, that it was well enough alleged, and after the
Verdict they must intend the Commitment was legal. Vide Crompton's Justice of
the Peace 252. a. and 255. there are two Presidents like this.

Note, It was said by Hale, that upon non Assumpsit Infancy might be given in
Evidence, though upon Non est factum it could not.

The King versus Always and Dixon.
ERror to Reverse a Judgment upon an Indictment; because the Award of the
Venire was Entered, Praeceptum fuit Vicecomiti, etc. which is more like an
Hystory of the Record, than the Record it self; for it ought to be Praeceptum
est, and so are the Presidents: And for this Cause it was Reversed.

Waldron versus Ruscarit.
Hill. ult. Rot. 225. In an Ejectment a Special Verdict was found, That one
levied a Fine of all his Lands in Saint Inderion in Cornwall, and that he had
Lands in Portgwyn, and that the Constables of Saint Inderion exercised their
Authority in Portgwyn; and that Porgwyn had a Tythingman.

And whether this Fine conveyed the Lands in Portgwyn was left to the Judgment
of the Court, and Resolved that it did.

A Parish may contain ten Vills, and if a Fine be levied of the Lands in the
Parish, this carries whatsoever is in any of those Vills. So where there are
diverse Vills, if the Constablewick of the one goes over all the rest, that is
the Superior or Mother Vill, and the Land which is in the other shall pass per
nomen of all the Lands in that: And though it be found that Portgwyn had a
Tythingman, Decenarius, which prima facie is the same with a Constable, and
differed little in the Execution of that Office concerning Keeping the Peace:
Yet Hale said, He was not the same Officer; and it is found that the Constables
of St. Inderion have a superintendency over Portgwyn, and therefore it is but as
an Hamlet of St. Inderion. But if found that they had distinct Constables, and
could not interfere in their Authority, it would be otherwise, Owen 60.

Note, It was said by the Court, That if there be a Conviction of a Forcible
Entry upon the View of the Justices of the Peace, no Writ of Error lies upon
it; but it may be Examined upon a Certiorari.

The King versus Green and al'.
THey were Indicted for refusing to take the Oath of Allegigiance contained in
the Statute of 3 Jac. tendered to them at the Sessions of the Peace.

One appeared, and the Entry was Nihil decit, etc. ideo remansit Dom' Rex
versus eundem indenfensus.

And the other were Convicted, and Judgment given quod forisfaciant omnia bona
and catalla, terr' and tenementa Domino Regi, and extra protectionem Dom' Regis
ponantur and committuntur, and quilibet eorum committitur Gaolae. They brought
Error. And,

First, It was moved, that the Indictment was for refusing the Oath contained
in the Statute of 3 Jac. in his Anglicanis Verbis, (Viz.) I do truly and
sincerely acknowledge, etc. that our Sovereign Lord, King Charles the Second,
is Rightful King of this Realm, etc. Whereas the Statute is King James; and the
words of the Statute are, That the Justices of the Peace shall demand of such
persons there mentioned, to take the Oath hereafter following. So that it is
tied up to that Oath in terminis, and then it cannot be Administered after the
Death of King James. And the diversity of the Penning of this Act of 3 Jac. and
the Act of 7 Jac. was observed in the last; the words are, Shall take and
receive an Oath according to the Tenor and Effect of the Oath contained in 3
Jac: which is as much as to say, the same Oath in substance. So the Act of 1
Eliz. cap. 1. is, That the Oath shall be taken according to the Tenor and
Effect hereafter following. Therefore it was Objected, that the Indictment
might have been upon the Act of 7 Jac. but not upon 3 Jac. which it was
conceived was tied up to the Person of King James, and therefore determined by
his Death. As if a Lease be made durante been placito Regis nunc, it does end
by the Dimise of that King that made it: Otherwise, if it be durante been
placito Regis, Moor pl. 311. And though these Statutes for the Oath of
Allegiance be General Laws, and need not have been recited; yet when an
Indictment is grounded upon an Act therein mentioned, which will not maintain
it, it shall not be made good upon any other General Act.

Secondly, Another Matter insisted upon for Error, was in the Entry of the
Nihil dicit, which was, Ideo remansit Dom' Rex versus eundem indefensus,
whereas it ought to have been remanet, and so the Record it self must express:
But as it is, it is but an History of the Record, and therefore upon Indictments
where the Award of the Venire is Praeceptum fuit, it is not good, but should he
Praeceptum est.

Thirdly, An Exception was taken to the Venire, which Commands the Sheriff to
Return 12 probos and legales homines, qui nec Dom' Regem nec aliquam partem
aliqua affinitate attingunt; whereas in the King's Cases his Kindred may be
Returned, and therein no Challenge to the Favor, neither ought the Sheriff to
be restrained from Returning them.

Fourthly, The Judgment is, Committuntur, and quilibet eorum committitur, which
is an Execution of the Judgment, that should have been given, and not the
Judgment it self, which ought to have been Committantur, etc. as it is extra
protectionem Domini Regis ponantur, and not ponuntur.

Fifthly, It was alleged, that the Statute was mis-recited in two places:

1. For See of Rome, it is written Sea of Rome; so instead of seeds Romana, it
is mare Romanum, which makes it to be no Sense.

2. The Words of the Statute are, I do declare in my Conscience before God,
whereas the Indictment is, I do declare, etc. in Conscience, and leaves out my.

It was also Objected, That the words of the Act being, That such as refuse the
Oath shall incur the danger and penalty of Praemunire mentioned in the Statute
of 16 R. 2. which Enacts, That Process shall be made against the Offenders
therein mentioned by Praemunire facias, in manner as it is Ordained in other
Statutes. And it appears that no such Process was made upon this Indictment;
wherefore the Statute is not observed.

Curia. The first Error was disallowed by all the Court, and held clearly, that
the Judgment was well grounded upon the Statute of 3 Jac. For the naming of the
King is but an instance of the thing as it stands at present; and it might as
well be objected, that the Oath in the Statute is, I A.B. do swear, etc. And
though some Statutes say according to the Tenor and Effect, and this is the Oath
hereafter following; it was held to be all one, for according to the Tenor and
Effect, and according to the words are all one, as where a Certiorari is to
certify Tenorem Recordi.

The second was held to be Error, and that the Judgment given upon the nihil
dicit must be reversed, (for there were several Judgments given) (viz.) One
upon that, and another given against the rest, which therefore was not affected
by the Error.

The fourth was overruled; for where the Party is present, the Judgment is
always quod committitur, as appeared by the Presidents.

Fifthly, the Variances from the Statute were not held to be material; for in
Old writings it is written Sea of Rome; and declaring in Conscience, and in my
Conscience, are the same.

The sixth Error was also disallowed, for the words of the Statute are, shall
incur the danger and penalty of Praemunire mentioned in 16 R. 2. which does not
necessarily bind up to the Process; Vid. 16 R. 2. 5. which makes this very
clear.
but means that such Judgment and Forfeiture shall be, and it appearing that
the Parties were present, there was no need of any Process.

But as to the third Exception which was taken to the Venire, they said they
would be advised until the next Term; and they told the Prisoners (who were
Quakers, and had brought a Paper which they said contained their acknowledgment
of the Kings Authority, and Profession to submit to his Government; and that
they had no exception to the matter contained in the Oath, but to the
Circumstance only, and that they durst not take an Oath in any Cause which they
prayed might be read, but it could not be permitted) that their best course
were to supplicate his Majesty in the mean time for his Gracious Pardon.

Radly and Delbow versus Eglesfield and Whital.
IN an Action sur 13 R. 2. cap. 5. and 2. H. 4. cap. 11. for suing the
Plaintiff in the Admiralty, for a Ship called the Malmoise, pretending she was
taken piratice; whereas the Plaintiff bought her infra corpus Com. It seems
there was a Sentence of Adjudication of her, to be lawful Prize in Scotland in
April 1667. as having carried bellicos apparatus (i.e. Contraband Goods in the
late Dutch War,) and the Plaintiff bought her here under that Title.

The Libel was, That the Ship belonged to the Defendants, and about January
1665 was laden with Masts, etc. and had Letters of safe conduct from the Duke
of York to protect her from Concussion, etc. and that certain Scottish
Privateers did practice to take the said Ship; and after the Defendants took
her, and being requested, refused to deliver her, and that ratione lucri
cessantis and damni emergentis, they suffered so much loss, etc.

The Defendants pleaded Not guilty to this Action, and upon the Trial would not
examine any Witnesses, but prayed the Opinion of the Court; who said there was
good Cause upon the Libel, (which now they must take to be true) in the first
instance for the Admiralty to proceed. In 43 Eliz. it was resolved, 1 Cro. 685.
Yelv. 125. Sty. 418.
If Goods are taken by Pirates on the Sea, though they are sold afterward at
Land, yet the Admiralty had Conusans thereof; for that which is incident to the
original matter, shall not take away the Jurisdiction, and that is Law, though
there were another Resolution in Bingleys Case, 1 Rolls 531 Hob. 78.
3 Jac.7 Ed. 4. 14. and 22. Ed. 4. If Goods are taken by an Enemy, and retaken
by an Englishman the property is changed: Otherwise, if by Pirates. And if in
this Case the taking were not Piratice, it ought to have been alleged on the
other side. Had the Sentence in Scotland been pleaded in the Admiralty, the
Court would have given deference to it; as if a Man had a Judgment in Communi
Banco, and should begin a Suit for the same in Banco Regis; This might be made
a good Plea to the Suit, but not to the Jurisdiction; for, for ought appeared
this might have been the first Prosecution, and no Proceedings might have been
in Scotland.

This came to be tried at the Nisi prius before Hales, who was of the Opinion,
ut supra, then. But because it was a cause of weight, he ordered it to be tried
at the Bar. And because 'twas for his satisfaction, and for a full Resolution,
the Jury was paid between the Parties. Note, A Proctour sworn a Witness said,
when this Cause was in the Admiralty, there was a provisionate Decree, as they
call it, or primum Decretum, which is a Decree of the Possession of the Ship,
and upon that an Appeal to the Delegates; but my Lord Keeper being informed,
that no Appeal to them lay upon it, because it was but an interlocutory Decree,
upon hearing of Counsel he superseded the Commission.

When a Ship is so seized upon security given, it is the course of the Admiralty
to suffer her to be hired out.

Watkins versus Edwards.
PAsch. 22 Car. 2. Rot. 408. An Action of Covenant was brought by an Infant per
Guardianum suum, for that he being bound Apprentice to the Defendant by
Indenture, etc. the Defendant did not keep, 5 Eliz. c. 4.
maintain, educate and teach him to his Trade of a Draper as he ought, but
turned him away.

The Defendant pleads, That he was a Citizen and Freeman of Bristol; and that
at the General Sessions of the Peace there, there was an Order made, that he
should be discharged of the Plaintiff for his disorderly living, and beating of
his Master and Mistress; and that this Order was Enrolled by the Clerk of the
Peace, as it ought to be, etc. To this the Plaintiff Demurrs.

The First question was, Whether the Statute extends to all Apprentices, or
only such as are imposed upon their Master by the Justicies and compellable to
serve. And Hale and Moreton inclined, That it did not extend to all
Apprentices. Twisden and Rainford contrary.

Secondly, Whether they had power to discharge the Master of his Apprentice, as
they might, and e Converso.

Hale conceived they could not, But cause the Servant to have due Correction,
in case the Master complained of him.

Twisden, Rainsford and Moreton Contra. Hankworthy's Case.
For he may be so incorrigible, that the Master cannot keep him without
standing in continual fear; and in Mich. 21, and Hill. 2. and 22 Regis nunc,
upon the removal of an Order of Sessions from York, it was resolved, That the
Master might be eased of his Apprenetice by the Sessions upon just cause. And
Twisden said, Shelton Clerk of the Peace for Middlesex informed him, that such
Orders are frequently made.

Thirdly, The great question was, whether the Defendant ought not to have
applied himself to one Justice first, as the Statute directs; that he he might
(if he could) have settled the business, and if not, then to go to the
Sessions, and not to go thither per saltum, as upon the Statute of the 18 Eliz.
cap. 3. The Sessions cannot make an Order for keeping of a Bastard, but upon an
Appeal from the two Justices, which are first to make an Order.

Hale, This case differs; for the 18 Eliz. gives the first Men power to make an
Order, which shall bind the Parties until it is avoided by Appeal; but this
Statute of 5 Eliz. gives no Jurisdiction to the first Man, for he is only to
compound the business if he can.

Twisden, The discharge being set forth in an Order, we must intend it duly
made; it is the common practice to go to the Sessions first. (It was moved at
first, that it did not appear that the Plaintiff had Notice; but that Point was
waided, for being in a judicial proceeding, it shall be intended.) Et
Adjurnatur.

Lucy versus Levington.
PAsch. ult. Rot. 96. Covenant by the Plaintiff as Executor of J. S. for that
the Defendant covenanted with J.S. his Heirs and Assigns to levy a Fine, etc.
and that they should enjoy the Lands against all persons claiming under Sir
Peter Vanlore; and then he says that Sir Robert Crook, and Peter Vandebendy in
the Testators life time, did enter claiming under Sir P. Vanlore, etc.

The Defendant pleads, That he had a good and indefeasible Title in the Lands
at the time of the Covenant, by virtue of certain Fines from Sir Ed. Powel and
his Wife; but that in 13 Regis nunc, there was an Act of Parliament, by which
these Fines were made and declared to be void, and that Sir R. C. and P.
Vandebendy had Title, and entered by reason of the Act, and not otherwise. (The
Act which was pleaded in haec verba recites, that certain Men came with armed
force, and thereby extorted, and took the Fines, etc.) And to this the
Plaintiff demurred.

It was urged for the Defendant, That this Title was by matter subsequent to
the Covenant, and not any thing which was in being then; as 9 Co. 106. Sir T.
Gresham conveys Land to certain uses, with power of Revocation, and then does
revoke, and Aliens and dies; the Revocation was not warranted by his power, but
was after made good by Act of Parliament, and then Process went out against his
Widow for a Fine, for the Alienation of Sir T. G. the Lands being of capite
tenure; but she was discharged, because the Alienation had its effectt by an
Act of Parliament, which can do no wrong.

Twisden. It Is hard this should be a breach; for the Defendant cannot be
intended to Covenant against an Act of Parliament, a thing out of his power.
Baron and Feme levied a Fine, J. S. Covenants, that the Conusee shall enjoy it,
against all lawfully claiming from B. and F. brings Dower after the Death of B.
the Conusee does not plead the Fine, but suffers Judgment and brings Covenant
against J.S. and adjudged against him; for the Covenant shall not extend to a
Right which is barred, and besides she did not claim lawfully. There is an Old
Book which says, that if an Attainder be reversed by Parliament, the person
shall have Trespass against him, which took the profits of his Land in the
interim.

Hale. My Lady Greshams Case is not like this for there the party was in by the
Queens consent to the Alienation by the Act she passed; but here the Covenant
is broken, as much as if a Man recover Land, and then sell and Covenant thus,
and then it be evicted in a Writ of Right; for this is in the nature of a
Judgment. Though it be by the Legislative power, it may be the prospect of this
Act was the reason of the Covenant; nor has the Defendant reason to complain,
for the Act was made because of his own fraud and force. Every Man is so far
party to a private Act of Parliament, as not to gainsay it, but not so as to
give up his Interest; it is the great question in Barringtons Case, 8 Co. the
matter of the Act there directs it to be between the Forresters, and the
Proprietors of the Soil; and therefore it shall not extend to the Commoners, to
take away their Common. Suppose an Act says, Whereas there is a Controversy
concerning Land between A. and B. It Is Enacted, That A. shall enjoy it, This
does not bind others, though there be no saving, because it was only intended to
end the difference between them two. Whereupon Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff.

It was agreed by all the Justices, that though the Covenant were made only to J.
S. his Heirs and Assigns, and it were an Estate of Inheritance; yet the Breach
being in the Testators Life time, the Executor had well brought the Action for
the Damages.

Peter versus Opie.
IN an Assumpsit the Plaintiff declares, That there was an Agreement between
him and the Defendant, that be (the Plaintiff) should pull down two Walls and
build an House, etc. for the Defendant, and that the Defendant should pay him
pro labor suo in and circa divulsionem, etc. 8 l and that in consideration
that the Plaintiff assumed to perform his part, the Defendant assumed to
perform his: and the Plaintiff avers, that he was paratus to perform all on his
part, but that Defendant had not paid him the Money: And after a Verdict for
the Plaintiff it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, That he did not aver that he
had done the work.

Hale. Pro labor, here makes a Condition precedent, and therefore the
performance of the work ought to have been averred; for though in case of a
Reciprocal Promise, performance need not be averred, yet if the Promise refers
to an Agreement, which contains a Condition precedent, the performance of that
must be averred; as if I should promise one to go to York, and in consideration
of that he promise to pay me 10 l there needs no averment of my going to York;
otherwise, if the Counter promise were to pay 10 l for my going to York. So if
the Counter promise were to do a thing after a time (ascertained or to be
ascertained,) it must be averred that the time is past. Therefore, that it is
said by way of Reciprocal promise will not concern much, for every Agreement is
a Reciprocal promise; but the matter is, what the Agreement is. Here though the
Reciprocal promise, be the foundation of the Consideration, yet it is to be
considered, that it refers to a Conditional promise or an Agreement, and the
Promise obliges not the Defendant to do it otherwise than according to the
Agreement. Now to show this pro labor makes a Condition precedent. Suppose the
Agreement to be in writing thus, Memorand that J.S. agrees and promises to
build, and J. N. promises to pay him so much for his pains, it cannot be taken
but that the building must be precedent to the payment. It Is the common way of
Bargaining, and in common dealing men do not use to pay before the work be
done; it would be inconvenient to give cross Actions in such cases especially,
since it is likely that the Workman is a poor Man. It Is true, if there be a time
limited for the payment, which time may fall out before the work or thing be
done, there the doing it, is not a precedent Condition. Vivian and Shipping, 3
Cro. An Award that one should pay 10 l and in Consideration thereof, the other
should become bound, etc. adjudged the paying the 10 l was a Condition
precedent, (5 or 15 H. 7. 10.) is our Case in Point, if the Plaintiff had
alleged that he had offered to work, and the Defendant had hindered him, it had
been good. The want of the Averment is not helped by the Verdict, for 32 H. 8.
extends not to Declarations or Avowry's, but only to Pleading; if otherwise,
there had been no need of 21 Jac. cap. 13. to cure the want of averring the
Parties Life.

Twisden Contra. There is no need of the Averrment, there being Reciprocal
promises, upon which the Parties have mutual remedies, and relied upon the
case, 1 Roll. 46.

Rainsford agreed with Hale. Et Ajornatur.

Termino Sancti Hillarij, Anno 23 and 24 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Harwoods Case.
HE was committed to Newgate by the Court of Orphans, and upon an Habeas Corpus
it was returned, That the City of London is an ancient City, and that time out
of mind the Mayor and Aldermen have had the custody of Orphans within the City,
until the Age of 21 or Marriage, and that there has been time out of mind a
Court of Record, (called the Court of Orphans) holden before them, having
Conusance of all matters concerning Orphans, and that they had power to give
License to Marry a Woman which was their Orphan, or to deny it upon reasonable
cause; and if any one did Marry such Orphan without License first had from the
said Court, that they might impose a reasonable Fine upon him, and if he should
refuse to pay it, or to give Security, to commit him to Prison. It was also
returned, That Harwood did Marry such an Orphan without License first obtained,
whereupon he being present in Court they fined him 40 l and he refusing to pay
it, or give Security was committed.

To this return First it was objected, That this Custom shall not bind
Strangers, in 1 Cro. 689. Deanes Case, who was imprisoned for refusing to find
Sureties for the Good Behavior, which was demanded of him, because he called
an Alderman Fool. It was returned, That if a Freeman commit such an Offense,
etc. So in Andrews Case, in Hutton 30. one was Imprisoned for not giving
Security for the payment of a Legacy, devised by his Testator to an Orphan, he
is returned to be a Freeman.

Secondly, This Custom as returned is unreasonable, for it would oblige
Strangers at what distance soever from London, who cannot take notice who are
Orphans of the City; yet they should incur a penalty by Marrying them without
leave from the City, and they have not returned, that Harwood Married the
Orphan within the City; and therefore it must be intended that he did not, and
in all other Points most advantagiously for him, in regard he cannot show the
truth of his Case by pleading to the Return. In an Action upon the Statute of
Laborers, the Plaintiff declared, That he retained a Servant at London, and
that the Defendant retained him within the Term he had contracted with him for.
The Defendant pleaded, that he found him vagrant in another County, and there
retained him, and held that it was a good plea, for he was not bound to take
notice of a retenier by the Plaintiff, when it was in another County, 17 E. 4.
7. b. The difference is taken between Customs, general such as Gavelkind, and
private particular Customs, the one everyone shall take notice of, but not the
other, 3 Cro. Launder and Brooks Case. The Court of Orphans is a particular
Jurisdiction, and not to be extended all over England; and it appears by the
Books, that they may have a Ravishment of Ward, F.N. B. 142 B. Hob. 95. which
therefore seems to be their proper remedy, rather than the course they have now
taken.

Thirdly, The Custom is unreasonable, that they should impose the Fine who are
to have it, and so to be Judges and Parties.

Fourthly, It was alleged, That the Fine was unreasonable, which is not to be
proportioned to the Portion the Orphan is to have, (which was shown in the
Return to be 800 l) but to the crime, for it does not appear, that the City is
to have the value of the Marriage, or any benefit by it; and in this Case there
was no disparagement, for his quality deserved such a Portion, and he had the
consent of her Friends.

But notwithstanding these Exceptions, to the Return it was resolved by all the
Court, that he should be remanded.

As to the 1, that it is not returned, Harwood is a Freeman, the Court
resolved, that it is not material, for in many Cases Strangers are bound by the
Customs of London, as that of Foreign bought and Foreign sold, was resolved to
be a good Custom, 15 Car. 2. between Hutchins and Players in Communi Banco.

2. Though it appears the Marriage was in a Foreign County, and not shown that he
had Notice; it is all one, for if that might be an excuse, the Government of
Orphans by the City of London would be utterly insignificant, for it would be
only to seduce the Orphan out of the Liberties of the City, and whatever
practice there were to disparage her in a Marriage, it would be dispunishable
by them; and Notice in this case is impossible to be given, but most easy to
be taken, for what more proper, than for a Man to inform himself of the
Condition of her, whom he intends to make his Wife? and if Notice were
requisite, it must be given to all the Men in England capeable of Marriage, and
in what manner should that be, by fixing it like a Proclamation to some
notorious place in the County? Yet it would be then hard to maintain, that a
Man was bound to take notice of such a thing; the Statute of this King, that
takes away the Court of Wards, saves and confirms the Jurisdiction of the Court
of Orphans in London, which being in a general Law is within every man's Notice;
for the Case of taking away a Man's Servant in a Foreign County to that he was
retained in, is not like to this, for it he be detained after demand made, he
which first retained him may have an Action, and so is at no loss; but here
there is no remedy by undoing the Marriage, and therefore it is fit the rashness
of it should be punished. This Custom concerning Orphans, is not confined to
the Walls of London in many particulars. All the Children of a Freeman though he
dies, and they were born out of London, shall yet be Orphans; If a Legacy be
bequeathed to a City Orphan in any Foreign County, the Executor, etc. shall be
compelled to give Security to the Court of Orphans for the payment of it. Et
vid. Luch's Case, in Hob. 247. The interest of the City adheres to the person
of the Orphan where ever he is; as a Citizen of London shall have his personal
Privileges in all places, as exemption from Toll, Prisage, ( Quaere the last)
(per Hale) And as well as they may have a Ravishment de guard, in what County
soever the Orphan was taken, so they may punish an unlicensed Marriage. Wallers
Case, 22 Jac. was the same with this which was resolved for the City. It
appears by the Return that Harwood was present in Court; and Hale said, they
could not award Process into a Foreign County.

3. It does not appear by the Return, that the Mayor and Aldermen are to have
the Fine, and then it shall not be so intended. But in Eastwick and Langhams
Case, (which Langham was fined for refusing the Office of a Sheriff, being a
Freeman;) it was held they might set the Fine, though they were to have it
themselves.

4. It was held the Fine was not excessive: But in regard there was no
disparagement by the Marriage, it was propounded by the Court, that upon the
submission of Harwood to the Court of Orphans, that they should do well to
remit the Fine.

St. Aubin versus Cox.
A Prohibition was prayed to the Court of the Compter in Woodstreet, London, to
an Action of Debt there commenced; for that the Defendant had pleaded before
any Imparlance taken, that the Cause of Action did arise at a place out of
their Jurisdiction, and offered to have Sworn his Plea, and they refused to
accept this Plea.

Upon this Matter a Prohibition was granted; for Inferior Courts have not
Cognizance of Transitory things, which arise in places out of their
Jurisdiction, as F. N. B. 45. is: But then it is not sufficient to surmize such
Matter for a Prohibition; but a Plea to that effect must be tendered in the
Inferior Court, and that before any Imparlance taken (whereby the Jurisdiction
would be admitted) and it must be upon Oath; and then if refused, a Prohibition
shall be granted; or upon such Refusal, a Bill of Exceptions may be made, and
Error assigned, Fitz. N.B. 21. N.

The King versus Sergeant and Annis.
THey were Indicted of Perjury committed in their Evidence, given upon an
Indictment of Barretry against Nurse (the Record of which was recited in this
Indictment, and therein it appeared that the Venire was made Returnable coram
J. S. and J. N. Justiciariis praedictis, and at a day certain,) and Judgment
given, and Error brought and assigned, that the Venire being Returnable coram
Justiciariis praedictis, none but the same Justices could proceed, and not
those who late the next Assizes by virtue of a New Commission: And therefore
the Proceedings before them were coram non Judice, and so no Perjury could be
committed.

Secondly, The Venire should not have been Returnable at a Day certain, but ad
proximas Assisas; because it is uncertain when the Assizes begin, and if they
should fall out to begin upon the very Day, yet it would not help the Error in
the first award of the Venire. Sed non allocatur.

For the Statute of 1 and 2 E. 6. enables New Commissioners of Oyer and
Terminer to proceed where the former left, before whom the Matter commenced.

And for the other Exception, it makes the Proceedings only Erroneous; and
while the Record stands unreversed, the Perjury may be well assigned. It was
said at the same Assizes, that the Judges may Adjourn to a Day certain; but if
there be a Continuance over to the next Assizes, there must be no day
expressed. But Inferior Courts cannot make a Continuance ad proximam Curiam,
but always to a Day certain.

Stanlack's Case.
UPon an Inquisition super visum Corporis before the Coroner, it was found that
he died of a Meagrim at Greenwich.

Sir Edward Thurland moved for a Melius Inquirendum, producing several
Affidavits, That Stanlack was Riding in the Highway, and a Coach with six
Horses rushing by him, cast him from his Horse and killed him; and that diverse
offered to prove this before the Coroner, and he would not hear them: And if
this Enquest should stand, the King would lose his Deodand; and alleged, that
there were several Presidents of this Nature, as in one Michael Bartholomew's
Case, and Toom's Case, who Hanged himself at Hackney about 15 years since.

The Court said in those Cases it was proved, that there was Practice with the
Coroner to suppress the King's Evidence, and so the Inquisition was set aside
upon a Male se gessit. If a Coroner omits to enquire, this Court as Supreme
Coroner throughout England, may Enquire, or may make Commissioners to Enquire,
or Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer may Enquire; but then it is not Super
visum corporis, and therefore may be Traversed. But Hale said, Where a Coroner
has Enquired, no Melius Inquirendum can go, as upon an Office found after the
Death of the King's Tenant. For unless they could take some Exception to the
Inquisition to quash it, the Coroner could not Enquire again; but if the
Misdemeanour of the Coroner were somewhat more clearly made out, the Court said
they would set the Inquisition aside, and cause a New one to be made.

Maynard's Case.
HE being produced as a Witness in an Action of Trover against Reynell Corey
and others, for 12000 l which the Defendants were charged to have conveyed
away, which was the Money of Mr. Luttrell, lately deceased, and belonged to
Mrs. Luttrell, now Plaintiff, as Executrix. He Swore, that the Defendants had
the Money, and carried it out of the House wherein Mr. Luttrell died; and upon
his Evidence principally the Jury found the Defendants Guilty.

Now the last Easter Term, which was about a year and an half since the Trial,
Maynard made an Affidavit in the King's Bench, that Mrs. Luttrell had Arrested
him amongst the rest, for the Taking away of this Money; and he being unable to
put in Bail, and apprehensive of the Ruin that lying in Prison would bring upon
him, he applied himself to Mrs. Luttrell, who promised him Favor, so that he
would accuse Reynell and the other Defendants with the taking of the Money, and
be a Witness against them; and that he was Examined before a Justice of the
Peace, (one A.) who did much urge him to depose against Reynell in this Matter.
And that by their Threats and Promises he was brought to give False Evidence,
and that what he said in his Testimony, relating to the Defendants taking away
the Money, was untrue. After this Affidavit made he was Indicted of Perjury, in
what he Witnessed in the Action of Trover, and confessed the Indictment.

Mrs. Luttrell thinking this matter might disparage her Verdict, brought an
Information against him of Perjury committed in his Affidavit, to which he
pleaded Not Guilty; but before the Trial made an Escape, so that at the Day the
Enquest was taken by Default.

The Court were at first in doubt, whether they should proceed upon the
Information, the King having taken his Confession upon the first, it seemed
contradictory and repugnant to prosecute him upon this: But in regard the
Affidavit charged Mrs. Luttrell and others with having suborned him to per^ure
himself, he might be tried upon that as another distinct Perjury, if so be they
should be clear of having practiced with him. And upon the trial of this
Information it did appear that he had charged them falsely, and so found Guilty.

Another Matter was moved, That the Indictment alleged the Perjury to be
committed in Middlesex; whereas it appeared by the Affidavit produced, that it
was taken at Justice Twisden's Chamber, in the Inner Temple; wherefore it ought
to have been tried in London, where the Oath was taken; and though the Affidavit
were Filed in Court, that would not help it. But the Court agreed, if it had
been in an Indictment it had been a good Objection, for there the Offense is
local; but otherwise they said it had been held in an Information. And Twisden
said. That if a Recognizance were taken at a Judges Chamber in London, and
after Filed in Court, the Scire facias upon it shall go first into Middlesex.
However the Court offered to have this Matter found Specially; but there being
no Counsel for Maynard, and this Matter stirred only per amicum Curiae, it went
off.

Austin's Case.
IN an Indictment for Erecting of Posts and Rails in an Highway, it was held
necessary to prove, that the party Indicted did set them up, for a Continuation
of them, for not suffering them to be removed, would not serve.

Hale: If there be no Special Matter to fix it upon others, the Parish where
the Highway is, ought to Repair it of Common Right. ( Sed Quaere, Why not the
County? as in the Case of Common Bridges, 2 Inst. 701.) Vide postea.

Butcher versus Cowper.
IN an Indebitat' Assumpsit, the Defendant pleads in Abatement, that the
Promise was, for carrying the Goods of the Defendant to a certain place; and if
there were any such Contract, it was made with the Plaintiff and a Stranger.
Upon which it was Demurred; because to plead, If there were any such Contract,
is not good, and more like an Affidavit to change a Venue, than Pleading, and
he ought to have averred that the Stranger was alive: Besides the Defendant had
taken an Imparlance, and therefore could not plead in Abatement. Wherefore it
was Adjudged for the Plaintiff.

Smith versus Butterfield.
IN Trespass Quare clausum fregit and bona asportavit; the Defendant pleaded
Not guilty to the breaking of the Close, and Iustifies the taking of the Goods
at a time varying from that alleged in the Declaration, and concludes Quae est
eadem transgressio, upon which it was Demurred; because he did not traverse the
Time before and after; and it was Adjudged for the Plaintiff.

Toll versus Dawson.
IN Debt upon a Bond Conditioned to perform an Award.

The Defendant pleaded Nullum fecerunt arbitrium.

The Plaintiff Replies, and sets forth the Award, which did express the Bond of
Submission to be Dated the 7th of February, whereas it was dated the 10th of
February; and for that Misrecital the Defendant Demurred.

But the Court held clearly, that it did not hurt the Award: and so if the
Submission had been of diverse particular matters; yet if they had meddled only
with the things submitted, it had been well enough.

Proctor versus Newton.
IN Debt upon a Bond, the Defendant demanded Oyer of the Condition, which was
to perform Covenants in an Indenture; which recited, that the Defendant had
sold to the Plaintiff a certain House; and there was a Covenant that the
Plaintiff, pacifice gauderet domum praedict' absque legali interruptione
disturbantia sive impedimento of the Defendant, or any claiming from or under
him. Upon this Covenant the Plaintiff assigned the Breach thus: That J.S.
habens jus and titulum virtute concessionis from J. N. ante tempus confectionis
of the Bargain and Sale to him, did enter and expel him: Upon which it was
Demurred; because not shown that J.S. had a lawful Title, and therefore not
well applied to the Condition, which is so expressly penned, 2 Cro. 315.

Hale: Habens jus implies it was a lawful Eviction.

Twisden doubted; because it may be J. N. Dissessed the Defendant before the
Bargain and Sale, and made a Lease to J. S. Et Adjornatur.

Freeman versus Boddington.
ERror of a Judgment in an Assumpsit against Baron and Feme, Hill. 21, 22. Rot.
126.
in Com. Banco. The Error assigned was;

That the Feme was an Infant, and appeared by Attorney; whereas the Court ought
to have admitted her per Guardianum. But if the Wife be of Age, then the Baron
makes an Attorney for her and himself, and the Entry is per Attornatum of the
Baron and Feme, and not the Baron only: And for this Cause the Judgment was
Reversed.

And Hale said, that the Baron could not disavow the Guardian made by the Court
for his Feme.

Lewyn versus Forth.
THe Case was, Magdalen College in Oxford being seized of an House and a Mill,
demised it to Lewyn for 31 years: Covenant.
Lewyn Let the Mill to J.S. for five years, and after demised the House and
Mill to Forth by Indenture for 31 years: Forth Covenanted to Repair the
Premises durante termino praedict' 31 annorum: J. S. refused to attorn; and
whether Forth were bound to Repair the Mill was the Question; because it was
alleged, that the Covenant was to Repair during the Term, and nothing in the
Mill passed during the five years, for want of Attornment. But it was Resolved,
that he was bound to Repair: For Hale said, Though the Lease did not commence in
point of Interest, yet it did in point of Computation; and this Covenant was to
Repair during the 31 years.

Zouch versus Clay.
TRin. ult. Rot. 787. In Debt upon a Bond, the Defendant pleaded, Mo. 619.
That at the time that he sealed and delivered the Bond, there was a Space
left, wherein afterward the Name of J.S. was put in, who also sealed and
delivered it; supposing that the adding another Obligor, bound jointly and
severally with him, 1 Cro. 627.
was an Alteration material to avoid the Bond, Mo. 547.
and relied upon Pigot's Case in the 11 Co.

But the Court held, that the Bond remained the same as to him, and he could
not take advantage of this matter; and it is the common practice of Sheriffs, to
make their Bonds for Appearance in this manner.

Sands versus Rudd.
IN Debt upon a Bond, Conditioned to give Security by a certain Day, as the
Chamberlain of London shall approve.

The Defendant pleaded, that there was no Chamberlain of London at the Day.
Upon which it was Demurred, and Adjudged for the Defendant.

Parsons versus Perus.
HIll. ult. Rot. 1051. In an Ejectment, upon a Special Verdict the Case
appeared to be thus: Two Women were Joynttenants in Fee; one of them made a
Charter of Feoffment to J. S. and Livery within the View, and after (before it
was Executed) married him.

And it was Objected, that this was not a good Feoffment,

None will deny, but that the Death of either party makes a Livery within View
(if not executed by Entry) ineffectual. And in Mo. 85. Dyer 5. If there be not
an Entry immediately, a Livery within the View is not good; and in this case,
by the Marriage, he becomes seized in the Right of his Wife, and cannot by his
own Act divest himself of that Estate, or work a prejudice to his Wife, by
putting the Estate out of her. Which makes it differ from the Case of the 38 E.
3. 11. b. Where a man made Livery of the within View to a Woman; and before she
Entered, married her, and claimed the Estate in Right of his Wife; there held to
be a good Feoffment: For in that case, there is no Alteration of the Estate
consequent upon the Intermarriage, Neither is it like the Case of 2. R. 2.
quoted in Forse and Hemling's Case in the 4 Co. Where a Woman grants a
Reversion to a Man, and they Intermarry before Attornment: For there the Grant
is to be perfected by the Act of a Stranger, which in reason should be more
available to a man than his own Act.

But it was Resolved by all the Court, that this Livery was well Executed after
the Marriage: For an Interest passes by the Livery in View, which cannot be
countermanded. The effectual part of it, (viz.) Go Enter, and take possession,
was before the Marriage, though the Estate is not in the Feme while Entry. She
has done all on her part to be done, and has put it merely in the Foffor's
power, and when he Enters it has a strong retrospect to the Livery, and shall
be pleaded as a Feoffment when she was sole. If two Women Exchange Lands, and
one marries before Entry; this shall not defeat the Exchange. The Cases of 2 R.
2. and 38 Ed. 3. are as strong.

Emerson versus Emerson.
TRin. ult. Rot. 1389. Error of a Judgment in the Common Pleas, in an Action of
Trespass by the Plaintiff as Executor, upon the Statute of 4 E. 3. De bonis
asportatis in vita Testatoris. The Plaintiff declared, that the Defendant blada
crescentia, upon the Freehold of the Testator, messuit defalcavit cepit and
asportavit.

Upon Not Guilty pleaded, a Verdict and Judgment was for the Plaintiff, and
assigned for Error, That no Action lay for Cutting of the Corn; for that is a
Trespass done to the Freehold of the Testator, for which the Statute gives the
Executor no Action, and while the Corn stands, it is to many purposes parcel of
the Freehold. So that if a man cuts Corn and carries it away presently, though
with a Felonious intent, it is no Felony: Otherwise, if he let it lie after it is
Cut, and at another time comes and steals it: So that it appears for parcel of
the Trespass no Action lies; then entire Damages being given as well for the
Cutting, as Carrying away the Corn, the Judgment is Erroneous.

But all the Court were of another Opinion; 9 Co. 78.
for it is but one entire Trespass; the Declaration only describes the manner of
Taking it away. Indeed, if it had been quare clausum fregit and blada
asportavit, it had been naught; or if he had Cut the Corn and let it lie, no
Action would have lain for the Executor. So if the Grass of the Testator be
Cut, and carried away at the same time; because the Grass is part of the
Freehold, but Corn growing is a Chattel. The Statute of 4 Ed. 3. has been
always Expounded largely.

Mr. Amhurst's Case of Gray's Inn.
Sergeant Maynard moved for a Mandatory Writ to the Mayor and Court of Aldermen
of London, upon the Statute of 13 Car. 2. c. 11. to give Judgment according to
the late Act of 22 nunc Regis. The Case was, That the Act appoints a Market to
be on certain Ground set out in Newgate-Market; and in all such cases, for the
satisfaction of the Owners of the Ground; (if the City cannot agree with them
for it) it Impowers the Mayor and Aldermen to Empannel a Jury, who shall Assess
and Adjudge what satisfaction and recompense shall be given to the Owners; and
says, That the Verdict of such Jury, on that behalf to be taken, and the
Judgment of the said Mayor and Court of Aldermen thereupon, and the Payment of
the Money so awarded or adjudged, etc. shall be binding and conclusive to and
against the Owners, etc.

Now there was Fifteen thousand Foot of Amhurst's Ground taken away for this
purpose, and a Jury had been Empannelled, and had assessed and awarded him Two
shillings a Foot; but the Mayor and Court of Aldermen refused to give Sentence
or Judgment thereupon: This, says he, is a Ministerial thing, and this Court
will interpose when any Officers will not do Justice, or will out-go their
Authority: For there is the same Reason to command to do Justice, as to
prohibit Injustice. A Bishop of Exon had Fallen-out with a Town in Cornwall, and
denied them Chrisme; and a Mandamus went hence, to command him to give it them.
Mr. Noy brought in a Copy of it.

Sir William Jones. This somewhat resembles a Procedendo ad Judicium; this is
stronger than the Case of commanding a Bishop to grant Administration; there
this Court commands them to observe a Statute, though it be in a Matter this
Court has no Cognizance of. We cannot have an Action on the Case.

Hale. If they don't make you Satisfaction, your Interest is not bound.

Maynard. But that is taken away by the same Act (Page 143. 4.) We are Lessee
to ^he Dean and Chapter of St. Paul's.

Hale. It Is not Enacted, That they shall give Judgment; but that is employed: I
never knew a Writ, commanding to grant Administration, though the Opinion has
been so.

Sir William Jones. That was done in Sir G. Sandy's Case, after great Debate.

Then a Rule was made, to show Cause why a Writ should not go.

Afterward the Court granted a Writ, but willed them to consider well of the
Form, and to whom to direct it.

Loyd versus Brooking.
TRin. ult. 1046. The Case was, Tenant for Life, Remainder to his first Son in
Tail, Remainder to J. S. for Life, Remainder to his first Son in Tail, etc.
Tenant for Life after the Birth of his first Son, accepts a Fine from J. S. to
certain uses; and then makes a Feoffment, after which the Son of J. S. is Born,
and whether his Contingent Remainder were destroyed, or should vest in him, was
the Question? And it was Resolved by the whole Court, upon the first Opening,
that the Contingent Remainder was not destroyed; the acceptance of the Fine
displaced nothing, the Feoffment divested all the Estates, but the Right left
in the first Son in Remainder, supported the Contingent Remainders. My Lord
Coke's Case 2 Rolls 796, 797, is stronger: He Covenanted to stand seized to the
use of himself for Life, Remainder to his Wife for life, Remainder to his
Daughter for Life (when born), Remainder to her first Son in Tail: And minding
to disturb the arising of the Contingent Estates, attempted it by these two
Means,

First, He grants the Reversion, and in the Grant recites the former
Settlement; which Grant was without Consideration.

And, Secondly, makes a Feoffment: And it was Resolved, that the Grant should
not hinder the arising of the Contingent Use; because the Grantee had Notice,
and was therefore subject to the Covenant, to stand seized by the Grantor, and
that the Feoffment should not destroy the Contingent Estate; because the right
of Remainder for Life in the Daughter, upon which she might have entered for the
Forfeiture did support it, though indeed the Remainder for Life in the Wife would
not, for the Feoffment by the Husband tolls her Right during the Coverture, cui
contradicere non potest; upon which reason is Biggot and Smiths Case adjudged,
3 Cro. Now this is stronger than the Case at Bar, because the Settlement was by
way of use, but here Act executed. The Case of my Lord Cook was adjudged by
Roll in Banco Regis, and after by Glyn. It has been the most common way of
Conveyancing, to prevent the disappointing Contingent Estates to make
Feoffments, etc. to the use of the Husband, etc. for Life, Remainder to the use
of the Feoffees for the Life of the Husband, and so on to Contingent
Remainders; and the more modern ways have been to make the first Estate but for
years; but in both Cases, he which has the first Estate, cannot destroy the
Remainders. It has been a question. Whether a right of Action would support a
Contingent Estate, but never doubted, but that a right of Entry would, Vid.
Archers Case, 1 Co.

Katherin Austins Case.
AN Indictment was found against her, that she vi and armis a certain part of
the Kings Highway, (leading from Shorditch Church to Stoke Newington thorough
Hogsdon,) postibus and repagulis inclusit, etc.

Upon a Trial at Bar the principal question was, Whether the place where the
obstruction was, were an High way.

Hale said, If a way lead to a Market, and were a way for all Travelers, and
did communicate with a great Road, etc. it is an Highway; but if it lead only
to a Church, to a Private House or Village, or to Fields, there it is a Private
way. But it is a matter of Fact, and much depends upon Common Reputation. If it
be a public way of Common right, the Parish is to repair it, unless a
particular person be obliged by Prescription or Custom. Private ways are to be
repaired by the Village or Hamlet, or sometimes by a particular person. In the
Case at Bar, it was found no Highway. Ante.

Castilian versus Platt.
ERror of Judgment in Communi Banco, in Scire facias against three Executors,
the Error assigned was, that one was an Infant.

Hale. No doubt a Scire facias lies against him; and seeing this case is, that
he did not appear, Judgment was well given against him.

Simon Morse versus Willam Sluice.
MIchael' ult. Rot. 421. An Action upon the Case was brought by the Plaintiff
against the Defendant; and he declared, that whereas according to the Law and
Custom of England, Masters and Governors of Ships which go from London beyond
Sea; and take upon them to carry Goods beyond Sea, are bound to keep safely day
and night the same Goods, without loss or substraction, ita quod pro defectu of
them, they may not come to any damage; and whereas the 15 of May last, the
Defendant was Master of a certain Ship called the William and John, then riding
at the Port of London, and the Plaintiff had caused to be laden on Board her
three Trunks, and therein 400 pair of Silk Stockings, and 174 pound of Silk, by
him to be transported for a reasonable reward of Freight to be paid, and he
then and there did receive them, and ought to have transported them, etc. but
he did so negligently keep them, that in default of sufficient care and custody
of him and his Servants, 17 May, the same were totally lost out of the said
Ship.

Upon Not guilty pleaded, a Special Verdict was found. (viz.) That the Ship lay
in the River of Thames, in the Port of London in the Parish of Stepney, in the
County of Middlesex, prout, etc.

That the Goods were delivered by the Plaintiff on Board the Ship, prout, etc.
to be transported to Cadiz in Spain.

That the Goods being on Board, there were a sufficient number of Men for to
look after and attend her left in her.

That in the night came 11 persons on pretense of pressing of Seamen for the
Kings service, and by force seized on these Men (which were 4 or 5, found to be
sufficient as before) and took the Goods.

That the Master was to have Wages from the Owners, and the Mariners from the
Master,

The She was of the Burden of 150 Tunn, etc.

So the question was upon a Trial at Bar, whether the Master were chargeable
upon this matter.

It was insisted on for the Plaintiff, that he who took Goods to carry them for
profit, ought to keep them at his peril.

To which it was answered, That there was no negligence appeared in the Master.
By the Civil Law, if Goods were taken by Pirates, the Master shall not answer
for them; and this is not the Case of a Carrier, for though here the Goods are
received at Land, yet they are to be transported, and being one entire
Contract, they shall not be under one Law in the Port and another at Sea; the
Master is not liable in case of Fire or Sinking the Ship; Owen. 57.
every one knows the Ship is liable to inevitable accidents, and there is no
Case of this nature in experience. And Sergeant Maynard added, that this
differed from the case of a Carrier, for that he is paid by the Owner of the
Goods; but here the Master is Servant to the Owner of the Ship, and he pays
him, and not the Merchant.

The Court inclined strongly for the Defendant, there being not the least
negligence in him; but it was appointed to be Argued, but since I Have heard it
was compounded. It was agreed on all hands, that the Master should have
answered, in case there had been any default in him, or his Mariners.

Anonymus.
UPon a motion for Restitution after the Reversal of an Outlawry, Hale said
that he must plead the Reversal to the seizure in Scaccario.

Puckle versus Moor.
MIchael. ult. Rot. 461. A Promise was made seven years since, to pay Money
within three Months after.

The Defendant pleaded Non Assumpsit infra sex annos ante exhibitionem Bille,
whereas it should have been causa Actonis non accrevit infra sex annos; though in
this case it appears within the Declaration, that the time of payment was not
within six years before; yet because the Defendant had not pleaded it, he
cannot have advantage of it.

Goff versus Loyd.
MIchael. ult. Rot. 268. Trespass quare domum fregit, and took away so many
Nails, etc.

The Defendant pleads Specially, and sets forth the two Acts for Hearth-Money,
14 Car. nunc. cap. 10. and 16 Car. nunc cap. 3. in pursuance of which he
distrained the said Nails, for the Duty due by those Acts out of a Smiths
Forge, etc.

The Plaintiff demurred; So the sole question was, whether a Smiths Forge were
within the Acts; it being once argued the last Term, the Court now gave their
Opinion.

Moreton. I think a Smiths Forge ought to pay; it is a great part of the Kings
Revenue, almost in every Village there is one, we should explain the Act
liberally for the King.

Rainsford of the same Opinion; it is within the words (scilicet,) an Hearth
whereon Fire is used, and within the meaning, for there is an exception of
things not so properly Fire hearths as this, (viz.) Private Ovens. Where the
Act excepts Blowing Houses, I take it is meant Glass houses, and the Houses at
Ironworks; by Stamps I think is meant Presses, Calenders for Clothes; by the
very words, Houses that are not Dwelling Houses are charged. The objection that
it is his Trade, is answered by the instance of Cooks, Chandlers, Common Ovens,
Hearths of Tripewomen, who boil Neats Feet.

Twisden of the same Opinion, the words are general, yet I would not extend it
to every Hearth that has a Fire upon it, as Stils and Alembicks, for so we
might extend it to a Chaffing dish of Coals; but we must take it for a Rule, to
extend it to those things which are most general. A Smiths Forge is of such
use, that it is found almost in every Village; therefore 'twas reckoned a great
piece of hardship and slavery upon the Children of Israel, that they were not
permitted a thing so useful amongst them. The exceptions enumerate particulars,
therefore it excludes whatever is not expressed.

Hale. I would fain know how the fact is. Do Silver Smiths, etc. pay? It were
too narrow to extend it only to Common Chimneys, and too great a latitude to
extend it to every place where Fire is, where a Man can but warm his Hands. I
suppose Boylers in Cooks Chimneys, and the Fireplaces of Worstead Combers do
not pay, Common Ovens should have paid, though there were no exception of Private
Ovens, for they never are, or can be without a Chimney. This is matter of fact,
I have not enquired into, and I would be loath to deliver an Opinion without
much inquiry; but it is very probable that they are Firehearths, and not
excepted; but it appears plainly upon the Record, that it is a Firehearth, and
by the general Demurrer it is admitted.

( Note, There was a Special Rule, that no advantage should be taken of the
Pleading by either side.) But Hale said, he did not know how they were bound by
that Rule.

Termino Paschae, Anno 24 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Monk versus Morris and Clayton.
THe Plaintiff after he had obtained Judgment in Debt became Bankrupt, and the
Defendants brought a Writ of Error.

The Judgment was affirmed in the Exchequer Chamber, and the Record sent back.

Then a Commission of Bankrupts is sued out, and the Commissioners Assign this
Judgment.

The Plaintiff Sues out Execution, and the Money is levied by the Sheriff and
brought into Court.

The Assignee moves, that it may not be delivered to the Plaintiff, surmising
that the Judgment was assigned to him, ut Ante.

The Court said, they might have brought a Special Sicre facias, which they
having delayed, and that it would be hard to stay the Money in Court upon a
bare surmise, and for ought appeared, it was the Plaintiff's due. But however,
because it might be hazardous to deliver it to him, they consented to detain
it; so that the Assignee forthwith took out a Scire facias against the
Defendant, in order to try the Bankrupcy, or otherwise, that it should be
delivered to the Plaintiff.

Sir Ralph Bovyes Case.
IN an Ejectment upon a Trial at Bar, the Case appeared to be this. Sir William
Drake was seized in Fee of the Lands in question, and 19 Car. 1. infeoffed Sir
William Spring, and five others, to such uses as he should declare by his Will
in Writing, or by his Deed subscribed by three Witnesses. In August 20 Car. 1.
by his Deed, ut supra, he limits the use of the said Lands to his Brother
Francis Drake for 90 years, and declares. That the Feoffees should be seized to
their own use, in Trust for the said Francis Drake and his Heirs, with a power
to Francis Drake to alter and limit the Trust as he should think fit.

In the same Month there is a Treaty of Marriage between F.D. and the Daughter
of Sir William Spring; and it was agreed by certain Articles between F.D. and
Sir W. S. etc. reciting that he should receive 2500 l with his intended Wife,
(which Money was proved to be paid,) that F. D. should convey the Lands in
question to himself and his Wife, and the Heirs Males of their two Bodies, etc.
for the Jointure of the Wife.

The Marriage afterward in 20 Car. takes effect, and soon after the same year
F.D. by Indenture between him Sir W.S. and another) reciting the Articles of
Marriage, Assigns his Term of 90 years, to Sir W. S. and the other in Trust to
himself for Life, the remainder to his Wife for Life, and after to the Heirs
Males of their two Bodies; and by the same Deed limits the Trust, of the
Inheritance of the Lands in the same manner.

Afterward in 23 Car. 1. he in consideration of 6000 l (proved to be paid)
Grants out of the said Lands a Rent of 400 l per annum, to Sir Ralph Bovy and
his Heirs, with power to enter into the Land, in case the Rent was not paid,
and to retain it until satisfaction.

Afterward F. D. and his Wife dye, the Rent was Arrear. Sir R. Bovy enters,
Sir Will. Spring, and the other Trustees Assign the term of 90 years, to Sir
Will. Drake, Heir Male of F.D. and his Wife the Lessor of the Plaintiff. In
this case, these Points were agreed by the Court.

First, That when Sir W. D. enfeoffed diverse to such Uses as he should declare
by his Will or Writing; that if he had in pursuance of that Feoffment limited
the Uses by his Will, that the Will had been but Declaratory, though if he had
made a Feoffment to the Use of his Will it had been otherwise, according to Sir
Ed. Cleeres Case, 6 Co. And Hale said, my Lord Co. made a Feoffment, (provided
that he might dispose by his Will) to the use of the Feoffee and his Heirs; and
resolved in that case he might declare the Use by his Will; which should arise
out of the Feoffment.

Secondly, That this Settlement being in pursuance of Articles made precedent
to the Marriage, had not the least color of fraud, whereby a Purchaser might
avoid it; and if there had been but a Verbal Agreement for such a Settlement,
it would have served the turn. And the Court said, if there had been no
precedent Agreement, so that it had been a voluntary Conveyance, though every
such an one carries an Evidence of fraud; yet is not upon that account, only
always to be reckoned fraudulent, or to be avoided by a Purchaser upon a
valuable Consideration.

Thirdly, Whereas it was objected, That the Trust of the Term which was but a
Chattel could not be Entailed, and therefore the Term was liable to the Rent
notwithstanding the Assignment of it, and limiting the Trust as before.

It was answered, and resolved by the Court; that if it had been a Term in
Gross in F. D. the Trust of it could have been no more Entailed than the Term
it self, but F. D. having the Term in Point of Interest, and at the same, the
Trust of the Inheritance, might Entail the Trust of the Term, to wait upon the
Inheritance; and that the Chancery does every day allow, which they should take
notice of.

But then it was objected, that he ought to have limited the Trust of the
Inheritance, and of the Term both together; but F. D. by a distinct Clause in
the Deed limits the Trust of the Term which divides it, and makes it
independent upon the Inheritance, the Trust of which he limits by another
Clause.

To that it was said by the Court, that though the Limitations were by several
Clauses, yet all must be taken as one entire Conveyance. And Hale said that in
1646, a Lease for years was assigned, and the Trust of it Entailed, and two
days after the Trust of the Inheritance Entailed in the same manner; and it was
held by the best Counsel then in England, that though this were done by several
Deeds, and at several times; yet being in pursuance of one Agreement, that all
was to be taken as one entire Act, according to the Case of 17 Jac. where a
Fine was levied to Lessee for years, with an intent that he should suffer a
Recovery, which was had the Term following, and resolved that his Term was not
drowned. The Jury hearing the Opinion of the Court found for the Plaintiff for
all, save a 12th part, for so much was drowned and surrendered by the Assignment
of F. D. to Sir W. S. one of the six Joynt-tenants of the Reversion.

Wood versus Coat.
AN Action for words, That the Defendant being indicted of a forcible Entry at
the Sessions, and the Plaintiff produced as a Witness for the King, and Swore
nothing but what was true; the Defendant after habens colloquium of the said
Oath said, The Plaintiff took a false Oath against me at the Sessions innuendo,
the said Oath, etc.

After Verdict for the Plaintiff it was moved, That the Action did not lie, for
the Defendant might mean an Extrajudicial Oath. In Pritchards Case, 2 Rolls,
where one said of him, He took a false Oath against me at the Assizes. It was
held, that the Action did not lie. Sed non allocatur, for in that case there
was no colloquium laid, which is alleged in this case, and shows to what the
words spoken did relate.

Bradnox Case.
A Habeas Corpus was brought to remove the Body of Broadnox, who was taken by
Process upon a Plaint exhibited in the Court of the Sheriffs in London, and it
was returned, That time out of mind the Mayor Aldermen and Common Council, of
the City, have had the Government and Regulation of Trade within the City, and
power to make By laws concerning the same; and that they had made a By-law,
that there should be but 420 Carrs allowed to work within the City, all which
should be Licensed by the President of Christ's Church Hospital, and that there
should be paid for the License of every Carr 1 l Fine. and 17 s per annum to
the said President, to be employed for the use of the Poor within the Hospital;
and that none should use a Carr without such License, under a certain penalty
to be recovered, etc. Provided, That all persons may send their own Carrs to
the Wharfs, etc. and carry Goods in their own Carrs from Wharfs, except such as
shall be Traders or Retailers in Fuel.

That B. without such License wrought with a Carr pro lucro suo proprio, and
for the penalty forfeited thereupon, a Plaint was levied against him, etc.

It was prayed, that there might be no Procedendo in this Case, for though the By
law should be admitted to be good, having a Custom to warrant it, as was
ajudged in this Court, 19 Car. nunc, between Player and Jenkins; yet it appears
that the Plaint is insufficient, for in that, no Custom is alleged; and in 1
Rolls 364. such a By-law to limit the number of Carrs was held void; for there
no Custom is alleged to ground it upon, and then a By-law cannot restrain
Trade.

Again, it is unreasonable, that such as Trade in Fuel should not be permitted
to bring home the Wood, which they buy in the Country in their own Carts, or to
carry it out to their Customers, for though they might limit the number of
Carmen, which in too great a multitude would be a Nusans, and infest the
Streets; yet they cannot restrain a Man from using his own Carrs, to carry his
own Commodities.

As to the First, The Court were of Opinion, that it was not necessary to
mention the Custom in the Plaint, for it is Lex loci, and they take notice of
their own Customs in their own Courts; As in Norwich the Custom is, that in
Debt upon a Specialty the Debtor fatetur Scriptum, sed petit quod inquiratur de
debito, and no Custom is set forth in the Record to warrant that. But here in
the Habeas Corpus they have returned the Custom, which shows they had good
cause to proceed upon their Plaint; for it has been often resolved, that
Custom may create a Monopoly, as the case in the Register is; a Custom was,
that none should exercise the Trade of a Dier in Rippon, without the Archbishop
of Yorks License.

As to the Second the Court doubted, whether this By-law could be adjudged
reasonable or good, because it would restrain the Woodmongers from bringing
their Wood, etc. home in their own Carrs, so that though they brought it in the
Country Carts as far as the Liberties of the City; they must then unload and
put it in City Carrs, which would be extremely inconvenient, and so it would be
if they should send City Carrs to fetch it; and though it might be reasonable to
prohibit them carrying their Commodities out in their own Carrs, that they
might not have so great an opportunity to cheat in their Measures; yet there
could be no Color to restrain them from bringing them in. Et Adjornatur.

Cuts versus Pickering.
UPon a Trial at Bar, one Baker (who had been Solicitor for Pickering) was
produced as a Witness concerning the Razure of a Clause in a Will, supposed to
be done by Pickering.

The Court were moved, Whether he could be Examined touching this, because
having been retained his Solicitor, he should by reason of that be obliged to
keep his Secrets? But it appearing that B. had made this Discovery to him, of
which he was now about to give Evidencee, before such time as he had Retained
him, the Court were of Opinion that he might be Sworn. Otherwise, if he had
been retained his Solicitor before: The same Law of an Attorney or Counsel.

Sir Samuel Jones versus the Countess of Manchester.
IN an Ejectment upon a Trial at the Bar, the Evidences which (as the Plaintiff
pretended) would have made out his Title, and would have avoided the Settlement
in Jointure, which the Countess of Manchester claimed, were locked up in a Box,
which was in the Custody of a Stranger, who before the Trial delivered the Key
to the Earl of Bedford, Brother to the Countess of Manchester, and Trustee for
her; who being present in Court, and requested to deliver the Key, that the Box
might be opened, which was brought into Court: He said, (being a Trustee in the
behalf of his Sister) He conceived, he was not obliged to show forth any
Writings that might impeach her Estate; and if he should, it would be a breach
of the Trust reposed in him, which he held sacred and inviolable.

The Court told him, That they could not compel him to deliver the Key: But
Hales said, It were more advisable for him to do it. For he held, though it is
against the Duty of a Counselor or Solicitor, etc. to discover the Evidence,
which he which retains him acquaints him with; yet a Trustee may and ought to
produce Writings, etc. But they could not Rule him to do it here; and the Earl
declaring his Resolution not to do it, the Plaintiffs Counsel desired leave of
the Court to break open the Box.

The Court said, that they would make no Order in it, nor would determine how
far the Title to the Writings drew in the property of the Box; or whether the
delivering the Key to the E. did not amount to a Pledge of the Box.

Sergeant Maynard said, It was the course of the Chancery, when a Bill was
Exhibited against a Joyntress, to discover Writings, not to compel her to do it
till such time as the Plaintiff agrees to confirm her Jointure. And he knew a
Bill of Discovery brought against a Purchasor upon a valuable Consideration;
and the Court would not compel him to Answer, though it was proved there was a
Deed and a real Settlement.

Upon opening the Evidence in the Case at Bar, these Points were stirred and
Resolved by the Court:

That where a man makes a Feoffment, etc. to Uses, with power of Revocation,
when he has executed that Power, he cannot limit New Uses; but if it had been
with a Power to revoke and limit New, then he might revoke and limit New, with
a power of Revocation annexed to those New; which if he does afterward revoke,
he may again limit New Uses according to the first Power, and so in infinitum:
But always the New Uses must correspond to those Circumstances, etc. which the
first Power appoints, for that is the Foundation, 2 Rolls 262. Beckett's Case.

The Plaintiff being at a loss for his Writings, was Nonsuit.

Seaman versus Dee.
AN Indebitat' Assumpsit, as Executor of S. was brought against the Defendant
by the Plaintiff, as an Attorney of this Court by Original.

The Defendant pleads four Judgments against him; One in an Action of Debt,
(upon which the Question was) for Money borrowed by the Testator upon Interest,
which Debt with the Interest, at the time of the Action brought, amounted to
such a Sum, which was recovered against him: And pleads three Judgments
besides, ultra quae he had not to satisfy.

The Plaintiff Demurs, and after being diverse times spoken to, the Court
Resolved for the Plaintiff.

First, For that Hale said, No Action of Debt lies for the Interest of Money,
though he which borrows it Promises to pay after the rate of 6 l per Cent. for
it; but it is to be recovered by Assumpsit in Damages. So where by Deed the
party Covenants or Binds himself to pay the Principal with Interest, the
Interest is not to be included with the Principal in an Action of Debt, but
shall be turned into Damages, which the Jury is to measure to what the Interest
amounts to, which is allowed to be done; though indeed the Statutes (which permit
the taking of Interest) say, That Usury is damned, and forbidden by the Law of
God. And though it was Objected, That the Judgment is but Erroneous, and the
Executor liable while Reversed; and it cannot be said, it was the Executor's
fault to suffer it: For an Executor may plead a Judgment against him in Debt
upon a simple Contract; though it could not have been recovered if he had pleaded
to the Action, or without his voluntary Consent.

To that Hale said, That Debt upon a Simple Contract lies against an Executor,
if he please; nay, it has been Adjudged, that an Executor may retain for a
Debt but to him from the Testator, upon a Simple Contract: But in this Case no
Action lies by the Law, nor any admission of the Executor can make it good.

Secondly, It appears, that part of the Interest accrued after the Testator's
death, which is the Executors proper Debt, being his own default to suffer the
Interest to run on: Then the Action being brought, both for that which is due
in the Testator's time, and for that which grew due since, is manifestly
Erroneous; and there is nothing in the Defendants Plea to take away the
Intendment, that he had Assets to satisfy at the Testator's death.

To the Objection, That the Plaintiff once had abated his Writ; for that he
declares by Privilege, as an Attorney of the Court.

It was Answered, That the alleging of his Profession and Privilege in the
Declaration, was Surplusage and an impertinent Flourish, and that being
rejected the Declaration is sufficient upon the Writ; and an Attorney is at
election to Sue, either by Original, or by Privilege. Wherefore the Rule was,
that the Plaintiff should have his Judgment.

The Lady Anne Fry's Case.
IN an Ejectment by Williams, Lessee of George Porter Esquire, against the Lady
Anne Fry. The Case appeared to be this, upon a Special Verdict.

That Mountjoy, Earl of Newport was seized of an House called Newport-House, in
the County of Middlesex, and had three Sons, who are yet living, and had two
Daughters. Isabel married to the Earl of Banbury, by whom she had Issue Anne
the Defendant; and Anne married to Porter, by whom she had Issue George Porter
Lessor of the Plaintiff, and made his Will in this manner:

I give and bequeath to my Dear Wife, the Lady Anne, Countess of Newport, all
that my House called Newport House, and all other my Lands, etc. in the County
of Middlesex, for her Life; and after her Death I give and bequeath the
Premises to my Grandchild Anne Knolles (viz. the Defendant) and the Heirs of
her Body: Provided always, and upon Condition, that she Marries with the
Consent of my said Wife, and the Earl of Warwick, and the Earl of Manchester,
or the major part of them: And in case she Marries without such Consent, or
happen to dye without Issue, then I give and bequeath it to George Porter,
(viz. the Lessor of the Plaintiff.)

The Earl of Newport dies, and the Lady Anne Knolles being of the Age of 14
years, marries with Fry without the Consent of her Grandmother, or either of
the Earls; and it was found, that she had no Notice of the Will until after the
Marriage, and that George Porter at that time was of the Age of 8 years; and
that after the Death of the Countess she Entered, and George Porter Entered upon
her, and made the Lease to the Plaintiff.

This Case having been twice Argued at the Bar, (viz.) in Michaelmas Term, by
Sir William Jones for the Plaintiff, and Winnington for the Defendant: And in
Hillary Term last, by Finch, Attorney General, for the Plaintiff; and Sir
Francis North, Solicitor General, for the Defendant.

It was this Term Resolved by the Court, (viz.) Hale, Twisden and Rainsford, (
Moreton being absent) for the Plaintiff, upon these Reasons.

Rainsford. Here have been three Questions made.

First, Whether the words in the Will, whereby the marriage of the Defendant is
restrained, make a Condition or Limitation: If a Condition, then none but the
Heir can Enter for the Breach. But it is clear, that they must be taken as a
Limitation, to support the intent of the Devisor, and to let in the Remainder
which he limits over, 1 Rolls 411.

Secondly, Whether the Infancy of the Defendant shall excuse her in this
Breach, and clearly it cannot: For a Condition in Deed obliges Infants as much
as others, 8 Co. 42. Whittingham's Case, the difference between Conditions in
Fact and Conditions in Law. Especially in this Case, the nature of the
Condition showing it to be therefore imposed upon her, because she was an
Infant.

Thirdly, (and the main Point of the Case,) Whether the want of Notice shall
save the Forfeiture of the Estate? As to that, Let the Rules of Law concerning
Notice be considered.

First, I take a difference where the Devisee, who is to perform the Condition,
is Heir at Law; and where a Stranger. The Heir must have Notice, because he
having a Title by Descent, need not take notice of any Will, unless it be
signified to him. And so is Fraunce's Case, 8 Co. Where the Heir was Devisee
for 60 years, upon Condition not to disturb the Executor in removing the Goods;
and Resolved that he should not lose his Estate upon a Disturbance, before he
had Notice of the Will. But where the Devisee is not Heir, (as in this Case) he
must inform himself of the Estate devised to him, and upon what terms.

Another Rule is, When one of the Parties is more privy than the other, Notice
must be given; but where the Privity is equal, Notice must be taken by the
party concerned. A Bargainee shall not Enter for a Condition broken, before
Notice, for the Bargain and Sale lies in his Cognizance, and not the Lessees.
So if a Lease be made to commence after the end of the former; if the first be
surrendered, the Lessor shall not Enter for a Condition broken for Non payment
of Rent, until Notice given of the Surrender, 3 Leon. 95. And therefore there
shall be no Lapse to the Ordinary upon a Resignation, without Notice. If a man
makes a Feoffment, upon Condition to Enter upon payment of such a Sum at a
place certain, he must give Notice to the Feoffee when he will tender the
Money, Co. Lir. 211. a. Dyer 354. And upon this Reason is Molineux's Case, 2
Cro. 144. where a Devise was, that his Heir should pay such Rents, and if he
made default, then his Executors should have the Lands, paying the said Rents;
and if they failed of Payment, then he devised the Land to his younger
Children, to whom the Rents were to be paid. It was Resolved, Non-payment by
the Executors should be no Breach, until they had Notice that the Heir had
failed, which was a thing that the younger Children must be privy to. But in 22
E. 4. 27, 28. Tenant for Life Lets for years, and dies; the Lessee must remove
in convenient time, to be reckoned from the death of the Tenant, whether he had
Notice of it or no: For he in Reversion is presumed to be no more privy to it
than himself. So Gymlett and Sands's Case. 3 Cro. 391. and 1 Rolls 856. where
Baron and Feme were Tenants for Life, Remainder to the Son in tail, Remainder
to the right Heirs of the Baron; the Baron makes a Feoffment with Warranty and
dies, then the Feme and Son join in a Feoffment; this is a Forfeiture of the
Estate of F. though she had no Notice of the Feoffment or Warranty, whereby the
Right of the Son was bound. So Spring and Caesar's Case. 1 Rolls 469. A. and B.
join in a Fine, to the use of A. in Fee, if B. does not pay 10 l to A. before
Michaelmas; and if he does, then to the use of A. for Life, Remainder to B. B.
dies before Michaelmas, the Heir of B. is bound to pay the 10 l without any
Notice given by A. The Reason given (which comes home to our Case) is, For that
none is bound to give Notice, and then it must be taken; though indeed a second
be added, For that B. (from whom his Heir derives) had Notice. The Mayor and
Comminalty of London aganst Atford, 1 Cro. where a Devise was to six Persons,
to pay certain Sums for the Maintenance of an Almshouse, etc. and if through
Obliviousness, or other Cause, the Trusts were not performed, then to J. S.
upon the same Condition; and if he failed by two Months, then to the Mayor and
Comminalty of London upon the same Trusts. The six did not perform the Trusts,
J.S. enters, J. N. enters upon him, and a Fine with Proclamations was levied,
and Five years passed; and the better Opinion was, that the Mayor and
Comminalty of London were bound to pay the Money appointed by the Will, although
they had no Notice that the six persons or J. S. had failed; though indeed the
Case is adjudged against them, as being barred by the Fine and Non-claim. Sir
Andrew Corbet's Case, 4 Co. is very strong to this purpose; where a Devise is
to J. S. until he shall or may raise such a Sum out of the Profits of the Land:
If a Stranger Enters after the death of the Devisor, though the Devisee had no
Notice of the Will, yet the time shall run on, as much as if he had the Land in
his own possession.

These Rules being applied to the present Case, it will appear no Notice is to
be given:

First, The Defendant is as privy to the Will as any one else, (viz.) as George
Porter, who is found also to be an Infant. It is not found whether there were
any Executors, if it had, they were not concerned to give Notice, nor did it
import the Heir: For he could have neither benefit or loss by the Condition.

The Two Cases which have been chiefly relied upon for the Defendant, were,
first France's Case, which differs, because it was in case of an Heir.
Secondly, the Case of Sanders and Carwell, 8 Jac. in a private Report of Sir
Geoffrey Palmer, the Attorney General, in which there is no clear account of
the Case, and we cannot find the Roll: It was a Devise to his Wife for life,
Remainder to his Daughter in tail, upon Condition to pay Money; and it was held
that the Non-payment would be no breach unless she had Notice.

First, It was an Opinion only upon Evidence, and Lea and Chamberlain only in
Court.

Secondly, For ought appears the Daughter might be Heir, and then it is good Law.

Thirdly, It appears there was a foul Concealment of the Will for Four years
time; within which time (for ought appears) the Condition was to have been
performed.

Twisden was of the same Opinion; but I omit his Argument, because I could not
hear him perfectly.

Hale was of the same Opinion. As to the first Point, I shall discharge the
Case of it, as not fit to be called in question: For without peradventure though
the word Condition be used, yet limiting a Remainder over, makes it a
Limitation; for so it is plain the Testator meant, and it is as much as if he had
said, And if she Marries, etc. then to remain, without the word Condition. And
this has received as many Resolutions as ever any Point did, (viz.) Wiseman
and Baldwin's Case, 2 Leon. 51. Owen 412. 1 Leon. 383.
18 Eliz. 1 Rolls 412. Hains worth and Pretty, 3 Cro 833. and 2 Cro. Pells and
Browne's Case, with a great many more; and nothing but the Opinion in Mary
Portington's Case, 10 Co. against it.

When Fynch, Attorney General, Argued this Case, he observed that Coke himself
was of another Opinion in the 3d Report, in Wellock and Hammond's Case, cited
in Boraston's Case: For though there it is the word Paying only, which is adjudged
a Limitation; yet Coke says, the Quaere in Dyer 317. is upon that well
Resolved, and the Case in Dyer is upon the word Condition expressly.

Then to proceed to the other Matters. Here is an Estate Tail devised to the
Defendant, subject to Two Limitations, the one of Law, (viz.) Dying without
Issue; the other express and in Fact, (viz) Marrying without the consent, etc.
and both are coupled together, so that whenever she Marries without Consent,
etc. her Estate determines and is transferred to him in Remainder, without
either Entry or Claim. It Is all one as if the Estate had been devised to her
for Life, and if she Marries, then to remain, which had been but an Estate
quamdiu sola vixerit: And it is to be observed, that if her Marriage here be no
breach of the Conditional Limitation (for so it is properly called) because she
had no Notice, then it can never be broken: So that the Question must be,
Whether such a Marriage shall discharge the Estate of it, and make it become
absolute.

It Is true, where the Condition requires such an Act to be done, as may be done
after Notice, in has been questioned, whether the Law shall not protract the
Time limited for performance, until Notice be had, 1 Cro. Alford's Case, which
was a Condition for Payment of Money: But this is a thing of that nature, that
being done, no subsequent Notice can ever retrieve.

Then it is to Enquire, How far the want of Notice will excuse? It must be
considered, that it is a Will made by a person now dead, who can give no Notice,
neither can any come to the knowledge of it without Enquiry, and one has the
same means to obtain it with another; and the person who would take advantage
of it, must make the best Enquiry he can. If a Devise were made to the
Defendant, it was her Concern to Enquire upon what terms; until then how can it
be ascertained, whether she will take it? And so it was Porter's Business to
Enquire; no difference between them in this respect. So that upon these Five
Accounts, it will appear, that no Notice is requisite to be given in this Case:

First, Because the Testator has not appointed any Notice to be given, than he
which was the Disposer might give upon what terms he pleased; and this Matter
of Notice shall not be added, unless it were in a Case wherein the Law would
very strongly require it.

Secondly, Because there is no Person who can reasonably be engaged to give
Notice (viz.) not the Heir, for he is Disinherited; not the Executors, for they
are not concerned in the Freehold; nor the Trustees, for they have but their
labor for their pains; nor Porter, for he is no more bound to give than she to
take Notice?

Thirdly, Because each Party have the same means of Informing themselves of the
Will, (i.e.) by Enquiry.

Fourthly, It more imported the Defendant to know it, as relating to her own
Interest; the Will which gives the Estate, gives it upon this Conditional
Limitation. Corbet's Case, 4 Co. comes very close; where, if the Devisee stays
while the time wherein the Money might be raised is elapsed, he shall never
raise it after. Suppose a man dies possessed of a Term upon which a great Rent
is reserved; shall the Executor, after that he has proved the Will throw up
the Term, as pretending not to have known of it? An Estate is devised to one
durante Viduitate; shall she Marry, and because she had do Notice of the Will,
hold the Estate absolutely for her Life? There is the same Reason in this Case;
for this Proviso is a part of the Limitation of the Estate it self. No man is
presumed to be ignorant of his own Interest; and as he must take Notice to
acquire, so of the manner of the Estate he gains. He that gave it thus, was not
obliged to do so much.

Fifthly, It was not impossible for the Defendant to have made Enquiry, and she
must not take advantage of her Latches. A Bond with Condition to pay 50 l when
the Obligee shall marry the Obligor's Kinswoman; in Debt upon this, it was
Resolved, that the Obligee was not bound to give Notice of the Marriage, though
it lay in his own privity; because the Obligor might have known it by other
means, Hill. 1650. Between Try and.... Rot. 1081. B. R. It was proper for the
Defendant to have Enquired, whether her Grandfather gave her any thing: And so
it was for him that should marry her. Ante.
Harwood's Case Adjudged here (Hill. ult.) was upon this Reason: He married a
City Orphan in Kent, and was fined by the Court of Orphans, because he had not
first applied himself to them for their License, etc. according to the Custom
of the City: And the Fine was Resolved here to be well imposed, though he had no
Notice that she whom he married was an Orphan; because it was his business to
enquire of the Condition of her whom he will make his Wife.

Then the next thing to be considered is the Infancy of the Defendant, and that
is nothing in this Case. Porter who was the probablest person to give notice is
found to be an Infant too. Conditions in Fact bind Infants. Again, the
Condition here relates to an Act, which she is capable of doing. The Statute of
Merton which Enacts, Non current usurae, etc. whereby Infants are exempted from
Penalties; yet in another Chapter gives the Forfeiture of the said double value
to the Lord where his Ward Marries without his consent. It Is a restraint laid
upon her in a matter proper for her Condition, and with respect to her
Condition, that being and Infant, she might advise with her Friends about her
Marriage. The Cases which have been objected do not come to this Case, as the
Opinion in Sanders and Carwells Case, which might be good Law, if it could be
known what that case was, for the words might either explicitly or implicitly
require notice, as if they were, if he refused to pay, etc. or it may be no
time might be set for payment; for in Molineux Case, there Rents were granted,
and after a Devise for the payment of them which naturally lie in demand.

Secondly, There it concerned the younger Children to give notice; for the
Rents were not only to be paid to them, but upon failer of payment the Land was
Devised to them; So that was a Concurrence of concern in them, as to the
performance of the Condition, and the Estate they should acquire by the Breach.
Whereas the Plaintiff in this Case, is not concerned in the performance of the
Condition.

Thirdly, The penning of the Condition were quite differs; for it is upon
default of payment, which implies notice must be first had. In Frances Case,
there would have been no need of notice, if the Devise had not been to the
Heir, which is the only thing wherein it differs materially from this Case. In
Alfords Case, the debate was occasioned by the special penning; for it was
thus, that if thorough Obliviousness, the Trusts should not happen to be
performed. Now there could be no Oblivion of that they never knew; therefore
there is some Opinion there, that the Mayor and Citizens of L. ought to have
had a precedent notice; yet the Judgment is contrary, for they could not have
been barred by the Fine and Non-claim, if notice had been necessary to the
Commencement of their Title; and it is not found, whether those to whom the
Estate was devised, before had notice; so that this cause proves rather, that
there needs no notice in this case, than otherwise. Wherefore the Plaintiff
must have his Judgment.

When my Lord Chief Justice had concluded. Rainsford said, he had spoken with
Justice Moreton, who declared to him, that he was of the same Opinion.

Fitzgerald versus Marshall.
ERror of a Judgment given in the Kings Bench in Ireland, in affirmance of a
Judgment removed thither by Error out of the Common Pleas in Ireland.

By the Record it appeared, that the Writ of Error to the Common Bench was
directed Rob. Booth, Militi and Socijs suis, quia in Recordo and processu ac in
redditione Judicij loquelae quae suit coram vobis and Socijs vestris. And the
Judgment certified appeared to be in an Action, commenced in the time of Sir.
R. Smith who died, and Sir R. Booth made Chief Justice in his place before
Judgment given. And the Court here were of Opinion, that the Record was not
well removed into the Kings Bench there, by that Writ, which commanded them to
remove Recordum loquelae coram R. Booth; whereas the loquela commenced before
R. Smith, and the Titling of the Record is in such case placita coram R. Smith,
etc. though some of the Continuances might be entered coram R. Booth, and the
Judgment given in his time, and for this Cause, the Judgment given in
affirmance in the Kings Bench there was reversed.

Sir Samuel Sterling versus Turner.
ERror of a Judgment in the Common Bench, in an Action upon the Case, where the
Plaintiff declared upon the Custom of London, of Electing of two Men in the
Office of Bridge-masters, every year by the Citizens assembled in a Common
Hall; and a Custom that if two be Competitors, he that is chosen by the
greatest number of Votes is duly Elected, and that if one in such case desire
the Polls to be numbered, the Mayor ought to grant the Poll. And shows that
there was a Common Hall assembled, the 18 of October 22. Regis nunc. Sterling
being Mayor, and that then the Plaintiff and one Allet stood as Competitors to
be chosen to that Office, and avers, that he had the greatest number of Voices,
and that he affirmed then and there, that he had the greatest number, which the
other denying, he requested the Mayor, that according to the Custom they might
go to the Poll; and the Defendant not minding the Execution of his Office, but
violating the Law and Custom of the City, then and there did maliciously refuse
the numbering of the Polls, but immediately made Proclamation, and dismissed
the Court, by which he lost the Fees and Profits of the Place, which he averred
belonged unto it.

Upon Not guilty pleaded, and Verdict for the Plaintiff after it had been
several times argued in Arrest of Judgment, that this Action did not lie, it
was adjudged for the Plaintiff, by Tyrrel, Archer and Wyld: Vaughan dissenting.
And now Error was brought and assigned in the matter of Law, and argued for
that it was uncertain, whether the Plaintiff should have been Elected; and that
he could not bring an Action for a possibility of damage, and this was no more,
not being decided who had the greatest number of Voices.

But the Court were clear of Opinion, that the Judgment should be affirmed; for
the Defendant deprived the Plaintiff of the means, whereby it should appear,
whether he had the greatest number of Electors or no. And Hale said, it was a
very good President, and so it was adjudged by both Courts.

One D. of Bedfordshire Esquire, was indicted of High Treason, for coining a
great number of counterfeit pieces of Guinnies of Gold 23 Regis nunc, and being
Arraigned at the Bar, he pleaded the Kings Pardon; which was of all Treasons,
and of this in particluar, but did not mention that he stood indicted.

Twisden said, that my Lord Keeling was of Opinion, that such a Pardon was not
good. But Hale said, it might be well enough in this case, but in case of
Murder it is necessary to recite it, because of the Statute of 27 E. 3. 2.
(vid. 10 E. 3. 2. 14 E. 3. 15.) and so it was allowed.

The Lady Chesters Case.
A Prohibition was prayed to the Prerogative Court of Canterbury. Sir Henry
Wood having devised the Guardianship of his Daughter by his Will in VVriting,
according to the Act of this King, to the Lady Chester his Sister, the Duchess
of Cleaveland, to whose Son this Daughter being about 8 years old was
contracted, pretending that Sir Henry VVood by word revoked this disposition of
the Guardianship. Sued in the Prerogative Court, to have this nuncupative
Codicil proved; and the Court granted a Prohibition, for they are not to prove
a Will concerning the Guardianship of a Child, which is a thing conusable
here, and to be judged whether it be devised pursuant to the Statute. And Hale
said, that they may prove a Will which contains Goods and Lands, though formerly
a Prohibition used to go quoad the Lands. Vid. 1 Cro. Netter and Percivalls
Case.

Prior versus....
ERror was brought of a Judgment in this Court into the Exchequer Chamber, and
Error in fact was then assigned; and the Court being there of Opinion, that
Error in fact could not be assigned there, they affirmed the Judgment; upon
which the Record with the Affirmation was remitted hither, and a Writ of Error
was brought here, coram vobis residen' (as is usual for Error in fact.) It was
prayed, that upon putting in not Bail, this new Writ of Error might be a
Supersedeas to the Execution. But the Court held, that this Writ was not to be
allowed in this case, for the Judgment given in this Court, being affirmed in
the Exchequer Chamber, transit in rem judicatam there, and a Writ of Error
cannot be brought here upon a Judgment there; and it is always the course in
Writs of Error to recite all the proceedings that have been in the matter; as
if a Judgment be removed hither, by Error out of the Common Pleas, and here
affirmed, and then brought into Parliament, the last Writ must recite both the
Judgment in Communi Banco, and the Affirmation here. And whereas this Writ goes
by the Judgment into the Exchequer Chamber, and mentions only the Judgment
here, it must therefore be quashed: And it is the course, if a Writ of Error be
brought here, upon Error in fact of a Judgment here, that the Writ should be
allowed in Court. And the Court said, they would allow none in this Case.

Throwers Case.
HE was indicted at the Sessions of the Peace at Ipswich for Stopping communem
viam pedestrem ad Ecclesiam de Witby. It was removed hither by Certiorari, and
the Court were moved to quash it, for it was objected, That an Indictent would
not lie for a Nusans in a Church-path; but Suit might be in the Ecclesiastical
Court. Besides the Damage is private, and concerns only the Parishioners. Where
there is a foot way to a Common, every Commoner may bring his Action if it be
stoped, but in such case there can be no Indictment.

Hale said, if this were alleged to be communis via pedestris ad Ecclesiam pro
parochianis, the Indictment would not be good, for then the Nusans would extend
no further than the Parishioners, for which they have their particular Suits;
but for ought appears this is a common foot way, and the Church is only the
Terminus ad quem, and it may lead further; the Church being expressed only to
ascertain it, and it is laid ad commune nocumentum; wherefore the Rule was, that
he should Plead to it.

The Lady Prettymans Case.
A Judgment was had in a Scire facias brought against her upon a former
Judgment, upon two Nihils returned. And the Court was moved to set it aside,
for that it was alleged; that before the Scire facias brought she was married
to Sir John Prettyman, and that it was brought against her as sole, by
contrivance between the Plaintiff and her Husband to oppress her, and lay her
up in Prison; and it was shown that the Plaintiff knew of the Marriage, for he
(being an Attorney) had prosecuted an other Action before the return of the
Scire facias against her and her Husband, and that she could not help her self
by Error, or Audita Querela, because her Husband would Release.

The Court said, they might set aside the Judgment, for the misdemeanour of the
Plaintiff; but because they were informed, that this Marriage was under debate
in the Ecclesiastical Court, and near to a Sentence, they suspended making any
Rule in this, while that was determined.

Twisden said, he had a Case from my Lord Keeling, where a Feme Covert Infant
levied a Fine, and her Friends got a Writ of Error in her Husbands and her
name, that the Court would not suffer the Husband to Release. But Hale said, he
could not see how that could be avoided; but he had known, that in such case
the Court would not permit the Husband to disavow the Guardian, which they
admitted for the Wife.

Hows Case.
HE was indicted of an Assault, Battery and Wounding of Thomas Masters
Esquire, and Found Guilty at the Assizes in Gloucestershire. Now the Attorney
General moved the Court to set a Fine, and such an one as might be exemplary,
according to the demerit of the Fact; for he showed, that a great part of the
Gentry of Gloucester, amongst which were How and Masters, being assembled at
Circencester, about the Election of a Burgess for that Town; How, without any
provocation, struck Masters on the Cheek with the end of his Cane, which had an
Iron pike at it; and that if Masters had not governed himself with much
moderation and prudence, it had in all probability engaged the whole Assembly
in a dangerous quarrel, they being both Men of great Estates and Quality in the
Country. And the Attorney said, there was nothing more necessary than that
somewhat of a limited Starchamber should be exercised in this Court, for the
due punishment of such enormous Crimes as these.

Hale said, that they were much discouraged from setting Fines, for the new Act
binds them to estreat them into the Exchequer; and then it was well known
whether they went, (meaning to such as farmed them from the King by Patent.)
The Attorney replied, that the legality of such Patents was to be questioned;
and that one which was granted to the Earl of Berkshire, 7 Co. Penal Statutes.
was now like to be resumed, and it was fit it should, seeing it was like to
prove an obstruction to the public Justice.

Then it was doubted, whether the Fine could be set, How not being present; but
held it might, but the Course is not to hear any thing moved in mitigation of
the Fine, unless the Party be present, and he was fined 500 Marks.

Ward versus Forth.
IN Debt upon a Bond, the Defendant pleads, that he delivered the Deed as an
Escrow to J. S. etc. and hoc paratus est verificare.

To this it was demurred. For that he ought to have concluded, and issint ninet
son fait, for this matter amounts to a Special Non est factum; and the
Plaintiff cannot reply, that he delivered it as his Deed absque hoc, that he
delivered it as an Escrow, and so said the Court.

Shermans Case.
BY Certiorari, an Order for the keeping of a Bastard Child by the Justices of
the Peace, in persuance of the Statute of 18 Eliz. was removed into this Court,
which was excepted to.

First, For that they had appointed the Father to allow 4 s to the Midwife;
whereas it did not appear, that the Parish had procured her, or that they were
chargeable with it.

Secondly, For that they ordered 7 s a week, to be allowed for the Nursing
Clothes, etc. of the Child, until it should be able to get its living by
working; which was said to be excessive in the Sum, and uncertain for the time,
for it should have been for so long time as it shall be chargeable to the
Parish.

Hale said, that they could make no allowance to the Midwife, unless in
discharge of the Parish.

Twisden said, that they could not order the 7 s a week to be paid, until it
should be able to get its living, for perhaps the Father would take it away and
maintain it himself, which he may do if he please; but that the Order might be
quashed without more delay, and the matter remanded to further Examination.
Sherman consented to pay all the Arrears of the 7 s a week, and the Costs that
had been expended in Maintenance of this Order, or what more should be laid
out, in case he should be again found the reputed Father of the Child, for he
said it was imposed upon him by Combination, whereupon it was quashed.

Sir Ralph Bovy's Case.
AN Action was brought upon an Escape, for that he being Sheriff of Surry,
voluntarily suffered J. S. whom he had in Execution, to escape.

He pleads, that be made fresh pursuit and took him again, and does not
Traverse the voluntary Escape, to which it was demurred. Et Adjornatur.

Anonymus.
A Scire facias against the Conusee of a Statute, who had extended, supposing
that he was satisfied. He pleads, that before the Scire facias brought he had
assigned over all his interest, and prays Judgment of the Writ.

Hale said, that the Writ was good, seeing he was a Party to the Record; the
Plaintiff need not take notice of the Assignee unless he please, and if there
be part of the Debt unsatisfied, that is to be tendered to the Conuzee.

In a Writ of Disceit, to reverse a Fine of Land in ancient Demesne; after
Assignment the Conuzee shall be made party. So in a Writ of Error, tho the
Terretenant shall not be turned out of possession without a Scire facias.

Dionise versus Curtis.
TRover de duabus Centenis Plumbi urae, Anglice two hundred weight of Lead Ore.

It was objected, that Centena signifies an hundred in a County, and it is
uncertain here of what it should be understood; but the Court said it was good
with the Anglice, and to be understood by the subject matter. Trover de duobus
ponderibus casei, Anglice, two weigh of Cheese, has been held good. So de
duobus oneribus Cupri, Anglice, two Horse loads of Copper.

Evans, etc.
IN an Action upon the Case, whereas he pretended Title to certain Goods in the
Custody of one Susan Pricket, and claimed them to be his own, intending to
remove them; the Defendant in Consideration, that he would suffer them to
continue there, assumed to see them forth coming, and that they should not be
imbezelled, but safely kept to the use of the Plaintiff, and shows that
afterward the Goods were Eloigned, etc.

Upon Non Assumpsit and Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved to stay
Judgment; that it does not appear, that the property of these Goods was in the
Plaintiff, for it is alleged only, that he pretended to them, and claimed them
to be his own: Sed non Allocatur.

For the Declaration is full enough, at least must be intended he proved they
were his own, or the Jury would not have found for him.

Anonymus.
IN Debt upon a Record in an inferior Court, upon Null Tiel Record pleaded,
they shall certify only tenorem Recordi, and grant Execution afterward.

Hale said, that he had seen a Certiorari to certify tenorem Recordi, upon a
Trial at Bar concerning the Toll of Uxbridge, the Town pretending to be
incorporated, and to have a right to the Toll; and it was resolved, that no
Bugh holder could be a Witness for the Town.

Termino Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno 24 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Mekins versus Minshaw.
A Prohibition was prayed to the Court of the Chamberlain of Chester, where an
English Bill was preferred, setting forth, that J. S. being Indebted to the
Plaintiff, the Defendant upon good Consideration promised. That if J. S. did
not pay it* he would; and that he wanted such precise Proof of the Promise as
the Law required. Wherefore he prayed to be relieved by the Equity of the Court.

The Defendant confessed the Promise in his Answer, and alleged further, That
he had paid the Money. And a Prohibition was granted; for the Plaintiff had now
obtained the end of his Suit, and might have remedy at Law upon the Evidence of
the Defendants Answer.

Anonymus.
AN Action was brought for these words: The Defendant said of the Plaintiff,
That he had picked his Pocket against his Will; and at the same time de
ulteriori malitia said, He was a Pick-pocket.

The Defendant Justified, but in such manner as it was Ruled against him.

Then he moved to stay Judgment upon the Insufficiency of the Declaration: And
the Court were of Opinion that the Words were not Actionable, as carrying with
them no necessary implication of Felony, and might mean only Trespass. And Hale
said, He would not improve Actions for Words further than they are.

Fortescue versus Holt.
A Scire facias was brought upon a Judgment of 1000 l as Administrator of J. S.

The Defendant pleaded, That before the Administration committed to the
Plaintiff, (viz.) such a day, etc. Administration was granted to J.N. who is
still alive at D. And demanded Judgment of the Writ.

The Plaintiff Replies, J. N. died, etc. and de hoc ponit se super Patriam. And
to that the Defendant Demurs.

For that he ought to have Traversed absque hoc, that he was alive: For though
the Matter contradicts, yet an apt Issue is not formed without an Affirmative
and a Negative; and so said the Court. And also that the Defendants Plea was
bad, being Concluded in Abatement; whereas it goes in Bar, which was so
palpable, as made it evident to be used only for delay. Which Hale observing,
he did exceedingly blame the bad Practice that is amongst Counsel in advising
such Pleas, and said it was within the Penalty of Westminster. 1. Sergeants Counters,
etc. and said, Though Counsel were obliged to be faithful to their Clients; yet
not to manage their Causes in such a manner, as Justice should be delayed, or
Truth suppressed; to promote which was as much the Duty of their Calling, as it
was the Office of the Judges, though not in so Eminent a Degree.

In this Case it was doubted, Whether Judgment final should be given, or a
Respondeas Ouster: But because the Plaintiff said, he would be content with the
latter, that was not Resolved.

Anonymus.
IN Trespass Quare clausum fregit, it is a Plea in Abatement to say, That the
Plaintiff is Tenant in Common with another: But cannot be given in Evidence
upon Not Guilty, as it may where one Tenant in Common brings Trespass against
the other.

Peter's versus Opie.
THe Case was moved again, and Hale held clearly, that the Promise being pro
labor (though there was also a Counter-Promise) did carry in it a Condition
precedent, (viz.) That the work should be done first. And he said, that in
Cases tried before him, where the Declaration was upon Reciprocal Promises, if
it appeared upon the Evidence, that the Intention was, that the Plaintiffs part
was to be performed before the Defendants; he directed against the Plaintiff,
and would not have the Defendant driven to his Cross Action.

Twisden strongly to the contrary. Pro labor (says he) is no more than would
have been implied if those Words had been omitted; then it is within the Case of
Reciprocal Promises. The Case cited in Ughtred's Case, 7 Co. A. Covenants to B.
to serve him in the Wars, B. Covenants to pay him so much for it; an Action
lies for the Money without averment of the Service done, because of the mutual
Remedy.

Hale was now of Opinion, that the Plaintiffs saying, parat' fuit and obtulit
to do the Work; though he did not say, and the other refused, yet it was a
sufficeint Averment after a Verdict. The Case of Vivian and Shipping, 3 Cro.
384. in an Assumpsit upon a Promise to perform an Award, the Plaintiff said
licet He had performed all on his part, etc. which though no good Averment in
Form, yet held it aided by the Verdict.

Wherefore though they could not agree in the other matter, yet Judgment was
given for the Plaintiff. Ante.

King versus Melling.
IN an Ejectment, the Case was thus found in a Special Verdict.

John Melling was seized in Fee, and had Issue Barnard and John, and by his
Will in Writing devised to Barnard for and during his Natural life, and after
his decease to such Issue as he should have of the Body of his second Wife,
(his first then being alive); and if no such Issue happened, then to John
Melling, provided that Barnard might make a Jointure to his Wife, which she
should enjoy for her Life. The Devisor dies, Barnard suffers a Recovery to the
use of himself in Fee, and after Covenanted to stand seized to the use of his
Wife for her Jointure for Life, and died without Issue by any second Wife. The
Question was, Whether the Wife had a good Estate, or that J. Melling in
Remainder had the Right?

It was Argued for John Melling; First, That Barnard Melling had only an Estate
for Life by this Devise. Indeed, if it had been to him and his Issue which he
should have by the second Wife, that would have been an Entail; but here it is
expressly given to him for his Life. The Case of Wiat Wield, 8 Co. 78. b. is
full to this: A Devise to a man and his Children is an Estate Tail, if he has
none at the time: But if the Devise were to a man for his Life, and after his
Decease to his Children; there, whether he had Children or no at the time, they
take by way of Remainder either contingent or vested: So Archer's Case, 1 Co. 1
Rolls 837. A Devise to his Son for Life, the Remainder to the Sons of his Body
lawfully begotten; the Son takes only an Estate for Life, because so expressly
limited. Then the Recovery destroys this Contingent Remainder, and so also the
power of appointing a Jointure to his Wife: For it is not a bare Collateral
Power, but annexed to his Estate, and therefore extinguishes in the Conveyance
of it.

But admitting it were still in him, yet he did not well execute it, which
should have been in such manner as it might have taken effect by the Will, and
not to arise upon a Covenant to stand seized.

On the other side it was Argued, that it was an Estate Tail in Barnard
Melling, and no Remainder contingent to the Issue: For there a Remainder is
said to be contingent where the first Estate may fail before it is ascertained
whether the Contingent will happen or no; here if it be an Entail, Barnard
Melling has it for his Life, and the Issue had nothing until after his
decease. So it is but an Expressio eorum quae tacit insunt.

Again, The Power remains notwithstanding the Recovery; for it is collateral to
the Estate. If Executors have Authority to make a Feoffment for the payment of
the Testator's Debts, if they should first make a Feoffment to another purpose,
this would not determine their Power, but they might afterward execute it in
performance of the Will, 1 Co. in Albany's Case.

Hale. It seems very strong upon Weild's Case, that Barnard Melling has but an
Estate for Life, (if it were devised to him,) and after his decease to his
Issue, I should think that to be an Estate Tail; but here the express Words are
for his Life. A Devise to one for his Life, and after his decease to his Heir,
that has been held a Fee; for Heir is nomen Collectivum. But Archer's Case, 1
Co. is a Devise to A. for his Life, and after to his Heir, and the Heirs of
that Heir; there because the words of limitation were put to the Heir,
therefore Heirs was taken to be but designatio personae, and Resolved he should
take by Purchase. Vid. Anderson 110. Construction must be according to the
express words of the Will. A Devise to Two, equally to be divided between them,
and to the Survivor of them, makes a Joyntenancy upon the express import of the
last Words.

Twisden. A Devise to one for Life in perpetuity, makes but an Estate for Life
only, 15 H. 7.

Hale. It Is considerable also, that he adds a Power to make a Jointure, which
would have been useless if he had intended him in an Estate Tail: And this
Power is in the nature of an Emolument annexed to his Estate, which seems to be
destroyed by the Recovery, neither has he well executed his Power; for after
the Recovery he became seized in Fee, so the Covenant to stand seized may work
upon that Estate, and so shall not be taken in pursuance of his Authority,
which possibly it might have been if he had but an Estate for Life; for without
reference to that, it would have been ineffectual; and quando non valet quod
ago, ut ago valeat quantum valere potest. And this is agreeable to the Learning
in Sir Edward Clere's Case in the 6 Co.

The Court seemed pretty clear in these Points; but because it was upon the
first Argument, they gave leave to the parties to speak to it again, if they
thought fit. Et Adjornatur. Post.

Goffe's Case.
A Trial at Bar was had upon an Indictment of Murder. The Case appeared to be
this:

Goffe (being a Collector of the King's Duty of Chimney-Mony) came with a
Constable to the House of one West in Southwark, to demand Money due upon that
account, and entered the House, there being only a Maidservant at home; who
telling them, That her Master was from home, and that she could not tell where
to find him, or come at any Money to pay them. They presently distrained a
Silver Cup which stood by: The Maid thinking to prevent the carrying of it
away, stands against the Door where they were to have gone out, and Goffe took
her by the Arm and beat her Head and Back against the Door Post diverse times,
of which she died within three Weeks after.

The Court were of Opinion, that this was but Homicide, and directed the Jury
to find it so; for hindering their Passage out, to go away with the Distress,
was a Provocation. And 'twas found accordingly.

Meredith's Case.
ERror of a Judgment given in the King's Bench in Ireland; where Robert
Meredith was Plaintiff, and that Judgment was Entered, Quod praedict' Carolus
Meredith recuperet.

And the Court held it amendable, as the Default of the Clerk; though in the
Judgment (the Misprision being only in the Name, which was right in the rest of
the Record that was before the Clerk, and should have directed him.)

Sir Ralph Bovy's Case.
IN Debt upon an Escape, the Plaintiff sets forth in his Declaration a
Voluntary Escape.

The Defendant protesting that he did not let him Voluntarily escape, pleads,
That he took him upon Fresh pursuit. To which it was Demurred, because he did
not traverse the Voluntary Escape, and Resolved for the Defendant: For it is
impertinent for the Plaintiff to allege it, and no ways necessary to his
Action. It Is out of time to set it forth in the Declaration; but it should have
come in the Replication. It Is like Leaping (as Hale Chapter Justice said) before
one come to the Style: As if in Debt upon a Bond the Plaintiff should declare,
That at the time of sealing and delivery of the Bond the Defendant was of full
Age; and the Defendant should plead deins age, without traversing the
Plaintiffs Allegation. Whiting and Sir G. Reynell's Case 657. in the 2 Cro.
seems to be against it: But Harvey and Sir Geo. Reynell 2 Car. in Latch, is
Resolved, that no Traverse is to be taken.

Thomas versus Butler.
A Prohibition was prayed to the Ecclesiastical Court, where the Case was this:

Sir R. Ashton made his Will, and therein gave diverse Legacies, and the residue
of his Goods and Chattels (after his Debts and Legacies paid) he bequeathed to
his Wife, and made three Executors and died, whereof one only proved the Will,
and afterward died Intestate.

The Daughter of Sir R. Ashton procures Letters of Administration (the Wife
uncalled) and about Five years after the Lady Butler, the Relict of Sir R.
Ashton, and residuary Legatee, Sues to have them Repealed: And whether there
should be any Prohibition to that Suit, the Court thought fit to Advise. For it
was Suggested, That there was not Assets to pay the Debts and Legacies, and so
there could be no residuum. And Sir Walter Walker (a Doctor of the Civil Law)
came to Inform the Court what had been their Course in such cases; and he
affirmed, that the Law was positive, absque aliqua distinctione, Assets or not
Assets, That Administration should be committed to the residuary Legatee. And
so Dr. Denni declared in Eastwick and Standen's Case in Dyer. And in one
Button's Case (which goes also by the the Name of Cotton's Case) 17 Jac. this
Point was much Debated, where the next of Kin obtained Administration, the
residuum being Devised to another, who afterward got it Repealed; and the
first Administrator appealed to the Delegates, who confirmed the Repeal. Where
the Residuum is Devised, the Law judges those words tantamount to the making of
him Executor, and it would be very inconvenient that that Allegation, That
there is no Residuum, should be admitted; for that may be offered in every
Case, and until that is tried, Administration would not be granted, which might
bring much Damage to the Estate of the Intestate. It Is also against a strong
Presumption, (viz.) That every man leaves as much as will satisfy his Will. He
said also, Seeing committing Administration was of the Cognizance of their
Courts he conceived they were to determine all Matters concerning them; and
cited the Register, where it is said, Cognitio principalis trahit ad se
accessorium.

Here Hale interrupted him, and said, Since the Statutes had made Provision in
those cases, they were to Expound them, and also to whom the Right of
Administration appertained; and if the Ecclesiastical Court did not commit it
accordingly, they use to prohibit them; and that the Court desired only to know
from them, what their Usage had been. He also asked him, if it had been Pleaded
in their Court, That there was no Residuum, what they would have done?

To this he Answered, That they should have received it as a Plea; but would
have Overruled it as Insufficient: As was done in the Countess of Lincolns
Case, in 1655.

Dr. Masters contra. In this Case the Daughter was Legatee of an 100 l In the
case of the next of Kin, one may be preferred before another; so why not one
Legatee before another? Qui prior est tempore potior est jure, in aequali jure,
they which first come, should be first served; and vigilantibus, non
dormientibus jura subveniunt. For Button's Case he said, That there the party
to whom Administration was first granted, was no Legatee. So it was in the
Countess of Lincolns Case; neither was there a Sentence in that Case, but ended
by Composition. In the Case between Blunt and Tailor, in 1670. where one Hall
having made his Will, and made the Wife of Blunt Executrix, and Devised to her
the Residuum: She proved the Will and died. Blunt Administers to her de bonis
non of Hall; and the Grandchild of Hall (being next of Kin) cites Blunt to
Repeal his Administration; and obtained a Repeal, which was confirmed upon an
Appeal to the Delegates. But Sir William Wild denied the Case to be so; for he
said, That the Administration was not Repealed, as unduly granted at first; but
for a male Administration: For Blunt being Cited, denied either to pay the
Legacy devised to the Grandchild, or bring in an Inventory, and the Case was
Debated upon that Point only before the Delegates; and he said, That it was
their course to Repeal an Administration, though granted to the next of Kin, in
case of Abuse.

But Hale said, That therein they exceeded their Power, and a Prohibition ought
to go, and that they ought to take sufficient Caution at first to prevent male
Administration.

The Court strongly inclined, that no Prohibition ought to go in this Case; for
the Reason that 21 H. 8. requires, That Administration should be granted to the
next of Kin was, upon the Presumption, That the Intestate intended to prefer
him: But now the Presumption is here taken away, the Residuum being disposed of
to another; and to what purpose should the next of Kin have it, when no benefit
can accrue to him by it? and it is reasonable that he should have the management
of the Estate, who is to have what remains of it, after the Debts and Legacies
paid. And the Averment, That there is no Residuum, is not material; for being
once out of the Statute, upon Construction of the Words of the Will, there is
nothing ex post facto, can bring it within it. And there are certain
Administrations which have been always Ruled to be out of the Statute, as
Administrations during Minority, and pendente lite, which need not be granted
to the next of Kin, and granting it to the Husband comes not within the Words
of the Statute. But because in this case, Administration had been granted so
long before the Residuary Legatee came in, and the Administrators by Decrees in
Chancery had got in great part of the Estate, and still there were Suits
depending there for obtaining of the rest, which were near their Effect; which
would be abated and set aside if the Administration were now Repealed.

The Court proposed an Accommodation, as most useful to either of the Parties,
and advantageous to the Estate; which was accepted.

The Civilians said, That a Legatee that had got Administration, though it were
after Repealed upon a Citation, should yet retain for his Legacy. Otherwise
upon an Appeal; for there the Administration is avoided ab initio. Vid.
Blackman's Case, 6 Co.

Bedniff and Ux' versus Pople and Ux'.
A Prohibition was prayed to stay a Suit for Defamation in the Ecclesiastical
Court for Words spoken to the Servant of the Plaintiff, (viz.) Go tell thy
Mistress Whore, she is a Whore, and I will prove it. It was said, they were
common Words of Brabling, and not importing any such Slander for which Suit
could be there, 3 Cro. 393. Dimmock versus Fawcet, and 3 Cro. 456. Pewe and his
Wife versus Jeffryes.

Hale. These cannot be said to be Words of Heat, as if spoken when the Parties
are Scolding together, but were uttered deliberately in the Parties absence to
her Servant. Formerly they would Prohibit, unless the Words implied some Act to
have been done: Vid. Eaton versus Ayloff, 3 Cro. 110. But it is Reason the Suit
should proceed in this Case, seeing it is for matter of Slander, which is
punished by public Penance. Therefore Suit lies in London for calling Whore;
because by the Custom there, Whores are to be Carted.

Wherefore the Court denied a Prohibition.

Road versus Wilmott.
IN False Imprisonment, the Defendant Justified by a Capias, directed to him
upon a Suit commenced against the Plaintiff in an Inferior Court. To which the
Plaintiff Demurred; because it was not shown that a Summons was issued first,
and Inferior Courts can Award no Capias, but upon a Summons first Returned. To
which it was Answered, That this being admitted, yet it is but an Erroneous
Process, in the Execution of which the Officer is excused, who is not to be
punished when the Court proceeds inverso ordine.

Hale said, It was a great Abuse in those Courts, their ordinary Practice being
to grant a Capias without any Summons, so that the Party is driven to Bail in
every trivial Action; and that though upon a Writ of Error this Matter is not
assignable, because a Fault in the Process is aided by Appearance, etc. yet
False Imprisonment lies upon it, and the Officer cannot Justify here, as upon
Process out of the Courts of Westminster. For suppose an Attachment should go
out of the County Court without a Plaint, could he that executes it, Justify?
Yet a Sheriff may Justify an Arrest upon a Capias out of the Common Pleas, 10
Co. 76. 3 Cro. 446.
though there were no Original: But Ministers to the Courts below, must see that
things be duly done. Wherefore the Plaintiff must have Judgment.

Monk's Case.
A Debt was recovered against him in this Court, and the Money levied by the
Sheriff, which he did not deliver, but was ordered to bring it into Court,
until a difference that arose about it was determined.

Monk being indebted to the King, a Writ was issued out to enquire what Goods
and Chattels he had.

The Kings Attorney moved, that they might have leave to find this Money, the
Court conceived, that the Money being but as a Depositum there, they might find
it; and that the Court did not protect it from the Inquisition, as when Goods
are under an Attachment, they cannot be distrained; but they would not make any
direction for the finding of it.

Blackamore versus Mercer.
IN Judgment against an Executor, a Fieri facias issued out to the Sheriff,
with a Scire fieri inquiry, and a Devastavit was found according to the common
course, the return whereof was, quod diversa bona quae fuerunt restatoris, etc.
habuit quae elongavit and in usum suum proprium convertit.

It was objected against this Return, That it was not said Devastavit, for in
some Cases an Executor may justly convert the Goods to his own use.

Hale said, anciently, when the Sheriff returned a Devastavit, which was not
found by any Inquisition, and to which there was no answer, it was necessary to
insert the word Devastavit. But otherwise, in a return upon this Special Writ;
for if the case be, that he has not wasted the Goods, but only eloigned then*
so as the Sheriff cannot come at them, the Executor is chargeable upon this
Writ, de bonis propriis, and this Return answers the Writ.

Perrot versus Bridges.
IN Trespass quare clausum fregit, and threw down his Fences.

The Defendant pleaded Not guilty to all, but the breaking of the Fences, and
for that he justifies; for that he was possessed of certain Corn in the place
where, as of his proper Goods, and made a breach in the Fence, as was necessary
for the carrying of it away.

The Plaintiff Demurrs Specially, because he did not show by what Title he was
possessed of the Corn. And the Court were of Opinion, that for that cause the
Plea was insufficient; for if a Man enters upon another Land and sows it, it is
his Corn while he that has right reenters; so if Tenant at Will sows the
Ground and then determins his own Will, he cannot break the Hedges to carry the
Corn away. And Twisden said, if the Sheriff sells Corn growing by a Fieri
facias, the Vendee cannot justify an entry upon the Land to Reap it, until
such time as the Corn is Ripe.

Anonymus.
IF an Administrator brings an Action, the declaring hic in Curia prolat' of
the Letters of Administration is but matter of Form, though it has been held
otherwise. For Hale said, it is not part of the Declaration, as a Specialty is,
upon which Debt, Covenant, etc. is brought, but only shown upon the
Declaration, to enable the Plaintiff to bring his Action.

Note, This is aided by a late Act of Parliament.

Jay versus Bond.
IN Trespass the Defendant pleads, that Ante Quinden' Sancti Martini usque ad
hunc diem praed' Jay Excommunicatus fuit and adhuc, existit, and protulit hic
in Cur' literas Testamentarias Episcopi Sarum quae notum faciunt universis quod
scrutatis Registeriis invenitur contineri quod Excommunicat' fuit, etc. pro
contumacia in non comparendo to a Suit for Tithes, etc. in cujus rei
Testimonium praed' Episcopus Sigillum apposuit.

It was objected, that such a kind of Certificate of Excommunication as this
is, was not allowable; for it ought to be positive, and under the Seal of the
Ordinary; whereas this is only a relation of what is found in their Register.
Sed non allocatur, for though such a form of pleading would be altogether
insufficient in our Law; yet their course is sometimes to certify
Excommunication, sub sigillo Ordinarij, and sometimes per literas
Testamentarias, as here.

Hale said, to plead Letters Patents without saying sub magno sigillo is
naught, and that because the King has diverse Seals.

Note, The entry was here quod Defendens venit and dicit, etc. Hale doubted,
whether he ought not to have made some kind of defense, though no full defense is
to be made, when Excommengment in the Plaintiff is pleaded.

Owen versus Lewyn.
THe Plaintiff declared in Action upon the Case, upon the Custom of the Realm
against a Common Carrier, and also sur Trover and Conversion.

Hale said so he might, for Not guilty answers both; but if a Carrier loses
Goods committed to him, a General Action of Trover does not lie against him.

Termino Sancti Michaelis, Anno 24 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Davenant against the Bishop of Salisbury.
IN Covenant. The Plaintiff declared, that the Bishop of Salisbury the
Defendants Predecessor, being seized in Fee, demised unto him certain Lands for
21 years, reserving the ancient Rent, etc. and Covenanted for him and his
Successors, to discharge all public Taxes assessed upon the Land; and that
since the Defendant was made Bishop, a certain Tax was assessed upon the Land
by virtue of an Act of Parliament, and that the Plaintiff was forced to pay it,
the Defendant refusing to discharge it, unde Actio accrevit, etc.

The Defendant demurred, first to the form, for that it is said that the
Predecessor Bishop was seized, and does not say in jure Episcopatus. But Hale
said the Old Books were, that where it was pleaded, that J. S. Episcopus was
seized, that it implies seizin in the right of the Bishopric which is true if
he were a Corporation capable only in his politic capacity, or as an Abbot,
etc. but in regard he might also be seized in his natural capacity, the
Declaration was for this Cause held to be ill. The matter in Law was, whether
this were such a Covenant as should bind the Successor as incident to a Lease,
which the Bishop is empowred to make by the 32 H. 8. For it is clear, if a
Bishop had made a Covenant or Warranty, this had not bound the Successor at the
Common Law, without the consent of the Dean and Chapter; and if it should be
now taken, that every Covenant would bind the Successor, then the Statute of 1
Eliz. would be of no effect: But Hale said, admitting this were an ancient
Covenant, (and if so, it should have been averred to have been used in former
Leases,) to discharge ordinary payments, as Pentions or Tenths granted by the
Clergy, then it might bind the Successor, by the 32 H. 8. But it were hard to
extend it to new charges: And we all know how lately this way of Taxes came in.

But the Court said, that the Declaration being insufficent for the other
matter, they would not determine this. But they held, that however this
Covenant should prove, it would not avoid the Lease. Vid. Gee, Bishop of
Chicester, and Freedlands Case, 3 Cro. 47.

Note, Hale said, that anciently when the Sheriff returned a Rescous upon a
Man, he was admitted to plead to it as to an Indictment. But the course of the
Court of latter times has been not to admit any Plea to it, but to drive the
party to his Action upon the Case, as upon the return of a Devastavit, etc.

Cole versus Levingston.
IN Ejectment, upon a long, and intricate Special Verdict, (the Chief Justice
said, never was the like in Westminster Hall,) these following Points were
resolved by the Court, and declared by Hale as the Opinion of himself, and the
rest of the Judges.

First, That where one Covenants to stand seized to the use of A. and B. and
the Heirs of their Bodies of part of his Land, and if they die without Issue of
their Bodies, then that it shall remain, etc. and of another part of his Land
to the use of C.D. and E. and the Heirs of their Bodies, and if they die
without Issue of their Bodies, then to remain, etc. that here there are no
cross Remainders created by Implication, for there shall never be such
Remainders upon construction of a Deed, though sometimes there are in case of a
Will, 1 Rolls. 837.

Secondly, As this Case is, there would be no cross Remainders if it were in a
Will, for cross Remainders shall not rise between three, unless the words do
very plainly express the intent of the Devisor to be so; as where black Acre is
devised to A. white Acre to B. and green Acre to C. and if they die without
Issue of their Bodies, vel alterius eor'; then to remain; there by reason of
the words alterius eor', cross Remainders shall be, Dier 303. But otherwise,
there would not, Gilbert v. Witty and others, 2 Cro. 655. And in this case,
though some of the Limitations are between two, there shall be no cross
Remainders in them, because there are others between three; and the intent
shall be taken to the same in all.

The Dean and Chapter of Durham* against the Lord Archbishop of York.
IN a Prohibition the Archbishop pleaded a Prescription, that he and his
Predecessors have time out of mind been Guardians of the Spiritualties of the
Bishopric of Durham, Sede vacant; and Issue joined thereupon, and tried at
the Bar this Term.

Hale said, De jure communi the Dean and Chapter were Guardians of the
Spiritualties, during the vacancy, as to matters of Jurisdiction; but for
Ordination they are to call in the aid of a Neighboring Bishop, and so is
Linwood: But the Usage here in England is, that the Archbishop is Guardian of
the Spiritualties in the Suffragan Diocese, and therefore it was proper here to
join the Issue upon the Usage.

There was much Evidence given, that anciently during the vacancy of Durham,
the Archbishop had exercised Jurisdiction, both Sententious, and other, as
Guardian of the Spiritualties: But since H. 8. time, it had been for the most
part administered by the Dean and Chapter; and the Verdict was here for the Dean
and Chapter.

King versus Melling.
IN an Ejectment upon a Special Verdict the case was this, R. Melling seized in
Fee, having Issue four Sons, William, Robert, Bernard and John, devised the
Land in question in this manner.

I give my Land to my Son Bernard for his natural Life, and after his decease,
I give the same to the Issue of his Body, lawfully begotten on a second Wife,
and for want of such Issue to John Melling and his Heirs for ever. Provided,
that Bernard may make a Jointure of all the Premises to such second Wife,
which she may enjoy during her Life.

R.M. dies, Bernard in the life of his first Wife suffered a Recovery to the
use of himself in Fee; and after her decease Marries a second Wife, and then by
Indenture covenants to stand seized to the use of himself for Life, and after
to the use of his Wife for her Life, for her Jointure, and dies.

J.M. Enters, and makes a Lease to the Plaintiff: And this Term after Arguments
at the Bar, the Court gave their Opinions.

Rainsford for the Plaintiff, First. I hold in this Case, that B. M. takes but
an Estate for Life, with a Contingent Remainder to the Issue by his second
Wife, for the Devise is by express words for Life; as in Archers Case, 1 Co. a
Devise to R. A. for Life, and after to the next Heir Male of R. and the Heirs
Males of that Heir Male, Resolved to create, but an Estate for Life to R. A. I
rely mainly upon Wilds Case, 6 Co. which was brought before all the Judges of
England; where the Devise was to a Man and his Wife, and after their decease to
the Children, and resolved to be but an Estate for Life; it is true, there were
Children at the time of the Devise, but in the end of the Case it is said, that
in such Case if there were no Children, the Children born after might take by
remainder, and the first Estate to be but for Life. Clerk v. Day, 1 Cro. 313.
the Devise was to Rose his Daughter for Life, and that if she married after his
Death and had Heir of her Body, then, that the Heir after his Daughter's Death
should have the Land, and to the Heirs of their Body begotten, and if his
Daughter died without Issue, then to a Stranger. It was held by Gaudy and
Fenner, that Rose had but an Estate for Life in this Case, 1 Rolls 837. Devise
to his eldest Son for Life, and after his decease to the Sons of his Body
lawfully begotten; the Son resolved to have but an Estate for Life.

The Second point, Whether the power to make a Jointure be destroyed by the
Common Recovery; these powers to make Estates are of two sorts, either
Collateral, as when Executors have power by a Will to sell Land, and such a
power cannot be destroyed as appears in Diggs's Case, 1 Co. or powers appendant
to Estates as to make Leases, which shall continue after the Estates, to which
the power is annexed determins; and the power in the Case at Bar to make a
Jointure are of this second sort, and are destroyed by the alteration of the
Estate to which it is annexed in privity, as 1 Co. Albany's Case is, so that
the Common Recovery being a Forfeiture of the Estate for Life, by consequence
it is an extinguishment of the power.

Thirdly, But admitting the power continues, whether it be well executed; and I
hold that it is not, for being seized in Fee at the time of the Covenant to
stand seized to the use of his Wife for her Jointure; and this without any
reference to his power, the use shall arise out of his Interest, and not be
executed by virtue of his power, according to the resolution in Sir Ed. Cleeres
Case, 6 Co.

Twisden of the same Opinion. As to the first Point it must be agreed, that
these words Issue of the Body ex vi termini make not an Entail, if they were in
a Conveyance by Act executed, no more than Children, as the words were in Wilds
Case. It Is true, in a Will a Devise of Land to a Man and his Issue creates an
Entail, if the Devisee had no Issue at that time, for otherwise those words
would be void; for in regard they are limited to take presently, the Issue born
after, cannot take as by Remainder, there being none to take in praesenti, they
must be intended to be words of Limitation; as a Devise to a Man and his Heirs
Males makes an Entail, or otherwise the word Males must be rejected; then
seeing the words in themselves are not proper to make an Entail, the next thing
to be considered is the intention, (which is to be known by the expressions in
the Will, and not any averment dehors,) the words are, J will give my Land to
my Son for Life, and after his decease, I will give the same to the Issue, etc.
so that the Land is given to him expressly for Life. Devise of Land in perpetuum
makes Fee, but if Land be given by Deed in perpetuum, there an Estate only for
Life will pass, 15 H. 7. A Devise to one paying 10 l this is a Fee, 6 Co.
Coliers Case: But a Devise to one for Life paying 10 l makes but an Estate for
Life; the Case of Furse and VVinter was, Mich. or Trin. 13 Regis Caroli Rot.
1339. A Devise to his two Daughters equally to be divided between them, and to
the Survivor of them, and to the Heirs of the Body of the Survivor. This was so
expressly to the Surviror, that it was resolved to be a Joint Estate, and not in
Common. The words here are after the decease of Bernard, I give the same to the
Issue of the Body, etc. implying that the Issue should take by Purchase as a
Gift, and not by Descent.

Again, The power given to Bernard to make a Jointure shows, that he could not
do it by Virtue of his Estate, and therefore needed a power to be annexed. And
though such powers are usually affixed to Estates Tail; yet when the construction
is doubtful, what Estate shall pass, the giving such a power is an argument,
that it is such an Estate, that cannot make a Jointure, or the like by any other
means. The words go further, and for want of such Issue, then to J.M. It Is
true, if Land be devised to a Man, and if he dies without Issue then to remain,
over the Devisee shall have an Entail. Owen 29. But it shall not be so in this
Case, because that Clause is crowded in with other Clauses directly to the
contrary. I rely mainly upon VVilds Case, 6 Co. and the Case quoted out of
Bendlowes in the end of that Case, A Devise to Baron and Feme, and to the Men
Children of their Bodies begotten; because it did not appear that there were
any more Children, at that time; this made an Estate Tail. But if it had been,
and after their decease to their Children, then the Children should take by
Purchase though born after. It Is true, that case is variously reported in the
Books, but I adhere to my Lord Coke, presuming, that being brought before all
the Judges in the Argument of VVilds Case, it was a true Report.

As for the second Point it is plain, that the power is extinguished, for by the
Recovery, the Estate for Life to which it was annexed in privity is gone and
forfeited, so that it is not necessary to dispute the third Point, whether well
executed or no: But upon the whole, I agree with my Brother Rainsford, that the
Plaintiff ought to have Judgment.

Hale. I differ from my two Brothers, and though I was of their Opinion at the
finding of the Special Verdict; yet upon very great Consideration of the Case,
I am of Opinion for the Defendant. I shall proceed in a different method from
my Brothers, and begin with that Point which they made last; and I agree with
them, admitting that Bernard had but an Estate for Life, that the power was
destroyed; also here the Recovery does not only bar the Estate, but all powers
annexed to it, for the recompense in value is of such strong Consideration,
that it serves as well for Rents, Possibilities, etc. going out of and
depending upon the Land, as for the Land it self: So Fines and Feoffments do
ransack the whole Estate, and pass, or extinguish, etc. all Rights, Conditions,
Powers, etc. belonging to the Land, as well as the Land it self.

Secondly, I agree with my Brother Rainsford, that if Bernard had but an Estate
for Life by the Devise, the power was not well executed. Where Tenant for Life
has a power to make Leases, it is not always necessary to recite his power when
he makes a Lease; but if he makes a Lease, which will not have an effectual
continuance, if it be directed out of his interest, there it shall be as made
by virtue of his power; and so it was resolved in one Roger's Case, in which I
was Counsel.

Again, Though it be here by Covenant to stand seized, an improper way to execute
his power; yet it might be construed an Execution of it, Mich. 51. In this
Court, Stapleton's Case, where a Devise was to A. for Life, Remainder to B. for
Life, Remainder to C. in Fee, with power to B. to make his Wife a Jointure. B.
covenanted to stand seized for the Jointure of his Wife, reciting his power,
though this could not make a legal Jointure; yet it was resolved to enure by
virtue of his power, quando non valet quod ago ut ago valeat quantum valere
potest. But in this Case Bernard has got a new Fee, which though it be defeasible
by him in Remainder; yet the Covenant to stand seized shall enure thereupon,
and the use shall arise out of the Fee.

Thirdly, I was at the first opening of the Case of Opinion, that Bernard had
but an Estate for Life, but upon deep Examination of the Will, and of the
Authority, and Considerations of the Consequences of the Case, I hold it to be
an Estate Tail.

And first to ease that Point of all difficulties, if cannot be denied; but a
Devise to a Man, and the Heirs of his Body by a second Wife makes an Estate
Tail executed, though the Devisee had a Wife at the time. As the Case often
cited, Land given to a Married Man and a Married Woman, and the Heirs of their
Bodies. We are here in case of the Creation of an Estate-Tail, where intention
has some influence (voluntas Donatoris, etc.) and may help words which are not
exactly according to legal form, 39 Ass. 20. Land given to a Man and his Wife,
and haeredi de corpore and uni haeredi tantum, this judged an Entail. Again, we
are in case of an Estate Tail to be created by a Will, and the intention of the
Testator, is the Law to expound the Testament; therefore a Devise to a Man and
his Heirs Males, or a Devise to a Man, and if he dies without Issue, etc. are
always construed to make an Entail. It must be admitted, that if the Devise
were to B. and the Issue of his Body, having no Issue at that time, it would be
an Estate Tail; for the Law will carry over the word Issue, not only to his
immediate Issue, but to all that shall descend from him: I agree it would be
otherwise, if there were Issue at the time. Tailor and Sayer, 41 Eliz. rot.
541. a Devise to his Wife for Life, 1 Cro. 742.
Remainder to his Issue, (having two Children) it was held the Remainder was
void, being to the Issue in the singular number, for incertainy which should
take. But that was a little too rank, for Issue is nomen collectivum.

Again, I agree, if a Devise be made to a man, and after his death to his Issue
(or Children,) having Issue at that time, they take by way of Remainder And
that was the only Point adjudged in Wild's Case, and there also against the
Opinion of Popham and Gaudy.

This way being made, I come to the Case it self, and shall briefly give my
Reasons, why I hold Bernard has an Estate Tail.

First, Because the word Issue is nomen collectivum, and takes in the whole
Generation ex vi termini; and so the Case is stronger than if it were Children:
And where it is said, to the Issue that he shall have of the Body of the second
Wife; that is, all that shall come of the second Wife: For so it is understood
in common Parlance.

Secondly, In all Acts of Parliament, Exitus is as comprehensive as Heirs of
the Body. In Westminster. 2. de donis, Issue is made a term of equivalence to Heirs
of the Body; for where it speaks of the Alienation of the Donee, it is said, quo
minus ad exitum discenderet. So in 34 H. 8. of Entails settled by the Crown.

It Is true, in Conveyances, etc. the wisdom of the Law has appropriated the
word Heirs as a Term of Art. In Clerke's Case: A Lease was made to commence
after the death of his Son without Issue; the Son had a Son and died, and then
that Son died without Issue. It was Resolved both in the Kings Bench and the
Exchequer, that the Lease should commence; for Issue being nomen collectivum,
whenever the Issue of the Son failed, the term of Commencement did happen.

But now to see the difference: Tyler's Case, Mich. 34 Eliz. B.R. He had Issue
A. B. C. and D. and Devised to his Wife for Life, and after her death to B. his
Son in Tail, and if he dies without Issue, then to his Children. A. had Issue a
Son and died, and B. died without Issue.

Resolved, that the Son of A. should not take as one of the Children of the
Testator. Which Case I cite, to show the odds between the word Issue and the
word Children.

My second Reason is from the manner of the Limitation, which is to his Issue;
and of his Body lawfully begotten upon the second Wife, Phrases agreeable to an
Estate Tail; and the meaning of a Testator is to be spelled out by little
Hints. It is admitted in Wild's Case in the 6 Co. 17. that if the Devise had
been, to the Children of their Bodies, it would have been an Entail.

Thirdly, It appears by the Devise, that the Testator knew there could be no
Children at that time, and shall not be supposed to intend a contingent
Remainder.

Fourthly, It appears that the Testator did not intend to prefer the Children
of the first Wife of Bernard, but did the Children of the second, and therefore
cannot be thought to mean, that John the younger Brother of Bernard should take
before failure of the Issue which Bernard should have by his second Wife. And
to this purpose is Spalding's Case, 3 Cro. 185. A Devise to his eldest Son and
the Heirs of his Body after the death of his Wife; and if he died living the
Wife, then to his Son N. And devised other Lands to another Son, and the Heirs
of his Body; and if he died without Issue, then to remain, etc. The first Son
died living the Wife. It was strongly urged, that his Estate should cease; for
being said, If he died living the Wife, this was a Corrective of what went
before. But 'twas Ruled by all the Court, that it was an absolute Estate Tail
in the first Son, as if the words had been, If he died without Issue living the
Wife; for he could not be thought to intend to prefer a younger Son before the
Issue of his eldest.

Fifthly, The words are further, and for want of such Issue, then to John;
which words in a Will do often make an Estate Tail by Implication. As 4 Jac.
Robinson's Case: A Devise to A. for Life, and if he died without Issue, then to
remain; A. took an Entail. So Burley's Case, 43 Eliz. A Devise to A. for Life,
Remainder to the next Heir Male; and for default of such Heir Male, then to
remain. Adjudged an Estate Tail. It Is true, Dyer 171. is, where Lands were
Devised to a man and the Heirs Males of his Body, and if he died without Issue,
etc. these last words did not make a Tail General to the Devisee: For an
Implication of an Estate of Inheritance shall never ride over an express
limitation of an Inheritance before; being it is said here for want of such
Issue the Land should remain, it is plainly meant, that it should not before the
Issue failed, and then the Issue must have it so long (for none else can,) and
so it is an Estate Tail.

I come now to Authorities: 6 Eliz. Anderson, number 86. Moor pl. 397. A Devise to
his Son for Life, and after his decease to the Men Children of his Body, said
to be an Estate Tail, and so cited by Coke in that Book, and so contrary to his
Report of it in Wild's Case, Bendloes, number. 124. But that Case is not so strong
as this; for Children is not so operative a word as Issue. Rolls 839. A Devise
to his eldest Son for Life, and non aliter, (for so were the words, though not
printed in the Book) and after his decease to the Sons of his Body; it was but
an Estate for Life, by reason of the words Non aliter. Hill. 13 Car. 2. Rot.
121. Wedgward's Case: A Devise to his Son Thomas for Life, and after his
decease (if he died without Issue living at his death) then to the Daughter,
etc. it was held to be an Estate for Life. But were it an Estate Tail or no, it
was not necessary to be Resolved, the Case depending upon the destruction or
continuance of a Contingent Remainder, which would have been gone had the
Devise made an Estate Tail; again, there being an express Devise for Life, they
would not raise a larger Estate by Implication.

Again, Wild's Case, where Lands were Devised to A. for Life, Remainder to B.
and the Heirs of his Body, Remainder to Wild and his Wife, and after their
decease to their Children. And the Court of King's Bench were at first divided:
Indeed, it was afterward adjudged an Estate for Life to Wild and his Wife:

First, Because having limited a Remainder in Tail to B. by express and the
usual words; if he had meant the same Estate in the second Remainder, it is like
he would have used the same words.

Secondly, It was not, after their decease to the Children of their Bodies; for
then there would be an Eye of an Estate Tail.

Thirdly, The main Reason was, because there were Children at the time of the
Devise; and that was the only Reason the Resolution went upon in the Exchequer
Chamber. And though it be said in the latter end of the Case, That if there were
no Children at that time, every Child born after might take by Remainder; it is
not said positively that they should take: And it seems to be in opposition to
their taking presently; but however that be, it comes not to this Case: For
though the word Children may be made nomen collectivum, the word Issue is nomen
collectivum of it self. Hill. 42. and 43 Eliz. Bifield's Case: A Devise to A.
and if he dies not having a Son, then to remain to the Heirs of the Testator.
Son was there taken to be used as nomen collectivum, and held an Entail.

I come now to answer Objections:

First, It Is objected, that in this Case the Limitation is expressly for Life,
and in that respect stronger than Wild's Case: And this is the great difficulty.

But I Answer:

That though these words do weigh the Intention that way, yet they are balanced
by an apparent Intention that weighs as much on the other side; which is, That
as long as Bernard should have Children, that the Land should never go over to
John; for there was as much reason to provide for the Issue of the Issue, as
the first Issue.

Again, A Tenant in Tail has to many purposes but an Estate for Life.

Again, It Is possible that he did intend him but an Estate for Life, and it is
by consequence and operation of Law only that it becomes an Estate Tail. 1651.
Hansy and Lowther: The Case was, A Copyholder surrendered to the use of his
Will, and Devised to his first Son for Life, and after his decease to the Heir
Male of his Body, etc. This was Ruled to be an Estate Tail; and this differs
from Archer's Case in the 1st of Co. for that the Devise there was for Life,
and after to the Heir Male, and the Heirs of the Body of that Heir Male: There
the words of Limitation being grafted upon the word Heir, it shows that the
word Heir was used as Designatio personae, and not for Limitation of the
Estate. So is the Case of Clerk and Day, 1 Cro. 313.

Another Objection was, That there being a Power appointed to Bernard to make
his Wife a Jointure, it shows, that it was intended he should have but an
Estate for Life, which needed such a Power, and not an Estate Tail; for then he
might have made a Jointure without it?

I Answer, That Tenant in Tail cannot, by virtue of such Estate, make a
Jointure, without discontinuing or destroying his Estate. Sed Judicium pro
Quer'. There being Justice Twisden and Justice Rainsford against the Chief
Justice.

Termino Sancti Hillarij, Anno 24 and 25 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Anonymus.
A Prohibition was prayed to the Ecclesiastical Court, for that they Cited one
out of the Diocese to Answer a Suit for a Legacy: But it was denied, because it
was in the Court where the Probat of the Will was. For though it were before
Commissioners appointed for the Probat of Wills in the late Times; yet now all
their Proceedings in such cases are transmitted into the Prerogative Court. And
therefore Suits for the Legacies contained in such Wills ought to be in the
Archbishop's Court; for there the Executor must give account, and be
discharged, etc.

Note, When a man is in custodia Marescalli, any man may Declare against him in
a Personal Action, and if he be bailed out, he is still in custodia to this
purpose, (viz.) quoad Declarations brought in against him that Term: For the
Bail are (as it were) Delegated by the Court to have him in Prison. Hob.

Error is not well assigned, That there was no Bail filed; unless added, That
the Defendant was not in custodia.

Debt.
IN an Action of Debt upon a Sheriffs Bond, the Case was this:

A man was Arrested upon a Latitat, in placito Transgr' ac etiam bille pro 40 l
de debito. And the Condition of the Bond given to the Sheriff was, to appear at
the Day of the Return of the Writ, to answer to the Plaint in plito debito. And
it was urged, that this made the Bond void by the Statute of 23 H. 6. for the
Condition should have been to Appear at the Day, to Answer in the Action upon
which the Process went out, and that was in this Case but an Action of
Trespass, and the adding the Ac etiam debiti, etc. is but to satisfy the late
Act, and for Direction to the Sheriff, to what Value he shall require Bail. And
it was usual to Endorse the Cause of Action before the Statute upon the
Latitats, that the Sheriff might insist upon Bail accordingly. So this is a
material Variance from the Statute, and not like some of these which are
remembered in Beaufage's Case in the 10 Co. and Dyer 364. And to this the Court
inclined.

And Hale Cited a Case between Button and Low, adjudged Mich. 1649. An
Attachment went out of Chancery to answer Coram nobis in Cancellaria ubicunque,
etc. and the Sheriff took a Bond, Conditioned to Appear Coram Rege in
Cancellaria ubicunque, etc. apud Westmonasterium: And for the addition of
Westminster, the Bond was held to be void.

Anonymus.
THe Court was moved for a Prohibition to the Archbishop's Court, to stop their
Proceedings in a Cause belonging to the Jurisdiction of Durham, upon a
Suggestion, that the Dean and Chapter of Durham, Sede vacant, have Cognizance
there, as Guardians of the Spiritualties.

And the Court granted a Prohibition; for the Right of Jurisdiction was tried
between the Archbishop and Dean and Chapter the last Term, and found against
the Archbishop; and therefore he was concluded by the Verdict, until the Record
was reversed by Error or Attaint.

Thodie's Case.
THody and two others were Indicted, for that Conspiratione inter eos habita,
they enticed J. S. to play, and cheated him with False Dice.

Thody pleaded, and was found Guilty; the others not having pleaded. It was
moved, that Judgment might not be Entered against him until the others came in;
for being laid by way of Conspiracy, if the rest should chance to be acquitted,
no Judgment could be given against him: And so is 14 H. 6. 25.

Hale said, If one be Acquitted in an Action of Conspiracy, the other cannot be
Guilty: But where one is found Guilty, and the other comes not in upon Process,
or if he dies hanging the Suit; yet Judgment shall be upon the Verdict against
the other. And so is 18 E. 3. 1. and 24 E. 3. 34.

Wild said, The difference was, where the Suit was upon Conspiracy wherein the
Villainous Judgment was to be given, and where the Conspiracy is laid only by
way of Aggravation, as in this Case.

Hale said, It would be the same in an Action against two upon the Case for
Conspiracy; but not in such Actions, where though there be a Charge of
Conspiracy, yet the Gift of the Action is upon another matter.

But the Court said, They would give him two or three days for the bringing in
of the other two, and defer the Entry of the Judgment in the mean time.

Methyn versus the Hundred of Thistleworth.
THe Case was moved again by North Solicitor. He urgrd for the Plaintiff, That
the Issue being, Whether they took the Felon upon Fresh Suit? It being not
found that there was any actual Taking, or that the Fresh Suit continued until
Sir J. Ash found the Felon in the presence of Sir P. Warwick. Also, it was
found that Sir J. Ash was a Justice of Peace, and therefore it was his duty to
Apprehend him.

To this it was Answered,

That the Statute of Winton (upon which the Action is founded, and not upon the
27 of Eliz. and therefore it is ill if it concludes contra formam Statutorum)
does not say shall Take, but shall Answer the Bodies of the Offenders; which
is, Answer them to Justice: And therefore if the Felon be taken upon another
account, and the Country finding him in Prison, cause him to be Indicted; this
satisfies the Statute, Goldsb. 55.

Again, it was more decent for Sir John Ash being concerned as an Inhabitant of
the Hundred to leave this Matter to the other Justice of the Peace; (for it has
been known, that Justices of the Peace have been Censured in the Star Chamber,
for being too forward to interpose in their own business:) But if it were an
omission of the Duty of his Office, that could not be Objected to him as an
Inhabitant, having done enough to satisfy the Statute of Winton.

Wild said, That the Defendant should have Demurred, because the Issue is ill
joined, (viz.) absque hoc that he took him super eadem recenti insecutione: For
if he were not immediately taken upon Fresh pursuit, it were sufficient; but
the Verdict finding Fresh Suit was made, it may be taken by Intendment (which
shall help out a Special Verdict,) that it was directed this way, and continued
until the finding of him in the presence of Sir P. Warwick. Et sic Judicium
pro Def. Ante.

Dacres versus Duncomb.
IN Trover, after Imparlance the Defendant pleaded, That the Plaintiff (with
two others) brought Trover for the same Goods before; which Action is still
depending: And demanded Judgment of the Writ.

The Plaintiff Replied, That the other two died before the Action was brought,
and so that Writ abated. To which it was Demurred, and Judgment quod respondeat
ouster: For in all Actions, where one Plaintiff dies, the Writ abates; (save in
an Action brought by two Executors.) And Hale said, So it should in a Quare
Impedit; but that it is revivable by Journeys Accounts.

Wild said, That the Pleading, That the Two died before the Action brought, was
double.

Hale. No, for he must show both were dead to enable him to bring this Action
alone.

Twisden. How comes this Plea in Abatement after an Imparlance?

Hale. Though after an Imparlance the Defendant cannot plead a Misnosmer, or the
like, or Ancient demesne; because he admits, he ought to answer the Writ; yet
such a Plea in Abatement as this he may. But that comes not in question;
because the Plaintiff Replied to it, and did not Demur.

Nota, Debt for Rent in the Detinet against an Executor, shall be brought where
the Lease was made; because it is for the Arrears in the Testators time: But
where it is in the debet and detinet, (viz.) for Rent incurred in the Executors
time, it must be where the Land lies. And so Agreed by the Court.

Nota, No Tithes to be paid for Pasture wherein the Plow-Horses are fed.

And Hale said, So it is of Saddle-Horses.

Anonymus.
A Foreign Attachment in an Inferior Court was pleaded in this manner: That by
Custom (time out of mind) whoever Leavied a Plaint, pro aliquo debito, against
another, upon Surmize, That a Stranger was Indebted to the Defendant; that
Process issued forth to attach, etc.

Against this Pemberton Objected, That it was not said pro aliquo debito which
did arise infra Jurisdictionem Curiae.

The Court said, that they need not express that the Debt did arise infra
Jurisdictionem; for perhaps it did not. And yet, if an Action be brought in
such case, and the Debt be laid to be Contracted infra Jurisdictionem Curiae,
if the Defendant will plead to it he may; but he shall never be admitted to
assign for Error in Fact, that the Debt did arise extra Jurisdictionem Curiae.
But if he had tendered such a Plea in the Inferior Court upon Oath; then, if
they had refused it, it would have been Error. Wherefore it is enough in this
case to say, If a Plaint were Levied pro aliquo debito infra Jurisdictionem
without averring that the Debt did arise within the Jurisdiction. Also there
cannot be a Custom for a Foreign Attachment, before there be some Default in
the Defendant. Wherefore the Pleading was there held to be Ill.

Mosdel, the Marshal of the Court, against Middleton.
IN Debt upon a Bond with Condition to be a true Prisoner, and to pay him so
much by the week for Chamber Rent.

To this was pleaded the Statute of 23 H. 6. And the Court resolved, it was
void by that Statute.

Hale said, a Bond for true Imprisonment is good prima facie; but the Defendant
may aver, that it was also for ease and favor. And so it was adjudged in Sir
John Lenthals time, who brought Debt upon a Bond of 2000 l and the party
pleaded, That it was taken for ease and favor; and upon the Trial it appeared,
That after that Bond the Defendant was permitted sometimes to go into the
Country with a Keeper, whereas before he was kept strait Prisoner; and upon
this matter the Bond was ruled to be void.

Twisden cited my Lord Hob. That a Jailer could not take a Bond of his Prisoner
for a just Debt.

Hale. That seems hard, because he takes it in another capacity. But he cannot
take a Bond for his Fees, because it would give him opportunity to extort.
Also, here part being against the Statute it avoids all, but the Condition of a
Bond or Covenant may in part be against the Common Law, and stand good in the
other part. Hob.


Cox versus Matthews.
IN Action for a Nusans, in stopping of the Lights of his House.

Exception was taken to the Declaration, for that he did not say autiquum
Messuagium; and yet it was ruled to be good enough, for perhaps the House was
new Built: And the truth of this Case was said to be, that the Defendant had
Built the House and Let it to the Plaintiff, and would now go to stop up the
Lights.

Hale said, if a Man has a Watercourse running thorough his Ground, and erects
a Mill upon it, he may bring his Action for diverting the Stream, and not say
antiquum molendinum; and upon the Evidence it will appear, whether the
Defendant has Ground thorough which the Stream runs before the Plaintiffs, and
that he used to turn the Stream as he saw cause, for otherwise he cannot
justify it, though the Mill be newly erected.

Watson versus Snead.
IN Debt for 20 l the Plaintiff declared, that the Defendant concessit se
teneri per scriptum suum Obligatorium, etc. the words of the Deed were, I do
acknowledge to Edward Watson by me twenty pounds upon Demand, for doing the
work in my Garden.

Upon a Demurrer to the Declaration, it was adjudged a good Bond.

Morse versus Slew.
THe Case was argued two several Terms at the Bar, by Mr. Holt for the
Plaintiff, and Sir Francis Winnington for the Defendant, and Mr. Molloy for the
Plaintiff, and Mr. Wallop for the Defendant; and by the Opinion of the whole
Court, Judgment was given this Term for the Plaintiff.

Hale delivered the Reasons as follows.

First, By the Admiral Civil Law the Master is not chargeable, pro damno
fatali, as in case of Pirates, Storm, etc. but where there is any negligence in
him he is.

Secondly, This Case is not to be measured by the Rules of the Admiral Law,
because the Ship was infra corpus Comitatus.

Then the First Reason wherefore the Master is liable is, because he takes a
Reward; and the usage is, that half Wages is paid him before he goes out of
the Country.

Secondly, If the Master would, he might have made a Caution for himself, 4 Co.
Southcotes Case.
which he omitting and taking in the Goods generally, he shall answer for what
happens. There was a Case (not long since) when one brought a Box to a Carrier,
in which there was a great Sum of Money, and the Carrier demanded of the Owner
what was in it; who answered, That it was filled with Silks and such like Goods
of mean value; upon which the Carrier took it, and was robbed. And resolved
that he was liable. But if the Carrier had told the Owner, that it was a
dangerous time, and if there were Money in it, he durst not take charge of it;
and the Owner had answered as before, this matter would have excused the
Carrier.

Thirdly, He which would take off the Master in this Case from the Action must
assign a difference between it, and the Case of a Hoyman, Common Carrier or
Inholder.

It Is objected, That the Master is but a Servant to the Owners.

Answer, The Law takes notice of him as no more than a Servant. It Is known,
that he may impawn the Ship if occasion be, and sell bona peritura: 2 Cro. 330.
Hob. 11.
He is rather an Officer than a Servant. In an Escape the Jailer may be
charged, though the Sheriff is also liable; for respondeat superior. But the
Turnkey cannot be sued, for he is but a mere Servant: By the Civil Law the
Master or Owner is chargeable at the Election of the Merchant.

It Is further objected, That he receives Wages from the Owners.

Answer, In effect the Merchant pays him, for he pays the Owners freight, so
that it is but handed over by them to the Master; if the Freight be lost, the
Wages are lost too, for the rule is Freight, is the mother of Wages: Therefore,
though the Declaration is, that the Master received Wages of the Merchant, and
the verdict is, That the Owners pay it, it is no material variance.

Objection, It Is found, that there were the usual number of Men to guard the
Ship?

Answer, True, for the Ship, but not with reference to the Goods, for the
number ought to be more or less as the Port is dangerous, and the Goods of
value, 33 H. 6. 1. If Rebels break a Gaol, so that the Prisoners escape, the
Jailer is liable; but it is otherwise of Enemies; so the Master is not
chargable, where the Ship is spoiled by Pirates. And if a Carrier be robbed by
an Hundred men, he is never the more excused. Ante.

Cox versus Mathews.
THe Case was moved again. And Hale said, that if a Man Builds a House upon his
own ground, he that has the Contiguous ground may Build upon it; also, though he
does thereby stop the Lights of the other House, for cujus est solum ejus est
usque ad coelum; Poph. 170.
and this holds, unless there be Custom to the contrary, as in London. But in
an Action for stopping of his Light, a Man need not declare of an ancient
House; for if a Man should Build an House up-his own ground, and then grant the
House to A. and grants certain Lands adjoining to B.B. could not Build to the
stopping of A's Lights in that Case, 1 Cro. Sands and Trefuses 415. But the
Case at Bar is without question, for he declares, That the Defendant fixed
Boards to the Windows of the Plaintiff's House.

Anonymus.
UPon a motion to set aside an Inquisition taken before the Coroner, super
visum corporis, certified into this Court, that J.S. killed himself, and was
Non compos mentis. Hale said, such an Inquisition that finds a Man Felo de se
is Traversable, but no Traverse can be taken to make a Man Felo de se; but
fugam fecit is never Traversable.

Clue versus Baily.
IN Replevin the Defendant made Conusans as Bailiff to J. S. who demised the
place where, under certain Rent, etc.

The Plaintiff Traverses the Demise, and concluded and hoc paratus est
verificare. To which the Defendant demurred generally. And the Court were in
doubt, whether this ill conclusion of the Plea were not helped upon a general
Demurrer.

Hale, It were well the Causes of Demurrer were always assigned Specially; and
not to say only, incertum and dubium and caret forma, etc. The old way was,
when Pleadings were drawn at the Bar to make the exception immediately, and the
other Party might mend if he pleased, or might Demurr if he durst venture it.
And though now they are put in Paper; yet such a Course should be observed, for
Demurrers were not designed to catch Men: This not concluding to the Country,
seems to be but matter of Form, and the Demurrer should have been quia non been
concludit. Here the Defendant pleads, that J. S. demised the Land for Life, and
without expressing the place of the Demise, because of necessity it must be
upon the Land.

Blake versus....
ERror of a Judgment in Replevin in the Manor Court of Hexam in
Northumberland, where the Defendant avowed for Damage fesant.

The Plaintiff replied, that J. S. was seized of the Manor of Tallowfield in
D. and that time out of mind he had Common, etc. in the place where, and showed
himself to be Tenant, and justified the putting in of his Beasts for Common;
and the Prescription being traversed, it was found for the Avowant. The Errors
assigned were.

First, In the Venire, which was, quia nec the Plaintiff, nec Defendant, aliqua
affinitate attingunt, instead of qui nec. Hale said, it was aided by the
Statute of 8 H. 6. that helps Error in Process. But Twisden said, that Statute
did not extend to inferior Courts.

Another Error insisted on was, that the Avowant did not show that the Manor
of Tallowfield was infra Jurisdictionem Curiae: But the Venire was, extra vill'
and Manerium de Tallowfield, infra Jurisdictionem Curiae. But the Court held,
that that was not sufficient to intimate that it was within the Jurisdiction,
but must have been shown in pleading. And Hale said, seeing the Plaintiff had
omitted to do it, the Avowant might in his Rejoinder have alleged Tallowfield
to have been within the Jurisdiction, as where one pleads a Plea without a
place, the other is not bound to Demurr, but for his expedition may show the
place in his Replication. Then VVild said, this seems to be aided by the
Statute of 21 Jac. which Enacteth, That if the Jury comes out of any one of the
places it suffices; and here the Jury came as well out of the Vill where the
Beasts were taken, (shown to be within the Jurisdiction) as the Manor of
Tallowfield.

Hale. That will not serve in this Case, for the Court could not Award a Venire
to a place out of the Jurisdiction, nor Jurors could not be returned out of
such a place to try a Cause there.

Another Error assigned was, that the Award of the Venire was praeceptum est
per seneschallum, and not said in eadem Curia.

To which it was answered.

That being on the same day upon which the Court was said to be held, it must
be intended so.

VVild held, the Judgment ought to be reversed for the last Cause.

Twisden, Principally for the first, for he held that the Statute of the 8 H.
6. Aided not Process in inferior Courts; therefore, where in the Award of the
Venire it has been per quos rei veritas melius Scire, poterit instead of Sciri,
the Judgment has been reversed.

Hale said, that it ought to be Sciri, for so it is in the Register, and in the
Statute of Eliz. that sets the Estate of Jurors at 4 l per ann. But for the
second Error, he held that the Judgment ought to be reversed.

Whaley versus Tancred.
TRin. 23 Car. 2. Rot. 1513. In an Ejectment the Case was this; Lessee for
years makes a Feoffment and levies a Fine, five years pass, Whether the Lessor
should have five years after the Term expired was the question; and after the
hearing of Arguments the Court resolved, that he should, as well as when Lessee
for Life levies a Fine, which differs not in reason from this Case, for there
the Lessor may have his Writ de consimili casu presently, as here he may bring
his Assize. And though in 9 Co. Podgers Case, It Is said, that where Lessee for
years is ousted by a Disseisor, who levies a Fine, if five years pass without
claim the Lessor is barred, that is not the same with this Case; for the
Disseissor comes in without the consent of the Lessee, and of his own wrong;
and if he can defend his Possession five years he shall hold it; but here all
is done with the privity, and by the means of the Lessee who is trusted with
the Possession, and it would be of most mischievous import to Men's
Inheritances, if they should not have five years after the Lease ended; and it
being put of a Disseisin in Podger's Case, seems to imply the contrary in other
Cases; and though there were many notorious Circumstances of fraud in Fermours
Case, which Co. in his report of it lays much weight upon; yet it does not
thence follow, that the Law is not the same where there are not such evidences
of fraud. In other Books where that case is reported, the resolution does not
seem to go so much upon the particularities of the Fraud. It Is Fraud apparent
in the Lessee.

Wilston versus Pilkney.
IN Debt for Rent the Plaintiff declared, that the Dean and Chapter of, etc.
demised to the Defendant for Life; by force of which he entered and demised the
Land to the Plaintiff for years, by virtue of which he was possessed, and
afterward granted to the Defendant, reserving a Rent, for which he brings his
Action.

To this Declaration the Defendant Demurrs.

First, Because he does not say of the Deans Demise hic in Curia prolat', which
Demise must be by Deed.

Secondly, He says, that the Defendant entered by force thereof, which is
impertinent to be alleged upon a Lease for Life, because Livery implies it.

Thirdly, As to the matter, that the Reservation was void, it being upon a
surrender by Parol. A Rent cannot be reserved upon a Feoffment by Parol; so
where Lessee for life, or years assigns over his whole interest, 12 H. 4. 14. 9
H. 6. 43. 12 H. 4. 17. also no Rent can be reserved upon a Conveyance that
works an Extinguishment, unless by Deed, where it is good upon the contract.
Peto's Case, 3 Cro. 101. is, that a Surrender drowns the interest to all
intents and purposes between the Parties. Dier 251. The Tenant for Life agreed
with him in Reversion, that he should have his Land for the Annual Rent of 20 s
it is doubted there whether this amounts to a Surrender, there being no Deed or
Livery. But in 2 Rolls 497. it is said, if it had been a Surrender, the
reservation had been void.

Hale. I do most doubt of the first exception, because the Deed was not
produced. And for the second it were better pleading to have said by force of
which he was seized; but that's not of necessity. And as to the matter, the
Court resolved for the Plaintiff. For

1. The Reservation was good by the contract, though without Deed. And so it was
adjudged in this Court in Manly's Case, that Tenant for years might assign his
whole Term by Parol, rendering Rent; so in the Case of Purcas and Owen, 23 Car.
But it was doubted, whether an Action would lie until the last day were past.
It Is all one where the Grant is made to him in Reversion, which is not
actually, but consequentially a Surrender by operation of Law, before which the
contract is perfected, upon which the Rent arises. 7 E. 4. is, that the Lessee
may Surrender upon Condition; and there is no reason, why a Rent cannot be
created upon it, as well as a Condition. If it were in the case of Tenant for
Life, a Deed were requisite, as well for a Rent as a Condition in respect of
the Freehold, but that is not so in case of Tenant for years. Vide Postea
Cartwright and Pinkney.

Termino Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno 25 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Hanslap versus Cater.
IN Error upon a Judgment in the Court of Coventry, where the Plaintiff Cater
declared. That the Defendant being indebted to him infra Jurisdictionem Curiae,
pro diversis Bonis and Mercimoniis ante tunc venditis and deliberatis, did then
and there assume, etc. Upon Non Assumpsit pleaded, and a Verdict and Judgment
for the Plaintiff, the Error assigned was, That the Goods were not alleged to
be sold within the Jurisdiction of the Court.

Hale and Wild seemed to be of Opinion, that it was well enough, the being
indebted, and the promise being laid to be within the Jurisdiction.

Twisden Contra, and said he had known many Judgments reversed for the same
Cause.

It being moved again this Term, Hale consented that it should be reversed
according as the latter Presidents have been; for he said it was his Rule Stare
decisis, Parsons and Muden, Pasch. 22. Car. 2. Rot. out of Barnstaple Court.

John Brown's Case.
HE was indicted upon the Statute of 3 H. 7. cap. 2. for the forcible taking
away and marrying of one Lucy Ramsy, of the Age of fourteen years, having to
her Portion 5000 l He was tried at the Bar, and the fact appeared upon the
Evidence to be thus, She was inveigled into Hide Park by one Mrs. P.
confederate with Brown, (who had prepared a Coach for that purpose) to take the
Air in an Evening, about the latter end of May last, and being in the Park the
Coachman drove away from the rest of the company, which gave opportunity to
Brown, who came to the Coach side in a Vizar-mask, and addressing himself first
to Mrs. P. soon persuaded her out of the Coach, and then pulls out a Maid
servant there attending Mrs. Ramsy; and then gets himself into the Coach, and
there detains her until the Coachman carried them to his Lodgings in the
Strand, where the next Morning he prevails upon her, (having first threatened to
carry her beyond Sea if she refused) to Marry him, but was the same day
apprehended in the same House.

It was a first doubted, whether the Evidence of Lucy Ramsy was to be admitted,
because she was his Wife de facto, though not de jure. But the Court seriatim
delivered their Opinions, that she was to be admitted a Witness.

First, For that there was one continuing force upon her, from the beginning
till the Marriage; wherefore, whatsoever was done while she was under that
violence was not to be respected.

Secondly, As such Cases are generally contrived, so heinous a Crime, would go
unpuished, unless the Testimony of the Woman should be received.

Thirdly, In Fulwoods Case, reported in 1 Cro. (which was read in the Court)
the Woman was a Witness, though married as here; and Rainsford cited my Lord
Castlehavens Case, where the Countess gave Evidence, that he assisted the
committing a Rape upon her: But Hale said he was not governed by that case,
because there was a Wife de jure, the Evidence being clear as to all the Points
of the Statute, (viz.)

First, That the taking was by force.

Secondly, That the Woman had substance according to the Statute.

Thirdly, That Marriage ensued, though it did not appear she was deflowred, the
Jury found him guilty. Whereupon Judgment was given, and he was hanged.

Note, 39 Eliz. cap. 9. takes away Clergy from this Offense.

Bailey versus Murin.
IN an Ejectment upon a Special Verdict, the Case was to this effect.

One Cooper Vicar of Granbrook in Kent, being seized of an House and Lands
thereunto appertaining, parcel of the Endowment of his Vicaridge situate in a
Market Town in the year 1672* lets it for three years, and one year of the said
Lease being expired the 11 of Sept. 1673. lets it for 21 years, to begin from
Michaelmas following, reserving the Rent during the Term, payable at the usual
Feasts, or within ten days after; this Lease was confirmed by the Archbishop (
Patron of the Vicarage) and Dean and Chapter of Canterbury.

Some years after Cooper dies, and the Question was, Whether Buck (the
succeeding Vicar) could avoid this Lease?

The first Point was, Whether the Lease became void within 80 Days after the
death of Cooper, by the Statute of Non-residence? 13 Eliz. 20.
And as to that all the Justices were of Opinion, that Death would not make
such a Non-residence as should avoid the Lease; for the Intention of the
Statute was, to oblige the Incumbents to Residence.

First, By imposing of the Forfeiture of a years Value of their Benefice, if
they did not Reside.

Secondly, By making their Leases void; which though prima facie seemed to be to
their advantage, yet was not so in the consequence; for none would be induced
to Farm their Lands, because it was in their power to defeat their Leases by
Non residence.

Again, It Is plain the Statute meant a Wilful Absence, because it says, The
party so offending the Statute of the 13th of Eliz. that allows Leases of
Houses, etc. in Market Towns for 40 years, would be of no effect if Death
should be interpreted a Non-residence, and the Confirmation of Patron and
Ordinary would be to no purpose. Butler and Goodale's Case in the 6 Co. 21. b.
is, that where the Incumbent is absent upon an Inhibition, or for the sake of
his Health, he is not within the Penalty of that Law. There is only one single
Authority against this, (viz.) Mott and Hale's Case in the 1 Cro. 123. which
Twisden doubted, whether it were so adjudged, because my Lord Coke mentions it
no where, supposing so Notable a Point would not have escaped his Observation,
especially in a Case wherein he was Counsel. But Hale said, It was Adjudged by
the Opinion of three Judges; though in Moor it is said, the Court was Divided; but
it was a hard Opinion: And in the 38th of Eliz. B.R. Moor 609. the very Point
was adjudged contrary.

The second Point, Whether it were void, because the Rent was reserved at the
usual Feasts, or within Ten days after? For it was urged, that the Term ending
at Michaelmas, would be expired before the last Payment: And for the other
payments, it is for the Successor's advantage, because the Predecessor may dye
within the Ten days. But the Court were clear of Opinion, in regard the
Reservation was during the Term, that there should be no Ten days given to the
Lessee for the last payment, according to Barwicke and Foster's Case in the 2
Cro. 227, 233.

The third point, Whether this were a Lease in Reversion, and so not warranted
by the Statute of the 14 of Elizabeth? And all the Court held that it was. This
Statute repeats that of the 13th of Eliz. as to Houses in Market Towns, (which
Liberty was given, as Twisden said, to render those places more populous;) but
excepts Leases in Reversion, which this is, being to commence at a Day to come,
where a Power is annexed to an Estate for Life to make Leases in possession. A
man cannot make a Lease to commence in futuro. In the 6 Co. Fitz William's
Case, 4 E. 3. tit. Waste 18. the Lessor made a Lease to commence after the
death of the Tenant for Life, and notwithstanding maintained an Action of
Waste: And Co. Lit. citing that Case, distinguishes between a Grant of the
Reversion, and a Lease in Reversion, as that Case was. In Plowden's
Commentaries, Tracy's Case, A Lease made to commence at a Day to come, is given
as a most proper Instance of a Lease in Reversion. In the 1 Cro. 546. Hunt and
Singleton's Case, a Lease of an House for 40 years (there being 10 years
unexpired of a former Lease) by the Dean and Chapter of St. Paul's, was held not
warranted by the 14th of Eliz. The like was Resolved in C. B. 14 Car. 2. in the
Case of Wyn and Wild, of a Lease of the Dean and Chapter of Westminster, and
there the Court denied the Opinion in Tomson and Trafford's Case, Poph. 9. And
two of the Judges seemed to be of Opinion, (and Twisden strongly), that if the
Lease in the Case at Bar had been made to commence presently, it yet would have
been void, there being another Lease in being; so that for so many years as
were to come of the former Lease, it would be a Lease in Reversion: And that
the 18th of Eliz. that permits a concurrent Lease, so that there be not above
three years in being, shall not in their Opinion, make any alteration of the
14th of Eliz. but it only extends to the 13th of Eliz. because it recites that,
but not the former. And so is the Opinion of Hobart, in the Case of Crane and
Taylour 269. and it has been often held, that it does not extend to the
Statute of 1 Eliz. concerning Bishops. But of this Hale doubted, and rather
conceived the contrary (viz.) That the Lease had been good, if it had been made
to commence presently, there being less than three years to come of the former
Lease. And that of the 18 of Eliz. did give a qualification to Leases made upon
the 14th, as well as the 13th.

First, Because the 14 of Eliz. is a kind of an Appendix to the 13th of Eliz.
and does not repeat it, but sub modo a little enlarging it as to Houses in
Market Towns: Wherefore the 18th of Eliz. reciting the 13th, does by
consequence recite the 14th also.

Secondly, There is such a Connection betwixt all the Statutes, concerning
Leases of Ecclesiastical persons, that they have been taken into the
Construction of one another. The Statute of the 32d of H. 8. is not recited,
neither in the 1st or the 13th of Eliz. yet a Lease is not warranted upon those
Statutes, unless it has the Qualifications required by the 32d of H. 8. And
this course is usual in the Construction of Statutes made in pari materia.

Thirdly, It would make a great Romage in Leases, as he conceived, if a Lease
should be void, when there was never so little of a former Lease unexpired.

Fourthly, There is no Authority to the contrary. In Hunt and Singleton's Case
there was 10 years of the former Lease in being, and upon that lay the weight
of the Opinion. And Crane and Taylor's Case is concerning Covenants only; and
the Reason that it does not extend to the 1st of Eliz. is, because the 18th of
Eliz. begins with Inferior Ecclesiastical persons, and therefore cannot
include Bishops.

Termino Sancti Michaelis, Anno 25 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Anonymus.
PAyment is no good Plea to a Scire facias upon a Judgment: But in a Scire
facias against the Bail, Hale said, he might plead, That the Principal paid the
Money.

Hinchman versus Isles.
IN a Replevin the Defendant avowed for Rent, upon a Lease made to the
Plaintiff at Will.

The Plaintiff Replies, That the Defendant, before the Distress taken, made a
Lease for years, by virtue of which the Lessee Entered.

The Defendant Rejoyns, and confesses the making of the Lease; but says, that
there was a Special Agreement that the Lessee should not Enter until a time
after; and traverses the Entry.

The Plaintiff Surrejoyns, and traverses the Agreement. To which the Defendant
Demurrs specially.

Hale. There are here two things considerable;

First, Whether the making of the Lease be a determination of the Will before
Entry?

Secondly, Whether there may be a Traverse upon a Traverse in this Case?

As to the first: If the Lessor does any Act inconsistent with the Continuance
of the Estate at Will, it shall determine it from such time as the Tenant at
Will takes notice of it; though this may prove a mischievous Case, in regard of
the frequency of Conveyancing by Lease and Release. An Outlawry of the Lessor
shall not determine the Will until a Seizure, nor an Extent upon him until the
Liberate. If the Lessor says, The Lessee shall hold it no longer: The Lessee
(as soon as he knows of the words) he may take advantage of them as a
determination of the Will. As where he in Reversion upon a Lease grants the
Reversion, and brings Debt for the Rent. 40 E. 3. 16. simile in Case de Waste.
The Lessee, though before Attornment, may plead in Bar, that he has granted
away the Reversion: But this Plea will amount to an Attornment.

As to the second Point, Where a Traverse is not good without a Special
Inducement, there a Traverse may be to that Inducement: As in Trespass, where
the Justification is local by virtue of his Office, or the like, and in Hobart
in Digby and Fitzherbert's Case.

If the Lease were by Parol, here the Collateral Agreement might be material.
As if a Lease were made at Midsummer for 21 years, and it were agreed, that the
Lessee should Enter but at Michaelmass, it would begin in point of Computation
at Midsummer; but in point of Interest, not till Michaelmass.

Anonymus.
IN a Suit for Tithes, the Defendant pleaded in the Spiritual Court, That the
Tithes belonged to another, who was Rector, and not the Plaintiff. Which Plea
being refused, and Oath thereof made in this Court, a Prohibition was granted.

Anonymus.
IN an Action upon the Case for Stopping of his Lights. The Plaintiff Declared,
that he was possessed for diverse years (and did not say how many,) and that
time out of mind the Light came in at the Windows. Which was allowed a good
form of alleging a Prescription.

Anonymus.
IN an Ejectment, the Lessor of the Plaintiff had a Title to Enter for a
Condition broken for Non-payment of Rent, Lease, Entry and Ouster was
confessed, and the Court was moved, that in regard the Lessor having such a
special Title, and no Estate until Entry, whether such an Entry should be
supplied by the General Confession, or that there should be an Actual Entry?
And it was held, that it should be supplied by the General Confession.

But Hale said, If A. Lets to B. and B. to C. to try the Title; the Confession
of the Lease, Entry and Ouster, extends only to the Lease made to C. and not to
that to B.

Anonymus.
IN Trespass against diverse, one dies pending the Action, and notwithstanding
the Venire and Distringas mentions all, and the Verdict is against all: If this
Matter is surmized before Judgment, so that the Judgment be against the
Survivors, it is well enough.

Anonymus.
ERror to Reverse a Judgment given in the Burrow-Court of Shrewsbury, in an
Action upon the Case, laid apud Villam Salopiae in Warda Wallica ejusdem
Villae. The Error assigned was:

First; For that it appeared they awarded a Capias, which an Inferior Court
cannot do in an Action upon the Case. Vid. Stat. of 19 H. 7. though it was said
to be usual for the Palace Court to do it. Vid. Yelv. 1. But this was
Overruled; because the Defendant appeared, which aids Miscontinuance of
Process.

Secondly, For that the Venire was awarded de vicineto Wardae. And it was
urged, that a Jury ought not to come out of a Ward.

Hale. It has been sometimes so held; but it has been since adjudged good.

Thirdly, That in London the Venue usually comes out of the Ward; but there the
Custom makes it good, here the Ward is intended lesser than the Vill. As Wild
said a Case was, not long since. A Perjury was laid apud Whitehall in Parochia
Sanctae Margarettae Westm', the Venue came out of the Parish, and held it to be
Ill; for Whitehall was intended to be a Vill, and less than the Parish.

Wildman versus Norton.
IN a Repl the Defendant pleads in Bar Property to the Defendant, and not to
the Plaintiff. Upon which it was Demurred, as supposing it amounted to the
General Issue, as in Trespass such a Plea does, 27 H. 8. 21.

Hale. This Matter may be pleaded in Abatement, or in Bar. The General Issue in
Repl is, Non cepit; and if the Issue be Non cepit, Property cannot be given in
Evidence: But if the Defendant pleads Property in a Stranger, then it is proper
to conclude in Abatement. But the difficulty in this case is, That the
Defendant should regularly have claimed Property in the Country, and then the
Sheriff could not have delivered them, but the Plaintiff must have brought his
Writ de Proprietat' proband': But this Plea serves as an Avowry, and the
Defendant shall have a Return, 39 H. 6. 35.

Note, It was said, that if one Distrains for a Rent, and before the Avowry,
the Estate upon which it is reserved determines; the Avowry shall be as if the
Estate had continued, for the Avowant is to have the Rent notwithstanding. But
if the Distress were for a Personal Service, then the Defendant must have a
Special Justification; for he cannot have that Service in Specie when the
Estate is determined.

The Case of Captain C.
A Captain of a Company in Colonel Russel's Regiment of Foot Gaurds, and a
Sergeant of his Company, were brought into Court upon the Prosecution of the
Sheriffs and other Citizens of London; and the Offense alleged and moved
against them was this: That one Danbert, a Butcher and Freeman of London, (who
had Broke) having Listed himself a Soldier in this Company, and being
afterward Arrested in London for Debt, and laid in the Counter; and thereof he
having given the Captain private Notice, the following Design was resolved and
executed for his Rescue, (viz.) There being a Privilege belonging to the
Freeman of London, that they may by a Customary Precept or Warrant, (called a
Duci facias, but by the Common People called a Horse) remove themselves from
any other Prison (where they are) in London, to Ludgate, where it seems they
have better Accommodation, (there being Maintenance allowed to the Prisoners of
that place.) Such an one Danbert got, and gave Notice to the Captain, at what
time he should be carried from the Counter to Ludgate thereby. Before this time
the Captain commanded this Sergeant to take twenty or thirty Soldiers with him,
and Waylay the Prisoner, and Rescue him from the Bailiffs and Officers of the
Counter, as they were bringing him along. Accordingly the Sergeant and Soldiers
went, and lay in or near an Alehouse about Pope's Head Alley in Ambuscade till
the Prisoner should be brought by: And when they had Notice from one (who they
had placed as Sentinel) that he was coming, they sallied out and drew their
Swords; (for the Sergeant had given them order so to do, and if any opposition
were made they should kill the first Man:) And by this means they Rescued him
and carried him away.

Hereupon Complaint being made to the Captain; He Answered, That his Soldiers
had done well, and he would Justify it.

The Court asked him, what he had to say in his Justification?

He said, That he did not know the Law; but he ever thought that a Soldier
could not be Arrested without leave of his Officer; and that there was an
Agreement to that purpose, between the late Lord General and the former Lord
Chief Justice, and that he knew one that had done the like thing, and nothing
was said to him for it.

Hale Chief Justice, (to whom the rest agreed) said, The more wrong has been
done. It seems you are grown very Dead-strong; but you ought to know, that
every Officer and Soldier is as liable to be Arrested, as a Tradesman or any
other person whatsoever; and you ought to give full Obedience to the King's
Commands; signified by his Writs or Process.

Wild said, That that may be served upon you, when you are in the Head of your
Company.

Hale said further. You are the Kings Servants, and intended for his Defense
against his Enemies, and to preserve the Peace of the Kingdom; not to exempt
your self from the Authority of the Laws. And indeed it were a vain thing to
talk of Courts and Laws, if Military Men shall thus give the Law, and control
Proceedings: And for that Agreement you speak of, I know nothing of it; and if
there were any such thing, it could be nothing but a Civility. Whatever you
Military Men think, you shall find that you are under the Civil Jurisdiction,
and you but gnaw a File, you will break your Teeth e're you shall prevail
against it. This is an Outrageous Offense, and the Punishment has formerly gone
high. Men have heretofore lost their Heads for Matters of such nature; and one
of the Crimes of the late London Apprentices was the breaking of Prisons, and
delivering of Prisoners; for which they had Judgment of High Treason by the
Advice of all the Judges. The Captain and Sergeant were Committed to Newgate:
and being brought up at another time, Hale asked, Why an Information against
these Persons was not Exhibited? And told the City Counsel, that if the
Sheriffs did not prosecute this business, they (the Court) would Prosecute
them; for this was a matter of great Example, and ought not to be smothered:
And further said, If that Men will take upon them to Rescue all Soldiers that
are Committed, it may be within the reach of High Treason; because of the
Universality of the Design against the King's Athority: But this being but for
one particular, it cannot be Treason; but it is a rank Misdemeanour. And be
Ordered, that as many of the rest of the Soldiers should be Prosecuted as their
Names could be learned. There must be one more to make a Riot, though however
it is a Misdemeanour.

Wild said, Though they cannot find out another Name; yet if it be set forth, and
made out that there were others, it is enough to make a Riot.

Termino Sancti Hillarij, Anno 25 and 26 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
NOte, When a Prohibition is moved for, that a Copy of the Libel is denied to
be delivered: The Court requires that Oath should be made of the Denial, and
the Prohibition is but quousque a Copy be delivered.

Anonymus.
AN Indebitat' Assumpsit was brought for Money Lent. The Defendant pleads a
Tender, (which being offered at first, before Action brought, and acknowledged
by the Plaintiff, he can never recover any Costs.)

The Plaintiff Replies, That before the Tender he brought an Assumpsit in the
Sheriffs Court, upon a Plaint upon the same Cause of Action, which was removed
hither.

The Defendant Rejoyns, that upon that Plaint he declared for a greater Sum.

To which the Plaintiff Demurred: For though there be a Variance in the Sum; yet
it might be averred to be the same Cause of Action, And so the Court agreed.

And Hale put this Case: A. in Consideration that B. would marry his Daughter
promised to pay 100 l and in an Action brought, the Plaintiff was barred; and
in another Action brought, The Promise was laid to pay the 100 l at Request,
and held it could not be averred to be the same.

Anonymus.
Note, Where Error is assigned in a Matter contrary to the Record, in nullo est
Erratum is a Demurrer. So where Matter of Fact is insufficiently alleged.

But if a Matter of Law and Matter of Fact together (well set forth) be
assigned (which ought not to be) there in nullo est Erratum will be a
Confession of the Matter of Fact, and not serve as a Demurrer for the
Doubleness: Wherefore, in that case the Defendant must Demur.

Anonymus.
ONe having Rent payable Half yearly for a Term, whereof about six years were
to come, was content to Release it upon a Bond Conditioned for the payment of
the like Sum, with the Rent, and at the same times. And in Debt upon the Bond
after failure of Payment, upon a Reference to the Secondary to state what was
really due, He asked the Opinion of the Court, whether there should be any
deduction for Taxes? And the Court said, it was Equitable; they should be
allowed, in regard the Money in the Condition was intended between the Parties,
to be but in lieu of the Rent, which should have been chargeable with that
Assessment

Anonymus.
IN an Action upon the Statute of the 13th of this King, which Imposes 6 s and
8 d Penalty upon any one that shall print another Copy, whereof he has made
due Entry in the Register Book of the Company of Stationers, without License of
the Proprietor. It was set forth, that the Defendant had printed One thousand
parts of a Book, called The Young Clerk's Guide, after that the Plaintiff had
made an Entry thereof in the Register Book of the Company of Stationers. After
a Verdict for the Plaintiff, as to One Book, which was all the Plaintiff could
prove printed since the late Act of General Pardon.

It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the Plaintiff did not show himself to
be Proprietor of the Book before he made the Entry. Sed non allocatur: For the
Statute gives the Action to him that has made an Entry in the Register Book.

Secondly, It was Objected, that the Plaintiff ought to have no Costs in this
Action. But for that the Court said, the Plaintiff might release them. But it
was to be considered whether the Costs were well given or no?

Hedgeborrow versus Rosenden.
IN Debt for 100 l the Plaintiff Declared upon Articles of Agreement,
purporting that the Plaintiff and Defendant should Run an Horse for 100 l and
if the Defendant lost, that he should pay the 100 l etc.

The Defendant pleaded the Statute of this King, concerning Gaming, which
provides that all Securities given for Money lost at Play, exceeding 100 l
shall be void. And sets forth, that in the Articles it was further agreed, that
the Plaintiff and Defendant should Run two, three or four Heats more at 20 l a
Heat, if the Plaintiff required it; so that the whole amounted to more than 100
l

Holt Argued for the Plaintiff.

First, The Statute (as appears by the words) intended to avoid Securities
given for Money lost at Play; but not where the Contract is precedent: For though
men, when they have lost their Money, are very rash in venturing further; yet
what is done before they enter into play may be supposed to be done
considerately: Sed non allocatur, for that Construction would wholly elude the
Statute, and let Men loose to play for any great Sum, provided they secured it
beforehand.

Secondly, It was objected, that the Statute did not intend to avoid the
security, when there was but 100 l lost at a time, and it does not appear here
that the Plaintiff requested the Defendant to play any further: Sed non
allocatur, for the bargain being to play for more than 100 l it is void ab
initio; and though the Plaintiff did not request the Defendant, it is not material
no more than if one should contract for more interest than the Statute allows,
if the Creditor requests it, though he never requests, yet it is within the
Statute of Usury; and the Court said, they would extend this Satute as largely
as might be in suppressing of Gaming, which was so mischievous.

Monsieur Bellew, Norman Senior and Norman Junior.
THree Frenchmen were indicted of Treason, in Coining and Clipping the Kings
Money, by two several Indictments; and the Court doubted, whether Judgment for
the Clipping should be Drawing, Hanging and Quartering, or Drawing and Hanging
only; and having advised with all the Judges at Serjants Inn, they resolved, it
should be Drawing and Hanging only, though the Presidents are both ways. And the
Opinion of Coke 3 Inst. 17. is, that a Clipper should be Drawn Hanged and
Quartered. But in regard the Statute of 3 H. 5. declared Clipping and
Diminishing the Kings Coin to be within the Statute of the 25 E. 3. which
mentions Coining only; that does not stand repealed by 1 Mar. that leaves all
Treasons within the Statute of the 25 E. 5. as they were before, and so 1 Eliz.
against Coining makes not a new Treason. And then, as Hale said, Coining was
esteemed as an inferior sort of Treason, in comparison of such as concerned
the Kings Person; wherefore, there was Drawing and Hanging only for that, and
then by the same reason for Clipping, which seems a less degree of the same
kind of Treason.

Then there was debate, whether Twisden being the ancient Judge or the Chief
Justice, should pronounce the Judgment.

Twisden said, in case of Treason it belonged to the Chief Justice, tho not in
Felonies; and that the Lord Foster did it in Sir Henry Vanes Case, in the 13 of
this King.

Hale, Thought the other was to do it; and therefore Twisden gave the Judgment,
ut supra; and to avoid scruple, Hale pronounced it over again.

Baker versus Bulstrode.
IN Debt upon a Bond, Conditioned to perform an Award; the question did arise
upon one part of the Award, (viz.) That the Defendant should Seal and Execute
such a Release to the Plaintiff, as should be to the satisfaction of the
Plaintiffs Counsel within the space of seven days, and which of the Parties was
to tender the Release was the question. And it was resolved, that the tender
ought to come on the Defendants side, and not like the Case where such Deed,
etc. is to be made, as the Counsel for the other Party shall advise, for the
Deed must be offered according as the Counsel does advise, and he to whom it is
to be made is to do the first Act; but the words here are of another import,
vid. Lambs Case, 5 Co. 23.13.

It was held by the Court, that a Writ of Error that hears Test before the
Judgment given, is good to remove the Record, so as Judgment be given before
the Return of it: And Hale said, that about three years since at Norfolk
Assizes, the Defendant in an Indictment of Barretry, brought a Writ of Error
Test before the Assizes; and it was disallowed, because if such practice
should obtain, it would disappoint all the Proceedings at the Assizes. And if
the Plaintiff does not show his Writ of Error to the other Party, or get it
allowed by the Clerk, (by Endorsing Recipitur upon it) within four days, (which
time the Court gives, as convenient time for putting in of Bayl according to
the Statute) the Writ of Error is no Supersedeas. Also, if before the Writ of
Error the Sheriff Returns Fieri feci, and non inveni emptores, the Execution is
not to be undone.

Termino Paschae, Anno 26 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Anonymus.
IN an Assault and Battery, the Case upon the Evidence was this. The Defendant
drew a Sword, and waved it in a menacing manner against the Plaintiff, but did
not touch him, so the Jury were ordered to find him Guilty as to the Assault,
but not of the Battery. And the Opinion of the Court was, that the Plaintiff
was to have no more Costs than Damages; for the new Act excepts Actions of
Assault and Battery, so that both must be proved.

Anonymus.
IF a Parish, etc. be indicted for not repairing of a Way within their
Precinct, they cannot plead Not guilty, and give in Evidence that another by
Prescription or Tenure ought to repair it; for they are chargeable de communi
Jure, and if they would discharge themselves by laying it elsewhere, it must be
pleaded.

Error.
ERror to Reverse a Judgment in Debt upon a Bond given in Norwich Court, where
by the Custom, the plea of the Defendant was, quod non dedicit factum, sed
petit quod inquiratur de debito.

First, It was moved to be Error, for that the Venire was XII Men, etc. in
figures; Sed non allocatur, for being in these letters XII and not in the
figures 12. it was well enough.

Secondly, It was ad triandum exi tum; whereas there was no Issue joined,
wherefore it ought to have been ad inquirend' de debito, etc. Sed non
allocatur, for the Presidents are as the Case is here.

Thirdly, The Condition of the Bond was to pay at Alborough, and that ought to
have been shown to be within the Jurisdiction of the Court: Sed non allocatur,
for the Plea here is not payment, secund' formam Conditionis, but the Jury is
to inquire by the custom of all manner of payments and discharges.

Fourthly, In the Record it was continued over to several Courts, and in the
Court where the Judgment is given, it is said in Curia praedicta, and so
uncertain which; but notwithstanding these matters, the Judgment was affirmed.

Anonymus.
THe Case upon Evidence at a Trial in Ejectment was this; a Dean and Chapter
having a right to certain Land, but being out of Possession, Sealed a Lease
with a Letter of Attorney, to deliver it upon the Land, which was done
accordingly, and held to be a good Lease, for though the putting the Seal of a
Corporation aggregate to a Deed, carries with it a delivery; yet the Letter of
Attorney to deliver it upon the Land, shall suspend the operation of it while
then.

Tenant for Life being in Debt, to defraud his Creditors, commits a Forfeiture,
to the end that he in Reversion may enter, who is made privy to the
contrivance. The Opinion of Hale was, that the Creditors should avoid this, as
well as any fraudulent Conveyance.

Anonymus.
IN an Ejectment upon a Trial at Bar for Lands in ancient Demesne, there was
shown a Recovery in the Court of ancient Demesne, to cut off an Entail which
had been suffered a long time since, and the Possession had gone accordingly.
But there was now objected against it,

First, That no sufficient Evidence of it appeared, because the Recovery it
self, nor a Copy of it was shown, for in truth it was lost. But the Court did
admit other proof of it to be sufficient; and said, if a Record be lost, it may
be proved to a Jury by Testimony, as the Decree in H. 8. time for Tithe in
London is lost; yet it has been often allowed that there was one.

Secondly, It appeared that a part of the Land was leased for Life, and the
Recovery with a single Voucher was suffered by him in Reversion, and so no
Tenant to the Praecipe for those Lands: But in regard the Possession had
followed it for so long time; the Court said they would presume a Surrender, as
in an Appropriation of great Antiquity, there has been presumed a License though
none appeared.

Thirdly, It was objected, That the Tenant in Tail which suffered the Recovery
having first accepted of a Fine sur Conusans de droit come ceo, his Estate Tail
was changed, for he was estopped during his Life, to say that he had any other
Estate than Fee; then he being made Tenant to the Praecipe, the Recovery was
not of the Estate Tail, and so should not bind. But the Court held clearly,
that the acceptance of this Fine made no alteration of his Estate. If Tenant
for Life accepts such a Fine it is a Forfeiture, because he admits the Reversion
to be in a Stranger, but it does not change his Estate; so where two
Joynt-tenants in Fee accept a Fine, which is to the Heirs of one of them, yet
they continue Joynt-tenants in Fee as they were before.

Fourthly, The Writ of Right Close did express the Land to lie in such a
Manor; and a Praecipe that demands Land ought to mention the Vill in which
they lie, for a Praecipe of Land in Parochia or in Manerio is not good. But
this exception was disallowed by the Court, for Hale said the Writ of Right
Close is directed Ballivis Manerij, etc. quod plenum rectum teneant of the Land
within the Precinct of the Manor, and it is not to be resembled to another
Praecipe. But if a Praecipe be faulty in that Point, unless exception be taken
to it in Abatement it cannot be assigned for Error; but if it were Erroneous,
the Recovery would bind until reversed.

Note, After Judgment quod computet, though it be not the final Judgment; yet no
motion is to be admitted in Arrest of Judgment, and after such Judgment a Scire
facias lies against the Executor of the Defendant.

Note, In an Action of Debt against the Lessee he may plead nil debet, and give
the expulsion in Evidence.

Anonymus.
IN an Assumpsit the consideration appeared to be, that the Defendant promised
to pay a Sum of Money which he owed, this is no good consideration though after a
Verdict, unless it appeared, that the Debt was become remediless by the Statute
of Limitations; but payment of a Debt without Suit is a good consideration.

Anonymus.
A Justice of the Peace brought an Action of Slander, for that the Defendant
said, He was not worth a Groat, and that he was gone to the Dogs; and upon
motion in Arrest of Judgment, notwithstanding that it was urged to maintain it,
that the Statute of H. 6. requires that a Justice of Peace should have 40 l a
year: And therefore, in regard an Estate was necessary to his Office, that the
Action would lie; yet the Judgment was stayed, for such words will not bear an
Action, unless the person of whom they are spoken, lives by buying and selling.

Anonymus.
IT was returned upon Elegit, that the Sheriff had delivered medietatem Terrar'
and Tenementorum in extent; and after the Filing and Entry of it upon the
Record, the Plaintiff moved to quash it, because it was insufficient, for the
Sheriff ought upon such Execution to deliver the Possession by Metes and Bounds.

Wild held, that it being entered upon the Record, there was no avoiding of it
but by Writ of Error. But Hale held, that in regard it appeared by the Record
to be void, it might be quashed, as if upon an Ejectment to recover Possession,
upon such a return it appears upon the Evidence, that there was more than the
half the Land delivered, this shall be avoided. So if a Fieri facias be not
warranted by the Judgment upon which it is awarded, though the Sheriff shall be
excused, yet it is merely void as to the Party. Et Ad jornatur.

Norton versus Harvey.
THe Case was, an Executor being possessed of a Term, let part of it, reserving
a Rent, and died. And the Question was, whether his Executor should have the
Rent or the Administrator, de bonis non.

It was argued for the Executor, that this Rent is merely due by the Contract,
and not incident to the Reversion, and the Administrator is in Paramount, it
being now as if the Testator had died Intestate; and therefore, before the
Statute of this King, such Administrators could not have had a Scire facias
upon a Judgment obtained by the Executor; though in the Case of Cleve and Vere, 3
Cro. 450, 457. it is held, that he may have a Liberate where the Executor had
proceeded in the Execution of a Statute, so far as an Extent, for there the
thing is executed, and not merely Executory as a Judgment. If a Man that has a
Term in the right of his Wife, lets part of it, reserving a Rent, the Wife
surviving shall not not have the Rent: On the other side it was said, that this
case differed from that, because the Reservation here is by him, that had the
whole Right executed in him.

Another objection against the Action was, that here in the Declaration being
in Covenant for Non payment of Rent, there is not any demand alleged. But that
was answered, because the Covenant was to pay such a Sum for the Rent expressly;
but if the Condition of a Bond be for performance of Covenants expressed in
such a Lease, one of which is for payment of Rent, in that case the Bond will
not be forfeit without a demand; and of that Opinion were the Court, and that
the Executor should have the Rent, but when recovered Hale said, it should be
Assets in his Hands. And accordingly Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Termino Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno 26 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Silly versus Silly.
DOwer of 300 Acres of Land, 200 Acres of Pasture, 100 Acres Meadow. The Tenant
pleaded Non Tenure.

The Jury found him Tenant as to 320 Acres of Land, and as to the rest that he
was not Tenant: And the Judgment was, that the Demandant should recover the 320
Acres.

Error was assigned in this Court, that the Verdict and Judgment were for more
Acres of Land than were demanded. But on the other side it was said, Land was a
general word, and might include Meadow and Pasture.

Curia, In a Grant Land will extend to Meadow, Pasture, etc. but in Pleading it
signifies Arable only, and here in regard they are distinguished in the Count,
the Verdict and Judgment must be reversed for the whole. Though Hale said,
anciently such Judgment would have been reversed but for the surplusage. Vid
Post.

Batmore and Vxor versus Graves.
TRover for a 100 Loads of Wood, upon a Special Verdict the Case was, this
Copyhold Land was surrendered to the use of J. S. for years, Remainder to the
Brother of the Plaintiff's Wife, who died before the Term expired; and so was
not admitted any otherwise, than by the admission of the Tenant for years. And
it was resolved,

First, That the admittance of him, that had the Estate for years, was an
admittance for him in the Remainder, 4 Co. 23. a. 3 Cro. 504. Fine sur Grant
and render to A. for Life, Remainder to B. Execution, sued by A. serves for B.
So an Attornment to Tenant for Life serves for him in Remainder, and this
brings no prejuduce to the Lord; for a Fine is not due until after admittance;
and the Lord may Assess one Fine for the particular Estate, and another Fine
for the Remainder. But Wild said, he need not pay it until his Estate comes in
Possession; after a Surrender the Estate remains in the Surrender before
admittance of the Cestuy que use; yet where Borough English Land was Surrendered
to the use of J. S. and his Heirs, and he died before admittance. It was held,
that the younger Son should have it.

Secondly, It was resolved, that the Possession of the Tenant for years was so
the Possession of him in Remainder, as to make a Possessio Fratris. But then it
was moved, that the Conversion was laid after the Marriage, and so the Feme
ought not to have joined with her Husband in the Action. But the Court held,
that in regard the Trover was laid to be before the Marriage, which was the
inception of the cause of Action, the Wife might be joined; as if one has the
Custody of a Woman's Goods, and afterward Marries, her she may join in Detinue
with her Husband; for in case of Bailment the Proprietor is to some purposes in
Possession, and to some out of Possession. Hale said, in this case the Husband
might bring the Action alone, or jointly with his Wife; And so Judgment was
given for the Plaintiff.

Anonymus.
IN Debt upon a Bond, the Condition was to save the Obligee harmless, from
another Bond.

The Defendant pleaded, Non damnificatus.

The Plaintiff replies, that the Money was not paid at the day, and he devenit
onerabilis, and could not attend his business for fear of an Arrest.

The Defendant rejoyns, that he tendered the Money at the day, absque hoc, that
the Plaintiff devenit onerabilis; to which it was Demurred, and the Judgment
was given for the Plaintiff, for the Money not being paid at the day, the
Counter Bond is forfeited, Vid. 1 Cro. 672.
5 Co. and the Traverse in this case is naught.

The Mayor and Commonalty of London versus Dupester.
IN Debt for a Duty, accruing to the City for Timber imported called Scavage.
The Declaration was, that they were and had been a Corporation time out of
mind, and their Customs were confirmed by Act of Parliament Temps R. 2. etc.

The Defendant tendered his Law, and Co. Entries 118. was cited; where in Debt
for an Amerciament in a Court Baron, though the imposing of it was grounded upon
a Prescription; yet, Wager of Law was admitted. But notwithstanding, in this
case the Court overruled the Wager of Law; for here the Duty it self is by
Prescription, and that confirmed by Act of Parlimant: Debt for a Duty growing
by a By-Law, if the By-Law be Authorized by Letters Patents, no Wager of Law
lies: So in Debt for Toll granted by Letters Patents, 20 H. 7.

Termino Sancti Michaelis, Anno 26 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Silly versus Silly.
THe Case was moved again: And the Court said, that the Demandant might have
taken Judgment for the 300 Acres only, habito nullo respectu to the rest, and
released all the Damages: But this was not proper for an Amendment the Mistake
being in the Verdict; but if it could have been amended in the Common Bench,
the Court might here have made such Amendment. Ante.

Burfoot versus Peal.
A Scire facias was brought against the Bail, who pleaded, that the Principal
paid the Debt ante diem impetrationis Brevis. Upon which it was Demurred.

Jones, Solicitor, for the Defendant, said, Though the Bail may plead payment,
because the Condition of the Recognizance is in the Disjunctive, (viz.) for
rendering the Body, or paying the Money: yet the Principal cannot. Also it ought
to have been pleaded, to be paid before a Capias ad satisfaciendum taken out;
for as it is, it may be after the Recognizance forfeited: As if the Death of
the Principal be pleaded, it must be alleged to be before the Capias ad
satisfaciendum taken out.

But the Court held it to be well enough: For if that matter be material, it is
to come on the other side, and ex gratia Curiae the Bail has time to save
himself before the Return of the second Scire facias.

Anonymus.
IN an Assumpsit the Plaintiff Declared, that on the 28th of June ( Discoursing
with the Defendant about the Marriage of his Daughter) the Defendant promised
him, That if he would hasten the Marriage, and should have a Son within Twelve
Months then next following, he would give him an Hundred Pound: And sets forth,
That he did Marry soon after, and had a Son within 12 Months after the Marriage.

Upon non Assumpsit pleaded, and a Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in
Arrest of Judgment, that the Plaintiff had not set forth, That he had a Son
within the time; for then next following shall be referred to the Day of the
Discourse, and not to the Marriage.

But the Court were of another Opinion, and gave Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Crawfoot versus Dale.
IN an Action for Words, it was thus: There being a Discourse of the Plaintiffs
Trade, the Defendant said, He was a cheating Knave, and kept a false Debt-Book,
with which he cheated the Country.

After Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that to
say a Tradesman was a Cheating Knave, though there were a Colloquium of his
Trade, was not Actionable; for that might be said, because he sold too Dear,
and so cheated in the Price; but to say, that He sold bad Commodities, is
Actionable; and to say, He kept a False Book, will not bear an Action, for that
may be unwittingly.

But the Court Resolved, that the Words laid together were Actionable; for
Tradesmens Books are of much regard, and sometimes given in Evidence.

Jennings versus Hunking.
IN an Action for saying, He was Perjured, the Declaration was laid in
Devonshire.

The Defendant Justified; for that the Plaintiff made a false Affidavit at
Launceston in Cornwall, and Issue was taken upon that, and tried at the Assizes
in Devonshire, and moved that this was a Mis trial.

But it was Answered, That the Statute of 17 Car. 2. cap. 8. helps all
Mis-trials, so as the Trial be in the County where the Action is brought. And a
Case was cited in this Court between Cross and Winton in the 21 Car. 2. where
an Action was brought for saying, He stole Plate from Wadham College in
Oxford. The Defendant Justified, that he did Steal there. Upon which there was
Issue joined, and tried in London, where the Action was brought, and it was
held good. And this Term a Case was moved in the Common Bench in a Writ of
Covenant against Wise: The Defendant pleaded a Feoffment of Lands in
Oxfordshire, and he Issue was non feoffavit, and afterward tried in London,
where the Action was laid; and the Opinion of the Court there was, that the
late Statute would help it.

The Court said, It was within the words of the Act, but (as they conceived)
not within the meaning; for they intended only, so the Trial was in the County
where the Issue did arise. But in regard of the Resolutions before, they would
not stay Judgment.

Anonymus.
IN an Action upon the Case the Plaintiff sets forth, that the Defendant
malitiose crimen Feloniae ei imposuit, and not mentioned any Felony in
particular; and yet held to be well enough.

Anonymus.
Trespass with a Continuando, which was alleged for some time after the Term
wherein the Action was brought, and Damages given to 10 l

It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that for part of the Trespass it appears
by the Plaintiffs own showing, that the Action was brought before the Plaintiff
had Cause of Action. And it was said, That if the Bill were Filed at the End of
the Term, and the Trespass reached to some time within the Term, the Filing
should not relate so as to make it Insufficient: But here it was carried to the
3d of July, which the Court must see is out of the Term; because they take
Cognizance of the beginning and end of every Term.

Anonymus.
IF an Audita Querela he brought before the Execution of a Judgment quia timet,
and it goes for the Defendant; he shall execute his Principal Judgment: But if
it he brought after the party is in Execution, and he be bailed out, then the
Judgment being once Executed, there can be no after resort to that; but the
Defendant shall proceed upon the Record of the Audita Querela.

Fawkener versus Annis.
THe Privilege of the Chancery was pleaded by way of Prescription, and upon
Demurrer it was held naught.

First, Because it was not Concluded, and hoc paratus est verificare: And,

Secondly, No place alleged; for they are Matters of Fact, and Triable.

Anonymus.
IN an Action upon the Case the Plaintiff Declared, That the Defendant (the
Tenants and Occupiers of such a parcel of Land adjoining to the Plaintiffs)
have time out of Mind maintained such a Fence; and that from the 23th of April
to the 25th of May, and postea, the Fence lay open, and that una Equa of the
Plaintiffs went through the Gap, and fell into a Ditch the 28th of May, and
submersa fuit. Upon Not Guilty pleaded, and found for the Plaintiff, Holt moved
in Arrest of Judgment:

First, That the Prescription is laid in Occupiers, and not shown their Estate;
and that has been adjudged naught in the 1 Cro. 445. and the 2 Cro. 665.

Curia. It Is true, there have been Opinions both ways; but it is good thus laid,
for the Plaintiff is a Stranger and presumed ignorant of the Estate: But
otherwise it is if the Defendant had prescribed.

Secondly, It was Objected, That the Cause of Action is laid after the 25th of
May, and (for ought appears) the Fence might be good at that time, though it is
said to be open till the 25th of May and postea. Sed non allocatur: For,

1. It Is after a Verdict.

2. It Is said expressly, that the Beast was lost in defectu fensuratum, and so
cannot be intended but that it was down at the time.

Anonymus.
AN Indictment of Forcible Entry upon the 8 H.6. being removed hither by
Certiorari, a Restitution was prayed: But to stop that it was said, that the
Indictment was traversed; and a Plea, that the party had had three years quiet
possession, according to the 31st of Eliz. and though Dyer 122 is, That it is in
the Discretion tion of the Court to grant Restitution even after a Traverse put
in; yet now since the Statute of Eliz. where such Plea is tendered, the Court
cannot grant a Restitution, though they would in this Case, if by Law they might;
for the party that made this Entry had lost the Land just before by Verdict in
an Ejectment, and by this means the effect of it should be disappointed.

Note, The Indictment wanted Vi and armis; for it was pacifice intravit and
sine Judicio disseisivit, and a possessione expulit and amovit.

But on the other side it was said,

First, That the Entry being pacifice, it was not the course to lay it Vi and
armis.

Secondly, That 37 H. 8. cap. 8. supplied the defect of Vi and armis in an
Indictment: But as to the latter the Court were of Opinion, that the Statute
supplied only the lack of the words gladiis, baculis and cultellis, as are
mentioned in the Statute. Vid. the Stat.

Anonymus.
A Suit for a Pension may be in Ecclesiastical Court, though by Prescription; but
if it be denied to be time out of mind, then a Prohibition is to go, so that
the Prescription may be tried at Law, as in a Modus decimandi, mutatis mutandis.

It was said by the Court, that two might join in a Prohibition, though the
Gravamen was several; but they must sever in their Declarations upon the
Attachment.

Termino Sancti Hillarij, Anno 26 and 27 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Anonymus.
IN Error, the Writ was Test the 30th of November last, and Retornable in
Parliament the 13th of April next, the Day to which the Parliament was
Prorogued. The Defendants Counsel desired the Rule of the Court for the taking
out of Execution, supposing this Writ of Error was no Supersedeas; and
alleged, that the late Rule made in the House of Lords did not extend to their
Case; for that was, That all Causes there depending should not be discontinued
by the intervening of a Prorogation; but this Case will not be there depending
before the Return of the Writ. In 3 H. 7. 19. the Court of King's Bench would
not allow a Writ of Error into the Parliament, until some Error was shown to
them in the Record, lest it should be brought on purpose to delay Execution. In
Bulstrode's Reports, a Writ of Error Returnable the second Return of the Term,
was held to be no Supersedeas, because it seemed an affected delay, that it was
not made Returnable the first Return.

Hale. It has been taken, that a Prorogation determined a Cause depending in
Parliament by a Writ of Error; but the Lords have lately Declared otherwise:
But that comes not to this Case, the Writ not being Returned. A Writ of Error
Returnable ad proximum Parliamentum, is not good; but otherwise if they are
summoned or prorogued to a Day certain. If the Day of the Session had been a
Year hence, it would be hard a Writ of Error should stay Execution; and the
same Reason where the whole Term intervenes. A Writ of Error did bear Test 10
Nov. and was Returnable 1 Nov. proxime futur'; and the Record was sent into the
Exchequer Chambet, and a Mittimus Endorsed upon the Roll here: And it was
Resolved, that Execution might be taken out because of the long Return.

Secondly, That though there were Mittimus upon the Roll, yet the Record remained
here until the Return of the Writ to all purposes.

And the Opinion of the Court was, that the Writ of Error was no Supersedeas:
But they would make no Rule in it, because they said it was not Iudicially
before them; but the party might take out Execution, if he thought fit: And
then if the other Side moved for a Supersedeas, they should then Resolve the
Point.

Note, Hale said in an Assumpsit for Money, upon the Sale of Goods, upon non
Assumpsit the Defendant might give in Evidence an Eviction of the Goods to
mitigate the Damage, and in all Assumpsits; though upon certain Contracts the
Jury may give less Damages than the Debt amounts unto, as he said was done in a
Case where a man promised to give a Straw for every Nail in every Horses Shoe,
doubling every time; and they gave in Damage; but the Value of the Horse, though
(as the Bargain was made) it would have come to above 100 l

Lomax versus Armorer.
A Writ of Error was brought to Reverse a Judgment in Dower, given in the Court
of Newcastle.

The Error assigned was; because the Proceeding was by Plaint, and no Special
Custom certified to maintain it: As in London and Oxford they have Assizes of
Fresh Force by Plaint.

The Court held it to be Erroneous for this Cause; but would not determine,
whether it might not be good upon a Special Custom? 1 Rolls 793. Pl. 11.

Anonymus.
A Mandamus was granted to the Archdeacon of Norwich, to Swear a Churchwarden
upon surmize of a Custom, That the Parishioners are to choose the
Churchwardens; and that the Archdeacon refused him, notwithstanding that he was
Elected according to the Custom.

The Archdeacon Returned, that non sibi constat, that there is any such Custom
(which Form is not allowable; for it ought to be positive, whereupon an Action
might be grounded) and that by the Canon the Parson is to choose one etc.

The Court said, that Custom would prevail against the Canon, and a
Churchwarden is a Lay Officer, and his Power enlarged by sundry Acts of
Parliament, and that it has been Resolved, that he may Execute his Office
before he is Sworn, though it is convenient he should be Sworn; and if the
Plaintiff here were Sworn by a Mandate from this Court, they advised him to
take heed of disturbing him, Noy Rep. 139.

Anonymus.
AN Assumpsit was brought against an Executor; for that the Testator being
Indebted to the Plaintiff, he did ad requisitionem of the Defendant come to
Account with him, upon which there appeared to be so much due to the Plaintiff,
which he promised to pay.

After Verdict the Judgment was de bonis propriis, and it was moved, that it
ought to have been de bonis testatoris: For the Accounting with him is little
more than telling him what is due, and this might make an Executor afraid of
Reckoning with any of his Testators Creditors.

The Court said, that the Accounting upon the Defendants Request, (which was
more than the Plaintiff was bound to have done) was a Consideration, and after
a Verdict they must intend an express Promise.

But Hale said, If upon the Evidence it had appeared that there was no
Intention to alter the Nature of the Debt, (as in case, an Executor should say,
stay a while until the Testators Estate was come in, and I will pay you,) he
should direct the Jury to find against the Plaintiff, that would in such case
charge an Executor in his own Right.

Termino Paschae, Anno 27 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
NOte, In an Indebitat' Assumpsit a man Promises in Consideration, that one (to
whom the Promise was made) would marry his Kinswoman, he would give her 100 l
It was adjudged that an Indebitatus will not lie; for it is not a Debt, but a
Collateral Promise.

Best versus Yates.
IN an Action upon the Case the Plaintiff declared, That the Defendant being a
Tailor, he retained him to make him a Coat well and artificially, and that the
Defendant maliciously intending to abuse and damnifie the Plaintiff, made it
tam inepte negligenter and inartificialiter, that it became of no value or use
to him, to his damage 20 l To this Declaration the Defendant Demurred.

First, For that he says he retained him, and does not show that he delivered
him any Materials, so that the Action might lie for spoiling of them; but this
amounts to no more than that he bespoke a Garment, which when it was made he
did not like, and so might have refused it, therefore there does not appear to
be any damage. Vid. The president in Astons. Entries fol. 12.

Secondly, He does not show wherein he had spoiled the Coat, or what defect
there was in it, and this ought to have been certainly set forth. And of this
Opinion were the Court, and Judgment was given quod querens nil capiat per
billam.

James versus Pierce.
IN an Action of Debt for an Escape, upon Nil debet, a Special Verdict was
found to this effect, (viz.) That the Plaintiff recovered 700 l Debt against J.
S. who was thereupon committed in Execution to the Fleet, and afterward the
Warden permitted him to make a voluntary Escape, after which he returned again
to the Fleet, and the Defendant was made Warden in the place of the other, and
J.S. being then in the Fleet was turned over with the other Prisoners, and
afterward suffered to Escape. So that the question was, Whether he were so in
Execution upon his return, as the escape in the now Wardens time should Entitle
the Plaintiff to the Action. It was principally insisted on against the Action,
that there being once an Escape, that the party could not be in Execution again
without new Process.

Hale said formerly it was held, even in the case of a Permissive Escape, that
if the party were taken again, he might discharge himself by Audita Querela,
and that he might not be retaken unless in case of a voluntary Escape; but
there the remedy was only against the Jailer. But afterward it was held, that
Debt would lie against the party who escaped, because the Duty they did not
suppose was discharged by the Escape: But they held it was a good Plea to a
Scire facias. But afterward, 9 Car. between the Lord Roberts and Trevilian,
The Opinion of the whole Court was, that a Scire facias quare Executionem
habere non debet would lie against one that had made a voluntary Escape; and
there is no reason, but that he may as well be taken by the party again without
a Scire facias, for the Party has an interest in the Body of the pledge, until
his Debt is satisfied; Though if the Prisoner should bring Trespass against a
Jailer, that detained him after a voluntary Escape, he could not defend it; the
mischief would be exceeding, if the Sheriff, etc. might at his pleasure put the
Plaintiff to an Action only against himself. For this last Vacation, the Warden
of the Fleet turned as many Prisoners at large, as their Debts came to 80000 l
and ran away himself: And so by the Opinion of the whole Court (absente
Twisden) Judgment was given for the Plaintiff. Vid. Hob. The Sheriff of Essex's
Case, which was denied to the Law.

Sir Thomas Littleton Case.
DEbt was brought against him, by one that Entitled himself by Assignment of
Commissioners of Bankrupts. Upon the Evidence it appeared, That he with two
others had covenanted with the King, to provide Victuals for the Seaman that
served in the late Dutch War at 8 d per Man; and after this they made a bargain
with the Pursers of the Ships, to provide for such as served in their Ships, at
other Rates agreed upon between them. The Victuallers, afterward falling into
the Kings displeasure, and being thereupon removed from their Employment, and
having a great Sum of Money due from the King to them upon thhe Contract
aforesaid, refused to pay the Pursers, supposing notwithstanding their
Contract, that they were not Debtors, being upon the Kings Account until such
time as their Accounts with the King were allowed and so was said, was the
usage of the Navy Board, whereupon a Commission of Bankrupt issued forth. But
the Court, (viz.) Hale, Rainsford and Wild, were clear of Opinion, That this
Employment in buying up Stores for Victualling the Fleet did not make the
Victuallers Traders, nor was it buying and selling within the Statute of
Bankrupts. And Hale said, that every Purveyour might as well be made a Trader,
or Schoolmaster, that keeps Boarders in his House; and though it were shown to
enforce the matter that where there was a Redundancy of Provisions, they used
to Victual Merchantmen; but in regard it was originally designed for the use of
the Navy, in pursuance of their Contract with the King, they might well dispose
of the Surplus to any other use: And then it was shown, that they Victualled
the French Fleet also, and that was more than was contained in their first
Agreement with the King; but that being proved to be done by the Kings express
order (though that Order was not produced.) The Court held, that it was not
sufficient evidence to prove them Traders. But Hale said, they having made a
Contract with the King to provide for the Fleet at so much a Head, the King was
not chargeable to those with whom they contracted; and therefore, that Contract
with the Pursers of the Ships would make them Debtors to them. But upon the
other matter, they directed the Jury to find for the Defendant.

Termino Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno 27 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Motteram versus Jolly.
IN Debt upon a Bond Conditioned to perform Covenants in an Indenture; one of
which was, that the Defendant Covenanted with the Plaintiff, that the Plaintiff
should elect 20 of the best Trees out of his Wood, to be taken within 11 years,
and the breach was assigned, that the Defendant had cut Trees within the time,
upon which it was Demurred, and relied upon Sir Thomas Palmers Cases, 5 Co.
where Sir T.P. sold 2000 Cords of Wood, to be taken at the Election of the
Vendee. And there it is said, if the Vendor cuts the Wood before the Vendee
has elected, the Vendee cannot meddle with that which is cut, but must supply
his bargain out of the residue: But here the Court were of Opinion for the
Plaintiff, for by the Covenant he has 11 years time to elect, and by cutting
any Trees in the mean time, the Latitude of his Election is abridged. And Hale
said, for the case in 5 Co. there if the Grantee can have the number of his
Cords of Wood, he has the effect of his Grant; But Trees differ in value
exceedingly from each other.

Bolton versus Cannon.
IN Debt against an Executor for Rent, Arrere in his own time in the debet and
detinet.

The Defendant pleads, that the Rent is more worth than the Land, and that he
tendered a Surrender before the time for which the Rent is demanded; and that
the Plaintiff refused to accept the Surrender, and that he had fully
administered, and so demands Judgment of the Action.

The Plaintiff replies, that there was Rent Arrear to him, and that therefore
he was not bound to accept of the Surrender, and to this the Defendant Demurrs.
The Court said,

First, That an Executor that does intermeddle cannot wave a Lease, or any
other part of the Testators Estate, for he cannot assume the Executorship for
part, and refuse for part.

Secondly, That in case the Land be not more worth than the Rent, it is a good
Plea to an Action of Debt in the debet and detinet, for he is to be charged in
the detinet only; though where the Rent is of less value, he may be charged in
the debet and detinet for that which is accrued in his own time, according to
Hargraves Case, 5 Co.

Thirdly, The doubt here is, that the Defendant having waved the material part
of his Plea, (viz.) That the Rent exceeded the value of the Land, and relied
upon his tender of a Surrender, which is nothing to the purpose, whether
Judgment can be here for him, and that otherwise his Plea is double; but
because the Plaintiff has not demurred to that, but answered only to one part
of it, the Defendant might well Demurr upon the Replication, because it does
not answer all contained in the Plea, for unless the party Demurrs for
doubleness he is bound to answer all the matters alleged. Et Adjornatur. But
being this Term moved again, Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, because the
Defendant relinquished the material part of his Bar, and offered matter merely
frivolous.

Cartwright versus Pinkney.
TEnant for years Surrenders to the Lessor, reserving a Rent; the question was,
Whether it was a good Reservation. And held, that it was, upon the Contract,
and that Debt lay after the first day was incurred wherein it was reserved to
be paid, for it was in the nature of a Rent, and not of a Sum in Gross. Ante,
Wilson and Pinckney.

Anonymus.
IN Trespass for Fishing in his several Fishery, and pisces cepit. After a
Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the
Plaintiff ought to have alleged what kind of Fishes, and the number of them as
in Playters Case, 5 Co. is. But for that it was said on the other side, that at
that time they were more strict in the certainty of pleading than since, for
now and indebitat' Assumpsit for Work done, or Goods sold, is allowed without
further certainty. And that however the Oxford Act, 15 Car. 2. here helped it;
for though this be none of the defects there enumerated; yet the words of the Act
being, That Judgment shall not be arrested for any other exception that does
not alter the nature of the Action, or Trial of the Issue, shall extend to this
Case. But the Court were of Opinion, that none of the Acts had aided this Case,
in regard, that there was not so much as the number of the Fishes expressed; as
if a Man should bring Trespass for taking of his Beasts, and not say what. But
Hale said, Trover for a Ship cum velis had been allowed, because all made but
one aggregate Body, both the Ship and Sails. But Trover pro velis would not be
good. Vid. 2 Cro. 435. Trespass quare clausum fregit and Spinas cepit, and 3
Cro. 553. Child and Greenhills Case.

Dr. Webb versus Batchelour. and al'.
IN Trespass for taking so many Cowes; upon Not guilty a Special Verdict was
found.

That an Act of this King for repairing of the Highways appoints, that such
persons as keep Carts and Horses, etc. should send them at certain times to
assist in the repairing of the Ways, not having a reasonable excuse, and that
warning was given to the Parishioners of the Parish, whereof the Plaintiff was
Parson to send in their Carts, and that the Plaintiff omitting to do it; a
Justice of Peace made a Warrant to the Defendant, to distrain him according to
the Authority given by the Act, etc. It was alleged for the Plaintiff.

First, That Clergymen were not obliged by this Act, for Ecclesiastical Persons
have always had immunities from such charges, as Pontage, Murage, etc. and
shall not be comprehended in the general words Parishioners.

Secondly, That in regard the Act allows an excuse; the Justice of the Peace
ought to have caused the Plaintiff to have appeared before him, to have seen
whether he had an excuse before he could have made his Warrant; and though the
Officer that executes the Process of a Court of Record be indemnified, where
the proceeding is Erroneous; yet it is not so where the proceeding is not of
Record, as the 10 Co. in the case of the Marshalsey, 3 Cro. 394. Nicholls
versus Walker and Carter. Where a Warrant was made by a Justice of the Peace to
distrain for a Poors Rate: Trespass was maintained against the Officer that
executed the VVarrant, because the Plaintiff was not chargeable as an
Inhabitant of the Parish, for whose Poor the Rate was made.

Curia contra. 1. The Clergy are liable to all public charges imposed by Act
of Parliament; and that has been resolved, as Hale said upon debate before all
the Judges. 2. The Officer that executes the VVarrant (though unduely made for
the cause alleged) is not answerable, for he is not to judge, but to execute
the matter, it being within the Jurisdiction of the Justice of the Peace: and
it is not like the Case, in the 3 Cro. for there the Churchwardens And Overseers
of one Parish distrained in another Parish, which was out of the limits of
their Authority; but in 14 H. 8. 16. where a Justice of the Peace made a
VVarrant to Arrest a Man for Felony, (which in those times was held beyond his
power, though otherwise since,) unless there had been some Indictment of Record;
yet it is there held, the Officer that executes such VVarrant is not punishable.
Wherefore Judgment was given here for the Defendants.

Termino Sanctae Michaelis, Anno 27 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Anonymus.
A Judgment was removed by Error into this Court, and affirmed, the Capias that
is Awarded thereupon must mention it, and not be general as upon a Judgment
originally in this Court; and if such a Writ issues out, the Court will upon
motion grant a Supersedeas, and there needs no Writ of Error in Adjudicatione
Executionis, though it was taken out in a former Term.

Anonymus.
LIbel was (by the Churchwardens of, etc.) in the Ecclesiastical Court for 1 l
6 s 8 d upon a Custom for payment of so much, for being Buried in the Body of
the Church; and a Prohibition was prayed, suggesting that there was no such
Custom. The Court held such a Custom must be good, because the Parish is to be
at the charge to make up the Church Floor; but if the Custom be denied, it must
be tried at Law: And therefore inclined, that a Prohibition was to go though it
was objected, that this duty belongs properly to the Ecclesiastical Court, and
no remedy for it elsewhere; for so is the Case of a modus decimandi, which may
be demanded in the Spiritual Court; but if the Custom be denied, there shall be
a Prohibition, and so the case of a Mortuary, since the Statute of H. 8. And it
afterward being moved again, Hale Chief Justice being present, the Prohibition
was granted. Which Hale said, was sometimes granted pro defectu Jurisdictionis,
and sometimes pro defectu Triationis, as in this case and others, where the
ground of the Suit is Prescription, for in their Law they have sometimes
allowed Prescriptions of 20 years, sometimes of 40 years, but we admit none but
what are de temps don't, etc.

St. John versus Moody.
IN an Action upon the Case; the Plaintiff declared, That he was possessed of a
Wood, and that he had a way leading from such a place to the said Wood, and
that the Defendant had obstructed it.

Upon not Not guilty it was found for the Plaintiff, and moved in Arrest of
Judgment, that the Plaintiff had not set forth his Title to the way, whether by
Prescription or otherwise, and this ought to be, that the Defendant might be
ascertained what to make defense unto: Also, it is proper to the nature of an
Action upon the Case, to set forth the Case at large.

Curia contra. The Action here is grounded upon the Possession; indeed, if
Trespass were brought by the owner of the Soil in a justification for a way,
it is necessary to express by what right it is claimed; but this (for ought
appears) may be against a Stranger. In Assize for a Rent against the
Terre-tenant he may demand Judgment, whether he ought to answer before Title
made; otherwise, of an Assize brought against the Pernor of a Man's Rent. Where
it is pleaded, that the Party ought to keep the Fence, it suffices to say
occupatores reparare consueverunt; for in Truth, the greatest part of the
Enclosures in England, have been within time of Memory. The Writ of Curia
claudenda, is only quod debet and solet; it is true, before 7 Jacobi, the usage
has been in Actions of this nature to prescribe, but not since. Vid. 2 Cro. 43,
123, 3 Cro. 499 and 575. Sands and Trefuses Case, and 325, Symonds and
Seabourn. Whereupon Judgment was given for Plaintiff.

Note, This Case was afterward affirmed, upon a Writ of Error in the Exchequer
Chamber.

Drue versus Baily.
THe Case was, an Executor had a Term, and let part of it, reserving a Rent,
and made his Executor and died. The question was, Whether the Executor should
have the Rent or the Administrator de bonis non. And it was held, that the
Executor should have it.

Bell versus Thatcher.
IN Error upon a Judgment given in the Court of Common Pleas, where the
Plaintiff in an Action upon the Case declared, That he had been retained by the
under Postmaster, to carry about post Letters, of which he made a profit, and
had behaved himself honestly in that Employment. And that the Defendant to
defame him said, He had broken up Letters, and taken out Bills of Exchange,
which brought him to such discredit, that he lost the said Employment. And
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, and Error assigned upon the matter, for
that the words do not import, but that he might break open the Letters, by the
direction of those to whom they were directed, neither do they express that
they were Post Letters, and the innuendo will not help it, unless there had
been such a signification in the words. Neither is it such an Employment that
an Action should lie for Scandalizing. Also the Plaintiff does not declare,
that he was retained for above a year, and seems to be little more then a
Common Porter. And for these reasons, by the Opinion of the Court the Judgment
was reversed; and (Hale) principally from the quality of the Employment, for he
said a Man should not speak disparagingly of a man's Cook or Groom, but an
Action would be brought, if such Actions as these should be maintained.

Anonymus.
IN an Action for words, the case was, that the Defendant speaking to the
Plaintiff, said thus, I know my self and I know you, I never buggered a Mare;
And the Opinion of the Court was, that the words were Actionable, or else there
might be sly ways to defame any Man and evade an Action.

Hodgkins versus Robson and Thornborow.
IN Debt for Rent.

The Defendants pleaded in Bar to the Action, that the Plaintiff had entered
into a Back-yard, part of the Land demised, by Force and Arms, etc.

The Plaintiff replied, that he ought not to be foreclosed of his Action, for
that the Defendant had let that Back-yard to J.S. for a lesser Term, reserving
no Rent; and that J. S. entered, and after assigned unto the Plaintiff, etc.
which is the same Entry in the Bar.

The Defendants rejoyns that J. S. did not enter, to which it was demurred: And
after it was several times spoken to at the Bar, Judgment was given this Term
by the whole Court for the Plaintiff, (viz.) Hale Chief Justice, Twisden,
Rainsford and Wild. And

First, They all held, that as the pleading was in this case, there could be no
Apportionment of the Rent, for when there is to be an Apportionment, either the
Jury shall do it upon nil debet pleaded, or the Defendant may in his pleading
set forth the value of the Land, and to what the Apportionment shall be. Hale
said, if the Lessee redemise part to the Lessor reserving a Rent there shall be
no Apportionment, for the parties, by the Reservation have ascertained what
Rent shall be allowed for that part; but where there is no Rent reserved upon
the Redemise, there shall be an Apportionment; but if part be assigned by the
Lessee to a Stranger, who Assigns it to the Lessor, and the Lessee had reserved
no Rent, in that case, there shall be no Apportionment, for the Lessor comes
under the benefit of the Strangers Contract. And Hale resembled it to the Case
of Lord and Tenant by an entire Service, if such Tenant aliens part, the
Service is multiplied; and after it be conveyed to the Lord, the entire Service
still remains upon the Tenant that holds the residue. A Rent upon a Lease is
not within the Statute of Quia emptores terrarum; yet in many Cases there shall
be an apportionment at Common Law. If the Lessor enters into part by Wrong,
this shall suspend the whole Rent; for in such case he shall not so apportion
his own Wrong, as to enforce the Lessee to pay any thing for the residue.
Otherwise of a Rightful Entry into part, as in the Case at Bar. It Is true, in
Ascough's Case in the 9 Co. it is said, a Rent cannot be suspended in part, and
in esse for part. And so in the 4 Co. Rawlin's Case, it is held, That the whole
Rent is suspended, where part is Redemised to the Lessor. But the Court
observed, that the Resolution of that Point was not necessary to the Judgment
given in that Case, which was upon the Extinguishment of the Condition, which
is entire, and not to be apportioned: But as to the Rent, no Book was found to
warrant such an Opinion, but Brook, tit. Extinguishment 48. where it is said, If
there be Lord and Tenant by three Acres, and the Tenant lets one to the Lord
for years, the whole Rent is suspended. This Case is not found in the Book at
large. An in 7 Ed. 3. 56, and 57. where a Formedon was brought of a
Rent-Service issuing out of three Acres, and as to one Acre it was pleaded,
that the Demandant himself was Sole seized, and concluded Judgment of the Writ:
But it was Ruled to be a Plea to the Action for so much, and to the rest the
Tenant must answer; which is a full Authority, that in such case the Rent is to
be apportioned. And the Case of Dorrell and Andrews, Rolls tit. Extinguishment
938. is full in the Point, That where Lessee for years letts at Will, which
Lessee Licenses the Lessor to enter, that the Entry of the Lessor thereupon
shall not suspend his Rent. For Hale said, Though it might be Objected, that in
regard the Lessee at Will cannot let, the Entry of the Lessor thereupon might
be a Disseisin; but that is ever at the Election of the Lessor: And if that
were now the Question, perhaps the Lessor cannot take such an Entry for a
Desseisin.

It is the Common Experience, that where it comes to be tried upon Nil debet,
if it be shown that the Lessor entered into part to Answer this, by proving it
was the Lease of the Lessee; and if the Law should not go upon this difference,
it would shake abundance of Rents, it being a frequent thing for a Lessor to
Hire a Room, or other part of the thing demised, for his Convenience.

Hale said, That a Case of a Lease for years was stronger than a Lease for
Life, where the remedy is by Assize, and the Tenants of the Land (out of which
the Rent issues) are to be named: And for a Condition, that must be extinct
where part of the thing Demised comes to the Lessor, because it is annexed to
such a Rent. in quantity. For if the Rent be diminished, the Condition must
fail.

Holland versus Ellis.
IN Trespass Quare clausum fregit, herbas conculc' and diversas carectat'
tritici ibid' asportavit.

After Verdict it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the Declaration did not
mention whose the Loads of Wheat were; for it was not ibid. crescent'.
Adjornatur.

Resolved per Cur', That an Inquisition before the Coroner, taken super visum
corporis, that finds that the Person was Felo de se, and non compos mentis, may
be traversed: But the fugam fecit in an Inquisition before the Coroner cannot
be traversed.

Termino Sancti Hillarij, Anno 27 and 28 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
The Earl of Leicesters Case.
IN an Ejectment upon a Special Verdict the Case was to this effect:

Robert Earl of Leicester in the.. of Eliz. levied a Fine of the Lands in
question to the use of the Earl of Pembrook and his Heirs, for payment of his
Debts, reserving a Power to himself to Revoke by any Writing Indented, or by
his last Will, subscribed with his Hand and sealed with his Seal: And sometime
after he Covenants by a Writing (Sealed and Subscribed, as aforesaid) to Levy a
Fine to other uses, and after the Covenant a Fine was levied accordingly. And
whether this should be taken as a Revocation, and so an execution of the Power,
and the extinguishment of it, was the Question?

It was Argued by Jones, Attorney General, that this should not be taken as a
Revocation.

In Powers of Revocation, there is to be considered the Substance and the
Circumstance, and that which Revokes must be defective in neither. The Deed
alone in this Case cannot revoke; for though it has the Circumstance limited
(viz.) Indenting, Writing, Sealing, Subscribing; yet it wants Substance, for it
does nothing in praesenti, but refers to a future Act (viz.) the Fine. If a man
has made his Will, a Covenant after that he will levy a Fine, or a Charter of
Feoffment made, will not be a Revocation of the Will, 1 Roll. 615. yet there
appeared an intention to Revoke; and less matter will Revoke a Will than a Deed.

Again, the Fine alone cannot Revoke, because it is defective in the
Circumstances contained in the Power; but then to consider them both together,
how can it be conceived that the Fine should communicate Substance to the Deed,
or the Deed give Circumstances to the Fine?

But it is Objected, That they make but one Conveyance.

I Answer, If so, then the words of the Power here are to Revoke by Deed, and
not by Deed and Fine.

Again, This Construction is repugnant to the words of the Power, which are,
That it shall be lawful for him to Revoke by his Deed: And yet it is agreed
here, that the Deed of it self is not sufficient to revoke, but only in respect
of another* Act done, which (as it must be observed) is executed at another
time. The Books agree, that a Condition or Power, etc. may be annexed to an
Estate by a distinct Deed from that which conveys the Estate; but not unless
both are Sealed and Delivered at the same time, and so they are but as one
Deed: But in the present Case, the Deed was made in one year, and the Fine
levied in another. Suppose the Power to be with such Circumstances, as in our
Case, and a Deed is made which contains some of them at one time, and another
Deed comprehending the rest of another time, Should both these make a
Revocation is one Deed? Surely not.

Again, Suppose the Fine had been Levied first, and then afterward such Deed
had declared the Uses; surely the Power had been extinguished by the Fine, though
there the Fine and Deed might be taken as one Conveyance, as well as here.

Again, the different natures of these Instruments makes, that they cannot be
taken as one entire Act within the Power; for the Covenant is the Act of the
party, and the Fine the Act or Judgment of the Court.

But it has been Objected, That this ought to have a favorable Construction.

I Answer, But not so as to dispense with that Form the Execution of the Power
is limited to be done by. In the 6 Co. 33. Powers that are to divest an Estate
out of another person are taken strictly, and here (upon the first Fine) the
Earl of Leicester had no Estate left in him. Mich. 6 Car. 1. in Communi Banco,
the Case of Ingram and Parker, which though it may not be a clear Authority for
me, yet I am sure it does not make against me: The Case was, Catesby levied a
Fine to the use of himself in Tail, with Remainders over, reserving a Power to
himself and his Son to Revoke by Deed, etc. (as in our Case) and his Son after
his decease (by Deed intended to be Enrolled) conveyed to one and his Heirs,
and after levied a Fine, and it was held no Revocation.

First, Because he having an Estate Tail in him, the Deed might operate upon
his Interest.

Secondly, Because it was but an inchoation of a Conveyance, and not perfected;
and they held it no Revocation, and that the Fine levied after, though intended
to be to the Uses of the Deed, yet should extinguish the Power.

Hale Chief Justice. Upon the close and nice putting of the Case this may seem
to be no Revocation; for it is clear, that neither the Deed nor Fine by it self
can revoke; but quae non valent singula juncta prosunt. The Case of Kibbett and
Lee in Hob. 312. treads close upon this Case, where the Power was to Revoke by
Writing under his Hand and Seal, and delivered in the presence of three
Witnesses, and that then and from thenceforth the Uses should cease. It was
there Resolved, that a Devise of the Lands by Will (with all the Circumstances
limited in the Power) should Revoke; yet the Delivery was one of the
Circumstances, and the Uses were to cease then and from thenceforth: Whereas a
Will which could have not effect while his Death, did strongly import, that the
meaning was to do it by Deed, and yet there the Will alone could be no
Revocation; for clearly he might have made another Will after, and so required
other Matter, (viz.) his Death to complete it. And in that Case there is
another put, That if a Deed of Revocation had been made, and the party had
declared, it should not take place until 100 l paid, there the operation of it
would have been in suspense until the 100 l paid, and then it would have been
sufficient; yet there it had been done by several Acts, and of several Natures,
the Intention in things of this nature, mainly governs the Construction. In
Terries Case it was Ruled, That if A. makes a Lease for years to B. and then
Levies a Fine to him, to the end that he might be Tenant to the Praecipe for
the suffering of a Recovery, that after the Recovery suffered his Lease should
revive. It Is true in the Case at Bar, if the Fine had been levied first, and
then the Deed of Uses made afterward, the Power had been extinguished by the
Fine, and so no Revocation (of that which had no being) could have been by the
Deed.

Twisden. What if before the Fine levied the Intent had been declared to that
purpose?

Hale. I doubt whether that would have helped it. I cannot submit to the
Opinion in Parker and Ingrams Case cited, (viz.) That the Deed not being
Enrolled, should make no Revocation. For in case of a Power to make Leases for
life, it has been always held (by the best Advice) that the better way is to do
it by Deed without Livery, (though Livery, by the Common Law, is incident to a
Lease for life) and so Adjudged in Rogers's Case, for Lands in Blandford forum
in Moor's Rep. where Tenant for life has power to make Leases for life, and
makes a Lease by Livery, it is there held a Forfeiture; though I conceived not,
because by the Deed the Lease takes effect, and so the Livery comes too late.
Therefore the omission of Enrolling the Deed (in that case) does not seem to be
material; but if that Opinion be to be maintained, it is, because the party had
such an Interest, upon which the Deed might enure without Execution of his
Power, and so rather construed to work upon his Interest. But that Reason does
not satisfy, because such an Estate as was intended to be conveyed, could not
be derived out of his Interest; therefore it should take effect by his Power,
according to Clere's Case in the 6 Co.

So by the whole Court here, the Deed and Fine (taken together) were Resolved
to be a good Execution of the Power and Judgment given accordingly.

Richardson versus Disborow.
A Prohibition was prayed to the Ecclesiastical Court, where the Suit was for a
Legacy; and the Defendant pleaded, That there was nothing remaining in his
hands to pay it, and that he had fully Administered: And producing but one
Witness to prove it, Sentence was given against him, and after he Appealed, and
because their Court gave no regard to a single Testimony, he prays a
Prohibition.

But it was urged on the other Side, That it being a Matter within their
Cognizance, they might follow the Course of their own Law: And though there are
diversities of Opinions in the Books about this Matter, yet since 8 Car. 1.
Prohibitions have been been denied upon such a Surmize.

Hale. Where the Matter to be proved (which falls in incidently in a Cause
before them) is Temporal, they ought not to deny such Proof as our Law allows;
and it would be a great Mischief to Executors, if they should be forced to take
two Witnesses for the payment of every petit Sum: And if they should, after
their Death there would be the same Inconvenience. In Yelv. 92. a Prohibition
was granted upon the not admitting of One Witness to prove the Revocation of a
Will: Which is a stronger Case, because that entirely is of Ecclesiastical
Cognizance. Wherefore let there go a Prohibition, and let the party (if he
please) Demur upon the Declaration upon the Attachment, Hob. 188. 1 Cro. 88.
Popham 59. Latch. 117.

Pigot versus Bridge.
IN Debt upon a Bond, Conditioned for performance of Covenants; and the Breach
assigned was, in the not quietly enjoying the Land demised unto him.

The Defendant pleads, that the Lease was made to hold from Michaelmas 1661, to
Michaelmas 1668; and that paying so much Rent Half yearly, he was to Enjoy
quietly; and shows, that he did not pay the last half years Rent, ending at
Michaelmas 1668. To which the Plaintiff Demurred, supposing that the words
being to Michaelmas 1668. there was not an entire Half year, the Day being to
be excluded; and that it was so held in the Case of Umble and Fisher, in the 1
Cro. 702.

Cur' contra. It Is true in pleading usque tale Festum, will exclude that Day;
but in case of a Reservation, the Construction is to be governed by the Intent.

Anonymus.
NOte per Hale. Debt does not lie against the Executor of an Executor, upon a
Surmize of a Devastavit by the first Executor. For,

First, It Is a Personal Tort, for which his Executor cannot be charged.

Secondly, It Is such an Action of Debt, as would have admitted Wager of Law,
and therefore lies not against the Executor. It was difficultly brought in,
that Debt should lie against the Executor upon a Surmize of a Devastavit by
himself. But that Point is now settled, but no Reason to extend it further. And
he cited a Case, where Debt was brought against A. Executor of B. Executor of
C. who pleaded, that he had not of the Goods of C. in his hands.

To which the Plaintiff, Replied, That B. had Wasted the Goods of C. to the
value of the Debt demanded. Upon which Issue was joined and found for the
Plaintiff, and he had Judgment to recover de bonis B. in the hands of A. But
that Judgment was Reversed.

Anonymus.
IF A. Engages, that B. shall pay for certain Goods that B. buys of C. this is
good to charge him, upon a Collateral Promise, but not upon an Indebitat'
Assumpsit; for it does not create a Debt.

Anonymus.
IN an Information for a Riot, it was doubted by the Court, whether it were
Local, being a Criminal Cause: And it was observed, that diverse Statutes in
Queen Elizabeth and King James's time provided, that Prosecutions upon Penal
Laws should be in their proper Counties. Which was an Argument, that at the
Common Law they might have been elsewhere.

Taylor's Case.
AN Information Exhibited against him in the Crown Office, for uttering of
diverse Blasphemous Expressions, horrible to hear, (viz.) That Jesus Christ was
a Bastard, a Whoremaster, Religion was a Cheat; and that he neither feared God,
the Devil, or Man.

Being upon this Trial, he acknowledged the speaking of the Words, except the
word Bastard; and for the rest, he pretended to mean them in another Sense than
they ordinarily hear, (viz.) Whoremaster, i. e. That Christ was Master of the
Whore of Babylon, and such kind of Evasions for the rest. But all the Words
being proved by several Witnesses, he was found Guilty.

And Hale said, That such kind of wicked Blasphemous words were not only an
Offense to God and Religion; but a Crime against the Laws, State and
Government, and therefore punishable able in this Court. For to say, Religion
is a Cheat, is to dissolve all those Obligations whereby Civil Societies are
preserved, and that Christianity is parcel of the Laws of England; and
therefore to reproach the Christian Religion, is to speak in Subversion of the
Law.

Wherefore they gave Judgment upon him, (viz.) To stand in the Pillory in Three
several places, and to pay One thousand Marks Fine; and to find Sureties for
his Good Behavior during Life.

Walker versus Wakeman.
THe Case was, An Estate (which consisted of Land, a Rectory, etc.) was
conveyed to the use of one for Life, etc. with a Power to Let the Premises,
or any part of them, so as 50 l Rent was reserved for every Acre of Land. The
Tenant for Life Demised the Rectory, reserving a Rent, which Rectory consisted
of Tithes only, and whether this was within the Power, was the Question?

Sergeant Pemberton Argued, That this Lease is not warranted by the Power; for
a Construction is to be made upon the whole Clause, and the latter Words that
appoint the Reservation of the Rent, shall explain the former, and restrain the
general Word Premises to Land only; for if it shall be extended further the
Settlement (which was in Consideration of a Marriage Portion) is of no effect
for the Rectory: As in case it should de Demised, reserving no Rent; which it
might be, if not restrained to the latter words, and they applied only to the
Land.

But it was Resolved by the Court, that the Lease of the Rectory was good; for
the last Clause being Affirmative, shall not restrain the Generality of the
former. And this Resolution was chiefly grounded upon Cumberford's Case in the
2 Rolls 263. where a Conveyance was made to Uses of diverse Manors and Lands,
with a Power to the Cestuy que use for Life, to make Leases of the Premises,
or any part of them, so that such Rent or more were reserved upon every Lease,
which was reserved before, within the space of Two years; and a Lease was made
of part of the Lands, which had not been Demised within Two years before: And
Resolved, it was a good Lease, and that thereupon any Rent might be reserved;
because the Power was General, To Lease all; and the restrictive Clause should
only be applied to such Lands as had been demised within Two years before.

Termino Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno 28 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
MEmorandum, The last Term Sir Richard Rainsford was made Chief Justice, (Hale
Chief Justice quitting it for infirmity of Body) and Sir Thomas Jones was made
one of the Justices of the Court of Kings Bench.

Anonymus.
IN an Action upon the Case brought against the Defendant, for that he did Ride
an Horse into a place called Lincolns in Fields, (a place much frequented by
the Kings Subjects, and unapt for such purposes) for the breaking and taming of
him, and that the Horse was so unruly, that he broke from the Defendant; and
ran over the Plaintiff, and grievously hurt him, to his damage, etc.

Upon Not guilty pleaded, and a Verdict for the Plaintiff, It was moved by
Sympson in Arrest of Judgment, that here is no cause of Action: for it appears
by the Declaration, that the mischief which happened was against the Defendants
Will, and so Damnum absque injuria; and then not shown what right the Kings
Subjects had to walk there; and if a man diggs a Pit in a Common, into which
one that has no right to come there, falls in, no Action lies in such Case.

Curia contra, It was the Defendants fault, to bring a Wild Horse into such a
place where mischief might probably be done, by reason of the Concourse of
People. Lately, in this Court an Action was brought against a Butcher, who had
made an Ox run from his Stall and gored the Plaintiff; and this was alleged in
the Declaration to be in default of penning of him.

Wild said, if a Man has an unruly Horse in his Stable, and leaves open the
Stable Door, whereby the Horse goes forth and does mischief; an Action lies
against the Master.

Twisden. If one has kept a tame Fox, which getts loose and grows wild, he
that kept him before shall not answer for the damage the Fox does after he has
lost him, and he has resumed his wild nature. Vid. Hobarts Reports 134. The
Case of Weaver and Ward.

Anonymus.
IN Trespass in an inferior Court, if the Defendant plead son frank Tenement,
to oust the Court of Jurisdiction, It was said by Wild, that they may enforce
the Defendant to swear his Plea, as in case of Foreign Plea, (negat Twisden)
and as in this Court, where a Local justification in Trespass, etc. is pleaded,
the Defendant must swear it: But the Court held, no Indictment will lie for
Perjury in such Oath, no more than upon a Wager of Law.

Anonymus.
IN Trover the Hab. corpora Juratorum was returnable, die Martis prox' post
mensem Paschae, Nisi prius Richardus Rainsford Mil', etc. venerit die Lune in
mensem Paschae, instead of post mensem, and so objected, That there was no
Authority to try the Cause, there being no such day: And the Court seemed to be
of that Opinion, and that there was no Record by which this could be amended;
but the Parties agreed to go to a new Trial; an so this Point did not come to
be fully resolved.

Woodward versus Aston.
AN Indebitat' Assumpsit, was brought by the Plaintiff against the Defendant
for 10l received of his Money. Upon Non Assumpsit pleaded, and a Trial at the
Bar (which the Court permitted, because the Parties were Officers of the
Court,) the Case appeared to be thus.

The Master of the King Bench Office, or Chief Clerk, had granted the Office of
Clerk of the Papers, (and agreed on all hands, that it was his to grant it) to
Woodward, the Plaintiff and one Vidian, and the longer liver of them.

Vidian being a Recusant, and knowing himself disabled by the late Act of
Parliament to continue in the Office, Prays the Court, that Aston might be
admitted in his room, which was done accordingly, and within two or three years
after Vidian died; and Woodward commenced this Suit against Aston, supposing
that he had no right in the said Office.

The Plaintiff, to Entitle himself, showed a Copy of the Enrolment in this
Court, of the Deed of Grant of the Office to him and Vidian. And it was
objected on the Defendants part, that this was not Evidence, but they ought to
produce the Grant it self, for though the Enrolment of a Bargain and Sale is
Evidence, because the Estate passes by the Enrolment, without which the Deed
would not be sufficient; yet here the Deed passes the Office, and the Enrolment
is but as it were a Copy. But the Court ruled, that the Enrolment might be
given in Evidence; and of Grants of Offices in this Court, it has been the
course to Enrol Deeds. Then the Deed it self was produced by the Defendant;
which was cancelled, and urged by his Counsel, that the Estate in the Office
was thereby destroyed.

Curia contra, Not as to the Plaintiff, unless it appeared, that he had a hand
in the cancelling of it. But then for the Plaintiff it was said, that this was
an entire Office, though granted to two; and one could not surrender or grant his
Interest. But then the Counsel for the Defendant showed, that when the
Defendant was admitted into the Office, the Court demanded of the Plaintiff
whether he consented, and he said salvo jure, and seemed unwilling at first;
but afterward the Chief Justice demanded of him, whether he would execute it
alone, and told him he knew such things of him, which would make appear it was
not proper for him so to do, and then he said he submitted; and that afterward
Sir Robert Henly Chief Clerk, made a new grant to the Plaintiff and Defendant
of that Office which the Plaintiff knew of, and yet joined in the Execution
with the Defendant; which as was urged amounted to a surrender of his former
Grant, (In 2 Cro. 197, 258. it is said, if an Officer for life accepts a new
Grant, it is no Surrender of his former Estate) The Court did not deny, but that
if it did appear, that the Plaintiff had accepted this new Grant, it would be a
Surrender, and that matter of fact was left to the Jury, and they found for the
Defendant.

The Court said in this case, that a Rent or other Grant, was not lost by the
destruction of the Deed, as a Bond or chose en Action was. ( Quaere, if the
party himself Cancel it,) and if the Grantee of the Rent delivers up the Deed
to the Grantor, this is no Surrender; but he may Sue for his Rent, if he can
recover the Deed again, for a Chose en Grant must be Surrendered by Deed.

Curtis and al' versus Collingwood.
IN an Assumpsit, the Plaintiffs declared, That the Defendant was
Excommunicated at their Prosecution, for not paying of a Tax made for the
Reparation of a Church of which they were Churchwardens; and that in
consideration, that the Bishop would absolve the Defendant, at the Defendants
Special instance and request, the Defendant promised to pay unto the Plaintiffs
so much. After Verdict, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that there was no
consideration on the part of the Plaintiff; yet the Plaintiff had Judgment, for
it cannot be intended, but that the Bishop absolved the Defendant at their
instance, and would not have done it, but upon the account of the Promise, of
paying the Money to them.

Termino Sancti Michaelis, Anno 28 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Anonymus.
A Bill of Middlesex was issued out by an Attorney of this Court, against the
Countess of Huntington, which was discharged by Supersedeas without pleading,
because it appeared by the Record that she was a Peer, and the Attorney was
committed for suing out of the Process.

The City of London against Goree.
AN Assumpsit for the Duty of Scavage, and declared upon the Custom of London,
that every one which exposes Foreign goods to Sale, which had been entered in
the Custom-house, shall pay so much for showing of them: After Verdict, it was
alleged in Arrest of Judgment, that no Assumpsit lay for such a Duty, for
there ought to be a Contract express, or implied to maintain an Assumpsit.

Again, forasmuch as the Customs of the City are confirmed by Parliament, this
is a Duty by Record; Sed non allocatur, for there are multitudes of Presidents
in such like Cases; an Assumpsit lies upon a Bill of Exchange accepted, an
Assignee of Commissioners of Bankrupt may bring an Assumpsit, and yet the Debt
is assigned by Virtue of an Act of Parliament. And the Court said, in such case
as this the Declaration might be upon an Indeb. Assumpsit, as it was in the
Case at Bar.

Molyn versus Cook and al'
IN Trespass for Assault, Battery and Imprisonment, until the Plaintiff was
forced to spend 20 l and deliver up a Bond of 100 l to be cancelled, wherein
one Lamplugh, one of the Defendants stood bound to him.

Cook pleads his Privilege, as Clerk to one of the Protonotarys of the Common
Pleas. The Plaintiff replies, that this Trespass, etc. was done by them
jointly, and that he had taken out an Original against them all; and that this
Declaration against Cook was upon that Original, and that he still prosecuted
the rest, (viz.) Lamplugh and Jeffries, to which the Defendant demurred: And
Judgment was given, ( Twisden and Jones only present) quod respondeat ouster,
for Cook being joined with others in the Action he shall have no privilege.
As Powles Case, Dier 377. he being Clerk of the Crown, was sued with his Wife,
and not allowed his Privilege, because sued with his Wife. Vid. Poph. Rep.
329. and Rolls Abr. 1 p. 493.

Brown versus Wait.
IN Ejectment, the Case upon a Special Verdict was to this effect; Sir John
Danvers being seized of the Lands, etc. in Tail, with the Fee expectant, Anno
1646 and in 1647, levied a Fine to the same uses as he was before seized; save,
that a power was reserved to make Leases for any number of years, and without
reserving any Rent. Sir John Danvers did after become Guilty of Treason, in
Murdring of King Charles the first in 1648, and died in 1655.

In 13 Car. 2. cap. 15. the Statute commonly called the Statute of Pains and
Penalties Enacts, That sundry of the Offenders in that execrable Treason, of
which Sir J. D. was one, should (amongst other Penalties there inflicted)
forfeit all their Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, Leases for years,
Chattels real, and interest of what nature or quality soever, See the Act of 14
of this King. The Lands were by Patent granted to the Duke of York, who let
them to the Defendant. And John Danvers Heir of Sir John Danvers entered, and
made the Lease to the Plaintiff: It had been several times argued at the Bar,
and this Term Judgment was given by the Court for the Defendant. And Rainsford
Chief Justice delivered the Opinion of the Court, and the Reasons for himself,
Twisden, Wild and Jones, as follows.

The question being, Whether an Estate Tail were forfeited by the words of the
Act of 13 Car. 2. It was observed, that all Estates were Fee simple at the
Common Law and forfeitable. W. the 2. de donis was the first Statute, that
protected Estates Tail from Alienations, and from all Forfeitures of all kinds,
and so continued until the 12 E. 4. Taltarums Case, from which time common
Recoveries have been held not to be restrained by the Statute de donis, (and by
the way it must be considered, that Perpetuities were never favored.) Then
came the Statute of 4. H. 7. of Fines, which with the explanation of the 32 H.
8. have been always resolved to bar the Issues in Tail; so as to Alienations,
Estates Tail were set free, but were not forfeitable, no not for Treason, until
the 26 H. 8. by which they became subjected to Forfeitures in case of Treason,
and so by 5 E. 6. But it is true, these Statutes extend only to Attainders, and
33 H. 8. Vests the Lands, etc. in the Kings possession without Office: Thus
having considered the History and Progress of Estates Tail, the reasons why
such an Estate should be construed to be forfeited upon this Act of 13 Car. 2.
are these.

First, The Crime mentioned is of the same nature, and with the same
aggravations as in 12 Car. 2. by which the Offenders are attainted of Treason,
etc. for they are called Perpetrators of that execrable Treason, with many
Expressions to the like effect; which was looked upon as an offense of that
heinous nature, that the same Parliament Enacted, An Anniversary Humiliation
throughout the whole Kingdom, to be perpetually observed upon the account of
it; as if, not only they that acted it, but the whole Kingdom and their
Posterity, (like to another Original sin) were involved in the Guilt of it,
Nati natorum and qui nascuntur ab illis. And therefore, the Punishment shall
not be mitigated in any other manner, than is expressly provided by that Act.

Secondly, It is proved by the generally, and comprehensions of the words which
are made use of, (viz.) Possessions, Rights, Hereditaments of what nature
soever; Interests, which does as well signify the Estate in the ting, as that
wherein the Estate is, which can have no effect if not extended to Estates
Tail. We must observe also, that at the making of this Act, entailed Lands were
not protected from Forfeitures; and though 26 H. 8. extends only to Cases, where
the Offender is attainted; yet it is of good direction to the Judges in Cases of
like nature, and it is plain, that by this Act of 13 Car. 2. the Offenders were
looked upon in pari gradu with these attainted; for when the Proviso comes to
save the Estates of Strangers, etc. in trust for whom the Offenders were
seized, It is said notwithstanding any of the Convictions or Attainders
aforesaid.

Thirdly, It is to be observed, that the Act takes notice, that diverse of the
Offenders included in this Act were dead; now in regard most Lands are known to
be entailed, if the Act had not intended such Estates to be forfeited, it would
signify nothing indeed, if the Offenders had been alive it might have been
somewhat satisfied with the Forfeiture during their Lives; But as the case was,
it should be of no effect at all after making a great noise of Forfeitures and
Confiscations, the Act would have been but a Gun charged only with Powder, or
as in the Fable, Parturiunt Montes, etc.

Fourthly, It is manifest, that the Parliament did not intend that the Children
or Heirs of the Persons within the Penalties of the Act, should have any
benefit of their Estates; for in the saving which is made for Purchasers upon
valuable Considerations, the Wives Children and Heirs of the Offenders are
excepted; then surely if they would bar them of the benefit of their Purchases,
a fortiori from inheriting to an Estate Tail, especially of a voluntary Entail,
that seems to be made with a prospect of this Treason which was perpetrated a
year after, and such an Entail as scarce the like was ever seen before; that a
power should be reserved to make Leases for any number of years, and without
Reservation of any Rent. By which it is manifest, that Sir John Danvers that
committed the Treason, was fully Master of the Estate.

Again, all Conveyances are avoided by the Act, unless such as were upon
valuable Consideration; which this Fine was not. The great case which has been
insisted upon by way of objection, is Trudgeons Case, Co. Litt. 130. Estates
Tail were not forfeited upon the Statute of Praemunire, but during the
Offenders Life. For answer to that it must be observed, that, that Forfeiture
is upon the Statute of 16 R. 2. at which times Estates Tail were under the
protection of the Statute de donis; but since that time the Judges have not
been so strict in expounding Statutes concerning Estates Tail, as appears by
Adams and Lamberts Case, 4 Co. That an Estate Tail given for a superstitious
use, was within the Statute of 1 E. 6. cap. 4. where the words are generally,
and not so large as in our case, nor so much to demonstrate the intent as is in
our Act to extend to Estates Tail, wherefore Judgment was given for the
Defendant.

Note, They that argued for the Defendant, endeavored to maintain, that if it
should be admitted, that Entails were not forfeited by the Act; yet the Estate
of Sir John Danvers, in those Lands would be forfeited, in regard he levied a
Fine in 1647, and the Act of 13 Car. 2. extends to all Lands, etc. whereof the
Persons therein mentioned were seized, etc. since 1646, and he being Tenant in
Tail and levying of a Fine, there is an Instantaneous Fee in him, out of which
the new Estate Tail is supposed to be created, and that cannot hold, bring
derived out of a Fee subject to the Forfeiture by Relation; but this Point was
not touched by the Judges, for that they were fully agreed upon the other Point.

Beasly's Case.
HE was taken in Execution taken a Recognizance of Bail, and he made it appear
to the Court, that he never acknowledged the Recognizance, but was personated
by another; and thereupon it was moved, that the Bail might be vacated and he
discharged, as was done in Cottons Case, 2 Cro. 256. But the Court said since,
21 Jac. cap. 26. by which this Offense is made Felony (without Clergy,) it is
not convenient to vacate it until the Offender is convicted, and so it was done
22 Car. 2. in Spicers Case, Wherefore it was ordered, that Beasly should bring
the Money into Court, an be let at large to prosecute the Offender. Twisden
said it must be tried in Middlesex, though the Bayl was taken at a Judges Chamber
in London because filed here; and the Entry is venit coram Domingo Rege, etc.
So it differs from a Recognizance acknowledged before my Lord Hobart, upon 23
H. 8. at his Chamber, and Recorded in Middlesex, there Scire facias may be
either in London or Middlesex, Hob. rep.

If a false Bayl be acknowledged, it is not Felony, unless it be Filed, and so
held in Timberly's Case.

The King versus Humphrey's and al.
AN Indictment upon the Statute of Maintenance, and one only found Guilty; and
it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that seeing but one was found Guilty, it
did not maintain the Indictment, 2 Rolls 81. several were indicted for using of
a Trade, and said uterque eor' usus fuit, and held not good. Sed non allocatur,
for that in that case, in Rolls, the using of the Trade by one cannot be an
using by the other. But this is an Offense, that two may join in, or it may be
several, as in a Trespass.

But then it was alleged, that the Maintenance was in quodam placito, in Cur'
coram Domino Rege pendent', and not said where the Kings Bench Sat, and this
was held fatal.

Termino Sancti Hillarij, Anno 28 and 29 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Jay's Case.
A Mandamus to restore to his place of a Common Council Man in the Corporation
of Eye in Suffolk. The Return was that he was amoved for speaking of approbious
words of one of the Aldermen, (viz.) That he was a Knave, and deserved to be
posted for a Knave all over England. And it was moved that the Return was
insufficient, for words are not good cause to remove a Man from his place in
the Corporation. To which it was said, that this not a difranchising of him,
but only removing him from the Common Council as a person not fit to sit there.
To which Twisden said, that his place there could no more be forfeited than his
Freedom; for he was chosen thereunto by the Custom of the place. And Magna
Charta is, that a Man shall not be disseised de liberis consuetudinibus. But he
held, that words might be a cause to turn out a Freeman, as if they were, that
the Mayor or the like did burn the Charters of the Town, or other words, that
related to the Duty of his place. But in the Case at Bar the words do not
appear, to have any reference to the Corporation, wherefore it was ordered that
he should be restored.

The Court said, that my Lord Hale held, That Returns of this nature should be
sworn, though of late days it has not been used, and that it was so done in
Medlecot's Case in Cro.

Abram versus Cunningham.
UPon a Special Verdict the Case appeared to be to this effect:

A. possessed of a Term makes B. Executor, who makes three Executors, and dies;
two of them dies, and the Will of B. the Executor not being discovered,
Administration is granted cum Testamento annexo to D. who grants over the Term.
The surviving Execcutor never intermeddles; but so soon as he had Notice of the
Will, Refused before the Ordinary; and the Point was, Whether the grant of the
Term in the mean time was good?

Saunders (to maintain it) Argued, That to the making of an Executor, besides
the Will there was requisite, that the Executor should assent; and if the
Executor refuses, it is as much as if there never had been any. There is no Book
which proves the Acts of an Administrator void, where there is a Will, and the
Executor renounces. Greysbrook and Foxe's Case in Plowden's Com. is, that after
Administration granted, the Executor proved the Will. And so in 7 E. 4. 14. in
Dormer and Clerke's Case, it was held, that where there was an Executor, who
after refused, and Administration committed, the Administrator should have all
the Rent, (belonging to the Term in Reversion) which accrued after the death of
the Testator. If an Executor be a Debtor, and refuses, the Administrator may
Sue him: (Which was denied by Twisden, because a Personal Action once
suspended, is ever so.) Dyer 372. If one makes an Executor, who dies, and never
proves the Will, Administration shall be granted, as upon a dying Intestate;
suppose an Executor de son tort had Judgment against him, Shall not there be
Execution upon a Term, as Assets in his hands?

Twisden. It has been Doubted, whether there could be an Executor de son tort
of a Term? or, whether he were not a Disseisor? And by the same Reason it may
be granted in the present Case; for at least the Administrator here, is an
Executor de son tort before the Refusal.

Levins contra. Anciently, Bona Intestati capi solebant in manus Regis; as
appears in Hensloe's Case in the 9 Co. And since the Power of the Ordinary has
been introduced, it was only to grant Administration upon a dying Intestate. 4
H. 7. Pl. 10. If the Ordinary cites the Executor to prove the Will, and he
Renounces, it is said he may grant Administration; which implies, that it cannot
be before. So 21 H. 8. cap. 5. is to grant Administration, etc. upon a dying
Intestate, or refusal of the Executor, the Interest of the Executor commences
before the Probat. In 36 H. 6. 8. an Executor commanded one to take the Goods,
and after the Executor refused before the Ordinary, who committed
Administration, and the Administrator Sued the person that took the Goods; who
Justified by the Executor's Command, and it was held good: And a Relation shall
never make an Act good, which was void for defect of Power. And the Court
seemed strongly of that Opinion.

But Sergeant Pemberton desiring to Argue it, the Court permitted him to speak
to it the next Term. Et sic Adjornatur.

And afterward it was Argued again, and Judgment was given for the Defendant
per totam Curiam.

Dunwell versus Bullock.
IN an Action of Trover inter al' de uno Instrumento ferreo, Anglice, an Iron
Range.

After Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that
Instrumentum ferreum was too uncertain, and that a Range was the same with a
Grate, for which Crates was a proper Latin word.

Sed non allocatur: For Crates is such a Grate as is before a Prison: But a
Fire Range was not in use in the Romans time; and therefore Instrumentum
ferreum is well enough, with the Anglice.

Twisden said, Trover de septem libris has been held good, without saying what
they were.

Blackman's Case.
IT was assigned for Error, that the Venire was to Summon probos and legales
homines, instead of liberos, and so a material Variance; and alleged, that
many Judgments had been Reversed for it.

But the Court here being informed, that the Presidents were generally probos
instead of liberos, would not allow the Exception.

The King versus Armstrong, Harrison and al', etc.
THey and others were Indicted for Conspiring to Charge one with the Keeping of
a Bastard Child, and thereby also to bring him to Disgrace.

After Verdict for the King, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the bare
Conspiring, without Executing of it by some Overt act, was not subject to
Indictment, according to the Poulterers Case in the 9 Co. And it does not
appear that he was actually Charged with the Keeping of a Child; nay, it is
alleged, 'twas but a pretended Child, neither was he by Warrant brought before
a Justice of Peace upon such an account; but only that they went and affirmed
it to the party himself, intending to obtain Money from him, that it might be
no further disclosed.

Sed non allocatur: For there was as much Overt act as the nature and design of
this Conspiracy did admit, in regard there was no Child really, but only a
Contrivance to Defame the Person, and Cheat him of his Money; which was a Crime
of a very heinous nature.

Then it was alleged, That this was tried at the Old Bailey, commonly called
Justice-Hall, in London; and the Jury came de Warda de Faringdon extra London,
which appeared to be out of the Jurisdiction. Sed non allocatur.

For the Name of the Ward is Faringdon extra, to distinguish it from Faringdon
infra; but both are known to be in London.

Whereupon Judgment was Entered up against them; and Armstrong, which appeared
to be the principal Offender, was Fined 50 l and the other 30 l

Burrough's Case.
HE and others were Indicted; for that they being Churchwardens, Overseers of
the Poor, and a Constable, did contemptuously and voluntarily neglect to
Execute diversa Praecepta and Watranta, directed to them by the Bailiffs of
Ipswich (being Justices of the Peace) under their Hands and Seals, etc. It was
moved to quash it; for that the nature and tenor of the Warrants were not
expressed in the Indictment: For unless the parties know particularly what they
are charged with, they cannot tell how to make their Defense.

And for that Reason it was quashed by the Court.

Note, The Court never gives Costs, for not Executing of a Writ of Enquiry of
Damages, though Notice be given.

Anonymus.
AN Indictment of Forcible Entry into certain Lands in the possession of J.S.
was quashed, for not showing what Estate J.S. had; and though the word
Disseisivit were in, the Court held, that though that might be taken to imply a
Freehold, yet it was not sufficient, Vid. Mo. 481. And another was quashed,
because it was said possessed pro termino: But the Court held, that if it had
been pro termino annorum, though not said for how many years, it had been well.

Note, A Bailiff caught one by the Hand (whom he had a Warrant to Arrest) as he
held it out of a Window. And the Court said, that this was such a Taking of
him, that the Bailiff might justify the breaking open of the House to Carry
him away.

Kent versus Harpool.
AN Ejectment: The Case came hither by a Writ of Error out of the King's Bench
in Ireland, and diverse Points were in it which concerned the Act for Settlement
of Lands in Ireland. But the Case was (as to the great Point at Common Law) to
this effect:

Father Tenant for Life, Remainder to the Son for Life, Remainder to first Son
of that Son (who was not born,) Remainder to the Heirs of the Body of the
Father; the Father died before the first Son was born, and Whether the Descent
of the Entail to the Son did prevent the Contingent Remainder, was the
Question? It was Argued, that it did not, because the Inheritance came to the
Son by Act in Law. And the Opinion in Cordal's Case in the 1 Cro. 315. was
cited; the great Reason in Chudley's Case, and other Cases, wherein Contingent
Remainders have been held to be destroyed, was for the preventing of
Perpetuities, which would have been let in, if Contingent Remainders had been
preserved, whatever Act had been done by those which had the Actual Estate. But
there is no such necessity of making the life Construction upon Acts in Law. If
Lessee for years makes the Lessor Executor, the Term is not drowned: But if the
Executor, that has a Lease, purchases the Inheritance, the Term is gone,
because it is his own act; but in the other Case, the Law shall not work that,
which must be construed a Devastavit. In Lewis Bowles's Case in the 11 Co. and
Co. Litt. where there is an Estate for Life, Remainder to the first Son,
Remainder in Fee to the Tenant for Life; the Estates at first close and open
again upon the Birth of the first Son, which should take the Remainder. And so
it may be here.

But the Court seemed to be of Opinion, that the Contingent Remainder was
destroyed by the Descent of the Estate Tail. And Rainsford, Chief Justice
relied upon Wood and Ingersol's Case in the 2 Cro. 260. where a Devise was to
the first Son for Life. Remainder to the Son which should survive; and there
three Judges against one held, that the descent of the Fee upon the first Son,
prevented the Contingent Remainder to the Survivor. Et Adjornatur.

Note, In Lewis Bowle's Case the Estates were united at the first, upon making
of the Conveyance.

Smith versus Tracy.
IN a Prohibition the Case was, One died Intestate, and whether his Brother of
the Half-blood should come in for Distribution (upon the new Statute of 22 and
23 Car. 2. cap. 10.) was the Question?

It was Argued, that the Half blood should have no share; for the Words are,
The next of Kindred to the Dead person in equal Degree; which the Half-blood is
not. The Words likewise are, Those which legally represent their Stocks; and
that must be intended in an Act of Parliament, such as the Common Law makes to
be Representatives, and not the Civil Law. For then it would be, that the
Bastard eigne should come in for Distribution. For their Rule is, that
subsequens matrimonium facit legitimum. Granting of Administrations was
originally Temporal, an came to the Churchmen by the Indulgence of Princes, and
therefore must in some sort be governed by the Temporal Laws. In
Administrations the Whole Blood ought to be preferred before the Half Blood;
for Next of Kin shall be taken to be meant by the Statute, such as our Laws
judge to be so, Rolls tit. Prohibition 303. and so it was held in one Brown's
Case before the Delegates in 8 Car.

This being a New Case, the Court gave no Opinion; but Adjourned it to the next
Term. Postea.

Termino Paschae, Anno 29 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
NOte, Where Justices of the Peace find a Force, and make a Record of it upon
their View; they are to Commit the Offenders, but cannot restore the Possession.

Anonymus.
A Prohibition was prayed to a Suit in the Spiritual Court, for Money taxed for
the Reparation of the Church, upon a Surmize that the Tax was imposed upon one
part of the Parish, omitting the rest. And for this was cited Rolls tit.
Prohibition 291. in the Point.

But the Court doubted, in regard it was not alleged, That they had offered
that Plea in the Ecclesiastical Court; because Reparation of Churches is proper
for their Cognizance. But the Prohibition was granted, and the other might
Demur if they thought fit: But afterward in this Term it was Countermanded.

Anonymus.
A Prohibition was prayed to the Admiralty, where there was a Libel for a Ship
taken by Pirates, and carried to Tunis, and there Sold; for that it did not
appertain to the Court to try the Property of the Ship, being sold upon Land.

Curia. In regard it was taken by Pirates, it is originally within the Admiral
Jurisdiction, and so continues notwithstanding the Sale afterward upon the
Land. Otherwise where a Ship is taken by Enemies, for that alters the Property:
And this was the Opinion of the Court in Eglesfield's Case, in my Lord Hales's
time, contrary to my Lord Hobart in the Spanish Ambassador's Case 78. in the 1.
Cro. 685. they have Cognizance of the Case of the Pirate, because incident to
the Principal Matter.

But afterward it was observed upon the Libel, that there was no mention made,
That the Ship was taken super altum Mare. And though there was contained therein
very much to imply it; yet the Court held that to be absolutely necessary, to
support their Jurisdiction.

Note, One taken upon an Excom' Cap' was Discharged; because the Writ de Excom'
Cap' was not delivered into this Court and Enrolled, as is required by the
Statute.

Robinson versus Woolly.
IN an Ejectment, upon a Special Verdict, the Case appeared to be thus:

A Clerk was Admitted and Instituted to a Benefice within the Diocese of
Gloucester whilst the Bishopric was Vacant, and a Mandate from the Archbishop
for Induction; but before it was Executed by the Archdeacon, a new Bishop of
Gloucester was Consecrated; and whether the Induction coming after was
sufficient, was the Question?

That it was,

It was Argued that after the Mandate made, it was Executed so far as the
Bishop had to intermeddle in the matter. For if no Induction does follow, the
Remedy lies not against the Bishop, F.N.B. 47. h. But an Action upon the Case
against the Archdeacon, for the Induction, is said to be a Temporal Act, 1
Rolls 125, 195. Neither can such Mandate be Revoked by the Bishop, or be
Inhibited by the King, 1 Rolls 294.

Again, the Archbishop has a concurrent Jurisdiction with the Bishops
throughout his Province, and may Admit and Institute until the Inferior
Bishopric is full. And the Statute of 23 H. 8. cap. 9. takes away the
Jurisdiction of the Metropolitan only, as to Proceedings in that Court: In case
the Inferior Ordinary refuses to Admit, the Archbishop may do it, as appears
Hob. 15. Hutton's Case, and Mo. 879.

It was said on the other side, That this was but an Authority derived from the
Bishop, and therefore ceasing before it was Executed, is determined. The Bishop
may direct his Mandate to another, as well as the Archdeacon. It was compared
to a Letter of Attorney, to make Livery, which cannot be done after the Death
of him that gave it. Et Adjornatur. Postea.

Anonymus.
IN an Information of Forgery, the Defendant Challenged one of the Jury, for
that the Prosecutor had been late Entertained at his House: This was admitted
to the Favor, though against the King, (Vid. for that in the 1 Cro. 663.) And
then the Counsel for the King challenged another, and being pressed to allege
the Cause; for 33 Ed. 1. does take away the General Challenge, quia non sunt
boni pro Rege.

But all the Court (save Wild, who seemed to be of another Opinion) ordered the
Panel to be first gone through, and if there were enough, the King is not to
show any Cause.

Virtue versus Bird.
IN an Action upon the Case the Plaintiff declared, that it was agreed between
him and the Defendant, That he should carry the Defendants Timber from a
certain place to the Defendants House; then and there to deliver at such place
as the Defendant should appoint; and that such a Day and Year he did carry with
certain of his Carts to the place aforesaid, the said Timber there ready to be
delivered, but that the Defendant delayed by the space of six Hours the
Appointment of the place; insomuch that his Horses being so Hot with Carrying
of the Timber aforesaid, and standing in aperto Acre, they died soon after.

After Not Guilty pleaded, and a Verdict for the Plaintiff, Ventris moved in
Arrest of Judgment, that here did not appear any Cause of Action; for it was
the Plaintiffs Folly to let the Horses stand: Neither was the Defendant under
the Penalty of an Action bound to receive the Timber, or appoint a place; but
in case of Refusal the other might recover what he Contracted for the Carriage,
having done all on his part; but not to bring an Action for not appointing a
Place. And by the Opinion of all the Court the Judgment was stayed. Vid. 2 Cro.
386. Roll. Rep. 275. Baily and Merritt.

Anonymus.
IT was moved for the setting aside of an Order of Sessions, for the Settling a
Poor person in a Town, which had been sent thither by a Warrant of two
Justices, and it was Confirmed upon an Appeal to the Sessions.

But the Court would hear nothing of the Merits of the Cause; the Order of the
Sessions being in such case Final, unless there were an Error in the Form.

Note, A man gives a Warrant of Attorney to Confess a Judgment, and dies before
the Judgment is Confessed: This is a Countermand.

Anonymus.
JUstices of the Peace at the Sessions, Ordered the Father of him which had the
Bastard Child, to provide for it under the pretense of the reputed Grandfather;
for the Statute does enable them to Tax the Grandfather of a Legitimate Child.

But in this Case the Court held, there was no Color, and therefore quashed
the Order. And Wild said, It was well Westminster Hall Doors were open.

Kent versus Derby.
INdebitatus Assumpsit. The Plaintiff declared, that the Defendant being
indebted to him in a certain sum, pro diversis mercionis ante tunc venditis and
deliberatis ad requisitionem, of the Defendant to a Stranger, did promise to
pay, etc. After Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment,
that this was but a Collateral Promise, and that no Indebitatus Assumpsit would
lie, for the Debt was from the person to whom the Goods were sold. Wild and
Jones held the Action well brought, and cited an Action sur indebitatus
Assumpsit lately in this Court, against one for Money promised in Marriage with
his Sister. Vid. R. 120 and 122. Sed Rainsford Chief Justice contra. But the
Plaintiff had Judgment.

Termino Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno 29 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Howlet versus Carpenter.
THe case upon a Special Verdict in Ejectment was this, a Copiholder of a Dean
and Chapter, levied a Fine with Proclamation, and five years passed without any
Seizure or Claim by him that was Dean at the time of the Fine levied, and
whether the succeeding Dean was barred was the question. And the Court at the
first opening held clearly that he was not, for if so, the Statutes 1 and 13
Eliz. which restrain the Alienation of the Church Revenue, would be of small
effect, 11 Co. Magd. Colledge's Case.

The Company of Ironmongers versus Nailer.
IN Trespass upon Not guilty, a Special Verdict was to this effect; that Nailer
being one of the Officers for Collecting of the Duty of Hearth Money,
distrained for a certain Sum, accruing for the Chimneys of a new built House
which had never been inhabited; neither did it appear, that there had been any
account of the Chimney's thereof returned into the Exchequer. There were made
three questions.

First, Whether any thing shall be paid for Chimneys in such new built Houses?

Secondly, Whether the Distress can be for that Duty in other places than at
such Houses?

Thirdly, Whether there can be any Distress taken before such time as the
account of the Chimneys be returned into the Exchequer.

As to the first, the whole Court were clear of Opinion, that such new Houses
which were never inhabited were chargeable, for the words of the first Act are
express, (viz.) That every Dwelling and other House, and Edifice (other than
such as are after excepted) shall pay. And there is no exception that extends
to such House, although it were objected, that the Proviso in the Act of 14 is,
that the Duty shall be chargeable only on the Occupier, and every Clause in the
Act runs upon Occupiers; and the Act of 15 recites the Kings Revenue to have
been much obstructed, for want of just Accounts of Chimneys, under the hands of
the Occupiers; and the Act of 16, charges the next Occupiers with the half
years payment, where the former Occup^er removed before it grew due; which
implies, if an House stood empty for longer time it should not be paid.

Again, it is appointed to be demanded at the House, and in case of refusal to
distrain; which shows an intention, that it should be inhabited.

But it was answered, That the words before mentioned were so full as not to be
avoided, and that there were sundry Clauses also in the Act which did import an
intention, that empty Houses should pay; and so has been the practice ever
since the Act, and that there were no manner of difference between these
Houses, which were new built, and other Houses; that in case there was no
Tenant, the Owner was understood to be Occupier, as if the Owner grants an
House in his Occupation, it would be well, though he did not inhabit it himself,
if it were inhabited by no other. The Act of the 13 and 14, appoints notice to
be fixed upon the Door, for an account to be given in case there be no
Inhabitant, and six days after such notice to enter and take account, which
shows they meant empty Houses should be chargeable; and why not as well as for
Chimneys, whereof no use is made?

As to the second Point the Distress it well taken, though it does not appear to
be after an account made into the Exchequer, for the duty accrues before; and
that is provided only, that the King might be apprized of the number of
Chimneys, and so there might be a check upon the Collectors when they make
their Accounts; neither is any Process appointed to go out upon such Return of
the number of Chimneys. The Statute of 21 Jac. appoints Informers to be Sworn,
but if an Informer be not Sworn, it is but a neglect in the Officer: The
Proceedings are notwithstanding sufficient, Mo. 447. where 21 H. 8. appoints
the Enrolments of Dispensations in Chancery; yet if not done, it does not
invalidate the Dispensation.

Thirdly, The Distress was resolved to be well taken being in the Kings Case;
for an Act of Parliament shall be expounded according to the reason of the Law
in such Cases.

Note, Livesay, the Secondary craved the Opinion of the Court, whether he
should tax treble Costs in this Case; for the Act of 14 gives treble Costs
where any person is prosecuted, for what he should do in execution of that Act,
etc. Now that Act appointed the Constables, etc. to Collect and Execute the
Act. But now by virtue of the subsequent Acts for the Chimney Money; the
Collection, etc. is by other persons, and the doubt is, Whether they can have
treble Costs by the Act of 13 and 14.

But the Attorney General, who was of Counsel with the Defendant said, he would
not insist upon treble Costs at this time, because this Cause was brought on by
consent, for the determination of the doubt about new empty Houses paying, but
desired that it might be without prejudice.

Baker versus Bakers.
A Prohibition to the Delegates. The case was, that Administration had been
granted to the Wife, upon which an Appeal was brought by the Mother of the
Intestate, upon this Allegation (int' al') That the Wife had Covenanted, that
she would not intermeddle in the Administration, in regard she had been
otherwise sufficiently provided for; for it was said, that the Ecclesiastical
Judges had not to do with such matter. But it was objected on the other side,
that it fell incidently into the principal matter whereof they had Conuzance,
but they might be prohibited, if they judged the effect of it contrary to our
Law; neither did it appear, that the Delegates would admit of this Allegation,
and there were no presidents for a Prohibition quia timer.

But on the other side it was said, that there would go a Commission out to
examine this matter of course before the Judges Delegates should sit to hear the
merits of the case, and that would take up so much time, that many of the Goods
being bona peritura, would be lost, (but note, the Ecclesiastical Judges may
provide for the disposition of them, in case of such necessity, pendente lite.)
And the Court granted the Prohibition quoad that Allegation only.

Tothil versus Ingram.
IN Replevin, the Defendant avowed for an Herriot, and Arrears of Rent upon a
Lease.

In Bar of this Avowry, as to to the Herriot the Plaintiff pleaded, That in a
former Replevin brought by him against J.S. the said J. S. made Conuzance as
Bailiff to the Defendant, for the same Herriot, and was barred: And to the rest
he pleaded a Release of all demands, made unto him by the Avowant before this
Rent accrued, and to this the Avowant demurred.

First, For that he does not show, that he which made Conisans was Bailiff to
the now Avowant, for he might make Conisans without his Privity; and if so, it
could be no bar to him now.

As to the Release it was said, that a Rent incident to a Reversion would not
be barred by such Release: And so it was adjudged in this Court, in Hen and
Hampsons Case, in the year 1662 by Foster Chief Justice, Windham and Maller,
against the Opinion of Twisden, who now said that, that Resolution was contrary
to Littl' Sect' 510. who says, that a Release of all demands will extinguish a
Rent-service. And it was said, that in Hancocks and Fields Case, 2 Cro. 170. it
is adjudged that such Release will extinguish a Rent reserved upon a Lease,
though not a Covenant before it be broken.

To which it was answered, That in Witton and Byes Case, 2 Cro. 486. It is
resolved, that if a Lessee Assigns over his Term reserving a Rent, it will be
extinguished by releasing of all demands. But Houghton makes a difference
between such a Rent, and a Rent incident to a Reversion.

For the first Point the Court held, that if the Bailiff had no Authority to
make Conisans, it ought to be shown on the Avowants part, for otherwise it
shall be intended; and this may be Traversed by the Avowant here, though the
Plaintiff in Replevin when Conizans is made cannot Traverse the being Bailiff.

But for the second Point Adjornatur.

Sir Walter Plomer versus Sir Jeremy Whitchcot.
THe Court were this Term to give their Opinions in the grand Point, (viz.)
Whether Sir Jeremy Whitchcot Warden of the Fleet were liable for Escapes
suffered by Duckenfeild, his Lessee; Duckenfeild being insufficient. But the
whole Court observing an imperfection in the Verdict, which found that
Duckenfeild was insufficient when put in, and at the time of his Escape, but it
was not found that he was so at the time of the Action brought. Hereupon they
declared, that they were all agreed, that Sir Jeremy Whitchcot was liable, if
the said matter had been found, but that they could not give Judgment upon the
Verdict as it was found; whereupon the Parties were permitted to take a Venire
de novo, but they rather chose to have a Nil capiat, etc. entered, and so bring
a Writ of Error; for their Counsel were very strong, that that matter should be
intended in a Special Verdict, and their Declaration did allege him to be
insufficient at the time of the Action brought. But Sir Jeremy Whitchot soon
after died, and so the Writ of Error did not proceed.

Ent versus Withers.
IN Debt against on Executor suggesting a Devastavit, and to charge him in his
own right.

The Defendant pleaded a frivolous Plea, to which it was demurred; but then
exception was taken to the Declaration, that it did not set forth any Judgment
obtained before, against the Executor de bonis testatoris, without which this
Action would not lie in this manner. Vid. Wheatly and Lane, Hill. 20 and 21.
Car. 2. in Sanders. And of that Opinion were the Court, but Sergeant Pemberton
desiring to argue it, saying there was no difference in reason between the
Cases, Adjornatur.

Anonymus.
THe Court said, that in case of an Indictment and Issue joined, the Party
could not carry it down to Try it by Proviso, for it lay not against the King.

Astree versus Ballard.
THe case was, The Plaintiff had recovered against two in Trover, and now
brought a Scire facias against the Bail; who pleaded, that he had taken one of
the Principals in Execution, before the Scire facias taken out, 1 To. 897. If
one has Execution against the Principal, he cannot afterward proceed against
the Bail nec e contra, but Paschae 28. of this King it was resolved in the Case
of Orlibary and Norris, where the Bail was taken first in Execution, and
afterward the Principal, that they should be both detained until satisfaction
contrary to 1 To. 897. So that it appears, that the Plaintiff shall not be
concluded by his Election to proceed against the one first. But here the
difficulty is, that the Bail by the Plaintiffs act is disabled to bring in both
their Bodies according to the Condition of their Recognizance, he having taken
one of them himself. Et Adjornatur.

Smith versus Tracy.
IN a Prohibition the case was, Eliz. Smith died Intestate, leaving two
Brothers, one of the whole Blood, and the other of the half Blood; And in the
Ecclesiastail Court, they would admit the half Blood to come in for
distribution with the whole Blood, upon the Act of 22 and 23 Car. 2. cap. 10.
Upon which a Prohibition was granted, to which there was a Demurrer. And the
question came upon these words in the Act, (viz.) That distribution is to be
made to the next of Kin of the Intestate, who are in equal degree, and such as
legally represent them.

For the Plaintiff it was said, that Statutes were to be expounded by the
reason of the Common Law, which took no consideration of the half Blood;
insomuch that an Estate should rather escheat then descend to the half Blood:
Then the words of the Act are such as legally represent them, which they both
do the common Auncestor, but not one another; in this case Consideration is to
be had of the intent of the Interstate, which must be supposed to prefer the
Brother of the whole Blood, Dier 372. Isteds Case, where the Executor dies
Intestate, the Residuary Legatee of the first Testator shall have
Administration, and not the next of Kin, because that is suitable to the intent.

On the contrary it was argued, that although the half Blood be rejected in
descents; yet it is regarded in other Cases, 3 Co. in Ratcliffs Case, the half
Blood may be Guardian in Soccage. Vid. 2 To. 303. and Stile's Rep. 74, 75. for
granting of Administrations to the half Blood; there cannot be two degrees made
of the whole Blood, and the half Blood; neither does out Law make any
distinction, but when it wholly excludes them.

Curia. The intent of this Act was, to give the Ecclesiastical Court the
Jurisdiction in this matter, and to provide for the distribution of Intestates
Estates; which they had a long time attempted and contested, but were still
prohibited, but now this Act permits them to proceed; and it were fit we should
be informed, what their course is and has been, and therefore let us hear the
Civilians as to this point. Post.

The King and Marlow.
THe Defendant being a Printer, was indicted for his second Offense, for
Printing of a Seditious Book contrary to the Act of 14 Car. 2. cap. 33. and
being found Guilty at the Sessions of the Old Baily, the Judgment was given,
That he should be for ever disabled to exercise the Art or Mystery of Printing,
and pay 20 l Fine, and to stand in the Pillory; And a Writ of Error was
brought, and Errors were assigned in the Judgment, as varying from the words of
the Act. For,

First, The Act is, That he should be disabled to exercise the Art and Mystery
of Printing or Founding of Letters: And the Judgment is only to disable him
from Printing.

Secondly, The Act is, That he shall receive such further punishment by Fine,
Imprisonment, or other Corporal Punishment: And the Judgment is, both for a
Fine and Corporal Punishment, when it ought not to be for both.

Curia. The first is, as it should be; for Printing and Founding of Letters are
two distinct Trades; and the words are to be taken respectively to such Trade
as the Defendant is of.

Again, it is a Rule, that a Man shall not Assign an Error in that which is for
his advantage.

But the second was held an Error, for that the Act did not intend a Fine and
Corporal Punishment both, and therefore the Judgment was reversed.

Termino Sancti Michaelis, Anno 29 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Davis versus Price.
IN Error upon a Judgment in the Common Bench in an Action of Trover, where
Judgment was given by default.

The Error was assigned in the Declaration, which was de december Juvencis
(Anglice*) Bullocks and Heifers, and not said how many of one and of the other.

But it was answered, that the Latin word being proper and of known
signification, the Anglice was void, according to Osborns Case, 10 Co. But the
Court reversed the Judgment, and cited the Case before in this Court, Trover de
viginti ovibus matricibus and agnis: And it was resolved to be naught, for not
ascertaining the number of each. But Twisden said, there was a Trover brought
de Viginti averiis, (ivz.) Bobus agnis, etc. and Viginti was applied to each
Species, and held well. It was offered in this case, to distinguish it from the
case de Ovibus matricibus and agnis, that there the Latin was of two sorts; Sed
non allocatur, for the words here being Equivocal it was all one.

Dutton versus Pool.
AN Assumpsit, the Plaintiff declared, That his Wives Father being seized of
certain Lands now descended to the Defendant, and about to cut a Thousand
pounds worth of Timber off from the said Lands, to raise a Portion for his said
Daughter; the Defendant promised to the Father in Consideration, that he would
forbear to fell the Timber, that he would pay the said Daughter 1000 l

After Verdict, upon Non Assumpsit for the Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of
Judgment; that the Father ought to have brought this Action, and not the
Husband and Wife; and there was a case shown to be adjudged in the Common
Bench, Hillary 23 and 24 Car. 2. Rot. 1538. between Pine and Norris, where the
Son promised the Father, that in Consideration that he would Surrender a
Copyhold to him, that he would pay a certain Sum to his Sister, for which she
brought the Action and then held, that it would lie for none but the Father;
for where the Party to whom the Promise is to be performed, is not concerned in
the meritorious cause of it, he cannot bring the Action. But if a Promise were
to a Man, that if his Daughter should Marry his Son, he would give her 1000 l
there, because the Daughter does the Act, which is the Consideration, she may
bring the Action.

On the contrary the Case was cited, 1 Rolls 32. Starkey and Miln, where in
Consideration of certain Goods sold, the Promise was to pay part of the Money
to another there, that other might bring the Action. And it differs from the
case where Money is delivered to A. to pay over to B. B. may bring Debt, Yelv.
24. If the Father had in the Case at Bar cut the Trees, And the Son had said,
Let me have the Trees, and I will pay the Daughter so much, that had been the
same with the Case before cited, 1 Roll. and it does not seem to differ, as it
is 1 Cro. 163. Rookwook Case, where the Father being about to charge the Land
with a Rent of 4 l per Annum to his Younger Sons; the Eldest promised, that if
he would forbear to charge the Land, he would pay the 4 l per Annum, and the
Sons upon this brought the Assumpsit, and recovered ( Sed vide librum, that
Promise is said expressly to be made to the Sons who were present.) Vid. 1 Cro.
619.652. Levett and Haws Case, where the Promise was made to a Man in
Consideration, that he had agreed, that his Son should Mary his Daughter, and
to settle such a Jointure upon her, that he would give the Son 200 l with her;
and for this the Father brought the Action, and held well brought, though the
Court seemed to incline, that the Son might also have brought it. And the Court
here inclined for the Plaintiffs. Sed Adjornatur. Post.

Saunders versus Williams.
IN an Action upon the Case the Plaintiff Declared, that he was seized in Fee
of one Acre, and possessed for a certain number of years in another Acre, and
had a Common in Black-acre for Beasts levant and couchant thereupon; and that
the Defendant put his Beasts in the place, and disturbed him.

The Defendant pleaded a Title of Common to himself also there. Upon which
Issue was joined, and found for the Plaintiff; and it was now moved in Arrest
of Judgment, that the Plaintiff had made no Title to the Common by Prescription
or otherwise.

Sed non allocatur: The Defendant being a Wrong-doer: And the same Matter was
Adjudged in the Court between St. John and Moody, St. Mich. 27 Car. 2. quod
vide ante, and in the 2 Cro. 43.122. and 3 Cro. 500.

Robinson versus Woolly.
THe Case was this Term Argued again: And Holt Argued, That the Induction, though
executed by the Archdeacon after the New Bishop was Consecrated, was sufficient.

The Bishop is only to Admit and Institute, and to send a Mandate to the
Archdeacon to Induct, who is to do it de communi Jure; and therefore if the
Bishop has Admitted and Instituted, and made a Mandate for Induction, it is a
sufficient Excuse for him in a Quare impedit; (11 H. 4. 9.) for the Bishop is
merely a Spiritual Officer. A Prebendary is to be Inducted by the Dean and
Chapter, Pl. Com. 529.

But it is Objected, That the Archdeacon does not Induct ex Officio, ^ut a
Mandate from the Bishop is requisite; (scilicet,)

First, The Mandate is to intimate to him, that the party is Instituted.

Secondly, To oblige the Archdeacon to Induct, under the penalty of an
Ecclesiastical Censure.

But if it be granted, that the Archdeacon's Authority in this matter is only
derivative; yet that being Executed (by the Mandate) quoad the Guardian of the
Spiritualties, what remains to be done remains only to the Archdeacon, who
shall finish what has proceeded so far already. If a Venire be awarded to the
Coroners, because of Kindred in the Sheriffs Family; though a New Sheriff comes
in before it be Returned, yet the Coroner shall proceed in the Execution
thereof. The Sheriff seized Goods by a Scire facias, and before they were sold
a New Sheriff was made, and then he sold them, and it was Resolved that the
Sale was good, in the 2 Cro. 73. Air and Aden's Case.

(Sed Nota, The Court said, that if the Did Sheriff had Returned, That the
Goods had remained in his hands pro defectu emptorum, a Distringas should have
gone to have them delivered to the New Sheriff, and then a Venditioni exponas
should have gone to the New Sheriff, Vid. Yelv. 44.)

In the 2 Cro. 48. the Executors of the Bishop of Carlisle were admitted to
proceed in a Suit commenced by the Testator in the Ecclesiastical Court,
because the Suit was well commenced, and the Court were possessed of the Cause:
Where Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer have given Judgment, and a New
Commission granted which determines the Old; yet the former Judgment may be
Executed, Bro. tit. Commission 13. So by the Sitting of the Kings Bench, the
Commission at the Old Baily, being in the same County is superseded, and yet
Execution is done in Term time.

But the Court said, That was by the Statute of 2. E. 6.

Again, Induction is but a Formality, and therefore shall not be so strictly
Examined. Where the Queen granted to two the Stewardship of a Manor, it was
held, that admission by one of them was sufficient. Mo. 107. Noy's Reports, (
Quaere that Case) the Archdeacon having received a Mandate for Induction, makes
a Precept omnibus literatis infra Archidiaconatum to Induct, and a Clerk who
did not belong to the Archdeaconry made the Induction; and this was held to be
well enough.

Saunders contra. The only Question is, Whether the Archdeacon Inducts by his
own Authority, or derivative from the Bishop? For if by the latter, then the
Induction cannot be good.

It Is clear, that the Archdeacon is but Minister Episcopi, and in his Precept
to those of the Clergy, to Execute he does as a Sheriff does, who makes a
Precept to his Bailiffs, recites his Mandate. If the Sheriff makes Execution
after the Kings death, if he has no notice thereof, he is excused in Trespass;
but the Execution shall be avoided. It appears by the making of the Statute of
2. E. 6. of Executing Judgments given by Commissioners after such time as the
Commission is expired, is a great Doubt; and yet there the thing was Executed
in a great part: But here it is but one single Act, whereof no part was done
before the New Bishop was made, In Sir Randolph Crew's Case in the 3 Cro. 97.
it appears, that Commissioners to Examine Witnesses, could not proceed after
Notice of the Demise of the King.

But here it is Objected, That the Verdict finds that the Archdeacon had no
Notice.

I Answer, That the Consecration of a Bishop, is a public and notorious Act.

And all the Court were of Opinion, that the Induction was wholly void, and
gave Judgment for Woolly the Defendant, and said, It was a Ministerial Act in
jure Episcopi, and like a Letter of Attorney to deliver Seisin, which cannot be
Executed but in the Life of him that made it. Ante.

Quaere, Whether this Judgment was not afterward Reverst in the Exchequer
Chamber.

Ent versus Withers.
THe Case was, Debt against an Executor upon a Bond of the Testator, and it was
brought in the Debet and Detinet, suggesting a Devastavit in the Executor.

The Defendant Demurred: For although such Action will lie, if there has been a
Judgment against the Executor, yet no such Action has been upon a Bond; and
it is hard upon such a Surmize to Charge the Executor in his own Right.

But on the other side it was said, That this differs not in Reason from the
Case of a Judgment, and upon Nil debet the whole Matter shall be brought in
question; as Whether the Bond was Sealed, etc. And in a Case between Merchant
and Driver, tried at Guild Hall before my Lord Hale, where it was brought as
this; because the Plaintiff could prove no actual Wasting (as is necessary in
this Case) he was Nonsuited. But Hale took no Exception to the Action.

But the Court said, That they would extend these Actions no further than they
had been already Resolved; and they would not agree, that an Executor should be
held to Bail upon a surmize of a Devastavit, and so Judgment was given for the
Defendant. Ante.

Pierce versus Win.
ERror out of the Grand Sessions of Wales: The Case upon a Special Verdict was
thus;

A Devise to one and to the Heirs Males of his Body, with a Proviso, That if he
does attempt to Alien, then immediately his Estate shall cease, and another
shall Enter.

The Devisee in Tail made a Feoffment, and he in Remainder Entered, and Judgment
was given in the Grand Sessions for the Feoffee against him in the Remainder.

And the Errors were assigned in the Matter in Law: And to maintain the Errors
it was said, That it must be agreed of all hands, that a Tenant in Tail could
not be restrained from Aliening by Fine or Recovery; and also, that in this
Case a bare Attempt would be no breach, according to Corbett's and Sir A.
Mildmay's Case, etc. and also, that a Tenant in Tail might be restrained to
Alien by Feoffment or other Act which was torcious, and would make a
Discontinuance; and here this Proviso imports as much, and therefore the
Feoffment will be a breach; for that is an Attempt and more. For,

First, In Conveyances, the Intention of the words of a Condition and the
Substance is regarded, and the Form of the words not so precisely followed. As
a Feoffment upon Condition, That the Feoffee shall give the Land in Frank
marriage with the Daughter of the Feoffor: This cannot be strictly pursued; yet
the Feoffee must make a Gift as near as may be, Co. 1 Inst. 217. So upon
Condition to give the Land to a Layman in Frankalmoign: But this Rule holds
(especially in Wills) where the Intent is chiefly looked at. A Devise of all
his Rents will pass Reversions upon Leases, and though the words be here, Proviso
if he does attempt to alien; it is as much as to say, Proviso, if he does alien,
etc.

Secondly, Whether the Feoffment shall determine the Estate quasi by
Limitation, so that the Remainder man shall take immediately by Executory
Devise, and that is very clear. For though in M. Portington's Case in 10 Co. it is
said, that the word Condition shall not in a Will be taken as a Limitation; yet
the Current of the Authorities since are otherwise.

But here the Court held the Condition void; for a man cannot be restrained
from an Attempt to Alien: For non constat, what shall be judged an Attempt, and
how can it be tried? And when the express words are so, there shall not be made
another sort of Condition than the Will imports. And so the Judgment was
affirmed.

Osborn versus Beversham.
DEbt for Rent, incurred at two Half years.

As to one of them the Defendant pleaded non debet.

And as to the other, Actio non; because he says, He was ready to pay it at the
Day and Place, and has been ever since; and profert in Cur' the Rent ideo petit
Judicium de damnis. To which the Plaintiff Demurred.

For that he did not say, quod obtulit; for where the Time and Place of Payment
is certain, Semper paratus is no Plea without an Obtulit.

For the Defendant it was said, That the Plaintiff ought to reply to a Demand,
1 Inst. 34. It Is a good Plea for the Heir in Dower to save his Damages to say,
That he was always ready. Rastal's Entries 159. Semper paratus is pleaded
without an Obtulit. So 1 Rolls 573. no mention made of a Tender.

But then another Fault was found, that it was pleaded in Bar, whereas it ought
to have been only in Bar of Damages, and not to the Action; and this was agreed
to be fatal.

But the Court held the Plea to be naught for the other Cause also.

Anonymus.
IN an Ejectment upon a Special Verdict, the Case was:

A man Devised his Land to J. S. after the death of his Wife.

And after Argument, the whole Court were of Opinion, that J.S. not being Heir
to the Devisor, there should go no implied Estate to the Wife; for an Heir
shall not be defeated, but by a necessary Implication.

Anonymus
AN Action for Words; for that the Defendant said of the Plaintiff, He would
have given Dean Money to have Robbed Golding's House, and he did Rob the House.

After Verdict, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the first part of the
words import only an Inclination, and not that he did give any Money: And the
words, He did Rob the House, shall be referred to Dean as the last antecedent,
and not the Plaintiff.

But the Court were of Opinion for the Plaintiff, as was Adjudged where the
words were, He lay in wait to Rob. Vid. Cockain's Case in the 1 Cro. and in the
4 Co. And the Court said, the Words might be construed, That the Plaintiff
offered Dean Money, and he refusing it, that the Plaintiff robbed the House
himself.

Smith versus Tracy.
THe Case being moved again, the Opinion of the whole Court was, That the
Half-Blood should come in for Distribution upon the new Act: For as to the
granting of Administration, the being of Guardian, etc. the Half-Blood may be
taken nearer of Kin, than a more remote Kinsman of the Whole Blood, Mo. 635*
To. Rep. 114. Ante.

J -- 's Case.
J. Brings his Habeas Corpus: The Return was, that he was Committed by J. S. J.
N. T. K. (to whom, and others, a Commission of Bankrupt was awarded) for
refusing to answer a Question put to him concerning the Bankrupt's Estate, etc.
and so Commissus fuit in custodia by a Warrant to the Officer Virtute
Commissionis praedictae, and haec est causa captionis seu detentionis, etc.

The Counsel for the Prisoner, took three Exceptions to the Return:

First, For that there did not appear a sufficient Authority: For the
Commission is said to be granted to them and others, and then they could not
act without the rest; for the Return does not express any Quorum, etc. in the
Commission.

Secondly, Instead of Commissus in custodia, it ought to be Captus, for that is
the usual Form: For this is, as if the Commitment were by the Officer that
makes the Return.

Thirdly, Haec est causa captionis seu detentionis, is uncertain; for it ought
to be and detentionis.

And upon the first and last Exception the Prisoner was Discharged by the
Court; but at the same time was told by the Court, That he must answer directly
to such Questions as were put to him, in order to the discovery of the
Bankrupts Estate, or else he was liable to be Committed.

Termino Sancti Hillarij, Anno 29 and 30 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Harrington's Case.
AN Information was preferred against him, for that he maliciously and
traitorously intending to stir up Sedition, and to create a Disturbance between
the King and his People, upon Discourse of the late Rebellion, and those
Persons which were Executed at Charing Cross for the Murder of the late King,
in praesentia and audita quamplurium utteravit and propalavit haec verba
pernitiosa sequentia, (viz.) Gubernatio nostra consistebat de tribus statibus,
and si eveniret Rebellio in Regno, nisi foret Rebellio contra omnes Status, non
est Rebellio.

Upon Not Guilty pleaded, he was found Guilty of speaking the precedent Words,
and Not guilty as to other Words contained in the Information.

It was moved in Arrest of Judment, that Gubernatio signified the Exercise and
Administration of the Government, and not the State of it, which Regimen does.

Again, That it was Consistebat, and so might relate to the Britons or Saxons
Time, or to the late mutations of the Form of Government amongst us, and that
to put the words in Latin (without an Anglice) was not to be allowed; for the
Translation might either aggravate or mitigate the Sense: And that such a
President might be prejudicial as well to the King, as the Defendant.

But those Exceptions finding little weight with the Court, his Counsel
proceeded to justify, or at least to extenuate the Words, alleging, That the
Relation was so great between the King and People, that to raise a Rebellion
against the King must also affect the other States; and this, whether the King
be taken (as some would have it) as one of the Three Estates; or (as others)
that the Lords Spiritual and Temporal make two of the Estates, and the Commons
the third, and the King as Chief and Head of all, as is the Statute of 1 Eliz.
cap. 3. where the Lords and Commons call themselves the Queens Obedient
Subjects, Representing the Three Estates of the Realm of England; and so is the
4 Inst. 1.

But the Court supposing that the Words did tend to set on Foot that Position
upon which the War (Levied in 1641. by the Two Houses against the King) was
grounded, were much displeased, that the Counsel would pretend to defend them,
or put any tolerable Sense upon them.

It was also insisted upon by the King's Counsel, and agreed by the Court, that
the Ancient Presidents, and many latter also, were to express the words in
Latin, and this pursuant to the Statute of E. 3. which requires, that their
legal Proceedings should be in Latin; and if the words were not so Elegant, yet
they would serve in an Information, etc. where it is rather chosen to put in
words agreeable to the phrase of the Law, than to Tully's Orations.

And so the Court ( Wild being absent) delivered their Opinions for the King;
but took time to set the Fine, and immediately Committed the Defendant (who
before was upon Bail;) as the course is when Judgment is given, although no Fine
was set.

Anonymus.
IT was said by the Court, upon an Indictment against one for Refusing to take
an Apprentice Bound by the Churchwardens and a Justice of Peace, according to
43 Eliz. that in such case a man cannot be Compelled to accept an Apprentice.

Pagett versus Dr. Vossius.
TRin. 26 Car. 2. Rot. 583. In an Ejectment upon a Special Verdict the Case
appeared to be thus:

Dr. Brown by Will Devised certain Lands to Dr. Vossius the Defendant, (a
Dutchman) during his Exile from his Country; and if it should please God to
restore him to his Country, or that he should dye, that then the Lands should
go to the Lady Mary Heveningham in Fee, who was the Lessor of the Plaintiff.

It was found, that at the time of making the Will, and the Death of Dr. Brown,
there was War between England and the States General, and that the Doctor was
fallen into Displeasure with the States, and that they had taken a Pension from
him of 140 l per annum, and that by reason thereof he came over: But did not
find that he was Exiled by any Act of State, and that the War was now ceased,
and that the Doctor might Return, if he pleased; but it did not find, that they
had restored him to his Pension, etc.

After diverse Arguments on both Sides this Term, Judgment was given for the
Defendant by the whole Court.

For they said there was a Voluntary and Compulsary Exile, and in regard he was
not Exiled by any Public Edict, the Will must be understood of a voluntary
absence from his Country: And the Jury found, that those Matters which drove
him away did still continue, (viz.) The depriving him of his Pension.

Nota, Exilium is a word known in our Law, (viz.) When Villains, by hard Usage,
are constrained to depart from the Manor.

And if it be Objected, That this durante Exilio is a void Limitation, as being
of unknown sense in our Law, it is still against the Lessor of the Plaintiff,
and then she cannot claim until the Doctor's death, and in the mean time the
Descent must be to the Heir at Law. Exilium, quasi ex solo; that is, as if it
had been said, During his absence from his Country.

The King versus Plume.
HE was Indicted upon the Statute of the 5th of the Queen for that he had set
up, used and exercised Artem Mysterium sive Manual occupationem Pomarii,
Anglice, of a Fruiterer, being a Trade, Mystery, or Manual occupation used in
this Kingdom, the 12th day of January, Anno Eliz. 5. in which Trade the said
Plume was not brought up by the space of Seven years, etc. And to this the
Defendant Demurred.

For that it has been held, that the Statute extends not to every Trade; but
to such an one as requires Art and Skill, and therefore not to a Hemp-dresser,
as in the 1 Cro. so in 2 Bulstrode 188. nor to a Pippinmonger, as in 1 Roll's
Rep. 10. And so a Gardener has been Resolved, not to be within the Act, in the
14th of this King: The Indictment was for the Trade of a Barber, but no
Judgment given; (but others said, That in that Case Judgment was for the King.)

On the other side it was said, That the Question here is not of those which
sell Apples in Stalls: but the Trade of a Fruiterer is well known, and they are
Incorporated in London, and there requires much Skill in Sorting of Fruit, and
in judging the durableness thereof.

But the Court inclined for the Defendant. But being informed by the Counsel
for the King, that there were many Presidents, it was adjourned. Postea.

Harrington's Case.
HArrington was again brought up, and the Court fined him a Thousand pounds,
and awarded that he should recant the words in such words as the Court should
direct, and to find Sureties for his Good behavior for seven years; after
which he produced a Writ of Error returnable before the Lords then Sitting in
Parliament, and prayed that it might be allowed, and that he might be admitted
to Bayl.

The Court said, that they allowed the Writ, but would advise whether they
should Bayl him or no, and so remanded him to Prison.

Anonymus.
IN an Assault; Battery and Wounding, the Plaintiff after Verdict moved the
Court for an increase of Damages, the Court said they could not do it, if the
word Maihemavit was not in the Declaration.

Clerks Case.
UPon an Habeas Corpus to the Mayor, etc. of London, a Custom was returned to
Disfranchise, and commit a Freeman for speaking opprobrions words of an
Alderman.

The Court said, they might Fine in such Case, but the other Custom would not
hold, notwithstanding the Act of Confirmation of their Customs.

Termino Paschae, Anno 30 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Anonymus.
IN Trespass of Battery by Baron and Feme for beating of them both.

Upon Not guilty, the Verdict was for so much Damage for beating the Husband,
and so much for beating of the Wife.

The Court said upon a motion to Arrest the Judgment, that the Plaintiff might
release the Damages for beating of himself, and take Judgment for the other.

The King versus Mead.
AN Information was brought against him, upon the Statute of 17 Car. 2. which
restrains Non conformist Ministers, from Inhabiting within five miles of any
City, Town Corporate or Borough, that sends Burgesses to Parliament, etc.

After Verdict for the King, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment.

First, That the place of his Habitation was alleged to be within five miles
of London; but it was said, that London sent Burgesses to Parliament, which not
being in the Record, the Judges were not to take knowledge of. Sed non allocatur.

For the last words of sending Burgesses to Parliament, shall be referred only
to Buroughs; and therefore the Act restrains them from dwelling in
Corporations, etc. though such Corporations as send no Burgesses.

Secondly, It is alleged, that the Town where the Defendant dwells is within
five miles; but not that the place of his Habitation in that Town was so, and
therefore may he intended to be more remote.

Thirdly, There wants vi and Armis. Sed non allocatur, Sed Judicium pro Rege.

Termino Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno 30 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
MEmorandum, This Term Sir Richard Rainsford was removed, and Sir William
Scroggs one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, was made Lord Chief Justice of
the Kings Bench.

Anonymus.
IN Trespass for Fishing in his several Piscary, and for taking 20 Bushells of
Oysters there such a day continuando piscationem praedictam, from the said day
to the time of the Action brought.

Upon Not guilty pleaded, and a Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in
Arrest of Judgment, that the Fishing in the continuando was altogether
uncertain, not expressing the quantity or quality of the Fishes as it ought,
according to Playters Case, 5 Co. And of this Opinion were Wild and Jones.

But the Chief Justice inclined to think it well enough, and said Playters Case
had not been very well approved of of late years, and that is, that it is
necessary to express the kind of the Fishes, which has been held since
needless; and he knew not why it might not be, as well as an indebitatus
Assumpsit pro diversis mercinoniis. But the other Judges said, though it was
reason it should be as the Chief Justice said; yet they knew not how to depart
from the Authorities in the Point, and that Playters Case had remained
mishaken. Sed Adjornatur.

Anonymus.
IN Debt for Rent against an Assignee of a Lessee.

The Defendant pleaded, That before the Action brought, he assigned over to J.
S. and thereof gave notice to the Plaintiff.

The Plaintiff replied, That he still kept the Possession, and had made the
Assignment by fraud to disappoint him, etc. To which it was demurred, for it
was said, that fraud was not averrable in this case, neither by the Common Law
nor any Statute.

But the Court inclined that it might, for if such a practice should obtain,
the Lessor might be hindered perpetually of his Action of Debt, by making
Assignments to persons unknown. An Executor confesses a Judgment, which is
lawful for him to do; yet this may be avereed to be entered or kept on foot by
fraud, and that by the Comman Law which hates all frauds. Sed Adjornatur.
Postea.

Anonymus.
A Prohibition was prayed to the Council of the Marches, for that they
proceeded upon an English Bill there against the Defendant; supposing that he
had promised upon a Consideration to pay the Debt of a Stranger, because it is
in the nature of an Action upon the Case, and consists merely in Damages. And
although many Presidents were shown of their Proceeding in such of Actions, and
the Statute of 34 H. 8. cap. 26. that they should determine such Cases as were
heretofore accustomed and used, etc. as should be assigned to them by the Kings
Majesty, and it was pretended that this was within their Instructions; yet the
Court granted the Prohibition: For where Damages are uncertain, they cannot be
set in a Court of Equity, but by a Jury. In Debt, because the demand is
certain, the Courts here have sometimes assessed Damages without a Writ of
Enquiry, but never in Trespass, or Actions upon the Case, which lie wholly in
Damages.

Anonymus.
AN Habeas Corpus, The Return was read and spoken to, and the Prisoner ordered
to be remanded.

Twisden said, the Return should have been first Filed, and the Prisoner
committed to the Marshalsey, for otherwise the Court have no power over him,
Vid. Mo. 839.
and he cited 1 H. 7. Humphry Staffords Case, who being brought to the Bar upon
an Habeas Corpus by the Lieutenant of the Tower, was committed to the
Marshalsey, and afterward remanded to the Tower; but the other Judges differed
as to the Commitment, and said it was not necessary to keep the Prisoner in the
Marshalsey until the Matter was determined, but he might be sent from time to
time to the same Prison, and brought up by Rule of Court until he is either
Bailed, Discharged or Remanded. And so they said it was lately done in the Earl
of Shaftsbury's Case.

Gilmore versus....
UPon a Special Verdict the Point was, whether a Promise made upon such
Consideration as by the Act of 29 Car. 2. to prevent Frauds and Perjury's is
requisite to be in Writing signed by the Party, to be charged therewith, being
made before the 24 of June last but the Action brought after, be within the
restraint of the Act which says, That from and after the 24 of June, no Action
shall be brought upon such Promise, etc.

And it was resolved, that the Case was not within the Act, which did not
extend to any Promise made before the 24 of June.

The King versus Sir Thomas Fanshaw.
SIr Thomas Fanshaw and others were indicted for not Repairing of a Bridge,
which it was alleged they were bound to Repair Ratione Tenurae of such Lands.

Sir Thomas Fanshaw pleaded, That he was not bound to Repair Ratione Tenurae,
and found that he was.

In Arrest of Judgment it was said, that the Verdict was not pursuant to the
Indictment; for therein it is alleged, that Sir Thomas Fanshaw and others were
bound to Repair Ratione Tenurae and the Verdict is, that Sir Thomas Fanshaw
Ratione Tenurae, etc. Reparare debet Parietem praedict' modo and forma prout
per Indictamentum praedict' supponitur.

Sed non allocatur, for each of them may be bound to Repair for their
respective Lands, and they must get Contribution by the Writ de onerand' pro
rata portione.

Secondly, It was said, that it is Ratione Tenurae, and not said Suae, and this
was said to be naught, Noy's Rep. 93.

Sed non allocatur, for the Presidents are generally so.

Parkers Case.
A Mandamus to restore an Attorney to his liberty of practicing in a Court
within the County Palatine of Chester; was Returned, That the Court was holden
before the Chamberlain, Vice-Chamberlain, Baron, or the Deputy of the Baron,
and that at a Court before the Barons Deputy, he spoke contemptuous words of
him, whereupon he suspended him from his Practice, and quod non aliter amotus
fuit. Upon exceptions offered to the Return, The Court held it a good cause of
Suspension, and ordered a Submission to him that received the affront in open
Court, before that he should be restored.

Anonymus.
THe Case upon the Averment of Fraud, upon an Assignment by the Assignee of a
Lessee was now moved again, and by Twisden, Wild and Jones against the Opinion
of Scroggs Chief Justice, Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, (viz.) That
Fraud in such Case might be averred. Ante.

Anonymus.
IN Ejectment, it was debated whether Confession of Lease, Entry and Ouster
would serve, where there ought to have been an actual Entry upon the Title, as
the in case of a Condition broken, or the like: And the Opinion of the Court
inclined, that it would not, though my Lord Hale was said to be of another
Opinion. Ante.

Termino Sancti Michaelis, Anno 30 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Dutton versus Poole.
CUjus principium ante, Michael' 29 Car. 2. It was now moved again to stay the
Judgment, by Sanders, who argued, that the Action could not be maintained by
the Plaintiff; for the Father whose the Wood was, could only bring it, for it
will be agreed he might have released it, or by cutting of the Wood, might have
taken away all the right of Action.

Again, it does not appear by the Record that the Defendant was here, and so no
benefit by the forbearing to cut the Wood. Rookwoods Case cited on the other
side, 1 Cro. 163. 1 Leonard 192. is, that the Promise was made to the younger
Brothers, and the Consideration that they would consent; but here the Plaintiff
who was to have the Money, had no share in the Consideration or Meritorious
Act, as where the Father promises J. S. if his Son will Marry his Daughter he
will give him 1000 l the Son may bring the Action, because the Consideration
moves from him, Hetlys Rep. 20. the Case was to this effect, A Man promises a
Woman whom he was to Marry upon a certain Consideration, that if he had a Son
by her he should have a Term, (whereof the Woman was then possessed) and if it
were a Daughter, she should have the Moiety of the Goods, etc. they Intermarry,
and after the death of the Husband, the Daughter born between them brings an
Action against the Executor of the Husband; and resolved that it would not lie,
though they did not think the Agreement made with the Wife, to be discharged by
the Intermarriage but only suspended, which is a Quaere in my Lord Hobart: Yet
the Daughter being no Party to the Promise, or to the Consideration, could not
bring an Action. The Case of Norris and Pine before cited is stronger, for
there he that made the Promise had a benefit, for it was in Consideration of
Marriage.

On the other side it was said, that though it does not appear that the Defendant
was Heir, yet it may be intended after Verdict, however it is not nudum pactum,
for if the Defendant had no benefit, yet there was a restraint upon the other,
and that is Consideration enough. And for the objection of releasing, that
holds; where J. S. promises J.N. if his Son will Marry his Daughter he will pay
him 1000 l J.N. may Release; but it is doubtful whether he can after Marriage,
because then it is vested in the Son, as Scroggs Chief Justice said, 1 Roll. 31.
The Uncle of an Infant delivered J.S. 12 l who promised to pay the Infant when
he came of Age, and the Action was well brought by him after his Age. So Goods
sold to A. to pay 10 l to B. B. may Sue. Vid. 1. Roll. 32 Starkey and Mills.

The Court said it might be another Case, if the Money had been to have been
paid to a Stranger; but there is such a nearness of Relation between the Father
and Child, and it is a kind of Debt to the Child to be provided for, that the
Plaintiff is plainly concerned. And so by the Opinion of them all, (viz.)
Scroggs, Wild, Jones, and Dolben, Judicium pro Querente. Ante.

Anonymus.
A Prohibition was prayed to the Sheriffs Court of London; for that an Action
was there Commenced, to which the Defendant pleaded, That the cause of Action
did not arise within the Jurisdiction, and offered to swear his Plea; but it
was refused. The Counsel for the Plaintiff objected against the Prohibition,
that the Plea came too late, for it was after an Imparlance. But it being
proved by Affidavit, that the Plea was tendered within two days after the
Declaration was delivered, and that immediately upon delivering the Declaration
there is an Imparlance of course, The Court granted the Prohibition, and said,
that the other side might Demurr if they thought fit, for the liberty of the
Subject was infringed by bringing him within a private Jurisdiction, when the
Matter arises out of it; and Attorney's in such places are sworn to advise no
Plea to the Jurisdiction, (nor that none shall be put in by them.)

And whereas 'twas said, that the Party had not prejudice for he might remove
his Case by Habeas Corpus.

The that the Court answered, coming by Habeas Corpus, Bail must be put in
above, though the Cause otherwise did not require it.

Note, It appeared here, that there was no defense made in this to the
Jurisdiction, and Co. Inst. was quoted, that defense should be made though not
full defense: But the Court said it was not necessary, and that Presidents were
otherwise, especially where the Court have no Jurisdiction of the matter,
otherwise where not of the person.

James versus Richardson.
IN Ejectment, the Case upon a Special Verdict was thus, A. devised the Lands
to B. and his Heirs during the Life of J. S. and after to the Heirs of the Body
of R. D. now living, and to such other Heirs was should after be Born; the
Devisee for Life levied a Fine in the Life of him to whose Heirs the Remainder
was limited, but he had a Son at the time of the death of the Testator. The
question was, Whether it was a Contingent Remainder, the consequence whereof
was to be destroyed by the Fine, and that it was vested in the Son. Scroggs
Chief Justice, Wild and Jones held it a Remainder, vested by reason of the
words now living, which was a sufficient Designation of the person that was to
take in a Will, though improper to call him Heir: But Dolben Contra, for by this
Construction the Heirs Born after are excluded, and the Son would take but an
Estate for Life, though it were devised to the Heirs in the Plural Number.

Note, Upon a Writ of Error in the Exchequer Chamber, this Judgment was
reversed, Hillary 31 and 32. Car. 2.

Termino Paschae, Anno 31 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
A Mandamus was prayed to the Ecclesiastical Court, to grant the Probat of a
Will under Seal, etc.

The Case was, the Executor named in the Will had taken the usual Oath, (but
after a Caveat entered) and then Refused; and another endeavored to obtain
Letters of Administration; the Executor came after to desire the Will under
Probat, and contested the granting of Administration: Which was Adjudged
against him, supposing that he was bound by his Refusal.

And after an Appeal to the Delegates, this Mandamus was prayed, and granted by
the Court; for having taken the Oath, he could not be admitted to Refuse, and
the Ecclesiastical Court had no further Authority, and the Caveat did not alter
the Case.

Note, The Oath was taken before a Surrogate; yet it was all one.

Anonymus.
A Prohibition was prayed to a Suit for Tithes upon the Suggestion, that the
Lands out of which they were demanded say out of the Parish, and the Bounds of
Parishes are tryable at the Common Law.

But the Court denied the Prohibition, because it did not appear, that a Plea
thereof had been offered in the Ecclesiastical Court.

Anonymus.
A Prohibition was prayed to stay a Suit against J. S. Lessee of a Rectory, out
of which a Pension was demanded. It was suggested that the Lord Biron had three
parts in four of this Rectory, upon which the Pension was chargeable, and that
the Suit against one alone ought not to be, as in an Assize for a Rentcharge,
all the Ter-Tenants are to be named, and here the party has an Election to Sue
a Writ of Annuity, and if so be must have named all that had been chargeable.

Curia. It Is true, in our Law it were a good Plea in Abatement; but perhaps
their Law and Course is otherwise. And here they have Jurisdiction, and may
proceed according to their own Rules; or if not, you may have an Appeal.
Whereupon a Prohibition was denied.

Anonymus.
IN an Habeas Corpus and Certiorari for the Body of J. S. who had been
Imprisoned for not paying of a Fine of 20 l set at the Quarter Sessions: The
Return was, that he being Constable, and demanded by the Court to Present an
Highway, which was sworn before him by Two Witnesses to be out of Repair, said
in Contempt of the Court, That he would not Present it: For which, and certain
other contemptuous words the Fine was set.

The Counsel for the Prisoner moved, that it might be Filed: Which was done.

The Court were of Opinion, that the Fine was not well set; for Constables are
to Present upon their own Knowledge, and the Two Witnesses should have been
carried to the Grand Jury, for the Constable was not obliged to Present upon
their Testimony. This Court is to judge of their Fines, whether without Cause,
or to mitigate them when excessively imposed; and for the Contemptuous Words
the Return is ill, because not expressed what.

On the other side it was prayed, that the Return might be amended, for he had
spoken Opprobious Words; but that could not be admitted after the Filing. And
so the party was discharged.

Anonymus.
IT was moved to quash an Order of Sessions, for the Keeping of a Bastard Child.

First, That it does not appear that the Child was born within the Parish.

Secondly, It Is to allow so much Weekly, until the Child is Eight years of Age;
whereas the Statute gives power to make a Weekly allowance while the Child
shall be chargeable.

Thirdly, The Order was, at Eight years old to pay 5 l for the Binding of it
out.

But the Court would not quash it; for they said it was implied, by saying, it
would be chargeable to the Parish, that it was born there; and 'twas apparent
it would continue Chargeable for so long as they appointed the Allowance, and
they might Order 5 l to be paid in the end.

Sed Quaere, For a Sum in gross ought not to be set, but a Weekly allowance.

And the Court said, they must show that respect to Justices of the Peace, who
served the Country at their own charge as not too nicely to examine their
Orders.

Anonymus.
ERror upon a Judgment by Nihil dicit given in the Common Pleas, where the
Action was for Words, which in the Declaration were laid thus: That the
Defendant said, Quidam J. S. (which was the Plaintiffs Name) innuendo the
Plaintiff was, etc.

The Error assigned was, that there was no Averment that these Words were spoke
of the Plaintiff, for there might be more of the name.

But Holt for the Defendant said, the Innuendo would help that fault; and he
cited the Case of Rebotham and Venlecke in the 3 Cro. 378. where the Plaintiff
Declared, that he had made an Oath before a Judge upon certain Articles
exhibited for the Good Behavior; and the Defendant to Scandalize him said, He
made a false Oath, (Innuendo the said Oath before the Judge) where it was held,
that the Innuendo was sufficient to ascertain what Oath was meant.

But the Court Reversed the Judgment in this Case, and said, that not saying in
the Declaration that the Words were spoken of the Plaintiff, it was not
sufficient to bring that in by an Innuendo, which ought to have been Averred;
and it is the worse, because it is said quidam J.S. which imports another person
than the Plaintiff.

Anonymus.
ERror to Reverse a Judgment given in the King's Bench in Ireland, in a
Prohibition, where the Issue was, Whether he had Prosecuted in the Court
Christian after the Prohibition? and it was found for the Plaintiff, and
Damages assessed to 100 l and 6 d pro misis and custagiis.

And now the Error was assigned in the Judgment given, which was, That the
Plaintiff should recover damna praedicta per Juratores assess. ad 100 l nec non
pro misis and custagiis de incremento per Cur' adjudicat' 20 l omitting the 6 d
Costs given by the Jury.

On the other side it was said, That damna praedicta in the Judgment included
all, and the saying 100 l was but a Miscomputation. Et Adjornatur. Postea Hill.
33 and 34 Car. 2.

How versus Whitfield.
A Fine of certain Lands to the use of J. S. for Life, and after to his
Executors and Assigns for 80 years, with Power to the Lessee and his Assigns to
let Leases for 21 years, reserving the ancient Rent.

After several mean Assignments, the Assignee of an Executor of an Assignee,
made a Lease for 21 years, which in the Special Verdict was found to be made of
the said Lands inter alia, reserving proinde six shillings per annum, and found
that six shillings was the ancient yearly Rent for the Land.

The Court seemed to be of opinion, that an Assignee after so many Removes
might execute this Power, for it was coupled with an Interest, and annexed to
the Estate, though to be construed strictly; but in regard the Lease was made of
the Land inter alia, reserving proinde, etc. in case the Reservation should be
taken to be for the whole Land, then it was not the ancient Rent reserved for
this; and upon that they doubted. Et Adjornatur. Postea.

Anonymus.
AN Indictment was quashed for want of Addition: For the Court said, no Process
ought to go out thereupon, because the party cannot be Outlawed.

Anonymus.
IN an Habeas Corpus the Return was, that the party was taken upon an Excom'
Cap'.

It was moved, that the party might be discharged, because upon Search it
appeared that the Writ had not been Enrolled in this Court; for so it ought to
be by the Statute of the 5th of the Queen, though the Writ issues out of Chancery.

The Court doubted, whether they could Discharge him upon a Motion, or that he
should be driven to plead this Matter? And it was said the Course had been both
ways. Vid. Parker's Case 3 Cro. 553.

But the party was afterward Discharged; ut opinor.

Herne versus Brown.
A Prohibition was prayed to a Suit in the Ecclesiastical Court.

The Libel sets out, That a Tax had been made for the Repairs of a Church where
the Defendant inhabited, and was to make him pay his proportion. To which they
required his Answer, (viz.) Whether he had paid, etc.

The Suggestion was, that the party had tendered his Answer, but the Court had
refused it, because it was not upon Oath and that the Ecclesiastical Court
cannot tender an Oath to the party sued, (nisi in causis Matrimonialibus and
Testamentariis.)

But the Court, after hearing diverse Arguments, denied the Prohibition; for
they said, It was no more than the Chancery did, to make Defendants answer upon
Oath in such like Cases.

Termino Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno 31 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
How versus Whitfield, ante in ult' Term.
IN Repl the Plaintiff declares of the taking of his Cattle in a Close,
containing five Acres.

The Defendant avows, and sets forth a Fine to the use of A. in Tail, which
descended to him, Virtute cujus he was seized in Dominico ut de feodo talliato,
etc.

The Plaintiff Replies, that the Fine was first to the use of J. S. for Life,
the Remainder to his Executors, Administrators and Assigns for 80 years, with
Power to him and his Assigns, to let the five Acres in Possession or Reversion
for 21 years, determinable upon three Lives, reserving the ancient Rent, and
that J. S. Devised this Term to J. N. and died; his Executors assented, and
after it came to the Executors of J. N. who assigned it; and that the Assignee
made a Lease of the said five Acres inter alia, reserving proinde the Rent of 6
s per annum, and avers that the ancient Rent was 6 s per annum.

The Avowant Rejoyns, setting forth his former Title. And the Plaintiff Demurrs.

It was Objected:

First, That the Plaintiff ought to have traversed the Seisin in Tail, alleged
by the Avowant seeing in his Replication he sets forth and intitles himself
under an Estate inconsistent with it.

To this it was Answered, and the Court agreed, that there ought to be no
Traverse; for the Avowant does not say, it was his Freehold, or that he was
Seized in Tail; but only under a Virtute cujus, etc. And the Plaintiff in his
Replication sets forth a Title consistent with all that the Avowant alleges,
and so confesses and avoids, and all depends upon the execution of the Power.
And for that,

Secondly, It was Objected, That he which made this Lease was not Assignee of
J. S. for Executors were not within the Power, and consequently not their
Assignee: This is a Power collateral to the Estate, and shall not run with the
Land; for then Assignees of Commissioners of Bankrupcy, the Vendee of the Term
by the Sheriff upon an Execution, etc. should execute this Power. It is like
Covenants annexed to Leases, which the Assignee could not take advantage of
till 32 H. 8.

Again, Here appears to be no good Reservation; for the Lease is of the five
Acres inter al', reserving proinde, so that the Rent issues out of other Lands
as well as the five Acres, and therefore cannot be said to be the ancient Rent
reserved upon that.

The Court were all of Opinion, that the Assignee in this case might execute
the Power, and conceived that Assignees might include Assignees in Law, Vid.
Mo. 855.
as well as Fact; but however the Tenant for Life devising this Term, the
Devisee was an Assignee, and the Power in the greatest strictness of
acceptance was in him, and consequently must go to his Executors, and by the
same Reason to their Assignee.

As to the Reserving the Rent proinde, the Court said it might be intended that
the inter al' might comprehend nothing but such things out of which a Rent
could not be reserved, and then the six Shillings was reserved only for the
five Acres. However the proinde might reasonably be referred only to the five
Acres, and not to the inter al, and that a distinct Reservation of Six
shillings might be for five Acres. And so Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.
Ante.

Steed versus Berrier.
ERror upon a Judgment given in the Court of Common Pleas upon a Special
Verdict; the Case was to this effect.

J.S. made his Will in Writing, and devised Lands to his Son J.S. and his
Heirs, and in the same Will gave a Legacy of 100 l to his Grandson. The Son
died afterward in his Life time, after whose decease J. S. the Grandfather
made a Codicil, wherein he gave away part of the Lands devised, as aforesaid,
to a Stranger, and afterward declared by Parol, that his Intention was that
his Grandson J. S. should have the Lands, which his Son J. S. should have had.

The Question upon this Special Verdict was, Whether this were sufficient to
carry the Lands to the Grandson? And Judgment was given in the Common Pleas by
three Judges against one, that it was. Whereupon a Writ of Error was brought in
this Court.

Finch Solicitor Argued, that this Will was sufficient to carry it to the
Grandson. He agreed Brett and Ridgen's Case in Pl. Com. that a Devise to a man
and his Heirs, who dies in the Life of the Devisor, a new Publication will not
be enough to make the Heir take by the Will, because named in the Will by way
of Limitation of the Estate, and not Designation of the Person that should
take. But in Fuller's Case in the 1 Cro. 423. and in Mo. 2. where the Devise
was to his Son Richard and the Heirs of his Body; which Richard afterward died
in his Life time, and then the Devisor said, My Will is, That the Sons of
Richard my Son, deceased, shall have the Land devised to their Father, as they
should have had if their Father had lived and died after me. There Popham and
Fenner held, that this new Publication would carry the Land to Richard's Son.
Gaudy and Clench contra. But our Case is much stronger; for there Heirs of the
Body were used only for Limitation; but in the Will here, where the words are,
I Devise to my Son J. with this new Publication the Grandson J. may take,
because a Grandson is a Son; and when a Will is new Published, it is all one as
if it were wrote at the time of such Publication. Beckford and Parncot's Case
in the 1 Cro. 493. Mo. 404. Devise of all his Lands, and after the Will the
Devisor purchases other Lands, and then publishes it again, it will carry the
new purchased Lands. Dyer 149. Trevanian's Case. Cestuy que use before the 27th
of H. 8. Devised the Lands; a new Publication will pass the Lands executed in
him by the Statute.

The Opinion of the Court inclined to Reverse the Judgment; they held it to be
the same with Fuller's Case in the 1 Cro. that no Parol averment can carry
Lands to one person, when the words of the Will plainly intended them to
another. They agreed, If a man having no Son, but a Grandson, devises his
Lands to his Son, the Grandson may take: But here is an opposition contained in
the new Publication, (viz.) Those Lands which my Son J. should have had, my
meaning is, my Grandson J. shall have. And in the Will it self there is a
Legacy devised to the Grandson by that Name; so where they are so
distinguished, it is impossible to take the Grandson to be meant by the name of
Son. As to Beckford's Case, the Words are full to carry all, and therefore it
had been impertinent to have wrote over the Will again. So where a man has two
Sons named John, it may be well averred that he meant the younger Son; for
nothing in the Will is inconsistent with such meaning.

The Court took time to deliver their Opinions. And afterward the Chief
Justice delivered the Opinion of the Court, That neither the Republication, nor
Parol Declaration, could operate as a Devise to R. etc. the Grandson.

Pepis's Case.
A Mandamus to restore him to his Place of Recorder of the Town of Cambridge.

The Return was, That they were Incorporated by the Name of Mayor, Aldermen,
etc. with a Power to choose a Recorder, Habend' pro termino vitae, aut ad
voluntat' eligentium.

That Mr. Pepis was Chosen Recorder ad voluntat' eligentium; and that
afterward by the Votes of the greater number of the Electors he was removed,
and the Lord Allington constituted a Recorder under their Common Seal, etc.

Upon this Return it was moved for Mr. Pepis, that although they had alleged a
Power to Choose a Recorder at Will, yet they should have shown Cause for his
Removal, being a Judicial Office, which the Court takes notice of; and that
none had such a Power, but the King, to remove Judges ad libitum.

Again, A Corporation aggregate cannot determine their Will, but under their
Common Seal, and that is not shown here.

Curia. Where a Recorder is at Will, they may remove him at pleasure, as it is
in Blagrave's Case, and several other Cases.

As to the other Point it does not appear that he was Constituted under their
Common Seal, perhaps then they must have determined their Will under their
Common Seal; but now it is well enough, my Lord Allington is Constituted under
their Common Seal, which Act removes the other, so it was adjudged against Mr.
Pepis.

Termino Sancti Michaelis, Anno 31 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
A Prohibition was prayed to the Court of Admiralty upon a Suggestion, that the
Suit was there upon a Contract made upon the Land. The Case was thus,

A Bargain was made upon the Land with severl Seamen, to bring up a Ship from a
Port in England to London, for a certain Sum to them to be paid. And for the
Prohibiton 'twas alleged, that this being upon the Land, and a Contract with
diverse jointly for a Sum in Gross, it could not be within the ordinary Rule of
Mariners Wages, which is permitted to be Sued for in the Court of Admiralty, in
favor of the Mariners, because they may all join in that Court, and not be put
to the inconvenience of Suing severally, as they must at Law; but as this
Contract is, they are to sue jointly at Common Law.

But the Prohibition was denied, for this must be taken as Mariners Wages. And
therefore, though the Contract were upon the Land; yet they have Jurisdiction:
Besides the Party comes after Sentence, and therefore in the Courts discretion,
whether they will then grant a Prohibition.

Note, A Rump Act was made to enable Mariners to Sue for Wages in the
Admiralty, but yet the Law was taken to be so before. Vid. 3 Cro.

Anonymus.
A Prohibition was prayed to the Ecclesiastical Court, where the Libel was for
these words, You are a Whore, and Ply in Moorfields. And the Suggestion was,
that the words were spoken in London, where an Action lies for such words; and
for that Cause a Prohibition was granted, otherwise Suits might have been in
the Court Christian for such words, though not singly for the word Whore being a
common word of brabling, otherwise where joined with words, which show the
intent to Defame in that kind.

Anonymus.
AN Indebitat' Assumpsit was brought for Goods sold and delivered. The Action
was laid in London, and a Motion was made to change the Venue, upon an
Affidavit, that the Sale was in Kent. But on the other side it was said, the
delivery was in London, and that were the Matter consists of two parts in
several Counties, the Plaintiff shall have his Election; to which the Court
agreed.

Anonymus.
A Man Covenants with his intended Wife, to give her leave to dispose of so
much by her Will, and then they Intermarry, the Husband having given Bond to a
third person for the performance of these Covenants; after the death of the
Wife, the Husband is Sued upon the Bond, for not permitting her Will to be
performed: And upon Oyer of the Condition it was insisted on for the Defendant,
that these Covenants were discharged by the Marriage, and so the Bond likewise
loses its force. Vid. Hob. 216. Et Adjornatur.

Anonymus.
A Motion was made to quash an Inquisition of forcible Entry; it was Inquisitio
capta per Juratores super Sacramentum suum coram T. S. and J. N. Justiciariis,
etc. qui dicunt super Sacramentum praed'.

And it was objected, That qui dicunt, etc. referring to the last antecedent,
it was that the Justices say: Sed non allocatur, for super Sacramentum
praedict' makes it certain.

Note, The Caption of an Indictment may be amended the same Term it comes into
Court.

Anonymus.
AN Indictment for not taking upon him and executing the Office of a Constable,
to which he was chosen by the Leer. The question was, Whether a Tenant in
ancient Demesne were obliged to that Office. And the Court held, that he was.

Termino Sancti Hillarij, Anno 31 and 32 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Anonymus.
IN Ejectment upon a Special Verdict the case was thus,

A Lease was made A. and B. for their Lives, Remainder to the first Son of A.
etc. Remainder to the Heirs of A. B. conveys his part to A.

The question was, Whether the Contingent Remainder to the first Son were
destroyed.

Holt argued that it was. For a Contingent Remainder must have some particular
Estate of Freehold to support it, and by the Release of B. his Estate was gone;
and there became an entire Fee in A. For by whotsoever means a Joint tenant for
Life conveys his Moiety to his Companion, it does not enure by Grant of the
Estate, but by Release, as Eustace, and Scawens Case, 2 Cro. 696. A. and B.
Joint tenants for Life, A. Levy's a Fine to B. B. dies, there shall be no
Occupancy of the Moiety of A. during the Life of A. Jones 55. and the Case of
Lewis Bowels, 11 Co. is not to be objected, where an Estate for Life was made
to B. and F. the Remainder to their first Son, that they should have in Tail,
Remainder to B. and F. in Tail, here, though an Estate in Tail is executed in B.
and F. until a Son Born; yet after upon the Birth of the Son, the Contingent
Remainder shall vest and split, and divide the former Estate; 2 Co. 60.61.
but here the Fee becomes executed by several Conveyances, but there the Estate
Tail; was executed by the first Conveyance. And in the Case at Bar until the
Release of B. the Fee was not executed in B. for the preservation of the
Jointure, and so the Plight and Condition of the Estate altered by matter
subsequent, and by consequence the Contingent Remainder destroyed.

The Court doubted, whether there were such alteration of the Estate, as to
destroy the Remainder; for they said, to some purposes the Fee was executed
before the Release, Vid. 1 Inst. 184. a.
for if the Joynttenants had joined in a Lease for years, an Action of Wast
would he against the Lessee. Et Adjornatur.

Anonymus.
A Person who was committed to the Tower for Conspiring the death of the King,
was brought up by Habeas Corpus, and prayed to have Bail taken, unless an
Indictment were found against her this Term, according to the new Act of 31
Car. 2. for Habeas Corpus's.

The Court said, that they which would have the benefit of that Act, must pray
it before the first week of the Term expires; but in regard it appeared, that
she had prayed it before by her Counsel, and her Habeas Corpus was taken out in
time, the Court said, the benefit of the Act should be saved to her, for the
prayer is not necessary to be made in person: But Mr. C. G. was refused the
advantage, he having omitted to make the prayer during the first week, either
in Person or by Counsel.

Sir Robert Peytons's Case.
HE was brought up by Habeas Corpus from the Tower, his Counsel pressed much to
have the Return Filed, supposing that he would be then a Prisoner to the Court,
and committed to the Marshalsey, but the Court ordered the Return to be Filed,
and notwithstanding remanded him to the Tower, as they said they might do.

The King versus Plume.
ANte Hill. 29 and 30 Car. 2. The Case was spoken to again upon the Demurrer to
the Indictment, for using of the Trade of a Fruiterer, contra 5 Eliz. not
having been bound an Apprentice.

Scroggs Chief Justice and Dolben inclined to the Opinion, that it was a
Mystery within the Statute, there being great Art in choosing the times to
gather, and preserve their Fruit. And that the Cause deserved the more
Consideration; for that the Fruiterers were an ancient Corporation in London,
(viz.) From the time of E. 4. also a Barber, Upholster, and lately a
Coachmaker, Ruled to be within the Act.

Jones and Pemberton, seemed to be of another Opinion, for it would be very
inconvenient to make every one that sells Fruit by the penny within the Act,
and majus and minus would make no odds; surely since the 5 of Eliz. there would
have been some Prosecution by the Company of Fruiterers in this case, if it
would have lain. Brewers and Bakers require Skill, and yet not within the Act.
But the Court took time, to deliver their positive Opinions. Et Adjornatur.

Reve versus Cropley.
AN Indebitat' Assumpsit was brought for 20 l as Executor to William Buroughs,
for so much of the said Williams Money had and received by the Defendant in his
Life time; whereupon the Plaintiff had Judgment by Nihil Dicit, and upon a Writ
of Inquiry, (the Plaintiff not being provided to prove the Debt supposing it to
be confessed by the Judgment,) the Jury found but two pence Damages.

Ventris moved to set aside this Writ of Enquiry, for that the Plaintiff was
not obliged in this Action to prove the Debt, at the executing of the Writ of
Enquiry, no more than if he had brought an Action of Debt, 2 Cro. 220. In
Trespass for taking of Goods, the Property is not to be proved upon the Writ of
Enquiry after Judgment Sur Nihil Dicit; for said the Court, if he should fail
thereof, it would be in destruction of the first Judgment. Vid. Yelv. 152,

Curia. This being in an Action upon the Case which lies in Damages, the Debt
ought to have been proved, and so let it stand.

Note, If a Verdict be for 30 l and the Judgment is quod recuperet damna
praedicta ad 32 l This surplus will do no hurt, because it is damna praedicta.
Jones 171.

Cook versus Fountain.
IN an Ejectment upon a Trial at the Bar, the Title of the Lessor of the
Plaintiff was upon the Grant of a Rent, with power to enter for Non payment.

The Executor of the Grantor was produced as a Witness for the Defendant. And
it was objected against him, that in the Grant of the Rent, the Grantor
covenanted for himself and his Heirs to pay it, and that the Executor being
obliged, was no competent Witness.

Against which it was much insisted upon on the other side, that this Covenant
annexed to a real Estate would not bind the Executor, but only the Heir.

But the whole Court were against it. The Counsel for the Defendant mentioned a
Bill of Exceptions; and the Court doubted, whether it would lie in the Kings
Bench, so they waved it, and showed that the Executor had fully Administered the
Inventory: But they gave a further charge on the Plaintiffs side, and so that
Witness was set aside.

Termino Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno 32 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Anonymus.
IN an Action upon the Case, The Plaintiff declared that he kept a Stage-Coach,
and got his Livelihood by carrying of Passengers: And that the Defendant spoke
such Scandalous words of his Wife, that so reflected upon him, and rendered him
so ridiculous, that no body would Ride in his Coach, and he thereby lost his
Customers.

After Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved to stay Judgment, that here was
no cause of Action: But on the other side, a Case was cited of one Bodingly, 14
Car. 2. C. B. where the Plaintiff declared, That he was an Innkeeper, and that
the Defendant had presented his Wife at a Leet for a Scold, and that such and
such Guests in particular had absented from his House upon it, and after
Verdict he had Judgment.

But the Court here said, that the Cases differed, for that quality of the
Wives might make the House troublesome to the Guests; but a Stage Coachman
could receive no probable prejudice in his Trade by defaming of his Wife, or at
the least the Plaintiff should have declared, what Customers he had lost in
particular, and therefore they ordered quod querens Nils capiat per Biliam.

Anger versus Brewer.
IN an Attachment upon a Prohibition, the Plaintiff declared, That he proceeded
in the Court Christian, after the Prohibition delivered.

After Judgment by Nihil dicit, and 100 l Damages given to the Plaintiff, it
was moved to stay Judgment; that there was no place laid in the Declaration,
where the Defendant prosecuted since the Prohibition delivered, and so if Issue
had been taken upon Non prosecut' fuit post deliberat' brevis, whence should
the Venue have come? But it being made appear to the Court, that in all the
Presidents of these kind of Declarations, there is no place found mentioned of
the Proceeding after delivery of the Writ, but the place only expressed where
the Writ was delivered, they thereupon overruled this Specious Exception. Post.

Anonymus.
ONe A. B. was indicted of High Treason in Conspiring the death of the King,
and was brought to his Trial at the Bar this Term, and one D. being produced a
Witness against him; the said A. B. excepted against him, for that the said D.
had been Outlawed of Felony and Burned in the Hand, and produced the Record.

The Witness to clear himself thereof produced the Kings Pardon, whereby he was
pardoned of the said Crimes, Outlawry, etc.

The Prisoner still objected, that the Pardon did not restore him to his
Credit; and that notwithstanding he was no legal and competent Witness; and
prayed that he might have Counsel assigned him, to argue the Point which was
granted: And the Court having heard his Counsel, and conceived some doubt in
the Matter, they desired Mr. Justice Raymond to consult with the Judges of the
Common Pleas, to which Court Raymond immediately went, and at his return
reported to this Court the Opinion of the said Judges to be, that he might be
Sworn. But if a Man convicted of Perjury were afterward pardoned; yet that
would not enable him to be a Witness, because it seemed to be an injury to the
People, to make them subject to the Testimony of such an one. Vid. Hob. 81. a
Pardon takes away poenam and reatum; so D. was Sworn.

Colepeppers's Case.
HE was indicted of High Treason, for Raising Rebellion in Carolina, (one of
the Kings Foreign Plantations in America) whereupon he was this Term Tried at
the Bar and acquitted.

Note, By 35 H. 8. cap. 2. Foreign Treasons may be either tried by Special
Commission, or in the Kings Bench by a Jury of the County where that Court
Sits. Vid. Co. 1 Inst. 261. b.

Anonymus.
UPon a Trial at Nisi prius at Guildhal before my Lord Chief Justice North, in
Trover and Conversion against an Executor de son tort'.

The question came to be, Whether the Goods having been taken in Execution,
upon a Judgment obtained against the Defendant by a Creditor of the Deceased,
should discharge him against the Plaintiff, who brought this Action as
Administrator: And the Opinion of the Chief Justice was, that this Execution
was a good Discharge against another Creditor that should Sue him, to whom he
might plead Riens inter ses mains, but it was no Discharge against an
Administrator, for Men must not be encouraged to meddle with a personsal Estate
without Right; but to prevent this mischief where the Party dies Intestate, and
there is contest about the Administration, a Man may procure of the Ordinary
Letters ad Colligendum.

Termino Sancti Michaelis, Anno 32 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Anonymus.
THe Statute of 43 Eliz. cap. 2. that enables Justices of Peace where a Parish
is unable to provide for their Poor, to Tax the neighboring Parish, the words
being any other of any other Parish. It was resolved, that the Justices might
impose the charge upon any of the Inhabitants of the neighboring Parish, and
were not obliged to put a general Tax upon the whole Parish.

Anger versus Brower.
A Prohibition, the Plaintiff declared upon an Attachment, that at such a day
and place he delivered the Writ to the Defendant, and that he had prosecuted
the Suit in the Court Christian since, and upon Judgment by Nihil dicit, and
upon a Writ of Enquiry 100 l Damages were found, and Judgment given, and a Writ
of Error brought.

The Error assigned was, that the Plaintiff had laid no Venue where the Suing
was since the Writ delivered, which was the cause of Damage, and not the
delivery of the Writ, so that place would not serve. On the other side it was
said, that the Presidents were generally this way: But to that the Court said,
that where those Presidents were, there was no further Proceeding after
Judgment, as there seldom was when there was Judgment by Nihil dicit; but here
they reversed it for this Error. Ante.

The Case of the City of London, concerning the Duty of Water Bailage.
THe Mayor and Commonalty of London brought an Indebitat' Assumpsit against A.
B. for 5 l for so much due to them for diverse Tons of Wine, brought from beyond
the Seas to the Port of London, at Four pence per Ton.

Upon Non Assumpsit pleaded, and Trial at Bar, diverse Freemen of London were
offered as Witnesses for the Plaintiff. But the Counsel of the other side
excepted to them, for that they were Parties (the Commonalty of London
comprehending all the Freemen, and likewise Interested.)

On the other Side it was said, that their Interest was in no sort to be
considered, it being so very small and remote; a small Legatee has been sworn
to prove a Will. In an Indictment against the County for not Repairing of a
Bridge, one of the County may be a Witness (and this Justice Dolben said, he
had known in the Case of Peterburgh Bridge.) In a Robbery sur Statute de
Winton, the Plaintiff shall be Sworn a Witness, and that for Necessity.

But it was Replied, that there was no Necessity, for they might have other
Witnesses besides Freemen, (though perhaps with difficulty.) In an Action against
the Hundred upon the Statute of Winton, an Hundred or cannot be a Witness.

Scroggs Chief Justice, Dolben and Raymond, were of Opinion, that they were
Witnesses.

Jones contra. And a Bill of Exceptions was tendered by the Counsel for the
Defendant, which the Court proffered to Seal, and to allow three or four days
time to Draw it up.

But afterward the Plaintiffs Counsel offered other Witnesses, and set by
their Citizens; but the Verdict went for the Defendant.

Note, It was said, that the Lord Mayor could not Release the Action but under
the Common Seal; and that for a Duty or Charge upon a Corporation, every
particular Member thereof is not liable, but Process ought to go in their
Public Capacity.

Note, A Sheriff was ordered to attend the Court for demanding an excessive Fee
for the execution of an Hab' fac' possess. the Court saying there was none due.

Anonymus.
A Prohibition was granted to the Consistory Court of the Bishop of London, for
Citing one for calling of her Whore; because such words by the Custom of London
are punishable in the Courts of Law there.

Anonymus.
IF the Plaintiff dies after the Term began, though before Judgment Entered; yet
Judgment may be Entered, because every Judgment relates to the first Day of the
Term.

Anonymus
A Motion was made to quash an Inquisition taken before the Coroners super
visum corporis, of one that killed himself, which found that he was Felo de se.

But the Court were Informed, that the party was Non compos mentis, and that
there had been an undue Practice by the Coroner; of both which great Proof was
made, and upon that it was quashed.

Note, The Court said, that if the Body could not be dug up, there might be
an Indictment Exhibited to the Grand Jury, who might Enquire thereupon.

Termino Sancti Hillarij, Anno 32 and 33 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Anonymus.
A Motion was made against a Judge of an Inferior Court of Record, for
increasing upon a View the Damages in an Action of Trespass and Battery to so
much more than was given by the Jury.

Curia. The proper way is to Reform it by a Writ of Error; for none but the
Courts at Westminster can increase Damages upon View.

Anonymus.
IF a Writ of Error in Ejectment, etc. abates by the Act of God, a second Writ
will be a Supersedeas. Otherwise where it abates by the Act of the Party.

Anonymus.
IN a Writ of Error to Reverse a Fine, the Proclamations were pleaded in the
same Fine, and Five ^ears quiet possession, and this in bar of a Writ of Error.

The Court Inclined, that the Error being in the Fine, Five years possession
could not be pleaded. Sed Adjornatur. Mo. Rep. 8.

Termino Paschae, Anno 33 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
NOte, This Term Sir Francis Pemberton was made Lord Chief Justice of the
King's Bench, in the room of Sir William Scroggs, who was displaced.

Page versus Denton.
HIll. 32 and 33. Car. 2. Rot. 45. In Debt upon a Bond against an Executor, who
pleads that the Testator was Indebted to him by an Obligation, the Condition
whereof was to pay Rent; and that at the time of his Decease there was 300 l
due for Rent, and that he had not more than 60 l Assets to pay it, etc.

The Plaintiff Replied, That there was but 30 l due for Rent at the time of the
Testator's death.

Which the Court held to be a good Replication, although the Penalty of the Bond
was forfeited at the time of the Testator's death. For if a Bond due to a
Stranger be forfeited, and this be pleaded by an Executor, and that he has not
Assets ultra, it is a good Replication to say, That the Obligee would have taken
part of his Money in full, and it shall be a Bar for no more; and here the
Defendant ought to take but his due Debt.

And the Court said, that if men would plead their Case Specially, it would
save many a Suit in Chancery.

Fitzharris's Case.
EDward Fitzharris was Indicted of High Treason; upon which being Ar^aigned,
and demanded to plead, he delivered in a Paper containing a Plea to the
Jurisdiction of the Court; which could not be received, (as the Court said) not
being under Counsel's Hand. Whereupon he prayed to have Counsel assigned, and
Named diverse, whereof the Court assigned Four. And he was taken from the Bar,
three of four days being given him to advise with his Counsel, to prepare his
Plea as they would stand by him.

The Counsel prayed, that they might have a Copy of the Indictment.

But the Court denied it and said, that it was not permitted in Treason, or any
other Capital Crimes.

But Justice Dolben said, that sometimes it had been allowed to take Notes out
of the Indictment. Vid. Mirror 304. Abusion est que Justices ne monstre
l'Indictment a les Indictes s'ils demandront. Sect. 115.

Termino Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno 33 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Anonymus.
IN an Action of Debt against an Executor, in the Debet and Detinet, upon a
Surmize of a Devastavit, the Defendant was held to Special Bail. And so Ruled
upon Motion.

Anonymus.
IT was said by the Court, That if a Corporation that has been by
Prescription, accept a New Charter, wherein some alteration is of their Name,
and likewise of the Method in the Governing part; yet their Power to remove
(and other Franchises which they had de temps d'ont, etc.) do continue. And if
the Power to Remove be at their Will and Pleasure, this Will must be expressed
under their Common Seal; but in Return to a Mandamus, debito modo amotus may
suffice.

Note, No Writ of Error lies upon an Indictment of Recusancy and Conviction by
Proclamation.

Note, In an Ejectment, where there are diverse Defendants which are to Confess
Lease, Entry and Ouster; if one does not appear at the Trial, the Plaintiff
cannot proceed against the rest, but must be Nonsuit.

Termino Sancti Michaelis, Anno 33 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Anonymus.
IN Covenant, the Plaintiff Declared upon several Breaches, one whereof was,
for not paying of 7 l according to the Covenant.

It was moved for the Defendant, that he might be admitted to bring 7 l into
Court to pay to the Plaintiff, together with his Costs hitherto, etc. as is
usual in Cases of Debt or Assumpsit for Money, and that the Plaintiff might
proceed for the rest, if he thought fit: But the Motion was denied, because the
Plaintiff had Declared of other Breaches, and the Matter lay in Damages.

Anonymus.
ERror upon a Judgment in the Common Pleas, where the Plaintiff Declared in an
Action upon the Case, that he had Common in the Defendants Lands, and habere
debuit, etc.

The Defendant Demurred, because not set out how the Plaintiff was Entitled to
the Common, whether by Prescription, or otherwise. Notwithstanding which
Judgment in the Common Bench was for the Plaintiff, and now the same Matter
insisted on for Error here; and the Court doubted.

To make the Declaration good there was quoted the Case of Sands and Trefuses,
in the 3 Cro. in an Action for Stopping of a Watercourse to his Mill, which was
held good without saying an Ancient Mill, or that he was Entitled to the
Watercourse by Prescription, or otherwise. 2 Cro. 43.122. Dent and Oliver, an
Action for disturbing of him to take Toll, and no Title set forth. Sed
Adjornatur. Vid. Co. Entr. 9. 11.

Day versus Copleston.
IN an Assumpsit for Money, the Defendant pleaded the Statute for the Discharge
of poor Prisoners, and that he had been Discharged by that Act; which provides,
that there shall be no after Prosecution by a Creditor in such case, so as to
subject the Body to Execution; and says, that he can say nothing further in Bar
of the Action.

Upon which the Plaintiff Demurred, and the Defendant joined in the Demurrer,
and Judgment was Entered up for the Plaintiff; but with a Cesset executio quoad
Corpus, etc.

And the Court approved of this way of pleading the Statute; for otherwise they
said, if the Matter had not been disclosed in pleading, they doubted whether
the could have given the Defendant the benefit of the Act, but he would be
driven to his Audita Querela.

Anonymus.
ERror of a Judgment in the King's Bench in Ireland, it was suggested, that the
Plaintiff was in Execution upon the Judgment in Ireland.

And the Court seemed to be of Opinion, that a Habeas Corpus might be sent
thither to remove him; as Writs Mandatory had been awarded to Calais, and now
to Jersey, Guernsey, etc.

Anonymus.
THe Case was, A. Tenant in Tail, Remainder to B. in Tail, etc. A. makes a
Lease for the Life of the Lessee, not warranted by the Statute, and dies,
leaving B. in Remainder his Heir B. letts for 99 years, to commence after the
death of the Tenant for Life, reserving Rent; and then the Tenant for Life
surrenders to B. upon Condition, and dies; B. suffers a Recovery with single
Voucher, and dies; the Lessee for years enters; the Heir of B. distrains for
the Rent, and the Lessee brings a Replevin; and upon an Avowry, and Pleadings
thereupon, this Case was disclosed to the Court of Common Bench, and Judgment
given there for the Avowant, and Error thereupon brought in this Court.

For the Plaintiff in the Error, it was Argued, That the Lease being derived
out of a Reversion in Fee, which was Created in A. upon the Discontinuance for
Life, and the New Fee vanishing by the Surrender of the Tenant for Life, (for
it was urged, he was in his Remitter, although the taking of the Surrender was
his own Act) that the Lease for years by consequence was become void.

Again, It was Objected against the Common Recovery, that the Tenant in Tail,
and a Stranger which had nothing in the Estate, were made Tenants to the
Praecipe, and therefore no good Recovery.

Again, In case B. were not remitted after acceptance of the Surrender, then he
was Seized by force of the Tail, and so no good Recovery, being with single
Voucher.

On the other side it was Argued to be no Remitter, because the acceptance of
the Surrender was his own Act, and the Entry was taken away. But admitting it
were a Remitter, because by the Surrender the Estate for Life (which was the
Discontinuance) was gone, and it was no more than a Discontinuance for Life:
For if Tenant in Tail letts for Life, and after grants the Reversion in Fee; if
the Lessee for Life dies after the Death of the Tenant in Tail, so that the
Estate was not executed in the Grantee, during the Life of the Tenant in Tail,
the Heir shall immediately Enter upon the Grantee of the Reversion. Co. Litt.
It seems also to be stronger against the Remitter in this case, because it is
not Absolute, but only Conditional. However the Lease may be good by Estoppel;
for it appears to have been by Indenture; and if the Lessor cannot avoid the
Lease, the Lessee shall without question be subject to the Rent.

But it was Objected against the Estoppel, that here an Interest passes, and
the Lease was good for a time: As if the Lessee for Ten years makes a Lease for
Twenty years, and afterward purchases the Reversion, it shall bind him for no
more than Ten.

To which Pemberton Chief Justice said, The difference is, where the party that
makes the Estate, has a legal Estate, and where a Defeasible Estate only; for
in the latter a Lease may work by Estoppel, though an Interest passed, so long as
the Estate (out of which the Lease was derived) remained undefeated.

As to the Recovery, it was held clearly good, although a Stranger that had
nothing in the Land, was made Tenant to the Praecipe with the Tenant in Tail;
for the Recompense in Value shall go to him that lost the Estate, and being a
Common Assurance, it is to be favorably Expounded. Et Adjornatur.

Termino Sancti Hillarij, Anno 33 and 34 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Anonymus.
IN Error upon a Judgment, in Ejectione Firmae in the Common Pleas, where the
Case was, That the Bishop of London was seized injure Episcopatus of a Manor,
of which the Lands in question were held, and time out of mind were demised and
demisable by Copy of Court Roll for Life, in Possession and Reversion; and J.S.
being Copyholder for Life in Reversion, (after an Estate for Life in Ann Pit)
and J.N. being seized of the Manor by Disseisin, J.S. at a Court holden for
the Manor in the name of J. N. surrendered into the Hands of the said J.N. (the
Disseisor Lord,) to the used of the said Lord. Afterward the Bishop of London
entered, and avoided the Disseisin. Ann Pit died, and an Ejectment was brought
by J. S. And it was adjudged in the Common Bench that he had a good Title; and
now upon a Writ of Error in this Court, the Matter in Law was insisted upon by
Pollexfen for the Plaintiff, in the Writ of Error.

That this Surrender to the Disseisor Lord to the Lords own use was good; for
all the Books agree, a Copyholder may Surrender to a Disseisor of the Manor,
to the use of a Stranger, and why not to the Lords own use? As if Lessee for
years be ousted, and he in Reversion disseised, and the Lessee Releases to the
Disseisor, this extinguishes his Term. Here is a complete Disseisin of the
Manor by Attornment of the Freeholders, (without which the Services cannot be
gained) and the Copyholders comeing to the Disseisors Court, and by making
Surrenders, etc. owning him for their Lords tantamounts.

Sergeant Maynard contra. And he insisted, that this Surrender was not good,
for the Disseisor had no Estate in this Land capable of a Surrender; for the
Copyholder for Life continuing in Possession and never having been ousted,
there could be no Disssesin of that. And he endeavored to distinguish it from
a Surrender to a Disseisor Lord to the use of another, for in such Surrenders
the Lord is only an Instrument, and does but as it were assent, and until
admittance the Estate is in the Surrenderer. And he resembled it to the
Attornment of a Tenant, when (e converso) a Seigniory is granted; and he put
Cases upon Surrenders of Leases, that they must be to one that has the
immediate Reversion, as an under Lessee for part of the Term cannot Surrender
to the first Lessor; and he cited a Case of Lessee for years, Remainder for
Life, Remainder in Fee to a Stranger, he that had the Fee enfeoffed the Tenant
for years by Deed and made Livery; and the Conveyance held void, for it could
not work by Livery to the Tenant for years, who was in Possession before; and a
Surrender it could not be, because of the intermediate Estate for Life; and it
could not work as a Grant for want of Attornment. He said it had been commonly
received, that a Common Recovery cannot be suffered, where the Tail is
expectant upon an Estate for Life, (not made Tenant to the Praecipe) which he
said was true in a Writ of Entry, in the Post which are commonly used. And the
true reason is, because such Writ supposes a Disseisin, (which cannot be when
there is a Tenant for Life in Possession.) But as he said, a Common Recovery in
such case in a Writ of Right would be good.

Pemberton Chief Justice said, his reason of Desseisin would overthrow
Surrenders to the use of a Stranger, for if the Possession of the Copyholder
would preserve it from a Disseisin, then was it pro tempore lopped off, or
severed from the Manor, and then no Surrender could be at all. Et Adjornatur.

Berry versus Bows.
IN an Ejectment upon a Special Verdict, the Case appeared to be this.

Commissioners of Bankrupt had assigned by Indenture the Lands in question to
the Lessor of the Plaintiff, which Indenture was afterward Enrolled: But the
Declaration was upon a Demise made after the Indenture, and before the
Enrolment, and whether that Demise were sufficient to Entile the Lessor of the
Plaintiff, was the general question.

It was first insisted on, that Enrollment of the Deed of Assignment, though to
pass Lands, was not necessary, 2 Co. 26. But that the Court overruled, saying,
that Enrolment is not requisite upon an Assignment of Goods, but of Lands it
is: But then it was said, that after the Deed was Enrolled it shall relate to
the Delivery; and it was compared to a Bargain and Sale, where by the Statute
of H. 8. of Enrolments, nothing passes till the Deed be Enrolled; but then it
relates 2 Instit. 675, Bargainee sells before Enrolment, the subsequent
Enrolment makes it good; so if the Bargainee suffers a Recovery before
Enrolment, he is a good Tenant to the Praecipe, by relation, ibidem: And this
is confirmed by the common practice. So if at Common Law a Recognizance be
acknowledged before a Judge, (as any Judge of the Courts at Westminster may
take a Recognizance) and afterward he causes it to be Recorded, it binds the
Land from the time of the Caption, Hob. 196. If Land be conveyed to the King by
Deed Enrolled, it binds from the time of the executing of the Deed, although the
Enrolment be sometime after.

Sanders contra. Here the Commissioners are under a Power given to them by the
Statute of Bankrupts, and they must execute that Power in all Circumstances
before it become effectual. In the case of Enrolment of a Bargain and Sale the
Deed it self passes the use, and the Statute of Enrolments obstructs the
operation of it till Enrolment; but when that is done it passes by the Deed.
Again, here needs no relation to avoid the mischief of mean Assignments from
the Bankrupt, because he is restrained from the time of his first Act of
Bankruptcy. And on the other side the mischief would be very great, if there
should be a relation from the Enrolment, in regard the Statute limits no time
for the doing of it, so that it may be seven years after; and if this should
relate to punish Mesne Trespasses, the inconvenience would be very great, for
such Trespassers are, until the Enrolment, exposed to the Actions of the
Bankrupt. As to the Case of the Recognizance, the Caption is a judicial Act and
the principal, and so binds from the time. And in the case of granting to the
King by Deed enrolled, the reason is, because the King shall not receive any
prejudice by the Laches of his Officer in neglecting to Enrol the Deed. But
generally in Cases at Common Law there is no relation, as in Case of Feoffment
and Livery, but stronger in Case of a Grant of Reversion, where the Attornment
is but the assent of the Tenant; yet it shall not relate to the Grant. It would
be hard, if a Relation should be admitted to make a Man liable to Trespass. It
has been much doubted, whether a Bargainee before an actual Entry, can maintain
an Action of Trespass.

Curia. The Case of Bellingham and Alsop, although it was said to be reversed,
and the authority is stirred in Iseham and Morrices Case, 3 Cro. Yet it has
been since taken for good Law in the main point, where Executors sell by an
authority given by Will, the Vendee is in the per from the Devisor, but here in
Post the and by the Statute. It were very inconvenient to admit of Relation,
because no time prefixed for the Enrolment. Sed Adjornatur.

Afterward Judgment was given for the Defendant.

Anonymus.
UPon a Writ of Error out of an inferior Court, in an Action upon the Case,
upon an Agreement to Assign over a Term, which the Defendant had in him for
four years. Upon Non Assumpsit a Special Verdict was found, that the Agreement
was made, but not put into Writing, and they found the Clause in the Act of 29
Car. 2. of Frauds and Perjuries, (viz.) No Action to be brought upon any
Contract or Sale of Lands, etc. or any Interest in or concerning them, etc.
Upon which Special Verdict found, it was adjudged for the Plaintiff, and now
Error was assigned in the Matin Law, that this Contract was within the Act to
be put in Writing: But it was objected, that the Statute extended only to
Interests created de novo out of an Estate, and not to an Assignment.

Curia contra, And held the Case to be plain within the words of the Act, and
so the Judgment was reversed.

Anonymus.
IN Error to Reverse a Judgment given in an inferior Court.

First, Because it is said Cur' tent' apud Guildhalld' Burgi, etc. and not said,
that the Guildhal was within the Jurisdiction of the Court. Sed non allocatur,
for that shall be intended.

Secondly; The Damages given by the Jury were 3 l 19 s and Costs 6 d and so
much for Costs de incremento adjud', and nothing said of the 6 d

Sed non allocatur, because damna per Jurator' assess' includes all, and the
other is but miscomputation, and the Costs awarded de incremento necessarily
implies the 6 d Costs before included. Vid. Ante Paschae, 31 Car. 2.

Anonymus.
IN an Action upon the Case the Plaintiff declared, That the Defendant did take
out a Latitat 21 Januarij, 32 Regni, ac etiam Billae, etc. whereas he owed him
nothing.

Upon Not guilty pleaded a Special Verdict was found, that the Latitat was
Test 28 Novembris, 32 Car. Regis, but was really taken out 21 Januarij, 32
Regis. Et si pro Quaere, etc.

Holt argued upon this, that by Law it must be said to be taken out the 28 of
November, when the Test is, Yelv. 130. Debt upon a Bond bearing date the 30 of
December, The Defendant demands Oyer of the Condition which was to perform
Covenants; and says, though it were dated the 30 of December; yet it was
deliberat' primo die Feb' and no breach since. If the Plaintiff replies and
agrees with the Defendant it is a Departure, because he had declared of a
precedent Date, which implies the Delivery.

But it is objected, That the Jury are not estopped to find the Truth.

I answer, Where the Parties impleading have agreed a Point certain, the Jury
is estopped to find the contrary.

Pemberton Chief Justice, we know the course of the Court is to Test Latitats
taken out in Vacation of the Term preceding; and the course of a Court is the
Law of the Court. He might have declared, That the Defendant Sued out a Latitat
the 21 of January, Test the 28 of November preceding, and if he be not
estopped to declare fo, surely the Jury may find the whole matter. And so
Judgment was given pro Quer.

Termino Paschae, Anno 34 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Clayton versus Gillam.
IN Trespass for breaking and entering of his Close, and Feeding, etc. and
laying thereon certain pieces of Timber, etc. Et continuando Transgressionem
praed'.

After Verdict for the Plaintiff it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that one
of the Trespasses, (viz.) The laying of Timber could not be with a Continuando.

But it was resolved by the Court, that continuando transgressionem praed'
shall be referred only to the Trespasses, which may properly be said with a
continuando. But if the continuando had been expressly laid for that Trespass,
all would have been naught; as it was resolved in a Case in this Court, between
Letchford and Elliot, 16 Car. 2.

The Earl of Shaftsbury versus Cradock.
IN an Action of Scandalum Magnatum for saying, That the Earl was a Traitor,
etc. The Action being laid in London where the words were supposed to be
spoken: It was moved in behalf of the Defendant, that the Venue might be
changed into some other Country, and Affidavits were read, that the Plaintiff
had a great interest in the City, and an intimacy with the present Sheriffs, so
that the Defendant could not expect an indifferent Trial there, and thereupon
the Court did think fit to take the Cause out of London, and gave the Earl the
Election of any other County; but he refused to Try it elsewhere, and would
rather let the Action fall.

Curtis versus Inman.
IN Debt for the Penalty forfeited by the Statute of 5 Eliz. for using the
Trade of a Grocer, having not been Bound an Apprentice.

It was moved, that the Action lies not in this Court, because 21 Jac. cap. 4.
Enacts, That Actions popular shall be brought before Justices of Assize, of the
Peace, etc. But a Case was cited, which was adjudged in this Court, Hill. 20
and 21 Car. 2. between Barns and Hughes (which see before,) that such Action
would lie. But the Court notwithstanding in this Case said, they would hear
Arguments.

The Earl of Shaftsbury versus Graham. and al.
IN an Action upon the Case, in the nature of a Conspiracy the Declaration was,
That the Defendants did conspire to indict the Plaintiff of High Treason, and
for that purpose did Solicit one Wilkinson; and endeavored to Suborn him to
give false Testimony against the said Earl, and an Indictment was offered at
the Sessions at the Old Baily in London, by the Defendant in pursuance of the
said Conspiracy, which Indictment the Grand Jury there found Ignoramus, etc.

It was moved in behalf of the Defendants, that whereas the Conspiracy was in
the Declaration alleged to be in London; that the Court would change the
Venue, and an Affidavit of the Defendants was produced, That the Conspiracy
alleged in the Declaration, if there were any such, was in Surry, and not in
London.

(Note, Wilkinson at the time of the supposed Conspiracy was a Prisoner in the
Kings Bench,) and Affidavits were produced likewise to show, that the Plaintiff
had such Interest with the present Sheriffs of London, that an indifferent Jury
was not like to be returned, and that several Persons named to be material
Witnesses for the Defendant, durst not come to the Trial if it were in London,
for fear of their Lives, in regard they had been so affronted and abused, when
they were produced to prove the before mentied Indictment at the Old Baily, and
several other matters were alleged. But it was insisted upon by the Counsel
for the Earl. That,

First, The Venue uses not to be changed in Case of a Peer, who is one of the
Comites Regis, and shall not be forced to Travel into another County, to try
his Case as a Common Person.

Secondly, That the present Case was local, (viz) The preferring the Indictment
at the Old Baily, and where the Cause of Action arises in two Counties, the
Plaintiff has his Election to bring it in either, 7 Co. Bulwers Case.

But the Court declared that they were satisfied, that no indifferent Trial
could be had in London; they remembered they were affronted themselves, when
they were at the Old Baily upon the before mentioned Indictment: And they
resolved, that they had a power to alter the Venue in the case of a Peer, as it
had been done about six years since in a Scandalum Magnatum, brought by the
Earl of Salisbury in this Court. And also they said, that the Cause of Action
here was Transitory, (viz.) The conspiring, and that the preferring of the
Indictment was but in aggravation of Damages, and the Action would lie although
none had been offered, or if preferred by other Persons than the Conspirators.

It Is true, when the matter arises in several plates the Plaintiff has
Election, but if there be like to be no indifferent Trial in the place where it
is laid, it is usual with this Court to change the Venue. But the Court said,
they would not confine the Plaintiff to Surry, if he could show them cause that
that was not an indifferent County Vid. 42 Ed. 3. 14.

Termino Sancti Michaelis, Anno 34 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Denison versus Ralphson.
IN an Action upon the Case the Plaintiff declared, That the Defendant in
consideration of a Sum of Money paid by the Plaintiff, did promise to deliver
to him ten Pots of good and Merchandizable Pot Ashes, and that not regarding
his Promise, and to defraud him he delivered him ten Pots of Ashes not
Merchandizable, but mixed with Dirt, etc. And declared also, that pro quadam
pecuniae summa, etc. the Defendant vendidit to the Plaintiff ten other Pots of
Ashes, Warrantizando, etc. that they were good and Merchandizable, and that he
delivered them bad, and not Merchandizable, knowing them to be naught; and to
this Declaration the Defendant Demurred.

And it was argued by Sanders, That here were Causes of Action of several
Natures put into one Declaration, and they required several Pleas, (viz.) Non
Assumpsit, and Not guilty, and therefore ought not to be joined.

Thompson for the Plaintiff, cited a Case between Matthews and Hoskin. An
Action against a Common Carrier, and declared upon the Custom of the Realm, and
that he had not delivered the Goods; and declared also in a Trover and
Conversion upon the same matter, and after Verdict upon motion in Arrest of
Judgment, the Action was adjudged well brought, 16 and 17 Car. 2. Hill. in this
Court. So an Action against one for twenty shillings, upon the Hire of an
Horse, and declared further, that he abused him; and held good.

Curia. Those Cases were after Verdict. Causes upon Contract which are in the
Right, and Causes upon a Tort cannot be joined, for they do not only require
several Pleas, but there is several Process, the one Summons, Attachment, etc.
the other Attachment etc. These upon the Contract lie for and against
Executors, the other not; but these seem to be both upon the Contract, (viz.)
That upon the Warranty as well as the other, though the Declaration says,
knowing them to be naught, yet the knowledge need not to be proved in Evidence.
Debt upon a Bond, and a mutuatus may be joined in one Action; yet there must be
several Pleas for Nil debet, which is proper to the one, will not serve in the
Action upon the Bond. Sed Adjornatur.

Termino Sancti Hillarij, Anno 34 and 35 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Anonymus.
A Quo Warranto was brought against diverse persons of the City of Worcester,
why they claimed to be Aldermen, etc. of the said Corporation. The Cause came
to be tried at the Bar, and a Challenge was made to the Jury in behalf of the
Defendants, for that the Jury men were not Freeholders.

The Court said, that for Juries within Corporate Towns, it has has been
held, that the Statutes that have been made, requiring that Jurymen should have
so much Freehold, do not extend to such places, for if so, there might be a
failer of Justice, for want of such Jurymen so qualified; but then to maintain
the Challenge it was said, by the Common Law Jurymen were to be Freeholders.

But the Court overruled the Challenge; but at the importunity of the Counsel,
they allowed a Bill of Exceptions, and so a Verdict passed against the
Defendants; and afterward it was moved in Arrest of Judgment upon the Point:
But the Court would not admit the Matter to be Debated before them (though diverse
Presidents of like nature were offered) because they said, they had declared
their Opinions before, and the Redress might be upon a Writ of Error.

Termino Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno 35 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Anonymus.
A Motion for a Prohibition to a Suit in the Ecclesiastical Court for a
Churchwarden's Rate, suggesting that they had pleaded, That it was not made
with the Consent of the Parishioners, and that the Plea was refused.

The Court said, That the Churchwardens (if the Parish were Summoned, and
refused to meet or make a Rate) might make one alone for the Repairs of the
Church, if needful; because that if the Repairs were neglected, the
Churchwardens were to be Cited, and not the Parishioners; and a Day was given
to show Cause, why there should not go to a Prohibition.

Termino Sancti Michaelis, Anno 35 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Gamage's Case.
ERror out of the Court of the Grand Sessions, where in an Ejectment the Case
was upon Special Verdict upon the Will of one Gamage, who devised his Lands in
A. to his Wife for Life, Item his Lands in B. to his Wife for Life, and also
his Lands which he purchased of C. to his Wife for Life, and after the decease
of his Wife he gave the said Lands to one of his Sons, and his Heirs.

And the Question was, Whether the Son should have all the Lands devised to the
Wife, or only those last mentioned? And it was Adjudged in the Grand Sessions
that all should pass. And upon Error brought it was Argued, that they were
Devises to the Wife in distinct and separate Sentences, and therefore his said
Lands should be referred only to the last.

On the other side it was said, that the word Said should not be referred to
the last Antecedent, but to all. If a man conveys Land to A. for Life,
Remainder to B. in Tail, Remainder to C. in forma praedict', the Gift to C. is
void, 1 Inst. 20. b. It is agreed, if he said All the said Lands to his Son and
his heirs, it would have extended to the whole: This is the same, because
Indefinitum equipollet universali. Et Adjornatur.

Herring versus Brown.
IN an Ejectment upon a Special Verdict the Case was, Tenant for Life, with
several Remainders over, with a Power of Revocation, Levied a Fine, and then by
a Deed found to be Sealed ten Days after, declared the Uses of the Fine, which
Deed had the Circumstances required by the Power. The Question in the Case was,
Whether the Fine had extinguished the Power?

It was Argued that it had not, because the Deed and Fine shall be but one
Conveyance, and the use of a Fine or Recovery may be declared by a subsequent
Deed, in the 9 Co. Downam's Case, And a Case was Cited which was in this Court
in my Lord Hale's time, between Garrett and Wilson, where Tenant for Life, with
Remainders over, had a Power of Revocation, and by a Deed under his Hand and
Seal Covenanted to levy a Fine, and declared it should be to certain Uses; and
afterward the Fine was Levied accordingly. This was held to be a good
execution of the Power, and limitation of the new Uses, and the Deed and Fine
taken as one.

On the other side it was Argued, That the Deed was but an Evidence to what
Uses the Fine was intended, and the Power was absolutely revoked by the Fine.
Suppose he in Remainder had Entered for the Forfeiture before this Deed, should
the Defendant have defeated his Right? Et Adjornatur. Postea.

Hodson versus Cook.
IN an Action upon the Case for commencing of an Action against him in an
Inferior Court, where the Cause of Action did arise out of the Jurisdiction.

After a Verdict for the Plaintiff, upon Not Guilty it was moved in Arrest of
Judgment, That it was not set forth that the Defendant did know, that the Place
where the Action arose was out of the Jurisdiction, which it would be hard to
put the Plaintiff to take notice of.

On the other side it was said, that the party ought to have a Recompense for
the Inconvenience he is put to, by being put to Bail perhaps in a Case where
Bail is not required above, and such like Disadvantages which are not in a Suit
brought here; and the Plaintiff ought at his peril to take notice. However to
help by the Verdict.

And of that Opinion were Jeffreys Lord Chief Justice, Holloway and Walcot; but
Withens contra.

The Court said, that it could not be assigned for Error in Fact that the Cause
arose out of the Jurisdiction, because that is contrary to the Allegation of
the Record, neither is the Officer punishable that executes Process in such
Action; but an Action lies against the party. And so it was said to be resolved
in a Case between Cowper and Cowper, Pasch. 18 Car. 2. in Scac. when my Lord
Chief Baron Hale sat there.

Anonymus.
AN Indictment of Perjury for Swearing before a Justice of the Peace, that J.
S. was present at a Conventicle, or Meeting for Religious Worship, etc.

It was moved to quash it, because it did not appear to be a Conventicle,
(viz.) That there was above the number of Five, and so the Justice of the Peace
had no power to take an Oath concerning it, and then it could be no Perjury. To
which the Lord Chief Justice said, That Conventicles were unlawful by the
Common Law, and the Justices may punish Unlawful Assemblies. And he seemed to
be of Opinion, that a man might be Indicted of Perjury in a voluntary and Extra
judicial Oath; and cited a late Case, where one had stole away a man's Daughter,
and went before a Justice of the Peace and Swore that he had the Fathers
Consent, and this in order to get a License to marry her; and he was Indicted,
and Convicted thereupon.

And all the Court said, that it was not the course to quash Indictments of
Perjury, Nuisance, or the like; but to put the party to plead to them.

Termino Paschae, Anno 36 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Duncomb versus Walter.
IN an Indebitat' Assumpsit by an Assignee of Commissioners upon the Statute of
Bankrupts, upon Non assumpsit a Special Verdict was found, upon which the Case
appeared to be thus:

One Staly was Arrested by an Executor of his Creditor, 6 Sept which was before
Probat of the Will, and within two or three days after he paid 1000 l to the
Defendant, to whom he stood Indebted in such Sum, and after the 18th of
September he yielded himself to Prison upon the said Arrest.

The Question was, Whether the Defendant should be obliged to Refund this Money
which was paid unto him, as aforesaid?

First, Whether the Arrest before the Probat was a good Arrest? It was said, If
an Executor has a Reversion in a Term upon which a Rent is reserved, and
Distrains, etc. he may avow for the Rent before the Probat. Vid. 1 Roll. 917.
tit. Executors, where an Executor brings an Action before Probat; yet if he
shows the Probat upon the Declaration it is well enough.

Secondly, Whether, when he yields himself to Prison, it shall not relate to
the first Arrest, to make him a Bankrupt from that time? This depends upon the
Statute of 21 Jac. cap. 19. where it is said, that in the Cases of Arrest and
lying in Prison, he shall be adjudged a Bankrupt from the time of his first
Arrest.

Object. This Relation does not prejudice Strangers?

Answ. Dame Hales's Case, Pl. Com. 293. If one gives another a mortal Wound,
and then sells his Land, and the person dies; there shall be such Relation as
to make the Land forfeit from the first Stroke.

Note, This Case came by Writ of Error out of the Common Pleas, where Judgment
was given for Walter; and the said Judgment was affirmed in this Court
principally upon the point, of Relation: For the Court said, that it would be a
great mischief if it should relate to the first Arrest, as to the payment of
Money to Strangers.

Termino Sancti Hillarij, Anno 1 and 2 Jac. II. In Banco Regis.
Herring versus Brown. Quod vid. ante Michaelmas 35 Car. 2.
THe Case upon a Special Verdict was to this effect; That J. S. being Seized in
Fee had made a Conveyance of his Estate to the use of himself for Life, with
diverse Remainders over to other persons, with a power of Revocation by Writing
under his Hand and Seal, etc.

Afterward the said J. S. having a purpose to Revoke the said Uses, and make a
new Settlement of his Estate, he levied a Fine, and after the Fine he made a
Deed, wherein he expressed that he Revoked the former Uses, and so proceeded to
a new Limitation by that Deed, and declared that the Fine by him limited should
be to the Uses of the said Deed.

The sole Question was, Whether the Fine had extinguished his Power, and by
consequence forfeited his Estate; or, Whether the Fine and Deed should be taken
as one Conveyance, and so be a good execution of his Power, and new limitation
of the Uses?

And after many solemn Arguments it was Resolved by the Chief Justice Herbert,
Holloway and Wright, that the Fine was an extinguishment of his Power, and that
the Deed came too late, contrary to the Opinion of Justice Withens. Vido ante.

ADDENDA.
Termino Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno 26 Car. II. In Banco Regis.
Pibus versus Mitford. Intratur Trin. 20 Car. 2. Rot. 703.
IN an Ejectment the Jury find a Special Verdict to this effect, (viz.) That
Michael Mitford was seized of the Lands in question, and of diverse other Lands
in Fee, and having Issue Robert by one Venture, and Ralph by Jane his second
Wife, did (23 Jan. 21 Jac.) by Indenture Covenant to stand seized of some of
the Lands to the use of himself for Life, Remainder to Trustees for years for
several purposes, Remainder to Jane his second Wife for Life, Remainder to
Ralph and the Heirs Male of his Body. And as to the Lands in question, he
Covenants to stand seized To the use of his Heirs Male begotten, or to be
begotten on the Body of his second Wife, and died. And then the Jury made this
Special Conclusion, If any Use did arise by the Deed to Ralph, then they find
for the Defendant; and if not, they find for the Plaintiff.

This Case was Argued several times at the Bar, and now the Judges delivered
their Opinions seriatim.

Wild Justice for the Defendant:

We are to give our Opinions upon a Deed of Uses, made for the Provision of
younger Children not otherwise provided for: But if the Case were not so, It is
a safe way, when the Words are ambiguous, to follow the Intention of the party
appearing in the Deed. I shall not maintain, that Ralph is a Purchaser, and so
make this an Executory Use: I agree, a man cannot either by Conveyance at
Common Law, by Limitation of Uses, or Devise, make his right Heir a Purchaser;
I agree also Griswold's Case in Dyer 156. and if this Case had operated by
Transmutation of Possession, this Limitation to the Heirs of the Body of the
Covenantor had been void, and no Use should have risen: But here, in the Case
of a Covenant to stand seized, nothing moves out of the Covenantor, he retains
the Land and directs the Use, and keeps sufficient in him to maintain this Use.
There Is a great difference between a Conveyance at the Common Law, and a
Conveyance to Uses: At the Common Law, the Heir cannot take where the Ancestor
could not; but otherwise it is in case of Uses, 2 Rolls 794. and so is Wood's
Case, 1 Co. 99. a. cited in Shelly's Case.

This I say, to show, that the Intent of the Parties shall be the Guide, and
that there is a difference between Conveyances at the Common Law, and
Conveyances to Uses. Horwood's Opinion in Hussey's Case, 37 H. 8. comes to our
Case; There Is no great difference between a Covenant to stand seized, and a
Feoffment to Uses.

I will not Argue to prove, that this Deed shall enure as an Executory Use,
because it is against a Rule in Law taken by my Lord Hobart, and so Agreed
before his time: But here Ralph is Tenant in Tail, Michael his Father being
Tenant for Life, Remainder to his Heirs Male begotten on the Body of Jane his
second Wife. For the Law, to preserve this Limitation to the use of his Heirs
Male, etc. will by Implication create an Estate for Life in Michael; because
the Intent of the parties appears, that it should be so. There Is no great
difference between the Construction of a Deed of Uses and a Will, 13 H. 7. The
Wife takes an Estate for Life by Implication, where the Land is devised to the
eldest Son after her decease, Manning and Andrew's Case in 1 Leon. 259. The
Reason of these Cases, is the fulfilling of the Intention of the Parties; and
here this Limitation cannot be made good by way of a Future Use, nor by any
other way, but only by creating of an Estate for Life in Michael the Father by
Implication, and this is according to the nature of a Covenant to stand seized:
For the Use is not to pass out of the Covenantor till the proper time for the
subsequent Estate to commence. As to my Lord Paget's Case, 'twas his Intention
to have the Use during his Life. And my Lord Coke was certainly very well
satisfied with the Resolution in Fenwick and Mitford's Case, when he wrote his
Institutes; for he Argued before to the contrary, as appears by the Report of
that Case in Moor.

Rainsford Justice to the same Intent.

If no Use rises immediately to Ralph; yet if a Use rises by the Deed so that
he has the Land any way, be it by descent from his Father, it is within the
Conclusion of the Verdict.

By the scope of the Conveyance it appears, that it was intended, that Robert
should never have his Land till Twelve hundred Pound was paid for the provision
of younger Children; so that if Robert should have it, it would be against the
Intention of Michael.

There are two Reasons and Grounds in Law, by which we may make this Deed agree
with the Intention of the Parties.

First, Because it is in the Case of an Estate Tail, ubi voluntas donatoris
observari debet.

Secondly, It is in a Conveyance settled by way of Use, and in Cases of Uses the
Intention of the parties ought to be pursued; And this is in Case of a Use that
rises by Covenant to stand seized, which makes the Case the stronger.

And I conceive this is not a void Limitation, but such an one as gives an
Estate to Ralph. In speaking to which I shall observe what my Lord Coke in the
1 Inst. 23. says, viz. That so much of the Use as the Owner of the Land does
not dispose of, remains in him, etc. and so in Cownden and Clark's Case in Hob.
30. And this is the Reason of Bingham's Case, 1 Co. 91.

Now here when Michael Covenanted to stand seized to the Use of his Heirs Male
on the Body of his second Wife begotten, I conceive he shall retain the Land as
parcel of his ancient Use during his Life; for non est Haeres viventis,
according to Archer's Case, 1 Co. And that Michael shall retain an Estate for
Life is proved by my Lord Paget's Case, 1 Co. 154. Dyer 310. N. 79. 1 Co.
Chudleigh's Case 129. 2 Rolls 788. 21 H. 7. 18.

From my Lord Paget's Case (upon which I shall rely) and the other Cases it
appears, that were there is a Limitation to one after the death of another, the
Covenantor shall retain the Land during the Life of the other; and here in our
Case, this Estate not taking effect till after the Death of Michael, he shall
retain the Estate, and shall be Tenant for Life of the old Use.

Now the Question is, Whether Ralph shall take by Descent, or Purchase? And I
conceive this Estate for Life, with the Remainder in Tail, makes but one Estate
Tail in Michael, and that he becomes Tenant in Tail, and so Ralph shall take as
Heir in Tail. I shall not trouble my self, whether Ralph may take here as a
Purchaser because in Cownden and Clark's Case in Hob. it is Resolved, that he
cannot take as Heir Male of the Body by Purchase; because all the words are not
verified in him, for he is not Heir.

I shall rely upon the First Point, That here is an Estate Tail executed in
Michael. For when an Estate for Life is in the Auncestor by way of Retainer,
and an Estate is afterward limited to his Heirs, this is within the Rule put
in Shelley's Case in 1 Co. where the Auncestor takes an Estate of Freehold, and
by the same Conveyance an Estate is limited to his Heirs, Mediately or
Immediately, they are Words of Limitation, and not of Purchase; because the
Heir is part of his Father.

Our Case is stronger that Fenwick and Mitfords Case: Its true, the same Reason
for that Case is not given by Anderson and More, which is given by my Lord
Coke, More 437. There the Reason is, because the Limitation to the right Heirs
is merely void; here Michael has an Estate in Tail of the ancient Use,
therefore it is not necessary for the Law to create an Estate for Life.

Obj. That this cannot be an Estate Tail executed in Michael, because the
Estate for Life is not by the same Limitation, but by Construction of Law.

But my Lord Coke says in Fenwick and Mitfords Case, 1 Inst. 22. b. that there
is no difference where the Estate is created by Law, and where by the Deed. 1
Anderson 259. and the Law retaining an Estate in Michael for Life, our Case is
the same, as if the Estate had been limited to him, with the Remainder to his
Heirs Male begotten on his second Wife, which would be an Estate Tail executed
in Michael, and would have descended to Ralph.

Twisden Justice for the Plaintiff.

I hold there is no Use raised to Ralph by this Deed. We are here in the
construction of a Deed, and not of a Will; It may be an Estate should be raised
in such a case by a Will, although my Lord Hobart is of a contrary Opinion. I
agree, the Case of Hodgkinson and Wood, Cro. Car. 23. but it cannot be argued
from thence, that it shall be so in a Deed, for a Devise is not to take effect
till after the Death of the Devisor, and then it is apparent, that he is Heir
Male of his Body. It has been agreed, that Heirs Male of the Body are words of
purchase: It is plain, that Ralph cannot take as Special Heir unless by
Purchase, and that he cannot do, because he who shall take by virtue of such a
Limitation ought to be Heir as well as Issue Male; and Ralph here cannot take
by virtue of the Statute de Donis Conditionalibis because none can take as
Special Heir, but where his Ancestor took before; and therefore this Limitation
is utterly void.

To make this Limitation good, diverse ways have been urged.

First, That this Deed has an operation by way of returning of the Use, and it
has been compared to my Lord Pagets Case which differs from it; here cannot be
any part of the old Use in Michael, for if he has an Estate for Life, it ought
to be a new Use; It cannot be a returning Use, for the Limitation to the Heirs
Male of the Body of Jane the second Wife is void, and it cannot be returning
where the Use is not settled in any Person. I agree, my Lord Pagets Case,
because there the Estate was vested in William Paget, and the other Use
returned by operation of Law, and the Estate settled could not be divested; but
here the Limitation to the Heirs Males being void, the ancient Use remained yet
in Michael, for nothing was out of him, he having limited a thing which cannot
be. And as to a returning Use, though all be done in an instant, yet there is a
priority of time in the Eye of the Law, for it ought to vest first in him in
Remainder, and then Return; but here nothing vests in the Remainder.

Secondly, It has been urged, That it shall be made good by Implication of
Law, and so shall amount to a Covenant to stand seized to the Used of the
Covenantor for Life, etc. and the rather, as it has been said by Wild, because
Uses are guided by Equity.

But I answer, we are here in case of a Deed, where an Estate shall not be
raised by Implication, as it shall by a Will, Cro. Car. Seagood ad Hone 366. A
Deed differs greatly from a Will, for if a Man Surrenders Copyhold Land to two,
equally to be divided, they are Joynt-tenants; but such a Devise would have
made them Tenants in Common. Admit in some Case an Estate shall be raised by
Implication in a Deed; yet it shall not be so here, for it would be to the
disinheriting the Heir: As to the case of 13 H. 7. I agree, that a Devise to
the Eldest Son, after the Death of the Wife, gives an Estate for Life to the
Wife; but otherwise it would be upon such a Devise to the Younger Son, for
there the Eldest Son, and not the Wife should have the Estate in the mean time,
Cro. Jac. Horton and Horton 57. We are not herein Favorabili materia, and
therefore no construction shall be made, which does not appear by the words. It
has been strongly urged, that this being by way of Use (which is a matter of
Equity) shall be favored. Admit it; yet it shall be guided by the Common Law,
for aequitas sequitur legem. There never shall be a Settlement by way of Use,
to make one capable who is not capable by the Common Law. I do not see any
difference between a Feoffment to Uses, and a Covenant to stand seized; for if
a Feoffment be made to the use of one for Life, the Use shall return which is
not disposed of, as well as upon a Covenant to stand seized.

Thirdly, It has been urged, if these severally cannot support this Limitation;
yet the intention operating with the Deed, will both together make an Estate
for Life in Michael. But I do not see his intent here to have it for Life; the
intention even in a Will, which is much stronger, ought to be collected out of
the words of the Will. Cro. Car. Spirt and Bence 368. agreed by the whole
Court, that words in a Will ought to have an apparent intent to disinherit an
Heir, and here there is not any apparent intent, but rather to the contrary;
for of some Lands Michael Covenants to stand seized to the Use of himself for
Life, Remainder, etc. but of the Lands in question, he makes a difference in
the Limitation: And the words of the Deed are to be considered, He Covenants to
stand seized to the Uses, mentioned, declared and limited in the Deed, and if
Michael shall have an Estate for Life, he must have it by operation of Law.
There was a like case between Flavil and Ventroise in the Common Pleas, in
which the Court was divided; but the same Point came afterward in question, in
the Case of Mr. Tape of Norfolk, and it was adjudged to be the ancient Use: And
no Case can be shown, that the Law will create an Estate in the Covenantor,
where the Use is not vested in any Person, but the ancient Use remains in him.

As to the Cases cited on the other side, I have answered my Lord Pagets's Case
already. And as to my Lord Cokes Case, 1 Inst. 22. b. I agree the Use returns,
and the Son is in by descent; and so it was adjudged in Fenwick and Mitfords
Case there cited: But the Paraphrase he makes there I do not understand; It is
said there, when the Limitation is made to his right Heirs, and right Heirs he
cannot have during his Life, the Law does create an Use in him during his Life:
Wherefore is this said? to make the Heir in by descent? No doubt without this
he is in by descent, and so was the Judgment in that Case; for what Reason then
should there be an Estate for Life raised by the Law, to be merg'd by the Fee
as soon as raised?

And there it is said, Till the future use come in Esse, I do not conceive then
where it is so long as the Father lives, and what he means by the Future Use, I
do not know, for it always was in Esse, and never was out of the Feoffor, and
this was so adjudg'd in that Case of Fenwick and Mitford, and not the
construction of my Lord Coke: And it is strange, that no other Reports should
mention his construction.

Hale Chief Justice for the Defendant.

If Ralph takes either by Descent from Michael, or by Purchase, the one way or
the other answers the Verdict, and the Issue is for the Defendant.

I shall divide the Case into two Points.

1. If he takes by Descent?

2. Admitting he does not, If he may take by Purchase, as this Case is I shall
Premise two or three things.

First, It has been agreed, if an Estate for Life be raised to Michael, the
Remainder being to his Heirs Male, of the Body of Jane his second Wife, the
Estate Tail is executed in him; be the Estate for Life raised by Implication,
or express Limitation.

Secondly, It is plain quacunque via It be raised, that the Estate was longed
in Michael, till Ralph the Son be in a capacity to take it, either by Descent
or Purchase; for be it part of the ancient Use, or a new Use, it ought to be in
Michael during his Life, for there is nothing to bring it out of him.

Thirdly, In all Cases touching Uses, there is a great difference between a
Feoffment to Uses, a Covenant to stand seized, and a conveyance at the Common
Law. If a Man by Feoffment to uses conveys Land to the use of J.S. for Life; he
may remit the Use to himself, and the Heirs Male of his Body by the same Deed,
and so alter that which was before a Fee simple, and turn it into another
Estate; but if A. gives Land to B. for Life, Remainder to A. and the Heirs,
Male of his Body; because a Man cannot give to himself, the Remainder is void,
for a Man cannot convey to himself by a Conveyance at the Common Law.

These things being premised, I conceive here is an Estate Tail in Michael.

First, Because in this Case the Use returns by operation of Law, and executes
an Estate in Michael for Life, which being conjoined to the Estate limited to
the Heirs Male of his Body, makes an Estate Tail: This Estate for Life rising
by operation of Law, is as strong as if it had been limited to him for his
Life, and after his decease to the Heirs Male of his Body.

Secondly, Because that a Limitation to the Heirs Male of his Body is in
Construction of Law, a Limitation to himself and the Heirs Male of his Body.
There is a great difference, when he who has the Use, limits it to A. for Life,
the Remainder to the Heirs of the Body of B. here no Estate can rise to B.
because nothing moved from him, but where he who has the Estate limits it to
the Heirs Male of his own Body, ut res valeat, he shall have it for his Life.

Thirdly, It is plainly according to the intent of the Parties; the intent
perfectly appears, that the Issue by the second Wife should take, and that
Robert the eldest Son should not take till so much Money be paid; therefore, if
we can by any means serve the intent of the parties, we ought to do it as good
Expositors. For as my Lord Hobart says, Judges in Construction of Deeds do no
harm, if they are astuti in serving the intent of the Parties without violating
any Law.

Obj. Here the Use being never out of Michael, he has the ancient Use which is
the Fee simple, and consequently being the ancient Use, and this being a new
Limitation to the Heirs Male of his Body, the ancient use and the new one
cannot be piec'd, to make an Estate Tail executed in Michael, but it shall be a
Contingent Use (if any) which ought to rise to the Heir Male of his Body, and
so remains the ancient Fee simple. And it has been compared to these Cases. If
a Man Covenants to stand seized to the Use of J.S. or of his Son after his
Marriage, or after the Death of J. D. these are Contingent Limitations, and
there is a Fee simple determinable in the Covenantor to serve the future Uses.

Resp. It Is true, if a Man Covenants to stand seized to such Uses, as that he
leaves a discendible Estate in himself: As if a Man Covenants to stand seized
to the Use of his Son, from and after his Marriage, this is purely a Contingent
Use, because it is possible the Marriage may never take effect, and nothing is
fetched out of the Covenantor; so if he Covenants to stand seized to the Use of
J. S. after 40 years, there is a Fee simple determinable in the Covenantor, and
therefore those Cases are not to be resembled to our Case, where the Estate of
Michael cannot continue longer than his Life. And this without any wrong done
to any Rule of Law, may be turned to a Use for Life, and therefore such
construction shall be.

Object. 2. Here is an Estate to rise by way of Use by a Deed, and not by a
Will, which shall not be by Implication by a Deed.

Resp. Its a certain truth: But we are not here upon raising an Estate by
Implication, but qualifying an Estate that is now in the Father, which by this
new Deed is to be qualified to be an Estate for Life, to preserve the Estate
Tail; so that the Cases of Implication are not to the purpose.

Object. 3. In this Case Michael shall be in of his ancient Estate in Fee
simple which is in him, and not of a new Estate created by Implication of Law;
and it has been compared to the Devise of Land to a Man's Heir, he shall not be
in by the Devise, but of his ancient Estate, that would have descended to him.

Resp. True: But in this Case a Man may qualify his Estate, as in Gilpins
Case, Cro. Ca. 161. Devise to his Heir, upon Condition, that he shall pay his
Debts in a year; the Heir is a Purchasor; so here is a qualification to turn
the Estate of Michael into an Estate for Life, ut res valeat.

Object. 4. Michael had not an Intention to have an Estate for Life, for in the
Limitation of the other Lands, he has limited them expressly to himself for
Life, and if he had intended to have had an Estate for Life in the Lands in
question, he would also have so expressed it.

Resp. The intention will not control the operation of Law; his main intent
was to settle the Lands upon his younger Children, this the Law serves, but not
his secondary intentions; If a Man Covenants to stand seized to the Use of
himself for Life, without impeachment of Wast, and afterward to the Use of the
Heirs Male of his Body, the Law supervenes his intention, and makes him to be
Tenant in Tail. And in our Case there was a necessity to limit the other Lands
to himself for Life, because there was another Estate to intervene the Estate
for Life, and the Estate Tail. The Reason given by my Lord Coke, in Fenwick and
Mitfords Case is plain enough, and it appears that he was of that Opinion
afterward by the Report of Panel and Lanes Case, 13 Jac. in Rolls Rep. 1
part. 238. The Case upon which I shall rely, which has not been answered, is my
Lord Pagets Case, adjudged by all the Judges of England.

Tho. Lord Paget Covenants in consideration of the discharge of his Funerals,
Payment of his Debts and Legacies out of the profits of his Land, and for the
advancement of his Son, Brother and others of his Blood; that he and his Heirs
would stand seized of diverse Manors to the Use of T.F. one of the Covenantees,
for the Life of my Lord Paget, and after his Death to the Use of C. Paget, for
the term of 24 years, and then to the Use of W. Paget his Son in Tail, with
Remainders in over; and afterward the Lord Paget was a^^^nted of Treason. And
it was adjudged, that the Lord Paget himself had an Estate for his Life, for
the Remainder being limited after his Death, the Estate cannot pass out of him
during his Life; and there in Case of a Covenant to stand seized, he himself
has an Estate for Life: And this is not because the Estate returns as my
Brother Twisden has said, but because the Estate was never out of him, and
cannot return either from the Heir or the Covenantee; otherwise, where should
it be during the Life of the Lord Paget, who was attainted? the Book is, that
it was never out of him, but was turned into an Estate for Life; So that now it
is all one, as if he had Covenanted to stand seized to the Use of his eldest
Son after his Death. And the question is, What Estate he has during his Life;
It is adjudged, that he has an Estate for Life, for if there had been a
Contingent Fee simple in the Lord Paget, his Heir could never have had an
Amoveas manus; for if a Man Covenants to stand seized to a Contingent Use, and
afterward is attainted of Treason before the Contingency happen, the
Contingency shall never rise, for the King has the Estate discharged, and the
Use is to rise out of the Estate of the Covenantor; so is Moor, Sir Tho Palmers
Case 815, In Moors Rep. of my Lord Pagets Case, 194. Its said, that W. Paget
had an Amoveas manus for the Estate of the Queen leased by the Death of my Lord
Paget. In Sir Francis Englefeilds Case, Popham 18. n. 7. Its resolved, that no
Use rises, because it is, that it shall Descend, Remain or Come which is
uncertain; but if he had Covenanted, that after his Death he and his Heirs,
would have stood seized to the Use of John, an Use would have resulted to Sir
Francis.

Second Point. I conceive if it be impossible for Ralph to take by Descent,
this would be a Contingent Use in him by Purchase.
The great Objection against this is, that the Limitation is to an Heir, and an
Heir which ought to take by Purchase, ought not to be only Heir of the Body,
etc. but Heir general. Of this I am not well satisfied: I conceive the
Remainder being limited to the Heirs of the Body of Jane, begotten by Michael,
such a Limitation will make a special Heir to serve the turn, and it is not to be
resembled to Shelley's Case. My Reasons are,

First, Because at the Common Law, before the Statute de Donis notice was
taken, that this was a special Heir, and therefore it is no wrong done to make
him here a qualified Heir. In the Statute de Donis it is said, When Lands are
given to Man and his Wife, and the Heirs of their two Bodies begotten.

Secondly, Upon the special penning of the Deed it is apparent, that Michael
took notice, that he had an Heir at Common Law; therefore it cannot be intended,
that he meant here such an Heir that should be Heir general to him; this would
be Contradictio in Adjecto. Litt. Sect. 352. puts this Case. If a Feoffment be
made upon Condition, that the Feoffee shall give the Land to the Feoffor and
his Wife, and the Heirs of their two Bodies begotten; In this Case, if the
Husband dye, living his Wife, before the Estate Tail is granted to them, the
Feoffee ought to make the Estate as near the Condition, and as near the intent
of the Condition as may be, (viz.) To let the Land to the Wife for her Life,
without impeachment of Wast, the Remainder to the Heirs of the Body of the
Husband on her begotten; If the Husband and Wife dye before the Gift made, then
the Feoffee ought to make it to the Issue, and to the Heirs of the Body of his
Father and Mother begotten. Suppose that this had been to a second Wife, and
there had been Issue by a former, the Book of 12 H. 4. 3. says that there it
shall be in another manner; but Litt. says it shall be as near, vid. Litt.
Sect. 22. Morevils Case, Fitzh. Tail 23. 2 Ed. 3. 1. 4. Ed. 3. 50. by all these
Cases it appears, that no regard is had, whether the Son be Heir of the
Husband, if he be Heir of their two Bodies. Therefore it seems, that by this
Limitation Ralph shall take by way of Contingent Remainder: For Heirs of the
Body of the second Wife is a good name of Purchase. I have not read any Case
against this. Hill. 16. or 26 Eliz. there was this Case. A Man taking notice in
his Will, that his Brother (who was dead) had a Son, and that he himself had
three Daughters who were his right and immediate Heirs, he gave them 2000 l and
gave his Land to the Son of his Brother, by the name of his Heir Male.
Provided, If his Daughters troubled his Heir, then the Devise of the 2000 l to
them should be void. And it was resolved, that the Devisor taking notice, that
others were his Heirs, the Limitation to his Brothers Son by the name of Heir
Male was a good name of Purchase; and this agrees with Cownden and Clarks Case,
in Hob.

Wild Justice said, he was of the same Opinion with Hale in this last Point.
And Judgment was given for the Defendant.

Three Learned ARGUMENTS.
One in the Court of King's Bench, BY Sir FRANCIS NORTH, Attorney General; And
Two in the Court of Exchequer, BY Sir MATTHEW HALE, Chief Baron there.
The Argument of Sir Francis North. In Banco Regis.
Potter and Sir Henry North.
IN a Replevin for taking of an Horse in a certain place called the Fenn, at
Milden-Hall in the County of Suffolk; the Defendant makes Cognizance, as
Bailiff to Sir Henry North, and says, That the place Where, etc. contains
Ten thousand Acres of Pasture in Milden-Hall, whereof a certain place called
Delfe is parcel; and that it is Sir Henry North's Freehold, and the Horse was
Damage feasant there, etc.

The Plaintiff Replies, Confessing the Soil to be the Freehold of Sir Henry
Norths; but says, That time whereof, etc. the place Where has been parcel of
the Fenn, and parcel of the Manor of Milden-Hall, of which Sir Henry North is
seized in Fee; and that the Plaintiff was at the time, etc. seized of an
Ancient Message, (one of the Freeholds,) holden of the Manor, by Rents and
Services, and parcel of the said Manor; and that Time out of Mind there were
diverse ancient Freehold Messuages, holden of the said Manor by Rents and
Services, and diverse Copyhold Messuages, parcel of the said Manor, by Custom
of the said Manor, demised and demisable by Copy of Court Rolls of the said
Manor.

And the several Tenants of the said Freehold Tenements being seized in their
Demesne, as of Fee; and they whose Estate they have in the same, Time out of
mind have had, together with the Customary Tenants of the said Customary
Tenements, the sole and several Feeding of 100 Acres of Pasture for all Beasts,
except Hogs, Sheep and Northern Steers, levant and couchant upon their several
Freeholds every year, at all times of the year, as to their several Freeholds
belonging.

And that within the said Manor there is, and Temps d'ont, etc. has been such
a Custom, that the several Tenants of the Customary Messuages, together with
the Freeholders aforesaid, have used and accustomed to have the sole and
several Feeding of the said 100 Acres of Pasture for all their Beasts, except
Sheep, Hogs, and Northern Steers, levant and couchant upon their several
Copyholds every year, at all times in the year, tanquam ad seperal' Tenementa
customar' spectant' and pertinent'; and the Plaintiff being seized put in his
Horse, etc. and so Iustifies.

Upon this the Defendant demurs generally.

This Prescription is naught in substance, and Judgment ought to be given for
the Defendant, upon these Four Exceptions:

First, That several Freeholders cannot join, or be joined in a Prescription to
claim an entire Interest in another man's Soil, as annexed to their several
Estates.

Secondly, The Interest of sola and seperalis Pastura, is an entire Interest,
and cannot be claimed both by Prescription and Custom.

Thirdly, That the Owner of the Soil cannot be wholly excluded out of the Soil
at all times, as this Prescription and Custom import.

Fourthly, This is a new Invention in Pleading, framed to overthrow a Maxim in
Law, and is of mischievous Consequence.

Though but one man pleads, yet it is a Joint Prescription that he Iustifies by,
and he involves all their Estates in his Prescription, and prescribes for the
whole thing belonging to all their Estates; so that it is the same thing in
substance, as if they had joined in Pleading.

If he had pleaded, That he, together with all the Freeholders and Copyholders,
etc. he had prescribed alone, and only for himself; but that would have been
naught, because the sole Pasture cannot by any Title or Prescription be annexed
to their several Estates, as shall be shown afterward.

First, I shall consider the Nature of the thing.

Secondly, The Rules of Prescription.

Thirdly, Examine the Case by those Rules.

First, I admit that there is a sole and several Pasture, and that it lies in
Prescription. Cases are frequent, where one man has the first Crop and the
Soil, and another man has the Pasturage or sole Feeding till the Sowing again,
etc.

I conceive it to be in its Nature a certain and determinate Interest or
Profit; I mean in distinction to an uncertain Profit a prender.

To have Common or Pasturage for Beasts levant and couchant upon such Land, or
to have Estovers to be spent in such an House, without any determinate quantity
or number, I call uncertain; for it is to be measured only by Use and Occasions.

But to have Pasture or Common for 100 Sheep, or Estovers of a certain
quantity, as ten Load of Wood, is certain every year, and differs very much in
its Nature from an uncertain profit a prender.

As for Example: The Levancy and Couchancy is not traversable, nor the
employment of Estovers certain; because that no Surcharge can be to the Owner,
Yelv. 188, 189.

It may be granted from the Land a que, 2 Cro. 15. Drury and Kent; for the same
Reason, in case of sole Pasturage, the party that claims it having a general
Interest, and the Owner being wholly excluded, it is not material with what
Cattle it be taken though they prescribe with an Exception of some; for if there
be an Overplus the Owner cannot have it.

Now as there may be such an Interest, so I admit that several persons may have
it; but it must be as Joyntenants or Tenants in Common, where they have several
Rights by Moieties and Purparties: But several men cannot claim the Entiertie
of this profit by Prescription, as I shall after show. If such a Profit a
prender as this be annexed to Land, it is appurtenant by Prescription or Grant,
and if part of the Land a que, etc. is aliened, the Entiertie cannot belong to
both their Estates, but there shall be an apportionment, (scilt.) the Alienee
shall have the same proportion for the sole Pasturage, that he has of the Land
a que, etc. in the same manner as it would be in a Case of Common appurtenant
certain, for which there will be an apportionment in such cases, as was
Adjudged 7 Jac. inter Moreton and Woods, 1 Rolls 235.

Having said this concerning the Nature of the Interest demanded, I will now
speak concerning the Nature and Rules of Prescription.

A Prescription that is to claim a real Interest of Profit in solo alieno, is a
Title, and as a Title must be strictly and curiously pleaded, and is not like
Prescriptions that are by way of Discharge, and for Easments, or for Matters of
personal Exemption or Privilege.

A man may lay a Prescription in a great many, where it tends but to claim an
Easment or Discharge, and not Matter of Interest and Profit, 15 E. 4. 29. 18 E.
4. 3. to say, That all the Inhabitants have had such an Easment, etc. or, to
have been Discharged, etc. will be well: And for Matters of Privileges a
Prescription may be in General; for it is but a Matter of Exemption, and
Personal, and is called a Prescription in distinction to a Custom; because
Custom is merely local, and this is to persons, yet having respect to such a
place, as All the Citizens, etc as in Day and Savage's Case in Hob. Rep. Or
having respect to such a Condition, as All Sergeants at Law, or All Attorneys
of such a Court, such Prescription must be in generalty, to express the extent
and nature of the Privilege, and so always have been allowed.

But a Prescription to claim a Profit, or an Interest, in alieno solo is a
Title; and as in setting forth Titles the Law is curious in pleading, and lays
down strict Rules, which must be observed;, so in pleading such Prescriptions,
the Rules taught in our Books, and the Course of Pleading hitherto used must be
followed.

One Rule of such Prescriptions is, That the Thing prescribed for by a que
Estate (not in gross, but appendant or appurtenant) must agree in the Nature
and Quality of the thing to which it is annexed or appurtenant. Corporeal
things cannot be appurtenant to Corporeal, because they are distinct, and can
have no relation one to another. Estovers of Wood cannot be appurtenant to
Land, because they cannot be used for it, 1 Inst. 121. b. 122. a. If a man
would plead, That he and all those whose Estate, etc. in Black-Acre, etc. Time
out of mind, have had Ten Load every year, to be taken, etc. tanquam spectant',
etc. upon Demurrer this would be naught; because it does not agree with the
Rules of Law. And Usage may be objected in that case; but Usage alone makes but
a Title in gross, which will serve when it has Time out of mind continued in
the same Hereditary line.

Usage cannot annex a Thing that cannot in nature be used with the Thing to
which it should be annexed.

One other Rule of Prescription for Matters of Interest, is, That nothing can
be prescribed for, that cannot at this day be raised by Grant.

For the Law allows Prescriptions, but in supply of the loss of a Grant.
Ancient Grants happen to be lost many times, and it would be hard that no Title
could be made to things that lie in Grant, but by showing of a Grant: Therefore
upon Usage temps d'ont, etc. the Law presumes a Grant and a Lawful beginning,
and allows such Usage for a good Title; but still it is but in supply of the
loss of a Grant: And therefore for such things as can have no Lawful beginning,
nor be Created at this day by any manner of Grant, or Reservation, or Deed that
can be supposed, no Prescription is good, 11 H. 7. 13, 14. 13 H. 7. 16. per
Keble, 21 H. 7. 40.

Prescription for a Lord to have so much for every Pound breach, is a good
Prescription to bind the Tenants, but naught as to Strangers; because as to the
Tenants it might have a good beginning by way of Reservation, but as to a
Stranger it could have no Lawful beginning by way of Grant, or Reservation, or
any way that can be imagined.

Now if we examine the Prescription in the Case in Question, by these Rules we
shall find;

First, That the Thing prescribed for does not agree in the nature and quality
nor is applicable to the Thing to which it is annexed.

The Thing prescribed for is an entire, determinate Interest, and the Thing to
which it is annexed is several Estates that have no relation one to another;
the Usage of one can have no relation to the Usage of another.

I would put this Case. In an Action of Trespass, the Defendant Iustifies for
Estovers certain, or Pasture certain in this Manor, and that he is seized of a
Message, etc. in Fee, and that J. S. is seized of another Message, etc. in
Fee, and that he and J. S. and all they whose Estates they have in the said two
Messuages, have had ten Load of Wood, etc. or Feeding for 500 Beasts: Or, if
two Lords of several Manors in Fee join in prescribing for a certain Rent,
under Favor it were absurd and never was known or allowed; for the Things to
which, etc. being several, the Usage of necessity must be several, and the
Prescriptions also must be several: As for Example, For one of them to
prescribe for a Moiety, etc.

The Reason why a man cannot prescribe to have Estovers of Wood to Land is,
because there can be no Usage to annex it; for it cannot be used with it; and
in all Cases Prescription follows the nature of the Usage; and therefore in the
Case at Bar, the Usage being several, and the Estates several, the Prescription
ought to be several also.

It is impossible to raise such an Interest by a Grant at this day; for if such
a Grant were now made, either the Grantees would be Joyntenants of this
Interest, and then there would be a Survivorship, or else they would be Tenants
in Common of it, and their several Interests might be annexed to their several
Estates by Purparties or Apportionment: And so it would be in the nature of
several Grants; and there must be to several Prescriptions several Men that
have had Land time out of mind, yet cannot join in making Title, but must make
it severally. As for Example:

If there be Three, one of them must say, That his Father was seized of a Third
part that descended to him, and so make a Title against a Stranger, though there
be a joint Possession: And if he be to make a Title against his Companions, he
may say, That he and all those whose Estates they have in the other Two parts;
they cannot say, That their three Fathers were seized of the Lands, and show
the several Discents; nor, That they Two, and all whose Estates they have in
Two parts in Three to be divided, have held in Common.

For the Title of the one concerns not the other; they are upon Lines and
Discents; and Prescription is making of a Title, as was said before; and the
Law is as strict in it, or rather more strict, than in making of a Title to
Land.

Therefore several Men that have several Estates, and no Relation one to
another, cannot join in making a Prescription; for the Prescription of one does
not concern the other.

Rastal's Entries 622. d. en Trespass, etc. Two Commoners (to avoid prolixity
and repetition) do, as near as they can, join in a Prescription; but being
considered, it is a several Prescription, as much as if they had Justified
severally.

My Lord Coke's Rule on Littleton 197. a. That Tenants in Common may join in an
Assize for an entire thing, as an Hawk, or an Horse for the necessity of the
case. It may be objected, that there is the same necessity here, I Answer,

That though in that case they join in the Demand and the Action, yet they must
make their Titles severally as they are, they must Sue as they may Recover,
which cannot be half an Hawk, or half an Horse; but when they come to make
their Titles in Pleading, they must set them forth distinct; there the
possession is joint and cannot be severed; but in our case the possessions are
several, and one has nothing to do with the other, and the thing claimed is in
its nature severable, either by Moieties, Purparties or Apportionment.

It may be Objected against my Rule, That a Prescription must be, as a Grant
may at this day be made, that (11 H. 7. 13, 14.) a man may prescribe against a
great many as Tenants, or a Commonalty, without naming a party certain; and
such a Prescription cannot spring out of one Grant no more than this. For if a
great many may join in one Grant, yet it is so many several Grants as to their
several Interests; and so it may be said, there ought to be so many several
Prescriptions.

I Answer, The Rules are not alike: For if 100 Men, being a Generality (as all
the Tenants of the Manor of Dale) make the same king of Grant to J.S. or there
be the same kind of Reservation, and the thing claimed be annexable to the
Estate of J. S. these all unite in the Grantee and his Estate, and the Estate
continues entire, Time knits and unites it, and an entire Prescription will
serve, being it will serve the Case.

But when a Grant is made from one to many that have several Estates, their
Estates are carried and descended several ways, and Time and Usage makes them
distinct and several, and cannot be served by the same Prescription.

But the Prescription at Bar is worse upon my Second Reason; for Prescription
and Custom are of contrary Natures and incompatible, and cannot give being to
the same thing.

Prescription is a Title presuming a Grant to the Freeholders and a Lawful
beginning. The Copyholders claim by Custom, because they are but Tenants at
Will and not capable of a Grant; their this must be raised from the Lord by
parcels', which being an Entire thing it cannot be: For which soever should be
raised first, the rest must be left in the Lord, who cannot have a Right of
sole Pasturage in his own Soil distinct from the Soil.

It may be Objected here, That Custom and Prescription are not of such contrary
Natures as I make them; for in Day and Savage's Case in Hob. 85. the Pleadings
were as a Custom of the City, and the Court Adjudged it to be a Prescription;
which shows, that Custom and Prescription differ not so much in the nature of
the Thing, as in the manner of the Pleading.

For Answer, I need but observe the Nature of that Case. The Officers of the
City of London Justified for a Duty of Wharfage claimed by the City. The
Plaintiff sets forth in his Replication, That within the City there is a Custom
for all Freemen to be Discharged, etc. and the Question was, Whether this was a
Custom to be tried by the Mouth of the Recorder, or a Prescription to be tried
per Pais? It was held to be in its Nature, a Prescription; and if it were not,
that it was Adjudged that it ought not to be tried by their Certificate who
were concerned in Interest.

The Prescription there meant by the Court, was not a Prescription to claim a
real Interest, as in this Case; but it was (as I may call it) a local
Prescription to privilege Persons in a certain Place and Condition, which is
in its Nature betwixt a Prescription and a Custom; and not a Custom, because it
concerns the Discharge of persons. And it is not merely Local, nor a
Prescription; because it is not annexed to any Estate nor to any Person; but in
relation to a certain Place and Condition. And yet it is rather termed a
Prescription; for it is said, That Inhabitants may prescribe for an Easement or
a Discharge; but a strict Prescription to make Title to a Real Interest is so
nice, that it cannot be pleaded by way of Custom, nor confounded with it.
Inhabitants, or Freemen, or Citizens cannot prescribe in that kind.

I must add to strengthen my Reasons upon these two Matters, that no President
can be shown in all our Books of any such Case, either where two Freeholders
join to claim a Real Interest in solo alieno, or where Prescription and Custom
are mixed, as in this Case.

It will be no Objection that it cannot be pleaded better when it appears the
very thing cannot consist with the Principles of Law; for though there be such a
thing as several Pasture, and frequent, which may be appurtenant to a Message,
yet it cannot be annexed to the Estates of so many several Freeholders and
Copyholders: But if the thing were consistent with Principles of Law, the
Pleading here is naught to mix a Prescription and a Custom together, which are
incompatible.

The whole ought to have been laid by way of Custom, it being an Entire thing,
and the necessity of the Case would have maintained it.

If J.S. makes a Feoffment to the use of the Feoffee and Feoffor and their
Heirs, one cannot be in by the Common Law and another by the Statute of Uses;
but has shall be in by the Statute of Uses. So here, the Entire thing not
being to be maintained, possibly has Prescription and Custom should have been
laid by way of Custom; for the Freeholders in case of Necessity (it may be)
might claim by Custom, though the Copyholders could not prescribe.

Thirdly, My third Reason is, because the Owner of the Soil can by no
Prescription or Custom be excluded out of his own Soil at all times of the
year. And this Reason I principally depend on, because it strikes at the very
Root and Essence of the thing.

I know there are many Cases in our Books of Usages, that have been all owed in
restraint of the Owner of the Soil; I shall not oppose any one of them, but
admit them all; yet oppose this Prescription of which I may confidently say,
there is not one President in all our Books.

I will admit the Lord or Owner may be excluded for a certain time, according
to the Books, Fitzh. tit. Prescription 51. Huttons Rep. 45. Pit and Cheeks
Case, and the same Case 6 Co. by the name of Sparks Case, and Co. on Litt. 122.
a. where he says, a Man may prescribe to have solam vesturam, from such a day
to such a day, and thereby the Owner of the Soil may be excluded from Feeding
there, so he may prescribe to have Separal' pasturam, and exclude the Owner of
the Soil from Feeding there.

I know that they object, that my Lord Co. is to be understood as to Separal'
pastur', that it may be at all times in the year, because he does not restrain
it as he does the solam pasturam. But certainly the Law is the same for the one
as for the other, and the Books must be intended for the one as well as for the
other, for coming immediately next, there needed no Repetition for the latter,
but the (so) signifies in the same manner, and so understood I admit it.

I admit the Lord or Owner may be stinted as to his kind of Cattle; and have
none but Sheep or Horses, and so he may be stinted to a certain number,
according to Kenwrick and Pargiters Case. Yel. 129. 2 Cro. 208.

I admit the Lord or Owner may be excluded as to some kind of profits: An other
Man may prescribe to have omnes Spinas upon such a Wast, according to Dowglass
and Kendals Case, Yel. 187. 2 Cro. 256.

And for this Reason, a Man may prescribe to have solam piscariam upon another
Soil, for there he leaves the Owner the profits of the Soil for Manuring of his
Ground or Ballastage, which the Owner has besides the Property and the use of
the Water, so that he leaves enough for the subsistence of the Fish.

Nay, I shall agree further, that the Lord may be excluded wholly from the
feeding of his Ground, upon Special Matter shown to the Court, whereby it may
appear that the Lord has some recompense, or takes the profits some other way;
as if there be a Park or Forest where the Lord has the Game, an other Man may
prescribe to have the Herbage, for the Lord has considerable profits of the
Ground by his Deer, which is so considerable, that if the Franchise come to be
determined, it has been held that such a Prescription for Herbage being but
surplusage after the feeding of the Deer and subordinate to it, shall rather be
lost than carry the whole profit of the feeding and exclude the Owner. And it
has been the Case of many Parks, that have been disparked by the King, after
the Herbage granted away; so if there be Mines opened, or any other profit,
that appears to the Court to be left to the Owner.

I do not oppose, but that the pasturage may be claimed by prescription.

But to have the Sole pasturage of all Pasture Grounds at all times in the
year, is to have the whole profit of the Ground, and the Owner is wholly
excluded, which would be very unreasonable. I shall agree yet further, that
upon a Special Case shown to the Court in the Pleading, the Lord may be
excluded from any pernancy of profit in his own Soil, as putting this Case; a
Lord has improved so much of his Wastes as that he has left, but just
sufficient for his Common Feeding in such Case the Lord ought to be excluded of
Feeding; but this must be shown in Pleading, according to my Lord Coke's
Opinion, in Kenwrick and Pargiters Case, which is well reported in Brownlow 2
part 64, 65. And in all reason there must be Special Pleading in such Case, for
where a Prescription or Custom is reasonable only upon Special Matter or
Circumstance, that Special Matter or Circumstance must be shown to the Court,
by him that would have the advantage of the Prescription, for the Negative
cannot be averred on the other side.

And it cannot be helped, by supposing there may be Trees, Mines or Park, but
it ought to be shown; for every thing that depends upon supposition, may as
well not be as be, and to allow a Prescription upon such a supposal, would be
to bind up a party by it though the thing be not; and Pasturage may well be
supposed, the whole profit of Pasture Ground, for it is so in fact in many
places, and has its name, because it is fed all the year. But Where it is fed
but part of the year, and mowed or plowed the rest, it is called Arable or
Meadow.

The main Objection that I conceive they can make to this is, That the Sole
Pasturage or Vesture lies in Grant, and the Owner may exclude himself wholly by
Grant, and so he may be excluded by Prescription or Custom; and this they
ground upon Co. Litt. 4, b. where it is said, if a Man Grants to another, and
his Heirs vesturam terrae, and makes Livery secundum formam Chartae; yet the
Freehold of the Soil shall not pass; by which it is implied, that the Vesture
shall.

If this Book be to be understood of the Vesture at all times of the year,
where no other profits remain to the Lord, I shall crave leave to object
against it from the same Page, where it is agreed, that if it were profits, the
Soil would pass.

Methinks it should be the same in reason, where the Vesture is all the
profits, and Vesture shall be intended all the profits. I shall cite some
Authorities, which are not inconsiderable to Warrant this Opinion.

I have in a Manuscript Report of Cases in King James's time, a Case betwixt
Collins and the Bishop of Oxford; It was Paschae 19. Jacobi upon a Trial at Bar
in the Kings Bench. The Case was, that 1 Ed. 6. the King erects the Bishopric
of Oxford, and gave to the Bishop and his Successors, int' al' primam vesturam
of a Meadow called Horse Meadow. John Bridge Bishop of Oxford leased it for
three Lives, rendering Rent, and dies; his Successors before restitution of the
Temporalties accepted the Rent of the Lessee, and afterward entered upon him.
Upon this Case the first question was, what passed by the Grant of prima
vestura.

My Report says, That it was agreed by all the Justices, that by a Grant of
Vestura Terrae by a common Person the Soil will pass, and then there must be a
Livery of consequence; but they held a Grant of prima vestura, was but like a
Grant of prima tonsura, and being for no certain time, is but an Interest in
the first cutting, or taking of the Grass. But they all agreed, that if a Man
Grants primam vesturam, from such a day to such a day certain, the Grantee
shall have the Soil and Mow it, or Feed it as he pleases.

Kelway 118. If a Man Grants vesturam Terrae for term of Life to another, it is
a Grant of the Land for Life; for says the Book, the vesture is the profit of
the Land, and it is all one to have the profit as to have the Land it self.
Littleton puts the Case, if a Man Grants the Vesture of Land to another and his
Heirs, without Livery, no Estate passes.

But the Book of my Lord Cokes difference, betwixt the Vesture of the Land, and
the profits of the Land seems to be mistaken, and in reason they are the same;
for I take it generally speaking. Vesture shall be intended all the profits,
and if there be special profits, as Mines opened, or Waters, etc. which may
qualify the word, and retain the Soil to the Owner, it must be shown.

And as it is for Vesture of Land, so I conceive where it appears in Pleading
that the Ground is Pasture. Pasturage or Sole Feeding will signify all the
profits; for Pasture is properly that which is wholly for Feeding; and where
the Sole Pasture is claimed, the Owner cannot claim, or take any other profit.

Temps E. 1. tit. Partition 21. Two Men agree to make partition of Pasture
Ground in this manner, That one shall have totam pasturam, from such a time to
such a time, and the other for the residue of the year; this is a partition of
the Soil it self, which shows Pasture is to be intended the whole profits of
Pasture Ground; in that case the quo jure could not be maintained, for the
party had not barely a Liberty, but the Soil it self.

If several Men have Profits upon the same Land, alternis vicibus, the Law most
commonly determines the right of the Soil to be in him, that has the most
considerable Profits. As for Example.

If one has the Summer Feeding of Pasture, or the first Tonsure of Meadow, or
the Sowing and Reaping of Corn upon Arable, and an other Man has the Feeding
separately at other times of the year; the Law says, that the Soil is in him
that has the Summer profits and Corn, because it is the greater Profits, and
the other has but a Profit a prender.

Now, suppose that two Men have interchangeably the sole Feeding of Pasture at
such times, that the interest of one is in all respects equal to that of the
other, there nothing can determine the Soil to be in one more than the other;
and therefore it shall be in one for his time, and in the other for his time.
But where one has the sole feeding of Pasture at all times in the year, and it
has been so time out of mind, and there is nothing but Pasture, what can the
other have to show the Soil to be in him, and why should it not be said to be
in him that has the Feeding or whole Profits? It seems very absurd, that a Man
should be allowed to be Owner of the Soil, and yet it may be has no badge of
Ownership by Perception of Profits. If the Man's Estate be displaced so as to be
put to a Writ of Right, how should he lay the Esplees?

And as to this Consideration there may be difference betwixt a Grand and
Usage, for a Grant beginning within time of Memory, the Ownership of the Soil
was once fully manifested, until he had divested himself of all but that; but
upon Usage time out of mind nothing can be said, why one Man should have the
Soil more than another if it be not in him that has all the Profits.

I must end this Point also with this Observation, That if there is no Case in
all the Books of a Sole Pasture at all times of the year, but in F. N. tit.
Prescription. 51 and 55, and Hutton 45. It is made a Profit a prender, and the
most considerable Pro^^ts are left to the Owner.

My fourth Reason upon which I hold this Prescription is void, is, because it
is a new invention framed to overthrow a Maxim in Law, and is of mischievous
consequence.

New inventions that are agreeable to Rules of Law, I know have been always
received, and sometimes have proved of excellent use. But New inventions that
are framed to supplant Principles of Law, have been always baffled and rejected.

The Maxim and Principle of Law that is overturned by this way of Pleading is,
That a Commoner cannot prescribe to exclude his Lord.

This Maxim is one of the foundations of Law, and depends upon the reason of
the thing, and not upon the sound of the word.

It will be objected, that the reason is, because ex vi termini the word Common
implies that they are to Common with the Lord, which they cannot do if the Lord
does not feed.

But I conceive it is not so, for it may be as well called a Common, without a
Solecism, where the Tenants feed in common together, and the Lord never feeds
with them, as where he does; the true reason is from the nature of the thing,
for it is supposed the Lord has no need of his Waste, and to make non-usage in
such a case turn to a Prescription or Custom against him, would be most
unreasonable.

Upon the creation of Manors, the Lords took as much as was for their own Use
into their Demesns, they distributed as much as was convenient amongst their
Tenants; what was left was called the Lords Waste, which was neglected by the
Lord, because he had before taken into his Demesns what he had need of.

It were very hard, that non-usage should turn to a Prescription against the
Lord, because he does not feed his Wastes, when he left them waste before,
because he had taken as much before as he had occasion to feed.

It is upon the same reason that the Law will not allow any Prescription for
Commoners to exclude, and not upon any Argument from the word Common. Maxims in
Law do not depend upon words, but upon foundations of reason; it is not for the
honor of the Law that it should have its Maxims depend upon sounds and words,
and not upon solid reason.

That Commoners cannot prescribe to exclude their Lords if they call their
Right by the term of Common; but if they call it by another name, though they
claim the same kind of interest, they may exclude them.

If you prescribe to have Communiam excludendo Dom' that is not good; but if
you prescribe to have solam and separalem Pastur' in common amongst your selves
for Beasts Levant and Couchant, you may exclude him.

Under favor, to have such a Maxim turned out of Doors and made Useless, there
ought to be very good Authority for it; such an Invention ought to be examined
by strict Rules.

And the consequence of this Innovation will be great and general, for there is
no Common in England, but this Plea will serve, for if the Jury will find it;
and it is found by experience, that many times, though the Lord of the Manor
gives very good Evidence, a Jury will find against him; and if a Lord cannot
prove an actual feeding, a Jury will certainly incline to find it, let the
Court direct what they please.

The King and great Lords, that have large Wastes, that lie remote from their
care, seldom made any benefit by feeding; and they must not expect hereafter to
make any improvements, if this pleading be allowed, which will be very
mischievous; whereas, if that Maxim of Law were observed, and such an
unreasonable Claim disallowed in Pleading, it will not be in the power of
Iuries to exclude Lords out of their own Wastes.

I conceive, in this Case, upon the matter disclosed, in pleading, the Court
may discern judicially, that this is but an Innovation, and an Artifice to
disguise a Common, and to call it a Sole-pasture to enable the Commoners to
prescribe to exclude the Lord, which they cannot directly do by the Rules of
Law.

Here first, The Soil is the Lords of the Manor, and a parcel of the Manor,
and a large quantity in truth 10000 Acres, though the place assigned is but 100
Acres.

All the Freeholders and Copyholders of ancient Houses, or parcel of the
Manor, are to feed and not to be excluded, and in truth of 3, or 4 Messuages
in the Town.

It Is for Beasts Levant and Couchant, it is with an exception of Hoggs, Sheep
and Northern Steers, which is like the regulation of Common; if it were a
Sole-pasture they might have put in what Cattle they pleased, for it is all one
to the Lord, who is to be wholly excluded.

The Court may discern by all these Badges, that it is in its nature but a
Common, by Art put into other words to oust the Lord.

I shall now crave leave to offer to the view of the Court the Consequences and
Inconveniences of this Prescription.

1. If there be a Surplusage at any time, the Lord cannot improve nor feed, but
it must be lost, which is against the Public Good.

2. If a Stranger feeds and does a Petit Trespass, as it is called in Robert
Mary's Case, 9 Co. the Lord can have no Action for the feeding, but the Tenants
must, and then they must either join or sever; if they join, what a number of
Plaintiffs will there be, and how shall the same recovered be divided in
Equity, or the Contribution for the Costs? If they sever, and be nonsuit; then
there will be as many several Actions, which will be vexatious, according to
Robert Mary's Case.

3. If a Freehold be purchased by the Lord, or Escheat, or a Copyhold Estate be
determined, what is become then of the share of the Sole feeding? The Lord
cannot join with them in the Prescription; shall he have not benefit of the
Soil?

If so, what if all but one fail, shall that one have all?

If on the contrary, the Lord shall feed, must he do it as the Owner of the
Soil, and have the Surplusage? for the Levancy and Couchancy, is not material
among themselves. And then they would become as Commoners again; and this would
be a strange Prescription, that cannot be maintained if ever there were any
Escheat of any Tenancy into the Lords hands.

4. But the greatest mischief of all will be, that this will be a ready way to
enable Tenants to withstand all Improvements. In Gatewards Case, 6 Co. 60. it
was a great reason against a Prescription, that it was inconsistent with any
improvement; it would be a great mischief to this Kingdom where there are large
Wastes and Commons, Forests and Fenns, to take away all power of improving
them; for the same Land by improvement becomes able to support a great number
of people which are the strength of the Kingdom.

And as there are great inconveniences on this side, so the other way there
will be none at all, for they may enjoy the same Usages as Commoners; if they
prescribe the ordinary way, and the Lord cannot do them any prejudice at all,
he can only take the Surplusage, leaving them sufficient; if he feeds to their
damage, it will be a Surcharge, and an Action upon the Case will lie against
him.

The Lord cannot improve but he must leave them sufficent, and there can be no
reason why the Owner should not have the Surplusage if any be.

I know they will cite an Authority against me in the Case between Webb and
Littleburgh, which was in C. B. 1654. There, I confess, the Declaration was
grounded upon a Prescription much like to this, and the Plaintiff had a
Verdict, and the Court would not arrest Judgment upon it.

The Answer that I must give to that Case is grounded upon the difference
between a Demurrer and a Verdict.

The Court may intend that after a Verdict, which may help it; for I allow an
exclusion of the Lord upon a Special Case disclosed in pleading, and that
Special Matter may be supplied by the Verdict.

Besides I must observe, that it was a Case of small consequence that concerned
the Lord only for his Costs, for he has enjoyed his feeding against that
Verdict ever since: I can say it upon my own knowledge; for I know the Parties,
and know the Place, it was at Elinswell near Bury St. Edmonds in Suffolk. The
Judges listen to Exceptions after a Verdict, but will give Judgment if there be
any possibility to maintain it.

I may add that this was a Popular Times, when all things tended to the
licentiousness of the Common People.

I shall Conclude, praying Judgment against this Prescription for these
Reasons.

It is a new and unheard of way of Pleading, and against the Rule of Law,
joining Freehold Tenants, in the generalty, which have no relation one to
another, and annexing an entire Interest to several Estates, and mixing
Prescription and Custom, which are of contrary Natures and are great
Absurdities.

It is against Reason to oust the Owner of all the feeding, which for ought
appears is all the Profits, without any Special Matter or Recompense appearing
in Pleading.

There is great inconvenience in admitting of such a Prescription, new
Inventions bringing unknown Consequences.

No inconvenience in ousting Tenants of this Prescription, seeing that they
claim the same Usage the ordinary way, and the Lord can do them no wrong either
by feeding or improvement.

In this Case the Court of Common Pleas had been divided in Opinion upon the
Matter in Law, as appears by Vaughans Reports; and therefore Sir Henry North
thought not fit to wave the Matter of Law in the King's Bench, although he had so
good a Case upon the Fact, that if it had been no prejudice he would join Issue
and try the truth of this Prescription at the Bar; whereupon the Demurrer was
by consent waved, and the Cause tried at the Bar, and the Verdict passed for
Sir Henry North, with the approbation of the whole Court.

Afterward another Action was brought to trial in the Exchequer at the Bar,
and it appearing to the Court that there had been Proposals toward an
Agreement, a Juror was withdrawn, and my Lord Chief Baron Hale gave the Tenants
advice to comply with this, saying Redime te captum quam queas minimo.

So that the Matter of Law was never adjudged against Sir Henry North, but the
Matter of Fact tried for him, and the main Question upon the Act of Level never
came in Question, which may extend to this great Waste, although both the other
Points were against Sir Henry North.

Afterward there was another Action brought to trial in the Exchequer, and
after a full evidence of about 4 or 5 hours, the Plaintiff not daring to stand
the Verdict, was nonsuited.

THE CASE OF Sir Robert Atkyns AGAINST HOLFORD CLARE, Undersheriff of the
County of Gloucester, TERMINO Sancti Hillarij, Anno 22 and 23 Car. II. In
Scaccario.
AN Action upon the Case was brought by the Plaintiff, Vid. Co. Entr. 439. a
Quo Warranto brought for these Hundreds.
setting forth. That he was seized of the Seven Hundreds of Crochon, Bright,
Reppesgate, Bradley, etc. in the County of Gloucester, and had Return and
Execution of Writs there: That the Defendant knowing of it, did Execute several
Writs there to the Plaintiffs damage, etc. Upon Not Guilty pleaded Issue is
taken, and this Special Verdict is found, (viz.)

They find the Patent of 11 May, 5 Johannis, whereby the King restores to the
Abbot and Convent of Canons Regular, in Cirencester, certain Lands granted to
them by his Brother Richard the First; and also grants, That no Sheriff of
Gloucester, or his Bailiff, do intromit in aliquo within the Seven Hundreds,
except for Pleas of the Crown and Summons, which the Abbot, etc. should receive
from the hands of the Sheriffs, and execute.

They find the Patent of 20 Decembris, 17 E. 3. wherein the King reciting that
Richard the First, by Patent granted to this Abbot and Convent the Manor of
Cirencester and the Seven Hundreds, and the Return of Writs in them, that
thereby they had used and enjoyed Retorna Brevium tanquam pertinentia ad Septem
Hundred' praedict'. Reciting also, that by a Presentment made it was seized
into the Chancery, and that He ( Edward the Third) for a Fine of 300 l grants
that they should hold the Manor, Hundreds, Vills, etc. and quod haberent in
Villis and Hundredis praedictis, etc. absque impedimento retorna Brevium
Infangthief, etc. tanquam pertinent' Hundredis praedictis, etc. of the King and
his Successors, etc. and confirms the Patent of King John.

They find, that the Abbot, etc. were seized prout Lex postulat till 4 Febr. 27
H. 8. when the Monastery was dissolved and all came to the Crown.

They find the Statute for vesting of these Lands, etc. belonging to the
Monastery in the King and the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 20. whereby it is
Enacted, That all Liberties, etc. which the late Owners of Monasteries had
used, etc. shall be revived and be really and actually in the King, his Heirs,
etc. and shall be in the Rule, Order, Survey and Governance of the Court of
Augmentations, and that the same Liberties, etc. shall be used and exercised by
such Stewards, Bailiffs, etc. as the King, his Heirs, etc. shall name and
appoint, etc. and that the said Stewards, Bailiffs, etc. shall be attendant and
obedient to all the King's Courts for all Returns of Writs, etc. as the
Officers of the late Owners should have been, etc. and that no Sheriff,
Undersheriff, etc. should intromit, meddle in, with or upon the Premises
otherwise, or for other cause than they lawfully might have done before the
same Premises came to the possession of the King.

They find, that Edward the Sixth (being seized by descent from Henry the
Eight) Anno primo of his Reign, per Lit' Patent' ex gratia and advisamento
Concilii sui dedit and concessit cuidam Tho. Seymour Mil', Dom' Seymour de
Sudley, omnia illa Hundreda de Crochen, etc. nuper Monasterio Cirencestrensi
dudum spectantia, etc. omnia Letas executiones Brevium and retorna eorundem
Sect' Hundred', etc. reputat' spectant' and pertinent' Hundredis praedictis,
etc.

They find, that the Lord Seymour being seized, etc. was Attainted of Treason
(by Act of Parliament, 2 and 3 Ed. 6. cap. 18.) and that thereby his Lands and
Hereditaments were forfeited and vested in the King.

They find, that 6 October. Anno 6 Ed. 6. the King grants the Hundreds, by his
Letters Patents to Kingston and his Heirs, and therein grants omnia
amerciamenta Heriotta emolumenta haereditamenta, etc. dictis Hundredis quoquo
modo spectant' aut ut membrum sive pars eorundem antetunc cognit' reputat', vel
usitat', vel habit' aut accept' ut pars parcell' vel membrum. And further
grants, by another Clause, Tot talia and tanta and consimilia Jurisdictiones,
Privilegia, Libertates, Franchesias, etc. quae quot qualia and quanta, and adeo
plene and integre, as Thomas Lord Seymour, or any Abbot, etc. had, etc. ratione
vel praetextu Hundred' praedict' virtute vel color alicujus doni Chartae,
Praescriptionis, etc.

They find that the Estate which Kingston had, came to the Plaintiff, and that
the Defendant entered into the Hundreds where the Liberty is claimed and
executed several Writs, etc. Et si, etc.

Baron Wyndham had Argued, and was of Opinion for the Plaintiff; and Baron
Littleton for the Defendant.

Now Argued Baron Turner, and my Lord Chief Baron Hale.

Turner, I am of Opinion for the Defendant. At the last Arguing my Opinion was
for the Plaintiff; but upon something which fell from my Brother Littleton I am
altered. The Case arises upon the Patents.

I take it to be clear that Retorn' brevium did not pass by the Patent of King
John; there is indeed some implication of such a Franchise, but it is nothing
like a Grant of it. It Is true, we must put that Exposition upon Ancient
Charters, as should have been put in those days wherein they were made: But I
say, this Patent would not have been expounded to have amounted to such a Grant
in diebus illis. If there had been an Usage of such a Franchise in pursuance of
this Patent (though made since Richard the First's time) I think it might have
been allowed to have given the Return of Writs, Vid. 2 Inst. 282. But here has
been no such Usage.

It Is true, in the Patent of E. 3. it is recited, that there was an Usage, and
that the Franchise was granted by Richard the First, and confirmed by King
John; but the Juries finding of that Patent, is no finding of the things
recited in it, as in the 10 Co. 56. q. the finding of Evidence of a Conversion,
(scil. Refusal to deliver on Request) upon a Trover, is no finding of the
Conversion.

In 17 E. 3. it is true, the Hundreds, and the Returns of Writs therein are
granted: But since my Brother Littleton's Argument I have been, and am of
Opinion, that that Grant is void, and that (as he observed) because of the
Statute 2 Ed. 3. cap. 12. Ordaining, That henceforth Hundreds and Wapentakes
should not be given nor severed from the Counties: And 14 Ed. 3. cap. 9.
Ordaining, That henceforth all the Wapentakes and Hundreds, which were severed
from the Counties, should be rejoyned to the same Counties, as before that time
had been established by another Statute, (meaning, I suppose, the said Statute
of 2 E. 3. cap. 12.) And thereupon my Lord Coke in the 4 Inst. 267. gives his
Opinion, That all the Grants made of the Bailywicks of Hundreds since this
Statute are void, and that the making the Bailiffs thereof belong to the
Sheriff, for the better Execution of Justice and of his Office. And for that he
cites a Resolution in his own Case; for he it was that was the Sheriff of
Bucks, mentioned in the Case there. Fitzh. Petition 1. 18 E. 3. is a Case of a
man, who by color of the New Statute it is said was ousted of his liberty of
Retorna Brevium, which was granted to him and his Heirs by the King in
Parliament. My Brother Littleton cited a good Opinion of three Judges, that an
Hundred could not be granted without a Non obstante to the Statute, and here is
no Non obstante. Now a man cannot have the Return of Writs without the Hundred.
Vid. 2. Inst. 452. 2. H. 4. pl. 12.

But admitting it did pass, and was granted before the Statute, then the
Statute does not extend to avoid that Grant. But then the Question will be,
when the Liberties return to the Crown, Whether the Crown can grant them out
again? And therein it will be considerable, Whether they are extinct in the
Crown, or no? I think they are not extinct. In 9 Co. 25. b. it is said, that all
Liberties, Franchises, etc. which were at first created and erected by the
King, and were not Liberties, etc. in the hands of the King as Flowers of the
Crown, are not by their accession to the King drowned in the Crown; and there
Hundreds and Leets are instanced in and allowed to be such. And now the Liberty
of Retorna Brevium is more strongly such; for that all Jurisdictions (of which
Hundreds, etc. are a Branch) were once in the Crown: But Retorna Brevium is but
a Ministerial thing. It is expressly Adjudged in the King's Bench, Keilway 72.
pl. 16. that the Liberties of Retorna Brevium are not extinct by coming to the
Kings hands. But however, if they were or were not extinct and drowned, I think
that they could not (because of the Statute) be severed and granted to Kingston.

Lord Chief Baron Hale:

I am of another Opinion; but I am very glad that two of my Brothers are
against me, and my other Brother. I would have been glad to have been excused
in this Matter,

First, Because the Case relates to my own Country, and is much to the
prejudice of it.

Secondly, Because it relates to Retorna Brevium, which I always took to be one
of the most ^^^nicious Liberties to the Common Justice of the Kingdom.

Thirdly, Because it is a Case full of difficulty; but We that are Judges must
satisfy our Judgments, and come to a Resolution, and I must Argue as the Law
is, and not as I wish it. I Argue according to my Conscience, though somewhat
against my desire, and I am sure against my particular Interest.

I shall be somewhat long, because the Case is very Intricate, and requires an
Explication of many things.

In the first place I shall explain three Terms in the Case:

First. The Monastery of Cirencester.

Secondly, An Hundred.

Thirdly, Retorna Brevium.

First, As to the Monastery of Cirencester I shall speak a little Historically,
to show the traduction and derivation of this Matter. It was a Monastery time
out of Mind; but in 30 H. 1. it was translated to the Canons Regular; and
therefore Henry the First is accounted the Founder, he Endowed it with three
Hides of Land. Richard the First gave them the Manor of Cirencester, and the
Seven Hundreds, at the Farm of 30 l per annum. The Charter of Exemption
(mentioned in the Verdit) was made by King John, who Confirmed the Grant of
Richard the First at the same Farm. This you shall find in Chartae Antiquae
Letter G. (for the Book goes by Letters) Number 9, and the Letter M. in Number
12.

Secondly, The next thing to be considered is an Hundred. Of old time Hundreds
were parcel of the Crown, belonging of Common Right to the King, 11 H. 6. 89.
pl. 44. by the Grant of an Hundred there did not pass only a Liberty, which had
a Court and also commonly a Leet, which is called the Leet of the Hundred: But
there was also an implied Power of making a Bailiff: The Bailiff had a double
Office.

First, He had the Collection of Perquisites, Amerciaments, Fees, Ancient
Duties, as Beupleader, Head, Silver, etc. belonging to the Hundreds in some
places.

Secondly, He had another Office and that was relating to the Sheriff. In
Ancient time the Bailiffs of the Hundreds were the immediate Bailiffs of the
King for the Execution of Process. Vid. the Statute of Sheriffs made at Lincoln
9 Ed. 2. the second Statute; there it is said, that the Execution of Writs that
come to the Sheriffs shall be done by Hundredors, ( i. e. Lords, or rather
Bailiffs of the Hundred) sworn and known in the full County, etc. which is
Confirmed 2 E. 3. cap. 4. and 14 E. 3. cap. 9. This thing of Farming out
Hundreds to persons thus, grew to be a great Inconvenience: For the Hundreds
which were of the County, and did belong to the Sheriff, there was no
Inconvenience; the Sheriff did sometimes Account as Custos, sometimes per
Manus. Then those many Provisions were made, viz. 2 E. 3. cap. 12. whereas all
the Counties in England were in Old time Assessed to a certain Farm; and then
were all the Hundreds and Wapentakes in the Sheriffs Hand rated to this Farm,
and after were Approvers sent into diverse Counties, which did increase the
Farms of some Hundreds and Wapentakes. And after the Kings at diverse times have
granted to many men part of the same Hundreds and Wapentakes for the old Farms
only. And now of late the Sheriffs are wholly charged of the Increase, which
amounts to a great Sum, to the great hurt of the People and ditherison of the
Sheriffs and their Heirs. It is Ordained, that the Hundreds and Wapentakes set
to Farm by the King that now is, be it for Term of Life or otherwise, which
were sometimes annexed to the Farms of the Counties where the Sheriffs be
charged, shall be adjoined again to the Counties, and that the Sheriffs and
their Heirs have Allowance for the Time that is past, and that from henceforth
such Hundreds and Wapentakes shall not be given nor severed from the Counties.
Then 14 E. 3. cap. 4. Whereas many Mischiefs be happened throughout the Realm,
for that Sheriffs have let the Hundreds and Wapentakes to a higher Farm than
they do yield to the King, and the Farmers do let the same to others at higher
and greater Sums in such manner, that by the letting and enhancing of the
Farms, and by the greater number of Bailiffs Errants, Outriders and others,
whom the Sheriffs Bailiffs and Hundredors do put in, the People be in diverse
manners charged and grieved: It is assented and accorded, That from henceforth
all the Wapentakes and Hundreds which be severed from the Counties, shall be
rejoyned to the same Counties, as before this time has been established by
another Statute, and that the Sheriffs hold the same in their own Hands, and
put in such Bailiffs and Hundredors, having Lands within the same Bailiffs and
Hundreds for whom they will Answer: And if they will Let any Hundreds,
Bayliwicks or Wapentakes to Farm, they shall let the same at the ancient Farm
without any thing increasing, and that the King and his People be served by
such Bailiffs and Hundredors, and their Under Bailiffs, in avoiding for ever
the Outriders and others, which in diverse Counties before this time have
notoriously grieved the People: And that no Bailiff Errant be but in the County
where Bailiffs Errants have been in times past, in the time of the King's
Grandfather that now is, and that there be no more but one Bailiff Errant in
one County: And in the same manner it is assented, That all other, of what
Estate or Condition they be, which have Bayliwicks or Hundreds in Fee, if they
the same will hold in their own Hands, then they shall put in such Bailiffs for
whom they will Answer; and if they will let the same in Farm to other, then
they shall let the same at the ancient Farm without any thing increasing, as
aforesaid is said, etc. For the Sheriffs did Farm at a certain Rate, and did
Account for it in the Exchequer, and this was called Firma Ballivarum.

Hundreds were either parcel of the County, and there the Sheriff did
constitute Bailiffs, (these Hundreds which were anciently parcel of the Farm of
the Sheriffs, that the Stat. of the 2 Ed. 3. cap. 12. speaks of;) or else they
were such as were granted out, which the Lord of the Hundred held sometimes at
Farm, and sometimes in Fee, called Hundreds of Fee, Liberties of Hundreds,
Franchises of Hundreds.

It was found that a great Inconvenience grew from the severing of Hundreds
from the Counties. The Statute intended that the Sheriff should execute Writs,
etc. and it was unreasonable that he should have Bailiffs put upon him, and yet
be bound to Execute, etc. therefore the Statute intended to reconcile this as
far as it could well, and to restore as many of the Hundreds as could well be,
to the Sheriff.

Thirdly, I come to the Third thing to be Explained and Considered, viz. the
Liberty of Retorna Brevium.

This is a superadded Liberty; though the Hundreds were granted, yet the Sheriff
might and must still Return the Writs executed there. This Liberty was commonly
annexed to the Grants of Hundreds, though sometimes of Manors it is acquirable
by Grant, and (I think) by Prescription, though that has been a Doubt: But 8 H.
4. c. 7. pl. 10. speaks of Retorna Brevium by Prescription, Vid. Mo. 670. contr.
And it was Adjudged it might be so in the Quo Warranto brought by the Queen
against the Earl of Shrewsbury, for Retorna Brevium and other Liberties claimed
by the Earl in Coleharborow in London. You will find the Pleading in the New
Entries, Quo Warranto pl. 2. Mich. 41 and 42 Eliz. in Banco Regis.

It Is true, It was Adjudged against the Earl; but it was Agreed that a man
might prescribe for Retorna Brevium, and that to have it within a House only;
for that Place was formerly the Bishop of Durham's Mansion House.

But the Prescription was naught, because it was applied only to the Return of
the Writs of the Queen: For he laid a Prescption (in the Bishop of Durham) to
have Retorna omnium Brevium Praeceptorum and Mandatorum dictae Dom' Reginae,
and says not of her Predecessors; and it is plainly impossible, that a man
should have time out of mind the Return of the Queens Writs, when the Queen
began her Reign within time of Memory.

This Retorna Brevium carries in it (by Implication) the Execution of Writs,
though it be not express, as in the last preceding Case, where after the Words
above mentioned is added, and Executionem eorundem.

And so it was Adjudged in the Case of the Countess of Warwick against Atwood,
Pasch. 41 Eliz. Rot. 331. B.R.

This Liberty, though it carries an Exemption, yet it does not exclude, but that
the Sheriff may execute Writs within it. But then it is a Wrong, for which the
Lord of the Liberty may have his Action: But in some Cases the Sheriff may
lawfully do it, as in the Case of the King, a Non omittas, etc. in case of
Execution of a Writ of Waste, whereto he is particularly Empowered by the
Statute, and sometimes where the Thing is divided, etc.

But I shall add no more concerning this, but only say,

First, This Liberty of Retorna Brevium is a dangerous Liberty for him that
has it; for he is to be Responsible for all the Defaults of his Bailiffs, as
Escapes, etc. And if the Bailiff do not Account for the Collection of the
King's Revenue, etc. it is a Feather in his Cap, but a Thorn in his Foot.

Secondly, It Is much derogatory to the Justice of the Kingdom: For the party
must go to the Sheriff first, then to the Bailiff, etc. and by this means
Justice is delayed and disappointed.

There are two Liberties do abundantly more hurt than they are worth, (viz.)
the Grants of Fines, especially of Jurors, and this of Retorna Brevium:
Therefore Edward the First, a most Wise Prince, Declared in Parliament, and it
was Recorded in the Courts, That he would not grant it. This you will find in
the Pleas of Edward the First, toward the latter End, in Mr. Ryley. The
Passage meant is in Placita Parliamentaria 35 Ed. 1. fol. 366. in Mr. Ryley, it
is this, Praeceptum Domini Regis, LE Roy ad Dit and Command, Quod apres cest
Grant qu'il ad fait al un Count de Nicole, de Return de Brief avoir, en deux
Hundreds a term de la vie du dit Count, le Roy ne voet doner ne granter a
nulluy tiel Franchise tant come le Roy vivera, s'il ne soit a ses Enfantes
demesne, and ceo voet le Roy que soit Escrit en le Chancellerie, en Gardrobe,
and al Eschequer.

Thirdly, A Grant of this Liberty was within a certain Precinct, and could not
extend to a County, 2 H. 4. For as my Lord Coke observes on W. 2. cap. 39. 2
Inst. 452. A Grant to have Return of Writs in a County is void; for in effect
it takes away the Office of a Sheriff.

By that time I have applied these Observations, I shall in effect have done.

First, It is to be Considered, Whether the Charters of King John did Create
the Return of Writs, or no? seeing there are only Negative, no Positive Words
in it. Somewhat may be said to maintain this to be a good Grant of Retorna
Brevium, but because the contrary has been admitted, I will admit it too,
especially because the scope of the Patent was, that the Abbot should be
immediate Officer to the King; and the intention of the Charter was to exclude
the Sheriff, and that does appear by the conclusion, where an Exception is made
of the Sheriffs Power of meddling per Summonitionem, etc. and so it is like the
Case of the Town of Berwick in 5 Jacobi, a Grant to them that they should be a
County, but no Grant of having a Sheriff, was adjudged to be void, because
there would be no Officer to execute and do Justice. I do observe that 13 Ed.
3. in the Iter there was an Information against this Abbot, and he pleaded the
Charter of R. 1. but there is nothing of Retorn of Writs that I can find, and I
have read the Book over.

Secondly, We come to consider the Grant of E. 3. I say,

1. It is a good Grant of Retorna Brevium.

2. There is a good annexation of it to the Hundreds by reason of these words
tanquam pertinent' Hundredis predict', for even at this day such a thing as
Common of Estovers, etc. may be granted appurtenant. Sacheverell against
Porter, 13 Car. 1. 1 Cro. 482. 1 Rolls 400. 11. H. 6. 11 Pl. 27. Now then by
this Patent here is a Retorna Brevium, not only newly created, but newly
created appurtenant, and especially since here is a kind of cognation between
the things, this may very well be; in like manner may Cognizance of Pleas be
granted, if the King should grant that a Lord of an Hundred should have
cognitionem omnium placitorum, etc. tanquam pertinent' Hundred', etc. it would
create Cognizance of Pleas appurtenant to the Hundred; for it being a Creature
of the Kings it may be created as he pleases, either in gross or as
appurtenant; for a thing appurtenant may be by Grant, though a thing appendant
must be by Prescription.

Well now, this Abbot is seized of this Liberty quodammodo appurtenant.

3. When the Monastery, etc. comes to be dissolved and given to the King, it is
to be considered what becomes of this Liberty then? I conceive this Liberty is
in the hands of the King, as it was in the hands of the Abbot, (viz.) as
appurtenant, and that without the aid of the Statute of 32 H. 8. c. 20. It is
adjudged Keilway 72. Pl. 16. that this Liberty of Retorna Brevium when it comes
to the King, remains in the Crown, and is not extinguished, rejoyned or drowned
thereby.

And this Liberty is not by this coming to the Crown, reannexed to the County,
but if that were a Question, the said Statute of 32 H. 8. has put it out of
question, for by that Statute it is in the same state that it was before. It Is
true, the King might rejoyn it to the County, but till he does, it continues a
Liberty distinct, an Hundred in gross, and the Sheriff shall write Ballivo Dom'
Regis, etc. It Is true, if a man forfeit such a Liberty by non user or mis user,
the Sheriff shall enter into it, and to, and execute as in other parts of the
County, because in that case the King comes in in disaffirmance of the Liberty,
but otherwise it is where the King comes in under a Subject, as in the Bar case
he does.

Fourthly, We come to consider what alteration is made in the Case by the Grant
to Seymour and his Attainder: As to this I must observe, that the Verdict is
ill found, for it is concessit, etc. Dom' Seymour, etc. but not found what
Estate, and here is a breaking off in the middle, of which we cannot tell what
to make. Now when the King Grants, and expresses no Estate, some Books have
held the Grant to be void; but the better Opinion is, that it creates an Estate
at will, 5 E. 4. 8. (the last Leaf) B. Pl. 1. but 17 E. 3. 45. Pl. 46. is
express in it, Davis 45, 45.
and so it was adjudged Paschae 8. Jacobi in Petsall's Case.

Why then the consequence will be, that by the Attainder the Will was
determined, and then the King was in of his Old Reversion, and then the Statute
of 32 H. 8. served well to preserve the Liberty in the same Estate still. But
if the Grant were in Fee, then the King came in by a New Title, viz. the
Attainder, and then there is no benefit of the said Statute; so that this Error
in the Verdict is most to the disadvantage of the Party (the Defendant.) who
would not amend it; for there was a Proposal and Discourse of amending, and
some things were amended; but the amending of this Mistake would not be
consented to by the Defendant. But to suppose this to be a Grant in Fee, I say
still it stood of it self a Liberty without the Statute, and so when it
returned to the Crown by Attainder, it stood not in need of any such Statute,
it was Substantive and not melted down in a General Confusion into the Form
whence it was derived.

Fifthly, Come we now to the Grant to Kingston: It has many Clauses in it, I
will insist upon two.

1. The King Grants Omnia Amerciamenta, etc. with large words, Cognita,
Reputata, Acceptata, etc. I did say that the Grant of E. 3. made an annexation
of this Liberty of Ret' Brev. to the Hundreds; and if we should admit that, it
were not sufficient to create an appurtenancy in reputation; and if it were no
more than so, these words would lay hold on it.

2. The other Clause I will rest upon; thereby the King grants tot talia and
tanta, etc. as any, etc. had ratione vel praetextu Hundred' praedict' virtute
praetextu, vel color alicujus Doni, Chartae, etc. Now certainly the latter
words are subservient and ancillary, and the ratione vel praetextu Hundredi
governs all, for it is but one entire Sentence, like Finches Case, 6 Co. 39.
This praetextu is a very large Clause and much more than tot talia and tanta,
wherefore I conclude, that it is a good and sufficient Grant of the thing in
Question.

Three Objections have been made, to which I shall endeavor to give Answers.

Object. 1. By the coming to the Crown the Liberty is merged.

Answ. 1. It is not.

2. Admit it were merged thereby, yet that is not till the dissolution. Why now
in this last Grant there is a Retrospect, and it is with a leaping over to the
Seisin which the Abbot had, and therefore the Grant of the King conjoyning it
to the possession of the Abbot, the Liberty is effectually revived and erected
in the same manner and condition as it was before the uniting of it to the
Crown.

Object. 2. If this Liberty be to be revived, yet it is not revivable without
Special Words; in the Grant to Seymour there are the words Retorna Brevium, but
in the Grant to Kingston, not.

Answ. Tot talia, etc. does it, and it is as much as if all had been
particularly recited, because it refers to a thing determinate.

It Is true, if there were an Act of Resumption, as in Pager and Darcy's Case;
or if the thing were merely Personal, as in the Abbot of Walthams Case, the
privilege for his Dogs in the Forest, such General Words will not revive and
pass the things, because of the ratio privata which intervenes; but if there be
nothing in the Case (which hinders) more than the generality of the words, it is
clear the words do it; no Case can be fuller than Amerediths Case is in this
point, 9 Co. 29. B. 30. in the Case of Coleharborow abovementioned. The Ret'
Brev', etc. came to the Crown by Act of Parliament. The King Ed. 6. grants to
Francis Earl of Shrewsbury the House, and quod habeat tot talia, etc. specially
reciting many Privileges, Liberties, etc. but not mentioning Returna Brevium,
and concludes, and alia, etc. and it was adjudged that this Grant in these
general words did revive Returna Brev' (for I have a Report of the Case) but
only for the Cause abovementioned Judgment was given against the Earl as to the
thing.

This Verdict is ill found, the effectual Statute which should aid this Case if
there were need is 1 Ed. 6. c. 8. which is not found; thereby it is Enacted,
That all Letters Patents, etc. made or to be made by the King of any Honors,
etc. Franchises, Liberties, etc. should be good, sure, etc. notwithstanding any
misnaming, misrecital or nonrecital of the Premises, or the lack of the true
naming of the Natures, Kinds, Sorts and Qualities of them or any parcel
thereof, and notwithstanding diverse and sundry other suggestions and surmises,
etc.

Object. 3. The Patent of Ed. 3. or at least this Patent made to Kingston is
void by reason of the Statute 2 Ed. 3. c. 12. (and likewise 14 Ed. 3. c. 9.)
whereby it is Ordained, That henceforth the Hundreds and Wapentakes should not
be given nor severed from the Counties.

Answ. This indeed is the grand Objection and was materially objected by my
Brother Littleton, and the Case of Fortescue against my Lord Coke has been
truly cited to this purpose, which was in this Court, and is reported by
himself. How shall we do now in this great difficulty? Truly this Objection had
need be strictly examined into, for it runs to the avoiding of the Grants of
100 Hundreds and more, which have been granted since 2 E. 3.

I do conceive this Grant of Ed. 3. is not within the Statute, for though it be
a New Grant of Ret' Brev' yet it is no New Grant of the Hundreds, neither is the
Grant of Ed. 6. avoided hereby. For,

1. This Statute extends only to those Hundreds which were parcel of the
Sheriffs Farm, and not to those which were divided, because as to the first
only there was an inconvenience to the Sheriff, in that he should be charged
with the Farm of the County (the Sheriffs Farm) and yet the profits, the Firma
Ballivarum be taken from him. The words of the Statute are, That such Hundreds
(viz.) as were annexed to the Farms of the Counties shall not be given nor
severed from the Counties, neither did these Hundreds come into the Sheriff by
their coming to the Crown: The Sheriffs Farm was modelled and settled long
before; and when these Hundreds came to H. 8. they were not part of the
Sheriffs Farm, but he made Bailiffs of his own there, and they were within the
Survey of the Court of Augmentations; so I say it refers only to those Hundreds
which made a part of the Sheriffs Farm.

2. None of these Statutes extend to prohibit a Grant of an Hundred in Fee. (I
apprehend my Lord meant a Regrant of an Hundred, which before those Statutes
had been granted out in a Fee, for 2 E. 3. c. 12. rejoyns and prohibits the
Grant of those Hundreds only which were set to Farm by the King for term of
Life or otherwise) The very words of the Statute 14. E. 3. c. 9. make provision
for the Hundredors in Fee; it is said that they which have Bayliwicks or
Hundreds, etc. shall answer for their Bailiffs. Fitzh. Petition 1. there is a
complaint of one who is turned out of an Hundred he had in Fee because of the
Statute called there the New Statute: And perhaps these Hundreds were seized,
upon the like pretense, and that was the matter of the Presentment mentioned in
the Grant of E. 3. or rather Regrant.

3. Neither this Statute nor the Decree or Report of the Case in this Court
does extend to this Case, for they are not to be understood of, nor extended to
a Case wherein Retorna Brevium is granted; were not Retorna Brevium added, it is
true the Grant of the Bayliwick might be void; where an Hundred is granted at
this day the Grant is good; but by Virtue of this Statute the Sheriff may put
in and use his Bailiffs there, the collection of the Profits, etc. the Grantee
shall have but the execution of Writs is in subserviency to the Sheriff, (still
I speak where no Retorna Brevium is granted) this Bailiff shall not be a
Bailiff to the Sheriff in spite of his Teeth; and this was the very Case of
Fortescue, he had a Grant of the Three Hundreds of Newport: We find the Farm of
these Hundreds formerly here in the Exchequer; the Firma Ballivatus in
Chiltern, etc. the Farm of the three Hundreds of Newport was 5 l then in 13 E.
3. 7 l then in 23 E. 3. 9 l then in R. 2. 10 l etc. these were the ancient
Farms; Queen Elizabeth grants a Lease of these three Hundreds to Fortescue for
three lives at a certain Farm, but does not grant him Retorna Brevium. This
grant indeed was adjudged void (viz.) as to the excluding of the Sheriff;
observe what my Lord Coke says in the Case, by the Statute, etc. (says he)
Hundreds are rejoyned as to the Balywick of the same to the Counties; and all
grants made of the Balywicks of Hundreds since that Statute are void, and the
making of the Bailiffs thereof belong to the Sheriff for the better execution
of Justice and of his Office, and so it was resolved, etc. the Grant at this
day is good as to what belongs to the Lord (of an Hundred) but not as to the
execution of Process, which belongs to the Sheriff; so that I say,

1. Consider the Grantee as an Officer for the collection of the Profits, etc.
and so it is a good Grant.

2. Consider him as an Officer for the Kings Process, and so it is void, because
the Sheriff ought not to have a Bailiff put upon him, and the Grantee shall not
be the Sheriffs Bailiff, whether the Sheriff will or no. But,

3. I say if the Grant be with Retorna Brevium, then it is a good Grant as to
the Bayliwick and all, for in that Case the Sheriff is at no inconvenience, for
the Grantee shall do all, and shall be liaable to all the Escapes, and all
things done or suffered by him.

My Lord Coke was very wary in what he said about this matter, for he knew, and
the truth is, if this Statute should make the Grants of Hundreds void, it would
call in question most of the Hundreds in England, and particularly would shake
his own Grants of Hundreds which he passed when Attorney General, and some of
which his Posterity enjoy at this day. 8 H. 7. fol. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and 13 H. 7.
fol. 19, 20. Pl. 2. is a great Case concerning an Hundred granted by Ed. 4. and
afterward by R. 3. wherein there are many Questions much argued, whereof the
chief is, whether a Leet may be granted and pass as part and parcel of a
Hundred, and it is adjudged that it may; but it is the Opinion of all on all
sides, that the Grant of an Hundred is good, and so much is implied and
concluded in the Judgment; Coke upon Amerediths Case, 9. Co. 29, 30. there
Judgment is given that the Grant of the Hundred is good.

I know that in 11 H. 4. by Special Act of Parliament (vid. 1 H. 4. c. 11.) the
Sheriffs had an allowance made to them for several Hundreds, which had been
parcel of their Farms and were granted away, which could not have been if this
Statute had made the Grants void.

I think there ought to be Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Nevertheless I am glad with all my heart, that we are delivered of this Case,
for truly if I could have found any Thing to satisfy my Judgment, I would have
given Judgment another way, both for the General Concern and for the sake of
the County of Gloucester which I know will suffer much by this thing.

One short Act of Parliament of three Lines, (viz.) That all Process should go
with a non omittas propter aliquam libertatem (saving still the Liberty) of a
Man's House, which indeed the Law in all such Cases saves now) would avoid a
great delay of Justice, many Suits and Vexations, grievous Wrongs and
oppressions, and would do more good to the Kingdom than all the Liberties of
Retorna Brevium have been worth these 100 years; for as they are used now, they
are nothing but a foundation of Brocage and Mischief; they are a Feather in his
Cap that has them, but they are a Thorn in the Foot of every one that has to do
with them: For first the Party must go to the Undersheriff, and there he is
handled; then through another Purgatory, to the Bailiff of the Liberty, and
there he is handled; and then to the Underbayliff, and there he is handled; and
then to the Sheriff again. I confess I drew a short Act once, and I wish some
good man would now promote it.

It is adjourned into the Exchequer Chamber.

THE CASE OF COLLINGWOOD and PACE IN THE Exchequer Chamber,
The Lord Chief Baron HALE's Argument.
IN the Argument of this Case I shall suppose as clear and unquestionable,
these three things, viz.

First, That Patrick the Son, and William the Grandson of Nicholas the elder
Brother are not inheritable to John the Earl, because though they are both
Denizens born, yet Nicholas their Father, thorough whom they must convey their
Pedigree, was an Alien.

Secondly, That as Patrick and William cannot inherit, so neither can they
obstruct the Descent to John the Son of George, because being descended from an
Alien, the Law takes no notice of them as to this purpose; otherwise it is if
the said Nicholas had been a Denizen born and Attainted, because in such a
case, though he could not take himself by Descent, he could obstruct the
Descent to the younger Brother, so the Land would Escheat.

Thirdly, That the Case of George, the Son naturalized, and the Case of John
his Son, as in reterence to John the Earl, and the Descent from him will be all
one; if George had survived him, John the Earl might have inherited, so will
John his Son, who jure Representationis, is the same with his Father, Et e
Converso.

These things being unquestionably to be admitted before I come to the Argument
of the Case, I shall premise certain General Observations.

First, Touching Discents.

Secondly, Touching the Capacities of Incapacities of an Alien.

Thirdly, Touching Naturalizations.

Touching Discents I shall consider,

First, The Rule whereby they are to be Governed.

Secondly, The various kinds of Discents or hereditary Successions.

Concerning the Rule of Discents, we must not govern our selves therein by the
General Notions of Law or Proximity of Nature, but by the Principal Laws of the
Country where the Question arises; for the various Countries have variously
disposed the manner of Discents, even in the same Law or Degree of Proximity.

For Instance.

The Father is certainly as near of Kin to the Son as the Son is to the Father,
and is nearer in Proximity than a Brother, and therefore shall be preferred as
next of Kin in an Administration, 3 Rep. Ratcliffs Case.

Yet touching the Succession of the Father to the purchase of his Son, the Laws
of several Countries variously provide.

First, According to the Jews, for want of Issue of the Son, the Father
succeeds, excluding the Brother, and that has been the Use and Construction of
the Jewish Doctors, upon Number 27. Seldom de Successionibus, Hebr. Cap. 12.

But the Mother was wholly excluded.

Secondly, According to the Greeks, the Provision for the Succession of the
Father is left doubtful, Petit Leges 1, 6. fol. 6.

According to the Romans or Civil Law, by the Construction of the Law of the
Twelve Tables, the Father succeeds in the purchase of the Son for want of Issue
of the Son under the Title of Proximus Agnatus, and accordingly was their
Usage, though my Lord Coke supposed the contrary, Co. Lit. 5. But to settle all,
the Institutes of Justinian, Lib. 3. Tit. 3. in an Authentic Collection, 8.
Tit. de Haered' ab intestato venientibus, the Son dying without Issue, his
Brothers and Sisters, Father and Mother do succeed him in a kind of Coparcenary
as well to Lands as Goods.

According to the Customs of Normandy, which in some things have a Cognition
with the Laws of England, the Son dying without Issue, his Brothers are
preferred before the Father, but the Father is preferred before the Uncles,
Terrien. lib. 6. c. 6. la Customier de Normandy, cap. Descheants.

5. According to the Laws of England, the Son dying without Issue, or Brother
or Sister, the Father cannot succeed, but it descends to the Uncle. And it is a
Maxim of the English Law, An Inheritance cannot Lineally ascend.

Consequently, the Question being in this Case touching a Descent of Lands in
England, it must be Ruled and Disputed according to the Grounds and Reasons of
the Laws of England.

Secondly, Touching the Second, the Division of Discents are of two kinds:

First, Lineal, as from the Father or Grandfather, to the Son or Grandson.

Secondly, Collateral or Transversal, as from Brother to Brother, Uncle to
Nephew, or e converso. And both these are again of two sorts:

First, Immediate, as in Lineals from Father to Son.

Secondly, Mediate, as in Lineals from Grandfather to Grandson, the Father
dying in the Life of the Grandfather, when the Father is the medium differens
of the Descent.

Thirdly, In Collaterals, from the Uncle to the Nephew, or from the Nephew to
the Uncle, where the Father is likewise the medium differens.

And I call this a Mediate Descent, though as to many purposes it be Immediate;
for the Father dying in the Life of the Grandfather, the Son succeeds in point
of Descent of the Laws immediately to the Grandfather; and in a Writ of Entry
shall be supposed in the Per to the Grandfather, and not in the Per and Cui.

But I call it a Mediate Descent, because the Father is the medium through or
by whom the Son derives his Title to the Grandfather.

Therefore if any man thinks the term of Mediate Descent not properly used, he
may if he please use the words of Mediate or Immediate Ancestors. Words are
imposed to signify Things, and therefore the Terms being explained what I mean
by them, I shall retain the Terms of Mediate or Immediate Discents.

This distinction of Discents or Relations between Ancestor and Heir, and
Hereditary Succession, will be of use throughout this whole Debate.

In Immediate Discents there can be no Impediment, but what arises in the
parties themselves.

For Instance,

The Father seized of Lands, the Impediment that hinders the Descent must be
either in the Father or the Son; as if the Father or the Son be Attaint, or an
Alien.

In Immediate Discents, a Disability of being an Alien or Attaint in him that I
call a medius Ancestor, will disable a person to take by Descent, though he
himself has no such Disability.

For Instance,

In Lineal Discents: If the Father be Attaint or an Alien, and has Issue a
Denizen born, and dies in the life of the Grandfather, the Grandfather dies
seized; the Son shall not take, but the Land shall Escheat.

In Collateral Discents:

A. and B. Brothers, A. is an Alien or Attainted, and has Issue C. a Denizen
born. B. purchases Lands and dies without Issue, C. shall not inherit; for A.
(which was the Medius Ancestor, or medium differens of this Descent) was
incapable, Dyer 274. Gray's Case.

And this is apparent in this very Case; for by this means Patrick, though a
Denizen, and the Son of an Elder Brother, is disabled to inherit the Earl.

A. and B. Brothers, A. is an Alien or person Attainted, and has Issue C. and
dies, and C. purchases Lands and dies without Issue. B. his Uncle shall not
inherit for the Reason before-going; for A. is a Medius, which was disabled.
This is Courtney's Case.

And if in our Case Patrick the Son of Nicholas, although a Denizen born, had
purchased Lands and died without Issue, John his Uncle should not have
Inherited him by reason of the Disability of Nicholas; and yet Nicholas
himself, had he not been an Alien, could not immediately have Inherited to his
Son; but yet he is a Block in the way to John. See the Reason 17 E. 4. cap. 1.

But this must be intended of such as are absolute Impediments, as Attainder or
Alien, not Temporary suspensions: As in the Lord Delaware's Case in 10 Co.

But in any Discents the Impediment of an Ancestor that is Medius Ancestor,
between the persons from whom and to whom, will not impede the Descent.

The Grandfather and Grandmother both Aliens, or Attaint of Treason, have Issue
the Father a Denizen, who has Issue the Son a Denizen; the Son shall be Heir
to the Father notwithstanding the Disability of the Grandfather: For they are
not Medii antecessores between the Father and the Son, but Paramount; and yet
all the Blood the Father has he derived from his disabled Parents.

And this Observation states in effect the Case.

For if the Descent between Brothers be an Immediate descent, and that the
Father be not Medius antecessor between them, then the Disability in Robert
will not impede the Descent of George his Brother, or to John his Brother's
Son. But if it be a Mediate descent, and the Father be a Medius antecessor
between them, then the Disability in Robert the Father may impeach the Descent.

The Second Term to be explained, is that disabling Term of an Alien, and to
consider what Disability arises from it. The Law that is the Rule of Discents
in England, is also the measure of this Nonability, and is the only Rule that
must determine how far it extends.

Therefore I consider, what Disability the Law does induce in case of an Alien.

It does not hinder, but that an Alien is of the same Degree and Relation of
Consanguinity as in the like cases of a Denizen born. The Son, Father and
Brother though Aliens, are yet Son, Father and Brother as Natural born Subjects,
and so taken notice of in our Law.

In Cro. Car. Carroon's Case, he shall be preferred in Administration as next
of Kin.

Secondly, What the Law does do as to Disabilities of an Alien: And this is of
two kinds.

First, the Disability that is Personal or Original to the Alien himself, in
reference to Inheritance.

Though he may take by Purchase by his own Contract that which he cannot retain
against the King, yet the Law will not enable him by Act of his own, to
transfer by Hereditary descent, the Alien dying, having since a Denizen born,
the Land will not descend.

Or to take by an Act in Law; for the Law, quae nihil frustra, will not give an
Inheritance or Freehold by Act in Law, for he cannot keep it.

And therefore the Law will not give him, 1. Descent. 2. Courtesy. 3. Dower. 4.
Guardianship.


And in respect of this Incapacity he does resemble a person Attaint; yet with
this difference, the Law looks upon a person Attaint as one that it takes
notice of: And therefore the eldest Son Attaint, over-living his Father, though
he shall not take by Descent in respect of his Disability, yet he shall hinder
the Descent of the younger Son.

But if the Eldest Son be an Alien, the Law takes no notice of him; and
therefore as he shall not take by Descent, so he shall not impede the Descent
to his younger Brother, 32 E. 3. Cousenage 5. A consequential Consecutive
Disability that reflects to an Alien from one that must derive by or through
him* though he perchance be a Natural born Subject.

As in our Case, though Patrick the Son of Nicholas be a Natural born Subject,
yet because Nicholas his Father was an Alien, there is a Consecutive Impediment
derived upon Patrick, whereby he is Consequentially disabled to Inherit John
his Uncle; and this Consecutive Disability is parallel to that which we call
Corruption of Blood, which is a Consequent of Attainder.

If the Father be Attainted, the Blood of the Grandfather is not Corrupted, no
nor the Blood of his Son, though he could not inherit him, but only the Blood of
the Father: But that Corruption of Blood in the Father draws a Consequential
Impediment upon the Son to inherit the Grandfather; because the Fathers
Corruption of Blood obstructs the transmission of the Hereditary descent
between the Grandfather and the Son.

And here we must take notice of a great diversity between a Disability in the
Blood and a Bar.

Cro. Car. 16. Edwards and Rogers's Case. William Rogers was seized of a
Reversion in Fee, Andrew his Uncle levies a Fine with Proclamations and dies,
having Issue John, who dies leaving Issue William; then William Rogers dies
without Issue. Ruled, that William the Grandson of Andrew shall inherit,
notwithstanding the Fine of his Grandfather; and the Reason is, because William
Rogers dying after Andrew, the Estate never passed through Andrew, and
consequently William the Grandson claiming from William, is in effect a
Stranger to the Fine of Andrew, and may aver that Parts, etc.

But in that Case had Andrew been an Alien, or Attaint, then had William his
Grandson been disabled to have inherited William by the Consecutive Disability.

Now in the Case at Bar, there is first no doubt but that John the Earl and
George were Brothers, though they continued Aliens; neither is there any question
that they could not have inherited one the other had they continued Aliens;
neither is there any question whether that Personal Disability be removed by
the Naturalization.

But the Question is, Whether any Consequential or Consecutive Disabilities do
result upon them from their Father Roberts being an Alien, which may disable
the one Brother to Inherit, though there Personal disability be removed? I come
now to the Explication of the Third Term, (viz.) the Restoring or Enabling
Term, Naturalization.

The Means of removing Disabilities of this kind are two:

A temporary, partial and imperfect amotion thereof, Letters Patents of
Denization, which though it puts the Person Denized as to some purposes in the
Condition of a Subject, and enables a Transmission Hereditary to his Children
born after the Denization; yet it does not wholly remove the Disease or
Nonability, as to the point of Discents or Hereditary Transmission, and
resembles a Pardon in case of an Attainder.

And therefore in Lineal Discents, if there be Grandfather a Natural born
Subject, Father Alien, Son Natural; the Father is made Denizen, he shall not
inherit the Grandfather; and if the Father dies in the life of the Grandfather,
the Grandchild, though born after the Denization, does not remove either the
Personal, or the Consequential Impediment or Incapacity of the Father.

In Collateral Discents the Father a Natural born Subject has Issue two Sons
Aliens, who are both made Denizens, and one dies without Issue, the other shall
not inherit him. This was agreed in Godfrey and Dixon's Case, hereafter cited.

The Second is more deep, (viz.) Naturalization.

According to the Laws of Normandy they may Naturalize, but such Naturalization
shall not divest a Descent already vested. Terrien lib. 2. cap. 12.

But according to our Law it can only be by Parliament, and not otherwise.

And this cures the Defect, and makes them as if they had been Born in England;
and no man shall be received against an Act of Parliament to say the contrary;
and therefore if the Father an Alien has Issue a Son born here, and then the
Father is Naturalized, the Son shall inherit.

If the Father a Natural Subject has Issue a Son an Alien, who is Naturalized;
the Father dies, the Son shall inherit, Co. Lit. 129.

Touching the retrospect of a Naturalization, and whether the Son being an
Alien Naturalized after the death of the Father, shall direct the Descent to
the youngest, depends upon the words of the Naturalization, which being by Act
of Parliament, may by a strange retrospect direct it.

But as the Naturalization in the Case in question is Penned it would not do
it, the Naturalization has only respect to what shall be hereafter.

The Clause of taking by Descent, after the Commencement of the Session of
Parliament, is sufficient to check that Retrospect.

And this brings me to the Consideration of the Naturalization in the Case in
question, and the Effect thereof, which I shall not Argue as a Point; because I
take the Point of the Case to be single: But I shall deliver my Opinion of it
by way of Conveyance to the Case.

(Read the Naturalization.)

First, In this Naturalization I shall set down, what Effect it has. And,

Secondly, What Effect it has not.

First, What Effect it has: It does doubtless remove that Inability and
Incapacity that is in John the Earl and George, in respect of themselves, being
Aliens, and so put them in the Condition as if they had been Born in England.

But if there be a Consequential Impediment or Incapacity derived upon them by
Robert, their Fathers being an Alien, which might hinder their Successions one
to another, which at the present I suppose, or admit: I say, if there be any
such Consequential Impediment, this I take is not removed by this
Naturalization.

My Reasons are briefly these:

First, Because this Act of Naturalization has a proper Subject upon which it
may work, and with which it is satisfied, (viz.) the Personal defects of the
Parties Naturalized; because this Defect arising from the Incapacity of the
Father is not in any measure taken notice of by the Act, nor so much as
mentioned that the Father was an Alien.

By the whole scope of the Act, and every Clause of it, and those Relative
Terms (As if Born in England,) is only to supply the Personal defect of the
Parties Naturalized, arising from their Birth out of England, and therefore
shall never be carried to a Collateral purpose.

Touching the Objection.

Though this Remedy will not Cure a Disease of another nature, as Illegitimation,
Half-Blood, etc. yet it Cures all the defects of Foreign Births, whether in the
Parties themselves, or resulting from the Ancestors. And the Act might have
been so Penned as it might have done it; but it is not.

The Plaster is applied only to defects in the arising from their own Birth;
not defects arising from the Father, or that Consequential disability arising
thereby.

Second Objection.

But we find in Curteen's Case, Placita Coronae 241. that where the Father was
Attainted, the Restitution in Blood granted by the Act to the Son, cures that
disability that results from the Fathers Attainder; and this not only to the
Son, but also to the Collateral Heirs of the Father.

And I have before observed, the Corruption of the Blood by Attainder, is only
of the Blood of the Father; for the Son's Blood was not at all Corrupted. By
this Act of Restitution,

1. Notice is taken of the Father's Attainder.

2. It does Intentionally provide against it, and it was the only business of
that Act to remove it.

3. Had it not removed that Corruption of Blood it had been useless; for there
had been nothing else for it to provide against, and so the Restitution had
been idle had it not had that Effect. But in our Case the Naturalization, as it
takes no notice of the defect in the Father, nor provides against it; so it
has another business to satisfy, it does remedy the Foreign Birth of the Son.

And let us examine the several Clauses in this Act of Naturalization, we shall
find the whole scope of it was no other, than to put them in the same and no
better Condition, than as if they were Born in England. This is the Governing
Clause, both in the first and last Sentence, and has an influence upon all the
Clauses that intervene.

It has been endeavored to break the Context, and to make the Clause (As if
Born in England) to be cumulative and superabundant.

But this were by a Nicety to alter the scope and intent of the Act.

If it were omitted, yet the first Clause making him but a Natural Born Subject
to all intents and purposes, surely makes him no more, and meddles not with the
disability of his Father, or the Consequence thereof.

There has been some stress laid upon the Clause, which enables him to make
his resort and Pedigree to Ancestors Lineal or Collateral, as if that should
Entitle George at least to some more advantage by Naturalization, than if he
had been Born here.

But to this I say,

First, That is a General Clause, and cannot make a Legal Ancestor.

Secondly, Upon the same Reason it may make John or George inheritable to
Patrick, and not adjudge the disability of Nicholas his Father, which no man
pretends.

It makes him as much inheritable to Ancestors Lineal, as well as Collateral;
and yet it makes no Ancestors Lineal. The Words are General, and create no new
Ancestor, that the Law does not enable.

It is true, that in the Argument of Godfrey and Dixon's Case, especially
Mountague laid some stress upon these Ancillary Clauses; but the rest rather
rested upon the very Matter, that the party Naturalized was become thereby a
Natural born Subject.

And thus I have done with the Naturalization, which does not Cure any
disability of Transmission Hereditary between the Brothers, resulting from the
disability of the Father, if any such be.

But it does cure the Personal disability in John and George, and makes them to
all intents as Natural Subjects as if they had been born in England. So that
now the Case made is no more than this:

An Alien has Issue two Sons born in England, and one purchases Lands and
dies without Issue, whether the other shall inherit?

For, as I have before observed, the Case of John the Son of George is all one
with the Case of George himself, whom he represents; as to the Point of the
Descent from John the Earl.

Before I come to the Argument of the Question, the Verdict had need be
delivered from a Question, which possibly would make an end of the Dispute.

It has been said, that if the Wife of Robert were an English Woman, there
would be no question but the Land might descend between the Brothers John and
George, though Robert the Father were an Alien; and that it shall be so intended,
because nothing appears to the contrary.

To this I say,

It is true, that if the Mother were an English Woman, the Descent from John to
George his Son would be unquestionable: For notwithstanding the Incapacity of
Robert the Father, by being an Alien, they might inherit their Mother, and
consequently they might inherit one the other.

It has been endeavored to be Answered, that it is not possible the Mother
could be an English Woman, because the Sons are found to be Aliens.

But that will not be so, although an English Man marry an Alien beyond the Seas,
and having there Issue, the Issue will be Denizens, as has been often
Resolved: Yet it is without question, that if an English Woman go beyond the
Seas and marry an Alien, and have Issue born beyond the Seas, the Issue are
Aliens; for the Wife was sub potestate viri, and yet the Issue born in England
should inherit though the Husband be an Alien.

But the true Answer is, That in this Case Robert the Husband being an Alien,
born out of the Allegiance of the Crown of England, and marrying, and having
all his Issues born there, She shall not be presumed an English Woman, but
shall be presumed a Native in Scotland, where her Husband lived and had Issue,
unless the contrary had been expressly found.

Now touching the Point in question, it is true that Sir Edw. Coke in his
Littl. fo. 8. is of another Opinion: He says, That if an Alien have two Sons
born in England, and one dye without Issue, the other shall not inherit him.
But I take the Law to be the contrary.

First, I will show what Reasons do not move me.

Secondly, What Reasons do convince and satisfy me.

It does not move me thus to conclude, because there is no defectus Parriae, or
Nationis or Ligeantiae of either of the Brothers; for though there be no personal
defect in either of the Extremes, yet it may be possible that a consequential
Impediment arising from another Ancestor, may hinder the Descent; and this is
apparent in the Case in question, for Patrick the Son of Nicholas the Elder,
Brother of John the Earl, has no Defectus Ligeantiae, for he was naturalized,
yet the Land shall not Descend from John the Earl to Patrick by reason of the
defect of Nicholas his Father, neither does it move me that George or John his
Son do not claim the Land from Robert the Father, but from John the Earl, for
if the Grandfather be seized, the Father is an Alien.

The Son of Denizen born, the Father dies in the Life of the Grandfather, the
Son shall not inherit by reason of the defect of the Father, though he claim
nothing from him, but from the Grandfather.

But the Reasons that satisfy me are these three in order as they are
propounded.

My first Reason is, because the Descent from a Brother to a Brother, though it
be a Collateral Descent, yet it is an Immediate Descent, and consequently upon
what has been premised at first, unless we can find a disability or impediment
in them, no impediment in another Ancestor will hinder the Descent between them.

Now to prove this Descent immediate, I shall use these three ensuing Instances
or Evidences.

First, In point of Pleading, one Brother shall derive himself as Heir to
another, without mentioning another Ancestor; this has been at large insisted
on by others, and therefore I shall pass it over.

Secondly, According to the computation of Degrees, according to the Laws of
England, Brother and Brother make one Degree, and the Brother is distant from
his Brother and Sister in the first degree of Consanguinity.

According to the Civil Law, the Brother is in the second Degree from the
Brother, for they make one Degree from the Brother to the Father, and from the
Father a second Degree to the other Brother; but yet they say in Collaterals,
Nullus est proximior Fratre, ideoque in Collateralibus nullus est primus
Gradus, sed secundus Gradus obtinet vocem primi, Inst. lib. 3. Tit. B. de
Gradibus Consaguinitatis.

According to the Cannon Law, Frater and Frater, Soror and Soror, sunt in primo
Gradu, Decret' gratian Laus 35. quest. 5. ad sedem, and therefore their Laws
prohibiting Marriage in the fourth Degree, take Brother and Sister to be the
first Degree of the fourth.

The Laws of England, in computation of the Degrees of Consanguinity, agree
with the Common Law, and reckon the Brother and Brother to be the first Degree,
and this is apparent by Littl' sect. 20. and the Objection of Lord Coke
thereupon, and the Book of 31 E. 3. Hollands Case cited by Littleton.

And with this likewise agrees the Laws and Custom of Normandy, which though in
some things they differ from the Law of England, as is before observed, yet in
this particular and diverse other touching Discents, they agree with it, Vid.
Glov. Com. super Customeir de Normandy, in Cap. de Escheat, Et doir un' Scavoir
que tonque le Custom de paijs de Normandy pur compter les Degrees en Line
Collateral solonque les Cannoists deux freres ont le primier Degree and eont
que en Degree.

My third Evidence that the Descent between Brothers is immediate, this (viz.)
the Descent between Brothers differs from all others Collateral Discents
whatsoever, for in other Discents Collateral the half Blood does inherit, but
in a Descent between Brothers, the half Blood does impede the Descent, which
argues that the Descent is immediate.

The Uncle of the part of the Father has no more of the Blood of the Mother,
than the Brother of the Second Venture.

The Brother by the second Venture has the immediate Blood of the Father, which
the Uncle (viz) the Fathers Brother has not, but only as they meet in the
Grandfather.

The Brother of the half Blood is nearer of Blood than the Uncle, and therefore
shall be preferred in the Administration.

And so it has been resolved in 5 E. 6. in Browns Case, and though the Book of 5
E. 6. B. Administration 47. mistakes the Law in preferring the Brother of the
half Blood before the Mother, yet it had been right in the case of a
Competition between him and the Uncle.

And yet the Uncle is preferred in the Descent before the Brother of the half
Blood, and the reason is, because that is a mediate Descent, mediante Patre;
but the Descent to the Brother must be immediate if at all, and therefore the
half Blood impedes it.

Again, it is apparent, that if in the Line between Brother and Brother the Law
took notice of the Father as the Medium thereof, the Brother by the second
Venture should rather succeed the other Brother, because he is Heir to his
Father; therefore in a Descent between Brothers the Law respects only the
mediate relation of the Brothers as Brothers, and not in respect of their
Father, though it is true the Bosom or Foundation of their Consanguinity is in
the Father and Mother.

My second principal Reason is to prove, that the disability of the Father does
not at all hinder the Descent between the Brothers immediate is this,

If the Father in case of a Descent between Brothers, were such an Ancestor as
the Law looks upon as the Medium that derives the one Descent from the other,
then the Attainder of the Father would hinder the Descent between the Brothers.

But the Attainder of the Father does not hinder the Descent between the
Brothers.

Therefore the Father is not such a Medium or Nexus as is looked upon by Law as
the means deriving such Descent between the two Brothers.

Both the former Propositions, and indeed the Illustration and Enforcement of
the whole reason, will be evidenced by the comparison of three Cases, the two
former of the Cases evincing the truth of the first Proposition, and the later
proving the second Proposition.

The First is Gravers's Case 10 Eliz. Dyer 274. The younger Brother has Issue
and is attaint of Treason and dies, the elder Brother having a Title to a
Petition of Right, dies without Issue, without a Restitution, the other
Brothers Son has lost that Title; for though that Title were in an Ancestor,
that was not attainted, yet his Father that is the Medium whereby he must
convey that Title, was Attainted, and so the Descent is obstructed.

On the other side, the Case of Courtney, in Cro. Car. 241. Henry Courtney had
Issue Edward, and is attaint of Treason and dies, Edward purchases Lands, and
dies without Issue, the Sisters and Sisters Children of Henry are disabled to
inherit Edward, yet neither Edward nor his Aunts were attainted, nor their
Blood corrupted, as is before manifested, but only Henry; though the Land could
not descend immediately from Edward, yet because he who nevertheless was the
Medium whereby the Aunts must derive their Pedigree and Consanguinity to Edward
was attainted, the Descent was obstructed till a restitution in Blood.

But suppose that the Grandfather of Edward was attainted, and not Henry, this
could not have hindered the Descent from Edward to his Aunts, because the
Attainder had been paramount, that Consanguinity which was between Henry and
his Sisters, as Brothers and Sisters, and that is proved by the third Case.

In 40 and 41 Eliz. in the Exchequer, Hobbies Case, William Hobby had Issue
Philip and Mary, and is attainted of Treason and dies, Philip purchases Lands,
and dies without Issue; Ruled that notwithstanding the Attainder, Mary shall
inherit, because the Descent between Philip and Mary was immediate, and the Law
regards not the disability of the Father, and in that Case all the Reasons that
have been objected against the Descent in the Case at Bar, were objected.

If it be objected that in that Case the Mother was not attainted, which might
preserve the Legal Blood between Philip and Mary.

I Answer, That that would not serve, admitting the disability of the Parents
were not at all considerable; for if it disable the Blood of the Father which
is derived to the Son, it would infallibly destroy the Descent to Mary the
Sister, for she could not inherit her Brother in the capacity of Heir to the
part of the Mother, if by the Attainder she had been disabled to take as Heir
by the Fathers Blood, 49 E. 3. 12.

If the Heir on the part of the Father be attainted, the Land shall escheat,
and shall never descend to the Heir of the Mother, because notwithstanding the
Attainder, the Law looks upon it as in esse; but otherwise it is in case of an
Alien, as has been before shown; for if the Son purchase Land and have no
Kindred on the part of his Father, but an Alien, it shall descend to the Heir
of the part of the Mother.

And although the Blood both of the Father and the Mother were in Mary, yet if
she were disabled in the Blood of her Father by his Attainder, she could never
entitle her self by the Blood of her Mother.

I have done with this Reason, there remain two Principal Objections to be
answered.

Object. 1. The Father in the Case at Bar, is the Fountain from whence the
Blood of John and George is derived, and their Consanguinity arises not from
one to another, but from their Father, which is the common vinculum to them
both, and therefore this disability in the Parents destroys the Civil Relation
of Hereditary Blood between the two Brothers.

I Answer First, The very same Objection might be, and indeed was made in
Hobbies Case, but prevailed not.

Secondly, But further, no man will say but that the Blood of the Father and
Mother are necessary to derive Consanguinity in the Son, for the Blood of the
Father without the Mother is impossible to be derived to the Children; and yet
no man will deny, that if the one or the other were Denizen born, their
Children should inherit one the other.

Thirdly, But the truth is, the Father and the Mother are the Blood Natural to
both the Sons, but it is the Law into which by their Birth or Naturalization
they are translated, that is the Fountain of the Civil or Hereditary Blood; the
Parents are the common Vinculum, the Fonntain of their Blood, that aliquod
tertium in quo convenient in regno naturali, but it is the Law of the Land into
which by their birth, or naturalization they are transplanted, the Commune
Vinculum, that aliquod tertium in quo convenient in Regno Civili.

Object. 2. But all their blood that they have is derived from their Parents,
and they can take no other blood but what they have from them; and if that
blood which the Parents transmit be stained, and void of Hereditary Quality, no
hereditary blood can intervene between them.

I Answer, It is true that their natural blood is derived from their Parents,
and as it is that that makes them Brothers Sons, so it is that that makes them
their blood; but yet the civil qualification of their blood which makes them
inheritable one to the other is from another Fountain (viz.) the Law of the
Land; and this Law finding them Legitimate and untrinque conjunctos sanguine
parentali naturali, and so natural Brothers, and finding them transplanted into
the civil rights of this Kingdom by their birth here or Naturalization, which
is all one, does superinduce and close the natural Consanguinity, with a civil
hereditary Quality, whereby they may inherit one the other.

For Instance,

A. Grandfather and B. his Wife, both Aliens, have Issue C. a Son born here,
who has Issue D. a Son also born here.

No body can deny that C. has all his natural blood from A. and B. and no
where else; nor is that blood that he has so from them, an inheritable blood,
yet is it unquestionable that D. shall inherit C. and D. has no natural blood
but what he has from C. nor C. no natural blood but what he has from A. and
B. But true it is, the Law does superinduce that civil hereditary Quality upon
the blood of C. by his birth in England, though as he took it from his Father and
Mother it was void of that Quality; the Law of Nature made him indeed Son, but
it was the Law of England that gave him a capacity to be an Heir in England, or
to have one.

My third and last Reason is indeed more general, though not so conclusive as the
two former were upon the particular Reason of the Case, though not altogether to
be neglected. (viz.)

The Law of England which is the only ground, and must be the only measure of
the incapacity of an Alien, and of those consequential results that arise from
it, has been always very gentle in the construction of the disability, and
rather contracting than extending it so severely.

For Instance,

The Statute de natis ultra Mare 25 E. 3. declares that the Issue born beyond
Sea of an English Man upon an English Woman shall be a Denizen, yet the
construction has been, though an English Merchant marries a Foreigner, and has
Issue by her beyond the Sea, that Issue is a natural born Subject.

In 16 Cro. Car. in the Duchy, Bacons Case, per omnes Justic' Angl'.

And accordingly it has been more than once Resolved in my Remembrance,
Pround's Case of Rent.

The Case of the Postnati, commonly called Calvin's Case, the Report is
grounded upon this gentle Interpretation of the Law, though there were very witty
Reasons urged to the contrary; and surely if ever there were reason for a
gentle Construction even in the Case in question, it concerns us to be guided
by such an Interpretation since the Union of the two Kingdoms, by which many
perthance very Considerable and Noble Families of a Scottish Extract may be
concerned in the consequence of this Question both in England and Ireland, that
enjoy their Inheritances in peace. I spare to mention particulars. So far
therefore as the parallel Cases of Attainder warrant this extent of this
Ability I shall not dispute, but further than that I dare not extend.

Now as touching the Authorities that favor my Opinion, I shall not mention
them, because they have been fully Repeated; and the later Authorities in this
very Case are not in my Judgment to be neglected.

Touching the Case of Godfrey and Dixon, it is true it does differ from the
Case in question, and in that the Father was made a Denizen and then had Issue
a younger Son, who inherited the elder Son an Alien born, but Naturalized after
the death of his Father; yet there is to be observed in that Case, either the
Naturalization of the elder Son relates to his Birth, or relates only to the
Time of his Naturalization; whether it did relate, or not, depends upon the
words of the Act of Naturalization, which I have not seen.

If it did relate, the Cause in effect will be no more, but an Alien has Issue
a Natural born Son, (for so he is, as I have Argued, by his Naturalization) and
then is made a Denizen, and has Issue and dies, the elder Son purchases Lands
and dies without Issue, the younger Son shall inherit; the elder should not
have inherited his Father, by reason of the Incapacity of the Father.

But it does not relate further than the Time of his Naturalization, which was
after the time of the Death of his Father, and consequently he could not divest
the Heirship of his younger Brother; yet if he purchases and dies without
Issue, his younger Brother shall inherit him, though there was never Inheritable
Blood between the elder Son and his Father, so much as in fiction or relation.

Upon the whole Case I conclude,

First, That there be two Brochers Natural born in England, the Sons of an
Alien, the one shall inherit the other.

Secondly, That the Naturalization puts them in the same Condition as if born
here, though it does not more.

Thirdly, That John the Son of George stands in the same Condition of
inheriting his Uncle, the Earl, as George should have done had he survived the
Earl.

Fourthly, But if the Disability of Robert the Father had disabled the Brothers
to have inherited one the other, the Naturalization of the Earl or George had
not removed that Disability.

Fifthly, But no such Disability of the Father does disable the Brother George
to inherit the Earl; it neither does Consequentially disable John the Son of
George to inherit the Earl.

Consequently, as to the Point referred to our Judgment, John the Son of George
is Inheritable to the Land of John his Uncle.

The End of the First Volume.
A TABLE OF THE Principal Points Argued and Resolved in the First PART OF THESE
REPORTS.
A.
Abatement. See Pleadings. IN the Ecclesiastical Court, a Suit does not abate
by the Death of either Party, Page 134 A Baronet is Sued by the Addition of
Knight and Baronet, the Action shall abate, 154 In all Actions where one
Plaintiff (of several) Dies, the Writ shall abate, save in an Action brought by
an Executor, 235
Acceptance. Where Acceptance of Rent from the Assignee shall discharge the
Lessee. 99
Action. See Bail. Whether an Action of Debt qui tam upon the Stat. 5 El. c. 4.
lies in B. R. 8 Action brought de uxore abducta, and concludes contra forman
Statuti, where there is no Statute in the case, yet good, 104 Action for a
Nuisance in stopping of the Lights of his House, p. 139, 237, 248 Action upon
the Stat. 13 Car. 2. by one Bookseller against another, for Printing his Copy,
p. 253 Where the Matter consists of two parts in several Counties, the
Plaintiff may bring his Action in which he pleases, p. 344 Where several Causes
may be joined in one Action, and where not, 365, 366
Action upon the Case. See Jurisdiction. Way.
In the Nature of Conspiracy, aagainst three, for Arresting without Cause, and
only one found Guilty, 12 Such an Action lies against one, p. 19 Lies for a
Justice of Peace against one, who Indicts him for Matters in the Execution of
his Office, p. 23, 25 For taking his Wife from him, brought against the Woman's
Father, p. 37 Lies not against a Justice of Peace for causing one to be
Indicted, who was after accquitted, 47 Where it lies for Suing one in the
Ecclesiastical Court, and where not, 86 For erecting a Market 7 miles off, 98
Upon the Custom of Merchants, for a Bill of Exchange accepted, 152 For not
Grinding at his Mill, 167 Where it lies against a Master of a Ship for Goods
lost out of the same, 138, 190, 191 Against the Mayor of L. for not Granting a
Poll upon a doubtful Election, 206 For not repairing a Fence, 264 Against a
Tailor for Spoiling his Coat in making, 268 For Riding over the Plaintiff with
an unruly Horse, 295 Where Action lies for Defaming the Wife, whereby the
Husband loses his Customers, 348
Action upon the Case. For Slander. You are a Forger of Bonds, a Publisher of
Forgery, and Sue upon forged Bonds. These last Words not Actionable, 3 She was
with Child by J. S. whereof she miscarried, 4 Thou have received stolen Goods,
and knew they were stolen, J. S. Stole them and thou were Partner with her, 18
Of a Midwife. She is an Ignorant Woman and of small Practice, and very
unfortunate in her Way; there are few that she goes to but lie desperately ill,
or dye under her hands. Action good, 21 Thou art a thievish Rogue, and did
steal Plate from Wadham College in Oxford. The Words spoke in London, where to
be tried, 22, 263 He is a Forsworn Justice and not fit to be a Justice of
Peace, if I did see him I would tell him so to his Face. Action good, 50 You
are a Pimp and a Bawd, and fetch young Gentlewomen to young Gentlemen, 53 Of an
Attorney. That he could not Read a Declaration, 98 He has broke 2 or 3 of his
Fathers Ribs of which he shortly after dyed, and I will complain to a Justice
of him; he may be hanged for the Murder tho it were done 20 years since. Action
good, 117 Of a Woollen Draper. You are a Cheating Fellow, and keep a false
Book. Action lies, 117 He has Forged his Uncle Row's Will, 149 He had picked
his Pocket against his will, and was a Pick pocket. Not Actionable, 213 Of a
Justice of Peace. He is not worth a groat, and is gone to the Dogs. Not
Actionable, 258 He is a false cheating Knave, and keeps a false Debt Book, with
which he cheats the Country. Actionable, 263 For charging the Plaintiff with
Felony generally. Good, 264 Of an under Carrier of Post Letters. He has broken
up Letters and taken out Bills of Exchange. Not lies, 275 The Defendant said to
the Plaintiff, I know my self and I know you, I never buggerd a Mare. The words
Actionable, 276 He would have given D. Money to have Robbed G's House, and he
did Rob it, 323
Administration. By the Civil Law Administration ought to be committed to the
Residuary Legatee, whether Assets or not Assets, 218 To which the Court of K.
B. strongly inclined; 219, 316
Admiralty. May punish one that resists the Process of their Court, and may
Fine and Imprison for a Contempt in the face of their Court, but not give the
Party, Damages, 1 Where Sentence is obtained in a Foreign Admiralty, one may
Libel for Execution thereof here, tho the matter were not originally
determinable in our Admiralty; yet if the Contract were made on Land beyond
Seas Prohibition lies, 32 Its Jurisdiction in seizing Ships, 173 It has
Jurisdiction of Ships taken by Pirates, but not if taken by Enemies, 308 Has
Jurisdiction for Mariners Wages, 343
Age. Bond Conditioned, that the Son and the Daughter of J. S. shall at their
full Age give Releases, this must be taken at their respective Ages, 58
Alien. Of his Capacity and Incapacity, 417
Amendment. The Court having Power over their own Entries and Judgments, can
amend defaults of Clerks after Judgment, tho in an other Term, 132 Mistake of
the name in a Judgment in Ireland, amendable here, 217 No Amendment of a Return
after the Filing, 336
Apprentice. See Statutes. Whether the Quarter Sessions can discharge an
Indenture of Apprenticeship, 174
Appurtenant. See Reputation. A thing Appurtenant may be by Grant, but a thing
Appendant must be by Prescription, 407 Connisance of Pleas may be created by
the King's Grant as he pleases, either in Gross, or as Appurtenant, ibid.
Arbitrament, Award. What Pleas good in Arbitrament, and what not, 50, 71, 87,
184
Arrest. Where the Bailiff may break a House upon an Arrest, 306
Assault and Battery. In an Action for both, the Defendant may be found Guilty
of the Assault, but not of the Battery, and here no more Costs than Damages,
256
Assets. Bonds and Specialties, no Assets till the Money be paid, 96
Assignment. Assignment where the Assignor keeps Possession, Fraudulent, and
such Fraud may be avered, 329, 331 The word Assignees includes Assignees in
Law, as well as Fact, 340
Assumpsit. See Pleading. Whether a Stranger to the Consideration may bring the
Action, 6, 7, 318, 332 Good cause of Demurrer in Assumpsit, where the
Consideration carries nothing of trouble or prejudice to the Plaintiff, or
benefit to the Defendant, 9 A mistake in the time relating to a Promise good
after a Verdict, 14, see also 119 Whether multum and gratissimum servitium, and
multa Beneficia, be sufficient Considerations in an Assumpsit, 27. So for
opere, labor and Servitio, 44 Infant may make a Consideration whereon to
ground an Assumpsit, 51 The Breach must be laid as the Promise is, 64
Forbearance of Suit, where a good Consideration whereon to ground an Assumpsit,
120, 152, 154, 159 Claim without proof where good to ground a Consideration in
an Assumpsit, 211 Of Reciprocal Promises, 177, 214 Assumpsits in Consideration
of Marriage, 262, 268 One Excommunicated for not paying in a Church Rate, a
Promise to pay in Consideration of Absolution. Good, 297 In Consideration of
delivering Goods to a third person. Good, 311
Attorney. See Mandamus. Attorneys at large have the same privilege with
Clerks of the Court, 1 Whether an Attorney in the Courts at Westminster may
practice in Inferior Courts, 11 Attorneys shall be discharged of the Service
of the Common Wealth, a fortiori of any private Service, as Constable,
Collector of Rents, etc. 16, 29 Committed for Suing out a Bill of Middlesex
against a Countess, 295 An Attorney, or Clerk of Court shall not have
Privilege if Sued jointly with others, 299
Averment. See Pleading. Assignment. Obligation.
Where necessary and where not, 41, 43, 44, 117, 149, 177, 178

B.
Bail. THe Action shall not be said to be depending until the Bail is Filed,
and not from the first day of the Term, 135 Condition of the Bail Bond ought to
agree with the Writ, or else be void, 233, 234 Whether the Principal and Bail
may be both taken in Execution, 315
Bankrupt. A Tradesman given over Trading may be a Bankrupt in respect of Debts
contracted before, 5 What makes a Man a Trader, so as to make him a Bankrupt,
29, 166 A Man has Judgment in Debt and then becomes Bankrupt, who shall have
Execution, 193 Victuallers for the Fleet not Traders within the Statute of
Bankrupts though they Victual Merchantmen with the Surplus, 170 The Commissioners
Authority as to Commitments, 323 Where a Debt paid by a Bankrupt to his
Creditors shall be refunded, 370, 371
Baron and Feme. See Statutes. In Trover that they ad usum proprium
converterunt, etc. Not good, 12, 24, 33 Indebitatus Assump. lies against the
Husband for Apparel sold to the Wife, 42 How to be Bailed when Arrested, 49
Baron and Feme taken in Execution, the Husband Escapes, the Escape of the
Husband is the Escape of the Wife, and she shall be discharged, 51 Battery
brought against both, and found only against the Feme. Good, 93 In a Suit the
Baron makes an Attorney for both, except the Feme be under Age, 185. For then
she is to be admitted by Guardian, ibid. Where the Husband cannot release
without the Wife, 209 Battery brought by B. and F. for beating them both, how
far good 328
Bishop. See Pleadings. Of Common Right the Dean and Chapter are Guardians of
the Spiritualties during the Vacancy of a Bishopric; but the Usage in England
is, that the Archbishop is Guardian of the Spiritualties in the Suffragan
Diocese, 225, 234
Blasphemy. Blasphemous Words not only an Offense to God and Religion, but a
Crime against the Laws, State, and Government, and Christianity is parcel of
the Laws of England, 293
Bond. See Obligation. What Bond a Jailer may not take of his Prisoner, 237 The
Condition of a Bond, or Covenant may in part be against the Common Law, and
stand good in the other part, ibid.

C.
Certiorari. PRisoners cannot be removed by Certiorari from a Country Gaol,
till the Indictment be found below, 63 Lies to remove an Indictment of
Manslaughter out of Wales, to be Tried in the next English County, 93 So of
Murder, 146
Challenge. What is good Cause, and where Cause shall be shown, 309 Where the
Kings Council shall show Cause, ibid,
Chancery. Trials directed out of Chancery, the Course, 66 Answer in a Court of
Equity, Evidence at Law against the Defendant, 212
Churchwardens. Bring Account against their Predecessor for a Bell, whether it
shall be said to be de bonis Ecclesiae, or de bonis Parochianorum, 89 Whether
they may refuse to take the Oath to present, and how to proceed, 114. 127
General Words to present Offenders do not extend to the Churchwarden himself,
but relate only to the rest of the Parish, 127 May make Rates themselves, if
the Parishioners are Summoned and refuse to meet, 367
Common. See Pasture. Where Common is claimed for Beasts Levant and Couchant on
certain Land, no other Beasts ought to be put on the Common but those of the
Tenant of the Land to which it is appendant, or those which he takes to
compester his Land, 18 A Man cannot prescribe for Common by a Prescripeion that
is unreasonable, 21 Common apurtenent for Beasts Levant and Couchant, how
pleaded, 54 Common in another Man's Soil, how to be claimed, 383 A Commoner
cannot prescribe to exclude his Lord, 394 The Comencement of Commons, 395 In a
Title of Common for Beasts Levant and Couchant, the Levancy and Couchancy is
not Traversable, 385. Nor material among Commoners, 397
Condition. What Words make a Condition, what a Limitation, and what
Conditional Limitation, 202, 203
Conspiracy. If one be acquitted in an Action of Conspiracy, the other cannot
be guilty; but where one is found guilty, and the other comes not in upon
Process, or Dies, yet Judgment shall be against the other, 238 Indictment lies
for Conspiring to charge with a Bastard Child, and thereby also to bring him to
disgrace, 305
Constable. See Attorney. Tenant in Ancient Demesne not excused from serving
Constable, 344
Contingency. See Grant. Remainder. Conveyance.
Contingent Estates what, and how destroyed, 215, 334 Whether a Descent in Tail
prevents a Contingent Remainder, 306
Contract. A Verbal Contract cannot create a Penalty to oblige the Heir. 76
Conveyance. The Modern VVays of Conveyancing to prevent the disappointing
Contingent Estates, 189 Where a Conveyance is good before Inrolment, and where
not, 360 Difference between a Conveyance at Common Law, and a Conveyance to
Uses, 373, 378
Copyhold. See Pasture. Admittance of Tenant for years is an Admittance of him
in the Remainder, 260 Weather Copyholder for Life in Reversion after an Estate
for Life in being, can Surrender to a Lord Disseizor, 359
Coroner. Where a Melius Inquirendum shall be granted after a Coroners
Inquisition super visum Corporis, 182 A Coroners Inquisition that finds a
person Felo de se, and non Compos, may be Traversed, 278. And quasht, 352
Corporation. What they can do without a Deed, and what not, 47, 48
Costs. See Assault and Battery. Treble Costs in an Action on the Stat. 8 H. 6.
of Forcible Entry, 22 Costs where payable in a Writ of Error, 88 Where
payable by an Executor, 92. and Administrator, 110 116 If an Executor be sued
and the Plaintiff Nonsuit he shall have Costs, but an Executor Plaintiff shall
pay no Costs upon a Nonsuit. 94 Costs and Damages not to be given in an Action
Popular, 133 Costs de Incremento, 337, 362
Covenant. What Collateral matters shall be implied upon a Covenant, 26, 44,
45 Tho a Covenant be made only to a Man his Heirs and Assigns, yet if a Breach
be in his Life time his Executors may bring the Action for Damages, 176 Where
a Covenant shall bind notwithstanding a subsequent Act of Parliament, 175, 176
Covenant with an Intended Wife, whether discharged by subsequent Marriage, 344
Courts. See Jurisdiction. Inferior Courts cannot make a Continuance ad
Proximam Curiam, but always to a Day certain, 181
Customs. See Prescription. To maintain a Common Key for the unlading of Goods,
and therefore every Vessel passing by the said Key to pay a certain Sum, a void
Custom as to those Vessels which did not unlade at the said Key, 71 A Custom
that Lands shall descend always to the Heirs Males, though of the Collateral
Line. Good, 88

D.
Damages. See Costs. NOne but the Courts at Westminster can increase Damages
upon View. 353
Date. See Lease. Demurrer. The old way of Demurring at the the Bar, 240
Devastavit. See Executor. Return.
Devise. Whether a Termor may Devise in Remainder, and limit a Possibility upon
a Possibility, 79 To Dr. V. during his Exile from his Country, what Estate
passes, 325 Diverse parcels of Lands being devised, whether these words the said
Lands pass all the parcels, or only the last mentioned, 368 A Devise of Lands
to two equally to be divided, makes them Tenants in Common, 376
Discents. The various Kinds of Discents, or Hereditary Successions, and the
Rules whereby they are to be governed, 414 The Descent from a Brother to a
Brother, tho it be a Collateral Descent, yet it is an immediate Descent, 423.
And therefore two Brothers Born in England shall Inherit one the other, though
the Father be an Alien, 429. Secus in Cases of Attainder, 416, 417 If the Son
purchase and have no Kindred on his Fathers side but an Alien, his Estate shall
descend to the Heir on the part of his Mother, 426
Distress. Whether in Distress for Rent, Horses may be severed from a Cart, 36
An Information lies not against a Landlord for taking excessive Distress of his
Tenants, 104 Hindering the Carrying off a Distress a provocation to make killing
no more than Homicide, 216
Dower. The regular proceedings therein, 60 Whether a Suit for Dower may be
commenced by Plaint in an Inferior Court without special Custom, 267

E.
Ecclesiastical Persons. PRivilidges from Offices, 105 Death of a Parson, etc.
does not make such a Non-residence as shall avoid a Lease, 245 What Leases they
may make, and what not, 245, 246 Clergy Men are liable to all public charges
imposed by Act of Parliament, in particular for reparation of the Highways, 273
Of the Induction of Clerks, by whom to be made, 309, 319
Election. Where a thing depends upon Election, what course is to be observed,
271
Entry. Where in Ejectment, actual Entry is necessary, 332
Error. See Executors. To reverse a Judgment in an Inferior Court for want of
infra Jurisdictionem Curiae, 2 For variance between the Count and Plaint, 6 But
it lies not for some Omissions, 5 A Writ of Error is a Supersedeas to an
Execution, 30. Yet the Judgment remains a Record, 34 Exception, 353, 355 A Writ
of Error returnable ad proximum Parliamentum, not good, Secus if to the day of
Prorogation, 31, 266 No Writ of Error lies upon a Conviction before a Justice
of Peace, 33 In a Writ of Error if the Defendant dies the Writ is not abated,
Secus if the Plaintiff dies, 34 Lies not to reverse a Judgment in a Qui tam,
nor upon the Statute de Scandalis Magnatis, 49 What Records to be returned upon
a Writ of Error, 96, 97 Where it lies upon a Judgment in a Scire facias, and
where not, 168 Error in fact not assignable in the Exchequer Chamber, 207 A
Writ of Error that bears Test before the Judgment, good to remove the Record,
if Judgment be given before the Return, 255
Escape. See Baron and Feme. Where a Prisoner Escapes by permission of the
Sheriff he may be taken again by the Party Plaintiff, 4 Debt against the
Sheriff for a Voluntary Escape, the Sheriff pleads that he took him again upon
fresh Suit. Good, 211, 217 Against the Warden of the Fleet, 269 The Lessor of
the Custody of a Prison answerable for an Escape where his Lessee is
insufficient, 314
Escrow. See Pleading. Evidence. See Statutes. The party suffering admitted to
give Evidence for the King to detect a Fraud, 49
Exception. See Feoffment. Excommunication. In Excommunication ipso facto no
necessity of any Sentence of Excommunication, 146 Excommunication pleaded to an
Action per Literas testamentarias. Good. 222 How discharged where the Capias is
not inroled according to the Statute, 338
Execution. Upon an Elegit the Sheriff ought to deliver Possession by Metes and
Bounds, or otherwise it may be quasht, 259
Executor. See Abatement. Costs. Return.
Of Infant Executors, where to Sue by Guardian, 40, 54. Where by Attorney, 40,
102, 103 If a Man names himself in an Action Executor or Administrator, and it
appears the Cause of Action was in his own right, it shall be well enough, and
the calling himself Executor is but surplusage, 119 Where the Executors
promise in relation to the Testators Debt shall make the Debt his own, 120, 268
Where Interest is due for a Debt partly in the Testators life time, and partly
since, and one Action brought, and Judgment given for the whole, this is
manifestly Erroneous, 199 Where chargeable in the Debet and detinet, and where
in the detinet only, 271, 321, 355 Cannot assume the Executorship for part, and
refuse for part. 271 Debt does not lie against the Executor of an Executor upon
a Surmise of a Devastavit of the first Executor, 292 Of the Executors
renouncing, 303 cannot refuse after Oath, 335
Of Executor de son tort. 349 What Acts an Executor may do before Probat, 370
Exposition of Words. Obstrupabat, 4 Or, 62, 148 Pair of Curtains and Vallence,
71, 106 Ad sequendum, 74 Vt, 73, 74 Aliter vel alio modo, 92 Mutuasset and
mutuatus esset, 109 Aromatarij, 142 Centena, 211 Issue, 229 Land, 260 Crates,
304 Gubernatio and Regimen, 324 Exilium, 326 Vestura terrae, 393
Extinguishment. Where two Closes are in the same Possession, the Duty of
Fencing is Extinguished and shall not Revive tho the Closes come after into
several hands, 97

F.
False Latin. DE sex bovibus instead of bobus no sufficient Cause to Arrest
Judgment, 17
Feoffment. A Man makes a Feoffment of a Manor, excepting two Closes, for the
Life of the Feoffor only: The two Closes descend to the Heir, 106
Fine. The Delivery of a Declaration in Ejectment upon the Lands, is no Entry
or Claim to avoid a Fine, 42. So where an Action is brought and discontinued,
45 A Fine cannot bar any Interest which was divested at the time of the Fine,
56 Whether a Fine and Non-Claim bars the Interest of a Lessee in Trust, 80 No
Bar to a Mortgage, 82 A Parish may contain many Vills; and if a Fine may be
levied of Lands in the Parish, it carries whatsoever is in any of those Vills,
170 Lessee for years makes a Feoffment and levies a Fine, the Lessor shall have
five years to Claim after the Term expired, 241
Forcible Entry. In an Indictment of Forcible Entry it must appear that the
place was the Freehold of the party at the time of the Entry with force,
because upon the finding, a Restitution is to be awarded, 23
Foreign Attachment. See London. Of Foreign Attachments by Custom how to be
pleaded, 236

G.
Gaming. See Statutes. Guardian. See Baron and Feme. Executor.
Grant. See Hundred. GRant without Consideration hinders not the arising of a
Contingent use, 189 In Prescriptions, or Usage time beyond Memory, the Law
presumes a Grant at first and the Grant lost, 387. And therefore nothing can be
prescribed, for that cannot at this day be raised by Grant, ibid. Of the Kings
Grant, 408, 409 A Grant to a Town to be a County, and no Grant of having a
Sheriff, void, 407

H.
Habeas Corpus. See Statutes. Though the Return be Filed, yet the Court may
remand the Prisoner to the same Prison and not to the Marshalsey, 330, 346
Whether it lies to remove a Prisoner in Ireland, 357
Half Blood. The Sister of the Half Blood shall come in for distribution upon
the Stat. 22, 23 Car. 2. chap. 10. 316, 317, 323 Half Blood no Impediment to
Administration, 424
Harriot. Where a Lease is made to commence on the Determination of another, if
the new Lessee dies before his Term Commences, whether a Harriot shall be due,
91
Heir. An implied Estate of Land shall not pass in a Will, for an Heir shall
not be defeated but upon a necessary Implication, 323, 376 A Man cannot by
Conveyance at Common Law, by Limitation of Uses, or Devise, make his right Heir
a Purchaser, 372, 379 Yet Heirs of the Body of his second Wife, having a Son by
the first, is a good name of Purchase, 381
Hospital. Mastership of a Hospital not grantable in Reversion, 151
Hundred. A Hundred, what it is, and the Bailiff of a Hundred, 403 The Grant of
a Hundred good, notwithstanding the Statutes, 2 E. 3. 12. and 14 E. 3. 9. 410,
412.

I.
Imprisonment. Where an Offense is Fineable, if the Fine be tenderd there ought
to be no Imprisonment, 116
Indictment. Where a Statute makes an Offense at Common Law more penal, yet the
Conclusion of the Indictment is not contra formam Statuti, 13 A Man cannot be
Indicted for saying of a Justice of Peace he understands not the Statutes of
Excise, but may be bound to Good Behoviour, 10, 16 Indictment of Forgery upon
the Stat. 5 El. 4. where good and where not, 23, 24 Strictness of words not
required in in an Order of Sessions, tho it ought in an Indictment, 37 For
Manslaughter, not quasht upon Motion, 110. So of Perjury and Nuisance, 370
Indictment before Justices of Peace for a Non feasance ought not to conclude
contra pacem, 108, 111 For suffering an Escape, 169 Quasht for Incertainty,
305, 306 No Copy of the Indictment allowed in capital Crimes, yet the Mirror
calls it abusion, 354 For Perjury extrajudicial, 370
Infant. See Executor. A Condition and Deed obliges Infants as much as others,
200, 205
Intent and Intendment.See Uses. Verdict.
Ioyntenant. Two Joyntenants, one Grants, bargains and sells all his Estate and
Interest the to other, this amounts to a Release and must be so pleaded, 78 A
Devise to two equally to be divided between them, and to the Survivors of them
makes a Joyntenancy upon the import of the last Words, 216, 227
Issue. A Lease is made to commence after the Death of J. S. without Issue, J.
S. has Issue and dies, and then the Issue dies without Issue, the Lease
commences: For Issue being nomen collectivum, when ever the Issue fails the
Term commences, 229
Judgment. Obtained by Forgery, vacated, 78 So if procured by Fraud and
deceit, 49 Arrested where there appears no Cause of Action, 310 Warrant to
confess a Judgment, the Party dies before it be confessed this is a Countermand,
310
Irisdictition. See Sewers. Judgment in an Inferior Court reverst for want of
Jurisdiction, 28 Every Subject has the Liberty of removing his Suit into a
Superior Court, 46 If there be several Contracts at several times for several
Sums each under 40 s and altogether amount to a Sum sufficient to entitle the
Superior Court, they shall be there put in Suit, and not in a Court that is
not of Record, 65, 73 In Assumpsit brought in an Inferior Court, the
performance of the Promise, must be as well within the Jurisdiction as the
Promise it self, 72 Inferior Courts ought not to award a Capias but upon
Summons first returned, and though a fault in the Process is aided by appearance,
yet an Action of false Imprisonment lies, 220, 249 Where infra Jurisdictionem
is necessary to be set forth and alleged, 240, 243 The Liberty of the Subject
is infringed by bringing him within a private Jurisdiction, when the matter
arises out of it, 333 Action on the Case for the same, 369
Jury. Where a Juror may be withdrawn, 28 In case of Life and Member, if the
Jury cannot agree before the Judges of Assizes depart they are to be carried
after them in Carts, 97 Twelve necessary on a Writ of Enquiry as well as in a
Venire, 113 Where the Iury's eating or drinking at the charge of either Party
shall avoid their Verdict, and what other Actions shall be sufficient Cause to
avoid it. 125 Whether the Statutes requiring Jurymen to have so much Freehold
extend to Corporate Towns, 366

K.
King. THE King in bringing an Action may choose his County, or wave that which
he had chosen before, as he may wave his Demurrer and join Issue, 17 King and
Council may disfranchise any Member of a Corporation. The Walls of N. were
ordered to be pulled down by King and Council, a fortiori an Alderman there may
be displaced upon just Cause, 20 The King may stay the Proceedings, and the
Attorney General Enter a noli prosequi after the Jury are returned, 33 Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons the three Estates, and the King Head of
all, 325
Knight. See Abatement.
L.
Lancaster. OF the Duchy Court of Lancaster, and its Jurisdiction, 155 and
infra.
Latitat. A Man may take out a Latitat before the Money is due, yet the Party
must not be Arrested upon it before, 28
Lease. See Recovery. No reason to favor Long Leases. By the ancient Law a
Lease for about 40 years was void, and they are never without suspicion of
Fraud, 58 A Lease made to begin from the End of a Lease misrecited, shall
commence presently, 83 A Lease without any Date specified, or an impossible
Date, as from the 40th of September, shall commence presently, 137 What Act
determins a Lease at Will, 247
Leet. The Kings Court, granted to Lords of Mannours as derived out of the
Town, 26 Presentiments may be there for the King, and the Lord of the Manor,
ibid. Fines in Leets where they may bedistrained for, and where not, 105
Presentment at a Leet quasht where the Court appears to be held above a Month
after Michaelmas, 107 Difference between the Stewardship of a Leet, and a Court
Baron, 153
Libel. The having a Libel in ones Lodging and not delivering it to a
Magistrate, was only punishable in the Star Chamber, unless the Party
Maliciously published it, 31
Liberties. Of Returna Brevium, 405. Their Vexation and Inconveniency, 412
Liberties belonging to Monasteries came to the King on their Dissolution, and
that without the Aid of the Statute, 32 H. 8. chap. 20, 407
Limitations. Whether the Statute of Limitations extends to bar a Promise
between Merchants relating to Trade, 90
Livery. Livery within view, where good and where not, 186
London. By the Custom of London a Debtor may be Arrested before the Money is
due, to make him find Sureties, 29 What Debts shall be Attachable by Foreign
Attachments, according to the Custom of London, 112, 113 Custom to commit
Offenders for obstinately and contemptuously refusing to obey the Order of the
Court of Aldermen. Good, 115 Whether they may Imprison a Stranger for Marrying
their Orphan without License, 178 Their By-Law to restrain the number of Carts.
Good, 21, 196 Of their Duty of Scavage, 298 Custom to Disfranchise and commit a
Freeman for speaking opprobrious Words of an Alderman, Not good, 327 Of their
Duty of Water Baylage, 351

M.
Mandamus. TO restore an Alderman, 19 Lies not to restore a Town Clark, where
the Corporation have power to Grant the Office Durante beneplacito, 77, 82. So
of a Recorder, 342 Lies to admit a Deputy into an Office, where the Office may
be executed by Deputy, 111 To swear a Churchwarden, 115, 267 To restore a
Sexton, 143, 153 Lies for an Office but not for a Service, ibid. Lies to an
Inferior Court to cause them to give Judgment according to a Statute, 188 To
restore a Common Council Man in a Corporation. 302 To restore an Attorney in an
Inferior Court, 331 To the Ecclesiastical Court to prove a Will, 335
Misnomer. When, and how amendable, 13 Name mistaken in the Issue, if right
before in the Record, amendable, 25
Monasteries. See Liberties. Pensions out of Monastery Lands, where to be sued
for, 120

N.
Naturalization. OF Naturalization and Denization, their General Effects and
Operation, 418, 419
Notice. Whether necessary upon a Counter bond to save harmless, 36, 37 Upon an
Award, 93 In what Cases necessary, and where not, 200, 201
Nuisance. See Action. Whether the erecting of a Glass-house be a Nuisance, 26 A
Rope-Dancers Booth in the Street a Nuisance, and a Writ to the Sheriff awarded
to prostrate the Bulding, 169

O.
Oath. OF the Marshal of the King's Bench, 65 No exception to the Oath of
Allegiance, that the words of the Statute are to King James, and in
administering the Oath King Charles is named, 171, 172 The Ecclesiastical Court
may make Defendants answer upon Oath, as the Chancery does, 339
Obligation. If two be bound jointly, and one be sued, he cannot demur, unless
he aver the other is living. And if there be two Obligees, one cannot sue
unless he avers the other is dead, 34 A Release of one Joint Obligee of all
Actions, etc. upon his own account, does not discharge the Obligation, 35 I do
acknowledge to E. H. by me 20 l upon demand, for doing the Work in my Garden.
Adjudged upon Demurrer, to be a good Bond, 238
Office and Officer. Whether acceptance of a second Grant of an Office be a
surrender of the first, 297 An Act begun by one Officer and left imperfect,
what remains for his Successor, 319, 320.
Outlawry. Reverst for want of the Words pro Comitatu, and why, 108

P.
Pardon. See Witness. WHere good, without mentioning the Indictment, 207
Parliament. See Error. The Three Estates. See King. Pasture. Custom for
Copyholders to have sole Feeding in a Certain Waste, it is not needful to
allege that the Beasts were Levant and Couchant. Here also a Copyholder may
license others (without Deed) to put on their Beasts. 165
Peace. See Indictments. Ac. Case.
Formality of Words where necessary in the Proceedings of Justices of Peace, 39
Justices of Peace, their Proceedings in relation to Bastard Children, 48, 59,
210, 310, 336 Upon a Forcible Entry, 308 Order of Sessions final in relation to
a settlement of the Poor, 310 King's Bench may judge of Fines imposed at
Sessions, and mitigate them, 336
Perjury. See Indictment. One gave Evidence at a Trial, and afterward made
Affidavit, that he was perjured and suborned; for which Affidavit an
Information of Perjury was exhibited against him, and he found guilty of
Perjury in swearing he was perjured, 182
Pleading. See Escape. Trespass.
In Debt upon Obligation, the Defendant pleads that he delivered it as an
Escrow, plea naught, 9 Where the Defendant pleads in Abatement and the
Plaintiff Demurs; if it be adjudged against the Defendant, it shall be quod
respondeat ulterius: But if any thing be alleged in Abatement, where, upon
Issue joined, it goes for the Plaintiff, there he shall have Judgment to
recover his Debt, 22 In Actions laid by way of Reciprocal Promise, there needs
no Averment of Performance, 41, 178 Double Plea, what, 48, 272 Trespass, quare
Arbores succidit, Declaration insufficient, because not expressed what kind of
Trees, 53 The like of Fishes, 272, 329 In Battery, absque hoc quod moderate
castigavit, no direct Traverse to the Defendants Justification, 70. Yet good
after a Verdict, ibid. A Plea in Abatement shall not be admitted after
Imparlance, 76, 136, 184. Exception, 236 A Traverse designed to bring a
Colateral matter in question, not allowed, 77 Executor pleads plene
Administravit, the Plaintiff confesses the Plea, and prays Judgment de bonis
Testatoris, quae in futuro ad manus defendentis devenerint, 94 Where the
Plaintiff denies what the Defendant affirms, whether he ought to traverse or
conclude to the Country, 101 In Trespass, where the Defendant claims a Way,
what Justification is sufficient, what not, 13 Incertainty in the Declaration
or Plea, where naught, 106, 114, 120, 278. What shall be said a Departure in
Pleading, what not, 121 Where one Declares against one upon a Deed, and it
appears that another was bound with him, it shall not be intended that the
other sealed, unless averred on the Defendants side, 136, 137 Deed delivered as
an Escrow how to be pleaded, 210 An apt Issue is not formed without an
Affirmative and a Negative, 213 To declare that a Bishop was seized in fee, and
not say in Jure Episcopatus, not binds Successor, 223 In Debt for Rent, semper
paratus is no good plea without saying quod obtulit, 322 The effect of an
Innuendo, 337 The Statute for discharge of poor Prisoners, how to be pleaded,
356 Several Freeholders cannot join or be joined in a Prescription to claim an
Entire Interest in another man's Soil, 384. Nor can Freeholders and Copyholders
join, 390
Powers. See Rocovery. Of Power to Lease where well persued, 294, 340
Of Power of Revocation. See Revocation. Whether the Power of Revocation is
extinguished by a Fine, 368, 371
Prescription. See Appurtenant. Common. Grant.
The Nature and Rules of Prescription. 386 Diversity between Prescription and
Custom, 389 The Owner of the Soil can by no Prescription or Custom be excluded
out of his own Soil at all times of the year, 390. But he may be excluded for a
certain time, and as to some kind of Profits. 391
Prohibition. Where it lies to the Admiralty, 1, 146 To the Ecclesiastical
Court, where a Parson sues for calling him Knave, 2 Whether it lies where a
Bishop sues for a Pension in his own Court, 3 Whether it lies upon Suggestion,
that the Proprietors and Occupiers of such a Manor, or any parcel thereof, pay
a Groat to the Parson for Herbage-Tythes, ibid. Lies for citing a man to answer
in the Ecclesiastical Court, and not delivering a Copy of the Articles, 5. And
if the Party be excommunicate, a Prohibition with a Mandamus to absolve him,
ibid. 252 Not lies to the Ecclesiastical Court for calling Impudent Whore, 7.
Or Whore and Bawd, 61, 220. Denied to the Ecclesiastical Court for calling Old
Theif and Old Whore, 10. Secus in London, 343, 352 In Prohibition on a Suit for
Tithes, what Suggestion is to be proved within six months, 107 To the
Ecclesiastical Court to stay a Suit there for Apparators Fees, Suggesting there
were no such Fees due by Custom, 165 To Woodstreet Compter London for refusing
to admit a Plea to their Jurisdiction before Imparlance, 180 The Defendant in
the Ecclesiastical Court pleads, that the Tithes belong to another, which Plea
is refused, Prohibition lies, 248, 335 Granted to the Ecclesiastical Court
where Custom and Prescription comes in question, tho the Principal Cause
belongs properly to that Court, as Churchwardens Rates, Tithes, Mortuaries,
274 Whether it lies to the Ecclesiastical Court for refusing to admit a Proof
by one Witness, 291 No Precedent for a Prohibition quia timet, 313 To the
Council of the Marches, 330
Proof. See Record. Where Proof is to be made upon a Writ of Enquiry, and where
not, 347

Q.
Queen. A Reservation to the Queen of England does not exclude a Queen Dowager.
151 One who has been a Queen, not properly called nuper Regina in her Life
time, 152
Qui tam. See Error. Action.
Judgment arrested because Issue was joined only on behalf of the Informer, and
not also for the King, 122
Quo Warranto. Against certain Persons of the City of Worcester, claiming to be
Aldermen, 366

R.
Record. If a Record be lost, it may be proved to Jury by Testimony, 257
Recorder. See Mandamus. What Causes may be sufficient to remove a Recorder,
144, 145
Recovery. Where a Fine is Levied to Lessee for years, with an Intent that he
should suffer a Recovery, his Term is not drowned, 195 Tenant for Life with
power to make a Jointure, suffers a Recovery, the Power is extinguished, 226,
227 Good, though a Stranger that has nothing in the Land, be made Tenant to the
Praecipe; for a Recovery being a Common Assurance is to be favorably
expounded, 358 Whether a Recovery can be suffered where the Tail is expectant
upon an Estate for Life, the Tenant for Life not being made Tenant to the
Praecipe, 360
Release. See Obligation. Of all Demands, its effect, 314
Remainder. Contingent Remainder, by what Act destroyed, 188, 306, 334, 345 No
Cross Remanders upon Construction in a Deed, though sometimes in a Will, 224
Rent. Difference between a Rent and a Sum in Gross, 99 Lease by Tenant in Fee,
and Rent reserved to the Lessor, Executors, Administrators and Assigns; the
words Executors and Administrators void, 162 A Rent may be reserved by Contract
without Deed, 242 Where Rent shall be suspended, and where apportioned by the
Lessors Entry, 276, 277
Reputation. Lands repurted parcel of a Manor, shall pass in a Recovery under
the Word Appurtenances, 52
Retorn. Sheriff amerced for retorning Non est inventus on the Writ brought
against his Bailiff, 12, 24 Sheriff retorns that Goods came to the Executors
hands, and elongavit, vendidit, disposuit, and ad proprium usum suum convertit,
this tantamounts to quod devastavit, 20, 221 Sheriff retorns upon a Fi. fa.
that he had taken Goods, and that they were rescued from him; not good, 21
Action against Sheriff for a false Retorn of Cepi Corpus, 85
Revocation. What shall be a good Revocation upon a Power reserved, 278 and
infra.

S.
Scandal. See Action upon the Case for Slander. Scandalum Magnatum. I do not
know but my Lord of P. sent G. to take my Purse, Action lies, 59 Difference
between an Action on the Statute of Scandalum Magnatum, and a Common Action of
Slander; the Words in one Case shall be taken in mitiori sensu, and in the
other in the worst sense against the Speaker, that the Honor of Great Persons
may be preserved, 60
Sewers. Commissioners of Sewers and their Proceedings subject to the
Jurisdiction of the King's Bench, notwithstanding the Clause in Statute 13
Eliz. cap. 9. 67
Sheriff. Sheriff may bring Trover for Goods taken in Execution, and after
taken away by the Defendant in the first Action, 52
Soldiers. Every Officer and Soldier as liable to be arrested as a Tradesman,
or any other person whatsoever, 251 A Captain and Sergeant committed to Newgate
for a great Misdemeaner in rescuing a Soldier, ibid.
Statutes. When a Statute makes an Offense the King may punish it by
Indictment, but an Information will not lie when a Statute does barely prohibit
a thing, 63 31 Ed. 1. Statute of Winton, in an Action upon this Statute, what
taking shall be sufficient to discharge the Hundred, 118, 235 4 Ed. 3. cap. 7.
Action lies for Executors upon this Statute, for cutting and carrying way Corn,
187. This Statute has been always expounded largely, ibid. 3 H. 7. cap. 2. A
Wife forcibly married, contrary to this Statute, shall be admitted to give
Evidence against her Husband, 244 5 Eliz. cap. 4. For using a Trade, not being
Apprentice thereto, 8, 51, 142, 326, 346, 364. This Statute in relation to
Apprentices, expounded, 174 31 Eliz. cap. 7. Of Cottages; no Offense against
this Statute to erect a Cottage if no body inhabits therein. 107 43 Eliz. cap.
2. Poor, By this Statute that enables Justices of Peace to tax a Neighboring
Parish; the Justices may tax any of the Inhabitants, and not the whole Parish,
350 21 Jac. cap. 26. Of Felony to Personate, 301 12 Car. 2. Of Ministers. A
good Act being made by King, Lords and Commons, and any defects in the
Circumstances of calling them together ought not to be pried into, 15 This Act
extends only to Benefices with Cure, ibid. 14 Car. 2. cap. 10. and 16 Car. 2.
cap. 3. Harth-mony. Smiths Forges shall pay, 191, 192. So empty Houses, 312 14
Car. 2. cap. 33. Of Printing Seditious Books, 316. 16 Car. 2. cap. 7. Of
Gaming. Articles for above 100 l at a Horse Race, within this Statute, 253, 254
17 Car. 2 cap. 2. Of Non Con-Ministers explained, 328 29 Car. 2. Of Frauds and
Perjuries. No Promise made before the 24th of June, within this Act, 330. What
Contracts within ths Act, 361 31 Car. 2. Habeas Corpus. Prayer must be made, by
Council, wiihin the first Week after the beginning of the Term, 346

T.
Tail. THOUGH a Term in gross cannot be entailed, yet where man has a Term in
point of Interest, and at the same time the Trust of the Inheritance, here he
may entail the Trust of the Term to wait upon the Inheritance, 194 What Words
create an Estate Tail, and what in Remainder contingent or vested, 215, 230,
231 Estates Tail how forfeitable for Treason, 299, and infra. A Devise to a
Man, and the Heirs Males of his Body, with a proviso if he attempts to alien
the Estate to cease, the Condition void, 321, 322 A Limitation in Tail, how it
operates, 378
Tender. Tender, and refusal, is as much as payment, 167 Tender, where not
good, 252, 261
Test. Where the Test of a Writ before it was taken out, is, notwithstanding,
good, 362
Tithes. May be paid of a Warren by Custom, 5. So of Doves and Fish, ibid.
Whether an Executor may bring Debt upon the Statute 2 E. 6. for Tithes due to
the Testator, 30, 31 Where and what Modus shall bar the Recovery of Tithes in
specie, 32 A Prescription cannot be suggested, time out of mind, to pay a Modus
for Tithe Hops, since they were not known in England till Queen Elizabeth's
time, 61 Tithes of VVood, though not Fuel, payable, unless expressed to be burnt
in a House for the maintenance of Husbandry, 75
Treason. In Coining and Clipping, the Judgment, 254 For raising a Rebellion in
Carolina, 349
Trespass. See Pleading. Quare Clausum fregit, and threw down his Fences, what
Plea in Justification good, 221 Continuando in Trespass, where good and where
not, 363
Trust. See Tail. A Use in former time the same with what a Trust is now, 130
Where a Trust for Life, Remainder over, with Power of Revocation is
forfeitable, and where not, 128, and infra. Whether a Trustee is compellable to
produce Writings, or the Key of the Box wherein they are, against the Interest
of the Party for whom he is Trustee, 197
Trial. See Venue. What shall be Cause for new Trial, what not, 30 Justices of
Assize may try Informations, though commenced before the Justices of a former
Assizes, 85, 181

V.
Venue. WHere a Deed is forged at S. and given in Evidence at D. from whence
the Venue ought to come in an Information thereupon, 17 A Breach of Covenant
assigned in Barwick, the Venue shall arise from the next place in
Northumberland, 58 Judgment by Nihil dicit reverst after a Writ of Enquiry
executed, because no Place assigned from whence the Venue should have come,
348, 350 No likelihood of an Indifferent Trial, cause to change the Venue, 365
Verdict. See Assumpsit. What Errors and Omissions are aided after Verdict, 34,
100, 108, 109, 114, 126 Where a Special Verdict refers one Special Point to the
Judgment of the Court, all other matters shall be intended, 118 After Verdict
the Court shall admit any Intendment to make the Case good, 123 Want of an
averment of Levancy and Couchancy aided by a Verdict, 165
Use. See Trust. What Words and Considerations shall raise a Use, 138, 140, 141
The use of a Fine or Recovery may be declared by a subsequent Deed, 368 In
Cases of Uses the Intention of the Parties ought to be pursued, 373, 374, 378
Usury. The Statute against Usury expounded strictly, in regard of Broakers, 38
No Action of Debt lies for the Interest of Money, but it is to be recovered by
Assumpsit in Damages, 198

W.
Wager of Law. WHere admitted, and where not, 261 Indictment of Perjury will
not lie upon an Oath in waging Law, 296
Way. High way and Private-way, the Diversity, and who shall repair, 189, 256
Whether an Indictment lies for stopping a Common Foot-way to a Church, 208
Action on the Case for obstructing his way to his Wood, 274
Wills. A man cannot release a Debt by Will, 39 Wills concerning the
Guardianship of a Child, and not to be proved in the Ecclesiastical Court, but
they may there prove a Will of Lands, 207 Where Suits for Legacies given by
Wills ought to be, 233 The Effect of a Republication and Paroll Declaration,
341, 342
Witness. See Evidence. Statutes.
A Council, Attorney, or Solicitor, ought not to be examined against his
Clyent, because obliged to keep his Secrets, 197 A Pardon of Felony (though
after burning in the Hand) restores a man to be a Witness, not so of Perjury,
349 Whether a Freeman of a City may be a VVitness for that City, 351
Writs. A Fault in a Mean Process is aided by Appearance; but if an Original
should bear date on a Sunday, the Appearance of the Party would not help it, 7

portrait of Sir Peyton Ventris, Knight Sr Peyton Ventris Knt.
Late one of the Justices of the Court of Com^on Pleas.
I: Royly pinx.
H: White sculp.
blazon of the Ventress family

THE SECOND PART OF THE REPORTS OF Sir Peyton Ventris Knight. LATE One of the
Justices OF THE COMMON PLEAS.

CONTAINING Select CASES Adjudged in the COURT of Common Pleas, in the Reigns
of K. CHARLES II. and K. JAMES II. and in the Three first years of the Reign of
His now Majesty K. WILLIAM and the late Q. MARY; while he was a JUDGE in the
said COURT.

With the Special PLEADINGS to the same.

ALSO Several CASES and PLEADINGS thereupon in the Exchequer-Chamber upon Writs
of ERROR from the King's Bench.

Together with many remarkable and curious Cases in the Court of Chancery.

Whereto are added Three exact TABLES; One of the Cases, the other of the
Principal Matters, and the third of the Pleadings.

With the Allowance and Approbation of the LORD KEEPER and all the JUDGES.

LONDON: Printed by the Assigns of Richard and Edward Atkyns, Esquires; for
Charles Harper at the Flower-de-Luce, and Jacob Tonson at the Judges-Head, both
over against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet, MDCXCVI.

MVNIFICENTIA REGIA 1715 blazon of Cambridge University, with Apollo standing
among a collection of books on the left and Minerva sitting on the right
GEORGIUS D. G. MAG. BR. FR. ET HIB. REX F. D.
medallion with head of George I I. P. Sc.


THE NAMES OF THE CASES, IN THE SECOND PART.
A
ADAMS v. Cross 181 Alleson v. Marsh ibid. Anonymus's 35, 39, 45, 46, 47, 48,
58, 73, 117, 154, 171, 172, 173, 174, 180, 194, 195, 196, 214, 215, 216, 218,
262, 346, 347, 349, 351, 353, 358, 359, 361, 362, 363, 365
B
BAiles v. Wenman 74 Barney v. Tyson 359 Bathurst 's Case 40 Baynton v. Bobbet
67 Bealy v. Sampson 90, 93 Beaumont v. Weldon 155 Beversham 's ( Sir William)
Case 345 Biddulph v. Dashwood 261 Bird v. Blosse 361 Blake v. Clattie 73 Bland
v. Haselrig and al' 151 Bliss v. Frost 63, 67 Blois (Charles) and al' v. Dame
Jane Blois, and Jane Blois, Infants 347 Bockenham v. Thacker 69, 71, 74 Bond v.
Moyle 106 Bonham v. Newcomb 364 Bowyer v. Milner 57 Bracton v. Lister 84 Bright
v. Addy 195 Broadhurst v. Richardson and al' 349 Brown v. Rands 156 Buckler v.
Millerd 107 Burchet v. Durdant 311 Bush v. Buckingham 80, 83 Butler 's ( Sir
Oliver) Case 344
C
CAge v. Russel 352 Carr v. Done 189, 193 Chamberlain v. Cook 75, 78 Chapman
v. Flexman 286, 291 Chase v. Sir James Etheridge 130 Clarke v. Peppin 97, 99
Clarke v. Tucket 182 Clobberie 's Case 342 Coghill v. Freelove 209 Collet v.
Collet 355 Colley v. Helyar 135 Cornwallis 's (the Lord) Case 38 Cook v.
Romney 173 Cramlington v. Evans and Percival 296, 307 Craw v. Ramsey 1
D
DAwney v. Vesey 249 Dawson v. The Sheriffs of London 84, 89 Dennis v. Mazey
210, 212 Dickman v. Allen 136, 138 Dighton (Christopher) v. Bernard Greenvil
321 Dod v. Dawson 143 Dodwell (the Case of) and The University of Oxford 33
Dowse v. Cale 117, 126 Draper ( Sir Thomas) v. Dr. Crowther 362
E
ELlis v. Yates 153 Every v. Carter 254, 259
F
FAgg v. Roberts and al' 195 Fleet 's (The Warden of the) Case 154 Fowkes v.
Joyce 50
G
GAwden v. Draper 217 George v. Butcher 140 Godfrey v. Ward 185 Gower 's ( Sir
Thomas) Case 90 Goylmer v. Paddiston 353 Grove v. Dr. Elliot Chancellor of
Sarum 41 Guldeford (Major and probi homines de) v. Clarke 243, 247
H
HAnson (Judith) v. Liversedge 239, 242 Harding 's (Patrick) Case 315 Harris v.
Parker 249, 253, 270 Harrison (Tho.) and Ux' v. Dr. Barwell 9 Haslewood v.
Mansfield 196 Haymer Vid. v. Haymer 343 Highway v. Derby 174 Hocket and Ux' v.
Stegold and ux' 29 Hodges v. Waddington 360 Holland v. Lancaster 131, 134
Hollis 's (my Lord) Case 345 Humphreys v. Bethily 198, 222
K
KEmp v. Cory and al' 224, 227, 283 Killigrew v. Sawyer 79 King of Gray's Inn v.
Sir Edw. Lake 28
L
LAde v. Baker and Marsh 145, 149 Lade v. Barker 260, 266 Lawson v. Haddock
234, 237 Lechmere and al' v. Toplady and al' 156, 169 Leigh v. Ward 72
Lexington (the Lord) v. Clarke and his Wife 223 Littleton 's ( Sir Thomas) Case
351 Lundy 's (Colonel) Case 314
M.
MArks v. Nottingham 196 Marsh v. Lee 337 Mason v. Watkins 109 Massingham v.
Durrant 49 Morgan v. Hunt 213 Morley v. Polhill and al' 51, 56 Mountague (the
Earl of) v. The Lord Preston 170
N
NEwport v. Godfrey 184 Noell v. Robinson 358 Norwood v. Woodly 193
O
ONslowe 's Case 37 Otwaie 's ( Sir John) Case 31 Oxford 's (the City of) Case
106
P
PAge v. Kirk 36 Pawlet 's (the Lord) Case 366 Perrot 's (Herbert) Case 30
Pheasant (Peter) v. Anne Pheasant, The Lord Mayor of London, and Sir Thomas
Player Chamberlain of London, etc. 340 Pinager v. Gale 100 Precious v. Robinson
173 Prynne v. Sloughter 101, 104 Pyne v. Woolland 176, 179
R
RAgget (William) and Vx' v. William Clarke 364 Rashly v. Williams 59, 61 Reeve
's ( Sir Robert) Case 363 Rogers v. Bradly 143 Rozer v. Rozer 36 Rudyard 's
(Thomas) Case 22
S
SAlisbury 's (the Lord) Case 365 Samon v. Jones 318 Sarsfield v. Witherly 292
Sail v. Freeland and al' Infants 350 Sherborn v. Colebach 175 Shipley v.
Craister 131 Smithson 's ( Sir Jerome) Case 345 Snode v. Ward 197
T
TArget v. Loyd 272, 277 Thompson v. Leach 198 Tovey v. Pitcher 228, 234
Tregonwell (Jane) Vid. Executrix of John Tregonwell v. Sherwin 262 Trethewy v.
Ellesdon 141 Trippet v. Eyres 110, 113 Tonstal v. Brend 174 Turner (Methuselah)
v. Sir Samuel Sterling 25 Turner 's Case 348
W
WAlden ( Sir Lionel) v. Mitchel 263, 265 Warren v. Sainthil 185, 186 Watmough
v. Holgate and al' 219, 221 Web (Prescilla) v. Moore 279, 282 Welbie v.
Phillips 129 West v. The Lord Delaware 357 Westby 's Case 152 Whitaker v.
Thoroughgood 130 White v. Ewer 340 Whitmore (Frances) Vid. v. Weld and al' 367
Williams v. Bond 238 Willows v. Lydcot 285 Woodward and al' v. Fox 187, 213,
267 Wright v. Wyvell 56
A TABLE OF THE PLEADINGS, IN THE SECOND PART.
A
Actions upon the Case. 1. IN a Special Indebitatus Assumpsit against an
Attorney The Plaintiff declares, That whereas T. S. was Indebted to the
Plaintiff in a certain Sum of Money exceeding 12 l and the Defendant was
indebted to the said T. S. in 12 l aut eo circiter. The Defendant promised,
That if the Plaintiff would procure an Order under the Hand of the said T. S.
for payment of the Money which he owed the said T. S. or any part thereof, that
then he would pay the same; and avers that he procured such Order, and showed
it to the Defendant, and requested payment, which he refused p. 69 After
Imparlance the Defendant demurs to the Declaration 70 The Plaintiff joins in
the Demurrer 71 2 Against a Common Carryer, for losing Goods delivered him to
Carry 75 The Plaintiff declares that the Defendant is a Common Carryer, and
sets forth the Custom of England, and the particulars of the Goods delivered to
him, to be Carried from B. to London, and that he paid him for the Carriage,
and the Defendant lost them 75, 76 Issue thereupon 77 3. Against a Sheriff for
Returning Nulla Bona upon a Special Outlawry, when the Party had Goods 84 The
Declaration sets forth the Special Matter 85, 86 Defendant pleads, That a
Prerogative Writ came out of the Exchequer, whereupon the Defendant seized the
G^ods. Nulla alia ^ona 87 The Pla^^tiff demurs 88 4. For not Folding his Sheep
upon the Plaintiffs Land, according to Custom 136 The Declaration sets forth
the special Custom and Cause of Action. Issue thereupon 137 5. For Stopping up
a Foot-way 185 The Plaintiff Declares, That he was possessed of, and did inhabit
in an ancient Mess^age, and that he had and ought to have a Footway for himself
and his Servants over such a Close, etc. as belonging to his said Message; and
that the Defendant to disturb him in his way dug Ditches and Trenches cross the
Way, and erected Hedges and Fences cross it, whereby he was hindered and
deprived of his Way 186 6. Indebitatus Assumpsit upon several Promises, For
Moneys had and received for the Plaintiffs use. For Money laid out for the
Defendant. For Money borrowed of the Plaintiff 254 For Money due to the
Plaintiff for the Arrearages of an Account The Defendant has not paid the said
several Sums, though requested, etc. As to the first and second Promises, the
Defendant pleads Non assumpsit infra sex annos; as to the third and fourth
Promises he pleads Non assumpsit 255 As to the first and second Promises, the
Plaintiff Replies and sets forth an Original s^ed forth i^ a Clausum ^^egit
within the six years, ea ^nt^ntione to ^eclare against him, and that he
promised within six years next before the Suing out of that Original. The
Defendant craves Oyer of the Original, and has it; and says, that the Writ
will not warrant the Declaration. 256 And prays Judgment, whether the Plaintiff
shall be admitted to set forth that Writ ad Warrantizandum Narracon' suam. The
Plaintiff demurs to the ^ejoynder: The Defendant joins in Demurrer 258 7. For
Words, (viz.) Papist and Pensioner 263 The Plaintiff declares, that he is a
Protestant, and never professed the Romish Religion; that he has been a Member
of Parli^^ent, and did his Duty therein, sets forth the Colloquium of the
Plaintiff, and of his being a Member of Parliament, the first Words; ex
ulteriori malitia other Words 264 The Defendant pleads Not guilty 265 8. In
Assumpsit the Plaintiff declares for a Runlet of Wine. Another Indebitatus, as
well for Meat, Drink, Brandy and Tobacco, as for Horse-Meat. A Quantum meruit
for Meat, Drink, Wine, Brandy and Horse-Meat, found and provided by the
Plaintiff as an Innkeeper 279 Another Indebitatus for Goods sold, An Insimul
computasset; the Plaintiff says, that the Defendant has not paid the several
Sums, and inde producit sectam, 280 The Defendant pleads an Outlawry in Bar,
and shows, that J. S. impleaded the Plaintiff in the Common Pleas in an Action
of Trespass, and for not appearing she was waived, and that the Outlawry is yet
in force; and hoc paratus est verificare per Recordum. Demurrer to the Plea;
Joynder in Demurrer 281
Assault, Battery and Wounding. Vide Trespass, 2. Assignees, Action by and
against them. Vid. Covenant, 4. 5. Assumpsit, Vid. Actions on the Case, 1. 6.
8. Award, vid. Debt, 2. 4. 6.
B
Bankrupcy, vid. Trover, 1. 2. Bill of Exchange, vid. Error, 2. By Law, vid.
Debt, 7.
C
Carryer, Action against him. Vid. Action on the Case, 2. Clausum fregit. Vid.
Action on the Case, 6. Covenant. 1. BRought by the Executor of a Bishop,
against the Executors of an Assignee of the Executor of the Lessee 51 The
Declaration sets forth the Indenture of Demise of a Rectory, etc. with the
Consideration and Particulars demised. The Covenants to repair, and yield up:
The Lessees Entry, etc. 51, 52, 53 And assigns the Breach in permitting the
Chancel, etc. to be out of Repair. Profert in Cur' the Lease 51 And Letters
Testamentary of the Bishop 55 Defendants Demur generally 55 2. Against an
Attorney upon Articles of Agreement, for quiet enjoyment of Lands 59 The
Declaration sets forth, That the Defendant Covenanted pro and ex part of
another. Recites the Articles, avers performance of all Covenants on the
Plaintiffs part, and assigns the Breach, That the Plaintiff and his Servants
were sued in an Action of Trespass in the Common Pleas, and Damages recovered
against him, which he was compelled to pay, and sic idem the Plaintiff, non
quiet and pacifice tenuit 60 The Defendant pleads non infregit Conventionem,
and Issue thereupon 61 3. By Executors upon certain special Covenants, with
their Testator, for a Demise of Land, which they set forth 97 They aver
performance by the Testator in his life time, and since his death by the
Plaintiffs, and assign a Breach on the Defendants part. Defendant pleads quod
Testator nihil habuit in Tenementis. The Plaintiffs demur to the Plea 98 4. By
an Assignee of an Assignee, against an Executor 117 The Declaration sets forth
the Demise, and that the Defendants Testator Covenanted to pull down three old
Houses, and build three new ones in their room, and to keep the same in good
repair, and so deliver them up at the end of his Term 119 Sets forth the
Plaintiffs Title to the Reversion by Assignment from the Lessor 119, 120 And
that the Tenant for years Attorned 121 That the Tenant in possession died, and
left the Defendant his Executor, etc. The the Plaintiff has performed all and
singular the Covenants on the part of the Lessor and his Assigns. Protestando
that the Defendant has not performed those on the part of his Testator 122 He
assigns a Breach in facto, for permitting once of the new erected Houses to
fall down, before the end of the Term, and other defaults in not Repairing. Et
sic the Defendant Convenconem non tenuit 123 The Defendant pleads performance
specially to each Breach assigned, and says, that his Testator pulled down the
three Houses, and built other three Houses in their room which he kept in
Repairs, and so delivered at the end of his Term 124 The Plaintiff demurs to
the Plea, as not being sufficient as to the leaving one House totally prostrate
and ruined, as the Plaintiff declared. The Defendant joined in Demurrer 125 5.
Against the Assignee of an Executrix 228 The Declaration sets forth, That the
Plaintiff was possessed of a Term for years yet in being, by Indenture demised to
the Testator for 21 years, at the yearly Rent of, etc. 229 With a Clause of
Re-entry, and Covenants 230 That the Lessee entered, made his Will, made the
Assignor his Exetrix, and died: That she proved the Will, entered and assigned
to the Defendant, who entered, and is still possessed. The Breach assigned was in
the Non payment of Rent 231 The Defendant pleads, That he assigned over before
any Rent due 232 Demurrer to part of the Plea; Joynder in Demurrer, Judgment
for the other part 233 Cesset executio Brevis de Inquirendo de dampnis quousque
the Demurrer be determined 234 6. In Covenant, the Plaintiff declares upon an
Indenture of Demise from the Defendant 272 Profert in Curia; The Demise.
Habendum, Reddendum; The Covenants on the Plaintiffs part 273 Covenants on the
Defendants part for himself and Assigns, to permit to make a Drain. The
Plaintiff entered and was possessed, and avers performance of all Covenants on his
part. The Breach assigned, Eo quod the Defendant being possessed of certain
Tenements adjoining for a Term of years, did demise part of the Term to J. S.
who entered 274 And died possessed: And Administration granted to his Widow, who
entered and was possessed, and took Husband. The Husband and Wife entered and were
possessed, and refuse to suffer the Defendant to make the Drain. Et sic inde
producit sectam 275 The Defendant pleads, That he permitted the Plaintiff to
make a Drain according to Covenant; but the Plaintiff refused it. The Plaintiff
demurs. The Defendant joins in Demurrer 276

D
Debt. 1. IN Debt upon a Bond, the Defendant craves Oyer of the Condition, and
pleads the Statute of Usury 80 He sets forth the Usurious Contract, the Money
lent, and the Bond in question given for it; and that the Money for Forbearance
exceeds the rate of 6 l per Cent. 81 The Plaintiff Replies, That the Bond was
made by a Scrivener in his absence, who mistook the Condition, and Traverses
the Corrupt Agreement. The Defendant demurs to the Replication. The Plaintiff
joins 82 2. Debt upon a Bond, to perform an Award 110 The Defendant craves Oyer
of the Condition, and pleads that the Arbitrators made no Award; but that they
named an Umpire, who made no Award by Writing or Word of Mouth 111 The
Plaintiff replies, That true it is that the Arbitrators, nor the Umpire by them
first Chosen, made any Award, but refused; whereupon the Arbitrators chose
another Umpire, who mad an Award within the time limited 112 The Defendant
demurs specially, and assigns for Cause, That it does not appear by the
Replication that the Defendant had Notice, that the Arbitrators had named the
second Umpire, or that he had any Authority to make any Umpirage. The Plaintiff
joins in Demurrer 113 3. For Rent against an Executrix, upon a Lease parol 176
The Declaration sets forth the Demise to the Defendants Testator, of the 4th
part of two Corn Mills and of one Mault-Mill under the same Roof, to hold for
one year, and sic de Anno in annum, as long as both parties shall please,
paying Monthly for the same the Sum of 60 s 4 d ob. so long as the said
Testator should hold the Premises; and shows, that he entered and held it for
so long, and that the Rent is due and unpaid for so many Months per quod actio
accrevit 176 He also sets forth another Demise from year to year, so long as
both parties shall please, at the yearly Rent of 20 l to be paid Quarterly, by
equal Portions, the Tenants Entry, the Rent arrear, per quod actio accrevit.
Another Demise at Will laid, Entry, Rent arrear, Actio accrevit 177 Another
Demise at Will laid, of the 4th part of another Mill, Entry, Rent arrear, Actio
accrevit; the The Testator in his Life time, nor the Executrix post mortem,
have not paid 178 The Defendant pleads in Abatement, That the Tenant died
Intestate, and that Administration was granted to her, and therefore ought to
be sued as Administratrix, and not as Executrix 178 The Plaintiff replies, That
the Defendant administered as Executrix, before the granting the Administration
to her. The Defendant demurs to the Replication. The Plaintiff joins 179 4.
Debt upon Bond. The Defendant craves Oyer of the Condition, which is to perform
an Award 219 Pleads, That the Arbitrators made no Award. The Plaintiff replies,
and sets forth the Award made in Writing, and assigns a Breach in not paying a
certain Sum of Money awarded 220 The Defendant demurs. The Plaintiff joins 221
5. Debt upon a Sheriffs Bond 234 The Defendant prays Oyer of the Condition,
which was to appear in Chancery to answer a Contempt. Pleads the Statute of 23
H. 6. That an Attachment issued out of Chancery, delivered to the Plaintiff,
being Sheriff, who caused the Defendant to be arrested, and after took the said
Bond for his Appearance 236 Contra formam Statuti praedicti, and sic scriptum
Obligatorium illud, etc. vacuum in lege existit. The Plaintiff demurs to the
Plea. The Defendant joins 237 6. Debt upon Bond, Conditioned to perform an
Award 239 The Defendant pleads, that the Arbitrators made no award. The
Plaintiff replies, and sets forth an Award made ore tenus 240 Notice of the
Award, and request for the Performance of it. Demurrer to the Replication.
Joynder in Demurrer 241 7. Debt upon a By-Law made by a Corporation by
Prescription 243 The Declaration sets forth, That the Town of G. is Antiqua
Villa, a Corporation time out of mind. Power to implead, and be impleaded. A
Custom to make Bylaws for good Government of the Corporation, and to impose
Penalties. Custom to elect a Bailiff annually 243 The By Law sets forth,
Forfeiture for the Breach. The Defendant elected Bailiff for the year then next
following, who refused to execute the Office, per quod Actio accrevit. The
Defendant pleads the Act of 13 Car. 2. 244 The Act set forth 245 And alleges
that he is, and at the time aforesaid was a Protestant Dissenter, and had not
received the Sacrament, according to the Rites of the Church of England, with a
year before his Election; and that the said Election (by virtue of the said
Act) was void. The Plaintiff demurs. The Defendant joins 246 8. Debt for Rent
upon two several Demises by Lease Parol 249 The first Demise. Exception,
Habendum, Reddendum, Entry, Rent arrear, Actio accrevit 250 The second Demise,
Exception, Habendum, Reddendum, Rent arrear, Actio accrevit 251 The Defendant
pleads, That the Plaintiff Nihil habuit in tenementis tempore dimissionis (it
should have been temporibus demissionis) ibid. The Plaintiff replies, That
before the several Demises, one J. S. demised to him for 41 years, the said J.
S. having then full Power, Right and Title, to make such Demise; by virtue of
which he entered and was possessed, and demised to the Defendant 252 The Defendan
demurs The Plaintiff joins in demurrer 253
Distress and Avowry. Vide Replevin.
E
Error. 1. ERror, in the Exchequer Chamber. The Style of the Court 286 The Writ
of Error 287 The Return of the Writ. The Memorandum, and Declaration in a
special Action of the Case, for not grinding at an Ancient Mill. Seisin of the
Manor and Mill. The Plaintiff Farmer of the Mill, and habuit and habere debuit
the Toll 288 The Defendant, Occupier of an Ancient Message, which ought to
grind at his Mill. That the Defendant erected a Hand-Mill, and ground
therewith, ratione cujus the Plaintiff lost his Toll. The Defendant imparles,
and pleads Not guilty 289 Postea, Tales, Verdict for the Plaintiff. The
Judgment. The Placita in the Exchequer Chamber 190 The General Errors assigned.
A Scire facias ad audiendum Errores prayed, and awarded. The Defendant in the
Writ of Error appears and pleads in nullo est Erratum 291 2. The Placita in the
Exchequer Chamber. The Writ of Error 296 The Return of the Writ. The Placita
297 The Memorandum, and Declaration upon an Inland Bill of Exchange. (...) The
Custom set forth, That any Merchant, or other person, vel Ordini suo, super
visum acceptavit, and sic per Indorsamentum appunctuaret, pro valor recept',
etc. Upon Refusal to pay, the Merchant or other person to become chargable 298
Avers, That the Defendant being a Merchant at N. drew a Bill upon one J. S. in
London, payable to one P. or Order, for Value received. The Bill presented to
J. S. and accepted by him. P. orders payment to the Plaintiff. J. S. had
Notice, and the Money demanded of him; but refused payment; of which the
Defendant had Notice 299 And became chargable, and thereupon promised payment;
but though after requested non solvit 300 The Defendant Protestando that there is
no such Custom; for Plea says, That one C. an Excise-man paid the Defendant the
Money in question, being the Kings Money, to the intent that it should be paid
to the King, and the Defendant at C's request drew the Bill. That C. was then
indebted to the King, prout per Record' Scaccarij 301 That an Extent issued out
thereupon ad inquirendum. The Writ delivered to the Sheriffs of London. An
Inquisition taken by them 302 The Money and Bill of Exchange seized and
returned into the Exchequer. The King became Entitled. An Extent issued out to
the Sheriff of N. for the levying the Money, and the Money paid thereupon.
Averment of una and eadem persona 304 Et una and eadem Billa; Et una and eadem
Summa. The Plaintiff demurs to the Plea especially, Causes of demurrer. The
Defendant joins in demurrer 304 Eleven Continuances 304, 305, 306 The Loquela,
and Proceedings revived by Act of Parliament 1 W. and M. Judgment for the
Plaintiff upon the demurrer. A Writ of Enquiry awarded 306 The Inquisition
returned. Damages found, Judgment for the Plaintiff 307
Mill and Toll. Vid. Error, 1. Outlawry pleaded. Vid. Action on the Case, 8.
Prerogative Process. Vid. Action on the Case, 3. Error, 2. Trover, 2.
Quantum meruit. Vid. Action on the Case, 8.
R
Rent. Vid. Debt, 3. 8. Replevin. 1. THe Plaintiff Declares for taking and
detaining 8 Cows, etc. The Defendant acknowledges the taking as Bailiff to the
Dean and Chapter of Canterbury 131 Sets forth, that they are Lords of the
Manor of M. That J. S. was seized of the Locus in quo, parcel of the said
Manor, and held it of the Dean and Chapter by Fealty, Rent and Suit of Court.
Sets forth a Custom for the Lord to have a year and an halfs Rent upon every
Alienation, and power to distrain for it, Shows the Alienation and the
Purchasers Entry, and that there was so much due for a Fine by Custom; and
because the same was unpaid the Defendant distrained infra feodum, etc. 132,
133 The Plaintiff demurs to the Conizance. The Defendant joins in demurrer 134
2. Against two Defendants; One of which avows, the other acknowledges the
taking as Baily to the former 145 They set forth, that long before the taking
R.L. and L.L. were seized in Fee of the Locus in quo, and by Deed granted an
Annuity to the Ancestor of the Avowant and his Heirs, issuing out of certain
Lands of which the Locus in quo was parcel, with power of Distress,
Conditionally to be void upon payment of 100 l on a certain day then to come,
which was not paid, etc. 146, 147 And for six years Rent Arrear the Distress
was made, which the one Defendant been advocat, and the other been cognoscit,
as in the Lands charged with the Distress. The Plaintiff demurs to the Avowry
and Conizance. The Defendants join 148 3. The Plaintiff declares for taking his
Colt, etc. 210 The Defendant avows for Damage fesant; and sets forth, that E.
M. being seized in Fee, demised the Locus in quo to the Avowant, to hold at
Will. That he entered and was possessed, and took the Cold Damage fesant; prays
Judgment and a Return, and Costs and Damages, according to the Statute. The
Plaintiff pleads in Bar to the Avowry, That E. M. demised the Locus in quo to
him before the pretended Demise to the Defendant, to hold for 6 years. That he
entered and was possessed, and that the Defendant took his Colt there, absque hoc
that E. M. demised to the Avowant mode and forma, as he has set forth 211 The
Avowant demurs generally. The Plaintiff joins 212 4. The Plaintiffs declare
against three Defendants, for taking and detaining their Cattle 224 One of the
Defendants avows, the other two make Conizance, as his Bailiffs. The Avowant
says, That the Father being seized in Fee of the third part of a certain
Message, etc. of which the Locus in quo was parcel, demised the same for 99
years, if A. B. and C. or either of them should so long live, reserving Rent.
That the Lessee entered. That the Father being seized of the Reversion, died
seized, and a descent to the Avowant as Heir at Law; who distrained for Rent
arrear 225 Super praedictam tertiam partem, etc. And avers, That C. is still
living. In Bar to the Avowry the Plaintiffs Confess the seisin of the Father of
one third, and that J. S. was seized of the other two parts, who licensed the
Plaintiffs to put in their Cattle upon the Locus in quo, which they did 226 The
Defendants demur to the Bar. The Plaintiffs join in Demurrer 227

S.
Scire facias. 1. AGainst a Ter-tenant 101 The Judgment recited in the Writ to
the Sheriffs of London. The Plaintiff obtulit se at the Return. The Sheriffs
Return, That there were no Tenants of any of the Defendants Lands at the time
of the Judgment, or at any time since quibus Scire fac' possunt 101 A Testatum
Scire fac' to the Sheriff of Norfolk. The Plaintiff and a Ter-tenant appear at
the Return. The Sheriff Returns, That he had summoned P. S. who was then Tenant
of Lands which were the Defendants at the time of the Judgment, and that there
are no other Tenants, to whom, etc. The Ter-tenant, salvis sibi omnibus
exceptionibus, etc. Imparls. The Plaint revived, continued and adjourned, by
Act of Parliament, 3 Febr. 1. W. and M. A further Imparlance. The Plaintiff
prays Execution 102 The Ter-tenant pleads in Abatement of the Writ, and
alleges, that there are other Tenants of other Lands in Surrey belonging to
the Defendant at the time of the Judgment, and prays Judgment, and that the
Writ may be quasht. The Plaintiff demurs to the Plea. The Ter tenant joins in
demurrer 103
Sheriff. Action against him. Vid. Actions on the Case, 3. Plea to his Bail
Bond. Vid. Debt 5.
Slander. Vide Action on the Case 7. Special Verdict. Vid. Trover 2.
T
Trespass. 1. TRespass against the Defendant simul-cum G. F. for taking Vi and
armis, and Impounding his Cattle quousque finem fecit of 11 l etc. contra
pacem, etc. 90 The Defendant, as to the Vi and armis, and contra pacem, pleads
Not guilty. And as to the residue of the Trespass, he pleads a Seizure by
virtue of a Fieri facias out of the Common Pleas, and the Sheriffs Warrant
thereupon, and that the Cattle were appraised at 11 l being the true Value, and
detained until the said Sum was paid to the Sheriffs Baily, for the use of the
said Sheriff, pro deliberatione averiorum, prout been licuit, which was the
residue of the said Trespass; absque hoc that he is guilty before or after the
said taking 91, 92 The Plaintiff demurs, and assigns for Cause, that the
Traverse is ill as to Time, and that the 11 l ought not to have been paid to
the use of the Sheriff by the Law of the Land. The Defendant joins in Demurrer
93 2. Trespass for Assault, Battery, Wounding and Imprisonment 189 As to the Vi
and armis, and vulnerationem, the Defendant pleads Not guilty, and Issue
thereupon. At to the residue of the Trespass, he pleads, that he obtained
Judgment against the Plaintiff in the Common Pleas, in an Action of Indebitatus
Assumpsit; which Judgment was afterward set aside and vacated; but before it
was vacated a Ca. sa. was sued out thereupon, directed to the Sheriff, who made
his Warrant to the Bailiff of the Liberty 190 The Bailiff takes the now
Plaintiff thereupon, and had him in Custody until he paid the Money, quae sunt
idem Resid', Transgr', Insult' and Imprisonat', and Traverses, that he is not
guilty of any other Trespass, etc. The Plaintiff replies, That the now
Defendant (then Plaintiff in the Judgment) was an Attorney, whose Duty is to
enter Judgments fairly and honestly, and that he in deceit of the Court entered
the Judgment, when he ought not to have done it 191 And that afterward, on the
Examination and Consideration of the said Entry, the said Judgment was by the
said Court adjudged void ab initio 192 The now Defendant (Plaintiff in the
Judgment) confesses the Matter, and says, that he appointed the Judgment to
be duly Entered; but by default of the Clerk it was entered irregularly: Absque
hoc that it was Entered by the said now Defendant falso and fraudulenter in
deceptionem Curiae ibid. The Plaintiff demurs. The Defendant joins 193
Trover. 1. TRover brought by an Assignee of Commissioners of Bankrupts 63 The
Declaration sets forth the Bankrupt to be possessed of such and such Goods, which
came to the hands of the Defendant 63 That the Bankrupt exercised the Trade of
a Vintner, and became Indebted to several Persons. That he departed from his
Dwelling House, and became a Bankrupt. That the Creditors Petitioned the Lord
Chancellor. The Commission sued out 64 The Commissioners find him a Bankrupt,
and make Assignment to the Plaintiff 65 A Conversion of the said Goods by the
Defendant 66 The Defendant demurs to the Declaration. The Plaintiff joins in
Demurrer 66 2. Against the Sheriffs of London and others, for 225 l in Money
numbered, and diverse Goods 156 The Defendants, as to part of the Goods (which
they set forth in particular) plead, That the Plaintiffs formerly brought an
Action of Trespass upon the Case in the King's Bench against the now Defendants,
for taking and carrying away the Goods now sued for 159 That upon Not guilty
pleaded, the Issue came to a Trial, and the Jury found a Special Verdict 160
Which they recite at large: That the Owner of the Goods became a Bankrupt. That
a Judgment was recovered against him for 1000 l and a Fieri facias issued out,
which being delivered to the Sheriffs of London, they seized the Goods in
Execution. That after Seizure, and before Sale, a Prerogatie Process issued out
against the Goods, which is recited in haec verba 161 The Return of the said
Process 163 The Goods taken by Inquisition, inventoried, appraised and sold,
and the Money delivered to the King's Debtor 164 A Commission of Bankrupts sued
out. The Commissioners assign to the Plaintiffs, The Assignees possessed. And
then they Conclude, Si utrum super tota Materia the Defendants are guilty, the
Jurors know not, if the Court shall adjudge them guilty, they find for the
Plaintiffs; if not, for the Defendants 165 After several Continuances, the
Loquela remaining sine die, was revived and continued by Act of Parliament 1 W.
and M. After which, Judgment for the Defendants 166 That the said Defendants
shall go sine die, and have their Costs 167 Averment, that the said Judgment
remains in full force. That the Goods in the said Action of Trespass, and this
of Trover, are the same. That the Conversion in this Action, and the Taking in
the other, is the same. That the Cause of Action was the same in both. And that
the Plaintiffs and Defendants are the same. Et hoc parati sunt verificare unde
petunt Judicium si praedicti, the Plaintiffs Actionem suam versus eos habere
debeant, etc. Not guilty to the residue of the Goods. The Plaintiffs demur. The
Defendants join 168
Usury Pleaded. Vid. Debt, 7. Way, Action for stopping it. Vid. Action on the
Case, 5.

WE all knowing the Great Learning and Judgment of the Author, do (for the
Benefit of the Public) approve of and allow the Printing and Publishing of this
Book, Entitled, The Reports of Sir Peyton Ventris Knight. Late One of the Justices
of the Court of Common Pleas.

J. Som^ers, C.S. J. Holt, Geo: Treby, Ed: Nevill, Joh. Powell, W. Gregory, N.
Lechmere, Tho. Rokeby G: Air, Jo: Turton, John Powell, Sam. Air.

April the 20 th, 1965.
The Second Volume.
TERMINO SANCTI HILLARII, Anno Vicesimo primo and secundo Caroli Secundi, IN
COMMUNI BANCO.
Craw versus Ramsey.
IN an Ejectment of Lands and the Rectory of Kingston upon Thames, in Surrey.

Upon Not Guilty pleaded, the Jury found a Special Verdict to this effect;
(viz.)

That Robert Ramsey, Born in Scotland before the Accession thereof to the Crown
of England, had Issue four Sons, Robert, Nicholas, John and George, Antenati;
Robert died (they do not find when) leaving Issue three Daughters, Margaret,
Isabel and Jane, who were also Aliens, and alive 1 October. 14 Car. 1. Nicholas
had Issue Patrick, born in England 1 May 1618. They also find, that at the
Parliament holden 10 Car. 1. in Ireland it was Enacted, That all Persons of the
Scottish Nation should be reputed the Kings Natural Subjects to all intents,
constructions and purposes of that his Realm of Ireland, as if Born there. And
they find the Act of Parliament at large.

Nicholas Ramsey was alive at the making of that Act. John the third Son
(afterward Earl of Holderness) was Naturalized by Act of Parliament in England
1 Jacobi, and purchased the Lands and Rectory in question; and being seized 22
Jac by Indenture Tripartite, between him of the First part, Sir William Cock
and Martha his Daughter of the Second part, and Charles Lord Effingham of the
Third part; In Consideration of a Marriage to be had between him and Martha,
did Covenant to levy a Fine to the use of himself for Life, and afterward to
Martha for Life, the Remainder to the Heirs Males of his Body, the Remainder to
his own right Heirs.

And 29 September. 22 Jac. the Marriage was had, and the Michaelmas Term after a
Fine was Levied accordingly. The 24 of Jan. 1 Car. 1. the Earl died without
Issue, Martha Entered and was seized for her Life, and died 17 Car. Et eodem
anno it was found by Office, that the Earl of Holderness died seized of the
Rectory, as before, and without an Heir; and that King Charles (anno decimo)
granted this Rectory to one Murray.

George (the fourth Son of Robert) was Naturalized by the Parliament here 7
Jac. He had Issue John the Defendant. Nicholas died. Patrick his Heir in 1651.
bargained and sold to the Earl of Elgin and one Sydenham, virtute cujus and
vigore Statuti, etc. they were seized prout Lex postulat; and in 1662.
bargained and sold for years to Amabel Countess of Kent and Jane Heart; and
afterward Released to them and their Heirs in 1665. They being seized,
bargained and sold by Lease and Release also to Pullen and Neale, who Entered,
and bargained and sold to Sir Lionel Talmash and West, the Lessors of the
Plaintiff, upon whom John the Defendant Entered.

Upon which the Action is brought, and the great Question in the Case was,
Whether Patrick the Son of Nicholas might claim these Lands, as Heir to the
Earl of Holderness, by virtue of the Act of Parliament in Ireland, 10 Car. or
that they should descend to the Defendant the Son of George, Naturalized the 7
of Jac. in England?

Wyld and Archer (who Argued first) were of Opinion, That however the Point was
adjudged the Plaintiff could not have Judgment upon this Verdict; for they do
not find that Patrick entered or was seized, but that he in 1651. did bargain
and sell, etc. Virtute cujus the Bargainees were seized prout Lex postulat; and
then bargained and sold in 1662, and do not so much as find their Bargainees
seized prout Lex postulat: But they find the Defendant Entered, and so the
primer Possession is in him, which is a good Title against the Plaintiff, for
whom none is found, it not being found that Patrick Entered.

Again, If the Naturalization in Ireland will serve in England, the Title
appears for the Daughters, the Heirs of Robert the eldest Son; for it is found
that he died, but not when, so it might be after the Act of 10 Car.

But Tyrrell, and Vaughan Chief Justice, differed in these two Points.

As to the First, They said it would be intended; Patrick entered for a Verdict
that leaves all the Matter at large to the Judgment of the Court, will be taken
sometimes by Intendment, as well as where the Jury Conclude upon a Special
Point. 2 Cro. 64. find an Incumbent Resigned, the Resignation shall be intended
accepted. So in 4 Co. Fullwood's Case it was found, that one came before the
Recorder of London and Mayor of the Staple, and recognovit se debere, etc. and
did not say, per scriptum suum Obligatorium, nec per formam Statuti, yet
intended so. Vid. Hob. 262. And where they find the Bargainees seized prout lex
postulat, that does not leave it doubtful whether seized or no, but whether by
right or wrong; for Seisin must be taken as found expressly. Neither do they
find any other in possession, nor that the Defendant made any Claim in Twelve
years after, which enforces the Intendment as before: And it is found expressly
that Pullen and Neale Entered in 1665. so that the Defendant had not the primer
Possession, however, or if he had, he should not have Judgment if no other
Title were found for him, as is Resolved in 1 Cro. 42. Hern and Allen's Case.

As to the Second, It shall be intended Robert died before 10 Car. For he is
found an Alien, and shall be presumed to have continued so during his Life,
unless found to the contrary; then the Descent to the Daughters is obstructed
by the Incapacity of their Father. And though when the Title is found for the
King the Court shall adjudge for him; because the Kings Courts are entrusted
with his Rights, it is not so of any other person: but they shall take no notice
of any Title found for a Stranger.

Wherefore they held (notwithstanding these Omissions in the Verdict) that
Judgment might be given for the Plaintiff.

And Tyrrell was of Opinion, in the Principal Matter, for the Plaintiff. In his
Argument he considered of diverse kinds of Allegiance natural and acquired,
which was either local or legal; As when a man is Sworn in the Leet, Denizated
by the Kings Letters Patents, obtained by Conquest, or Naturalized, which
Naturalization must be by Act of Parliament, and cannot be limited, 2 Cro. 539.
1 Inst. 129. who is to all purposes a Natural born Subject. An Indictment of
Treason against such an one is contra naturalem ligeantiam. Neither can it be
confined to Place; for it is due to the Natural, and not to the Politic person
of the King, Mo. 790. And the Plea of infra ligeantiam Regni sui Angliae was
rejected in Calvin's Case in Co. and said to be never heard of before. Idem est
nasci, and idem naturalizari. And he Argued, That in regard Ireland has the
like Court of Parliament that England has, it has also the same Power, and
conceived that the English Laws were introduced by Parliament in King John's
time: For in the Charter 11 H. 3. it is recited, that Johannes quondam Rex
Angliae duxit secum in Hiberniam Viros discretos and legis peritos, quorum
Communi Concilio and ad instantiam Hibernentium statuit, etc. and ex
diuturnitate temporis omnia praesumuntur solenniter esse acta. In the 4 Inst.
357. it appears that Parliaments were holden there before 17 E. 3. 2 R. 3. 12.
Hibernia habet Parliamentum, and facium Leges. And in 4 Inst. 452. it is said,
they may Naturalize an Alien; and if they do so, he is all one with an Irish
man born: As one that purchases his Freedom in a Corporation, has all
Immunities as amply as he that is born a Member of it. Neither does it follow
from hence, that an Act of Parliament in Ireland could bind England; it is the
Law of England Cooperating with the Act, that gives the Naturalization an
effect here. The Act is but remotio Impedimenti: As if one were Attainted by
the Parliament there, he should forfeit his Lands here, and if that Act were
Repealed he should be restored to them again; yet neither Act were oligative to
England: The Act of Ireland is causa remota, or sine qua non; the Law of
England is causa proxima, and this of Naturalization was one of the Wonders of
the Powers and Privileges of Parliament; As Legitimation of a Bastard, and the
like.

The other three Justices were of a contrary Opinion, and Argued to this
effect: that Ireland was a Conquered Kingdom, the Conquest completed, if not
begun in K. Henry the Second's time; in whose time there is no Record of any
Establishment, and being a Christian Kingdom they remained Governed by their
own Laws, until King John (Anno 12 Regni sui, by Charter, (for so they
conceived it to be, and not by Parliament;) for it appears that the Nobles were
sworn, which is not usual in Acts of Parliament, neither is it Test Rege in
Parliamento) introduced the English Laws; yet it has ever remained a distinct
Kingdom, viz. from the bringing in the Laws by King John, M. Paris Hist. 230.
and Calvin's Case in 7 Co. 22, 23. the Conquest brought it infra Dominium
Regis, sed non infra Regnum Angliae. Oruke committed Treason in Ireland, and it
was held tryable by Commission, by 33 H. 8. as a Treason out of the Realm. 20 H
6. 8. the Judges here are not bound to take notice of the Laws of Ireland.
Fitzh. tit. Voucher 239. A man in Ireland cannot be Vouched. Anders. 262, 263.
2 Inst. 2. it is said, Magna Charta, nor the Statute Laws here, did not extend
to Ireland until Poinings Law, 10 H. 7. though in truth it appears to be before
by 8 E. 4. cap. 10. neither are they obliged by any Statute since unless named,
Dier 303. It is said of Lands holden in Capite in England and Ireland; that
there ought to be several Liverties and by several Seals 11 Ed. 4. 7. When the
King went into Ireland it was held to be a Voyage Royal. And Wyld said, Two
Kingdoms could not be united but by Act of Parliament; and there ought to be
reciprocal Acts; and so is my Lord Coke 4 Inst. cap. Scotland. But this the
Chief Justice said in his Argument, was not requisite in case of a Conquered
Nation, which hereby had lost its Original Right of holding Parliaments; but he
agreed in case of Kingdoms independent one upon the other. He said he had a
Charter whereby Gascoigne, Guyan and Callice were united to England in Ed. the
3ds time, and recited to be by mutual pact upon a Peace concluded, that Wales,
was fully conquered in Ed. 1st. time: whereupon they all submitted de alto and
basso to the King; and it appears he abrogates some Laws, makes some new, and
continues others, and Wales was united and consolidated with England, in H. 8
time by Act of Parliament here, but there was no Act on their part; neither is
Ireland only a distinct Kingdom, but also subordinate. A Law enacted here to
extend to all the Kings Dominions shall bind Ireland; Writs of Error have been
always brought here to reverse Judgments in Ireland; and they naturally lie as
the Chief Justice said into all subordinate Kingdoms, Fitz. tit. Ass. 562. A
Writ of Error to reverse a Judgment given in an Assize in the County of
Glamorgan, and 21 H. 7. 31. B. it is said many Writs of Error have been brought
to reverse Judgments given in Callice though it was alleged the Civil Law there
was in use.

So the Romans allowed Appeals out of every Province subordinate unto them, as
appears by the Case of St. Paul in the Acts, and it is against Nature that the
Inferior should have any influence upon the Superior; suppose a Bill of
Naturalization were brought into Parliament here and rejected, and after it
should pass in Ireland, should it have the same effect as if it had passed
here? If this might have been, what needed the endeavors in the beginning of
King James's Reign to obtain an Act for the Naturalization of all Scots, and
the Union of both Kingdoms, when an Act in Ireland would have been as
effectual, and procured with much greater facility? Neither is the Parliament
of Ireland equal to that of England, for that might be aliened by an Act of
Parliament, as Gascoigne and Guyan were by mutual Consent, though the King cannot
do it alone; therefore King John's Grant to the Pope was held absolutely void;
but Ireland could not be transferred from the Sovereignty of England by any Act
there, for they cannot discharge themselves of their Subordination to England.
H. 3. granted to Ed. 1. Terrem Hibernicam, and it was held to be void, 40 Ed.
3. 4 Inst. 357. And if they should make an Act there, that no Writ of Error
should lie into England, the Chief Justice said it would be void for their
Power is merely precarious as to the Parliament of England, though not to the
King in regard of his Charter: Wherefore he said it might be questioned whether
they could Naturalize at all, for the King cannot alone, and their Power is
wholly derived from this Charter, neither has it been attempted by them until
10 Car. 1. when the Earl of Strafford was Lieutenant there: Whereas it was said
on the other side, that to be Naturalized in Ireland was the same thing as to
be born in Ireland; he denied it, unless they added by the Laws of Ireland, i.
e. the Law gives him there all the Privileges a Native has; but this was not
ligeantia nata, sed data, and therefore can extend no further than the Power of
them that gave it; and though it be said an Act of Parliament can do any thing,
that must be understood as to civil things, which are but the Creatures of Men,
therefore may be altered and disposed at the will of the Supreme Authority; but
natural things are not within its Power: For an Act of Parliament cannot make a
Man a Woman, or a Man to be born in any other place than where he was really
born, though it may give him such privileges as one has that is born there,
viz. such as are within their Power and none else; and 7 Co. 18. B. The time of
the Birth is of the essence of a Subject born, and after in Calvin's Case 27. it
is said natural Ligeance respects the time of the Birth, and he cannot be a
Natural Subject who was born under the Allegiance of another King, for a
Natural Subject is the correlative to a Natural Prince, and one naturalized
there, might in all respects be compared to an antenatus, who differed from a
postnatus in these two things.

First, He was another Princes Subject before a Subject to the King of England.

Secondly, Such an one might have been an Enemy, whereas a born Subject may be
Traitor, but can never be an Enemy. Now the Subjects of a Prince that conquers
another Kingdom become immediately Denizens of that Kingdom, But not e
converso, as was held in Calvin's Case, of the antenati in Scotland: But the
Subjects of a King who is Homager to that King, shall not be Aliens in any of
his Dominions, as in Wales before the Conquest of it in Edw. the 1st Time, the
like in Scotland, as appears Dier 304. Pl. 57. A Scot was indicted of a Rape,
who pleaded not guilty, and prayed a Trial per medietat' Linguae, and it was
denied, for that a Scot was never accounted an Alien, sed potius Subject', though
the Chief Justice was of Opinion they ought not to have judged so there,
because the Homage of Scotland had been lost so long before: The Statute of 5
Eliz. is, that none shall set up a Trade unless he has been an Apprentice to
it by the space of seven years. Suppose an Act were made in Ireland, that it
should be lawful for J. S. to set up a Trade though he had never been an
Apprentice; this would enable him there, but no man would say that thereby he
should have liberty to set up here: No, though the words of the Act were as if he
had served seven years. So the Law is, that no man can be naturalized here but
by Act of Parliament; here Naturalization is a great point of State-interest,
therefore the King cannot do it by his Charter. And the inconvenience would be
very great if naturalization in Ireland should extend hither; for though it was
objected we might obviate it if found to be so, by disallowing their Acts,
which, before they pass there, are sent hither and remitted under the Great
Seal, and so we may repeal their Acts; yet it was said the like Power, by
consequence, must be yielded to Scotland, and we cannot disannul their Acts; so
they shall introduce what Aliens they please amongst us without control. And
though it was said a naturalization there would do us no harm, for it could never
be made appear, because no Certiorari could be awarded from hence thither; yet
it is manifest there are ways of making it appear. In 42 Ed. 3, 2. Lord
Beaumonts Case, Vide 2 Cro. 484. a Certiorari to remove a Record taken at
Callis.
it is said that part of Scotland was within the Kings Ligeance and part
without, and that the King kept a Roll of such Places as he had under his
Subjection, and the Party was directed to petition the King to certify whether
Rosse were so or no; so the King must be Party to their Acts there, and
therefore may certify them, or they may be given in Evidence as Foreign Laws,
or the Sentences in the Ecclesiastical or Civil Law Courts. Now we must not
always conclude a thing not to be Law, because it is inconvenient; but that for
which there is, neither Practical Custom, Judicial Precedent or Act of
Parliament to warrant, may be well judged to be so.

Wyld and Archer in their Arguments did much insist upon the particular penning
of this Act, where the Makers did seem to intend that the effect of this
Naturalization should be confined to Ireland; for the Preamble recites this,
Your Majesty's Realm of Ireland will be much impaired for want of Scottish
Planters, and that 100000 were planted in the Province of Vlster; there it
enacts, That they and all Scottish shall be deemed Your Majesty's liege
Subjects of this Your Realm of Ireland, and this your Realm repeated almost in
every Clause, which would lose its force if the naturalization should be
construed to have a larger extent. They also took notice of the Proviso of the
Act, That it should not extend unto any Lands whereof any Office was found for
the King, and seized into his hands: And here was an Office found 17 Jacobi;
they also mentioned the Statute of 7 Jacobi c. 2. which Enacts, That the Bill
of Naturalization shall be twiced read, unless the Person has received the
Sacrament within a Month before, and also taken the Oaths of Allegience and
Supremacy.

To the first Tyril answered.

First, That Naturalization could not be restrained, at least, not by
affirmative words, for it does not say Your Realm of England and not elsewhere;
the Act has also these words, as born of Irish Parents, as natural born
Subjects, and other words as full as may be; also the Act of Naturalization of
John and George in England has the same words mutatis mutandis, viz. of this
Your Realm, and in others they are more restrictive, viz. from henceforth shall
be deemed, etc. the Irish Act is that they shall be deemed Natural Subjects;
that they shall inherit such Lands as have descended after the first day of
King James' coming to the Crown of England; this has no such restraint.

As to the Second he answered, it was the Rectory only which was found in the
Office. The Countess also was alive at that time, and so could not be seized
into the Kings hands. And as to the Statute of 7 Jacobi it is plain, that it
means a Naturalization by Parliament here; for it appoints the Lord Chancellor
or Keeper to Administer the Oaths if the Bill begin in the House of Lords, and
the Speaker to do it if it begin in the House of Commons. And of this Opinion
was Vaughan in these three last things, though in the Principal Matter he agreed
with the other two.

Termino Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno 22 Car. II. In Communi Banco.
Thoms Harrison and Ux' versus Dr. Burwell.
IN an Action for suing in the Spiritual Court after a Prohibition sued out and
delivered, the Plaintiff sets forth that by an Act of Parliament, made in the
32 H. 8. c. 38. it was enacted, etc. That from the first day, etc. all and
every such Marriages as within this Church of England should be contracted
between lawful persons (as by this Act they declared all persons to be lawful
that be not prohibited by Gods Law to marry) such Marriages being Contracted
and Solemnized in the face of the Church, and consummate with Bodily Knowledge,
etc. should be, etc. deemed, judged and taken to be lawful, good, just and
indissoluble, notwithstanding any precontract, etc. and notwithstanding any
Dispensation, Prescription, Law, or other thing granted or confirmed by Act or
otherwise, and that no Reservation or Prohibition, Gods Law except, should
trouble or impeach any Marriage without the Levitical Degrees; and that no
person of what Estate, Condition or Degree whatsoever he or she be, should,
etc. be admitted to any of the Spiritual Courts within this the Kings Realm, or
any his Graces other Lands and Dominions, to any Process, Plea, or Allegation
contrary to this foresaid Act.

And sets forth further, That one Abbot had Issue Robert and Bartholomew; that
Robert had Issue Mary, who married Robert Harrison, and by him had Issue Thomas
the Plaintiff; that Bartholomew took to Wife Jane Brown, who is now the other
Plaintiff, and that Bartholomew died without Issue, and that then the
Plaintiffs intermarried; they say that he and she were free from any Marriage
or Contract with any other person, and the Marriage was solemnized according to
the Orders and Rules of the Church, and that this is a good Marriage by the
Laws of God and Man; and that A. B. a Notary intending to dissolve this
Marriage (contrary to the said Act) cited the Plaintiffs, before Dr. Burwell,
and articled against them in this manner, That within the Jurisdiction, etc.
(reciting the Alliance, etc.) and that the said T. H. took the said Jane Abbot
to Wife, de facto, cum de jure non potuit nec debuit, and so they committed
Incest, etc. Hereupon Dr. Burwell Demurs and prays a Consultation. It had been
diverse tunes argued at the B^r, and now Vaughan Chief Justice delivered the
Opinion of the Court in this manner.

Vaughan. It Is the pleasure of my Brothers, that I deliver their Opinion in
this Case, and what I do deliver, I do not deliver as their Opinion only, but
as the Opinion of all the Judges of England; for they have met together by the
Kings Command several times to debate and consider of this Case, and they all
agree that no Consultation be granted: This is a Case of great expectation, and
perhaps the only Case which has been solemnly resolved since the Statute of 32
H. 8. was made; there are but three Cases concerning it, Man's Case, 1 Cro.
228. Mo. 907. Parson's Case, 1 Inst. 235. and Remington's Case, Hob. 181.

I must in the first place premise, that perhaps if we the Judges had been
makers of the Law, this Question had not been; but we are to proceed upon the
Laws as made, and cannot alter them: This is not a thing of our promotion, and
this I speak to satisfy such as might object against us, This Statute was made
in a time when the Popes Power was warmly pursued, and Laws were then made,
which in the circumstances of another time would not have been made. I will
first give the Reasons the Judges went upon in their Resolution; and then I
will also give some Reasons to satisfy People abroad, for I know the Case will
meet with many censures.

First, Of the former. Anciently the Kings Temporal Courts had nothing to do
with the lawfulness or unlawfulness of Marriage, it was wholly of
Ecclesiastical Conisance; the Statute de Circumspecte agatis, is, that the
Temporal Judges should not punish the Spiritual Courts for holding Pleas of
those things quae mere sunt spiritualia, viz. pro Fornicatione, Adulterio and
hujusmodi; and Sir Ed. Coke 2 Inst. 488. expounding those words, Et hujusmodi,
he says, and he says very right, that these are to be taken for Offenses of
like nature, as the two Offenses here particularly expressed, be, viz. as
solicitation of any Women's Chastity, which is lesser than these, and for
Incest which is greater: Here is an undoubted evidence, that the Temporal
Courts used to prohibit, etc. and the ancientness of that is unquestioned; but
it seems they did border in their Prohibitions, sometimes upon things which
were Spiritual, which they ought not to have done: There was no time but in
which some Marriages were lawful and some unlawful; but if a man were formerly
questioned about such a matter, he had no relief from the Temporal Courts. By
the Ancient Common Law, Marriages were unlawful as far as they had names of
Kindred, viz. to the fourth Degree, from Cousin Germans inclusively, and
therein it irritated the Civil Law; but in the Council of Lateran, under Pope
Innocent the 3d it was ordained thus, Sancitum est prohibitionem copulationis
conjugalis quartum gradum non excedere, and so it stands in all places under
the Common Law at this day in Popish Countries; with us it has received
alteration by this Statute, in this matter there is a Reason very much sticks
with many, viz. That the Temporal Courts are not skilled in the Laws by which
this is to be judged, and therefore that it is not fit that they should
determine concerning it; It Is true, the word Cognitio signifies both, but yet
there is a great difference between Skill and Cognizance, But I say further,
That the Temporal Judges may well enough have both; for though the knowledge of
the Canon Law be not adequatum subjectum to a Common Lawyer, yet it is commune
subjectum.

There are four Statutes which have made great alteration in the Cognizance of
this matter, 25 H. 8. 22. 28 H. 8. c. 7. 28 H. 8. c. 16. and this of 32 H. 8.
c. 38.

The first indeed is repeased, because it was interwoven with matter of
Succession of the Crown, etc. which was set aside. But the Second, viz. 28 H.
8. cap. 7. is syllabically the same as to this purpose; the words are, Since
many inconveniences have fallen, etc. by reason of Marriages within the Degrees
of Marriages prohibited by Gods Laws, that is to say, the Son to marry the
Mother, or the Stepmother carnally known by his Father, the Brother the Sister,
the Father his Sons Daughter, or his Daughters Daughter, or the Son to marry
the Daughter of his Father, procreate and born by his Stepmother, or the Son to
marry his Aunt, being his Fathers or Mothers Sister, or to marry his Uncles
Wife, carnally known by his Uncle, or the Father to marry the Sons Wife,
carnally known by his Son, or the Brother to marry the Brothers Wife, carnally
known by his Brother, or any Man married, and carnally knowing his Wife, to
marry his Wives Daughter, or his Wives Sons Daughter, or his Wives Daughters
Daughter, or his Wives Sister. So these Marriages are declared to be plainly
prohibited and detested by the Laws of God, and not to be dispensable with by
any man; and therefore it is enacted that no person shall thenceforth marry
within these Degrees, what pretense soever shall be made to the contrary
thereof: And in case any person have married within these Degrees, and by any
the Archbishops or Ministers of the Church of England be separate from the Bond
of such Unlawful Marriage, that every such separation shall be good, etc. And
in case there be any person thus married, and be not yet separate, that every
such person shall be separate by the definitive Sentence and Judgment of the
Archbishops, Bishops and other Ministers of the Church of England, etc. and by
no other Power or Authority; and that all Sentences and Judgments given, and to
be given by any Archbishop, Bishop or other Minister of the Church of England,
etc. shall be definitively firm, good and effectual to all intents, and
observed and obeyed without suing any Provocations, Appeals, Prohibitions or
other Process from, or to the Court of Rome, to the Derogation thereof, or
contrary to the 24 H. 6. c. 12. It Is very observable, and perhaps it has not
been observed before, that the words of the Statute do not run so as commonly
it seems, for if the words had been by reason of marrying within (or against)
the Prohibition of Marriage by Gods Laws, there had been little question that
there had been any other marriage against Gods Law (in the intention of this
Parliament) but those reckoned up; but the words are, marrying within the
Degrees of Marriage prohibited, etc. Every man apprehends that for the Son to
marry the Mother is forbidden, and that for the Father to marry the Daughter is
within the same Degree, though not expressed; so for a Grandson to marry his
Grandmother is within the same Degree of what is there forbidden: So whereas
the Text, Leviticus 18. v. 14. forbids a man to marry his Fathers Brothers
Wife, (for so the Text is) though the Statute expresses it his Uncles Wife; to
marry the Mothers Brothers Wife is within the same Degree, though not mentioned
in Leviticus, etc. The Judges did observe this only, but did give no Opinion
concerning Marriages within the Degrees ( viz. which are within the Degrees
paritate rationis only, and are not expressed) such as Parsons and Manns and
Remingtons Case, in all which the Case was, a man married his first Wives
Neice, which by Equity and Parity of Reason was perhaps within the Prohibition,
ver. 12, 13. that a man should not marry his Aunt, or rather the Prohibition,
ver. 14. that a man should not marry his Fathers Brothers Wife, etc. but only
in one particular, viz. that in the ascending and descending Parental-Line, the
Marriages are prohibited in infinitum, but for the rest which are in pari gradu
to the Degrees there mentioned, they have not given any resolution at this time.

Now as to this Case, in the second Statute there is observed this difference,
that the words carnally known are added, where the Prohibition is in respect of
a former Marriage of one of the Parties, as the Son to marry the Stepmother,
carnally known by his Father, or to marry his Uncles Wife, carnally known by
his Uncle, etc. this indeed is not particularly expressed and applied to every
individual Prohibition, to which it is applicable in the first Statute; but
methinks it is intended and as fully provided for (though in general) in the last
Clause of the said first Statute, which is this, provided always That the
Article in this Act contained concerning Prohibition of Marriages within the
Degree aforementioned in this Act, shall always be taken, interpreted and
expounded of such Marriages ( i. e. I suppose former Marriages) where Marriages
was solemnized and carnal knowledge was had

In neither of these two Acts is there any Power given to the Temporal Courts,
to make any alteration as to the Canon Law; or God's Law; but it was referred
to the Canon Law, and the power of Dispensing de facto left in the same state
as before: And Dispensations were granted in these very particulars, which the
Statute says ought not to be done.

The Third Law which concerns this Case is the 28 H. 8. cap. 16. against
Dispensations, etc. from Rome, by which all Marriages which stood upon these
Dispensations became absolutely unlawful; for the Dispensations are made
thereby clearly void, etc. and therefore there is a provisional Clause in it,
That yet notwithstanding at the most humble Petitions of the Lords and Commons,
etc. all Marriages had and solemnized before the 30th of November. Anno 26 of
the Kings Reign, etc. whereof there is no Divorce or Separation had by the
Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm, and which Marriages be not prohibited by
God's Laws, limited and declared in the Act made in this present Parliament,
for the establishing the King's Succession, (viz.) 28 H. 8. cap. 7.
aforementioned) or otherwise by Holy Scripture shall be, etc. good, etc. and
reputed, taken and adjudged, etc. as good, etc. if no impediment of Matrimony
had ever been between them that have contracted and solemnized such Marriages.

If the Act had gone no further than these words (For the Establishment of the
King's Succession) it had clearly brought the Cognizance of these Marriages to
the Temporal Courts.

But it is Objected, That this Law made no such alteration, because of the words
which are added, Or otherwise by Holy Scripture; for this it is said makes it
directly of the Cognizance of the Ecclesiastical Courts, so that it leaves it
to them who know what is lawful or unlawful by Holy Scripture.

I shall forbear to Answer this until I come to the other Act, where indeed the
very same Exception is; (for the words, Gods Law except, in that, is tantamount
to these words) and then I will answer both.

The Fourth and last Law is 32 H. 8. cap. 38. on which the Question is. This is
Cardo Questionis, the mischief before the Statute was, that the Bishop of Rome
had entangled and troubled the Kings Jurisdiction, and unquieted his Subjects
by his Usurped Power in making that unlawful which by Gods Word is lawful in
Marriages, etc. Therefore (as the Statute says) it was thought convement that
two things especially for that time should be with diligence provided for.

First, Whereas diverse Marriages had been dissolved upon pretense of
Precontracts not consummate by Carnal Knowledge, that such Marriages should be
good and indissoluble notwithstanding any such Precontract. But this Point is
Repealed by te 2 Ed. 6. cap. 23.

Secondly, and this concerns the present Case, Whereas also Marriages were
often dissolved and brought into great incertainty, by reason of other
Prohibitions than Gods Law admits. For the Court of the Bishop of Rome for
their lucre invented Dispensations, the granting whereof they always reserved
to themselves, as in Kindred and Affinity between Cousin Germans, and so to
fourth and fifth Degrees, etc. which else were lawful, and be not prohibited by
Gods Law; and all, because they would get Money by it, etc. It was Enacted,
etc. That from the first day, etc. ut supra, it does declare all persons to be
lawful to Marry who are not prohibited by Gods Laws. If it had gone no further,
or if the following words had not added or given something more, it had been
the same with the former Statutes, and liable to the same Objections, and the
Temporal Courts would have had no Cognizance of the matter. But the contrary is
manifest; for had it been so, the Statute would have been of no use as the time
then was: For the Pope or the Popish Clergy must have judged of it, and that
they would have done by the Canon Law. For the Decretals (Gratian and
Gregory's) in which the Sum of the Canon Law consists, (there is some little
more, but they are the sum) are nothing but the Determinations of the Pope and
his Ministers upon Gods Law.

Now what provision had this been according to the Evil to be remedied? The
words of Kindred were as far as the seventh Degree, and so far by the ancient
Canon Law was the Prohibition of Marriage; and they grounded themselves upon
Levit. 18. ver. 6. None of you shall approach to any that is near of Kin to
him, to uncover their Nakedness; and if they had had Words as far as the
seventeenth Degree, they might have done the same. But that was Corrected, as I
said, by the Council of Lateran: And so it stood with us till this Statute.

Now if this Statute gave no other direction or alteration in this matter,
there was no restraint or probability, but that they might and would extend the
Prohibition of Marriage as far as the Canon Law. Also, if the meaning of the
Statute had been to prohibit in general Marriages against Gods Law, it had been
to no purpose to express the Levitical Degrees: For they who are prohibited by
the Levitical Degrees are but a part of those who are prohibited by Gods Law,
and the general Expression would have served the turn. It Is certain, the
Statute meant to make all Marriages without the Levitical Degrees lawful,
except some few which are excepted here by the words, Gods Law except; and in
the former Statute by the words, Or otherwise by the Holy Scripture. For who
will say now, taking the Words strainedly and literally, that no Marriage shall
be set aside for impotency of Generation, or plurality of Husbands and Wives,
or perhaps Adultery?

There has been an Opinion in our Books, That if a Woman take two Husbands the
Marriage is void, and there needs no separation by Sentence; but if a Man take
two Wives there has been some doubt. The first, that of the Woman is clear, the
Words Gods Law except, did intend such Marriages; and the same Answer would
serve to Answer the same Consequence that would follow out of the words in the
former Act, by reason of the words Or otherwise by Holy Scripture. I give this
as an Interpretation at present, though I shall give a fuller Answer presently.

It was intended that no Marriage, as to Kindred or Affinity, should be set
aside, but according to the Levitical Degrees, and that is the scope of the
Statute; for it had no aspect to any other sort of Impediment, if it had (as I
observed) the General words would have done it more clearly.

But take this Statute in the largest Sense, it has given the Temporal Courts
an undoubted Cognizance. Since the making of this Statute there has been no
question but that a Prohibition would lie in case of Cousin Germans Marriage,
and so on, 2 Inst. 684. This is manifest indeed, because the Statute does
expressly declare that such Marriages are lawful and not prohibited by Gods Law:
But this our Case is not so clear.

It Is true, the plain Sense is, that all Marriages are and shall be lawful and
good, which are not prohibited by the Levitical or other part of Gods Law, (and
this, as other Statutes, the Temporal Courts are Conservators of); the former
Statutes were only directory to the Ecclesiastical Courts, viz. That they
should Divorce, and not admit of Dispensations, etc.

This being made clear, that the Judges may grant Prohibitions, then the first
Question is, Whether any Marriages without the Levitical Degrees be unlawful
and impeachable? And for that the Authority is in the Negative, 1 Inst. 235. a.
By the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 8. it is declared, That all persons be lawful;
that is, may lawfully marry, that be not prohibited by the Levitical Degrees.
But this is not intended to extend to persons which upon other accounts are
prohibited by Gods Law to marry, as (at this time Persons precontracted)
Persons under a perpetual Impotence, (whereof we have two Instances, Dyer
178.9.40.) And the truth is, as my Lord Coke says expressly in 2 Inst. 687.
These Marriages (says he) are said to be prohibited by Gods Law, otherwise the
Statute of 32 H. 8. would extend unto them.

We come now to this particular Case. Some would have this Marriage prohibited
not by Leviticus 18. ver. 14. where the words are, Thou shall not uncover the
Nakedness of thy Fathers Brother: thou shall not approach to his Wife, she is
thine Aunt. But by Levit. 20. ver. 20. where the words are, And if a man shall
lie with his Uncles Wife, he has uncovered his Uncles Nakedness.

But certainly this Case is no Prohibition, it serves only to declare the
Punishment; for the immediate next words are, They shall dye Childless. This
last Text is expressed vice versa in respect to the first; but it is the same.

Now the Reason the Judges went upon in this Case, in determining this Marriage
to be lawful is, because 'its neither within an express Prohibition, nor within
any Degree there. If we shall admit any thing against this, there is no
Repagulum or stay, we shall not know where to rest, but it would go on as far
as the Canon Law.

Object. A Great Uncle is an Uncle as well as an Immediate Uncle; and a man is
forbid to uncover his Uncles Nakedness, Lev. 20. ver. 20.

Answ. There is no such Prohibition, that Expression is but as a Consequent of
lying with his Uncles Wife.

But read the words as you will, it is plain no other person is meant here, but
the Fathers Brothers Wife, even the same as is mentioned Levit. 18. ver. 14.
and this 20th Verse only meant to declare the punishment.

First, Because there is no other Prohibition in this 20th Chapter, and why
should this be taken for one?

Secondly, In the Latin they have distinct words, as Patruus and Avunculus to
express Uncles by; but in the Hebrew they say, (for I will not pretend skill in
what I have none) they have no such distinct words, nor has the Septuagint any
such; the words are, (...). I have looked upon the last and best, the Paris
Edition; the words run thus: Qui cubaverit cum Cognata sua retexit pubertatem
Cognatae suae: But I rely upon Junius and Tremilius, whose Translation is done
with great Care, they have the same words in both places, viz. Nuditatem
Patrui; and the whole current of Translations run so. The word Uncle is an
Equivocal word; in our Welsh.
Language (the British Language) a Grandfather, or Great Grandfathers Cousin
German is called an Uncle.

As to the Argument a fortiori, whether or how far Nata is to be received I
shall take notice presently.

There is one thing I must observe, (viz.) that Churchmen should not object to
us, that this is Falcem immittere in alienam Messem; because were it not for
the Statute, it would be hard to make out by persons of what Learning soever,
that we are obliged to the Levitical Degrees: For we are not bound by the
Judicial Law, and how comes this part of it to be distinguished from the rest,
I mean those of the Levitical Degrees, which are of the Judicial, positive Law
only? For there are some of these Degrees such, as that Marriages within them
were prohibited from the beginning of Time: But the Law of the Land, (viz.) 28
H. 8. cap. 7. has declared, That all Marriages within those Degrees are
prohibited by the Laws of God; (indeed the Statute in its declaration does
include all that is prohibited in Leviticus:) But I must observe too, that the
Statute does in this particular declare more and otherwise than is declared in
the Scripture; (viz.) the Statute declares generally Marriage with a man's
Brothers Wife to be prohibited by Gods Law; but it is certain that was not so
generally prohibited, for it was with this Circumstance, If the Brother had
Issue; for if he had none, the Brother was commanded to take her to Wife and
raise up Seed to his Brother, Deuteronomy. 25. ver 5. Matt. 22. ver. 24. Mark 12. ver.
19. Luke 20. ver. 28. But now this is absolutely prohibited by our Law, though
but qualified by theirs.

Another is said to be prohibited, (viz.) To marry a man's Wives Sister: But
that was not so amongst the Jews, where this was the Law of the Forum, the
Practical Law; but it was only during her Life, and so is the Text. Lev. 18.
ver. 18. Neither shall thou take a Wife to her Sister to vex her, to uncover
her Nakedness, besides the other in her Lifetime. For Bigamy and Poligamy with
Non prohibited Persons were allowed there.

So that these things are not so truly of Ecclesiastical Cognizance, because
there are things declared to be prohibited here, which are not by Gods Law
(otherwise.) Now to consider how this Law in Leviticus shall be extended and
expounded, the clearest way how to understand any Law is by what was the Story
and Judgment of those People, and the Times in which it was practical. To
examine this Law by the Civil Law or Canon Law, is as wide and as bad as to
examine it by the Indian Law, or Persian Law; therefore the Judges have
considered what was the Opinion and Judgment of the Jews; (this I observe to
show the Care of the Judges) and especially they have consulted Mr. Selden's
Uxor Hebraica, the six first Chapters, there it appears that the Scribes and
Pharisees interpreted this Law Literally; but the Prudentes and the Sanhedrim
did make other Prohibitions, tanquam fepimenta Legis: But this Degree in this
Case is not even amongst those. Then there were others, the Karmites, who held
that these Degrees were mentioned only for Instance, and that several others
are within the Prohibition paritate rationis; and what they say (save in two or
three particulars) is the same with our Parochial Tables, and probably at the
first this Table came thence from that Example into the Christian Churches. Now
the first is of incomparable Authority above the latter, for they had Moses's
Authority, Matt. 23. ver. 23. but the others were a Sect.

It was agreed, as I said, that Marriages in the ascending an descending Line,
i.e. of Children, with their Father, Grandfather, their Mother, Grandmother,
and so upwards, are prohibited without limit: But the prohibition of Marriage,
which is in question here, (viz.) with an Uncles Relict, is not to be extended
beyond the Degree which is expressed. The Reason of the difference between
these, I will show

First, The Reason of the Prohibition to marry a man's Parent is, because they
are the Cause of his Being; the Father and Mother indeed are the immediate
Cause, but the Grandfather and Grandmother, etc. are the Cause too though
mediate; he could not be that which he is without them, and if he be obliged to
the one, he is to the other: But a man is no more obliged to his Uncle for his
Being, than if the Uncle had never been. The Reason why a man is prohibited to
marry his Uncle's Wife is, because it is expressly named.

Secondly, Another Reason of the Prohibition in the first Case is, That such a
Marriage is against Nature; but not as it is commonly taken. For as we commonly
talk of the Law of Nature, it is Pons stulrorum, when Fools cannot tell which
way to go further they go there; for by Nature it is not possible for a Child to
know his Parent (he comes to that knowledge by Laws and Reputation, and
therefore the Theban Story might well be true, (viz.) That Oedipus being bred
from his Parents, might unwittingly kill his Father Laius and marry his Mother
Jocasta. He is a wise Son that knows his Father, our Proverb says: So neither
can the Father know his Son, though the Mother may, (at least better than the
Father); but with another thing supposed, it is Naturally unlawful, one (that
knows his Relation) ought not to marry his Parent or Child, it is against
Nature. There is neither Servant or Master in Nature, but those Obligations are
induced thereupon by Contract, etc. But supposing a man cannot be Master and
Servant to the same person at the same time, because there is a repugnancy in
it; so a man cannot be Child and Husband, etc. because there is a repugnancy in
the Offices. A Parent cannot obey a Child, and therefore it is unnatural a
Parent should be Wife to a Child. A Parent, as a Parent, may Command and
Correct a Child, and there there a Child, as Husband, should Command and
Correct the same Parent, is utterly repugnant.

Under the Law the Son that Cursed his Father or Mother, Levit. 20. ver. 9. and
also he that was Disobedient to either of them, Deuteronomy. 21. ver. 18, 19, 20, 21.
was to be put to death. And as there is a Reverence and Obedience due to the
Immediate Parents, so there is to Grand Parents; if the Immediate Parent have
an absolute or qualified Power over the Son, the Grand Parent has the like over
the Son too; because the Grand Parent has it over the Immediate Parent.

Now I will cite a Case in our Law somewhat to the purpose I have been
speaking, it is in Platt's Case, Pl. Com. 37. a. If a Woman be Warden of the
Fleet, and one that is in Prison there marry her, he is thereby out of Prison,
and the Law does adjudge him to be Enlarged; because it is repugnant that he as
Husband should have the Custody of her, and she as Jailer the Custody of him.
And the like Reason, at least in some degree, is against Parents marrying their
Daughters, etc.

And now as to all this, I will cite one of the greatest Human Authorities. It
is the Opinion of Hugo Grotius, the Learnedest man of his time, De jure Belli
ac Pacis, lib. 2. cap. 5, and 12. Ab hac generalitate (says he) eximo
matrimonia parentum cujuscunque gradus cum liberis, quae quo minus licita sunt
rati (ni fallor) satis apparet, nam nec maritus qui superior est lege
matrimonii eam reverentiam potest praestari matri quam natura exigit, nec patri
filia; quia quanquam inferior est in matrimonio, ipsum tamen matrimonium talem
inducit societatem quae illius necessitudinis reverentiam excludit. The
Reverence on each side is inconsistent. But this Reason holds not against the
marriage of a man's Uncles Wife; and the same very Great Person gives his
Opinion to this purpose a little before; De conjugiis eorum qui sanguine aut
affinitate junguntut satis gravis est quaestio, and non rato magnis motibus
agitata; nam causas certas ac naturales cur talia conjugia, ita ut legibus aut
moribus vetantur illicita sint, assignate qui voluerit, experiendo discet, quam
id sit difficile, imo praestari non possit.

Thirdly, Another Reason of the Unlawfulness or Prohibition of Marriages of the
first kind (which holds not in this Case) is the inconsistence, absurdity and
monstrousness of the Relations to be begotten by them, the Son would be his
Fathers Brother, his Mothers Grandson, his own Uncle, etc.

Object. In the Civil Law Uncles are Loco Parentum?

Answ. They were so estimated there; but thence it does not follow that they
are so. But I will give the true Reason why they were so called, (viz.) They,
the agnati are legitimi Tutores of the Brothers Children; and this appears by
Justinian: But how absurd is it to apply this to the Matter? Why, by the same
Reason the Guardian in our Law cannot marry his Ward, let the Degree be what it
will.

Object. The Canon Law does prohibit the same also, because they are Loco
Parentum?

Answ. The Reason is borrowed from the Civil Law, and must have the same Answer.
There is another thing very remarkable as to this distinction, (viz.) that our
Law puts a great difference between Parents and Uncles; the Father cannot
inherit the Son, but the Uncle may. So that the measure to be taken by and from
the Laws of one Kingdom to another, is quite different.

In the Synod held by the Province of Canterbury, Anno 1603. there were certain
Canons made: The Synod was called by the Kings Writ, and the Canons ratified as
they ought to be. In the 99th Canon of those it is Ordained, That no person
shall marry within any Degrees expressed in the Table there mentioned. This
Table was first set up after this Canon; but it had been published by
Proclamation, etc. in the Queens time. This Canon is so penned that it must be
understood, that all the Degrees are expressed there within which Marriage was
intended to be prohibited; but now there is no such Degree as this in the
present Case there. I do not take the Pleading in this Case to be good; because
here it is not said, she was Carnally known, as before I observed it ought to
be, to bring him within the Statute, then there is a Fault in the Plaintiffs;
for though they have set down the Case so that we can see what it is, yet they
ought to have averred that it was not within the Levitical Degrees; because
that then they might have given opportunity to the Defendant to assign some
other Cause, Been and verum est, etc. but she had married a former Husband
before, etc.

Now I come to the other sort of Objections, which I promised to give some
Reasons in answer of, for the satisfaction of of People abroad.

I did say, That it were very difficult, without this Statute, to make it out,
that we were bound to observe this part of the Iudaical Law: And we are not
bound to observe any part of the Iudaical Law, (except those particulars where
there is a Natural Reason too.) Acts Apost. 15. There is the account of a
Council held concerning the keeping of the Mosaical Law, and the result is,
That it seems good to the Holy Ghost and the Apostles, to lay upon their
Brethren (which were of the Gentiles in Antioch, etc.) no greater burden than
these necessary things, That the abstained from Meats offered to Idols, Blood,
things strangled, and Fornication. A man cannot say that all these were Mosaical
neither; but it is plain these were all they would lay upon them and the
Corinthians. It Is clear, they were not given as Precepts, but Counsels, that
the Communion between the two Churches which were then coming together might
not be interrupted, Cor. 10. ver. 17, etc. Whatsoever is set before you eat,
asking no Question for Conscience sake: But if any man say unto you, This is
offered in sacrifice unto Idols, eat not for his sake that showed it, and for
Conscience sake, etc. Conscience I say, not thine own, but the others, etc.
Give none offense, neither to the Jews, etc. Romans 2. ver. 14. does clearly
affirm, that the Law of Moses was not given to the Gentiles. And Romans 3. v. 2.
shows that this Law called there the Oracle of God, was committed to the Jews
only.

Object. (And this is the great Objection against our Prohibitions) This Law
depends upon the Original Tongues and Tradition and History; and Laymen cannot
know the Secret of this Law by which this matter is to be decided.

Answ. This Objection has some speciousness in it, but no weight.

First, The Law, viz. the Levitical Law is generally understood, to be that
which is publicly received as the Translation; all Laws that are made
concerning any such thing, are to be understood of that kind of the thing which
is vulgarly and generally known and received.

Secondly, And it is not long since the Clergy came to be so learned, they were
content heretofore with the Vulgar Translation; and it is not necessary for a
Dean (for that purpose) or other Dignitary or Clergyman, quasi such, that he
should understand the Languages. But,

Thirdly, We have no Cognizance of this Matter; there was a time when they had
no cognizance of Wills and Testaments (but now they have, they must study them,
and determine concerning them.) Since we have a Cognizance, we may as well
prohibit in this Case of Land Freehold, etc. For since this is made of the same
nature, we must go the same way: If an Act were made, that in matter of Theft,
etc. we should judge after the Law of Moses, we must study it, and judge by it.
It Is no new thing that Laws be thus transferred from one Nation to another;
thus was the Law of the Twelve Tables from Athens to Rome; thus the Law of
Rhodes to other parts of the World, and so our Law was made the Law of Ireland;
and this is the Answer I give to the two Statutes, that since we have
Cognizance we must take notice of Gods Law. If Churchmen in this case encroach
Jurisdiction, they must be prohibited, because they have no Cognizance, and we
have, though their accidental Learning may be more than ours.

Object. It Is hard that this should be a Prohibiting Law any more than those
two other Statutes, which it is agreed were directive only (to the Spiritual
Courts) and gave the Temporal Courts no Jurisdiction.

Answ. There is a full and flat answer to this; this Statute makes it not at
all cognisable by them, for where any Court has Cognizance the party must have
Process, etc. But now here in the close of this Statute, it is enacted, That no
Person, etc. shall be admitted to any of the Spiritual Courts, etc. to any
Process, Plea or Allegation contrary to this foresaid Act: And therefore all
Cognizance of that nature is taken away from them. They have Cognizance of all
Marriages within the Levitical Degrees (we allow and agree) to disturb and
punish the Parties; but they have no Cognizance nor Power to determine what is
within the Levitical Degrees, and what not.

I conclude, It is the Opinion of this Court and of all the Judges, that the
Prohibition do stand, and no Consultation be granted.

In this Case Dr. Stern the Archbishop of York was very zealous and industrious
to set aside the Prohibition. He made several and distinct applications to the
Judges about it; he earnestly and particularly debated the matter with them,
and gave them Papers of his Arguments and Reasons to prove this Marriage
incestuous and unlawful.

Thomas Rudyards Case.
THomas Rudyard, an Attorney of this Court, came into this Court upon the
retorn of an Habeas Corpus directed to the Keeper of Newgate, who returned,
that he was taken and detained by virtue of a Warrant to him directed from Sir
Samuel Sterling Lord Mayor, and Sir J. Robinson, two of the Kings Justices of
the Peace, the tenor of which Warrant follows in these words. Whereas T. R.
Gent. has been brought before Us, and examined touching several Misdemeanors
by him committed within the City of London since the Month of April and before
the 4th of this instant June, and to Us complained of, and more particularly
for inciting and stirring up of His Majesty's Subjects, then and there, to the
disobedience of his Laws, and for abetting and encouraging of such as do meet
in unlawful and seditious Conventicles, contrary to the form of the late
Statute made in the 22th Year of our Sovereign Lord the King that now is; upon
whose Examination we find just cause to suspect him to be guilty of the said
Misdemeanors, and thereupon did require him to find Sureties to be of the good
Behavior, which he refused: These are therefore to require you to take into
your Custody the Body of the said T. R. and him safely to keep till he be from
thence delivered by due Course of Law, Given under our Hands and Seals this
11th day of June 1670.

The Retorn being filed and spoken to by the Counsel upon two several days, the
Court delivered their Opinion Seriatim.

Wyld held that he ought to be remanded, for if the Warrant had been that he
appeared to be guilty, or that they had found him guilty; then the Commitment
had been good, as has been agreed on all Hands, and here the words in a
favorable construction amount to as much. The proceedings of the Magistrates
against such Seditious Persons are to be encouraged, especially in such a time
as this, when it is known they are grown to such a head.

Archer, contra, For it is altogether uncertain; it is said he was complained of,
etc. but not that he did any thing, and that they find just cause to suspect,
but show not the Cause in particular: If it had been said sundry Misdemeanors,
and not expressed what, all would agree it insufficient, as Chambers Case, 1
Cro. and Wolnoths Case, ibid. Mr. Seldom, 3 Car. was required to find Sureties
for the good Behavior, for which the Judges were severely reprehended in full
Parliament because no sufficient Cause appeared: Though the Justices here had
sufficient Cause to induce their suspicion, they ought upon the Retorn to have
signified it to the Court for their satisfaction also; it should have been
expressed also in what sum they required him to find Sureties, that it might
have appeared to be reasonable, so that we cannot remand him; but I think it is
fit to oblige him to Bail to appear the first day of the next Term, that he may
answer such things as shall be objected against him.

Tyrrell, It is the Statute of 34 E. 3. c. 1. that enables Justices of the
Peace to require Sureties for the good Behavior, and that upon Suspicion, and
seems to refer it to their Discretion, but that must be exercised according to
Law, and whether it be or no, the Judges in this Hall must judge, and therefore
the matters ought to be certainly certified to them. The present Retorn is
altogether uncertain, wherefore I think it ought to be discharged, but I would
advise him to consider the Statute of 35 Eliz. c. 1. against impugners of the
Kings Authority in Ecclesiastical Causes.

Vaughan, Chief Justice, This Case is one of the nicest that ever I met with;
on the one side is the consideration of discouraging Sectaries, and preserving
of the Public Peace and Quiet of the Government. On the other side the Legal
Right which every one has to his Liberty. Whoever excites the People to the
disobedience of a Law, commits the Highest Offense under High Treason. I do not
mean every Law, as if one which should cause a Trespass to be done, should be
so guity, but Laws which are of a public Nature.

As to the Retorn I think it is the most insufficient I ever yet saw. The
certainty of the sum ought to have been expressed in which he and his Sureties
should have been bound; for otherwise the sum required might be so great that
any Person might be constrained to remain in Prison. There may may be lawful
inciting to the breach of the Law, as a Counsel or Attorney advising an Action
which is not maintainable, and sometimes it may be upon some particular design,
as in Dier 168. Bronker being made Sheriff, one Hyde dissuaded him from taking
the Sheriffs Oath, because of the difficulty of the Articles. B. was condemned
in 100 l fine and 5 weeks imprisonment for refusing of the Oath, and H. in 20 l
and 5 weeks imprisonment for inciting him to it; and the reason was because
Hyde knew it to be an Offense, and that makes it differ from the case of a
Counsel or Attorney; but the Offense was the less, because the incitement was
upon a particular reason, and not against the Law, quatenus a Law. In the
Retorn here they don't say that they found he was guilty, but only that they
found cause to suspect him. Now what Remedy can be had in such a Case, can an
Issue be taken whether they had cause to suspect him or no? Put the case, one
who had been fined 10 l for an Offense against this Act (in which case the
Statute allows of an Appeal) had come to Mr. Rudyard to know what he should do,
and he had advised him to bring an Appeal at the Quarter Sessions, this is no
Offense and yet it is an abetting to such as meet, and perhaps might be a cause
of suspicion to a Justice of Peace: I do not see that the Retorn is good in any
part of it, and therefore he ought to be discharged; but I think the Justices
should do well if they know him to be guilty, to commit him by a better
Warrant; whereupon the Prisoner was discharged: For it is the usage of this
Court when the Judges are of three Opinions, (as here my Lord Chief Justice and
Tyrrell for discharging him, Archer for putting him to Bail and Wyld for
remanding him) to give the Rule according to the Opinion of the Two which agree.

The Court said they had often directed, that no Habeas Corpus should be moved
for in this Court except it concerned a Civil Cause, because when the Party was
brought in and the Cause shown, this Court cannot proceed upon it, therefore
the proper place to move for them is the Kings Bench; but they permitted it in
this Case, because the Party was an Attorney of the Court.

The Court demanded of Rudyard upon his first bringing in, whether he would
submit to what they should propose and direct, he said he would submit to the
Rule of the Court; but the Court told him that he must do; but demanded whether
he would yield to what they should do by way of Arbitration; but he (though
advised otherwise by his own Counsel) discovered his unwillingness to submit to
any thing but the Rule of Law.

Termino Sancti Michaelis, Anno 23 Car. II. In Communi Banco.
Methuselah Turner versus Sir Samuel Sterling. Pas' 23 Rot' 363.
IN an Action upon the Case brought by the Plaintiff against the Defendant; the
Plaintiff declares That London is an Ancient City, and that there is an Ancient
Bridge; and that there use to be two Officers for it to look after it called
Bridgmasters, and that they have certain Fees and Profits belonging to them.
And that there is a Custom for the Citizens assembled in a Common Hall or
Court, yearly to choose or continue those Bridgemasters. And another Custom,
that if one of these die within the Year, that the Mayor shall assemble a
Common Hall, and they being Congregated, shall proceed to the election of
another Bridgemaster in his stead for the residue of the year. And another
Custom, that upon their proceeding to Election, if there be two Persons upon
Election, he that is chosen by the major number of Votes is duly Elected; and
that if one in such case require that the Polls should be numbered, that the
Mayor ought to allow the Poll, and that the Assembly ought to be dismissed till
that were done, And another Custom, that the Party so chosen, ought to be
sworn, and used to receive the Profits to his own Use. That 24 June 22 nunc
Regis there was a Common Hall assembled, the Defendant being then Mayor, and
that A. and B. were then and there chosen to this Office, etc. and being so, A.
died in October following; and on the 18th of the same October there was
another Common Hall for the Election of a Bridgemaster in his stead,
congregated by the Defendant, and then and there the Plaintiff and one Allen
stood as Competitors to be chosen for that Office, and the Question grew which
had the greatest number of Electors, and the Plaintiff avers that he had the
greatest Number, and the other denied it, and he requested that according to
the Custom they might go to the Poll; and the Defendant not minding the
execution of his Office, but violating the Law and Custom of the City, did then
and there maliciously refuse the numbering the of Polls, and made Proclamation,
That the Congregation of Electors should depart, and discharged the Court, and
the other man was sworn, and so he lost the Profits of the Place, etc.

Upon Not Guilty pleaded, and a Verdict for the Plaintiff, after it had been
several times spoken to in Arrest of Judgment, the Court delivered their
Opinions seriatim.

Wyld. I think the Action well lies, for otherwise it will be in the power of
every Head Officer to get whom he will have chosen or refused.

It is objected, That non constat whether the Plaintiff should have been chosen.

Answer, The Law gives an Action for but a possibility of Damage, as an Action
lies for calling an Heir Apparent, Bastard.

It was objected also, That at the Common Law there was no Action for a
Parliament man against a Sheriff for not returning of him being Elected.

I Answer, That is a place of Burden, this of Profit; if I have an Horse or
Beast-Market, and a Toll for Sale, and one hinder the Beasts from coming
hither, non constat whether they should be sold. Yet for the possibility of
that, and of the loss of the Toll thereon, an Action lies, 41 E. 3. 24. Pl. 17.
b. An Action of the Case was brought against a Sheriff for making of a Precept
to one to make a Retorn in the Plaintiffs Case, who indeed was not a Bailiff of
a Franchise, and thereupon the Retorn was quashed, Br' tit' Act' Case, 120. So
9 H. 6. 60. Action against an Escheator, who had taken an Office, whereby the
Party was found to hold of J.S. and he returned one whereby he was said to hold
the Moiety in Capite. Where an Officer does any thing against the Duty of his
Place and Office, and a Damage thereby accrues to the Party, an Action lies:
It Is positively affirmed here, he had the greater Number.

Archer of the same Opinion. This is a wilful dental of the duty of the
Defendants Place, and for the particular Damage an Action lies. 'Twas said
there might be many Competitors, and all might bring Actions. No, for it is
averred that the Plaintiff had the greatest Number. An Action lies against an
Archdeacon for not inducting, F. N. B. 94. So if a Sheriff will not execute a
Writ of Seisin, an Action lies against him. An Action lies against an Ordinary
for admitting a wrong Patrons Clerk against a Verdict in a jure patronatus,
Hob. 318. I agree to the Case put at the Bar, that upon a Writ de Coronatore
eligendo, if the Sheriff will not retorn him Coroner, who was chosen by the
major part, an Action upon the Case lies, though I know no Authority for it in
point, Vid. 6 E. 4. 9. b. Pl. 21. A man that has a Title to an Office, before
he has possession, shall have an Action upon the Case after an Assize, 21 E. 4.
23. is as memorable a Case for the purpose as any I know, there Fairfax gives
good advice to Pleaders to mind Actions upon the Case; and then he said the use
of the Subpoena would not be so frequent, Hob. 205. Action for suing double
Execution. I think Actions upon the Case should be according to Justice
Fairfax's his advice favored in Courts of Justice.

Tyrrell. Perhaps there never was such an Action, which is an Argument against
it, Litt. 107. but I think it lies. Action lies not against a Lord for not
admitting a Copyholder, nor against Feoffees in trust for refusing to make a
Feofment, or a Tenant for refusing to Attorn, or against a Foeffor for refusing
to make Livery according to the Charter; but it lies against an Officer or
against a Clerk for refusing to enroll: This Action is for Damages for being
prevented of having the Office, and not for the Office it self. The Cases of
the Copyholders, etc. are not to be compared to this, for there are proper
Remedies for them, as Subpoena's, and other Writs at the Common Law, but here
is none. De cetero non recedunt Parts a Curia nostra sine Remedio, ne Curia
deficeret in Justitia exhibenda says the Statute. And my Lord Coke says it is a
Maxim in Law, that no Action lies for the Ward against the Lord which
disparages him, but the next of Kin may enter. Co. Lit. 107. An Action lies as
much for injurious preventing him of having the Office, as for hindering in of
him the executing of it after that he is in. For Actions of the Case are not of
any certain Form, but vary according to the Circumstances.

It was objected, That every Action upon the Case supposes dammens and
injuriam; now here was no Election, it is impossible to know whether he should
be an Officer.

Answ. The Custom is alleged positive, that he which has the greater Number
is elected ipso facto; again, qui destruit medium destruit finem, it is as bad
as if he had turned him out of his Office: It may be tried whether he were duly
elected, and it is in effect tried here; there cannot be multiplicity of Actions
brought, by this this Mayor will make himself sole Judge and Arbiter, and
dispose of Elections which should be Popular and as my Brother has said, an
Action of the Case lies for a possibility of Damage.

Vaughan, Chief Justice, contra. That wherein I am satisfied is, that no Damage
appears; suppose none had been elected, he should not have an Action more than
any person in the Town: If a Mayor will not elect a Burgess, or a Sheriff a
Knight, no Action lies, because there is no Election. If an Officer will not
elect at all, it is against his Duty, and so it is if he do it unduly; but he is
punishable in a public way by Information, or it may be by Indictment: If 20
had stood, must each have recovered the value of the Place?

Object. But there is an Averment that he was chosen by the greater Number.

Answ. That cannot be put in Issue, or known or tried; suppose the Election were
by Ballots, etc. should he have an Action for not opening the Box. In the Case
of the Coroner there is apparent Damage, and it is against the Statute; and in
the Case of Induction there is a certain loss. I take it that it is not
Actionable to call a man Bastard, while his Father is alive, the Books are
cross in it: nay, if Land had Descended, I doubt it without a Special Damage,
no more than to say one had no Title to his Land. The Case of the Market is
close, but there the Person damnified is certain, and the thing leads to
deprive him of the benefit of the Kings Grant. But my Brothers have given the
Rule, take Judgment.

King of Grayes Inn versus Sir Edward Lake.
ACtion for that whereas he was bred up to the Law and practiced it, and had
many Persons of Honor and others his Clients, and thereby got Money and
maintained his Family, etc. The Defendant, falso and malitiose wrote a Letter
to Ann Countess of Lincoln, who was the Plaintiffs Client, containing that the
Plaintiff would give vexatious and ill Council, and stir up a Suit, and that he
would milk her Purse and fill his own large Pockets, etc. per quod he lost the
said Countess and other Clients. Upon not Guilty pleaded and a Verdict for the
Plaintiff. It being moved in Arrest of Judgment, Wyld, Archer, and Tyrrell held
that the Action lay; it is a Scandalous Letter concerning his Profession, and
here is a Special Damage: He does give bad Counsel, spoken of a Lawyer, judged
Actionable; so Dunce stirring up Suits is taken in malam partem.

Vaughan Chief Justice, I must submit to the Rule given, but am of another
Opinion. In ancient Books we do not read of an Action for Words, unless the
Slander concerned Life. 'Twas held not actionable to call Villain, unless
'twere added he was lain in wait to be seized; the growth of these Actions will
spoil all communications; a man shall not say such an Inn, or such Wine is not
good. Their progress extends to all Professions, to say a man was not a good
Surveyor has been held actionable. The words spoken here have no more relation
to the Plaintiffs Profession, than to say of a Lawyer he has a Red Nose, or
but a little Head; to say one had the use of a Woman's Body, is a slander, it
being an ideom of speech for lying with her. But,

Object. All these words together to make a Slander.

Answ. No man can assign me such a ratiocination, a male divisis ad been
conjuncta: I never heard it but in my Lord Straffords Case, viz. that many
Trespasses should make a Treason. It Is said he stirred up a Vexatious Action,
so does a Counsel when he Advises an Unsuccessful Action; for the party is
amerced pro falso clamore. He will milk your Purse, taken enunciatively
signifies no more than Milking a Bull, the Phrase is not come to an Idiom. So
of Filling his Pockets; these Words might have been spoken of the Law, and
indeed they are spoken of the Thing, not the Man or his Practice: Dunce,
Corrupt, etc. concern the Profession; but these words are applicable to any. If
he had said, he were not a Good Fiddler; would that be Actionable?

Termino Paschae, Anno 28 Car. II. In Communi Banco.
Hockett and Uxor versus Stegold, and Ux'.
TRespass for Assault, Battery, and Wounding of the Baron and Feme.

Upon Not Guilty pleaded, the Verdict was as to the Wife Guilty, and quoad
residuum Not guilty.

It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the Baron and Feme could not join in
an Action of Trespass for Beating them both, 2 Cro. 355, 655.

2. That there is nothing found as to the Beating of the Husband, and so an
imperfect Verdict; for the Quoad residuum shall extend only to the other
Trespasses done to the Wife, Yelv. 106. Vid. Lib. which goes to both Points.

But the Whole Court were of Opinion, that the Verdict had Cured this Mistake
in the Action, 9 Ed. 4. 51. 6 Acc'. Vid. Styles 349.

Termino Paschae, Anno 29 Car. II. In Communi Banco.
Herbert Perrot's Case.
HE having married a Wife that had an Inheritance of a considerable Value,
prevails upon her (while she was but of the Age of 20 years) to levy a Fine,
upon which the Use was declared to him and her, and the Heirs of their two
Bodies. This was taken in the Country upon a Dedimus potestatem by Sir Herbert
Perrot his Father and Mother. After which the Wife died without Issue; but had
Issue at the time of the Fine,

It was moved in Court, that this Fine might be set aside and a Fine imposed
upon the Commissioners, for the undue Practice and taking of a Fine of one
under Age. But all the Judges agreed, they could not meddle with the Fine; but
if the Wife had been alive and still under Age, they might bring her in by
Habeas Corpus and inspect her, and set aside the Fine upon a Motion; for
perhaps the Husband would not suffer the bringing or proceeding in a Writ of
Error.

And Justice Atkyns said, These Abuses (which are so frequent in taking Fines)
were occasioned by the Alteration of the Common Law, made by the Statute of
Carlisle 15 Ed. 2. that Fines which before were always to be done in Court, may
now be taken by Dedimus: But the Common Law ^alls much short of the Order the
Statute prescribes, which requires that two Judges of the Court, or one at the
least, should (taking with him an Abbot, Prior or Knight of good Fame) take
such Fines; whereas it is now the Common Practice to name Attorneys and
Inconsiderable persons.

The Court were of Opinion, That if a Commissioner to take a Fine do execute it
corruptly, he may be Fined by the Court; for in relation to the Fine (which is
the proper Business of this Court) he is subject to the Censures of it, as
Attorneys, etc. But they held, that they had no power to Fine the Parties for a
Misdemeanour in them.

North Chief Justice and Wyndham, would have Fined Sir Herbert Perrot for
taking a Fine of one under Age: But Atkyns and Scroggs dissented, because it
did not appear that Sir Herbert Perrot did know she was under Age, and it could
not be discerned by the View, she being Twenty.

Termino Sancti Hillarij, Anno 29 and 30 Car. II. In Communi Banco.
Sir John Otwaie's Case.
IN an Ejectment, upon a Special Verdict the Case was to this effect:

It was found that there was a Parish of Ribton and Vill of Ribton; but not
Coextensive with the Parish. J.S. had Land in Tail in the Parish and out of the
Vill, and bargained and sold by Indenture, with a Covenant to levy a Fine and
suffer a Recovery to the Uses of the Deed of the said Land in the Parish of
Ribton; and the Fine and Recovery were only of Lands in Ribton, and whether
this would serve for the said Land in the Parish of Ribton was the Question?

Sergeant Maynard Argued, that it would not; and said, that the Division by
Parishes is wholly Ecclesiastical, the Limits of which are equal to the Cure of
the Parson: But that of Towns and Vills is Civil, and has the same Limits with
the Power of the Constable and Tythingman. Where a Place is named in a Record
of the Law, and no more said, it is always intended a Vill; though when a Vill and
Parish are both mentioned, and of the same Name, they are intended Coextensive.
The later Authorities have admitted Fines to be levied of Land in a place
known, 1 Cro. 2 To. 20. But in a Recovery the Town must be mentioned.

But it is Objected, That here the Intention appears by the Deed, that these
Lands should pass?

But he Answered, That cannot carry the Words further than they are contained
in the Record.

Again, it is Objected, That the Deed, Fine and Recovery, do all make but one
Assurance?

True, but each has its several effect; the Deed serves to declare the Uses,
but it cannot make the Record larger than it is in the Subject Matter of it. If
a Formedon had been brought, and the Fine and Recovery pleaded in Bar, had it
not been a good Reply to have said, Nient comprise, etc.? In 2 Cro. 120. Storke
and Fox, the Case was, Walton and Street were two Vills in the Parish of
Street, and a Fine was of Lands in Street; and Resolved, that no Lands, but in
the Vill of Street (though in the Parish) did pass. And so is Mo. 910. in case of
a Grant, 2 To. 54. If this were permitted it would introduce much Mischief; for
men would not know what passed by searching the Record; but this should be
known only by a Pocket Deed, and so they in Reversion, a Lord of Ancient
Demesne, etc. would not know when to make their Claim, and should be barred by
reason of a Private Deed, when the Record of the Fine or Recovery did not
import that they were concerned. Fines are to end Controversies, and therefore
must be certain, and in that respect sometimes receive a stricter Construction
than Grants. A Fine of a Tenement is not good, but ought to be reversed; but a
Grant of a Tenement will bind.

On the other side it was Argued, that since Common Recoveries have been so
much in practice, and become the Common Assurances of men's Estates, they have
been favorably Construed. A Manor in Reputation has passed by the name of a
Manor in a Recovery. Sir M. Finch's Case in Co. and in 5 Co. Dormer's Case,
Common Recoveries have been admitted of an Advowson. All here is to be taken as
one Conveyance: A Deed expressing the intent may abridge the Recovery in the
number of Acres, 2 Co. 76. It Is true in case of the King, as that in Mo. 710.
there shall be no larger Construction than the express Words import. So where
the Intent appears, as that in Dyer 261. B.

North Chief Justice, Wyndham and Atkyns (Scroggs absent, but said by the Chief
Justice to be agreed) were of the same Opinion, and that Common Recoveries were
not to be overthrown by nice Constructions, and that the Inconvenience objected
against the Intent being explained by a Pocket Conveyance, was the same where a
man had several Lands in the same Vill; that of late they have directed the
Cursitors to make out Writs of Lands in Parochia. They said, that there was no
Case express against this, and that it was the stronger because found in the
Verdict, that he which suffered the Recovery had no Lands in the Vill, and
therefore must be void if not extended to the Parish.

Termino Paschae, Anno 32 Car. II. In Communi Banco.
The Case of Dodwell and the University of Oxford.
A Prohibition was prayed to the Chancellors Court of the University of Oxford
in the behalf of Dodwell, who being a Townsman of Oxford, was Libelled against
in the said Court upon a Statute or By Law of the University made in King
James's time, that whoever Privilegiatus sive non privilegiatus should be taken
Walking in the Streets at Nine of the Clock at Night, or after, having no
reasonable Excuse to be allowed by the Proctor, etc. should forfeit 40 s etc.
whereof one Moiety was to go to the University, and the other to the Proctor,
etc. that should take him: And that Dodwell was taken walking abroad at that
Hour, and being demanded a Reason thereof, he refused to give any Account; and
causa contemptus and ad morum reformationem this Libel was Exhibited.

The Prohibition was moved for the last Term; but in regard the Court observed
it touched the Jurisdiction of the University on the one hand, and concerned
the Liberties and Rights of the Townsmen on the other hand, they deferred the
granting of it until they should hear Counsel on both Sides, which was
appointed this Term. And now sundry ancient Charters were shown, by which was
granted to the University a Jurisdiction tam in Laicos, quam in alios, and a
By-Law made above 200 years since against Night-walking, with the penalty of 40
s upon the Offender, and Presidents of Proceeding thereupon in the Chancellors
Court; and that they were as well Guardians of the Peace by Prescription, as by
Charter. And an Act of Parliament of 13 Eliz. was shown, whereby their
Jurisdictions, and Privileges, and Statutes, were Confirmed. And although the
Mayor has also a Commission of the Peace, yet it is subordinate, and he swears
Fealty to the Chancellor.

Curia. This Libel is grounded upon a By-Law of 7 Jac. and being subsequent to
that Statute of 13 Reginae it is questionable whether warranted by it, or no?
This By-Law and Proceeding cannot be grounded nor derive Authority from their
being Guardians of the Peace by Prescription, as it seems they are by 9 H 6.
44. For without Act of Parliament, or express Prescription, a Corporation
cannot make a By Law to bind those which are not of the Body. Justices of the
Peace cannot ordain a Penalty for a Crime without their Jurisdiction and the
Proceeding in the Chancellors Court, which is according to the Civil Law^,
cannot be warranted by the Kings Charter. For no Court, other than such as
proceed according to Law, can be, unless by Prescription or Act of Parliament;
wherefore in regard if the University should Entitle themselves to this
Jurisdiction by Prescription, it were properly triable by a Jury. And if upon
the Act of 13 Eliz. Matter of Law might arise how for the Act might extend.

North Chief Justice, Atkyns and Scroggs, thought it was not fit they should
determine those Questions upon a Motion, but inclined to grant the Prohibition,
and propounded to the parties to agree that the Libel should be amended,
wherein it was grounded upon the By-Law made 7 Jacobi, which being subsequent
to the Act of 13 Eliz. the Merits of the Cause would not be brought before
themselves to determine the Grand Points, which was agreed.

And then the Court said, that they would grant a Prohibition, and let the
other Plead, etc. For North said, that they did often deny a Prohibition, though
it were a Writ ex debito Justitae, where they saw no Color for it: But if any
material Questions were like to arise, it was proper to grant it, and not to
determine them upon Motion, but upon pleading to the Prohibition, and therein
it differed from a Habeas Corpus, which was to be inst aly granted, because the
party is in Prison; but there is no such speed requisite in a Prohibition.

But Wyndham was against the Prohibition in the Case at Bar; for he took it
that the By-Law (7 Jac.) was but in Confirmation of that made before, and as a
Renewing of it, which he took to be confirmed by the Act of 13 Eliz.

Nota, Scroggs said, that Nine of the Clock could not be held such an Hour, as
it should be a Crime for a Townsman to walk at no more than Three in the
Afternoon. Though for Scholars it might be reasonable to restrain them; but no
Reason that Townsmen should be subjected to such Rules as were proper for
Scholars. And upon this he much grounded his Opinion for the Prohibition.

Anonymus.
IN an Action of Trespass the Defendant pleaded, That the Plaintiff was
Impropriator of such a Rectory, and that he was sued in the Ecclesiastical
Court, and by Sentence there the Profits were sequestered for the Repair of the
Chancel. To which the Plaintiff demurred, supposing that by 31 H. 8. the
Profits of Rectories Impropriate were made Lay Fee, and so not subject to be
sequestered by the Court Christian; and therefore it was supposed that the Lay
Impropriator could not sue for Tithes in the Spiritual Court. For which Cause
32 H. 3. was made to empower Laymen to recover them; and 35 H. 8. gives the
Ordinary Remedy for Procurations and Synodals, which was conceived had been
lost by making the Rectories Lay Fee. 2 Cro. 518. in Parry and Banks's Case it
is Resolved, that when the Rectory is in the hands of a Lay Impropriator, the
Ordinary cannot dissolve the Vicaridge, nor in such case cannot augment the
Vicaridge, 2 Roll. 339.

The Form of Pleading was also Objected unto: As,

First, It Is not positively alleged, that the Chancel was out of Repair; but
that he was Libelled against, which Libel did mention only it to be out of
Repair.

Secondly, The whole is Sequestered, whereas it ought to have been but in
proportion to the Charge of Repairing, and should be certainly expressed what
it required.

Thirdly, The Sequestration is to remain by the Sentence until the Judge should
take further Order. Whereas it ought to have been, but until the Repairs had
been done.

These Exceptions the Court held fatal, and therefore gave no Opinion as to the
Matter in Law, but did incline that there could be no Sequestration; for being
made Lay Fee, the Impropriation was out of their Jurisdiction, and it was now
only against the Person as against a Layman, for not Repairing the Church. And
they said in case of Dilapidations the whole ought not to be Sequestered, but to
leave a proportion to the Parson for his Livelihood.

Anonymus.
IN an Ejectment upon a Special Verdict the sole Point was, Whether a Lease for
a year, upon no other Consideration than reserving a Pepper Corn, if it be
demanded, shall work as a Bargain and Sale, and so to make the Lessee capable
of a Release.

And it was Resolved that it should, and that the Reservation made a sufficient
Consideration to raise an Use, as by Bargain and Sale. Vid. 10 Co. in Sutton's
Hospitals Case.

Rozer versus Rozer.
AN Indebitatus Assumpsit pro parcell' Corii ad specialem instantiam and
requisitionem of the Defendant, sold and delivered to J.S. Et sic inde
Indebitat' existens the Defendant promised to pay.

Upon Non assumpsit pleaded, and a Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in
Arrest of Judgment that there is no Promise laid, and no Reason to presume a
Promise, when it is the very ground of the Action, though after a Verdict. And
admitting there were a Promise; yet it being Collateral it did not make a Debt,
but should have been brought as an Action upon the Case, Mo. 702. and Dyer 230.
And hereupon Judgment was stayed. Though (as I hear) in the King Bench about two
years since, between Danbey and Kent, they held such a Case well enough after a
Verdict. Quaere.

Termino Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno 33 Car. II. In Communi Banco.
Page versus Kirk.
IN an Action of Trespass, upon Not Guilty at the Assizes in Suffolk, a Verdict
was found for the Plaintiff, and 10 s Damages and 40 s Costs, and Judgment
entered accordingly.

And an Action of Debt was brought upon the Judgment, and the Defendant pleaded
Specially the Statute 22 and 23 of Car. II. ca. 9. against Recovering more
Costs than Damages (where the Damages are under 40 s) in Trespass, unless
certified by the Judge that the Title was chiefly in question, the Words of the
Statute being, If any more Costs in such Action shall be awarded, the Judgment
shall be void.

To which the Plaintiff Demurred, and the Plea was held Insufficient; because
the Verdict was for 40 s Costs, and not Costs increased by an Award of the
Court.

2. If the Judgment were Erroneous, yet it was hard to make it avoidable by
Plea, notwithstanding that the Words of the Statute are, Shall be void.

Termino Sanctae Michaelis, Anno 33 Car. II. In Communi Banco.
Onslowes Case.
HE brought an Action against a Bailiff (being the chief Magistrate) of a
Corporation, for that although he were chosen one of the Burgesses to serve in
Parliament for the Corporation by the greater Number, etc. yet the Bailiff to
disappoint him of sitting, and to bring trouble, etc. upon him, did return
another Person in the Indentures, together with him, to his Damage, etc. Upon
Not Guilty pleaded, and a Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of
Judgment that the Action would not lie. And of that Opinion were the whole
Court, viz. North Chief Justice, Wyndham, Charlton and Levins, for they said
they had no Jurisdiction of this Matter, the principal part thereof being a
Retorn in Parliament. No Action before the Statute H. 6. etc. did lie against a
Sheriff or chief Officer of a Corporation for a False-retorn, and the Courts at
Westminster must not enlarge their Jurisdiction in these matters further than
those Acts give them. That there were no Presidents of any Actions at the
Common Law save Nevils Case in the late times and Sir Samuel Bernardistons
Case, both which miscarried. In the Long Parliament there were a great many
double Retorns, but no Actions had been brought, which is a great Argument that
no such Action lies, as Littleton argues upon the Statute of Merton of
disparaging an Heir.

Termino Paschae, Anno 35 Car. II. In Communi Banco.
The Lord Conwallis's Case.
THE Case was, Isaac Pennington a Copyholder of the Manor whereof my Lord
Conwallis is now feised, committed Treason in the matter of the Murder of King
Charles the First; and then about Anno 1655. surrendered into the hands of the
Lord of the Manor his Copyhold Lands to the use of some of his Children, who
were admitted. In 1659. the Manor was aliened to the Lord Conwallis, then came
the Act of Attainder 12 Car. 2. whereby Tychburn with other Regicides were
attainted, and thereby it was Enacted, That all their Manors, Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Remainders, Possessions, Rights,
Conditions, Interests, Offices, Annuities, and all other Hereditaments, Leases
for Years, Chattels Real, and other things of that nature whatsoever they be,
shall stand forfeited to the King, etc. Provided that no Conveyance, Assurance,
Grant, Bargain, Sale, Charge, Lease, Assignment of Lease, Grants and Surrenders
by Copy of Court Roll, etc. made to any Person or Persons, other than the Wife
or Wives, Child or Children, Heir or Heirs of such Person or Persons, etc.
After which Attainder, etc. the Lord of the Manor caused the Lands to be
seized, and brought an Ejectment.

The First Point, Was whether in Case of Treason or Felony the Lord can seize
before Conviction or Attainder? And the Court seemed to be of Opinion, that no
Seizure could be till Attainder, without Special Custom; but they agreed the
presentment of the Homage was not necessary to precede a Seizure, or to entitle
the Lord to take the advantage of a Forfeiture; but in case of a Capital Crime
it would be unreasonable and inconvenient to permit the same to be tried or
controverted in a Civil Action before the Conviction appeared upon Record.

Secondly, Whether this were such a Forfeiture as the Lord was bound to take
notice thereof; for if no notice, then the acceptance of the Surrender, etc.
would not preclude him from taking advantage of the Forfeiture. And the Court
inclined that the Lord should be presumed to take notice in this Case, as he
shall in the Case of Failer of Suit of Court, Non-paiment of Rent, etc. Vide 2
Cro. Matthews and Whetton 233.

Thirdly, Whether the Manor being conveyed away before the Attainder shall
purge the Forfeiture.

Justice Levins said, That although no advantage of this Forfeiture can be
taken till Attainder, yet after Attainder it has relation, and the committing
of Treason is the Forfeiture: There is a difference between an Heir taking
advantage of a Forfeiture in the time of the Ancestor; and an Alienee in the
time of the former Lord, Vid. Owen 63.

But then Justice Charleton declared his Opinion that the Copyhold was given to
the King, by the of Statute of 12 Car. For the generality of the words, other
things of that Nature whatsoever, and that enforced by the Proviso, where mesn
Conveyances, Surrenders by Copy were mentioned.

But the other Justices seemed to be of another Opinion, for that Copyholds
were never included in a Statute where any prejudice would thereby accrue to
the Lord, unless expressly named; and for the Proviso, it might be satisfied by
the Copyholds, which the Traitors might hold of the Kings Manors, or where
they had a Manor held of the King, and had made voluntary Grants of Copyholds,
and Surrenders made subsequent: And so 'twas said to be the Opinion of my Lord
Hales, 16 Car. 2. when he was Chief Baron of the Exchequer. But however they
were ordered to attend the Kings Attorney General, to know whether he desired
to be heard to that point. Et adjornatur.

Anonymus.
UPon a Trial at Bar upon a Quare Impedit; the Case was, Parceners had made
partition to present by turn; and an Usurpation is in the turn of one of them,
whether this put all the rest out of possession, or the Sister which had the
next turn should present when the Church became void. The Court inclined to an
Opinion that it should put all out of possession, and would not permit a
Special Verdict upon the motion of Sergeant Maynard, but a case was made of it
for the consideration of the Judges, Vid. Kielway, and F. N. B. 35.

Anonymus.
IN na Ejectment: Upon a Special Verdict, an Usurpation had been made to a
Church, and a Quare impedit brought to remove the Incumbent, and pending the
Quare impedit, the perpetual Advowson was sold by the Plaintiff, and it was
found ea intention, that J. S. Clerk should be presented after the Usurper
Incumbent removed, and accordingly after such removal J. S. was Presented,
Admitted, Instituted and Inducted. And after Argument the Court gave Judgment
for the Plaintiff, whose Lessor, supposing the Presentation, etc. void by the
Statute against Simony had procured a Presentation from the King, and
Admission, Institution and Induction thereupon, and the Court held it to be
plain Simony.

Termino Sancti Michaelis Anno 2 Jac. II. In Communi Banco.
Bathursts Case.
AN Action was brought against him, as Executor of an Executor of an Executor,
against whom the Plaintiff had recovered a Judgment in Debt, and it was
suggested that he had wasted the Estate of the first Testator, and so by the
Statute 30 Car. 2. his Executor was liable in such Manner as his Testator would
have been if he had been living. Upon Plene Administravit pleaded the matter
was found specially, and that the Executor which wasted was indebted to the
Defendant, whom he made Executor upon a simple Contract. And the Question was,
whether the Defendant might retain for his Debt against the Debt, grounded upon
the Devastavit: And the Court held that he might, for it shall not be adjudged
a Debt superior to a simple Contract.

Termino Paschae, Anno 22 Car. II. In Communi Banco.
Grove and Dr. Elliot Chancellor of Sarum.
A Motion had been made for a Prohibition, upon a Suggestion that per legem
terrae no man ought to be Judge in his own Cause, etc. nor ought any man to be
compelled to answer Articles prosecuted against him ex mero Officio, etc. And
that contrary hereto the Defendant had articled against the Plaintiff, that he
did out of his own private Will and Spirit, and contrary to the Laws, keep
Conventicles, and did allow and permit one South and others, pretended
Ministers, and not allowed by the Church, to Expound and Preach to himself and
many others, etc. and this was ex promotione A. B. Notarij Publici, etc.

It was not alleged in this Libel or Articles, that there was any Presentment
of this Matter, but the Register of the Court swore that there was a
Presentment made by the Curate of the Parish, where, etc. and that a certain
Copy which he delivered here into Court was a true Copy thereof.

Ellis Sergeant for the Plaintiff,

First, Conventicles are properly punishable at the Common Law, and not by the
Ecclesiastical Law, they are inquirable upon every Commission of Oyer and
Terminer, 4 Inst 162. and the late Act against Conventicles was in force at
this time.

Secondly, No man ought to be proceeded against in the Spiritual Court without
a due presentment. 25 H. 8. c. 14. declares that it is not reasonable that any
Ordinary by any suspicion conceived of his own fancy, without due accusation or
presentment, should put any Subject of this Realm into the infamy or slander of
Heresy And the reason of this extends to other things as well as Heresy.
Indeed this Statute is repealed, but as my Lord Coke 12 Rep. 26. observes it
was herein declaratory of the Common Law; and it is great reason that there
should be a presentment and accusation by some proper Person, for otherwise an
innocent Person in case of false accusation would not known where to have his
remedy.

Object. Here is a Presentment by the Curate, and by the 113 of the Canons made
3 Jacobi, a Curate in the absence of the Rector may present.

Answ. First, These Canons were never confirmed by Act of Parliament, and
without that there cannot be any Canons made to alter the Law, 12 Co. 72, 73.
at least they can bind none but the Clergy, Vid. Mo. 755. and one reason
thereof is, because the Laity have no Representatives in the Convocation.

Secondly, This Canon says only, that a Curate may present in the absence of
the Rector; it does not appear here that the Rector was absent.

Thirdly, All such Presentiments ought to be upon Oath, and this is not proved
so to be: The Courts in this Hall cannot proceed upon any such thing without
Oath.

Fourthly, It is not alleged in the Libel or Articles, that there was any
Presentment at all, only the Register comes in and says he finds such a
Presentment among the Acts of the Court, so that Issue cannot be taken whether
any or no: So it must be taken his proceeding was ex Officio mero without
Presentment, and it is as great a mischief as was by reason of common Informers
before the 18 Eliz. c. 5. appointed their names to be endorsed upon all Process
sued out by them.

Thirdly, In this Case they will examine upon Oath: Now no Layman ought to
answer upon Oath except in Cases matrimonial and Testamentary, 12 Co. 26, 27. 3
Cro. 262.

Baldwyn contra.

First, That Conventicles are punishable at the Common Law, or were by the late
Statute, does not disprove or take away the Jurisdiction of the Spiritual
Court, for the proceedings are diverso respectu. We proceed against
Conventicles, as being against the Peace, and as being against the Laws of the
Church, and to prevent the broaching of Heterodor Opinions, as in one Court we
do agere civiliter by Action, and criminaliter by Information for the same
matter.

Secondly, The proceeding in this Case is according to the constant course of
proceeding in their Court; for when a Presentment is made, they form Articles
thereupon, tibi articulamur and objicimus. etc. but they never recite or
mention the Presentment in the Articles, and therefore it does not, nor need it
appear in them in this Case. So that it cannot from hence he concluded to be a
prosecution ex Officio mero. Moreover 25 H. 8. when it was in force concerned
Heresy only.

As to the Presentment made in this Case by the Curate.

1. Those Canons are not to be questioned, they have been always allowed,
having been confirmed by the King.

2. The Rectors absence shall be intended.

3. The Churchwardens themselves, whose ancient and unquestioned Office it is
to make Presentiments, don't take a particular Oath upon all the Presentiments
they make, but they do it by virtue of their general Oath of Churchwardens, and
Ministers do the same (as the Bishop of Sarum present in Court had asserted
just before in verbo Sacerdotis,) or rather by virtue of their general Oath of
Canonical Obedience.

4. They are not bound to specify the Presentment in their Articles; and this
is not so liable to the Objection of Mischief and Unreasonableness, as the
Informations daily brought in the King's Bench in the Name of the Clerk of the
Crown; which Informations are approved and preserved by the very Statute of 18
Eliz. c. 5. And if there be no due Presentment, it is an Error which consists in
not proceeding according to their Rules, i. e. the Canon Law, and the proper
remedy for that is by Appeal; and our Courts will not take notice whether they
observe their own Laws. Prohibitions are only to be granted when the Common Law
is invaded and interfered with.

Thirdly, As to the examining of the Party upon Oath, here is no cause to
mention it; and indeed it is not their course, for they only ask him ore tenus,
whether he will confess or deny the Articles; if he deny them, then there is
litis contestatio, and they proceed to examine Witnesses to prove it; and if it
be not proved, the Informer is condemned in Costs.

Justice Wyld. I am of Opinion that there should go no Prohibition. We must
Judge only upon the Suggestion: Here it is suggested that the Defendant
proceeded against the Plaintiff ex Officio, but that may be understood two
ways, either that he proceeded officiose on his own head, or that he proceeded
out of Duty according to his Duty, and nothing appears to the contrary of this
last, and then he did as he ought. If the Plaintiff had suggested that by the
Law of the Land there ought to be a Presentment by such persons in such manner,
etc. he might have brought that into question.

Archer of the same Opinion. We must give faith and credit to their
proceedings, and presume that they are according to their Law, 4 Co. 29 The
King with the Convocation may make Orders and Constitutions for the Government
of the Church.

Tyrrell of the same Opinion. But if the Suggestion were that no Presentment by
a Curate were sufficient, nor unless it were upon Oath, etc. I should have been
Opinion for a Prohibition. I hold that the King and Convocation, without the
Parliament, cannot make any Canons which shall bind the Laity though they may
the Clergy, Vid. 35 H. 8. c. 19.

Vaughan of the same Opinion. If the Articles were exhibited merely ex Officio,
i.e. out of the mind of the Chancellor himself they were not warrantable. But
there is no color for this Suggestion, for they appear to be the Information
of a Public Notary. As to the Presentment which is thought requisite by the
preamble of 25 H. 8. c. 14. declaratory of the Common Law or not, it is
sufficient Answer to say that the Act is repealed and therein the Preamble: And
for ought any man knows, the Preamble was the Cause of the Repeal; this has
been the only specious Objection. As to the Canons 3 Jacobi certainly they are
of force, though never confirmed by Act of Parliament. Indeed no Canons of
England stand confirmed by Act of Parliament; yet they are the Laws which bind
and govern in Ecclesiastic Affairs. The Convocation with the License and
assent of the King under the Great Seal may make Canons for regulation of the
Church, and that as well concerning Laics as Ecclesiastics; and so is
Linwood. Indeed they cannot alter or infringe the Common Law, Statute Law or
Kings Prerogative, but they may make alterations ( viz. in Eccleastical
Matters) or else they could make no new Canons: All that is required of them in
making of new Canons is, that they confine themselves to Church Matters. As no
Human Law can be made which is contrary to the Divine Law; and it is binding
only in those things which are permissa by the Divine Law: So no Canon Law can
be made which is repugnant to the Law of the Land. The Subject Matter is in the
Case. The permissa, the things of Ecclesiastical Nature, which are left
indifferent by the Law of the Land; in this Case we must presume there was a
Presentment according to their Law, if not the Remedy is by Appeal. We ought
not to assume the Jurisdiction of Judging upon their Law, but give way to their
course of Proceedings.

Sergeant Ellis. I only intended that Canons cannot be made to alter the Law
without Parliament.

Curia. We all agree as to the First Exception, that the Spiritual Court may
proceed against Conventicles, as a Spiritual Offense, though not as a Civil.

As to the Second, That they have Conusans of all False Worshippers.

As to the Third, That there is nocolour or occasion to make it.

Note. The Course of the Spiritual Court is not to make a Significavit until
forty days after the Excommunication. General Citation is a cause of
Prohibition, for it ought to be expressed for what Cause: But this is cured by
Appearance or Appeal.

Termino Paschae, Anno 1 Willielmi and Mariae. In Communi Banco.
Anonymus.
UPon a Suggestion of Devastavit of a Feme Executrix, it was, That the Baron
and Feme, devastaver' and converter' ad usum ipsorum: And upon the Issue it was
found accordingly.

It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, That they could not Convert to their own
use: And so in Trover and Conversion, Quod converter' ad usum ipsorum is not
good.

Sed non allocatur: For here the material part of the Issue was the Wasting,
which the Baron and Feme might do jointly, and the Conversion is nothing to the
purpose. Vid. 2. Sand. Issue upon a Devastavit.

Anonymus.
IN an Assumpsit, in Consideration that he paid him so much Money, he promised
to pay a like Sum into the Court, and appear.

Object. That there is no benefit, as if it were in Consideration that he
deposited so much Corn, he promised to deliver it over, 3 Cro.

Cur'. This is not like; for here he was benefit by the use of the Money, but
in the other case he is to deliver the Corn in specie.

Anonymus.
IT was moved, that where the Defendant was a Constable, and a Verdict for him
being in the Execution of his Office, and no Memorandum appeared, as was usual
upon the Postea to give him Double Costs, according to the Statute of 7 Jac.
that it must be now supplied.

But per Curiam, We cannot do it; because the Statute says, the Judge before
whom the Cause was tried should allow double Costs; and the Court cannot do it,
unless the Judge of Assize had ordered the Postea to be marked.

Anonymus.
IT was pleaded in Abatement, that the Declaration varied from the Original in
the Name of the Defendant and his Addition. 'Twas said that in such case the
Cursitor or Clerk that made out the Writ may be ordered to attend; and if his
Instructions were right, to amend the Writ by the Instructions.

Anonymus.
WHere a man was Outlawed after the Plaintiff had him in Prison, a Reversal was
Ordered at the Charge of him that prosecuted the Outlary, it appearing to be an
Abuse.

Anonymus.
COvenant, that he shall Have and Enjoy; and a Breach was assigned, that such
an one brought Trespass and Recovered. And after Verdict it was moved in Arrest
of Judgment, that it does not appear that he which recovered in Trespass had a
Title.

Sergeant Levins. Here is an express Covenant, that he should quietly hold the
Possession, and he is disturbed in his Possession, though upon no Title. And so
is Dyer 328. a. Vaughan 120. Vide Hob. 35. Et Adjornatur.

Termino Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno 1 W. and M. In Communi Banco.
Anonymus.
A Motion was made to change a Venue, where an Attorney was Plaintiff.

Object. He has privilege to lay it in Middlesex, because of his Attendance.

Answ. But here he has laid it within London.

Curia. Then let the Venue be changed; for then he is to be considered as a
person at Large.

Anonymus.
A Motion was made for a Prohibition to a Suit for Tithe Lamb, upon a
Suggestion of a Modus to pay 2 d falling in the Plaintiffs Farm in the Parish.

Object. A Prohibition was granted before to stop this Suit upon a Suggestion,
which was tried and found for the Plaintiff, and a Consultation granted.

Answ. That Suggestion was for 2 d to be paid for every Lamb which fell in the
Parish, and this only to a particular Farm, and so not within the Statute of 50
Ed. 3. that a second Prohibition shall not be granted after a Consultation
awarded in the same Suit. Vid. 1 Cro. 151. Stroud and Hoskins, 1 Roll. Rep. 378.

Note here, If this Matter had been found by the Verdict, no Consultation had
been granted, Hob. 192.

But here the Court inclined against a Prohibition by reason of the said
Statute of 50 Ed. 3.

Anonymus.
A Fine was acknowledged before Herbert Chief Justice, by a Man and his Wife, 7
December. 1689. and by reason that the late King James had deserted the Kingdom
and taken away the Great Seal, there followed a step of Proceedings at Law; and
the Woman died thy 20th of February following, and upon the 22th of February
the Kings Silver was paid, as upon a Writ of Covenant in King James's time,
though no Writ was then sued out. But afterward a Writ of Covenant was taken
out, Returnable in Michaelmass Term last, which was sealed with the Seal of
King William and Queen Mary; and the Fine was Engrossed and made as a Fine in
Michaelmass Term.

And this present Term it was moved, that the Fine might be vacated, and the
Book of 1 H. 7. fo. 9. was cited, where the Cognizance of the Fine was in the
time of R. 3. and afterward a Writ of Covenant was sued in the time of Henry
the Seventh, which being shown to the Court they stopped the Fine; though it is
said in that Case, that it is the common course to take the Acknoweldgment of
Fines, and then to sue out a Writ of Covenant: But they said they would not
permit a President, That an Acknowledgment of a Fine should be in the
Predecessor King, and the Writ of Covenant in the time of the Successor.

But the Court (after the Cause had been twice moved, and full Consideration of
it) gave their Opinions seriatim, that the Fine should stand. For the Entering
of the Kings Silver after the parties death could not be now Examined, in
regard the Fine was engrossed and completed as a Fine of Michaelmass Term. And
so was Farmer's Case Hob. 330. and Carill's Case Dyer 220. b. The Court would
not stop a Fine taken of a Feme Covert when she was dead, 1 Roll. Rep. 114.

Note, Several Presidents were shown where Fines were set aside for undue
Practice in the Passing of them; (viz.) in case of Personating Fines taken by
Commissioners of Infants, etc.

Anonymus.
IN an Action of Trespass, Quare clausum fregit, and putting Stakes upon his
Ground, it was held that this was within the late Statute, which Enacts, That
the Plaintiff shall recover no more Costs than Damages; but if any thing had
been taken away (of how little value soever) it had not been within the Statute.

Anonymus.
A Prohibition was granted to a Suit for Tithes, upon a Suggestion that the
Tithes were set out; and it was moved for a Consultation, that he did not
allege Notice given to the Parson: And the Bishop of Catlisle's Case Hob. 107.
was cited, where a Custom was laid to set out Tithe Wool, absque aliquibus visu
and tactu, Roll. Abr. 2. pl. 19.
of the Nine parts by the Parson, etc.

But the Court were all of Opinion, that Case having been twice moved, that no
Notice need be given to the Parson. And so it is said to be Adjudged in Noy 19.
though the Ecclesiastical Law is otherwise. So is the Case of Chase and Ware,
Rolls tit. Tithes 643. Style 342. where it is held, that if an Action be brought
against the Parson, for not taking away his Tithe after set out, Notice must be
given before such Action. For the Bishop of Carlisle's Case in Hobart does not
make against this; for there a Custom was laid to exclude the Parson from
seeing the Tithe which is to be set out, which Custom is not to be omitted.
Vid. Rolls Abridg. tit. Dismes 647. And the 2 of E. 6. cap. 13. Enacts, That it
shall be lawful for every person, to whom Tithe ought to be paid, to view his
Tithe set forth and severed from the Nine parts.

Massingburn versus Durrant.
IN an Action of Trespass for breaking of his Close and cutting of his Corn:
The Plaintiff declared of several Trespasses some whereof were in the time of
King Charles the Second, and other in the time of King James the Second, and
Judgment was by Default. And after a Writ of Enquiry of Damages Returned, Error
was brought in the King's Bench, and assigned that there was no Original, and
upon that a Writ was awarded to the Custos Brevium, who certified an Original
between the parties, taken out in the time of the late King James, which
concluded contra pacem nostram, And this could not be taken to be an Original
in this Cause; because then it should have Concluded, contra pacem nostram,
necnon contra pacem Caroli Secundi nuper Regis; and for that a Rule was in the
King's Bench to Reverse the Judgment, nisi.

It was thereupon moved in this Court, that the Original might be amended; for
that it was said, that the Instructions to the Cursitor were right, and a Form
given him to draw the Conclusion of the Writ contra pacem nostram, and contra
pacem nuper Regis.

And it was admitted on the other Side, that the Instructions were so given to
the Cursitor.

But then it was Objected, That this was part of the Legal Form of the Writ,
and in that an Original was not amendable. And so Parker's Case in Hutton 56.
where Indicari was put in a Writ upon the Statute of Hue and Cry instead of
Indictari, and it could not be amended, though that word was right in the
Instructions to the Cursitor. And for Blackamore's Case in 8 Co. there (in the
principal Case) the Instructions were in a Matter of Fact, as in the addition
of the party, Knight, instead of Gentleman; but in that Case held, That the
Writ could not be amended in the Legal Form.

To this it was Answered, That this was in Matter of Fact; for a Writ of
Trespass does not distinguish Trespasses in one Kings Reign or another, that is
only distinguished by the Conclusion contra pacem nostram and nuper Regis, and
for that the Instructions were particularly given, and that is the manner of
giving the Instructions, when there are Trespasses to be declared upon in the
Reigns of several Kings.

And of that Opinion was all the Court, and Ordered the Amendment accordingly:
But that the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error should have his Costs, because the
Error was brought and assigned by reason of this Fault in the Writ.

Note, The Cursitor was not required to attend with his Instructions; because
they were agreed to be as the Plaintiffs Counsel in the Action alleged, and so
no Examination of the Cursitor requisite.

Note in Blackmore's Case in the 8 Co. it is said, that the Writ shall be
Amended by the Cursitor. Quaere.

Fowkes versus Joyce.
IN a Replevin the Defendant avowed the Taking, as a Distress for Rent in Bar
of the Avowry.

The Plaintiff Replied, That the Avowant had Let the place where, with an Inn,
and that he was driving his Cattle to London ad proficuum inde faciend', and
that he asked leave of the Avowant to put his Cattle in the Ground for a Night,
and that he gave him leave, with the Consent of the Lessee, Virtute cujus he
put in his Cattle prout ei been licuit.

Upon which it was Demurred; and to maintain the Bar to the Avowry it was
urged, That being put in the Ground belonging to the Inn they were privileged,
and that being driving to London to a Market, and put in for Pasture by the
way, they could not be Distrained.

To this it was Answered, That there was nothing appeared in the Pleading of a
Common Inn, and so the Matter did not come in question; neither was it set
forth that the Cattle were driving to Market, but only to London, ad proficuum
inde faciend'. And besides, in the Bar to the Avowry the License is the only
Matter relied upon, which does not Conclude the Lessor from taking the
Distress. And of that Opinion was the Court.

And the Court held, That Cattle driving to a Market, and put into Pasture by
the way, were not privileged from being Distrained. For it is by the Statute of
Marlbridge That Beasts cannot be Distrained in the Highway; and not by the
Common Law.

Morley versus Polhill, and al'.
Sussex' ss.
EDWARDUS Polhill nuper de Burwash in Com^praedicto Armig', Covenant by the
Executors of a Bishop, against the Executors of an Assignee, Executor of the
Lessee.
and Walterus Roberts Jun^ nuper de Saleherst in Com' praedict' Armig',
Executores Testamenti Roberti Foul Armig', Assign' Thomae Carey Armig',
Executoris Testamenti Samuelis Got Armig', nuper dicti Samuelis Got of Grays
Inn in the County of Middlesex Esquire. Summon' fuer' ad respondend' Francisco
Morley Armig', Executori Testamenti Georgii nuper Domini Episcopi Winton' prox'
Successori Brian', nuper Domini Episcopi Winton' defunct' de plito, quod teneat
ei convenc^onem inter praefat Brian' nuper Dom' Episcopum Winton' in vita sua,
and praefat' Samuelem Got in vita sua factam secundum vim formam and effectum
quarundam Indenturarum inde inter eos confectarum, etc. The Count.
Et unde idem Franciscus Morley per Joseph' Newington Attorn' suum dicit quod
cum per quandam Indentur' factam apud Westfield in Com' praedict' vicesimo
quarto die Decembr', The Indenture set forth.
Anno Regni Domini Caroli Secundi nuper Regis Angl', etc. Decimo tertio, inter
praefat' Brian' nuper Dom' Episc' Winton' in vita sua, per nomen Reverend'
Patris in Deo Brian', per Divinam providentiam Dom' Episc' Winton' ex una
part, and praefat' Samuelem Got in vita sua, per nomen Samuelis Got de Grays
Inn in Com' Midd' Armig' ex altera part, cujus quidem Indenturae alteram
partem, sigillo praedict' Samuelis Got in vita sua signat', idem Franciscus
hic in Cur^ profert' cujus dat' est eisdem die and anno Testat' sit quod
praefat' Brian' tunc Dominus Episcopus Winton', Profert in Curia.
pro and in consideratione sursumreddic^on' prioris Indenturae, (Anglice, The
Considetion.
Lease) quae suit determinare (Anglice, to expire) in mense Augusti, qui tunc
forer in Anno nostri Domini Dei Millesimo sexcentesimo sexagesimo tertio,
dimisisser, concessisset, and ad firmam tradidisset. Et praedictus Brianus tunc
Dominus Episcopus Winton', The Demise of Rectories and Parsonages.
per Indentur' praedictam pro seipso, and successoribus suis, dimisit,
concessit and ad firmam tradidit eidem Samueli, Omnes illas Rectorias (Anglice
Parsonages) de Rye and Westfield, and quaslibet earundem cum suis pertin' in
Comitat' Sussex', and omnia aedificia, structura, horrea, stabula, pomaria,
gardina, terras, tenementa, haereditamonta, Gleabs, Tithes, Oblations,
Obventions, etc.
prata, lesuras, pasturas, terras Glebarum boscos, subboscos Decimas, (Anglice,
Tenthe) Decimas (Anglice, Tithes) oblacon', obvencon', proficua, commoditat'
(Anglice, Commodities) and advantagia (Anglice Advantages) quascunque dictis
Rectoriis de Rye and Westfield praedict', vel alteri illarum spectan' sive
appertinen' (except' and semper reservat' praefat' Dom' Episcopo, Exception of
the Presentation to the Churches
and successoribus suis extra dimissionem praedict' donis Donac^onibus,
Advocationibus, Praesentationibus, No minationibus and Jure patronatus
(Anglice, Right of Patronage) Vicariarum de Rye and Westfield praedict';) and
cujuslibet illarum Habend' and tenend' dictas Rectorias, Habend.
and omnia and singula al praemissa cum suis pertin' (except' praeexcept')
praefat' Samueli Got, Executoribus, Administratoribus and Assign' suis a
confectione Indentur' praedict', usque plenum finem and terminum, and pro and
duran' plen' termino Viginti and unius annorum deinceps prox' sequen', For 21
years.
and plenar' complend' and finiend'. Reddend.
Reddend' and solvend' proinde annuatim duran' dicto termino praefat' Domino
Episcopo, and successoribus suis, apud suum and suos Scaccarium apud Wolvesey
prope Winton' annual' reddit viginti librarum legalis monet' Angl' ad Festa
Annunciationis beatae Mariae Virginis and Sancti Michaelis Archangel', per
aequas and aequales portiones, (videlicet) pro dicta Rectoria de Rye annual'
Reddit' octo librarum. A further Reservation.
Et pro praedict' Rectoria de Westfield annual' reddit' duodecim librarum;
Acetiam reddendo and solvendo proinde annuatim duran' dicto termino prout hic
postea mentionar' est praefat' Domino Episcopo, and successoribus suis super
dies and apud locum praedict' per aequas and aequales portiones annual' reddit'
viginti librarum similis legalis Monet' Angl' ad solvend' per dict' Dominum
Episcopum, and successores suos annuatim Vicariis pro tempore existen'
parochial' Ecclesiarum de Rye and Westfield predict', videlicet, Vicario pro
tempore existen' de Rye praedict' annual' sum^ duodecim librarum and december
solidorum, and Vicario pro tempore existen' parochial' Ecclesiae de Westfield
praedict' annual' summam septem librarum and december solidorum in prosecutione
(Anglice pursuance) tunc Regiae Majestatis directionis pro augmentationibus in
ea vice dat' (prima solutio inde pro dictis Vicariis faciend' ad Festum
Annunciationis heatae Mariae Virginis, quod tunc foret in Anno Dom' nostri Dei
Millesimo sexcentesimo sexagesimo tertio.) Et praefat' Samuel Got pro seipso
Executoribus, Administratoribus and Assign' suis convenit promisit and
concessit, A Covenant to Repair.
ad and cum praefat' Domino Episcopo, and successoribus suis per Indentur'
praedict', quod ipse praefat' Samuel Got, Executor', Administrator' and
Assignat' sui, de tempore in tempus and ad omnia tempora tunc postea duran'
dicto termino viginti and unius annorum, ad ejus, eorum, vel alicujus eorum
propr' custag' and onera quando, and toties quoties necesse foret, vel
requireret been and sufficient' repararent, emendarent, manutenerent,
supportarent, (Anglice, uphold) sustinerent, praesepirent (Anglice, Fence) and
custodirent ram praedict' Rectorias and al' praemissa, (except' praeexcept')
quam Sacraria (Anglice, the Chancels) Ecclesiarum de Rye and Westfield
praedict', and earum alterius in per and cum omnibus and omnimodis requisit'
(Anglice, needful) and necessar' reparationibus, and emendationibus
quibuscunque, ac eaedem and earum quilibet sic been and sufficient' reparat',
emendat' manutent', supportat', sustent', praesept' and custodit' ad finem
praedict' termini, vel aliam citiorem, determination', dimission' praedict',
utrum prius accideret, relinquerent sursum redderent and traderent (Anglice,
yield up) And to yield up all Repaired at the end of the Term.
praefat' Domino Episcopo and successoribus suis, prout per eandem Indentur'
praedict' (inter alia before liquet and apparet) Virtute cujusquidem Indentur'
praedictus Samuel Got in Rectorias and tenementa praed' cum pertin' superius
dimissa (except' praeexcept' The Lessee Entered.
) intravit and fuit inde possessionat' Et sic inde possessionat' existen' idem
Samuel postea scilicet quintodecimo die Septemb' Anno Regni dicti nuper Regis
vicesimo tertio apud Westfield praed' condidit testamentum and ult' voluntat'
And made his Will.
suam and per eandem praedictum Thomam Bard Executorem ejuldem testamenti and
ult' voluntar' suae constituit and ordinavit Posteaque ibidem obiit de
Rectoriis and al' dimissis praemissis praedictis cum pertin' sic ut praefertur
possessionat' And died possessed.
Post cujus mortem praedictus Thomas Bard in Rectorias and al' dimissa
praemissa cum pertin' intravit and suit inde possessionat' Et sic inde
possessionat' existen' The Executor entered.

And granted to the Defendants Testator.


praedictus Thomas Bard postea scilicet primo die Octob' Anno Regni dicti
Domini nuper Regis vicesimo quinto apud Westfield praed' concessit and
assignavit Rectorias and caetera praemissm praed' cum pertin' ac totum statum
jus titulum interesse and termin' annorum adtunc ventur' and inexpirat de and
in eisdem (virtute Indentur' praed, praefat' Roberto Foul Executor' and
Assign' Who Entered.
suis) virtute cujus quidem concession' praedictus Robertus Foul in Rectorias
and caetera praemissa praed' cum pertin' per Indentur' praed' dimissa intravit
and fuit inde possessionat' Et sic inde possessionat' existen idem Robertus
Foul postea and ante finem termini praedicti superius dimiss. scilicit decimo
die Decembris Anno Regni dicti nuper Regis tricesimo quarto apud Westfield
praed' obiit de Rectoriis and al' And Died.
tenementis praedictis cum pertin' superius dimissis possessionat' Et
praedictis Brianus de reversionne Rectoriae and caererorum praemissorum
praedictorum praed' seisit' The Bishop being then seized of the Reversion in
the Right of his Bishopric.

Died seized.


exexistens in dominico suo ut de feodo in jure Espiscopat' sui praedicti
praedictus Brianus postea scilicet undecimo die Decemb' Anno tricesimo quarto
supradicto apud Westfield praed' obiit de Revertione Rectorie and ceterorum
praemissorum praed' cum pertin' sic ut praefertur seisit' post cujus mortem
reversio tenementorum praed' cum pertin' deven' praedicto Georgio nuper
Episcop' Winton' prox' successori predict' And the same came to his successor,
Bishop. Who was duly made Bishop.
Briani in Episcopat' praed' debito modo constitut' and praefectus in jure
Episcopat' sui praed' Et praedictus Georgius Episcopus de reversione
tenementorum praed' seisit' existen' and praedict' Edwardus Polhill and
Walterus Roberts de Rector' and caeteris praemissis cum pertin' sic ut
praefertur possessionat' existens praed' The Term expired.
terminus viginti and unius Annorum de and in praemissis sic ut praefertur
dimissus finivit post mortem Brian nuper Episcop' Winton and in vita praedicti
Georgii prox' successor' praed' Briani scilicet vicesimo tertio die Decembris
Annon Dom' Millesimo Sexcentesimo Octogesimo Secundo (eodem Georgio tunc
Episcopo Winton' de reversione tenementorum praedictorum sic ut praefertur
seisit' existen' Et idem Georgius Episcopus Winton' postea scilicet tricesimo
die Decembris Anno Regni dicti nuper Regis Tricesimo Quarto supradicto apud
Westfield praed' The succeeding Bishop made his Will.

And made the Plaintiff Executor and died.


condidit testamentum and ult' voluntat' suam and per eaud; constituit and
ordinavit praedictum Franciscum Morley Executorem ejusdem Testamenti posteaque
ibidem obiit Ac licet praedictus Brianus Dominus Episcopus in vita sua Et
praefat' Georgius Dominus Episcopus post ipsius Briani mortem cujus prox'
Successor' (in Episcopat' praed' praedictus Georgius Dominus Episcopus fuit in
vita sua) been and fidelit' observaver' persormaver' and perimplever' omnes and
singulas convention' concessiones articulos and agreamenta in Indentur' praed'
specificat' ex part ipsius Briani Dom' Episc' and successorum suorum
observand' perfor' mand' and perimplend' secundum formam and effectum Indentur'
praed' The Breach assigned.
idem tamen Franciscu^ in secundo die qd' praedictus Edwardus Polhill and
Walterus Roberts ante finem termini praedicti and post mortem praedicti Roberti
Foul (cujus Executores praedicti Edwardus and Walterus sunt) in vita praedicti
Georgii nuper Episcop' Winton', scilicet, vicesimo die Decembris Anno Regni
dicti nuper Regis tricesimo quarto permiser' paedictum Sacrarium (Anglice, In
permitting the Chancel and other Buildings to be out of Repair.

The particulars of the Defects.


the Chancel) Ecclesiae Parochial' de Westfield praed' (parcell' praemissorum
stare and esse discoopert' pro' defectu sufficientis tecturae inde and parietes
muros ostia and paviment' ejusdem Sacrar' fore ruinosa and in decasu pro
defectu sufficien' tabulation' crustiation' (Anglice, Plaistering) and
emendatione inde cum lapidibus and aliis necessariis materialibus and vitrum de
fenestris Sacrarii illius fore fract' and dirupt' and fenestras illas stare and
esse minime vitriat' (Anglice, unglazed) per qd' grossum maheremium Sacrar'
illius per tempestat' pluvial' super ill' descenden' ac per vim venti superinde
affluen' putrid' devenit and corrupt' ac ratione inde Sacrar' ill' ruin'
minatur Necnon praedicti Edwardus Polhill and Walterus Roberts eisdem die and
anno ult' praementionat' permiser' unum horreum Rectoriae de Westfield praed'
spectan' ac parcell' praemissorum superius ut praefertur dimissorum stare and
esse discoopert' ruinos' and in decasu pro defectu sufficien' tegminis
contabulationis (Anglice, Bording) and substructionis (Anglice, Groundselling)
per qd' grossum maheremium horrei predicti putrid' and corrupt' deven' ac
horreum predictum penitus coruit and in terram cecidit pro defectu reparationis
praed' Predictique Edwardus Polhill and Walterus Roberts Sacrar' praed' and
horreu' praed' ad aliquod tempus postea ante finem ejusdem termini minime
reparaver' And was not repaired.
seu emendaver' Sed Sacrarium praed' and horreum pred' sic in decasu and
irreparat' ut praefetur' existen' in fine termini praedicti absque aliqua
reparatione vel emendatione inde reliquer' contra formam and effectum
conventionis praed' in Indentur' praed' utpraefertur mention' Et sic idem
Franciscus dicit' Et sic infregit Conventionem.
qd' praedicti Edwardus Polhill and Walterus Roberts Conventionem praed'
Samuelis Got de eo qd' praedictus Samuel Gott' convenisset and concessisset
pro seipso Executoribus Administratoribus and Assign' suis ad and cum praefat'
Brian' Episcopo and Successoribus suis qd' dictus Samuel Got Executor'
Administrator' and Assign' sui de tempore in tempus duran' dict' termino quando
and toties quoties necesse foret been and sufficient' repararent emendarent
manuten' supportarent sustinerent praesepirent and custodirent tam praed'
Rectorias and al' praemissa (except' praeexcept') quam Sacraria Ecclesiarum de
Rye and Westfield praed' and eadem sic sufficient' reparat' emendat' manutent'
supportat' sustentat' praecept' and custodit' ad finem dicti termini dimiss.
praed' relinquerent sursumredderent and traderent praefat' Briano Episcopo and
Successoribus suis) praefat' Georgio Episcopo Winton' in vita sua prox'
Successori praedicti Briani nuper Episcopi nec praefat' Francisco post ipsius
Georgii Episcopi mortem (licet saepius requisit') non tenuer' set injuste
infreger' ac ill' eidem Franscisco hucusque tenere omnino contradixer' and
adhuc contradic' unde idem Franciscus dic' qd' ipse deteriorat' est and dampn'
habet ad valenc' ducentarum librarum Et inde produc' Profert in Cur' the
Letters Testamentary of the Bishop.
sectam etc. Et profert hic in Cur' Literas Testamentar' praedicti Dom' Georgii
nuper Episcopi Winton' per quas satis liquet Cur' hic ipsum Franciscum fore
Executorem Testamenti praedicti and inde habere Administrationem, etc.

Et praedictus Edwardus and Walter' per Robert' Spiller' Attorn' The Defendants
demur generally.
suum ven' and defend' vim and injur' quando, etc. Et dic' qd' narratio
praedict' materiaque in eadem content' minus sufficien^ in lege eist^t ad
praedictum Franciscum actionem suam praed' versus praedictos Edwardum and
Walter' habend' seu manutenend' Quodque ipsi ad Narrationem illam modo and
forma praed' fact' necesse non habet nec per legem terrae tenentur respondere
Et hoc parat' sunt verificare Unde pro defectu sufficien' Narration' ipsius
Francisci in hac part ijdem Edwardus and Walterus pet' Judicium and qd' praed'
Franciscus ab action sua praedicta versus eos habend' praecludatur, etc.

Et praedictus Franciscus dic' qd' Joynder in Demurrer.
narratio praedicta materiaque in eadem content' bon' and sufficien' in lege
existunt ad ipsum Franciscum actionem suam praedictam inde versus praed'
Edwardum and Walterum habend' manutenend' Quam quidem materiam idem Franciscus
parat' est verficare Unde ex quo praedict' Edwardus and Walterus ad narrationem
praed' non responder' nec materiam in ead' content' aliqualit' dedixer' idem
Franciscus pet' judicium and dampna sua occasion fractionis conventionis
praed' sibi adjudicari, etc. Et quia Justic', etc.

Morly versus Polhill.
IN an Action of Covenant the Plaintiff declared as Executor to George Morly,
late Bishop of Winchester, and sets forth that Brian the Predecessor of the
said Bishop, had demised a Rectory and certain Lands to J. S. for 21 years, who
had assigned it to the Testator of the Defendant, and that the Lessee
covenanted with Brian and his Successors to repair the Chapel of the Church,
and the Barns, etc. and assigned a breach in the not xepairing by the Testator
of the Defendant in the life of George Morly, and that the Lease afterwarns
expired.

To this the Defendant demurred, for that it was pretended, that the Executor
of the Bishop could not bring this Action, for the Covenant was with the
Predecessor Bishop and his Successors, and cited the Cases of Real Covenants, 1
Inst. 384, 385. A Parcener after partition Covenants to acquit the other
Parcener of a Suit, and the Covenantee assigns; the Assignee shall not bring
Covenant. But the whole Court gave Judgment for the Plaintiff, and that the
Executor is here well entitled to the Action for the Breach in the Testators
time.

Wright versus Wyvell.
IN an Ejectment the Plaintiff declared upon a Demise of Dorothy Hewly, and
upon a Special Verdict the Case appeared to be thus.

That Christopher Hewly was seized of the Premises in Fee, and made his Will
in this manner, I make my last Will in manner following.

As concerning my Personal Estate, First, I give and bequeath unto Ann Hewly my
Wife, the sum of Six Hundred Pounds to be paid unto William Weddall of
Eastwick, Esquire and it is for the full payment of the Lands lately purchased of
the said Mr. Weddall by the said Christopher Hewly, and is already estated in
part of a Jointure to Ann my said Wife, during her natural Life, being of the
value of Sixty Seven Pounds per annum; That of Wiskow, York and Malton, the
Lands and Tenements there amounting to the yearly value of Sixty Three Pounds,
in all One Hundred and Thirty Pounds, which being also estated upon my said
Wife, it is in full of her Jointure.

And after this he gives several Legacies, and the rest of his Personal Estate
he gave to his Wife, and made her Executrix.

Then they find that he had made no settlement of the Premises, or of any part
of them, upon his Wife; and that the Lessor of the Plaintiff was Heir at Law to
Christopher Hewly, and that Ann the Wife is still living: So that the sole
Question was, whether the Lands should pass to the Wife upon these words in the
Will; and diverse Cases were put upon implicit Devises, as that his Feoffees
should stand seized to the use of J. S. has been held a good Devise to J. S.
though there were no Feoffees 3 Leon. 167, 162. Devise to his eldest Son after
the death of his Wife, there the Wife takes, though nothing expressly devised to
her. After Arguments heard on both sides; by the Opinion of Pollexfen Chief
Justice, Rokeby and Ventris. Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, against the
Opinion of Powell. Here it appears indeed that the Testator took it, that she
had the Land, but it appears he did not intend to devise any thing by the Will,
for he mentions that she was estated in it before; and in the Cases of Implicit
Devises there is no reference to any Act that should have conveyed the Land to
the Devisee before; but the Will there passes the Land by Construction and
Implication.

Again, This Devise is introduced with this Clause, as to the disposing of my
Personal Estate; and throughout the Will he gives only Personal Things.

Again, This recital comes in as part of another Clause, of an express Devise
of the Six-Hundred Pounds. But Powell relied upon the Case in Mo. 31. A man
made a Will in this manner, I have made a Lease to J. S. paying but 10 s Rent;
this was held a good Lease by the Will: To which it was answered. That the Case
there was of little authority, for it did not appear how that matter came in
question, or in what Court or in what Action; and said only fuit tenus 3 Eliz.
And Judgment here was given for the Plaintiff.

Bowyer versus Milner.
IN a Formedon against several Tenants, one appeared and was Essoigned, and
then another appeared, and it was moved whether he could be Essoigned by reason
of the Statute of W. 1. c. 43. which seems to be that Parceners or Ioyntenants
should have but one Essoign, and that they should not fourch.

Cut' Contra. The Statute is to be understood of Essoigns after appearance, and
so is the Book of 28 Ed. 3. 18. it is said to have been the Law of the Times
for Tenants to fourch before appearance; and so is Co. 2. Inst. 250. Hob. 8,
and 46. The Case of Essoigns, if the Tenant voucheth two, one Essoign may be
cast for each of them singly, Vid. Stat. of Glouc. c. 6.

Anonymus.
IN an Action of Trespass de Uxore abducta cum bonis viri, to his damage of
10000 l

Upon Not Guilty pleaded, and a Trial at the Bar, the Return of the Jury was
Octab' Trin. and the Appearance Day was die Mercurij, at which day the Jury
appeared; but it being appointed for the keeping of a solemn Fast by the King's
Proclamation, the Jury was adjourned to the Day following, and then the Jury
and Parties being at the Bar, a Plea was offered by the Defendants Counsel puis
darrein continuance, that the Plaintiff was Excommunicated, and produced it
under the Seal of the Court, and begun their Plea thus, Ad hunc diem, viz. die
Jovis prox' post Octab' Trin', etc. So that the Plea came too late; for it
should have been pleaded die Mercurij; for though the Jury was adjourned to
Thursday, yet all Matters were entered as upon Wednesday. So this Plea did
appear upon the Record to come too late, and for that Cause it was disallowed
by the Court.

Note, This Plea was recited by Sergeant Trenchard in French, and then a
Challenge was offered to the Array; for that it was Returned by J. S. as
Sheriff of Buckinghamshire, who was made Sheriff in Michaelmass Term 1687. and
had continued in the Office for more than three Months, and not taken the
Oaths, and subscribed the Declaration required by the Act of 25 Car. 2. made
for preventing of dangers by Popish Recusants; and so his Office by that Act
was void to all intents and purposes before he made this Return of the Jury.

But this Challenge was disallowed by the Court; for he must be taken here as a
Sheriff de facto, and if such a Challenge should be allowed, no Trial could be
had, but should be put off, unless the party were ready to show that the
Sheriff had taken the Test.

In 1 Cro. 369. Hoar versus Brom, a Challenge was made, that the Sheriff which
Returned the Jury had a Writ of Discharge before he made the Return, and it was
disallowed by the Court as contrary to the Record.

Rashly versus Williams. Trin. 4 Jac. Rot. 730.
PLACITA apud Westm' coram Edwardo Herbert Mil', Covenant against an Attorney,
upon Articles of Agreement for quiet enjoyment of Lands.
and Sociis suis Justic' Domini Regis de Banco; De Termino Sanctae Trinitatis,
anno regni Domini nostri Jacobi Secundi, Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae
and Hiberniae Regis Fidei defensor', and. Quarto. Rot. 730.

Alias prout patet Termino Paschae ult' praeterit' Rot. DCXLVIII. continetur
sic Memorandum, quod secundo die Maij isto eodem Termino ven' hic in Cur'
Jonathan' Rashleigh Armig', per Carolum Dymock Attorn' suum, and exhibuit
Justic' Domini Regis hic quandam Billam suam versus Humfridum Williams Gen',
un' Attorn' Cur 'Dn^i Regis de Banco hic praesent' hic in Cur' in propria
persona sua de Placito conventionis fract' cujusquidem Billae tenor sequitur in
haec verba: Justic' Dom' Regis de Banco, Cornub. ss. Jonathan' Rashleigh Ar',
per Carolum Dymocke Attorn' suum, queritur de Humfrido Williams Gen', un'
Attorn' Cur' Domini Regis de Banco hic praesent' hic in Cur' in propria persona
sua de Placito, quod cum per quosdam Articulos Agreeament' fact' sexto die
Aprilis, anno Domini Millesimo sexcentesimo octogesimo quinto, apud Lanceston'
in Com' praedict', inter praedict' Humfridum Williams, per nomen Humfrid'
Williams de Burgo de Bodmyn' in Com' Cornub' Gen', Ex part of another.
pro and ex part cujusdam Thomae Manning de London' Gen', ex una part, and
eundem Jonathanum, per nomen Jonathani Rashleigh de Menabilly in Com' praedict'
Armig', ex altera part, fact' quor' quidem Articul' unam partem sigillo
praedict' Humfr' signat', idem Jonathan' hic in Cur' profert cujus dat' eisdem
die and anno testat' existit: Profert in Curia.
Imprimis concludat' and agreat' fuit inter parts praedict', Quod idem
Jonathan' Rashleigh pro Considerat' in Articulis praedict' postea express
quiet and pacifice haberet, teneret, occuparet, The Articles set forth.
possideret and gauderet Tenementum vocat' le Saltmarsh, and Marsh Park, cum
pertin' scituat', jacen' and existen' in paroch' de Tywardreth in Com'
praedict' (pro Termino unius anni integri) a Vicesimo quinto die Martij, tunc
ult' praeterit' and plenar' complend' and finiend' (except' e dimissione
praedict') cuidam Edwardo Knollis nuper tenen' praemissorum unum parvum clausum
parcell' praemissorum tunc arat' (Anglice, Tilled) usque and post tempus
messionis and asportationis grani abinde, per praedict' Edward' Knollys. Item
concludat' and agreat' fuit inter parts praedict', quod praedict' Jonathan'
Rashleigh solveret seu solvi causaret pro tenemento praedict' summam viginti
librarum legalis Anglicanae monetae, per quarterial' solutiones maxim usual'
in anno. Item concludat' and agreat' fuit inter parts praedict', quod
praedict' Jonathanus Rashleigh ad finem termini praedict' sursum redderet
tenementum praedict' been reparat' and in tam bona condition, quam idem
Jonathan' tunc inveniebat tenementum praedict', Entry of the Plaintiff.
prout per Articulos praedict' before apparet; Virtute quorum quidem
Articulorum idem Jonathan' postea, scilicet, nono die Aprilis, anno Domini
Millesimo sexcentesimo octogesimo quinto supradicto in tenementum praedict' cum
pertin', (except' praeexcept') intravit and fuit inde possessionat': Et idem
Jonathan' dicit, quod licet ipse a tempore confectionis Articulorum praedict',
The Plaintiff avers performance of all the Covenants.
usque finem termini predict', omnia and singula conventiones and agreamenta in
Articulis praedict' superius specificat', ex part ipsius Jonathan' performand'
and perimplend', been and fideliter performavit and perimplevit, secundum vim
formam and effectum Articulorum praedict' in facto idem Jonathan' dic', quod
praedict' Jonathan' post confectionem Articulorum, The Breach assigned.
scilicet, decimo quinto die Aprilis, anno Domini Millesimo sexcentesimo
octogesimo quinto supradicto intravit in tenementum praedict' (except'
praeexcept') per se and servos suos, videlicet Arthurum Harris, Johannem
Williams and Petrum Kittoe, and posuit averia sua, videlicet, equos, equas,
boves, vaccas, oves, porcos and bidentes suos in tenementum praedict' (except'
praeexcept') and herbam ibidem crescent' cum averiis ipsius Jonathan' praedict'
depast' fuer' conculcaver' and consumpser': Ac superinde praedict' Edwardus
Knollys pro intratione and depasturatione praedict' postea and ante finem
praedict' termini unius anni, scilicet, Termino Sanctae Trinitatis, The
Defendant (and his Servants) sued in an Action of Trespass in the Common Pleas.
anno regni Domini Regis nunc primo, in Cur' ipsius Domini Regis de Banco
(eadem Cur' apud Westm' in Com' Midd existen') implacitavit and prosecut' fuit
ipsum Jonathanum, and praedict' Arthurum Harris, Johannem Williams and Petrum
Kittoe, servos suos in placito Transgr' pro praedict' intratione and positione
averiorum suorum praedict' in tenementum praedict' (except' praeexcept') and
herbam praedict' ibidem crescent' cum averiis praedict' depascent'. Taliterque
in eadem Cur' postea super placito illo process. suit, quod per eandem Cur'
cons' suit, quod praedict' Edwardus, recuperet versus praedict' Jonathanum,
Arthurum, Johannem and Petrum viginti libr' pro dampnis, quae praedict'
Edwardus sustinuit occasion Transgr' illius, Damages recovered against them.
necnon septemdecim libr' quae praedict' Edwardo adjudicat' fuer' pro misis and
custagiis suis per ipsum circa sectam suam in ea part apposit', quae quidem
dampna in toto se attingebant ad triginta and septem libras; Et quod praedict'
Jonathan', Arthurus, Johannes and Petrus capiantur etc. prout per Record' and
Process. inde in eadem Cur' de Banco hic remanen' before liquet and apparet,
Quas quidem triginta and septem libr'; idem Jonathan' postea, scilicet,
Vicesimo die Januarii, And the Plaintiff compelled to pay them.
anno regni dicti Domini Regis nunc Secundo apud Lanceston praed', praedicto
Edwardo solvere and satisfacere, coactus and compulsus fuit, idemque Jonathan'
diversas denar' summas, videlicet, duodecim libr' in defensione Sectae
praedict', praedicto Humfrido solvit, erogavit and exposuit. Et sic idem
Jonathan' dic', Quod ipse non quiet and pacifice tenuit, habuit, Et sic non
quiet and pacifice tenuit.
possidit and gavisus fuit ten^tum praedict', secundum convention' praed',
praedicti Hum fridi, sed fuit sectat', disturbat' and molestat', and dampna
praedict' ex causa praedict', modo and forma praedict' recuperat' proinde
solvere coactus fuit, videlicet, apud Lanceston' praedict' in Com' praedict';
unde dic', quod deteriorat' est and dampnum habet ad valenc' sexaginta
librarum. Et inde produc' sectam, etc.

Et praedict' Humfridus in propria persona ven' and defend' Non infregit
Conventionem pleaded.

Note, This Plea is good after a Verdict; but it had been naught upon a
Demurrer.


vim and injur', etc. Et dicit, quod ipse non infregit Conventionem praedictam
modo and forma praedict', prout praed' Jonathan' superius versus eum queritur.
Et de hoc pon' se super Pr^iam. Et praedict' Jonathan' similiter etc. Ideo
Praecept' est Vic' quod Venire fac' hic die Mercurii prox' post tres Septimanas
Sanctae Trinitatis duodecim, etc. per quos, etc. Et qui nec, etc. Ad recogn',
etc. Quia tam'. etc.

Rashly versus Williams.
IN an Action of Covenant the Plaintiff declared upon certain Articles of
Agreement made between the said Williams (for and on behalf of Thomas Manning
of London, Gent.) of the one part, and the said Rashley of the other part;
whereby it appeared that it was agreed between the Parties, that the said
Rashley quiore and pacifice haberet, teneret, occuparet, possideret and
gauderet Tenement' vocat' Le Saltmarsh etc. for the term of one year, Except e
dimissione praedict' cuidam Edwardo Knollis nuper tenent' praemissorum unum
parvum clausum parcell' praemiss. And it was further agreed, that the said
Rashly should pay Twenty Pounds by Quarterly payments for the said year.

And the Plaintiff seis forth, that he entered into the Premises and put in his
Cattle, and that before the year was out the said Edward Knollis sued the said
Rashly in an Action of Trespass for entering into the Premises, and putting in
of his Cattle, etc. and in that Action he recovered Twenty pounds Damages
against him, and Seventeen pounds Costs, which he was forced to pay, and was
put to the Expense of Twelve pounds more in defense of the Suit, and so he did
not hold the Premises quietly, but was sued and disturbed, and compelled to
pay as aforesaid.

The Defendant pleaded, that he did not break his Covenant. And upon that Issue
was joined, and found for the Plaintiff.

It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that it did not appear that Knollis sued
upon any Title, which should have been set forth.

Levins for the Plaintiff Argued, That it was not necessary to set forth the
Title of Knollis, because this was a Covenant for the quiet enjoyment of the
possession; and for that cited Dyer 128. where the Covenant was, That he should
enjoy absque interruptione alicujus; and so is 1 Roll Abr. 430.

Again, This is a Collateral Agreement by a Stranger to the Land, and no Lease.
It Is no more than a Covenant by a Stranger, that he shall quietly enjoy the
Land, and that shall be construed strongest against him to extend to any
disturbance whatsoever.

And he urged further, that this Disturbance was by Edward Knollis, and he was
mentioned in the Articles; and so it seems a Covenant against a particular
person, and that goes to any disturbance, 1 Cro. 512.
whether upon Title or otherwise.

But it was Resolved by Powel and Ventris, (the Chief Justice being absent, and
Rokeby doubting) that the Declaration was insufficient, in regard it was not
set forth that Knollis had any Right; for the Articles did amount to a Lease,
though by a Stranger, for he acted in behalf of the Owner of the Land, and it
shall be taken he had an Authority to demise, and it appears they intended it a
Demise; for that part excepted is mentioned to be e dimissione praedict': But
if it were a Collateral Covenant by a Stranger, it would be hard to extend it
to a Tortious Entry. A Collateral Warranty given by a Stranger, extends only to
Titles precedent.

In the Case of Wotton and Hele in the 2 Sand. 177. it was set forth, that J.
S. entered Habens legale Titulum; and that was held naught after a Verdict,
because not expressly set forth to be an ancient Right. The Case cited in Dyer
seems to go upon the words, Absque interruptione alicujus. See for that Hob. in
Tesdale and Essex's Case, and as it is cited by Rolls Abr. the 1st part 430. and
Vaughan 118. Hayes and Bickerstaff. Vid. 3. Cro. 373, 436. Cro. Jac. 425. where
the Promise was to enjoy without the Interruption of any person, and yet held
that a Title ought to be set forth. This is no Covenant express against
Knollis, for he is only mentioned for the part excepted, and to have been
Tenant of the Premises; and so in the principal Case Judgment was stayed.

Bliss versus Frost.
London' ss.
Willielmus Frost nuper de London' praedict', Trover by an Assignee of
Commissioners of Bankrupts.
Feltmaker, attach' fuit ad respondend' Richardo Bliss de placito Transgr'
super Casum, etc. Et unde idem Richardus per Willielmum Air Attom' suum
Queritur quare cum quidam Josephus Fisher primo die Aprilis, The Bankrupt
possessed.
anno regni Domini Jacobi Secundi nuper Regis Angliae, etc. Tertio, apud
London' in Parochia Beatae Mariae de Arcubus in Warda de Cheap, possesionat'
suisset de quidusdam bonis and catallis, videlicet, de december Doliis, Vini
Helvici (Anglice vocat' Hogsheads of Claret) quinque Cadis, Vini Hispanici
(Anglice, Pipes of Canary, and uno Vase (Anglice Vllage) Vini Hispanici
(Anglice, Canary) ad valentiam Ducentarum and undecim librarum; ut de bonis and
catallis suis propr', and sic inde possessionat' existen' idem Josephus bona
and catalla praedict' postea apud London' praedict', in Parochia and Warda
praedict', extra manus and possessionem suas Casualit' perdidit and amisit;
Quae quidem bona and catalla postea, scilicet, Vicesimo die Aprilis, anno regni
dicti Domini nuper Regis Tertio supradicto, apud London' praedict', They came
to the hands of Defendant.
in Parochia and Warda praedict' ad manus and possession' ipsius Willielmi
Frost per Inventionem devener'; Cumque etiam praedict Josephus existen',
Subdit' natus hujus Regni Angl' praedicto Vicesimo die Aprilis, anno Tertio
supradicto, and per spatium Trium annorum and amplius antetunc elaps' and diu
postea apud London' praedict', The Bankrupt exercised the Trade of a Vintner.
in Parochia and Warda praedict', exercebat artem sive myster' Canponis
(Anglice, of a Vintner) and per totum idem tempus querebat victum and vivend'
facultat' suam (Anglice, did seek and endeavor to get his Living) per viam
emend' and vendend' in art sive myster' praedict' Canponis (Anglice, of a
Vintner) praedictusque Josephus artem sive myster' praedict' sic exercend' and
victum suum, and vivend' facultat' per viam emend' and vendend' in art sive
myster' praedict' Canponis (Anglice, And became Indebted to several persons.
of a Vintner) querend' adtunc and ibidem indebitat' devenit and adhuc
Indebitat' existit eidem Richardo and diversis al' personis Creditor' praedict'
Josephi, similit' existen' Subdit' nat' hujus Regni Angl', in diversis and
separalibus denar' summis legalis monet' Angl', in toto se attingen' ad summam
Mill librarum and amplius; Cumque etiam idem Josephus (praedict' seperal'
derrat' summis eidem Richardo and al' Creditoribus praedicti Josephi minime
solut' sive satisfact' existen') postea, scilicet, Vicesimo quinto die Aprilis,
anno Tertio supradicto, apud London' praedict' in Parochia and Warda praedict'
seipsum absentavit and recessit (Anglice, And went from his House.
did depart) a domo mansional' sua ea intention ad defraudaud' ipsum Richardum
and caeteros Creditor' ipsius Josephi de veris and justis debitis suis
praedict'; and idem Josephus eodem Vicesimo quinto die Aprilis, anno Tertio
supradicto, apud London' praedict', in Parochia and Warda praedict' manifest
devenit Decoctor (Anglice, a Bankrupt) infra veram Intentionem diversorum
Statutorum versus Decoctores edit' And became a Bankrupt.
and provis' Cumque etiam postea, scilicet, Vicesimo octavo die Aprilis, anno
Tertio supradicto, apud Westm' in Com' Midd', ad Petitionem praedict' Richardi,
tam pro seipso quam pro omnibus aliis Creditor' praedict' Josephi Praehonorab'
The Creditors Petition the Lord Chancellor.
Georgio Domino Jeffreys, Baroni de Wem, Domino Cancellar' Angl', apud Westm'
praedict' in Com' praedicto, in Scriptis secundum formam Statut' in hujusmodi
Casu edit' and provis' exhibit' and fact' pro remediis suis versus praefat'
Josephum existen' Decoctor' in hac part habend', eidem Richardo, and caeteris
Creditor' praedict' Josephi de separalibus diobus sicpraedict', ut supradict'
est minime solut' aut satisfact' existen' Quaedam Commissio dicti Domini nuper
Regis super eadem Statut' contra Decoctor' edit' and provis' sub magno Sigillo
ipsius Domini nuper Regis Angl' The Commission sued out.
sigillat' Et in Cur' Cancellar' dicti Domini nuper Regis de Recordo Irrotulat'
emanavit versus praefat' Josephum geren' dat' apud Westm' praedictam, praedicto
Vicesimo octavo die Aprilis, anno regni dicti Domini nuper Regis Tertio,
quibusdam Johanni Cressett Armig', Georgio Evans Armig', Johanni Cole, Roberto
Wilkinson, and Johanni Weaver gen', honest' and discret' person' per praefat'
Domin' Cancellar' Angl' Commissionar' nominat' and appunctuat' direct' (Quae
quidem Commissio adtunc and ibidem eisdem Johanni Cressett, Georgio Evans,
Johanni Cole, Roberto Wilkinson and Johanni Weaver, deliberat' fuit) Per quam
quidem Commissionem dictus Dom' nuper Rex, dedit plenam potestatem and
authoritat' praedict' Johanni Cressett, Georgio Evans, Johanni Cole, Roberto
Wilkinson and Johanni Weaver, quatuor vel tribus eorum, quorum praefat'
Johannem Cresset vel Georgium Evans, un' esse voluit juxta Statut' praedict',
non solum concernen' dict' Decoctor' Corpus ejus Terras, Tenementa, Libera and
Customar', Bona, Debita sua, and al' res quascunque, verum etiam concernen'
omnes eorum personas, quae per concelament' vel alit' offendissent seu
offenderent (Anglice, did or should offend) tangen' praemissa, vel aliquam
partem inde contra verum sensum and intentionem in Statut' praedict', seu
aliqua eorundem ad faciend', and exequend' omnes and singulas rem and res
quascunque tam pro and erga satisfactionem and solutionem dictorum Creditorum,
quam erga and pro omnibus aliis Inventionibus and proposit' secundum ordinem
and provisionem Statut' praedict'; ac idem Dominus nuper Rex per eandem
Commissionem voluit and in mandat' dedit dictis Commissionar' quatuor vel
tribus eorum, quorum praefat' Johannem Cressett vel Georgium Evans, un' esse
vouluit ad procedend' in executionem and complementum Commission' praedict',
secundum Statut' predict', cum omni diligentia and effect' prout special'
fiducia ejusdem Domini nuper Regis fuit in eos reposit', prout per eandem
Commission' (inter alia) before apparet Virtute cujus quidem Commission'
praefat' Johannes Cresset Georgius Evans Robertus Wilkinson and Johannes Weaver
quatuor Commissionar' praed' in Commissione praed' nominat' postea scilicet
praedicto vicesimo octavo die Aprilis Anno tertio supradicto apud London'
praedict' in Parochia and Warda praedict' convener' ad Commison' praed' in
debito modo exequend' Qui quidem Commissionar' ult' mentionat' sic convent'
adtunc and ibidem super debitam examinacon' Test' and al' sufficien' probacon'
super Sacrament' coram eisdem Commissionar' ult' mentionat' capt' invener' qd'
praed' Josephus conat' fuisset victum suum querere and adipisci in emend' and
vendend' in art sive mysterio Cauponis (Anglice, of a Vintner) per spacium
trium annorum and amplius insimul tunc ult' praeterit' ante dat' and
prosecution' Commission' ac indebitat' deven' praefat' Rich' and diversis al'
personis Creditor' praedict' Josephi in diversis and seperalibus denar' summis
attingen' ad summam mill librarum and amplius legalis monet' Angliae Et sic
seperalit' indebitat' existens ut supradict' est qd' ipse praed' Josephus ante
dat' and emanation' Commission' praed' devenisset decoctor ad omnes intention'
and proposit' The Commissioners find him a Bankrupt.
infra circuitum and veram intention' seperal' Statut' praed' in Commission'
praed' mentionat' sive eorum alicujus Cumque eciam paefat' Johannes Cresset
Georgius Evans Robertus Wilkinson and Johannes Weaver quatuor Commissionar'
praed' virtute Commission' ill' and vigore Statut' praed' pro meliori remedio
Creditorum praedict' post maturam deliberation' superinde capt' postea scilicet
decimo octavo die Marcii Anno tertio supradicto apud London' praedict' And make
Assignment to the Plaintiff.
in Parochia and Warda praedict' per quandam Indenturam suam assignation' int'
eosdem Commissionar' per nomen Johannis Cresset Armig' Georgii Evans Armig'
Rob' Wilkinson and Johannis Weaver Gent' ex una part and praedict' Rich' per
nomen Rich' Bliss de Parochia Sanct' Salvator' Southwark in Com' Surry
Mercatoris un' Creditorum Josephi Fisher de Parochia Sancti Olavi Southwark in
dic' Com' Surr' Cauponis ex altera part fact' cujus quidem Indentut' un'
partem sigillo eorundem Johannis Cresset Georgii Evans Rob' Wilkinson and
Johannis Weaver sigillat' idem Ricardus hic in Cur' profert cujus dat' est
eisdem die and anno ult' supradictis pro Consideratione in eadem Indentur'
specificat' praed' december Dolia un' Helv^^i quinque Cados Vini Hispanici and un'
Vas' (Anglice, Vllage) Vini Hispanici (int' alia) assignaver' habend' and
recipiend' eidem Rich' Executor' Administrator' and Assign' suis imperpet' in
fiducia pro beneficio ipsius Rich' and omni al Creditorum praefat' Josephi qui
antetunc petiissent aut' postea debito tempore peterent auxilium per
Commission' praed' and contribuer' erga custag' ejusdem Commission' secundum
direction' and limitation' Statut' praed' prout per Indentur' ill' before
apparet per quod and vigore Statut' praed' eadem december Dolia Vini Helv^^i
quinque Cadi and un' Vas' Vini Hispanici praedict' Rich' spectarent and
pertiner Unde praedict' Will' Frost adtunc and ibidem notitiam habuit praedict'
tamen Will' Frost sciens praed' december dolia Vini Helvoli quinque Cados and un'
Vas Vini Hispanici fuisse Bon' and Catalla praed' Rich' propr' and ad ipsum
Rich' spectare and pertinere sed machinans and fraudulentur intendens ipsum
Rich' de eisdem callide and subdole decipere and defraudare eadem december dolia
Vini Helv^^i and quinque Cados and un' Vas' Vini Hispanici (licet saepius
requisit' Then he lays a Conversion in the Defendant. Then he lays a General
Action of Trover for the same goods.
) eidem Rich' non deliberavit sed eadem adtunc and ibidem ad usum suum propr'
convertit and disposuit Cumque eciam idem Rich' postea scilicet tricesimo primo
die Maii anno tertio supradicto apud London' praed' in Parochia and Warda
predict' possessionat' fuisset de diversis al' bonis and catallis sequen'
videlicet de december al' Doliis Vini Helv^^i (Anglice vocat' Hogsheads of Claret)
quinque al' Cadis Vini Hispanici (Anglice, Pipes of Canary) and un' al' vase
(Anglice, Vllage) Vini Hispanici (Anglice, Canary) ad valentiam al' ducentarum
and undecim librarum ut de bonis and catallis suis propr' Et sic inde
possessionat' existens idem Rich' bona and calla illa extra manus and
possessionem suas casualit' perdidit and amisit Quae quidem bona and catalla
ult' mentionat' postea scilicet eodem tricesimo primo die Maii anno tertio
supradido apud London' praed' in Parochia and Warda praed' ad manus and
possession' praed' Will' Frost per inventionem devener' praed' tamen Will'
Frost sciens praed' december Dolia Vini Helvo^i quinque Cad' and un' Vas Vini
Hispanici ult' mentionat' fuisse bona and catalla praedict' Rich' propr' and ad
ipsum Rich' de jure spectare and pertinere ac machinans and fraudulent'
intendens ipsum Rich' de eisdem callide and subdole decipere and defraudare
eadem december Dolia Vini Helv^^i quinque Cados and un' Vas Vini Hispanici ult'
mentionat' (licet saepius requisit') eidem Rich' non deliberavit sed eadem
adtunc and ibidem in usum suum propr' convertit and disposuit Unde idem Rich'
dic' qd' deteriorat' est and dampnum habet ad valentiam ducentarnm and
quinquaginta librarum Et inde produc' Sectam, etc.

The Defendant Demurs.
Et praed' Will' per Zach' Blunt Attorn' suum ven' and defend' and injur'
quando, etc. Et dic' qd' Narratio praedict materiaque in eadem content' minus
sufficiens in lege existunt ad praedict' Rich' actionem suam praedict' versus
praefat' Will' habend' manutenend' Qd'que ipse ad narration' ill' necesse non
habet nec per legem terrae tenetur respondere and hoc parat' est verificare
Unde pro defectu sufficien' Narration' idem Will' pet' Judic' and qd' praedict'
Rich' ab action sua praed' habend' praecludatur, etc.

The Plaintiff joins in Demurrer.
Et praed' Rich' ex quo ipse sufficien' materiam in lege ad praedictum Rich'
actionem suam praed' versus ipsum Will' habend' manutenend' superius narrando
allequavit quam ipse parat' est verificare Quam quidem materiam praed' Will'
non dedic' nec ad eam aliqualit' respond. sed verificationem ill. admittere
omnino recusat pet. judicium and dampna sua occasion praemisso sibi
adjudicari, etc. Et quia Justic. hic se advisare volunt de and super praemissis
praedictis priusquam Judicium inde reddant dies dat* est partibus praedictis
hicusque in crastino Sanctae Trinitatis de audiend. inde judicio suo eo quoth.
iidem Justic. hic inde nondum, etc.

Bless versus Frost.
IN a Trover and Conversion brought by the Plaintiff as Assignee of
Commissioners of Bankrupts, amongst other things he declared that he was
possessed de uno Vase ( Anglice Vessel) Vini Hispanici, and it was objected
upon a Demurrer to the Declaration, that it was not said what the Vessel was
made of, and so no measure for the Damages, sed non allocatur, for it is
intended to be made of Wood, and is used for Casks of Wine.

Bynton versus Bobbett.
IN an Action of Covenant brought in this manner, (viz.) by Henry Baynton and
the Lady Anne his Wife, the Lady Elizabeth Wilmot and the Lady Mallet Wilmot,
against Robert Bobbet. The Plaintiffs declared, that whilst the Lady Anne was
sole by a certain Writing, bearing Date the 20th day of March in the year of
our Lord 1684. sealed by the said Robert and produced in Court; it was agreed
with the said Robert for and on the behalf of the said Ann, Elizabeth and
Mallett, Daughters and Coheirs of the Right Honorable John late Earl of
Rochester, for the passages of all Boats and other advantages of Navigation
upon the River made navigable by John Mallett Esquire deceased Grandfather of the
Right Honorable Elizabeth late Countess of Rochester, from the Bridge of
Bridgwater, to a certain place upon the River aforesaid, called Ham Mills (the
benefit of which River aforesaid was granted to the said Ann, Elizabeth and
Mallett by the Leters Patents of the Late King, bearing date by the last year
of his Reign, with power to chain up a Bridge made by the said John Mallett
near the place in the said River called Knapps Bridge, or any other place of
the River aforesaid, granted to the said Ladies as foresaid) with power also to
sue or implead in the name of the said Ladys any Person passing with Boats upon
the said River without the license of the said Robert first had and obtained,
he taking for every Boat that should pass below the said Knapp Bridge, one
shilling. To have and to hold the benefit of the Passage aforesaid to him, his
Executors and Assigns from the 25th of March next after the date of the said
Writing, for three years, yielding and paying for the same yearly during the
Term, to the said Ann, Elizabeth and Mallett Wilmot the Rent of 45 l at
Michaelmas and our Lady Day, by equal portions.

The Plaintiffs further say, That although he the said Robert had occupied and
enjoyed the Passage and Premises aforesaid, the said Robert did not pay to the
said Ann, Elizabeth and Mallett whilst the said Ann was sole, nor to the said
Henry, Ann, Elizabeth and Mallett, after the Marriage of the said Ann, or to
any of them, the said Rent of 45 l or any part thereof; and so the said Robert
did not perform his Covenant, but broke the same ad dampnum, etc.

The Defendant pleaded protestando, That there was no such Grant made by the
King, and protestando that the said River was not made Navigable by the said
John Mallett, Pro placito, That the said River from the said place called
Bridgewater-Bridge to the said place called Ham Mills, supposed and pretended
to have been made Navigable as aforesaid, is, and for time out of mind has
been an ancient and Navigable River, free and common for all the Kings Subjects
to pass with Boats. And further says, That the aforesaid Ann, Elizabeth and
Mallett Wilmott at the time of the making of the said Writing, or at any other
time had nothing of passage of Toll in the River aforesaid, whereof they could
make any Demise or Grant to the said Robert, per quod the said Robert could not
have, take or receive the advantage and profit aforesaid, according to the
purport of the said Writing, but was wholly deprived thereof during all the
time aforesaid, and hoc paratus est verficare, and so demands Judgment, Si
Actio.

To this the Plaintiffs demurred, for that the Plea was double, and that no
Traverse was to the enjoyment, which were the Causes specially assigned for
Demurrer.

Pollexfen Chief Justice, Powell and Rokeby held the Plea to be double.

Ventris, contra. For it is all but one matter, for if the River were free for
all the Kings Subjects to pass, then the Plaintiffs could have no Toll, or make
any obstruction thereupon, so that one matter depended upon the other, and in
such case a Plea shall not be said to be double. Calf and Nevill Poph. 186. In
a Scire facias against the Bail, the Defendant pleaded, That the Principal
tendered himself to Prison before the Scire facias, and died in Prison; either
of these matters would have served, and yet the Plea not held double. But all
the Court resolved that the Plea was insufficient to bar the Plaintiffs.

First, Because it was set forth in the Declaration, that the Defendant had
enjoyed the Passage and Profit granted, and then the Rent must be paid so long;
if an eviction be pleaded in bar to Rent it must be Rent grown due after the
eviction, 20 H. 6. 22. if a Disseissor lets, rendering Rent, and the Disseisee
enters after the Rent-day, yet an Action of Debt lies for the Rent accrued
before, therefore the Defendant should have traversed the enjoyment.

Again, This is not a Rent, for it is reserved out of a thing Incorporeal, and
an express Covenant to pay it. The Mayor and Commonalty of London against
Hatton, Sty. 357. upon a Lease of the Garblers Office, and Covenant was brought
for the Rent, and pleaded that it could not be let, but it does not appear by
the Book that Judgment was given, Vid. Newton and Weeks, Allens Rep. 79. One
reciting that he was seized of such Land, granted a Rent out of it, and
covenanted to pay the Rent, he could not plead to his Covenant that he had
nothing in the Land.

Judgment pro Quer'.

Bockenham versus Thacker.
ALIAS prout patet Termino Paschae ult' praeterit' A Special Indebitatus
Assumpsit against an Attorney.
Rotulo Sexcentesimo octagesimo continetur sic Memorandum quod Vicesimo octavo
die Maij isto eod' Termino venit hic in Cur' Hugo Bockenham per Robert' Snell
Attorn' suum and exhibuit Justic' Domini Regis hic quandam billam suam versus
Pet' Thacker sen' un' Attorn' Cur' Domini Regis de Banco hic praefentem hic in
Cur' in propria persona sua de placito Transgr' super Casum cujus quidem Billae
tenor sequitur in haec verba Justic' Domini Regis de Banco hic Norf. ss. Hugo
Bockenham per Robertum Snell Attorn' suum queritur de Petro Thacker generoso
uno Attorn' Cur' Domini Regis de Banco hic praesente hic in Cur' in propria
persona sua pro eo videlt quod cum quidam Thomas Seely indebitat' One J. S. was
indebted to the Plaintiff in a certain sum of Money not exceeding 12 l The
Defendant was indebted to the said J. S. in 12 l aunt eo circiter.

The Defendant, promises that if the Plaintiff would procure a Note under the
hand of J. S. for payment of the Money which he owed J. S. or any part thereof,
that then he would pay the Plaintiff.

The Plaintiff avers that he procured such Note.

And showed it to the Defendant.


fuisset eidem Hugoni in quadam pecuniae summa exceden' duodecim libras Cumque
etiam praedictus Petrus (ut ipse dixit) indebitat' fuisset praefat' Thomae
Seely in duodecim libris aut eo circit' praedictus Petrus quinto die Septembris
anno regni Domini Jacobi Secundi nuper Regis Angl' Tertio apud Hethersett in
Consideratione quod idem Hugo ad specialem instantiam and requisitionem
praedict' Petri procuraret ordinem praedict' Thomas Seely in scriptis sub manu
sua praefat' Petro pro solutione denarior' quos idem Petrus dicto Thomae debuit
aut alicujus partis earundem eidem Hugoni super se assumpsit and eid. Hugoni
adtunc and ibidem fidelit promisit quod ipse praedictus Petrus denar. illos vel
aliquam partem inde juxta hujusmodi ordinem been and fidelit. solvere and
contenrare vellet Et idem Hugo in facto dic. quoth. ipse permissioni and
assumptioni praedict. Petri praedict fidem ad hibens postea scilicet praedicto
quinto die Septembris anno tertio supradicto apud Hethersett praedictam
procuravit Ordinem praedicti Thome Seely in scriptis sub manu and nomine ipsius
Thomae Seely subscript. and praefat. Petro direct. dictusque Thomas perinde
requisivit ipsum Petrum super visum Ordinis sive not. illius ad solvend. eid.
Hugoni vel ejus ordini quinque libras and ad collocand. easdem ad comporum
ipsius Thome Seely idemque Hugo postea scilicet eisdem die and anno ibidem
ostendebat praefat. Petro ordinem and notam ill. and eum requisivit ad solvend'
And requested him to pay him the Money.
sibi dicto Hugoni easdem quinque libras praedictusque Petrus adtunc and ibidem
habuit visum Ordinis and notae ill' praedictus tamen Petrus promission' and
assumption' suas praedictas minime curans sed machinans and fraudulent'
intendens ipsum Hugon' in hac part callide and subdole decipere and defraudare
praedictas quinque libras seu aliquem denarium inde licet sepius requisit'
eidem Hugoni non solvit seu aliqualit' But he refused payment.
contentavit sed ill' ei hucusque solvere omnino recusavit and adhuc recusat
Cumque eciam praedictus Hugo postea scilicet praedicto quinto die Septembris
anno tercio supradict' Then he lays it another way.
apud Hethersett praed' procurasset Ordinem cujusdam Thomae Seely in scriptis
sub manu and nomine ipsius Thome Seely subscript' and praefat' Petro direct'
dictusque Thomas perinde requisivisset praedict' Petrum super visum ordinis
sive not' illius ad solvend' eidem Hugoni vel ejus ordinis quinque libras and
ad collocand' easdem ad compotum ipsius Thomae ipse praedictus Petrus in
consideratione inde postea scilicet vicesimo nono die Septembris anno tercio
supradicto apud Hethersett praed super se assumpsit and eidem Hugon' adtunc and
ibidem fidelit' promisit qd' ipse praedictus Petrus praed' quinque libras ult'
mentionat' eidem Hugon' cum inde postea requisit' esset been and fidelit'
solvere and contentare vellet praedictus tamen Petrus promission' and
assumption' suas praedictas ult' mentionat' minime curans sed machinans and
fraudulent' intendens ipsum Hugon' in hac part callide and subdole decipere
and defraudare praedictas quinque libras ult' mentionat' eidem Hugon' (licet
adhoc per ipsum Hugon') vicesimo die Octobris anno tertio supradicto and
saepius postea apud Hethersett praedict' requisit' fuisset non solvit seu
aliqualit' contentavit sed ill' ei hucusque solvere omnino recusavit and adhuc
recusat ad dampnum ipsius Hugonis december librarum Et inde petit remedium, etc.
Pleg' de prosequend' Johannes Do and Richardus Roe.

The Defendant Imparles.
Et praedictus Petrus in propria persona sua venit and defend' vim and injur'
quando, etc. Et petit licenc' inde interloquendi hicusque diem veneris pro^'
post crastinum Sanctae Trinitatis and habet, etc. Idem dies dat' est praefat'
Hugoni hic, etc. Et modo ad hunc diem scilicet diem Veneris prox' post
crastinum Sanctae Trinitatis venit tam praed' Hugo per Attorn' suum praedict'
quam praedictus Petrus in propia persona sua Et super hoc idem Hugopetit qd'
praedictus Pet' ad Billam suam praedict' respondeat, And Demurs to the
Declaration.
etc. Et praedictus Petrus ut prius defend' vim and injur' quando, etc. Et
dicit qd' narratio praed' modo and forma praedictis fact' ac materia in eadem
content' minus sufficiens in lege existunt ad praedict Hugon' action' suam
praed' versus ipsum Petrum Habend' manutenend' qd'que ipse ad narration' illam
modo and forma praedict' fact' necesse non habet nec per legem terrae tenetur
respondere and hoc parat' est verificare Unde pro defectum sufficien'
narration' in hac part idem Petrus petit Judicium Et qd' praedictus Hugo ab
action sua praed' versus ipsum Petrum habend' precludatur' etc.

Et praedictus Hugo ex quo ipse sufficien' The Defendant joins in Demurer.
materiam in lege ad action' suam praed' versus ipsum Petrum habend'
manutenend' superius declaravit quam ipse parat' est verificare quam quidem
materiam praedictus Petrus non dedicit nec ad eam aliqualit'* respondet sed
verification' illam admittere omnino recusat petit Judicium and dampna sua
occosione premiss. sibi adjudicari, etc. Et quia Justic' hic se advisare volunt
de and super materia in narratione praedict' specificat' priusquam judicium
inde reddant dies dat' est partibus praedictis hic usque diem martis prox' post
tres septiman' Sanct' Michael de audiend' inde Judicio suo quod iidem Justic'
hic inde nondum, etc.

Bockenham versus Thacker.
IN an Action upon the Case the Plaintiff declared, that J. S. was indebted in
a sum of Money to the Plaintiff not exceeding 12 l and that the Defendant (as he
the Defendant said) was indebted to J. S. in 12 l or there about.

That the Defendant in consideration, that the Plaintiff at his request would
procure an Order from J. S. in writing to the Defendant for payment of the Money
which the Defendant owed J. S. or any part thereof to the Plaintiff, he
promised to pay the Money according to such Order.

The Plaintiff avers, that he procured such Order from J. S for the Defendant
to pay him 5 l which he showed to the Defendant, and the Defendant refused to
pay, etc.

The Defendant demurs generally to the Declaration.

Levinz for the Defendant argued, that it was no sufficiently set forth, that
the Defendant was indebted to J. S. and if not, there was no consideration.

Cur' contra, for it must be intended that he was indebted, for it is set forth
that the Defendant said so, but if not, the procuring the Note at the
Defendants request by the Plaintiff was a sufficient. consideration.

It was Objected further, that the Plaintiff had not alleged that he procured
the Note at the request of the Defendant, as the agreement was, and for that 3
Leon. 91. was cited in consideration that he should repair such part of the
House at his request; it was held naught for not laying the repairing to be
done at request. Sed non allocatur, for it shall be intended to have been done
at request, and so is Bretton and Boltons Case, 3 Cro. 246. 2 Cro. 404.
Berisfords Case, and Poynters Case, 1 Cro. Sed Nota, All those Cases are after
Verdict; and so is the above cited Case See more of this Case afterward.

Termino Sancti Michaelis, Anno 1 W. and M. In Communi Banco.
Sergeant Trinder moved the Court to set aside a Verdict recovered in an Action
for the mesn Profits after a recovery in an Ejectment, showing that the
Defendant in the Ejectment had brought another Ejectment since and recovered,
so that the first recovery was disaffirmed, and therefore there ought to have
been no recovery for the mesn Profits; but the motion was denied by the whole
Court.

Leigh versus Ward.
DEbt upon a Bond, the Condition was to perform an Award, and the Defendant
pleaded that the Arbitrator made no Award.

The Plaintiff replied, that after the Bond entered into, and before the time
set in the Condition for making of the Award, scilicet tertio die Novembris,
anno, etc. per quoddam Scriptum suum arbitr' adtunc and ibidem fact', etc. and
so sets forth the Award, upon which the Defendant demurred, because no place
was mentioned where the Award was made.

Tremain for the Plaintiff said, that the adtunc and ibidem should refer to the
place mentioned in the Declaration where the Bond was made.

Cur' contra, The adtunc and ibidem cannot be referred to the place in the
Declaration, and there is no place mentioned in the Replication. Whereupon
Judgment was given for the Defendant.

Memorandum, Mr. Justice Eyres came to this Court at the desire of the Court of
Kings Bench, who were trying of a Cause at the Bar, to know the Opinion of the
Court of Common Pleas upon this Question, An Infant who was a party to the
Ejectment that was upon trial, had answered a Bill in Chancery by his Guardian,
whether that Answer could be read in Evidence against the Infant: And the
Opinion of the whole Court was, that it could not be read, for it is not reason
that what the Guardian swears in his Answer should affect the Infant.

Blake versus Clattie.
TRespass Quare clausum fregir and diversa onera equina of Gravel, had carried
away per quod viam suam amifit.

After Verdict it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the diversa onera
equina was uncertain, and then mentioned the loss of his Way, and had set forth
no Title to the Way, nor set forth any certainty of it.

It was said on the other side, that the Incertainty was aided by the Verdict,
and the other Matter about the Way was only laid in aggravation of Damages.

But the Court held the Exceptions material, and thought it would be very
inconvenient to permit such a Form of putting in of a Way to a Declaration in
Trespass.

Anonymus.
IN an Action of Debt for Rent, the Plaintiff declared in Michaelmass Term
last, and laid the Demise to be Anno primo Jacobi Secundi Regis.

The Defendant pleaded Nil hab' in Tenementis, and the Plaintiffs Attorney
delivered a Copy of the Issue where the Demise was laid Anno primo Regis nunc,
and so the Nisi prius Roll was at first; but it was observed that the
Plaintiffs Attorney had amended it, but gave no Notice thereof to the
Defendants Attorney, nor delivered him a new Copy of the Issue and so went to
Trial, which proceeded, the Nisi prius Roll being right, and a Verdict was
found for the Plaintiff.

And it was moved by Sergeant Rotheram, that there should be a New Trial
granted; for the Defendant was surprised to find the Record right, when they
had a wrong Copy of the Issue.

But it appearing to the Court, that the Defendant notwithstanding proceeded in
his Defense, and the Verdict was after a long Evidence, that the Court would
not set it aside, but ordered the Plaintiffs Attorney to attend for the undue
Practice in making of an Amendment in such manner.

Bailes versus Wenman.
IN an Ejectment upon a Special Verdict the Case appeared to be thus:

That Articles of Marriage were made between the eldest Son and Heir apparent
of the Defendant and Martha, one of the Daughters of one William Nailor,
whereby the Defendant was to settle the Lands in question upon the Lessor for
his Life, and after his decease upon Martha for her Ioynture, with a Proviso,
that the Lessor should make a Lease of the Premises to the Defendant for 99
years, if the Defendant and Susan his Wife should so long live, and that Susan
died before the Lease made to the Plaintiff. So the only Question was, Whether
the Lease for 99 years determined by the Death of said Susan?

The Court upon the first opening, without Argument, were all of Opinion, that
it did determine, and Ordered Judgment to be Entered for the Plaintiff. 5 Co. 9.
in Brudnell's Case, Daniel and Waddington, 2 Cro. 378. Vide Dyer 67. and 1
Inst. 225. a. Trupenny's Case. Vide Anderson 151. A Lease made to two for their
Lives, absque impetitione vasti durant' vitis of the Lessees, and held that
this Privilege would hold to the Survivor; for it is reasonable to give the
Privilege as large a Construction as the Interest.

Bokenham versus Thacker. Trin. 4 Jac. Secundi Rot. 1451.
THe Plaintiff declared, That whereas one Thomas Seely was Indebted to him in a
certain Sum of Money, amounting to above 12 l And whereas the Defendant (as he
said) was Indebted to the aforesaid Seely in 12 l or thereabout. The Defendant
in Consideration that the Plaintiff, at the special Instance and Request of the
Defendant, would procure an Order from the said Thomas Seely in Writing under
his Hand, directed to the Defendant for the payment of the Money which the
Defendant owed to the said Thomas Seely, or any part thereof.

The Defendant did promise to the Plaintiff, that he would pay the said Money,
or any part thereof, according to the said Order, and sets forth, That he
promissioni and assumptioni praedict' fidem adhibens, did procure an Order of
the aforesaid Seely in Writing, directed to the Defendant, Requesting him upon
sight of the Note, to pay to the Plaintiff or his Order, Five Pounds, and to
place it to the Account of the said Thomas Seely: And the Plaintiff showed him
the said Order at such a day and place, and Requested him to pay the said Five
pounds, and that he did not pay, etc.

And upon this Declaration the Defendant demurred: And by Levins for the
Defendant it was Argued,

First, That the Note is not alleged to be procured at the Request of the
Defendant, (3 Leon. 91. Merry and Jews) in Consideration that he would Repair
an House at the Defendants Request he promised to pay; and alleges, that he
Repaired; and it was held naught after Verdict for not saying, He Repaired at
Request.

Secondly, This is not for a Duty to the Plaintiff, but Collateral, and became
due upon a Special Promise; and therefore a Request ought to have been laid
with Time and Place.

But both the Exceptions were Overruled, and Judgment by the whole, Court was
given for the Plaintiff. For when it is said to be agreed, That if he did
procure at the Defendants Request a Note, there shall not be intended any
Request to be meant, other than what was included in the Agreement. Otherwise,
if the words had been to procure a Note when he should be Requested: But as
this Agreement is, no subsequent Request was intended. See for that the Case of
Bretton and Bolton in 1 Cro. 246. 1 Cro. Pointer's Case 194. and 2 Cro. 404.
Berisford and Woodroffe.

As to the second Point, If a Demand be necessary in this Case, the whole Court
were of Opinion, it was sufficiently laid, ut supra; (viz) That at such a Day
and Place he showed the Note, and Requested him to pay it; without saying,
adtunc and ibidem, Requested him to pay it; for all shall be intended done
together.

Levins cited Hill and Wade's Case in the 2 Cro. 523. as to the Request.

Sed Nota, In that Case the Promise was to pay it upon Request: But here the
Promise was not laid so in the Declaration; therefore I take it, no Request at
all was necessary.

Chamberlain versus Cook.
Suff. ss.
RObertus Cook nuper de Bury Sancti Edmundi in Com' praedict' Carryer attach'
fuit ad respondend' Johanni Chamberlain de placito Transgr' super Casum, An
Action upon the Case, upon the Custom of England, against a Common Carryer, for
losing of Goods delivered him to carry.
etc. Et unde idem Johannes per Thomam Folks Attorn' suum Queritur quod cum
praedictus Robertus tertio die Octobris anno regni domini Jacobi Secundi nuper
Regis Angl. Tertio and diu antea and continue postea abinde hucusque fuit and
adhuc existit Communis Portator (Anglice a Common Carryer) and per totum idem
tempus usus fuit and consuevit per seipsum and servien' suos cum Equis and
Plaustro (Anglice Wagon) ipsius Roberti Carriar' The Defenis a Common Carryer.
and portar' bona and catalla pro aliquibus personis hujusmodi carriacon' and
porta con requiren' pro rationabil' mercede and stipendio proinde solvend' ad
ab and inter Bury Sancti Edmundi praedict' and Civitat' London' juxta
agreament' and soluc^on' The Custom of England.
in ea part faciend' and habend' Cumque etiam secund' legem and consuetudinem
hujus regni Angliae omnes hujusmodi Communes portatores qui bona and catalla
aliquarum personarum hujusmodi carriation' and portation' sic ut praefertur
requiren' eis deliberat' existen' absque subtracc^one spoliatione and amissione
salvo ducere custodire and carriare debent and tenentur ita quod pro defectu
vel pro defalt' talis Communis portatoris vel fervien' suorum hujusmodi bona
and catalla eis sic ut praefertur portand' and carriand' deliberat' non
subtrahantur spolientur seu amittantur Cumque etiam praedictus Johannes
praedicto tertio die Octobris anno Tertio supradicto apud Bury Sancti Edmundi
praedict' The particulars of the Goods delivered to him.
possessionat' fuisset de bonis and catallis sequen' videlicet de duabus
argenteis Crateris (Anglice Salvers) una alba Pelvi (Anglice a Basin) quatuor
Candelabris argenteis una patina pro emunctoriis (Anglice a Snuffer-pan) un'
par' argenteorum emunctoriorum (Anglice a pair of Snuffers) sex culullis
(Anglice Tumblers) duobus poculis argenteis (vocat' Tea-pots) duabus seriebus
(Anglice Sets) argenteorum vascillorum (Anglice vocat' Casters) quinque
argenteis ignitabulis (Anglice Chaffing-dishes) tribus argenteis pixidibus pro
necotian' (Anglice Tobacco-boxes) tribus coralliis cum scapis argenteis
(Anglice Socket Corals) tribus poculis argenteis (vocat' Cans) quatuor poculis
morae Japoniae pictis (Anglice Iapand Pots) quatuor poculis argenteis undecim
salillis argenteis duabus laminis argenteis duobus discis argenteis (vocat'
Wants (aliis.)
Wants (alio) there being Pots and Candlesticks before.
Coffe Dishes) uno poculo argenteo (vocat' a Child's Pot) uno candelabro
argenteo (vocat' a Hand Candlestick) una argentea capula (Anglice a Ladle)
duobus cultris and furculis (Anglice Knives and Forks) undecim unciis argenti
format' Uncertain.
in diversas argenteas nugas (Anglice Silver Toys) duabus seriebus (Anglice
Sets) aurearum fibularum (Anglice Buttons) septem annulis lapideis (Anglice
Stone Rings) quatuor deargent' thecis pro candelis (Anglice vocat' Gilt
Sockets) duobus fixidibus pro pulvere ptarmico (Anglice Snush Boxes) quinque
par' fixularum metallinarum (Anglice Metled Buckles) duodecim fibulis septem
lapillis ornat' (Anglice seven Stoned Buttons) una serie Cyanorum and Granator'
(Anglice a Set of Turks and Garnets) sex par' Erearum fibularum sex par'
lapidearum fibularum (Anglice Stone Buttons) quatuor poculis pro potu Turcico
unice marginatis (Anglice vocat' Wants (aliis.)
Wants (aliis) ^here being Stoned Buttons before.

Wants aliar. Wants (aliis.)


single Tipped Coffee Dishes) duodecim longis and duodecim rotundis fibulis
lapideis (Anglice Stone Buttons) sex argenreis rutellis (Anglice Scoops) octo
par' fibular' (Anglice Buttons) una Theca argentea (vocat' a Springing^Case)
quatuor poculis morae Japoniae pictis duplicat' marginat' (Anglice vocat'
Iapand double Tipped Mugs) duobus poculis morae Japomae pictis Wants (Anglice
Iapand Mugs) cum pedibus unice marginat' un' par' Wants (aliis.) Wants (alior.)
parvorum Candelabrorum argenteorum septem poculis lapideis (vocat' Wants
(aliis) thrice. Wants (alio.) Wants (aliis.)
Fire-stone Mugs) duobus poculis pictis duplicat' marginat' sex parvis poculis
(vocat' Mugs) duobus magnis poculis (vocat' Mugs) duplicat' marginat' uno
poculo (vocat' a Mug) unice marginat' tribus pixidibus pro pecunia (Anglice
Money Bores) duobus poculis (vocat' Dram Cups) una pixide pro zibetho (Anglice
a Civit-Box) tresdecim cochlearibus argenteis undecim argenteis furculis
(Anglice Forks) and viginti and duabus peciis auri (vocat' Guineas) ad
valentiam Centum octoginta and septem librarum quindecim solidorum and quinque
denarior' ut de bonis and catallis suis propriis Et sic inde possessionat'
existen' idem Johannes postea scilicet eodem tertio die Octobris anno Tertio
supradicto apud Bury Sancti Edmundi praedict' bona and catalla illa praefat' To
be carried from Bury to London.
Roberto ad eadem a Bury S. Edmundi usque Civitatem London' praedict' salvo
ducend' custodiend' and carriand' tradidisset and deliberasset and praefat'
Roberto adtunc and ibidem prae manibus solvisset tres solidos legalis monet'
Angliae pro carriatione and portatione bonorum and catallorum illorum quae
quidem bona and catalla praedictus Robertus ad eadem a Bury Sancti Edmundi
praedict' usque praedict' Civitatem London' salvo ducend' custodiend' and
carriand' and praedictos tres solidos pro carriatione and portatione eorundem
adtunc and ibidem habuisset and recepisset praedictus tamen Robertus bona and
catalla praedicta post deliberationem inde eidem Roberto juxta consuetudinem
praedict' and officii sive oneris communis portator' praedict' exigent' non
carriavit usque Civitatem London' praedict' set idem Robertus bona and catalla
praedict' tam negligent' and improvide custodivit carriavit and disposuit quod
pro defect' bonae curae and custod' The Defendant lost them.
ipsius Roberti bona and catalla praedicta postea scilicet quarto die Octobris
anno Tertio supradicto apud Bury Sancti Edmundi praedict' amissa and deperdit'
fuerunt ad dampnum ipsius Johannis ducentarum librarum Et inde produc' sectam,
etc.

Et praed' Robertus per Johan' Craske Attorn' suum ven' and defend' vim and
injur' quando, Not Guilty pleaded.
etc. Et dic' quod ips' in nullo est culpabilis de praemissis superius ei
imposit' prout praedict' Johannes Chamberlain superius versus eum Queritur Et
de hoc pon' se super Patriam Et praedict Johannes Chamberlain similit' Ideo
Paecept' est Vic' quod Venire fac' hic a die Sanctae Trinitatis in tres
septimanas duodecim, etc. Per quos, etc. Et quia nec, etc. ad recogn', etc.
Quia tam, etc.

Chamberlain versus Cook.
IN an Action against a Common Carrier the Plaintiff declared, that he was
possessed of diverse Goods, (Viz.) Quatuor poculis argenteis, uno poculo
argenteo, duabus seriebus aurearum fibularum, (Anglice, Sets of Gold Buttons)
una serie Cyanorum and Granatorum, ( Anglice, a Set of Turks and Garnets) and
of diverse other things in the Declaration mentioned, and that he delivered them
to the Defendant to carry from Bury St. Edmonds to London, there to be safely
delivered to the Plaintiff, and that he paid the Defendant Three shillings for
the Carriage, and that the Defendant afterward through Negligence lost them.

The Defendant pleaded Not Guilty, and after Verdict for the Plaintiff it was
moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the Declaration was insufficient.

First, He declares of four Silver Pots, and then afterward of one Silver Pot,
and does not say uno alio poculo; and the like Omission there is in diverse
other parts of the Declaration: Sed non allocatur. For if for want of the word
alio or aliis the thing shall be taken to be the same, and so a Tautology, then
the Jury shall not be supposed to have given Damages for the things so laid;
and if in Construction they are to be taken as diverse Pots, then Damages are
well given for them.

Secondly, And that which was most insisted upon was the incertainty of a Set
of Buttons, and not said how many Turkey Stones and how many Garnets; as an
Action of Trover pro ducentis ovibus matricibus and agnis has been held naught,
for not setting forth how many Ewes and how many Lambs.

But the Court here held the Declaration well enough; for a Set is a sufficient
certainty, Vid. Kelw. 153. Devise of a Brewhouse, with Utensils be longing to
Brewing, and not said what they were. 2 Siderfin 174. Feke and Ward.
being intended to be well known to those that deal in such things, and in what
number the Precious Stones are placed in such Sets. The Case of Tailour and
Wells, Trin. 21 Car. 2. Rot. 302. B. R. Trover december parium velorum and
regularum (Anglice, Ten pair of Curtains and Vallence) where the Plaintiff had
Judgment, is as uncertain. In Sty. 419. Trover for Two pieces of Cloth. Vid.
Cro. 244. a Hatband set with Pearls and Diamonds, the Plaintiff had Judgment in
Trover. Sed Nota, In that Case no Exception was taken to the Incertainty. Mod.
Rep. 46. and Siderfin 445. Herbert and Lane. Vid. Sty. 370. an Action against
an Innkeeper for a Pack of Clothes and other Goods lost. Sic Nota, A Carrier's
Pack a sufficient Certainty.

Killigrew versus Sawyer.
IN an Action of Covenant the Plaintiff Declared, That he had and held the
Office of Vice-Chamberlain to the Queen Dowager, and that by Deed produced in
Court he agreed with the Defendant for the sale of the said Office, and that
the Defendant should hold it with the Consent of the Queen. But by the said
Writing the Defendant obliged himself, That the Plaintiff should have, receive
and enjoy (during the Life of the Plaintiff) diverse Pensions and Salaries
belonging to the said Office, and that the Defendant should receive no part of
them.

Then he sets forth, That the Defendant, at his Procurement, and with the
Approbation of the Queen, was admitted into the said Office, and enjoyed it,
and there were Six years Arrear of a certain Salary belonging to the said
Office, according to the Agreement aforesaid, due and payable to the Plaintiff,
which he the Plaintiff had not received, and the Defendant had not paid unto
him licet saepius requisitus, and so the Defendant had broke his Covenant.

The Defendant pleaded in Bar, That he had from the time of the Agreement
aforesaid, to the time of the Writ brought, permitted the Plaintiff to receive
yearly the Profits of the said Office, according to the said Agreement; absque
hoc, that the Defendant had or received any part of the Profits of the said
Office.

To this the Plaintiff Demurred, and showed for the Cause of Demurrer, that the
Defendant had traversed Matter not alleged.

And upon the first Argument Judgment was given for the Plaintiff by the whole
Court, that the Traverse was not good: And the Court held, that upon this
Agreement the Defendant was not bound to pay the Money grown due for the
Profits of the Office to the Plaintiff; but was only restrained from
intermedling with them, and to leave them to be received by the Plaintiff.

Bush versus Buckingham.
Bedf. ss.
Debt upon a Bond.
THOMAS Buckingam nuper de Shenly in Com' Bucks Yeoman, alias dict' Thomam
Buckingham de Houghton Reg' in Com' Bedford' Yeoman, sum' fuit ad respondend'
Mariae Bush Vid' de placito qd' reddat ei centum libras quas ei debet and
injuste detinet, etc. Et unde eadem Maria per Robertum Jenkin Attorn' suum dic'
qd' cum praedictus Though undecimo die Maii Anno Dom' milliesimo sexcentesimo
octogesimo sexto apud Luton' per quoddam scriptum suum obligatorium
concessisset se teneri praefat' Mariae in praedictis centum libris solvend'
eidem Mariae cum inde requisite fuisset praedictus tamen Thomas licet sepius
requisit' praedictam centum libras eidem Mariae nondum reddidit Set ill' ei
hucufque reddere contradixit and adhuc contradic' unde dic' qd' deteriorat' est
and dampnum habet ad valenc' viginti librarum Et inde produc' Sectam, Profert
in Curia scriptum.
etc. Et profert hic in Cur' scriptum praedictum qd' debitum praedictum in
forma praed' testatur cujus dat' est die and anno supradict, etc.

Defendant craves Oyer of the Condition.
Et praedictus Thomas per Humfrid' Tailor Attorn suum ven' and defend' vim and
injur' quando, etc. Et pet' audit' scripti praedicti and ei legitur, etc. pet'
eciam audit' conditionis ejusdem scripti and ei legitur in hec verba. The
Condition of this Obligation is such, that if the above bound Thomas Buckingham
and William Holk, or either of them, they or either of their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them do or shall well and truly pay or
cause to be paid unto the abovenamed Mary Bush, her Executors, Administrators
or Assigns, or any of them, the full and just sum of fifty two pounds and ten
shillings of good and lawful Many of England in or upon the twelfth day of
November next ensuing the date hereof without fraud or further delay, That then
this present Obligation to be void and no effect, or else to remain in full
force and virtue. And pleads the Statute of Usury.
Quibus lectis and audit' idem Thomas dic' qd' ipse de debito praedict virtute
scripti praedicti onerari non debet quia dic' qd' per quendam Actum in
Parliament' Dom' Caroli Secundi nuper Reg' Angliae inchoat' and tent' apud
Westm' in Com' Midd' vicesimo quinto die Aprilis Anno Regni sui duodecimo edit'
and provis. inter alia inactitat' fuit Authoritat' ejusdem Parliament' qd'
nulla persona sive personae quaecunque ab and post vicesimum nonum diem
Septembris Anno Dom' millesimo sexcentesimo and sexagesimo super aliquem
contractum ab and post praedictum vicesimum nonum diem Septembris caperet seu
caperent direct' vel indirect' pro accommodatione (Anglice, leave) aliquorum
denar' mercimoniorum merchandizarum vel al commoditat' quorumcunque ultra
valor' sex librarum pro differend' (Anglice, forbearance) centum librarum pro
Anno and sic secundumistam ratam pro majori vel minori summa vel pro longiori
seu breviori tempore Et qd' omnes obligationes (Anglice Bonds) contract' and
assuranc' quecunque post tempus praedict' fact' pro solutione alicujus
principal' summae pecun' accommodand' vel convent' performari super vel pro
aliqua usuria (Anglice Usury) super quas vel per quas reservat' vel capt' foret
ultra ratam sex librarum in centum libris ut praefertur penitus vacuae forent
prout per eundem Actum (int' al' The Usurious Contract.
) before liquet and praedictus Thomas dic' qd' post praedict' vicesimum nonum
diem Septembris in Actu praed' superius mentionat' and ante confection' scripti
obligat' praedict' scilicet praed' undecimo die Maii An' Dom' milesimo
sexcentesimo octogesimo sexto supradict' apud Luton praed' int' praefat' Mariam
and ipsum Though corrupt' and contra form' Statut' predict' agreat' and
concordat' fuit qd' praed' Maria accommodaret eidem Thomae quinquagint' libras
eidem Mariae praedict' duodecimo die Novembris in Condition praed' spec'
resolvend' qd'que praedict' Thomas pro lucro interesse differendo and dando
diem solutionis praedict' quinquaginta librarum per tempus illud solveret
praefat' Mariae summam duarum librarum and december solidorum Qd'que pro
securitat' solutionis tam praedictarum quinquata librarum de principal' debito
praed' quam praedict' duarum librarum and december solidorum ipse idem Thomas per'
scriptum suum obligatorium debit' legis forma conficiend' deveniret tent' and
obligat' The Bond to be given thereupon.
praefat' Mariae in centum libris cum condition eidem subscript' pro solutione
quinquaginta and duarum librarum and december solidorum super praedict' duodecimum
diem Novemb' tunc prox' sequen' and idem Thomas ulterius dic' qd' in
performatione corrupt' concordiae praedict' int' ipsam Mariam and praefat'
Thomam in forma praed' habit' and fact' praedict' Mariae postea scilicet
praedict' undecimo die Maii Anno Dom' The Money lent.
millesimo sexcentesimo octogesimo sexto supradicto apud Luton' praedict'
accommodavit eidem Thomae quinquaginta libras resolvend' eidem Mariae praedicto
duodecimo die Novembris tunc prox' sequen' Qd'que ipse idem Thomas pro secur'
solutione tam praedictarum quinquaginta librarum quam praedict' duar' librar'
and december solid' pro interesse and lucro differendo diem soluc^onis inde per
scriptum obligatorium praedictum hic in cur' prolat' And the Bond in question
given for it.
adtunc and ibidem devenit tent' and obligat' praefat' Mariae in praedict'
centum libris cum condition praedict' superius recitat' Qd'que praedict' Maria
tunc and ibidem accepit praedict' scriptum obligatorium pro solutione praedict'
quinquaginta duarum librarum and december solidorum secundum formam and effectum
corrupt' concordiae praedict' Et praedict' Thomas ulteriu dic' qd' praedicta
summa duarum librarum and december solidorum pro differend' and dand' diem
solutionis praedict' quinquaginta librarum pro tempore praedict' Exceeds six
per Cent.
sic ut praefertur excedit rat sex librarum pro centum libris pro uno anno per
quod scriptum obligatorium praedictum hic in Cur' prolat' vigore praedict'
Actus Parliamenti vacucum and nullius vigoris in lege existit and hoc parat'
est verificare unde pet' Judicium si ipse de debito praedict' virtute scripti
obligatorii praed' onerari debeat, etc.

The Plaintiff replies, that the Bond was made by a Scrivener in his absence,
who mistook the Condition, and Traverses the Corrupt Agreement.
Et praedict' Maria dic' qd' ipsa per aliqua praellegat' ab action sua
praedict' versus praedict' Thomam habend' praecludi non debet Quia dic' qd'
praedicto undecimo die Maii Anno Dom' millesimo sexcentesimo octogesimo sexto
supradicto apud Luton' praedict' ad requisitionem praedict' Thomae int' ipsos
Mariam and Thomam agreat' fuit in forma sequen' videlicet qd' eadem Maria
accommodaret dict' Thomae quinquaginta libras legalis Monet' Angliae ac de eo
haberet and reciperet pro interesse and dando diem solutionis inde fecundum
ratam quinque librarum pro centum libris pro uno anno and non amplius Qd' A
Scrivener made the Bond.
que quidem Thomas Cheyne de Luton praed' scriptor qui tunc in manibus suis
habuit quinquagint' libras de denar' ipsius Mariae illas dict' Thomae Buckingam
solveret and deliberaret ac prepararet and de praefat Thoma Buckingam and
praed' Willielmo How in condition nominat' caperet ad usum ipsius Mariae
legale scriptum Obligatorium cum Condition pro solutione praedictatum
quinquaginta librarum cum interesse secundum ratam quinque librarum pro centum
libris ut praefertur Et eadem Maria ulterius dic' qd' praedict' Thomas Cheyne
postea die and anno ult' specificat' apud Luton' praed' solvit and deliberavit
praedict' Paid the Money to the Defendant.
Thomae Buckingam praedict' quinquaginta libras ac adtunc and ibidem in
absencia and sine notitia ipsius Mariae praedict' scriptum Obligatorium in
placito praedicto superius spec' And took the Bond without the Plaintiffs
notice.
scripfit and de praedict' Thoma Buckingam and Willielmo cepit in condition
cujus praedict' summa quinquaginta and duarum librarum and december solidorum pro
quinqaagint' and un' libris and quinque solidis negligent' improvide and ex
errore praedicti scriptoris contra voluntatem and absque noticia ipsius Mariae
script' and insert' fuit absque hoc qd' int' ipsam Mariam and praefat' Traverse
of the Corrupt Agreement.
Thomam Buckingam corrupt contra formam Statut' praedict' agreat' seu
concordat' fuit modo and forma prout praed Tho. Buckingam superius placitando
allegavit Et hoc parat' est verificare unde pet' judic' and debitum suum
praedictum unacum dampnis suis occasion detentionis debiti illius sibi
adjudicari, etc.

Demurrer.
Et praedict' Tho. Buckingam dic' qd' placitum praedict' per praefat' Mariam
superius replicando placitat' materiaque in eodem content' minus sufficien' in
lege existunt ad ipsam Mariam action' suam praedict' inde verius eum habend'
manutenend' ad quod quidem placitum modo and forma praedict' superius placitat'
idem Thomas Buckingam necesse non habet nec per legem Terrae tenetur aliquo
modo respondere Et hoc parat' est verificare prout Cur, etc. Unde pro defectu
sufficien' replicationis in hac parce idem Thomas Buckingam (ut prius) pet'
judic' and qd' praedict' Maria ab action sua praed' inde versus eum habend'
praecludatur, etc.

Joynder.
Et prdict' Maria ex quo ipsa sufficien' materiam in lege in placito suo
praeict' superius replicando placitat' ad ipsam Mariam actionem suam praed'
versus praedict' Thomam Buckingam habend' manutenend' superius allegavit quam
ipsa parat' est verificare quam quidem materiam praedict' Thomas Buckingam non
dedic' nec ad eam aliqualit' respond' set verificationem ill' admittere omnino
recusat eadem Maria ut prius pet' judicium and debitum suum praed' unacum
dampnis suis occasion detentionis debiti illius sibi adjudicari, etc.

Bush versus Buckingam.
DEbt upon Bond in 100 l penalty.

The Defendant demands Oyer of the Condition, which was to pay the Plaintiff 52
l 10 s upon the 2d day of November, which was at the end of six months after
the end of the date of the Bond, and pleaded the Statute of 12 Car. 2. that
none should take above 6 l per Cent, for use of Money, and makes all Bonds and
Contracts for more use void, and shows that it was corruptly agreed between the
Plaintiff and Defendant, that the Plaintiff should lend to the Defendant upon
thee 11th of May 1686. fifty pounds, and that he was to pay the Plaintiff 2 l
10 s for the forbearance thereof upon the 12th of November next ensuing, and
for securing of the payment thereof, the Defendant should become bound in the
Obligation, upon which the Action was brought, and in performance of the said
corrupt Agreement the Plaintiff lent the Defendant the 50 l and he became bound
ut supra to the Plaintiff, and that the Plaintiff did receive the aforesaid
Bond, which became void by force of the said Statute, and so demands Judgment
of the Action.

The Plaintiff replies, That upon the 11th of May aforesaid, it was agreed,
that he should lend 50 l to the Defendant, and that the Defendant should pay
for the forbearance thereof according to the rate of 5 l per Cent. and no more,
and that J. S. a Scrivener had 50 l of the Plaintiffs in his hands, and it was
agreed between the Plaintiff and Defendant, that the said J. S. should pay the
50 l to the Defendant, and that the said Scrivener should take a lawful Bond
with Condition to pay the interest according to the rate of 5 l per Cent. and
that the said J. S. the Scrivener did pay to the Defendant the said 50 l and in
the absence, and without the notice of the Plaintiff, took the Bond ut supra,
ex errore praed' Scriptoris, contra voluntatem and absque notitia ipsius Quer'
2 l 10 s was incerted in the Condition ut supra, for six months forbearance
absque hoc, that it was corruptly agreed between the Plaintiff and Defendant,
as the Defendant by his Plea alleges.

To this Replication the Defendant demurred, and it was insisted upon, that
here it is expressly pleaded, that the Plaintiff accepted the said Bond, which
implies a consent to it; and though the Plaintiff says in the Replication, that
he had no notice at the time of the taking of the Bond, yet if there were
notice when it was accepted, that carries the Plaintiffs consent to the corrupt
Agreement. But the whole Court gave Judgment for the Plaintiff, and held it to
be the same Case with that of Nevison and Whitley, 3 Cro. 501. For though the
Plaintiff did know how it was when the Bond was accepted, as it must be
supposed in the Case of Nevison, That the Plaintiff had Notice how it was when
the Actton was brought, yet that does not make the Plaintiff party to the
corrupt Agreement; and the Plaintiff must use the Bond of necessity to recover
the Money, 2 Cro. 677. Buckly and Guilbank's Case.

Bracton versus Lister.
AN Action against an Administrator, and not shown in the Declaration that
Letters of Administration were committed to him.

And this was held by the Court incurable. For though they need not show by what
Authority they were committed, yet it is necessary to set forth, that
Administration was committed to charge him with the Action.

Otherwise of an Executor; It is not necessary to show he proved the Will,
because an Action lies against him before Probar.

Dawson versus the Sheriffs of London.
Midd' ss.
Case against a Sheriff for Returning of a Nulla bona upon a Special Utlawry,
and when the party had Goods.
JOHANNES Parsons nuper de London' Mil' and Basil' Firebras nuper de London'
Mil' nuper Vic' Civitat' London' Attach' fuer' ad respondend' Johanni Dawson de
placito Transgr' super Casum, etc. Et unde idem Johannes Dawson per Carolum
Blood Attorn' suum queritur quod cum quidam Radulphus Davis nuper de London'
Vintner tertio decimo die Junii anno regni Domini Jacobi secundi nuper Regis
Angl', J.S. indebted to the Plaintiff.
etc. Tertio apud London' in Paroch' Beatae Mariae de Arcubus in Warda de
Cheap indebitat' fuisset eidem Johanni Dawson in vigint' and quinque libris
legalis monet' Angl' pro servitia lapulat' and illupulat' (Anglice Beer and
Ale) per praedict' For Goods sold.
Radulph' de eod' Johanne Dawson ante tempus illud habit' and recept' ac sic
inde indebitat' existen' praedict' Radulph' in cons. inde super se assumpsit
and eidam Johanni Dawson adtunc and ibidem fidelit' promisit quod ipse
praedict' Radulph' praedict' vigint' and quinque libras praefat' Johanni Dawson
cum inde postea requisit' esset been and fidelit' solvere and contentare vellet
Cumque etiam postea scilicet tertio decimo die Junii anno tertio supradicto
apud London' praedict' in paroch' and Warda praedict' computasset cum praefat'
And also upon an Account stated.
Johanne Dawson de diversis denar' summis eidem Johanni Dawson per praefat'
Radulph' tunc debit' pro diversis al' servitia lupulat' and illupulat' (Anglice
Beer and Ale) per ipsum Radulph' de eodem Johannes Dawson ante tempus illud
empt' and habit' and super compot' illo praedict' Radulph' invent' fuit in
arrerag' erga eundem Johannem Dawson in al' vigint' and quinque libris
consimilis legalis monet' Angl' and sic inde in arrerag' existen' ipse idem
Radulphus in cons. inde super se assumpsit praefatoque Johan' Dawson adtunc and
ibidem fidelit' promisit quod ipse idem Radulph' praedict' vigint' and quinque
libras eidem Johanni Dawson cum inde postea requisit' esset been and fidelit'
solvere and contentare vellet praedict' tamen Rad' seperal' promission' and
assumption' suas praedict' in forma praedict' fact' minime curans sed machinans
and fraudulent' intendens eundem Johannem Dawson de praedict' seperalibus
denar' summis (in toto se attingen' ad quinquagint libr') in hac part callide
and subdole decipere and defraudare praedict' quinquagint' libr' seu aliquam
inde denar' eidem Johanni Dawson juxta promission' and assumption' suas'
praedict' nondum solvit seu aliqualit' pro eisdem contentavit licet ad hoc
faciend' praedict' Radulphus postea scilicet quarto decimo die Junij anno
tertio supradicto apud London' praed. in parochia and Warda praedictis per
praedict' J. S. did not pay the Money^.
Johannem Dawson requisit' fuisset set ill' ei solvere omnino recusavit ad
dampn' ipsius Johan' Dawson quadragint' librarum Cumque idem Johannes Dawson
pro obtentione dampnorum suorum per ipm^ occ^one non performation' promission'
and assumpsion' praedict' sustentat' in Cur' dicti nuper Regis Jacobi Secundi
de Banco hic scilicet apud Westm' The Plaintiff sues out an Original.
per breve Original' ipsius nuper Regis extra Cur' Cancellar' ejusdem nuper
Regis apud Westm' praedict' emanat' and retornabile and retornat' coram Justic'
ejusdem nuper Regis de Banco hic Implacitasset praed' Radulph' in placito
Transgr' super Casum pro non performation' promission' and assumption'
praedict' Idemque Radulph' Upon an Assumpsit.
pro eo quod non venit in eadem Cur' dicti nuper Regis hic praefat' Johanni
Dawson inde respons. secundum legem and cons' hujus Regni posit' fuisset in
exigendo utlagand' in London' praedict' and ea occasion postmodum scilicet'
die Lun' And is thereupon Outlawed.
Vicesimo tertio die Aprilis anno regni dicti nuper Regis Jacobi Secundi, etc.
Quarte Utlagat' fuit in London' ad sectam praefat' Johan' Dawson de praed'
placito prout per Record' inde in Cur' hic remanen' before liquet and apparet
Cumque etiam idem Johannes Dawson pro citiori expedition' sectae suae praedict'
habend' postea scilicet quarto die Julii Termino Sanctae Trinitat' The
Plaintiff sued out a Special Writ of Outlawry thereupon.
anno regni dicti nuper Regis Quarto prosecut' fuit extra eandem Cur' dicti
nuper Regis de Banco hic scilicet apud Westm' praedict' quoddam breve dicti
nuper Regis de Capias utlagat' super utlagar' praedict' tunc Vic' Civitat'
London' praedict' direct' per quod quidem breve idem nuper Rexeisdem tunc Vic'
Praecepit quod non omitterent propt' aliquam libertatem Civitat' London'
praedict' quin per Sacr' proborum and legalium hominum de balliva sua diligent'
inquir' quae bona and catalla terr' and tenementa praed' Radulphus habuit in
balliva sua praedict' Vicesimo tertio die Aprilis anno regni dicti nuper Regis
Quarto supradicto vel unquam postea quo die ut praefertur idem Radulphus
utlagat' fuit and ill' per eorum Sacr' extend' and appretiar' fac' juxta verum
valorem eorundem Ac ea quae per inquific' ill' inven' in manus ejusdem nuper
Regis caper' and salvo custod' facerent Ita quod de vero valor and exit'
eorundem eidem nuper Regi respond' Et ill' sic extent' and appretiat' quod inde
fac' Scire fac' Justic' ipsius nuper Regis hic scilicet apud Westm' praedict' a
die Sancti Michaelis in tres Septimanas tunc pcox' sequen' distinct and aperte
sub figillis suis and sigillis eotum per quorum Sacr' extent' and
appretiationem ill' fac' Ac pro eo^ quod idem Radulphus utlagat' latitat and
discur' in Civitat' London' praedict' in contempt' ipsius nuper Regis and
Coronae suae praejudicium Idem nuper Rex eisdem tunc Vic' praecepit quod
praedict' Radulph' ubicunque in balliva sua tam infra libertat' quam extra
invenire continger' caper' and eum salvo custod' Ita quod haberent corpus ejus
coram Justic' dicti nuper Regis de Banco praedict' hic apud Westm' praedict' ad
praefat' termin' ad fac' and rec' quod eadem Cur' de eo cons' in ea part and
quod haberent tunc hic breve illud quod quidem breve idem Johan' Dawson postea
and ante praedict' The Writ delivered to the Defendants.
tres Septimanas Sancti Michaelis scilicet sexto die Julii anno quarto
supradicto deliberavit praefat' Johanni Parsons and Basil Firebras tunc Vic'
Civitat' London' praedict' existen' in forma Juris exequend' Ac licet praedict'
Radulphus die Utlagariae praed' ac tempore deliberationis praed' brevis eisdem
Vic' (ut praefertur exequend' J.S. was possessed of diverse Goods.
) and postea diversa habuit bona and catalla ad valenc' quadragint' librar' and
amplius in balliva ejusdem Vic' scilicet apud London' praed' in paroch' Beatae
Mariae de Arcubus in Warda de Cheap quae iidem Vicecom' extend' appretiar and
in manus dicti nuper Regis Jacobi Secundi coeper' and seisire potuer' praedict'
tamen Johannes Parsons and Basil Firebras Vic' Civitat' praed' ut praefertur
existen' Officia sua praedict' in vera and justa executione praedict' brevis
dicti nuper Regis minime curan' sed machinan' and fraudulenter intenden' non
solum ipsum nuper Regem de eo quod ad ipsum pertinet occasion Utlagar' praed'
defraudere ac ipsum nuper Regem and Cur' suam hic illudere Verum etiam ipsum
Johannem Dawson ab assecutione and recuperatione dampnorum suorum praed'
retardare aliqua bona seu catalla terras seu tenementa praed' The Defendants
refuse to seize the Goods, but Return a Nulla bona.
Radulph' in balliva sua extend' appretiar' vel in manus dicti nuper Regis
capiend' minime fecerunt set hoc facere recusaver' and penitus neglexer' and ad
praedict' tres Septimanas Sancti Michaelis Anno regni dicti nuper Regis Jacobi
Secundi Quarto supradicto Justic' dicti nuper Regis de Banco hic scilicet apud
Westm' praed falso deceptive and fraudulenter retorn' quod idem Radulphus nulla
habuit bona seu catalla terras seu tenementa nec die utlagariae praed' seu
unquam postea aliqua habuisset in balliva sua quae extendi appretiari seu in
manus dicti nuper Regis capere potuer' prout eis per breve praedict' Praecept'
fuit in dicti nuper Regis contempt' Ac in Cur' hic illusionem ac praedict'
sectae ipsius Johannis Dawson dilationem and retardationem manifest' ad dampnum
ipsius Johannis Dawson quinquagint' librat' Et inde producit sectam etc.

Et praedict' Johannes Parsons and Basil Firebrace per Johannem Haslewood
Attorn' suum ven' and defend' vim and injur' quando, The Defendants plead, That
a Prerogative Writ came out of the Exchequer, whereupon they were seized.
etc. Et iidem nuper Vic' dicunt quod praedict' Johannes Dawson' action' suam
praedict' versus eos habere non debet quia dicunt quod antequam per Sacr'
proborum and legalium homin' de balliva sua inqui fiver' quae bona and catalla
terr' and tenementa praedict' Radulph' habuit in balliva sua ut ill' per eorum
Sacr' extend' and appretiat' facerent juxta verum valorem eorundem prout
praedict' breve de Capias de Utlagat' super Utlagar' praedict' in se exigebat
and requirebat scilicet Vicesimo tertio die Julii anno regni Jacobi Secundi
nuper Regis Angl' etc. Quarto deliberat' fuit eisdem nuper Vic' Quoddam breve
Praerogative e Cur' The Prerogative Writ sued out.
Scaccarii dicti nuper Regis apud Westm' scilicet quarto die Julii anno regni
dicti nuper Regis Quarto emanat' eisdem nuper Vic' direct' in forma juris
exequend' per quod quidem breve Praecept' fuit eisdem nuper Vic' quod de bonis
and catallis terris and tenementis praefat' Radulphi Davis in balliva ejusdem
nuper Vic' quoddam debitum quadragint' librar' fieri and levari facerent quod
capt' and seisit' fuit in manus dicti nuper Regis per Thomam Rawlinson Mil' and
Thomam Foul Mil' nuper Vic' Midd' vicesimo secundo die Januarii anno regni
dicti nuper Regis secundo Quodque per Judicium Baron' dicti Scaccarii dict'
nuper Regis apud Westm' postea reddit' recuperat' fuit per dict' nuper Regem
versus praefat' Radulph' Davis Ita quod denar' ill' cum sic levassent iidem
nuper Vic' scilicet Johannes Parsons and Basil' Firebrace haberent coram tunc
Baron' de Scaccario apud Westm' praedict' a die Sancti Michaelis in tres
Septiman' anno regni dicti nuper Regis Quarto dict' Cur' ejusdem nuper Regis
tunc ibidem ad usum ipsius nuper Regis solvend' Virtute cujus quidem brevis
Praerogativi praed' The Sheriffs thereupon seized the Goods.
iidem Vic' scilicet Johannes Parsons and Basil' Birebrace seisire fecerunt
omnia bona and catalla praedict' Radulphi Davis in balliva ejusdem nuper Vic'
prout breve Praerogativ' in se exigebat and requirebat Quae quidem bona and
catalla per appretiator' per eosdem nuper Vic' scilicet Johannem Parsons and
Basil' Firebrace nominat' And Appraised them.
apprecr' fue' ad viginti and septem libras quinque solidos and novem denar'
quos quidem viginti and septem libras quinque solidos and novem denar' iidem
nuper Vic' scilicet Johannes Parsons and Basil' Firebrace habuer' coram Baron'
de Scaccario dicti nupar Regis apud Westm' praedict' ad diem and locum in brevi
Praerogativo praedict' content' dict' Cur' ejusdem nuper Regis tunc ibidem ad
usum ipsius nuper Regis solvend' prout per breve Praerogativ' praedict' eis
praecept' fuit Et praedict' nuper Vic' scilicet Johannes Parsons and Basil'
Nulla alia bona.
Firebrace ulterius dicunt quod praedict' Radulphus null' aliqua alia sive
plura bona and catalla terr' aut tenementa die Utlagar' praedict' seu unquam
postea habuisset in balliva sua quae extendi appretiar' seu in manus dicti
nuper Regis cap' potuer' praeterquam bona and catalla praedict' ut praefertur
seisit' virtute brevis Praerogativi praed' Et hoc parat' sunt verificare Et
pet' Judicium si praed' Johannes Dawson action' suam praedictam inde versus eos
habere debeat, etc.

Demurrer.
Et praedict' Johannes Dawson' dicit quod praed' placitum praedict' Johannis
Parsons Mil' and Basil' Firebrace Mil' superius in barram placitat' ac mteria
in eodem content' minus sufficien' in lege existunt ad ipsum Johannem Dawson ab
action sua praedict' versus praefat' Johannem Parsons Mil' and Basil'
Firebrace Mil' habend' praecludend' quodque ipse ad placitum illud modo and
forma praedict' placitat' necesse non habet nec per legem terrae tenetur
respondere Et hoc parat' est verificare Unde pro defect' sufficien' Respons'
praedicti Johannis Parsons and Basil' Firebrace Mil' in hac part placitat'
Idem Johannes Dawson pet' Judicium and dampna sua occasion Transgr' illius
sibi adjudicari, etc.

Joynder.
Et praedict' Johannes Parsons and Basil' Firebrace ex quo ipsi sufficien'
materiam in placito suo praedicto ad praedict' Johannem Dawson ab action sua
praedict' versus eos habend' praecludend' superius allegaver' quam ipsi parat'
sunt verificare quam quidem materiam praedict' Johannes Dawson non dedicit nec
ad eam aliqualiter respond' sed verificationem illam admittere omnino recusat
iidem Johannes Parsons and Basil' Firebrace pet' Judic' and quod praed'
Johannes Dawson ab action sua praedict' versus eos habend' praecludatur etc.

Et quia Justic' hic se advisare volunt de and super praemissis priusquam
Judicium inde reddant dies dat' est partibus praedict' hicusque a die Sancti
Michaelis in tres Septimanas de audiend' inde Judicio suo eo quod iidem Justic'
hic inde nondum, etc.

Dawson versus The Sheriffs of London.
IN an Action upon the Case against Sir John Parsons and Sir Basil Firebrace,
Sheriffs of London.

The Plaintiff Declared, That whereas one Ralph Davis was Indebted to him in 25
l and to recover it he brought an Original Writ, Returnable in the Common
Pleas; and for that the said Davis did not appear, he prosecuted him to an
Outlawry in London. And the said Davis was Outlawed, and thereupon the
Plaintiff took out a Capias Utlagatum in Trinity Term, 4 Jacobi nuper Regis,
directed to the Defendants, then Sheriffs of London; by which Writ they were
commanded to enquire what Goods and Chattels, Lands and Tenements the said
Davis had at the time of the Outlawry, or at any time since, and to Extend and
Apprize the same, and to Return such Extent in tres Septimanas sci' Michael',
and that they should take the said Davis, etc. Which Writ was delivered to the
Defendants, then Sheriffs of London: And although the said Davis had at the time
of the Outlawry, and after, diverse Goods and Chattels to the value of 40 l and
more, within the Bailywick of the said Sheriffs, which they might have taken
apprized and extended; yet not regarding the Duty of their Office, non solum
ipsum Regem de eo quod ad ipsum pertinet occasion Utlagariae praedict'
defraudare verum etiam ipsum Johannem Dawson ab assecutione and recuperatione
debit' praedict' retardare, they did not take, seize or extend the said Goods,
but neglected and refused to do it; and at the Day of the Return of the Writ,
falsely, deceitfully and fraudulently Returned, that the said Davis had no Goods
and Chattels, Lands or Tenements at the time of the Outlawry, or ever after
within their Bailywick, in Dom Regis contemptum Curiae hic illusionem and in
Sectae ipsius Quer' dilationem and retardationem ad damnum Quadraginta^
Librarum.

To this the Defendant pleaded, That before they made any Enquiry of the Goods,
etc. of the said Davis, (viz.) the 23d of July, Anno regni nuper Regis Jacobi
Secundi quarto, a Prerogative Writ was issued out of the Exchequer to them the
said Sheriffs directed, whereby they were commanded to levy a certain Debt of
40 l of the Goods and Chattels, Lands and Tenements of the said Davis, which
was taken and seized into the hands of the said late King by Rawlinson and
Foul, late Sheriffs of Middlesex, and which was recovered by the said late
King in the Court of Exchequer, against the said Davis, etc. by virtue of which
Writ they seized all the Goods of the said Davis in their Bailywick, which were
apprized at 27 l which they Returned into the Exchequer, as the Writ required;
and the said Davis had no other Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements within
their Bailywick at the time of the Outlawry, or ever after, etc.

To this the Plaintiff Demurred, and the Court held the Plea insufficient; for
they set forth, that the Predecessor Sheriffs had seized and taken the Debt
into the Kings hands, so that Execution seems to be had before the Defendants
were Sheriffs.

But Judgment was given against the Plaintiff; for the Court held that the
Action would not lie for the party who has an Outlawry, that because the
Sheriff upon the Cap' utlagatum neglects to extend or seize the Goods and Lands
of the Outlawed person, for that is the Kings loss: And though it was pretended,
that the Sheriff extending an seizing would be a means to enforce the Defendant
to appear to the Plaintiffs Action, the Court said that it was so remote, as
not to be considered as a ground to support an Action; but if it had been
shown, that the Sheriffs might have taken his Body, and had neglected to do it,
there might have been more reason to support this Action. So Judgment was
given, quod Querens nil capiat per breve.

Sir Thomas Gower's Case.
HE had upon a Commission made an Attorney, in order to suffer a Recovery this
Term, which was done the last Assizes at York.

And the Court was now moved in behalf of the Heir in Tail to stop the passing
of the Common Recovery; and several Affidavits were produced to satisfy the
Court, that Sir Thomas Gower (since the said Assizes) died in Ireland, and the
Court being satisfied of the truth thereof, did stay the passing of the
Recovery; and they said, if it should pass, it would be Erroneous.

Bealy versus Sampson.
Lincoln' ss.
Trespass for Impounding of his Cattle, quousque finem fecit of 10 l
JOHANNES Sampson' nuper de Mawvis Enderby in Com' praedict' Yeoman attach' fuit
ad respondend' Willielmo Bealy de placito quare ipse simulcum Georgio Francis
nuper de Stamton' in Com' praedict' Labourer, Vi and armis averia ipsius
Willielmi pretii quadraginta librarum apud Halton cum Beckeringe nuper invent'
cepit and imparcavit and ea ibidem sic imparcat' quousque idem Willielmus finem
undecim librarum pro deliberatione eorundem inde habend' cum praedict' Johanne
and Georgio fecisset detinuit and alia Enormia ei intulit ad grave dampnum
ipsius Willielmi Et contra pacem domini Regis nunc, etc. Et unde idem
Willielmus per Johannem Fancourt Attorn' suum queritur quod praedict' Johannes
simulcum, etc. primo die Februar' anno regni domini Regis nunc, etc. tertio vi
armis, etc. averia (viz.) quatuor boves and quatuor vaccas ipsius Willielmi
pretii, etc. apud Halton cum Beckeringe praedict' nuper invent' cepit and
imparcavit and ea ibidem sic imparcat' quousque idem Willielmus finem undecim
librar' pro deliberatione eorundem inde habend' cum praed' Johanne and Georgio
fecisset detinuit Et alia Enormia, etc. ad grave dampnum, etc. Et contra pacem,
etc. Unde dic' quod deteriorat' est and dampnum habet ad valenc' quadraginta
librar' and inde produc' sectam, etc.

Et praedict' Johannes Sampson per Stephan' Malton Attorn' suum ven' and
defend' vim and injur' quando, The Defendant pleads a seizure by the Sheriff,
by virtue of a Fieri facias. Non culp' to part.
etc. Et quoad Venire vi and armis seu quicquid quod est contra pacem dicti
dn^i Regis nunc dic' quod ipse non est inde culpabilis prout praedict'
Willielmus superius versus eum queritur Et de hoc pon' se super patriam Et
praedict' Williel' similit' Et quoad resid' Transgr' praedict' superius fieri
supposit' idem Johannes dic' quod praedict' Willielmus actionem suam praedict'
inde versus eum habere non debet quia dic' quod ante praedict' tempus quo
Transgr' praed' Fieri facias issued out of the Court of Common Pleas.
superius fieri supponitur scilicet quintodecimo die Junii anno regni dicti
domini Regis nunc tertio emanavit extra Cur' dicti domini Regis de Banco hic
scilicet apud Westm' quoddam breve dicti domini Regis nunc de Fieri fac' versus
praedict' Willielm 'ad sectam ipsius Johannis tunc Vic' Com' Lincoln' direct'
per quod quidem breve dictus dom' Rex nunc praefat' tunc Vic' Com' Lincoln'
praecepit quod de terris and catallis praedict' Willielmi in balliva ejusdem
Vic' Fieri fac' tam quoddam debitum december librar' quod praedict' Johannes
Sampson in Cur' dicti domini Regis coram Justic' ejusdem domini Regis apud
Westm' recuperasset versus eum quam quadragint' solid' qui eidem Johanni
Sampson in eadem Cur' dicti domini Regis adjudicat' fuer' pro dampnis suis quae
habuisset occasion detent' debiti illius and qd' denar' ill' haberet coram
Justic' dicti domini Regis apud Westm' a die Sancti Martini in quindecim dies
ad reddend' praefat' Johanni de debito and dampnis praedict' unde convict' fuit
quod quidem breve postea and ante re^torn' ejusdem brevis necnon ante praedict'
tempus quo, Delivered to the Sheriff.
etc. scilicet secundo die Augusti anno tertio supradicto apud Halton in Com'
praedict' cuidam Antonio Air Ar' tunc Vic' Com' Lincoln' existen' deliberat'
fuit in forma juris exequend' Virtute cujus quidem brevis praedict' Vic'
praedict' Com' Lincoln' postea and ante retorn' ejusdem brevis necnon ante
praedict' tempus quo, The Sheriff made his Warrant.
etc. scilicet eodem secundo die Augusti Anno tertio supradicto apud Halton
praedict' pro executione brevis praedict' habend' fecit quoddam Warrant' suum
in scriptis sigillo Officii sui Vic' sigillat' ballivo Wapentag' de Wraggoe
necnon praedict' Georgio Francis Balliv' ejusdem Vic' ea vice tantum direct'
per quod quidem Warrant' praedict' Vic' praedict' Com' Lincoln' eis and
cuilibet eorum conjunctim and divisim mandavit quod de terris and catallis
praedicti Willielmi Bealy in balliva ejusdem Vic' Fieri fac' tam praed' debitum
december librar' quod praed' Johannes Sampson in Cur' dicti domini Regis coram
Justic' dicti domini Regis apud Westm' recuperassent versus eum quam praed'
quadragint' solid' qui eidem Johanni in eadem Cur' dicti domini Regis
adjudicat' fuer' pro dampnis suis quae habuisset occasion detentionis debiti
illius ita quod denar' ill' haberet coram Justic' dicti domini Regis apud
Westm' a die Sancti Martini in quindecim dies ad reddend' praefat' Johanni de
debito and dampnis praedictis unde convict' fuit quod quidem Warrant' postea
and ante retorn' ejusdem brevis necnon ante praedict' tempus quo, etc. scilicet
eodem secundo die Augusti Anno tertio supradicto apud Halton in Com' praed'
praefat' Georgio Francis deliberat' fuit in forma juris exequend' virtute cujus
quidem Warranti praed' The Warrant delivered to the Defendant.
Georgius Francis and praed' Johannes ut ejus servien' and per ejus mandat'
postea and ante retorn' brevis praed' necnon ante praed' tempus quo, etc.
scilicet die and anno ult' mentionat' apud Halton praed' averia praedicta in
Narratione praedicta spec' Who, with his Servant seized the Plaintiffs Cattle
in Execution.

And caused them to be Appraised.

And kept them in Custody until the Plaintiff paid the Execution money.

Traverse, that he is guilty before or after.


in executione pro debito and dampnis praed' ceper' and seisiver' and eadem
averia debito modo appreciari fec' quae quidem averia appreciat' fuer' ad
summam undecim librar' existen' verum valorem eorundem Et sic capt' and seisit'
imparcaver' and detinuer' quousque praed' Williel' praed' summam undecim
librar' praefat' Georgio Francis ad usum dicti Vic' pro deliberatione averiorum
illorum habend' solvisset prout eis been licuit quae sunt idem resid' Transgr'
praed' unde praed' Williel' superius se modo queritur absque hoc qd' ipse idem
Johannes sit culpabil' de caption' sive detentione averior' praed' ad aliquod
tempus ante praed' secund' diem Augusti Anno tertio supradicto vel post praed'
quinden' Sancti Martini Anno tertio supradicto Et hoc parat' est verificare
unde pet' Judicium si praed' Williel' actionem suam praedict' inde versus eum
habere debeat, etc.

Special Demurrer.
Et praedictus Willielmus dic' quod praed' placitum praed' Johan-Sampson
superius in barram placitat' materiaque in eodem content' minus sufficien' in
lege existunt ad ipsum Willielm' actionem suam praedict' versus praefat'
Johannem Sampson habend' praecludend' quodque ipse ad placitum ill' modo and
forma praed' placitat' necesse non habet nec per legem terrae tenetur
respondere Et hoc parat' est verificare unde pro defectu sufficien' placiti in
hac parre idem Willielm' pet' Judicium and dampna sua occasion Transgr'
praedict' sibi adjudicari, Cause of Demurrer, that the Traverse is naught.
etc. Et pro causis moracon' in lege idem Willielm' secundum formam Statuti
ostend' and Cur' hic demonstat has causas subsequen' videlicet quod placitum
praed' male traversat' mater' and tempus in ea part traversat' ac travers'
ill' extra idem placitum omitti debuisset si non idem placitum traversasset
tempus inter praed' secundum diem Augusti and praed' quinden' Sancti Martini in
eodam placito mentionat' Item qd' placitum praedict' suppon' averia praedict'
imparcari quousque summa undecim librarum ad usum dicti Vic' solut' fuit ubi
revera dict' Vic' hujusmodi summam ad usum ipsius Vic' per legem terrae
recipere non potuit.

Et praedict' Johannes ex quo ipse sufficien' mater' in lege ad praed' Joynder.
Will ab action sua praed' habend' praecludend' superius allegavit quam ipse
parat' est verificare quam quidem materiam praed' Will non dedic' nec ad eam
aliqualit' respond' sed verificationem ill' admittere omnino recusat ut prius
pet' judicium Et qd' praed' Will ab action sua praedict' habend' praecludatur
etc. Et quia Justic' hic se advisare volunt de and super praemisses priusquam
Judic' inde reddant dies dat' est partibus praedict' hicusque a die Sancti
Michaelis in tres septimanas de audiendo inde Judicio suo eo qd' iidem Justic'
hic inde nondum, etc.

Bealy versus Sampson.
THe Plaintiff brought an Action of Trespass, and declared that the Defendant
Sampson, simul cum Georgio Francis 1 Febr. Anno Jacobi Regis tertio, vi and
armis, etc. quatuor Boves and quatuor Vaccas of the Plaintiff took at Stamton
in Com', etc. and imparcavit and detinuit quousque the Plaintiff finem undecim
librarum pro deliberatione earum inde habend' cum praedicto Sampson, the
Defendant, and Georgio Francis fecisset, etc. ad dampnum, etc.

The Defendant pleaded not guilty as to the vi and armis, and as to the residue
of the Trespass he pleaded in Bar, that before the time in which the Trespass
is supposed to be done, viz. the 14th day of June anno supradicto, there went
out a Writ of Fieri Facias out of this Court against the now Plaintiff at the
suit of the said Defendant Sampson, directed to the then Sheriff of Lincoln to
levy a Debt of 10 l which the said Sampson had recovered in the said Court, and
40 s for costs of Suit, and that he should have the Money in Court in quinden'
Martini ad reddend' praefato Johanni Sampson de deb' and damnis praed' unde
convictus fuit: Which Writ of Fieri facias was delivered to the Sheriff of the
said County, and thereupon the Sheriff, for the executing of the said Writ,
made his Warrant in writing, sealed with the Seal of his Office, to one J. S.
and the said George Francis Ballivus ejusdem Vicecomitis ea Vice tantum
directed, commanding them to levy the said Debt and Costs, of the Goods and
Chattels of the now Plaintiff, that the said Sheriff might have the Money in
Court at the day of the Retorn of the Writ, to pay the said John Sampson; which
Warrant was delivered to the said George Francis; and by virtue of the said
Warrant, the said George Francis, and the said Defendant Sampson ut ejus
serviens and per ejus mandatum, the aforesaid Beasts in execution for the Debt
and Costs aforesaid, took and seized, and caused them to be appraised, and they
were appraised at 11 l being the true value of them, and detained them quousque
praed' W. Bealy the aforesaid sum of 11 l to the said George Francis to the use
of the said Sheriff, pro deliberation' averiorum illorum habend' solvisset
prout eis been licuit quae sunt idem resid' transgress' praed' unde praed'
Willielmus Bealy se modo queritur absque hoc quod ipse idem Johannes Sampson
est culpab' de captione, etc. ad aliquod tempus ante praed' secundum diem
Augusti vel post praed' Quindend' Sancti Martini and hoc parat' est verificare.

And to this the Plaintiff demurred.

This Case was spoken to the last Term, and then Pollexfen Chief Justice and
Rokeby were of Opinion for the Plaintiff, and Powell and Ventris for the
Defendant; and it was again argued at the Bar this Term, and by the Opinion of
the Chief Justice Powell and Rokeby, Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

The Chief Justice and Rokeby held the Plea to be naught, chiefly because the
Defendant pleads that he detained the Chattel till the Plaintiff had paid so
much Money to the use of the Sheriff; whereas it should have been to the use of
the Plaintiff, at whose suit the Execution was.

The Chief Justice said, that he found no Authority in Law that warranted the
delivering of the Goods back to the Plaintiff, especially upon payment of part
of the Money, vide 1 Cro. 404. Stringar versus Stanlack, but here the taking of
the Money to the use of the Sheriff made him a Trespasser, for it could not be
done in pursuance of the Execution. He also said, that one Far in the time of
King Charles the Second, by color of a Writ of Execution came into the House
and carried away the Goods, and it was adjudged Felony. He also said, that if
this manner of Pleading should be allowed, admitting that the Bailiff had
agreed to take the Money to the Sheriffs proper use, how should the Plaintiff be
let in to a Replication in this manner of Pleading to put the matter in issue?

Rokeby said, Parols font Plea, and that it must be here taken that the Money
was paid to the proper use of the Sheriff; and in pleading the matter is to be
taken most strongly against him that pleads.

Another matter they went upon is, that in the justification the Defendant
says he detained the Cattle till 11 l was paid to Francis, whereas the
Declaration charge him with detaining till 11 l was paid to the Defendant;
and so Francis answers nothing to the payment alleged to himself.

Note, The Chief Justice cited the Case of Thompson and Clarke, 1 Cro. 504.
where it is said, that the Sheriff cannot deliver the Defendants Goods to the
Plaintiff in satisfaction of the Debt, neither ought they to be delivered to
the Defendant against whom the Execution is, but they ought to be sold, and the
apprisement is not material for the Goods upon a Fieri facias need not to be
appraised as they must be upon Elegit, 1 Cro. 584. in Palmers Case. In the Case
of Goodyers and Ince, 2 Cro. 246. upon an Elegit it was held, that the Sheriff
could not sell a Term to the Plaintiff himself that took out the Elegit.

Powell was of Opinion, that the Plea was good in that point of paying the Money
to the use of the Sheriff, for he has an interest or special property in the
thing taken in Execution, 1 Cro. 639. the Sheriff may bring trespass against
one that takes Goods after they are seized in Execution, Wilbraham and Snow, 2
Saunders 47. resolved that in such Case the Sheriff may bring Trover.

But he held the Plea insufficient for the other exception, because the
Declaration is of a Detainer till the Money was paid to Francis and the
Defendant; And in the Plea the Justification is of the detaining till the Money
was paid to Francis.

He took another Exception also, that the Defendant had not shown that there
was a retorn made of the Warrant to the Sheriff, and cited Br' Tit. Trespass
566. but that was not much insisted upon, because the Warrant was not directed
to the Defendant here, but to Francis and another, and the Defendant ought not
to be punished for the omission of the Bailiffs in not retorning the Warrant.
Upon a Mesn Process the Bailiff who acts by a Warrant from the Sheriffs, is not
liable in Trespass if the Sheriff does not retorn the Writ.

Ventris was of Opinion for the Defendant as to the first matter, the payment
to the use of the Sheriff he thought ought to be taken upon the whole matter
set forth in the Plea, that it was paid to the particular and special use of
the Sheriff, viz. that he might have the Money in Court as the Writ commands,
and the Warrant mentions, and it was a strained construction to take it to be
to the proper use of the Sheriff; it would not have been proper to say, paid to
the Bailiff to the use of the Plaintiff, because it is not the Plaintiffs Money
till it is paid to him, in the Case of Benson and Flower, 3 Cro. and Jones 115.
it was resolved, that if the Plaintiff became Bankrupt, the Commissioners could
not assign the Money that had been levied at the Plaintiffs suit upon Execution,
or remaining in the Sheriffs Hands or in Court; a Bar is good to a common
intent.

2. The pleading of the payment to Francis, and not said to Francis and the
Defendant, though it does not precisely answer the Declaration, yet he held it
well enough, because payment to Francis is a payment to both, because it is set
forth, that they acted jointly in pursuance of the Warrant; and averring that
the matters pleaded were idem residuum transgressionis was sufficient answer of
the Allegation in the Declaration of payment to both.

He put this Case, one brings Trespass against A. that he simul cum B. took his
Cattle and detained them quosque he made a Fine with the said A. and B. for the
delivery of them. A. the Defendant pleads, that a Rent was granted to B. with a
clause of Distress; and that the said B. and A. as his Servant, and by his
command took the Cattle by way of Distress, and detained them till the
Plaintiff paid the arrear to B. quae est eadem transgressio, Would it not have
been good?

Again, If this payment must be taken to be to the proper use of the Sheriff,
and so not in pursuance to the Execution, yet he held that the Plaintiff here
could not maintain an Action of Trespass, that in regard that he is particeps
criminis, the detaining the Goods is but a Nonfeasans. If the Sheriff upon Mesn
Process refuses Bayl, this does does not make him a Trespasser ab initio, though
he is liable to an Action upon the Case for such refusal; and so is the Case of
Salmon and Percival, Jones 226. and 1 Cro. So also if the Sheriff detains a man
taken upon Mesn Process after a Supersedeas, and that appears by Stringer and
Stanlacks Case, 1 Cro. 404. and Withers and Henly's Case, 2 Cro. 379. there
said the detaining is a new Caption; but it is objected here, that the taking
of the Money is a Misfeasans; and in 6 Co. Poulters Case, if a man distrain and
abuses the Distress, he is a Trespasser ab initio; so where a thing is done by
an authority of Law, and an abuse is committed after.

Answ. That is true, if there were a Misfeasans in any matter wherein the
Plaintiff in this Action had not concurred: If a man should detain a Horse, and
the Owner should bid him ride him, would this make him a Trespassor ab initio,
as if he had rode him without such license? The payment is here the Act of the
Plaintiff in this Action, and therefore he was of Opinion, that he could not
bring Trespass. But by the Opinion of the other Three Judges, Judgment was
given pro Quer'.

Clarke versus Peppin.
Somerset ss.
GEORGIUS Peppin nuper de Culverton in Com' praedict' Gen' al' dic' Executors
bring Covenant, reciting an Agreement for a Chattel Lease under a Rent and
Covenant. The Defendant pleads that the Testator Nihil habuit in Tenementis,
etc.
George Peppin of Culverton in the said County G^nt. summonitus fuit ad
respondend' Edwardo Clarke Armig' Johanni Bowls Armig' and Georgio Musgrave
Armig' executoribus testamenti Will' Clarke Armig' de placito qd' teneat eis
conventionem int' eosdem Willielmum and Georgium Peppin in vita ejusdem
Willielmi factam juxta vim formam and effectum cujusdam scripti agreament' int'
eos confect', etc. Et unde iidem Edwardus Johannes and Georgius Musgrave per
Humfr' Stear Attorn' suum dic' qd' cum per quoddam script' agreament' habit'
Scriptum agreamenti.
and fact' apud Camimgton' decimo septimo die Julii Anno Dom' Millesimo
sexcentesimo octogesimo quarto int' praed' Will' ex una part and praed' Georg'
Peppin ex altera part sub figillo praed' Georg' Peppin signat' and hic in Cur'
prolat' cujus dat' est eisdem die and anno agreat' The Agreement set forth.
fuit int' easdem parts pro una dimissione pro annis (Anglice, a Chattle
Lease) pro nonaginta novem annis ad incipiend' (Anglice, to commence) post
mortem vel al' determinationem status Ux' Christoferi Melhuish decessi and ad
determinand' super mortem Eliz' Peppin aetat' (Anglice, aged) circa december and
septem annos filiae praed' Georgii Peppin ac Johannis Peppin filii Johannis
Peppin de Culverton praed' aetat' (Anglice aged) circa duodecim annos de and in
omni ill' uno mesuagio and tenemento cum pertin' continen' circa viginti and
septem acras de quibus quatuor sunt pratum nuper in possessione praed'
Christoferi Melhuish and parcel' manerii de Curry Pool sub antiquo annual'
reddit' viginti and septem solidorum and quatuor denar' and pro Herriotto
(Anglice, an Herriot) optimo averio vel quatuor libris ad Dom' electionem and
usual' covencon' ut in omnibus dimissionibus (Anglice, Leases) concessis per
fiduciarios (Anglice, Trustees) constitut' per nuper Comitem Roffen omnium
quorum consideratione praed' Georgius Peppin pro se Executoribus
Administratoribus and Assign' suis convenit promisit concessit and agreavit ad
and cum praed' Willielmo Executoribus and Assign' suis qd' ipse Georgius Peppin
Executores Administrutores vel Assign' sui solverent vel solvi causarent praed'
Willielmo Executoribus vel Assign' suis plenam summam centum and octoginta
librarum videlicet unam medietat' inde ad Festum Sancti Michaelis Arc^hi tunc
prox' post dat' scripti illius and altram medietat' ad Festum sancti Michaelis
Arc^hi tunc prox' sequen' proviso qd' si Ux' praed' Cristoferi contingeret mori
ante sigillationem praed' designat' dimissionis (Anglice, intended Lease) qd'
tunc script' ill' vacuum foret Aceciam proviso qd' si aliqua supramentionat'
vitarum contingeret mori antequam praed' designat' dimissio sigillat' foret qd'
tunc licitum foret ad and pro praed' Georgio Peppin Executoribus
Administratoribus and Assign' suis nominare and appunctuare aliquam al'
personam in loco talis personae sic obien' Licet the Plaintiff Testator
performed all the Covenants, etc.
Et iidem Edwardus Johannes Bowls and Georgius Musgrave ulterius dic' qd'
licet ipse praefat' Willielmus in vita sua and praed' Edwardus Johannes Bowls
and Georgius Musgrave post mortem ipsius Will' perimplever' and custodiver'
omnia and singula agreament' and convention' in script' praed' spec' ex part
sua perimplend. and custodiend. Protestando that the Defendants have not kept
them.

The Breach assigned.


Protestando eciam quoth. praed. Georgius Peppin non perimplevit nec custodivit
aliqua agreament. five conventiones in scripto praed. superius spec. ex part
sua perimplend. and custodiend. in facto iidem Edwardus Johannes and Georgius
Musgrave dic. quoth. praed. Ux. praed. Cristoferi adhuc superstes and in plena
vita existit videlicet apud Camimgton praed. qd'que praed. Georgius Peppin non
solvit praefat. Willielmo in vita sua seu eisdem Edwardo Johanni and Georgio
Musgrave post mortem praed. Willielmi praed. centum and octoginta libras
videlicet unam medietat. inde ad Festum Sancti Michaelis Arc^hi prox. post dat.
script. illius and alteram medietat. inde ad Festum Sancti Michaelis Arc^hi
tunc prox. sequen. Et sic, etc.
Et sic iidem Georgius Johannes and Georgius Musgrave dic. quoth. pred. Georgius
Peppin conventionem suam pred. nec cum prefat. Willielmo in vita sua nec eisdem
Edwardo Johanne and Georgio Musgrave post mortem prefat. Willielmi in hac perte
factam tenuit set. il. penitus infregit ac il. prefat. Willielmo in vita sua
and eisdem Edwardo Johanne and Georgio Musgrave post mortem prefat. Willielmi
tenere contradixit and adhuc contradic. unde dic. quoth. deteriorat. sunt and
dampnum habent ad valenciam ducentarum librarum Et inde produc. sectam, Profert
in Cur' Literas Testamentarias.
etc. and proferunt hic in Cur. Literas Testamentar. prefat. Willielmi per quas
satis liquet Cur. hic ipsos Edwardum Johannem and Georgium Musgrave fore
Executores Testamenti pred. Et inde habere Administrationem, etc.

Testator nihil habuit in Tenementis.
Et pred. Georgius Peppin per Thomam Webber Attorn. suum ven. and defend. vim
and injur. quando, etc. Et dic. quoth. pred. Edwardus Clarke Johannes Bowls and
Georgius Musgrave actionem suam pred. inde versus eum habere seu manutenere non
debent quia dic. quoth. pred. Will. Clarke defunct, pred. tempore quo supponitur
pred. conventionem fieri nec unquam postea nichil habuit in tenementis pred.
per ipsum Willielmum per script. agreament. pred. sic ut praefertur dimitti
agreatum Et hoc parat. est verificare unde pet. Judicium fi praed. Edwardus
Clarke Johannes Bowls and Georgius Musgrave actionem suam praed. inde versus
eum habere seu manurenere debeant, etc.

Demurrer to the Plea.
Et praed. Edwardus Johannes Bowls and Georgius Musgrave dic quoth. placitum
praed' Georgii Peppin superius in Barram placitat' ac materia in eodem content'
minus sufficien' in lege existit ad ipsos Edwardum Johannem and Georgium
Musgrave ab action sua praed' versus praefat' Georg' Peppin habend'
praecludend' qd'que ipsi ad placitum ill' modo and forma praed' placitat'
necesse non habent nec per legem terrae tenentur respondere and hoc parat. sunt
verificare unde pet' Judic' and dampna sua praed' occasion fractionis
conventionis praed' sibi adjudicari, etc.

Et praed' Georgius Peppin ex quo ipse sufficien' Joyder in Demurrer.
materiam in lege ad praefat' Willielmum Johannem and Georgium Musgrave ab
action sua praed' versus ipsum Georgium Peppin habend' procludend' superius
placitat' inde allegavit quam ipse parat' est verificare quam quidem materiam
praed' Edwardus Johannes and Georgius Musgrave non dedicerunt nec ad eam
aliqualit' responder' set verificationem ill' admittere omnino recusant ut
prius pet' Judic' Et qd' praed' Edwardus Johannes and Georgius Musgrave ab
action sua praed' habend' praecludantur, etc. Et quia Justic' hic se advisare
volunt de and super praemissis priusquam Judic' inde reddant dies dat' est
partibus praed' usque a die Sancti Martini in xv dies de audiendo inde Judicio
suo eo qd' iidem Justic' hic nondum, etc.

Clarke versus Peppin.
IN an Action of Covenant the Plaintiff declared, that whereas by an Agreement
in writing made between him and the Defendant, it was agreed between the said
Parties for a Demise of a Lease of 99 years, of, and in a certain Message,
etc. under a certain Rent, and the usual Covenants as in all Demises granted by
the Trustees of the Earl of Rochester were used, omnium quorum consideratione,
the said Peppin did agree to pay to the said Clarke 180 l at Michaelmas next
following, and licet the Plaintiff performed all of his part, the Defendant had
not paid the Money, etc.

The Defendant pleaded in bar, that the Plaintiff tempore quo supponitur praed'
conventionem nec unquam postea nihil habuit in Tenementis praed, so agreed to
be demised.

To this the Plaintiff demurred, and Judgment by the whole Court was given for
the Plaintiff; for though that may be pleaded in an Action for Debt for Rent, yet
it cannot be pleaded in Covenant for a sum in gross.

Besides, the Agreement does not necessarily import that the Lease should be
made by the Plaintiff; it may be understood, that it was agreed he should
procure a Lease for the Defendant.

Penager versus Gale.
IN an Action of Trespass the Plaintiff, declared for the taking of his Cattle,
and detaining them till he was forced to pay 2 l 8 s and 2 d

The Defendant justified, that J. S. levied Plaint in the County Court in a
Plea of Debt of 39 s 11 d against the now Plaintiff, and superinde taliter
processum fuit, that he recovered the said Debt, and 8 s and 4 d for Costs of
Suit, prout per processum inde in Cur' Com' praedict' remanen' before apparet
and super quo ad prosecutionem ipsius J. S. quoddam praeceptum extra Cur' Com'
praedict' emanavit, per quod praeceptum the Sheriff commanded the Defendant to
levy the Money, etc. by virtue of which Precept he took the Cattle, and detained
them till the Plaintiff paid the Money, etc.

The Plaintiff demurred, and it was adjudged for the Plaintiff.

First, Because when a Judgment is pleaded in an inferior Court, especially in
a Court not of record the proceedings should be set forth at large, and not to
say taliter processum fuit.

Secondly, It is not shown that the Debt arose within the Jurisdiction.

Thirdly, It does not appear that the Court awarded the Precept, it is only said
quoddam Praeceptum e Cur' emanavit per quod the Sheriff commanded, whereas the
Suitors are the Judges; for it should be per quod praeceptum per praefat' Cur'
directum fuit, etc. Vide Rastalls Entries in Trespass, 669. and as to the
setting forth the proceedings at large.

Prynne versus Sloughter.
ALIAS prout patet Termino Sancti Michaelis ult' praeterit' Scire faccias
against Heir and Tertenants, the Defendanss Tertenants appear and plead that
there are Lands in another County.
Rotulo DCCLXXIV. continetur sic London ss. Praeceptum fuit Vic' Cum Robertus
Prynne generosus nuper in Cur' domin^ Caroli Secundi nuper Regis Angl', etc.
scilicet Termino Sanctae Tri^ nitatis Anno regni sui decimo nono coram Orlando
Bridgman Mil' and Baronetto and sociis suis tunc Justic' dicti nuper Regis de
Banco hic scilicet apud Westm' per consideracon' ejusdem Cur' recuperasset
versus Willielm' Wormell nuper de London' Armig' alias dict Willielm' Wormell
de Spittlefield in dicto Com' Midd' Armig' tam quoddam debitum Ducentarum
librarum quam octoginta solid' quam eidem Roberto in eadem Cur' dicti nuper
Regis adjudicat' fuer' pro dampnis suis quae habuit occasion detentionis
debiti illius unde convict' est prout per recordum and processum inde in Cur'
domini Regis nunc de Banco hic residen' liquet manifest Execut' tamen Judic'
praedict' adhuc restat saciend' ac praedict' Willielmus mortuus est prout ex
insinuatione praedicti Roberti acceperat Rex Et quia, etc. quod per probos,
etc. Scire fac' tenentibus terrarum and tenementorum quae fuer' praedicti
Willielmi in Octabis sanctae Trinitatis Anno regni dicti nuper Regis decimo
nono supradicto quo die Judicium praed' reddit' fuit vel unquam postea in
Balliva sua quod essent hic a die sanctae Trinitatis in tres Septimanas ult'
praeterit' ostens. si quid, etc. quare debitum and dampna praedicta de terris
and tenementis illis fieri and praefat' Roberto reddi non deberent juxta formam
recuperac^on' praedict' si, etc. ad quem diem hic ven' praedict' Robertus per
VVillielm' Mantell Attorn' suum Et op' se quarto die versus praefat' The
Plaintiff obtulit se.
tenentes de praed' placito Et ipse solempnit' exact' non ven' Et Vic' videlt
Johan' Parsons Miles and Basilius Firebrace Miles modo mand' qd' nulli sunt
tenentes nec aliquis est tenens aliquar' terrar' seu ten^tor' The Sheriffs of
London Return, That there are no Tertenants.
fuer' praedicti VVillielmi in praedict' Octab' sanctae Trinitatis Anno decimo
nono supradicto vel unqam postea in Balliva sua quibus vel cui Scire fac'
possunt prout per breve illud eisdem Vic' praecept' fuit Et super hoc testat'
est in eadem Cur' Regis hic quod sunt seperal' tenentes diversorum terrarum and
tenementorum in Com' Testatum scire fac'.
Norf. quae fuer' praedicti VVillielmi in eisdem Octab' sanctae Trinitatis Anno
decimo nono supradicto and postea unde debitum and dampna praedicta fieri and
levari possunt Ideo Praecept' est Vic' Norf. quod per probos, etc. Scire fac'
tenentibus terrarum and ten^torum quae fuer' praedicti VVillielmi in praedict'
Octab' sanctae Trinitatis Anno regni dicti nuper Regis decimo nono supradicto
vel unquam postea in Balliva sua quod essent hic ad hunc diem scilicet a die
sancti Michaelis in tres Septimanas ad ostend' in forma praedicta, etc. Et modo
hic ad hunc diem ven' tam praedictus Robertusper Attorn' suum praedict' quam
Paris Sloughter per Henr' Clift Attorn' suum Et super hoc Vic' Plaintiff and
Tertenants appear.

Scire feci Returned.


praedict' Com' Norf. videlicet Thomas Seaman Armig' modo mand' quod ipse
virtute brevis praedicti sibi directi per VVillielm' Dicker and Johannem Scott
probos, etc. Scire fac' praefat' Paris Sloughter tenenti undecim Messuagiorum
cum pertin' in Lin-Regis in Com' suo modo vel nuper in seperalibus
possessionibus sive occupation' Ezekielis Goddard Elizabethae Tilson Vid'
Everardi Farthing Johannis Wilson Roberti Edwards Georgii Burnett Johannis
Williamson VVilielmi Melton VVillielmi Cobb Susan' VVestgate and Janae Kurry
Vid' and unius repositori (Anglice a Warehouse) modo vel nuper in possessione
sive occupatione Nicholai Rookes quae quidem se peral' messuagia and
repositorium fuer' tenementa praed' VVillielmi VVormell in predict' Octab'
sactae Trinitatis Anno decimo nono supradicto and postea quod essent hic ad
hinc diem scilicet praedict' tres Septimanas sancti Michaelis ad ostendend' si
quid etc. quare debitum and dampna praedict' de tenementis illis fieri and
praefat' Roberto Prynne reddi non deberent juxta formam recuperationis
praedictae prout per idem breve sibi praecept' Nulli alii tenentes.
fuit quodque non sunt aliqui alii tenenentes nec est aliquis alius tenens
aliquarum terratum sive ten^torum quae fuer' praedicti Willielm Wormell in
praedictis Octab' sanctae Trinitatis Anno decimo nono supradicto vel unquam
postea in balliva sua quibus vel cui Scire fac' potest Super quo praedict'
Robertus Prynne pet' executionem versus praefat' Paris de debito and dampnis
praedictis de eisdem tenementis cum pertin' levand' sibi adjudicari, etc.

Special Imparlance.
Et praedict' Paris salvis sibi omnibus and omnimod' exceptionibus and advantag'
tam ad praedict' breve quam ad praedictam narrac^on' pet' licent' inde
interloquend' hicusque in Octab' sancti Hillarii Et habet, Loquela Revificat'
continuat' and adjournat' fuit per actum Parliamenti.
etc. idem dies dat' est praefat' Roberto hic etc. Posteaque scilicet a die
Paschae in quindecim dies de quo die loquela praedicta antea remanen' sine die
virtute cujusdam Actus Parliamenti domini VVillielmi and dominae Mariae nunc
Regis and Reginae Angl' etc. tertio die Februarii Anno regni sui primo
revivicat' continuat' and adjornat' fuit hic ven' tam praedict' Robertus Prynne
quam praedict' Paris pro Attocn' Ulteriius special Imparlance.
suos praedictos Et super hoc idem Paris salvis sibi omnibus and omnimod'
exceptionibus and advantag' tam ad breve quam ad narration' praedict' ulterius
pet' licent' inde interloquendi hic usque in Crastino sanctae Trinitatis Et
habet, etc. Idem dies dat' est praefat' Roberto Prynne hic etc. Et modo hic ad
hunc diem scilicet ad praedict' Crastin' sanctae Trinitatis ven' tam praedictus
Robertus Prynne quam praedict' Paris per Attorn' suos praedictos Et super hoc
idem Robertus Prynne ut prius pet' The Plaintiff prays Execution.

Tertenants plead in abatement of the Writ.


execution' versus praefat' Paris de debito and dampnis praedictis de
renementis praedictis cum pertin' levand' sibi adjudicari, etc. Super quo
praedict' Paris pet' Judic' de praedicto brevi de Scire fac' Vic' praedict'
Com' Norf. direct' quia dic' quod diu ante emanacon' ejusdem brevis de Scire
fac' and tempore emanation' inde quidam Georgius Underwood and Jeremias White
seisit' fuer' and adhuc seisit' existunt de duobus Messuagiis cum pertin' in
paroch' de Thames Ditton in Com' Surr' ultra and praet' praedict' ten^ta in
praedicto retorno ejusdem brevis de Scire fac' Lands in another County.
superius specificat' de quibus quidem duobus Messuagiis cum pertin' praedict'
Willielm' Wormell seisit' fuit in dominico suo ut de feodo in praedict' Octab'
sanctae Trinitatis Anno decimo nono supradicto Et hoc parat' Unde ex quo the
Tenants of those Lands were not summoned petit Judicium de brevi.
est verificare unde ex quo praedicti Georgius and Johannes non sum' fuer' nec
in eodem brevi de Scire fac' nominat' nec in praedicto retorno ine retornat'
tenentes praedictorum duorum Messuagiorum cum pertin' vel aliqnor' tenementorum
quae fuer' praedicti Willielmi Wormell praedicto tempore redditionis Judicii
praedicti idem Paris pet' Judic' de brevi illo Et quod idem breve cassetur, etc.

Et praedictus Robertus dic' quod praed' placitum praed' Demurrer to the Plea.
Paris superius in forma praedicta placitat' ac materia in eodem content' minus
sufficien' in lege existunt ad praedict' breve de Scire fac' praefat' Vic'
Norf. direct' cassand' vel ad ipsum Robertum ab executione sua versus praefat'
Paris de debito and dampnis praedict' levand' de terris and ten^tis praed' cum
pertin' unde idem Paris tenens ut praefertur retornat' existit repellend' seu
retardand' quodque ipse ad placit' illud modo and forma praed' placitat'
necesse non habet nec per legem terrae tenetur respondere Et hoc parat' est
verificare Unde pro defectu sufficien' placiti praedicti Paris in hac parre
idem Robertus petit Judicium and quod breve suum praedict' bon' adjudicetur
necnon execution' suam versus praefat' Paris de debito and dampnis praed' de
terris and tenementis praed' cum pertin' unde dictus Paris tenens ut praefertur
retornat' existit levand' fibi adjudicari, etc.

Et praedictus Paris ex quo ipse sufficien' Joynder in Demurrer.
materiam in lege in placito suo praedicto ad praedict' breve de Scire fac'
praefat' Vic' Norf. direct' cassand' and ad praedict' Robertum ab executione
sua praedicta retardand' superius allegavit quam ipse parat' est verificare
quam quidem materiam praedictus Robertus non dedic' nec ad eam aliqualit'
respondit sed verification' illam admittere omnino recusat Unde ut prius pet'
Judic' de brevi praedict. Et quod idem breve cassetur, etc. Et quia Justic' hic
se advisari volunt de and super praemissis priusquam Judic' inde reddant dies
dat' est partibus praedict' hic usque a die sancti Michaelis in tres Septimanas
de audiendo inde Judicio suo eo quod Justic' hic inde nondum, etc.

Prynne versus Sloughter.
IN a Scire facias upon a Judgment recovered in Trinity Term, Anno 19 Car. 2.
nuper Regis in this Court, against William Wormell Esquire in 200 l Debt, to warn
the Tertenants of the said Wormell, if they could show any thing why Execution
should not be, etc. which was directed to the Sheriffs of London, who returned
that there were no Tertenants in their Bailywick, upon which a Testatum scire
fac' went to the Sheriff of Norfolk to warn the Tertenants there, and the
Sheriff returned the said Sloughter Tenant of a Message, etc. which the said
Wormell was seized of at the time of the Judgment, and that there was no other
Tertenants in balliva sua.

Sloughter appeared, and demanded Judgment of the Writ of Scire fac' quia dicit
quod diu ante emanationem ejusdem brevis and tempore emanationis inde quidam
Geo. Underhill and Jer. White were and still are seized of two Messuages, etc.
in Thames Ditton in the County of Surry, ultra and praeter Tenementa praedict'
in retorno ejusdem brevis de Scire fac' superius specificat', of which the said
Wormell was seized, etc. Unde ex quo praed' Georgius and Jeremias non summon'
fuer' nec in eodem brevi de Scire fac' nominat' nec in praedict' retorno inde
retornat' tenentes, etc. idem Sloughter petit Judicium de brevi illo and quod
idem breve cassetur.

To this Plea the Plaintiff demurred, and Sergeant Pemberton Argued, that it
was no Plea in Scire fac' to say that there were Tertenants in another County
than where the Scire sacias was brought, though it might be if the Tenants were
in the same County. Especially this Plea is not to be admitted since the
Statute of 16 and 17 Car. 2. c. 5. which was made to prevent delay of Execution
upon Judgments, Statutes and Recognizances; and Enacts, that when any Judgment,
etc. shall be extended, the same shall not be delayed or avoided by occasion,
that any part of the Lands and Tenements extendible, axe or shall be omitted
out of such Exten^, saving the Remedy for Contribution against such persons as
shall have any of the Lands extendible. Which Statute was at first temporary,
and made perpetual by 22 and 23 Car. 2. cap. 2.

The Court were of Opinion, that as to the Matter of the Plea, that it might be
pleaded. And when one Tertenant is Returned summoned upon a Scire fac', he may
plead that there are other Tertenants, though in another County; and this will
put the Plaintiff to take out a Scire facias against them. Vid. for that the
Lady Greshams Case, Mo. 429. and Clarke and Hardwick's Case Mo. 524. Vid. Die.
331. B. semble Cont. In a Scire fac' for a Tertenant in the nature of an Audita
Querela, it was held, that the Tertenant returned Could not plead, there was
another Tertenant not warned. Vid. 1 Roll. Rep. 57. Holland and Lee, it seems
to be made a Doubt.

But the whole Court held, that such Matter might be pleaded, and the Statute
of 22 and 23 Car. 2. does not extend to this Case; for that is when an Extent
is executed, and the Tertenant brings an Audita querela, he shall not drive the
Plaintiff to extend anew, but the Extent shall stand, and he shall have
Contribution against the rest.

But the Pleading in this Case was altogether ill and insufficient; for it is
pleaded in Abatement of the Writ, which it ought not to be, but he should have
demanded Judgment, si ipse ad breve praed' in forma praed' retorn' respondere
compelli debeat; and so is the Conclusion in Jefferson and Dawson's Case, 2
Sand. 23. and in Clarke's Case in Mo. 524.

And then he shows, that the said George and Jeremy were not summoned, nec in
eodem brevi de Scire fac' nominat' nec in eodem retorno retornat', which is
naught; for the Sheriff of Norfolk could not summon or return those Tenants,
being in another County.

But then it was shown on the part of the Defendant, that the Record of the
Scire fac' was wrong, for it was tituled Alias prout patet Term' Sancti
Michaelis ultimo praeterito, and then sets forth a Scire facias to the Sheriffs
of London, Returnable tres septiman' Trin. ultimo praeterito; who Returned,
that there were no Tenants in Balliva sua, and super hoc Testatum est in Cur'
Regis hic, that there were several Tenants in the County of Norfolk; and upon
that a Scire facias was awarded to the Sheriff of Norfolk, Returnable tres
Michael', etc. So by this Record it would seem, the Writ and Return is all the
same day, whereas the Testatum scire fac' ought to be in Trinity Term before;
and therefore the Record should have been tituled Alias prout patet Term'
Sanctae Trinitat'.

And this the Counsel for the Plaintiff prayed might be amended; but the Court
would not permit it, unless they agreed to amend on both sides.

The City of Oxfords Case.
A Townsman of Oxford was chosen into an Office in the Incorporation, and
refusing to hold he incurred a Penalty according to the Usage of this place,
for which an Action of Debt was brought.

And it was moved for the Defendant, that he might be allowed the Privilege of
the University; and a Charter was shown, whereby it was granted to the
University, that their Members, Servants, etc. belonging to the University,
should be sued in the Court before the Vice Chancellor, and not elsewhere. And
a Certificate was produced from the Chancellor of Oxford, directed to the Chief
Justice, and Sociis suis Justiciariis de Banco, that the party was Matriculated
and Registered in the University, and a Servant to Doctor Irish.

And after hearing Counsel, and it appearing to the Court, that he was
Registered in the University but two days before he was Chosen into the Office,
and was a Painter that had dwelt long in the Town, and been for many years of
the Corporation, and no Servant attendant to Dr. Irish, but had his
Dwelling House, and kept Shop in the Town; and that he procured himself to be
admitted in the University as an Artificer to hinder the Remedy the Town had
against him for not holding his Office.

The Privilege was denied by the whole Court.

Bond versus Moyle.
IN an Action of Debt for 28 l 2 s and 4 d the Plaintiff declared, that whereas
the Defendant by a certain Bill Obligatory, cognovisset se debere and
indebitat' fore to the Plaintiff, summam viginti and octo librarum duorum
solid' and quatuor denat' solvere Querenti, etc. ad vel super vicesimum nonum
diem Septembris qui foret anno Dom. 1685. pro vera solutione quatuordecim
librar' unius solidi and quatuor denar' ipse the Defendant obligasset se
firmiter per eandem billam, and in facto dicit quod the said Moyle non solvit
Querenti the said 14 l 1 s and 4 d upon the said 29th of September, per quod
actio accrevit.

To this the Defendant Demurred, and it was Adjudged for the Plaintiff; for
though it is not drawn properly as a Penal Bill for the payment of the 14 l etc.
yet there is enough to ground an Action of Debt for the 28 l 2 s and 4 d and
the Day of payment seems to refer to the 28 l 2 s and 4 d Vid. 1 Cro. 771.

Note, It Is the common course to declare in Communi Banco per scriptum
indentat', without saying, sigillo sigillat'; but it is otherwise in B.R.

Buckler versus Millerd.
THe Plaintiff Buckler and two others, Executors of Peter Becket, brought Debt
upon a Bond of 200 l which the Defendant (together with one Katherine Becket)
had entered into to the Testator.

The Defendant demanded Oyer of the Condition, which was, (Viz.) That if the
above bound Katherine Becket, and James Millerd, should yearly, during the Life
of the said Peter Becket and the minority of Mary Becket, pay unto the said
Peter Becket, or his Assigns, the sum of Twelve pounds by equal payments, upon
the 15th day of August and the 15th day of February, that then the Bond should
be void.

The Defendant pleaded Actio non, for that upon the 15th of February, when the
Bond was alleged to be made, and before the sealing thereof, the said Peter
Becket (being Grandfather to Mary Becket in the Condition mentioned) who was
then within Age, did deliver to the Defendant and the said Katherine Becket,
200 l to the use of the said Mary, to be paid to her when she should be One and
twenty years of Age. And it was then agreed, that the Defendant and the said
Katherine Becket should give a Bond in 200 l penalty to the said Peter Becket:
And it was also then agreed, that the Condition should be for the payment of 12
l yearly for the Interest thereof to the said Peter and his Assigns during the
minority of the said Mary, If the said Peter should so long live, at the two
days mentioned in the said Condition, by equal portions; and if it should
happen that the said Peter should dye before the said Mary should be One and
twenty, that then the said 12 l Interest should remain in the hands of the
Defendant and the said Katherine, for the use of the said Mary, to be paid to
her when she should come to 21 years of Age, and then to be paid to the said
Mary. And the Defendant further says, that after the Bond and Condition were
so agreed, one Yeomans by mistake wrote the Obligation as is in the Bond, upon
which the Action is brought; and the said Defendant and Katherine not knowing
the Mistake, sealed the said Bond prour; and that the said Peter Becket
afterward died, and that only the first day of payment incurred between the
date of the said Bond and the death of Peter Becket, (viz.) the 15th day of
August, anno tertio Jacobi Regis. And the Defendant on the said 15th day, (Six
pounds being all that was then due to the said Peter Becket) at S. obtulit
solvere, and was ever after ready to pay it to him; and after, scilicet, the
first day of December, anno tertio supradicto, did pay to the said Peter Becket
the said Six pounds, which he did accept, unde petit Judicium, etc.

The Plaintiff replied Protestando, that there was no such Agreement, and that
the said Mary Becket was still living and under Age, and that Six pounds became
due upon the 15th of February, anno quarto nuper Regis Jacobi, according to the
said Condition, which the Defendant had not paid, and hoc paratus est
verificare, etc.

To this the Defendant demurred, and it was insisted on for the Defendant that
this Agreement might be pleaded, and averred to show the meaning of the
parties, and to have the Condition taken accordingly. As the Case of Nevison
and Whitly in the 3 Cro. and in Jones Rep. 396. where the Condition of the Bond
was for payment of Interest at Six months, as much as the Statute allows for a
year, and it was shown to be made so by the Mistake of the Scrivener, and that
the Agreement of the parties was for no more than just Interest; and this was
held a good Averment to save the Bond from being void by the Statute of Usury.
And a Case between Lewknor and Mountague was cited, where the Condition of a
Bond was, If William Mountague shall do, etc. whereas there was William
Mountague the Father and William Mountague the Son, and by the Averment of the
meaning of the parties this was expounded of the Son.

But the whole Court were here of Opinion, that the Averment in the Case at Bar
was not to be admitted; for it would carry the Condition to another sense then
the words import.

As to the Case upon the Statute of Usury, there it depends upon the Agreement;
and the party may show any to make appear there was no Corrupt Agreement. Vid
ante, hoc Termino the Case of Bush and Buckingham. And as to Lewknor's Case,
the Averment was but to ascertain which William Mountague was meant, and stands
well with the words of the Condition. But whether, as the Condition is penned,
for the payment to be during the Life of Peter Becket and the Minority of Mary,
that the payment should determine upon the death of Peter, the Court did not
deliver their Opinion (according to the Opinion in Brudnell's Case in 5 Co. 9.
it would seem that it should. But the Case of Cross and Tooker in Latch. 162.
seems strong to the contrary. Vid. that Case in Popham 201. and in 1 Anderson
151. absque impetitione vasti during their Lives, held, that the Privilege
shall continue to the Survivor.)

But the whole Court held the pleading of the tender insufficient, because it
is not said that Peter Becket refused; otherwise if a place of payment had been
in the condition, and it had been shown in pleading, that the party which was
to receive the Money, was not there, 1 Cro. 888. Plea of tender without setting
forth a refusal, not good, Lea and Exellies Case: And the acceptance after the
day signifies nothing, and upon that point the Court were of Opinion for the
Plaintiff, but Judgment was not given, because the parties showed an
inclination to compose the business.

Mason versus Watkins.
AN Action of Debt upon a Bond of 20 l

The Defendant demanded Oyer of the Condition, which was, that the Obligor
should not himself bring any Evidence at the Assizes to prove the two Cows now
in question between one Owen Mason the younger, and the said Watkins, to be the
Cows of the said Watkins or of Robert Gillo, and that the said Gillo shall set
in a Bill of Ignoramus, that then the Bond should be void.

The Defendant pleaded quod ipse de deb' praedict' virtute Scripti Obligat'
praedict' onerari non debet, because that one of the said Cows was the Cow of
the said Watkins, and the other of the said Gillo; and that before the Bond,
Owen Mason jun. in the said Condition mentioned, being the Plaintiffs Son,
stole the said two Cows, and was imprisoned thereupon; and the Defendant
Watkins was bound by Recognizance to prosecute him at the Assizes for the said
Felony; and there the said Mason jun. was indicted and convicted, and the
Defendant did give Evidence that one of the Cows was his, prout been licuit,
and that the Defendant did not give any Evidence by himself, or any one else to
prove the two Cows to be the Cows of the Defendant, or the Cows of the said
Gillo, and hoc paratus est verificare, etc. unde petit judicium, etc.

To this the Plaintiff demurred, and upon the first opening, Judgment was given
for the Defendant, for the Condition is against Law, viz. to shift off evidence
of Felony, and that makes the Bond void, vide Jone's Case, 1 Leon. 203. and the
Court recommended it to Sergeant Pawlet who was a Judge in Wales where the
Plaintiff lived, to see to have him prosecuted for taking such a Bond.

Termino Sancti Hillarii, Anno 1 and 2 W. and M. In Communi Banco.
Trippet versus Eyres.
Lond' ss.
Debt upon a Bond to perform an Award.
JOHANNES Air nuper de Sheffeild Manor in Com' Eborum Gen' al' dict' Johannem
Air de Sheffeild Mannor' in Com' Eborum Gen' summonitus fuit ad respondend'
Burrowes Trippet Gen' de placito qd' reddat ei trecentas libras quas ei debet
and injuste detinet, etc. Et unde idem Burrowes per Rich. Milward Attorn' suum
dic' qd' cum praedict' Johannes nono die Marcii Anno Regni Domini Regis nunc
tercio apud London' in Paroch' beatae Mariae de Arcubus in Warda de Cheap per
quoddam Scriptum suum Obligatorium concessisst se teneri eidem Burrowes in
praedict' trecentis libris solvend' eidem Burrowes cum inde requisit' fuisset
praedict' tamen Johannes licet saepius requisit' praedict' trecentas libras
eidem Burrowes nondum reddidit set ill' ei hucusque reddere contradixit and
adhuc contradic' unde dic' qd' deteriorat' est and dampnum habet ad valentiam
centum librarum Et inde produc' Sectam, etc. Et profert hic in Cur' Scriptum
praedict' Quod debitum praedict' in forma praedict' testatur cujus dat' est die
and anno supradictis, etc.

The Defendant craves Oyer of the Condition.
Et praedict' Johannes per Johannem Gatacre Attorn' suum ven' and defend' vim
and injur' quando, etc. Et pet' audit' Scripti praedicti and ei legitur Pet'
eciam audit' conditionis ejusdem Scripti and ei legitur in haec Verba. ss. The
Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above-bounden John Air, his
Heirs, Executors and Administrators, for his and their parts and behalfs, do in
all things well and truly stand to, obey, abide, perform, fulfill and keep the
Award, Order, Arbitrament, final End, and Determination of Francis Barlow of
Sheffeild in the said County Gent. and Robert Soresby of Sheffeild aforesaid
Gent. Arbitrators, indifferently named, elected and chosen, as well on the part
and behalf of the above-bounden John Air, as of the abovenamed Burrowes
Trippet to Arbitrate, Award, Order, Judge and Determine of and concerning all
and all manner of Action and Actions, Cause and Causes of Actions, Suits,
Bills, Bonds, Specialties, Judgments, Executions, Extents, Quarrels,
Controversies Trespasses, Damages and Demands whatsoever, at any time or times
heretofore had, made, moved, brought, commenced, sued, prosecuted, done,
suffered, committed or depending by or between the said Parties, or either of
them; so as the said Award be made and put in Writing, or by word of Mouth, on
or before the ninth day of April now next ensuing; but if the said Arbitrators
do not make such their Award of and concerning the Premises, by the time
aforesaid; that then if the said John Air his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, for his and their parts and behalfs, do in all things well and
truly stand to, obey, abide, perform, fulfill and keep the Award, Order,
Arbitrament, Vmpirage, Final End and determination of such Vmpire as the said
Francis Barlow and Robert Soresby shall nominate between the said Parties of
and concerning the Premises, so as the said Vmpire do make his Award or
Vmpirage of and concerning the Premises by Writing or word of Mouth, on or
before the sixteenth day of April aforesaid, then this Obligation to be void,
or else to remain in full force, strength and virtue. Quibus lectis and audit'
idem Johanne; Air dic' qd' praedict' Burrowes Trippett action' suam praedict'
inde versus eum virtute scripti obligatorii praed' hic in Cur' prolat' habere
non debet quia dic' qd' praed' Franc' Barlow and Rob' Defendant pleads that the
Arbitrators made no Award.
Soresby in condition praed' superius menc^onat' post confectionem Script'
Obligat' praed' hic in Cur' prolat' and infra tempus praed' in condic^one
praed' in ea part limitat' nullum fecer' Arbitrium Ordinem Arbitramentum
final' finem vel determination' in Scriptis vel per verbum oris de and super
praemissis in Condition praedict' superius mentionat' int' praefat' Burrowes
Trippet and praedict' Johannem Air Et praedict' Johannes Air ulerius dic'
quod praedict' Franciscus Barlowe and Robertus Soresby post confection' Scripti
obligatorii praed' hic Cur' prolat' and infra tempus Condition praedict' in ea
part limitat' scilicet decimo die Aprilis anno tertio supradicto apud London
praedict' in paroch' and Warda praedict' nominaver' quendam Franc' Jessopp Ar'
But they named an Umpire, who made no Award in Writing, or by word of Mouth.
fore Umpirator' inter praedict' Burrowes Trippet and praefat' Johannem Air de
and super praemissis praedict' quodque praedict' Franc' Jessopp sic ut
praefertur Umpirator nominat' infra tempus ei Condition praedict' in ea part
limitat' nullum fec' Arbitrium sive Umpiragium aut determination' de and
concernen' praemiss. praed' The Plaintiff Replies and says, That true it is
that the Arbitrators, nor A. B. by them first chosen Umpire, made no Award; but
they say, that afterward the Arbitrators chose one J. N. who made an Award.
per Scriptum vel verbum oris Et hoc parat' est verificare Unde pet' Judicium
si praedict' Burrowes Trippet actionem suam praedict' inde versus eum virtute
scripti Obligatorii praedict' habere debeat, etc.

Et praedict' Burrowes dic' quod ipse per aliqua praeallegat' ab action sua
praed' versus prefat Johannem habend' praecludi non debet quia dic' quod been
and verum est quod praedicti Franciscus and Robertus in Condition praedict'
superius nominat 'post confecc^onem scripti Obligatorii praed' and infra tempus
praedict' in Condition praedict' in ea part limitat' nullum fecer' arbitrium
Ordinem arbitramentum final' finem vel determinationem in scriptis per verbum
oris de and super praemissis in Conditionc praedicta superius mentionat' int'
praefat' Burrowes and praedict' Johannem Air ac qd' praed' Francisc' Barlowe
and Robertus Soresby ante decimum sextum diem Aprilis in Condition praedict'
mentionat' scilicet die and loco in placito praed' mentionat' nominaver'
praedict' Franc' Jessopp Ar' fore Umpiratorem inter praed' Burrowes and
praefat' Johannem sed praed' Burrowes ulterius dic' quod praedict' Franc'
Jessopp adtunc and ibidem fore Umpirator' int' eundm^ Burrowes and praefat'
Johannem de and super praemiss. penitus recusavit Et superinde praedict'
Francisc' Barlowe and Robert' postea adtunc and ibidem sciliet praedicto decimo
die Aprilis Anno tertio supradicto apud London' praed' in paroch' and Warda
praed' nominaver' quendam Cornel' Clarke Armig' fore Umpirator' int' praedict'
Burrowes and praefat' Johannem Air de and super praemiss. praed' Et idem
Burrowes ulterius dic' quod praed' Cornelius postea and ante praed' decim'
sextum diem Aprilis in Condition praed' mentionat' scilicet quartodecimo die
Aprilis anno tertio supradicto apud London' praed' in paroch' and Warda
preadict' suscepto super se onere Umpiragii praed' ore tenus (Anglice, by word
of Mouth) arbitravit and ordinavit quod praed' Johannes solveret praedict'
Burrowes septuagint' libras super decimum nonum diem Maii tunc prox' sequen'
apud dom' Johannis Ellison in Sheffeild in Com' Eborum int' duodecimam and
tertiam horas post meridiem ejusdem diei Et quod post talem solutionem super
eundem diem apud eundem locum praed' Burrowes and Johannes Air un' eorum
alteri invicem sigillarent general' Relaxationes praed' tamen Johannes Air
licet sepius requis. praed' septuagint' libras eidem Burrowes non solvit juxta
formam and effectum Umpiragii praed' Et hoc parat' est verificare unde pet'
Judicium and debitum and dampna sua sibi adjudicari, etc.

The Defendants special Demurrer.
Et praed' Johannes dic' quod praedict' Placitum praed' Burrowes superius
replicando placitat' ac materia in eodem content' minus sufficien' in lege
existunt ad praedict' Burrowes actionem suam praedict' versus eundem Johannem
habend' manutenend' quodque ipse ad placitum ill' modo and forma praed placitat
necesso non habet nec per legem terrae tenetur respondere and hoc parat' est
verificare unde pro defectu sufficien' Replication' praedict' Burrowes in hac
part idem Johannes pet' Judicium Et quod praed' Burrowes ab action sua praed'
versus eum habend' praecludatur, Causes of Demurrer.
etc. Et pro causis morationis in lege ipsius Johannis in hac part idem
Johannes juxta formam Statuti in hujusmodi Casu nuper edit' and provis' ostend'
and Cur' hic demonstrat' has causas subsequen' videlicet quod non constat per
Replication' ill' quod idem Johannes habuit notitiam quod arbitrator' praed'
nominaver' praed' Cornelium Clarke fore Umpirator' inter parts praed' vel quod
praedictus Cornelius habuit aliquam authorital ad faciend' aliquod Umpirag' vel
fore Umpirator' inter easdem parts de praemissis praed', etc.

Et praedictus Burrowes ex quo ipse sufficien' Joynder in Demurrer.
materiam in lege ad actionem suam praed' manutenend' superius replicando
allegavit quam ipse parat est verificare Quam quidem materiam praedict'
Johannes non dedicit nec ad eam aliqualit' respond' set verification' ill'
admittere omnino recusat idem Burrowes pet' Judic' and debitum suum praed' una
cum dampnis suis occasion detentionis debiti illius sibi adjudicari, etc. Et
quia Justic' hic se advisare volunt de and super praemissis praedictis
priulquam Judic' inde reddant dies dat' est partibus praed' hicusque a die
sancti Michaelis in tres Septiman' de audiendo inde Judic' suo eo quod Justic'
hic inde nondum, etc.

Trippet versus Eyres. Trin. 4 Jac. Secundi Rot.
IN Debt upon an Obligation of 300 l penalty.

The Defendant demanded Oyer of the condition, which was thus viz. If the above
bounden John Air his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, for his and their
parts and behoofs do in all things well and truly stand to and keep the Award
of Francis Barlow, and Robert Soresby, etc. Arbitrators indifferently named and
elected, as well on the part and behalf of the above-bounden John Air, as of
the abovenamed Burrows Trippett to arbitrate and award of and concerning all
Actions and Demands whatsoever at any time heretofore had, made, or depending
between the said Parties or either of them, so as the said Award be made and
put in Writing, or by word of Mouth, on or before the 9th day of April next
ensuing; but if the said Arbitrators do not make such their Award by the time
aforesaid, that then if the said John Air his Heirs, etc. do stand to and keep
the Award and Umpirage of such Umpire, as the said Francis Barlow and Robert
Soresby shall nominate between the said Parties of and concerning the
Premises, so as the said Umpire do make his Award or Umpirage of and
concerning the Premises by Writing or word of Mouth, on or before the 16th day
of April aforesaid, then this Obligation to be void.

The Defendant pleaded Actio non quia dicit, that the said Francis Barlow and
Robert Soresby made no Award within the time aforesaid; and the said Defendant
ulterius dicit, that the said Francis Barlow and Robert Soresby the 10th day of
April in the year aforesaid, at London, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, did
name one Francis Jessup Esquire to be Vmpire between the aforesaid Burrows Trippet,
and the aforesaid John Air, and the said Francis Jessup sic ut praefertur
Umpirator nominatus, did within the time to him limited make no Award or
Vmpirage of and concerning the Premises, and hoc paratus est verificare unde
petit Judicium, etc.

The Plaintiff replies, quod been and verum est, that the said Arbitrators made
no Award, and that before the 16th day of April aforesaid, Scilicet, at the day
and place in the Plea of the Defendant mentioned, they did name the said
Francis Jessup to be Vmpire between the said Parties; but he further says,
that the said Frincis Jessup adtunc and ibidem for Umpiratorem penitus
recusavit, and superinde, the said Arbitrators postea adtunc and ibidem
nominaverunt quendam Cornelium Clarke Armig' to be Vmpire between the said
Parties; and further says, that the said Cornelius Clarke postea and ante
praedict' decimum sextum diem Aprilis, scilicet, apud London, etc. suscepto
super se onere Umpiragii praedict' ore tenus arbitravit and ordinavit quod
praedict' Johannes Air solveret praedict' Burrows Trippett septuaginta libras,
etc. And that after payment the Parties should give mutual Releases, and says
that the Defendant did not pay the said 70 l according to the said award, and
hoc paratus est verificare, etc.

To this Replication the Defendant demurred. This Case was the last Term argued
at the Bar, and the Court took time till this Term to give their Opinions.

The sole Question was, whether the award made by Clarke was good, in regard
the Arbitrators had before named Jessup to be Vmpire, and though he refused, it
was insisted on for the Defendant that the Arbitrators were concluded to name
another, and so Cornelius Clarke had no Authority as Vmpire.

Powell, Rokeby and Ventris were of Opinion for the Plaintiff.

Pollexfen, Chief Justice, for the Defendant.

The reasons the three Justices went upon were, that the Nomination of Jessup
to be Vmpire did not make him Vmpire, and that his refusal immediately upon his
nomination made it amount ^o no more than a bare proposal to him, and so to
stand for nothing, and then it did not conclude the Arbitrators, but that they
might name another: The penning of the Condition of the Bond is to be observed,
the words being, to stand to the Award of such Umpire as the Arbitrators should
nominate, and not of such Person as they should name to be Umpire. So that
there is in the Condition a description or qualification of the Person to whose
award the Parties should submit, viz. to such an one as should be Vmpire, and
Vmpire by the nomination of the Arbitrators. Now Jessup, though nominated, yet
was not Vmpire, for his refusal hindered that, and therefore does not come
within the qualification, the Pleading is always suscepto super se onere
Arbitrii, so that it is the acceptance that makes him Vmpire or Arbitrator,

But it is objected, that the Arbitrators here have executed their Authority,
and it is done as fully as can be on their parts, and therefore they have no
power to name any other; The Condition empowered them to name one, but not to
name a second.

Answ. It Is true, when an Authority is once fully executed, the Power is
determined; but here, admitting it to be an Authority, (which Ventris said it
was not properly to be called so, there being no express Authority given to the
Arbitrators, but it is rather a description or qualification of the Person which
is to make the Award ut supra) yet there is no complete execution. If a Letter
of Attorney be to deliver Seisin, and the Attorney deliver Seisin within the
view, which is no good Execution of his Authority; yet sure that does not
hinder him from delivering Seisin upon the Land; an habere fac' process was
executed by the Sheriff in delivering a House, and after it was over, it was
discovered that a Person was hid in a Room of the House, whereupon he was
turned out, and the Sheriff delivered Execution again, which was resolved to be
well in Palmers Rep. 289. Submissions to Awards have been favorably construed,
because they tend to the end of Controversies; it was surely the Parties
meaning, if the Arbitrators named a man that rejected the Vmpirage, that this
should not conclude them from naming another: This nomination can be taken to
be no more than a proposal of the thing to Jessup, who must be taken to be
present at the first nomination for the pleading is, quod adtunc and ibid'
penitus recusavit.

But the great Objection relied upon at the Bar, and by the Chief Justice was,
that Jessup, though he did refuse, might have still proceeded with the Vmpirage;
and then if Clarke were well nominated, there should be a concurrent Authority
in several Persons to make an Award, which the Law will not suffer, as the Case
of Bernard and King, Roll. Abr. 262. and Sty. 306. where the submission was to
the Award of A. and B. so so that they made the Award within such a time; and
if they made no Award, then to the Award or Vmpirage of C. so as he made his
Award within the same time; and the Pleading was; that the Arbitrators
denegassent facere Arbitrium within the time, and superinde C. made an Award
within the time, and it was adjudged that the Award was void, because the
Arbitrators, notwithstanding the denial, might have made an Award, and the
Vmpire could have no power till their power was determined. And the Case of
Barber and Giles, 1 To. Abr. 261: is to the same purpose.

To which it was answered, That if it be admitted that Jessup, after his
refusal, might have taken upon him the Vmpirage in case the Arbitrators had
named no other Vmpire, yet it is clear Jessup could not have accepted the
Vmpirage after another was named; for the Arbitrators naming another upon his
refusal, had quite taken away their first nomination; and in case Jessup had
accepted before they had proceeded to name another, then the Arbitrators had
been prevented naming of any other; so here could be no concurrent Power at
all, Vide the Case of Frall and Brierly, 2 To. Abr. 261. Where the submission
was to two Arbitrators, and if they did not agree within a certain time, then
to the Vmpirage of such an one as they should choose, so that the Vmpire made
his Award within the same time: And it was shown that the Arbitrators made no
Award, and they chose an Vmpire who made an Award within the time; and that was
held good, because they had determined their Power by choosing an Vmpire, and
so it differed from the Case of Bernard and King, where the Vmpire was named in
the submission; and the Case of Copping and Horner, 2 Saunders 129. where the
submission was to Arbitrators, and if they made no Award, and could not agree
in such a time, then to the Arbitrament of J. S. so that he made an Award
within the same time.

In an Action brought upon the Award made by the Vmpire, it was set forth, that
the Arbitrators made no Award, nec facere potuerunt aliquod Arbitrium inter
Parts, and that the Vmpire made an Award within the time; upon a Demurrer to
the Declaration, Judgment was given for the Defendant; for the Averment quod
non potuerunt facere Arbitrium was idle, for it appeared they might have made
an Award within the time: But as it is reported by Saunders, if the Plaintiff
had set forth that they had declared they would make no Award. Then all the
Court held (except Twysden Justice) that the Award of the Vmpire had been good.

And this Ventris said did somewhat shake the Authority of Bernard and Kings
Case.

But Pollexfen, Chief Justice, said he had taken a report of the Case of
Copping and Horner, and produced his Report, where there was no mention of that
last Opinion reported by Saunders.

And the Chief Justice said, no Case could be put that where a man that was
vested with a bare Authority, his denial or refusal to execute it could
conclude him, but that notwithstanding he might execute his Authority; but if
he makes a void or insufficient execution he may do it over again. There is no
reason he said to take the words adtunc and ibidem penitus recusavit, that he
was present, and that the nomination was but a communication or proposal, for
if he had notice of it many days after, and refused, the pleading might be the
same, and no Traverse could be taken to the adtunc and ibidem. Where a man is
to be vested with an Interest his Acceptance is necessary; but it signifies
nothing when but a bare Authority. In the Cases of Awards the Pleading is,
nullum fecerunt arbitrium, and it is never pleaded that they were not
Arbitrators, or that they refused to be Arbitrators; for the Submission makes
them so, the pleading suscepto super se onere arbitrii is but mere Form. Lessee
for years assigns upon Condition to obtain the assent of the Lessor; the Lessor
at first denies, he may after Consent, and it is a good performance of the
Condition, 14 H. 7. 17. This is properly an Authority in the Arbitrators; it is
so taken in Vinyor's Case in 8 Co. and is revokable as other Authorities are.

These were the Chief Reasons upon which the Chief Justice relied.

But Judgment was given for the Plaintiff by the Opinion of the other three
Justices.

Anonymus.
IN a Writ of Dower the Tenant was Essoigned, and the Essoign adjourned in
Crastino Purificat', at which Day the Demandant did not appear with the Writ,
and demand the Tenant, but would have a Grand Cape made out.

This being shown to the Court, they said the Demandant must be Nonsuit, for
his not being ready in Court at the Day of Adjournment of the Essoign to demand
the Tenant, and the Tenant was therefore in no default.

Dowse versus Cale.
Midd. ss.
JOHANNES CALE nuper de London' Plumber, Covenant by an Assignee of an Assignee
of an Assignee against an Executor.
Executor Test'i Richardi Cale nuper dict' Richard Cale of the Parish of St.
Bridgets alias Brides, London Plumber sum' fuit ad respondend' Thomae Dowse
gen' assign' Thomae Dowse patri suo assign' Arthuro Stanhope Armig' Edwardo
Rosceter Mil' Johanni Wostenholme Armig' and Thomae Bristowe gen' assign'
Johannis Comitis de Clate de placito quod teneat ei convention' inter ipm^
Johann' Comitem de Clare and praefat' Ric' Cale in vita sua fact' secundum vim
formam and effectum quarundam Indentur' inter eos confectarum, Lessor seized in
Fee.
etc. Et unde idem Thomas Dowse per Robert' VVaring Attorn' suum dic' quod cum
praedict' Johannes Comes de Clare nono die Decembris Anno Domini Millesimo
sexcentesimo quadragesimo septimo seisit' fuisset de and in tribus Messuagiis
cum pertin' in parochia sancti Clementis Dacorum in Com' Midd' praed' in
dominico suo ut de feodo Ipsoque Johanne Comite de Clare sic inde seisit'
existen' Idem Johannes Comes de Clare postea scilicet eodem nono die Decembris
Anno Domini Millesimo sexcentesimo quadragesimo septimo supradicto apud paroch'
sancti Clement' And demised by Indenture.
Dacorum praed. in Com. praed. per quandam Indentur. inter ipm^ Johannem Commit
de Clare per nomen Praehonorabil Johannis Comit' de Clare ex una part Et
praefat' Ricm^ Cale in vita sua per nomen Ricardi Cale de paroch' sanctae
Bridgettae aliis Brides London' Plumber ex altera part adtunc and ibidem fact.
cujus alteram partem sigillo ips. Ricardi in vita sua sigillat' idem Thomas
Dowse modo quer' hic in Cur' profert cujus dat' est eisdem die and anno
dimisisset praefat' Ricardo ten^ta praed' cum pertin' per nomina tot' illorum
trium Messuagiorum sive tenementorum suorum cum pertin' in paroch' sancti
Clement' Dacorum in Com' Midd' adtunc vel nuper in tenura and occupation'
Elianorae Peirson Vid' Assign' assignat' vel subtenen' (Anglice Vndertenants)
suorum prox' jacen' messuag' sive tenement' Willielmi Haberfield erga orien'
and continen' in longitudine ex ea part Centum and sexagint' pedes Assize
(Anglice of Assize) aut eo circit' and prox' messuagio sive tenement' adtunc in
tenura Willielmi Hobson cogn' per nomen de le Bear and Harrow erga occiden'
and continen' in longitudine ex ea part Centum and sexagint' pedes Assize
(Anglice of Assize) aut eo circit' and in latitudine erga Austr' super plateam
adversus quendam locum vocat' le Buteher Row quatuordecim pedes Assize
(Anglice of Assize) and ad finem erga Boream novemdecim pedes Assize (Anglice
of Assize) aut eo circit' habend' and tenend' dict' tria messuag' sive
tenementa and praemissa cum pertin' dicto Ricardo Cale Executor' Administrator'
and Assign' suis a Festo Natalis Domini nostri Dei prox' sequen' dat' ejusdem
Indentur' pro and duran' toto te^pore and tmino quadragint' For 41 years.
and unius annor' extunc prox' sequen' plenar' complend' and finiend' Reddend
and solvend' proinde annuatim and quolibet anno duran' toto dict' termino dicto
Comiti Haered' vel Assign' suis summam viginti libr' Reddend', etc.
legalis Monetae Angl' ad vel immagna Aula capitalis mesuagii sive domus
manc^onal' dicti Comitis' scituat' in Drury Lane in Paroch' Sancti Clement'
Dacorum praed' ad quatuor maxim usual' terminos and Festa in anno (videlicet)
Annunciation' beatae Dom' nostrae Sanctae Mariae Virginis Nativitat' Sancti
Johannis Baptistae Sancti Michaelis Arc^hi and Natal' Domini nostri Dei per
equas and equal' portion' vel infra octodecim dies prox' post unum Quodque
eorundem Festorum prima solution' inde incipiend' and fiend' ad and super
Festum Nativitat' Sancti Johannis Baptistae prox' sequen' dat' ejusdem
Indentur' vel infra octodecim dies prox' post dict' Festum Et praed' The
Covenants.
Rich' Cale pro seipso Executor' Administrator' and Assign' suis and quilibet
eorum convenit promisit and concessit and and cum dicto Comite de Clare Hered'
and Assign' suis per Indentur' praed' Qd' ipse praed' Rich' Cale Executor'
Administrator' vel Assign' sui indilate post dat' ejusdem Indentur' devellerent
and prosternerent (Anglice pull or take down) tot' dict' tres domos tunc stan'
and existen' super dicta dimiss. premiss. and erigerent edificarent and
extruerent (Anglice, To pull down some Houses.
set up) super dict' solum ad ejus vel eorum propr' onera and eustag' tres tam
valid' firmas substantial' and artificiosas (Anglice, Workmanlike) domos tam in
operibus Laterar' Carpentar' Dealvator' (Anglice, And build up new Houses in
their rooms.
Plaisterers) Plumbar' Fabr' Vitrar' Lapidar' (Anglice Mason) and Pictor'
(Anglice, Painter) quam ipse praed' Rich Cale tunc nuper edificaverat pro
seipso in Fleetstreet in praed' Paroch' Sanctae Bridgettae alias Brides Lond'
in un' quarum quidem Domorum ipse tunc habitabat Ac etiam de tempore in tem pus
and ad omnia tempora tunc postea duran' dicto termino annorum per eandem
Indentur' concess. ad ejus vel eorum propr' onera and custag' been and
sufficien' repararent fulcirent sustinerent conservarent and manutenerent omnia
domos and edificia agreat' and convent' edificat' fore super dicta dimiss.
praemiss. aut aliquam partem inde Ac etiam omnia and singula Canal (Angl'
Sewers) Sentinas (Anglice, Sinks) Elicia (Anglice, Drains) and Paviment'
(Anglice, Pavements) fact' vel fiend' in per and eum omnibus requisite and
necessar' reparation' Ac dicta dimiss. praemiss. ac domus and edificia
superinde fore erect' and edificat' and little quodlibet been and sufficient'
reparat' supportat' sustent' conservat' and manutent' in fine vel citiori
determination' dicti termini quadragint' and un' annorum pacifice and quiet
relinquerent traderent and sursum redderent dict' Comiti Hered' vel Assign'
suis prout per per eandem Indentur' before apparet Virtute cujus quidem
dimission' praedict' Ricus Cale in tenementa praed' cum pertin', The Lessee
entered and was possessed.
etc. ut sic prefertur dimiss. intravit and fuit inde possessionat' reversion'
inde eidem Johanni Comiti de Clare and Haered' suis spectan' Ipsoque Rich Cale
sic de tenementis praedict' cum pertin' possessionat' existen' ac praed'
Johanne Comite de Clare de Reversione inde in dominico suo ut de feodo seisit'
existen' idem Johannes Comes de Clare postea scilicet sexto die Augusti Anno
Regni Domini Caroli secundi nuper Regis Angl, Lessor bargains and sells the
Reversion for a year.
etc. decimo quarto apud Paroch' Sancti Clement' Dacorum praed' in Com' praed'
per quandam Indentur' int' eundem Johannem Comit' de Clare per nomen
praehonorabil' Johannis Comit' de Clare ex una part Et praed' Arthurum
Stanhope Edward' Rosseter Joh' Wolstenholme and Though Bristowe per nomina
honorabil Arthur' Stanhope Armig' secundi Filii nuper praehonorabil Philippi
Comitis de Chesterfeild Ed. Rosseter de Somerby in Com' Lincoln. Mil' Joh.
Wolstenholme de London' Armig' and Tho. Bristowe de Beesthorpe in Com'
Nottingham Genesis ex altera part adtunc and ibidem facta cujus quidem Indentur'
un' partem sigillo praed' Comit' de Clare sigillat' idem Tho. Dowse modo Quer'
hic in Cur' profert cujus dat' est eisdem die and anno ult' supradicto pro and
in consideration' cujusdam Pecuniae summae eidem Comit' de Clare in manibus
praed' Arthur' Stanhope Ed Rosseter Joh Wolstenholme and Tho. Bristowe solut'
barganizavit and verdidit praefat' Arthuro Stanhope Ed. Rosseter Joh.
Wolstenholme and Tho. Bristowe (int' al') revertion' tenementorum praed' cum
pertin praefat' Rich. Cale, etc. ut praefertur dimiss. habend' and tenend'
revertion' ill' eisdem Arthur' Stanhope Ed. Rosseter Joh. Wolstenholme and Tho.
Bristowe Executor' Administrator' and Assign' suis a die prox' ante dat'
ejusdem Indentur' pro and duran' termino un' anni integri extunc prox' sequen'
plenar' complend' and finiend' reddend' and solvend' proinde dicto Joh. Comiti
de Clare Haered' and Assign' suis reddit' un' grani Piperis ad Festum Sanct.
Michaelis Arch' prox' sequen' post dat' ejusdem Indentur' si idem foret petit'
Virtute quarum quidem bargainae and vendition' necnon vigore cujusdam Actus in
Parliament' dom' Henrici nuper Regis Angl' octavi apud Westm' By virtue
whereof, and of the Statute of Uses the Bargainee was possessed.
in dicto Com' Midd' quarto die Februar' Anno Regni sui vicesimo septimo tent'
edit' and provis' de usibus in possession' transferend' praed' Arthur' Stanhope
Ed. Rosseter Joh. Wolstenholme and Tho. Bristowe fuer' de praed' revertion'
tenementorum praed' cum pertin' possessionat' revertion' inde ulterius eidem
Comit' and Haered. suis spectan. Ipsisque Arthur. Stanhope Ed. Rosseter Joh.
Wolstenholme and Tho. Bristowe sic de praed' revertion. tenementorum praed' cum
pertin. possessionat. existen. ac praed' Comite de revertion inde immediate
super praed' The Lessor Releases the Inheritance.
termin. praed' Arthur. Ed. Joh. Wolstenholme and Tho. Bristowe expectan. in
dominico suo ut de feodo seisit. existen. idem Comes postea scilicet septimo
die Augusti Anno Regni dict nuper Regis Caroli Secundi decimo quarto supradicto
apud Paroch. Sacti Clement. Dacorum praed' in Com. praed' per quandam al.
Indentur. int. eundem Joh. Commit. de Clare per nomen praehonorabilis Joh.
Comitis de Clare ex una part and praefat. Arthur. Stanhope Ed. Rosseter Joh.
Wolstenholme and Tho. Bristowe per nom' praehonorabilis Arthur. Stanhope Armig.
secundi Filii nuper praehonorabil. Philip. Commit. de Chesterfeild defunct. Ed.
Rosseter de Somerby in Com. Lincoln' Mil. Joh. Wolstenholme de London. Armig'
and Thomae Bristowe de Beerthorpe in Com. Nottigham genesis ex altera part adtunc
and ibidem fact. cujus un' partem sigillo praedict' Commit. de Clare sigillat'
Idem Thomas Dowse modo quer' hic in Cur' profert cujus dat' est eisdem die and
anno ult' supradict' pro and in cons. in eadem Indentur' mentionat' relaxavit
and remisit praefat' Arthur' Stanhope Edwardo Rosseter Johanni Wolstenholme and
Thomae Bristowe (inter al.) praed' revertion' ipsius Comitis tenementorum
praed' cum pertin. habend. and tenend. eisdem Arthur' Stanhope Edwardo Rosseter
Johonni Wolstenholme and Thomae Bristowe Haered' To the use of himself for life.
and Assign. imperpetuum ad usum praed' Johannis Comitis de Clare pro termino
vitae suae natural' Et post decess. ipsius Commit. tunc ad usum ^^^rundam
Arthur. Stanhope Edwardi Rosseter Johannis Wolstenholm and Thomae Bristowe
Executor' Administrator' and Assign' And after his decease to the Grantees for
1000 years.
suorum abpro; and duran' tetmino Mill annorum a dat' ^j^sejusdem Indentur'
computand' plenar' complend. and finiend. virtute cujus quidem relaxation'
necnon vigore praedict' Statut' de usibus in possession' transferend' Seisin by
virtue of the Statute of Uses.
Idem Johannes Comes de Clare fuit de praed' revercon' tenementorum praed' cum
pertin' seisit' in dominico suo ut de libero tenemento pro termino vitae suae
natural' remanere inde ut praefertur limitat' spectan' Et sic inde seisit'
existen' idem Comes postea scilicet primo die Julii Anno regni dicti nuper
Regis Caroli Secundi decimo octavo apud praed' paroch' sancti Clement' Dacorum
obiit sic de tali statu suo inde seisit' Tenant for Life died seized.
post cujus mortem iidem Arthur' Stanhope Edwardus Rosseter Johannes
Wolstenholme and Thomas Bristowe possessionat' fuer' de praed' revercon'
ten^torum praed' cum pertin' pro praed' The Grantees possessed for the Term of
1000 years.
termino Mill annorum Et sic inde possessionat' existen' iidem Arthur'
Stanhope Edwardus Rosseter Johannes Wolstenholme and Thomas Bristowe postea
scilicet septimo die Julii anno regni dicti nuper Regis Caroli Secundi vicesimo
apud praed' paroch' sancti Clement' Dacorum per quandam Indentur' inter
Gilbertum Comit' de Clare and praefat' Arthur' Stanhope Edward' And by
Indenture grant to the Defendants Testator for the residue of the Term.
Rosseter Johannem Wolstenholme and Thomam Bristowe per nomina Praehonorabil.
Gilberti Comit' de Clare Honorabil' Arthur. Stanhope Armig' secundi filii nuper
Praehonorabil' Philippi Commit. de Chesterfield defunct. domini (Anglice Sir)
Edwardi Rosseter de Somerby in Com' Lincoln' Mil' Johannis Wolstenholme de
London Armig' and Thomae Bristowe de Beerthorpe in Com. Not. gen' ex un' part
and quendam Thomam Dowse patrem praed' Thomae Dowse modo quer' per nomen Thomae
Dowse de Gray's Inn in Com. Midd. genesis ex altera part adtunc and ibidem fact'
cujus quidem Indentur' un' partem sigillis praed' Gilberti Comitis de Clare
Arthur' Stanhope Edwardi Rosseter Johannis Wolstenholme and Thomae Bristowe
sigillat' Idem Thomas Dowse modo quer' hic in Cur' profert cujus dat' est
eisdem die and anno ult' supradict' pro and in cons' cujusdam pecuniae summae
eisdem Arthur. Stanhope Edwardo Rosseter Johanni Wolstenholme and Thomae
Bristowe in manibus per predict' Thomam Dowse patrem solut' concesser' dicto
Thomae Dowse pr^i Executor. Administrator. and Assign. suis (inter al') praed'
revercon' tenementor' praed' cum pertin' habend. and tenend. revercon' praed.
cum pertin' dicto Though Dowse pr^i Exec. Administr. and Assign' suis pro and
duran omni reliq' and resid' dicti termin' Mill annor' tunc ventur. and
inexpirat. prout per eand' Indentur' before apparet ad quam quidem concession'
The Tenant for years attorns.
dictus Ricardus Cale postea scilicet octavo die Julii Anno regni dicti nuper
Regis Caroli Secundi vicesimo supradicto apud praed. paroch. sancti Clementis
Dacorum eodem Ricardo Cale tunc tenent. tenementorum praed. cum pertin. virtute
dimission' praed. sibi ut praefertur fact. existen. se attorn' and agreavit
virtute cujus quidem concession. and attornament. praed. pretextu praedict.
Thomas Dowse pater de praed. revercon' ten^torum praedict' cum pertin' suit
possessionat' pro resid' dicti term' Mill annorum Ipsoque Ricardo Cale sic de
tenementis preadict' cum pertin' ut prefertur possessionat' existen' Idem
Ricardus Cale in vita sua scilicet octavo die Julii Anno regni dicti nuper
Regis Caroli Secundi decimo nono apud praedict' paroch' sancti Clementis
Dacorum condidit test' The Tenant in possession makes his Will, and makes the
Defendants Father his Executor.
and ult' volunt' sua in scriptis and inde constituit praedict' Johannem Cale
Executor' and praedict' Ricm^ Cale postea and post attornament' praedict' fact'
scilicet decimo die Decembris anno regni ducti nuper Regis Caroli secundi
vicesimo secundo apud praed' paroch' sancti Clementis Dacorum obiit de
tenementis praed' sibi ut prefertur dimiss. sic ut praefertur possessionat'
post cujus mortem praed' Johannes Cale onus execution' And died possessed. The
Defendant proved the Will and entered, and was possessed.
test' praedict' super se suscepit and ut Executor test' praedict' in tenementa
praedict' cum pertin' intravit and fuit inde possessionat' Et sic inde
possessionat' existen' praedictoque Thoma Dowse patre de revercon' inde ut
prefertur etiam possessionat' existen' ipse praedict' Thomas Dowse pater postea
scilicet vicesimo sexto die Februarii anno regni dicti nuper Regis Caroli
secundi tricesimo sexto apud paroch' Then the Grantee in Reversion made his
Will, and devised the Reversion to the Plaintiff for Life, and after his
decease to his Son in Tail.
sancti Clement' Dacorum praedict' fecit and condidit testm^ and ult' voluntat'
sua in scriptis and per eadem test' and ult' voluntat' sua dedit and devisavit
inter al' praedict' revercon' tenementorum praedict' cum pertin' eidem Thormae
Dowse modo quer' filio suo pro termino vitae ejusdem Thomae filii and post ejus
decess. tunc cuidam Thomae Dowse filio praedict' Thomae Dowse modo quer' and
haered' de corpore ejusdem Thomae filii praed' Thomae modo quer' exeun' and de
eodem testo^ idem Thomas Dowse pater constituit dict' fil' suum Thomam Dowse
modo quer' sol' Executor' Posteaque scilicet decimo sexto die Aprilis anno
tricesimo secundo supradicto apud paroch' And made the Plaintiff Executor. And
died.
sancti Clement' Dacorum praedict' in Com' praed' praedict' Thomas Dowse pater
obiit de praedict' revercon' tenementor' praed' cum pertin' in forma praed'
possessionat' post cujus mortem praedict' Thomas Dowse modo quer' scilicet
vicesimo sexto die Januarii anno regni dicti nuper Regis Caroli secundi
tricesimo tertio supradicto test' The Plaintiff proved the Will.
praedict' debita juris forma apud predict' paroch' sancti Clementis Dacorum
probavit ac onus and execuconem test' praedict' super se suscepit and praedict'
revercon' tenementorum praedict' cum pertin' ratione legat' praedict' dict'
vicesimo sexto die Januarii anno tricesimo tertio supradicto apud praedict'
paroch' sancti Clement' And claimed the Tenements Virtute legat'.
Dacorum clamavit virtute cujus quidem legationis idem Thomas Dowse modo quer'
de revercon' tenementor' praedict' cum pertin' pro resid' dicti termini Mill
annorum fuit possessionat' Et sic inde possessionat' existen' praedictoque
Ricardo Cale de tenementis praedict' cum pertin' in forma praedict' ut
praefertur possessionat' existen' licet Idem Thomas Dowse modo quer' been and
fidelit' observavit perimplevit performavit and custodivit omnia and singula
convencon' concession' articul' and agreament' in Indentur' dimission' superius
primo recitat' spec' ex part praedict' Johannis Comit' Protestando, That the
Defendant did not perform the Covenants of his part.
de Clare haered' and assign' suor' observand' performand' perimplend' seu
custodiend' secundum formam and effect' ejusdem Indentur' protestandoque quod
praedict' Johannes Cale non tenuit observavit perimplevit performavit seu
custodivit aliqua convencon' concession' articulos and agreament' in eadem
Indentur' spec' ex part praedict. Ricardi Cale Executor. Administrator. and
Assign. suorum observand. performand. perimplend. seu custodiend. secundum
formam and effect. Indentur. dimission. praedict' in facto idem Thomas Dowse
modo quer. dic. quod praedict. Johannes Cale sic ut praefertur possessionat.
existen. post mortem dicti Thomae Dowse patris and ante finem praedict. termini
quadragint. and unius annorum per eandem Indentur' Breach assigned in
permitting the Premises to be out of Repair.
concess. scilicet decimo tertio die Septembris anno Domini Millesimo
sexcentesimo octogesimo quarto apud paroch. sancti Clementis Dacorum praedict.
in Com. praed. permisit un' domum ad valentiam ducentarum librarum super
praedict' dimiss. praemiss. per praedict. Ric' Cale in vita sua post dimission'
praedict' sibi ut praefertur fact. and duran. dimission. ill. erect. fore
penitus prostrat. consumpt' The particulars
and totalit. ruinat. in omnibus partibus inde pro defectu supportacon. inde Et
praed' Johannes Cale sic ut praefertur possessionat. existen. ad finem praed'
termini quadraginta and un' Another breach assigned for want of Repairs.
annorum qui finivit ad Festum Natalis Dom Anno Domini MDCLXXXVIII. praed' dom
sic prostrat' consumpt' and total' ruinat' reliquit contra formam and effect.
convencon. praed' in ea part quodque praed' Johannes Cale sic ut praefertur
possessionat' existen' post mortem patris sui praed' and duran. praed' termino
quadraginta and unius annorum scilicet decimo die Maii anno regni dicti nuper
Regis Caroli secundi vicesimo quarto and continue postea usque ad finem praed.
termini quadraginta and unius annorum permisit paviament. cujusdam areae
(Anglice Yard) parcel. praemissor. ut praefertur dimiss. fore and esse fract.
dirupt. and in decasu pro defectu reparacon' inde per quod aqua pluvial. and
al. aqua in aream praed. venien. pro defectu reparacon. paviament. praed. a
praed. area in and super muros and aream querceam (Anglice an Oaken Floor)
cujusdam cellarii parcel. praemissorum ut praefertur dimiss. descender. ita
quod muri and area quercea ill. per aquam ill. putrid. devener. and corrupt'
quodque praed' Johannes Cale praed' paviment' sic fract' dirupt' and in decasu
and praed' muros and aream querceam sic putrid' and corrupt' pro defectu
reparacon' inde ad finem praed' termini quadragint' and un' annocum reliquit
contra formam and effect' convencon' praedict' in ea part Quodque praedict.
Johannes Cale sic ut praefertur possessionat' existen' post mortem patris sui
praedict' and duran' praedict' Another breach for want of Repairs.
termino quadraginta and un' annorum scilicet primo die Octobris Anno Domini
Millesimo sexcentesimo octogesimo octavo permisit tegulas lateras (Anglice
Lathes) fenestras and muros cement' (Anglice Plaster Walls) videlicet december
mill tegulas december mill latas ducent. pedes fenestr' and centum virgat'
cement' quatuor al' domorum super dimiss. praemiss. per praedict. Ric. Cale in
vita sua post dimiss. praedict' sibi ut praefertur fact' and duran' dimiss.
ill. erect. fore and esse fract' dirupt' and in decasu pro defectu reparacon'
inde Et praedict. Johannes Cale praedict' tegulas latas fenestras ac muros sic
fract' dirupt' and in decasu pro defectu reparacon' inde ad finem praedict.
termini quadragint. and unius annorum reliquit contra formam and effect'
convencon' Et sic, etc.
praedict' in ea part Et sic idem Thomas Dowse modo quer' dic' quod praedict.
Johannes Cale convencon' praed' in Indentur' dimission' praed' superius prim.
menconat' in hac part fact' non tenuit sed infregit ac ill. eidem Thomae Dowse
modo quer' tenere contradixit and adhuc contradic' unde idem Thomas Dowse modo
quer' dic' quod deteriorat' est and dampn' habet ad valenc' trescent. librarum
Et inde produc' sectam, etc. Et profert hic in Cur' idem Thomas Dowse modo
quer' Litteras testament' praefat' Thomae Dowse patris per quas satis liquet
Cur' hic ipm^ Thomam modo quer' fore Executor' testamenti ill. and inde habere
administracon', etc.

The Defendant pleads performance specially to each breach assigned.
Et praedict' Johannes per Johannem White Attorn' suum ven' and defend. vim and
injur' quando, etc. and dic. quod praedict' Thomas Dowse actionem suam praed.
inde versus eum habere non debet quia dic. quod praedict' Ricardus Cale in vita
sua post confeccon' Indenturae praed' superius prim. menconat' prostravit tot'
praed' tres domus quae dicto tempore confeccon' ejusdem Indentur' fuer' stant.
and existen. super dimissa premissa and de novo erexit aedificavit and extruxit
super dict' solum in eisdem loc. ubi praedict. tres domus sic prosternat. sic
fuerunt stant. tres al. domus tantae magnitudinis quant. praedict' tres domus
sic prosternat' fuerunt quodque idem Johannes Cale a praed' tempore mort'
praed' Ricardi Cale de tempore in tempus duran. toto praedict. termino
quadraginta and unius annorum been and sufficien reparavit sustinuit
conservavit and manutenuit omnes ill. tres domus sic de novo aedificat. cum
pertin. and tres domus sic de novo aedificat. cum pertin. and tres domus ill.
and quamlibet eorum sic been. and sufficien. reparat. sustent. conservat. and
manutent. in fine praedict. termini quadragint. and unius annorum sursum
reddidit and reliquit secundum formam convencon. praedict' in ea part fact. Et
de hoc pon. se super Patriam Et quoad non reparacon. paviament. areae praed. An
Issue tendered.
Idem Johannes dic. quod ipse idem Johannes non permisit paviament. areae
praedict' fore fract. dirupt. seu in decasu pro defectu reparacon. inde nec
paviament. and muros and aream querceam praedict. seu aliquam pertem inde fore
fract. dirupt. seu in decasu pro defectu reparac' inde ad finem praedict.
termini quadragint. and unius annorum modo and forma prout praedict' Thomas
superius versus eum queritur Et de hoc ponit se super priam^ and praed' Thomas
similiter Et quoad permission' Another Issue tendered.
tegular' laterar' fenestra and murorum ten^t' in narratione praed' mentionat'
fore and esse fract' dirupt' and in decasu pro defectu reparation' Idem
Johannes dic' qd' ipse idem Johannes Cale non permisit tegulas lateras
fenestras and muros cement. praed' seu aliquam partem inde fore fract' dirupt'
seu in decasu pro defectu reparation' inde nec praed' tegul lat' fenestras and
muros cement' praed' seu aliquam partem inde fract' dirupt' seu in decasu pro
defectu reparation' inde ad finem praed' termini quadragint' and unius annorum
reliquit modo and forma prout praed' Thomas superius versus eum queritur Et de
hoc ponit se super priam^ and praedict' Thomas similiter, etc. A third Issue
tendered.


Et praedict' Thomas Dowse filius dic' qd' praed' placitum praed' A Demurrer to
the first Plea, upon which the Issue is tendered but not taken.
Johannis Cale quoad fraction' convention' praed' in relinquendo ad finem
praed' termini quadragint' and unius annorum praed' un' domum super praed'
dimissa praemissa per praed' Rich. Cale in vita sua post dimission' praed' sibi
ut praefertur fact' and duran' dimission' ill' erect' prostrat' consumpt' and
totalit' ruinat' prout idem Thomas Dowse filius superius inde narravit superius
in barram placitat' materiaque in eodem placito content' minus sufficiens in
lege existunt ad ipsum Thomam Dowse filium ab action sua praed' inde versus
praefat' Johannem Cale habend' praecludend' qd'que ipse ad placitum illud in
hac part modo and forma praed' placitat' necesse non habet nec per legem
terrae tenetur respondere Et hoc parat' est verificare unde pro defectu
sufficien' placiti in hac part idem Thomas Dowse pet' judicum and dampna sua
occatione fraction' convention' praed' in hac part sibi adjudicari, etc.

Et praed' Johannes Cale dic' qd' placitum praed' per ipsum Johannem modo and
forma praed' placitat' materiaque in eadem content' A Joynder in Demurrer.
bon' and sufficien' in lege existit' ad Cur' dict' Domini and Dominae Regis
and Reginae nunc hic a cognitione placiti praedict' habend' praecludend' quod
quidem placitum materiaque in eadem content' idem Johannes parat' est
verificare and probare prout praed' Cur', etc. Et quia praed' Thomas Dowse ad
placitum illud non respond' nec ill' hucusque aliqualit' dedic' idem Johannes
Cale pet' Judicium si Cur' dictorum Dom' and Dominae Regis and Reginae nunc hic
placitum illud ulterius cognoscere velit. Hen. Trinder. Et quia Justic' hic se
advisare volunt de and super praemissis unde parts praed' superius posuer' se
in Judicium Cur' priusquam Judicium inde reddant dies dat' est partibus praed'
hicusque in Octabis Sancti Hilarii de audiendo inde judicio suo eo qd' iidem
Justic' hic inde nondum, etc. Et quoad triand' separal' exit' praed' inter
parts praed' per patriam triand. superius junct. Prec. est Vic. quoth. venire
fac. hic ad praefat. Terminum duodecim, etc. per quos, etc. Et qui nec, etc. ad
recogn. etc. Quia tam, etc.

Dowse versus Cale.
IN an Action of Covenant brought by Thomas Dowse, as Assignee of Thomas Dowse
his Father, Assignee of Arthur Stanhope, Edward Rosseter, John Wolstenholm and
Thomas Bristow, Assgnees of John late Earl of Clare, against John Cale Executor
of Richard Cale. The Plaintiff set forth a Lease by Indenture, made by the said
Earl of Clare the 9th of December 1647. to the said Richard Cale of three
Messuages in the Parish of St. Clement Danes in Middlesex, to hold from
Christmas Day then next following for 41 years, rendering 20 l yearly Rent; and
further sets forth, that the said Richard Cale by the said Indenture Covenanted
with the said Earl, his Heirs and Assigns to pull-down the said three Houses,
and would in the same place build three as good and substantial Houses in all
respects as the said Richard Cale had for some short time before built for
himself in Fleetstreet; Ac eciam, That he would, during the said term, well and
sufficiently repair all the Houses so agreed to be built; ac eciam, omnia and
singula Canal' ( Angelice Sewers) Sentinas (Anglice, Sinks) Elicia ( Anglice,
Drains) and paviamenta fact' vel fiend' in pro and cum omnibus requisitis and
necessar' reparationibus ac dicta dimissa praemissa ac domus and edificia
superinde fore erect' and edificat' and eorum quodlibet been and sufficienter
reparat' supportat' and manutent' in fine vel citiori determinatione dicti
termini pacifice and quiet relinqueret and sursum redderet dicto Com' Haered'
and Assign' suis prout per Indentur' praed', etc.

By virtue of which said Demise the said Richard Cale entered and was possessed,
and the said Earl being seized of the Reversion by Lease and Release, dated the
6th and 7th of August 1662. conveyed the said Reversion to the said Arthur
Stanhop, Edward Rossiter, John Wolstenholm and Thomas Bristow and their Heirs,
to the use of the said John, Earl of Clare, during his Life, and after his
Decease to the use of the said Stanhop, Rossiter, Wolstenholm and Bristow for
one thousand years next after the date of the said Indenture; and that after
the said Earl of Clare died, and the said Stanhop, Rossiter, Wolstenholm and
Bristow became possessed of the Reversion of the Premises for the said term of
1000 years; and upon the 7th of June 1668. by an Indenture between Gilbert,
Earl of Clare, and the said Stanhop, Rossiter, Wolstenholm and Bristow of the
one part, and Thomas Dowse (Father of the Defendant) of the other part; they
granted to the said Thomas Dowse the Reversion of the said Premises, for and
during the residue of the term of 1000 years, to which the said Richard Cale
being then possessed of the term demised to him as aforesaid of the Premises,
did attorn; and the said Richard Cale being so possessed in the year 1672.
died, having made his last Will, and the Defendant Executor thereof, who after
the decease of the said Richard, entered into the said demised Premises, and
became possessed; and the said Thomas Dowse, Father to the Plaintiff, died
possessed of the Reversion aforesaid, in the year of our Lord 1686. having made
his Will, and thereby devised the said Reversion to the Plaintiff for his life,
and after his decease to Thomas Dowse, Son of the Plaintiff, and to the Heirs
of his Body, and made the Plaintiff Executor of his said Will, who caused the
same to be proved, and did claim the Reversion of the said Premises ratione
legationis praed', and thereupon became possessed thereof for the residue of
the said term of 1000. years then to come, and unexpired: And the said Richard
Cale being possessed by virtue of the Demise aforesaid, although he the said
Thomas Dowse performed all the Covenants to be performed as aforesaid on the
part of the said John, late Earl of Clare, his Heirs and Assigns; the said
Defendant did not perform the Covenants which were to be performed on the part
of the said Richard Cale his Executors and Administrators, and in facto dicit
the said John Cale being possessed of the Premises, after the decease of the
said Thomas Dowse, Father of the Plaintiff, before the end of the said term of
one and forty years, viz. the 13th of September 1684. did permit one House of
the value of 200 l erected upon the Premises by the said Richard Cale, in his
life time, to fall down, and to be wholly ruinated; and the said John Cale at
the end of the said term, which ended at Christmas Anno Dom. 1688. left the
said House so prostrated and ruined, contra formam conventionis praed'.

And assigns another Breach, for that he permitted the Pavement of the Yard to
be broken and in decay; and at the end of the term left it so in decay for want
of repair; and that he suffered the Tiles, and one hundred yards of Walling of
four Houses upon the Premises, erected by the said Richard Cale, in his
lifetime, during the term, to be broken and in decay for want of Repairs, and
so the said John Cale left them at the end of the said term; and so the said
Defendants broke the Covenants ad damnum of the Plaintiff 300 l

The Defendant pleaded, that the said Richard Cale, in his lifetime, did
demolish the three Houses demised, and upon the ground whereon they stood, did
erect three new Houses according to the agreement, which, during the term, were
kept well repaired, and at the end of the term left in good repair, and so
yielded up according to the Covenant aforesaid, and de hoc ponit, etc. And as
to the not repairing the Pavements, traverseth that also, and the like as to
repairing of Tiles and Walls.

The Plaintiff as to the not repairing of one House, in the Declaration
mentioned, and delivering it up well repaired, demurs to the Defendants Plea;
which Demurrer came to be argued this Term, and the sole question was upon this
Covenant, whether the Defendant, being obliged only to build three Houses, and
having built one more, whether the Covenant did not bind him to repair and
deliver up that House well repaired, as well as those which were agreed to be
built: And the Court were of Opinion that the Covenant did extend to the other
House as well as to the three which were agreed to be built: For in the last
Covenant, which is to deliver up well repaired, it is dicta premissa, ac Domos
and Edificia superinde fore erect, which is general; and it is the rather so to
be taken, because in the first Covenant for keeping in repair during the term;
it is the Houses agreed to be built, which words, agreed to be built, are left
out in the last Covenant, which the Court took to be a distinct Covenant.

Rokeby doubted, it seeming to him to be all as one Covenant, and so all the
subsequent matter concerning leaving the Houses well repaired, should be
restrained and understood of those agreed to be built.

But Judgment was given for the Plaintiff upon the reasons aforesaid.

It was also objected on the part of the Defendant, that Dowse the Plaintiff
was not an Assignee in this Case to bring Covenant, for that the term in the
reversion was devised to him for Life only; and if he died within the Term,
then to his first Son, etc.

To this it was answered, that the Devise of the term to him, passed the whole
Estate, and the remainder to the Son was but a possibility, and an executory
Devise.

Welbie versus Phillips.
IN Debt for Rent, the Plaintiff declared upon a Demise made the 25th of March
Anno nuper Regis Jac. 4. of one Message to hold from thenceforth quamdiu
ambabus partibus placeret, yielding 10 l Rent quarterly, and avers that the
Defendant entered by virtue of the said Demise, and continued possessed of the
Premises till Christmas then next following, and for 50 s a quarters Rent
ending at the said Christmas Day, he brings his Action, and so lays two several
other Demises of two other Houses, to begin at the same time, under the same
Rent, and demands a quarters Rent upon each at Christmas aforesaid, in all 7 l
10 s which the Defendant did not pay, which he lays ad damnum 5 l

The Defendant demurred to this Declaration, for that he sues for a quarters
Rent upon each Demise, ending at Christmas, whereas there were two quarters
incurred before, which he does not show were paid, and so sues for less, than
upon his own showing appears to be due; and the Case of Baily and Offord, 3
Cro. was cited, where upon a Demise, rendering 31 s per annum at our Lady Day
and Michaelmas, the Plaintiff declared for 15 s and 6 d due for a years rent,
ending at our Lady Day, and held naught, because he demands but 15 s and 6 d
and does not show that the rest of the years Rent was satisfied; and the Case
of Clothworthy in 3 Cro. where in a Writ of annuity the Plaintiff demanded the
Arrears; incurred at Michaelmas, 3 Car. 1. and brought his Writ the 16th of
April 4 Car. 1. and said in that Case by Maynard, that a man cannot bring an
Action for part of a Debt without he shows the rest satisfied, Vide 2 Cro. 499.

But the Court gave Judgment for the Plaintiff, and said this was not like the
Cases cited; for in the first Case of Baily the whole years Rent is said to be
due, and yet demands but half a year: And for the Case of Clothworthy, there
the Judgment as appears by 3 Cro. and To. Abr. 1 part 229. was, that he should
recover the Arrears before the Writ, and pending the Writ, whereas he demanded
the Arrears but to Michaelmas before the Writ brought, and so the Judgment was
for more than was demanded; but in this Case every quarters Rent is a several
Debt, and distinct Actions may be brought for each quarters Rent; and so not
like Debt brought for part of the Money upon a Bond or Contract, Vide for this 7
H. 6. 26. a. Allen 57. Noy's Rep. 45.

Chase versus Sir James Etheridge.
THe Plaintiff in an Action for Words, had taken out an Original and delivered
a Declaration, which the Defendant upon searching for the Instructions given by
the Plaintiff to the Cursitor found differed in diverse material things from the
Original, and thereupon the Defendant pleaded the Statute of Limitations, that
the words were not spoken within two years. The Plaintiff suspecting some
miscarriage had been, upon which the Defendant, as he conceived, did rely, (for
the Plaintiff knew the Fact would not serve the Defendant to plead the Statute)
he found that he had mistaken his Original, and upon that petitions the Master
of the Rolls for another Original that should warrant the Declaration
delivered, and had it granted and filed in Court; whereupon the Defendant moved
the Commissioners of the Great Seal, and showed the whole matter; upon which
they set aside the Order of the Master of the Rolls, and ordered an Original to
be taken out according to the first Instructions given to the Cursitor: And now
the Court was moved here, that the last Original might be filed, and so it was
ordered by the Court; for that taken out by the Order of the Master of the
Rolls, was unduly taken out.

Whitaker versus Thoroughgood.
BEnjaminus Thoroughgood Mil. attach. fuit per breve Domini Regis and Dominae
Reginae de privilegio e Cur. hic emanen. ad respond. Edwardo Whitaker Genesis un.
Attorn. Cur. Domini and Dominae Regis and Reginae de Banco juxta. libertat. and
privileg. ejusdem Cur. pro hujusmodi Attorn. and aliis Ministris de eodem Banco
a tempore quo non extat memoria usitat. and approbat. in eadem Cur. de placito
transgressionis super casum, etc. and so declares in propria persona in an
Action, for that the Defendant being a Justice of Peace in the time of the late
King James, made a Warrant, directed to the Constable, charging the Plaintiff
with being outlawed of High Treason, ubi re vera, etc. The Defendant demurred,
and showed for Cause, that in the prescription for the Privilege, it was
tempore quo non extat memoria, which was said to be insensible; and the course
in pleading was to say a tempore cujus contrarium memoria hominum non existit.
Sed non allocatur, for the Court took the words to be sufficiently expressing
time out of mind, and diverse Presidents are in this manner, Rastalls Entries
475, 476, and 143.

Shipley versus Craister.
IN an Action of Debt upon a Bond of 80 l the Plaintiff declared, that the
Defendant entered into a Bond to him, who was then the Sheriff of Northumberland
by the name of his Office of 80 l

The Defendant demanded Oyer of the Condition, which was, that one Jenkin Wood
should appear coram Dom. Rege apud Westminster. die Lunae proxime post Octab Pur.
etc. and then he pleaded a Release of all Demands under the Plaintiffs Hand and
Seal, made to him, bearing date the 9th day of March in the third year of the
reign of the late King James, and profert hic in Cur. the Release. And to this
the Plaintiff demurred.

Sergeant Jefferson offered to argue, that this Bond being taken by the
Sheriff, according to the duty of his Office, and for the benefit of the
Plaintiff who brought the Action, that his Release to the Obligor would not bar
this Action; but the Court said there was no color but it should be a good bar.

But upon perusing of the Record it appeared, that the Defendant had pleaded
that the Plaintiff had released by his Deed of Release, bearing date the 9th
day of March, whereas the Release produced in Court, bore dath the 19th of the
same March; and this the Court held a material variance.

Note. The King cannot discharge a Recognizance taken for Security of the
Peace, but after it is broken he may, 11 H. 7. 12.

Holland versus Lancaster.
ss.
JOHANNES LANCASTER sum^ fuit ad respondend' Count in Replevin.
Thomae Holland de placito quare cepit averia ipsius Thomae and ea injuste
detinuit contra Vad' and Pleg' etc. Et unde idem Thomas per Robertum Bird
Attorn' suum queritur qd' praed' Johannes vicesimo secundo die Octobris Anno
Regni Domini Jacobi secundi nuper Regis Angl, etc. tercio apud Mounckton in
Insula de Thanett in quodam loco ibidem vocat' le Barnyard cepit averia
videlicet octo Vaccas ipsius Thomae and ea injuste detinuit contra vad' and
pleg' quousque etc. Unde dic' qd' deteriorat' est and dampnum habet ad valenc'
december librarum Et inde producit sectam, etc. Conuzance as Bailiff to the Dean
and Chapter of Canterbury, for a Distress for a Fine upon an Alienation. Dean
and Chapter seized of a Manor in Fee in jure Ecclesiae.


Et praed' Johannes Lancaster per Brian' Courthop Attorn' suum ven' and defend'
vim and injur' quando, etc. Et ut Ballivus Decani and Capitalis Ecclesiae
Cathedral' and Metropolitan' Cantuar' been cognoscit captionem averiorum
praedictorum in praedict' Clauso in quo, etc. and just, etc Quia dic' qd' diu
ante praedict' tempus captionis averiorum praed' ac eodem tempore quo, etc.
praed' Decanus and Capital' fuer' seisit' de Manerio de Mounckton cum pertin'
in Com' Kanc' praed' in dominico suo ut de feodo in jure Ecclesiae suae
praedict' Qd'que quidam Johannes Sabine Barronettus diu ante praed' tempus quo,
J. S. seized in Fee of the locus in quo.
etc. suit seisit' de tribus Mesuagiis quatuor Horreis centum and quadraginta
Acris terrae and octogint' acris marisci cum pertin' in Parochiis de Mounckton
and sancti Nicholai Atwade in Insula Thanett in Com' Kanc' praed' unde praed'
Clausum in quo, etc. est and praed' tempore quo, And held it of the Dean and
Chapter.

By fealty and Rent, and Suit of Court.


etc. necnon a tempore cujus contrar' memoria hom' non existit suit parcel' in
dominico suo ut de feodo and illa tenuit de eisdem Decano and Capitalo ut de
Manerio suo praed' per fidelitat' and reddit' sex librar' duorum solidorum sex
denar' and un' oboli singulis annis ad Festum Sancti Michaelis Arc^hi solvend'
and per servicium faciend' sectae ad Cur' ipsorum Decani and Capituli Manerii
sui praedict' de tribus septimanis in tres septimanas apud Manerium ill' The
Dean and Chapter seized of the Services.
tenend' de quibus quidem serviciis iidem Decanus and Capitalus fuer' seisit'
per manus praefat' Johannis Sabine ut per manus very tenentis sui videlicet de
fidelitate and secta Cur' praedict' ut de feodo and jure ac de reddit' praed'
in dominico suo ut de feodo Et praedict' Johannes Lancaster ulterius dic' A
Custom for the Lord to have a year and halfs Rent upon every Alienation.
qd' infra Manerium praed' talis habetur consuetudo and a tempore quo non extat
memoria hom' habebatur scilicet qd' post quamlibet alienationem in feodo vel de
statu liberi tenementi alicujus parcel' terrae vel ten^torum tent' de Manerio
praed' Dom' Manerii praed' pro tempore existen' cum talis alienatio acciderit
habuit and habere consuevit reddit' un' anni and medietat' reddit' unius anni
per quem tal' terrae vel tenementa sic aliena^t' tent' fuer' de Manerio
praedict' nomine finis pro alienatione Et sic dictus finis pro alienatione sic
ut praefertur per consuetudinem Manerii praedict' solubil' aut aliqua pars in
aretro fuit and insolut' qd' tunc Dom' And power to distrain for it (if in
arrear.)
Manerii praedict' pro tempore existen' de tempore in tempus and ad omnia
tempora duran' toto tempore praed' quando and quoties necesse requisivit
distrinxit and usus fuit and consuevit distringere in and super terras and
tenementa praed' de Dom' Manerii praed' ut de eodem Manerio tent' and sic ut
praefertur alienat' quousque dictus finis pro alienatione sic ut praefertur
solubil' Quousque it be paid.
solut' soret Et praedict' Johannes Lancaster ulterius dic' qd' praedict'
Decano and Capitulo de Manerio praedict' cum pertin' ac praed' Johanne Sabine
de Mesuagiis Horreis and Terris praed' cum perrin' Unde, etc. in forma
praedict' seisit' existen' Idem Johannes Sabine ante praed' tempus quo, etc.
scilicet vicesimo die Septembris Anno Regni Domini Caroli Secundi nuper Regis
Angliae, The Alienation.
etc. tricesimo quarto apud Paroch' de Mounckton praed' alienavit praed' tria
Mesuagia quatuor Horrea centum and quadraginta acr' Terrae and octoginta acras
Marisci cum pertin' unde, etc. cuidam Waltero Tyndall Armig' habend' eidem
Waltero Haered' and Assign' suis imperpetuum Virtute cujus idem Walterus in
Mesuagia Horrea and Terras praed' cum pertin' unde, The Purchaser entered, and
was seized.
etc. intravit and fuit inde seisit' in dominico suo ut de feodo Et sic inde
seisit' existen' Ac eisdem Decano and Capitulo de Manerio praedict' cum pertin'
in forma praed' seisit' existen' Idem Walterus ante praed' tempus quo, etc.
scilicet decimo die Septembris Anno Regni dicti Domini Caroli Secundi nuper
Regis Angliae, etc. tricesimo sexto apud Paroch' de Mounckton praed' alienavit
praed' tria Mesuagia quatuor Horrea centum and quadraginta acras Terrae and
octoginta acras Marisci cum pertin' unde, etc. That there was so much due for a
Fine by the Custom.
Cuidam Christophero Yates Gen' habend' eidem Christophero Haered' and Assign'
suis imperpetuum Et praed' Johannes Lancaster ulterius dic' qd' per praed'
consuetudinem Manerii praed' debit' fuer' eisdem Decano and Capitulo pro fine
pro praed' prima alienatio praefat' Waltero Tyndall sic ut praefertur fact'
summa novem librarum trium solidorum novem denar' un' oboli and un' quadrantis
Ac pro fine praed' pro secunda alienatione eidem Christophero ut praefertur
fact' consimilis summa novem librarum trium solidorum novem denar' un' oboli
and un' quadrantis and quia praed' separal' denar' sum^ae in toto se attingen'
ad octodecim libras septem solid' septem denar' and un' obol' praefat' Decano
and Capitulo praed' tempore quo, And because the same were in Arrear and
unpaid, the Defendant distrained.
etc. aretro fuer' and adhuc existunt insolut' Idem Johannes Lancaster ut
Ballivus eorundem Decani and Capituli captionem averiorum praedict' videlicet
captionem quatuor Vaccarum de praed' octo Vaccis pro praed' novem libris tribus
solid' novem denar' uno obolo and uno quadrante pro fine pro praed' prima
alienatione praefat' Waltero Tyndall sic ut praefertur fact' debit' and
insolut' and captionem praed' aliarum quatuor Vaccar' de praed' octo Vaccis pro
praedict' novem libris tribus solid' novem denar' uno obolo and un' quadrante
pro fine pro praed' secunda alienatione praefat' Christophero Yates sic ut
praefertur fact' debit' and insolut' been cognoscit in praed' Clauso in quo,
etc. Et just, etc. ut in parcell' tenementorum praedict' cum pertin' de ipsius
Decano and Capitulo in forma praed' tenent' ac infra feodum and dominicum suum,
etc. Infra feodum, etc.
Et hoc parat' est verificare unde pet' judicum and retorn' averiorum praed'
unacum dampnis misis and custag' suis per ipsum in hac part sustent' secundum
formam Statuti in hujusmodi casu edit' and provis' sibi adjudicari, etc.

Et praed' Thomas dic' qd' cognitio praed' Johannis praed' ac ma teria in eadem
content' minus sufficien' in lege existunt ad praed' Johannem Lancaster
captionem averiorum praed' in praedict' loco in quo, Demurrer to the Conuzance.
etc. justam cognoscend' Qd'que ipse ad cognitionem ill' modo and forma praed'
fact' necesse non habet nec per legem terrae tenetur respondere Et hoc parat'
est verificare Unde ex quo praed' Johannes Lancaster captionem averiorum praed'
superius cogn' idem Thomas pro defectu sufficien'* cognitionis praedict'
Johannis Lancaster in hac part pet' judic' and dampna sua occatione captionis
and injustae detentionis averiorum illorum sibi adjudicari, etc.

Et praed' Johannes Lancaster ex quo ipse sufficien' materiam in lege ad ipsum
Johannem ad captionem averiorum praedict' in praedict' loco in quo, Joynder.
etc. justam cognoscend' habend' manutenend' superius allegavit quam ipse
paratus est verificare quam quidem materiam praed' Thomas non dedic' nec ad eam
aliqualit' respond' set verificationem illam admittere omnino recusat ipse
praed' Johannes Lancaster ut prius pet' judicium and retorn' averiorum
praedict' unacum dampnis misis and custagiis per ipsum in ea part sustent'
juxta formam Statuti in hujusmodi casu edit' and provis' sibi adjudicari, etc.
Et quia Justic' hic se advisare volunt de and super praemissis priusquam
judicium inde reddant dies dat' est partibus praed' hic usque a die Sancti
Michaelis in tres septimanas de audiendo inde judicio suo eo qd' iidem Justic'
hic inde nondum, etc.

Holland versus Lancaster.
IN Replevin, for taking of 8 Cows in a place called the Barnyard, in the Isle
of Thanett in Kent.

The Defendant made Conusance as Bailiff to the Dean and Chapter of the
Cathedral Church of Canterbury, and sets forth, that the Dean and Chapter were
seized of the Manor of Moncton in fee, jure Ecclesiae; and that one John Sabin
Baronet, was seized of 3 Messuages, 4 Barns 140 acres of Marsh in the I Will of
Thanett, unde locus in quo est anda tempore, etc. fuit parcell', and held them
of the said Dean and Chapter as of their said Manor, by Fealty, and the Rent
of 6 l 2 s and 6 d ob. yearly, payable at Michaelmas; and showed that the said
Dean and Chapter were seized of the said Rent by the hands of the said Sir John
Sabin, as by the hands of their very Tenant, and lay a Custom in the said
Manor, quod post qualimbet alienationem in feodo vel de Statu liberi tenementi
alicujus parcell' terr' vel tenement' tent' de Manerio praed' Dom' Manerii
praed' pro tempore existen' cum talis alienatio acciderit habuit and habere
consuevit redd' unius anni and mediet' redd' unius anni per quem talia terrae
vel tenementa sic alienat' tent' fuer' in Manerio praed' nomine finis pro
alienatione, and lays a Custom to distrain for the said Alienation Fine, and
then sets forth an alienation of the said Message and Premises by the said
Sir John Sabin to one Walter Tyndall in fee, and shows that the said Walter
Tyndall made another alienation in fee to one Christopher Yates, and so sets
forth, that there were two Fines due upon the said alienations, after the rate
aforesaid, amounting to 18 l 7 s and 7 d ob. and that he as Bailiff of the said
Dean and Chapter, captionem praed' been cognoscit in praed' loco in quo ut in
parcell' tenement' praed'.

To this the Plaintiff demurred, and it was spoken to at the Bar the last Term,
and likewise this Term: The main thing was, that the Custom, as it was laid,
was not good; for the Alienation Fine is set forth to be due upon the
Alienation of any parcel of Lands or Tenements held of the said Manor, to have
a year and halfs Rent, by which the Lands or Tenements so aliened were held; so
that if the 20th part of an Acre be aliened, a Fine is to be paid; and that of
the whole Rent for every parcel is held at the time of the alienation by the
whole Rent, and no apportioning thereof can be but subsequent to the
Alienation; and this the whole Court held an unreasonable Custom; and it is set
forth it could not be otherwise understood than that a Fine should be due, viz.
a year and halfs Rent upon the Alienation of any part of the Lands held by such
Rent.

The Court doubted also whether the Custom was good as to the claiming an
Alienation Fine upon an Alienation for Life, because by that the tenure of the
Lands aliened is not altered, for the Reversion is still held as before by the
same Tenant. Judicium pro Quer'.

Colley versus Helyar.
IN an Action of Debt for 34 l the Plaintiff declared against the Defendant an
Attorney of this Court, praesente hic in Cur. in propria persona sua upon a
Bond of 34 l

The Defendant pleads in Bar, quoad quinque libras sex solid. and tres denar.
of the aforesaid 34 l that the Plaintiff post confectionem Scripti Obligat'
praedict', scilicet vicesimo, etc. anno, etc. per quoddam Scriptum suum
acquietantiae cognovisset se accepisse and habuisse de praed. Defendente 5 l 6
s and 3 d in part solutionis majoris summae, and pleaded a frivolous Plea as to
the rest of the Money, to which the Plaintiff demurred.

And it was argued, that the Acquittance under the Plaintiffs Hand and Seal for
5 l 6 s and 3 d part of the Money due might have been pleaded in bar of the
whole; and that if the Defendant here had relied upon it, it would have barred
the Plaintiff of the whole. Vide for that matter, Hollingwoth and Whetston,
Sty. 212. Allen 65. Beaton and Forest. Note, there the payment was since the
Action brought, and pleaded in abatement; where it was said, that it could not
be so pleaded without an Acquittance. Vide Kelw. 20. 162. 3 H. 7. 3 B. receipt
of parcel pending the Writ, 7 Ed. 4. 15. a. But it seems clear by the Book, of
Edw. 4. 207. Mo. 886. Speak versus Richards. That if part be received, and an
Acquittance given before the Action, it is a Bar only of so much, but it seems
the Action must be brought for the whole.

Dickman versus Allen.
Cantabr' ss.
Case brought against the Defendant for not folding his Sheep upon the
Plaintiffs Land, according to Custom.

The College of St. Mary and St. Nicholas seized in Fee j^re Collegii.


ABRAHAMUS ALLEN nuper de Grancester in Com' praedicto Yeom' attach' fuit ad
respondend' Roberto Dickman Gen' de placito transgr' super Casum, etc. Et unde
idem Robertus per Robertum Drake Attorn' suum queritur quare cum Praepositus
and Scholares Collegii Regalis Beatae Mariae and Sancti Nicholai in Cantabr' in
Com' praed' seisit' fuissent de uno Capitali Messuagio cum pertinen' in
Grancester in Com' praedicto ac de centum and sexaginta acris terrae arrabil'
jacen' in Communibus Campis de Grancester praedicta cum pertinen' in dominico
suo ut de feodo in jure Collegii sui praedicti iidemque Praepositus and
Scholares and omnes ill quorum statum ipsi habuer' de and in tenementis praed'
cum pertinen' a tempore cujus contrarii memoria hominum non existit habuer' and
habere consuever' pro se Firmariis and Tenentibus suis eorundem. A Custom for
all the Tenants to sold their Landlords Land.
Tenementorum cum pertinen' libertatem Faldagii (Anglice, Foldage) omnium Ovium
(Ovibus suis propriis and Ovibus tenen' and occupatorum pro tempore existen'
quorundam Messuagiorum and Terrarum in Villa de Coton in Com' praed' qui a
tempore cujus contrarii memoria hominum non existit respective usi fuer' Common
of Vicinage.
interc^oiare causa vicinagii in quibusdam Communibus Campis de Grancester
praed' cum Ovibus suis in and super praed' Messuagiis and terris suis in Coton
praed' Levant and Couchant.
levan' and cuban' except') suor' and depascen' infra Communes Campos and
territoria de Grancester praedicta a vicesimo quinto die Martii usque primum
diem Novembris quolibet anno super praedictas centum and sexaginta acras terras
arabil percipiend' From such a day to such a day.
and faldand' tanquam ad tenementa praedicta cum pertinenciis pertinen'
praedictisque Praeposito and Scholaribus Collegii praed' de Tenementis
praedictis cum pertinen' The Principal and Scholars demise to the Plaintiff by
Indenture.
in forma praedicta seisit' existen' Praepositus and Scholares postea scilicet
decimo nono die Octobris Anno Domini millesimo sexcentesimo octogesimo primo
apud Grancester praedictam quodam Johanne Coppleston Sacrae Theologiae
Professor' adtunc Praeposito Collegii praedicti existen' per quandam Indenturam
inter ipsos Praepositum and Scholares ex una part and quendam Johannem
Wittewronge Mil and Barronet' ex altera part factam cujus alteram partem
Sigillo c^oi ipsorum Praepositi and Scholarium signat' idem Robertus Dickman
hic in Cur' profert cujus dat' est eisdem die and anno dimiser' and ad firmam
tradider' eidem Johanni Wittewronge Tenementa praedicta cum pertinen' Habendum.
habend' and occupand' praefat' Johanni and Assign' suis a tempore confectionis
Indenturae illius usque plenum finem and terminum viginti ann' For 21 years.
extunc prox' sequen' and plenar' complend' and finiend' Virtute cujus
dimissionis praedictus Johan' in Ten^ta praed' cum pertinen' Lessee enters.
intravit and fuit inde possessionat' Et sic inde possessionat' existen' idem
Johannes postea scilicet decimo die Augusti Anno Domini millesimo sexcentesimo
octogesimo secundo apud Grancester praedictam dimisit and ad firmam tradidit
eidem Roberto Dickman Tenementa praedicta cum pertinen' habend' and occupand'
And Demised to the Plaintiff.
eidem Roberto and Assign' suis a Festo Sancti Michaelis Arc^hi tunc prox'
sequen' usque plenum finem and terminum sex annorum extunc propx' sequen' and
plenar' For six years.
complend' and finiend' virtute cujus dimissionis idem Robertus in crastino
dicti Festi Sancti Michaelis Arch' Anno Domini milesimo sexcentesimo octogesimo
secundo supradicto in Tenementa praedicta cum pertinen' intravit and fuit inde
possessionat' The Lessee Enters.
usque finem and expirationem ejusdem termini praedictus tamen Abrahamus
praemissorum non ignarus sed machinans and fraudulenter intendens ipsum
Robertum minus rite praegravare ac eum de faldagio praedicto ut praefertur
habend' impedire ac de prosicuo and commoditate inde totaliter deprivare diu
ante finem termini praedicti ult' mentionat' scilicet primo die Maii Anno Regni
Domini Jacobi secundi nuper Regis Angliae tertio Oves (videlicet ducent' Oves
ipsius Abrahami in Communes Campos de Grancester praed' ibidem depasturand' The
Cause of Action.
posuit and Oves ibidem eun' and depascend' extunc usque decimum diem
Septembris tunc prox' sequen' existen' ante finem termini praedicti ult'
mentionat' custodivit and continuavit sed Oves ill' in aut super praedictas
centum and sexaginta acras terrae arrabilis ipsius Roberti vel in aut super
aliquam inde parcellam minime faldavit sicut ipse debuisset nec permisit ipsum
Robertum habere beneficium faldagii earun-praedicto Abrahamo duran' eodem
termino non existen' tenen' For not Folding his Sheep according to Custom.
sive occupatore aliquorum messuag' sive terrarum in Villa de Coton praed' de
quibus tenen' sive occupator' inde pro tempore existen' a tempore cujus
contrarii memoria hominum non existit usi fuer' intercoic^are Causa vicinagii
in praedictis Communibus Campis de Grancester praedict' cum Ovibus suis
praedict' ut praefertur per quod idem Robertus proficuum and advantagium
faldagii Ovium praedictorum super praedictas centum and sexaginta acras terrae
arabil' quibus ipse gaudere debuisset per tempus illud omnino perdidit and
amisit ad dampnum ipsius Roberti quadraginta librarum and inde produc' Sectam,
etc. Per quod the Plaintiff lost the benefit of Foldage.


Et praedictus Abrahamus per Richardum Pyke Attorn' suum ven' and defend' vim
and injur' quando, etc. Not Guilty pleaded.
Et dic' qd' ipse in nullo est culpabilis de premissis praedictis superius ei
imposit' prout praedictus Robertus su perius versus eum queritur Et de hic pon'
se super Patriam Et praedictus Robertus similiter Ideo praecept' est Vic' qd'
venire fac' hic a die Sanct' Trin' in tres septimanas duodecim, etc. per quos,
etc. Et qui nec, etc. ad recogn', etc. quia tam, etc.

Dickman versus Allen.
IN an Action upon the Case, the Defendant declared, That the Provost and
Scholars of Kings College in Cambridge were seized in Fee in jure Collegii of a
Message in Grancester in Cambridge, and 160 Acres of Arable Land, lying in the
Common Fields of Grancester aforesaid; and the said Provost, etc. and all those
whose Estate they have in the Tenements aforesaid, have time whereof, etc. for
themselves, their Farmers and Tenants of the said Tenements, libertatem
Foldagii ( Anglice, Foldage) omnium Ovium (except, etc.) euntium and
depascentium infra Communes Campos and Territoria de Grancester praed' super
praed' centum and sexaginta Acras Terrae percipiend' and foldand' tanquam ad
praed' Tenement' perertinent', and then sets forth a Lease made by the Provost
and Scholars to Sir John Witwrong of the said Message and 160 Acres for 20
years, which said Sir John let them to the Plaintiff for six years, by virtue
whereof the Plaintiff entered and was possessed; and the said Defendant,
Praemissorum non ignarus, did put 200 Sheep into the Common Fields of
Grancester aforesaid, and there kept and depastured them for a certain time;
sed Oves illas in aut super praed' centum and sexaginta Acras Terrae Arab'
ipsius Quer' vel in aut super aliquam inde parcell' minime foldavit sicut ipse
debuisset nec permisit ipsum Querentem habere beneficium faldagii earundem (and
shows how the Defendant was not within exception) by which the Plaintiff lost
the profit of the Foldage, etc. and laid it to his damage of 40 l

The Defendant pleaded not guilty, and a Verdict was for the Plaintiff. And it
was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the Plaintiff had not in his Declaration
set forth a sufficient Cause of Action; for he says that the Defendant had not
folded his Sheep upon the 160 Acres as he ought; and it is not set forth, that
the Custom was for the Owner of the Sheep to bring his Sheep to fold them upon
the said Lands.

But it was objected on the Plaintiffs part, that the word Foldagium did imply
as much, and it was the usage in Norfolk and Suffolk for the Owner of the Sheep
to put his Sheep into the Lords Land and fold them there, for which the Lord
provided Hurdles, and prepared the Fold to receive them; and of this Faldagium
a Fine was levied of inter al' as is reported in 1 Ed. 3. fo. 2. and the usage
in Norfolk and Suffolk is there mentioned. And it was said in a Possessory
Action it is enough to say sicut debuit, without setting forth any particular
Custom or Prescription: And Dent and Olivers Case was cited, 2 Cro. 122. where
an Action was brought for disturbing of him in taking of Toll ad Feriam ipsius
le Plaintiff spectan'; and it was moved after Verdict, that he made no Title by
Prescription or Custom to the Toll, and it was held by the Court to be
sufficient in a possessory Action to say, ad Feriam suam spectant': So also in
an Action for stopping of a way belonging to his House, without setting forth
any Prescription, between St. John and Moody, a late Case; and if this sicut
debuit is not sufficient, it is laid further in the Declaration, that he did not
permit the Plaintiff to have the benefit of this Foldage.

But the Court held the Declaration insufficient, for that there is no
Authority in any Book of Law to show that the word Faldagium did imply so much
as was pretended on the Plaintiffs part; Faldagium is to have Sheep folded in
his ground, as Falde cursus is a Sheep-walk or feed for his Sheep; and if it be
the usage in case of Foldage for the Owner of the Sheep to bring his Sheep to
the Fold, it ought to have been so set forth, for the Court cannot take notice
of the private usages of Countries; and if the Faldagium did imply what the
Plaintiff would have it, then it should have been set forth, that the Plaintiff
had set up a Fold in the Land where the Sheep were to have been folded, for he
was to do the first act, which must have been shown, if all the particulars had
been set forth; and sicut debuit is not enough here for the obscurity of the
word Faldavit; so that it does not appear to the Court what ought to have been
done on the Defendants part; and to say non permisit Querentem habere
beneficium Faldagii, was not good without showing how he disturbed him, as 8
Co. in Francis Case. Sed nota, That was upon Demurrer; but here it is not said
non permisit the Plaintiff habere Faldagium, or non permisit eum faldare, but
non habere beneficium faldagii; so that it was not certain what was meant, for
the Sheep might be folded, and yet he might be deprived of the benefit of the
foldage: And the Chief Justice said, here the Prescription is laid to have the
Sheep going infra Communes Campos and Territoria de Grancester to be folded,
and Territoria is a word unknown in the Law, so no certainty in the
Prescription.

Note, Here a Prescription is laid in a Body Aggregate, in a que Estate, but
that was held to be well enough, because for a thing appurtenant to the Manor,
Vide 2 Cro. 673. Kelw. 140. B. 1 Inst. 121. a. But for the Reasons above
mentioned, the Judgment was stayed by the Opinion of the whole Court.

George versus Butcher.
DEbt upon a Bond. The Defendant demands Oyer of the Condition, which was to
perform certain Articles of Agreement; and the Defendant set forth the Articles
made between the Defendant of the first part, the Plaintiff of the second part,
and Rebecca Morse Widow, Joseph Morse, Samuel Morse, John Morse, Daniel Morse,
Nathaniel Morse, Robert Morse and Thomas Morse, Sons of the said Rebecca of the
third part, by which it was recited, that a Marriage was intended between the
Defendant Butcher, and the said Rebecca, by means whereof the Defendant would
become possessed of her Personal Estate, and in consideration thereof the
Defendant covenanted by the said Articles, inter al' (having also recited that
Robert Morse deceased Father of the said Joseph Morse, Samuel Morse, John
Morse, Daniel Morse, Nathaniel Morse, Robert Morse and Thomas Morse had by his
Will bequeathed cuilibet ipsorum praed' Josepho, Samuel', Johan', Daniel',
Robert' and Though (omitting Nathaniel) the sum of 50 l) with the Plaintiff, that
the said Defendant would pay praed' Josepho, Samuel', Johan', Nathaniel',
Robert' and Though praedict' seperal' legationes vel summas quinquaginta librat';
And the Defendant pleads further, that he paid to the said Joseph, Samuel,
John, Daniel, Robert and Thomas the said several sums of 50 l and showed
performance of all the other Articles.

And to this the Plaintiff demurred, because that he did not show that he paid
50 l to Nathaniel Morse, and expressly covenanteth to pay to the said Nathaniel
and the rest, the said several Legacies or sums of 50 l

Sed non allocatur, for in the recital of the said Bequest by the Will, there
is nothing mentioned to have been bequeathed to Nathaniel, and though he
covenants to pay to Nathaniel as well as the rest, yet it is legationes vel
summas praed', and there being no Legacy to Nathaniel, and that appearing by
the recital of the Will, his Covenant shall not oblige the Defendant to pay him
any thing. Et sic Judicium pro Defendente.

Trethewy versus Ellesdon.
IN Replevin: The Plaintiff declared of taking his Cattle in a place called the
Barnclose in Branwell in the County of Cornwall.

The Defendant made Conusance, as Bailiff of Elizabeth Cossen, and shows that
Nicholas Cossen was seized in Fee of a Message and Lands, of which the place
where was and is parcel, and being so seized the 9th of September in the
fourteenth year of the late King Charles the Second, by his Deed indented
produced in Court, did grant to the said Elizabeth Cossen an annual Rent of 10
l to be issuing out of the Premises, to have to the said Elizabeth and her
Assigns for term of her Life, payable at the usual Feasts, and in case it were
arrear that it should be lawful for her to distrain, by virtue whereof the said
Elizabeth Cossen (who is still living) became seized of the Rent for her Life,
and avers that the usual Feasts are our Lady, Midsummer, Michaelmass and
Christmas, and for 40 l for four years Rent ending at Michaelmass 1688. the
Defendant took the said Cattle as a Distress for the arreat of Rent, etc.

The Plaintiff demanded Oyer of the Indenture, which was read, containing as
follows, viz. This Indenture made the 29th day of September, etc. between
Nicholas Cossen, etc. of the one part, and Elizabeth Cossen, etc. and Nicholas
Cossen the younger Son of the said Elizabeth, of the other part of witnesses,
That whereas the said Elizabeth Cossen has given and surrendered into the hands
of the said Nicholas Cossen one Indenture of Lease of an Annuity, dated the
15th of March 1657. of ten pounds yearly, going out of all that his Barton and
Demesne called Melder, for a term yet to come, as in and by the said Indenture
of Lease more fully and at large appears, has Given, Granted and Confirmed,
and in and by these Presents, does Give, Grant and Confirm unto the said
Elizabeth Cossen, her Heirs and Assigns by these Presents, one Annuity or
Yearly Rent of ten pounds, to be issuing and going out of all that his Barton,
etc. to Have, Receive and take yearly the said Annuity to the said Elizabeth
Cossen and Nicholas Cossen the younger, and the Survivor and Survivors of them,
at the usual Feasts in the Year, by equal Portions; and if it shall happen the
said Yearly Rent to be behind after any of the said Feasts, that then it shall
and may be lawful to and for the said Elizabeth, during her Natural Life, and
so the said Nicholas Cossen the younger, after her Death, to enter into the
Premises, and distrain, etc. In Witness whereof, etc.

Quibus lectis and auditis idem Querens dicit quod cognitio praed' in forma
praed' fact' and materia in eadem content' ac factum indentat' praed' in forma
praed' fact' minus sufficien' in lege existunt, etc. and the Defendant joined
in Demurrer.

It was argued for the Plaintiff, that there is no sufficient Grant by this
Indenture, for it is said to be made between Nicholas of the one part, and
Elizabeth and Nicholas Cossen junior of the other part, and then recited the
Surrender of a former Grant; after which came the words, has Given and
Granted, and by these Presents does Give and Grant, etc. and no Grantor names,
but if it should be taken for a Grant from Nicholas Cossen, it is a Grant to
Elizabeth an her Heirs, and the habend' cannot alter the Premises in the
limitation of the Estate in the Grant of a Rent; and the Defendants in their
Plea set forth, that the said Elizabeth was seized of the said Rent for her
Life, ut de libero Tenemento, so there is a material variance between the
Indenture and the Plea.

The Court were of Opinion as to the first matter, that it was a good Grant,
the Indenture being between Nicholas Cossen of the one part, and Elizabeth of
the other part; and then after a recital says, has Given and Granted to
Elizabeth, etc. That must be taken, that Nicholas Cossen has Given and
Granted, and that the Conisans setting her forth to be seized for Life, whereas
there passed an Estate in Fee, was a material variance.

The Chief Justice Pollexfen seemed to incline, that it was a Rentcharge for
Life, for the power of Distress was given to her only for Life, and a Rent-seck
in Fee, and that it was as a Grant of two several Rents, and then the Pleading
was good.

But the other Justices held it was one entire Rent, and that she had it with a
Privilege of Distress during her Life only; but leave was given to amend the
Conisans upon payment of Costs.

Dod versus Dawson.
SCire Facias upon a Recognizance of Bail in this Court, upon condition, That
if Judgment should be had against the Principal in an Action of Debt for 2000
l in this Court, that he should pay the Debt and Damages recovered, or render
his Body in Execution to the Prison of the Fleet; and sets forth, that he
recovered the said Debt of 2000 l and 12 l pro damnis, Termino Pschae, 4 Jacobi
Secundi nuper Regis, and that the Defendant did not pay the said Money, nor
render himself in Execution, etc.

The Defendants plead to this Scire fac' that the Money, praetextu cognitionis
praed' in praed' brevi de Scire fac' mentionat' de Terris and Catallis, etc.
praed' Defendentis fieri and ad usum praed' Timothei Dod levari non debet quia
dicunt quod Narratio super qua Judicium praed' in praed' Brevi de Scire fac'
mentionat' obtent' fuit versus ipsum Willielmum Dawson, seu aliqua alia
narratio in placito debiti non fuit exhibit' in Curia hic in Termino Paschae
Anno Regni dicti nuper Regis primo quo Termino recognitio praed' facta fuit nec
ad aliquod tempus infra duos terminos post praed' Terminum Paschae proxime
sequen' unde pro defectu Narr' per praefatum Timotheum Dod versus praefat'
Willielmum Dawson in eadem Cur' ante finem praed' duorum terminorum praed'
summa duarum mill librarum per cursum legis de Terris and Catallis praed'
Defend' vel eorum alicujus fieri and levari non debent and hoc parat' sunt
verificare unde pet' Judicium, etc.

To this the Plaintiff demurs, and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff; for
although by course of the Court, if the Defendant lie in Prison two whole Terms,
without any Declaration put in, he may get a Rule to be discharged; yet if a
Declaration be afterward delivered, and Judgment thereupon, it is a good
Judgment, and the Bail will be liable in such case.

Rogers versus Bradly.
IN a Replevin for taking of a Cow apud Liscard in Cornwall, in a certain
place, there called the Underway.

The Defendant made Conusans as Bailiff to William Trewman and Thomas Coll, and
sets forth that Joseph Mark diu ante, etc. was seized in Fee of a Close called
Underway, parcel of the Manor of Liscard, of which the place where was and is
parcel according to the Custom of the said Manor; and being so seized the 9th
day of January, Anno Domini 1663. demised to Sampson Rogers the Premises for
99 years from the Date of the Indenture, if A. B. etc. should so long live,
tendering 10 l yearly Rent, by virtue whereof the said Rogers entered, and the
said Joseph Mark being seized of the Revertion in Fee, secundum consuetudinem
Manerii praed' upon the first day of February, Anno 1663. supradict' at a Court
of the said Manor then held, did surrender in Manus Domini Caroli Secundi
nuper Regis Angliae, etc. adtunc Domini Manerii praed' secundum consuetudinem
Manerii praedict', the aforesaid Revertion and Rent to the use of the said
Trewman and Coll, and their Heirs, to which said T. and C. at the Court praed'
Dominus Rex per quendam Thomam Moulton adtunc Seneschal' suum Manerii praed'
did grant the said Revertion and Rent to hold to them and their Heirs,
according to the Custom of the said Manor, and by virtue thereof the said T.
and C. became seized of the said Revertion and Rent in their Demesne as of Fee,
according to the Custom of the said Manor, and for five years Rent, ending at
Michaelmass, etc. been cognoscunt captionem, etc.

To this the Plaintiff replied, and the matter in the Replication was
frivolous, and Demurrer thereupon.

But the Court gave Judgment for the Plaintiff, because the Conusans was
insufficient; for the Lands whereupon the Distress was taken, being Freehold
(for so they must be taken to be, though it is shown that Mark was seized
according to the Manor, because it is not said at the Will of the Lord) could
not be conveyed by Surrender in Court, and an admittance without an Especial
Custom to pass them in that Form; and it is not enough to say, that he
surrendered them secundum consuetudinem Manerii, but the Custom should have been
fully set forth, viz. quod infra Manerium praed' de tempore, etc. talis
habebatur consuetudo, etc. but here the Custom is by Implication, 1 Cro. 185
Vaughan 253. 2 Leon. 29.

Lade versus Baker and Marsh.
Kanc' ss.
THOMAS BAKER and Nicholaus Marsh sum^ fuer' ad respondend' Philippo Lade Gen'
de placito quare ceper' averia ipsius Philippi and ea injuste detinuer' contra
Vad' and Pleg', etc. Declaration in Replevin.
Et unde idem Philippus per Brian' Courthope Attorn' suum queritur qd'
praedicti Thomas and Nicholaus vicesimo die Marcii Anno Regni Domini Jacobi
Secundi nuper Regis Angliae, etc. quarto apud Barham in quodam Clauso Terrae
ibidem (vocat' le fourteen Accres) cepit averia ipsius Philippi videlicet tres
Spadones and unam Equam and ea injuste detinuer' contra vad' and pleg'
quousque, etc. unde idem Philippus dic' qd' ipse deteriorat' est and dampnum
habet ad valenciam viginti librar' Et inde produc' Sectam, etc.

Et praedicti Thomas Baker and Nicholaus Marsh per Johannem Wade Attorn' suum
ven' and defend' vim and injur' quando, etc. A vowry and Conizans.
Et idem Nicholaus Marsh been advocat ac praedict' Thomas Baker ut Ballivus
ejusdem Nicholai been cogn' caption' averiorum praed' in praedicto loco in quo,
etc. and just, etc. quia dicunt qd' praedict' locus in quo supponitur caption'
averiorum praed' fieri continet and praedicto tempore quo, etc. continebat in
se quatuordecim acr' Terrae cum pertin' in Barham praed' qd'que diu ante
praedict' tempus quo, Seisin in Fee in Jointenants.
etc. quidam Robertus Lade Armig' and Lancelot Lade filii praedict' Roberti
Lade fuer' seisit' de eisdem quatuordecim acr' Terrae inter alia in Dominico
suo ut de feodo and sic inde seisit' existen' iidem Robertus Lade and Lancelot
Lade diu ante praedict' tempus quo, etc. scilicet primo die Octobris Anno Regni
Domini Caroli Primi nuper Regis Angliae, And by Deed grant an Annuity.
etc. vicesimo quarto apud Barham praed' per quoddam Scriptum suum Indentat'
inter ipsos Robertum Lade and Lancelot' Lade per nomina Roberti Lade de Barham
in Com' Kanc' Armig' and Lancelot Lade fil' praedict' Roberti Lade ex una part
and quendam Nicholaum Marsh nuper defunct' Avum praed' Nicholai Marsh modo
defend' per nomen Nicholai Marsh de eadem Yeom' ex altera part ibidem fact'
cujus script' alteram partem sigillis praed' Roberti Lade and Lancelot Lade
sigillat' iidem Thomas Baker and Nicholaus Marsh modo Defend' hic in Cur'
profert cujus dat' est eisdem die and anno pro and in consideratione centum
libr' bonae' and legalis Monet' Angliae eidem Roberto Lade in manibus solut'
pro seipsis and Haered' suis deder' concesser' and confirmaver' praefat'
Nicholao Marsh Avo and Haeredibus suis quandam annuitat' sive annual' reddit'
octo libr' bonae and legalis Monet' Angliae exeunt' de omni il' Capital'
Mesuagio sive Ten^to cum pertin' in Barham praed' and exeun' de omnibus terris
and hereditament' in Barham praed' Mesuagio praedicto spectan' and tunc in
occupatione praedicti Roberti Lade unde praedict' locus in quo, Issuing out of
the Capital Message.
etc est and praedict' tempore quo, etc. fuit parcel Habend' tenend percipiend
and recipiend' annual' reddit' praed' praefat' Nicholao Marsh Avo Haered' and
Assign' suis mperpetuum ad solum opus and usum praedicti Nicholai Marsh Avi
Haered' Habend' to the Grantee in Fee.
and Assign' suorum imperpetuum solvend' Annuatim apud mesuagium praed' ad
Festa Annuciaconis Beatae Mariae Virgis and Sancti Michaelis Arc^hi per equales
portiones vel infra octo dies prox' post quodlibet praedictorum Festorum Et si
contigeret praed' And if behind, in 8 days to distrain.
annuitat' sive annual' reddit' octo libr' sive aliquam inde partem aretro fore
and insolut' per spacium octo dierum prox' post aliquod praed' Festorum
solution' dierum qd' tunc and deinceps licit' foret praedicto Nicholao Marsh
Avo Haered' and Assign' suis in praemissis praed' intrare and distringere and
districtiones illas imparcare quousque praedictus Nicholaus Marsh Avus plene
content' and solut' foret inde sub condition qd' Upon Condition to be void
upon payment of a sum of 100 l in futuro.
si praed' Robertus Lade vel Lancelot Lade Haered' vel' Assign' sui vel eorum
aliquis been and fidelit' solveret vel solvi causaret praedicto Nicholao Marsh
Avo Haered' vel Assign' suis summam centum librarum legalis Monet' Angliae cum
arreragiis si aliqua essent ad vel super diem Sancti Michaelis Arch. qui esset
in Anno Dom' Dei nostri milles. quinq^^ges. sexcentes. primo apud mesuagium
praed' qd' tunc concessio illa and omnia in eadem content' foret vacua and
nullius valor' in lege aliqua re antea content' in contrarium non obstant'
prout per idem scriptum Indentat' before apparet Et iidem Thomas Baker and
Nich' Marsh modo Defend' ulterius dicunt qd' nec praed' Robertus Lade vel
Lancelot Lade Haered' vel Assign' sui vel aliquis eorum solverunt aut solvi
causaver' The 100. l was not paid.
nec eorum aliquis solvit aut solvi causavit praefat' Nicholao Marsh Avo in
vita sua praed' summam centum libr' super praed' Festum S. Michaelis anno Dom'
millesimo sexcentesimo quinquagesimo primo praed' secundum formam and effectum
Conditionis in Script' Indentat' praed' virtute cujus quidem concessionis
praedictus Nciholaus Marsh Avus de Annual' reddit' praed' fuit seisit' in
dominico suo ut de feodo and sic inde seisit' existen' praedictus Nicholaus
Avus ante praedict' tempus quo, The Grantee made his Will.
etc. scilicet vicesimo octavo die Novembris Anno Dom' millesimo sexcentesimo
quinquagesimo quarto apud Barham praed' condidit Testamentum and ultimam
Voluntat' suam in script' and per eandem voluntat' suam (inter alia) devisavit
praed' And Devised it to his Wife for the education of his Children.
annuitat' sive annual' reddit' octo libr' Aliciae Exec' ejus pro and duran'
vita sua natural' pro education' and vict' nept' suorum Ann' and Aliciae Waters
quousque pervenirent ad seperal' etat' octodecim annorum and post Uxor' suae
mortem and tal' aetat' octodecim annorum praed' Ann. and Alicae Walters tunc
praedictus Nicholaus Avus per ult' voluntat' suam praedictam voluit qd' filium
suum Rich. Marsh and Hered' After his Wives death to his Sons.
sui haberent praed' annuitat' sive annual' reddit' octo libr' solvend' december
libr' seperatim (Anglice a piece) praedict' Ann' and Aliciae Waters and december
libr' legalis monet' Angl' Nich. Waters fratri praed' Ann and Alicie Waters
infra sex menses prox' post mortem Ux' suae si essent aetat' praed' ad eandem
recipiend' and extunc voluit and legavit praed' annuitat' sive annual' reddit'
octo libr' praedict' filio suo Rich. and Hered' suis imperpetuum and praedict'
Nicholaus Avus post confection' test'i sui praedicti and ante praedictum tempus
quo, The Testator died.
etc. scilicet primo die Julii Anno Dom' millesimo sexcentesimo quinquagesimo
septimo apud Barham praed' obiit sic inde seisit' post cujus quidem Nicholai
Marsh Avi mortem praedict' Alicia Ux' ejus virtute test'i praed' seisit' fuit
de praed' annuitat' sive annual' reddit' octo libr' The Wife seized Virtute
Testamenti.
in dn^ico suo ut de libero ten^to pro term^ vitae suae Et sic inde seisit'
existen' praedicta Alicia Ux' praedcta Nich. Marsh defunct' diu ante praedictum
tempus quo, And died.
etc. scilicet tertio die Junii Anno Dom' millesimo sexcentesimo quinquagesimo
octavo apud Barham praed' obiit post cujus quidem Aliciae Ux' mortem praedict'
Rich. Marsh fuit seisit' de praed' annuitat' sive annual reddit' octo libr' The
Son seized.
in dominico suo ut de feodo and solvit praed' seperal' legata praefat' Ann.
and Alicie and Nich. And paid the Legacies.
Waters secundum formam and effectum testamenti praed' scilicet apud Barham
praed' Et sic inde seisit existen' praedict' Rich. Marsh diu ante praedict'
tempus quo, etc. scilicet decimo die Augusti Anno Regni Dom' Caroli Secundi
nuper Regis Angliae, etc. tricesimo secundo apud Barham praed' per quoddam
Scriptum suum Indentat' inter ipsum Rich. Marsh per nomen Rich. And conveyed
the Deed to the Defendant.
Marsh de Swingfield in Com' Kanc' Yeom' ex una part and praed' Nich. Marsh
modo defend' per nomen Nich. Marsh filii praedict' Rich. ex altera part ibidem
fact' cujus scripti alteram partem sigillo praedict' Rich. Marsh sigillat'
iidem Tho. Baker and Nich. Marsh modo defend' hic in Cur' proferunt cujus
dat'est eisdem die and anno pro and in consideratione naturalis amoris and
affectionis quae gessit praedicto Nich. modo defend' filio suo and summae
quinque libr' legalis monet' Angliae per praed' Nich. Marsh modo defend' eidem
Rich. Marsh and Assign' suis solvend' secur' (Anglice. secured) duran' vita sua
natural' ad duos dies solutionis in anno and pro diversis aliis bonis causis
and considerationibus ipsum Rich. ad hoc movent' dedit and concessit assignavit
and transposuit praedict' Nichol' Marsh filio suo modo defend' Haered' and
Assign. suis praed' annuitat' sive annual' reddit' octo libr' habend' and
tenend' dict' Habendum.
annuitat' sive annual' reddit' octo libr' praedict' Nicholao Marsh filio modo
defend' Hered' and Assign' suis ad solum opus and usum praedict' The Uses.
Nicholai filii modo defend' Haered' and Assign' suorum imperpetuum sub
condition qd' si Haered' vel Assign' praedict' Upon Condition.
Roberti Lade tunc defunct' vel praedict' Lancelot Lade Haered' vel Assign' sui
vel aliquis eorum been and fidelit' solveret vel solvi causaret praedicto
Nicholao Marsh filio modo defend' Haered' vel Assign' suis summam centum and
octodecim libr' legalis monet' Angliae apud Capital' Mesuag' praed. ad vel
super Festum diem Sancti Michaelis Archi prox' sequen' dat' praed. Indentur'
ult' mentionat' qd' tunc praerecitat' fact' annuitat' The Money was not paid.
and omnia articula claus. and res in eadem content' foret vacua frustra and
nullius valoris aliqua re in eadem mentionat' in contrarium non obstant' prout
per idem scriptum indentat' ult' mentionat before apparet Et idem Thomas Baker
and Nicholaus Marsh modo defend' ulterius dicunt qd' Haered' vel Assign'
praedict' Roberti non solverunt nec solvi causaver' nec praedict' Lancelot Lade
Haered' vel' Assign' sui vel aliquis eorum solvit vel solvi causavit praefat'
Nich. Marsh modo defend' praed. summam centum and octodecim librarum super
praed. Festum Sancti Michaelis tunc prox' sequen' secundum formam and effectum
Conditionis in praedict' Vigore Concessionis, and of the Statute of Uses.
scripto indentat' ult' mentionat' Virtute cujus quidem concessionis and
assignationis ult' mentionat' ac vigore cujusdam Statuti fact' apud Westm' in
Com' Midd' quarto die Februarii Anno Regni Domini Henrici octavi nuper Regis
Angliae, etc. vicesimo septimo de usibus in possessionem transferend' praed'
Nich. The Defendant was seized In Dominico suo ut de feodo.
Marsh modo defend' praedict' tempore quo, etc. fuit and adhuc est seisit' de
praed' Annuitat' sive annual' reddit' octo libr' in dominico suo ut de feod' Et
quia quadraginta and octo libr' de reddit' praed' per sex Annos integros finit'
ad Festum Sancti Michaelis Arc^hi prox' ante praedict' tempus quo, For 6 years
Rent due the Distress was made.

The one Defendant been advocat, and the other been cognovit.


etc. praedict' Nich. Marsh modo defend' aretro fuer' and insolut' ad praed'
Festum Sancti Michaelis Arch' prox' ante praed' tempus quo, etc. and per octo
dies prox' post idem Festum and praedict' tempore quo, etc. idem Nich. Marsh
modo defend' in jure suo propr' been advocat Et praedict' Thomas Baker ut
Ballivus praedict' Nich. Marsh modo defend' been cogn' caption' averiorum
praedictorum in praedicto loco in quo, etc. pro eisdem quadraginta and octo
libr' de reddit' praed' sic aretro existen' and just, etc. ut in terris
distriction' praedict' Nich. As in Lands charged with the Distress.
Marsh modo defend' in forma praedict' onerat' and obligat', etc.

Demurrer.
Et praedictus Philippus Lade dic' qd' per aliqua per praed' Thomam Baker and
Nicholaum Marsh superius in advocatione praed' alleg' iidem Thomas Baker and
Nicholaus Marsh captionem averiorum praedictorum in praedicto loco in quo, etc.
justam cognoscere non debent quia dicit qd' placitum praed' per eosdem Thomam
Baker and Nicholaum Marsh modo and forma praed' superius placitat' materiaque
in eodem content' minus sufficien' in lege exist' ad captionem averiorum
praedictorum in praedicto loco in quo, etc. justam cognoscend' ad quod idem
Philippus Lade necesse non habet nec per Legem Terrae tenetur aliquo modo
respondere Et hoc parat' est verificare Unde pro defectu sufficien' placit' in
hac part idem Philippus Lade pet' judic' and dampna sua praed' occatione
captionis and injuste detentionis averiorum praedictorum sibi adjudicari, etc.

Joynder.
Et praedict Thomas and Nicholaus ex quo ipsi sufficien' materiam in Lege ad
ipsum Nicholaum captionem averiorum praedictorum in praedicto loco in quo, etc.
justam advocand' Et ad ipsum Thomam ut Ballivum ipsius Nicholai eandem
captionem in eodem loco justam cognoscend' in advocare and cognitione suis
praedictis superius allegaver' quam ipsi parat' sunt verificare quam quidem
materiam praedictus Philippus non dedic' nec ad eam aliqualit' respond' pet'
judicium and retorn' averiorum praedictorum unacum dampnis, etc. sibi
adjudicari, etc. Et quia Justic' hic se advisare volunt de and super praemissis
priusquam Judicium inde reddant dies dat' est partibus praedictis hic usque a
die Sancti Michaelis in tres septimanas de audiend' inde Judicio suo eo qd'
iidem Justic' hic inde nondum, etc.

Lade versus Baker and Marsh.
REplevin for taking his Cattle at Barrham in Kent, in a place there called the
Fourteen Acrees.

The Defendant Baker made Conusans and Bailiff of Nicholas Marsh, and says,
that diu ante praed' tempus quo, etc. one Robert Lade was seized in fee of the
said 14 Acres, and by his Deed indented, dated 1 October. 24 Car. 1. between him
of the one part, and Nicholas Marsh, Grandfather of the said Nicholas Marsh of
the other part, and produces the said Deed in Court, in consideration of 100 l
paid to him by the said Nicholas Marsh the Grandfather, did grant to the said
Nicholas Marsh and his Heirs, an annual Rent of 8 l to be issuing out of all
that Capital Message with the appurtenances, in Barham aforesaid, and out of
all Lands and Hereditaments in Barham, aforesaid, to the said Message
belonging, and then in the occupation of the said Robert Lade, unde praedict'
locus in quo est and praed' tempore quo, etc. fuit parcell' to be paid at our
Lady Day and Michaelmas by equal portions, with power to distrain, if the said
Rent, or any part thereof were behind.

And the Defendant further says, that by virtue of the said Grant, the said
Nicholas Marsh the Grandfather, became seized in Fee of the said Rent; and
being so seized by his Will in Writing, dated the 28th. of November 1654,
devised the said Rent to Richard Marsh and his Heirs, and died; by virtue
whereof the said Richard Marsh became seized in Fee of the said Rent, and being
so seized, diu ante praedict' Tempus, quo, etc. viz. 10 Aug. 32 Car. 2. nuper
Regis, by his Deed indented between him of the one part, and the said Nicholas
Marsh the Defendant, Son of the said Richard of the other part, cujus Scripti
alteram partem Sigillo praedict' Richard Marsh (omitting sigillat') idem Thomas
Baker the Defendant hic in Cur' profert for and in consideration of Natural
Love and affection which he bore to the said Nicholas now Defendant, his Son,
and the sum of 5 l yearly by him the said Nicholas to the said Richard Marsh,
during the Life of the said Richard, secured to be paid, and for diverse other
good causes and considerations concessit assignavit and transposuit to the said
Defendant Nich. Marsh and his Heirs the said Annuity or yearly Rent of 8 l to
the use of the said Nicholas Marsh the Defendant and his Heirs, prout per idem
Scriptum Indentat. before apparet Virtute cujus quidem concessionis and
assignationis ulterius mentionat. and vigore Statuti Anno Regni Hen. 8. nuper
Regis Angliae vicesimo septimo de usibus in possessionem transferend. praedict.
Nich. Defend' fuit and adhuc est seisit. de praedict. annual. reddit, etc. and
for 48 l for six years arrear at Michaelmas next-before the taking of the
Cattle, to the said Nicholas the Defendant been cognoscit ut Ballivus ipsius
Nicholai, etc.

To this the Defendant demurs.

First. It is not sufficiently shown that the Place where, etc. was charged
with the Rent, for the Rent is granted out of a Message with the appurtenances
in Barham, and out of all the Lands in Barham aforesaid to the said Massuage
belonging, and then in the occupation of the said Robert Lade unde praedict.
locus in quo est and tempore quo, etc. fuit parcel. and though it were parcel at
the time of the Distress taking, it might not be belonging to the said House,
or in the tenure of Lade at the time of the Rent granted, which should have
been shown, and of that Opinion were the Court.

Secondly. In the Deed by which the Defendant Nicholas Marsh claims, it is said
sigillo praedict. Rich. Marsh, (omitting sigillat.)

Sed non allocatur, for it is said before that per Scriptum indentat. factum
inter, etc. he granted, and that is enough.

Thirdly. Here is a grant of the Rent from Richard Marsh pleaded without any
Attornment or Enrollment To which it was answered by the Counsel for the
Defendant, that it appears that the Grant was made in Consideration of
Natural Affection as well as Money, and so it shall enure as a Covenant to stand
seized; and for this the Case of Crossing and Scudamore was cited, Pas. 23 Car.
2. Rot. 871. where in Ejectment it was found by Special Verdict that Nicholas
Hele was seized of Lands in Fee, and that he made a Deed to Jane Hele, enrolled
within six Months, by which he did, for and in consideration of Natural Love,
Augmentation of her Portion, and the Preferment of Her in Marriage, and other
good and valuable Considerations, Give, Grant, Bargain and Sell, Alien, Enfeoff
and Confirm unto the said Jane and her Heirs the said Lands. And in the said
Deed there was a Covenant, that after due execution, etc. the said Jane should
quietly enjoy, and also a clause of warranty; and the Jury found that there was
no other Consideration than what was expressed in the Deed, ut supra; this Deed
could not enure as a Bargain and Sale, but it was adjudged that it should work
as a Covenant to stand seized; and Watts and Dix's Case was also cited, Sty.
188, 204 where Rolls said if Lands are passed for Money only, the Deed ought to
be enrolled, but if for Money and Natural Affection the Land will pass without
Enrollment.

The Court here in the Principal Case inclined, that this Grant would work as a
Covenant to stand seized.

But Pollexfen Chief Justice was of Opinion that it ought to have been so
pleaded, and not to use the words concessit assign. and transposuit, which is
to plead it as a Grant at Common Law.

Powell and Ventris did conceive that it was pleaded sufficiently, in regard it
was said that by virtue of the Deed and Statute of Uses he became seized; but
leave was given by the Court to amend the Plea as the Defendant should see
cause.

Bland versus Haselrig and alios.
QUarto Jacobi Secundi the Case was, an Assumpsit was brought against four, who
pleaded non Assumpsit infra sex annos, and the Verdict was, that one of the
Defendants did assume infra sex annos, and the other non assumpsit. And it was
moved that no Judgment could be given against the Defendant, upon whom the
Verdict was found, for this is an Indeb. assump. for Goods sold, and it is an
entire contract, and they must all be found to promise, or else it is against
the Plaintiff.

Torts are in their nature several, so one Defendant may be found guilty and
the other not guilty, but it is not so in Actions grounded upon Contract.

Pollexfen Chief Justice, Powel and Rokeby were of Opinion in this Case, That
the Plaintiff could not have Judgment.

Ventris inclined to the contrary, he admitted if an Indebitat' assumpsit be
brought against four, and they plead non assumps. and found that one of them
assumed, this is against the Plaintiff, for he fails in his Action. But in the
case at Bar it may be taken, that they did all promise at first, and that one
of them only renewed the promise within six years: The plea of non assumpsit
infra sex annos implies a promise at first, and if one should renew his promise
within six years it is reason it should bind him, and the Plaintiff must sue
them all, or else he will vary from the Original Contract.

But the Chief Justice seemed to be of an Opinion, that if the promise were
renewed within the six years, yet if not upon a new Consideration, it should
not bind; and if there were a new Consideration, the Action will lie against
him that promised alone. Sed Quaere, for the common Practice is upon a Plea of
the Statute of Limitations to prove only a renewing the Promise without any
further Consideration, but a bare owning the Debt is not taken to be
sufficient, Quaere, if the first Consideration upon repeating the Promise
within six years be not enough to raise a new Cause of Action. Judgment was
given for the Defendant.

Westby's Case.
WEstby brought an Action by Original, and the Instructions to Cursitor for
drawing of the Writ were Westby, but the Writ was Westly, and so all the
Proceedings. Afterward the Court upon a motion ordered the Cursitor to attend,
who satisfied the Court that the Instructions were right, and so they ordered
the Original to be amended in Court, and this without any application to the
Chancery or Order from thence, and they amended all the proceedings after.

Termino Paschae, Anno 2 Willielmi and Wariae. In Communi Banco.
Ellis versus Yates.
IN an Action of Trespass the Writ was brought, and so recited, Quare clausum
fregit and herbam ibid' crescent' conculcavit and consumpsit and averia
fugavit; and the Declaration was, Quare clausum and herbam ibid' crescent'
conculcavit and consumpsit and bidentes, etc. fugavit and alia enormia, etc.

Upon Not guilty pleaded, a Verdict was found for the Plaintiff. It was moved
in Arrest of Judgment, that fregit was omitted in the Declaration, so one of
the Trespasses contained in the Writ, viz. the Clausum fregit was not mentioned
in the Declaration, and if the Writ contains more than is Declared for; this is
a Variance not aided by the Verdict, 1 Cro. 329. Haselop and Chaplin, where a
Replevin was de averiis, and declares only of an Horse, and for that the
Judgment was Reversed in a Writ of Error. So where the Writ was Quare clausum
fregit, and the Declaration Quare clausum, 1 Cro. 185. Edwards and Watkin.

Pollexfen Chief Justice and Rokeby were of that Opinion, that Judgment should
be arrested.

Ventris contra ( Powel being absent) because the treading and consuming of the
Grass necessarily implied a breach of the Close; for there could not be an
Entry without a Breach. So the Declaration by necessary Intendment comprehended
all that was in the Writ, and to support the Verdict it was reasonable to
intend no other breach of the Close, than by a bare Entry: But the other two
said, That there might be given in Evidence a breach of a Gate or Hedge, and
Damages might be given for that, and then there was no ground for such Damage
set forth in the Declaration.

And by the Opinion of the Chief Justice and Rokeby the Judgment was stayed.

Vid. Keilway 187. B. finding in a Verdict upon a Writ of Forcible Entry, that
the Defendant expulit, disseisivit, etc. this implies it was Vi and armis, and
yet that is the very point of the Action.

The Warden of the Fleet's Case.
A Motion was made by the Warden of the Fleet, for a Writ of Privilege sitting
the Parliament, alleging that he was obliged to attend the House of Lords, and
therefore ought to be privileged from Suits; and diverse Presidents were shown,
where Writs of the like nature were granted to the Warden of the Fleet upon
Motion, one whereof was 2 Car. 1. and diverse since that time, some whereof
appeared to be upon hearing of Counsel on both sides.

And the Court were at first inclined to grant him the like Writ; but it being
afterward made appear to the Court, that he was sued upon Escapes, and the
Court considering the great inconvenience that would ensue thereupon, and being
of Opinion that it was in their Discretion, whether they would grant such Writ
upon Motion or no. For they could not Iudicially take notice of this Privilege
of Parliament, and therefore in case he had such Privilege, the Court said he
might plead it, if he would; but they would not grant him such Writ upon
Motion: Or if his Privilege were infringed by the parties prosecuting a Suit
against him, he might complain to the Lords for a breach of Privilege.

Anonymus.
THere was a Judgment by Default, which the Defendant let go by Default
depending upon the Mistake in the Original. Now suspecting that the Plaintiff
had discovered it, and so would procure another Original that should be right,
he moved the Court by Sergeant Birch, that he might have Oyer of the Original;
and this was intended to prevent the procuring of another.

But the Court denied the Motion, and said, It was usual for a Plaintiff to
take out his Original after Judgment Entered.

Beaumont versus Weldon.
IN an Assumpsit the Plaintiff declared upon several Promises, three whereof
were for finding of Lodging for so many Months for the Wife of the Plaintiff at
his Request, and the last Promise was an Indebitat' for Goods and Wares sold to
the Defendant himself.

The Defendant pleaded in Bar, That long before the Plaintiff had found his
Wife any Lodging, (viz.) such a day his Wife went away from him without his
Consent, and lived in Adultery with some person or persons unknown to the
Defendant from that time to this present; and that the Plaintiff, before he had
provided her any Lodging, had notice of that her Departure, notwithstanding
which the Plaintiff provided her Lodging, and also said to her the said Goods
and Wares, supposed in the Declaration to be sold to the Defendant, without any
assent or notice of the Defendant, absque hoc quod assumpsit super se modo and
forma prout praedictus Querens supuerius versus eum queritur, and hoc paratus
est verificare, etc.

To this the Defendant Demurred generally, and it was Argued that the Plea was
naught both as to the Matter and Form. It was said, the great Case of Scot and
Manby was Resolved chiefly upon the express Prohibition that the Husband had
given to Trust his Wife. Mod. Rep. 9. Dier and East it was said That the Wife
should have been Endowed though she eloped before the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap.
34. and as to the manner of pleading, it is altogether insufficient; for it
amounts to the General Issue, and he should have traversed the Request: And for
the Goods and Wares alleged to be sold to the Defendant himself, there is no
Answer given at all; but only said, That the Wares supposed to be sold to the
Defendant, were sold and delivered to the Wife; which is nothing to the purpose.

The Court, as to the Special Matter pleaded, gave no Opinion; but seemed to
agree, that upon Non Assumpsit pleaded, the Matter set forth in the Plea would
have been good Evidence for the Defendant.

Vid. the Opinion of some of the Judges in 2 Siderfin in Scot and Manby's Case
129. and the Court held that the Plea amounted to the General Issue, as to the
Lodging found for the Wise; but then this was cured upon a General Demurrer.
But because there was nothing pleaded to the Indebitat' Assumpsit laid for the
Wares alleged to be sold to the Defendant himself, they were of Opinion to
give Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Nota, The Traverse absque hoc, as this Pleading is, amounts to no more than
a Protestation. Vid. Kelway 187. B.

Brown versus Rands.
THe Plaintiff brought an Action of Debt for 400 l and Declared upon two Bonds,
each of them in the penalty of 200 l

The Defendant demands Oyer of the several Bonds, and of the Conditions of each
Bond; which Conditions reciting, that a Marriage was intended between the
Defendant and the Anne Stow, One of them was to permit and suffer her to
dispose of her Personal Estate, and to permit the person and persons, to whom
she should dispose of it, to enjoy it; and the other Condition was to permit
her to give away 5 l and that the Defendant should pay it within two Months
after her Decease: And to each of these Bonds the Defendant pleaded, Quod
Conditio ejusdem scripti nunquam infracta fuit per ipsum ad aliquod tempus
hucusque and hoc paratus est verificare.

To this the Plaintiff demurred, It was insisted on for the Defendant that this
Plea was good, and should drive the Plaintiff to assign a Breach; for the
Matter did not lie within the Notice of the Defendant, whether she had made any
disposition of her Personal Estate, or had given the 50 l and so could plead no
otherwise than thus.

But the Court held the Plea to be naught, and that for saving of the Bond, it
is necessary for the Defendant to show how he has performed the Condition, and
this manner of Pleading was never admitted.

Lechmere and al' versus Toplady and al'.
Land. ss.
Trover brought for a great many Goods.
ALICIA Toplady nuper de London Vid' Benjamin' Thorowgood nuper de eadem Mil'
Thomas Kinsey nuper de eadem Mil' and Georgius Benson nuper de eadem Servien'
ad Clavam attach' fuer' ad respondend' Nicholao Lechmere and Sabian' Coals
mercatoribus de placito Transgr' super Casum Et unde iidem Nicholaus and
Sabian' per Humfridum Wall Attorn' suum queruntur quare cum praedict' Nicholaus
and Sabian' quarto die Junii Anno Domini Millesimo sexcentesimo octogesimo
sexto apud London' videlt in paroch' Beatae Mariae de Arcubus in Warda de
Cheap possessionat' The particulars of the Goods.
fuissent de bon' and catal' sequen' ( videlt) de ducent' vigint' and quinque
libris legalis monet' Angl' in pecun' numerat' ac de december pipis (Anglice
pipes) and quingent' lagen' (Anglice gallons) Vini Hispanici (Anglice vocat'
Canary) duobus buttis (Anglice butts) dimid' Cadi (Anglice half Hogsheads) and
ducent' and quinquagint' lagen' Vini Hispanici (Anglice vocat' Sherry) duabus
buttis and ducent' and quinquagent' lagen' Vini Hispanici (Anglice vocat'
Malaga) quinque Tonnis (Anglice Tons) vigint' Cadis (Anglice Hogsheads) and
mill lagen' Vini Gallici (Anglice Whitewine) december tonnis quadragint' cadis
septem vasibus ((Anglice vocat' Fats) un' pipa and duobus mill lagen' Vini
Gallici (Anglice vocat' Claret) duobus vasibus (Anglice Fats) tribus cadis and
trecent' lagen' Vini Rhenens' (Anglice vocat' Rhenish) un' cado un' Tertia
(Anglice Teirce) and sexagint' lagen' Vini Hispanici (Anglice vocat' Tent) sex
duoden' (Anglice dozen) ampullar' (Anglice bottles) implet' cum Vino Hispanico
(Anglice vocat' Canary) octo duoden' ampullar' implet' cum Vino Gallico
(Anglice vocat' Claret) septem duoden' ampullar' implet' cum Vino Gallico
(Anglice vocat' Whitewine) vigint' and tribus vasibus (Anglice Casks) tribus
circulis (Anglice Screwhoops) duodecim ferreis circulis (Anglice Iron-hoops)
duobus cantharis (Anglice vocat' Cans) sex Infundibulis (Anglice Funnels) sex
Cupis (Anglice Tubs) un' par' cranor' (Anglice Cranes) and hancher (Anglice
Hanchers) vigint' librat' ponderibus Nicotian' sex duoden' librat' ponder'
Candelar' (Anglice Candles) triginr' duoden' ampullar' Vitriar' (Anglice
Glass-bottles) un' Crate (Anglice Range) duobus Fensoribus (Anglice Fenders)
tribus Battillis (Anglice Fireshovels) tribus Forcipibus (Anglice pairs of
Tongs) un' furca Ignar' (Anglice Firefork) duabus cranis (Anglice Cranes) and
hamis (Anglice Hooks) duobus uncis pro veribus (Anglice Spitracks) duobus
craticulis (Anglice Gridirons) duobus Ignitabulis (Anglice Chafingdishes)
duobus tripis (Anglice Trevets) duobus Ansoriis (Anglice Chopping-knives) un'
pixid' ferrea (Anglice Box-Iron) quatuor calefactor' (Anglice Heaters) un'
Veruversorio (Anglice Jack) un' catena and ponderibus (Anglice Weights) tribus
verubus (Anglice Spits) un' folle (Anglice pair of Bellows) un' pixid' pro Sale
(Anglice Salt-box) un' unco pro Sartagine (Anglice a rack for a Drying Pan) un'
instrument' ferreo (Anglice vocat' a Plate-Frame) tribus ollis ereis (Anglice
Brass-Pots) and tegminibus (Anglice Covers) tribus scutellis (Anglice
Saucepans) duobus ereis caldariis (Anglice brass Kettles) sex ereis ignitabulis
(Anglice brass Chaffingdishes) un' ereo caleficio lectuali (Anglice Warmingpan)
vigint' and novem patinis Stanneis (Anglice Pewterdishes) tribus malluviis
(Anglice Basins) quinque duoden' and dimid' (anglice Dozen and half) lamin'
(anglice Plates) tribus catillis (anglice Porringers) tribus scutellis (anglice
Saucers) un' lamina (anglice Pasty-plate) quatuor lamini pro caseo (anglice
Cheese-plates) duobus salsariis (anglice Saltsellars) novem matulis (anglice
Chamber-pots) duobus ferreis diguttoriis (anglice Iron Drippingpans) duobus
sartaginibus (anglice Fryingpans) vigint' and tribus mensis (anglice Tables)
septem tapet' (anglice Carpets) nonagint' and quatuor cathedris (anglice
Chairs) duobus sedil' (anglice Stools) un' pixid' pro aromat' (anglice Spice
Box) un' erea sicula (anglice Pail) un' fulcro (anglice Turnupbed) quatuor
lect' pulvinar' (anglice Featherbeds) quatuor cervical. (anglice Boulsters) sex
pulvinar' (anglice Pillows) quatuor lodic' lanear' (anglice Blankets) quatuor
par' lodic' linear' (anglice Sheets) quatuor opiment. (anglice Iuggs) quatuor
fulcris (anglice Bedsteads) un' stannea cisterna (anglice Cistern) un' cantharo
continen' tres quartas (anglice Three quart Pot) un' plumbea cisterna un'
plumbea sentina (anglice Sink) un' pipa plumbea un' area papilla adinde affix'
(anglice a Lead Pipe and Brass Cock) quadragint' and sex duoden' ampullar'
vitrear' tribus duoden' stannea candelabra (anglice Tin Candlesticks) duobus
ereis candelabris un' cantharo continen' quarter' pint (anglice Quartern Pot)
novem cantharis continen' dimid' pint (anglice Halfpint Pot) vigint' and
quatuor cantharis continen' pintas (anglice Pint Pot) octo cantharis continen'
quartas (anglice Quart Pots) duobus cantharis continen' duas quartas (anglice
Pottle Pots) quatuor cratibus ignear' (angl. Firegrates) tribus tintinnabulis
un' plumbeo tegmin' (angl. Lead Cover) duabus celdis carbon' (angl. Chaldron of
Coals) quatuor cratibus (angl. Stoves) un' lagen' (angl. Gallon) aceti duabus
postibus (angl. Posts) un' furca ferrea (angl. Spud) un' cantharo (angl. Black
Jack) un' abaco (angl. Cupboard) sex cultris (angl. Knives) tribus curtinis
(angl. Curtains) un' par' curtin' and vallene' (angl' a Suit of Curtains and
Vallence) novem par' perirtromat' (angl. Suits of Hangings) duabus cistellis
(angl. Chests of Drawers) quatuor picturis (angl. Pictures) un' lanterna (angl.
Lanthorn) duabus duoden' vitrij (angl. Glasses) un' par. andelar' (angl.
Andirons) quinque par' catellor' ferreor' (angl. Iron Dogs) tribus catellis
ferreis quinque pec' tapet' (anglice Tapestry) un' pec' ligni (angl. vocat. a
Horse for drying Clothes) un' cista pipar' (angl. a Chest of Pipes) un' sentina
(angl. Closestool and Pan) undecim pec' ferri pro circulis (angl. Irons for
Hoops) quingent' fascibus (angl. Faggots) and sex lanternis (angl. Sconses) ad
valenc' quingent' librar' legalis monet' Angl' ut de pecun' bon' and catallis
ipsor' Nicholai and Sabian' propr' Et sic inde possessionat' existen' ipsi
iidem Nicholaus and Sabian' postea scilicet eisdem die and anno apud London'
praedict' in Paroch' and Warda praedict' pecun' bon' and catall' ill' extra
manus and possession' suas casualit' perdider' and amiser' Quae quidem pecun'
bon' and catall' postea scilicet eisdem die and anno apud London praedict' in
Paroch' and Warda praedict' ad manus and possession' praedict' Aliciae^
Benjamini Thomae and Georgii per Invenc^on' devener' praedict' tamen Alicia
Benjaminus Thomas and Georgius scien' pecun' bon' and catall' praed' sore
pecun' bon' and catall' ipsor' Nicholai and Sabian' propr' and ad ipsos
Nicholaum and Sabian' de Jure spectare and pertinere machinan' tamen and
fraudulent' intenden' eosdem Nicholaum and Sabian' de pecun' bon' and catall'
praed' in hac part callide and subdole deipere and defraudare pecun' bon' and
catall' praedict' licet saepius requisit', etc. eisdem Nicholao and Sabian' seu
eorum alteri nondum deliberaver' nec eorum aliquis deliberavit Sed pecun' bon'
and catall' ill' postea scilicet die and anno ult' praedict' apud London'
praed' in Paroch' and Warda praed' in usum suis propr' converter' and
disposuer' Ad dampnum ipsius Nicholai and Sabian' cuingent' librar' Et inde
producunt sectam, etc.

Et praedict' Alicia Benjaminus Thomas and Georgius per Carol' Draper Attorn'
suum ven' and defend' vim and injur' quando etc. The Defendant pleads a
Recovery in an Action of Trespass in Bar.

The particulars of the Goods.


Et quoad convercon' and disposicon' bonor' and catallor' sequen' (parcell'
^onor' and catallor' in Narr' praed' superius mentionat') ad usum ipsor'
Aliciae Thomae Benjamini and Georgii (viz.) december pipas (Anglice Pipes) and
quindecim lagen' (Anglice Gallons) Vini Hispanici Anglice vocat' Canary) duas
Buttas (Anglice Butts) and dimid' cadi Anglice half Hogsheads) Vini Hispanici
(Anglice voc' Sherrey) And so all the particulars beforementioned are to come
in here verbatim. -- quingent' fascis (Anglice Faggots) and sex lanternas
(Anglice Sconses) iidem Alicia Thomas Benjaminus and Georgius dicunt ^uod
praed' Nicholaus Lechmere and Sabian' Coals accon' suam praed' Actio non.
^^de versus eos habere seu manutenere non debent quae dicunt quod Termino
Sancti Michaelis Anno regni Domini Jacobi secundi nuper ^egis Angl', etc.
secundo coram ipso nuper Rege apud Westm' Action brought in the King's Bench.
in Com' Midd' existen' Nicholaus Lechmere and Sabian' Coals mercator' ^er
Johannem Smith tunc Attorn' suum ven' and protuler' in Cur' ^icti domini nuper
Regis tunc ibidem quandam billam suam versus ^enjamin' Thorowgood Mil' Thomam
Kinsey Mil' Aliciam Toplady ^ Georgium Benson in custod' Marr', The Declaration.
etc. de placito Transgr' Et ^^nc fuer' pleg' de prosequend' scilicet Johannes
Do and Richardus ^oe per quam quidem Billam praedict' Nicholaus Lechmere and
Sabian' ^oles mercator' querebant de Benjamino Thorowgood Mil' Thoma ^insey
Mil' Alicia Toplady and Georgio Benson in custod' Marr' Ma^schal' domini nuper
Regis coram ipso nuper Rege existen' de eo ^^od ipsi tertio die Junii Anno
regni dicti domini Jacobi secundi ^per Regis Angl', etc. secundo Vi and armis,
Trespass for taking away of the Goods.
etc. bon' and catall' ipsor' ^cholai and Sabian' Coals sequen' videlicet december
pipas (Angl. Pipes) ^quindecim lagen' (Angl. Gallons) Vini Hispanici (Angl.
vocat' ^nary) duas Buttas (Angl. Butts) and dimid' Cadi (Angl. half ^gshead)
Vini Hispanici (Angl. vocat' Sherrey) duas Buttas Vini ^spanici (Angl. vocat.
Malaga) [Here follows all the before^^ntioned Goods] -- undecim pec' ferri pro
circulis (angl. Iron ^f Hoops) quingent' fasces (angl. Faggots) and sex
lanternas (angl. Sonses) ad valenc' quingent' libr' legalis monet' Angl' apud
Lon^d' vidlt in Paroch' Sancti Dunstani in Occidente in Warda de Fingdon extra
adtunc and ibidem invent' ceper' and asportaver' Et anormia eisdem Nicholao and
Sabian' adtunc and ibidem intulet' Contra pacem nuper Regis.
c^ra pacem dicti domini nuper Regis, etc. ad dampnum ipsorum Nicholai and
Sabian' quingent' and vigint' librar' Et inde produc' sectam, etc.

Imparlance.
Et postea scilicet die Lunae prox' post Octab' Sancti Hillar' tunc prox'
sequen' usque quem diem praedict' Alicia Benjaminus Thomas and Georgius habuer'
licenc' ad Billam praed' interloquend' and tunc ad respondend', etc. coram
domino Rege apud Westm' ven' tam praedict' Nicholaus and Sabian' per Attorn'
suum praedict' qui praedict' Alic^a Benjaminus Thomas and Georgius per Ant'
Ward attorn suum and iidem Alicia and Georgius tunc defend' vim and injur'
quando, Not Guilty pleaded.
etc. Et dixe^ quod ipsi non fuer' inde culpabil' and de hoc posuer' se super
Patrian Et praedict' Nicholaus and Sabian' similit', etc. Per quod Praecept'
fur Vic' quod Venire fac' coram dicto domino nuper Rege apud Westn' die Veneris
prox' post Crast' Purificacon' Beatae Mariae Virgins duodecim, etc. Per quos,
etc. Et qui nec, etc. ad Recogn', etc. qui tam, etc. idem dies dat' fuit
partibus praedict' ibidem, etc. Post continuat' fuit inde process. inter
parts praedict' de placito predic^ per Jur' posit' inde inter eas in respect'
coram domino Rege apu^ Westm' usque diem Mercur' prox post Quinden' Paschae
extunc pro' sequen' Nisi dilect' and fidel' domini Regis Edwardus Herbert Mil'
Ca' Justic' domini Regis ad placita in Cur' ipsius domini Regis coram ip^ Rege
tenend' assign' prius die Martis decimo quinto die Februar' apu^ Guihald'
London per formam Statut', etc. ven' pro defect' Jur', and Ad quem quidem diem
Martis scilicet decimum quintum die^ Februar' ven' coram dicto domino nuper
Rege tam praedict' Nicholaus and Sabian' per attorn' suum praedict' quam
praedict' Alicia Thomas Benjaminus and Georgius per attorn' suum praedict' Et
praefat' Capital' Justic' dicti domini nuper Regis coram quo, Return of the
Postea.
etc. mis. hic recordsuum coram eo habit' in haec verba Postea die and loco
infracontent' coram praedict' Edwardo Herbert Mil' Capital' Justic'
infrascript' associat' sibi Richardo Phillips gen' per formam Statut', etc.
ven' parts praedict' per attorn' suos praedict' Et Jur' Jurat' unde infra fit
mentio exact' quidam eorum videlicet Thomas Barnelsly Josephus Baggs Johannes
Reynolds Richardus Beauchampe Josephus Can Richardus Brown Johannnes Bernard
and Thomas Mills ven' and in Jur ill' Jurat' existunt and quia resid' Jur'
ejusdem Jur'e non comparuer Ideo al' de circumstantibus per Vic' Civit' London,
infrascript' ac hoc elect' ad requisicon' praedict' Nicholai and Sabian' ac per
mandat Capital' Justic' praedict' de novo apponunt' Quorum Nomina pan^ nello
infrascript' Tales.
affilantur secundum formam Statut' in hujusmod^ casu inde nuper edit' and
provis' Et Jur' sic de novo apposit' videl Nicholaus Bendy Jacobus Woods
Edwardus Falkingham and Kenelr^ Smith exact' similit' ven' and in Jur' ill'
Jurat' existunt Qui ad ver^ tat' de infracontent' simulcum al' Jur' praedict'
prius ad hoc impa^^ nellat' and Jurat' dicend' elect' triat' and Jurat' dixer'
super Sacrar^ suum quod diu ante praed' tempus quo, The Jury find a Special
Verdict.
etc. scilicet vicesimo octa^ die Aprilis Anno regni domini nostri Regis nunc
secundo quida^ Johannes Toplady adtunc and diu antea existen' That the Owner of
the Goods was a Vintner.
negotiator (Anglice a Trader) uten' and exercen' negotium (Anglice Trade)
Vinarij (Anglice a Vintner) and viam and modum suum vivendi emendo and vendendo
and adtunc existen' indebitat' diversis person' in diversis magnis denar'
Summis ultra ducent' libr' legalis monet' Angl' praed' vicesimo octavo die
Aprilis devenisset Decoctor (Anglice a Bankrupt) infra Statut' fact' And became
a Bankrupt.
contra Decoctores (Anglice Bankrupts) Et Jur' praedict' ulterius super Sacrum'
suum praed' dicunt quod Termino Paschae anno regni dicti domini Regis nunc
primo quoddam Judicium and recuperac' in Cur' And a Judgment recovered against
him for 1000 l
domini nostri Regis nunc coram ipso Rege apud Westm' praed' habit' fuer' pro
mill libr' de debito necnon septuagint' and tribus solid' and quatuor' denar'
de dampn' prout per record' Judic' praed' in Cur' dicti domini Regis coram ipso
Rege apud Westm' remanen' before liquet and apparet Et Jur' praedict' ulterius
super Sacrum' suum praed' A Fieri fac' issued out upon it.
dicunt quod quoddam breve de Fieri fac' Jur' praedict' modo hic in evidenc'
osten' super Judicium praed' per praefat' Aliciam Toplady emanat' and prosecut'
fuisset Vic' London' direct' per quod quidem breve mandat' fuit Vic' London
quod de bon' and catall' praed Johannis Toplady in balliva sua Fieri fac' tam
praed' mill libr' de debito quam praedict' septuagint' tres solid' and quatuor
denar' qui eidem Aliciae in eadem Cur' coram dicto domino Rege adjudicar' fuer'
pro dampnis suis quae sustin' tam occon' detencon' debiti illius qui pro misis
and custag' suis per ipsum circa Sectam suam in hac part apposit' and denar'
ill' habeat' coram dicto domino Rege apud West' die lunae prox' post Crin^
Ascencon' Domini ad reddend' praefat' Aliciae pro debito and dampn' praedict'
Quod quidem breve de Fieri fac' postea scilicet vicesimo nono die Aprilis anno
ult' supradict' deliberat' fuit per praedict' Aliciam prefat' And delivered to
the Sheriff.
Benjamino Thorowgood and Thomae Kinsey tunc Vic' London existen' in forma Jur'
exequend' quodque praedict' Benjaminus Thorowgood and Thomas Kinsey and
praedict' Georgius Benson tunc existen' un' Servien' ad Clav' eorundem Vic' per
eor' Warrant' super praed' breve de Fieri fac' and per ordin' and direccon'
praed' Aliciae postea scilicet eodem vicesimo nono die Aprilir and non antea
bona and catalla in Narr' ipsor' Nicholai and Sabian' menconat' in custod'
ipsor' A Sergeant at Mace, by Order and direction of the Sheriffs, seize the
Goods in Execution. That after seizure and before sale, a Prerogative Process
issued out against the Goods. The Writ found inter verba.
Benjamini and Thomae Kinsey receperunt asportaver' and seisiver' Et Jur'
praedict' ulterius super Sacram' suum praed' dixer' quod duran' tempore quo
bon' and catall' praedict' sic fuer' in custod' praedict' Vic' ac ante aliquam
vendicon' vel disposicon' inde fact' quidam Process. (vocat' an Extent) extra
Cur' dom' Regis de Scaccario apud Westminster. versus praedict' Johannem Toplady
prosecut' fuisset Tenor cujus quidem propcess. Jur' praedict' modo hic in
evidence ostens. sequitur in haec verba ss. Jacobus Secundus Dei gratia Angl'
Scot' Franc' and Hiberniae Rex fidei defensor' etc. Vic' London salutem cum
Richardus and Holder Edwardus Cook ambo Mercat' de Roodlane and Richardus
Powney Winecooper de Marklane London per scriptum suum obligator' sigillis suis
sigillat' geren' dat' septimo die Novembr' anno regni nostri primo deven'tent'
in nobis quadragint' libr' bonae and legalis monet' Angl' solvend' ad certum
diem preterit' and eas nobis nondum solver' Inquisition found.
nec solvi fecer' ut dicitur Cumque per quandam Inquisicon' indentat' capt'
apud Guihald' Civit' Lond' scituat' in Paroch' sancti Laurentii in veteri
Judaismo in Warda de Cheap ejusdem Civitat' primo die Maij anno regni nostri
secundo coram vobis praefat' Vic' Civit' The Bankrupt indebted.
London virtute brevis nostri de extend' sub sigillo Scaccarii nostri versus
praefat' Ric. Holder. vobis direct. compert. exist. per Sacrum. Daniel. Man and
al. probor. and legal. hom. Civitat. praedict' quod quidam Johannes Toplady de
London Vintner praedict' die caption. predict' Inquisicon. indebitat. exist.
praefat' Richardo Holder in summa Centum and sexagint. librar. bonae and
legalis monet. Angl. pro tant. denar. debit. pro Vin. per eundem Ric. Holder
praedict' Johanni Toplady vendit. and deliberat. Quam quidem summam Centum and
sexagint. librar. praedict' vos praefat' Vic. dicto die caption. Inquisition.
praedict' virtute brevis predict' in manus nostras cap. and seisiri fecistis
proput per breve praed' and retorn. ejusdem and pred' Inquisicon. eidem brevi
annex. in Scacc. nostrum certificat. and ibidem in custod. Rememoratoris nostri
remanen. before apparet Nosque de dictis Centum and sexagint. libr. nobis jam
debit. omni celeritate qua poter' satisfieri volen. quod est Justum vob.
praecipimus quod non omit. propter aliquam libertat. quin in ead. ingred. and
tam per Sacrum. proborum and legal-hominum de balliva vestra vel aliter per
Sacrum. and testimonium aliquorum proborum and legalium hominum de eadem
balliva vestra per quos rei veritas melius scire poterit quam omnibus al. viis
mediis and modis quibus melius sciveritis aut poteritis diligenter Inquir. quas
terr. and quae ten. and cujus annui valoris praedict' Ad Inquirend' what Goods
and Chattels, Lands and Tenements.
Johannes Toplady habuit in dicta balliva vestra dicto primo die Maij anno
regni nostri secundo quo die nobis primo debtor inde devenit seu unquam postea
hucusque necnon quae and cujusmodi bon. and catall. and cujus pretii Ac quae
debit. credit. Specialit. and denar. Sum. praedict' Johannes Toplady modo habet
in dicta balliva vestra eaque omnia and singula praedict' bon. and catall.
terr. and tenementa debit. credit. Specialit' And to Extend them in
quibuscunque manibus.
and denar. Sum. in quorumcunque man. jam exist. per Sactum. praefat. proborum
and legalium hominum diligent. appretiari and extendi ac in manus nostras
capiatis and seisiri fac. ut ea quousque nobis de debit' praedict' plene
satisfact. fuit habeamus juxta formam Statut. per hujusmodi debit. nostris
recuperand. inde nuper edit. and provis' Ac vobis ulterius praecipimus and
potestat' damus per praesentes ad quascunque person. in praemissis existimari
idon' coram vobis advocand. ac de and in eisdem praemissis diligent. examinand.
ne hoc praesens mandat. nostrum reman' ulterius exequend. and qualiter hoc
Praecept' nostr. fuerit execut' Baron. de Scaccario nostro apud Westm' octavo
die instan. mensis Maij distinct and aperte constare fac. and habeatis ibi hoc
breve proviso quod bon. and catall. ill. quae in manus nostras occasion hujus
brevis nostri ceperitis ea non vendatis nec vendi faciatis quousque al' de
nobis habuer' in mandat' Proviso.
Test Edwardo Atkyns Mil' apud Westm' quarto die Maij anno regni nostri
secundo per breve and Inquisicon' praed' ac per praed' Actum in Parliament anno
tricesimo tertio nuper Regis Henrici octavi tent' edit' Retorn of the Writ.
ac per Warrant' Baron' Jenner and per Barons Ayloffe Executio istius brevis
patet in quadam Inquisic' huic brevi annex' Respons' Thomae Kinsey Mil' and
Benjamin' Thorowgood Mil' Vic', London ss. The Inquisition
Inquisitio indentat' capt' apud Guihald' Civitat' London scituat' in paroch'
sancti Laurentii in veteri Judaismo in Warda de Cheap ejusdem Civitat' sexto
die Maij anno regni domini nostri Jacobi secundi Dei gratia Angl' Scot' Franc'
and Hiberniae Regis fidei defensor', etc. secundo coram Thoma Kinsey Mil' and
Benjamin' Thorowgood Mil' Vic. Civit. Lond' praed. Virtute cujusdm^ brevis
dicti domini Regis eisdem Vic' direct' and huic Inquisicon' annex' ad
inquirend' de and super quibusdam materiis in eodem brevi content' and spec'
per Sacrum' Danielis Man Willielmi Church Richardi Beauchampe Philippi Perrey
Johannis Phillips Johannis Pope Johannis Tailor Jofiae Tulley Johannis Dodd
Willielmi Haywood Johannis Middleton and Thomae Pounsett proborum and legalium
hominum de Balliva praefat' Vic' qui dicunt super dictum Sacrum' suum quod
Johannes Toplady in dicto brevi nominat' quarto die instan' Maij possessionat'
fuit and dicto die caption' hujus Inquisicon' possessionat' exist' ut de bon'
The Bankrupt found possessed.
and catalli suis propr' in balliva praefat' Vic' de diversis bon' and catall'
in quadam Schedula sive Inventorio huic Inquisicon' annex' mentionat' attingen'
in toto secundum valorem super ea apposit' ad summam Centum octogint' and trium
librar' Quae quidem bon' and catall' praedict' Nos praefat' Vic' praedict die
capcon' hujus Inquisicon' Virtute brevis praedict' Nulla alia bona, etc.
in manus dicti domini Regis capi and seisiri fec' Ac Jur' praed' supra dict'
Sacrum' suum ulterius dicunt quod praed' Johannes Toplady nulla al' sive plur'
habet bon' seu catall' nec habet aliqua debit' credit' Specialit' seu denar'
Sum' nec die in dicto brevi mentionat' quo dicto domino Regi de debit' in dicto
brevi Spec' primo devenit Debtor seu unquam postea hucusque al' habuit terras
seu tenementa in balliva praefat' Vic' ad notic' eorundem Jur' quae modo
extendi appretiari vel in manus dicti domini Regis cap' seu seisiri possunt in
cujus rei Testimonium tam praefat' Vic' quam Jur' praedict' huic Inquisicon'
sigilla sua apponi fecerint die and anno primo supradict. A Proclamation to
claim.
Si nullus venerit and clamaverit proprietat' bon' and catall' supramentionat'
citra diem veneris decimum quartum diem Maij hoc Termino fiat breve de
vendicon' exponas per Cur'. Butler. An Inventory of the Goods seized by the
Sheriffs.
An Inventory of the Goods and Chattels of John Toplady of London, Vintner,
seized by Sir Thomas Kinsey Knight and Sir Benjamin Thorowgood Knight, Sheriffs
of London, by virtue of his Majesty's Writ of Extent unto them, directed for
One hundred and sixty Pounds found by Inquisition, as the Debt of one Richard
Holder; which Writ is Returnable before the Barons of His Majesty's Exchequer
at Westminster, on the eighth day of this instant May, Appraisment.
and Appraised the fourth of this instant May, One thousand six hundred eighty
six. Imprimis, Five Pipes of New Canary at One hundred and twenty pounds: Item,
Two Pipes of old Canary at Thirty pounds: Item, One Butt of new Sherrey at
Twelve pounds: Item, Three Hogsheads of Galliack at Twenty one pounds. Et
Jurator' praed' ulterius super Sacr' suum praed' dicunt quod praed' quinque
Pipae Vini (vocat' New Canary) and praed' duae Pipae Vini (vocat' Did Canary)
and praed' un' dolium (Anglice Butt) Vini (vocat' New Sherrey) and pred' tres
dolij (Anglice Hogsheads) (voc' Galliack) sunt parcell' Vinorum in Narr' pred'
mentionat' Quodque bona pred' in Inquisic' pred' menc' Virtute cujusdam brevis
dict. domini Regis de vendicon' exponas e Cur' Scaccarij praedict' emanat'
super Extent' praedict' per Vic' Civitat' praed' The Money paid to the party.
vendit' and barganizat' fuer' pro Centum and sexagint' libr and denar' ill'
praed' Richardo Holder solut' and deliberat' per Vic' praed' prout per breve
praedict' and retorn' inde in evidenc' hic oftens' constat and apparet Et Jur'
praed' ulterius super Sacr' suum dicunt quod super quandam Peticon' Petition to
the Lord Chancellor for a Commission of Bankrupcy.
domino Magno Cancellar' Angl' exhibit' and Jur' praedict' modo hic in evident'
ostens' quaedam Commissio Banckrupcon' sub Magno Sigillo Angl' postea ac
antequam aliqua venditio bonor' and catall' praedict' vel alicujus inde
parcell' fact' fuit vel aliqua levatio debit' The Commission sued out.
domini nostri Regis super processum Scaccarii praed' habit' fuit scilicet
quinto die Maij anno secundo supradict' versus ipsum Johannem Toplady obtent'
and prosecut' fuit ad Sectam creditor' praed' Johannis Toplady debita Jur'
forma and secundum formam and effect' Statutor' contra Decoctores (Anglice
Bankrupts) Anthonio Upton Willielmo Hall Armig' Mathaeo Petley Johanni Smith
and Johanni Cole gen' direct' per quam quidem Commission' dictus dominus Rex
nominavit assignavit and constituit ipsos Special' Commissionar' duos sive
quatuor vel tribus eor' Commissioners named.
quorum praed' Anthonius Upton vel Willielmus Hall foret unus plen' and
sufficien' authoritat' facere and exequi omnia and singula de and concernen'
praedict' Johanne Toplady and creditoribus suis secundum formam and effectum
Statut' praedict' vel eorum alicujus prout per Commission' praed' before
liquet and apparet Et Jur' praedict' super Sacr' suum praed' ulterius dicunt
quod praed' Johannes Toplady praed' tempore quo ipse ut praefertur devenit
Decoctor ac postea fuit possessionat' de praedict' Vinis bon' and catall' in
Narr' praedict' menconat' ut de bon' suis propr' quodque praed' Willielmus Hall
Mathaeus Petley and Johannes Smith postea scilicet tertio die Junij anno
secundo supradict' ut Commissionar' and in prosecucon' Commission' praed' and
Statut' praed' per Indentur' suam Jur' The Commissioners assign to the
Plaintiffs.
praed' in evidenc' monstrat' barginazaver' vendider' ordinaver' and
assignaver' praed' Nicholao Lechmere and Sabian' Coals adtunc duobus
creditoribus praed' Johannis Toplady omnia and singula vina bona and catalla in
Narr' praed' mentionat' habend' tenend' and recuperand' in fiducia pro usu and
beneficio porprio praedict' The Assignees possessed.
Nicholai and Sabian' Coals and tal' al' creditor' praedict' Johannis Toplady
qual' adtunc praeantea advenissent vel postea in debito tempore veniant ad
quaerend' relevium secundum formam and effectum Statut' praed' Virtute cujus
ipsi praed' Nicholaus Lechmere and Sabian' Coals possessionat' fuerint prout
lex postulat de vinis bon' and catall' in Narr' Et utrum super teta materia the
Defendants are guilty or no, the Jurors know not.
praed' mentionat' Sed utrum super tota materia in forma praed' compert'
videretur Cur' dicti domini Regis coram ipso nuper Rege quod praed' Benjaminus
Thomas Alicia and Georgius fuer' culpabil' aut eorum aliquis fuit culpabil' de
transgr' infrascript' modo and forma prout praed' Nicholaus and Sabian'
interius inde versus eosdem Benjaminum Thomam Aliciam and Georgium Querebantur
Necne Jur' praed' dixer' quod penitus ignorabant and inde pet' advisament' Cur'
dicti domini Regis coram ipso nuper Rege and si super tota materia praed' per
Jur' praed' in forma praed' compert' videretur Cur' If the Court shall adjudge
them guilty, they find for the Plaintiffs.
dicti domini Regis coram ipso nuper Rege quod praed' Benjaminus Thomas Alicia
and Georgius fuer' culpabil' modo and forma prout praed' Nicholaus and Sabian'
interius inde versus eosdem Benjaminum Thomam Aliciam and Georgium querebantur
tunc Jur' ill' dixer' super Sacram' suum praed' quod praed' Benjaminus Thomas
Alicia and Georgius fuer' culpabil' de transgr' praed' modo and forma prout
praed' Nicholaus and Sabian' interius inde versus eosdem Benjaminum Thomam
Aliciam and Georgium querebantur tunc assidebant dampnum ipsorum Nicholai and
Sabian' occasion inde ultra mis' and custag' sua per ipsos circa Sectam suam
in hac part apposit' ad quadringent' and tresdecim librar' Et pro mis' and
custag' ill' ad quinquagint' tres solid' and quatuor denar' Sed si super tota
materia praed' per Jur' praed' in forma praed' compert' If not, for the
Defendants.
videretur Cur' dicti domini Regis coram ipso Rege quod praed' Benjaminus
Thomas Alicia and Georgius non fuer' culpabil' de Transgr' praed' tunc Jur'
praed' dixer' super Sacrum' suum praed' quod praed' Benjaminus Thomas Alicia
and Georgius non fuer' culpabil' de Transgr' ill' modo and forma prout ipsi
praed' Benjaminus Thomas Alicia and Georgius interius pro se placitando
allegaver' Sed quia Cur' Continuances.
dicti domini Regis nunc hic de Judicio suo de and super praemiss. reddend'
nondum advisatur dies inde dat' fuit partibus praed' Further Continuances.
coram domino Rege apud Westm' usque diem Veneris prox' post Crastin' Sanct'
Trinitat' de Judicio suo inde audiend' eo quod Cur' dicti domini Regis hic inde
nondum, etc. Ad quem diem coram domino Rege apud Westm' ven' parts praed' per
Attorn' suos praed' Sed quia Cur' dicti domini Regis nunc hic de Judicio suo de
and super praemiss. reddend. nondum advisatur dies inde dat' fuit partibus
praed' coram domino Rege apud Westm' usque diem Lunae prox' post tres Septiman'
Sancti Michaelis de Judicio suo inde audiend' eo quod Cur' dicti domini Regis
nunc hic inde nondum, etc. Ad quem diem coram domino Rege apud Westm' Further
Continuance.
ven' parts praed' per Attorn' suos praed' Sed quia Cur' dicti domini Regis
nunc hic de Judicio suo de and super praemiss. reddend' nondum advisabatur dies
inde dat' fuit partibus praedict' coram domino Rege apud Westm' usque diem
Lunae prox' post Octab' sancti Hillar' de Judicio suo inde audiend' eo quod
Cur' dicti domini Regis nunc hic inde nondum, Further Continuance.
etc. Ad quem diem coram domino Rege apud Westm' ven' parts praed' per Attorn
suos praed' Sed quia Cur' dicti domini Regis nunc hic Judicio suo de and super
praemiss. reddend. nondum advisabatur dies inde dat' fuit partibus praed' cosam
domino Rege apud Westm' usque diem Mercur' prox' post Quinden' Paschae de
Judicio suo de and super praemiss. audiend' eo quod Cur' dicti domini Regis
nunc hinc inde nondum, etc. Ad quem diem coram domino Rege apud Westm' Further
Continuance.
ven' parts praed' per Attorn' suos praed Sed quia Cur' dicti domini Regis
nunc hic Judicio suo de and super praemiss. reddend' nondum advisabatur dies
inde dat' fuit partibus praed' coram domino Rege apud Westm' usque diem Veneris
prox' post Crastin' Sanctae Trinitat' de Judicio suo inde audiend' eo quod Cur'
dicti domini Regis nunc hic inde nondum, Further Continuance.
etc. Ad quem diem coram domino Rege apud Westm' ven' parts praed' per Attorn'
suos praed' Sed quia Cur' dicti domini Regis nunc hic de Judicio suo de and
super praemiss. reddend' nondum advisabatur dies inde dat' fuit partibus praed'
coram domino Rege apud Westminster usque diem Martis prox' post tres Septiman'
sancti Mich' de Judicio suo inde audiend' eo quod Cur' dicti domini Regis nunc
hic inde nondum, etc. Ad quem diem coram domino Rege apud Westminster. ven. parts
praedict' per Attorn' suos praed. Further Continuance.
Sed quia Cur' dicti domini Regis nunc hic de Judicio suo de and super
praemiss. reddend' nondum advisabatur dies inde dat' fuit partibus praedict'
coram domino Rege apud Westm' usque diem Mercur' prox' post Octab' sancti
Hillar' de Judicio suo inde audiend' eo quod Cur' dicti dom' Regis nunc hic
inde nondum, The Loquela remaining, sine die was revived and continued by Act
of Parliament.
etc. Postea scilicet a die Paschae in quindeeim dies extunc prox' sequen'
usque quem diem Record' and Process. praed' (antea remanen' sine die) Virtute
cujusdam Actus Parliam^ confect' apud Westm' decimo tertio die Februar' anno
regni domini Willielmi and dominae Mariae nunc Regis and Regin' Angl. etc.
primo revivificat' continuat' and ordinat' fuer' coram eisnem domino Rege and
domina Regin' apud Westm' ven' parts praed per Attorn' suos praed. Sed quia
Cur' Further Continuance.
dict' domini Regis and dominae Regin' nunc hic de Judicio suo de and super
praemiss. reddend' nondum advisabatur dies inde dat' fuit partibus praed' coram
domino Rege and dominae Regin' apud Westm' usque diem Veneris prox' post
Crastin' sanctae Trinitatis de Judicio suo inde audiend' eo quod Cur' dict'
domini Regis and dominae Regin' nunc hic inde nondum, Judgment for the
Defendants.
etc. Ad quem diem coram domino Rege and domina Regin' apud Westm' ven' parts
praedict' per Attorn' suos praedict. Super quo Vis. and per Cur' dicti dom'
Regis and dominae Regin' nunc ibidem before intellectis omnibus and singulis
praemiss. maturaque deliberacon' inde habita videbatur Cur' dict' domini Regis
and dominae Regn' nunc ibidem quod praed' Benjaminus Thomas Alicia and Georgius
non fuer' culpabil' de Transgr' praedict' modo and forma prout praedict'
Benjaminus Thomas Alicia and Georgius pro se placitando allegaver' Ideo cons.
fuit quod praedict' Nicholaus and Sabian' nil' caperent per billam suam
praedict' Sed quod ipsi pro falso clamore suo forent inde in misercordia, Qui
nil Cap' per Billain.
etc. Et praedict Benjaminus Thomas Alicia and Georgius irent inde sine die,
Sine die.
etc. Et ulterius cons. fuit quod praed' Benjaminus Thomas Alicia and Georgius
recuperarent versus praedict' Nicholaum and Sabian' septemdecim libr' pro mis.
and custag' suis per ipsos circa defencon' suam in hac part sustent' eisdem
Benjamino Thomae Aliciae and Georgio Juxta formam Statut' per Cur' dict' domini
Regis and dominae Regin' nunc ibidem ex assensu suo adjudicat' Et quod
praedict' Benjaminus Thomas Alicia and Georgius habeernt inde Execucon',
Execution adjudged.
etc. prout per Record' and Process. inde in Cur' dict' domini Regis and
dominae Regin' nunc coram ipsis Rege and Regin' apud Westm' praedict' residen'
Averment that the Judgment is in force.
before apparet quod quidem record' in pleno robore and vigore suis adhuc
remanet minime reversat seu annihilat' Et iidem Benjaminus Thomas Alicia and
Georgius ulterius dicunt quod bon' and catall' in billa and record' praedict'
per ipsos Nicholaum and Sabian' versus praed' Averment that the Goods in the
Action of Trespass, and in this of Trover, are the same.
Benjaminum Thomam Aliciam and Georgium in Cur' dicti domini nuper Regis coram
ipso nuper Rege ut praefertur exhibit' in accon' Transgr' praedict' menconat'
Et praedict' bon' and catall' superius hic recitat' and menconat' ad manus
praedict' Benjamin' Thomae Aliciae and Georgii and conversio in Narr' praedict'
Nicholai and Sabian' Averment as to the Conversion.
hic menconat' unde versus eos inde narraver' sunt un' and eadem and non alia
neque diversa quodque dispositio bon' and catall' in accon' Transgr' praedict'
menconat' and concessio praed' bon' and catall' praed' hic superius recitat'
sunt un' and eadem captio asportatio adventio dispositio and conversio and non
alia neque diversa causa accon' Unde ipsi predict' Nicholaus and Sabien' versus
ipsos Benjaminum Thomam Aliciam and Georgium quoad praed' parcell' bon' and
catall' hic superius menconat' modo narraver' Et causa accon' unde ipsi praed'
Nicholaus and Sabian' That the Cause of Action was the same in both.
in Narr' sua in accon' Transgr' praed' superius recitat' narraver' est un' and
eadem and non alia neque diversa quodque Nicholaus and Sabian' quer' in accon'
Transgr' in billa and record' praedict' nominat' and praed' Nicholaus and
Sabian' modo quer' sunt un' Averment, that the Plaintiffs Defendants are the
same.
and eaedem personae and non aliae neque diversae quodque praed' Benjaminus
Thomas Alicia and Georgius quatuor defend' in accon' Transgr' praed' menconat'
and praed' Benjaminus Thomas Alicia and Georgius modo defend' sunt un' and
eaedem person' and non aliae neque diversae Et hoc parat' sunt verificare unde
petunt Judicium si praed' Nicholaus and Sabian' accon' suam praed' versus eos
habere seu manutenere debeant, The Conclusion of the first Plea.
etc. Et quoad resid' Transgr' convercon' and disposicon' resid' bon' catall'
and pecun' in Narr' praedict' superius menconat' iidem Alicia Thomas Benjaminus
and Georgius dicunt quod ipsi non sunt inde culpabil' Et de hoc pon' se super
Patriam Et praedict' Nicholaus and Sabian' similiter, Not Guilty to the residue
of the Goods.
etc.

Creswell Levinz.

Demurrer.
Et praedict' Nicholaus and Sabian' dicunt quod ipsi per aliqua per praedict'
Aliciam Benjaminum Thomam and Georgium modo and forma superius placitand'
allegat' ab accon' sua praed' inde versus eos habend' praecludi non debent quia
dicunt quod placitum praedict' per ipsos Aliciam Benjaminum Thomam and Georgium
modo and forma praed. superius placitat' materiaque in eodem content' minus
sufficien' in lege exist' ad ipsos Nich' and Sabian' ab acc^one sua pred' inde
versus ipsos Aliciam Benjaminum Thomam and Georgium habend' praecludend' ad
quod quidem placitum ipsorum Aliciae Benjamini Thomae and Georgii iidem
Nicholaus and Sabian' necesse non habent nec per legem terrae tenentur
respondere Et hoc parat' sunt verificare Unde pro defect' sufficien' respons.
ipsorum Aliciae Benjamini Thomae and Georgii in hac part iidem Nicholaus and
Sabian' petunt Judicium and dampnum sua occ^one convercon' and disposicon' bon'
and catall' ill' sibi adjudicari, etc.

Joynder in Demurrer.
Et praedict' Alicia Benjaminus Thomas and Georgius dicunt quod placitum praed'
ipsorum Aliciae Benjamini Thomae and Georgii modo and forma praed' superius
placitat' materiaque in eodem content bon' and sufficien' in lege exist' ad
ipsos Nicholaum and Sabian' ab accon' sua praed' versus ipsos Aliciam
Benjaminum Thomam and Georgium habend' praecludend' quod quidem placitum
materiamque in eodem content' ipsi iidem Alicia Benjaminus Thomas and Georgius
parat' sunt verificare Et quia praedict' Nicholaus and Sabian' ad placitum ill'
non respond' nec ill' hucusque aliqualit' dedic' sed verificacon' ill'
admittere omnino recusant iidem Alicia Benjaminus Thomas and Georgius (ut
prius) petunt Judicium Et quod praedict' Nicholaus and Sabian' ab accon' sua
praed' inde versus eos habend' praecludentur, etc. Et quia Justic' hic se
advisare volunt de and super praemiss. priusquam Judicium inde reddant dies
inde dat' est tam praed' Nicholao and Sabian' quam praed' Aliciae Benjamino
Thomae and Georgio hic usque in Octab' Sancti Hillar' de audiend' inde Judicio
suo eo quod iidem Justic' hic inde nondum, etc.

Lechmere versus Toplady.
IN an Action of Trover by Letchmere and Others against Alice Toplady, Sir
Benjamin Thorowgood and Others, where the Plaintiffs Declared, That they were
possessed de ducent' viginti and quinque libris legalis monet' Angl' in
pecuniis numerat', and of ten pipes and fifty gallons of Canary, and of diverse
other things in the Declaration mentioned, which they lost, and which came
afterward to the possession of the Defendants, and they converted them to
their own use.

The Defendants, as to diverse of the Goods in the Declaration mentioned (which
they particularly recite in their Plea) plead in Bar, That in Michaelmass Term,
in the second year of the late King James the Second, the said Plaintiff
commenced an Action against the now Defendants in the Kings Bench, de plaeito
Transgr' super Casum; where they Declared, that the Defendants Vi and armis
took the said Goods and Chattels in the Declaration now mentioned and pleaded
to, apud London, etc. ceperunt and asportaverunt. To which the Defendants
pleaded Not Guilty, and went to Trial upon that Issue. Upon which the Jury
found a Special Verdict, which the Defendants set forth in their Plea verbatim,
together with the whole Record, in the King's Bench; and that upon that Special
Verdict the Court gave Judgment, that the Plaintiffs nil capiant per billam,
and that the Defendants irent inde sine die prout per Recordum and Process.
inde in Cur' dicti domini Regis and dominae Reginae nunc coram ipsis Rege and
Regina apud Westm' residen' plen' apparet quod quidem Recordum in plenis robore
and vigore suis adhuc remanent minime reversat' seu annihilat'; and avers, that
the Goods and Chattels in both Declarations' were the same, and the taking,
carrying away and disposing of the said Goods in the said Action of Trespass;
and the coming of the said Goods to the hands of the Defendants, and the
disposition and conversion thereof in this Declaration mentioned are the same,
and the Cause of Action the same, etc. and as to the residue of the Goods and
Chattels in the now Declaration mentioned the Defendant pleads Not Guilty, and
Issue thereupon; and to the Bar pleaded, the Plaintiffs demurred.

It was Argued by Sergeant Tremayne against the Bar, That the Actions were of a
different nature, and that in many Cases Trover would lie where Trespass Vi and
armis would not, 1 Cro. 667. Ferrars and Arden; where it is said, If one deliver
Goods to another to keep and brings Trespass, and is Barred, he may after bring
Detinue; because he mistook his Action, Vid. 6 Co. 7. And he relied upon the
Case of Putt and Royston, Pasch. 34 Car. 2. B. R. Rot. 422. where, in an Action
of Trespass upon a Not guilty, Verdict was for the Defendant and Judgment; and
there the Plaintiff brought an Action of Trover for the same matter, and the
former Judgment was pleaded in Bar, and upon a Demurrer it was adjudged for the
Plaintiff.

Sergeant Pemberton contra. It Is taken for a Rule in Sparrie's Case, 5 Co. 61.
Nemo bis vexari debet si constet Cur' quod sit pro una and eadem causa. He
agreed, that Trover would lie in many cases where Trespass would not; but here
it appears to the Court, by the Matter disclosed in the pleading, (the Special
Verdict and whole Record being set forth) that the Plaintiff was barred before,
not for having mistaken his Action, but upon the Rights and Merits of the
Cause, and this (he said) differed this Case from that of Putt and Royston; (
Note, That Case was Adjudged when Sir Francis Pemberton was Chief Justice of
the King's Bench) for there the Verdict being upon the General Issue in
Trespass, it could not appear upon the Record, but that the Verdict was against
the Plaintiff upon the mistake of the Action; whereas here it appears, upon the
Matter at large set forth in the Special Verdict, that Judgment was given
against the Plaintiffs upon the Merits of of the Cause.

And the Court were of Opinion, that the Plea in Bar was good in this Case; but
they took the Case of Putt and Royston to be a Case of the same nature. For
though the Issue were General, yet in regard of the Averments which in every such
Plea there must be, it appears to the Court that the Matter was the same, as
well as here it does upon the Special Verdict; and if it were not the same, so
that the Plaintiff was barred to the former by mistaking the Nature of his
Action, the Averment might be traversed: Therefore by reason of that Case
Adjudged and the Importunity of the Plaintiffs, Leave was given by the Court to
speak further to the Case the next Term.

The Earl of Mountague versus The Lord Preston.
IN an Action on the Case, for the Profits of the Office of Master of the
King's Wardrobe, the Plaintiff Declared, That King Charles the Second, in the
23th year of his Reign, granted him a Patent to hold the said Office for Life,
reciting a former Grant thereof to the Earl of Sandwich, and the Surrender of
that Grant. And that the Defendant by color of a Patent granted to him in the
First year of the late King James had entered upon the Office, and taken the
Profits, and had deprived the Plaintiff of the whole benefit and profit of the
Office.

Upon Not guilty pleaded, it came to a Trial at the Bar this Term, and it was
insisted upon for the Defendant, That the Plaintiffs Patent having recited a
former Grant, that they must prove that Grant to have been surrendered.

To which it was Answered, That if they took advantage of the Recital, they
must admit all that was recited, as well the Surrender as the Grant. And of
that Opinion was the Court.

Then the Defendant produced the Earl of Sandwich's Patent; and this the Court
held would put the Plaintiff to prove a Surrender: And a Surrender was shown in
Evidence accordingly.

Note, It was said in an Action of this Nature, that it is not necessary to
show every particular Sum received by the Defendant: But it is a good Evidence
for the Damage, to show the Profit of the Office communibus annis.

Anonymus.
AFter an Extent upon a Statute, and a Liberate out of this Court, the Writ was
Habere fac' terr' and tenementa, instead of Liberari facias; and it was moved
to amend the word Habere in the Writ and to make it Liberari.

And after diverse Motions the Court Ordered the Amendment to be accordingly;
because it is a Judicial Writ. 8 Co. 157. a. 1 Cro. 709. A Writ of Enquiry was
awarded to the Sheriffs of London, and it was quod Inquirat instead of
Inquirant, and it was amended. Vid. the Case of Walker and Riches, 3 Cro. 162.
and the Case of Keer and Guyn, Hob. 90. but in that Case the Roll was wrong in
a very material thing; for it was not said in the Elegit, the Lands and
Tenements of the Defendant.

Anonymus.
AN Action of Debt was brought in this Court, for a Sum of Money recovered in
the Hundred Court; and the Defendant was admitted to wage his Law, though at
first the Court doubted. Vid. Mo. 276. for a Wager of Law to an Action of Debt,
brought for an Amercement in a Court Baron.

Note, When the Defendant has his Hand upon the Book, before he is sworn, the
Plaintiff is to be called, and he may be Nonsuited.

The Defendant is to bring his Compurgators; but they may be less than Eleven,
and they are sworn de credulitate.

Anonymus.
AN Action was brought for speaking of these words of the Plaintiff, He broke
my House, like a Thief. And upon Not guilty pleaded, a Verdict was found for
the Plaintiff.

And the Court held the words not to be Actionable.

Anonymus.
IN an Action for Words spoken of the Plaintiff in saying; He was a Clipper and
Coiner.

After Verdict, upon Not guilty, pleaded, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment,
that the Words did not charge him with Clipping and Coining of Money; and
Clipping and Coining might be applied to many other things.

But the Court held the Words to be Actionable in regard of the strong
Intendment; and such Words are understood, by those that heard them, to mean
Clipping and Coining of Money.

Anonymus.
AN Attorney brought an Action, for that the Defendant said of him, He is a
Cheating Knave, and not fit to be an Attorney.

After Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that
there was no Communication of his Profession, and the Words did not necessarily
relate to his Practice.

But the Court held the Action would lie: for saying, That he was not fit to be
an Attorney, showed plainly, that Cheating Knave had reference to that.

Anonymus.
UPon a Motion for a New Trial it appeared, that the Solicitor for the
Plaintiff (who also was an Attorney) had wrote two Letters to two of the Jury
before the Trial, importuning them to Appear, and setting forth the Hardships
that his Client had suffered in the Cause, and how he had Verdicts for his
Title.

The Court set aside the Trial for this Cause, and Committed the Solicitor to
the Fleet for this Misdemeanor, being Embracing of a Jury; and before his
Discharge, made him pay Ten pounds to the party toward the Charges of the
Trial.

Precious versus Robinson.
THe Cause being at Issue in Hillary Term last, a Venire was awarded, and a
Jury Returned upon it; and in Easter Term after another Venire was awarded, and
a Trial was by a Jury Returned upon the two Venire's.

Upon this the Court set aside the Verdict; for there was no Authority for the
two Venire's, so all the Proceedings thereupon are void, and not aided by the
Statute of 16 Car. 2.

Cook versus Romney.
AN Action of Covenant was brought against two, and it was quod teneat
conventionem instead of teneant; and after a Writ of Error brought it was
moved, that it might be amended and made teneant.

It was Objected, That False Latin in an Original could not be amended, as hos
breve for hoc breve; so in Waste, destrictionem for destructionem, Blackamore's
Case, 8 Co.

But the Court granted the Motion, and ordered the Amendment. And it was said,
of late days it had been done in case of a word Mistaken in an Original; as in
Ejectment, divisit for dimisit. Vid. in Blackamore's Case the like, 159. b.
Imaginavit for imaginatus est, was amended.

Anonymus.
IN Trover and Conversion for a Mare.

Upon Not guilty pleaded, and a Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in
Arrest of Judgment, that the Mare was said ad valentiam, and it should have
been pretii.

Sed non allocatur. After Verdict (2 Cro. 307. Still. 174, 182. 2.) the
Plaintiff declares, that he was possessed de quadam equa ut de catallis suis
propriis, and that catalla praedict' casualiter perdidit, and that coming to
the Defendants hands, he converted catalla praedict' to his own use, so that
there is no express Conversion of the Mare.

The Court said, That the Declaration was Inartificial, but good after a
Verdict; for catalla praedict' must refer to the Mare, for nothing else is
mentioned before.

Tunstall versus Brend.
IN an Ejectment, upon Not guilty a Special Verdict was found, upon which there
arose several Points of Law; but it was moved for the Defendant, that the
Declartion was of Michaelmass Term 2 Jac. 2. and the Demise is laid to be 30
October. 2. Jac. and so after that Term began.

Note, The Declaration recited an Original, and an Original was produced Test
2 Novembris, which was after the Demise. And the Prothonotary informed the
Court, that this was frequently allowed, and that no Memorandum of the
Originals, bearing Test within the Term, was used to be made upon the Record.

Highway versus Derby.
IN an Action of Trespass, Quare clausum fregit, and solum, and fundum, (viz.)
duas acras terr' fod' subvert' and asportavit.

Upon Not guilty pleaded, and Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest
of Judgment, that the Declaration was insufficient as to the digging and
carrying away of the Soil; for duas acras terr' does not express the quantity
of Earth, but the measure and extent of the Ground where the digging was.

And for this Cause the Judgment was stayed, by the Opinion of the whole Court.

Note, If the Sheriff Return a Rescous, it is not traversable; but an
Attachment goes against the Rescousers, and a Fine usually set. Though it appears
by Dyer, such Return was allowed to be traversed in C.B. but not practiced of
late.

Termino Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno 2 W. and M. In Communi Banco.
Sherborn versus Colebach.
IN an Indebitat' assumpsit for 20 l lost by the Defendant, to the Plaintiff at
a certain Play, called Hazard.

Upon Non assumpsit, after Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of
Judgment, that to Play at Dice is an unlawful Game, and so the Consideration is
insufficient.

But to that the Court said, that they could not intend that this was Play at
Dice, though there is a Play called Hazard at Dice, known amongst Gamesters;
neither is Play at Dice in it self unlawful, though prohibited by several
Statutes to certain persons, and to be used in certain places.

Then it was moved, that the Declaration was too General; for though there have
been diverse Actions maintained for Money won at Play, yet they use to declare,
that in Consideration the Plaintiff promised, That if the Game went on the
Defendants side, he would pay so much to the Defendant; the Defendant promised,
That if it went on the Plaintiffs side, to pay so much to him.

But the Court said, that of late it had been the usage to declare Generally,
and it might be as well as an Indebitatus pro opere and labor. And Judgment
was given for the Plaintiff.

Note, Justice Powell, cited in the Case supra the Lord North's Case, 2 Leon.
179. where Queen Elizabeth had granted the Fines to him and his Heirs, pro
licentia concordandi, within a certain place; and he brought an Indebitat'
assumpsit for such Fine; and it was held, that it would lie.

And also a Case adjudged in the Kings Bench the last Term, that an Indebitat'
assumpsit would lie for a Dropping Fine, in one Shuttleworth's Case.

Pyne versus Woolland.
Civit' Exon'
Debt for Rent against an Executor, upon a Lease parol.
THomasina Woolland nuper de Civitat' Exon' in Com' Civ8788 itat' Exon' Vid'
Executrix testament' Isaaci Woolland sum' fuit ad respondend' Mariae Pyne Vid'
de placito quod reddat ei octoginta and sex libras duos solid' un' denar' and
un' obulum quos ei injuste detinet etc. Et unde eadem Maria per Nathanielem
Salter Attorn' Demise to the Testator.
suum dic' quod cum praedicta Maria decimo die Maij Anno Domini Millesimo
sexcentesimo octogesimo tertio apud Civitat' Exon' praedict' in Com' ejusdem
Civitat' dimisisset praefat' Quarta pars molendini, etc.
Isaaco in vita sua quartam partem duorum molendinorum granaticorum and unius
molendini brasiatorij (sub uno tecto Anglice Roof) vocat' sive cognit' per
nomen de Cuckingstool-Mists scituat' jacen' and existen' in Exland in Paroch'
sancti Edmundi in Com' Civit' Exon' praedict' ac quartam partem domus molendin'
sive tenementi cum pertin' adinde prox' jacen' ex boreali latere eorundem
necnon quartam partem medietatis pasturae unius parcell' terrae pone dicta
molendina not' sive cognit' per nomen de Bonhay eisdem molendinis pertin'
Habend.
sive pertinen' habend' and occupand' eidem Isaaco a primo die ejusdem mensis
Maij usque finem and terminum unius anni integri extunc prox' sequen' and
plenar' complend' and finiend' Pro uno anno, Et sic de anno in annum.
and sic de anno in annum quamdiu ambabus partibus placeret reddend' and
solvend' proinde eidem Mariae ad finem cujuslibet mensis (secundum computacon'
viginti and octo dierum pro quolibet mense) quo idem Isaacus eadem dimissa
praemissa teneret reddit' The Rent payable Monthly.
sexaginta solidor' quatuor denar' and unius obuli legalis monet' Angl' Virtute
cujus dimissionis idem Isaacus in quartas parts praedictas intravit and fuit
inde possessionat' ac easdem quartas parts usque nonum diem Septembr' Anno
Domini millesimo sexcentesimo octogesimo nono habuit and occupavit ac
quinquaginta septem libr' septem solid' un denar' and un' obul (de praedictis
octoginta sex libris duobus solid' un' denar' and un' obul' parcell') super
eodem nono die Septembris Anno Domini millesimo sexcentesimo octogesimo nono
supradicto pro reddit' dimissorum praemissorum pro novem decim mensibus
secuncum computacon' praedict' adtunc finit' eidem Mariae aretro fuer' and non
solut' Rent unpaid. Actio accrevit.
per quod acco^ accrevit eidem Mariae ad exigend' and habend' de praefat'
Isaaco in vita sua and de praedict' Thomasina post ipsius Isaaci mortem
praedictos quinquaginta septem libras septem solid' un' denar' and un' obul'
(de praedictis octoginta sex libris duobus solidis un' Another Demise at Will
laid.

De quarta part molendini Fullonici. Habend.


denar' and un' obul' parcell') Ac etiam cum praedicta Maria eodem decimo die
Maij Anno Domini millesimo sexcentesimo octogesimo tertio apud Civit' Exon'
praedict' in Com' ejusdem Civit' dimisisset eidem Isaaco quartam partem duorum
molendinorum Fullonicorum cum pertin' in Paroch' Sancti Edmundi praedict'
habend' and occupand' De anno in annum.
eidem Isaaco a primo die ejusem Maij usque finem and terminum unius anni
integri and sic de anno in annum quamdiu ambabus partibus placeret Reddend' and
solvend eidem Mariae pro praedicta quarta part duorum moledin' Fullonicorum
ill' cum pertin' durante tempore quo idem Isaacus eandem quartam partem haberet
and teneret annual' reddit' viginti librarum ad quatuor maxim usual' Festa
scilicet ad Festa Sancti Michaelis Arch'i Nativitat' Entry.
Domini nostri Dei Annunciationis beatae Mariae Virginis and Nativitatis Sancti
Johannis Baptistae per aequales porcones solvend' Virtute cujus dimissionis
idem Isaacus in eandem quartam partem ult' menconat' intravit and fuit inde
possessionat' ac eandem quartam partem usque nonum diem Septembr' Anno Domini
Millesimo sexcentesimo nono habuit and occupavit ac viginti and quinque librae
(de praedict. octoginta sex libris duobus solid' un' denar' and un' obuli al'
parcell') pro reddit praedict quartae partis ult' menconat' pro uno anno
integro and un' quarter' Rent arrear.
unius anni finit' ad Festum Nativitatis sancti Johannis Baptistae Anno Domini
millesimo sexcentesimo octogesimo nono eidem Mariae aretro fuer' and non solut'
Actio accrevit.
per quod acc^o accrevit eidem Mariae ad exigend' and habend' de praefat'
Isaaco in vita sua and de praefat' Thomasina post ipsius Isaaci mortem
praedictas viginti and quinque libras (de praedictis octoginta sex libris
duobus solid' un' denar and un obul' al' parcell') Ac etiam cum praedict' Maria
eodem decimo die Maij Anno Domini millesimo sexcentesimo octogesimo tertio apud
Civit' Another Demise at Will laid.
Exon' praedict' in Com' ejusdem Civit' dimisisset eidem Isaaco quartam partem
unius Stabuli and novae Structurae super veteri Stabulo in paroch' Sancti
Edmundi praedict' Habend' and occupand' Habend.
eidem Isaaco a primo die ejusdem Maij usque finem and terminum unius anni
integri extunc prox' sequen' Sur uno anno, etc.
Et sic de anno in annum quamdiu ambabus partibus placeret reddend' and
solvend' proinde eidem Mariae duran' Reddend.
tempore quo idem Isaacus eandem quartam partem haberet and teneret annual'
reddit' quinquaginta solidorum ad quatuor maxim usual' Festa scilicet ad Festa
Sancti Michaelis Arch'i Nativitatis Domini nostri Dei Annunciac^onis Beatae
Mariae Virginis and Nativitatis Sancti Johannis Baptistae per aequales
porc^ones solvend' Virtute cujus dimissionis idem Isaacus in eandem quartam
partem ult' Entry and Possession.
menc^onat intravit and fuit inde possessionat' ac eandem quartam partem usque
nonum diem Septembris Anno Domini millesimo sexcentesimo octogesimo nono habuit
and occupavit ac sexaginta duo solidi and sex denar' (de praedict' octoginta
sex libris duobus solidis un' denar' and un obul' Rent arrear.
al' parcel') pro reddit' praedict' quartae partis ult' menconat' pro uno anno
integro and uno quarter'-unius anni finit' ad Festum Nativitatis Sancti
Johannis Baptistae Anno Domini millesimo sexcentesimo octogesimo nono eidem
Mariae aretro fuer' and non solut' per quod acc'o accrevit eidem Mariae ad
exigend' and habend' de praefat' Actio accrevit
Isaaco in vita sua and de praefat' Thomasina post ipsius Isaaci mortem
praedict' sexaginta duos solid' and sex denar' (de praedict' octoginta sex
libris duobus solidis un' Another Demise at Will laid.
denar' and un' obul' al' parcel') Ac etiam cum praedict' Maria decimo die Maij
Anno Domini millesimo sexcentesimo octogesimo tertio apud Civit' Exon'
praedict' in Com' ejusdem Civit' dimisisset eidem Isaaco quartam partem
cujusdam al' molendini (vocat a Treble Mill) in Paroch' Of a Treble Mill.
Sancti Edmundi praedict' habend' and occupand' eidem Isaaco a primo die
ejusdem Maij usque finem and termin' Pro uno anno, etc. Reddend.
unius anni integri extunc prox' sequen' Et sic de anno in ann' quamdiu ambabus
partibus placeret reddend' and solvend' eidem Mariae pro eadem quarta part
ult' menconat' duran' tempore quo idem Isaacus eandem quartam partem haberet
and teneret annual' reddit' Ad quatuor Festa.
december solidorum ad quatuor maxim usual' Festa scilicet ad Festa Sancti
Michaelis Arch'i Nativitatis Domini nostri Dei Annuntiationis Beatae Mariae
Virginis and Nativitatis Sancti Johannis Baptistae per aequales porc^ones
solvend' Virtute cujus dimissionis idem Isaacus in quartam partem ill' Entry
and Possession.
intravit and fuit inde possessionat' ac eandem quartem partem usque nonum diem
Septembris Anno Domini millesimo sexcentesimo octogesimo nono habuit and
occupavit ac duodecim solid' and sex denar' (de praedict' octoginta sex libris
duobus solid' un denar' and un' obul' resid') pro reddit' praedict' quartae
partis ult' Rent arrear.
menconat' pro uno anno integro and uno quarterio unius anni finit' ad Festum
Nativitatis Sancti Johannis Baptistae Anno Domini millesimo sexcentesimo
octogesimo nono eidem Mariae aretro fuer' and non solut' Actio accrevit.
per quod acc^o accrevit eidem Mariae ad exigend' and habend' de praefat'
Isaaco in vita sua ac de praefat' Thomasina post mortem ejusdem Isaaci
praedict' duodecim solid' and sex denar' (de praed' octoginta sex libris duobus
solid' un' denar' and un' obul' resid') praedict' Testator in vita, nor the
Executrix post mortem, have not paid.
tamen Isaacus in vita sua ac praedict' Thomasina post mortem ejus licet
saepius requisit' praedict' octoginta sex libras duos solidos un' denar' and
un' obul' seu aliquem inde denar' eidem Mariae nondum reddider' nec eorum alt'
reddidit set ill' ei reddere omnino contradixer' ac praedicta Thomasina ill' ei
reddere adhuc contradic' and injuste detinet Unde dic' quod deteriorat' est and
dampnum habet ad valentiam quadraginta librarum Et-inde produc' sectam etc.

The Defendant pleads in Abatement, that the party died Intestate, and that
Administration was granted to her.

Died intestate. Letters of Administration granted.

The Defendant ought to be sued as Administratrix, and not as Executrix.


Et praedicta Thomasina per Thomam Clarke Attorn' suum ven' Et dic' quod
praedict' Isaacus Woolland apud Civit' Exon' praedict' obiit intestat' post
cujus mortem Edwardus Lake Clericus Sacrae Theologiae professor' Archi
Archidiac' Exon' legittime constitut' apud Civit' Exon' praedict' per Litteras
suas Administratorias commisit eidem Thomasinae Administraconem omnium bonorum
and catallorum quae fuer' praedict' Isaaci tempore mortis suae qui quidem
Edwardus adtune habuit plenam Authoritatem ad Administraconem illam in ea part
committend' in quo casu praed' Maria ipsam Thomasinam Administratricem bonorum
and catallorum quae fuer' praedict' Isaaci and non Executricem Testamenti
ipsius Isaaci in brevi suo praedict' nominare debuit Et hoc parat' est
verificare Unde pet' Judic' de brevi illo Et quod breve illud cassetur.

Et praedicta Maria dic' quod breve suum praedict' The Plaintiff Replies, That
the Defendant administered as Executrix before the granting of the
Administration to her.
ratione praeallegat' cassari non debet Quia dic' quod post mortem praefat'
Isaaci and ante commissionem Administrationis praedict' eidem Thomasinae in
forma praedicta scilicet decimo octavo die Septembris anno regni domini Regis
and dominae Reginae nunc primo praefat' Thomasina diversa bona and catalla quae
fuer' praefat' Isaaci tempore mortis suae ut Executrix testamenti ipsius Isaaci
Administravit videlt apud paroch' Sancti Edmundi praedict' Et hoc parat' est
verificare Unde pet' Judicium and debitum suum praedict' unacum dampnis suis
occ^one detentionis debiti illius sibi adjudicari etc.

Et praedicta Thomasina dic' quod praedict' placitum praedict' Demurrer to the
Replication to the Plea in Abatement.
Mariae superius replicando placitat' materiaque in eodem content' minus
sufficien' in lege existunt ad acconem ipsius Mariae praedict' versus ipsam
Thomasinam habend' manutenend' quodque ipsa ad placitum ill' modo and forma
praedict' placitat' necesse non habet nec per legem terrae tenetur respondere
Et hoc parat' est verificare Unde pro defectu sufficien' placiti praedict'
Mariae in hac part eadem Thomasina pet' Judicium Et quod breve ipsius Mariae
cassetur etc.

Et praedicta Maria dic' quod placitum praedict' per ipsam Mariam superius
replicando placitat' materiaque in eodem content' Joynder in Demurrer.
bonum and sufficien' in lege existit ad actionem ipsius Mariae versus praefat'
Thomasinam habend' manutenend' quod quidem placitum materiaque in eodem
content' ipsa' eadem Maria parat' est verificare and probare prout Cur' etc. Et
quia eadem Maria ad placitum illud non respond' nec ill' hucusque aliqualit'
dedic' ipsa eadem Maria ut prius pet' Judicium and debitum suum praedict'
unacum dampnis suis occasion detentionis debiti illius sibi adjudicari etc. Et
quia Justic' hic se advisare volunt de and super praemiss. priusquam Judicium
inde reddant dies dat' est partibus praedict hicusque in Crastino Sanctae
Trinitatis de audiendo inde Judicio suo eo quod iidem Justic' hic inde nondum
etc.

Pyne versus Woolland.
IN an Action of Debt against the Defendant, as Executrix of her Husband for
Arrears of Rent due from the Testator.

The Defendant pleaded in abatement of the Writ, That after the death of her
Husband, Administration of his Goods and Chattels was granted to her, and that
she ought to have been named Administratrix in the Writ, and not Executrix,
unde pet' Judicium de brevi and quod breve istud cassetur.

The Plaintiff Replied, That after the death of the Husband, and before the
Administration committed, the Defendant administered diverse Goods and Chattels
of her Husbands at such a day and place, etc.

To this the Defendant Demurred, and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff. For
she sets not forth the Day when Administration was committed, so it might be
after the Writ brought: And besides, if she disposed of the Goods as Executrix
of her own wrong, the taking of Administration afterward, though before the Writ
brought, will not hinder the Plaintiff from charging her as Executrix of her
own wrong. And the difference is taken in the Case of Williamson and Norwich,
Still. Rep. 337. 1 To. 923. where an Action of Debt was brought upon a Contract
against the Defendant, as Executor of his own wrong. The Defendant pleads the
party was Indebted to him upon Bond, and died Intestate; and that he afterward
took out Letters of Administration to him (which appeared to be after the Writ
brought) and pleads a Retainer for his own Debt: And the Plaintiff Demurred,
and Judgment was given for the Defendant, that such Administrator might Retain
for his own Debt, though he had been before Executor of his own wrong. But such
taking of Administration should not abate the Plaintiffs Writ, Kelw. 127. a.
Vid. 5 Co. Coulter's Case, and Executor of his own wrong cannot Retain.

Anonymus.
TRespass Quare clausum fregit, and declared of diverse other Trespasses.

The Defendant pleaded Not guilty as to the clausum fregit, and Justified as to
the other Trespasses; which upon the Issue was found for the Defendant, and as
to the clausum fregit it was found for the Plaintiff.

The Court held it a clear Case within the late Statute, that the Plaintiff
should have no more Costs than Damages, the Damages being under 40 s

Alleson versus Marsh.
A Prohibition was prayed to the Court of Admiralty, to stay a Suit commenced
there by some of the Mariners in a Ship against two of the Part owners, for
their Wages, upon a suggestion that the Contract was made with them upon Land.

It was said, that though Suits had sometimes been permitted there for Mariners
Wages, yet that was when they all joined in the Suit, to avoid the putting them
to Sue severally, as they must do at Law. But here there is but part of them
that Sue, and then they appear to be Officers in the Ship that Sue, and so not
to have this Privilege of the Common Seamen to Sue; for it was alleged, that
this practice had been obtained but of late, and in favor to them; and here it
appears, that the Contract for the Wages was joint with the Owners, and they
have sued but two of them, and so they shall be charged with the whole.

But the Court denied the Prohibition; for they have been ever allowed to
proceed for Mariners Wages; and though the Plaintiffs have an employment in the
Ship, as Purfer, Boatswain, or the like, they are Mariners as well as others,
and may sue in the Admiral Court for their Wages, and they having Jurisdiction
shall proceed in their own way, though different from our Law as to the joining
of all the Plaintiffs or Defendants, and if the Proceeding be not according to
their Law, the Remedy lies there.

Note, It was said by one of the Admiralty, that though the Suit be against some
of the Owners, the course there is not to charge them with the whole, but
according to their proportionable parts.

Adams versus Cross.
IN a Replevin against Cross and two others, for taking of diverse Goods at
Ware, in quodam loco vocat' a Message there.

The Defendants made Conusance as Bailiffs of Jane Cross, and they say, that
before the Caption she was seized in her Demesne as a Fee, at the Will of the
Lord of the Manor, according to the Custom of the Manor of and in the
aforesaid Message; which said Message is, and time out of mind has been
parcel of the said Manor, and demised and demisable by Copy of Court Roll,
etc. and being so seized 24 June 1687. she demised the said Message to the
said Adams from thenceforth at Will, reserving for so long time as the said
Adams should hold it, the yearly Rent of 8 l by equal Quarterly payments: By
virtue of which Demise the said Adams entered, and was, and yet is possessed;
and for 14 l (being a Year and three Quarters Rent, ending at the Feast of the
Nativity of St. John Baptist last past) they as Bailiffs to the said Jane
distrained the said Goods, being in the House, etc.

To this Avowry the Plaintiff pleaded an insufficient and frivolous Bar, and
now took Exceptions to the Avowry; for that the said Jane Cross is therein set
forth to have been seized in Fee of the said Message at the Will of the Lord,
according to the Custom of the Manor, and shows no admission from the Lord;
whereas a Copyholder cannot plead his Estate, without setting forth an
Admission or Grant from the Lord, 4 Co. 22. b.

But the Court resolved in this Case, there need not be shown any Admittance;
for the Title did not come in question.

If one pleads a particular Estate for life or years generally, the
commencement of it is to be shown; but if a Lessee for years Let for a lesser
Term, reserving a Rent, in an Action of Debt for the Rent, he may set forth,
that at the time of the Lease he was possessed of the Land pro termino
diversorum annorum adtunc and adhuc ventur'; and being so possessed, demised to
the Defendant, etc. without showing the beginning of his Term, and how derived;
for it is but an inducement to the Action. And Judgment was given for the
Avowant.

Clarke versus Tucket.
IN an Action of Trespass, for entering of his House and taking of four Pewter
Dishes of the Plaintiffs.

The Defendant pleaded the Letters Patents of Edward the 4th, whereby the
Company of Tailors in the City of Exeter were Incorporated, and by the said
Letters Patents they were to keep a Feast every year, upon the Feast Day of St.
John the Baptist, in some place of the City belonging to them, and there to
make Orders and Bylaws, etc. And that the said Corporation, at a Meeting held
the 20th of March, in the 21st year of the Reign of the late King Charles the
Second, did make an Ordinance or By-Law, That if any person (being Master, or
one of the Chief Wardens of the Corporation aforesaid) at any of their
Assemblies, should reproach or revile the Master, or any of his Brethren, or
any of the Common Council of the Corporation, he should forfeit 6 s and 8 d And
if any other person or persons of the said Bodies should revile or use any
unhandsom Speech of the Master, Wardens, or any of the said Council, he should
forfeit 3 s and 4 d the said Fines to be levied by Distress upon a Warrant
under the Corporation Seal, and by sale of the Offenders Goods, after Four days
Notice given to the Fine so set forth, and an Allowance of the By-Law by the
Justices of Assize, according to the Statute of Henry the 7th. And further
says, That the Plaintiff being a Member of the said Corporation, and having
Notice of the said By-Law, did at an Assembly of the said Master and Wardens in
the Common Hall, say of the said Master and Wardens in the said Corporation
these words, (viz.) The Masters (ipsos Magistrum and Custod' innuendo) are all
a Company of Pickpocket Rogues; and diverse other very scurrilous and
reproachful Words were set forth to have been there spoken of the said Master
and Wardens by the Plaintiff, whereby the Plaintiff forfeited 3 s and 4 d by
the said By-Law; which was demanded of him, and by him neglected to be paid by
the space of six Days. Whereupon the said Master made his Warrant, directed to
the Defendant, commanding him to Levy the said 3 s and 4 d by distress and sale
of the Goods of the Plaintiff. And the Defendant (by virtue of the said
Warrant) did enter into the Plaintiffs House (being then open) and took the
Goods in the Declaration mentioned, Nomine districtionis prout ei been licuit.
And to this Plea the Plaintiff demurred, and Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff.

For a Corporation cannot make a By-Law to have a Forfeiture levied by the sale
of Goods, 8 Co. 127. nor for Forfeiture of Goods: And here, though the Defendant
only Distrained, neither is the Defendant charged with selling the Goods in the
Declaration; yet the By-Law being void as to the selling, is void in toto, and
no Justification can be upon it.

It was also said at the Bar, That the Distress was excessive, to distrain so
many Dishes for 3 s and 4 d Indeed a man cannot sever a Distress, and therefore
in some cases a Distress of great value, as a Cart and Horses, may be taken for
a small matter, because not severable; but here he might have taken some of the
Dishes.

But the Court did not regard that Exception, because it did not appear of what
value the Dishes were.

Again it was said, That they ought to have made the By-Law upon St. John
Baptists Day. To which it was answered, That they were not tied to the Time,
but the Place; it was ibidem facere Ordinationes, and not adtunc and ibidem.

But the Court gave Judgment upon the first Matter.

Newport versus Godfrey.
THe Plaintiff brought an Action of Debt in the Detinet against Godfrey,
Executor of Stephen Turner for 70 l arrear of Rent, and declared upon several
Demises upon the 28th of September 1685. to the said Turner, reserving several
Rents, of which there became arrear to the Plaintiff, in the Life time of the
said Turner, 70 l and it appeared by the Declaration that the Leases ended in
the Life of the said Turner.

In Bar of which the Defendant pleaded several Bonds entered into by the
Testator, to diverse persons, for the payment of Money, which he avers to be all
for true and just Debts, and that he had administered all, besides Goods, to the
value of 40 l which he retained toward satisfaction of the said Bonds, etc.

To which the Plaintiff demurred, and it was Argued last Term for the
Defendant, that a Debt upon a Specialty was to be preferred before Debt for
Rent upon a Lease parol, Still. Rep. 61. Rolls said, that a Specialty was of an
higher nature, than Rent reserved upon a Lease by Deed. Indeed it is made a
Quaere in Roll. Abr. 1. part 927. but if Rent should be preferred where the
Lease was continuing after the Death of the Testator, in regard the Testator's
Goods are liable to be distrained for it, which the Executor cannot withstand.
Yet there is not the like Reason when the Lease expires in the Life of the
Testator; and the Case was adjourned to this Term for the Judgment of the Court.

And the whole Court were of Opinion, that Judgment should be for the
Plaintiff. For though the Lease be determined, yet the Debt still savours of the
Realty, and is maintained in regard of the Profits of the Land received;
insomuch that no Wager of Law lies in Debt for Rent, though brought after the
Lease determined, A Bond given for Rent will not drown it, 11 H. 4. 75. b. an
Action lies against the Executors of an Assignee of a Lease for Rent in the
Testator's time, and yet the Assignee is chargable only in respect of the
Lease. Vid. 13 H. 4. 1. a. Office of Executors 209, 210, 211, etc.

Godfrey versus Ward.
IN an Action of Debt for Rent.

The Defendant pleaded the Statute of Limitations, and that Causa Actionis
praedicte, etc. accrevit above six years before the Writ brought.

To this the Defendant demurred, and the Cause of the Demurrer was upon the
late Statute for reviving of Process, anno primo Willielmi and Mariae, by which
it is provided, in regard there was an Interruption of the Government and
proceedings of Law, from the 11th of September 1688. to the 13th of February
following, that the time within those Days should not be accounted as any part
of the six years to bar an Action by the Statute of Limitations, or of the six
Months for bringing a Quare Impedit, etc. so as it was urged, that the
Defendant should have shown, that six Years and so many Days were elapsed as
are between the 11th of December and the 13th of February. For though six years
may be passed, yet the Plaintiff may be within time by reason of the said
Statute.

But the Court were of Opinion, that the Defendants Plea. was well, and this
should be shown of the Plaintiffs part; for the Statute does not alter the Form
of Pleading, but that shall be as it was before; and the Plaintiff (if the
Matter will bear it) is to help himself upon the said Statute.

The old way upon the Statute of Limitations was, for the Defendant to plead
the Statute at large; but of late years, the General Pleading of Non assumpsit
infra sex annos has been allowed.

Warren versus Sainthill.
Devon' ss.
SAMUEL SAINTHILL nuper de Bradmuch in Com' praedict' Armig' and Johannes
Savery nuper de Bradmuch in Com' praedict' Husbandnian attach' fuer' ad
respondend' Thomae Warren gen' de placito Transgr' super Casum etc. Case for
stopping up of a Foot way.
The Plaintiff says, That was possessed he and Inhab of, in an ancient Message.

And that habuit and habere, debuit a Footway for himself and his Servants.


Et unde idem Thomas per Johannem Prowse Attorn' suum Queritur quod cum
praedict' Thomas vicesimo nono die Septembris anno regni domini Regis and
dominae Reginae nunc primo and continue postea usque primum diem Januarii tunc
prox' fequen' fuit possessionat' and inhabitans de and in quodam antiquo
Mesuagio scituat' and jacen' in villa de Watterstaffe infra paroch' de Bradmuch
praedict' ac pro totum tempus ill' quandam viam pedestrem ducen' a Villa de
Watterstaffe praedict' in per and trans quaedam Clausa (voc' Crollands Smiths
Down and Tulver Park) infra paroch' de Bradmuch praedict' usque ad villam de
Bradmuch in Bradmuch praedict' pro se and servientibus suis ad eundem and
redeund' omnibus temporibus ad libitum ejus tanquam ad Mesuag' As belonging to
his Message.
praedict' spectan' and pertinen' habuit and de jure habere debuit praedicti
Samuel' and Johannes machinan' and intenden' ipsum Thomam minus rite perturbare
and ipsum de via praed' impedire and deprivare praedict vicesimo nono die Sept'
Anno primo supradicto apud paroch' de Bradmuch quaedam Fossa and Trencheas ex
transverso viae praedict' The Defendant, to disturb him in the Way, dug Ditches
and Trenches cross the Way. And erected Hedges and Fences cross it. Whereby he
was hindered of his Way.
int' Villas de Watterstaffe and Bradmuch praedict' fodier' and fecer' ac etiam
viam ill' ibedem cum quibusdam sepibus and fensuris ex transverso viae
praedict' eject' obstruxer' and praecluser' per quod idem Thomas a via
praedict' in forma praedict' habend' a praedict' vicesimo nono die Septembris
usque praed' primum diem Januarii Anno primo supradicto penitus impedet' and
deprivat' fuit ad dampnum ipsius Thomae quadragint' librar' Et inde producit
sectam, etc.

To this the Defendant pleaded a frivolous Plea, and the Plaintiff demurrs; and
the Defendant joined in the Demurrer, and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Warren versus Sainthill.
IN an Action upon the Case for Stopping of a Way, the Plaintiff declared, that
he was possessed, and an Inhabitant of and in a certain ancient Message the
29th of Sept. in the first year of the now King and Queen, and so continued to
the first day of January then next following; and for all that time had a
Foot-way over the Defendant's Ground, tanquam ad Mesuag' praed' spectant' and
pertinent' and de jure habere debet, and that the Defendant stopped it up ad
damnum, etc.

The Defendant pleaded a frivolous Plea, to which there was a Demurrer.

It was Objected on the Defendant's part, that the Declaration was
insufficient, because the Plaintiff did not prescribe for the Way, nor
otherwise entitle himself to it, than by a possession of the Message, and that
he had and ought to have a Way to the said Message belonging. And a difference
was taken between this and Dent and Oliver's Case, 2 Cro. 43. where one
alleged himself to be seized in Fee of a Manor, and had a Fair there, and
that the Defendant disturbed him to take Toll. And in 2 Cro. Stackman and West,
there is a Prescription laid in the Dean and Chapter (who had the Fee) for the
Way: But it was Objected, That a Corporation could not prescribe in a Que
Estate; but it was held well, being but inducement to the Action.

And the Court here held the Declaration sufficient, being but a possessory
Action. And a Case was said to be so Adjudged in this Court between the same
parties Anno primo Jacobi secundi. Vide the Case of Saint John and Moody upon
the like Point.

Woodward and al' versus Fox.
IN an Indebitat' Assumpsit for 200 l for so much Money received by the
Defendant for the use of the Plaintiffs.

The Defendant pleaded Non assumpsit, and upon that a Special Verdict was
found, That in the Year 1681. before the Promise supposed, etc. John Hammond
was, and yet is, Archdeacon of Huntington, within the Diocese of Lincoln, and
that the Bishop of Lincoln is Patron of the Archdeaconry, and that the Office
of Register of the Court of Archdeaconry was time out of mind grantable by the
Archdeacon for the Term of three Lives; and that the said John Hammond in the
said Year 1681. for 100 l sold and granted to Simon Michael and John Juce, for
their Lives, the said Office of Register, it being an Office concerning the
administration of Justice, and that by Color thereof they enjoyed the Office
till Juce died, which was in 1687. and soon after in the same year, the said
Simon Michael died in the possession of the said Office, and that Hammond was
no ways Convicted of selling the said Office upon any prosecution at Law, or
otherwise. And they further said, That Thomas, Bishop of Lincoln, in the said
Year 1687. after the Death of Juce, and some time before the Death of Michael,
granted the said Office of Register to the Defendant Fox, and set forth the
Grant in haec verba, which mentioned the said Registers Office to be void by
the Statute of the 5 and 6 Ed. 6. against Sale of Offices, and that thereupon
it belonged to the said Bishop to grant the said Office, by virtue of which the
said Fox became seized of the said Office prout lex postulat. And they find
afterward, that in the same Year that Juce and Michael died, Hammond being
Archdeacon (as aforesaid) granted the said Office to the Plaintiffs, Woodward,
Masters and Gilbert, for their Lives; and that they entered upon the said
Office, and became seized thereof prout lex postulat. And they find that the
Bishops Grant was Afterward Confirmed by the Dean and Chapter; and they find,
that afterward, (viz.) the 22 of October. Anno regni Willielmi and Mariae primo,
the said King and Queen their Letters Patents under the Great Seal reciting,
that the said Office appertained to Their Majesty's, to grant by the said
Statute of Edward the 6th, did grant the said Office of Register to the said
Plaintiffs Woodward, Masters and Gilbert, for their Lives, and that by virtue
thereof they entered upon and exercised the said Office, and received diverse
Fees and Profits thereunto belonging; and that the Defendant having notice
thereof, did take diverse Fees and Profits of the said Office, amounting to 30 l
claiming them to his own use, etc. and if upon the whole Matter, etc.

Upon this Special Verdict there were these Points moved:

The first Point was, Whether this Office of Register could be granted for
Lives?

This was not much insisted on by the Defendants Council, it having been
usually granted, and so found by the Verdict, 3 Cro. Young and Fowler's Case, a
Grant in Reversion of the Registers Office was allowed, being warranted by
Usage; and so in 3 Cro. Young and Stoel. But unless there have been such Usage,
it is not grantable in Reversion. Vide 3 Cro. Walker and Sir John Lamb.

The second Point was, Whether the Grant of this Office, in Consideration of
Money, is void by the Statute of the 5th and 6th of Edward the 6th, against
Sale of Offices?

That Point was also waved, it being Resolved in Dr. Trevor's Case, 12 Co. 78.
2 Cro. 269. forasmuch as it concerned Administration of Justice.

The third Point was, That the Statute of 5 Ed. 6. Enacting, That the person
who takes any Money for any Office, shall lose and forfeit all his Right to any
such Office, etc. Whether the King or the Bishop shall take advantage of this
Forfeiture, in regard the Statute does not express who shall dispose of the
Office in such case?

Co. Lit. 159. a.
And it was said on the part of the Plaintiff, That when a Statute gives a
Forfeiture, and not said to whom, the King shall have it, 11 Co. 60. a. unless
there be a particular party grieved; as upon the Statute of 2 Ed. 6. of Tithes;
and yet it was for some time before it was settled, that the Parson should have
the treble Value in that Case. And this agrees with the Reason of the Common
Law; things that are nullius in bonis, the King shall have them as extra
Parochial Tithes, 11 H. 4. 17. Vid. 5. Co. in Sir Henry Constable's Case, The
Soil of Navigable Rivers and derelict Lands was with this difference; If the
Sea leaves the Land gradatim, and for but a little quantity, the Owner of the
Land shall have it; but if in a great quantity at a time, it goes to the King,
Davis Rep. 5. 6. Vid. Siderfin 86. Dyer 126. It Is true, at the Common Law,
where a person has an Interest in that which is Forfeited, he shall have the
benefit of it; as if a Parkkeeper forfeit, it shall go to the Owner of the
Park. And in Sir John Breon's Case, Bridgm. 27. where the Earl of Lancaster
gave License to make a Park in his Forest, and the party forfeited his Office,
the Earl had the advantage of it. In those cases the thing is forfeited to him
from whom it was granted; as a Copyholder forfeits to his Lord, and Tenant for
Life to him in Reversion; but here the Bishop has nothing to do with the
Office of Register, he cannot dispose of it in the time of Vacancy of the
Archdeaconry. The Verdict finds, that his Office is to Register the Acts in the
Court of the Archdeacon, and he must answer for his Register as his Superior:
And as this Verdict is found, it may be taken as an Archdeaconry by
Prescription, and then it has no dependence upon the Bishop, but wholly exempt,
Godolphin 61. and 5 Co. 15. in Cawdry's Case.

Levinz contra. Generally Forfeitures given by the Statute go to the King,
unless a Common person be grieved or particularly concerned; but here the
Archdeacon had disabled himself to grant this Office of Register, and the
Archdeacon himself is an Officer to the Bishop; for the Bishop has the Care of
the whole Diocese, and the other are but subordinate Officers to him; an
Archdeacon way be deprived by the Bishop. The addition of a Parson is Clerk;
because they were the Bishops Clerks or Curates. This Crime of coming into an
Office for Money, is Simony by the Ecclesiastical Law. In the Vacancy of the
Archdeaconry, if the Registers Office becomes void, the Bishop puts him in; but
perhaps the succeeding Archdeacon shall remove him, because he must answer for
him: As the Case of the Exigenter in Dyer, Scrogg's Case; and vid. 39 H. 6. 32.

And the Case was Adjourned for further Argument upon this last Point: But the
Court held the other Matters to be clear.

Carr versus Done.
Norf. ss.
ROBERTUS DONE nuper de South Creake in Com' praedicto gen' Attach' fuit ad
respondend' Trespass, Assault and False Imprisonment.
Willielmo Carr de placito quare Vi and armis in ipsum Willielmum apud South
Creake praed' insult' fecit and ipm^ verberavit vulneravit imprisonavit and
maletractavit and eum in Prisona diu detinuit Ita quod de vita ejus
desperabatur Et alia enormia ei intulit ad grave dampn' ipsius Willielmi and
contra Pacem Jacobi Secundi nuper Regis Angl' etc. Et unde idem Willielmus per
Warner Dawes Attorn' The Count.
suum queritur quod praed' Robertus primo die Maij anno regni dicti domini
Jacobi Secundi nuper Regis Angl' etc. quarto Vi and armis videlicet gladiis
bacculis and cultellis in ipm^ Willielmum apud South Creake praed' insult'
fecit and ipsum verberavit vulneravit imprisonavit and maletractavit and eum
sic in Prisona diu videlicet per spatium unius mensis and quatuor dierum tunc
prox' sequen' detinuit Ita quod de vita ejus desperabatut Et alia enormia etc.
ad grave dampn' etc. Et contra pacem etc. Uncle dic' quod deteriorat' est Et
dampn' habet ad valenciam ducentarum librarum Et inde produc' sectam etc.

As to the Vi and armis and vulnerationem, Not guilty.
Et praed' Robertus in propr' persona sua ven' and defend' vim and injur' etc.
Et quoad venire Vi and armis necnon vulnerationem ipsius Willielmi praed'
superius fieri supposit' idem Robertus dic' quod ipse in nullo est inde
culpabilis Et de hoc pon' se super Patriam Et praed' And Issue thereupon.
Willielmus inde similit' Et quoad resid' Transgr' insult' and Imprisonament'
As to the residue of the Trespass he pleads, that he recorded Judgment against
the Defendant, and had him taken upon a Cap' ad satisf. Recovery in the Common
Bench.
praedict' superius fieri supposit' idem Robertus dic' quod praed' Willielmus
acconem suam praed' inde versus eum habere non debet quia dicit quod diu ante
praed' tempus quo supponitur praed' resid' Transgr' insult' and imprisonamrnt'
praed' superius fieri scilicet Termino sanctae Trinitatis anno regni dicti
nuper Regis secundo ipse idem Robertus in Cur' ipsius nuper Regis de Banco hic
scilicet apud Westm' in Com' Midd' per Considerationem ejusdem Cur'
recuperasset versus eundem Willielm' octo libras and december solid' qui in eadem
Cur' adjudicat' fuer' eidem Roberto tam pro dampnis suis quae habuisser
occasion non performaconis seperal' promission' and assumpcon' Upon an
Indebitat' assumps.
eidem Roberto per praefat' Willielm' antetunc fact' quam pro misis and custag'
suis per ipm^ circa sectam suam in ea part apposit' unde Convict' fuit sed
Judicium illud postea scilicet Termino Paschae anno regni dicti nuper Regis
quarto per eandem Cur' And the Judgment set aside and vacated.
de Banco hic scilicet apud Westm' praedict' Certis de causis eidem Cur' adtunc
moventibus evacuat' and adnullat' fuit and adhuc adnullat' existit quodque idem
Robertus pro citiori obtencone dampnorum illorum ac mis' and custag' praedict'
post Judicium praedict' in forma praedict' obtent' But before it was vacated, a
Cap' ad sat. was sued out thereupon.
and ante adnullaconem ejusdem scilicet vicesimo tertio die Junij anno regni
dicti nuper Regis secundo supradicto impetrasset and persecut' fuisset extra
praed. Cur' dicti nuper Regis de Banco hic scilicet apud Westm' praedict'
quoddam breve ipsius nuper Regis de Capias ad Satisfaciend' de and super
Judicio illo versus praefat' Willielm' tunc Vic' Directed to the Sheriff.
Norf. direct' per quod quidem breve dom' nuper Rex eidem tunc Vic' praecepit
quod caperet eundem Willielm' si invent' foret in balliva sua Et eum salvo
custod' Ita quod haberet corpus ejus coram Justic' ipsius nuper Regis apud
Westm' die Sabbati prox' post tres Septimanas sancti Michaelis tunc prox'
sequen' ad Satisfaciend' eidem Roberto de dampnis illis Et quod haberet ibi
breve illud Quod quidem breve postea and ante retorn' ejusdem scilicet vicesimo
sexto die Junij anno regni dicti nuper Regis secundo supradicto apud South
Creake praedict' And delivered to him.
deliberat' fuit cuidam Roberto Nightingale Mil' adtunc Vic' Com' Norf'
existen' in debita Juris forma exequend' qui quidem Vic' Who made his Warrant
to Bailiff of the Liberty.
adtunc and ibidem ad requisiconem ipsius Roberti mandavit executionem inde
cuidam Willielmo Drage Armig' ballivo libertatis dicti nuper Regis Ducat' sui
Lancastriae in praedicto Com' eo quod executio inde extra eandem libertatem
fieri non potuit qui quidem ballivus adtunc habuit and adhuc habet plenam
executionem and retorn' omn' Warrant' Praecept' and Mandat' Who had execution
of Precepts.
infra eandem libertatem quodque Virtute mandat' illius praed' Willielmus Drage
postea and ante retorn' The Bailiff takes the Defendant thereupon.
ejusdem brevis scilicet decimo octavo die Octobris anno regni dicti nuper
Regis secundo supradicto apud South Creake praedict' in praed. Com' Norf. and
infra libertatem praed' ad requisiconem ipsius Roberti manus suas super eundem
Willielm' Carr molit' imposuit ac ipm^ Willielm' Carr adtunc and ibidem per
Corpus suum cepit and asportavit ac eundem Willielm' And had him a Month in
Custody until he paid the Money.

Quod est idem Resid' transgr' and imprisonament', etc.

An traverses, that he is not guilty of any other Trespass before the Suing
out, and after the Return of the said Writ.

The Plaintiff Replies, That the Plaintiff in the Judgment was an Attorney,
whose duty it is to Enter Judgments fairly and honestly, and that he in deceit
of the Court entered the Judgment, when he ought not to have done it.


Carr in custodia sua ad instantiam ipsius Roberti ibidem habuit and detinuit
per spatium un' mensis and quatuor dierum tunc prox' sequen' in execucone pro
dampn' mis' and custag' illis scilicet quousque idem Willielmus Carr ibidem
solvit eidem Willielmo Drage ad usum ipsius Roberti dampna mis' and custag'
ilia quae sunt idem resid' transgr' insult' and imprisonat' praedict. unde
praed' Willielmus Carr superius se modo queritur absque hoc quod ipse idem
Robertus est culpabilis de resid' transgr' insult' and imprisonament' praed'
seu aliqua inde part ad aliquod tempus ante emanaconem brevis praed' seu post
retorn' ejusdem Et hoc parat' est verificare unde idem Robertus petit Judicium
si praed' Willielmus Carr acconem suam praed' inde versus eum habere debet etc.

Et praed' Willielm' quoad praed' placit' praed' Roberti quoad praed' resid'
transgr' insult' and imprisonament' praed' dic' quod ipse per aliqua in eodem
placito praeallegat' ab accone sua praed' inde versus ipsum Robertum habend'
praecludi non debet Quia dic' quod praed' Robertus praedict' Termino Sanctae
Trinitatis anno regni domini Jacobi secundi nuper Regis Angl' etc. secundo and
diu antea and adhuc est un' Attorn' Cur' de Banco hic quodque ipse praed'
Robertus ratione officii sui Attorn ejusdem Cur' ad intrand' Narracon' placita
and Judicia in eadem Cur' in Rotulis ejusdem Cur' de tempore in tempus per
eandem Cur' Creditus fuit (Anglice Trusted) quodque praed' Robertus sic
Creditus existen' falso fraudulent' and contra officij sui debit' and in
decepconem ejusdem Cur' in Rotulis ejusdem Cur' de praed' Termino Sanctae
Trinitatis praed' intrari fecit quod ipse idem Robertus per Consideraconem
ejusdem Cur' recuperaret versus eundem Willielm' octo libras and december solid'
qui in eadem Cur' adjudicat' fuer' eidem Roberto tam pro dampnis suis quae
habuisset occ^one non performaconis seperal' promis' and assumpcon' eidem
Roberto per praefat' Willielm' antetunc fact' quam pro mis' and custag' suis
per ipsum circa sectam suam in ea part apposit' ubi revera null' tale Judicium
in eadem Cur' versus eundem Willielm' intrari debuisset super qua quidem false
intratione ipse praed' Robertus ante praed' tempus praed' resid' transgr'
insult' and imprisonament' falso and improvide prosecut' fuit quoddam breve de
Capias ad Satisfaciend' versus eundem Willielm' tunc' Vic' Norf. direct' Color
cujus quidem brevis ipse praed' Robertus praed' tempore quo etc. de Injur' sua
propr' Vi and armis in ipsum Willielm' insult' fecit and ipsum verberavit
imprisonavit and maletractavit Ita quod de vita ejus desperabatur prout ipse
superius versus eum narravit Et idem Willielmus ulterius dic' qd' postea
scilicet praedict' Termino Paschae Anno regni dicti domini Jacobi Secundi nuper
Regis Angl' The Judgment adjudged to be void.
quarto supradicto Examinacon' and Consideracon' de Intracon' praedict' per
eandem Cur' hic habita eadem Intrac' fuisse ab initio inde vacua and pro nullo
Judicio per eand' Cur' adjudicat' and declarat' fuit Et hoc parat' est
verificare Unde ex quo praed' Robertus transgr' insult' and imprisonament'
praed' superius cognovit idem Willielmus petit Judicium and dampna sua occon'
transgr' insult' and imprisonament' praed' sibi adjudicari' etc.

The Plaintiff in the Judgment confesses the matter; but says that the fault
was in the Clerk, who Entered the Judgment.
Et praedict' Robertus dic' quod been and verum est quod ipse id^m Robertus in
Rotulis dictae Cur' nuper Regis de Banco intrari fecit Jndicium in placito
praed' Roberti menconat' scilicet quod ipse idem Robertus per Consideracon'
ejusdem Cur' recuperaret versus praedict' Willielm' octo libr' and december solid'
qui in eadem Cur' adjudicat' fuer' eidem Roberto tam pro dampnis suis quae
habuisset occon' non performacon' seperal' promis' and assumpcon' eidem Roberto
per praefat' Willielm' fact' quam pro mis' and custag' suis per ipsum circa
sectam suam in ea part apposit' prout praed Willielm' superius inde replicando
allegavit Idemque Robertus ulterius in facto dic' quod praed' Robertus
appunctuavit intracon' He appointed the Judgment to be duly Entered.
Judicij illius in Rotulis praed' fieri debite and secund' cursum and
consuetud' ejusdem Cur' scilicet apud Westm' praedict' sed per negligentiam
Clerici qui Judicium illud intravit evenit qd' Judicium illud in aliquibus
circumstantiis intrat' fuit irregularit' and contra quandam regulam ejusdem
Cur' sine noticia ipsius Roberti ac ratione hujusm' But by the default of that
Clerk it was Entered irregularly.

And Traverses, that it was Entered falso and fraudulenter in deceptionem Curiae.


irregular' intrac' ill' praed' Termino Paschae Anno regni dicti nuper Regis
quarto supradicto per eandem Cur' de Banco evacuat' fuit and adnullat' prout
idem Robertus superius inde placitando allegavit absque hoc quod Intrac' ill'
facta fuit per ipsum Robertum falso fraudulent' ac in decepconem ejusdem Cur'
modo and forma prout praedict' Willielmus superius inde replicando allegavit Et
hoc parat' est verificare Unde ut prius petit Judicium Et quod praedict'
Willielmus ab accon' sua praedict' inde versus eum habend' praecludatur, etc.

The Plaintiff Demurrs to the Rejoinder.
Et praedict' Willielmus dic' quod ipse per aliqua per praed' Robertum superius
rejungen' allegat' ab accon' sua praedicta inde versus ipsum Robertum habend'
praecludi non debet quia dic' quod placit' praedict' per eundem Robertum modo
and forma praedict' superius rejungen' placitat' materiaque in eodem content'
minus suffic' in lege existunt ad ipsum Willielmum ab accon' sua praedicta
versus praefat' Robertum habend' praecludend' Ad quod idem Willielmus necesse
non habet nec per legem terrae tenetur respondere Et hoc parat' est verificare
Unde pro defectu sufficien' respons' in hac part idem Willielm' petit Judicium
and dampna sua praedicta sibi adjudicari etc.

Et praedict' Robertus ex quo ipse sufficien' The Defendant joins in Demurrer.
materiam in lege ad praedict' Willielm' ab accon' sua praedicta versus ipsum
Robertum habend' praecludend' superius rejungen' allegavit quam ipse parat' est
verificare quam quidem materiam praed' Willielm non dedic' nec ad eam
aliqualit' respond' set verificationem ill' admittere omnino recusat ut prius
petit Judicium Et quod praed' Willielm' ab accon' sua praed' versus eum habend'
praecludatur etc. Et quia Justic' hic se advisare volunt de and super
praemissis praed' unde parts praedict' posuer' se in Judic' Cur' priusquam
Judic' inde reddant dies dat' est partibus praed' hic usque a die Paschae in
quindecim dies de audiend' inde Judic' eo quod iidem Justic' hic inde nondum etc

Carr versus Done.
IN an Action of Trespass the Plaintiff declared upon an Assault, Battery,
Wounding and Imprisonment.

The Defendant, as to the Vi and armis and vulnerationem, pleaded Not guilty;
and quoad resid' transgr' insult' and imprisonament' he Justified, for that he
obtained Judgment against the Plaintiff in the Common Bench, and that a Capias
ad satisfaciend' was thereupon awarded to the Sheriff, which being delivered to
the Sheriff, he at the Request of the Defendant, Mandavit Executionem inde
cuidam eo quod executio inde extra eandem libertatem fieri non potuit etc.
Which said Bailiff had the Return and Execution of all Warrants, Precepts,
Mandates, etc. by virtue of which the said Bailiff, molliter manus imposuit
upon the Plaintiff, and arrested him, etc.

Upon a Demurrer it was Adjudged for the Plaintiff for an apparent fault in the
Plea, which was, that he had not pleaded to the Battery. Powel said, that the
Plea was also naught, because it sets forth a Mandate to the Bailiff of the
Liberty, and did not show that it was under the Hand and Seal of the Sheriff.

Norwood versus Woodly.
IN an Indebitat' assumpsit for Goods sold.

The Defendant pleaded the Statute of Limitations.

The Plaintiff Replied, That before the Six years were out he brought an
Original in Trespass against the Defendant, ea intention to Declare against
the Defendant in an Assumpsit, secund' consuetud' Cur' de tempore cujus etc.
The Defendant said, that there was no such Record; and the Plaintiff produced
an Original in Trespass brought within the time against the Defendant and two
others, and it was in Trespass and insult' in London. And it was moved, that
this Record did not make good the Replication, for it is against Three, and it
should have been in a Clausum fregit; for that was said to be the course of the
Court, to declare in any thing upon such a Writ.

But the Prothonotary Informed the Court, that the Original being in London,
the Cursitor would not make a Clausum fregit into London; (for which no Reason
was given) and that therefore, though in other Counties it is to be a Clausum
fregit, yet Trespass and Insult would do in this Case, and so was the constant
Practice. And the Plaintiffs Replication is, that he brought an Original in
Trespass generally; so it may be applied to this, and it is not material though
others be joined in the Writ with the Defendant.

But the Court doubted of the Practice.

Anonymus.
AN Attachment was granted against an Attorney for a Misdemeanor in Practice,
and upon a Rule of Court it was referred to the Prothonotay to tax Costs for
the party grieved, which were taxed accordingly; and then came out the Act of
General Pardon, which discharged the Contempt.

The Court inclinced, that the Costs were also discharged, though taxed before
the Pardon; for that they are not Costs upon a Judicial Proceeding, but a kind
of Composition with the Offender, who submits to pay Costs to the Injured party
to the eased of the Penalty for his Contempt; and so not like Costs taxed in
the Ecclesiastical Court pro reformatione morum, as in 5 Co. 51. and in 3 Cro.
6.

Nota, In the Duchy Court this Term, in a Suit in Equity, Costs were taxed
(upon a Contempt) to the party grieved before the Pardon.

And the Opinion of the Lord Chief Baron Atkyns and Justice Ventris, who
attended there as Assistants, was, That the Costs were not discharged.

But that was in a Court of Equity, where Costs are at the pleasure of the
Judge.

Anonymus.
IN an Action of Trespass, Quare clausum fregit; where as to some part there
was Not guilty pleaded, and as to the other a Special Justification; and a
Verdict upon the General Issue for the Plaintiff, and upon the Special Issue
for the Defendant.

The Court took this to be within the late Statute, for the Plaintiff to have
no more Costs than Damages; because the Issue upon the Matter specially
pleaded, was found for the Defendant; and so the same thing if the General
Issue had been only pleaded, and found for the Plaintiff.

Fagg versus Roberts and al'.
NOta, Upon a Trial at Bar in an Ejectment, where two were made Defendants, and
had entered into the Common Rule, and at the Trial one appeared and confessed
Lease, Entry, etc. but the other did not. And after Evidence given the
Plaintiff was Nonsuited, and Costs taxed for the Defendants.

The Court said, that both these Defendants were entitled to these Costs, and
he that did not appear might release them to the Plaintiff; but they said, that
if there should appear to the Covin between the Lessor of the Plaintiff, and
the Defendant, who did not appear to release the Costs; the Court supposed that
they might correct such Practice, when it should be made appear.

Bright versus Addy.
AN Action of Trespass, Quare clausum fregit, was brought by Baron and Feme.

Pollexfen, Chief Justice, was of Opinion, that the Feme could not be joined,
though it was her Land.

Ventris contra. For this Action will survive, and they have election either to
join, or to bring it alone, 1 Brown l. 21. 1 To. Abr. 348. Hob. 189. 1 Cro. 96.
3 Cro. Tregniel and Reeve, Mo. 5. In an Action of Forcible Entry upon the Wives
Land, after the Coverture, she was joined with the Husband. Adjornatur.

Anonymus.
IN an Assumpsit against the Administratrix, the Defendant pleaded quod ipsa
non assumpsit instead of the Intestate.

After Verdict a Repleader was awarded, and no Costs to either party upon a
Repleader.

Marks versus Nottingham.
THe Defendant pleaded in Abatement, that the Plaintiff was dead at such a
place before the Action brought.

The Court doubted, whether such Plea could be received; but upon view of
Rastall's Entries 161. pl. 6. where the like Plea was.

Powell and Ventris conceived it to be a good Plea.

Pollexfen Chapter Justice and Rokeby said, that that in Rastall differed, because
there were two Plaintiffs, so that Issue might be joined with the other
Plaintiff. Sed vide librum, where the Replication to that Plea is, that W.H.
and praedict' R.B. Attornat' praed' J. (which J. was pleaded to be dead) nomine
and pro ipso J. Magistro suo dicit, quod breve praed' ratione praeallegat'
cassari non debet quia dicit quod praed' J. superstes and in plena vita existit
(viz.) apud L. in Com. N. and non mortuus prout praed' W. superius allegavit
and hoc petit quod inquiratur per Patriam and praed' W. similiter etc.
Adjornatur.

Haselwood versus Mansfield.
IN Debt for 150 l the Plaintiff declared upon a Charter-party, which contained
diverse mutual Agreements; and in performatione conventionum praed' ex part
dicti Magistri ipse obligasser se dicto Mercatori in penali summa 150 l and ad
performationem convention' praed' ex part dicti Mercator' obligasset se dicto
Magistro etc. in simili penali summa 150 l etc. And this Action was brought by
the Master of the Ship against the Merchant.

The Defendant pleaded an Insufficient Plea, to which there was a Demurrer.

But it was moved, that the Declaration was Insufficient; for when it comes to
the Penalty on the Merchants part it is only obligasset se, omitting ipse, or
ipse praed' Mercator obligasset se; so it is not expressly declared that the
Defendant was bound.

And of that Opinion were Pollexfen Chief Justice, Powell and Rokeby.

Ventris contra. For it is obligasset se dicto Magistro, so none but the
Merchant can be understood to be bound; and if it were ipse obligasset it had
been good, and that is understood.

But Judgment was given for the Defendant.

Snode versus Ward.
IN an Indebitat' assumpsit for Goods sold.

The Defendant pleaded quod ipse infra sex annos proxime ante diem
impetrationis Brevis Originalis ipsius Quer' non assumpsit.

To which the Plaintiff demurred.

1. Because the late Statute of 1 Willielmi and Mariae, for reviving of
Process, does Enact, That the Time from the 11th of December 1688, to the 13th
of February then next following, should not be accounted as any part of the
Time upon the Statute of Limitations. And therefore the Defendant should have
pleaded, that he did not assume within six years and so many days as were
between the 11th of December and the 13th of February. And it was said, so had
the Pleading been ever since the said Statute.

But the Court Resolved, that the Pleading might be still in such manner as
before the Statute: For the Statute is, that those Days shall be no part of the
time; and therefore pleading non assumpsit infra sex annos is to be understood
of Six years exclusive of those Days between the 11th of December and the 13th
of February.

2. Another Exception was taken to the Plea, for that it is ante impetrationem
Brevis Original' ipsius Quer', and does not say praed' brevis, and so it may be
referred to some other Writ the Plaintiff might have.

Pollexfen Chief Justice inclined, that it was naught for this Cause.
Adjornatur.

Vid. 8 Co. 57. The Earl of Rutland's Case: He pleads, that he was seized of
the Park of Clipsham, and granted officium Parci sui, and not said praed'
Parci; and held it good. Vid. 2. Cro. 288. Burton and Air.

Humphreys versus Bethily.
IN an Action of Debt upon a Penal Bill, where the Defendant was to pay 10 s
upon the 11th of June, and 10 s more upon the 10th of July next following, and
so 10 s every three Weeks after, till a certain Sum were satisfied by such
several payments. And for the true payment thereof, the Defendant obliged
himself in the Penal Sum of 7 l

The Plaintiff in facto dicit pleaded, that the Defendant did not pay the said
Sum, or any part thereof, upon the several days aforesaid, unde actio accrevit
for the 7 l

The Defendant pleaded, that he paid 10 s upon the 11th of June, and hoc
paratus estve rificare, etc.

The Plaintiff Replied, that he did not pay it, and hoc petit quod inquiratur
per Patriam. To which the Defendant demurred.

The Plea was held altogether Insufficient.

But then Pollexfen Chief Justice observed that the Declaration was naught; for
he should have declared, that the Defendant failed in payment of one of the
Sums, which would have been enough to have entitled him to the Penalty; but he
says, The said several Sums of Money, or any of them, and this is double; and
he inclined that it was not aided by Answering over, or by the General
Demurrer. Adjornatur.

Vide Saunders and Crowley, 1 To. 112.

Thompson versus Leach.
IN an Ejectment by Thomas Thompson against Sir Simon Leach and diverse other
Defendants, upon the Demise of Charles Leach of the Manor of Bulkworthy, and
diverse Messuages, Lands and Tenements.

Upon Not Guilty pleaded, a Special Verdict was found to this effect: Viz.

That Nicholas Leach was seized in Fee of the said Manors, Lands and Tenements
in the Declaration; and by his last Will in Writing, bearing date the 9th day
of December in the 19th year of the Reign of the late King Charles the Second,
devised the Premises to his Brother Simon Leach for Life, remainder to the
first Son of the Body of the said Simon, and the Heirs Males of the Body of
such first Son, and in like manner to the second, third Son, etc. and for want
of Issue of the said Simon Leach, the remainder to Sir Simon Leach and the
Heirs Males of his Body; and for default of such Issue to the right Heirs of
Nicholas the Testator for ever; and that the said Nicholas died seized of the
Premises, and after his decease the said Simon Leach entered and became seized
for Life, with Remainders over, as aforesaid; and being so seized made a Deed,
hearing date the 23th of August, in the 25th year of the Reign of the said King
Charles, sealed and delivered to the use of the said Sir Simon Leach (but he
was not present) which Deed the Verdict sets forth in haec verba; and by if he
granted and surrendered to the said Sir Simon Leach, his Heirs and Assigns, the
said Manor and Premises, the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and
Remainders of the same: To have and to hold the same to the said Sir Simon
Leach and his Heirs, to the use of him and his Heirs; and they find that the
said Charles Leach, Lessor of the Plaintiff, the first Son of the said Sir
Simon Leach was born the first of November, in the 25th year of the Reign of
the said King Charles, and not before; and that Simon Leach, from the time of
his Sealing the Deed to the 25th of May, in the 30th year of the said King
Charles, continued possessed of the Premises; and that then, and not before,
Sir Simon Leach accepted and agreed to the said Surrender, and entered into the
Premises; and that afterward the said Simon Leach, Brother of the said
Nicholas the Testator died, and the said Charles Leach his Son, after his
decease entered into the Premises, and demised them to the Plaintiff, who by
virtue thereof entered and became possessed, and so continued till the said
Simon Leach and the other Defendants, by his Command, ejected him. But whether,
upon the whole Matter, the said Simon Leach did surrender the said Manor and
Premises to the said Sir Simon Leach, before the said Charles Leach was born;
and if he did not surrender before the birth of the said Charles Leach, then
they find the Defendants Guilty; and if he did surrender them before the birth,
then they find for the Defendants.

And Pollexfen Chief Justice, Powell and Rokeby, were of Opinion that here was
no Surrender till such time as Sir Simon Leach had notice of the Deed of
Surrender, and agreed to it, and so the Remainder was vested in Charles the
Son; and it was not defeated by the Agreement of Sir Simon after his birth, to
the Surrender.

But Ventris differed, and his Argument was as follows:

Whom this Record the Case is no more than this; Simon Leach, Tenant for Life,
Remainder to his first Son, Remainder in Call to Sir Simon Leach. Simon Leach
before the birth of that Son by Deed, sealed and delivered to the use of Sir
Simon (but in his Absence and without his Notice) surrenders his Estate to Sir
Simon, and continues the possession until after the birth of his Son; and then
Sir Simon Leach agrees to the Surrender, Whether this Surrender shall be taken
as a good and effectual Surrender before the Son born?

There are two Points which have been spoken to in this Case at the Bar.

First, Whether by the Sealing of the Deed of Surrender the Estate immediately
passed to Sir Simon Leach; for then the Contingent Remainder could not best in
the after-born Son, there being no Estate left in Simon Leach his Father to
support it?

Secondly, Whether after the assent of Sir Simon Leach, though it where given
after the birth of the Son, does not so relate as to make it a Surrender from
the Sealing of the Deed, and thereby defeat the Remainder which before such
Assent was vested in the Son?

I think these Points include all that is material in the Case, and I shall
speak to the Second Point, because I would rid it out of the Case. For as to
that Point I conceive, that if it be admitted, that the Estate for Life
continued in Simon Leach till the Assent of Sir Simon, that the Remainder being
vested in Charles the second Son before such Assent, there can be no Relation
that shall divest it.

I do not go upon the General Rule, That Relations shall not do wrong to
Strangers.

It Is true, Relations are fictions in Law, which are always accompanied with
Equity.

But it is as true, that there is sometimes loss and damage to Third Persons
consequent upon them; but then it is what the Law calls Damnum absque injuria,
which is a known and stated difference in the Law, as my Brother Pemberton
urged it. But I think there needs nothing of that to be considerrd in this
Point.

But the Reason which I go upon is, That the Relation here, let it be never so
strong, cannot hurt or disturb the Remainder in Charles Leach in this Case; for
that the Remainder is in him by a Title antecedent and paramount to the Deed of
Surrender, to which the Assent of Sir Simon Leach relates, so that it plainly
over-reaches the Relation.

If an Estate in Remainder, or otherwise, arises to one upon a Contingency or
a Power reserved upon a Fine or Feoffment to Uses, when the Estate is once
raised or vested it relates to the Fine or Feoffment, as if it were immediately
limited thereupon, 1 Co. 133, 156. So this Remainder, when vested in Charles,
he is in immediately by the Will, and out of danger of his Remainder being
divested by any act done since, as the Surrender is.

I will put one Case, I think full to this Matter, and so dismiss this Point.

It cannot be denied, but that there is as strong a Relation upon a
disagreement to an Estate, as upon an agreement, where the Estate was Conveyed
without the Notice of him that afterward agrees of disagrees; if the Husband
discontinues the Wives Estate, and then the Discontinuee conveys the Estate
back to the Wife in the absence of the Husband, who (as soon as he knows of it)
disagrees to the Estate, this shall not take away the Remitter which the Law
wrought upon the first taking the Estate from the Discontinuee. And so is Litt.
cap. Remitter, Jones 78.
Co. 11 Inst. 356. b. The true Reason is, because she is in of a Title
paramount to the Conveyance to which the Disagreement relates, though that indeed
was the foundation of the Remitter, which by the Disagreement might seem to be
avoided. This therefore I take to be a stronger Case than that at the Bar: So
that if there were no Surrender before the birth of Charles the Son, there can
be none after by any Construction of Law; for that would be in avoidance of an
Estate settled by a Title antecedent to such Surrender, whereas Relations are
to avoid Mesn Acts; and I believe there can be no Case put upon Relations that
go any further, and it would be against all Reason if it should be otherwise.

But as to the first Point, I am of Opinion, that upon the making of the Deed
of Surrender, the Freehold and Estate of Simon Leach did immediately vest in
Sir Simon, before he had notice, of gave any express consent to it; and so it
was a Surrender before Charles was born, and then the Contingent Remainder
could never vest in him, there being no particular Estate to support it.

A Surrender is a particular sort of Conveyance that works by the Common Law.
And it has been agreed, and I think I can make it plainly appear, that
Conveyances at the Common Law, do immediately (upon the Execution of them on
the Grantors part) divest the Estate out of him, and put it in the party to
whom such Conveyance is made, though in his absence, or without his notice, till
some disagreement to such Estate appears. I speak of Conveyances at the Common
Law; for I shall say nothing of Conveyances that work upon the Statute of Uses,
or of Conveyances by Custom, as Surrenders of Copyholds, or the like, as being
guided by the particular penning of Statutes, and by Custom and Usage, and
Matters altogether foreign to the Case in question.

In Conveyances that are by the Common Law, sometimes a Deed is sufficient (and
in Surrenders sometimes Words without a Deed) without further Circumstance or
Ceremony; and sometimes a further Act is requisite to give them effect, as
Livery of Seisin, Attornment, and sometimes Entry of the party, as in case of
Exchanges; and as well in those Conveyances that require a Deed only, as those
which require some further Act to perfect them, so soon as they are executed on
the Grantors part, they immediately pass the Estate. In case of a Deed of a
Feoffment to diverse persons, and Livery made to one Feoffee in the absence of
the rest, the Estate vests in them all till Dissent, 2 Leon. 23. Mutton's Case.
And so 223. an Estate made to a Feme Covert by Livery, vests in her before any
Agreement of the Husband, Co. 1 Inst. 356. a. So of a Grant of a Reversion
after Attornment of the Lessee, passes the Freehold by the Deed, Co. 1 Inst.
49. a. Litt. Sect. 66. In case of a Lease, the Lessee has right immediately to
have the Tenements by force of the Lease. So in the case of Limitation of
Remainders and of Devises, (which though a Conveyance introduced by the Statute,
yet operates according to the Common Law) the Freehold passes to the Devisee
before notice or assent. I do not cite Authorities, which are plentiful enough
in these matters, because they that have Argued for the Plaintiff have in a
manner agreed, that in Conveyances at the Common Law, generally the Estate
passes to the party, till he divests it by some disagreement.

But it is Objected, That in case of Surrenders, an express assent of the
Surrendree is a Circumstance requisite; as Attornment to a Grant of a
Reversion, Livery to a Feoffment, or Execution by Entry, in case of an Exchange.

To which I Answer, Than an Assent is not only a Circumstance, but it is
essential to all Conveyances; for they are Contracts, actus contra actum, which
necessarily suppose the assent of all parties: But his is not at all to be
compared with such collateral Acts of Circumstances, that by the Positive Law
are made the effectual parts of a Conveyance; as Attornment, Livery, or the
like; for the Assent of the party that takes, is implied in all Conveyances,
and this is by intendment of Law, which is as strong as the Expression of the
party, till the contrary appears; stabit praesumptio donec probetur in
contrarium.

But to make this thing clear, my Lord Coke in his first Institutes, fol. 50.
where he gives instances of Conveyances that work without Livery, or further
Circumstance or Ceremony, puts the Cases of Lease and Release, Confirmation,
Devise and Surrenders, amongst the rest; whereas if an express Assent of the
Surrendree were a Circumstance to make it effectual, sure he would have
mentioned it, and not martiall'd it with such Conveyances as I have shown
before, need no such assent, nor any thing further than a Deed.

The Case of Exchanges has been put as an Instance of a Conveyance at Law, that
does not work immediately; but that cannot be compared to the Case in question,
but stands upon its particular Reasons; for there must be a mutual express
Consent, because in Exchanges there must be a Reciprocal Grant, as appears by
Littleton.

Having, I hope, made out (and much more might have been added, but that I find
it has been agreed) that Conveyances work immediately upon the Execution of
them on the part of him that makes them, I will now endeavor to show the
Reasons, why they do so immediately vest the Estate in the party without any
express Consent; and to show that these Reasons do hold as strongly in case of
Surrenders, as of any other Conveyances at Law; and then consider the
Inconveniences and ill Consequences that have been Objected, would ensue, if
Surrenders should operate without an express Consent; and to show, that the
same are to be Objected as to all other Conveyances, and that very odd
Consequences and Inconveniences would follow, if Surrenders should be
ineffectual till an express Consent of the Surrendree; and then shall endeavor
to Answer the Arguments that have been made on the other Side, from the putting
of Cases of Surrenders in the Books, which are generally mentioned, to be with
mutual Assent, and from the manner of Pleading of Surrenders.

The Reasons why Conveyances do divest the Estate out of the Grantor, before
any express Assent or perhaps Notice of the Grantee, I conceive to be these
Three:

First, Because there is a strong Intendment of Law, that for a man to take an
Estate it is for his benefit, and no man can be supposed to be unwilling to
that which is for his Advantage. 1 Rep. 44. Smalman and Agborough.
Where an Art is done for a man's benefit an Agreement is implied, till there be
a Disagreement. This does not hold only in Conveyances, but in the Gift of
Goods, 3 Co. 26. A Grant of Goods vests the property in the Grantee before
Notice. So of things in Action; a Bond is sealed and delivered to a man's use,
who dies before Notice, his Executors may bring an Action. Dyer 167. An Estate
made to a Feme Covert vests in her immediately, till the Husband disagrees. So
is my Lord Hobart 204. in Swain and Holman's Case. Now is there not the same
presumption and appearance of Benefit to him in Reversion in case of a
Surrender? Is it not a palpable Advantage to him to determine the particular
Estate, and to reduce his Estate into possession? and therefore, why should not
his Affent be implied, as well as in other Conveyances?

Secondly, A second Reason is, Because it would seem incongruous and absurd,
that when a Conveyance is completely executed on the Grantors part, yet
notwithstanding the Estate should continue in him. The words of my Lord Coke (1
Inst. 217. a) are, That it cannot stand with any Reason, that a Freehold should
remain in a man against his own Livery when there is a person able to take it.
There needs only a Capacity to take, his Will to take is intended. Why should
it not seem as unreasonable, that the Estate should remain in Simon Leach,
against his own Deed of Surrender? For in case of a Surrender, a Deed, and
sometimes Words without a Deed, are as effectual as a Livery in case of a
Feoffment.

Thirdly, The third and principal Reason, as I take it, why the Law will not
suffer the Operation of a Conveyance to be in suspense, and to expect the
Agreement of the party to whom 'twas made, is to prevent the Uncertainty of the
Freehold. This I take to be the great Reason why a Freehold cannot be granted
in futuro, because that it would be very hard and inconvenient that a man
should be driven to bring his Praecipe or Real Action first against the
Grantor, and after he had proceeded in it a considerable time, it should abate
by the transferring the Freehold to a Stranger, by reason of his Agreement to
some Conveyance made before the Writ brought; for otherwise there is nothing in
the nature of the thing against Conveying a Freehold in futuro; for a Rent de
novo may be so granted; because that being newly Created, there can be no
precedent Right to bring any Real Action for it, Palmer 29, 30.

Now in this Case, suppose a Praecipe had been brought against Simon Leach,
this should have proceeded, and he could not have pleaded in Abatement till Sir
Simon Leach ha assented; and after a long progress in the Suit he might have
pleaded, that Sir Simon Leach assented puis darrein continuance, and defeated
all. So that the same Inconvenience, as to the bringing of Real Actions, holds
in Surrenders, as in other Conveyances.

And to show that it is not a slight matter, but what the Law much considers,
and is very careful to have the Freehold fixed, and will never suffer it to be
in abeyance, or under such uncertainty; as a Stranger that demands Right should
not know where to fix his Action.

A multitude of Cases might be cited; but I will cite only a Case put 1 H. 6.
2. a. because it seems something of a singular nature, Lord and Villain,
Mortgagor and Mortgagee, may be both made Tenants.

But it will be said here, that if a Praecipe had been brought against Sir
Simon Leach, might not he have pleaded his Disagreement, and so abated the Writ
of Nontenure?

It Is true; but that Inconvenience had been no more than in all other Cases, a
Plea of Nontenure, and it must have abated immediately; for he could not have
abated it by any dissent after he had answered to the Writ. Whereas I have
shown it in the other Case, it may be after a long progress in the Suit.

Again, It Is very improbable that he should dissent; whereas on the other side,
an Assent is the likeliest thing in the world; so the mischief to the Demandant
is not near so great, nor the hundredth part so probable.

Now I come to consider those Inconveniences that have been urged that would
ensue, if a Surrender should work immediately.

It has been said, That a Tenant for Life might make such Deed of Surrender,
and continue in possession, and suffer a Recovery; and this might destroy a
great many Recoveries, and overthrow Marriage Settlements, and defeat Charges
and Securities upon his Estate after such Deed of Surrender.

These, and a great many more such like Mischiefs, may be instanced in
Surrenders; but they hold no less in any other Conveyance, whereby a man may
(as has been showed before) divest himself of the Estate, and yet continue the
Possession; and in this Case the Assent of the Surrendree, though he does not
enter, would (as it is agreed of all hands) vest the Estate in him, Hutton 95.
Br. tit. Surrender 50. though he cannot have Trespass before Entry, and that
Assent might be kept as private, and let in all the Mischiefs before mentioned
as if no such Assent were necessary.

And this I think sufficient to Answer to the Inconveniences objected on that
side.

Now let us see what Inconveniences and odd Consequences would follow, in case
a Surrender could not operate till the express Assent of the Surrendree, then
no Surrender could be to an Infant at least, when under the age of Discretion;
for if it be a necessary Circumstance, it cannot be dispensed with no more than
Livery or Attornment. So though an Infant of a year Old is capable to take an
Estate, because for his benefit he could not take a particular Estate, upon
which he had a Reversion immediately expectant, because it must enure by
Surrender. If there be Joyntenants in Reversion, a Surrender to one of them
enures to both, 1 Inst. 192, 214. a. so there, as to one Moiety, it operates
without Assent or Notice.

Suppose Tenant for Life should make Livery upon a Grant of his Estate to him
in Reversion and two others, and the Livery is made to the other two in the
absence, and without the Notice of him in Reversion, should the Livery not work
immediately for a Third part of the Estate? And if it does, it must enure as a
Surrender for a Third part. So is Bro. tit. Surrender, and 3 Co. 76.

If Tenant for Life should by Lease and Release convey the Lands held by him
for Life, together with other Lands to him in Reversion who knows nothing of
the Sealing of the Deed; should this pass the other Lands presently, and the
Lands held for Life not till after an express Assent, because as to those Lands
it must work as a Surrender? Plainly an express Assent is not necessary. For if
the Grantee enters, this is sufficient.

I come in the last place to Answer those Arguments that have been made from
the manner of putting the Case of Surrenders in the Book, and the Form of
pleading Surrenders, Co. 1 Inst. 337. b.

First, A Surrender is a yielding up of the Estate, which drowns by mutual
Agreement between them. Tenant for Life, by Agreement of him in Reversion,
surrenders to him; he has a Freehold before he enters. And so Perkins, in
putting the Case of a Surrender, mentions an Agreement; and diverse other Books
have been cited to the same purpose.

To all which I Answer:

No doubt but an Agreement is necessary. But the Question is, Whether an
Agreement is not intended where a Deed of Surrender is made in the absence of
him in the Reversion; whether the Law shall not suppose an Assent, till a
Disagreement appears?

Indeed, if he were present', he must agree or disagree immediately; and so
it is in all other Conveyances. The Cases put in Perkins, Sect. 607, 608, 609.
are all of Surrenders made to the Lessor in person; for thus he puts them: The
Lessee comes to the Lessor, and the Lessee says to the Lessor, I surrender,
says he, if the Lessor does not agree, it is void: Car il ne poit surrender a
luy maugre son dents. And that is certainly so in Surrenders, and all other
Conveyances; for a man cannot have an Estate put into him in spite of his
Teeth.

But I cannot find any of the Books cited that come to this Point, That where a
Deed of Surrender is executed without the Notice of him in Reversion, that it
shall pass nothing till he Consents; so that it cannot be said, that there is
any express Authority in the Case.

Now, as to the Form of Pleading of a Surrender it has been Objected, That a
Surrender is always pleaded with Acceptance; and many Cases have been cited of
such Pleadings, Rastal's Entries 176, 177. Fitzh. tit. Bar 262. which are
Cases in Actions of Debt for Rent, and the Defendant in Bar pleads, That he
surrendered before the Rent grew due, and shows, that the Plaintiff accepted the
Surrender: So in Waste brought, a Surrender pleaded with the Agreement of the
Plaintiff.

These and the like Cases have been very materially, and I think fully Answered
at the Bar by my Brother Pemberton; That those Actions being in Disaffirmance
of the Surrender, and implying a Disagreement, the Defendant had no way to bar
or avoid such Disagreement, but by showing an express Agreement before.

The Case of Peto and Pemberton in the 3 Cro. 101. that has been so often
cited, is of the same sort: In a Replevin the Avowry was for a Rentcharge; in
Bar of which it is pleaded, That the Plaintiff demised the Land out of which the
Rent issued, to the Avowant. The Avowant Replies, That he surrendered
dimissionem praedict. to which the Plaintiff agreed. This is the same with
Pleading in Bar to an Action of Debt for Rent: But when the Action is in
pursuance of the Surrender, then it is not pleaded.

So is Rast. Entries 136. The Lessee brought an Action Covenant against the
Lessor, for entering upon him, and ousting of him. The Defendant pleads a
Surrender in Bar, and that without any Agreement or Acceptance.

In Fitzherbert, tit. Debt. 149. where the Case is in an Action of Debt for
Rent: The Defendant pleaded in Bar, that he surrendered, by force of which the
Plaintiff became seized: There is no mention of pleading any Agreement,
notwithstanding that the Action was in Disaffirmance of the Surrender.

Therefore, as to the Argument which has been drawn against the Form of
Pleading, I say, that if an Agreement be necessary to be pleaded: Then, I say,

First, That it is answered by an implied Assent, as well as an express Assent.
I would put the Case; Suppose a Lessee for Life should make a Lease for years,
reserving Rent; and in Debt for the Rent the Lessee should plead, That the
Plaintiff before the Rent grew due surrendered to him in Reversion, and he
accepted it, and Issue is upon the Acceptance; and at the Trial it is proved,
that the Plaintiff had executed a Deed of Surrender (as in this Case) to him in
Reversion in his absence; would not this turn the Proof upon the Plaintiff,
that he in Reversion disagreed to this Surrender? for surely his Agreement is
prima facie presumed, and then the Rule is, stabit praesumptio donec probertur
in contrarium.

Again, I say it appears by the Cases cited that it is not always pleaded, and
when pleaded it is upon a special Reason, as I have shown before, i. e. to
conclude the party from disagreeing; and it would be very hard to prove in
Reason, that an Agreement (admitting an express Assent to be necessary) must be
pleaded; for if it were a necessary Circumstance to the Conveyance, why then
it is implied in pleading sursum reddidit; for it cannot be a Surrender without
it.

In pleading of a Feoffment it is enough to say Feoffavit, for that implies
Livery; for it cannot be a Feoffment without it.

Now why should not sursum reddidit imply all necessary requisites, as well as
Feoffavit? and therefore I do not see that any great Argument can be drawn from
the Pleading. For,

1. It is not always to be pleaded.

2. It cannot be made out to be necessary so to plead it; for if Assent be a
necessary requisite, then it is implied by saying sursum reddidit, as Livery is
in Feoffavit; and then to add the words of Express Consent is as superflous, as
to show Livery after saying Feoffavit.

And again, If it were always necessary, it is sufficiently answered by an
Assent intended in Law; for Presumptions of Law stand as strong till the
contrary appears, as an express Declaration of the party.

Memorand. Anno quarto Willielmi and Mariae, this Case was brought by Writ of
Error into the House of Lords, and the Judgment was there Reversed upon the
Reasons in the aforegoing Argument.

Termino Sancti Michaelis, Anno 2 W. and M. In Communi Banco.
Coghill versus Freelove.
IN an Action of Debt for Rent the Plaintiff Declared for 78 l upon three
several Demises against the Defendant, as Administratrix to Thomas Freelove her
late Husband in the Detinet.

The Defendant pleaded, that after the Letters of Administration granted to
her, and before the Rent became due, she assigned to Samuel Freelove the
Indenture of Demise, and all her Estate and Interest in the Premises; and that
Samuel entered and was possessed, and that the Plaintiff had notice of the
Assignment before the Action brought.

To this the Plaintiff Demurrs.

It was said for the Plaintiff, that the Action being brought in the Detinet,
the Assignment was no Plea; for the Administratrix is charged upon the Contract
of the Intestate, and liable (so far as there is Assets) though there be no
Assignment. And though in the 3 Co. and in the 1 Cro. 555. Overton and Syddal's
Case seems the contrary; and so Marrow and Turpin's Case in the 1 Cro. 715. And
that the privity of Contract is determined by the Death of the Lesser, yet in
Ironmonger and Newsam's Case in Latch 260. the contrary was Resolved. ( Note,
it did not appear by Latch to be Resolved; but the Chief Justice said it was so
Resolved) So in 17 Car. 2. Syderfin 266. in Heylar and Casbord's Case it was
Resolved, that the Action lay against the Executor upon the Contract, after an
Assignment; where it was held also, that an Executor cannot wave a Term, unless
he renounceth the whole Executorship.

After hearing Arguments at the Bar, the Court gave Judgment for the Plaintiff,
(Powell absente.) As to Overton and Syddal's Case, it appears by Mo. 352. that
Popham and Fenner were against Gaudy and Clench, vide Poph. Rep. 121.

It appears that the Action was brought in the Debet and Detinet, and by a
Prebend upon the Lease of his Predecessor, and then an Assignment will be a
Bar; which matters indeed do not appear to be urged in the Case, as Cited by my
Lord Coke, and Reported by Cro. Eliz. 355. But they go upon the privity of
Contract, said to be dissolved by the Death of the Lessee. Sed vid. Latch. 261.
that Case said not to be Resolved, as cited by Co. and so Noy's Rep. 77. And
for Marrow and Turpin's Case there is an acceptance of the Rent of the Assignee
pleaded, as appears by 1 Cro. 715. though that does not appear to be insisted on
by the Books which Report the Case; however the latter Authotities are clear,
that the Action lies in the Detinet after an Assignment, as appears by the
Cases cited. Judicium pro Quer.

Note, The Court was moved upon the Case of Persons Outlawed upon Mesn Process
before the late Act of General Pardon, 2 Willielmi and Mariae, it being
provided by the said Act, That no Process of Outlawry, at the Suit of any
Plaintiff, shall be stayed or avoided, unless the Defendant appears and puts in
Bail (where by Law Bail is necessary) and takes forth a Writ of Scire facias
against the party at whose Suit he was Outlawed.

Whether the Defendant, before he can have the benefit of this Pardon, must pay
the Costs to the Plaintiff of the Outlawry; there being no mention of any
thing, but his appearing and putting in of Bail?

The Court were of Opinion, that he must pay the Costs, and to take the Act
otherwise would be a great prejudice to the Plaintiff, who did no wrong.

And Pollexfen Chief Justice said, that the Practice had been so upon the
General Act of Pardon, 25 Car. 2. cap. 5. and yet in that Statute the Claus^
concerning Outlawries is to the same purpose, and no mention made of the Costs
of the party.

Denny versus Mazey.
Essex' ss.
Replevin.
SIMON MAZEY nuper de Bocking in Com' praedict' Clothier sum^ fuit ad
respondend' Samueli Denney de placito quare cepit un' Equul' ipsius Samuelis
and eum injuste detinuit contra vados and pleg' etc. Et unde idem Samuel per
Johannem Meriton Attorn' suum queritur quod praedict' Simo vicesimo sexto die
Septembris anno regni domini and dominae Regis and Reginae nunc primo apud
Bocking in quodam loco ibidem (vocat' Townfield) cepit un' Equul' nigr'
(Anglice Black Horse Colt) ipsius Samuelis and eum injuste detinuit contra vad'
and pleg' quousque etc. unde dic' quod deteriorat' est and dampn' haber ad
valenciam december librarum Et inde produc' sectam etc.

Avowry pur Damage fesant.
Et praedict' Simo per Stephan' Hales Attorn' suum ven' and defend' vim and
injur' quando etc. Et been advocat capc^onem Equuli praedict' in praedicto loco
in quo etc. Et just etc. quia dic' quod ante praedict' tempus quo supponitur
capc^onem Equuli praedicti quaedam Elizabetha Mann Vid' J.S: seized in Fee.
fuit seisit' de praedict' loco in quo etc. in dominico suo ut de feodo Et sic
seisit' existen' praedicta Elizabetha ante praedict' tempus quo etc. scilicet
vicesimo die Septembris anno regni domini and dominae Regis and Reginae nunc
primo apud Bocking praed' dimisit eidem Simoni locum praed' And demised to the
Avowant at Will.
in quo etc. habend' and occupand' eidem Simoni abinde per spacium unius anni
tunc prox' sequen' and sic de anno in annum quamdiu ambabus partibus placuer'
The Avowant entered and was possessed.
Virtute cujus dimissionis Idem Simo postea and ante praed' tempus quo etc.
scilicet vicesimo primo die ejusdem mensis Septembr' in praedicto loco intravit
and fuit inde possessionat' Ipsoque Simone sic inde possessionat' existen' quia
Equul' praedict. praedicto tempore quo etc. fuit in praedicto loco in quo etc.
herbam suam ibidem tunc crescen' depascen' and dampn' ibidem facien' And took
the Colt damage feazant.

Prays Judgment and a Return.

And Costs and Damages, according to the Statute. The Plaintiff pleads in Bar
to the Avowry, that J. S. demised to him, and traverses the Demise to the
Avowant. Confessing of the seisin Fee. Demise to the Plaintiff.

For six years.


Idem Simo been advocat capc^onem Equuli praed' in praedicto loco in quo etc.
Et just etc. dampn' ibidem sic, facien' Et hoc parat' est verificare unde pet'
Judic' and retorn' praed' Equuli una cum dampnis mis' and custag' suis in hac
part appoit' juxta formam Statuti in hujusmodi casu edit' and provis' sibi
adjudicari etc.

Et praedict' Samuel dic' quod praedict' Simo ratione praeallegata capc^onem
Equuli praed' in praedicto loco in quo etc. justam advocare non debet quia dic'
quod praedicta Elizabetha Mann Vid' ante praed' tempus quo etc. suit and adhuc
est seisit' de praed' Clauso in quo etc. cum pertin' int' alia in dominico suo
ut de feodo Et sic inde seisit' existen' eadem Elizabetha ante praed' tempus
quo etc. scilicet quinto die Junij anno regni dictorum domini Regis and dominae
Reginae nunc primo supradicto apud Bocking praed' dimisit' praefat' Samueli
idem Clausum cum pertin' in quo etc. inter alia habend' a secundo die Marcij
tunc ult' praeterit' pro sex annis ab eodem secundo die Marcij prox' sequen'
Virtute cujus dimissionis idem Samuel ante praedict' tempus quo etc. in Clausum
illud in quo etc. inter alia intravit and fuit and adhuc existit inde
possessionat' Et sic inde possessionat' existen' The Plaintiff entered and was
possessed.
idem Samuel ante praed' tempus quo etc. posuit Equul' praed' in idem Clausum
in quo etc. ad herbam ibidem tunc crescen' depascend' Et Equulus ille praedicto
tempore quo etc. fuit in eodem Clauso in quo etc. Herbam ibidem tunc crescen'
depascen' And the Defendant took his Colt there.
quousque praedictus Simo praedicto vicesimo sexto die Septembris anno primo
supradicto apud Bocking praed' in pradicto Clauso (vocat' Townfield) cepit
Equulum illum Et eum injuste detinuit contra vad' and pleg' quousque etc. prout
ipse idem Samuel superius versus eum queritur Absque hoc quod praedict'
Elizabetha Mann dimisit praed' Simoni praedict' Absque hoc that J.S. demised to
the Avowant modo and forma, as he has set forth in his Avowry.

Petit Judicium and dampna, etc.


loc' in quo etc. modo and forma prout praed' Simo per advocar' suum praed'
superius supponit. Et hoc parat' est verificare unde ex quo praed' Simo
capc^onem Equuli praedicti in praedicto Clauso in quo etc. superius cogn' idem
Samuel pet' Judicium and dampna sua occ^one capconis and injuste detenconis
Equuli illius sibi adjudicari etc.

Demurrer to the Plea.
Et praedict' Simo dic' quod praed' placitum praedict' Samuel' superius
replicand' placitat' materiaque in eodem content' minus sufficien' in lege
existunt ad ipm^ Samuel' acconem praed' versus eum habend' manutenend' quodque
ipse ad placitum illud modo and forma pred' replicand' placitat' necesse non
habet nec per legem terrae tenetur aliquo modo respondere Et hoc parat' est
verificare unde pet' Judicium si praed' Samuel acconem suam praed' inde versus
eum habere debeat etc.

Joynder in Demurrer.
Et praedict' Samuel ex quo ipse sufficien' materiam in lege in replicacone in
sua praedicta ad acconem suam praed' versus praefat' Simonem habend'
manutenend' superius allegavit quam ipse parat' est verificare Quam quidem
materiam idem Simo non dedic' nec ad ill' aliqualit' respondet set verificacon'
ill' admittere omnino recusat Idem Samuel ut prius pet' Judicium and dampna sua
occone capconis and injuste detenconis Equuli illius sibi adjudicari etc. Et
quia Justic' hic se advisare volunt de and super praemissis priusquam Judicium
inde reddant dies dat' est partibus praedictis hic usque -- ad audiend' inde
Judicio suo eo quod iidem Justic' hic inde nondum etc.

Denney versus Mazey.
IN a Replevin the Plaintiff Declared of taking of his Horse Colt at S. in
quodam loco vocat' Townfield.

The Defendant says, that before the Taking one Elizabeth Mann was seized in
Fee de praedicto loco in quo, etc. and 20 September. Anno primo Willielmi and
Mariae demised the Premises to him for a year then next ensuing, and that he
entered, and avowed the taking of the Plaintiffs Horse damage feasant.

The Plaintiff Replied, that the said Elizabeth Mann was seized of the
Premises in Fee, and before the Lease to the Avowant, (viz.) the 5th of June,
in the said first year of the King and Queen, she demised to the Plaintiff the
Premises habend' from the second day of March then last past for the Term of
six years; by virtue of which he entered, and put his Horse into the Premises,
and traverseth the Lease made to the Avowant.

To this the Avowant Demurred generally.

Pollexfen Chief Justice inclined, that the Traverse was no cause of Demurrer,
though it might have been omitted. He said there were diverse Authorities against
Heylars' Case in the 6 Co. which is Reported to the same effect in Mo. 551. 1
Cro. 658. as 1 Cro. 754. Covert's Case; Hob. 81.103. Traverse where the Matter
in confessed and avoided.
and the Books generally are only, that there need be no Traverse, as the
Bishop of Salisbury and Hunt in 3 Cro. 581. and Kellend and White, 3 Cro. 494.
the other Justices doubted, relying upon the Authority of Heylar's Case, and
Rice and Harveston's Case, 2 Cro 299. and Yelv. 221. where it is said, that such
a Traverse makes the Plea vicious, Vid. Mo. 557. But here the Demurrer being
General, it is but matter of Form, and clearly aided by the Statute of 27 Eliz.
where if one Confess, and Avoid, and Traverse, it is in nature of a Double Plea.
Vid. That it is good upon a General Demurrer, Edwards and Wooden, 3 Cro. 323.
So Judgment was by the whole Court given for the Plaintiff.

Woodward versus Fox. Quod vide ante ultimo Termino.
THe Case was this Term Argued again by Sergeant Pemberton for the Defendant,
and by Sergeant Powell for the Plaintiff; upon the Point, Whether the
Nomination to the Office, being forfeited by the Statute of Ed. 6. it did
belong to the King or the Bishop (in whose Diocese the Archdeaconry was) to
make the Register?

But Pollexfen, Chief Justice, desired them to Consider, Whether the King
(admitting he had a right by the Statute) could grant this Office of the
Register, before Office found of the Forfeiture?

Note, In case of Simony the Presentation vests in the King without Office.
Adjornatur.

Morgan versus Hunt.
IN Covenant the Plaintiff Declared, that the Defendant Let to him a certain
House and Lands, and Covenanted that he should quietly and peaceably enjoy it,
without any manner of interruption, molestation or disturbance; and that by
virtue of the said Demise he ented, and sometime after the Defendant exhibited
a Bill against the Plaintiff in the Court of Chancery, wherein he charged the
Plaintiff with ploughing up Meadows, and the committing of diverse Wastes; and
did obtain an Injunction out of the said Court against the Plaintiff, whereby
he was interrupted in his Ploughing, etc. and that afterward the said Bill was
dismissed with 20 l Cofts, and so the Defendant had broken his Covenant.

After a Verdict for the Plaintiff (I know not upon what Issue) it was moved in
Arrest of Judgment:

First, That here was no sufficient Breach set forth. It was said, that the Law
does not take notice of Proceedings in Chancery, Poph. 205. it is said, If one
be possessed of Lands by Extent, and by a Decree in a Court of Equity he is
forced to pay a Rent out of the Lands, this shall not be a legal Eviction or
Recovery for so much.

Secondly, The Suit in Chancery here is not touching the Lessees Estate or
Title, but for Waste, which he ought not to do; and though the Suit might be
groundless, yet it not relating to his Title or Possession, was no breach of
Covenant.

The Judgment was stayed by the Opinion of the whole Court, for the last
Reason; for this was interruption or disturbance within the Covenant, the
Subject matter of the Suit being for Waste.

But the Court will take notice of a Suit in Chancery; and 1 Cro. 768. an
Assumpsit in Consideration of desisting from exhibiting a Bill in Chancery was
held a good Consideration.

Anonymus.
IN a Covenant, That the Defendant should keep in good Repair the House,
Outhouses and Stables; and the Breach assigned, was that the Defendant had
permitted the Racks in the Stable to be in decay.

After Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the
Plaintiff had not set forth that the Racks were fixed in the Stable, and so
part of the Freehold; for they might be in the Stable and lie loose.

Pollexfen, Chief Justice, was of Opinion, that it ought to have been shown in
the Declaration, that the Racks were set up and fixed.

But the other Justices conceived, that it should be intended that they were
Racks fixed for use in the Stable; and it would be very remote to give it any
other Construction. And so Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Anonymus.
IN an Ejectment it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the Plaintiff had
declared of two Demises, (viz.) That J. S. demised 10 Acres of Land to him, an
that J. N. had demised 10 other Acres of Land to him habend' for the Term of
Five years, etc. and that he entered into the Premises demised to him by J. S.
and J. N. in forma praedict'.

After Verdict, upon Not guilty for the Plaintiff, it was Objected, That in one
of the Demises there is no certain Term or Estate; for the habend' can be
referred only to the Demise of J.S. for that begins a New sentence.

But the Court held, that the Habend' should be a good Limitation of both
Demises for Five years; and when it is shown, that the Plaintiff entered into the
Premises demised to him in forma praedict', that is an Averment that all was
demised for Five years, for that is the forma paed'; As Lands let to A. for
his life, Remainder to B. in forma praed', this is an Estate to B. for Life.
And so Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Anonymus.
IN an Action upon the Statute of Hue and Cry, it was after Verdict moved in
Arrest of Judgment, that in the Recital of the Statute there were Variances
from the Statute and Omissions.

First, There was no mention of Burning of Houses in the Recital; but that is
in the Statute.

Non allocatur: For it is not necessary to set forth more in the Declaration
than is pertinent to the Action.

Secondly, The Statute is, That the Country should answer for the Bodies of the
Malefactors; and the Recital is, Quod patria respondeat pro Malefactoribus, the
sense of which is, That the Country should stand in their stead; whereas the
meaning of the Statute is, That they should produce their Persons.

Sed non allocatur: For as it is in the Recital of the Declaration it well
answers the sense of the Statute.

Anonymus.
IN an Action of Trespass, quare Clausum fregit, and digging up and carrying
away of his Trees.

It appeared upon the Evidence, That the Defendant had entered into the
Plaintiffs Close, and dug up several Roots of his Trees, and removed them to
a place on the same Ground, about two yards distance off.

And the Question was, Whether this were such a Carrying away, as that the
Plaintiff should have full Costs, or only Costs according to the late Statute,
where the Damages are under 40 s as was in this Case?

Pollexfen Chief Justice and Rokeby (Powell absente) were of Opinion, that the
Plaintiff was to have full Costs, because the Roots were carried from the place
where they were dug, though not removed off from the Ground; and they said,
that it had been adjudged Felony to take and removed things with an intent to
steal them, though laid at a small distance from the place, and not carried out
of the House, or the like.

Ventris conceived, That the taking of the Roots and laying them a little way
off in the same man's Ground, could not be taken as an asportavit, and it
differed from the Case of Stealing; for taking Goods as a Thief is the Felony,
and it does not lie in the carrying them off, but in the Felonious intent in
the taking.

But by the Opinion of the other two of the Plaintiff had his full Costs.

Anonymus.
IT was moved for a Prohibition to the Ecclesiastical Court, to stay a Suit for
Dilapidations, by the Successor against the Executor of the former Incumbent,
upon the late General Act of Pardon; for that all Suits for Offenses of Incest,
Simony, or Dilapidations, are excepted in the Act, unless commenced and
depending before such a Day, (viz.) the 20th day of March last; and this Suit
was commenced since.

The whole Court, upon Hearing of Counsel at the Bar and Consideration of the
Matter, conceived, that the Parliament never intended to take away the
Successors Remedy for Dilapidations; for that would be to ease the Executor of
the last Incumbent, who was the Wrong-doer, and translate the Charge to the
Successor: But they would intend this Exception of such Suits as might be in
the Ecclesiastical Court ex Officio against the Dilapidator himself, to punish
it as a Crime against the Ecclesiastical Law, and to pardon it, unless there
were Prosecution before the Day aforesaid. And so the Prohibition was denied.

Nota, If a Sheriff of a County in a City be in Contempt, the Attachment is to
go to the Coroner, and not to the Mayor or Chief Officer of the Corporation in
such City or Town: And if the Offender be out of his Office, the Attachment
shall be directed to the New Sheriff.

Gawden versus Draper.
IN an Action of Covenant the Plaintiff declared upon a Deed of Covenant by
Indenture, made between the Defendant and him, whereby the Defendant Covenanted
with the Plaintiff, That Sarah (Wife of the Defendant) should be permitted to
live separate from the Defendant, until the Defendant and the said Sarah by
Writing under their several Hands, attested by two Witnesses, should give
notice to each other, that they would again Cohabit. And further Covenanted,
That he the Defendant, during the Coverture, and until such Notice should be
given of their desires to Cohahit, as aforesaid, would pay to the Plaintiff,
for the Maintenance of the said Sarah, 300 l per Annum at four Quarterly
payments; and sets forth, That the said Sarah, form the Date of the said
Indenture to the time of the said Suit, did live separate from the Defendant,
and no notice of Cohabitation, as aforesaid, had been given during that time of
either side: And for 75 l for one Quarters payment of the said 300 l which was
to be paid at our Lady Day last the Action is brought.

The Defendant pleads in Bar, That after the Indenture aforesaid, and before
the Action brought, another Indenture was made between the Defendant and the
said Sarah his Wife, of the one part, and the Plaintiff of the other part,
which the Defendant profert hic in Cur' reciting the said first Indenture; and
further reciting, That the Defendant and the said Sarah did then intend to
Cohabit, and did at that time Cohabit, and expressing that it was the true
intent and meaning of all the said parties to the said Indenture produced, ut
supra, by the Defendant, That so long as the Defendant and the said Sarah
should agree to Cohabit, the said Annual payment should cease. And the
Plaintiff did by the said last mentioned Indenture, by the appointment of the
said Sarah, as appointed by her, being party thereunto, and her Signing,
Sealing and Delivery thereof, covenant and agree with the Defendant, That so
long as the Defendant and the said Sarah should Cohabit, he should be saved
harmless from the said 300 l Annual payment; and that it should be lawful for
him (during such Cohabitation) to detain the same, ut per dictam Indenturam
before apparet, and averreth, That ever since the last mentioned Indenture
they did Cohabit, and demands Judgment of the Action.

The Plaintiff Replies, That they did not Cohabit modo and forma prout the
Defendant placitando allegavit, and hoc petit quod inquirat', etc. And to that
the Defendant Demurred.

Birch Sergeant, Argued for the Defendant, That this latter Indenture, which
sets forth a mutual Agreement to Cohabit, and that they did Cohabit, which is
alleged in the Bar, and confessed by the Demurrer, had dispensed with those
Circumstances, (viz.) A Writing mutually Subscribed, arrested by two Witnesses,
giving Notice of each parties Intention so to Cohabit; and this Covenant, That
it should be lawful for the Defendant to detain the same so long as such
Cohabitation should continue, as is therein mentioned, might well be pleaded in
Bar to the Action brought upon the first Indenture.

But by the Opinion of the whole Court Judgment was given for the Plaintiff;
for they held, that unless the Cohabitation had been according to the first
Indenture, it was no Bar; for the last Deed, had not taken away the effect of
the former, a latter Covenant cannot be pleaded in Bar of a former. But the
Defendant must bring his Action upon the last Indenture, if he would help
himself.

Anonymus.
A Fieri facias was taken out, which was executed after the party was Dead upon
the Goods in the hands of the Executor; but the Test was before his death. But
it appeared, that the Delivery to the Sheriffs, and Endorsment thereupon,
according to the New Statute of 29 Car. 2. was after his Death.

The Court held, that at the Common Law the Execution had been clearly good:
But the Statute is, that the property of the Goods shall be bound but from the
delivery of the Writ to the Sheriff.

And the Court rather inclined, that the Execution was good, and that the
Statute was made for the benefit of Strangers, who might have a Title to the
Goods between the Test of the Writ of Execution, and the time of the delivery
thereof to the Sheriff. But as to the party himself, the Goods were bound from
the Test ever since the Statute of Vicesimo nono Car. 2. But it was Ordered to
be further spoken to.

Watmough versus Holgate.
Eborum ss.
WILLIELMUS HOLGATE nuper de Sawley in Com. praedict' Yeoman alias dictul
Williel' Debt upon a Bond.
Holgate de Sawley in Com' Eborum Yeoman sum^ fuit ad respondend' Roberto
Watmough Radulpho Duxbury and Willelmo Swire de placito quod reddat eis
quadraginta libras quas eis debet and injuste detinet etc. Et unde ijdem
Robertus Radulphus and Willielmus Swire per Robertum Scater Attorn' suum dic'
quod cum praedict' Willielmus Holgate secundo die Augusti anno regni domini
Regis Jacobi secundi Angl' etc. quarto apud Gisborne per quoddam scriptum suum
obligatorium concessisset se teneri praefat' Roberto Radulpho and Willielmo
Swire in praedictis quadraginta libris solvend' eisdem Roberto Radulpho and
Willelmo Swire cum inde requisit' fuisset praed' ramen Willielmus Holgate licet
saepius requisit' praedict' quadraginta libras eisdem Roberto Radulpho and
Willielmo Swire nondum reddidit set ill' ei hucusque reddere contradixit and
adhuc contradict unde dic' quod deteriorat' sunt and dampn' habent ad valenciam
viginti librar' Et inde produc' sectam etc. Et proferunt hic in Cur' scriptum
praedict' quod debitum praedict' in forma praedicta testatur cujus dat' est die
and anno supradicto etc.

Et praedictus Willielmus Holgate per Johannem Mitchel Attorn' The Defendant
craves Oyer of the Condition.
suum ven' and defend' vim and injur' quando etc. Et pet' auditum scripti
praedicti and ei legitur etc. petit etiam auditum Condiconis ejusdem scripti
and ei legitur in haec verba ss. The Condition of this Obligation is such, That
if the above-bounden William Holgate, Which is for the performance of an Award.
his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, for his and their parts and behalves,
shall and do in all things well and truly stand to, obey, abide, perform,
fulfill and keep the Award, Order, Arbitrament, final End and Determination of
Ambrose Pudsey of Colton Esquire, and Thomas Parker of Crouseholme Esquire,
Arbitrators indifferently elected and named, as well on the part and behalf of
the above-bounden William Holgate, as of the abovenamed Robert, Ralph and
William Swire, to arbitrate, award, order, judge and determine, of and
concerning all and all manner of Action and Actions, Cause and Causes of
Actions, Suits, Bills, Bonds, Specialties, Judgments, Executions, Extents,
Quarrels, Controversies, Trespasses, Damages and Demands whatsoever, at any
time heretofore had, made, moved, brought, commenced, sued, prosecuted, done,
suffered, committed or depending, by or between the said parties, so as the
said Award be made and put into writing, and ready to be delivered to the
parties in difference, or such of them as shall desire the same, on or before
the Eleventh day of November next, then this Obligation to be void, or else to
stand in force. The Defendant pleads, That the Arbitraters made no Award.
Quibus lectis and auditis idem Willielmus Holgate dic' quod praedict' Robertus
Radulphus and Willielmus Swire acconem suam praed' inde versus eum habere non
debent quia dic' quod praedict' Ambrosius Pudsey and Thomas Parker Arbitratores
praedict' post confecconem scripti praedicti ad vel ante praedict' undecim'
diem Novembr' in Condicone scripti praedicti menconat' nullum fecer' arbitrium
int' parts praedict' in Condicone praedict' superius menconat' de and in
praemissis in Condicone praedict' superius spec' Et hoc parat' est verificare
unde pet' Judic' si praedict' Robertus Radulphus and Willielmus Swire acconem
suam praedict' inde versus eum habere debeant etc.

The Plaintiff Replies, and sets forth the Award.
Et praedict' Robertus Radulphus and Willielm' Swire dic' quod ipsi per aliqua
per praefat' Willielm' Holgate superius placitando allegat' ab accone sua
praedicta versus eum habend' praecludi non debent Quia dic' quod praedicti
Ambrosius Pudsey and Thomas Parker Arbitratores in Condicone praedict' superius
nominat' accepetis super se onera arbitrandi int' parts praedict' de and super
praemissis in Condicone praedicta superius menconat' post confecconem scripti
praedicti and ante praedict' undecimum diem Novembr' in Condicone praedicta
superius spec' scilicet decimo die Novembr' anno regni domini Jacobi secundi
nuper Regis Angl' The Award made in Writing.
quarto apud Gisborne praedict' fecer' quoddam arbitrium suum in scriptis sub
manibus and sigillis suis de and super praemissis praedictis adtunc and ibidem
partibus praed' parat' fore deliberand' per quod quidem arbitrium iidem
Arbitratores arbitraver' and ordinaver' de and super praemissis in Condicone
praedicta superius spec' modo and forma sequen' videlicet quod praedict'
Willielmus Holgate been and veracit' solveret seu solvi causaret eisdem Roberto
Watmough Radulpho Duxbury and Willielmo Swire vel eorum alicui summam quindecim
librar' legalis monet Angl' ad vel ante prim' diem Decembr' tunc prox' sequen'
qui Arbitratores praedict' judicaver' praedict' Robertum Radulphum and
Willielmum Swire sustinuisse in custag' and dampnis ratione cujusdam sectae
sine causa per dict' Willielmum Holgate versus ipsos Robertum Radulphum and
Willielm' Swire prosecut' Et ulterius Arbitratores praedict' ordinaver' quod
omnes sectae and differenciae inter dict' Willielm' Holgate ex una part and
ipsos dictos Robertum Radulphum and Willielmum Swire ex altera part quae mot'
That all Suits should cease.
habit' sive depend' fuer' ante diem dat' scripti Obligatorij praedicti
absolut' cessarent vacuae forent and determinarentur prout per idem arbitrium
inter alia before liquet and apparet Et praedict' Robertus Radulphus and
Willielmus Swire protestando quod praedict' Willielmus Holgate non observavit
performavit perimplevit seu custodivit aliquod in arbitrio praedicto superius
spec' ex part ipsius Willielmi Holgate observand' performand' perimplend' seu
custodiend' A breach of Non-payment assigned in the Award.
In facto iidem Robertus Radulphus and Willielmus Swire dicunt quod praedict'
Willielmus Holgate non solvit praedict' Roberto Radulpho and Willielmo Swire
vel eorum alicui summam quindecim librarum super praedict' primum diem Decembr'
tunc prox' sequen' dat' arbitrij praed' quas eis vel eorum alicui super eundem
diem solvisse debuit secundum formam and effectum arbitrij praedict' Et hoc
parat' sunt verificare unde pet' Judic' and debitum suum praed' unacum dampnis
suis occone detenconis debiti illius sibi adjudicari etc.

Et praedict' Willielmus Holgate dic' quod placitum praed' praedict' The
Defendant Demurs.
Roberti Radulphi and Willelmi Swire modo and forma superius replicand'
placitat' minus sufficien' in lege existit ad praedict' Robertum Radulphum and
Williemum Swire ad acconem suam praed' versus ipm^ Willielmum Holgate habend'
manutenend quodque ipse ad replicaconem illlam modo and forma praed' placitat'
necesse non habet nec per legem terrae tenetur respondere Et hoc parat' est
verificare Unde pro defectu sufficien' replicaconis in hac part Idem Willielmi
Holgate pet' Judic' and quod praed' Robertus Radulphus and Willielm' Swire ab
accone sua praedicta versus eum habend' praecludantur etc.

Et praed' Robertus Radulphus and Willielm' The Plaintiff joins in Demurrer.
Swire ex quo ipsi sufficien' materiam in lege ad acconem suam praed' versus
praefat' Willielmum Holgate habend' manutenend' superius replicando allegaver'
quam ipsi parat' sunt verificare Quam quidem materiam praedict' Willielm'
Holgate non dedic' nec ad eam aliqualit' respondet sed verificaconem illam
admittere omnino recusavit iidem Robertus Radulphus and Willielm' Swire ut
prius pet' Judic' and debitum suum praed' unacum dampnis suis occone detenconis
debiti illius eis adjudicari etc. Et quia Justic' hic se advisare volunt de and
super praemissis priusquam Judic' suum inde reddant dies dat' est partibus
praedict' hic usque a die Sancti Michaelis in un' mensem de audiendo inde
Judicio suo eo quod iidem Justic' hic inde nondum etc.

Watmough versus Holgate and al'.
AN Action of Debt upon a Bond of 40 l

The Condition was to perform an Award to be made of all Matters between them.

The Defendant pleaded no Award made.

The Plaintiff Replied, and set forth an Award to have been made de praemissis,
(viz.) That the Defendant should pay to the Plaintiff 15 l at or before the
first day of December then next ensuing, which the Arbitrator did judge the
Plaintiff to have sustained in Costs and Damages, by reason of a Suit without
Cause commenced by the Defendant against the now Plaintiff.

And further the Award was, That all Suits and Differences between the said
parties, which were depending before the Date of the Bond should cease and
determine; and in facto dicit, that the Defendant had not paid the said 15 l
upon the 1st day of December in the said Award mentioned.

And to this the Defendant Demurred.

It was Argued, First, That this Award was all of one side; for it does not
appear that there was any Difference between the parties, save the Suit upon
which the Costs are awarded, (viz.) 15 l and that was the Suit of the now
Defendant; and what benefit has he by staying his own Suit, and paying 15 l
for Costs?

Secondly, He assigns the Breach, that the 15 l was not paid upon the 1st day
of December, so it might be paid before; and the Award is to pay it ad vel ante
primum diem Decembris.

It was Answered to the first, That there might be well intended other
Differences, though not set forth.

Again, For ought appears, the Plaintiff in the Action mentioned in the Award
might be subject to have Costs taxed at the prosecution of the then Defendant,
whereas this Award stops the Defendant from applying to the Court for Costs.

As to the second, If Issue be taken upon solvit ad diem, payment before the
Day maintains the Issue.

The Court inclined, that the Award was good. Sed Adjornatur.

Humphreys versus Bethily. Quod vide ante ultimo Termino.
THe Court now delivered their Opinions, That the Doubleness in the Declaration
was cured by Answering, and no Exception can be taken to it upon the General
Demurrer. And the Case in the 1 Roll. Rep. 112. Sanders and Crowly is the same
with this. Judicium pro Quer.

The Lord Lexington versus Clarke and his Wife. Trin. 1 Willielmi and Mariae
Rot. 1539.
IN an Assumpsit the Plaintiff sets forth, That the 25th of March 1685. he had
Demised to William Brady, the former Husband of the now Defendants Wife, diverse
Lands at the Rent of 320 l per Annum to hold at Will, and that there was due
from the said Brady 160 l for Half a years Rent, and that he died possessed of
the Premises, and that the Wife of the now Defendant, while she was sole, and
soon after the death of the said Brady her late Husband, in Consideration that
the Plaintiff would permit her to hold and enjoy the Premises till our
Lady Day next ensuing the decease of her said Husband, and permit her to remove
diverse Posts, Rails and other things, fixed and placed upon the Premises by
her said Husband, did promise to the Plaintiff, That she as well the aforesaid
160 l that then was in arrear (as aforesaid) in the life of her said late
Husband, as also 260 l more, would well and truly pay; and shows, that she did
enjoy the said Premises by the permission of the Plaintiff till Lady Day
aforesaid: And that he suffered her also to take away the things
beforementioned; yet she, when she was sole, nor the Defendant or she, since
her Marriage, did not pay the said Sums of Money, or any part of them, etc.

Upon Non Assumpsit pleaded, a special Verdict was found,

The the Defendants Wife did make the Promise prout, and that she enjoyed the
Lands, and took away the Posts, etc. as in the Declaration is set forth; and
that since she had paid the 160 l to the Plaintiff; but had not paid the 260 l
or any part thereof; and they find, that the said Promise, nor any Memorandum
or Note thereof, was not put into Writing, or signed by the Wife of the
Defendant, or any person authorized by her to do it; and they find, that she
paid the 160 l before the Action brought; and they find the Act of Parliament
in 29 Car. 2. against Frauds and Perjuries; whereby it is Enacted, That no
Action should be brought to charge an Executor or Administrator upon any
special Promise to answer of his own Estate, or upon any Promise to answer for
the Debt, Default or Miscarriage of any other person, etc. unless the
Agreement, or some Memorandum or Note thereof, were by the person, or some
other empowered by him, put into Writing, signed, etc. prout in Statuto; and
made the General Conclusion.

It was Argued for the Plaintiff, that although as to the payment of the 160 l
which was the Debt of her the Defendants late Husband, the Promise might be
void in regard it was not in Writing, according to the said Statute; yet as to
the payment of the 260 l the Promise is not within the Statute, for that is
upon a good Consideration, and her own proper Debt and Damages are only given;
for that the 160 l is found to have been paid.

But by the Opinion of all the Court Judgment was given for the Defendant; for
the Promise as to one part being void, it cannot stand good for the other: For
it is an entire Agreement, and the Action is brought for both the Sums, and
indeed could not be otherwise, without variance from the Promise.

Note, It did not appear by the Record that the Wife was Executrix or
Administratrix to her former Husband.

Kemp versus Cory and al'.
Cornub' ss.
Replevin.
JOHANNES CORY nuper de West-Putford in Com' Devon' gen' Johannes Cock nuper de
ead' Yeoman and Willielmus Cock nuper de Launceston in Com' Cornub' praed'
Yeoman sum^ fuer' ad respondend' Willielm' Kempe Edwardo Laundry and Edwardo
Cheapman de placito quare ceperunt averia ipsorum Willielmi Kempe Edwardi
Laundry and Edwardi Cheapman and ea injuste detinuer' contra vad' and pleg'
etc. Et unde iidem Willielmus Kempe Edwardus Laundry and Edwardus Cheapman per
Willielmum Crown Attorn' suum queruntur quod praedict' Johannes Cory Johannes
Cock and Willielmus Cock decimo nono die Junij anno regni domini Regis and
dominae Reginae nunc primo apud Blisland in quodam loco ibidem (vocat' Fludder
Park alias Bladder Park) ceper' Tres Juvencas, and unam Equulam.
averia videlicet tres Juvencos quatuor Juvencas and unam Equulam ipsorum
Willielmi Kempe Edwardi Laundry and Edwardi Cheapman and ea injuste detinuer'
contra vad' and pleg' quousque etc. Unde dic' quod deteriorat' sunt Et dampn'
habent ad' valenciam december librarum Et inde produc' sectam etc.

Avowry and Conuzance for Rent by the Heir of the Lessor, upon a Lease of a
Third part of a Farm for 99 years, if A.B. and C. or either of them shall so
long live. The Avowants Father seized in Fee of a Third part of a Message. etc.
Et praed' Johannes Cory Johannes Cock and Willielmus Cock per Thomam Horwell
Attorn' suum ven' and defend' vim and injuriam quando etc. Et idem Johannes
Cory in jure suo proprio been advocat and praed' Johannes Cock and Willielmus
ut Ballivi praed' Johannis Cory been cogn' capconem averiorum praedictorum in
praed' loco in quo etc. Et just etc. quia dic' quod idem locus in quo
supponitur capconem averiorum illorum fieri continet and praed' tempore quo
supponitur capconem averiorum illorum fieri continebat in se viginti acras
terrae cum pertin' in Blisland praedict' quodque diu ante praed' tempus quo
etc. Quidam Johannes Cory gen' pater praed' Johannis Cory modo Advocan' fuit
seisit' in dominico suo ut de feodo de and in tercia part cujusdam mesuagij
and tenementi (vocat' Trewint in Blisland) praed' unde praed' viginti acrae
terrae in quibus etc. sunt and praed' tempore quo etc Necnon a tempore cujus
contrarii memoria hominum non existit fuer' parcell' praedictoque Johanne Cory
patre sic inde seisit' existen' ipse idem Johannes Cory pater ante praedict'
tempus quo etc. scilicet tricesimo die Septembris anno regni domini Caroli
secundi nuper Regis Angl' decimo nono apud Blisland praed' And demised for 99
years, if A.B. etc. or either of them should so long live.
dimisit and ad firmam tradidit cuidam Jacobo Robyns Executoribus
Administratoribus and Assign' suis praed' terciam partem praed' mesuagij and
tenementi (vocat' Trewint) scituat' jacen' and existen' infra paroch' de
Blisland alias Bliston in Com' Cornub' and nuper in tenura and occupacone
Johannae Smith Vid' assign' vel assign' ejus habend' and tenend' praed' Jacobo
Robyns Executoribus Administratoribus and Assign' suis pro and duran' pleno
tempore and Termino nonaginta and novem annorum tunc prox' sequen' plenar'
complend' and finiend' si Thomasina Robyns and Maria Robyns filiae praed'
Jocobi Robyns ac Johannes Robyns filius Roberti Robyns gen' defunct' fratris
praed' Jacobi Robyns vel aliquis vel alter eorum tam diu vivere contingeret
Reddend' and solvend' proinde annuatim durante dicto Termino praed' Reddendum.
Johanni Cory patri haeredibus and assign' suis annual' reddit' vel summam
triginta and trium solidorum and quatuor denar' legalis monet' Angl' ad quatuor
Festa vel dies soluconis reddit' in anno maxim usual' videlicet Natalis Domini
Dei Annunciaconis Beatae Mariae Virginis Nativitatis sancti Johannis Baptistae
and Festi sancti Michaelis Archi per aequas and aequales porcones fore
dividend' and solvend' durante dicto Termino Virtute cujus dimissionis praed'
Jacobus Robyns in praedictam terciam partem tenementorum praedictorum cum
pertin' intravit and fuit inde possessionat' Entry into the Premises.
praedictoque Jacobo de praedicta tercia part tenementorum praedictorum cum
pertin' possessionat' existen' ac praed' The Father being seized of the
Reversion, died seized.
Johanne Cory patre se revercone inde sic ut praefertur seisit' existen' idem
Johannes Cory pater postea and ante praed' tempus quo etc. apud paroch' de
Blisland praed' de revercone praed' terciae partis tenementorum praedictorum
cum pertin' unde ande. obiit inde seisit' per quod reverco praed' terciae
partis tenementorum praedictorum cum pertin' unde etc. descendebat praed'
Descent to the Avowant, as Heir at Law.
Johanni Cory modo Advocan' ut filio and haeredi praed' Johannis Cory patris
per quod idem Johannes Cory modo advocan' fuit and adhuc est de revercone
praed' Who is seized of the Reversion.
terciae partis tenementorum praedictorum cum pertin' unde etc. seisit' Et quia
tres libr' sex solid' and octo denar' de praed' reddit' triginta and trium
solidor' and quatuor denar' pro duobus annis finitis ad Festum Natalis Domini
Anno Dn^i MDCLXXXVIII. ante praed' And for Rent arrear distrained.
tempus quo etc. necnon eodem tempore quo etc. eidem Johanni Cory modo Advocan'
aretro fuer' and non solut' idem Johannes Cory in Jure suo proprio been advocat
Et praed' Johannes Cock and Willielmus ut Ballij praed' Johannis Cory modo
Advocan' been cogn' capconem averiorum praedictorum in praed' loco in quo etc.
ut in and super praed' In the Lands subject to the Distress.
terciam partem tenementorum praedictorum eidem Jacobo Robyns ut praefertur
dimiss. pro eisdem tribus libris sex solid' and octo denar' de reddit' praed'
in forma praed' aretro existen' Et just etc. An Averment of the Lessees Life.
Cum hoc quod iidem Johannes Cory Johannes Cock and Willielmus verificare
volunt quod praed' Johannes Robyns adhuc superstes and in plena vita existit
videlicet apud paroch' de Blisland praed' etc.

Bar to the Avowry.
Et praed' Willielmus Kempe Edwardus Laundry and Edwardus Cheapman dicunt quod
nec praed' Johannes Cory modo advocan' ratione praeallegat' capconem averiorum
praedictorum justam advocare neque praed. Johannes Cock and Willielmus Cock
eadem ratione ut Ballij ipsius Johannis Cory capconem averiorum praed' in
praedicto loco in quo etc. justam cognoscere debent quia dicunt quod been and
verum est quod praed' Confesses the Seisin of the Father of one Third.
Johannes Cory pater praed' Johannis Cory modo Advocan' seisit' fuit in
dominico suo ut de feodo de and in tercia part praedicti mesuagij and
tenementi (vocat' Trewint) prout iidem Johannes Cory modo Advocan' Johannes
Cock and Willielmus Cock superius allegaver' set iidem Willielmus Kempe
Edwardus Laundry and Edwardus Cheapman dicunt quod ante praed' tempus quo etc.
quidam Willielmus Spry gen' seisit' fuit in dominico suo ut de feod' And that
J.S. was seized of the other two parts.
de and in duabus aliis terciis partibus praedicti mesuagij sive tenementi
(vocat' Trewint) unde praed' viginti acr' terrae in quibus etc. sunt and praed'
tempore quo etc. necnon a tempore cujus contrarij memoria hominum non existit
fuer' parcell' praedictoque Willielmo Spry sic inde seisit' existen' ipse idem
Willielmus Spry ante praed' And that J.S. Licensed the Defendant to put in
their Cattle.
tempus quo etc. scilicet primo die Marcij anno regni domini Regis and dominae
Reginae nunc primo supradicto apud Blisland praed' dedit licentiam eisdem
Willielmo Kempe Edwardo Laundry and Edwardo Cheapman ad ponend' averia
praedicta in praedicto loco in quo etc. ad herbam ibidem crescen' depascen'
Virtute cujus licentiae iidem Willielmus Kempe Edwardus Laundry and Edwardus
Cheapman ante praed' tempus capconis averiorum praedictorum etc. posuer' averia
sua praed' in praed' locum in quo etc. ac averia illa fuer' Which they did.
in praed' loco in quo etc. quousque praed' Johannes Cory modo Advocan'
Johannes Cock and Willielmus Cock decimo nono die Junij anno regni domini
Regis and dominae Reginae nunc primo apud Blisland praed' ceperunt eadem averia
ipsorum VVillielmi Kempe Edwardi Laundry and Edwardi Cheapman videlicet in
praedicto loco (vocat' Fludder Park al' Bladder Park) and ea injuste detinuer'
contra vad' and pleg' quousque etc. prout praed' Willielmus Kempe Edwardus
Laundry and Edwardus Cheapman superius versus eos quer' Et hoc parat' sunt
verificare unde ex quo praed' Johannes Cory Johannes Cock and Willielmus
Cock capconem averiorum praed' cogn' iidem Willielmus Kempe Edwardus Laundry
and Edwardus Cheapman petunt Judicium and dampna sua occasion capconis and
injuste detenconis Averiorum praedictorum sibi adjudicari etc.

Et praedicti Johannes Cory Johannes Cock and Willielmus Cock dicunt quod
praedictum placitum praedictorum VVillielmi Kempe Edwardi and Edwardi superius
ad advocare ipsius Johannis Cory and ad cogniconem ipsorum Johannis Cock and
Willelmi Cock modo and forma praedict' superius in barram placitat' minus
sufficien' Demurrer to the Bar.
in lege existunt ad ipsum Johannem Cory ab advocare ac ad praedict' Johannem
Cock and Willielmum Cock a cognicone suis praedict' versus praefat'
VVillielmum Kempe Edwardum and Edwardum habend' praecludend' quodque ipsi ad
placitum illud modo and forma praedict' placitat' necesse non habent nec per
legem terrae tenentur respondere Et hoc parat' sunt verificare unde pro defectu
sufficien' placiti in barram ad advocare and cogn' praedict' in hac part iidem
Johannes Cory Johannes Cock and Willielmus Cock pet' Judicium and retorn'
averiorum praedictorum unacum dampnis etc. sibi adjudicari etc.

Et praedict' Willielmus Kempe Edwardus Laundry and Edwardus Cheapman ex quo
ipsi sufficien' materiam in lege ad praed' Joynder in Demurrer.
Johannem Cory ab advocare suo praedict' and ad praedict' Johannem Cock and
VVillielmum Cock a just cognoscend' capconem averiorum praedictorum in
praedicto loco in quo etc. praecludend' superius allegaver' quam ipsi parat'
sunt verificare Quam quidem materiam praedict' Johannes Cory Johannes Cock and
Willielmus Cock non dedic' nec ad eam aliqualit' respond' set verificaconem
ill' admittere omnino recusant pet' Judicium and dampna sua occone capconis and
injuste detenconis averiorum praedictorum sibi adjudicari etc. Et quia Justic'
hic se advisare volunt de and super praemissis praedict' priusquam Judicium
inde reddant dies dat' est partibus praedict' hic usque a die Sancti Michaelis
in tres Septimanas de audiend' inde Judicio suo eo quod iidem Justic' hic inde
nondum etc.

Kempe versus Cory and al'.
IN a Replevin the Plaintiff declared for the taking of his Cattle the 19th of
June 1 VVillielmi and Mariae at D. in a place called Fludder Park.

The Defendant avows; for that the locus in quo contains twenty Acres, and
says that he was seized of a Third part of a Message and Tenement called
Trewint, of which the said twenty Acres are, and for time whereof, etc. were
parcel; and that he being so seized long before the taking, demised the said
Third part of the said Message and Tenement to one James Robyns, to have and
to hold for 99 years at the yearly Rent of 1 l 13 s and 4 d payable Quarterly
during the said Demise. And that the said Robyns entered, and for two years Rent
arrear at the Feast of the Nativity, in the Year of our Lord 1688. he
distrained the Cattle in the Declaration.

The Plaintiff Replied in Bar of the Avowry, and Confessed the Seisin of a
Third part of the said Message and Tenement, and the Lease prout etc. but
says, that before the taking one William Spry was seized in his Demesne, as of
Fee, of the other two parts of the said Message and Tenemeni called Trewint,
of which the said twenty Acres are parcel. And he being so seized, the said
William Spry, before the time of the taking, did give License to the Plaintiff
to put his Cattle into the said twenty Acres, and he put them in by the said
License; where they continued till the Plaintiff took them, and detained them
prout, etc.

To this the Avowant Demurred.

It was held clear by the Court, That the Third part and two parts, being
undivided, the Avowant could not Distrain the Cattle of him that had the Two
parts, or the Cattle of any one which were put in by his License upon any part
of the Land.

But Pollexfen Chief Justice doubted, in regard the Avowry was of the taking in
praedicto loco in quo ut in and super praedict' tertiam partem tenementi
praedict', Whether the Plaintiff should not have traversed absque hoc, that the
taking was in tertia part tantum, and shown in the Inducement to such traverse
how they held in Common? Vide More and Newman's Case in Hobart 80, 103. Et
Adjornatur.

Tovey versus Pitcher.
Midd'x ss.
Covenant against an Assignee of an Executrix.
THOMAS PITCHER nuper de VVestm' in Com' praedict' gen' Assign' Susannae Gill
Executric' Testamenti and ult' volunt' Richardi Gill nuper dict' Richardi Gill
of the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields aforesaid Vintner, sum' fuit ad
respond' Christianae Tovey de placito quod teneat ei convencon' inter predict'
Christian' and praefat' Ric' in vita sua factam secundum vim formam and
effectum quarundam Indenturarum inde inter eos confect' The Plaintiff possessed
of a Term for years yet in being.
etc. Et unde eadem Christiana per Carolum Draper Attorn' suum dicit quod cum
ipsa praedict' Christiana decimo quinto die Julij Anno Domini Millesimo
sexcentesimo octogesimo and extunc hucusque fuit and adhuc existit
possessionat' de duobus mesuag' sive tenement' cum pertin' in paroch' Sancti
Martini in Campis in Com' Midd' praedict' pro major' Termino tunc and adhuc
ventur' Et sic inde possessionat' existen' praed' Christiana postea scilicet
eodem decimo quinto die Julij Anno Millesimo sexcentesimo octogesimo supradict'
apud praedict' paroch' Sancti Martini in Campis in Com' Midd' praed' per
quandam Indentur' factam inter eandem Christian' per nomen Christianae Tovey de
paroch' sancti Martini in Campis in Com' Midd' Vid' ex una part Et praedict'
By Indenture demised to the Testator.
Richardum Gill per nomen Richardi Gill de paroch' sancti Martinis in Campis
praedict' Vintner ex altera part cujus alteram partem sigillo praed' Richardi
signat' eadem Christiana hic in Cur' profert cujus dat' est eisdem die and anno
pro and in consideracon' annual' reddit' and convencon' postea in Indentur'
praed' reservat' menconat' and content' ex tenen' vel less. part and vice
solvend' faciend' and performand' dimisisset concessisset and ad firmam
tradidisset praefat' Richardo Executor' Administrator' and Assign' suis totum
ill' frontal' mesuag' sive tenement' cum pertin' sicut idem tunc fuit in
occupacon' praed' Richardi vocat' five cognit' per nomen vel signum de le
Fleece scituat' jacen' and existen' in Venella sancti Martini (Anglice St.
Martins Lane) in paroch' sancti Martini in Campis praedict' cum Romaeis
scituat' supra viam Januae (Anglice Gate-way) ducen' in Aream (Anglice vocat'
Moor's Yard) quod quidem mesuag' sive tenement' abuttasset occidental' super
Venellam sacti Martini praed' oriental' super retrorsum mesuag' (Anglice a back
Message) sive tenement' extune imposterum dimissum boreal' super mesuag' sive
tenement' tunc in occupacon' Radulphi Mayor Coach-maker and austral' super
mesuag' sive tenement' tunc in occupacon' Dowdall Campbell Scissor' Ac etiam
totum ill' retrorsum mesuag' (Anglice a back Message) sive tenement' cum
pertin' tunc etiam occupacon' praed' Richardi scituat' jacen' and existen' in
oriental' partem (Anglice the East Side) dicti Frontal' mesuag' sive tenement'
and Frontal' aream praedict' (Anglice vocat' Moor's Yard) simul cum omnibus
viis passag' luminibus esiament' aquarum proficuis commoditat' and pertin'
quibuscunque dictis mesuag' sive tenementis seu eorum alteri spectan' aut
aliquo modo pertinen' Habend' and occupand' Habendum.
dicta Frontal' mesuag' sive tenement' and praemissa cum pertin' adinde
spectan' praefat' Richardo Executor' Administrator' and Assign' suis a Festo
Annunciacon' Beatae Mariae Virgin' tunc ult' praeterit' ante dat' The Term.
Indentur' predict' usque plenum finem and termin' viginti and unius annorum
extunc prox' sequen' and plenar' complend' and finiend' Ac etiam habend' and
occupand' dicta retrorsum mesuag' sive tenement' and praemissa cum pertin'
adinde spectan' praefat' Richardo Executor' Administrator' and Assign' suis ab
and immediate post finem and expiracon' prior' dimission' (Anglice Lease)
ejusdem fact' Habend' for a further Term.
Jacobo Supple quae quidem dimissio determinaret and expiraret in vel ante
Annum Domini nostri Dei (secundum computacon' in Angl' usitat') Millesimum
sexcentesimum octogesimum primum usque plen' finem and terminum Novemdecim
annorum and unius quarter' anni ex tunc prox' sequen' and plenar' complend' and
finiend' Reddend' and solvend' Reddendum.
proinde annuatim and quolibet anno duran' tam longo tempore primi termini
annorum quam dicta dimiss. (Anglice Lease) praefat' Jocobo Supple facta
continuaret eidem Christianae Executor' Administrator' vel Assign' suis annual'
reddit' vel summam trigint' and quinque librar' ad quatuor maxim usual' Festa
seu terminos in Anno (videlicet) Nativitat' sancti Johannis Baptistae sancti
Michaelis Arch'i Natalem Domini nostri Dei and Annunciacon' Beatae Mariae
Virginis per aequas and aequales porcon' Ac etiam reddend' and solvend' proinde
annuatim and quolibet anno durante ultimo termino post finem and expiracon'
dimission' (Anglice Lease) concess. praefat' Jacobo Supple eidem Christian'
Executor' Administrator' vel Assign' suis annual' reddit' sive summam
quadragint' librar' legalis monet. Angl' ad quatuor maxim usual' Festa sive
terminos in anno (videlicet) Natal' Domini nostri Dei Annunciacon' Beatae
Mariae Virgin' Nativitat' sancti Johannis Baptistae and sancti Michaelis Arch'i
per aequas and aequal' porcon' prima solucon' inde incipiend' and faciend' in
tael' dict' Fest' qual' primo and prox' accideret post finem and determinacon'
dictae dimission' praefat' Jacobo Supple factae Proviso semper quod si
accideret dict' Proviso.
annual' reddit' trigint' and quinque librar' and quadragint' librar' aut eorum
alterutr' seu aliqm^ inde parcell' vel eorum alterutrius sore aretro and
insolut' per spacium quatuordecim dierum prox' super vel post aliquos Festival'
dies predict' quibus eadem solvisse debuer' (existen' legittime demandat) qd'
tunc and extunc esset and possit licitum fore ad and pro eadem Christiana
Executor' Administrator' and Assign' suis in dicta dimiss. praemiss. cum
pertin' and in quamlibet vel aliquarum partem eorundem in nomine totius
totalit' Clause of Re-entry.
reintrare and eadem rehabere retiner' and gaudere ut in ejus seu eorum primo
and priori statu seu statubus (praedict' Indentur' aut aliqua re in eadem
content' in contrar' inde in aliquo non obstan') Et preadict' Richardus pro
seipso Executor' Administrator' Covinants.
and Assign' suis and pro quibuslibet eorum convenisset promisisset and
concessisset ad and cum eadem Christiana Executor' Administrator' and Assign'
suis and eorum quibuslibet per Indentur' praed' modo and forma sequen'
(videlicet) Quod ipse praedict' Richardus Executor' Administrator' and Assign'
sui de tempore in tempus and ad omnia tempora extunc imposterum duran' dict'
seperal' terminis per Indentur' To pay the Rent.
praedict' concess. been and fidelit' solverent vel solvi causarent dicta
seperal' reddit' annual' eidem Christian' Executor' Administrator' and Assign'
suis supra dictos seperal' Festival' dies and terminos in anno in quibus iidem
solvi debuissent secundum veram intencon' and propositum Indentur' praed' and
seperal' reservacon' inde prout in eadem Indentura praeantea menconat' and
specificat fuit Et per Indorsament' super Indentur' praed' agreat' fuit per and
inter parts praed' ad and ante sigillacon' and deliberacon' ejusdem Indentur'
Et praed' Richardus pro seipso Executor' Administrator' and Assign' suis
convenisset promisisset and concessisset ad and cum eadem Christiana Executor'
Administrator' and Assign' suis quod ipse praedict' Richardus Executor'
Administrator' and Assign' sui vel eorum aliquis super primu^ diem Januar' in
quolibet anno annuatim duran' Termino viginti and unius annorum in Indentur'
praedict' concess. solverent and deliberarent vel solvi and deliberari
causarent eidem Christian' Executor' Administrator' vel Assign' suis apud vel
in tunc domum menconal' ejusdem Christianae scituat' in paroch' sancti Martini
in Campis in Indentur' praedict' infra script' duodecim plen' quart' utres
(Anglice Bottles) boni and merchandizabil' Vini Hispanici (Anglice vocat'
Canary) prout per eandem Indentur' and Indorsament' inde inter al' before
liquet and apparet Virtute cujus dimission' praedict' Entry and Possession.
Richardus in vita sua in praedict' dimiss. praemiss. intravit and fuit inde
possessionat' Et sic inde possessionat' existen' praedict' The Lessee made his
Will.
Richardus postea scilicet decimo septimo die Julij Anno Dn^i Millesimo
sexcentesimo octagesimo supradicto apud Paroch' and Com' praedict' condidit
testament' and ult' voluntat' sua in script' and per eandem volunt' suam praed'
And made the Assignor his Executrix, and died.
Susannam Executric' ejusdem Testamenti sui constituit and ordinavit Et postea
scilicet vicesimo primo die Octobr' eisdem anno and loco ult' supradict' ipse
praedict' Richardus obiit de and in praedict' dimiss. praemiss. cum pertin'
possessionat' post cujus mortem praedict' Susanna onus execucon' Testamenti
praedict' She proved the Will and entered.
super se suscepit Et ut Executrix Testamenti praedict' in praed. dimiss.
praemiss. cum pertin' intravit and fuit inde possessionat' ratione execucon'
Testamenti praedict' Ipsaque Susanna sic inde possessionat' existen' eadem
Susanna postea scilicet quarto die Junij Anno Domini Millesimo sexcentesimo
octogesimo quinto apud paroch' and Com' praedict' concessit totum Stat' jus
titulum interesse and termin' And assigned to the Defendant.
annorum suum quae ipsa tunc habuit ventur' de and in predimiss. praemiss. cum
pertin' praefat' Thomae Virtute cujus concession' Idem Thomas postea scilicet
eisdem die anno and loco ult' supradict' Who entered, and still is possessed.
in predimiss praemiss. cum pertin intravit and fuit and adhuc existit inde
possessionat' Et eadem Christiana protestando quod ipsa eadem Christiana a
tempore confeccon' Indentur' praed' hucusque been and fidelit' observavit
performavit and perimplevit omnes and singulas convencon' promission' and
concession' in Indentur' praedict' superius specificat' ex part sua observand'
performand' and perimplend' secundum formam and effectum Indentur' praedict'
protestandoque etiam qd' praedict' Thomas post concession' praedict' ei ut
praefertur fact' hucusque non observavit performavit seu perimplevit aliquas
convencon' promission' seu concession' in Indentur' praed' superius specifieat'
ex part sua observand' performand' and perimplend' secundum formam and
effectum Indentur' ill' Breach assigned in the Non-payment of the Rent.
in facto eadem Christiana dicit quod post concession' praedict' eidem Thomae
ut praefertur factam scilicet ad primum diem Januar' anno regni domini Regis
and dominae Reginae nunc primo vigint' and quatuor quartae utr' Vini Hispanici
(Anglice quart Bottles of Canary Wine) per Indorsament' super Indentur'
praedict' reservat' pro duobus annis finit' ad praedict' primum diem Januar'
anno primo supradicto eidem Christian' aretro fuer' insolut' and non deliberat'
Et quod ad Festum Annunciacon' Beatae Mariae Virgin' anno regni dicti domini
Regis and dominae Reginae nunc secundo sexagint' libr' de annual' reddit'
quadragint' librar' praedict' pro uno anno integro and dimid' unius anni finit'
ad praedict' Festum Annunciacon' Beatae Mariae Virgin' anno secundo supradicto
eidem Christianae similit' aretro fuer' and insolut' quodque praedict' Thomas
non solvit nec deliberavit praedict' viginti and quatuor quart' utr' Vini
Hispanici (Anglice Canary Wine) super praedict. primum diem Januar' anno primo
supradicto nec praedict' sexagint' libras seu aliquam inde denar' ad praedict'
Festum Annunciacon' Beatae Mariae Virgin' anno secundo supradict' quas ei ad
eundum diem and Festum solvisse debuit secundum formam and effect' Indentur'
praedict' Et sic eadem Christiana dicit quod praedict' Thomas licet saepius
requisit' convencon' suam praedict' cum eadem Christian' in hac part factam
non tenuit set infregit ac all' ei tenere hucusque contradixit and aduc
contradicit Unde dic' quod deteriorat' est Et dampnum habet ad valenc'
septuagint' libr' Et inde produc' sectam etc.

The Defendant pleads, That he assigned over before any Rent due.
Et praedict' Thomas per Willielmum Pocklington Attorn' suum ven' and defend'
vim and injur' quando etc. Et quoad fraccon' convencon' praedict' in non
solucon' duodecim quart' utr' Vini Hispanici parcell' praedict' viginti and
quatuor utr' in Narr' praedict' superius spec' pro uno anno finit' ad primum
diem Januar' Anno Domini Millesimo sexcentesimo octogesimo octavo and vigint'
libr' de praedict' sexagint' libr' parcell' quae devener' aretro and insolut'
pro dimid' unius anni finit' ad Festum Annunciacon' Beatae Mariae Virgin' anno
regni dictorum domini Regis and dominae Reginae nunc primo supradicto Idem
Thomas dic' quod ipse non potest dedicere accon' praedict' Christianae inde
praedict' nec quod ipse convencon' praedict' in ea part quod ill' duodecim
quart' utr' Vini Hispanici ac praedict' vigint' libr' infregit in forma qua
eadem Christian' per Narracon' suam praed' superius suppon' Et quoad fraccon'
convencon' praed' in non solucon' duodecim quart' utr' Vini Hispanici resid'
praed' vigint' and quatuor quart' utr' Vini Hispanici necnon in non solvend'
quadragint' libr' de praed' sexagint' libr' resid' in Narr' praed' spec' idem
Thomas dic' quod praed. Christian' accon suam praed' inde versus eum habere non
debet quia dic' quod ante iidem duodecim quart' utr' Vini Hispanici aut aliqua
parcell' inde aut eaedem quadragint' libr' pro reddit' Tenementorum praed' cum
pertin' vel aliqua inde parcell' deven' debit' aretro seu solubil' scilicet
decimo quarto die Junij anno regni domini Regis and dominae Reginae nunc primo
supradicto apud parochiam praed' in Com' praed' ipse idem Thomas concessisset
and assignavit cuidam Jacobo Mott de London' gen' totum statum titulum
interesse and termin' annorum quae idem Thomas adtunc habuit ventur' de and in
Tenementis praed' cum pertin' Virtute cujus quidem assignacon' Idem Jacobus
Mott postea scilicet eisdem die and anno in Tenementa praed' cum pertin'
intravit and fuit and adhuc est inde possessionat' pro resid' praedict' Termini
superius in Narr' praed' spec' and hoc parat' est verificare Unde pet' Judicium
si praedict' Christiana accon' suam praedict' inde versus eum habere debeat etc.

Et praedict' Christiana dicit qd' placitum praed' Demurrer to part.
Thomae quoad fraccon' convencon' praedict' in non solucon' praedict' duodecim
quart' utr' Vini Hispanici resid' praedict' vigint' and quatuor quart' utr'
Vini Hispanici necnon in non solvend praedict' quadragint' libr' de praedict'
sexagint' libr' resid' in Narracon' praedict' specificar' superius in barram
placitat' materiaque in eodem content' minus sufficien' in lege existunt ad
ipsam Christian' ab accon' sua praed' versus praefat' Thomam habend'
praecludend' quodque ipsa ad placit' illud modo and forma praed' placitat'
necesse non habet nec per legem terrae tenetur respondere Et hoc parat' est
verificare Unde pro defectu sufficien' respons. in hac part eadem Christian'
pet' Judicium and dampn' sua occon' fraccon' convencon' praedict' sibi
adjudicari etc.

Et praed' Thomas ex quo ipse sufficien' materiam in lege ad praed' Joynder in
Demurrer.
Christianam ab accon' sua praed' versus praefat' Thomam quoad fraccon'
convencon' praed' in non solucon' praed' duodecim quart' utr' Vini Hispanici
resid' praed' viginti and quatuor quart' utr' Vini Hispanici necnon in non
solvend' praed' quadrint' libr' de praed' sexagint' libr' resid' in Narracon'
praed' specificat' habend' praecludend' superius placitando allegavit quam ipse
idem Thomas parat' est verificare Quam quidem materiam praed' Christiana non
dedic' nec ad eam aliqualit' respond' sed verificacon' illam admittere omnino
recusat idem Thomas pet' Judic. Et quod praed' Christiana ab acc^on' sua praed'
inde versus ipsum Thomam habend' praecludetur etc. Ac pro eo quod eadem
Christiana dampna sua occone fracconis convenconis praed' in non soluccon'
praedictorum duodecim quart' Judgment for the other part
utr' Vini Hispanici in placito ipsius Thomae primo superius menconat' ac
praedict viginti libr' per ipsum Thomam in forma praed' superius cogn' Et quia
conveniens est quod unica fiat taxaco' dampnorum pro totis praemissis in uno
brevi specificat' si contingat' Un' taxatio dampnorum.
Judicium pro eadem Christiana versus praefat' Thomam quoad fracconem
convenconis praed' in non solucon' praedictorum duodecim quart' utr' Vini
Hispanici praedictorum viginti' and quatuor quart' utr' Vini Hispanici resid'
ac praedictorum quadraginta librar' de praed' sexaginta libris resid' unde
parts praed' in Judic' Cur' hic' superius se posuer' Cesset brevis de
Inquirend' de dampnis quousque, etc.
reddi Ideo cesset emanac' brevis de Inquirendo de dampnis occone fracconis
convenconis praed' in non solucone praedictorum duodecim quart' utr' Vini
Hispanici in placito ipsius Thomae primo superius menconat' ac praedictorum
viginti librarum ineodem placito per ipsum Thomam in forma praedicta superius
cogn' quousque materia in lege praed' unde parts praed' superius in Judicium
Cur' hic se posuer' terminetur etc. Et quia Justic' hic a advisare volunt' de
and super praemissis Unde parts praedict' in Judicium Cur hic superius se
posuer' priusquam Judicium inde reddant dies inde dat' est partibus praedicts
hic usque -- de audiendo inde Judicio suo eo quod iidem Justic' hic inde nondum
etc.

Tovey versus Pitcher.
IN an Action of Covenant against the Defendant, as Assignee of Susan Gill,
Executrix of Elizabeth Gill, the Plaintiff Declared of a Demise of a Message
to Richard Gill, reserving Rent; and that Gill entered and died possessed, and
that after the said Susan (his Executrix) entered, and the 4th of June 1685.
assigned the Lease to the Defendant, and showed, that the Defendant had not
paid Half a years Rent due on the 1st of January 1689.

The Defendant pleads, That before the said Rent became due, (viz.) the 4th of
June 1689. he granted and assigned all his Estate and Interest in the Premises
to one James Mott of London Gent. who entered by virtue of the said Assignmenr.
and is yet possessed, etc.

And to that the Plaintiff Demurred.

The sole Question was, Whether the Defendant ought to have given Notice to the
Plaintiff of the Assignment. Er Adjornatur.

Lawson versus Haddock.
Cumbr' ss.
Debt upon a Sheriffs Bond.
TIMOTHEUS HADDOCK nuper de Civit' Carlisle in Com' Cumbr' Mercer alias dict'
Timotheum Haddock de Civitat' Carliol' in Comitat' Cumbr' Mercer Sum' fuit ad
respondend' Wilfrido Lawson Bar' Vic' Com' praedicti de placito quod reddat ei
quadraginta libras quas ei debet and injuste detinet etc. Et unde idem
Wilfridus per Thomam Brook Attorn' suum dicit quod cum praedictus Timotheus
vicesimo primo die Aprilis anno regni Regis and Reginae Willielmi and Mariae
secundo apud Carlisle praedict' per quoddam scriptum suum Obligatorium
concessisset se teneri eidem Wilfrido per nomen Wilfridi Lawson Bar' Vic' Com'
praedicti in praedictis quadragintis libris solvend' eidem Wilfrido cum inde
postea requisit' esset praedict' tamen Timotheus licet saepius requisit'
praedictas quadraginta libras eidem Wilfrido nondum reddidit set ill' ei
reddere omnino contradixit and adhuc contradic' unde dic' quod deteriorat' est
Et dampn' habet ad valenciam triginta librarum Et inde produc' sectam etc. Et
profert hic in Cur' scriptum praedict' quod debitum praedict' in forma
praedict' testatur cujus dat' est eisdem die and anno supradictis etc.

Et praedictus Timotheus per Johannem Pattison Attorn' suum ven' Defendant
prays Oyer of the Condition.
and defendit vim and injuriam quando etc. Et pet' auditum scripti praedict. Et
ei legitur etc. petit etiam auditum Condiconis ejusdem scripti Et ei legitur in
haec verba ss. Condico istius Obligaconis talis est quod si super Obligat' The
Condition.
Timotheus Haddock compareat coram dict' domino Rege and Regina in Cancellar'
apud Westm' in Quinden' Paschae prox' futur' ad respondend' dict' domino Rege
and Reginae tam de quodam Contemptu per praefat' Timoth' dict' domino Regi and
Reginae illat' quam de his quae sibi tunc and ibidem objicientur Et ad faciend'
ulterius and recipiend' quod dict' Cur' Cons' in hac part quod tunc^ haec
praesens Obligac' vacua fort and nullius vigoris aliter stet and permaneat in
suo pleno robore vigore and effectu Quibus lectis and auditis idem Timoth' dic'
quod praedict' Wilfridus acconem suam praedict' versus eum habere non debet
Quia dic' The Statute of Hen. the 6th pleaded.
quod per quendam Actum factum in Parliamento domini Henrici nuper Regis Angl'
etc. sexti tent' apud Westm' in Com' Midd' vicesimo quinto die Februarij anno
regni sui vicesimo tertio recitan' in eodem Actu quod dictus Rex consideran'
magnam perjuriam extorcon' and oppress. que tunc praeantea fuerunt in Regno
Angl' per suos Vic' Subvic' and eorum Clericos Coronatores Seneschall'
Franches. Ballivos and Custod' Prison' and al' Officiar' in diversis Com'
istius regni inter alia inactitat' fuit Authoritate ejusdem Parliamenti in
evitacon' omn' tal' extorcon' perjuriar' and oppression' quod nullus Vic' ad
firmam traderet in aliquo modo Com' suum nec aliqua Ballivarum suarum Hundred'
nec Wapentack Et quod praedict. Vic' and omnes al' Officiar' and Ministri
praedicti traderent extra Prisonam omnimod' person' per ipsos aut aliquem eorum
arrestat vel existen' in eorum Custod. virtute alicujus brevis Billae sive
Warranti in aliqua accone personal' aut per causam Indictament' de Transgr'
super rationabili fidejuss. sufficien' personarum habend' sufficien' infra Com'
ubi tal' Prisona sic forent tradit' ad balliv' sive manucapconem ad Custod'
eorum dies in talibus locis qual' praedict. Brevia Billae sive Warrant'
requirerent (tal' person' sive personis quae fuer' sive forent in eorum Custod'
per Condempnacon. Execucon' Capias Utlagat' vel Exco^icacon' securitat' de Pace
and omnibus talibus personis quae fuer' sive forent commiss. ad Custodiam per
spec' Mandat' alicujus Justic' and vagabund' recusan' servire secundum formam
Statut' de laboratoribus tantummodo except') Et quod null' Vic' nec aliquis
Officiar' vel Ministror' praedict' caperent vel capi causarent feu sacerent
aliquam Obligaconem pro aliqua Causa supradicta vel color eorum Officij sed
solummodo sibimetipsis de aliqua persona nec per aliquam personam quae esset in
eorum Custod' per cursum legis Nisi per nomen eorum Officii and super Condicon'
script' quod praedict. Prisonar' compareret ad diem content' Nota.
in dictis Brev' sive Warrant' ac in talibus locis qual' praedict' Brevia
Billae sive Warrant' requirerent Et si aliquis praedict' vel Vic' vel al'
Officiar' aut Ministr' praedict' facerent seu caperent aliquam Obligaconem in
aliqua alia forma color Officiorum suorum quod vacua foret prout in eodem Actu
(inter alia) before liquet and appatet Et idem Timoth' ulterius dic' quod post
edic^onem Actus praedicti Ac praedicto tempore confecconis scripti praedicti
scilicet praedicto vicesimo primo die Aprilis anno secundo supradicto and diu
antea praedictus Wilfridus Lawson suit Vic' praedict' Com' Cumbr' ad officium
illud debit' elect' and praefect' quodque ante confeccon' scripti Obligatorij
praedict' scilicet decimo octavo die Febr' anno regni Regis and Reginae nunc
secundo supradicto quoddam breve eorundem Regis and Reginae de Attachiamento de
Contemptu e Cur' Attachment issued out of Chancery.
Cancellar' ipsorum Regis and Reginae apud Westm' in Com' Midd' tunc existen'
Vic' praedict' Com' Cumbr' direct' emanavit versus eundem Timoth' per quod
quidem breve Praecept' fuit eidem Vic. quod Attach' eundem Timoth' Ita quod
haberet eum coram eisdem domino Rege and domina Regina in Cancellar' sua
praedict' in Quindenam Paschae tunc prox' sequen' ubicunque Cur' ill' tunc
tent' foret in Angl' ad respondend' dictis domino Regi and dominae Reginae tam
de quodam Contemptu per praefat' Timoth' eisdem Regi and Reginae illat' quam de
hiis quae sibi tunc and ibidem objicientur Et ad faciend' ulterius and
recipiend' quod dicti Cur' consideraret in ea part Quod quidem breve postea
and ante retorn' ejusdem scilicet primo die Aprilis anno regni Regis and
Reginae nunc secundo supradicto apud Carlisle praedict' And delivered to the
Sheriff.
in Com' praedicto deliberat' fuit eidem Wilfrido Lawson adtunc Vic' ejus Com'
in forma juris exequend' Virtute cujus quidem brevis idem Vic' postea and ante
confeccon' scripti praed' scilicet eodem vicesimo primo die Aprilis anno
secundo supradicto apud Carlisle praedict' eundem Timoth' per corpus suum
Attachiavit ac ipm^ in Custod' The Defendant arrested.
sua ibidem habuit and detinuit quousque ipse idem Timoth' ac quidam Richardus
Letchat de Civitat' Carliol' in eodem Com' gen' postea scilicet eodem vicesimo
primo die Aprilis anno secundo supradicto apud Carlisle praedict' per script'
Obligatorium praed' sigillis suis signat' and eidem Wilfrido ut factum suum
deliberat' conjunctim and divisim devener' tent' and obligat' eidem Wilfrido in
praedict' quadragint' libris sub Condiconc praedict' pro easiamento and favore
eidem Timoth' de imprisonament' suo praedict' per praedict' Wilfridum
demonstrand' and pro deliberacone sua ab imprisonamento illo habend' and
obtinend' Quod quidem script' Obligatorium idem Wilfridus color Officii sui
praedicti de eodem Timoth' and praefat Richardo contra formam Statuti praedicti
cepit Et sic idem Richardus dicit quod scriptum Obligatorium illud in forma
praedicta and ex causa praedict' fact' vigore Statuti praedicti vacuum in lege
existit Et hoc idem Richardus parat' est verificare Unde pet' Judicium si
praedictus Wilfridus acconem suam praedictam versus eum habere debeat etc.

Et praedictus Wilfridus dic' quod placitum praed' praedict' Timoth' Demurrer
to the Plea.
superius placitat' materiaque in eodem content' minus sufficien' in lege
existunt ad ipsum Wilfridum ab accone sua praed' versus prefat' Timotheum
habend' praecludend' quodque ipse ad placitum illud modo and forma praed'
placitat' necesse non habet nec per legem terrae tenetur respondere Et hoc
parat' est verificare Unde pro defectu sufficien' placiti in hac part Idem
Wilfridus pet' Judicium and debitum suum praedict' una cum dampnis suis occone
detenconis debiti illius sibi adjudicari etc.

Et praed' Timotheus ex quo ipse sufficien' The Plaintiff joins in Demurrer.
materiam in lege ad praedict' Wilfridum ab accone sua praed' versus ipsum
Timotheum habend' praecludend' superius allegavit quam ipse parat' est
verificare Quam quidem materiam praedict' Timotheus non dedic' nec ad eam
aliqualit' respondet set verificaconem ill' admittere omnino recusat ut prius
pet' Judicium Et quod praedict' Wilfridus ab accone sua praedict' versus ipsum
Timotheum habend' praecludatur etc. Et quia Justic' hic se advisare volunt de
and super praemissis praedictis priusquam Judic' inde reddant dies dat' est
partibus praedict' hic usque a die Sancti Michaelis in tres Septimanas de
audiendo inde Judicio suo eo quod iidem Justic' hic nondum etc.

Lawson versus Haddock.
IN an Action of Debt upon a Sheriffs Bond, the Condition was, That the
Defendant should appear coram Rege and Regina in Cancellaria apud Westminster. in
Quinden' Paschae, which was the Return Day of an Attachment issued out of
Chancery against him for a Contempt.

The Defendant pleaded the Statute of 23 H. 6. which (inter alia) Enacts, That
the Sheriffs, etc. should let to Bail such persons as were Arrested and in
their Custody, by virtue of any Writ, Bill or Warrant, in any Action Personal,
or upon any Indictment of Trespass. And upon Condition, that they should appear
at the Day and Place in the Writ, etc. mentioned; and that all Bonds taken in
other Form should be void.

And the Defendant further said, That by an Attachment awarded out of Chancery
against him, the Plaintiff being then Sheriff, was commanded to have the
Defendant coram Rege and Regina in Cancellar' in Quinden' Pasch' ubicunque Cur'
illa tunc foret in Anglia; and the Plaintiff took him by virtue of the said
Writ, and detained him till he had given the said Bond with Condition, as
aforesaid, pro easiamento and favore, etc. Which said Bond the Plaintiff color
Officij took of the Defendant contra formam Statuti etc. and sic dicit quod
scriptum Oblig' vigore Statuti praedict' vacuum in lege existit and hoc parat'
est verificare, etc.

To this the Plaintiff Demurred:

First, The Statute says, That where the party is in Custody by virtue of any
Writ, etc. in any Action, or upon any Indictment of Trespass: And an Attachment
for Contempt out of Chancery, is not within the words of the Statute, in the 3
Cro. John's and Stratford 309. Taken by a Sergeant at Mace upon Process out of
the Grand Sessions, held not within the Statute, in the 3 Leon. 280.

Secondly, The Condition is to appear coram Rege in Cancellar' apud Westminster.
instead of ubicunque, as the Writ is: For this vide Still. 234. Burton and Law,
and Mo. 430. Corbett and Downing.

As to the first the Court inclined, That Attachments out of Chancery were
within the Statute. It Is the constant Practice for Sheriffs to take Bail in
such Cases. Vid. Still. 234. Rolls's Opinion according.

As to the second Point it is true, That such Bonds have been judged void; but
of later times the Court have not been so strict upon the Wording of such
Bonds. And a Case was Cited to have been in B. R. Trin. 22 Car. 2. Rot. 914.
where the Condition of a Sheriffs Bond was to appear coram Justiciariis nostris
de Banco, and not said apud Westminster. and yet held good.

But the Court gave leave to speak further to the Case at Bar.

Williams versus Bond.
A Prohibition to a Suit in the Ecclesiastical Court by the Defendant,
Churchwarden of the Parish Church of St. Peter in Hereford, against the
Plaintiff, charging him with the Repairs of the Chancel of the said Church, as
Owner of the Priory-House, to which Owners it has belonged (as was pretended)
t^^e out of mind to Repair the said Chancel; whereas there never was any such
Custom as the Plaintiff suggested and set forth in his Declaration upon the
Prohibition: And that he had so alleged and pleaded in the Ecclesiastical
Court, to hinder the Proceedings upon and trying such Custom in the Court
Ecclesiastical; which the Judge there refused to admit, but does proceed to
Try, Determine and give Sentence against the Plaintiff upon the said pretended
Prescription, whereas all such Custom ought to be tried at Law, etc.

The Defendant after a Traverse to any Proceedings after the Prohibition
delivered pro Consultatione habend', says, That all the Proprietors of the
said Message called the Priory-House, have Repaired the said Chancel time out
of mind, and hoc parat' est verificare, etc. unde petit Judicium and breve de
Consultatione.

And to this the Plaintiff Demurred.

And the Court were of Opinion, that a Consultation should be granted; for they
may sue upon this Prescription and try it there, as a Suit may be in the
Ecclesiastical Court for a Modus decimandi; and though the Parson is of Common
Right to Repair the Chancel, yet it may be upon a particular man's Estate by
Prescription. Vide 1 Brownl. 16. 1 Roll. 126. Poph. 197. and Latch. 217.

Judith Hanson versus Liversedge.
Ebor' ss.
SAMUEL LIVERSEDGE nuper de Mirfield in Com' praedict' Yeoman alias dict' Debt
upon Bond.
Samuelem Liversedge de Mirfield in Com' Ebor' Panificem Sum' fuit ad
respondend' Judithae Hanson Vid' de placito quod reddat ei Centum libr' quas ei
debet and injuste detinet etc. Et unde eadem Juditha per Thomam Beaumont
Attorn' suum dic' quod cum praedict' Samuel vicesimo quinto die Julij Anno
Domini Millesimo sexcentesimo octogesimo nono apud Wakefield per quoddam
scriptum suum Obligatorium concessiss. se teneri eidem Judithae in praedict'
Centum libr' solvend' eidem Judithae cum inde requisit' fuiss. Praed' tamen
Samuel licet saepius requisit' praedict' Centum libr' eidem Judithae nondum
reddidit set ill' ei hucusque reddere contradixit and adhuc contradic' Unde
dic' quod deteriorat' est and dampn' habet ad valenc' december libr' Et inde
produc' sectam etc. Et profert hic in Cur' scriptum praedict' quod debitum
praedict' in forma praed. testatur cujus dat' est die and anno supradictis etc.

Et praedict' The Defendant craves Oyer of the Condition.
Samuel per Johannem Empson Attornatum suum venit and defendit vim and injuriam
quando etc. Et petit auditum Scripti praed' and ei legitur etc. pet' etiam
auditum Condiconis ejusdem scripti Et ei legitur in haec verba, The Condition
is for the performance of an Award.
The Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above-bounden Samuel
Liversedge his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, for their parts and
behalves, shall and do in all things well and truly stand to, obey, abide,
perform, fulfill and keep the Award, Order, Arbitrament, final End and
Determination of Edward Deane of Batley in the County of York, Clerk, and
Robert Radcliffe of Adwalton in the said County, Gent. Arbitrators
indiff^rently elected and named, as well on the part and behalf of the
abovenamed Samuel Liversedge, as of the abovenamed Judith Hanson, to
arbitrate, award, order, judge and determine, of and concerning all and all
manner of Action and Actions, Cause and Causes of Actions, Suits, Bills, Bonds,
Specialties, Judgments, Executions, Extents, Quarrels, Controversies,
Trespasses, Damages and Demands whatsoever, at any time heretofore had, made,
moved, brought, commenced, sued, prosecuted, done, suffered, committed or
depending, by or between the said parties, or either of them, so as the said
Award be made and in Writing, or by Words of Mouth, and ready to be delivered
to the parties in difference, (or such of them as shall desire the same) on or
before Seven of the Clock in the Afternoon of this present Day, then this
Obligation to be void, or else to remain in full force and virtue. The
Defendant pleads, That the Arbitrators made no Award.
Quibus lectis and audit' ^idem Samuel dic' quod praed' Juditha accon' suam
praed' verse. cum habere non debet Quia dic' quod Arbitrator' praedict' post
confeccon' Scripti praedict' and ante praed' Septimam horam post Meridiem
praed' vicesimi quinti diei Julij Anno Domini Millesimo sexcentesimo octogesimo
nono supradicto nullum fecer' Arbitrium int' ipm^ Samuel' and praefat' Judith'
de and super praemissis in Condicone praedict' superius specificat' Et hoc
parat' est verificare Unde pet' Judicium si praedict' Juditha accon' suam
praedict' versus eum habere debeat etc.

The Plaintiff sets forth an Award made Ore tenus.
Et praedict' Juditha dic' quod ipsa per aliqua praeallegat' ab accone sua
praedict' habend' praecludi non debet quia dic' quod ipsa eadem Juditha diu
ante confeccon' scripti praed. scilicet Termino Sanctae Trin' The Plaintiff
impleaded the Defendant in the Common Bench.
anno regni domini Regis and dominae Reginae nunc primo in Cur' ipsorum Rigis
and Reginae de Banco hic scilicet apud Westm' in Com' Midd' implacitasset ipsum
Samuel' in quodam placito Transgr' super Casum pro eo quod idem Samuel' dixiss.
de praefat' Juditha diversa scandalosa Anglicana verba Quod quidem placitum
tempore confecconis ejusdem scripti fuit penden' and indeterminat' quodque
Arbitrator' praedict accept' super se onere Arbitrij praedict' immediate post
confeccon' scripti illius scilicet praedict' Vicesimo quinto die Julij Anno
Domini Millesimo sexcentesimo octogesimo nono supradicto and ante Septimam
horam post Meridiem ejusdem diei apud Wakefield praedict' The Award made Ore
tenus.
Arbitrium suum ore tenus de and super praemissis in Condicone praed' superius
menconat' fecer' and publicaver' ac partibus praedict' ibidem ante horam illam
declaraver' modo and forma sequen' videlicet quod pred' Samuel solveret eidem
Judithae duodecim pecias Aurij cuneat' (vocat' Guinea's) ac omnes tal' denar'
summ' qual' eadem Juditha erogasset seu expendisset in and circa prosecucon'
plac' praed' quodque immediate post hujusmodi solucon' alt' tam praedicta
Juditha quam praedict' Samuel' daret alteri eorum per scriptum general'
relaxacon' omnium Accon' causar' Accon' demand' quorumcunque usque praedict'
tempus confecconis Scripti praedict' inter eos moven' Et eadem Juditha ulterius
dic' quod tempore confecconis scripti Obligatorij praed' and Arbitrij praedicti
quaelibet pecia hujusmodi Auri (vocat' Guine'as) se attingebat in valor ad
viginti un' solid' and sex denar' quodque adtunc ac praed' tempore confeccon'
Arbitrij praed' praedicta Juditha erogavit and expendidit in and circa
prosecucon' placiti praed' summam undecim libr' septem solid' and septem denar'
videlicet apud Wakefield praed' Unde praed' Samuel' postea scilicet primo die
Augusti anno regni Regis and Reginae hunc primo apud Wakefield praed' Notice of
the Award.
habuit noticiam posteaque scilicet vicesimo die ejusdem Augusti apud Wakefield
praedict' eadem Juditha requisivit eundem Samuel' ad solvend' eidem Judithae
tam praedict' And requested the performance of it.
duodecim pecias Auri vel valor' inde quam praedict' undecim libr' seprem
solid' and septem denar' protestando autem quod praedict' Samuel non solvit
eidem Judithae praedict' summam undecim libr' septem solid' and septem denar'
In facto eadem Juditha dic' quod praedict' Samuel non solvit eidem Judithae
praedict' duodecim pecias Auri cunat' (vocat' Guinea's) seu valor' inde juxta
forma and effectum Arbitrij illius Et hoc parat' est verificare Unde pet'
Judicium and debitum suum praed' unacum dampnis suis occone detenconis debiti
illius sibi adjudicari etc.

Et praedict' Samuel dic' quod praedict. placitum praedict' Demurrer to the
Replication.
Judithae superius replicando placitat' ac materia in eodem content' minus
sufficien' in lege existunt ad praedict' Judith' ad accon suam praedict' versus
ipm^ Samuel' habend' menutenend' quodque ipse ad placitum illud modo and forma
praed' replicat' necesse non habet nec per legem terrae tenetur aliquo modo
respondere Et hoc parat' est verificare Unde pro defectu sufficien'
replicaconis in hac part Idem Samuel ut prius pet' Judicium Et quod praedict'
Juditha ab accone sua praed' habend' praecludatur etc.

Et praedict' Juditha ex quo ipsa sufficien' Joynder in Demurrer.
materiam in lege ad acconem suam praedict' versus praefat' Samuel' habend'
manutenend' superius replicando allegavit quam ipsa parat' est verificare Quam
quidem materiam idem Samuel non dedic' nec ad eam aliqualit' respond' sed
verificacon' ill' admittere omnino recusat ut prius pet' Judicium and debitum
suum praedict' unacum dampnis suis occone detenconis debiti ill' sibi
adjudicari etc. Et quia Justic' hic se advisare volunt de and super praemissis
priusquam Judicium inde reddant dies dat' est partibus praedict' hic usque a
die Paschae in quindecim dies de audiendo inde Judicio eo quod iidem Justic'
hic inde nondum etc.

Judith Hanson versus Liversedge.
IN an Action of Debt upon a Bond, the Condition was to perform the Award of
two Arbitrators in Writing, or by word of Mouth.

The Defendant pleaded Nullum fecerunt arbitrium.

The Plaintiff replies, That at the time of the Bond and Award she had an
Action against the Defendant for scandalous Words, and that the Arbitrator did
make, declare and publish their Award in manner and form following, (viz.) That
the Defendant should pay to the Plaintiff 12 Guinea's, and all such Moneys as
she had expended circa prosecutionem placiti praedict'; and that the parties
should give mutual Releases of all Matters to the Date of the said Bond, and
says, that she laid out in the said Suit 11 l 7 s and demanded the said Sums
of Money of the Defendant, and protestando that the Defendant had not paid her
the 11 l 7 s dicit in facto that he had not paid the 12 Guinea's awarded, as
aforesaid, and hoc parat' est verificare, etc.

To this the Defendant Demurred.

And Pemberton for the Defendant said,

First, This Award, as set forth, appears to be void; for it is to pay the
Charges expended circa placit' praed', and the Award does not mention any Suit
before; and though the Plaintiff in her Inducement says, That she had an Action
for Words against the Defendant then depending, that will not help it, for that
is no part of the Award; but the Award in the Form as it is set forth is
unintelligible, there being no Suit mentioned before to refer placit' praedict'
unto.

Secondly, It Is not sufficient to Award payment of the Charges in such a Suit,
it being altogether uncertain what the Sum will amount to.

Thirdly. It ought to have been shown, that the Plaintiff had a Cause of Action
in the Action that is mentioned to have been brought against the Defendant for
Slander; and so is Spigurnell's Case in Siderfin 1st Part 12.

Curia. As to the first, if the Award were in Writing in such form of
Expression, it could not be good; but he which sets forth an Award by Parol is
not tied to the words, for the precise words might be very difficult to prove;
but it is sufficient to show the effect and substance of what was awarded by
Word of Mouth, and it is sufficiently show that this Award was made concerning
that Action of Slander.

For the Second, the Court held, that the Award was good; for it may be easily
reduced to a Certainty, when it is made appear what was laid out in that Suit,
as in 1 Roll. Abr. 251. Beale and Beale, and in the 3 Cro. 383. to pay the
Charges of such a Voyage held a good Award.

Thirdly, The Plaintiff need not show that there was Cause of Action, for that
is left to the Arbitrators, and they have power to award Charges thereupon,
though in point of Law there were no Cause of Action; for the Parties have made
the Arbitrators their Judges.

And the Court were not satisfied with the Opinion Reported by Syderfin in
Spigurnell's Case, and said, he was then a young Reporter. Whereupon Judicium
pro Quer'.

Major and probi homines de Guldeford versus Clarke.
Surr' ss.
JOHANNES CLARKE nuper de Guldeford' Debt upon a By Law made by a Corporation
by Prescription.
in Com' praedict' Dyer Sum' fuit ad respondend' Majori and probis hominibus
Villae de Guldeford' in Com' Surr' de placito quod reddat eis viginti libras
legalis monet' Angl' quas eis debet and injuste detinet etc. Et unde inde iidem
Major and probi homines Villae de Guldeford' praed' per Henr' Dyve Attorn' suum
dic' quod cum praedict' Villa de Guldeford' in dicto Com' Surr' est antiqua
Villa quodque probi homines ejusdem Villae a tempore cujus contrarij memoria
hominum non existit fuer' Antiqua Villa.
and adhuc existunt corpus Corporat' and Politicum in re facto and nomine per
nomen Majoris and proborum homin' Villae de Guldeford' in Com' Surr' A
Corporation time out of Mind.

To implead and be impleaded.


and per idem nomen usi fuer' placitare and implacitari respondere and
responderi Cumque etiam infra Vill' ill' habetur and a toto tempore supradict'
cujus contrar' memoria hom' non existit habebatur talis consuetudo usitat' and
approbat' quod Major and probi homines Villae praedict' pro tempore existen'
vel major pars eorundem in Com' A Custom to make Bylaws.
Concil' congregat' and assemblat' usi fuer' and consuever' facere and
constituere leges and constitucones pro bono regimine and gubernacone Villae
praed' and inhabitan' ejusdem and poenas and poenalitat' For good Government of
the Corporation.

And to impose Penalties. Custom to elect a Bailiff Annually.


super personas contra leges and constitucones ill' delinquen' imponere Cumque
etiam infra Villam praedict' fuit antiquus Officiarius annuatim and quolibet
anno super diem Lunae prox' post Festum Sancti Michaelis Archi' pro uno anno
tunc sequen' per Majorem and probos homines praed' elect' (vocat' Balliv')
ejusdem Villae ad negotia ejusdem Villae peragend' Cumque etiam praed' Major
and probi homines Villae praed' The By-Law set forth.
secundo die Octobris anno regni domini Caroli secundi nuper Regis Angl' etc.
tricesimo quarto apud Vill' de Guldeford praedict' in Com' Consilio adtunc and
ibidem congregat' and assemblat' ordinaver' and stabiliver' quod si aliquis
inhabitan' ejusdem Villae tunc postea secundum antiquum usuag' and consuetud'
ejusdem Villae foret debite elect' ad officium Ballivi ejusdem Villae and
recusaret acceptare and super se suscipere idem officium Ballivi ejusdem Villae
sive idem Officium exequi quod tunc super vel recusacon' sive non acceptacon'
ejusdem Officij quaelibet tal' person' forisfaceret and solveret Majori and
probis hominibus praedict' Forfeiture for the Breach.
summam viginti librar' legalis monet' Angl' ad usum incorporacon' praedict'
Cumque post confeccon' ordinacon' The Defendant elected Bailiff.
praedict' scilicet tricesimo die Septembris anno regni domini Willielmi and
dominae Mariae nunc Regis and Reginae Angl' etc. primo apud Villam de Guldeford
praedict' praed' Johannes Clarke adtunc and diu antea and semper postea
hucusque existen' inhabitan' infra eandem Villam and liber homo ejusdem Villae
secundum antiquum usuag' and consuetud' ejusdem Villae per Majorem and probos
homines ejusdem Villae debite elect' suit fore Ballivum ejusdem Villae pro anno
tunc prox' For the year then next following.
sequen' de quibus idem Johannes adtunc and ibidem notic' habuit and adtunc and
ibidem requisit' fuit ad Officium ill' acceptand' and exequend' quodque idem
Johannes adtunc and ibidem and abinde hucusque ad Officicium ill' The Defendant
refused to execute the Office.
acceptand' and exequend' omnino recusavit and adhuc recusat per quod acc^o
accrevit eisdem Major' and probis hominibus Villae de Goldeford' praed' ad
exigend' and habend' de praefat' Johanne praed' viginti libr' praed' tamen
Johannes licet saepius requisit' praedict' viginti libr' praefat' Majori and
probis hominibus Villae de Guldeford' praed' nondum reddidit sed ill' eis
hucusque solvere omnino contradixit and adhuc contradic' ad dampn' ipsorum
Majoris and proborum homin' Villae praed' december librarum Et inde produc' sectam
etc.

The Defendant pleads the Act of Parliament made 13 Car 2. and that he had not
taken the Sacrament within a year before his Election, so that he wasl not
capable of his Office.
Et praedict' Johannes Clarke per Robertum Waring Attorn' suum ven' and defend
vim and injur' quando etc. Et dicit quod praed' Major and probi homines Villae
de Guldeford' praed' acc^onem suam praedict' versus eum habere non debent quia
dicit quod per quendam Actum in Parliamento domini Car' Secundi nuper Regis
Angl' apud Westm' in Com' Midd' anno regni sui tertiodecimo tent' edit' and
provis' inactitat' suit Authoritate ejusdem Parliamenti inter al' quod
Commissiones ante vicesimum diem Februarij tunc prox' emanat' forent sub Magno
Sigillo Angl' talibus personis quales dictus nuper Rex appunctuaret pro
execucone potestatum and authoritatum in eodem Actu postea express. and quod
omnes and quaelibet personae nominat' Commissionar' The Act set forth.
in praedict' Commissionibus respective vigore praedicti Actus forent
Commissionar' respective pro and infra seperal' Civitates Corporacones and
Burgos and Quinque-Portus and eorum Membra and al' Villas portus habentes
(Anglice Port-Towns) infra Regn' Angl' Dom' Walliae and Villam de Barwick super
Tweedam pro quibus ipsi respective nominarentur and appunctuarentur Et ulterius
per eundem Actum inactitat' existit Authoritate praedict' quod omnes personae
qui super vicesimum quartum diem Decembris Millesimo sexagesimo primo forent
Majores Aldermanni Recordatores Ballivi Clerici Vill' (vocat' Town Clerk)
homines de Communi Consilio (Anglice Common Councilmen) and al' personae tunc
geren' aliquod officium vel officia Magistratus (Anglice of Magistrates) sive
locos vel fiducias vel al' negocium (Anglice Employment) respicien' ad (Anglice
relating to) vel concernen' gubernaconem dictorum respectivorum Civitat'
Corporac' and Burgor' and Quinque-Portuum and eorum Membrorum and al' Villarum
portus habentium ad aliquod tempus ante vicesimum quintum diem Martij Millesimo
sexcentesimo sexagesimo tercio cum inde requirerentur per dictos respectivos
Commissionarios vel aliquos tres vel plures eorum caperent Juramenta ligeanciae
and supraemaciae and sacramentum in eodem Actu specificat' Ac etiam ad idem
tempus public subscriberent coram eisdem Commissionar' vel aliquibus tribus
eorum Declaracon' in eodem Actu specificat' Et ulterius per eundem Actum
inactitat' existit Authoritate pred' quod pred' respectivi Commissionar' vel
aliqui tres vel plures eorum respective haberent potestatem durante
continuacone suarum respectivarum Commissionum administrare sacr' praedict' and
offerre dictam declaraconem dictis personis per eundem Actum requisitis capere
and subscribere eadem ab and post expiraconem dictarum respectiv' Commissionar'
(praed' tribus sacr' and declaratione de tempore in tempus administrarentur and
offerentur talibus personae and personis quales per veram intentionem ejusdem
Actus vel alicujus Clausulae in eodem content' capere deberent eadem per tales
person' vel personas respective quales per Chartas vel Usuagia dictorum
respectivorum Civitat' Corporacon' and Burgor' and Quinque Port' and Membror'
suorum and aliarum Villarum portus habentium deberent administrate Sacramentum
pro debita execucone dictorum locorum sive officiorum respective and in defalt'
talium per duos Justiciarios Pacis dict' Civitat' Corporacon' and Burgor' and
Quinque port' and eorum Membror' and al' Villar' portus habentium pro tempore
existen' si qui tales forent vel aliter per duos Justic' Pacis pro tempore
existen' respectivorum Comitat' ubi predict' Civitates Corporacones vel Burgi
sive Quinque portus vel eorum Membra vel al' Villae portus habentes essent) Ac
per eundem Actum ulterius inactitat' existit authoritate praedict' quod ab and
post expiracon' dictarum Commission' nulla persona sive nullae personae
imposter' extunc postea locaretur eligeretur seu deligeretur (Anglice should be
Chosen) seu locarentur eligerentur seu diligerentur (Anglice should be Chosen)
in vel ad aliqua Officia vel loca praedict' quae infr' unum annum prox' ante
talem eleccon' vel deleccon' (Anglice Choice) non cepisset seu cepissent
Sacramentum Coenae Dominicae secundum ritus Ecclesiae Anglicanae and quod
quaelibet talis persona and personae sic locata electa vel delecta vel locatae
electae sive delectae similit' caperet seu caperent praedict' tria sacramenta
and subscriberent praed' declaracon' ad idem tempus quando Sacramentum pro
debita Execuc^one dictorum locor' and officior' respective administraretur Et
in defalt' inde quaelibet tal' locatio elecco and delecco per eundem Actum
inactitat' and declarat' existit fore vacua Et per eundem Actum ulterius
inactitat' existit authoritate pred' quod potestates concess. dictis
Commissionariis Virtute ejusdem Actus continuarent and essent in vigore usque
vicesimum quintum diem Marcij anno Domini Millesimo sexcentesimo sexagesimo
tertio and non longius prout per eundem Actum before apparet Et idem Johannes
Clarke ulterius dic' quod ipse est and tempore praed' elecconis ipsius Johannis
fore Balliv' praed' Villae de Guldeford' in Narracone praed' superius fieri
supponit' fuit protestan' Subditus dict' domini Regis and dominae Reginae nunc
dissentiens ab Ecclesia Anglicana quodque ipse idem Johannes Clarke ad aliquod
tempus infr' The Defendant has not taken the Sacrament within a year before
his Election.
unum annum prox' ante tempus Eleccon' ipsius Johannis fore Ballivum praed'
Villae de Guldeford' praed' per Narraconem praed' superius fieri supponit' non
cepisser Sacramentum Coenae Dominicae secundum ritus Ecclesiae Anglicanae per
quod vigore praed' Statuti idem Johannes Clarke tempore Elecconis praed' in
Narracone praed' superius fieri supponit' So that he is become incapable of it.
fuit inhabil' and incapax fore eligend' ad praed' locum sive officium Ballivi
Villae de Guldeford' praed' and praed' elecco ipsius Johannis fore Ballivum
ejusdem Villae per Narraconem praed' superius supponit' vigore Actus praed'
fuit vacua Et hoc parat' est verificare Unde pet' Judicium si praedict' Major'
and probi homines de Guldeford' praedict' acconem suam praedict' versus eum
habere debeant etc.

The Plaintiff Demurrs.
Et praedicti Major and probi homines Villae de Guldeford' praed' dicunt quod
praedictum placitum ipsius Johannis superius in barram placitat' materiaque in
eodem content' minus sufficien' in lege existunt ad ipsos Major' and probos
homines Villae de Guldeford' pred' ab accone sua praedicta versus praefat'
Johannem habend' praecludend' quodque ipsi ad placitum illud modo and forma
praedict' placitat' necesse non habent nec per legem terrae tenentur respondere
Et hoc parat' sunt verificare Unde pro defectu sufficien' placiti ipsius
Johannis iidem Major' and probi homines Villae Guldeford' praed. pet' Judicium
and debitum suum praedictum unacum dampnis suis occone detenconis debiti ill'
sibi adjudicari etc.

The Defendant joins in Demurrer.
Et praedict' Johannes ex quo ipse sufficien' materiam in lege ad pred' Major'
and probos homines Villae de Guldeford' praed' ab accone sua praedict' versus
ipm^ Johannem habend' praecludend' superius placitando allegavit quam ipse
parat' est verificare Quam quidem materiam praedict' Major and probi homines
Villae de Guldeford' praedict' non dedic' nec ad eam aliqualit' respond' set
verificacon' ill' admittere omnino recusant pet' Judicium Et quod praedict'
Major and probi homines Villae de Guldeford' pred' ab accone sua praed' versus
ipsum Johannem habend' praecludentur etc. Et quia Justic' hic se advisare
volunt de and super praemissis priusquam Judicium inde reddant dies dat' est
partibus praedict' hic usque a die Sancti Michaelis in tres Septimanas de
audiend' inde Judicio suo eo quod iidem Justic' hic inde nondum etc.

Major and probi homines de Guldeford' versus Clarke.
IN an Action of Debt by the Mayor and probi homines of Gildford against
Clarke, they declared upon a Prescription to make Bylaws pro bono Regim' and
Gubernac^one Vill' pred', and that there has been an ancient Officer (called a
Bailiff) of the said Town elected for time whereof, etc. upon the Monday next
after Michaelmass Day, and they set forth a By Law made, That if any Inhabitant
of the said Town should be duly Elected to the said Office of Bailiff, and
should refuse to take it upon him, he should forfeit and pay to the Corporation
20 l And that after the said Law made (viz.) upon the 30th of September, anno
primo Willielmi and Mariae, the Defen-being then an Inhabitant and Freeman of
the said Town, was Chosen a Bailiff, according to ancient Usage for the year
following, and had Notice thereof; but he refused to take upon him the said
Office, unde actio accrevit Major' and prob' homin' for Twenty pounds, etc.

The Defendant pleaded Actio non; for that by the Statute made 13 Cat. 2. for
Regulating of Corporations, it was amongst other things Enacted, That after the
determination and expiration of the Commission for Regulating of Corporations
(in the said Act mentioned) no person or persons should for ever after be
Chosen into any of the Offices or Places (before mentioned in the said Act,)
who within One year next before such Election had not Received the Sacrament of
the Lord's Supper, according to the Usage of the Church of England; and that
every person Elected, should take the Oaths and subscribe the Declaration (in
the said Act mentioned) at the same time as the Oath, for the due Execution of
the Office he is Elected to shall be Administered; and in default thereof, every
such Election to be void.

And the Defendant further said, That he is, and at the time of the said
Election he was a Protestant Subject of the King and Queen, and a Dissenter
from the Church of England, and that he had not Received the Sacrament within a
year before the said Election, by reason whereof he was not capable to be
Elected to the said Office, and the Election, by reason of the said Act, was
void, and hoc parat' est verificare, etc.

To this Plea the Plaintiffs Demurred.

In the Argument of this Case, Sir John Read's Case was Cited, who several
years since was made Sheriff of Hertfordshire, who was then under an
Excommunication and so could not Receive the Sacrament; and therefore after he
had held the Office for three Months, left off, and did not attend at the
Assizes, for which he was Fined 500 l And after Argument in the Exchequer,
where it was insisted on, that the Act of 25 Car. 2. made for preventing of
Dangers that might arise from Popish Recusants, did avoid the said Office upon
his not having taken the Sacrament, and he was disabled to do it by reason of
his Excommunication; yet he was Adjudged in the Court of Exechequer to pay the
500 l Fine.

But the Court held here, that the Matter pleaded by the Defendant was a good
Bar; for in regard the Act of 13 Car. 2. had Enacted; That none should be
Chosen who had not Received the Sacrament within One year before such Choice;
and there could be no Refusal before the Election, it was plain that the
Defendant had not incurred the Penalty of the By-Law. And it differed from the
Case of Sir John Read; for he was once actually in the Office, and obliged
thereupon to do all things necessary for his proceeding in it: But here, in
this Case, to make a Default in the Defendant there must have been an Election
antecedent, and the Election of such an one as the Defendant is, is absolutely
prohibited by the Statute.

There were also two Exceptions taken to the Declaration.

First, The By-Law is said to have been, That if any Inhabitant should be
Chosen; whereas they cannot make Bylaws to bind all the Inhabitants of the
Town, but only the Freemen or Members of the Corporation.

Secondly, The Usage is set forth, That the Election should be die Lunae
proxime post Festum Sancti Michael' Archi', and the Election of the Defendant
is alleged to be upon the 30th of September; but it was not shown that it fest
upon the Monday, and that the Court cannot take notice of it, or consult the
Almanac, as this Case is, where it ought to have been set forth in pleading.

And the Court held these Matters incurable, and so Judgment was given for the
Defendant.

Dawney versus Vesey.
THe Plaintiff as Executrix to William Dawney, her late Husband, brought an
Action of Debt upon a Bond, wherein the Defendant was bound to the said
Testator, with Condition to perform an Award.

The Defendant demanded Oyer of the Condition, and pleaded, That the
Arbitrators made an Award, that the Defendant should pay 30 l to the said
William Dawney, or his Assigns, within two Months then next following, in full
satisfaction of all Trespasses, Damages and Demands; and that the said parties
upon payment of the said Money should give mutual Releases; and shows, that
the said William Dawney after the said Award, and within two Months died, and
demanded Judgment of the Action.

To this the Plaintiff Demurred.

And Judgment was given for the Plaintiff; for though the Money was awarded to be
paid to William Dawney, and no mention of his Executors, yet the Money was to
be paid to the Executors, for an Award creates a Duty.

And it was Objected, That if the Defendant should pay the Money, they could
not compel the Plaintiff, who is Executrix, to Release.

The Court held, that she ought to release all Demands that the Testator had
against the Defendant. Vide 1 Cro. 10. Kingwell and Knapman, 1 To. Rep. 197. 31
H. 6. tit. Bar 59. 3 Leon. 12. 1 Roll. Abr. 420.

Hartis versus Parker.
Midd'x ss.
SAMUEL PARKER nuper de Staples-Inn in Com' Midd' gen' Sum' fuit ad Respondend'
Debt for Rent upon two several Demises by Lease Parol.
Johanni Harris de placito quod reddat ei Nonagint' and novem libr' quas ei
debet and injuste detinet etc. Et unde idem Johannes Harris per Johannem Wood
Attorn' suum dicit quod cum praed' Johannes Harris primo die Maij anno regni
domini Caroli secundi nuper Regis Angl' etc. Tricesimo quinto apud paroch'
Sancti Martini in Campis in Com' Midd' praedict' The first Demise.
dimisisset concessisset and ad firmam tradidisset praefat' Samueli un' mesuag'
sive tenementum cum pertin' continen' duas Romeas in una Area (Anglice two
Rooms on a Floor) and dua gardina and un' latrinam (Anglice a House of Office)
eidem mesuagio spectan' and un' stabulum dictis duobus gardinis prox' adjungen'
quae praemissa praedict' sunt scituat' jacen' and existen' in and super
acclivitatem de Hamstead-Hill (Anglice the Rise of Hampstead) cum omnibus and
singulis Aedificiis structur' pomar' gardinis areis (Anglice Courts)
curtilagiis viis aquis aquaecursibus boscis subboscis commun' Commun' Pastur'
and turbar' esiament' commoditat' proficuis emolumentis and advantagiis
quibuscunque eisdem mesuag' and tenement' gardin' stabulis and praemiss. jacen'
spectan' vel aliqualit' pertinen' vel cum eisdem tunc vel frequent' habit and
dimiss occupat' vel petit' aut judicat' accept' reputat' capt' vel cogn' fuisse
ut pars parcel' sive membrum inde aut eisdem aliqualit' pertinen' Exception.
(except' and semper reservat' praed' Johanni Harris Executoribus
Administratoribus and Assign' suis omnibus tal' magnis arboribus (vocat' Timber
Trees) qual' tunc steter' crever' and fuer' vel ad aliquod tempus postea
starent crescerent vel forent in and super praedict' dimiss. praemiss. vel
aliquam pattem inde habend' Habendum.
and tenend' praemissa praed' (except' praeexcept') eidem Samueli Parker and
Assign' suis a vicesimo quinto die Marcij tunc ult' praeterit' usque plenum
finem and terminum septem annorum extunc prox' sequen' Reddend' inde eidem
Johanni Harris annual' Reddendum.
reddit' sive summam octodecem librar' legalis monet' Angl' solvend' eidem
Johanni Harris ad Festa sancti Johannis Baptistae sancti Michalis Archi'
Natalis Domini Dei and Annunciacon' Beatae Mariae Virginis in quolibet anno per
aequas and aequales porcones duran' toto termino annorum praedict' virtute
cujus dimissionis praedict' Samuel Parker in praemiss. praed' praedimiss. cum
pertin' intravit and ill' Entry by virtue of the Demise.
a praedict. primo die Maij anno tricesimo quinto supradict' usque ad Festum
sancti Michaelis Archi' anno regni Jacobi secundi nuper Regis Angl' etc. quarto
habuisset tenuisset and occupasset and quadraginta and quinque libr' de reddit'
praedict' pro duobus annis and dimid' unius anni de praed' Rent arrear.
termino septem annorum finit' ad praedict' Festum sancti Michaelis Archi' anno
quarto Jacobi secundi supradict' eidem Johanni Harris arretro fuer' and adhuc
arretro existunt and insolut' per quod acco accrevit eidem Johanni Harris ad
exigend' and habend' de praefat' Actio accrevit.
Samuele Parker praed' quadragint' and quinque libr' de pred' nonagint' The
second Demise.
and novem libr' parcell' Cumque etiam praedict' Johannes Harris vicesimo
quinto die Marcij anno regni dicti domini Caroli secundi nuper Regis Angl' etc.
tricesimo quinto apud paroch' sancti Martini in Campis praedict' in Com' praed'
dimisisset concessisset and ad firmam tradidisset praefat' Samueli un' al'
mesuag' sive tenement' cum pertinen' continen' duas romeas in una area (Anglice
two Rooms on a Floor) and duo al' gardin' and un' al' latrinam (Anglice a House
of Office) eidem mesuagio ult' mentionat' spectan' and un' al' stabulum prox'
adjungen' dictis duobus gardinis ult' mentionat' quae praemissa praedict' ult
menconat' sunt scituat' jacen' and existen' in and super acclivitatem de
Hampstead (Anglice the Rise of Hampstead Hill) cum omnibus and singulis
aedificiis structur' stabulis pomar' gardinis areis (Anglice Courts)
curtilegiis viis aquaecursibus boscis subboscis commun' Common' pastur' turbar'
esiament' commoditat' proficuis emolumentis advantagiis quibuscunque eisdem
mesuagio and tenemento gardinis stabulis and praemissis ult' menconat' jacen'
spectan' vel aliqualit' pertinen' vel cum eisdem tunc vel frequent' habit'
dimiss. occupat' vel petit' aut judicat' accept' reputat' capt' vel cogn'
fuisse ut pars parcell' sive membrum inde aut eisdem aliqualit' pertinen'
except' and semper reservat' praedict' Exception.
Johanni Harris Executoribus Administratoribus and Assign' suis omnibus tal'
magnis arboribus (vocat' Timber Trees) qual' tunc steter' crever' and fuer' vel
ad aliquod tempus postea starent crescerent vel forent in and super praedict'
dimiss. praedimiss. ult' menconat' vel aliquam partem inde Habend' Habend.
and tenend' praedict' mesuag' and praemiss. ult' menconat' cum pertin'
(except' praeexcept') praedict' Samueli Parker a praedict' vicesimo quinto die
Marcij anno Tricesimo quinto dicti domini Caroli secundi nuper Regis Angl' etc.
ad voluntat' eorundem Johannis and Samuelis and quamdiu ambabus partibus
praedict' placuerit reddend' and solvend' Reddend.
proinde praedict' Johanni Harris reddit' sive summam legalis monet' Angliae ad
ratam (Anglice after the Rate) octodecem librar' per annum duran' Continuacon'
dimission' praedict' ult' menconat' Virtute cujus quidem dimissionis ult'
menconat' idem Samuel Parker in praemiss. praedict' praedimiss. cum pertin'
ult' menconat' intravit and a tempore dimission' ill' ult' menconat' Entry and
possession.
usque ad Festum sancti Michaelis Archi' anno regni domini Jacobi secundi nuper
Regis Angl' etc. quarto habuisset and occupasset and quinquagint' and quatuor
libr' de reddit' praedict' pro tribus annis finit' ad praedict' Festum sancti
Michaelis Archi' anno quarto Jacobi secundi supradict' ad ratam (Anglice after
the Rate) octodecim librar' per annum eidem Johanni Harris debit' arretro and
insolut' fuer' Rent arrear. Actio accrevit.
and adhuc arretro and insolut' existunt per quod acco accrevit eidem Johanni
Harris ad exigend' and habend' de praefat' Samuele Parker easdem quinquagint'
and quatuor libr' ult' memconat' de praedict' nonagint' and novem libr' resid'
praedict' tamen Samuel' Parker licet saepius requisit' etc. praedict'
quadragint' and quinque libr' primo menconat' ac praed' quinquagint' and
quatuor libr' ult' menconat' eidem Johanni Harris nondum reddidit nec aliquam
inde parcell' set ill' ei hucusque reddere omnino contradixit and adhuc
contradicit Unde dicit quod deteriorat' est and dampnum ad valenc' december
librar' Et inde producit sectam etc.

Et praedict' Samuel per Carolum Townsend Attorn' suum venit and defendit vim
and injur' quando etc. Et dicit quod praedict' The Defendant pleads, that the
Plaintiff* nihil habuit in tenementis tempore dimissionis.

He should have said temporibus dimission.


Johannes Harris acconem suam praedict' versus eum habere non debet Quia dicit
quod praedict' Johannes Harris tempore dimission' praedictarum superius fieri
suppoit' nichil habuit in tenementis praed' cum pertin' unde suppon' dimission'
ill' fieri Et hoc parat' est verificare Unde petit Judicium si praedict'
Johannes Harris acconem fuam praed. versus eum habere debeat etc.

The Plaintiff Replies, that before the Dem^ses one J.S. demised to him for a
Term for years.
Et praedict' Johannes Harris dicit quod per aliqua per praedict' Samuelem
Parker superius placitando allegat' ipse idem Johannes ab accone sua praed'
versus eum habend' praecludi non debet Quia dicit quod diu ante tempora
praedict' seperal' dimission' per ipsum Johannem praefat' Samueli de tenementis
praedict' superius in Narracone praedict' menconat' esse fact' scilicet decimo
tertio die Novembris anno regni Caroli secund nuper Regis Angl. vicesimo sexto
Praenobilis Carolus Henricus dominus Wotton Baro de Wotton in Com' Kane' J. S.
demised to him.
apud paroch' sancti Martini in Campis in Com' Midd' praed' dimisit concessit
and ad firmam tradidit praefat' Johanni un' peciam sive parcell' terrae unacum
antiquo mefuagio and horreo existen' superinde scituat' and existen' in
Hampstead praed' in Com' praedict' continen' dimidium unius acrae terrae cum
pertinen' unde tenement' praed' in Narracone praed' menconat' fore dimissa sunt
parcell' Hab' and tenend' For 41 years.
praemiss. ill' praefat' Johanni Harris Executoribus and Assign' suis a Festo
sancti Michaelis Archi' tunc ult' praeterit' usque ad plenum finem and termnium
quadraginta and unius annorum extunc prox' sequen' J. S. having then good Right
and Title to make such Demise.
plenar' complend' and finiend' praefat' (Carolo Henrico domino Wotton adtunc
and ibidem plenam potestatem jus and titulum ad praedict' peciam and parcell'
terrae and praemiss. praedict' cum pertinen' dimittend' and concedend' pro
praedict' termino quadraginta and unius annorum habente) Virtute cujus quidem
dimissionis idem Johannes Harris postea scilicet eodem decimo tercio die
Novembr' anno regni dicti dn^i Caroli secundi Regis vicesimo sexto in praedict'
peciam sive parcell' Entry and possession.
terrae mesuag' and horreum cum pertin' intravit and suit inde possessionat'
pro residuo praedict' termini quadraginta and unius annorum Et sic inde
possessionat' existen' idem Johannes primo die Maij anno regni dicti dn^i
Caroli Regis tricesimo quinto in Narracone praed' superius menconat' apud
paroch' sancti Martini in Campis praedict' And demised to the Defendant.
in Com' praedict' dimisit praefat' Samueli tenementa praedict' in Narracone
praedict' superius menconat' cum pertin' modo and forma prout idem Johannes
superius versus eum Narravit Et hoc parat' verificare Unde petit Judicium and
debitum suum praedict' unacum dampnis suis occone detenconis debiti illius sibi
adjudicari etc.

The Defendant demurrs to the Plaintiffs Replication.
ss. Et praedict' Samuel dic' quod praedictum placitum praedict' Johannis
superius Replicando placitat' materiaque in eodem content' minus sufficien' in
lege existunt ad praedict' Johannem acconem suam praed' habend' manutenend'
quodque ipse ad placitum illud modo and forma praed' placitat' necesse non
habet nec per legem terrae tenetur respondere Et hoc parat' est verificare Unde
pro defectu sufficien' Repl' ipsius Johannis in hac part idem Samuel pet'
Judicium Et quod praedict' Johannes ab accone sua praedict' versus eum habend'
praecludatur etc.

Hen. Trinder.

Et praedict' Johannes dicit quod placitum praedict' The Defendant joins in
Demurrer.
per ipsum Johannem modo and forma praedict' superius Replicando placitat'
materiaque in eodem content' bon' and sufficien' in lege existunt ad praedict'
Johannem acconem suam praedict' habend' manutenend' Quod quidem placitum
materiaque in eodem concent' ipse idem Johannes parat' est verificare and
probare prout Cur' etc. Et quia praedict' Samuel ad placitum ill' non Respond'
nec ill' hucusque aliqualit' dedic' ipse idem Johannes petit Judic' and debitum
suum praedict. unde cum dampnis suis occone detenconis debiti praed' sibi
adjudicari etc. Sed quia Cur' hic de Judicio suo de and super praemissis
reddend' nondum advisatur Dies inde dat' est partibus praedict' coram Justic'
domini Regis and dominae Reginae apud Westm' usque -- de Judicio suo de and
super praemissis ill' audiend' eo quod Cur' hic nondum inde etc.

Harris versus Parker.
IN an Action of Debt for Rent the Plaintiff declared, That he demised at the
Parish of St. Martin in the Fields in the County of Middlesex, to the Defendant
a Message Barn and Gardens, with a Stable adjoining que premissa praed. sunt
Scituat' jacen. and existen. in and super acclivitatem de Hampstead (Anglice)
the rise of Hampstead Hill, to hold to the Defendant for seven years at 18 l
per annum Rent, etc. and declared of another Demise at St. Martins aforesaid,
of another Message, etc. Situate as aforesaid, to the Defendant, to hold at
Will at the like yearly Rent, etc. and for 90 l set forth to have been due upon
the said several Demises, he brings the Action.

The Defendant pleaded, That the Plaintiff tempore dimissionum praed. nihil
habuit in Tenementis praed.

The Plaintiff replied, That ante tempora praedict seperal. Dimiss the Lord
Wotton dimised to the Plaintiff, the said Message and Premises for the Term
of one and forty years (ipso Dom. Wotton plenam potestatem jus and titulum ad
premissa and ea dimittend. pro Termino praed. habente) and that the Plaintiff
did enter by virtue of the said Dimise, and being possessed of the Premises
made the several Dimises to the Defendant prout, etc.

To this the Defendant Demurred:

For that the Plaintiff in his Replication has set forth no Title in the Lord
Wotton, nor shown what Estate he had, or that he had any Estate.

As to that the Court inclined, that the Replication was well enough, but they
took the Bar not to be well pleaded; for the Plaintiff declared of two Dimises,
and the Bar is, that tempore dimissionum praed. nihil habuit, whereas it ought
to have been distinctly pleaded, that he had nothing at the time of either of
the Dimises, for the Declaration is of two Dimises, and the time being put in
the singular number it cannot be carried to both, and it is not like pleading Non
Assumpsit to a Declaration, containing several promises, vide Palmers Rep. A
Quo Warranto was brought against a Corporation for several Franchises, and they
pleaded a Prescription to one, and a Charter as to another, etc. and concluded
eo War. Clamant; and that was held good, and so Judgment there was given for
the Plaintiff nisi causa.

But then it was moved at another day, that the Declaration was not good for
the Message and Premses dimised, for they are said here to be Situate in and
super acclivitat' de Hampstead, which is a description of the Situation; but
here is no Vill laid or lieu conus for a Jury, and of this the Court doubted.
Postea.

Every versus Carter.
Staff. ss.
Indebitatus Assumpsit upon several Promises.
JOHANNES CARTER nuper de Burton super Trent in Com' praedict' Dyer Attach' fuit
ad respondend' Johanni Every Armig' de placito Transgr' super Casum etc. Et
unde idem Johannes Every per Isaacum Hawkins Attorn' suum Queritur quare cum
praedict' Johannes Carter primo die Marcij anno regni dominorum Regis and
Regin' nunc etc. primo apud Tutbury indebitat' fuisset eidem Johanni Every in
Cent' nonagint' and quinque libr' For Moneys had and received to the Plaintiffs
use.
legalis monet' Angl' pro denar' pro eodem Johanne Every and ad ejus usum per
praedict' Johannem Carter ante tempus ill' habit' and recept' and sic inde
indebitat' existen' Idem Johannes Carter in cons. inde super se assumpsit and
eidem Johanni adtunc and ibidem fidelit' promisit quod ipse Johannes Carter
praedict' Centum nonagint' and quinque libr' eidem Johanni Every cum inde
postea requisit' esset been and fidelit' solvere and contentare vellet Cumque
etiam idem Johannes Carter postea scilicet eisdem die and anno ult' menconat'
For Money laid out for the Defendant.
apud Tutbury praedict' indebitat' fuisset eidem Johanni Every in ducent'
libris similis legalis monet' Angl' pro denar' pro praed' Johanne Carter and ad
ejus instanc' and requisiconem per predict Johannem Every ante tempus ill'
deposit' and solut' Et sic inde indebitat' For Money borrowed of the Plaintiff.
existen' idem Johannes Carter in Cons. inde super se assumpsit and eidem
Johanni Every ad tunc and ibidem fidelit' promisit quod ipse idem Johannes
Carter praedict' ducent' libr' ult' menconat' eidem Johanni Every cum inde
postea requisit' esset been and fidelit' solvere and contentare vellet Cumque
etiam praed' Johannes Carter postea scilicet eisdem die and anno ult' menconat'
apud Tutbury praedict' indebitat' fuisset eidem Johanni Every in vigint' libr'
legalis monet' Angl' pro denar' de eodem Johanne Every per praedict' Johan'
Carter ante tempus ill' habit mutuat' and recept' and sic inde indebitat.
existen' idem Johannes Carter in Cons. inde super se assumpsit and eidem
Johanni Every adtunc and ibidem fidelit' promisit quod ipse Johannes Carter
praedict' vigint' libr' eidem Johanni Every cum inde postea requisit' esset
been and fidelit' solvere and contentare vellet Cumque etiam praed' Johannes
Carter postea scilicet eisdem die and anno ult' menconat' apud Tutbury
praedict' indebitat' fuisset eidem Johanni Every in Centum libr' similis
legalis monet' Angl' For Money due to the Plaintlff, for the a^^erages of an
Account.
pro arreragiis debit' eidem Johanni Every per praed' Johannem Carter super
quodam Compo^ int' eundem Johannem Every and praedict' Johannem Carter ante
tempus ill' habit' and fact' and sic inde indebitat' existen' Idem Johannes
Carter in Cons. inde super se assumpsit and eidem Johan' Every adtunc and
ibidem fidelit' promisit quod ipse idem Johannes Carter praedict' Cent' libr'
eidem Johanni Every cum inde postea requisit' esset been and fidelit' solvere
and contentare vellet praedict' tamen Johannes Carter praedict' seperal'
promission' ac assumpcon' suas praed' mie^ curans sed machinans and fraudulent'
intendens eundem Johan' Every in hac part callide and subdole decipere and
defraudare praed' seperal' denar' The Defendant non solvit the several Sums.
summas eidem Johanni Every nondum solvit nec ipsum pro eisdem aliqualit'
hucusque contentavit licet adinde idem Johannes Carter postea scilicet secundo
die Marcij anno regni dictorum dominorum Regis and Regin' nunc etc. primo and
saepius postea apud Tutbury praed' per praedict' Johan' Every requisit' fuisset
sed ill' ei solvere aut aliqualit' pro eisdem contentare omnino hucusque
recusavit and adhuc recusat ad dampum ipsius Johannis Every sexcent' libr' Et
inde produc' sectam etc.

Et praedict' Johannes Carter per Thomam Porter Attorn' As to the first and
second Promises, the Defendant pleads Non Assumpsit infra sex annos.
suum ven' and defend' vim and injur' quando etc. Et quoad primam and secundam
promission' and assumpcon' superius menconat' dic' quod praedict' Johannes
Every acconem suam praedict' inde versus eum habere non debet quia dic' quod
ipse idem Johannes Carter ad aliquod tempus infra sex annos ante diem
impetraconis brevis Originalis ipsius Johannis Every non assumpsit super se
modo and forma prout praedict' Every superius versus eum queritur Et hoc parat'
est verificare Unde pet' Judicium si praedict' Johan' Every acconem suam
praedict' inde versus eum habere debeat etc. As to the third and fourth
Promises he pleads Non Assumpsit.
Et quoad tertiam and quartam promission' and assumpcon' in Narracone superius
menconat' idem Johannes Carter dicit quod ipse non assumpsit super se modo and
forma prout praedict' Johan' Every superius inde versus eum queritur* Et de hoc
pon' se super patriam and praedict' Johan' Every similiter etc.

As to the first and second Promises* the Plaintiff Replies and sets forth an
Original sued out in a Clausum fregit within the six years.
Et praedict' Johannes Every quoad praedict' placitum praedict Johannis Carter
quoad primam and secundam promission' and assumpcon in Narr' praedict' superius
menconat' dicit quod ipse per aliqua in eodem placito praeallegat' ab accon'
sua praedict' inde versus eum habend' praecludi non debet quia dic' quod ipse
idem Johan' Every post promission' and assumpcon' praedict' in forma praed'
fact' scilicet undecimo die Maij anno regni domini Jacobi secundi nuper Regis
Angl' secundo pro recuperacon' dampnorum suorum occon' non performacon' The
suing out of the Original.
promission' and assumpcon' ill' prosecut' fuisset extra Cur' Cancellar' dicti
nuper domini Regis quoddam breve Original' dicti nuper Regis in hae part
versus praedict' Johan' Carter tunc Vic' Com' Stafford' direct retornabil'
coram tunc Justic' dicti nuper Regis apud Westm' in Crastino sanctae Trinitatis
tunc prox' sequen' respondend' Ea intention to Declare against him.
eidem Johan' Every ea intention quod praedict' Johan' Carter caperetur and
arrestaretur and idem Johan' Every super comparent' praedict' Johan' Carter in
eadem Cur' ad sectam ejusdem Johan' Every pro recuperacon' dampnorum suorum
occone non performacon' promission' and assumpcon' ill' superius menconat'
narraret quodque praedict' And that he promised within the six years.
Johan' Carter infra sex annos prox' ante diem impetraconis ejusdem brevis
Original' in hac part assumpsit super se modo and forma prout idem Johan'
Every superius versus eum queritur Et hoc pet' quod inquiratur per patriam.

The Defendant craves Oyer of the Original.
Et praedict' Johannes Carter pet' auditum praedict' brevis Original' praefat'
Johan' Every superius replicando menconat' Et ei legitur in haec verba Jacobus
secundus Dei gratia Angl' Scotiae Franciae and Hiberniae Rex Fidei defensor
etc. Vic' And has it.
Staff. salutem Si Johan' Every Armig' fec' te secur' de clausum suo pros' tunc
pone per vad' and salvos pleg' Johan' Carter nuper de Burton super Trent in
Com' tuo Dyer quod sit coram Justic' nostris apud Westm'in Crastino sanctae
Trinitatis ostens' quare Vi and armis clausum ipsius Johan' Every apud Tutbury
fregit Et al' enormia ei intulit ad grave dampnum ipsius Johannis Every and
contr' pacem nostram and habeas ibi nomina pleg' and hoc breve Test meipso
apud Westm' 11 die Maij anno regni nostri secundo, Elwes. Johan' Do pleg' de
pros. Richardus Roe Infra nominat' Johan' nichil habet in balliva mea per quod
Attach' potest Jonath' Cope Arm' Vic' Quo lecto and audito idem Johan' Carter
dic' This Writ will not warrant this Declaration.
quod praedict' Johan' Every ad monstrand' idem breve Originale superius
replicando menconat' ad Warrantizandum Narraconem suam praedict' modo versus
eundem Johan' Carter fact' and declarat' admitti seu recipi non debet Quia dic'
quod breve Original' unde praedict' Johan' Every superius modo Narravit est de
placito quare cum praed' Johan' Carter primo die Marcij anno regni dominorum
Regis and Regin' nunc etc. primo apud Tutbury inebitat' fuisset eidem Johan'
Every in Cent' nonagint' and quinque libr' legalis monet' Angl' pro denar' pro
eodem Johan' Every and ad ejus usum per praedict' Johan' Carter ante tempus
ill' habit' and recept' and sic inde indebitat' existen' idem Johan' Carter in
Cons. inde super se assumpsit and eidem Johan' Every adtunc and ibidem fidelit'
promisit quod ipse idem Johan' Carter praedict' Centum nonaginta and quinque
libras eidem Johan' Every cum inde postea requisit' esset been and fidelit'
solvere and contentare vellet Cumque etiam idem Johan' Carter postea scilieet
eisdem die and anno ult' menconat' apud Tutbury praedict' indebitat' fuisset
eidem Johanni Every in ducent' libris similis legalis monet' Angl' pro denar'
pro praedict' Johan' Carter and ad ejus instanc' and requisiconem per praed'
Johan' Every ante tempus illud deposit' and solut' and sic inde indebitat'
existen' idem Johan' Carter in Cons. inde super se assumpsit and eidem Johan'
Every adtunc and ibidem fidelit' promisit quod ipse idem Johan' Carter praed'
ducent' libras ult' menconat' eidem Johan' Every cum inde postea requisit'
esset been and fidelit' solvere and contentare vellet Cumque etiam praed'
Johan' Carter postea scilicet eisdem die and anno ult' menconat' apud Tutbury
praed' indebitat' fuisset eidem Johan' Every in viginti libr' legal' monet'
Angl' pro denar' de eodem Johan' Every per praed' Johan' Carter ante tempus
ill' habit' mutuat' and recept' and sic inde indebitat' existen' idem Johan'
Carter in Cons. inde super se assumpsit and eidem Johan' Every adtunc and ibid'
fideliter promisit quod ipse idem Johan' Carter' praed' viginti libras eidem
Johan' Every cum inde postea requisit' esset been and fidelit' solvere and
contentare vellet Cumque etiam praed. Johan' Career postea scilicet eisdem die
and anno ult' menconat' apud Tutbury pred' indebitat' fuisset eidem Johan'
Every in Centum libris similis legalis monet' Angl' pro arreragiis debit' eidem
Johan' Every per praed' Johan' Carter super quodam Compo^ int' eundem Johan'
Every and praed' Johan' Carter ante tempus ill' habit' and fact' and sic inde
indebitat' existen' idem Johan' Carter in Cons. inde super se assumpsit and
eidem Johan' Every adtunc and ibidem fidelit' promisit quod ipse idem Johan'
Carter praedict' Centum libras eidem Johan' Every cum inde postea requisit'
esset been and fidelit' solvere and contentare vellet praed' tamen Johan'
Carter' seperal' promission' and assumpcon' suas praed' minime curans sed
machinans and fraudulent' intendens eundem Johan' Every in hac part callide
and subdole decipere and defraudare praed' denar' summas eidem Johan' Every
nondum solvit nec ipm^ pro eisdem aliqualit' hucusque contentavit licet adinde
idem Johan' Carter postea scilicet secundo die Marcij anno regni dictorum
dominorum Regis and Regin' nunc etc. primo and saepius postea apud Tutbury
praed' per praed' Johan' Every requisit' fuit sed ill' ei solvere aut
aliqualit' pro eisdem contentare hucusque omnino recusavit and adhuc recusat ad
dampnum ipsius Johan' Every sexcentarum librarum etc. Ad quod quidem breve
Original' ipse pred' Johan' Carter in Cur' hic ad sectam praed' Johan' Every
comparens praed' Johan' Every superinde versus eundem Johan' Carter de praed'
placito in eodem brevi Original' ult' spec' narravit and non super brevi
Originali praed' per praedictum Johannem Every superius replicando supponit' Et
hoc parat' est verificare unde pet' Judicium si praedict' And prays Judgment,
whether the Plaintiff shall be admitted to set forth that Writ. The Plaintiff
Demurs to the Rejoinder.
Johannes Every ad monstrandum praedictum breve Originale superius replicando
menconat' ad Warrantizandum Narracon' suam praedict' modo versus eundem Johan'
Carter fact' and declarat' admitti seu recipi debeat etc.

Et praedicti Johannes Every dicit quod placitum praedictum per praedict'
Johannem Carter modo and forma praedict' superius rejungendo placitat'
materiaque in eodem content' minus sufficien' in lege existunt ad quod ipse
idem Johan' Every necesse non habet nec per legem terrae tenetur aliquo modo
respondere Et hoc parat' est verificare Unde pro defectu sufficien' rejuncc^on'
in hac part ipse idem Johannes pet' Judicium and dampna sua occon' non
performacon' promissionem and assumpconem ill' sibi adjudicari etc.

The Defendant joins in Demurrer.
Et praedict' Johannes Carter ex quo ipse sufficien' materiam in lege ad
praefat' Johan' Every ab accone sua praedict' versus eum praecludend' superius
allegavit quam ipse parat' est verificare Ac quam quidem materiam praedict'
Johannes Every non dedic' nec ad eam aliqualit' respond' sed verificacon' ill'
admittere omnino recusat ut prius pet' Judicium Et quod praedict' Johannes
Every ab accone sua praedict' inde versus eum habend' praecludatur etc. Et quia
Justic' hic se advisare volunt de and super praemiss. inde parts praedict'
posuer' se in Judicium Cur' priusquam Judicium inde reddant dies dat' est
partibus praedict' hicusque a die Sancti Michaelis in tres Septimanas de
audiendo inde Judicio suo eo quod iidem Justic' hic inde nondum etc. Et tam
quoad triand' exitum praed' inter parts praedict' superius junct' per patriam
triand' quam ad inquirend' quae dampna praedict' Johan' Every sustinuit occone
praemiss. superius menconat unde parts praed' posuer' se in Judicium Cur' si
contingat Judic' inde pro praed' Johan' Every versus praefat' Johannem Carter
inde reddi Praecept' est Vic' quod Venire fac' hic a die Sanctae Trinitatis in
tres Septimanas duodecim etc. per quos etc. Et qui nec etc. Ad recogn' etc.
quia tam etc.

Every versus Carter.
IN an indebitat' Assumpsit, the Plaintiff declared upon several Promises.

The Defendant pleaded the Statute of Limitations.

The Plaintiff replied, That before the six years were elapsed he prosecuted an
Original against the Defendant, Returnable coram tunc Justiciariis Jacobi
secundi nuper Dom. Regis apud Westminster. ad respondent' eidem Johanni Every eo
intention quod praed. Johannes Carter capietur Et idem Johannes Every super
comparentiam praed' Johannis Carter in eadem Cur' ad sectam ipsius Johannis pro
recuperatione damnor' suor' occasion non performationis promiss. illor'
superius mentionat' narraret quodque praed' Johannes Carter infra sex annos
proxime ante diem impetrationis ejusdem brevis Original' in hac part Assumpsit
super se modo and forma prout, etc. Et hoc petit quod inquitatur per patriam.

Et praed' Johannes Carter petit auditum praed' brevis Original and ei legitur
in haec Verba Jacobus secundus, etc. Vicecom' Staff' salutem Si Johanes Every
Ar' fec' te securum de clamore suo prosequend' tunc pon' per vadios and salvos
plegios Johannem Carter, etc. quod sit coram Justiciariis nostris apud Westm',
etc. ostens' quare vi et armis clausum ipsius Johannis Every, apud Tutbury
fregit and alia emormia ei intulit ad grave damnum, etc. Quo lecto and audito
idem Johannes Carter dicit quod praed' Johannes Every ad monstrand' idem breve
Original' superius replicando mentionat' ad Warr' narrationem suam praed' modo
versus eundem Johannem Carter fact' admitti feu recipi non debet quia dicit
quod breve Original' unde praed' Johannes superius modo narravit est de placito
quare cum praed' Johannes Carter indebitatus fuisset eidem Johanni Every, etc.
ad quod quidem breve Original' ipso eodem Johanne Carter in Cur' his comparente
praed' Johannes Every superinde versus eund' Johannem Carter de placito in
eodem brevi Original' ult' specificat' narravit and non super breve Original'
praed' per praed' Johannem Every superius replicando mentionat' ad
Warrantizand' Narr' praed' and hoc parat' est verificare unde petit Judic', etc.

To this the Plaintiff Demurred; for it was said, that it was according to the
course which of late time had obtained in this Court, to declare in any Action
upon a Clausum fregit, as they do upon a Latitat in the Kings Bench.

The Court agreed, it was the practite now settled in the Court, to take out
such Original in a Clausum fregit, and to declare super Assumpsit or the like;
but whether this were sufficiently set forth in the Plaintiffs Replication, for
he mentions nothing of the course of the Court, but that he prosecuted such a
Writ ea intention to declare; And the Court being informed that there were a
great many Presidents in this manner, the Court appointed them to be looked
into. Et Adjornatur.

Lade versus Barker.
IN Replevin the Plaintiff declared of a taking at a place called the 14 Acres
at Barham in Kent: The Defendant avowed, for that Robert Lade being seized in
Fee of the said 14 Acres by Indenture between him and Nicholas Marsh, in
Consideration of One hundred pounds paid unto him by the said Nicholas, granted
a Rent of 8 l per Annum, to the said Nicholas and his Heirs out of the
Premises, with power to distrain; and the said Nicholas being seized in Fee of
the said Rent, by his Will in Writing devised the said Rent to Richard Marsh,
Son of the said Nicholas, and his Heirs, and died seized as aforesaid Anno,
1675. And the said Richard Marsh being seized in Fee of the said Rent, by
Virtue of the said Devise by Indenture dated the 10 of Aug. 32. Car. 2. nuper
Regis, between him the said Richard of the one part, and Nicholas Marsh Son of
the said Richard of the other part, which Indenture the Defendant produced in
Court, in Consideration of a natural Love to the said Nicholas his Son, and 5 l
in Money to be paid Annually to the said Richard during his Life; he did give
and grant to the said Nicholass Marsh, his Heirs and Assigns, the said Rent of
8 l per Annum, to the use of the said Nicholas Marsh his Heirs and Assigns. And
then the Defendant says further in this manner, Quae quidem concessio ult'
mentionat' nullo attornamento vel alia Executione superinde fact' existen'
praeter solam sigillationem and deliberationem inde operavit per viam
conventionis praed' Richardi Marsh, stare seisit' ad usus in eadem concessione
mentionat' per quod and vigore Statuti fact', etc. de usibus in Possessionem
transferen' praed' Nicholaus Marsh fuit and adhuc est seisit' de praed'
annuitate octo librarum in Dominico suo ut de feodo; and for 4 l Arrear of the
said Rent as Bailiff to the said Nicholas Marsh, he makes Conisans, etc.

To this the Plaintiff Demurred.

First, This is a Grant by Richard to Nicholas, and so void without Attornment
or Enrollment, and being intended to Enure as a Grant, shall, not work as a
Covenant to stand seized.

Secondly, The Defendant has pleaded it as a Grant; and what he says after in
the Avowry, to set forth how the Deed should work is vain and idle.

As to the first Point, the Court held, this Deed having no Execution to make
it work as a Grant, it shall operate as a Covenant to stand seized, Mod. Rep.
178. Sanders and Savins Case. A Grant of a Rent to his Kinsman for Life, there
being no atturnment, it raised an use by way of Covenant; but the pleading the
Court held impertinent, for instead of pleading of this Grant according to the
effect of it in Law. (viz) As a Covenant to stand seized, He sets forth the
matter in Law, and haw it ought to be construed, and because they would not
countenance such vain and improper pleading, the Case was adjourned.

Biddulph versus Dashwood.
IN an Action of Debt for 90 l The Plaintiff declared, quod cum recuperasset
coram Justiciariis de Banco apud Westm' 90 l pro dam' against the Defendant,
prout per Record and process' quae Dom' Rex and Regina coram eis causa Erroris
in eisd' corrigend' Venire fac' and quae in Cur' dicti Domini Regis and Dom'
Reginae in pleno robore and vigore remanent minime revocat' plen' apparet per
quod actio accrevit, etc.

To this the Defendant Demurred, supposing that the Judgment was suspended so
far that an Action of Debt could not be brought upon it, pending the Writ of
Error: But the Court held, if the Defendant could insist upon this he ought not
to have Demurred; but to have pleaded Specially, and demanded Judgment, if the
Plaintiff should be answered pending the Writ of Error. So Judgment was given
for the Plaintiff.

Termino Sancti Hillarij, Anno 2 and 3 W. and M. In Communi Banco.
Anonymus.
TRespass quare clausum fregit and diversas petias Maheremij cepit, etc.
Judgment by default; upon the Writ of Enquiry returned, The Judgment was stayed
for the incertainty of the Declaration.

James Tregonwell, Vid. Executrix of John Tregonwell against Sherwin.
IN an Action of Debt for Rent, the Plaintiff declared in this manner, That
Frances Fen and John Tregonwell the 23 of Jan. 24. Car. 2. did Demise to the
Defendant certain Lands for 21 years, reserving 20 l per Annum to the said
Frances during her Life, and after her Decease to the said Tregonwell, his
Executors and Administrators, and set forth Frances to be Dead; and that the
said Tregonwell being possessed of the Reversion of the Premises, pro Termino
Annor' adtunc and adhuc ventur' the 4 of May 30 Car. 2. made his Will, and
thereof made the Plaintiff his Executrix and died, and that she took the
Executrixship upon her, and by virtue thereof became possessed of the said
Reversion, and for 30 l for a year and halfs Rent accruing after, she brought
the Action.

The Defendant pleaded an insufficient Plea, and the Plaintiff Demurred.

And Judgment was given against the Plaintiff upon the insufficiency of the
Declaration, for there is no good Title set forth to the Plaintiff for the
Rent; for it is not said that Tregonwell was at the time of the Lease, possessed
of the Lands pro Termino Annorum, etc. but that at the time of making his Will,
and that might be upon the creating of such Estate since, and the Rent might
not belong to the Reversion: And though it was said his reserving the Rent to his
Executors carried an intendment, that he had a Term for years only; yet that
was held not to be sufficient, and Judgment was given for the Defendant.

Sir Lionel Walden versus Mitchell.
Hunt' ss.
JOHANNES MITCHELL nuper de Huntington in Com' praed' Maulster Attach' fuit ad
respondend' Action for Words, viz. Papist and Pensioner, spoken of one who had
been a Member of Parliament ^n the time of King Charles the Second.
Lionello Walden Mil' de placito Transgr' super Casum Et unde idem Lionellus
per Robertum Clarke Attorn' suum queritur quare cum praed' Lionellus bonus
verus pius fidelis and honestus subditus and ligeus domini Regis and dominae
Reginae nunc existit ac ut bonus verus pius fidelis and honestus subditus and
ligeus eorundem domini Regis and dominae Reginae nunc and progenitorum suorum a
tempore Nativitat' suae hucusque se habuit gessit and gubernavit bonorumque
nominis famae conversaconis and gesture tam int' quamplurimos venerabiles and
fideles subdit' dictorum domini Regis and dominae Reginae nunc and progenitorum
suorum quam omnes vicinos suos per tot' tempus praed' habit' not' and reputat'
fuerat and per tot' tempus praed' The Plaintiff a Protestant.
fuit and adhuc existit verus professor Religionis Protestan' and Reformat' per
leges hujus regni Angliae stabilit' ill' sincere proficiend' and exercen' and
Divina Servitia in Ecclesia in paroch' sua seu aliqua Ecclesia capello aut alio
usuali loco Communis precacon' secundum usum Ecclesaie Anglicanae lect' semper
frequentans and audiens and Ecclesiae Romanae nunquam reconciliat' And never a
Professor of the Romish Religion.
fuit neque Religionem Romanam unquam profeffus fuit neque ad Missam unquam
ivit Cumque praed' Lionellus fuit and extit un' Burgens' That he has been a
Member of Parliament.
sive Membr' Parliamenti pro Villa de Huntingdon' in Com' Hunt' in Parliamento
domini Caroli secundi nuper Regis Angi' inchoat' and tent' apud Westm' in Com'
Midd' octavo die Maijanno regni sui decimo tertio and ut hujusmodi Burgens'
sive Membr' Parliamenti per tot' idem Parliament' usque dissolucon' inde just
and fidelit' And did his Duty therein justly.
deservivit and debitum fiduciae and officij sui Burgens' and Membr' ejusdem
Parliamenti per tot' idem tempus performavit Idemque Lionellus pro performacone
fiduciae officij sui praedict' Burgens' sive Membr' Parliamenti praedict' and
alijs Causis diversa itenera ad Civitat' London' and Westm' a Villa Hunt'
praedict' fecit and performavit praed' tamen Johan' praemissorum non ignarus
set machinans and malitiose intendens eundem Lionellum non solum in bonis
nomine fama credenc' and reputacone' suis praedict' multiplicit' laedere
detrahere and penitus distruere verum etiam ipsum Lionellum infra poenas and
poenalitat' contra Papistas and subdit' hujus regni qui Missam frequentant vel
audiunt per Statut' hujusmodi regni Angliae inde edit' and provis' infer
causare octavo die Decembr' Anno Domini Millesimo sexcentesimo octogesimo
octavo apud Hunt' praedict' in Com' Hunt' praed' Colloquium habens cum quodam
Thoma Waddington tunc Servien' Colloquium.
ipsius Lionelli in aperto and publico Mercato ibidem tunc tent' de and
concernen' eodem Lionello and Religione sua and de ejus existen' un' Burgens'
Of the Plaintiff, and of his being a Member of Parliament.
sive Membr' Parliament' praed' pro Villa de Hunt' praedict' in praesentia and
auditu quamplurimarum person' in eodem publico Mercato adtunc and ibidem
congregat' and praesen' existen' haec falsa ficta scandalosa Anglicana verba
sequen' praefat' Thomae Waddington servien' ipsius Lionelli tunc and ibidem
existen' de eodem Lionello falso and malitiose palam and proublice dixit
retulit propalavit and alta voce publicavit and pronunciavit (videlicet) Your
Master (ipsum Lionellum innuendo) is a Papist; The first words.
when he (ipsum Lionellum innuendo) is at home he (ipsum Lionellum iterum
innuendo) goes to Church, but when he (ipsum Lionellum iterum innuendo) is at
London, he (ipsum Lionellum iterum innuendo) goes to Mass: (Missam in Ecclesia
Romana performat innuendo) Sir John Cotton (quendam Johan' Cotton de Stratton
in Com' Bedf. Baronet' al' Burgens' sive Membr' Villae de Hunt' praedict' in
Parliamento praedict' innuendo) and he (ipsum Lionellum iterum innuendo) were
both Pensioners (ipm^ Johan' Cotton and Lionellum penc^ones habere de praedict'
nuper Rege Carolo secundo ad consentiend' and voces suas dand' in Parliamento
pro confeccone legum and statut' in oppressione subdit' ipsius nuper Regis
innuendo) all the time of the Long Parliament (praedict' Parliament' in quo
idem Lionellus and praedict' Johannes ut praefertur fuerint Burgens' sive
Membr' innuendo) praedictusque Johan' ex ulteriori malitia sua postea scilicet
eisdem die and anno ult' menconat' apud Hunt' praedict' super quod' al'
Colloquium adtunc and ibidem habit' cum praedict. Ex ulteriori malitia.
Thoma Waddington adtunc and ibidem Servien' ipsius Lionelli existen' de and
concernen' eodem Lionello and Religione ipsius Lionelli and de suo existen' un'
Burgens' sive Membr' Parliamenti praedict' pro Villa de Hunt' praed' in
praesentia and auditu quamplurimarum aliarum person' in publico and aperto
Mercato ibidem assemblat' existen' ad intencon' praedict' haec alia falsa ficta
scandalosa Anglicana verba sequen (praed Thoma Waddington adtunc and ibidem
Servien' ipsius Lionelli ut praefertur existen') de eodem Lionello falso and
malitiose palam and public dixit retulit asseruit and alta voce publicavit and
pronuncavit (videlicet) Your Master (ipsum Lionellum cujus Servien' Other words.
praed' Thom' ut praefertur tunc fuit innuendo) is a Papist; when he (ipsum
Lionellum iterum innuendo) is in the Country he (ipsum Lionellum iterum
innuendo) goes to Church, but when he (ipsum Lionellum iterum innuendo) is at
London he (ipsum Lionellum iterum innuendo) goes to Mass, (ipsum Lionellum ad
audiend' Missam in Ecclesia Romana performat' ivisse innuendo) Sir John Cotton
(praedict' Johan' Cotton' iterum innuendo) and he (ipsum Lionellum iterum
innuendo) were both Pensioners all the time of the Long Parliament. Quorum
quidem falsorum fictorum scandalosorum and malitiosorum verborum diccon' and
propalacon' praetextu idem Lionellus non solum in bonis nomine reputacone and
fama suis praedict' gravit' laesus and deteriorat' est verum etiam diversas
grandes denar' sum' pro sedacone quamplurimorun falsorum rumorum de ipso
Lionello sparsor' expendere and diversos corporis sui labores subire coact' and
compulsus fuit ad dampnum ipsius Lionelli ducent' libr' and inde produc' sectam
etc.

Et praedict' Johannes pro Richardum Lee Attorn' suum ven' The Defendant pleads
Not guilty.
and defend' vim and injur' quando etc. Et dic' quod ipse in nullo est
culpabilis de praemissis superius ei imponit' modo and forma prout praedict'
Lionellus superius versus eum queritur and de hoc pon' se super patriam and
praedict' Lionellus similitur Ideo Praecept' est Vic' quod Venire fac' hic a
die Sanctae Trinitatis in tres Septiman' duodecim etc. per quos etc. Et qui nec
etc. ad recogn' etc. quia tam etc.

Sir Lionell Walden versus Mitchell.
THe Plaintiff Declared in an Action for Words, That he was a true professor of
the Protestant Religion according to the Reformation and Laws of England, and
that he had been a Member of the Parliament, begun the 8th of May, 13 Car. 2.
and that the Defendant premissor' non ignarus 8 December. Anno Domini 1688.
having discourse of the Religion of the said Plaintiff, and of his having
served in the said Parliament, said to T. W. Servant of the Plaintiff, your
Master is a Papist, when he is at Home he goes to Church, but when he is at
London he goes to Mass; Sir John Cotton and he were both Pensioners ( innuendo,
that the said Sir John Cotton and the Plaintiff received Pensions of King
Charles the Second; for giving their Votes in Parliament for Laws and Statutes
in oppression of the People) at the time of the long Parliament innuendo, the
Parliament in which the Plaintiff and Sir John Cotton served, and upon not
Guilty pleaded, a Verdict was found for the Plaintiff.

It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that none of these words were Actionable,
1 Leon 336. To call a Man Papist; said by Wray Chief, Justice there, that it is
not Actionable unless spoken of a Bishop, so in Savage and Cooks Case, 1 Cro.
192.

It Is true, where spoken of a Person in some eminent Office it is otherwise; as
Sir John Knightlies Case, who was a Justice of Peace, and Deputy Lieutenant,
Hill. 33 and 34. Car. 2. in C. B. rot. 1518. He had Judgment in an Action for
calling of him Papist, and it was affirmed in a Writ of Error brought in B.R.
And the Case of Peake and Tucker, which was Trin. 1. Jac. 2. B. R. Rot. 838.
Where the Plaintiff was a Merchant, And the Defendant said of him he is a
Rogue, a Papist Dog, never a Rogue in Town would have made a Bonfire, but he (
Note those words were spoken the day that King James came to the Crown, and the
time is supposed to have influenced the Opinion of the Court) and the Plaintiff
had Judgment. After having heard the Case several times spoken to, the Court
gave Judgment for the Plaintiff principally for the words, that he went to
Mass; for by the Statute of 23 Eliz. cap. 4. the Offender is to Forfeit 100 l
and he imprisoned for a year, so that they expose him to Corporal Punishment.
It is held, that to say a Man committed petit Larceny is Actionable, Allens
Rep. 11.

The Chief Justice here said, That where a Man had been in an Office of Trust,
to say that he behaved himself corruptly in it, as it imported great Scandal,
so it might prevent his coming in to that or the like Office again, and
therefore was Actionable.

Note, The time these words were spoken was taken notice of (viz.) between King
James the Second's Desertion of the Kingdom, and the Proclaiming of the King
and Queen, when to call a Man Papist would have exposed to him the danger of
the Rabble, whereupon Judicium pro Quer.

Lade versus Parker.
VIde ante Termino Michal' ult. It was this Term moved again, That the pleading
dedit and concess' Nicholao Marsh, filio suo Annuitatem praed' habend' praed'
Nicholao heredibus and assignat' suis ad opus and usum dicti Nicholai haered'
and assign' suor' per quod and vigore Statuti de usibus in possession'
transferen', the said Nicholas became seized, etc. was sufficient, and the
words quae quidem concessio, etc. quod vide ante were to be rejected as
Surplusage: And of that Opinion were Powell, Rokeby and Ventris.

But Pollexfen Chief Justice held strongly to the contrary; and he agreed, this
Deed being to the Son with an express Consideration of natural affection, (though
Money was also part of the Consideration mentioned) that it would work as a
Covenant to stand seized: But then the Parties ought to have pleaded it as a
Covenant, to stand seized, according to the legal construction of such a Deed
where there is no Execution at Law; whereas, here they have pleaded it as a
Grant at the Common Law.

The other Judges differing in their Opinion said, it was sufficient to plead
the Deed as it was worded, and if there were sufficient matter to entitle the
Avowant, Judgment ought to be given accordingly; and then the Avowant
concludes, that he became seized by the Statute of Uses, which shows he
intended to take the operation of the Deed that way, so Judgment was given for
the Avowant. Chief Justice contra.

Note, Sergeant Levins cited the Pleading in Foxes Case, 8 Co. where the words
Demise and Grant in consideration of Money amounted to a Bargain and Sale, (it
being of an Estate for years) without enrolment) it was pleaded, dimisit
concessit and ad firmam tradidit, and non Barganizavit.

Woodward, etc. versus Fox.
IN an Action sur Assumpsit for 200 l received to his use. Upon non Assumpsit a
Special Verdict was found, quod vide ante Term' Trin' ult', and the Case this
Term came to have the resolution of the Court: The case upon the Special
Verdict is to this effect, an Archdeacon makes a Register of the Court,
belonging to his Arch-deaconry in Consideration of 100 l The Bishop of the
Diocese, who was also Patron to the Archdeacon (supposing the Office to have
been void, by the Statute of 5 and 6 Edw. 6. against the Sale of Offices
relating to the Administration of Justice) granted the said Office of Register
to the Defendant, and the said Grant was confirmed by the Dean and Chapter; The
Archdeacon after the Death of that person to whom he had sold the Office, ut
supra, Grants the said Office to the three Plaintiffs for their Lives, and the
Life of the longer liver of them, the Plaintiffs before any Office found for
the King, or any Record showing the Sale of this Office, obtains a Grant of it
from the now King and Queen.

The Court were all of Opinion for the Plaintiffs.

The Court did not speak to two Points stirred in the case, (viz) Whether this
Office could be granted for three Lives, or whether it was within the said
Statute of 5 and 6 Edw. 6. because they were in a manner agreed at the Bar and
the Points settled, But the two main Points in the Case which were spoken to are,

First, Where an Archdeacon sells the Office of Register in the Court of the
Archdeaconry, whether by the Statute of 5 and 6 Edw. 6. the Grant and
Nomination to this Office shall come to he Crown, or whether it shall go to the
Bishop of the Diocese.

Secondly, Admitting the Right to be in the Crown, whether the King and Queen
can make a Register till Office found, or that the Title appears by some
matter of Record.

1. It was resolved, that the Right of appointing the Register, it being
Forfeited by the said Statute of 5 and 6 Edw. 6. did come to the King and Queen.

It is a Rule laid down by Manwood Chief B. Mo. 238. That where a Statute
gives a Forfeiture either for Nonfesans or Misfesans, the King shall have; it
so in 11 Co. 68. This follows the Reason of the Common Law, in case of things
which are nullius in bonis; where no visible Right appears, the Law gives them
to the King (Siderfin 148, 86.) As Derelict Land, Treasure Trove, and a great
number of such like instances may be cited from the Books; so it is in
Extraparochial Tithes, though things of an Ecclesiastical nature, 2 Inst. 646.
Cawdry's Case, 5 Co. 18. Nay, if the Right lie equal between the King and
Subject, the Kings Title has the preference by Law; Detur digniori is a Rule,
9 Co. 24. In case of concurrence of Titles, between the King and Subject.

It was objected, That this held in valuable things, and matters of profit to
the Crown:

But the Court said, there was no such distinction made in the Books, and many
Prerogatives, etc. were given to the King, for the public good and interest of
the Government, as well as for increase of the King's Treasure. There is no
exception out of this construction of Forfeitures upon Penal Statutes, unless
they are in recompense for the Damage suffered by a Subject, as the Statute of
2 Ed. 6. that gives the Forfeiture of the treble value for not setting out of
Tithes, 2 Inst. 650. And this follows the Reason of the Common Law, that Fines
and Penalties for Offenses at Law go to the King as the Head of the Government;
and that was the second Reason the Court went upon, that the Offense for which
this Forfeiture is inflicted is principally against the King. By the preamble
of the Statute it appears to be made for avoiding of corruption in Offices, and
abuses in the Administration of Justice.

Now the King is the Fountain of Justice, and that Ecclesiastical as well as
Civil, in the case of Proxies Davis Rep. 4. It is said the King has power, and
that by the Ancient Law of the Realm, to Visit, Reform and correct all Abuses,
and Enormities in the Jurisdiction Spiritual; so that an Offense of this nature
is a Violation of the Kings Justice, and a Transgression of the Rules of his
Administration.

This is indeed the case of all Crimes of a public nature, the King is most
evidently injured by them; the Indictments run contra coronam and dignitatem,
etc. Now, who should have the Forfeiture, but he that has the greatest share
in the Injury.

Again, by giving of this Forfeiture to the King, the end and design of the
Statute is like to be best answered, By the Preamble the Statute appears to
be made, that worthy persons might be advanced to places where Justice was to
be administered; and who is best to be entrusted with this but the King?

The Court having given these Reasons, they came to consider what had been
insisted on at the Bar in the behalf of the Bishop: It was said, that all the
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical in the Diocese, was originally placed in the
Bishop, and the case of Gastrill and Jones, 2 To. Rep. 646, 647. was cited
where it is said, That the Judicial power of the Archdeacon was derived from
the Bishop; he is called Vicarius Episcopi, and Oculus Episcopi.

It Is true, there are some Archdeacons that have Jurisdictions peculiar and
exempt; but that is by Prescription or Custom; these are taken notice of by
Godolphin.

But there is nothing found of that in the Verdict, and so must be taken to be
the common case of an Archdeacon, and that was agreed.

It was said, this offense was reckoned Simony in the Canon Law. And the Bishop
had the correction of it, as in Smithes Case, Owens Rep. 87.

This was compared to the Cases of inferior and subordinate Officers; which
when they are forfeited, the superior takes advantage, as in the Earl of
Pembrooks Case, and Sir H. Bickly, Popham 119. The Keeper of a Walk in a
Forest forfeited, this went to him that had the custody of the Forest; so in
Bridgman's Rep. 27. He that has Liberty of a Park in a Forest, when forfeited
it goes to the Lord of the Forest, 39 H. 6. 32. The Keeper of the Marshalsey
of the Kings Bench forfeited his Office, the Duke of Norfolk Great Marshal of
England took advantage of it.

To these Cases it was said by the Court, That they differed much from the Case
at the Bar.

First, In the Cases cited, the Inferior Officer is put in by the Superior, and
in some Cases to answer for his miscarriage ubi respondeat Superior, they are
Offices incident, as the County Clark to the Sheriff, Mittons Case, 4 Co. and
Scroggs Case, of the Exigenter to the Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Dyer
175. But here the Bishop does not put in the Register of the Archdeacons Court:
He may make one to supply that place if it falls void, when the Archdeaconry is
vacant, but then the next Archdeacon removes him and puts in another.

Secondly, The Forfeitures in the Cases cited were upon Breaches of Conditions
in Law annexed to the Offices; and it is a Rule in Law, that the Grantor is to
take advantage of the Breach of all Conditions; but we are in case of a
Forfeiture, for offending against an Act of Parliament: And the Court said,
though it might be supposed originally, the Jurisdiction within the Diocese was
lodged in the Bishop; yet the Archdeacons Court has time out of mind been
settled as a distinct Court, 4 Inst. 339. and the Statute of 24 H. 8. cap. 12.
takes notice of the Consistory Court, which is the Bishops Court, and the
Archdeacons Court from which there lies an Appeal to the Bishops Court, in 2
To. Rep. 150. Chivertons Case, The Archdeacon is said to have a Court of
himself, and that the Courts of Westminster take notice thereof: Th^s may be
resembled to the Case of the Torn and Leet in the County; the Leet is supposed
to have been derived out of the Torn, and yet upon the Forfeiture of a Leet, it
shall not go to the Sheriff.

As to the second Point it was resolved by the Court, That the King might in
this Case make a Register before Office found. It was agreed, That where an
Estate of Freehold was forfeited to the King by Act of Parliament, that an
Office would be requisite to vest it in the King, and that by the Statute of 5
Edw. 6. against the sale of Offices, all the Estate and Interest, etc. of the
Offender is forfeited. But Pollexfen Chief Justice conceived, this was not an
Estate in the Archdeacon, but only a Power to appoint a Register, and in the
nature of a chose en Action, like the case of Offices in the King, where the
King may grant or nominate to the Office, but has not the Office in him to use
or execute. But he conceived, and with that the rest of the Court agreed, that
however as to the present vacancy the right to supply that was a Chattel
separate from the Inheritance, and the King might supply the present avoidance
before any Office found, though it be admitted, that the right of nomination in
point of Estate should not vest in the King before Office found. Where the
Kings Tenant dies seized of an Advowson, or in case of an Outlawry, though the
Estate is not in the King before Office; yet if the Church becomes void, the
King shall present before Office, 20 Edw. 4. 11. The case so put of an Advowson
appendant, Stamf. Prerog. 54. B. It Is a Transitory Chattel, the present
avoidance, Lanes Rep. 43, 64. 1 To. Rep. 326. and Jones Rep. 425. So the Body
of the Ward is in the King before Office. In Case of Simony the King shall
present without Office, (Sed nota 31 Eliz. gives the Presentation pro hac vice
only:) And the Court said, that the Verdict found, that the Plaintiffs had a
Grant from the Archdeacon also; so that if nothing be in the King till Office,
it must remain in the Archdeacon, so his Grant will be good till Office found:
There are no disabling words in the Statute, but only shall Lose and Forfeite,
so quacunque via data, the Plaintiffs ought to have Judgment.

Harris versus Parker. Ante ult' Term.
IN an Action of Debt for 99 l Rent, the Plaintiff Declared upon two Demises,
which he laid at the Parish of St. Martin in the Fields in Middlesex of a
Message, and diverse Lands quae praemissa sunt struat' jacent' and existent in
and super acclivitatem de Hampstead (Anglice) the rise of Hampstead Hill, to
hold for seven years, reserving upon each Demise eighteen pounds yearly Rent.

The Defendant pleaded, Actio non, quia dicit quod praed' Johannes Harris,
tempore dimiss' praed' nihil habuit in Tenementis praedict' unde, etc.

The Plaintiff Replied, That long before the said several Demises, (viz.) 13
November. Anno. 26. Car. 2. nuper Regis, The Lord Wotton Demised the Premises in
Hampstead praed' to the Plaintiff for 40 years, (the said Lord Wotton, adtunc
and ibedem plenam potestatem jus and titulum ad praemissa dimittend' pro praed'
Termino Quadraginta and unius annorum habente) by virtue whereof the Plaintiff
entered and became possessed, and made the several Demises to the Defendant,
etc. prout, etc.

To this the Defendant Demurred:

And it was objected, That the Replication was insufficient; for that it did
not set forth what Estate the Lord Wotton had when he made the Demise to the
Plaintiff, but only plenam Potestatem jus and titulum adtunc habente; whereas
it should have been shown that he was seized in Fee, or of some other Estate,
empowering him to make the Lease, Yelv. 228. Glasses Case; where in Debt for
Rent, The Defendant pleaded, The Plaintiff nil habuit, as in this Case, and the
Plaintiff replied, quod habuit bonum and sufficientem Statum unde he could
Demise, and Issue thereupon, and a Verdict for the Plaintiff: And upon a Writ
of Error brought the Court held, That the Estate ought to be set forth, that
the Court might judge whether the Plaintiff could make the Lease; but it being
after a Verdict, in that Case they resolved, it was aided by the Statute of
Jeofailes: And the Court inclined in the Case at Bar, that it was not good upon
a Demurrer.

But then an Exception was taken to the Bar, that it was tempore dimissionum
praedictar' nil habuit; whereas there are two Demises in the Declaration, and
the Plaintiff might have a Title, the time when one was made and not the other,
and tempore in the singular number can be understood but of one of the Demises.

But the Court said, tempore would serve as well as temporibus, and non
Assumpsit where there are diverse Promises; or in a Quo Warranto he used several
Franchises, and the Party Entitles himself in his Plea to one by Prescription,
and to another by Charter, etc. he may conclude and eo Wart' clamat, etc.
Palmers Rep. 1, 2. Nevertheless it was resolved, That the Bar was insufficient,
for he ought to have pleaded distinctly, (viz.) That the Plaintiff nil habuit
at the time of the first Demise, nor at the time of the second; for as it is
pleaded the Construction is dubious and uncertain, whether he had Right when
each of the Demises was made, or at either of them, and the Council for the
Defendant seeing the Opinion of the Court, took exceptions to the Declaration.

For that no place is laid for the Message and demised Premises, only it is
said quae premissa sunt situat' and existent' in and super acclivitatem de
Hampstead (Anglice) the rise of Hampstead Hill, and this could not be taken for
a Vill, or lieu conus out of a Vill; a Venire may come out of a Forest, etc. or
place known, but then it must be shown to lie out of a Town or Parish, 1 Inst.
125. Syderfin 326. Hutton 105.

Pollexfen Chief Justice was strong of Opinion, That here was no place
sufficiently laid for the Lands, as to the manner of laying it: It seemed to be
only a description of their Situation. He seemed to agree, that to lay a thing
apud acclivitatem de Hampstead might be good, but to say Situat' in and super,
etc. varied wholly from the Form of pleading the place.

The other three Justices agreed, That the place was sufficiently laid, they
did not take acclivitas de Hampstead in this Case, for a lieu conus, for that
must indeed lie out of any Town or Parish; but here the Venue shall come out of
Hampstead, and Hampstead shall be taken for the Vill, and they relied upon the
Cases, 1 To. Rep. 312. Atkinson and Buckle, where a delivery of Goods was
alleged to be at Barton Haven, and not shown where Barton Haven was; there it
was inteneded, Barton was a Town, and the Haven there, so the Venire was out of
Barton, Mo. 695. Issue upon delivery of Goods apud Portum de Blackney, the
Venire was to Blackney, 2 Cro. 239. so Hampstead is taken for the Town.

And as to the Form of Pleading, it seemed to the said Justices not to be
varying in sense from the common Farm, and that in and super might serve as
well as apud; so by their three Opinions, Judgment was given for the Plaintiffs.

Target versus Loyd.
Midd'x ss.
Covenant.
ELIZABETH LLOYD nuper de parochi Sancti Jacobi Westm' in Com' praedict' Vid'
alias dicta Elizabeth Loyd of the Parish of St. James Westminster in the County
of Middlesex, Widow; sum' fuit ad respondend' Willelmo Target Bricklayer de
placito quod teneat ei Convenconem inter praedict' Elizabetham and ipsum
Willielmum secundum vim formam and effectum quarundam Indenturarum inter
praedict' Elizabetham and praefat' Willielmum factarum Et unde idem Willielmus
per Willielm' Indentures made.
Botteler Attorn' suum dic' quod cum per quandam Indenturarum apud parochiam
Sanctae Margaret' Westm' in Com' praedict' factam decimo sexto die Novembris
anno regni domini Jacob secundi nuper Regis Angl' etc. quarto inter praefat'
Elizabetham per nomen Elizabethae Loyd de parochia Sancti Jacobi Westm' in Com'
Midd' Vid' ex una part and praedict' Willielm' per nomen Willielmi Target de
eadem parochia and Comtat' Bricklayer ex altera part and menconat' fore factam
inter praefat' Elizabetham Loyd per nomen Elizabeth' Loyd de parochia Sancti
Jacobi Westm' in Com' Midd' Widow ex una part and praedict' Willielm' Target
per nomen Willielmi Target de eisdem parochia and Com' Bricklayer ex altera
part Cujus quidem Indenturae alteram partem sigillo praed' Profert in Curia.
Elizabethae sigillat' dictus Willielmus hic in Cur' profert cujus dat' est
eisdem die and anno Testatur quod praedict' Elizabetha pro and in consideracone
annual' reddit' and convencon' in eadem Indentura reservat' and content' and
diversis aliis bonis causis and consideraconibus ipsam dictam Elizabetham
adinde moven' The Demise.
dimisisset concessisset and ad firmam tradidisset etc. per eandem Indenturam
dimisit concessit and ad firmam tradidit eidem Willielmo Executoribus
Administratoribus and Assign' suis illa duo mesuagia vel tenementa and parvas
areas a Front cum subliciis inclus' scituat' jacen' and existen' in Market
Lane in parochia and Com' praed' and tunc in occupacone ejusdem Willielmi
abutran' super viculam (vocat' Market Lane) ex occidentali in mesuagium vel
tenementum in occupacone Willielmi Eades ex Meridionali in parv' ingressum and
passagium a viculo (vocat' Market Lane) praedict' ex boreali and in ateam
mesuagij in occupacone Mariae Tomlin ex Orientali una cum omnibus viis
passagiis luminibus proficuis easiamentis commoditatibus and appertinen'
qualitercunque dictis mesuagiis sive tenementis and praemissis spectan' vel in
aliquo modo appertinen' seu cum eisdem tunc usis occupat' vel gavis' Habend'
and tenend' dict' Habendum.
mesuagia sive tenementa and omnia alia singula alia praemissa praedimissa cum
pertin' dicto Willielmo Target Executoribus Administratoribus and Assign' suis
a Festo die Annunciaconis Beatae Virginis Mariae tunc prox' sequen' datum
dictae Indenturae usque plenum finem and terminum viginti and quinque anhorum
abinde prox' sequen' and plenarie complend' and finiend' Reddend' inde and
solvend' annuatim duran' praedict' termino eidem Elizabethae Loyd Executoribus
Administratoribus and Assign' suis summam sive annual' Reddit' Reddendum.
viginti and quatuor librarum legalis monetae Angl' ad quatuor maxima usualia
Festa sive Terminos in anno (videlicet) Festum Nativitatis Sancti Johannis
Baptistae Sancti Michaelis Archi' Nativitatis Domini nostri Dei and
Annunciaconis Beatae Mariae Virginis per aequas and aequales porcones Et idem
Willielmus Target dic' quod ipse praedict' Willielmus Target pro seipso
Executoribus and Assign' The Covenants
suis convenit promisit and concessit ad and cum eadem Elizabetha Executoribus
Administratoribus and Assign' suis per eandem Indenturam modo and forma
(videlicet) quod ipse idem Willielmus Executores Administratores and Assign'
sui infra tres annos prox' sequen' dat' dictae Indenturae ad ejus and eorum
propr' onera and custagia fabricarent and facerent vel fabricari and facere
causarent supradicta singula mesuagia sive tenementa in duas duplices domus
sufficien' (Anglice double sufficient Houses) duas Romeas in aream continen'
Acetiam ad ejus and eorum propr' onera and custagia repararent passagium dictis
dimissis praemissis pertinen' Et (sicut tunc fuit latitudinis trium pedum)
latitudinis trium pedum and dimidij unius pedis in Clera (Anglice the Clear)
facarent (ostio ad dom' passagium except') Et idem Willielmus ulterius dic'
quod praedicta Elizabetha per eandem Indenturam pro seipsa Executoribus
Administratoribus and Assign' suis convenit promisit and concessit ad and cum
dicto Willielmo Target Executoribus Administratoribus and Assign' suis modo and
forma sequen' (videlicet) quod ipsa dicta Elizabetha Executores Administratores
and Assign' sui permitterent and tollerent dom' Willelm' Executores
Administratores and Assign' sui ad ejus vel eorum propr' onera and custag'
facere aquaductile (Anglice a Drayn) ad aquam vacuam (Anglice Waste Water) a
dictis domibus in magnam Canalem Fossam (Anglice Main Shore in Six Bell-yard)
abducend' prout per eandem Indenturam inter alia before liquet and apparet
Virtute cujus quidem dimissionis idem Willielmus immediate post Festum
Annunciaconis Beatae Mariae prox' The Plaintiff entered and was possessed.
sequen' datum dictae Indenturae in tenementa praed' cum pertin' intravit and
fuit inde possessionat' Ipsoque Willielmo sic inde possessionat' idem
Willielmus de novo aedificavit erexit and fecit supradicta singula mesuagia
sive tenementa cum pertin' And erected New Houses, according to his Covenant.
The Plaintiff avers performance of all on his part.
in and per omnia secundam formam and effectum Indenturae praed' Et idem
Willielmus ulterius dicit quod licet ipse praed' Willielm' omnes and singula
convencones concessiones and agreamenta in Indentura praedicta superius
specificat' ex part ipsius Willielmi Executor' Administrator' and Assignator'
suorum performand' and perimplend' been and fidelit' juxta vim formam and
effectum Indenturae praedictae custodovit and perimplevit praedicta tamen
Eizabetha convenconem praed' inter ipsam Elizabetham and praefat' The Breach
assigned.
Willielm' factam (Et quod ipsa eadem Elizabetha existens possessionat' de
termino viginti annorum and ultra adhuc ventur' and inexpirat' de and in quadam
pecia terrae ac de and in diversis stabulis scituat' jacen' and existen' in
parochia sancti Jacobi Westm' in Com' praedict' inter praed' domos per
praedict' Willielm' modo and forma supradicta aedificat' and praedict' Canalem
Fossam (Anglice Main Shore in Six Bell-yard) praedicta and per quae aquaductal'
praed' currete debuit a praedict' domibus in Canalem Fossam praedict' apud
parochiam Sancti Jacobi Westm' praedict' in Com' praedict' Demise to J. S. for
part of the Term.
concessit dimisit and assignavit praedict' peciam terrae and stabula praedict'
cuidam Johanni Tomlinson Executoribus Administratoribus and Assign' suis pro
diversis annis adtunc and adhuc ventur parcel' J.S. entered.
) termini Virtute cujus quidem concessionis dimissionis and assignaconis idem
Johannes Tomlinson in vita sua postea in praedict' peciam terrae and stabul'
praedict' intravit and suit inde possessionat' Et sic inde possessionat'
existen' idem Johannes postea scilicet primo die Julij Anno Domini millesimo
sexcentisimo octogesimo octavo apud parochiam Sancti Jacobi Westm' in Com'
praedict' de praemissis praedict' sic ut praefertur possessionat' obiit
intestat' And died possessed.
post cujus quidem Johannis mortem scilicet nono die Julij Anno Domini
millesimo sex centesimo octogesimo octavo Administraco omnium and singulorum
bonorum and catallorum Jur' and Creditor' quae fuerunt praed' Johannis tempore
mortis suae per Johannem Edisbury legum Doctorem Reverend' Vir' Decani and
Capituli Ecclesiae Collegiat' Divi Petri Westm' Administration of his Goods
granted to his Widow.
loci illius Ordinar' Commissar' and Officialem legittime constitut' apud
parochiam Sanctae Margaretae Westm' praed' in Com' praed' cuidam Mariae
Tomlinson nuper uxori praed' Johannis debita legis forma commissa fuit per quod
praed' Maria postea scilicet die and anno ult' menconat' in praedict' peciam
terrae and stabulae praed' Who entered and were possessed.
intravit and fuit inde possessionat' Virtute Concessionis and Administraconis
praedict' Ipsaque Maria sic inde possessionat' existen' postea scilicet primo
die Septembris Anno Domini millesimo sexcentesimo octogesimo octavo supradicto
apud parochiam praed' in Com' praedict' And took Husband.
cepit in virum quendam Samuelem Carter per quod iidem Samuel and Maria in
praedict' peciam terrae and stabula praed' intraverunt and fuerunt inde
possessionat' Ipfisque Samuel and Maria sic inde possessionat' existen' The
Husband and Wife entered and were possessed.
praedict' Samuel and Maria dict' Willielm' ad ejus propr' onera and custagia
facere Aquaductale (Anglice a Drayn) ad Aquam vacuam (Anglice the waste Water)
a suis Domibus in forma praed' aedificat', and fact' per praedict' peciam
terrae and stabula praedict' in magnam Canalem (Anglice Main Shore in Six
Bell-yard) praed' The Breach assigned.
abducend' juxta vim formam and effectum Indenturae praed' non permiserunt sed
praedict' Willielm' facere Aquaductale (Anglice a Drayn) ad Aquam vacuam
(Anglice waste Water) in dictis domibus per praed. peciam terrae and stabula
praedict' in magnam Canalem (Anglice Main Shore in Six Bell-yard) praedict'
abducend' recusaverunt and adhuc recusant licet ad ill' permittend' iidem
Samuel and Maria per eundem Willielm' Target postea scilicet primo die Augusti
Anno Domini millesimo sexcentesimo octogesimo nono apud parochiam Sancti Jacobi
praed' in Com' praedict' requisit' fuerunt') non tenuit set infregit and ill'
prefat' Willelmo hucusque tenere omnino contradixit and adhuc contradic' Unde
dic' quod deteriorat' est and dampnum habet ad valenciam Centum librarum Et
inde produc' sectam etc.

Et praedict' Elizabetha per Johannem Tissar Attorn' suum venit and defendit
vim and injur' quando etc. The Defendant pleads, That he permitted the
Plaintiff to make a Drayn, according to his Covenant.
Et dic' quod praedict' Willielm' Target acconem suam praedict' versus eum
habere non debet Quia dic' quod praedict' passagium dictis praemissis praefat'
Willielmo di missis pertinens est scituat' in praedict' parochia Sancti Jacobi
Westm' praedict' and ducit a praedict' dom' praefat' VVillielmo ut praefertur
dimiss. usque ad Six Bell-yard praed' in praedict' parochia Sancti Jacobi
VVestm' quodque quoddam Aquaductale (Anglice a Dray^) ad Aquam vacuam (Anglice
the waste Water) a dictis dom' in praedict' magnam Canalem fossam (Anglice Main
Shore in Six Bell-yard) praedict' abducend' in and per passagium praedict'
convenient' fieri potuit and potest quodque ipsa eadem Elizabetha post
confecconem dimissionis praed' praefat' Willielmo ut praefertur factae scilicet
praedict' decimo sexto die Novembris anno regni dicti nuper Regis Jacobi quarto
supradicto apud parochiam Sanctae Margaretae VVestm' That he permitted and gave
liberty.
praed' permisit and libertatem dedit praefat' VVillielm' ad ejus onera and
custagia facere Aquaductale in and per passagium praedict' ad Aquam vacuam a
dictis dom' in praed' magnam Canalem Fossam in Six Bell-yard praed' abducend'
per quod idem Willielmus aquaductale ill' in and per passagium praed' ad
libitum suum facere potuisset si voluisset set hoc facere penitus recusavit Et
hoc parat' But the Plaintiff refused it.
est verificare unde petit Judicium si predict' Willielmus acconem suam praed'
versus eam habere debeat etc.

The Plaintiff Demurs.
Et praedictus Willielmus dicit quod praedict' placitum praedict' Elizabeth'
superius in Barram placitat' ac materia in eodem content' minus sufficien' in
lege existunt ad ipsum VVillielmum ab accone sua praed' versus praefat'
Elizabetham habend' praecludend' quodque ipse ad placitum illud modo and forma
praedictis placitat' necesse non habet nec per legem terrae tenetur respondere
Et hoc parat' est verificare Unde pro defectu sufficien' respons' praed'
Elizabethae in hac part placitat' idem Willielmus pet' Judicium and dampna
sua occon' fraccon' convenconis praedict. sibi adjudicari etc.

The Defendant joins in Demurrer.
Et praedict' Elizabetha (ex quo ipse sufficien' materiam in lege ad praedict'
VVillielm' ab accone sua praedict' versus ipsam Elizabetham habend'
praecludend' superius allegavit quam ipsa parat' est verificare Quam quidem
materiam praedict' Willielmus non dedit' nec ad eam aliqualit' respond' sed
verificacon' ill' admittere omnino recusat) pet' Judicium Et quod praedict'
Willielmus ab accone sua praedict' versus eam habend' praecludatur etc. Et
quia Cur' dicti domini Regis and dominae Reginae hic de Judicio suo de and
super praemissis reddend' nondum advisatur dies inde dat' est partibus
praedictis hic usque -- de audiendo inde Judicio suo eo quod Justic' hic inde
nondum etc.

Target versus Loyd.
IN an Action of Covenant, the Plaintiff Declared, That by Indenture made at
Saint Margarets in Westminster between the Defendant, by the name of Elizabeth
Loyd, of the Parish of Saint Margarets Westminster, etc. and the Plaintiff,
etc. Testatur, That the Plaintiff had demised to the Defendant all those two
Messuages, etc. lying, and being in Market-Lane, in the Parish and County
aforesaid, with all Ways, Passages, etc. to hold for one and twenty years,
reserving 24 l yearly Rent, and the Plaintiff set forth diverse Covenants in the
Indenture to be performed on his part, (viz.) That he should repair and enlarge
the Passage belonging to the Premises, etc. and then sets forth, that the
Defendant by the said Indenture for her self, her Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, did Covenant with the Plaintiff; that she, her Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, would permit the Plaintiff at his proper Costs to a
make a Drain, to convey the wast Water from the said Houses demised as
aforesaid, to the main Shore in Six Bell Yard, prout per Indentur' pred' plen'
liquet, and then showed that he entered and became possessed by virtue of the
said Demise, and that the Defendant had broke the said Covenant (eo quod,) that
she being possessed of a Term for years, then and yet to come of a certain
parcel of Land, and two Stables lying between the demised Premises, and the
said main Shore in Six Bell Yard; and by which the Drain aforesaid, ought to
run from the said Houses into the main Shore aforesaid; and then sets forth,
that the Defendant had assigned all her Term in the said piece of Ground, and
Stables to one Tomlinson, by virtue whereof he entered, and after died possessed
of the said piece of Ground and Stables; and that Mary his Wife afterward
became possessed thereof as his Administratrix, and did after Intermarry with
one Barker, who became likewise possessed, and the said Barker and his Wife non
permiserunt, the Plaintiff to make a Drain, to carry the wast Water from the
Houses demised as aforesaid to the Plaintiff, thorough the said piece of Ground
and Stables (assigned as aforesaid) into the said main Shore; but did refuse,
and do yet refuse the Plaintiff to make the same, though requested thereunto,
such a day and year, etc. so the Defendant had broken her Covenant ad damnum
Cent' librarum.

The Defendant pleaded, That the aforesaid Passage belonging to the said
demised Premises, is Situate in the Parish of Saint James aforesaid, and
leads from the Houses demised to the Plaintiff as aforesaid, to Six Bell Yard
aforesaid, and that a Drain to carry off the wast Water from the said Houses,
to the said main Shore in Six Bell Yard, in and thorough the said Passage might
have been, and still may be conveniently made; and that the Defendant did
permit the Plaintiff to make a Drain in and thorough the said Passage, for the
carrying off, etc. and if the Plaintiff would, he might have made it
accordingly, but he refused to do it, and demands Judgment of the Action.

To this the Plaintiff Demurred.

And it was Argued at the Bar, that this Plea was insufficient; for when the
Defendant Covenanted, that the Plaintiff should be permitted to make a Drain
from the demised Premises to Six-Bell-Yard, he was at election to make it
through any part of the Defendants Ground that lay between, though the Ground
were built upon, and so might be very inconvenient for the Defendant, and though
there might be another place to make the Drain in. And cited the Cases of
Election; as where a Feoffment is made of 20 Acres of such a Wood, etc. the
Feoffee may take which 20 he will in any part of the Wood.

The Court were rather inclined, that in this Covenant there should not be
Election to make the Drain through the parties Stables, or Buildings, in case
there were other places proper and convenient to make the Drain in; for every
Agreement must have some reasonable Construction that may be consistent with
the Intent of the parties. But no Opinion was delivered as to this Point,
because there were diverse Exceptions taken to the Declaration, some of which
were fatal.

First, There is no certain place laid for the Houses demised, which are said
to be lying and being in the Parish aforesaid; whereas there are two named
before, (viz.) St. Margarets and St. James's, so it was altogether uncertain.

Secondly, The Breach is eo quod, they did not permit the Defendant; which is
no positive Affirmation.

Thirdly, The Covenant is, That the Defendant, her Executors, Administrators
and Assigns shall permit, and the Breach is laid in the Assignees not
permitting; and it appears by the pleading, that this Assignment was made to
Thomlinson diverse years before the Demise to the Plaintiff; and this Covenant
cannot be extended only to the Assignees of the Defendant after the Demise made.

Fourthly, Here it is said quod non permiserunt; but no special Disturbance,
which ought to have been particularly set forth for the Court to judge of it.

The Court held all these Exceptions, but the second, to be fatal, especially
for that the Disturbance was laid to be by an Assignee which came in before the
Demise; but as to the pleading the Breach eo quod, they rather inclined that it
was good. And so the Opinion of the Court seems to be in the Cutlers and
Southern's Case in the 1 Sand. 116. But for the other Exceptions, Judgment was
given against the Plaintiff.

Priscella Web versus Moore.
Wiltes' ss.
FRANCISCUS MOORE nuper de paroch' de Wootton Basset in Com' praedict' Armig'
Attach' fuit ad respondend' Priscillae Web Vid' de placito Transgr' super
Casum etc. Indebitat' Assumpsit the Defendant pleads an Outlawry in Bar.
Et unde eadem Priscilla per Johannem VVilkyns Attorn' suum queritur quod cum
praedict' Franciscus primo die Martij anno regni domini Jacobi secundi nuper
Regis Angl' secundo apud Wootton Basset indebitat' fuisset eidem Priscillae in
summa quinquaginta solidorum legalis monet' Indeb' Assumps. for a Runlet of
Wine.
Angliae pro cado minori (vocat' a Runlet) Vini albi (Anglice White Wind) and
triginta and sex ampullis vitreis (Anglice Glass Bottles) ipsius Priscillae per
ipsum Francisum de eadem Priscella ante tempus illud empt' habit' and recept'
Et sic inde indebitat' existen' praedict' Franciscus postea scilicet eodem
primo die Marcij anno regni dicti nuper Regis secundo supradicto apud Wootton
Basset praedict' in consideracone inde super se assumpsit and eidem Priscillae
adtunc and ibidem fidelit' promisit quod ipse praedict' Franciscus praed'
quinquaginta solidos eidem Priscillae cum inde postea requisit' fuisset been
and fidelit' solvere and contentare vellet Cumque etiam praedict' Another
Indebitatus, as well for Meat, Drink, Wine, Brandy and Tobacco, as for
Horse-meat
Franciscus postea scilicet decimo die Januarij anno regni dicti nuper Regis
tercio apud Wootton Basset praed' indebitat' fuisset eidem Priscillae in summa
octo librar' similis legalis monet' Angl' tam pro esculent' poculent' vino vino
forti (Anglice Brandy) nicotiano and foco (Anglice Fire) ipsius Priscillae pro
eodem Francisco quam pro feno and pabulo ipsius Priscillae pro quodm^ equo
ipsius Francisci per ipsam Priscillam ad speciales instanc' and tequisiconem
ipsius Francisci ad seperal' tempora antetunc invent' and provis' Et sic inde
indebitat' existen' praed' Fransciscus postea scilicet eodem decimo die
Januarij anno tertio supradicto apud Wootton Basset praedict' in consideracone
inde super se assumpsit praefataeque Priscillae adtunc and ibidem fidelit'
promisit quod ipse praedict' Franciscus easdem octo libras eidem Priscellae cum
inde postea requisit' esset been and fidelit' A quantum meruit for Meat, Drink,
Wine, Brandy and Horse-meat, found and provided by the Plaintiff as an
Innkeeper.
solvere and contentare vellet Cumque etiam praedictus Franciscus eodem decimo
die Januarij anno regni dicti nuper Regis tertio supradicto apud Wootton Basset
praedict' in consideracone quod praedict' Priscilla (communis Hospitatrix tunc
existen') ad speciales instanc' and requisiconem ipsius Francisci saepius
invenisset and providisset ad onera and custagia ipsius Priscillae propria tam
esculent' poculent' vinum vin' forte nicotian' and focum pro eodem Francisco
quam fenum and pabulum pro quodam equo ipsius Francisci super se assumpsit and
eidem Priscillae adtunc and ibidem fidelit' promisit quod ipse praedict'
Franciscus tant' denar' summas quant' esculent' poculent' vinum vin' forte
nicotianum focum foenum and pabulum ill' rationabilit' valebant eidem
Priscillae cum inde similit' postea requisite fuisset been and fidelit' solvere
and contentare vellet Et eadem Priscilla in facto dicit quod esculent'
poculent' vinum vin' forte nicotianum focum foenum and pabulum praed'
raconabilit' valebant scilicet octo libras similis legalis monet' Angl' Another
Indebitatus for Goods sold.
Cumque etiam praedict' Franciscus eodem decimo die Januarij anno tertio
supradicto apud Wootton Basset praedict' indebitat' fuisset eidem Priscillae in
summa septem librar' and december solidor' similis legalis monet' Angl' pro
diversis bonis mercimoniis and merchandizis ipsius Priscillae eidem Francisco
per praedict' Priscillam ad similes speciales instanc' and requificonem ipsius
Francisci ante tempus illud vendit' and deliberat: Et sic inde indebitat'
existen' praedict' Franciscus postea scilicet eodem decimo die Januarij anno
tertio supradicto apreud Wootton Basset praedict' in consideracone inde super
se assumpsit and eidem Priscillae adtunc and ibidem fidelit' promisit quod ipse
praedict' Franciscus easdem septem libras and december solid' eidem Priscillae cum
inde silit' postea requisit' fuisset been and fidelit' solvere and contentare
vellet Cumque etiam praedict' An Insimul computasset.
Franciscus postea scilicet primo die Aprilis anno regni dicti nuper Regis
quarto apud Wootton Basset praed' computasset cum eadem Priscilla de diverfis
denar' summis eidem Priscillae per praefatum Franciscum ante tempus illud
debit' and adtunc insolut' existen' Et super Compo^ illo praed' Franciscus
invent' fuit in arregagiis erga eandem Priscillam in summa septem librar' sex
solidor' and undecim denarior' similis legalis monet' Angl' Et sic in
arreragiis praed' invent' existen' praed' Franciscus postea scilicet eodem
primo die Aprilis anno quarto supradicto apud Wootton Basset praed' in
consideracone inde super se assumpsit praefatoque Priscillae adtunc and ibidem
fidelit' promisit quod ipse praed' Franciscus praed' septem libras sex solid'
and undecim denar' eidem Priscillae cum inde similit' postea requisit' fuisset
been and fidelit' solvere and contentare vellet Praedictus tamen Franciscus
seperales promission' and astumpcon' The Plaintiff says, That the Defendant
has not paid the several Sums.
suas praed' sic ut praefertur fact' minime curan' set machinan' and
fraudulent' intenden' eandem Priscillam in hac part callide and subdole
decipere and defraudare praed' seperales denar' summas in toto se attingen' ad
triginta and tres libras sex solid' and undecim denar' seu aliquem denar' inde
eidem Priscillae (licet ad hoc fac' praed' Franciscus postea scilicet decimo
die Aprilis anno quarto supradicto and saepius postea apud Wootton Basset
praed' per eandem Priscillam requisit' fuisset) non solvit seu aliqualit' pro
eisdem contentavit set ill' ei hucusque solvere seu aliqualit' pro eisdem
contentare omnino recusavit and adhuc recusat ad dampn' ipsius Priscillae
quadragint' librar' Et ind produc' sectam etc.

Et praed' Franciscus per Humfridum Wall Attorn' suum venit and defendit vim
and injur' qundo etc. The Defendant pleads an Outlawry in Bar.
Et dicit quod praed' Priscilla acconem suam praed' versus eum habere non debet
quia dicit quod quidam Scarborough Chapman al' scilicet Termino Sanctae
Trinitatis anno regni dicti domini nuper Regis tertio implacitavit praed' J.S.
impleaded the Plaintiff,
Priscillam per nomen Priscillae Web nuper de Wootton Basset in Com' VVilt'
Vid' in Cur' dicti nuper Regis de Banco praed' hic de placito Transgr' In the
Common Pleas.
praedictaque Priscilla pro eo quod non ven' in praed' Cur' de Banco praed'
praefat' Scarborough inde responsur' secundum legem and consuetud' hujus regni
Angliae in exigend' posit' fuit ad utlagand' In an Action of Trespass.
in Com' Wiltes' praed' and ea racone postea scilicet quinto decimo die Maij
anno regni dicti nuper Regis quarto in Com' Wiltes' praedict' And for not
appearing she was waived.
debito juris modo ad sectam praed' Scarborough waviat' fuit and adhuc waviat'
existit prout per Recordum and Process. inde in eadem Cur' dicti nuper Regis de
Banco praedict' retornat' and modo residen' The Outlawry yet in force.
before liquet and apparet quae quidem utlagar' adhuc in suis robore and
effectu remanem' minime reversat' seu annihilat' Et hoc parat' est verificare
per Recordum illud Unde petit Judicium si praedict' Priscilla acconem suam
praedict' inde versus eum haere debeat etc. Et hoc parat' est verificare per
Recordum.


Et praedict' Priscilla dic' quod praedictum placitum praedict' Demurrer to the
Plea.
Francisci superius in Barram placitat' materiaque in eodem content' minus
sufficien' in lege existunt ad ipsam Priscillam ab accone sua praed' versus
eundem Franciscum habend' praecludend' quodque ipsa ad placitum illud modo and
forma praed' placitat' necesse non habet nec per legem terrae tenetur
respondere Et hoc parat' est verificare Unde pro defectu sufficien' Respons'
praedict' Francisci in hac part eadem Priscilla pet' Judicium and dampna sua
occone non perform' promission' and assumpcon' praed' sibi adjudicari etc.

Et praedict' Franciscus ex quo ipse sufficien' materiam in lege ad praedict'
Priscillam ab accone sua praedict' versus eum habend' Joynder in Demurrer.
praecludend' superius allegavit quam ipse paratus est verificare Quam quidem
materiam praedicta Priscilla non dedic' nec ad eam aliqualit' respondit set
verificacon' illam admittere omnino recusavit ut prius per' Judic' and quod
praed' Priscilla ab accone sua praed' versus eum habend' praecludatur etc. Et
quia Justic' hic se advisare volunt de and super premissis praed' priusquam
Judic' inde reddant dies dat' est partibus praed' hic usque a die Sancti
Michaelis in tres Septimanas de audiendo inde Judicio suo eo quod idem Justic'
hic nondum inde etc.

Priscilla Web Widow versus Moore.
THe Plaintiff Declared in an Action upon the Case upon Five several Promises,
one whereof was upon a Quantum meruit, for finding Meat and Drink for the
Defendant at his Request.

The Defendant pleaded in Bar an Outlawry of the Plaintiff in this manner
(viz.) Quod quidam S.C. al' scilicet Termino Sanctae Trinitat' anno regni nuper
Regis Jacobi secundi tertio implacitavit pred' Priscillam in Cur' dicti nuper
Regis de Banco hic de placito trangres. praedict' quae Priscilla pro eo quod
non venit in praedict' Cur' de B. praed' praefat' S. C. inde responsur'
secundum legem and consuetud' hujus regni Angl' in Exigendo posita fuit ad
utlagand' in Com' Wiltes' and ea ratione postea scilicet quinto decimo die Maij
anno regni dicti nuper Regis quarto in Com' Wiltes' praed' debito juris modo ad
Sectam praed' S. C. waviata fuit and adhuc waviata existit prout per recordum
and processum inde eadem Cur' dicti nuper de Banco praed. retornat' and modo
residens plen' liquet Quae quidem Utlagaria adhuc in suis robore and effectu
remanet minime reversat' seu annihilat' and hoc parat' est verificare per
Recordum illud unde pet' Judicium si action' etc.

And to this Plea the Plaintiff Demurred.

1. For the Outlawry could not be pleaded in Bar to an Assumpsit upon a Quantum
meruit; for there is no certainty of Debt appearing till the thing comes to be
valued, and so cannot be forfeited. It was doubted, Whether Debt upon a Simple
Contract was forfeited till 4 Co. Slade's Case?

But it was Resolved by the Court in this Case, that the Outlawry was a good
Plea in Bar; for the Consideration created a Debt, though that Debt was not
reduced to a certain Sum. Markham and Pit in 3 Leon. 205. Outlawry pleaded in
Bar to Trover, where it lies all in Damages: But this Action arose upon a
property of Goods which would have been forfeited, 3 Leon. 197. where the King
had granted all Forfeitures that accrued to him by the Outlawry of J. S. and
the Grantee brought an Action.

But an Exception was taken to the pleading of the Outlawry; for it ought to
have been set forth, that the Plaintiff did not appear upon the Exigent, and
upon that waviata fuit and debito juris modo is too general, Fitzherb. Account
91. Traverse 31. Stamford 148.

And of this the Court doubted, and appointed to search Presidents of the
Pleading. Et Adjornatur.

Kempe versus Cory and al'. Quod vide ante ultimo Termino.
THe Case was now moved again, and as to the Matter in Law it was held clear,
that where A. is seized of a Third part in Common, and B. of the other two
parts in Common with A. and A. let his Third part, reserving Rent, and B. puts
in his Cattle, or a Stranger by his License, that such Cattle are not
Distrainable for the Rent. But the Doubt was, because the Avowry was in loco in
quo ut in and super praedict' tertiam partem, etc. Whether the Plaintiff should
not have traversed the Taking in tertia part tantum. Vide the Case of Newman
and Moor in Hob. 80. and 103. And note there, that the Traverse was held
unnecessary.

And the Court held clearly, that it would have been impertinent to make a
Traverse in this Case; for the Matter in the Avowry was confessed and avoided.

CASES Adjudged upon Writs of ERROR IN THE Exchequer Chamber, Termino Sancti
Michaelis Anno 1 W. and M. BY Pollexfen Chief Justice. Powell, Justices.
Rokeby, Justices. Ventris, Justices. Atkyns Chief Baron. Nevill, Barons.
Lechmore, Barons. Turton, Barons.

Willows versus Lydcot.
Upon a Writ of Error upon a Judgment in Ejectment in B.R. which was brought
for a Message in St. Martins in the Fields.

Upon the General Issue pleaded, and a Special Verdict found, the Point was to
this effect:

William Shelton was seized in Fee of the said Message, and of dvers other
Messuages situate in the said Parish of St. Martin, and other Parishes, and
made his Will in Writing, and thereby Devised his Houses in the other Parishes
to diverse Charitable Uses, and then devised to one Edward Harris and Mary his
Wife the Message in question for their Lives; and then in the following
Clause, the better to enable his Wsfe to pay his Legacies, he devised all his
Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever, within the Kingdom of
England, (not above disposed of) to have and to hold to her and her Assigns for
ever; and made her Executrix. And the Verdict was found, That Edward Harris and
Mary his Wife were dead, and that the Testator left sufficient to his Wife to
pay his Legacies, without the Reversion of the said Messuages devised to Harris
and his Wife: That the Lessor of the Plaintiff was Heir at Law to the Testator,
and that the Defendants claimed from Anne, Wife of the Testator, etc. and si
super totam materiam, etc. And Judgment was given in the Kings Bench for the
Plaintiff.

And upon a Writ of Error brought in the Exchequer-Chamber, it was this Term
Argued before the Justices and Barons, and by the Opinion of them all the
Judgment was Reversed.

For they held, that there were words in the Devise to the Testators Wife that
would carry the Reversion of this House as an Hereditament undis^o^d of. Vide
the Case of Wh^eler and Walroon in Allen's Rep. 28. one having a Manor and
other Lands in Somersetshire, Devised the Manor to A. for Six years, and part
of the other Lands to B. in Fee; and then comes this Clause, -- and the rest of
my Lands in Somersetshire, or elsewhere, I give to my Brother; and it was
adjudged by the word [Rest] the Reversion of the Manor passed as well as the
Lands not Devised before.

A Case about 20 years ago was cited by the Counsel for the Defendant, in the
Writ of Error, between Bowyer and Milbanke, in a Borough where a Nuncupative
Will would pass Lands by the Custom, a man upon his Deathbed being asked about
his Will, said, I Give All to my Mother, and repeated the words twice or
thrice, Raymond's Rep. fo. 97.

It was held that would not pass the Land; for it was said, that it were hard
that Lands should pass by a Parol Will by Custom, unless there be express and
plain words to show the Intention.

Chapman versus Flexman.
The Style of the Court of the Exchequer Chamber.
PLACITA in Camera Scaccarij apud VVestm' coram Thoma Street Mil' and Edwardo
Lutwich Mil' duobus Justic' domini Regis de Communi Banco and Thoma Powell Mil'
un' Baron' de Scaccario domini Regis de gradu de la Coife die Sabbati vicesimo
quinto die Novembr' anno regni domini Jacobi secundi Dei gratia Angliae Scotiae
Franciae and Hiberniae Regis Fidei defensor' etc. quarto.

Dominus Rex mandavit dilecto and fideli suo Roberto Wright Mil' The Writ of
Error.
Capitali Justic' suo ad placita coram ipso Rege tenend' assign' Breve suum
Clausum in haec verba Jacobus secundus Dei gratia Angliae Scotiae Franciae and
Hiberniae Rex fidei defensor' etc. Dilecto. and fideli nostro Roberto Wright
Mil' Capital' Justic' nostro ad placita coram nobis tenend' assign' salutem Cum
in Statuto in Parliamento Dominae Elizabethae nuper Regin' Angl' apud Westm'
vicesimo tertio die Novembr' anno regni sui vicesimo septimo tent' edit' int'
caetera inactitat' fuit authoritat' ejusdem Parliamenti quod ubi aliquod Judic'
ad aliquod tempus extunc postea reddit' foret in Cur' de Banco Regis in aliqua
secta aut accone debiti detencon' convencon' compoti accon' super Casum
Ejeccon' firmae aut Transgr' primum inchoat' aut primum ibidem inchoand'
preterea tantum ubi nos foremus pars sequen' aut defend' contra quam aliquod
tal' Judic' reddit' foret ad suam eleccon' prosequi potest extra Cur' Cancellar
speciale breve de Errore devisand' in dicta Cur' Cancellar' Capitali Justic'
dictae Cur' de Banco Regis pro tempore existen' dirigend' mandans ill' causare
dict' Record' ae omnia concernen' dict' Judic' Transferri coram Justic' de
Communi Banco and Baron' de Scaccario in Camera Scaccarij ibidem examinand' per
dictos Justic' de Communi Banco and Baron' praed' Qui quidem Justic' de Communi
Banco and tales Baron' de Scaccario qui sunt de gradu de la Coife aut sex
illorum ad minus virtute ejusdem Actus superinde plenam potestat' and
authoritat' habuerunt ad examinand' omnes tales Error' qual' assignat' aut
invent' fueirnt in aut super aliquod tale Judic' and superinde reversare aut
affirmare dict' Judic' prout lex requiret praeterquam pro Erroribus assignand'
aut inveniend' pro aut concernen' Jurisdicconem praed' Cur' de Banco Regis aut
aliquem defect' form' in aliquo Brevi retorn' Querela Billa Declaracone aut in
alio placito processu veredicto aut procedencia quibuscunque Et quod postquam
dict' Judic' affirmat' aut revocat' fuit dict' Record' ac omnia ill' concern'
in dictam Cur' de Banco Regis removend' and reducend' erunt ut talis ulterior'
process. superinde fiat tam pro execucon' quam alit' prout pertinebit sicut in
dicto Statuto before continetur Ac quia in record' etc process. ac etiam in
reddicone Judic' loquelae quae fuit in Cur' nostra coram nobis per billam inter
Rogerum Flexman and Johannem Chapman de quadam Transgr' super Casum eidem
Rogero per praefat' Johannem illat' ut dicitur Error intervenit manifestus ad
grave dampnum ipsius Johannis sicut ex loquela sua accepimus Qui quidem Error
nullo modo tangit nos aut Jurisdiccon' praed' Cur' nostr' de Banco Regis
praedict' aut aliquem defect' formae in aliquo Brevi retorn' Querela Billa
Declaracon' aut in alio placito vel procedencia quibuscunque ut accepimus Nos
igitur volentes Errorem si quis fuerit juxta formam Statut' praed' corrigi and
partibus praed' plenam and celerem Justic' fieri in hac part vobis mand' quod
si inde Judic' reddit' sit tunc Record' and process. praed' cum omnibuse a
tangen' coram dictis Justic' de Communi Banco and Baron' de Scaccario nostro
praedict' in Camera Scaccarij nostri praedict' die Sabbati (videlicet) vicesimo
sexto die instantis mensis Novembr' ven' fac' ut dicti Justic' and Baton' vis'
and examinat' Record' and process. praed' ulterius inde Fieri fac' quod de jure
and secundum formam Statut' praed' fuerit faciend' Test meipso apud Westm'
xiij. die Novembr' anno regni nostri tertio:

Davies.

The Return of the Writ.
Record' and process. praed' cum omnibus ea tangen' de quibus in brevi praedict'
fit menc^o sequuntur in haec verba.

Placita coram domino Rege apud Westm' de Termino Sancti Hill' annis regni
domini Jacobi secundi nunc Regis Angliae etc. secundo and tertio.

Rot' DCCCCLXMIIII.

The Memorandum.
Devon' ss. Memorandum quod alias scilicet Termino sancti Michaelis ult'
praeterit' coram domino Rege apud Westm' ven' Rogerus Flexman per Johannem
Clifton Attorn' suum and protulit hic in Cur' dicti domini Regis tunc ibidem
quandam billam suam versus Johannem Chapman in Custod' Mar' etc. de placito
Transgr. super Casum Et sunt pleg' de pros' scilicet Johannes Do and Ric' Roe
quae quidem Billa sequitur in haec verba: Declaration in a Special Action of
the Case, brought by a Lessee of an Ancient Mill, for not grinding at his Mill.
Devon ss. Rogerus Flaxman queritur de Johanne Chapman in Custod' Mar' Maresc'
domini Regis coram ipso Rege existen' pro eo videlicet quod cum quidam Johannes
Speccott Armig' secundo die Novembr' Anno Domini Millesimo sexcentesimo
octogesimo quinto and diu antea and continue postea hucusque fuit and adhuc est
seisit' de and in Maner' and Burgo de Torrington in Com' praed' ac de septem
antiquis molend' aquat' suffic' ad molend' omnia grana and brasium
inhabitantium infra Manerium and Burgum praedict' pro necessar' usibus suis
molit' and ibidem expendit' sex eorum infra Manerium and Burgum de Torrington
praedict' altero eorum extra Burgum praedict' Seisin of the Manor and Millrs.
sed infra' praedict' Manerium praed' existen' Cumque etiam praedict' Rogerus
Flexman praedict' secundo die Novembr' Anno Domini millesimo sexcentesimo
octogesimo quinto supradict' and continue postea hucusque fuit and adhuc est
tenens and firmar' praed' Johannis' The Plaintiff Farmer of the Mills.
Speccot ad voluntat' praedict' Johannis praed' septem molendinorum aquaticorum
granaticorum Et deinde possessionat.' Et tolnet' granorum and brasij in eisdem
molendinis molit' per tempus illud habuisset and habere debuit Cumque eriam
omnes inhabitan' Et habuit and habere debuit the Toll.
in aliquibus antiquis mesuag' infra Manerium etc Burgum praedict' existen' de
jure debuerunt molire ad praedict' septem molendina aliqua sive aliquod eorum
infra Manerium praedict' existen' onmia and omnimoda grana sua and brasium
infra Manerium and Burgum existen' post molitur' inde in praedict' mesuag' suis
expandit' (Anglice spent) ac solvere pro molitur' inde rationabile tolnet'
except' tantummodo tal' grana and brasium Inhabitantium praedict' in antiquis
mesuag' praedict' post molitur' inde expendit' qual' per possessorem sive
possessores quorundam antiquorum molendinorum aquaticorum granaticorum (vocat'
Wear Mills alias Weargifford Mills) jacen' extra Manerium and Burgum praedict'
videlicet infra paroch' de Weargifford in Com' praedict' pro tempore existen'
per se vel servientes suos super un equinum oneratorium (Anglice Loading-Horse)
solummodo in Servitio ill' ad un' tempus impens' pro asportacone talium
granorum and brasij ad praedict' molendin' (vocat' Wear Mills alias Weargifford
Mills) and reportacone eorundem quando molit' onerari and portari possunt
Cumque praedict' Johannes Chapman praed' The Defendant an Occupier of an
Ancient Message, which ought to grind at his Mills.
secundo die Novembr' Anno Domini Millesimo sexcentesimo octogesimo quinto
supradict' and diu antea and continue postea hucusque fuit and adhuc existit
occupatorem and possessorem unius antiqui mesuag' (vocat' the Swanne) jacen'
and existen' infra Manerium and Bur gum praedict' ac per totum tempus praed' in
eodem mesuag' vixit com^oravit and inhabitavit and adhuc vivit commorat and
inhabitat praed' tamen Johannes Chapman praemiss. non ignarus sed machinans and
intendens ipsum Rogerum in hac part callide and subdole decipere defraudare
and pejorare praedict' secundo' die Novembr' anno regni dicti domini Regis nunc
primo erexit locavit and imposuit quoddam molendin' manuarium (Anglice vocat'
The Defendant erected a Hand-Mill and ground therewith.
a Hand-Mill) infra Manerium and Burgum praedict' (videlicet) in praedict'
antiquo mesuag' ipsius Johannis Chapman ibidem Et praedict' secundo die
Novembr' anno regni dicti domini Regis nunc primo supradicto and diversis aliis
diebus and vicibus postea and ante exhibicon' Billae ipsius Rogeri praedict'
Mill modios Brasij ipsius Johannis Chapman infra Manerium and Burgum praedict'
existen' and in praedicto antiquo mesuag' praedict' Johannis Chapman post
molituram inde expendit' in praed' molendino (vocat' the Hand-Mill) moluit
racone cujus praedict' Rogerus tolnetum quod ipse pro molitur' inde ad
praedict' molendina ipsius' Ratione cujus the Plaintiff lost his Toll.
Rogeri lucrari potuit perdidit and amisit ad dampnum ipsius Rogeri quadraginta
librarum Et inde produc' sectam etc.

Et modo ad hunc diem Lunae prox' post Octab' sancti Hillar' The Defendant
Imparles.
isto eodem Termino usque quem diem praed' Johannes Chapman habuit licenc* ad
Billam praed' interloquend' and tunc ad respond' etc. coram domino Rege apud
Westm' ven' tam praed' Rogerus per Attorn' suum praedict' quam praed' Johannes
Chapman per Johannem Lugg Attorn' suum Et idem Johannes Chapman defendit vim
and injur' quando' etc. And pleads Not guilty.
Et dic' quod ipse non est inde Culp' Et de hoc pon' se super Patriam Et praed'
Rogerus silit' etc. Ideo ven' inde Jur' coram domino Rege apud Westm' die
Sabbati prox' post' Octab' Purificacon' Beatae' Mariae Et qui nec etc. ad
recogn' etc. Quia tam etc Idem dies dat' est partibus praed' ibidem etc. postea
continuat' inde process inter parts praedict' de placito praed' per Jur'
posit' inde inter eas in respect' coram domino Rege apud Westm' usque diem
Lunae prox' post' tres Septimanas sancti Michaelis extunc prox' sequen' Nisi
Justic' dn^i Regis ad Assisas in Com' praedict' capiend' assign' prius die
Martis vicesimo sexto die Julij apud Castrum Exon' in Com' Devon praed' per
formam Statut' etc. ven' pro defect' Jur' etc. ad quem diem coram domino Rege
apud Westm' ven' praed' Rogerus per Attorn' suum praedict. Postea.
Et praefat' Justic' domini Regis coram quibus etc. miser' hic Record' suum
coram eis habit' in haec verba: ss. Postea die and loco infracontent' coram
Roberto Wright Mil' Capital, Justic' domini Regis ad placita coram ipso Rege
tenend' assign' and Johanne Powell Mil' Justic' dicti domini Regis ad placita
coram ipso Rege tenend' assign' Justic' ejusdem dicti domini Regis ad Assisas
in Com' Devon' capiend' assign' per formam Statut' etc. ven' infranominat'
Rogerus Flexman per Attorn' suum infracontent' and infrascript' Johannes
Chapman licet solempnit' exact' non ven' sed defalt' fecit Ideo Jur' unde infra
fit menco capiatur versus eum per defalt' Et Jur' Jurae illius exact' quidam
eorum videlicet Willielmus Booth Andreas May Georgius Gregory Thomas Corrindon
Thomas Rugg Samuel Hall Ambrosius Thomas and Petrus Clarke vener' and in ill'
jurat' existunt Et quia resid' Tales.
Jur' ejusdem Jur' non comparuer' Ideo al' de circumstantibus per Vic' Com'
praed' ad hoc electi ad requisicon' praedict' Rogeri Flexman ac per mandat'
Justic' praed' de novo apponuntur Quorum nomina Panello infrascript' affilantur
secundum formam Statut' in hujusmodi casu edit' and provis' ac Jur' sic de novo
apposit' videlicet Hugo Bidwell Johannes Crauscombe Willielmus Avent and
Johannes Sprye exact' silit' ven' Qui ad veritatem de infracontent' simulcum
al' Jur' praedict' prius impannelat' and jurat' dicend' elect' triat' and
jurat' dicunt super Sacrum^ suum quod praed' Johannes Chapman est culpabilis de
praemiss. infrascript' prout praed. Verdict for the Plaintiff.
Rogerus Flexman interius inde versus eum queritur Et assidunt dampnum ipsius
Rogeri Flexman occone inde ultra mis' and custag' sua per ipsum circa sectam
suam in hac part apposit' ad un' denar' Et pro mis' and custag' The Judgment.
ill' ad quadragint' solid' Ideo cons' est quod praed' Rogerus Flexman
recuperet versus praefat' Johannem Chapman dampna fua praedict' per Jur' praed'
in forma praed' Asses. necnon sexdecim libras pro misis and custag' suis praed.
eidem Rogero per Cur' dicti domini Regis nunc hic ex assensu suo de Incro^
adjudicat' Quae quidem Dampna in toto se attingunt ad octodecim libras and un'
denar' Et praed' Johannes in misericordia etc.

The Placita in the Exchequer Chamber.
Placita in Camera Scaccarij apud Westm' coram Edw' Atkyns Mil' Capital' Baron'
de Scac' dn^i Regis de gradu dela Coife Thoma Jenner Mil' Richardo Heath and
Thoma Powell Mil' tribus al' Baron' de Scaccario dn^i Regis de gradu de la
Coife necnon Thoma Street Mil' Edw' Lutwich Mil' and Christof. Milton Mil'
tribus al' Justic' dn^i Regis de Communi Banco vicesimo sexto die Maij anno
regni domini Jacobi secundi Dei gratia Angliae Scot' Franciae and Hiberniae
Regis Fidei defensor etc. quarto.

Ad quem diem hic ven' praedict' The General Errors assigned.
Johannes Chapman per Johannem Lugg Attorn' suum Et dic' quod in Record' and
process. praedict' ac etiam in reddicone Judic' praed' manifest' est errat' in
hoc videlicet quod Judic' praed' in foima praed' reddit' reddit' existit pro
praedict' Rogero versus praefat Johannem Chapman ubi per legem terrae hujus
regni Angliae idem Judicium reddi debuisset pro praed. Johanne Chapman versus
praed' Rogerum Ideo in eo manifest est errat' Et petit quod Judicium praed' ob
Errores praedict' and alios in Record' and process. praed. ac in reddicone
Judicij praed. existen' revocetur adnulletur and pro nullo penitus habeatur and
quod ipse ad omnia quae occone Judic' praed. amisit restituatur etc. And a
Scire facias ad audiendum Errores prayed,
Et petit breve domini Regis Vic' Devon' dirigend' ad praemuniend' praefat'
Rogero essendi hic auditur' Record' and process. praed' and ei conceditur etc.
And awarded.
Ideo Praecept' est Vic' quod probos etc. Scire fac' praefat' Rogero quod sit
hic die -- prox' futur' auditur' Record' and process. praedict' si etc. Et
ulterius etc. Idem dies dat' est eidem Johanni Chapman hic etc.

Et praedict' Rogerus Flexman dic' quod nec in Record' and process. praedict.
The Defendant in the Errors appears and pleads in nullo est Erratum.
nec in reddicone Judic' praed' in ullo est erratum Et petit etiam quod Cur'
domini Regis and dominae Reginae hic procedat ad examinacon' tam Record' and
process. praed' quam praed' causae per ip m^ Johannem Chapman superius per
erroribus assign' and allegat' Et quod Judic' praed' in omnibus affirmetur Et
quia Cur' dicti domini Regis and dominae Reginae hic se advisare vult de and
super praemiss. prius. quam Judic' inde reddat dies dat' est partibus praed'
usque diem Sabbati -- prox' futur' de Judicio suo inde audiend' eo quod Cur'
domini Regis hic inde nondum etc.

Chapman versus Flexman.
IN an Action upon the Case, in B. R. the Plaintiff declared, That one Jo.
Specot 2 Novembr' 1685. and diu ante was seiseo of the Manor and Burgh of
Torrington, and of seven ancient Water Corn Mills, sufficient to grind the Corn
of the Inhabitants, within the Manor and Burgh aforesaid, for their necessary
uses; and that the Plaintiff was the day aforesaid and continue postea, Tenant
at Will to the said Specot of the said seven Mills, and had the Toll of Corn,
which was ground in the said Mills during the time aforesaid and habere
debuisset: And whereas all the Inhabitants of any ancient Message, within the
Manor and Burgh aforesaid, de jure debuerunt molere ad praed' septem molend'
aliqua sive aliquod eorum omnia and omnimoda grana sua infra Mess' praed'
expendit' ac solvere pro molitura inde rationab tolnetum. And whereas the said
Chapman the day aforesaid, and diu antea was Occupier of an ancient Message,
within the Manor and Burgh aforsaid; the said Chapman the 2 of November, etc.
Erected a certain Mill within the Manor and Burgh aforesaid, and within his
said Message, wherewith he did grind diverse, (viz.) 1000 Bushels of Malt,
which he spent in his said House; by Reason whereof, the said Flexman lost the
benefit of the Tall of the said Malt which he should have had, ad damnum, etc.

The Defendant pleaded not Guilty, and a Verdict was found Plaintiff, and
Judgment that he should Recover in B. R.

And the Error now insisted upon was, That the Plaintiff had not set forth any
Title in his Declaration to the Toll, or any Custom or Prescription, for the
Inhabitants of those ancient Houses, to bring their Corn to be ground there.

But the Opinion of all the Court, the Judgment given in the Kings Bench was
affirmed; for it is sufficient to say in this possessory Action, that during the
time aforesaid, he had and ought to have the Toll; and that the Inhabitants
debuerunt molere, vide the Case of Dent and Oliver, in 2 Cro. 43.122. vide
Rastall Tit. molin', in Action sur le Case, fol. 90. F. N. B. 123. for an
ancient Watercourse said currere consuevit.

Note, That of Rastall cited by Pollexfen Chief Justice it is said, that the
Inhabitants a toto tempore praedicto molere consueverunt, and the Prior and his
Predecessors, are alleged to be seized of the Mill time out of mind; so that,
that President does not seem to warrant the Judgment in this Case.

Sarsfeild versus Witherly.
FRancis Sarsfeild brought an Action upon the Case, against Hamond' Witherly in
the Kings Bench, wherein he declared to this effect. Cum Civitas Paris in regno
Franciae est and tempore, etc. fuit antiqua Civitas Cumque etiam Civitas London
in hoc regno est and a toto tempore, etc. fuit antiqua Civitas Cumque etiam
duplex usantia in aliqua billa excambij mention int' mercatores and al' person'
apud Paris praed' residen' negotian' and commercium haben' and mercat' and al'
person' apud London praed' residen', etc. and appunctuat' fore solut' apud
London praed' acceptat' est and a toto tempore, etc. acceptat' fuit per spatium
duorum mensium a dat' hujusmodi primae Billae Excambij Cumque etiam apud London
praed', (viz.) in paro eh, etc. existit eta toto tempore, etc. habebatur
antiqua consuetudo int' mercatores and al' person' apud Paris praed' residen'
and negotian' and mercatores and al' person' apud London praed' residen' and
negotian', (viz.) quod si aliquis mercator sive al' persona apud Paris praed'
residen' and negotian' fecerit primam Billam Excambij pro aliqua denar' summa
and alicui al' mercator' sive al' personae apud London praed' residen' and
negotian' direxit and requisivit ad duplicem usantiam hujusmodi primae billae
Excambij secunda minime solut' ad solvend' alicui al' mercat' sive al' person'
vel ordini suo aliquam denar' sum pro valor recept' de hujusmodi mercator'
sive al' persona cui vel cujus ordini hujusmodi denar' summa per hujusmodi
prim' billa' Excambij appunctuat' fuit solvendum and ante solutionem and
satisfactionem inde per Indorsamentum in scriptis manu sua propria subscript'
and indorsat' super hujusmodi primam billam Excambij ordinavit hujusmodi denar'
sum' solvi ordim alicujus alij mercator' in hujusmodi indorsament' nominat'
valor recepto de illo Et' si hujusmodi mercator sive al' persona cui vel cujus
ordini hujusmodi denar' summa per hujusmodi indorsament' appunctuat' fuit
solvend' per secund' indorsament' super hujusmodi primam billam Excambij
ordinavit hujusmodi denar' summ' solvi ordini alicujus alij mercator' sive al'
personae ac si post hujusmodi seperal' indorsament' and notitiam inde dat'
hujusmodi mercator sive al' personae cui hujusmodi prima billa Excambij sic
fuit direct' and quod ille non solveret hujusmodi denar' summam hujusmodi
mercator' sive al personae cui per hujusmodi secundum indorsament' praedicta
solutio inde appunctuat' fuit sed pro defectu solutionis hujusmodi mercator
sive al' persona in hujusmodi secundo indorsamento nominat' ad finem duorum
mensium a dat' hujusmodi primae billae Excambij protestare sive protestari
causaret secund' praed' consuetud' mercator' hujusmodi primam billam Excambij
Et si post hujusmodi protestationem hujusmodi mercator sive al' persona in
hujusmodi primo indorsamento nominat' solveret and satisfaceret hujusmodi
mercatori sive al' personae in hujusmodi secundo indorsamento mentionat'
hujusmodi denar' summam in prima billa Excambij content' quod tunc hujusmodi
mercator sive al' persona qui hujusmodi primam billam Excambij fecerit onerat'
and onerabil' existit per consuetud' ad solvend' hujusmodi denar' summam
hujusmodi mercatori sive al' personae cui solutio inde per hujusmodi primum
indorsamentum appunctuat' fuit Cumque etiam praed' Hammond Witherly die, etc.
apud Civitat' Paris praed' apud London praed' in Parochia and Warda praed'
residens and negotians and Mercator ibid. existens eodem die, etc. Stilo novo
apud Paris, etc. secundum consuetud' mercator' praed' fecit quandam primam suam
billam Excambij manu sua propria subscript' geren' dat', etc. cuidam T.W. in
parochia and Warda praed' residen' and negotian' direct' and per eandem
requisivit praed' T. W. ad duplicem usantiam dictae suae primae billae Excambij
(secunda sua minime solut' existen') ad solvendum cuidam W. Ellis sive ordini
plenam summam septuaginta and quatuor librarum pro valor recept' quam quidem
billam postea and ante finem duarum mensium a dat' ejusdem scilicet die, etc.
apud, etc. praed' W. Ellis per indorsamentum manu sua propria subscript' and
indorsat' secundum consuet' etc. ordinavit praed' septuaginta and quatuor
libras fore solut' ordini praed. Francisci Sarsfeild mercator' adtunc and
ibidem existen' etc. valor de illo, etc. idemque Franciscus ante solutionem
Billae praed. and ante finem duorum mensium a dat', etc. scilicet -- die, etc,
apud London', etc. per secundum indorsamentum manu sua propria subscript' super
illam primam Billam excambij secund' praed' consuetud' ordinavit praed' 74 l
fore solut ordini cujusdam Johannis Comin mercat' adtunc and ibidem existent'
and quod de praed' seperal' indorsament' praed' Tho. W. postea scilicet die
etc. apud L. praed' noticiam habuit Et praed' Franciscus Sarsfield in facto
dicit quod praed' T. W. a fine duorum mensium a dat', etc. seu hucusque non
solvit praedict' Johanni Comin praed' 74 l and quod pro defectu solutionis
praed' J C. ad finem duorum mensium a dat', etc. scil' die, etc. apud L. praed'
in Paroch. etc. protestavit seu protestari causavit praed' primam Billam
excambij secund' confuetud', etc. and ulterius in facto dicit quod ipse idem
Franciscus postea scil' 20 die Septembr' Anno 1681. apud L. etc. solvit
praefat' Johanni Comin praedict' septuagint' and quatuor libras ratione quorum
quidem praemiss. and consuetud' praed' pred' Hamond Witherly onerat' and
onerabil' est per consuetud' praed' onerab' and onerat' esse consuevit ad
solvend' praefat' Francisco praed' sum' 74 l in praedict' prima Billa excambij
mentionat' ac idem Hamond in consideracone praemissor' postea scil' eodem 20
die Septembr' apud L. praedict', etc. super se assumpsit and eidem Francisco
adtunc and ibid' fideliter promisit quod ipse idem Hamond' praed' 74 l eid'
Francisco been and fideliter solvere vellet Cumque etiam praed' Hamond postea
scilicet eodem die, etc. indebit' suit eidem Francisco in al' 74 l pro consim'
denar' summa per eundem Franciscum ad requisiconem ejusd' Hamond ante tempus
illud erogat' and sic inde indeb' existen' idem Hamond in consideracone inde
postea scilicet eod' die, etc. apud L. etc. super se assumpsit and eidem
Francisco adtunc and ibidem fideliter promisit quod ipse idem Hamond praed' 74
l ult' menconat' eidem Francisco cum inde postea requisit' esset been and
fideliter solvere and contentare vellet praedict' tamen Hamond seperales
promiss. and assumps. etc. minime curans sed machinans, etc. praedict' seperal'
denar' summas in toto se attingen' ad 148 l seu aliquam partem eidem Francisco
non solvit, etc. licet ad hoc faciend', etc. saepius postea apud London', etc.
requisitus fuit, etc. Unde idem Franciscus dicit quod ipse deteriorat' est and
dampnum habet ad valenciam 60 l and inde producit sectam, etc.

The Defendant as to the second Promise pleaded Non Assumpsit and quoad
residuum praed' Transgr' super Casum in Narr' praed' idem Hamond dicit quod
praedict' Franciscus actionem suam habere non debet quia protestando non eorum
aliqua superius inde allegat' fore vera protestando etiam quod praed' narratio
inde ac materia in eadem content' minus sufficien' in lege existunt ad actionem
praed' manutenend pro placito idem Hamond dicit quod ipse est filius and haeres
apparens praed' Thomae VVitherly superius nominat' quodque ipse idem Hamond pro
ejus meliore educatione videndo parts and gentes extraneos ac notando and
intelligendo mores and linguas earum ante praedict' tempus quo supponitur Billa
excambij praedict' fieri ex licentia domini Regis peregrinatus fuit ut
generosus Anglican' in part' Transmarin' ac dicto tempore quo, etc. fuit apud
Civitat' Paris praed' ut hujusmodi generosus ac peregrinator ac nulla alia de
cuasa absque quod hoc quod ipse idem Hamond est vel unquam fuit Mercator seu
persona per viam merchandizandi negotians int' Civit' Paris in part'
Transmarin' and Civit' London' vel apud eorum alter' vel alibi ubicunque prout
praed' Francisc' superius supponitur and hoc parat' est verificare Unde petit
Judicium si praedict' Franciscus actionem, etc.

To this the Plaintiff Demurred.

1. It was said, that the Plea amounted to the General Issue; for if the Matter
of it would avail the Defendant, it might be given in Evidence upon Non
assumpsit.

To which it was Answered, That it was no General Rule that a Matter could not
be pleaded specially, which might be given in Evidence upon the General Issue.
In an Action of Debt for Rent, an Entry and suspension of the Rent may be given
in Evidence upon Nil debet; yet it is always allowed to be pleaded, and so Nil
habuit in tenementis; and wherever the Matter pleaded contains Matter of Law it
is allowed to be pleaded, though it might be shown upon the General Issue, Hob.
127.

And of the Opinion were the Court.

2. But then it was said for the Plaintiff, That the Plea was insufficient in
the Matter of it; for the Custom is laid for Merchants and other persons
resident and negotiating at Paris; and the very Drawing of the Bill of Exchange
is a negotiating in it self, and the practice is so frequent between all
persons, as well as Merchants, to negotiate by Bills of Exchange, that it would
prove a great Inconvenience, if they should not be of the same effect between
others as well Merchants.

And the Court were all of Opinion, that the Plea of the Defendant was
Insufficient, and that he having Drawn this Bill was obliged by it, according
to the course of Bills of Exchange; and whereas Judgment was given in the
King's Bench upon this Record for the Defendant, they Reversed the said
Judgment, and gave Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Termino Paschae, Anno 2 Willielmi and Mariae. In Scaccario.
Cramlington versus Evans and Percival.
The Placita in the Exchequer Chamber.
PLACITA in Camera Scaccarij apud Westm' coram Robeto Atkyns Mil' Capital'
Baron' de Scaccario domini Regis and dominae Reginae de gradu de la Coife
Henrico Pollexfen Mil' Capital' Justic' domini Regis and dominae Reginae de
Communi Banco Johanne Powell Mil' Johanne Rokeby Mil' and Peyton Ventris Mil'
tribus al' Justic' domini Regis and dominae Reginae de Communi Banco necnon
Edwardo Nevill Mil' and Johanne Turton Mil duobus al' Baron' de Scaccario
domini Regis and dominae Reginae de gradu de la Coife die Sabbati decimo quinto
die Junij anno regni domini Willielmi and dominae Mariae Dei gratia Angl' Scot'
Franc' and Hiberniae Regis and Reginae Fide defensor etc. primo.

Dominus Rex and Domina Regina mandaver' dilecto and fideli suo Johanni Holt
Mil' Capital' Justic' suo ad placita in Cur' ipsorum domini Regis and dominae
Reginae coram ipsis domino Rege and domina Regina tenend' The Writ of Error.
assign' breve suum Clausum in haec verba: ss. Gulielmus Tertius and Maria
secunda Dei gratia Angl' Scotiae Franciae and Hiberniae Rex and Regina Fidei
defensor' etc. dilecto and fideli nostro Johanni Holt Mil' Capital' Justic'
nostro ad placita coram nobis tenend' assign' salutem Cum in Statuto in
Parliamento dominae Elizabethae nuper Reginae Angl' apud Westm' vicesimo tertio
die Novembris anno regni sui vicesimo septimo tent' edit' int' caetera
inactitat' fuit authoritat' ejusdem Parliamenti quod ubi aliquod Judicium ad
aliquod tempus extunc postea reddit' foret in Cur' de Banco Regis in aliqua
secta aut accone debiti detencon' convencon' comput' Accon: super Casum
Ejeccon' firmae aut Transgressionis primum inchoat' aut primum ibidem inchoand'
praeterea tantum ubi nos foremus pars querens aut defendens contra quem aliquod
tale Judicium reddit' foret ad suam eleccon' prosequi potest extra Cur'
Cancellar' special' breve de Error' devisand' in dictam Cur' Cancellar' Captal'
Justic' Cur' de Banco Regis pro tempore existen' dirigend' mandans ill' causare
dict' record' ac omnia concernen' dict' Judicium transferri coram Justic' de
Communi Banco and Baronibus de Scaccario in Camera Scaccarij ibidem examinand'
per dictos Justic' de Communi Banco and Barons praedictos Qui quidem Justic'
de Communi Banco and tales Barons de Scaccario qui sunt de gradu de la Coife
aut sex illorum ad minus Virtute ejusdem Actus superinde plenam potestat' and
Authoritat' habebunt examinand' omnes tales Errores qual' Assign' aut invent'
fuerint in aut super aliquod tale Judicium and superinde reversare aut
affirmare dictum Judicium prout lex requiret praeterquam pro Erroribus assign'
aut inveniend' pro aut concernen' Jurisdicconem praedict' Cur' de Banco Regis
aut aliquam defectum formae in aliquo Brevi retorn' Querela Billa Declaracon'
aut in alio placito processu veredicto aut procedentia quibuscunque Et quod
postquam dictum Judicium affirmat' aut reversum fuerit dictum Record' ac omnia
illud concernen' in dictam Cur' de Banco Regis removend' and reducend' erunt ut
talis ulterior processus superinde fiat tam pro execucone quam aliter prout
pertinebit sicut in dicto Statuto before continetur Ac quia in Record' and
processu cujusdam loquelae quae suit in Cur' domini Jacobi secundi nuper Regis
Angl' etc. coram ipso nuper Rege per Billam inter Stephanum Evans and Petrum
Percival and Lancelot' Cramlington de quadam Transgr' super Casum eisdem
Stephano and Petro per praefat' Lancellot' illat' necnon in reddicon' Judicij
ejusdem loquelae versus praefat' Lancelot' in Cur' nostra coram nobis ut
dicitur Error intervenit manifestus Ad grave dampnum ipsius Lancelot' sicut ex
Querela sua accepimus Qui quidem Error' nullo modo tangit Nos aut Jurisdiccon'
praedict' Cur' nostrae de Banco Regis praedict' aut aliquem defectum formae in
aliquo Brevi retorn' Querela Billa Declacone aut in alio placito processu
veredicto aut procedencia quibuscunque ut accepimus Nos igitur volentes Errorem
si quis fuerit juxta formam Statuti praedict' corrigi and partibus praed'
plenam and celerem Justiciam fieri in hac part vobis mandamus quod si Judicium
inde reddit' sit tunc Record' and process. praedict' cum omnibus ea tangen'
coram dictis Justic' de Communi Banco and Baronibus de Scaccario nostro
praedict' in Camera Scaccarij nostri praedict' die Sabbati (videlicet) decimo
quinto die instantis Mensis Junij Venire fac' ut dicti Justic' and Barons vis'
and examinat' record' and process. praedict' ulterius inde Fieri fac' quod de
jure and secundum formam Statut' praed' fuerit faciend' Test nobis ipsis apud
Westm' quarto die Junij anno Regis nostri primo.

Fish.

Record' and Process. praedict' cum omnibus ea tangen' de quibus in Brevi
praedict' fit menco sequitur in haec verba: The Return of the Writ of Error.

The Placita.




Placita coram domino Rege apud Westm' de Termino Paschae anno regni domini
Jacobi secundi nunc Regis Angl' etc. secundo.

Rot' CXC II.

The Memorandum.
London ss. Memorand' quod al scilicet Termino sancti Hillar' ult' praeterit'
coram domino Rege apud Westm' ven' Stephanus Evans and Petrus Percival per
Johannem Normansell Attorn' suum Et protuler' hic in Cur' dicti domini Regis
tunc ibidem quandam Billam suam verse. Lancelot' Cramlington in Custod' Mar'
etc. de placito Transgr' super Casum Et sunt pleg' de prosequend' scilt Johan'
Do and Rich' Roe Quae quidam Billa sequitur in haec verba: ss. London ss.
Steph' Evans and Petrus Percivall queruntur de Lancel' Declaration upon an
Inland Bill of Exchange.

The Custom set forth.


Cramlington in Custod' Mar' Maresc' domini Regis coram ipso Rege existen' pro
eo videlt quod cum infra hoc regn' Angl' videlt in paroch' Beatae Mariae de
Arcubus in Warda de Cheap Lond' praed' habetur and existit and a tempore cujus
contrar' memoria hom' non existit habebatur and fuit quaedam consuet' int'
mercatores and al' person' infra hoc regn' Angl' residen' and commerciu^
habentes usitat' and approbat' videlt quod si aliquis mercator vel al' person'
Any Merchant, or other person.
infra regn' Angl' residen' fecerit aliqm^ Billam excambij secund' usum
mercator' and hujusmod' Billam excambij sua propr' manu subscrips. and eandem
Billam excambij secund' usum mercator' alicui al' mercat' sive al' personae
infra hoc regn' Angl' direxit and per eand' Billam excambij requisivit hujusm'
m^cator' sive al' person' cui hujusm' Billa excamb' sic suerit direct' ad
solvend' aliquam denar' sum' in hujusm' Billa excambij menconat' ad aliquod
tempus in hujusm' Billa excambij limitat' alicui al' mercatori sive person in
hujusm' Billa excambij nominat' vel ordini suo pro usu alicujus al' Vel ordini
suo.
mercator' sive person' in hujusm' Billa nominat' pro' consimili valor in
hujusm' Billa menconat' fore recept' de aliquo al' mercat' sive person' in
hujusm' Billa excamb' nominat' and ad locand' hujusm' denar' sum' ad comput'
prout peradvisam' Et si hujusm' mercat' sive al' person' cui hujusm' Billa
excambij sic direct' foret super visum hujusm' Super visum acceptavit.
Billae excambij acceptaret hujusm' Bill' excambij secund' usum mercat' ad
solvend' hujusm' denar' sum' in hujusm' Billa mencon' secund' tenor' hujusm'
Billae excambij Et si hujusm' mercat' sive al' person' cui vel cujus ordini
soluco hujusm' denar' sum' in hujusm' Billa excambij menc' Et sic per
Indorsamentum appunctuaret, etc.

Pro valor in hujusmodi Indorsamento. Upon refusal to pay.


appunct' fuerit fiend' per Indors. hujusm' Billae excambij ordinau^it content'
hujusm' Billae excambij solvend' aliquibus al' mercat' sive al' person' in
hujusm' Indors. nominat' vel ordini eorum pro valor in hujusm' indorsament'
mencon' fore recept' de hujusm' personis in hujusm' Indorf. nominat' Ac si
hujusm' mercat' sive al' person' qui hujusm' Bill' excambij sic accepraverit
postea recusau^it solvere hujusm' denar' sum' in hujusm' Billa excambij
menconat' hujusm' mercat' sive al' personis in hujusm' Indorsament' hujusm'
Billae excambij nominat' quibus vel quorum ordini soluco inde per hujusm'
Indors. hujusm' Billae excambij appunctuat' foret fiend' secund' tenorem
hujusm' Billae excambij tunc hujusm' Then the Merchant to become chargable.
mercat' sive al' person' qui hujusm' Billam fic fecit super noticiam hujusm'
recufacon' onerabilis extitit and a toto tempore supradict' onerabilis existit
and onerat' esse consuevit solvere hujusmodi denar' sum' in hujusm' Billa
excambij menc' hujusm' mercat' sive al' personis in hujusmodi Indorsament'
hujusm' Billae excambij nominat' quibus vel quoru^ ordini soluc' inde pro
hujusm' Indors. hujusm' Billae excambij sic ut praefertur appunct' foret fiend'
Ac iidem Steph' and Petrus in facto dic' quod praed' Lancelot' Cramlington
infra hoc regn' Angl' The Defendant being a Merchant at Newcastle, drew a Bill
upon one J. S.
scilicet apud Villam and Com' Novi Castri super Tinam residen' and mercator
existen' decimo die Novembris Anno Dom' MDCLXXXV. apud Villam and Com' Novi
Castri praedict' secundum usum mercator' praed. fecit quandam solam Billam suam
excambij in scriptis geren' dat' eisdem die and anno and eand' Billam manu sua
propr' subscripsit and eandem Billam cuidam Willielmo Ryder adtunc in Lond'
praedict in paroch' and warda praed' residen' and artem Mercatoris ibidem
exerc' direxit and per eandem Billam excambij idem Lancelot' Cramlington adtunc
and ibidem requisivit praed' Willielm' Ryder ad vigint' and quinque dies po st
dat' ejusdem solae Billae suae excambij solvere cuidam Thomae Price (adtunc
apud Lond' praed' in paroch' and ward' praed' residen' Payable to one Price.

Merchant in London.


and mercator' ibidem existen' vel ordini suo quingent' libr' pro usu Fel'
Calvert Armig' pro consimili valor recept' ibidem ( scilt apud Villam and Com'
Novi Castri praed') de Magistro Franc' Clever and locare ill' Value received
ad comput' prout per advisament' Quodque Billa excambij praed' postea scilt
decimo quarto die Novembr' anno supradicto apud Lond' praed. in paroch' and
ward' praed' praefat' Willielmo Ryder praesentat' fuit idemque Willielm' Ryder
eandem Billam adtunc and ibidem scilt eodem decimo quarto die Novembris anno
supradicto apud Lond' praed. The Bill presented to J. S.
in paroch' and ward' secundum usum mercator' praed. acceptavit quodque praed'
Thomas Price cui vel cujus ordini soluc' denar' praedict' And by him accepted.
in Billa excambij praed' menconat' per eandem Billam appunctuat' fuit fiend'
postea scilicet eodem decimo quarto die Novembris anno supradicto apud Lond'
praedict. in paroch' and ward' praed' pro valor per eundem Thomam Price de
eisdem Stephano Evans and Petro Percivall adtunc and ibidem habit' and recept'
per Indorsamen' Price orders payment to the Plaintiff.
ejusdem Billae excambij secund' consuetud' Mercator' praed' ordinavit content'
ejusdem Billae excambij solvi praefat' Petro Percivall and Stephano Evans
adtunc apud Lond' praedict' residen' and Mercator' ibidem existen' quodque
praedict' Willielmus Ryder postea scilicet quinto die Decembris anno supradicto
apud Lond' praedict' in paroch' and ward' de praemiss. J.S. had notice, and the
Money demanded of him.
praedict' habuit notic' ac per eosdem Stephanum and Petrum adtunc and ibidem
requisit' suit ad solvend' eandem denar' sum' in eadem Billa excambij menconat'
eisdem Stephano and Petro secund' formam and effect' praed' Indors' Billae
excambij praed' quod ipse idem Williel' adtunc and ibidem facere penitus
recusavit de omnibus quidem praemiss. idem Lancelot' Cramlington postea
scilicet primo die Januar' But he refused payment.
anno ult' supradict' apud Lond' praedict' in paroch' and ward' praed' notic'
habuit ac ratione inde ac per consuetud' praed' a toto tempore praed' Of which
the Defendant had notice.
usitat' and approbat' idem Lancelot' ad solvend' easdem quingent' libr' eisd'
Stephano Evans and Petro Percivall onerabil' and onerat' devenit Et superinde
idem Lancelot' Cramlington in considerac' praemiss. postea scilicet eodem primo
die Januar' anno ult' supradicto apud Lond' praed' And became chargable, and
thereupon promised payment.
in paroch' and ward' praed' super se assumpsit and eisdem Steph', and Petro
adtunc and ibidem fidelit' promisit quod ipse idem Lancelot' praedict'
quingent' libr' eisdem Stephano and Petro cum inde requisit' esset been and
fidelit' solvere and contentare vellet praedict' tamen Lancelot' promission'
and assumpcon' suas praed' in forma praed' fact' minime curan' sed machinan'
and fraudulent' intenden' eosdem Steph' and Petr' in hac part callide and
subdole decipere and defraudare praed' quingent' libr' Bill' excambij praed'
menc' seu aliquam inde denar' eisdem Steph. and Petro seu eorum alteri nondum
solvit (licet ad hoc faciend' postea scilicet eod' But although often requested
non solvit.
primo die Jan' anno suprad' apud Lond' praed' in paroch' and ward' praed' idem
Lanc' per praefat' Steph' and Petr' requisit' fuit) sed ill' eis seu eorum
alteri solvere hucusque omnino recusavit and adhuc recusat unde iidem Steph'
and Petr' dic' qd' ipi' deteriorat' sunt and dampnum habent ad valenc'
sexcentar' libr' Et inde produc' sectam etc.

Et modo ad hunc diem scilicet diem Mercurij prox' post Quinden' Paschae isto
eodem Termino usque quem diem praed' Lancelot' habuit licenc' Imparlance.
ad Bill' praed' interloquend' and tunc ad respondend' etc. coram' domino Rege
apud Westm' ven' tam praed' Steph' and Petr' pro Attorn suum praedict' quam
praed' Lancelot' per Adam' Baynes Attorn' suum Et idem Lancelot' defend' vim
and injur' quando etc. Et dic' quod praed' Steph' and Petrus Accon' suam praed'
inde versus ipsum habere seu manutenere non debent Quia protestando quod non
habetur nec exist' nec a toto tempore fupradict' habebatur vel suit quaedam
consuet' int' mercator' Protestando, that there is no such Custom.
and al' personas infra hoc regn' Angl' residen' and Commerc' habentes usitat'
and approbat' quod' si aliquis Mercator vel al' person' infra hoc regn' Angl'
residen' fecerit aliquam Billam excambij secund' usum Mercator' and hujusmodi
Billam excambij sum propr' manu subscrip' and eandem Biilam excambij secundum
usum mercator' alicui al' mercatori sive al' personae infra hoc regn' Angl'
residen' direxerit and per eandem Billam excambij requisiverit hujusm' mercat'
sive al' person' cui hujusm' Billa excamb' suit direct ad solvend' aliquem
denar' sum' in hujusm' Billa excambij menconat' ad aliquod tempus in hujusm'
Billa excambij limitat' alicui al' mercatori sive personae in hujusmodi Billa
excambij nominat' vel ordini suo pro usu alicujus al' mercator' sive person' in
hujusmodi Billa nominat' pro consimili valor in hujosmodi Bill' excambij
menconat' fore recept' de aliquo al' mercat' sive person' in hujusm' Billa
excambij nominat' and ad locand' hujusm' denar' sum' ad Comput' prout per
advifament' Et si hujusmodi mercator sive al' person' cui hujusmodi Billa
excambij sic direct' foret super visum hujusm' Billae excambij acceptaret
hujusm' Bill' excambij secund' usum mercat' ad solvend' hujusm' denar' sum' in
hujusm' Billa menconat' secundum tenor' hujusmodi Billae excambij Et si hujusm'
mercat' sive al' person' cui vel cujus ordini soluco hujusm' denar' sum' in
hujusm' Billa excamb' menconat' appunctuat' fuerit fiend' pro Indors. hujusm'
billae Excambij ordinavit content' hujusm' billae Excambij solvend' aliquibus
al' mercat' sive al' person' in hujusm' Indors. nominat' vel ordini eorum pro
valor in hujusm. Indors. menc' fore recept' de hujusmodi person' in hujusm'
Indors. nominat' ac si hujusm' mercat' sive al' person' qui hujusm' billam
Excambij sic accept' postea recusaverit solvere hujusm' denar' in hujusm' billa
Excambij menc' hujusm' mercat' sive al' person' in hujusm' Indors. hujusm'
billae Excambij nominat' quibus vel quorum ordini soluco inde pro hujusm'
Indors' hujusm' billae Excambij appunct' fore fiend' secund' tenor' hujusm'
billae Excambij tunc hujusm' mercat' sive al' person' qui hujusm' billam
Excambii sic seceritsuper notic' hujusm' recusacon' onerabilis extitit and a
toto tempore suprad' onerab' extitit and onerat' esse consuevit solvere hujusm'
denar' sum' in hujusm' billa Excambij menc' hujusm' mercator' sive al' personis
in hujusm' Indors. hujusm' billae Excambij nominat' quibus vel quor' ordini
soluco inde per Indors' hujusm' billae Excambij sic ut praefertur foret fiend'
modo and forma prout pred' Stephanus etc Petrus pet billam suam praed' superius
allegaver' Pro placito tamen idem Lancelot' dic' quod diu ante diem exhibicon'
Pro Placito, That one Calvert an Exciseman paid the Defendant the Money in
question by the hands of one Claever, being the Kings Money.
billae praed' Felix Calvert Arm' in billa praed' superius nominat' existen'
un' Commissionar' and Gubernator omn' Ratar' Imposicon' and Debit' Excisae
super Cervisiam lupulat' (Anglice Beer) Cervisiam (Anglica Ale) Pyracon'
(Anglice Perty) Pomac (Anglice Cider) Mellicrati (Anglice Metheglin) and omnium
al' liquorum Excisabil' dic' dn^o Regi nunc debit' and solubil' infra regn'
Angl' Dom' Walliae and villam Bervici super Tweed decimo die Novembr' anno
regni regni dicti domini Regis nunc primo supradicto apud praed' Villam Novi
Castri super Tinam solvit eidem Lancelot' per manus praed' Francisci Clever
praed' quingent' libr' de denar' eidem domino Regi nunc accrescen' and renovan'
de Debit' Excisae super liquores Excisabil praed' in praed' Villa and Com' Novi
Castri super Tinam and Com' Northumbr' ad intencon' quod praedict' quingent'
libr' solut' To the intent that it should be paid to the King.
forent eidem Felici Calvert pro usu dicti d^ni Regis nunc apud Civit' Lond'
praed' posteaque scilicet eodem decimo die Novembris anno primo supradicto apud
praed' Villam Novi Castri super Tinam ad requisicon' praed' Felicis idem
Lancelot' praed' And the Defendant afterward at Calvert's Request drew the
Bill. That Calvert was then indebted to the King.
billam Excambij fecit and subscripsit and praed' Willielmo Ryder direxit and
pet eandem billam requisivit praed' Willielm' Ryder ad solvend' praedict'
Thomae Price praed' quingent' libt' pro usu praed. Felicis modo and forma in
billa praed' menconat' Et idem Lancelot' ulterius dic' quod praed' Felix sic ut
praefertur Commissionar and Gubernator debit' Excisae praed, existen' postea
scilicet vicesimo quarto die Novembris anno primo supradicto and ante diem
exhibic' billae praed eidem domino Regi nunc indeb' existebar in diversis
denar' sum' attingen' in toto ad quinque mill libr' legalis monet' Angl' and
amplius ratione praemiss. prout per Record' Scac' dicti dn^i Regis nunc apud
Westm' in Com' Midd' plen' Prout per Record' Scaccarij.
liquebat and apparebat Quodque praed. Fel' Calvert praed' quinque mill libr'
eidem dn^o Regi nunc non solvit nec solvi fecit ratione cujus taliter superinde
in Cur' Scac' process. fuit quod postea scilicet eodem vicesimo quarto die
Novembris anno regni dicti domini Regis nunc primo supradicto quoddam Breve
dicti domini Regis nunc de Extendi sac' An Extent issued out thereupon.
a dicta Cur' Scac' dicti domini Regis nunc apud Westminster sub Sigillo ejusdem Cur'
and Vic' Lon' direct' pro praed' Debit' quinque mill librar' versus praed'
Felicem Calvert debito modo emanavit per quod quidem breve idem dominus Rex
nunc eisdem tunc Vic' Lond' praecepit quod iidem Vic' non omitterent propt'
aliquam libert' quin eam ingred' ac tam per sacrum' proborum and legal' hom' de
balliva praefat' Vic' vel alit' per sacrum' and testimoniu^ aliquorum proborum
and legal' hom' de eadem balliva praefat' Vic' per quos rei veritas melius
scir' potuisset qm' omnibus aliis viis mediis and modis quibus iidem Vic'
sivissent aut potuissent diligent' Ad inquirendum.
inquirerent quae and cujusmodi bona and catalla and cujus precij Ac quae
debit' special' and denar' sum' idem Fel' Calvert tunc habuit in dicta balliva
praefat' Vic' eaque omnia and singula praed' bona and catalla debit' credit
special' and denar' sum' in quorumcunque manus tunc exist' per sacrum' praefat'
prob' and legal' hom' diligent' apprec' and extendi ac in manus dicti dom'
Regis nunc capi and seisire fecerint ut idem dom' Rex nunc ea quousque sibi de
debito pred' plen' satifact' haberet juxta form' Stat' pro hujusm' debit' dicti
domini Regis recuperand' inde nuper edit' and provis' Et qualit' praecept' ill'
fuerit execut' iidem Vic' contrar' facerent Bar' de Scac' pred' apud Westm'
praed' vicesimo sexto die instant' mensis Novemb' Quod quidem breve postea and
ante retorn' ejusdem scilt vicesimo quarto die Novemb' anno regni dicti dn^i
Regis nunc primo supradicto apud Lond' praed' in paroch' The Writ delivered to
the Sheriffs.
and ward' praed' quibusdam Benj' Thorowgood Mil' and Thomae Kinsey Mil' adtunc
existen' Vic' Lond' praed' deliberat' fuit in deb' Juris forma exequen' Et
praed' Lancelot' ulterius dic' quod postea and ante diem exhibic' Billae praed'
necnon ante retorn' brevis praed' scilt vicesimo quinto die Nov' anno regni
dicti domini Regis nunc primo supradicto praed' An Inquisition taken by them.
Benj' Thorowgood and Though Kinsey Vic' Lond' praed' execuconi brevis praed.
procedebant Et quandam Inquisic' indent' cora^ eis apud Guildhall Civit' Lond'
praed' scituat' in paroch' sancti Laurencij in veteri Judailmo in Warda de
Cheap ejusd' Civitat' praedict' vicesimo quinto die Nov' anno regni dicti dom'
Regis nunc primo supradicto per Sacr' Danielis Mann Willielm' Church Thomae
Pounsett Johan' Phillips Georgij Gill Johan' Pope Phil' Perry Wil' Partridge
Johan' Hutton Johan' Bell Johan' Dod and Georg' Knight proborum and legal' hom'
Civit' Lond' praed' Virtute brevis praed' ceper' per quam quidem Inquisic'
inter al' in eadem Inquisic' content' and specificat' compert' existit quod
ipse idem Lancelot' Cramlington (modo def) per nomen Lanc' Cramlington de Villa
and Com' Novi Castri super Tinam market praed' 24 die tunc instanc' Novembr'
indebitat' fuit and adtunc indebitat' existebat praefat' Felici Calvert in
quingent' libr' legal' monet' Angl' pro tant' denar' sum' per eundem Lancelot'
Cramlington (modo def.) ad opus and usum ipsius Felicis Calvert ante tunc
habit' and recept' Et quod ipse idem Lanc' Cramlington (mode def.) fecit and
traxit quandm^ billam Excambij geren' dict' 10 die tunc instantis mensis Nov'
pro praed' quingent' libr' solvend' per quendm^ Will Ryder cuidam Thomae Price
ad usum pred' Felicis Calvert quodque pred' sum' quingent' libr' and quaelibet
inde parcell' dicto die Capcon' Inquisic' praed' praed' Felici Calvert debit'
existebat and insolut' Et iidem Vic' dicto die Cap' Inquisic' praed' praed'
sum' quingent' libr' per ipm^ praed' Lanc' Cramlington praed' Felici Calvert
sic ut praefertur tunc debit and insolut' and quaelibet inde parcell' necnon
bill' Exambij praed' Virtute brevis praed' The Money seized.
sibi direct' in manus dicti dom' Regis nunc capi and seisire fec' juxta
exigent' ejusdem brevit Et ad diem retorn' ejusdem brevis scilicet pred'
vicesimo sexto die Nov' anno regni dicti dom' Regis nunc primo supradicto pro
execuc' brevis praed' Baron' praed in Scac' praed' (eodem Scac' apud Westm'
praed' tunc existen' retornaver' and certificaver' Inquisic' praed' per ipsos
in forma praed' capt' Et quod iidem Vic' praedict' sum' quingent' libr' per
ipm^ praed' Lancelot' Cramlington praed' Felici Calvert and q^libet inde
parcell' necnon billa Excambij praed' The Money and Bill of Exchange seized,
and returned into the Exchequer.
in manus dicti dom' Regis nunc capi and seifiri fec' juxta exigent' brev'
praed' prout per Record' praed' brevis de Extendi fac' and retorn' ejusdem and
Inquisic' praed' eidem annex' in Scac' praed' certificat' and ibm^ in custod'
Remem' dicti domini Regis remanen' plen' apparet Virtute cujusquidm^ brevis de
Extendi fac' and Inquisic' praed' superinde capt' and praed' capcon' Seisurae
praed' summae quingent' libr' and praed' bill' Excambij pro solucon' inde sic
ut praefertur fact' and tract' in manus dicti domini Regis per Vic' Lond'
praed' sic ut praefertur fact' The King became Entitled.
idem dominus Rex nunc ad praed' sum' quingent' libr' and praed' bill' Excambij
in Inquisic' praedict' menc' pro eisdem quingent' libr' sic ut praefertur fact'
and tract legittime intitulat' fuit and existit videlt apud Lond' praed' in
paroch' and ward' praed' Et idem Lancelot' ulterius dic' quod taliter superinde
in praed' Cur' Scac' dicti domini Regis nunc coram Baron' ejusdem Scac'
process. fuit quod postea scilicet nono die Dec' An Extent afterward issued
out for the levying of the Money.
anno regni dicti domini Regis nunc primo supradicto quoddam breve dicti domini
Regis nunc de Extendi fac' e dicta Cur' Scac' dicti domini Regis nunc sub
Sigillo ejusdem Cur' Vic' praed' Vilae Novi Castri super Tinam direct' pro
praed' debito quingent libr' per Inquisic' praed' sic ut prefertur compert'
versus eund' Lancelot' (modo def.) debito modo emanavit Et idem Lancelot'
postea and ante diem exhibic' billae praed' praedict' Stephani and Petri
scilicet decimo quinto die Jan' anno regni dicti domini Regis nunc primo
supradicto apud Lond' pred' in paroch' and ward' praed' praed' sum' quingent'
libr' legalis monet' Angl' ad usum dicti domini Regis nunc solvit and
satisfecit in plen' exonracon' and satisfac' praed' ult' menc' brevis de
Extendi fac' and praed. billae Excambij and sum' quingent' libr' And the money
paid thereupon.
per Inquisic' praed' sic ut praefertur compert' and per Vic' Lond' praed' in
manus dicti dom' Regis nunc sic ut prefertur capt' and seisit' Et idem
Lancelot' ulterius in facto dic quod ipse idm^ Lanc. Cramlington (modo defend.)
and praed' Lanc. Cramlington in Inquisic' praed' and in praedict' Averment of
una and eadem persona.
ult. menc^ brevi de Extendi facc^ nominat. sunt una and eadm^ persona and non
alia neque diversa Quodque praed' billa Excambij in billa praedict' praed'
Petri and Stephani menc^ and sum' quingent. libr. in eadem billa Excambij menc^
and pro eandem solvi appunctuat. and praed. bill. And una and eadem Billa.
Excambij and sum quingent. libr. per Inquisic. pred' sic ut prefertur compert'
and per Vic^ Lon' praed' in manus dicti domini Regis nuc sic ut praefertur
capt' and seisit' and peripsum Lanc. sic ut praefertur solut. and satisfact.
fuer and sunt una and eadem billa Excambij and una and eadem summa quingent.
libr. and non alia neque diversa Et hoc parat. est verificare Unde pet' Judic^
si pred. Steph. and Petrus accon. suam pred' inde verse. eum habere seu
manutenere debeant etc. Et una and eadem Summa.


The Plaintiff Demurrs to the Plea, especially.
Et praed' Stephanus and Petrus dic' quod ipsi per aliqua per praedict. Lanc'
superius placitando allegat' ab accone sua praed' inde versus ipsum Lanc.
habend. praecludi non debent quia dic. quod placit. praed' per ipsum Lanc. modo
and forma praed' superius in barram placit. materiaque in eodem content. minus
sufficien' in lege existunt ad ipsos Steph. and Petrum ab accone praed. inde
versus praed Lanc. habend' praecludend' Quodque ipsi ad placit illud modo and
forma praed' per ipsos Lanc. super' placitat' necesse non habent nec per legem
terrae tenentur respondere Et hoc parat' sunt verificare Unde pro defectu
sufficien' Respons' praed' Lanc. in hac part iidem Stephanus and Petrus pet'
Judic. and dampna sua occone promissor' sibi adjudicari etc. Causes of Demurrer.
Et pro causis moracon' in lege super placito illo iidem Steph' and Petr.
secund. formam Statut' in hujusm. casu inde nuper edit. and provis. ostendunt
and Cur. hic demonstrant has causas subsequen. videlicet eo quod placit. praed'
tendit ad general. Et tendit ad Generalem Exitum.
Exit. and est incertum in se pregnans and forinsecum and non respondit ad
Narracon. and caret forma etc.

Joynder in Demurrer.
Et praed' Lancelot. dic. quod placitu^ praed' per ipsum Lanc. modo and forma
praed' superius in barram placit. materiaque in eodem content. bon. and
sufficien' in lege existunt ad ipsos Steph. and Petru^ ab accone sua praedict'
inde versus ipsum Lanc. habend' praecludend' quod quidem placitum modo and
forma pred. superius in barram placitat. materiamque in eodem content. ipse
idem Lanc. paratus est verificare and probare prout Cur. etc. Et quia praed'
Steph' and Petrus ad placit. ill. non respondit nec ill' hucusque aliqualiter
dedic. idem Lanc. ut prius pet. Judic' Et qd' praed' Steph. and Petrus ab
accone sua pred' versus eund' Lanc. habend. praecludantur etc. Et quia Cur'
dicti domini Regis nunc hic de Judicio suo de and super praemiss. reddend'
nondum advisatur dies inde dat' est partibus praed' coram domino Rege apud
Westminster. usque diem Veneris prox' post Crastinu^ sanctae Trin. de Judicio suo de
and super premiss. ill' audiend. eo quod Cur. dicti domini Regis nunc hic inde
nondum etc. Continuances.
Ad quem diem coram domino Rege apud Westm' ven' tam praedict' Stephanus Evans
and Petrus Percivall qm^ praed' Lancelot' Cramligton per Attorn' suos praedict'
Et quia Cur' dicti domini Regis nunc hic de Judicio suo de and super praemiss.
praed' reddend' nondum advisatur dies inde dat' est partibus praedict' coram
eodem domino Rege apud Westm' usque diem Sabbati prox' post tres Septimanas
Sancti Michaelis de Judicio suo de and super praemiss. audiend' eo quod Cur'
dicti domini Regis nunc hic inde nondum etc. Further Continuance.
Ad quem diem coram domino Rege apud Westm' ven' tam praedict' Stephanus and
Petrus qm^ praed' Lancelot' per Attorn' suos praed' Et quia Cur' dicti domini
Regis nunc hic de Judicio suo de and super praemiss. praedict' reddend' nondum
advisatur dies inde dat' est partibus coram eodem domino Rege apud Westm' usque
diem Lunae prox' post Octab' sancti Hillar' de Judicio suo de and super
praemiss praed' audiend' eo quod Cur' dicti domini Regis nunc hic inde nondum
etc. Further Continuance.
Ad quem diem coram domino Rege apud Westm' ven' tam praefat' Stephanus and
Petrus qm^ praedict' Lancelot' per Attorn' suos praedict' Et quia Cur' dicti
domini Regis nunc hic de Judic' suo de and super praemiss. praed' reddend'
nondum advisatur dies inde dat' est partibus praed' coram eodem domino Rege
apud Westm' usque diem Mercur' prox' post Quinden' Paschae de Judicio suo de
and praeimiss. ill' audiend eo quod Cur' dicti domini Regis nunc hic inde
nondum etc. Further Continuance.
Ad quem diem coram domino Rege apud Westm' ven' tam praedict' Stephanus and
Petrus qm^ predict' Lancelot' per Attorn' suos praedict' Et quia Cur' dicti
domini Regis nunc hic de Judicio suo de and super praemiss. praed' reddend'
nondum advisatur Dies inde dat' est partibus praedict' coram eodem domino Rege
apud Westm' praedict. usque diem Veneris prox' post Craft' sanctae Trinitatis
de Judicio suo de and super praemiss. audiend' eo quod Cur' dicti domini Regis
nunc hic inde nondum etc. Further Continuance.
Ad quem diem coram domino Rege apud Westm' ven' tam praedict' Stephanus and
Petrus qm^ praedict' Lancelot' per Attorn' suos praedict' Et quia Cur' dicti
domini Regis nunc hic de Judicio suo de and super praemiss. reddend' nondum
advisatur dies inde dat' est partibus praedict' coram eodem' domino Rege apud
Westm' ufque diem Lunae prox' post tres Septimanas sancti Michaelis de Judicio
suo de and super praemiss. audiend' eo quad Cur' dicti domini Regis nunc hic
inde nondum etc. Further Continuance.
Ad quem diem coram domino Rege apud Westm' ven' tam praedict' Stephanus and
Petrus qm^ praedict' Lancelot' per Attorn' suos praed' Et quia Cur' dicti
domini Regis nunc hic de Judicio suo de and supe premiss reddend' nondum
advisaturdies inde dat' est partibus pred' coram eodm^ dn^o Rege apud Westm'
pred' usque diem Lunae prox' post Octab' sancti Hillar' de Judicio suo de and
super praemiss. audiend' eo quod Cur' dicti domini Regis nunc hic inde nondum
etc. Further Continuance.
Ad quem diem coram domino Rege apud Westm' ven' tam praed' Stephanus and
Petrus qm^ praed' Lancelot' per Attorn' suos praed. Et quia Cur' dicti domini
Regis nunc hic de Judicio suo de and super praemiss. reddend' nondum advisatur
dies inde dat' est partibus praed' coram eodem domino Rege apud Westm' praed'
usque diem Mercurij prox' post Quinden' Paschae de Judicio suo de and super
praemiss. audiend' eo quod Cur' dicti domini Regis nunc hie inde nondum etc.
Further Continuance.
Ad quem diem coram domino Rege apud Westm' ven' tam praedict' Stephanus and
Petrus qm' praed' Lancelot' per Attorn' suos praed' Et quia Cur' dicti domini
Regis nunc hic de Judicio suo de and super praemiss. reddend' nondum advisatur
dies inde dat' est partibus praed' coram eodem domino Rege apud Westm' usque
diem Veneris prox' post Crastin' sanctae Trinitatis de Judicio suo de and super
praemiss. audiend' eo quod Cur' dicti domini Regis nunc hic inde nondum etc.
Further Continuance.
Ad quem diem coram domino Rege apud Westm' ven' ram praedict' Stephanus and
Petrus qm' praedict' Lancelot' per Attorn' suos praedict' Et quia Cur' dicti
domini Regis nunc hic de Judicio suo de and super praemiss. reddend' nondum
advisatur dies inde dat' est partibus praedict' coram eodem domino Rege apud
Westm' usque diem Martis prox' post tres Septimanas sancti Michaelis de Judicio
suo de and super praemiss. audiendo eo quod Cur' dicti domini Regis nunc hic
inde nondum etc. Further Continuance.
Ad quem diem coram domino Rege apud Westm' ven' tam praedict' Stephanus and
Petrus qm' praedict' Lancelot' per Attorn' suos praedict' Et quia Cur' dicti
domini Regis nunc hic de Judicio suo de and super praemiss. reddend' nondum
advisatur dies inde dat' est partibus praedict' coram eodem eodem domino Rege
apud Westm' praedict' usque diem Mercurij prox' post Octab' sancti Hillar' de
Judicio suo de and super praemiss. audiend' eo quod Cur' dicti domini Regis
nunc hic inde nondum etc. Further Continuance.
Et modo ad hunc diem scilicet a die Paschae in quindecim dies isto eodem
Termino usque quem diem loquela praedict' (antea remanens sine die) Virtute
cujusdam Actus Parliamenti confect' apud Westm' decimo tertio die Febr' anno
regni domini Willielmi and dominae Mariae nunc Regis and Reginae Angl' etc.
primo revivificat' continuat' and adjornat' fuit coram dom' The Loquela and
Proceedings revived by Act of Parliament.

Judgment for the Plaintiff.


Rege and domina Regina Willielmo and Maria apud Westm' predict' ven' tam
praed' Steph' and Petr' qm^ pred' Lancelot' pro Attorn' fuos praed' super quo
vis' and pro Cur' dictor' domini Regis and dominae Reginae nunc hic before
intellectis omnibus and singulis praemiss. maturaque deliberacon' superinde
habita videtur eidem Cur' quod placitum praed per ipsum Lancelot' modo and
forma praedict' superius in Barr' placitat' materiaque in eodem content' minus
sufficien' in lege existunt ad ipsos Stephanum and Petrum ab accone sua
praedict' inde versus praedict' Lancelot' habend' praecludend' Ob quod iidem
Stephanus and Petrus dampna sua versus praefat' Lancelot' occone praemissorum
recuperare dabeant Sed quia Cur' dictorum domini Regis and dominae Reginae nunc
hic incognit' exislit quae dampna iidem Stephanus and Petrus tam occone
praemissorum praed' qm' pro mis' and custag' fuis per ipsos circa sectam suam
in hac part apposit' Writ of Inquiry awarded.
sustinuer' Ideo praecept' est Vic' London' praedict' quod per Sacrum' proborum
and legalium hominum de Balliva sua diligent' inquir' quae dampna iidem
Stephanus and Petrus tam occone praemissorum praedict' qm' pro mis' and custag'
suis per ipsos circa sectam in hac part apposit' sustinuer' and Inquisicon'
qm' etc domino Regi and dominae Reginae apud Westm' praedict' die Veneris prox'
post Craftin' sanctae Trinitatis sub Sigill' etc. and Sigill' etc. mittant una
cum Brevi dicti domini Regis and dominae Reginae eis inde direct. Idem dies est
praefat' Stephano and Petro ibidem etc. Ad quem diem coram domino Rege and
domina Regina apud Westm' praedict' ven' praed' Stephanus and Petrus per
Attorn' suum praed' Et Vic' London' praed' (videlicet) Johannes Fleet Mil' and
Humfrid' Edwin Mil' retorn' quandam Inquisicon' The Inquisition returned.
coram eis vicesimo quarto die Maij anno regni domini Willielmi and dominae
Mariae nunc Regis and Reginae Angl' etc. primo apud Guild Hall scituat' in
paroch' sancti Laurencij in Veteri Judaismo in Warda de Cheap ejusdem Civitat'
Virtute Brevis praedict' capt' per Sacrum' duodecim proborum and legalium
hominum de Balliva praefat' Vic' per quam compert' exist' quod praedict'
Stephanus and Petrus sustinuet' dampna occasion praemissorum praed' ultra mis'
and custag' sua per ipsos circa sectam suam in hac part apposit' ad sexcent
libr' Damages found.

Judgment for the Plaintiff.


and pro mis' and custag' ill' ad vigint' sex solid' and octo denar' Ideo cons'
est quod praed' Stephanus and Petrus recuperent versus praefat' Lancelot'
dampna praed' per Inquisicon' praed' superius in forma praed' compert' necnon
trigint' and sex libr' tresdecim solid' and quatuor denar' pro mis' and custag'
suis praed. eisdem Stephano and Petro per Cur' dictorum domini Regis and
dominae Reginae nunc hic ex assensu suo de Incro^ adjudicat' Quae quidem dampna
in toto se attingunt ad sexcent' trigint' and octo libr' Et praed' Lancelot' in
misericordia etc. Judic' sign' sexto die Junij MDCLXXXIX. General Errors
assigned.

Cramlington versus Evans and Percival.
IN a Writ of Error upon a Judgment in the Kings Bench, where Evans and
Percival declared against the Defendant in an Action upon the Case, that in the
Realm of England (viz.) in the Parish of St. Mary le Bow, London, there is and
has been time out of mind a Custom amongst Merchants and other persons, (viz.)
That if a Merchant, or other person, makes a Bill of Exchange according to the
Usage of the Merchants, directed to a Merchant or other person resident in
England, requesting the person to whom directed to pay the Sum of Money in the
Bill mentioned, at the time therein limited, to the person in the Bill named or
his Order, for the use of any other person in such Bill mentioned, for the
value received of the person mentioned in such Bill, and to place it to account
as by advice; and if the person to whom such Bill is directed, accepts it
according to the Usage of Merchants; and if that person who in such Bill is
appointed to receive such Money by an Indorsment upon the said Bill, orders the
payment of such Money to any other person or persons, or their Order, for the
value in the Indorsment mentioned, to have been received of the person named in
such Indorsment; if he that accepted such Bill does afterward refuse to pay it
to him named in the said Indorsment, then he which made and directed the Bill,
upon Notice of such Refusal, is chargeable to pay the Money to the person, or
his Order, to whom by the Indorsment it was appointed to be paid.

Then they say, That Cramlington the 10th day of November, Anno Domini 1685. at
Newcastle, directed a Bill of Exchange of the same Date to one William Ryder,
requesting him at 25 Days after the Date of the said Bill, to pay to Thomas
Price, or his Order, 500 l for the use of Felix Calvert Esquire for the value
received of Francis Clever, and to place it to account prout per advisamentum;
and on the 14th of the said November it was shown to the said Ryder, who then
(according to the Usage of Merchants) accepted it; and that the said Price upon
the said 14th day of November, for the value received of them the said Evans
and Percival, by an Indorsment upon the said Bill, according to the Usage of
Merchants, ordered the Contents thereof to be paid to the said Evans and
Percival; and that the said Ryder afterward (viz.) the 5th day of December, in
the year aforesaid, was requested by them the said Evans and Percival to pay to
them the said Money according to the aforesaid Indorsment, and the said Ryder
refused to pay it.

Of all which the said Cramlington had Notice, (viz.) upon the 1st day of
January in the same year, and by reason thereof, and of the Custom aforesaid,
he became charged with the payment of the said Money to them the said Evans and
Percival; and thereupon the said Cramlington in consideratione praemissorum,
did promise to pay the said 500 l to the said Evans and Percival, etc. but not
minding his Promise, had not paid the said Money licet saepius requisitus, etc.

To this the Defendant Cramlington puts in a Plea in Bar to the effect as
follows; (viz.) Protestando, that there was no such Custom as set forth in
the Declaration pro placito dicit, that long before the Action brought, Felix
Calvert in the Declaration mentioned, was one of the Commissioners of Excise;
and upon the 10th of November, Anno primo Domini Regis nunc, by the hands of
Clever in the Declaration mentioned, did pay 500 l of the Money arising to his
Majesty upon the Duty of Excise; and at the Request of the said Calvert, the
Defendant upon the some 10th of November, made and directed the aforesaid Bill
of Exchange to the said William Ryder, to pay to the said Price 500 l for the
use of the said Calvert, as in the Declaration is set forth.

And he further says, That the said Calvert, upon the 24th day of the said
November, was indebted to the King upon the Account aforesaid in 5000 l and
upwards, prout per Recordum Scaccar' etc. and superinde taliter processum fuit
in Cur' Scaccar' praedict'; that upon the 24th of November aforesaid a Writ of
Extendi facias was awarded to the Sheriffs of London against the said Calvert
for the said Debt of 5000 l commanding him to Enquire per Sacramentum proborum
and legalium hominum, etc. what Goods, Chattels, Debts, Specialties, Sums of
Money, etc. the said Calvert then had, and to extend and seize them into the
Kings hands, in whole hands soever they then were, that the King might be
thereout satisfied of the said Debt juxta formam Statuti pro hujusmodi deb'
dicti domini Regis recuperand'; Which Writ was Returnable the 26th of the said
November, and upon the 24th was delivered to the then Sheriffs of London; who
upon the 25th day of the said November, by virtue of the said Writ, took an
Inquisition per Sacramentum, etc. by which it was found that the said Defendant
Cramlington, upon the 24th of the said November, was indebted to the said
Calvert in 500 l for Money received by him to the use of the said Calvert; and
that the Defendant made a Bill of Exchange, dated the 10th of the said
November, directed to the said Ryder, to pay to the said Price, to the use of
the said Calvert the Sum of 500 l and that the same was due to the said Calvert
at the time of the Inquisition taken; and that the said Sheriffs did thereupon
seize the Debt and Bill of Exchange into the Kings hands secundum exigentiam
brevis praedict', and Returned the said Writ and Inquisition, etc. into the
Exchequer prout per Recordum, etc. before apparet; by virtue of which the King
became lawfully entitled to the said 500 l and Bill of Exchange aforesaid.

And the Defendant further says, That afterward (scilicet) the 9th of
December, Anno primo, etc. a Writ of Extendi facias was awarded out of the said
Court of Exchequer against the said Defendant Cramlington for the said 500 l
and thereupon be paid the said 500 l upon the 15th day of January Anno primo
supradictio, to the use of the King in plena exoneratione and satisfactione
praedict' ult' mentionat' brevis de extendi fac' and praedict' Billae excambij
and and summae quingent' librarum per Inquisitionem praed' sic ut praefertur
compertum, etc. and concludes with Averments, (viz.) That he the Defendant
Cramlington is the same so named with him in the Extent, and that the 500 l the
Bill of Exchange, etc. in the Inquisition found are the same with them
mentioned in the Declaration, etc. and so demands Judgment of the Action.

To this Plea the Plaintiffs Demurred.

And after diverse Arguments Judgment was given in the King's Bench for the
Plaintiffs in Easter Term, in the first year of King William and Queen Mary.

And now it came to be Argued upon a Writ of Error in the Exchequer Chamber.

First, It was alleged for Error, that the Custom is laid so general, (viz.)
not only to extend to Merchants, but all others; so that it must be at the
Common Law if to be allowed at all.

Sed non allocatur: For in the Case of Sarsfield and Witherly, (lately
Adjudged) it was Resolved, That a person, not being a Merchant, drawing a Bill
of Exchange, was bound according to the Usage of it amongst Merchants, and in
Declarations upon Bills of Exchange, the whole Matter is to be set forth
specially.

Secondly, There was (as appears by the Bill of Exchange) 25 Day given for the
payment of it after the Date of the Bill; whereas here the Request and Refusal
is upon the 25th day after the Date.

Sed non allocatur: For as the Bill is set forth, it is to pay the Money ad
viginti and quinque dies post datum; and this cannot be, if not paid at the Five
and twentieth day.

Thirdly, The Matter chiefly insisted upon for Error was, That the 500 l was
appointed to be paid to Price for the use of the Calvert, so the right and
interest of the Money was in Calvert, by whomsoever it should be received, and
then it might well be seized for the Debt which Calvert did owe to the King.

But the Court held, that the Seizure for the King ought not to have been in
this case.

1. For that though it were to be paid for Calvert's use, yet this was but a
Trust, and the Right of the Money was in Price. As if Goods be given to A. to
the use of B. the property of the Goods is in A. Otherwise, if Money be
delivered to A. to pay to B. there the Right of the Money is in B. and he may
bring an Action of Debt.

2. Here the Bill is Endorsed over to be paid to the Plaintiffs before any
Seizure, or the Writ of Extent was issued forth, and the Custom is expressly
laid, that an Endorsment might be as in the Case here; which Custom is
confessed, and that determines the Right and Interest in the Money of him that
makes the Endorsment, and puts it in the Plaintiffs.

Wherefore the Judgment was affirmed.

Termino Sanctae Trinitatis Anno 2 W. and M. In Scaccario.
Burchett versus Durdant.
IN a Writ of Error upon a Judgment in an Ejectment in the King's Bench, where
the Plaintiff Mary Durdant declared upon the Demise of William Durdant of two
Messuages, 100 Acres of Land, etc. in Chobham, in the County of Surrey.

Upon Not guilty the Jury gave a Special Verdict, That Henry Wicks was seized
in Fee of the Premises, and by his Will in writing, dated the 6th of June
1657. be Devised in the words following: (Viz.) I give to my Cousin John Higden
and his Heirs, during the Life only of Robert Durdant my Kinsman, all those my
Messuages etc. in Chobham in the County of Surrey; upon this Trust and
Confidence, That he the said John Higden and his Heirs, shall permit and suffer
the said Robert Durdant, during his Life, to have and receive the Rents and
Profits thereof, which shall yearly grow due and payable, he the said Robert
committing no Waste. And from and after the Decease of Robert Durdant, then do
I give the said Lands and Premises in Chobham unto the Heirs Males of the Body
of him the said Robert Durdant now living, and to such other Heirs Male and
Female as he shall hereafter happen to have of his Body; and for want of such
Heirs, then to the use and behoof of my Cousin Gideon Durdant and the Heirs of
his Body; and for want of such Heirs, the same to be and remain to the right
Heirs of me the said Henry Wicks.

They find that Wicks died the 2d of December 14 Car. 2. seized, as aforesaid,
and that John Higden entered and was seized prout lex postulat, and by Deed
bearing date the 1st of Jan. 14 Car. 2. reciting the said Will, and that the
said Robert Durdant and Gideon Durdant had Contracted with the said John Higden
for the sale of the said Mesuages, Lands and Premises: And to the intent, that
the Contingent Remainder by the said Will limited to the Heirs Males and
Females of the Body of the said Robert Durdant might be extinguished and
destroyed, he the said John Higden, by the appointment of the said Robert
Durdant, did surrender his Estate in the Premises to the said Gideon Durdant;
and by the said Deed it was Covenanted, That the said Robert Durdant, John
Higden and Gideon Durdant should levy a Fine of the Premises, which should be
to the use of the said John Higden and his Heirs.

They find that a Fine was levied accordingly in Easter Term, 15 Car. 2.

They find, That Robert Durdant died on the 19th of August, 20 Car. 2. and that
John Higden after in 20 Car. 2. upon a valuable Consideration in money,
enfeoffed John Burchet of the Premises; and that the said Burchet died the 1st
day of October in the same year, and that the Premises from him came to the
Defendant Burchet, who entered into the Premises and became seized prout lex
postulat.

And they find, That Robert Durdant as well at the time of the said Will
making, as at the death of the said Henry Wicks, had an only Son called George
Durdant, who was also Godson to the Testator; and that the said George Durdant
died, and that William Durdant (Lessor of the Plaintiff) was his Son and Heir,
and entered, and made the Demise prout, etc. and si super totam materiam, etc.

Upon his Special Verdict Judgment was given in the King's Bench for the
Plaintiff.

And the Court here afterward having heard the Case thrice Argued, did affirm
the Judgment.

And the first Point spoken to was, Whether the Estate did not execute in
Robert Durdant by the Statute of 27 H. 8. of Uses? For if so, he would be
seized of an Estate tail, and then Burchet would have a good Title.

It is clear, Lands may be Devised to the use of another, as in Popham 4.

It Is true, a Devise implies a Consideration, and will lodge the Estate in the
Devisee, if no Use be limited upon it.

Here it is Devised to John Higden and his Heirs, upon trust and confidence
that he should permit and suffer, etc. The word Trust is proper for the
Limitation of an Use, and the Estate shall Execute, unless it be first limited
to the use of a man and his Heirs in Trust for another, there the Intention is,
that it should be only a Trust; and here Robert Durdant is restrained only from
doing waste, which shows, that he intended he should take an Estate, or else he
could not commit waste.

But Lands may be Devised to an Use, though the Statute of Wills is since the
Statute of Uses, Mo. 107. 1 Cro. 343.
The Court overruled this Point, and Resolved it to be only a Trust in Robert
Durdant; for the words are, That Higden should permit him to take the profits,
which shows that the Estate was to remain in Higden; And for the restraint of
waste it was proper; for Higden was to permit Robert Durdant to have the
possession, but the Testator would not have him to commit waste or spoil.

The second and principal Point was, Whether the Remainder to the Heirs of
Robert Durdant, now living, did vest in George Durdant, or was a Contingent
Remainder.

It was much urged, That one could not take in the Life of his Ancestor by the
name of Heir; for nemo est haeres viventis, in the 1 Co. Archer's Case. A
Devise to Robert, Remainder to the next heir Male of Robert, and to the heirs
Males of the Body of that heir Male, this is Resolved to be a Contingent
Remainder during the Life of Robert; and it was said in that Case, that the
next heir Male is as much a designation of a person, as an Heir now living. He
that will take by purchase by the name of Heir, must be a complete Heir to all
intents, Co. Littl. 24. b. 2 Leon 70. Chaloner and Bowyer's Case upon a Devise.

But it was Resolved, that this was a Remainder vested in George Durdant; for
the Remainder being limited to the Heirs of the Body of Robert Durdant, now
living, and George being found to be then the only Son, it was a sufficient
designation of the person, and as much as if it had been said, to his Heir
apparent; and such an one is called Heir sometimes in proceedings in Law, where
the greatest strictness of phrase is used; as in Writs of Ravishment of Ward,
Quare filium and haeredem rapuit, 2 Inst. 439. Westminster. 2. cap. 35. 25 Ed. 3. the
Statute of Treasons, Treason to kill the Heir of the King.

The third Point was, Whether George Durdant took an Estate Tail, or only an
Estate for Life; for it was Objected, that if the words (Heirs of the Body)
were taken for the description only of the person who should take, then he must
take only for Life.

But the Court held, that they would make an Estate Tail; for Heirs is nomen
collectivum, and is sometimes so taken when it is only Heir in the Singular
Number. A Devise to one for life, Remainder to the heir Males of his Body for
ever; this is an Estate Tail in the Devisee, Pawsey and Lowther, in Roll. Abr.
2. Part 253. But in case the first words, (viz.) Heirs of the Body now living,
would carry but an Estate for Life to George Durdant, yet the subsequent words
would make an Entail in him, (viz.) and to such other Heirs, Male and Female,
as he should hereafter happen to have of his Body, this would clearly vest an
Entail in George, he being Heir of the Body of Robert, and surviving Robert. So
the Judgment was affirmed.

Sed Nota as to the second Point, the Lord Chief Baron Atkyns and Justice
Powell seemed to be an Opinion, that the Remainder was Contingent: But in
regard the Point had been upon a Writ of Error brought in the House of Lords
upon a Judgment given in the King's Bench in another Case, upon the same Will,
adjudged to be a Remainder vested, they conceived themselves bound by that
Judgment in the House of Lords.

Paschae, Anno 2 Willielmi and Mariae.
Memorandum.
BY an Order of the King and Council, 1 Willielmi and Mariae, the Judges were
Ordered to meet; and all of them (except Gregory, Air and Turton) were
assembled at the Lord Chief Justice's Chamber, to give their Opinion concerning
Colonel Lundy, who was appointed Governor of London Derry in Ireland by the
King and Queen, and had endeavored to betray it; and afterward he escaped
into Scotland, where he was taken and brought Prisoner into England, and
Committed to the Tower.

Whether admitting he were guilty of a Capital Crime by Martial Law, committed
in Ireland, he might be sent thither from hence to be Tried there, in regard of
the Act of Habeas Corpus made Anno 31 Car. 2. which Enacts, That no Subject of
this Realm shall be sent over Prisoner to any Foreign parts: But then it has a
Proviso, That if any Subject of this Realm has committed any Capital Crime in
Scotland, or other Foreign parts of the King's Dominions, he may be sent from
hence to be Tried in such Foreign place.

Upon Consideration of which Proviso the Judges unanimously gave their Opinion,
That there was nothing in the Habeas Corpus Act (supposing he had committed a
Capital Crime by Law Martial in Ireland) to hinder his being sent thither to be
tried thereupon; and subscribed their Names to the said Opinion, and certified
the same to the Privy Council.

Note, That it was said; (while my Lord Hale was Chief Justice of the
King-Bench) that one -- who had committed Murder in the Barbados and taken
here, was sent over to be Tried there: But was before the Habeas Corpus Act.

Patrick Harding's Case.
HE was Indicted at the Sessions in the Old Baily (Anno, primo Willielmi and
Mariae) for High Treason.

The Indictment sets forth, that the said Patrick Harding machinans and
proditorie intendens pacem and communem tranquillitatem hujus regni Angl'
destruere and Gubernationem dictorum domini Regis and dominae Reginae infra hoc
regnum Angl' subvertere ac caedes destructiones and desolationes infra hoc
regnum procurare 23 Novembr' anno regni domini nostri Willielmi and Mariae,
etc. primo apud paroch' sanctai Martini in Campis in Com' Middlesex' praedict'
malitiose and proditorie compassavit imaginat' fuit and intendebat dict' dom'
Regem and dom' Reginam adtunc supremos veros and indub' dom' suos non solum a
statu titulo potestate imperio and regimine regni sui Angl' penitus deponere
and deprivare verum etiam eosdem dom' Regem and dom' Reginam interficere and ad
mortem and finalem destructionem ponere and adducere and stragem miserabilem
inter subditos per totum hoc regnum and alia Dominia sua causare quodque ipse
praedict' Patrick Harding ad nequissimas proditiones and proditiosas
intentiones suas praedict' perimplend' eodem vicesimo tertio die Novembr' apud
paroch' praedict' proditorie vi and armis, etc. bellum and rebellionem contra
dictos dom' Regem and dom' Reginam nunc ordinavit levavit and gerebat ac
diversos milites and viros armatos and armaturos ad mil' ac bellum contra
dictos Regem and Reginam nunc gerend' congregavit levavit and procuravit ac
viros and milites sic ut praefertur levat' extra hoc regnum Angl' misit and
iter suum suscipere procuravit ad sese jungen' aliis hostibus inimicis and
rebellionibus dictorum Regis and Reginae and bellum contra eosdem gerend' and
ulterius quod ipse Patricius Harding ad nequissimas suas proditiones
perimplend' and perficiend' eodem 23 Novembr' apud paroch' praedict' ut
falsissimus proditor dictor' Regis and Regin' cum quodam Johanne Taaf adtunc
subdito dictor' Regis and Reginae existen' proditorie se assembl' and
consultavit ac easdem proditiones suas praed' adtunc and ibid' eidem Johanni
Taaff malitiose proditorie and advisat' loquend" in auditu diverse. subditor'
dictor' Regis and Reginae publicavit and declaravit ad suadend' eundem Johannem
Taaff adjutan' and assisten' esse in iisdem proditionibus magnum praemium and
stipend' eidem Johanni Taaff adtunc and ibidem obtulit Si ipse praed' Johannes
Taaff adjutans and assistens in iisdem esse vellet contra ligeantiae suae
debitum and contra pacem dictor' dom' Regis and dom' Regin' nunc coron' and
dignitat' suas necnon contra formam Statut' in hujusmodi casu edit' and provis'
etc.

Upon Not guilty pleaded the Jury found a Special Verdict, (Viz.)

That Patrick Harding, to the intent to Depose the King and Queen, and deprive
them of their Royal Dignity, and restore the late King James to the Government
of this Kingdom, did (for Money by the said Patrick paid) list, hire, raise and
procure Sixteen men. Subjects of this Kingdom, at the time and place in the
Indictment mentioned, to fight and wage war against the King and Queen; and
those Sixteen men so listed, hired, raised and procured, did send out of this
Kingdom into the Kingdom of France to assist and aid the French King, then and
yet an Enemy to the King and Queen, and in open war with Their Majesty's, and
to join themselves with the Enemies and Rebels of and against the King and
Queen in waging war against the King and Queen: And if upon this matter the
said Patrick Harding be guilty of Treason prout the Indictment, then we find
him Guilty prout etc. and if Not guilty, etc, then not Guilty, etc.

Upon this Special Verdict found, the Lord Chief Justice, Justice Gregory and
Justice Ventris, who were then present at the Sessions, conceived some Doubt;
for they were of Opinion, that it did not come within the Clause of the Statute
of 25 Ed. 3. of Levying War: For that Clause is, That if a man levy War against
our Sovereign Lord the King in his Realm; and by the Matter found in the
Special Verdict it appears, that these Men were listed and sent beyond Sea to
aid the French King.

It was also Doubted, whether it were a good Indictment within the Clause of
the Statute of adhering to the King's Enemies, the Fact found in the Verdict
comes fully within that Clause, (viz.) the sending Men to aid the French King,
then an Enemy to the King and Queen in open War against them. But the
Indictment is short as to this matter; for it is quod milites sic ut praefertur
levatos extra hoc regnum Angl' misit ad sese jungend' aliis hostibus inimicis
and rebellat' dict' Regis and Regin'; whereas it should set have forth who the
Enemies were, that the Court might take notice whether they were Enemies as the
Law intends. 33 H. 6. 1. b.
If the Indictment had been That he sent them to the French King, then in open
War, etc. it had been well.

And upon these Doubts the Case was Adjourned for further Consideration.

In Michaelmass Vacation the greater part of the Judges were assembled at the
Lord Chief Justices Chamber, and having debated the Matter amongst themselves,
they all (except Justice Dolben) agreed, that the said Patrick Harding was
guilty of High Treason within the Clause of the Statute, for Compassing the
Death of the King, it being found by the Verdict, That the said Patrick
Harding, to the intent to depose the King and Queen, and deprive them of their
Dignity, etc. did for Money, hire, list, etc. and an intent to Depose the King
(proved by an Overt act) has been always taken to be within the Clause of
Compassing the Death of the King. So is Hales's Pleas of the Crown, so. 11. and
so it was held in the Case of the Earl of Essex in Queen Elizabeth's Time, and
in the Lord Cobham's Case in the Reign of King James the First.

And the Chief Justice cited the Statute made 29 H. 6. cap. 1. upon the
Rebellion of Jack Cade; which Act sets forth, that John Cade, naming himself
John Mortimer, falsely and traitorously imagined the Death of the King, and the
destruction and subversion of this Realm, in gathering together and levying of
a great Number of the King's People, and exciting them to Rise against the
King, etc. against the Royal Crown and Dignity of the King; was an Overt act of
imagining the Death of the King, and made and levied War falsely and
traitorously against the King and his Highness, etc. So that it appears by that
Act, that it was the Judgment of the Parliament, That gathering Men together,
and exciting them to Rise against the King, was an Overt Act of Imagining the
Death of the King. Vide Stamford's Pleas of the Crown, fo. 180.

And according to this Opinion Judgment was given against Harding in the
following Sessions, and he was Executed thereupon.

NOta, At an Adjourned Sessions held the 19th of May, 2 Willielmi and Mariae,
it appeared, that one of the Kings Witnesses which was to be produced in an
Indictment for Treason, had been the day before Challenged to Fight by a
Gentleman, (that, it was said was a Member of the House of Commons), he was by
the Court bound in a Recognizance of 500 l to keep the Peace. And because it
appeared the Witness had accepted the Challenge, he was bound in the like Sum.

NOta, Upon an Appeal to the House of Lords (Anno 2 Willielmi and Mariae) the
sole Question was, Whether upon the Statute of Distributions, 22 and 23 Car. 2.
the half Blood should have an equal share with the whole Blood of the Personal
Estate? And by the Advice of the two Chief Justices, and some other of the
Judges, the Decree of the Lords was, That the Half Blood should have an Equal
share.

Samon versus Jones.
IN an Ejectment brought in the Court of Exchequer, in the -- year of the Reign
of the late King James the Second.

The Case upon a Special Verdict was to this effect; William Lewis, seized of a
Reversion in Fee expectant upon an Estate for Life, did by Deed Poll, in
Consideration of Natural love and affection which he had to his Wife, and
Robert Lewis his Son and Heir apparent, begotten on the Body of his said Wife,
and to Ellen his Daughter, give, grant and confirm unto the said Robert Lewis
the Son, all those Lands, etc. the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and
Remainders thereof. To have and to hold to his Son and his Heirs to the Uses
following, (viz.) to the use of himself for Life, (and then mentioned several
other Uses not necessary to be here mentioned, as not material to the Point in
question) and then to the use of the Wife for Life, and after to the use of
Robert and the Heirs of his Body; and for want of such Issue to the use of
Ellen the Daughter, and the Heirs of her Body, etc. William Lewis and his Wife
died; Robert the Son devised the Estate to the Lessor of the Plaintiff, and
died without Issue; Ellen was in possession, and claimed the Lands by this
Deed; in which th^re was a Warranty, but no Execution of the said Deed (further
than the Sealing and Delivery) was had, either by Enrolment, Attornment, or
otherwise.

So that the sole Question was, Whether this Deed should operate as a Covenant
to stand seized, or be void? And it was Adjudged to amount to a Covenant to
stand seized in the Court of the Exchequer.

And upon a Writ of Error brought upon the Statute of Ed. 3. before the
Commissioners of the Great Seal, and others empowered by that Act to sit upon
Writs of Error, of Judgments given in the Court of Exchequer, the said Judgment
was Reversed by the Opinion of Holt Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, and
Pollexfen Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.

And upon a Writ of Error before the Lords in Parliament, brought upon the said
last Judgment, it was Argued for the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error, That this
should enure as a Covenant to stand seized to the use of the Wife, Son, etc.

It appears by Bedell's Case in the 7 Co. and Foxe's Case in the 8 Co. that the
words proper to a Conveyance are not necessary; but ut res magis valeat a
Conveyance may work as a Bargain and Sale, though the words be not used so as a
Covenant to stand seized, though the word Covenant is not in the Deed, and -- and
Poplewell's Case were cited in 2 Roll. Abr. 786, 787. A Feme in Consideration
of a Marriage intended to be had between her and J. S. did give, grant and
confirm Lands to J.S. and his Heirs, with a Clause of VVarranty in the Deed,
which was also Enrolled, but no Livery was made: It was Resolved to operate as
a Covenant to stand seized, (Vide Osborn and Churchman's Case in the 2 Cro.
127. which seems contrary to that Case) but the chiefest Case relied upon was
that of Crossing and Scudamore, Mod. Rep. 175. where a man by Indenture
bargained, sold, enfeoffed and confirmed certain Lands to his Daughter and her
Heirs, and no Consideration of Natural Love or Money expressed: This was Resolved
22 Car. 2. in B.R. to operate as a Covenant to stand seized; and upon a Writ of
Error in the Exchequer Chamber, the Judgment was affirmed.

It was said on the other side for the Defendant, That the Case at Bar differed
from the Cases cited; for here the Intention of the Deed is to transfer the
Estate to the Son, and that the Uses should arise out of such Estate so
transferred. In the Cases cited no Uses are limited upon the Estate purported
or intended to be Conveyed; but only an Intention appearing, to convey an
Estate to the Daughter in Crossing's Case, and to the intended Husband in
Poplewell's Case; and seeing for want of due Execution in those Cases the
Estate could not pass at Law, it shall pass by raising of an Use. But the Case
at Bar is much the same with the Case of Hoar and Dix in Siderfin the 1st Part.
25. where one by Indenture between him and his Son of the one part, and two
Strangers of the other part, in Consideration of Natural love, did give, grant
and enfeoff the two Strangers to the use of himself for Life, Remainder to the
Son in Tail, etc. and no other Execution was three than the Sealing and
Delivery of the Deed; this was Resolved not to raise an Use, for the Use was
limited to rise out of the Seisin of the Strangers, who took no Estate. Vide
Pitfield and Pierce's Case 15 Car. 1. Marche's Rep. 50. One gave, granted and
confirmed Lands to his Son after his Death; this Deed had been void, if Livery
had been made: It was Resolved not to enure as a Covenant to stand seized,
because the Deed was void in the frame of it.

The Lords affirmed the last Judgment given by the Lords Commissioners, etc.
and held that no Use would arise.

With the concurrent Opinion of Baron, Nevil, Justice Air, and Justice Ventris.

THE ARGUMENT OF Mr. Justice Ventris IN THE EXCHEQUER-CHAMBER, UPON A Writ of
ERROR out of the King's Bench.
Christopher Dighton Gent Plaintiff versus Bernard Greenvil Esquire Defendant.
THE Plaintiff brought a Writ of Error upon a Judgment* in an Action of
Trespass and Ejectment in the King's Bench given for the Defendant, where the
Plaintiff declared upon the Demise of Theophilus Earl of Huntington, of a
Moeity of the Manor of Mar, and of diverse Messuages, Lands and Tenements
lying in Mar Bentley in Baln in the County of York, and also of the Demise of
Robert Earl of Scarsdale, of the other Moiety of the said Manor, and of the
Demise of Elizabeth Lewis, of the entire Manor of Mar, and that by Virtue of
these several Demises he entered, and was possessed until ejected by the
Defendant.

Upon Not Guilty pleaded, the Jury found the Defendant Not Guilty of the
Trespass and Ejectment upon the Demise of Elizabeth Lewis, and as to the
Demises of the several Moieties by the said Earls, they found a Special Verdict
to this effect, (Viz.)

That Thomas Lewis the 9 of April, 20 Jac. 1. before the Mayor of Lincoln,
acknowledged a Statute Merchant to William Knight for 1200 l to be paid at the
Feast of St. Philip and Jacob then next following, and that the said Money was
not paid at the day, and that William Knight the 16 of November 1629. made his
last Will, and one Isaac Knight his Executor, and died, that Isack proved the
said Will, and in Trinity Term 20 Car. 1. sued a Cap. si laicus out of the
Common Pleas against the said Thomas Lewis, directed to the Sheriff of Lincoln,
returnable in Tres Trin. who returned quod laicus fuit sed not fuit inventus in
balliva sua, upon which issued a Writ hearing Test the 7 of July, 23 Car. 1.
Vic Eborum, to estate the Goods and Chattels, and all the Lands and Tenements
of the said Thomas Lewis, tempore Recognitionis debiti praed' returnable Mense
Michael, upon which the said Sheriff returns an Inquisition taken the 11 of
October then next following; whereby Thomas Lewis was found seized of diverse
Lands and Tenements, parcel of the Lands in the Declaration mentioned to be
demised by the said Earls, which he the same day caused to be delivered to the
said Isack, to hold by Extent as his Freehold, until he should be satisfied of
his said Debt, with his Damages and Costs.

They further find, That the said Thomas Lewis, and one John Levet, and Thomas
Lever the 20 of November. 13 Car. 1. acknowledged a Recognizance in nature of a
Statute Staple, before the Lord chief Justice Brampston, to Richard Gerrard for
1000 l payable at Christmas then next following, which Money was not paid at
the day, and that upon a Certificate of the said Recognizance in the Chancery
by John Gerrard, surviving Executor of Richard Gerrard the 22 of June, 24 Car.
1. there issued a Cap. si laicus, and an Extent against the said Thomas Lewis,
to the Sheriff of the County of York, retainable in Craft. animar' prox' at
which day the Sheriff returned all Inquisition by him taken; whereby it
appeared, that the said William Lewis tempore Recogn' debiti praed' was sessed
in Fee of the Manor of Mar, and of diverse Messuages, Lands and Tenements,
being the same Lands in the Declaration mentioned, to be devised by the said
Earls; and the 29 of November. 24. Car. 1. a Liberate was sued out returnable in
quinden' Hillar' to the said Sheriff who returned, that the 29 of November. 24.
Car. 1. he had caused to be delivered the said Manor, Messuages, Lands and
Tenements to the said John Gerrard, to hold as his Free hold; until he should
be satisfied his said Debt, will his Damages and Costs.

They further find, That Thomas Lewis, and Thomas Lever the 27 of May, 15 Car.
1. acknowleged a Recognizance in nature the of a Statute Staple, before the
Lord Chief Justice Brampston, to Sir Gervase Elwaies, and William Buroughs for
5000 l payable at the Feast of St. John the Baptist next following, which Money
was not paid at the day, and that upon a Certificate of the said Recognizance
in Chancery, by the said Sir Gervase Elwaies and William Buroughs, the 10 of
December. 15 Car. 1. there issued out a Cap. si laicus, and an Extent against the
said Thomas Lewis, directed to the Sheriff of the County of York, returnable in
Quinden' Hill. prox. at which day the Sheriff returned on Inquisition by him
taken; whereby it appeared, that the said William Lewis tempore Recogn' debiti
praed' was seized in Fee of a Capital Message in Mar, and of diverse
Messuages, Lands and Tenements, being the same Lands mentioned in the
Declaration, to be demised by the said Earls; and that the 10 of Febr. 15 Car.
1. a Liberate' was sued out returnable in Quidden' Pasch. to the said Sheriff,
who returned, that he had caused to be delivered the said Lands and Tenements
to the said Sir Gervase Elwaies, and William Buroughs, to hold as their Free
hold, until they should be satisfied, the said Debt with their Damages and
Costs.

They find that Thomas Lewis was seized of all the Lands mentioned in the said
several Inquisitions, at the respective times of his acknowledgment of the said
Statute and Recognizance.

They find that the 15 of July 1651. Isaac Knight, and John Gerrard, by their
respective Deeds granted their said several extended interests to one Edward
Lewis; by virtue whereof the said Edward Lewis became possessed of the Manor
and the Tenements, and praed. Edwardo sic possessionat existente praedictoque
Thoma Lewis de Manerio and omnib' premissis seisit' existen' and in actual. and
reali possessione inde; the said Thomas Lewis by his Indenture of Lease and
Release, dated the 25 and 26 of May 1657. for 4000 l conveyed the said Manor
and Premises to John Lewis and his Heirs, in which there is a Covenant to Levy
a Fine, before the end of Trinity Term then next ensuing, and that accordingly
in Trinity Term 1657. The said Thomas Lewis did Levy a Fine come ceo, with
Proclamations of the said Manor and Premises to the said John Lewis, to the
uses in the said Indenture mentioned, by virtue whereof the said John Lewis was
seized in Fee of the said Manor and Premises: And that John Lewis being
thereof so seized the 21 day of July 1670, made his last Will and Testament in
Writing, and thereby devised the said Manor and Tenements to Edward Lewis, and
the Heirs Males of his Body, and for want of such Issue to his Daughters,
Elizabeth and Mary, and the Heirs of their Bodies lawfully Issuing, and for
want of such Issue to his own right Heirs; and that John Lewis the 1 of August
1671 died so seized, and that the said Manor and Premises, at the time of
making of the said Will, were in the possession of the said Edward Lewis; and
that by virtue thereof, the said Edward Lewis became seized of the said Manor
and Premises prout lex postulat, and that in Michaelmass Term 23 Car. 2. the
said Edward Lewis being so seized levied a Fine come ceo, with Proclamations of
the said Manor and Premises to Francis and his Heirs, to the use of Edward
Lewis and his Heirs.

They find that John Lewis had Issue two Daughters, Elizabeth and Mary, who
were the Heirs both of John and Edward Lewis; and that Edward Lewis 30 Sept. 26
Car. 2. died without Issue; and that the said Elizabeth and Mary, as Heirs to
both John and Edward Lewis thereupon entered into the said Manor and Premises
and were seized prout lex postulat; and that Elizabeth afterward married
Theophilus Earl of Huntington, and that Mary married Robert Earl of Scarsdale,
by virtue whereof the said Earls, in right of their said Wives, entered into the
said Manors and Premises, and were seized prout lex postulat.

They find, that the Executors of Edward Lewis assigned to Elizabeth Lewis
Widow, all their interest in the said Statute and Extent, by virtue whereof the
said Elizabeth entered and was possessed, but in Trust for the said two Earls,
and demised the same unto the said Earls at Will.

They find, that the 6th of November 1672. Sir Gervase Elwaies died, and that
William Buroughs survived; and that he afterward on the 3d of May 30 Car. 2.
died, and that on the 30th of July 1680. Administration as to the said
Recognizance and Sum of 5000 l and Process thereupon, was committed to Anne
Greenvil (Wife of the said Bernard) and that the said Earls being so seized on
the 31st of July 32 Car. 2. the said Bernard Greenvil and Anne his Wife
Administered of all the Goods and Chattels of Richard Gerrard, Vnadministred by
John Gerrard and Francis Gerrard; which Administrators of the Goods and
Chattels of Richard Gerrard, cum Testamento annexo; did confess themselves to
be fully satisfied the said 1000 l in the said Recognizance acknowledged by
Thomas Lewis unto the said Richard Gerrard, and of their Damages and Costs
thereby sustained, and prayed that the said Recognizance might be vacated,
which was accordingly done; and afterward on the 28th of September 24 Car. 2.
the said Bernard in Right of the said Anne, entered into the said Manor and
Premises; and afterward, (viz.) on the 1st of June 34 Car. 2. the said Earls
entered upon the said Bernard, and made Leases in the Declaration to the
Plaintiff, by virtue whereof the Plaintiff was possessed, until ejected by the
Defendant; and concludes generally, that if Bernard be guilty, they assess
Damages to 12 d and Costs to 40 s and if Not guilty, they find so:

There have been diverse Points made in the Case by the Counsel that have
Argued; some have made more than others: But the Method I shall take will be,
to observe the several Transactions that have been in the Case, as they are
found in this Special Verdict; and to Consider of what effect and consequence
they will be in Law for the Barring of the Extent upon the Statute acknowledged
to Elwaies and Buroughs, either in respect of any present Right that he had at
the time of the Fines levied, or any future Right that should first come to him
upon the Satisfaction acknowledged upon Gerrard's Statute, so as to give him
the benefit of the second Saving in the Statute of the 4th of Henry the 7th of
Fines.

It is found, that there were three Statutes successively acknowledged, and
that the last Statute was extended first, which I think makes neither one way
nor other; and that on the 5th of July in the Year 1655. the two Extents which
were upon Knight's Statute and Gerrard's Statute (which were the 1st and 2d in
time acknowledged) were assigned to Edward Lewis; and two years after in the
year 1657. Thomas Lewis, who is found to be in the actual and real possession
of the Lands in question; and Edward Lewis in possession prout lex postulat,
bargained and sold the Premises to Sir John Lewis in Fee, and levied a Fine in
Trinity Term 1657. to him with Proclamations, and Five years passed without any
Claim by Edward Lewis.

Before I go any further, I will see what became of the Extents upon the
several Statutes to Knight and Gerrard, after this Assignment, Fine and
Non-claim.

I Observe, that the Counsel for the Defendant has Argued, That the Extents
upon Gerrards and Elwaies Statutes were Reversions or Reversional Interests;
and thereupon have concluded, that Knight's Extent was drowned in Gerrard's
Extent, after they came both to be assigned to Edward Lewis.

Which Point they made use of first, to remove Knight's Statute out of the way;
for if that be not made an end of some way or other, there having been no
Satisfaction acknowledged upon that, it would stand in way of the Defendants
Title: And this is also of use to them in another Matter; for if the two
Extents upon the Statutes of a latter date be Reversional Interests, the
Consequence will be that when Sir John Lewis devised the Inheritance to Edward
Lewis, Gerrard's Extent will not thereupon be drowned in the Fee because of the
Reversional Interest which was then in Buroughs and Elwaies, that comes
between; as is Resolved in the Case of Chamberlain and Ewer in 2 Brownl. 12.
For if Gerrard's Statute were drowned by that Devise, it would make an end of
it too soon for the Defendants purpose; for that the Estate and Interest by
Extent they would suppose to continue at least as to Buroughs and Elwaies,
till such time as Satisfaction should be acknowledged, which was not done till
Twelve years after.

For my part, I do not think it necessary to the Resolution of the main Point
of this Case, to insist upon the Drowning; or to determine, whether the Extent
upon Gerard's Statute and Burrough's Statute were Reversions, or in the nature
of Reversional Interests; yet because it has not been a Point much spoken to on
both sides, I will say something to it by and by, and I do incline to think
that they are in the nature of Reversions, and that Knight's Extent after the
Assignment to Edward Lewis became drowned in Gerrard's Extent: But whether
there were any drowning or no, there is enough in the Case besides to take
Knight's Extent out of the way, or to determine it: For I am not satisfied that
Knight's Statute, as the Verdict is found, was ever extended at all; for it is
found to have been acknowledged before the Mayor of Lincoln, and that the Money
was not paid at the day, and that Knight the Conusee died; and that Isaac
Knight, his Executor, took a Capias thereupon out of the Common Pleas.

Now it being a Statute-Merchant, it ought first to have been certified into
the Chancery, and from thence a Capias should be issued out, Returnable in the
Court of Common Pleas. And so the Statute of Acton Burnel (30 Ed. 3.) Enacts,
and so is Fitz. N.B. 130. whereas here the Capias goes out of the Common Pleas,
and for ought appears was the first step toward the execution of this Statute;
for it does not appear that it was ever certified, or that the Court had any
Record before them to award this Capias upon, and so the Execution is quite in
another manner than the Statute provides, and in a new Case introduced by the
Statute, and therefore it seems to be void, and if so, then the Statute of
Knight could not be assigned so as to pass the Interest of it to Edward Lewis,
and the Fines will have no effect upon it; and indeed it puts it clean out-of
the Case before us, as if it had never been acknowledged, and the Interest of
that Statute must be still in the Executor of Knight.

But then admitting it to have been extended and consequently well assigned,
together with Gerrard's Statute, to Edward Lewis; if so, I take it to be
drowned in Gerrard's Extent. As to that the Case is no more than this; that
after the Statute is extended there comes another Extent upon a puisne Statute
(for it is found that Gerrard's Statute was extended after Knight's Statute),
whether the Estate by Extent upon the puisne Statute be in the nature of a
Reversional Interest; for if so, then when the Interest of the first Extent and
the latter comes into one person, the first must be drowned; for an Estate for
years, or other Chattel Interest, will merge in a Chattel in Reversion that is
immediately expectant. And that is Hughes and Robotham's Case in the 1 Cro.
302. pl. 32. If a Lease for years be made, and then the Reversion is granted
for years with Attornment, the Lessee may surrender to the Grantee and the Term
will drown in the Reversion for years.

To which it is Objected, That an Extent is rather in the nature of a Charge
upon the Land, than an Interest or Estate in the Land it self. In the Case of
Haydon and Vavasor versus Smith in Mo. 662. an Extent is thus described, that
it is onus reale inhaerens gremio liberi tenementi and tout temps Executory, as
the words of that Book are, If the Tenant by an Extent purchase the Inheritance
of part of the Lands extended, the whole falls, So a release of the Debt will
immediately determine the Extent; and it has been compared to one that enters
into Lands by virtue of a power to hold until the arrear of Rent is satisfied.

It is true, an Extent is an Execution given by the Statute Law, for the
satisfaction of a Debt, and therefore the release of the Debt must determine
the Estate by Extent, because the Foundation of it is removed; and so if the
Inheritance of part of the Land extended comes to the Conusee, it destroys the
whole Extent, whereas if a Lessee for years purchases the Reversion of part,
the Lease holds for the rest: But in case of an Extent, if it should be so, the
Conusee would hold the residue of the Land longer, because the Profits that
should go in satisfaction of the Debt must be less, and this would be to the
wrong of him in the Reversion. But in other respects an Extent makes an Estate
in the Land, and has all the properties and Incidents of and to an Estate, and
does in no sort resemble such an Interest as is only a Charge upon the Land.

An Interest by Extent is a new Species of an Estate introduced by Statute Law;
Our Books say, that it is an Estate treated in imitation of a Freehold, and
quasi a Freehold; but no Book can be produced that says; that it is quasi an
Estate. The Statute of 27 Ed. 3. cap. 9. Enacts, That he to whom the Debt is
due; shall have an Estate of Freehold in the Lands; and the Statute of 13 Ed.
1. de Morcatoribus say, That he shall have Seisin of all the Lands and
Tenements. When a Statute is extended, it turns the Estate of the Conisor into
a Reversion; and so are the express words in Co. 1 Inst. 250. b. and so the
Objection, That he does not hold by Fealty is answered, and there are no
Tenures that are to no purpose; but he that enters by virtue of a power to hold
till satisfied an Arrear of Rent, he leaves the whole Estate in the Owner of
the Land, and not a Reversion only.

If a Lease for years be made reserving Rent, and then the Lessor acknowledge a
Statute, which is extended, the Conisee after the Extent shall have an Action
of Debt for the Rent, and distrain and avow for the Rent, (as in Bro. tit.
Stat. Merch. 44. and Noy fo. 74.) but he that enters by a Power to hold for an
Arrear of Rent shall not.

He in Reversion may release to the Tenant by Extent, which will drown the
Interest and emerge his Estate, according as it is limited in the Release, Co.
1 Inst. 270. b. 273. Tenant by Statute may forfeit by making a Feoffment, Mo.
663. He is to Attorn to the grant of the Reversion, 1 Roll. 293. and is liable
to a Quid juris clamat, 7 H. 4. 19. b. Tenant by Extent may surrender to him in
Reversion, 4 Co. 82. Corbet's Case; therefore these Cases are to show, That an
Extended Interest makes an Estate in the Lands, as much as any Demise or Lease.

And I take it, the consequence of that is, That when an Estate by Extent is
evicted by an Extent upon a prior Statute, as Elwaies and Buroughs Extent was
by the Extent of Knight's Statute; or where the prior Statute is first
extended, and then a Statute of later date is extended, as Gerrard's Statute is
found to be extended after the Extent upon Knight's Statute: In both these
Cases, the Extent upon the puisne Statute will be in the nature of a
Reversional Interest.

A Reversion is every where thus described, (viz.) An Estate to take effect in
possession after another Estate determined. It Is not in nature of a future
Interest, as a Term for years limited, to commence after the end of a former
Term; for such an one shall not have the Rent upon a former Lease, as I have
shown before, but he that extends upon a Lessee for years shall; for the
Liberate gives a present Interest to hold ut liberum tenementum, but indeed
cannot take effect in possession by reason of a prior Extent, or by prior Title.

And this is the very case of a Reversion which is an actual present Interest,
though it be to take effect in possession after another Estate.

Now I conceive it will plainly follow from this, That Knight's Statute is
drowned in Gerrard's Statute upon the assignment of both to Edward Lewis. It Is
true in Fulwood's Case in the 4 Co. whereas in the Case before us two Estates
by Extent were assigned to one person, there is no notice taken of the
drowning, which makes nothing against it; for there was no occasion there to
stir or insist upon that Point.

But the next thing to be considered is, (supposing Knight's Statute to have
been well extended and not to be drowned in Gerrard's Statute, after the
assignment of both to Edward Lewis) how the Fine levied by Thomas Lewis and Non
claim will work to the barring of these extended Interests, that were thus in
Edward Lewis at the time of the Fine levied?

That a Right to an Estate by Extent will be barred by a Fine and Non-claim, as
well as the Interest or Right to a Term of years, or any other such like
Estate, cannot be questioned, and I think has been agreed of all hands.
Saffin's Case in the 5 Co. and the Authority of a great many other Books makes
that to be without Controversy.

But the Counsel for the Defendant have insisted upon two things in this Case,
by which they have endeavored to show, that neither of these Extents should be
barred by this Fine; which I shall mention and give some Answer to.

First, It has been said, that it is reasonable to intend, That the Assignment
of Knights and Gerrard's Extent to Edward Lewis was in Trust, and to wait upon
the Inheritance; and if so, the Fine by Thomas Lewis shall only work upon the
Inheritance. For it would be a great inconvenience when Estates for years, or
by Extent, are taken in and assigned to protect Purchasers from latter
Encumbrances, if the Fine of him that has the Inheritance, and also the Trusts
of those Estates assigned, should bar his own Trustee. And tho in Iseham and
Morris's Case, in the 3 Cro. 109. there seems to be an Opinion, That a Trustee
in such Case is Barred: Where the Case is:

That a man had purchased a Lease for years in Trust for himself, and
afterward he bought the Inheritance, and afterward sold it, and levied a Fine
to the Purchasor; it is said there, that Five years Non claim shall bar the
Assignee of the Term: For (says the Book) the Trust passed inclusively in the
Fine. So that it must be understood in that Case, that the Conisee, who was a
Purchasor, did not know of this Term, nor any Agreement to have it assigned in
Trust for him; and then if the Fine had not barred he had been cheated.

But I conceive the Law would have been otherwise, if by Agreement this Term
had been to be assigned in Trust for the Conisee; and this I think goes upon a
very good Reason; For he that has the Inheritance in Trust, for whom such a
Term or Estate by Extent is assigned, must be taken as tenant at Will to his
Trustee, and then that his possession is the possession of the Trustee; the
consequence of which is, That the Fine levied by him that has the Inheritance
will work only upon that, when it appears that it was so intended, and that the
Term should be kept on Foot; whereas in Iseham and Morris's Case, for ought
appears, there was no such Intention, not does it appear that the Conisee knew
of the Term. So that I do agree, That if it were found that these Assignments
to Edward Lewis of the Statutes were in Trust, and to wait upon the
Inheritance, which was after sold and conveyed by the Fine of Thomas Lewis to
Sir John Lewis, that then the Fine and Non-claim will not work to the Barring
of either of those Statutes.

But the Special Verdict finds nothing of any Trust, and we cannot intend it
without finding; neither is there any thing found to induce or ground any
supposition of a Trust: For it is not found that either of the Assignments were
made to Edward Lewis for Money, or other Consideration moving from Thomas Lewis
or Sir John Lewis, nor to have been made by any direction or a request of
theirs, and there was two years distance between the Assignments and the Fine
levied and Sale of the Premises to Sir John Lewis, so that they cannot be
taken to have been made with any relation to his purchase; and then it will be
plain that Knight's Extent (supposing it not to be drowned in Gerrard's Extent)
must be barred after Five years, without claim upon the Fine in 1657. of Thomas
Lewis. For as this Verdict is found, it must be taken that the Estate by Extent
was divested and put to a Right; for the Liberate puts the Conisee in actual
possession. If an Extent be made upon a Lessee for years, the Lessee after a
Liberate to the Conisee may plead an Eviction, and not before the Liberate,
Hob. 82. The Conisee after the Liberate is capable of a Release to enlarge his
Estate, 1 Co. Inst. 270. b.

Now the Verdict finds, that at the time of the Fine levied in 1657. Thomas
Lewis, the Conusor of that Fine, was in actual and real possession, and that
Edward Lewis was in possession prout lex postulat; this actual and real
possession in Thomas Lewis could not be, unless he had regained the possession
after the Liberate upon the extent of Knight's Statute.

It has been Objected, That he should be taken to have entered by the Consent of
Edward Lewis.

There is no such thing found, and so cannot be intended, and then that Estate
by Extent must be divested; and so the Case is stronger than that of a Lessee
for years before Entry, who gains no actual possession till Entry, and
therefore his Interest cannot be properly said to be divested; and yet a Fine
will bar him, if he enters not within Five years. A fortiori a Tenant by
Statute shall be barred, who has had the actual possession by a Liberate, and
then afterward the Conisor gains the actual and real possession, as the
Verdict expressly finds, and levies a Fine upon the finding in this Verdict;
which I take it to be as strong a Case as can be put as to Edward Lewis, being
barred by the Fine as to the Knight's Statute.

Why then after that he became barred he shall have five years more to claim,
in respect of Gerrard's Statute, this is still upon a supposal that Knight's
Statute was well extended, and that it did not drown in Gerrard's Statute: For
if the Extent upon Knight's Statute were void upon the Reasons mentioned
before, or if drowned, then must Edward Lewis claim within the first Five years
after the Fine, to save Gerrard's Extent. For I shall grant that he may have
Five years upon Gerrard's Statute, after the Five years Non-claim upon Knight's
Extent, and that by the second saving of the Statute of 4 H. 7. for it is a new
Right then first come to him upon Knight's Extent, being barred.

Therefore I cannot agree with Mr. Finch and some that have Argued for the
Plaintiffs in the Writ, That if there be several Extents upon Statutes
acknowleged at different times, that they are all present Rights, because the
Liberate delivers the Land to the Conisee to hold immediately ut liberum
tenementum; and therefore if a Fine be levied, he that has the Extent upon the
puisne Statute must claim immediately, as well as he that has the first
Extent; whereas the Extent upon a latter Statute, until there comes an Extent
upon an elder Statute, is either turned to a Reversion, as I Argued before, or
in the nature of a future Interest: And therefore till the first Extent be
barred, or some way determined, he that has the Extent upon the puisne
Statute, can have no present Right, and consequently is not bound to claim, but
his Right is preserved by virtue of the second saving of the Statute of 4 H. 7.
But it appears by the Verdict, that above ten years passed after the Fine of
Thomas Lewis, without any claim by Edward Lewis; so that I conceive he was
barred as to both Extents.

So that which I have taken notice of to have already passed in the Case, is
enough to bar the two Extents of Knight and Gerrard, and to let in the Right of
the Extent of Elwaies and Buroughs; so that I think they might have entered or
made their claim without any thing more. But it is found further in the Case,
that in the year 1670. Sir John Lewis devised the Premises by his Will in
writing to Edward Lewis and the Heirs of his Body, and for want of such Issue
to his two Daughters, who are married to the Earls the Lessors of the
Plaintiff, and died in August 1671. and it is found that at the time of the
Will, and also of the Death of the said Sir John Lewis, the Lands were in the
possession of Edward Lewis; and in Michaelmass Term 1671. Edward Lewis levied a
Fine of the Lands in question to Francis Lewis, to the use of Edward (the
Conusor) and his Heirs.

Now if we should admit that the Extents of Knights and Gerrard's Statute were
not barred by the Fine of Thomas Lewis, let us see what will become of them
upon these things done since. And here I will agree with those that have Argued
for the Defendant, that the Devise of the Inheritance to Edward will not drown
the Extent upon Gerrard's Statute. For, as I have Argued before, I take the
Extent of Elwaies and Burrough's Statute, after the eviction by the elder
Statute, to be turned to a Reversional Interest, and then the interposing of
the Reversion will hinder the drowning of Gerrard's Extent in the Fee devised
to Edward Lewis, as aforesaid.

Now therefore let us see what is found to have been done further in the Case;
and I conceive, if we should grant as the Counsel for the Defendant have urged,
That the Fine by Thomas Lewis had no effect as to the barring of Gerrard's
Extent, nor that the Devise of the Inheritance of the Premises to Edward Lewis
will not drown the Extent; as I agree it did not, by reason of the Extent
interposing that was in Elwaies and Burrough's Case, being (as I have Argued) a
Reversional Interest. I say, admitting all this, yet when Edward Lewis, who had
the Extended Interests upon Knights and Gerard's Statute in him, and the Estate
of Inheritance also in Michalmass Term 1671. Levied the Fine to Francis Lewis,
to the use of himself and his Heirs, that Fine must destroy and determine the
Extended Interests that were in him. For where a Fine is levied by him that
has the Fee and Freehold in him, whatever Right, Estate or Interest there is
in him besides, passes inclusively in the Fine; not by way of transferring the
very Interest it self, but (as it were) consolidating with the Fee: So as to
determine and extinguish such Interest, none can pretend that after this Fine
of Edward Lewis the Extended Interest did continue in him.

They could not pass to Francis Lewis, as assigned or transferred by the Fine;
why then they must be destroyed: And I think it cannot be denied, but that
Elwaies and Buroughs might have entered immediately, the two former Extents
being taken out of the way. And it is found that at the time of the Fine Edward
Lewis was in possession, so that Five years passing without Claim after the
Fine (for it is found that Satisfaction was not acknowledged till Nine years
after,) it is plain that the Extent upon Buroughs and Elwaies Statute was
barred as to the present Right. For I think its clear, that when a former
Statute is determined, whether it be by release of the Debt, by purchase of
part of the Lands, by being barred by Non-claim upon the Fine, Satisfaction
acknowledged or any other means, this sets in the puisne Statute.

And now we are come to the great Question in the Case.

Admitting the Extent upon Elwaies Statute was barred in respect of the present
Right; Whether a new Rightcame upon the satisfaction acknowledged upon
Gerrard's Sta-tute, so that there should be Five years more given by the second
saving of the Statute of the 4 H. 7. to claim upon that new Right?

It has been much urged by those that Argued for the Defendant, that wherever
there is a Reversion or an Estate to commence after the end of another Estate,
that if a Fine be levied, though the Case be so that he in Reversion may enter or
bring his Action, so that Five years Non-claim will bar him as to the present
Right or Remedy, yet he shall have Five years more to claim when the Time is
incurred, or the Limitation come? That the first or particular Estate should
end.

Now, though the Extents upon the two first Statutes were so avoided, that
there might have been an entry upon Elwaies Extent, yet the proper and natural
determination of Gerrard's Extent was not till satisfaction acknowledged upon
Record, or by perception of Profits appearing upon Record, and then there shall
be Five years given to claim, and that by virtue of the second saving of the
Statute of the 4 H. 7. which is to this purpose, (Viz.) Saving to all persons
such Right as first shall grow, remain, descend or come to them after the Fine
levied, by reason of any matter before the Fine levied, so that they take their
Action or pursue their Right within Five years next after such Right shall come.

Now I do not see that the Condition of this saving was performed by those that
had the Right of Elwaies and Buroughs Extent; the Right indeed came after the
Fine levied, and upon a matter before; for it came after that the Extents upon
Knights and Gerrards Statutes were barred, or otherwise avoided. Whether upon
the Non claim by the first Fine, or their being destroyed by the second Fine,
which was levied by Edward Lewis; but there was no claim within Five years
after either of those Fines, so the Right clearly was not pursued within Five
years after the Right first came.

And this has been held necessary to be done where there has been only a right
of Action, as in Sawle and Clerke's Case in Jones 211. and Cro. Car. where the
Case as to this Point is to this effect:

A Remainder upon an Estate Tail was divested by the Fine of Tenant in Tail,
who had made an Estate for Life, warranted by the Statute, and died without
Issue: He in the Remainder was barred from bringing a Formedon in the life of
the Tenant for Life within Five years after the Fine, and had not a new Five
years after the death of Tenant for Life, though he could not Enter in the life
of the Tenant for Life.

And the Reason given in Crook's Reports is, because he had no other Right
after the Death of the Tenant for Life than he had before; and this plainly
distinguishes that and the Case at the Bar from the Cases that have been cited
of June and Smye's Case in the 1 Cro. 219. and Laund and Tucker 254. for there
the Fine was Levied by the particular Tenant, which was a Forfeiture which he
in Reversion might choose whether he would take advantage of, and as the case
might be, it would be to his prejudice to take advantage of it, where the
particular Tenant has charged the Land; and therefore if he would, he should
have Five years after the Estate determined, to claim as of his Reversion,
which is another distinct Right from that of the Forfeiture.

And this was the standing difference that made the distinction, where there
should be a new Five years given to him in Reversion after the particular
Estate determined, and where not; as we see in Margaret Podgers Case in the 9
Co. 106. If the Tenant for years were ousted, and a Fine levied by the
Disseisor, he in the Reversion was bound by the first Five years Non-claim;
because, though he could not enter, as if the Estate for years had been
determined, or as in the Cases before of the Forfeiture; yet he might have
immediately brought an Assize, with which Sawl and Clarke's Case exactly
agrees, and goes upon the same Reason. As for Freeman's Case, the Resolution
goes wholly upon the Circumstances of Fraud appearing in the Case; the
principal of which was, That the Lessee continued in possession, and paid the
Rent.

I confess they have gone a little further of late; and now it is taken, That
he in Reversion shall have Five years after the Term is ended by effluction of
Time, though there were no Forfeiture incurred at the Levying of the Fine: Nor no
such plain Circumstances of Fraud, as appears in Fermer's Case, and the Case
put before, and cited out of Margaret Podgers Case is not held to be Law.

The contrary whereof is taken to have been Resolved in Folley and Tancred's
Case in the 24 Car. 2. and I do not intend to shake the Authority of that Case,
but admit it to be good in Law; yet I crave leave to observe, That it is a
Resolution carried beyond the words of the Statute; for the Right is not
pursued within Five years next after it first came. For it is agreed in
Fermer's Case, fo. 79. that there the Construction was against the Letter of
the Statute; and I must say, it is a Construction by Equity, which is a little
extraordinary to weaken the force of a Statute which was made for the quieting
of men's Possessions, and to add force to Fines, which were of so great regard
in Law; and especially to make a Construction by Equity, contrary to the Reason
of the Common Law, which took no care of a future Right at all; for he in the
Reversion, in case of a Fine Levied at the Common Law, depended wholly upon the
Entry or Claim of the particular Tenant, and in default of that lost his
Estate, as in the 1 Inst. 262. b. and in Plowden's Commentaries in Stowell's
Case. I say again, I do not design by this to oppose any Case that has been
settled: But I confess I should not have gone so far, if I had not been led by
Authority; and am not willing to go a step further.

And now I shall endeavor to show, that this Case goes a great deal further,
and would be a greater strain upon the Statute than yet has been. And,

First, I Observe, that upon all or most of the Cases of a Fine, where there
has been an Estate for Life or Years in being at the time of the Fine, that the
Possession has held still in the particular Tenant, so that he in Reversion had
no reason to suspect any Fine or other thing done upon the Estate, there being
no alteration of the Possession. And this agrees somewhat with the Reason of
the Common Law, in case of a Fine Executory; he that had Right was not bound to
claim till there were an Execution of the Fine, and Transmutation of the
Possession thereupon, as in Plowden's Commentaries 257. b. in Stowell's Case:
But here it is found, that the Conusor, and not the Conusees, or the Tenants by
Extent, or either of them were in possession; so that the Land being in the
possession of a Wrong-doer, they which had Right ought to have watched, and
might well suspect that Fines should be Levied to the prejudice of their
respective Rights. It is said in Fermer's Case, If a mere Wrong-doer having got
the Possession, levieth a Fine on purpose to bind the Right, this shall bind
notwithstanding his unjust Design.

But the Differences that I chiefly rely upon, to distinguish the Case before
us from the Cases of Reversions upon Estates for Life and Years, or the like
particular Estates, are these:

1. That in those Estates there is either, by an express Limitation of the
Parties, or an operation of Law, a certain and particular Term or End of the
Estate, which until it happens, it has not its proper determination, which an
Estate by Extent has not. I know it is has been much insisted on, that the
natural and proper determination of an Extent is satisfaction by a perception
of Profits, according to the extended Value; whereas I cannot see but a release
of the Debt, or satisfaction by a sudden Accident, is as properly a
determination of the Extent, as if it were run out by perception of Profits,
according to the extended Value. For when the first Extent is out of the way
the second is immediately to take place; or why this acknowledging Satisfactoin
on Record, should be the natural and proper determination of the Extent more
than a Release of the Debt by the Conusee, or destroying of it by a Fine, which
is an higher Record than the Statute, or the Entry of Satisfaction acknowledged
thereupon.

2. To let him that has the Reversion upon an Estate by Extent have Five years
to claim after the first Extent run out by perception of Profits or
Satisfaction acknowledged, is to let in a Claim after an Estate, that no man
can see to the end of: For when it shall be satisfied by the Profits no man can
tell, and can much less tell that Satisfaction will ever be acknowledged;
whereas other particular Estates have a known and determinate Limitation, In
the other Case it could not be computed within what compass of time a
possession should be quieted, and so the Statute of Fines, in a great measure
would be defeated of its end. But,

3ly, and principally, It should be in the power of the party that has the
Extent in Reversion, to protract the time as long as he pleased; for till he
thinks fit to bring the Scire facias ad computandum, he nor no one else can say
the Statute is satisfied. For that must appear by an account taken in the Scire
facias, nor none can compel the acknowledging of Satisfaction, and so it should
be at the pleasure of Strangers to him that is in possession by a Fine to make
his Estate liable to a future Claim as long as they pleased; and sure this
would render the Statute of Fines of little or no effect. And this makes an
Estate by Extent, to differ wholly from an Estate for Life or Years, or such
other like particular Estate, which will end of it self, and cannot be
protracted longer than the proper limitation of the act of any one whatsoever.

I will conclude with an Answer to an Objection, that has been much insisted
upon by those that Argued for the Defendant, That an Extent begins by Record,
and cannot end but by Record, viz. either by an account taken upon a Scire
facias or Satisfaction acknowledged upon the Record of the Statute; or at
least, he that is in Reversion, is bound to take notice of any other
determination of the Extent.

To which I Answer, It begins by Record, but it may end without Matter of
Record; for a Release by the Conusee after the Extent determines it to all
intents and purposes; and undoubtedly in such case he which has a puisne
Statute may enter, an Extent upon an Elegit begins by Record; yet when
satisfied by perception of Profits, he in Reversion may enter: So that the
Scire facias, as appears by our Books, is to be brought upon another Reason,
and not because the Extent cannot end but by Record, but it is because of the
incertainty of the Expenses that must be satisfied. And why should not they
which have had the right of Burroughs's Extent be bound to take notice of the
Fines that have been levied, as much as the acknowledging of Satisfaction? And
a Fine is much more a public Record than the other, especially since the
Statute of the 4th of H. 7. has provided for the making of Proclamations upon
it.

Some Remarkable and Curious CASES IN THE COURT OF CHANCERY. Termino Sanctae
Trinitatis Anno 22 Car. II. In Cancellaria.
Marsh versus Lee.
A Bill in Chancery was brought by Marsh, and an Answer put in thereto.

The Case was thus:

One English being seized of the Manor of Wicksall, and of the Manor of
Morfield, in 1649. Mortgages part of the Manor of Wicksall to Burrell for 1000
l Afterward in 1655. he acknowledges a Statute to Burrell of 800 l for the
payment of 400 l Afterward in 1662. English Mortgages both these Manors to
Mrs. Duppa for 7000 l Afterward in 1665. English Mortgages the Manor of
Wicksall to Lee for 2000 l Lee having no notice of the former Mortgages. But
afterward Lee coming to have notice of the Mortgage to Duppa, purchases in the
two Encumbrances to Burrel, (Viz.) the Mortgage of part of the Manor of
Wicksall, and the Statute. And now Marsh, Executor of Duppa, sues Lee, who
pleads this whole Matter.

My Lord Keeper, assisted with Hale Chief Baron and Justice Rainsford, held,
That Lee might make use of these Encumbrances to protect his own Mortgage. For
they said, that he had both Law and Equity for him.

First, He had Law; for that he had a precedent Mortgage in 164^. (which indeed
was but upon part) and also the Statute in 1655. so that while these remained
in force, Marsh could not come in.

Next, He had Equity; for he having a subsequent Mortgage, (yet) it being
without Notice, he ought to be relieved in this Court. And therefore my Lord
Chief Baron put the Case, as if the first Mortgage had been of the Manor of W.
to Burrel, and afterward it had been mortgaged to Duppa, and afterward to
Lee, not having notice; if afterward Lee bought in Burrel's Mortgage, he shall
hold the Estate against Duppa, until he be satisfied for both the Money which
he paid Burrel and also his own Money lent upon the last Mortgage: And for that
he said, that it had been so Adjudged in Camera Scaccarij, in the Court of
Equity, since the King came in, in one Shelley's Case* Next he put the Case of
the Statute which English entered in to Burrel in 1655. and was afterward
bought by Lee from Burrel. He held that Duppa shall not bring Lee to any
Account upon this Statute here in Equity, any otherwise than he may do at
Common Law.

Nota, It was agreed, that the Lands were extended upon the Statute at the
third part of the true value. Now at Common Law the Conusor, or he that claims
under him, must bring a Scire facias ad computand', as in the 4 Co. 69. b. But
then the Conusee shall not account according to the true value, but according
to the extended value, and also for the whole Statute: And if the Conusee is
satisfied by the extended value the Conusor shall recover; or if the Conusor
will pay down the rest of the Money which is behind with Damages, he shall also
recover. But if the Conusor will sue the Conusee in a Court of Equity, then he
shall bring him to Account for what he has received of the Profits above the
extended value.

Now then our Case here is somewhat more; for Lee has also Equity on his Side,
and therefore Duppa shall not bring him to Account for what he has received
above the extended value, unless he has also received enough to satisfy his
own Mortgage of 2000 l as well as the Statute; and therefore if Marsh will take
off this Statute by a Suit in this Court, he must be content that Lee does
account upon the extended value for the whole 800 l and Damages.

Secondly, They held, that whereas part of the Manor of W. was mortgaged to
Burrel; but that now the whole Manor was mortgaged to Lee, that (yet) the
first Mortgage should not extend to protect more than that part of the Manor
which was first mortgaged to Burrell.

And my Lord Chief Baron Hale put the Case thus: If a man is seized of 60
Acres, and mortgages 20 to A. and then mortgages the whole to B. and then
mortgages the whole to C. and afterward C. purchases in the first Mortgage,
that shall not protect more than the 20 Acres; but it shall protect those 20
Acres so as B. shall never recover that until he pay C. all the Money upon the
first and last Mortgage.

But Hale said, That he thought that in this Case, inasmuch as the Mortgage to
Lee was only of part of W. that therefore Marsh might bring Lee to an Account
upon the extended value, whereupon these two Manors were extended upon the
Statute; and if Lee had received the Money due upon the Statute by receiving of
the Profits according to the extended value, or if she will pay down the
residue of the Money due upon the Statute, or if she will pay down so much as
the proportion will come to for Monfield, that then she may discharge the
Manor of Monfield.

But then my Lord Keeper asked him, how he would have it appointed, and how
much should be laid upon Monfield, and how much upon Wicksal; for that part of
W. is under that Extent.

To which Hale Answered, That if Marsh did sue Lee for the discharge of this
Statute from Monfield, that Monfield should be Discharged by her paying down as
much as the proportion comes to; or when Lee shall have received so much
according to the extended value, and that he thought there might be a
proportion found out by the Court.

Nota, Sir H. Fynch, Counsel for Lee, cited Primate and Jackson's Case, Grove
and Grove's Case, and Mrs. Calamy's Case: All which were Resolved in this
Court, That a Purchasor or Mortgagee coming in upon a valuable Consideration
without Notice, and purchasing in a precedent Encumbrance, it shall protect his
Estate against any person that has a Mortgage subsequent to the first, though
before the last Mortgage; though he purchased in the Encumbrance after he had
Notice of the second Mortgage.

White versus Ewer.
AT a Re-hearing before my Lord Keeper, assisted with Justice Vaughan and
Turner, concerning the Redemption of a Mortgage which had been made above 40
years since.

My Lord Keeper Declared, That he would not relieve Mortgages after 20 years;
for that the Statute of 21 Jac. cap. 16. did adjudge it reasonable to limit the
time of ones Entry to that number of years: Unless there are such particular
Circumstances as may vary the ordinary Case, as Infants, Feme Coverts, etc. are
provided for by the very Statute; though these Matters in Equity are to be
governed by the Course of the Court, and that it is best to square the Rules of
Equity, as near the Rules of Reason and Law as may be.

Termino Sancti Michaelis, Anno 22 Car. II. In Cancellaria.
Peter Pheasant versus Anne Pheasant, The Lord Mayor of London, and Sir Thomas
Player, Chamberlain of London, etc.
THe Case was this:

Anne Hadly (now Pheasant) one of the Defendants, being an Orphan of London,
and having an Estate of 3 or 4000 l in Money in the Court of Orphans there, was
married to W. Pheasant, elder Brother to the Plaintiff. W. Pheasant before he
was at the Age of 21 years, and not having taken out this Money, dies, having
bequeathed this Money inter alia to his said Wife, provided that she should not
claim Dower, etc. Notwithstanding she brings Dower against the now Plaintiff,
Brother and Heir to her late Husband. Whereupon he brings this Bill in Chancery
to make Discovery of this Estate, and to compel her to release her Dower, or
renounce this Devise; and thereupon obtains an Injunction, to stay Proceedings
in the Writ of Dower.

The Point was, Whether this Money in the Court of Orphans were Devisable, or
no?

Sergeant Goodfellow Argued, That it was Devisable as a Chattel personal in the
Testator's possession, and vested in the Baron; the Court of Orphans have but
have the Custodiam, Co. Entries 346. 1 Roll. 550. the Chamberlain of London is
the Officer entrusted, and a sole Corporation to this purpose, so as to take
Recognizance which shall go to his Executors, and is the only Corporation of
that nature in England. His possession is the Testator's actual possession,
Latch 127. If the Servant be robbed, the Master shall have the Action, in the 1
Cro. 37. This is not a Debitum, but a Depositum, as in Custodia in gremio legis
by the Custom of London, as if Money had been brought into Court here by a
Compulsory Order, in which case it would have vested in the Husband. Now in the
Court of Orphans they compel People to bring in the Money, or to give Security,
and they pay no Interest, only allow Finding-Money, that is, for the Orphans
Maintenance, and no more. Seeing the Feme is entitled to Dower immediately, it
were hard that the Baron should not have the Portion; Debts he shall not have
because of his Latches, in not bringing an Action whereby to reduce them to
Property; but this cannot be had until the Wives full Age. Upon the Marriage of
Orphans the Custom is, to appoint the Common Sergeant to Treat and take
Security for the Orphan.

Sergeant Maynard contra. This was a Chose en Action, Debt lies for it, and it
cannot be recovered without an Action. Interest is allowed for it according to
the Custom (though not Statute Interest) and proportionable to the Sum. And the
Case of Dr. Ent versus Adrian was, by the Custom of London, If a man dye
leaving three Sons, his Estate shall be equally divided amongst them; and if
either of them dye within Age, his part shall survive to the other. The Father
taking notice of this Custom, Devised, That if any of his Sons dye within Age,
his part should not survive, but that it should go to J.S. It was Resolved,
that the Father could not thus give the Child's Portion, because but a
possibility, and a thing not vested in himself.

Wyld said, That when he was Recorder he certified the Custom in that Case to
be, That the Father might Devise.

Curia, viz Bridgman, Lord Keeper (Twisden and Wyld assisting) We are clear of
Opinion, that this was a Chose en Action and not Devisable. A Trover and
Conversion lies not for it, if it be refused to be paid: It was the Latches of
the Husband, that he did not recover it; for by the Custom it is to be paid at
the full Age or Marriage of the Female Orphan. The Chamberlain is not a Servant
to the Orphan, but to the Mayor. If it were purely a Depositum, it must be paid
in specie without Interest; but they pay Customary Interest: And though whilst
the Orphans are under Age (and Unmarried, if Women) they give them Finding
Money only; yet at the end of all, when the Orphan comes at full Age, (or if a
Female marries) all is Cast up, and the Interest is paid. The word Custodia in
Pleading imports an Interest, as in the Case of Guardian in Soccage, etc. the
Lord Mayor, etc. have a Special Interest in it, and if it be lost or miscarry,
they are to Answer it. Let the Injuction be Dissolved.

Nota, This Case was referred by my Lord Keeper to Justice Wyld. A man opens a
Mine in his Land, and digs until he comes under the Soil of another; whether he
can follow his Mine there? And he certified his Opinion, that he might: But if
the Owner dig there also, he conceived that he might then stop his farther
progress. And in Cornwall it is their Use, that if a man begins a Mine in his
own Land, he may proceed in the Vein through another man's Ground.

Note, If a Bill in Chancery be Exhibited against a Peer, the Course is first,
for my Lord Keeper to write a Letter to him, and if he does not answer, then a
Subpoena, and then an Order, to show Cause why a Sequestration should not go;
and if he still stands out, then a Sequestration: For there can be no Process
of Contempt against his Person.

Termino Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno 29 Car. II.
Clobberie's Case.
IN one Clobberie's Case it was held, That where one Bequeathed a Sum of Money
to a Woman, at her Age of 21 years, or Day of Marriage, to be paid unto her
with Interest, and she died before either, that the Money should go to her
Executor; and was so Decreed by my Lord Chancellor Fynch.

But he said, If Money were bequeathed to one of his Age of 21 years; if he
dies before that Age the Money is lost.

On the other side, If Money be given to one, to be paid at the Age of 21
years; though, if the party dies before, it shall go to the Executors.

Termino Sancti Michaelis, Anno 30 Car. II. In Cancellaria.
Haymer Vid. versus Haymer.
THe Case was thus:

The late Husband of the Plaintiff, before their Marriage, had entered into
Articles with the Plaintiff; whereby it was Agreed, That certain of the said
Haymer's Lands should be settled before the Marriage (which was then intended
between them) should be solemnized upon him and the Plaintiff, and the Heirs of
his Body, by the Plaintiff, but died before the Settlement was made.

In pursuance of the said Articles the Plaintiff married him, and after his
Decease the Plaintiff Exhibits her Bill, to have those Articles executed: Which
was Decreed accordingly against the Heir at Law of the Husband.

Although it was Objected, That the Articles being to make the Settlement before
Marriage, it was a Waver of the benefit of them, the Plaintiff marrying before
it was done; and the Plaintiff being the sole party with whom they were made,
her marriage with the other party before they were performed, was a Release in
Law.

Note, The Lands were mortgaged to one that had no Notice of the Articles.

It was Decreed, That the Plaintiff should Redeem, and hold for her Life, and
that her Executors should detain the Land till the Money was raised that she
had been out upon the Redemption.

Termino Sancti Hillarij, Anno 31 and 32 Car. II. In Cancellaria.
Sir Oliver Butler's Case.
UPon a Scire facias to Repeal a Patent, granted by this King to Sir Oliver
Butler, for a Market to be kept at Chatham; reciting, That there was an Ancient
Market long before kept at Rochester, within Half a Mile of Chatham, and that
there was an Ad quod damnum taken out before the New Patent; and the Inquest
thereupon taken, found it not to be to the Damage of any, and that it was
Executed by Surprise and without Notice; and that notwithstanding it was to the
great Damage of the former Market, etc.

To this Scire facias Sir Oliver Butler Demurred.

And it was Argued by his Counsel, That this Patent could not be Repealed,
because it was preceded by a Writ of Ad quod damnum; whereupon it was found to
be to no Bodies damage, and that should conclude all; or at least, the King
could not bring a Scire facias to Repeal his own Patent.

But the Lord Chancellor Fynch (assisted by North Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, and Justice Jones) gave Judgment for Repealing of the Patent: For
the Return of the Writ of Ad quod damnum was not Conclusive, and here by the
Demurrer it is Confessed to be to the Damage of the former Market. And where a
Patent is granted to the prejudice of the Subject, the King of Right is to
permit him, upon his Petition, to use His Name for the Repeal of it in a Scire
facias at the King's Suit, and to hinder multiplicity of Actions upon the Case;
for such Actions will lie notwithstanding such void Patent.

Termino Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno 32 Car. II. In Cancellario.
Sir Jerome Smithson's Case.
A Motion was made for a Ne exeat Regnum against Sir Jerome Smithson; for that
his Wife had Sued him in the Ecclesiastical Court for Alimony, and it was
suspected that he would go beyond Sea to avoid the Sentence: And the Writ was
granted.

And the Lord Chancellor said, That it had been so done before; for this Court
was to aid the Ecclesiastical Court in such Cases.

And likewise the Court being Informed of his Ill usage of his Wife, a
Supplicavit de bono gestu was granted.

My Lord Hollis's Case. Pasch. 26 Car. II.
MY Lord Hollis's Case was thus:

An Hundred Pounds was Lent by his Lady, and in the Note which was first given
for it, it was written that the Money was to be disposed as the Lady Hollis
should direct. An Action at Law for this Money being barred by the Statute of
Limitations, a Bill was exhibited for Relief, and the Statute of Limitations
insisted upon. But in regard the Money was looked upon as a Depositum, and a
Trust thereupon to the Lady, a Decree was obtained for the Money.

Sir William Beversham's Case.
HE had purchased a Manor, and a Copyhold being a little before Escheated,
which was not intended to pass in Demesne was left out of the particular; yet
the Conveyance was sufficient to pass it in Law.

And the Vendor Exhibited a Bill to be relieved, and obtained a Decree, to hold
by Copy of Sir William Beversham. Vide 1 Roll. 397. Averments not to be
admitted in Chancery contrary to the purport of a Deed.

Anonymus. Trin. Anno 31 Car. II.
THe Case was thus:

J.S. made his Will, (his Wife being at that time with Child) where he ordered
that all his Personal Estate, after his Debts and Legacies paid, should be laid
out in Land (in case he had a Son) and be settled upon his Brother, for
preservation of his Name, and Devised, That if his Wife were delivered of a
Daughter, that she should have 3000 l paid her at her Day of Marriage, provided
that she married with her Mothers Consent, and otherwise but 1000 l and also
Devised, That the Mother should have 80 l part of the Interest of the 3000 l
for the Education of the Daughter.

The Testator dies, and the Wife has a Daughter. The Question was, Whether the
Daughter should have the remaining part of the Interest of the 3000 l or the
Executors should have it in Trust for the Brother, and so to be laid out, etc.?

It was said for the Brother, that the Father intended the Daughter but 3000 l
at the most, and that appointing 80 l part of the Interest of her Education,
excluded her from the rest; and its a Devise, That all his Personal Estate
shall be laid out, etc.

Curia. There is nothing to be laid out until the Debts and Legacies paid; the
80 l is not to the Daughter, but for the Mother. It Is taken for granted, that
where a Sum of Money is devised to a Child at such an Age, it shall have the
Interest in the mean time, rather than the Executor shall swallow it; but
clear, when no Maintenance is otherwise provided for.

The Lord Chancellor Decreed it for the Daughter, and that the Executor should
account for what Interest he paid the Brother.

Note, Though it be said, that the Money to be laid out after all Legacies paid;
yet all, besides what serves to pay the Legacies, should be laid out presently.

Anonymus. Trin. Anno 31 Car. II.
A Devise of 100 l to J.S. at the Age of 21 years; and if J.S. died under Age,
then J.N. and A.B. to have the 100 l or else the Survivor of them.

A.B. and J.N. dye both in the life of J. S. and before the Age of 21 years,
and then J.S. dies under the Age of 21 years.

The Administrator of J.N. who survived A.B. sued, and obtained a Decree for
the 100 l for though he died before the Contingency happened, yet his Administrator
should have it.

Charles Blois and al', Plaintiffs, versus Dame Jane Blois and Jane Blois
Infants, Defendants. Mich. Anno 31 Car. II.
THe Case was thus:

Sir William Blois, who had Issue the Plaintiff and two Daughters by a former
Venture, and Jane the Defendant by a second Venture; upon his second Marriage
settled Lands for the Ioynture of his Wife, and after her decease (in case he
had Issue only a Daughter) to raise 3000 l for that Daughter, to be paid her at
the Day of Marriage, so that she married after Sixteen, or otherwise at the Age
of Eighteen years; and if she died before either, then his Heir to have the
benefit.

Afterward Sir William Blois by his Will devises the Reversion of his settled
Lands, and all his other Estate, to Jane his Relict, one of the Defendants, and
three others; and says, That after the Son, by a convenient Match, shall have
raised 9000 l for his three Daughters, that then they should let the Son, the
now Plaintiff, have his Estate.

The Question now was, That if the Daughter by the second Venture had 3000 l
paid her, whether she should have any further benefit by the Settlement, and so
take a double Portion, one upon the Will, and another upon the Settlement?

The Decree made by my Lord Fynch was, That if the Heir paid 9000 l the
Security by the Settlement should be discharged, the Will being but Cumulative
Security, and so the Defendant Jane was to have but one 3000 l and be subject
to the same Contingencies with the Settlement, and gave the Heir two years time
to pay the Money; and in the mean time Jane to have a third part of the Profits
of the Land devised.

My Lord Chancellor cited one Pyne's Case; where a man had secured Portions for
his Children, and afterward by his Will Devised to each of them a like Sum; it
was held, that this would not double their Portions; unless plainly proved that
he intended to do so.

Nota, If one sue in Chancery an Executor of one Obligor, to discover Assets,
you must make all the Obligors parties, that the Charge may lie equal.

Quaere, Whether you may not sue the Principal, and leave out them that are
bound only as Sureties? But it is clear, that if a Judgment be had at Law
against one Obligor, you may sue the Executor of him alone, to discover Assets,
etc. because the Bond is drowned in the Judgment.

Turner's Case.
A Mortgage was made in Fee, which descended to the Heir at Law, and the Money,
ten years since paid to him. The Executor of the Mortgagee preferred his Bill,
and had a Decree for the Money; but without Interest.

My Lord Chancellor went upon the Reason of the Case in Littleton, That if a
Feoffment be made upon Condition to re-enter upon the payment of a Sum of
Money, and not expressed to whom to be paid, there (after the Death of the
Feoffee) it must be paid to the Executor, and not to the Heir. So here, though
the Proviso was to pay to the Feoffee, his Heirs or Executors; yet when the Day
is past, it is as much as if no person had been expressed, and then Equity shall
follow the Law and appoint it to the Executor.

Termino Paschae, Anno 32 Car. II. In Cancellaria.
Anonymus.
AN Impropriator devised to one that served the Cure, and to all that should
serve the Cure after him, all the Tithes and other Profits, etc. Though the
Curate was incapable to take by this Devise in such manner, for want of being
Incorporate and having Succession; yet my Lord Chancellor Finch Decreed, That
the Heir of the Devisee should be seized in Trust for the Curate for the time
being.

Broadhurst versus Richardson and al'.
A Man had Issue three Daughters, and devised to his three Daughters 540 l
equally to be divided between them; that is to say, 180 l apiece; but if any of
them died without Child, her part to go to the Survivors.

One of the Daughters married Broadhurst, and before the Portion paid she died
without Issue.

Broadhurst Exihibits his Bill against the Executor, and the two surviving
Sisters, and had a Decree for the 180 l For a Sum of Money cannot be Entailed.

Anonymus.
IF Lands be devised for the payment of Debts and Legacies, and the residue of
the Personal Estate be given to the Executors after the Debts and Legacies
paid; the Personal Estate shall notwithstanding, as far as it will go, be
applied to the payment of the Debts, etc. and the Land charged no further than
is necessary to make up the residue.

Termino Sancti Hillarij, Anno 32 and 33 Car. II. In Cancellaria.
Sail and Freeland and al' Infants.
THe Bill was to Redeem a Mortgage made by the Father of the Defendants, or to
be foreclosed.

The Defendants by Guardian Answered, setting forth,

That their Grandfather was seized in Fee, and made a Settlement, whereby he
entailed the Estate; but with a power of Revocation by any Writing published
under his Hand and Seal in the presence of three Witnesses.

And the Case was; That he made his Will under his Hand and Seal, wherein he
recited his Power, and declared that he Revoked the Settlement; but the Will
had but two Witnesses, which subscribed their Names, though a third present, and
died. The Lands descended to the Father, who made the Mortgage; and the
Defendants claimed by virtue of the Entail.

The Decree was that the Mortgage Money should be paid.

First, My Lord Chancellor said, that here was an Execution of the Power in
strictness, though the third Witness did not Subscribe.

Secondly, If there had not, that Equity should help it in such a little
Circumstance where the Owner of the Estate had fully declared his Intention.
There is a difference where a man has power to make Leases, etc. which shall
charge and incumber a third persons Estate, such Powers are to have a rigid
Construction; but where the Power is to dispose of a man's own Estate, it is to
have all the favor imaginable.

It was offered by the Counsel, That where Tenant in Tail did bargain and sell
his Estate, that seeing he had power over it, notwithstanding there were no
Fine and Recovery, a Court of Equity should Decree against the Heir.

But my Lord Chancellor said, that he would not supersede Fines and Recoveries;
but where a man was only Tenant in Tail in Equity, there this Court should
Decree such disposition good; for a Trust and Equitable Interest is a Creature
of their own, and therefore disposable by their Rule. Otherwise, where the
Entail was of an Estate in the Land.

Nota, In the Case supra, that the Court would not Decree the Infants to be
foreclosed till they come of Age, (though sometimes it is so done;) because this
Mortgage depended upon a disputable Title, and so no Money could be expected
upon Assignment of it over.

Termino Paschae, Anno 33 Car. II. In Cancellaria.
Sir Thomas Littleton's Case.
IN this Case my Lord Chancellor Declared,

1. That it was a constant Rule, That the Money to be paid upon Mortgages in
Fee, whether forfeit or not before the death of the Mortgagee, that it should
go to the Executor.

2. If a man had Lands in Fee, and other Lands mortgaged to him in Fee; by a
Devise of all his Lands the Mortgage would pass.

3. If a man had but the Trust of a Mortgage of Lands in D. and had other Lands
in D. by a Devise of all his Lands in D. the Trust would pass: But here a Will
devised Lands to J. S. in D. S. and T. and all his Lands elsewhere, when he had
a Mortgage of Lands that did not lie in D. S. or T. which were of more value
than the Lands in D. S. and T. The Decree was, that the Mortgage should not
pass; for he could not be thought to mean, to comprehend Lands of so much value
under the word (elsewhere) which is like an (etc.) that comes in currente
calamo; and besides, that there were some other Circumstances in the Will that
did seem, as if he intended not to pass the Mortgage Lands.

Anonymus.
A Bill was Exhibited, setting forth, That the Defendant in a Replevin had
avowed for a Rentcharge; and Issue was taken thereupon, upon the Seisin of the
Grantor, and it was found for the Defendant.

Which Verdict the Plaintiff complained of, alleging that the Rent pretended
to be granted, had not been paid in 50 years, and other Circumstances, to
render the Grant suspicious, etc.

The Lord Chancellor Decreed, That there should be a New Trial the Complainant
paying the Costs of the former.

Note, This could not have been tried again at Law; because the Verdict in
Replevin is conclusive.

Cage versus Russel.
A Feme Covert having Power by her Will to Devise certain Lands, devised them
to her Executors to pay 500 l out of them to her Son, when he should attain the
Age of One and twenty years; provided, that if the Father of the Son did not
give a sufficient Release to the Executors, of the Goods and Chattels remaining
in such an House, then the Devise of the 500 l should be void and to go to the
Executors.

After her Decease, a Release was tendered to the Father, who refused it; and
then the Son exhibits a Bill against the Father and the Executors for the 500 l
and to compel the Father to Release.

The Executors in their Answer insisted upon the Refusal as a Forfeiture of the
500 l

And the Father said, That though he had for some Reasons before refused, he was
now ready to Release.

The Lord Chancellor Decreed the Payment of the 500 l and said, that it was the
standing Rule of the Court, That a Forfeiture should not bind where a thing may
be done afterward, or any Compensation made for it. As where the Condition was
to pay Money, or the like. But in the Case of Fry and Porter in the 22th of
Car. 2, (which see at large in the Modern Reports) where a Devise was of an
House, upon Condition that the Devisee should Marry with the Consent of three
persons, and she married without Consent, it was an immediate Forfeiture: for
Marriage without Consent was a thing of that nature that no after Satisfaction
could be made for it: But if where there is a Devise over to a third Person,
after a Forfeiture by the first, a Forfeiture in such a Case would be generally
binding; but here it is said, that it shall go the Executors, etc. which was not
to be considered, because it is no more than what the Law implied.

Termino Sancti Michaelis, Anno 33 Car. II. In Cancellaria.
Anonymus.
ONe Devises 250 l to his Son, and makes his Wife Executrix, who marries
another Husband.

In a Bill brought against them for the Legacy by the Son the Defendants would
have discounted Maintenance and Education.

Which was not permitted by the Court, so as to a diminish the principal Sum;
for it was said, that the Mother ought to maintain the Child: But a Sum of
Money paid for the binding of him out an Apprentice was allowed to be
discounted.

Note, It is the Course here, that where a man dies in Debt, and under several
Encumbrances, (viz.) Judgments, Statutes, Mortgages, etc. and the Heir at Law
buys in any of them that are of the first Date; if those which have the latter
Securities prefer their Bill, the Encumbrances brought in shall not stand in
their way for more than the Heir really paid for them.

Goylmer versus Paddiston.
THe Case was thus:

Thomas Goylmer in 1653. being seized of certain Lands in Fee of the value of
14 l per annum, and there being a Marriage in Treaty between the Plaintiff (the
Brother of Thomas) and Anne Wells, the said Thomas did make a Writing, sealed
and delivered by him; which was to this purpose, (Viz.) That if the Marriage
takes effect between my Brother and Ann Wells, she being worth Eightscore
Pounds, I do promise, that if I dye without Issue, to give my Lands in, etc. to
my Brother and his Heirs, or to leave him 80 l in Money; And for the true
performance of this, I bind my self, my Heirs, Executors and Administrators.

After which the Brother (the now Plaintiff) and the said Anne Wells did
intermarry, and she was worth Eightsocore pounds: But Thomas Goylmer did
afterward marry, and having no Issue, he did settle the Lands upon his Wife
for Life, the Remainder to his own right Heirs; (this way a Jointure settled
before Marriage) and did afterward devise the Land to her in Fee, and died
without Issue.

His Wife afterward devised it to the Defendant's Wife in Fee; and now the
Plaintiff exhibited his Bill to have the Land Conveyed according to the
Agreement above.

But for the Defendants it was much insisted upon, that this being to settle
the Lands, in case Thomas should dye without Issue, it should not be regarded
in this Court; for the Execution of a Trust of a Remainder or Reversion in Fee,
upon an Estate Tail* shall not be compelled, because it is subject to be
destroyed by the Tenant in Tail; as here Thomas might have done, in case he had
made a Settlement according to the import of that Writing, who therefore could
not have been compelled himself to have executed this Agreement.

But the Lord Chancellor Fynch Decreed the Land for the Plaintiff; because it
was proved that the Marriage with the Plaintiffs Wife was in expectation of the
performance of this Agreement, and he was obliged to have left the Land to the
Plaintiff if he had had no Issue.

Termino Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno 34 Car. II. In Cancellaria.
Collet versus Collet.
WIlliam Fox having three Daughters, Mary, Elizabeth and Martha, (the two
latter being Married, and the first a Widow) by his Will devised in these
Words, (Viz.)

I give unto Martha my Daughter the Sum of 400 l to be paid unto her by my
Executors within one year next after my decease: But I will, and my desire is,
that Cornelius Collet (the Husband of Martha) upon the payment of the said 400
l shall give such Security as my Executors shall approve of, that the said 400
l shall be laid out within 18 Months next after my decease, and purchase an
Estate of that value to be settled and assured upon her the said Martha, and the
Heirs of her Body lawfully begotten.

And in the Close of his Will were these words following: (Viz.)

I Will, That after my Debts which I shall owe at the time of my Decease, and
my Funeral Expenses, and the Probat of this my Will be discharged; then I do
give all the rest of my Personal Estate Unbequeathed, to purchase an Estate
near of as good value as the same Personal Estate shall amount unto, within one
year next after my my decease. Which said Estate so to be purchased, I Will
shall be settled and assured unto and upon my said three Daughters, Mary,
Elizabeth and Martha, and the Heirs of their respective Bodies lawfully
begotten for ever; or otherwise my said Daughter Mary, and the Husbands of my
said two other Daughters Elizabeth and Martha shall for such Moneys as they
shall receive of my said Executors, for the Overplus of my Personal Estate,
enter into one or more Bonds in the double Sum of Money as each part shall
amount unto (the same being to be divided into three parts) unto my said
Executors, within 18 Months next after my decease to settle and assure such
part or Sum of Money as each of them shall receive and have by this my Will*
for the Overplus of my Personal Estate, unto and upon the Child and Children of
my said Daughters, Mary, Elizabeth and Martha, part and part alike.

Martha, the Wife of Cornelius Collet died within six Months after the
Testator, leaving Issue only a Daughter, who died within four Months after the
Mother; the other two Sisters surviving.

Cornelius Collet took out Letters of Administration both to Martha his Wife,
and likewise to his Daughter; the Four hundred Pounds, and likewise the
Overplus of the Personal Estate, being unpaid or disposed of.

Cornelius Collet preferred his Bill against the Executors and the surviving
Sisters, and thereby demanded the 400 l and likewise a third part of the
Overplus, which amounted unto 700 l

And the Cause came to be heard before the Lord Chancellor upon Bill and
Answer, who Decreed the 400 l to the Plaintiff; but as to the Surplus of the
Estate the Bill was dismissed, although it was much insisted upon for the
Plaintiff, that he might have given Bond to secure the Surplus for his Child,
and so from the Child it would have come to him as Administrator: But seeing
that no Interest could vest in the Child till the Election were determined (it
not being material as to this Point, whether the Executors or the Husband a^
the Election) the Father could not claim it as Administrator to the Child. And
then if the Money had been laid out in Land, and the Settlement, according to
the direction of the Will, the Husband would have had no benefit: for there
would have been a Joint Estate for Life in the Daughters with several
Inheritances, and no severance of the Ioynture by the Marriage and having
Issue, Co. Inst. -- and so no Tenant by the Courtesy. Therefore as to the
Surplusage the Bill was Decreed to be dismissed.

Note, As to the 400 l the Order of my Lord Chancellor was, That Interest
should be paid for it from the time of bringing the Bill.

Termino Sancti Michaelis, Anno 34 Car. II. In Cancellaria.
West versus The Lord Delaware.
WEST, Heir apparent of the Lord Delaware, Exhibited his Bill against the said
Lord, setting forth:

That upon a Marriage agreed to be had between him and the Daughter of one Mr.
Huddleston, with whom he was to have 10000 l Portion. The Lord his Father
Articled to settle Lands of such yearly value for the Wives Ioynture, for their
maintenance and the Heirs of their Bodies, etc. That the Wife being now dead
(and without Issue) and no Settlement made, the Bill prayed an Execution of the
Articles, and a discovery of what Encumbrances there were upon the Lands to be
settled.

To this the Lord Delaware Answered, That he never intended to settle Lands,
but for the Wives Ioynture only, and that the Plaintiff her Husband was not
named in the Articles, and so was Advised, He need make no Settlement; and upon
that Reason the Plaintiff could not require him to discover Encumbrances.

An Exception being taken to the Answer, for that it did not discover any thing
touching Encumbrances, it was Argued before my Lord; and for the Defendant it
was alleged, That by the Course of the Court the time of the Discovery should
be when the other Point was determined; for if that be for the Defendant, then
no Discovery can be required; but if otherwise, that then the Defendant shall
be put to answer Interrogatories, as is usual in Cases of like nature: And it
cannot be Objected. That the Estate may be charged with Encumbrances since the
Bill, because they will be of no avail.

On the other side it was said, That this would create great delay; for upon
the discovery of Encumbrances other parties must be made to the Bill, and
therefore this Case differed from the Case of Account, which concerns the
Defendant himself only; but the Question now is only for the making proper
Parties.

The Court Ordered, That a further Answer should be made.

Nota, If a man devises, that such a Sum of Money shall be paid out of the
Profits of his Lands, and the Profits will not amount to the Sum, in such case
the Land may be sold.

Noell versus Robinson.
THe Plaintiffs Father being seized in Fee of a Foreign Plantation, devised it
to the Plaintiff, and made the Defendant Executor.

The Executor let it for years, reserving Rent in Trust for the Plaintiff, who
now Exhibited his Bill to have his Rent.

The Defendant Confessed the Devise of the Testator, and the Lease made by
himself; but said, That great Losses had fallen upon the Testator's Estate, and
that he paid and secured (which is payment in Law) for the Debts of the
Testator to ^ great value, and that he hoped he should be permitted to
reimburse himself by the receipt of this Rent, notwithstanding the mentioning
of the Trust, as aforesaid.

The Cause came to Hearing, and the Court Decreed for the Plaintiff.

For although a Legatee shall refund against Creditors (if there be not Assets)
and against Legatees, all which are to have these proportion where the Assets
fall short; yet the Executor himself, after his Assent, shall never bring the
Legacy back: But if he had been sued and paid it by the Decree of this Court,
the Legatee must have refunded; as if a Debtor to a Bankrupt pays him
voluntarily, he must pay him over again. Otherwise of payment by Compulsion of
Law.

Note, My Lord Chancellor said, That if they give Sentence for a Legacy in the
Ecclesiastical Court, a Prohibition lies, unless they take Security to Refund.

Note also in this Case, that though it be an Inheritance, yet being in a Foreign
Country it is looked upon as a Chattel to pay Debts, and a Testamentary thing.

It was Objected, That this could not be taken for an Assent; for if so, how
could the Executor let it?

But the Court said, that it did tantamount to an Assent, and being a lawful
Act a little matter will be taken for an Assent.

Anonymus.
A Bill was Exhibited by the Assignees of Commissioners of Bankrupts, to have
an Account against the Defendant of the Bankrupts Estate.

The Defendant pleaded, that he was but Servant to the Bankrupt, and had given
an account of all to his Master, and likewise had been Examined before the
Commissioners upon the whole Matter.

Upon Hearing his Plea, my Lord Chancellor Overruled it, and Ordered that he
should Answer.

Anonymus.
IF a man makes a Lease, or devise an Estate for Years (he being seized of an
Estate of an Inheritance) for payment of Debts; if the Profits of the Lands
surmount the Debt, all that remains shall go to the Heir, though not so expressed;
and albeit it be in the case of an Executor.

Barney versus Tyson.
THe Case was thus:

The Plaintiff in the Life of his Father, being about 26 years of Age, and
having occasion for Money, prevails with the Defendant to let him have in Wares
to the value of 400 l and gives him Bond for 800 l to be paid if he survived
his Father (at which time an Estate would befall him of 5000 l per Annum;) and
he having survived his Father, he preferred his Bill against the Defendant, to
compel him to take his Principal Money and Interest.

And it was proved in the Case, that the Defendant was Informed at the time of
this bargain, that the Father was ill, and not like to live, (and he did live
but a year and half after) and that one Stisted, a man very Infamous, was
employed in the transaction of this Bargain.

And the Plaintiff obtained a Decree in the time of the Lord Chancellor Fynch.

And now upon a Petition to the Lord Keeper North the Defendant obtained a
Re-hearing.

And in maintenance of the Decree it was alleged, that the hazard which was
run was very little, and such Bargains with Heirs were much to be
discountenanced.

The Lord Keeper affirmed the Decree; but said that he would not have it used
as a President for this Court to set aside men's Bargains.

But this Case having received a Determination, and the Defendant having
accepted his Principal Money and Interest thereupon; and there being only a
slight Omission in the Enrolment of the Decree (which if it had been done had
prevented a Re-hearing) and the Defendant having delayed his Application to him
by Petition, he would not now set the Decree aside.

Termino Paschae, Anno 35 Car. II. In Cancellaria.
Hodges versus Waddington.
THe Case was thus:

An Executor wasted the Testator's Estate, and made his Will, wherein he
devised diverse of his own Goods, and made his Son Executor.

Afterward a Suit was commenced against the Son, to bring him to an Account
for the Estate of the first Testator, which was wasted; and pending that Suit
the Son after the Bill brought against him by the Legatee of his own Goods,
delivered them to the Legatee, and assented to the Legacy.

After which, upon the Account against the Son, it appeared that the first
Executor had wasted the Goods of the first Testator to such a value.

And then the party, at whose Suit the said Account was, and who was to have
the benefit thereof, together with the Son and Executor of the first Executor,
preferred a Bill against the Legatee of the Goods, to make him Refund, and
obtained no Relief; especially for that he had made the Executor Plaintiff, who
should not be admitted to undo his own Assent.

But liberty being given to bring a New Bill against the Legatee and the said
Executor, the Cause came to Hearing, and it was Decreed, That the Legatee
should Refund: So that one Legatee that is paid, shall not only Refund against
another; but a Legatee shall Refund against a Creditor of the Testator, that
can charge an Executor only in Equity, (viz.) Upon a wasting by the first
Executor: But if an Executor pays a Debt upon a Simple Contract, there shall be
no Refunding to a Creditor of an higher Nature.

Note also, The Principal Case went upon the Insolvency of the Executor.

Anonymus.
A Bill was brought, setting forth a Deed of Settlement of Lands in Trust, and
to compel the Defendant, who was a Trustee therein nominated, to Execute an
Estate.

The Defendant by Answer says, That he believed that there was such a Deed as
in the said Bill is set forth, etc.

And upon the Hearing they would have read a Deed for the Plaintiff, though not
proved, (but upon a Commission taken out only against another Defendant to the
Bill) supposing it to be Confessed by the Answer.

But the Court would not permit the Reading of it; for the Confessing goes no
further than what is set forth in the Bill, and will not warrant the Reading of
a Deed produced, although it has such Clauses in it.

Anonymus.
A Bill was preferred against one, to discover his Title, that A.B. might be
let in to have Execution of a Judgment.

The Defendant pleaded, That he was a purchaser for a valuable Consideration;
but did not set forth That he had no Notice of the Judgment.

And it was Overruled; for it is a fatal Fault in the Plea.

Bird versus Blosse.
THe Case was thus:

One wrote a Letter signifying his Assent to the Marriage of his Daughter with
J.S. and that he would give her 1500 l And afterward by another Letter, upon a
further Treaty concerning the Marriage, he went back from the Proposals of his
Letter. And at some time after declared, That he would agree to what was
propounded in his first Letter.

This Letter was held a sufficient Promise in Writing, within the Statute of 29
Car. 2. called the Statute against Frauds and Perjuries, and that the last
Declaration had set the Terms in the first Letter up again.

Anonymus.
WHere a man buys Land in another name, and pays Money, it will be in Trust for
him that pays the Money, though no Deed declaring the Trust; for the Statute of 29
Car. 2. called the Statute of Frauds, does not extend to Trusts, raised by
Operation of the Law.

Anonymus.
AN Administrator de bonis non of the Conusee of a Statute had agreed with the
Conusor, to assign it in Consideration of a Sum of Money which upon the said
Agreement the Conusors had Covenanted to pay to him, his Executors or
Administrators; and then the Administrator died.

The Court Decreed the Money to be paid to the Executor of the Administrator,
and not to the New Administrator de bonis non; although before the Extent it
could not be assigned at Law.

Sed nota, That there were not Debts of the first Intestate appearing.

Termino Sancti Hillarij, Anno 35 and 36 Car. II. In Cancellaria.
NOte, Suits in Chancery admitted for Distribution of Intestates Estates upon
the Act of 22 Car. 2.

Sir Thomas Draper Mil' versus Dr. Crowther.
THe Bill sets forth a Contract under Seal with the Defendant, for making of a
Lease of certain Lands in Middlesex, and to have an Execution of the Agreement.

The Defendant pleaded, That he has Head of a College in Oxford; and sets
forth the Charters of 14 R. 2. and 14 H. 8. Impowering the University to
enquire and proceed in all Pleas and Quarrels in Law and Equity, except
concerning Freehold, where a Scholar, their Servants and Ministers sunt una
partium, etc. ita quod Justiciarij de Banco Regis, sive de Communi Banco, vel
Justiciarij ad Assisas non se intromittant, etc. And the Confirmation by an Act
of Parliament of the 13th of Elizabeth; and Concluded his Plea to the
Jurisdiction of the Court.

And it came to be Argued before the Lord Keeper Guildford, 22 Febr. 1683. and
the Plea was Overruled, because the Charter ought properly to be extended to
Matters at Common Law only, or to Proceedings in Equity that might arise in
such Cases, and not to mere Matters of Equity, which are Originally such, as to
Execute Agreements in specie.

Again, Conuzance of Pleas is never to be allowed, unless the Inferior
Jurisdiction can give Remedy. Here they can only Excommunicate or Imprison; but
cannot proceed to Sequestration of Lands in Middlesex.

If the Matter lay only in Damages, it might be allowed to them, because the
Jurisdiction is given over all England; but this is not to be intended where
the Suit is for the thing it self, and when it is out of their reach.

A President was cited in the year 1663. before my Lord Clarendon Chancellor,
assisted with Hale (then Chief Baron) and Justice Wyndam, where the Plea was
Overruled. Vide in the 3 Cro. 63. Wilcocks and Bradell's Case, and Hallie's
Case 87.

Sir Robert Reeve's Case.
SIr George Reeve, upon his Marriage with his Second Wife, settled a Ioynture of
diverse of his Lands in Suffolk, which he had before charged with his Daughters
Portion, (viz.) 3000 l (which Daughter he had by a former Wife;) and by his
last Will he mentioned, that the said Jointure Lands were so encumbered; and
therefore he Devised certain Lands he had in Bickerton in Yorkshire to his
Wife, in lieu of such part of the Suffolk Lands as were charged with the
Portion, in case she would accept thereof.

But after his Decease it appeared, that the Lands in Bickerton were not
equivalent in Value to the Suffolk Lands; and therefore she held to the latter,
and was not prejudiced by the Charge of the Portion, because it appeared to be
a Voluntary Settlement.

Nota, In this Case the Lord Keeper Decreed, that the Portion should be charged
upon the Bickerton Lands, for so much as it was defeated by the Settlement in
Ioynture of the Suffolk Lands.

Anonymus.
ONe Devised his Lands to J.S. in Fee, in Trust for Katharine -- and the Heirs
of her Body; and if Katharine died without Issue to Jane -- for life: And in
another Clause in the Will he devised, That if Katharine died without Issue,
and Jane be then deceased; then, and not otherwise, he gave the Land to J. N.
and his Heirs.

Katharine died without Issue, and Jane survived her and died.

A Bill was brought by J. N. against J. S. and the Heir at Law of the Testator,
to have this Trust executed.

My Lord Keeper Decreed it for J. N. although Jane survived Katharine; because
the words (if Jane be then deceased) seemed to be put in to express his
meaning, that Jane should be sure to have it for her life, and that J. N.
should not have it till she were dead; and also to show when J.N. should have
it in possession.

Termino Paschae, Anno 36 Car. II. In Cancellaria.
Wiliam Ragget and his Wife versus William Clarke.
THe Case was thus:

Nicholas Wheeler was seized of a parcel of Land for his own life, and the
lives of two others, and prevailed with the Defendant to be bound with him for
a Sum of Money: And that the Defendant might raise Money for the discharge of the
said Debt, he permitted the Defendant to enter into the said Lands, and to take
the Profits for two years, (the said Lands being about 12 l yearly value;) and
the said Land being so in the possession of the Defendant, the said Wheeler
died, and made Isabel (Wife of the now Plaintiff) his Executrix.

And this Bill was brought by the said Husband and Wife, to have an account of
the Profits, and that the possession of the Land should be delivered up to them.

The Defendant by Plea sets forth his Title as Occupant, and it was allowed.
And the Bill was dismissed.

Bonham versus Newcomb.
ONe being seized in Fee, in Consideration of 1000 l paid to him by a Person
that married his Kinswoman, Conveys to him and his Heirs, and takes a Re-demise
for 99 years, if he should live so long: And a Covenant therein, That if he
should pay 1000 l (with the Interest that should be due for the same) at any
time during his life, that the Grantee should Re-convey to him and his Heirs;
and that if he did not pay the Money, then that his Heirs, etc. should have no
power to Redeem.

He died, the Money not being paid, and his Heir preferred a Bill to Redeem it.

And it was urged for him, That in a Conveyance, which was a Security for Money,
whatever Covenant there was therein to exclude from Redemption such Covenant
would not be regarded in this Court, and that the Person to whom the Conveyance
was made might have had a Bill in the life time of him that Conveyed, to have a
time set for the payment of the Money, or otherwise to be foreclosed.

But my Lord Keeper dismissed the Bill; For, he said, in a common Mortgage such
Covenant, to restrain Redemption, should not be regarded; but this was made
with an Intention of a Settlement of his Estate, besides the Consideration of
the Money paid. And he denied that he could have been, by the Decree of this
Court, limited to any time for payment of the Money; for this Court cannot
shorten the time that is given by express Covenant and Agreement of the
parties; but when that time is past, then the Practice is to foreclose.

Nota, This Dismission was afterward in the Parliament, held 1 and 2 W. and M.
affirmed.

Nota, If a man makes a Voluntary Conveyance, and there be a defect in it, so
as it cannot operate at Law, this Court will not Decree an Execution thereof:
But sometimes it has been Decreed, where it is intended a provision for younger
Children.

The Lord Salisbury's Case.
MY Lord Salisbury married the Daughter of one Bennet, who had two Daughters,
and bequeathed by his Will to each of them 20000l provided, that if they, or
either of them married before the Age of Sixteen, or if that the Marriage were
without the Consent of such persons, that they should lose 10000 l of the
Portion, and that the 10000 l should go to his other Children.

The Case was thus:

The Lord Salisbury married with one of the Daughters under the Age of 16. but
with the Consent of all the parties.

It was urged, That it being with Consent, it might be at any Age.

But my Lord Keeper was of Opinion, that both parts must be observed.

Anonymus.
IN a Covenant to stand seized to the use of A. for life, and after to two
equally to be divided, and to their Heirs and Assigns for ever.

My Lord Keeper declared his Opinion, that the Inheritance was in Common, as
well as the Estate for life. He said, that it had been held that where the
words were (to two equally divided) that should be in Common; otherwise if the
words were (equally to be divided); but since taken to be all one. Nay, a
Devise to two equally will be in Common. Here there shall not be such a
Construction as to make one kind of Estate for life, and another of the
Inheritance; and Survivorship is not favored in prejudice of an Heir.

Note, That if a Bill be Exhibited for the Examining of Witnesses in perpetuam
rei memoriam, if the Plaintiff therein prays Relief, the Bill shall be
dismissed.

Termino Paschae, Anno 1 Jac. II. In Cancellaria.
The Lord Pawlett's Case.
THe Lord Pawlett had made a Settlement of his Estate, and had by the Deed
charged his Lands with the payment of 4000 l apiece, to be paid to his two
Daughters, at their respective Ages of 21 years, or days of Marriage; and
reserved to himself a Power of otherwise ordering it by his Will.

And by his Will in Writing made at the same time, or within a day after,
devised by these words, (viz.) I give and bequeath to my two Daughters by name
4000 l apiece, to be respectively paid unto them for their Portions, in such
manner as I have provided by the said Settlement; and mentioned, that he would
be understood to mean only one 4000 l to each of his said Daughters, and
appointed to each of the Daughters 100 l per annum for Maintenance.

It happened one of the Daughters died before Marriage or the Age of 21 years;
and my Lady Pawlett (the Mother of the Daughters) took out Letters of
Administration to the Daughter that died, and preferred a Bill against the
Trustees for the 4000 l and the Heir, to whom the benefit of the Lands after
the Money raised was appointed.

The Question solely was, Whether this Money should go to the Administratrix, or
the Land be discharged thereof, and accrue to the benefit of the Heir?

It was agreed on all hands, that if this had been a Legacy, or a Sum of Money
bequeathed by the Will, although the party had died before the Age of 21 or
Marriage, the Administrator should have had it; and that is the Practice in the
Ecclesiastical Court in case of Legacies. The Legatee in such case is taken to
have a present Interest, though the time of payment be future.

My Lord Keeper mentioned the Reason to be, because it Charges the Personal
Estate which is in being at the time of the Testator's death, and if the Legacy
should by such an accident be discharged, it would turn to the benefit of the
Executors, whereas the Testator did not probably so intend it: And further it
has been Ruled, That although a Sum of Money be devised out of Lands to be so paid
at a future day, the Death of the Legatee does not lose it. Though my Lord Keeper
did not seem satisfied with the Reason of that Case; but it having been so
Decreed it was not good to vary, to avoid Arbitrariness and Incertainties.

But here this Sum of Money is appointed to be paid by the Deed, and is a Trust
charged upon Lands, and Trusts are governed by the Intention of the party, and
that the Personal Estate is not Charged, and this Sum of Money does not lie in
demand by a Suit, as where a Legacy is devised; but only a Bill may be
preferred, to have the Trusts performed.

And though it was much insisted on for the Plaintiff, that here the Will
bequeaths this Money; yet that refers to the Deed, and orders it to be paid in
such manner as was thereby appointed.

And it was said to be the same with the Case of Bond and Richardson, which was
lately by my Lord Keeper thus Decreed, being a Sum of Money charged to be paid
out of Land at such an Age. If a Settlement were made, and Lands charged with
such Sums of Money as a Will should declare, there the Will would be but
Declarative, and not Operative.

Termino Sancti Hillarij, Anno 1 and 2 Jac. II. In Cancellaria.
Frances Whitmore Vid' Plaintiff, versus Weld and al', Defendants.
THe Case, as it was drawn up upon Reference thereof by my Lord Keeper to the
Judges of the Common Pleas for their Opinion, was thus: (Viz.)

On the 18th of January 1675. William Whitmore the Elder taking notice that he
had settled the major part of his Lands by Deed, and being possessed of a very
great Personal Estate in Mortgages, Jewels, Plate, Bonds and other Goods and
Chattels, amounting in the whole to a very great Sum by Will in Writing devised
several Legacies; and after Wills in this manner: (Viz.)

-- The surplusage of my Personal Estate (my Debts, Legacies and Funeral
Charges being paid and satisfied) I give unto the Right Honorable William Earl
of Craven, for the use of my only Son William Whitmore and his Heirs lawfully
desscended from his Body, and for the use of the Issue Male and Issue Female
descended from the Body of my Sister Elizabeth Weld, deceased* Margaret Kemes
and Anne Robinson, in case that my only Son William Whitmore should decease in
his Minority, without Issue lawfully descended from his Body. I nominate and
appoint my only Son William Whitmore Executor of my last Will and Testament. I
nominate and appoint the Right Honorable William Earl of Craven, during the
Minority of my only Son William Whitmore, Executor of my last Will and
Testament, I commit the Education and Tuition of my only Son William Whitmore
unto the Care of the Right Honorable the Earl of Craven.

On the 5th of August 1678, the Testator died, his Son being then about the Age
of 13 years. The Earl of Craven proved the Will.

William Whitmore the Son made his Will in Writing; and thereby Devised to
Frances his Wife all his Estate real and personal, and makes her sole
Executrix, and about the 2d of August died without Issue, being above the Age
of 18 years, and under the Age of 21 years, not having proved his Father's Will.

The Will of William Whitmore the elder, is duly proved by Frances.

The Question was, Whether Frances Whitmore the Executrix of William Whitmore
the Son, be well Entitled to the surplusage of the Personal Estate of William
Whitmore the Father, or the Discendants of the Sisters?

Upon hearing of this Cause a Case was made ut ante, and referred by the late
Lord Keeper North to the Judges of the Common Pleas, who were divided in
Opinion, but made no Certificate thereof, (the Reference being determined by
his Death.)

And afterward by Order it came to be heard before the Lord Chancellor
Jefferies, who upon Hearing of the Counsel of both sides, Decreed it for
Frances Whitmore the Complainant; for that the Executorship of my Lord Craven
determined at the Age of 17 years of William Whitmore the Son, and then the
Surplusage became an Interest vested in him, and could not be devised over: And
his Lordship seemed to be of Opinion, That Minority in the Clause wherein the
Devise over was, should be understood to determine at the same time, as in the
Clause of Executorship.

A TABLE OF THE Principal Points Argued and Resolved in the SECOND PART OF
THESE REPORTS.
A
Acceptance. See Surrender. Action. TORTS in their Nature are several, so one
Defendant (of many) may be found Guilty, and the other Not guilty; but it is not
so in Actions grounded upon Contracts p. 151
Action upon the Case. See Assumpsit, Outlawry.
Action lies against the Mayor of London, for not granting a Poll upon a double
Election 25 The Law gives an Action for but a possibility of Damage; as for
calling an Heir apparent, Bastard, etc. 26, 27 Where an Officer does any thing
against (or refuses to do) the Duty of his place, whereby Damage accrues to the
party, Action lies 26 But it lies not against a Lord of a Manor, for refusing
to admit a Copyholder 27
Against a Common Carryer, for losing Goods delivered, and Carriage paid for 78
Against Bailiffs, for levying Money by pretense of a Fieri facias 93 For not
Folding his Sheep upon the Plaintiffs Land, whereby the Plaintiff lost the
benefit of Foldage 138 For the Profit of an Office; not necessary to show every
particular Sum received by the Defendant: But it is a good Evidence for Damage,
to show the Profit of the Office Communibus Annis 171 In an Action, for not
Grinding at his Mill, what shall be a sufficient Setting forth of the Custom 292
Action upon the Case for Slander. Writ in a Letter, of a Lawyer, He will give
Vexations and ill Counsel, and stir up a Suit, and milk your Purse, and fill
his own large Pockets, Actionable 28 Anciently, no Action for Words, unless the
Slander concerned Life ibid. Of one who had been a Member of Parliament, Your
Master is a Papist, when he is at home he goes to Church; but when he is at
London he goos to Mass: Sir J.C. and he were both Pensioners at the time of the
Long Parliament, Actionable 265 To say of a Man that had been in an Office,
that he had behaved himself corruptly in it, Actionable 266
Administration. In an Action against an Administrator, it is necessary to set
forth, that Administration was committed to him, though not to say by whom 84
Administrator shall be charged for Rent, after the Assignment of the Testator's
Term 209
Admiralty. Mariners, as well Officers as Common Seamen, may sue for Wages in
the Court of Admiralty, and some only may sue there, as well as when all join
181 If the Suit be there against some of the Part-owners, the Course is not to
charge them with the whole, but according to their proportionable parts ibid.
Advowson. Presentation by Turns among Parceners, whether an Usurpation in a
Turn, puts all out of Possession, or only one 39
Age. See Devise, Executor.
Amendment. See Distress, Scire facias, Writs.
Habere facias, instead of Liberari facias; and inquirat, instead of inquirant,
amendable upon Motion, because in a Judicial Writ 171
Arbitrament, Award. See Vmpire. No place mentioned where the Award was made,
naught 72 Whether Arbitrators having Power to name an Umpire, may name a
second, if the first refuses 114 Submissions to Awards favorably construed,
because they tend to the end of Controversies 115 Where an Award that seems all
on one side, may be good 222 Award may be by Word of Mouth, and he which sets
forth such Parol Award is not tied to strictness of Words; but it is sufficient
to show the effect and substance of what was Awarded 242 Award to pay the
Charges of a Suit, good, though the Sum is uncertain; for it may be easily
reduced to certainty 243 Where Money is awarded to be paid to J. S. and no
mention made of his Executors; yet in case that he dies before, the Money shall
be paid to his Executors; for an Award creates a Duty; and the Executor shall
release where the Testator was awarded so to do 249
Assent. See Executor. Assent of a Purchaser vest the Estate in him, though he
cannot have an Action of Trespass before Entry 205
Assigns. Where a man covenants for himself and his Assigns to permit; if a
Breach be laid in the Assigns, this Covenant shall relate only to the Assigns
after the Deed was made, and not before 278
Assumpsit. J. S. being indebted to the Plaintiff, and the Defendant to J. S.
the Defendant promises, that if he would procure an Order from J. S. he would
pay him; Action good after the Order procured 71, 74 If Four be sued in an
Assumpsit, and they plead Non assumpsit infra sex annos, and the Jury find that
one did assume infra sex annos, but not the rest; the Plaintiff cannot have
Judgment 151 Indebitatus Assumpsit brought for Money won at a Play called
Hazard, a general Declaration good, without setting forth Cross Considerations
175 A Promise to one Part being void, cannot stand good as to the other 224
Attorney. An Attorney has Privilege to lay his Action in Middlesex, because
of his Attendance 47
Averment. Whether an Agreement may be pleaded and averred, to show the meaning
of the Parties, and that the Condition of a Bond may be taken accordingly 108
Quarter-days may be averred upon these General Words, [The usual Feasts] 141
Authority. See Vmpire. Where an Authority is once fully Executed, the Power is
determined. Not so where there is a complete Execution 115 Where a man is
vested with a bare Authority, his denial or refusal to execute it does not
conclude him, but that he may execute it afterward, 116 Secus where he is
vested with an Interest 117
Award. See Arbitrament.
B
Bail. See Pleading. THe Plaintiff may release his Action after the Sheriff
has taken a Bail-Bond 131 Attachments out of Chancery, within the Statute,
that enables the Sheriff to take Bail-Bonds 238 How far a Bail-Bond may vary
from the Writ 238
Bankrupt. Trover and Conversion brought by an Assignee of Commissioners of
Bankrupts, against one possessed of Bankrupt's Goods 63 The Commissioners cannot
assign Money levied at the Bankrupt's Suit in Execution, remaining in the
Sheriffs hands, or in Court 95 A Bankrupt's Servant shall set forth an Account
of the Bankrupts Estate in his Answer to a Bill in Chancery, though he has been
already Examined before the Commissioners 358
Baron and Feme. If a Woman be Warden of the Fleet, and one in Prison there
marry her, he is thereby out of Prison, and (in the Eye of the Law) at large;
being a Husband cannot be in Custody to his Wife 19 Battery brought for both,
and found only as to the Wife, though they cannot join for beating both; yet good
after Verdict 29 That Baron and Feme (Executrix) devastaverunt and converterunt
ad usum iplorum, good 45 In an Action brought against the Husband for Lodging,
and Goods had by the Wife after Elopement, what Plea shall be good, what not
155 Whether the Wife may join with her Husband in bringing Trespass Quare
Clausum fregit, where the Land is the Wives 195 A Supplicavit de bono gestu
granted in Chancery against the Husband, for ill Usage to his Wife 345
Bond, or Bill Penal. See Obligation.
By Law. A Corporation cannot make a By-Law to bind those which are not of its
Body, without Act of Parliament, or express Prescription 33 Whether a By-Law of
the University of Oxford shall oblige the Townsmen 33, 34 A Corporation cannot
make a By-Law, to have a Forfeiture levied by sale of Goods, nor for Forfeiture
of Goods 183

C
Canons. THose of 3 Jac. 1. of force, though never confirmed by Act of Parliament
44 What Canons of force, what not ibid.
Challenge. To the Array; because the Sheriff (in 1687.) had not taken the
Test, the Challenge disallowed 58
Chancery.See Covenant, Mortgage, Trial, Limitations, Executor.
An Infants Answer in Chancery by Guardian, no Evidence at Law to affect the
Infant 72 There can be no Process of Contempt in Chancery against a Peer 342
Purchaser without Notice of Encumbrance favored in Chancery 339. 343 Words of
Conveyance passing more than was intended, how relievable in Chancery 345 A
Trust and Equitable Interest is a Creature of the Chancery, and therefore
disposable by the Rules of that Court 350 Where a man leaves his Estate under
several Encumbrances, if the Heir buys in any of the first, they shall not by
the Course of this Court stand in the Way of Creditors for more than the Heir
really paid for them 353 Relieves an Heir against Extortion 359 What shall be
admitted to be read in Chancery, what not 361 Distribution of Intestates Estate
upon the Statute of 22 and 23 Car. 2. cap. 10. may be sued for in Chancery 362
Where a Bill is Exhibited, to examine in prepetuam rei memoriam, the Plaintiff
must not pray Relief 366
Commitment. What Commitment of Justices of the Peace, for refusing to find
Sureties of Good Behavior, good; what not 22, 23, 24
Condition. Condition of a Bond, not to give Evidence at the Assizes, against
Law; and the Obligee ought to be prosecuted for taking such a Bond 109
Consideration. See Use, Notice, Grant, Enrolment, Marriage, Mortgage.
Conveyance. Conveyances at the Common Law (not such as work by the Statute of
Uses, or Surrenders of Copyholds) divest the Estate out of him that makes them
immediately, and put it in the Party to whom such Conveyance is made, though in
his Absence, or without his Notice, till he shows his disagreement 201 What
Acts are requisite in Conveyances at Common Law 201, 202 Atricles to Settle,
decreed to be executed by the Heir at Law 343 A Voluntary Conveyance defective
at Common Law, rarely relieved in Chancery 365
Copyhold. See Action on the Case. In what Cases, and when, the Lord shall
seize the Copyhold Estate of his Tenant, for Felony or Treason 38 Lands do not
appear to be Copyhold by saying they were held according to Custom, unless it
be said at the Will of the Lord 144 A Copyholder in Pleading, need not show
admittance, where the Title does not come in question, as in Avowry for Rent
reserved from his Under Tenant 182
Corporation. See By-Law. A Corporation cannot prescribe in a Que Estate ^ sed
quere 186
Costs. See Nonsuit. The Court cannot allow double Costs, unless the Judge of
Assizes caused the Postea to be marked 45 Diverse Trespasses assigned; the
Defendant pleads Not Guilty for some, and Justifies for others, and the Jury
find for the Plaintiff in one Issue, and for the Defendant on the other, no
more Costs than Damages 180, 195 What Costs discharged by the General Pardon,
and what not 210 No Costs to either Party upon a Repleader 196 Full Costs in
Trespass given, where the Damage was under 40 s 215
Covenant. See Grant, Trespass.
An Attorney Covenants on behalf of another Person, that the Plaintiff shall
quietly Enjoy, an Action of Trespass is brought against the Plaintiff* Whether
this is a Breach of the Covenant? 46, 61, 62 In an Action of Covenant the
Defendant cannot plead, that the Plaintiff tempore quo nihil habuit in
tenementis, though such Plea in an Action of Debt for Rent, is good, 99 Where
Lessee Covenants to build three Houses upon the Premises, and keep them in
Repair; he builds four and lets one fall to decay, Whether the Covenant extends
to the fourth 128 A Covenant which does not consist with the Recital that leads
and occasions it, shall not oblige 140 A Suit in Chancery to stay Waste, no
Breach of Covenant for quiet Enjoyment, though the Bill be dismissed with Costs
213, 214 A Latter Covenant by a second Indenture cannot be pleaded in Bar to
the former; but the Defendant must bring his Action on the last Indenture, if
he will help himself 218
Custom. See Fine.
D
Damages. See Costs. Debt. See Rent. IF part of a Debt upon Bond be received,
and an Acquittance given before the Action, it is a Bar only of so much as was
received; but if after the Action brought, it seems it may be pleaded in bar to
the Whole 135 Whether an Action of Debt may be brought upon a Judgment pending
a Writ of Error, and whether the Defendant in such Action ought to Demur or
plead Specially 261 A Consideration creates a Debt, though that Debt be not
reduced to a certain Sum; as in the case of a Quantum meruit 282 Debt secured
is Payment in Law 358
Devise. See Tail, Use.
Of implicit Devises, and where Lands shall pass by Implication in a Will, and
where not 56, 57 A Reversion shall pass in a Will by the Words, All my
Hereditaments 286 Whether Money in the Court of Orphans be devisable 340 If
Money be devised to one, to be paid at his Age of 21 years, if the Party dies
before, it shall go to his Executors; but if Money be bequeathed to one at his
Age of 21 years, and he dies before, the Money is lost 242, 366 Where a Sum of
Money is devised to a Child at such an Age, it shall have the Interest in the
mean time, rather than the Executor shall swallow it, especially when no
Maintenance is otherwise provided 346 Devise to J.S. at the Age of 21, and if
J.S. dies before 21, then to A; A. dies, after J. S. dies under 21, the
Administrator of A. shall have it 347 If Lands be devised for payment of Debts
and Legacies, the Personal Estate shall notwithstanding as far as it will go,
by applied to the payment of Debts, etc. and the Land only make up the Residue
349 Where an Administrator shall have an Estate devised to an Infant, and where
not 355, 356 A Sum of Money devised to be raised out of the Profits of his
Lands, the Profits will not amount to the Sum, the Land may be sold 357
Diversity, where a Child's Portion is devised out of Personal Estate, and where
to be raised out of Land 366, 367
Distress. Whether a Drover's Cattle put into a Ground belonging to a
Common-Inn upon the Road to London, may be distrained for Rent due from the
Innkeeper 50 Leave given to mend the Conisans upon a Distress, after a
Demurrer, paying Costs 142 A Distress may not be severed (as Horses out of a
Cart) and therefore in some Cases a Distress of great Value may be taken for a
small matter, because not severable 183 Where one holds a Third part of certain
Land, and another two Third parts of the same Land, undivided; he who has the
One part cannot distrain the Cartel which were put in by License of him who
has the two Parts 228, 283

E
Ecclesiastical Court. See Marriage. WHether the Ecclesiastical Court may
proceed against Conventicles, or whether they be punishable only at the Common
Law? 41. They may 44 The legal Method of Proceedings in the Ecclesiastical
Courts 42, 43 The Proceeding ex Officio 43 A Suit may be tried in the
Ecclesiastical Court upon a Prescription to Repair the Chancel; so also for a
Modus Decimandi 239
Ecclesiastical Persons. A Curate, incapable of taking an Estate devised in
Succession, for want of being Incorporate; but the Heir of the Devisee shall
hold the Estate in Trust for the Curate for the time being 349
Ejectment. In Ejectment, the Declaration of Michaelmass Term, and the Demise
laid 30 of October, after the Term began 174
Elegit. See Execution. Enrolment. A Deed, where the Grant is expressed to be in
Consideration of Natural Affection as well as Money, need not be Enrolled; but
the Land will pass by way of Covenant to stand seized, 150
Error. See Debt. Essoine. Where several Tenants in a Real Action may be
Essoigned severally 57 Regularly Proceedings in an Essoine in Dower 117
Estate. What Words shall create a Tenancy in Common 265, 266
Evidence. See Action on the Case. Chancery. Exchange.
Bills of Exchange have the same Effect between others as between Merchants,
and a Gentleman shall not avoid the Effect by pleading He is no Merchant 295,
310 The Custom of Bills of Exchange 307, 310
Execution. How the Sheriff ought to behave himself in Executing a Fieri facias
94, 95 Whether Money paid for Goods taken upon a Fieri facias is properly paid
to the use of the Sheriff, or Plaintiff ibid. A Fieri facias was executed after
the Party was dead, upon the Goods in the hands of the Executor; but Test
before, though not delivered to the Sheriff till after. This was a good Execution
at the Common Law; but quaere since the Statute of 29 Car. 2. cap. 3. 218 An
Extent upon an Elegit being satisfied by perception of Profits, he in Reversion
may enter 336
Executor. See Award, Rent, Waver.
And Executor may detain for a Debt due upon a simple Contract, against a Debt
grounded upon a Devastavit 40 Whether the Executor of a Bishop may bring an
Action of Covenant for breach of a Real Covenant relating to Lands of the
Bishopric 56 Where a Woman disposes of Goods, as Executrix in her own wrong;
if she takes Administration afterward, though before the Writ brought, this will
not hinder the Plaintiff from charging her as Executrix in her own wrong 180 An
Executor in his own wrong cannot retain ibid. The Mother Executrix shall not
discount for Maintenance and Education, out of the Money left by the Father;
for the Mother ought to maintain the Child: But Money paid for binding him
Apprentice may be discounted 353 After an Executor assents to a Legacy, he
shall never bring it back again to pay Debts: Secus, where he is sued and pays
by Decree in Chancery, there the Legatee shall refund 358 Where an Executor
pays a Debt upon a Simple Contract, there shall be no refunding to a Creditor
of a higher nature Vid. Legacy. 360 Money decreed in Chancery to the Executor
of an Administrator do bonis non, and not the second Administrator de bonis
non, where no Debts appeared of the first Intestate 362 Minority as to
Executorship determines at the Age of 17, and then a Personal Estate devised to
such Executor, vests in him 368
Exposition of Words. Faldagium 139 The force of these Words [in forma
praedicta] 215

F
Fieri facias. See Execution. Fine. WHere and how a Fine levied by a
Feme-Covert shall be set aside, and where the Commissioner who took it may be
fined by the Court 30 A Fine acknowledged before the Revolution, and Writ of
Covenant sued out after, allowed good 47, 48 A Right to an Estate by Extent
barred by a Fine and Non-claim, 329. So also the Right to a Term for years,
ibid. Secus, where a Statute is assigned in Trust to wait upon the Inheritance
330
Fine Customary. What Customary Fine between Lord and Tenant, shall be allowed
good upon Alienation 134, 135
Forfeiture. See Office. Generally where a Statute gives a Forfeiture, and not
said to whom, the King shall have it, unless there be a particular person
grieved 188, 189, 267, 268 A Forfeiture shall not bind, in Equity, where a
thing may be done afterward, or Composition made for it 352

G
Gaming. See Assumpsit. DIce Play not unlawful in it self, though prohibited by
several Statutes to certain persons, and in certain places 175
Grant. A Deed having no Execution to make it work as a Grant, shall operate as
a Covenant to stand seized, 261. and by the Statute of Uses 266 Where Land is
granted by Deed-Pool in Consideration of Natural Affection, without Enrolment
or Attornment, whether it shall operate as a Covenant to stand seized, or be
void? 318

H
Habeas Corpus. NO Habeas Corpus to be moved for in the Common Pleas, unless it
concerns a Civil Cause; yet the contrary permitted in the case of an Attorney
of that Court 24
Half-Blood. The Half-Blood shall have equal Share with the Whole-Blood, in
Distribution, upon the Statute of 22 and 23 Car. 2. c. 10. 317
Heir. See Mortgage. Heirs, is Nomen collectivum, and is sometimes so taken
when it is only Heir, in the Singular Number 313 Heir (and not Executor) shall
have the Surplusage of Lands leased for payment of Debts 359

I
Infant. INfants not foreclosed in Chancery till they come of Age 351
Intent. No Exception to Vnum Vasum Vini Hispanici, that is not said what the
Vessel was made of; for it is intended to be made of Wood 67 The Name of a
Grantor omitted in an Indenrure, supplied by Intendment 142 Racks in a Stable
shall be intended to be fixed, and need not to be shown to be so in Pleading 214
Every Agreement must have some reasonable Construction, that may may be
consistent with the Intent of the Parties; and therefore if a man agrees with
another, that he shall make a Drain through his Ground, he shall not make it
through the parties Stables or Buildings, in case there are other places proper
278 In a Special Verdict, nothing shall be intended that is not found 330
Imprisonment. See Pleading. Impropriation. Whether a Rectory Impropriate,
being made a Lay-Fee, can be sequestered by the Court Christian, for not
Repairing the Chancel 35
Ireland. See Naturalization. Of its Conquest, and the Introducing the Laws of
England there 4 The Power of an Act of Parliament in Ireland 5

K
King. See Forfeiture. ALlegiance due to the Natural, and not the Politic,
Person of the King 3 In case of things which are Nullius in Bonis, where no
visible Right appears, the Law gives them to the King, as Derelict Lands,
Treasure Trove, Extra-parochial Tithes, etc. So where the Right is equal
between the King and the Subject, the Kings Title has the Preference 268 The
King is the Fountain of Justice, and that as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, and
may by the Ancient Law of the Realm visit, reform and correct Abuses in the
Jurisdiction Spiritual 268 In what Cases Forfeitures are vested in the King
before Office found, and where not 270

L
Law. A Thing for which there is neither Practical Custom, Judicial Precedent,
or Act of Parliament, to warrant, may well be judged to be against Law 7 The
clearest way how to understand any Law, is to consider what was the Judgment of
those People among whom, and the Times in which, it was practical 17 To excite
the People to the disobedience of a Law of a Public Nature, is the highest
Offense under High Treason 23
Lease. What Lease capable of a Release, to work a Bargain and Sale 35 For 99
years, if two Persons shall so long live, determines upon the death of either
74
Legacy. See Executor. Legatees are to have their Proportion, where the Assets
fall short 358 Legatees shall refund against Creditors, and if the
Ecclesiastical Court give Sentence for a Legacy, a Prohibition lies, unless
they take Security to refund 358, 360
License. See Distress. Limitation. See Original, Mortgage.
Suit to recover a Depositum in Trust for a Feme Covert, not barred by the
Statute of Limitations 345
London. Of the Custom of London, relating to Orphans Money 340, 341

M
Market. WHere a Market is granted to the Damage of another, the Patent may be
repealed in a Scire facias, notwithstanding a Writ of Ad quod Damnum had been
executed; for the Return of that Writ was not conclusive 344
Marriage. Whether a Man may marry his Great Uncle's Widow, 9. He may 18, 20
The four Statutes relating to Marriage expounded 11, and infr. Though the Stat.
32 H. 8. c. 38. allows all persons to Marry that are without the Levitical
Degrees; yet persons Pre-contracted, or under a perpetual Impotence, are
prohibited to Marry 15 To Marry his Brother's Wife prohibited by the Statute,
though not by the Levitical Law, 17. So of his Wives Sister ibid. Marriages in
the ascending and descending Line, prohibited without limit; not so between
Collaterals, and the Reasons 18 The Ecclesiastical Courts have Conizance to
punish persons Marrying within the Levitical Degrees; but not to determine what
is within the Levitical Degrees, and what not 22 Agreements to settle in
Consideration of Marriage, favored in Chancery 353, 354, 357 Marriage
restrictions, how to be observed 365
Mine. If a Man opens a Mine in his own Land, he may dig and follow the Vein
under another Man's Ground 342 But if the Owner did there also, he may stop his
further progress ibid.
Mortgage. Where Lands are Mortgaged thrice over, the third Mortgagee may buy
in the first Encumbrance, to protect his own Mortgage, and he has both Law and
Equity for him 338 He shall hold the Land against the second Mortgagee, until
be be satisfied both the Money he paid the first Mortgagee, and also his own
which he lent upon the last Mortgage ibid. But where only Part of the Lands are
mortgaged to the first, and the whole to the second, and after to the third;
here, if the third buys in the first Title, it shall protect only that part
that is in the first Mortgage 339 A Purchaser or Mortgagee coming in upon a
Valuable Consideration without Notice, and purchasing in a precedent
Encumbrance; it shall protect his Estate, though he purchased in the Encumbrance
after Notice of a second Mortgage ibid. Mortgages not relievable in Chancery
after 20 years; for the Stat. 21 Jac. 1. c. 16. limits the time of Entry to
that number of years, and it is best to square the Rules of Equity, as near the
Rules of Reason and Law as may be 340 Upon a Mortgage in Fee, the Redemption
Money shall be paid to the Executor, and not to the Heir 348, 351 Where by a
Devise of all his Lands, Lands in Mortgage pass 351 Where a man's own Covenant
shall restrain him from his Equity of Redemption, and where it shall not 365
Murder. Husband kills a Man in the act of Adultery with his Wife, Manslaughter
and not Murder; the Provocation being exceeding great. Vide the First Part of
these Reports 158

N
Naturalization. WHether a Scotishman Antenate, being Naturalized by Act of
Parliament in Ireland, can Inherit Lands in England 2
Ne exeat Regnum. Granted in Chancery, to stop one from going beyond Sea to
avoid a Sentence in the Ecclesiastical Court 345
Nonsuit. The Plaintiff Nonsuited in Ejectment after Evidence, where two
Defendants, and one appears to confess Lease, Entry, etc. and the other not,
the Plaintiff shall pay Costs; but quaere how to be divided 195
Notice. See Chancery, Conveyance, Mortgage.
If a Man pleads a Valuable Consideration in Chancery, to save his Estate from
a Judgment, he must also set forth, That he had no Notice of the Judgment 361

O
Obligation. A Penalty may be recovered in an Action of Debt upon a Bill
Obligatory, though it be not drawn properly as a Penal Bill 106
Occupant. Occupancy favored in Chancery 364
Office. Where the Archdeacon forfeits his Right to grant the Office of his
Register, by the Stat. 5 E. 6 c. 16. against the Sale of Offices, whether the
King or Bishop shall take advantage of the Forfeiture 188, 213, 267 A Dissenter
that has not received the Sacrament of 12 Months before, may plead the Stat.
13 Car. 2. Stat. 2. cap. 1. to excuse him from serving Offices in Corporations
247, 248
Original. See Writs. What Original Filing within time, shall be sufficient to
prevent the pleading the Statute of Limitations 193, 259 Whether, in the Common
Pleas, an Original in a Clausum fregit, be sufficient to warrant a Declaration
in an Assumpsit 259
Outlawry. A Man in Prison ought not to be Outlawed by him who Imprisoned him
46 Action on the Case will not lie for the Party who has an Outlawry, against a
Sheriff who neglects to extend the Goods of the Outlaw, upon the delivery of a
Writ of Capias Vtlagatum, for that it is the King's loss 90 Whether Outlawry
may be pleaded in Bar to an Assumpsit upon a Quantum meruit 282
Oxford. See By-Law. The Privilege of the University not allowed to a
Townsman, so as to excuse him from Office, who keeps a Shop and follows a
Trade, though he be Matriculated, and Servant to a Doctor 106 Privilege not
allowed to a Member of this University, in a Suit in Chancery 362

P
Pardon. SUits by Successor against Executor for Dilapidations, not pardoned by
the General Pardon; otherwise of Suits ex Officio against the Dilapidator 216
Parliament. No Action lies against the Chief Officer of a Corporation for a
Double-Return of a Burgess, the Common Pleas, having no Jurisdiction of this
Matter 37
Peace. The King cannot discharge a Recognizance taken for Surety of the Peace;
but after it is broken he may 131 A Gentleman (said to be a Member of the House
of Commons) bound to the Peace for Challenging one of the King's Witnesses to
Fight 317
Plantation. Though a Plantation be an Inheritance; yet being in a Foreign
Country, it is looked upon as a Chattel to pay Debts, and a Testamentary thing
358
Pleading. See Baron and Feme, Covenant. Intent, Scire facias, Copyhold.
What shall be held a Double Plea, and what not 68, 198 Trespass for carrying
away diversa onera equina of Gravel, naught for incertainty 73 Want of the Word
alio, or aliis, in a Declaration, where several mention is made of things of
the same nature, yet good enough 78 For the Defendant to traverse Matter not
alleged, good Cause for the Plaintiff to demur 79 If a Judgment and Execution
be pleaded in an Inferior Court, not of Record, the Proceedings ought to be
set forth at large, and not sufficient to say taliter processum fuit; also it
ought to be set forth, That the Cause of Action did arise within the
Jurisdiction 100 In a Prescription for Privilege, tempore quo non exstat
memoria, good enough; though the Course be to say, a tempore cujus contrarium
memoria hominum non existit 130 Though by Course of the Court, if a Defendant lie
in Prison two whole Terms, without any Declaration put in, he may get a Rule to
be discharged; yet if a Declaration be afterward delivered and Judgment
thereupon, it is a good Judgment, and the Bail formerly given will be liable 143
Where Freehold Lands were pleaded to pass by Surrender, according to Custom,
the Special Custom must be set forth 144 Where the Writ contains more than is
Declared for; this is a Variance not aided by the Verdict, and Judgment
arrested 153 Debt upon Bond Conditioned, That the Husband shall permit the Wife
to dispose of her Personal Estate, etc. it is not sufficient for the Defendant
to plead, quod Conditio nunquam infracta fuit, and put the Plaintiff to assign
a Breach; but the Defendant must show forth, That he has performed the
Condition 156 Where an Action of Trespass (brought for the same Matter in
another Court) may be pleaded in Bar to an Action of Trover 169, 170 In
Trespass, quod duas acras terrae fod. subvert. and asportavit, Judgment stayed,
because the Declaration does not express the quantity of Earth carried away;
for the two Acres relate only to the Ground dug 174 The Plaintiff Declares
for Assault, Battery, Wounding, and Imprisonment; the Defendant in his Plea
takes no notice of the Battery; naught 193 Plea in Abatement, That the
Plaintiff was dead before the Action brought; where good 196 Where [preadict.]
is necessary, and where not 197 Where a Traverse that might have been omitted,
is Cause of Demurrer 212 Doubleness in a Declaration cured by Answering 222 Day
of the Week, where material; ought to be set forth in Pleading; for the Court
are not obliged to consult the Almanac 248 Tempore dimissionum, where it
should be temporibus dimissionum; naught 253, 254, 271 Super Acclivitatem de
Hampsted, which is a description of a Situation, whether it be a Vill, or Lieu
conus, sufficient for a Jury? 254, 272 Diversas petias Maheremij cepit, etc.
naught, for the Incertainty 262 Where the Defendant pleads an Insufficient
Plea, the Plaintiff shall make no Advantage of that (upon Demurrer) if his own
Declaration be naught; but Judgment will be against the Plaintiff, 262. As
where an Executor sues for Rent, and does not sufficiently Entitle his Testator
to the Estate demised ibid. Plenam potestatem, Jus, and Titulum ad Praemissa
dimittend', and does not set forth what Estate he had, whether in Fee, or other
Estate; not good upon a Demurrer 271 Houses are set forth in Pleading, to lie
in Parochia praedicta, and two Parishes are named before; naught for the
Incertainty 278 Traverse impertinent, where the Matter is confessed and avoided
283 No General Rule, That a Matter cannot be pleaded specially, which may be
given in Evidence upon a General Issue, and in what Cases it may 295 Vid.
infra, Statut. 1 W. and M. cap. 4.
Presumption. Presumptions of Law stand as strong, till the contrary appears,
as an express Declaration of the Party 208
Privilege. Whether the Warden of the Fleet shall have a Writ of Privilege,
fitting the Parliament 154
Prohibition. A second Prohibition not grantable after a Consultation 47

Q
Quantum meruit. See Outlawry. Que Estate. See Corporation.
R
Recovery. A Deed* Fine and Recovery, do all make but one Assurance, but each
has its several effect 31 Common Recoveries are Common Assurances, and are not
to be overthrown by nice Constructions 32 A Common Recovery stopped; what shall
be good Cause to stop it 90
Relation. Of Relation, its force, and where it shall Operate 200
Remainder. What shall be accounted a Contingent Remainder, and what a
Remainder vested 313
Rent. Rent due, if the thing let has been really enjoyed 68 A Rent cannot be
reserved out of a thing Incorporeal 69 Every Quarters Rent is a several Debt,
and distinct Actions may be brought for each Quarters Rent: Not so for part of
the Money due upon Bond, or Contract, unless the Plaintiff shows, that the rest
is satisfied 129 A Debt for Rent payable by an Executor before Bonds, because
it savours of the Realty, and is maintained in regard of the Profits of the
Land received 184
Request. Request, where necessary to be set forth, and where not 75
Rescous. See Return. Return. If a Sheriff Return a Rescous, it is not now
Traversable, though formerly it was 175
Reversion. A Reversion is a present Interest, though to take effect in
possession after another Estate determined 328
Revocation. What shall be a good Revocation in Equity 350

S
Scire facias. WHere one Ter-tenant is Returned summoned, he may plead, That
there are other Ter-tenants, though in another County 104. But he must not plead
this by way of Abatement, but demand Judgment, si ipse ad breve praed. in forma
praed. retorn' respondere compelli debeat 105 The Record of a Scire facias
naught in the Titleing, not permitted to be amended 105 Scire facias in
Chancery to Repeal a Patent 344
Settlement. See Conveyance, Marriage, Mortgage.
A Voluntary Settlement avoided by a following Settlement in Jointure 363
Sheriff. If a Sheriff of a City be in Contempt, the Attachment shall go to the
Coroners, and not to the Mayor; but if he be out of Office, then it shall go to
the succeeding Sheriff 216
Simony. To sell an Advowson ea intention that J.S. shall be presented, Simony
39 In case of Simony the Presentation vests in the King without Office. Quaere
in other Cases 213
Statutes. 13 E. 1. Stat. of Winton. In an Action upon this Statute, not
necessary to set forth more in the Declaration than is pertinent to the Action
215 4. H. 7. cap. 24. Of Fines. Of Claims after the coming in of Future
Interests in the second Saving in this Act 333 21 Jac. 1. cap. 16. See
Limitations. 22, 23 Car. 2. cap. 9. No more Costs than Damage, explained 36
What Trespass within this Statute, What not 48 29 Car. 2. cap. 3. A Promise by
Letter, a sufficient Promise in Writing within this Statute, 361. This Statute
does not extend to Trusts raised by Operation of Law 361 31 Car. 2. cap. 2.
Where a Man commits a Capital Crime in Ireland, he may be sent thither to be
Tried thereupon; notwithstanding that by this Act, No Subject of this Realm
shall be sent Prisoner to any Foreign parts 314 1 W. and M. cap. 4. That
Statute (which saves time of Limitation) does not alter the Form of Pleading,
but that shall be as it was before 185, 197
Statute, Recognizance. See Fine. What shall be esteemed a regular Extending of
a Statute Merchant 326 Where the Interest of a former Statute shall drowned in
that of a latter, being both Extended, and assigned to the same person 326,
327, 328 The Extent of a Statute, what it is, and the Effect thereof 326, 338
An Extent upon a Puisne Statute, where Extended after a Prior Statute, is in
the nature of a Reversional Interest 328 When a former Statute is determined,
whether it be by release of the Debt, by purchase of part of the Lands, by
being barred by Non-Claim upon a Fine, Satisfaction acknowledged, or any other
means, this lets in the Puisne Statute 332 An Extent begins by Record, but it
may end without Record; for a Release by the Conizee after Extent, determines
it, and he that has a Puisne Statute may Enter 336 Cannot be assigned before
Extent, in Law 362
Surrender. No Surrender of an Estate without Acceptance by the Surrenderee,
199 Yet quaere; for the Judgment was reverst in Parliament 208 That a Surrender
divesteth the Estate immediately, before express Assent of the Surrenderee 203
and infr.

T
Tail. A Devise to one for Life, Remainder to the Heir Males of his Body for
ever; this is an Estate-Tail in the Devisee 313 A Sum of Money cannot be
Entailed 349
Tender. Plea of a Tender without setting forth a Refusal, not good; otherwise
if a place of Payment was appointed, and the Party to Receive was not there 109
Tithes. Whether Notice be necessary to be given to the Parson, upon setting
forth of Tithes 48
Traverse. See Pleading. Treason. Whether Listing of Men, to send beyond Seas
to join the King's Enemies, be Treason within the Clause of Levying War, in the
Stat. 25 Ed. 3. 316 Whether the indictment should not express in particular,
who those Enemies are; or whether the General Words be not sufficient ibid. To
List, etc. and an Intent to Depose the King is Treason, within the Clause of
Compassing the Death of the King 317
Trespass. See Assent. Whether a Suit in an Action of Trespass, be a Breach of
Covenant to hold and enjoy quietly 46, 61, 62 Where an Action of Trover will
lie for Goods, though an Action of Trespass would not, for taking them 169, 170
Trust. See Chancery, Limitation.
The force of the Word, Trust, in the Limitation of a Use 312 Where a Man buys
Land in another Name, and pays Money, it will be a Trust for him who pays the
Money, though there be no Deed declaring the Trust 361 Trust executed in
Chancery, according to the Parties meaning 363, 364
Trial. A New Trial directed by the Lord Chancellor, where the former Verdict
has been complained of in a Bill before him, the Complainant paying the Costs
of the first Trial 351, 352

V
Variance. See Pleading. Verdict. See Baron and Feme. A Mistake in an
Indebitatus Assumpsit, where good after Verdict 36 A Declaration, though
Inartificial, is notwithstanding good after Verdict 174
Vill. Vill and Parish, the Diversity, and where Lands in One shall pass in the
Other of the same Name 31
Vmpire. Arbitrators and Umpire cannot lawfully have concurrent Authorities at
the same time 115
Use. Where Money is paid to A. for the Use of B. in whom the Right and
Interest vests? 310 Lands may be Devised, to the Use of another; but if no Use
be limited, they will lodge in the Devisee; for a Devise implies a
Consideration 312
Usury. No Unlawful Usury, if the Agreement be not Corrupt, though the Wording of
the Condition may be otherwise by Mistake 83

W
Wager of Law. WHere a Man shall be admitted to Wage his Law in an Action of
Debt, and the manner of doing it 171
Waver. An Executor cannot Wave a Term, unless he renounce the whole
Executorship 209
Way. How a man may Entitle himself to a Foot Way 186
Wills. See Devise. Where there is a Custom to pass Lands by a Parol or
Nuncupative Will; yet they shall not pass without express and plain Words, to
show the Intention 286 A Cumulative Provision in a Will, shall not double a
Portion, unless plainly proved, that the Testator intended to do so 347, 348
Writs. Where a Writ shall be amended, according to the Instructions given to
the Cursitor 46, 49, 152 Where an Original Writ shall be new made, according to
the Instructions first given to the Cursitor 130 Usual for a Plaintiff to take
out his Original after Judgment entered 154

ERRATA, in the Second Part.
Page 8. lin. 4. read Ireland, p. 10. l. ult. r. Canon Law, p. 16. in fine r.
Judaical, p. 21. l. 23. r. Lands, Freehold, etc. p. 50. l. 15. r. In Bar to the
Advo^^ry the Plaintiff replied, p. 80. l. last but 3, r. Loan, p. 115. l. 16.
r. ^abere fac' possess. p. 150. l. ^. r. Plaintiff. p. 234. l. 12. for Eliz. r.
Richard.

BOOKS Printed for and Sold by CHARLES HARPER, at the Flower-de-Luce over
against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet.
LAW BOOKS.
THE Lord Coke's Reports in English, Fol. -- His Eleven Reports in French, Fol.
-- His Commentary on Littleton, or the First Part of the Institutes, Fol. --
His Commentary on Magna Charta, or the Second Part of the Institutes, Fol. --
His Pleas of the Crown, or the Third Part of the Institutes, Fol. -- His
Jurisdiction of Courts, or the Fourth Part of the Institutes, Fol. Bulstrode's
Reports, in Three Parts, with New References, Fol. Leonard's Reports, in Four
Parts, with New References, Fol. The Year Books, in Ten Volumes, the last
Edition with new Notes and Tables to them all, Fol. The Reports of the Lord
Keeper Littleton, in the Time of King Charles the First, Fol. The Reports of
the Learned Judge, Sir Henry Hobart, the Fourth Edition Corrected and Amended,
Fol. Reports in the Court of King's Bench at Westminster, from the 12th to the
30th Year of King Charles II. By Jos. Keble of Grays Inn, Esquire in Three Volumes,
Fol. An Assistance to Justices of the Peace, for the easier performance of
their Duty, in Two Parts; to which is now added a Table, for the ready finding
out the Presidents, with a large Table of the Matters never before printed. By
Jos. Keble of Gray's Inn, Esquire Fol. An Exact Abridgment of the Records in the
Tower of London, being of great use for all that are concerned in Parliamentary
Affairs, and Professors of the Laws of this Realm. Collected by Sir Robert
Cotton Knight. and Bar. Fol. The Commentaries of Edm. Plowden, with References;
whereunto are added his Quaeries, Fol. Keilwey's Reports, with new References
to all the late Reports, Fol. Reports of several especial Cases in the Court of
Common Pleas in the Reign of King Charles II. By S Carter of the Middle Temple
Esquire Fol. The Laws of Jamaica, in Fol. An exact Abridgment of all the Statutes
in force and use from Magna Charta. Begun by Edm. Wingate of Grays Inn, Esquire and
carefully continued down to the Year 1689. by Jos. Washington of the
Middle Temple, Esquire 8o. The New Natura Brevium of the most Reverend Judge Mr.
Anth. Fitzherbert, Corrected and Revised, Octavo. Style's Practical Register,
begun in the Reign of King Charles I. consisting of Rules, Orders, and the
principal Observations concerning the Practice of the Common Law in the Courts
at Westminster; particularly the King's Bench, as well in Matters Criminal as
Civil Carefully continued down to this time, Octavo. Two Dialogues in English,
between a Doctor of Divinity and a Student in the Laws of England, of the
Grounds of the said Laws, and of Conscience, 8o. The Law against Bankrupts, or
a Treatise wherein the Statutes against Bankrupts are explained. By F. Gooding,
Sergeant at Law, Octavo. The Entering Clerk's Vade Mecum, being an exact
Collection of Presidents for Declarations and Pleadings in most Actions, etc.
By W. Brown Gent. Oct. The Law of Jamaica, Octavo. The Exact Clerk, or
Scrivener's Guide, being choice and approved Forms of Precedents of all sorts
of Business now in use and practice, in a much better Method than any yet
printed; being useful for all Gentlemen, but chiefly those who practice the
Law. By Nicholas Covert, One of the Attorneys of the Court of Com. Pleas, 8o.
Miscellanies.
DOctor Willis's Practice of Physic, being the whole Works of that Renowned
and Famous Physician; Rendered into English. The Second Edition with 40 Copper
Plates, Fol. The Historical and Miscellaneous Tracts of the Reverend and
Learned Peter Heylin, D. D. now Collected into One Volume, and an Account of
the Life of the Author, never before Published, Fol. The Religion of
Protestants, a safe Way to Salvation; with a Discourse of the Apostolical
Institution of Episcopacy. By W. Chillingworth, M. A. To which (in this
Edition) is added Mr. Chillingworth's Letter, showing the Reasons why he left
Popery, Fol. The History of Queen Elizabeth: By W. Cambden, King at Arms; The
Fourth Edition, Fol. Dugdale's Monasticon Anglican', Fol. in Three Vol. The
History of the Life, Reign and Death of Edward II. King of England, and Lord of
Ireland, Fol. The Life of Our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, an Heroic
Poem, in Ten Books. By Samuel Wesley, Rector of South Ormsby in the County of
Lincoln, with 60 Copper Plates, Fol. The Works of the Famous N. Machiavel,
Citizen and Secretary of Florence. Written, Originally in Italian, and from
thence newly and faithfully Translated into English, Fol. With several other
Tracts, etc.
FINIS.

