CONSIDERATIONS For regulating the EXCHEQVER, In the more timely answering,
better husbanding, and more orderly and safe conduct of the Revenues of the
Crown into his Majesty's Coffers, as has been heretofore used by Sheriffs.

And for freeing the Subject from all unjust vexations concerning the same.

With the Causes and Remedies of the inconveniences which have been occasioned
by the breach of the Laws, and ancient course of the Exchequer.

As also for the better enabling and easing of Sheriffs in the execution of
their Offices, and passing their Accounts.

Per C. Vernon, de Scaccario Dom. Regis.

Printed by Tho. Harper, and are to be sold by Matthew. Walbanke, Lau. Chapman,
Will. Cook, and Ric. Best. 1642.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR JOHN CVLPEPPER, Knight, Chancellor and
Under-Treasurer of his Maties Exchequer, one of his Maties most honorable
Privy Council, and one of the Knights of the Shire for the County of Kent
this Parliament.
May it please your Honor,
I Have here adventured by the truest Copies I could meet withal, to do my
best in these times of wished reformation, to represent and set forth the
portraiture of the Exchequer, as it was in its first institution and best
perfection, so near to the life as I could, sitting so far off; To the end
it might, by a right understanding thereof, be restored to its ancient form
and proper working. In the description whereof (as it was in its said first
institution and perfection,) the great wisdom and providence of our Ancestors
will appear principally in these three points: First, that no one Officer was
to be trusted alone in the receiving, charging, discharging, or issuing forth
of the Kings Revenues: In that the Annual or Great Roll of the Exchequer
(being the Lord Treasurers Roll) and of so great esteem in all ages, as that
it has been the Center and Repository wherein to all the Revenues of the
Crown, as well in the Exchequer, as from all other Courts, were and still are
to be reduced, was not entrusted with the Lord Treasurer alone, but the
Chancellor of the Exchequer, by his Substitute or Deputy, is designed and
appointed to write and keep a double or counterpart thereof for controlment
sake.

The second point wherein their great wisdom and care appeared, was, In that,
as no Rent or Debt was to be charged in the said Annual or Great Roll, upon
any the Kings Subjects, but by good and just matter of Record, so the same
(being once charged) was not to be discharged again, or to be set and posted
of de anno in annum, or otherwise prolonged, but by like matter of Record, lest
the same might thereby grow desperate, or become a grievance to his Majesty's
subjects.

And the third and last point was, In that for avoiding of all superfluous and
un-necessary charge to the Crown and subject, by having over-many hands in the
Kings Purse, they did provide and foresee that the Exchequer should not be
charged with more persons then was necessary: And to that end that the Sheriff
of every Shire and County should be the constant Minister for leavying and
bringing in the Rents and Debts belonging to the Crown.

Which Rules, if they had been observed, and continued in the Exchequer,
according to their said first institution, many great losses and inconveniences
which have been occasioned both to the King and Subject, by the breach and
discontinuance thereof, might have been prevented, as in the ensuing Treatise
will appear.

The causes which moved me, at this time, (contrary to my my own will and
approbation, as knowing my own insufficiency) to publish this Treatise so
unworthy of such and so great a subject as this is, were principally these
which follow, namely:

First, that such unperfect Copies upon this subject, as had at any time come
to several hands under my name, might be rectified and put into some method
of coherence conducing to the work intended.

A second cause was, to give satisfaction to some of my near friends, who by
their importunities (over-hastily before I could well deliberate thereof)
thrust me forward to do it, as conceiving I might give some light and
furtherance thereby to the great work intended for the establishing and
ordering of his Majesty's Revenue, and the cutting off and taking away the
superfluity of expenses and abuses of Officers concerning the same.

And in the last place, I was the rather induced to give way thereunto, in
regard I speak nothing of my self, but what I have authority for, either by
good matter of Record, or from the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom.

That which now remains on my part to be desired, is, That your Honor being
at this present (in the vacancie of a Lord Treasurer) the chiefest Officer of
the Exchequer; and one in whom his Majesty (upon contemplation of your own
worth, has reposed so great a trust and superintendencie over his Revenues)
will be pleased so far to patronize these poor Endeavors of mine,
(howsoever performed with great weakness and want of judgment) as (upon
reading over the whole, and weighing the several Authorities, Proofs, and
Reasons, which are therein cited and set down for warrant and confirmation
thereof,) they may (for the matter) be found worthy of your acceptance. And
as there is a fitness of Dedication from me in this kind, due to your Honor,
in respect of your high place and authority in the Exchequer, so more
particularly for your Noble favors already showed to me and mine, whereby I
am obliged, and must ever acknowledge my self to be

Your Honors most humble and devoted servant, Christopher Vernon.

Although the Printer used great diligence in the review and examination of his
proves before he committed the same to pass the Press, yet because he was
not well acquainted with my hand, nor with the Exchequer terms, some mistakes
happened one time when I was absent, In regard whereof the understanding Reader
for his better satisfaction of those mistakes and omissions, is desired that
be will first cast his eye over the Errata in the end of this Book.

Considerations FOR Regulating the Exchequer, etc.
THE Court of Exchequer is one of those four Courts at Westminster, which,
Chancery, Kings Bench. Common Pleas, Exchequer.
in the common opinion, had their beginning by the fundamental laws of this
Realm, time beyond the memory of man. And for the due answering and managing
of the Revenues of the Crown both certain and casual: The said Court has been
supported with great and ancient privileges and high authority by and under
the survey, rule and government of a Lord Treasurer; Chancellor,
Undertreasurer, Chamberlaines, and Barons of the said Court. And that the said
Court now is, and has been anciently distinguished and known by the Superior
or Upper, and the Inferior or Lower Exchequer. The Superior being also known
by the Title of Scaccarium Computorum: And the lower by the Title of the
Receipt, where the Kings moneys are paid to certain Tellers, and Tallies
stricken for the same, for discharge of such Farmers, Debtors, Accountants,
etc. which pay in the same.

The principal Officers of trust in the said superior Exchequer (under the
said head Officers) are the Kings and Lord Treasurers Remembrancers, the Clerk
of the Pipe, or Ingrosser of the Great Roll, and the Controller of the Pipe,
with a competent number of Auditors for preparing and casting up all accounts.
The said Controller of the Pipe being to write a duplicate, or double of the
said great Roll, to remain in his custody, for the better safeguard and
controlment of the revenues of the Crown; and twice every year, to make forth
process from the said great Roll, to all Sheriffs for levying the Rents,
Farms, and Debts in every Shire, City, and Town Corporate; which process was
anciently called by the name of the Summons of the Exchequer, being of the
force and nature of a fieri facias, for levying of the Kings rents and debts
upon the goods and chattels of the Farmers and Debtors therein specified.
Howbeit about the beginning of the Reign of King Edward 3. when the casual
revenue, called the Greenwax, was so much increased, that the Controller of the
Pipe could not well undergo the burden of the whole work: Clerk of the
Estreats.
There was a new Officer (entitled the Clerk of the Estreats) introduced to
write the summons for the said Greenwax, only in assistance of the said
Controller: and one other Officer called the Foreign Apposer. Foreign
apposer.
For opposing of Sheriffs upon the said Summons of Greenwax, who is, forthwith
after every such apposall, to send the whole charge wherewith every Sheriff
charge himself of the said Greenwax, in every title into the Pipe, there to
be added to the other charge of each Sheriff upon his account in the great
Roll, together with so much of every title as is to be charged upon the Lords
and Bailiffes of Liberties; and that which is nichelled is to be written in
process a new from the Pipe, saving that the nichelled issues are by the Clerk
of the Nichells sent to the Treasurers Rememorancer, who according to the
Statute of 27. E. 1. makes forth writs of Scire facias, out of his Office to
all such Sheriffs who returned those parties at issues to show cause why they
should not satisfy the same Issues to the King, by reason of the insufficiency
of the said parties so by them returned at Issues: since which time of the
introducing of the said Clerk of the Estreats to write the summons of the
Greenwax, the summons written by the Controller of the Pipe, and the Clerk of
the Estreats have been distinguished by the names of the Summons of the Pipe,
and Summons of the Greenwax.

As concerning the said casual Revenue called the Greenwax, it consists of
such Fines, Issues, Amerciaments, Recognizances, for appearances and other
forfeitures as are yearly set, lost, and forfeited before the Justices of the
Kings Bench, Common Pleas, Barons of the Exchequer, Justices of Assize,
Goaledeli cry, Justices of Peace, Commissioners of Sewers, Clerk of the
Market, and the like; which (by the Laws of this Kingdom) are to be Estreat
yearly, and sent into the Exchequer, from all the said Courts and places to the
Lord Treasurers Remembrancers Office, and from thence (after an entry made of
the numbers of every scedule, etc.) to be forthwith delivered together with
those of the Exchequer (as well in that Office as in the Offices of the Kings
Remembrancer and the Clerk of the Pleas) to the said Clerk of the Estreats
for execution to be done thereupon in such manner as is formerly set down. And
as for all Rents, Farms, Custodies, Extents, and other Debts and Duties
belonging to the Crown, as well the Remainders of the Farms of the Counties,
the Farms of Serjeancies, and Asserts, the Farms of Cities, Burroughes, and
Towns corporate, and all other Farms and Rents, whatsoever whereof there is
answer made yearly in the Exchequer, and all debts determined, and gross
Debts arising from the Offices of the Remembrancers, whereof there is hope that
somewhat shall be paid, and all debts and Supers depending in any accounts
within the survey of the said Court of Exchequer. These are by the new Statute
of the Exchequer, Stat. de Rutland, An. 10. E. 1.
called the Statute of Rutland, An. 10. E. 1. to be written in the Annual or
Great Roll of the Pipe, and process to be first made from thence to the
Sheriffs by the Summons of the Pipe for leavying thereof to the Kings use
accordingly.

And the reasons why the Summons of the Pipe (not extending to the body or
lands of any debtor, but only to their Goods and Chattels) and why the Summons
of the Green Wax (not extending either to body or lands, or to the infringing
or entering into any liberty) is to be the first process, M^gna Charta, cap. 8.
is this: For that by the statute of Magna Charta, it is provided that no
Sheriff or Bailiffe shall seize any lands for the Kings debts, so long as the
present Goods and Chattels of the debtor do suffice, and the debtor himself
be ready to satisfy the same. And that the Pledges of the debtor shall not
be distrained as long as the principal debtor is sufficient. And for that
also if a stronger process should be first made to the Sheriff of non
omittas propter aliquem libertatem, etc. For leavying of the Green Wax, the
Lords of liberties should thereby be barred and put by their Franchises and
claims, which would be against common right.

But they are much deceived that take the Summons of the Pipe to be no more
then (as it were) a Scire fasias, or Summons to the Farmer or debtor to pay his
rent or debt, or that it is but tardum remedium, or of slow execution to bring
in the Kings Rents and Duties: for though it is (in truth) but a Summons, yet
it is a Summons (not to the debtor) but to the Sheriff, and such a Summons as
transcends all other commands in any of the Kings Writs, for injoyning them to
the performance of what is thereby required.

The Writ is as follows:

Carolus Dei gratia, etc.
Vic. B. salutem,
vide sicut teipsum and omnia tua diligis quod sis coram Thesaur. and Baronum
de Scaccario apud Westmonasterium in Crastino clausi Pasche prox. futur. Et
habeas ibi tunc quicquid nobis debes de novis and veteribus firmis and omnia
debita subscript. and hanc summon. de Pipa.

Test A. B. Thesaur. Angliae apud Westmonasterium duodecimo die Februarii,
Anno, etc.
As if the King should say, Viz. at the Easter proffer by the first Summons,
and at the Michaelmas proffer by the second.
Mr. Sheriff, as you love your self, your wife and children, and all that you
have, see that you be upon such a day at Westminster, before our Treasurer and
Barons, and bring with you all our Farms and rents then due, and all other the
debts underwritten, and this Summons.

And if there were no more in it but this (it being of so great antiquity
beyond the memory of man) as makes it of sufficient force by the Common laws
of this Kingdom to be obeyed: yet this is not all; for this Writ is strongly
backed by an Act of Parliament in Anno 51, H. 3. called the Statute of the
Exchequer, whereby it is ordained, that all Sheriffs, Farmers, Bailiffs, of
Franchises, and others shall come to the proffers of the Exchequer the Monday
after the utas of Easter, and the Monday after the Feast of S. Michael to pay
the Farms, Rents and Issues belonging to the King, and shall bring at the
foresaid Terms, the Farms Rents and Issues due, wholly into the Exchequer: And
if they make default, their bodies shall remain without departing from thence,
until they have paid or made agreement; and he that will not come at the Terms
aforesaid, shall be amerced after the custom of the Exchequer, and the
Shiriffes and Bailiffes at the same Terms shall bring and pay such moneys as
they have received of the Summons of the Exchequer, and other the Kings debts;
and shall be prepared to make full account of the things aforesaid, to the
Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer. And this is in all points agreeable to
the Summons of the Pipe, directed to the Sheriffs twice in the year, for
bringing the Farms, Rents and Debts belonging to the King, at the times in the
said Statute mentioned; and has been in use ever since the making of the said
statute, and is so continued at this day (though not rightly put in execution.
The first Summons now sent forth every year to the Sheriffs being under the
Test of 12. Feb. which is the last day of Hillary Term, returnable in Crast.
claus. pasche prox. futur. (being the Easter proffer) styled in the said
Statute to be the Monday after the utas of Easter; and the other Summons
bearing always the Test of the last day of every Trinity Term returnable in
Crast. Mich. (if it be not Sunday) which before is mentioned to be the Monday
after the feast of Sain Michael.

After the Sheriffs have so made their appearances at their Easter and
Michaelmas proffers (as aforesaid) and brought in and paid at his Majesty's
receipt so much at each proffer, as was then come, or lawfully might have come
to their hands, or in default thereof have been amerced or committed to ward,
every Sheriff is to appear in person at his day of prefixion in the Exchequer
before the Treasurer and Barons of the said Court, or (if he be hindered by
sickness) before some Commissioners thereunto authorized by the Court, to make
his final account of all the issues and profits of his office due to the King
for his year, and then is to take his oath as follows, viz.

That he shall yield to his Majesty a true and lawful acount of the issues and
profits of his said office of Sheriffwicke, and make true answer to the Summons
of the Pype and Greenwax, and in the same account to charge himself with all
such sums of money as he, his Vnder-Sheriffe, Bailiffs or Ministers for him
have levied, or lawfully might have levied to his Majesty's use by the Summons
aforesaid: And of all Fellones goods, outlawed men's goods, attainted men's
goods, wayfes, estraies, and other profits whatsoever which have come to the
hands of his Vnder-Sheriffe, Bayliffes or Ministers by reason of his said
office: And that he shall not in the same account vouch any franchises or
liberties, nor make any petition, nor ask any allowance or discharge, but such
as shall be good and true, and likewise to deliver a book written in
parchment, declaring of whom and where he receives the vicondells, and other
the Rents and Farms written unto him in the Summons of the Pipe, and well and
truly to behave himself in yielding the same account, as a true accountant
ought to do without any omission or concealment.

And every Sheriff which shall not so appear at his said day of prefixion
before the Treasurer and Barons, and take his oath, or procure such commission
for taking thereof at the same time as aforesaid, shall forfeit to the King 5.
pounds for every day after his said day of prefixion, that he shall so fail to
appear and take his said oath as aforesaid; and after the taking of the said
oath every Sheriff is to attend upon the Court, and to be apposed before the
said Treasurer and Barons in open Court upon the said Summons of the Pipe, and
shall according to his said oath charge himself with all such Farms, Rents,
and other debts written unto him by the said Summons of the Pipe, as he has or
lawfully might have levied. And to such Farms, Rents and Debts as he charge
himself withal, The foreign aposer and clarke of the estrates are in like
manner to mark the one the summons, and the other the record upon their
apposall on the greeenwax.
tot or oni (scilicet oneratur nisi) is to be marked against their names and
Summons, by the Clarke of the Pipe, and controller respectively in the said
great Roll, and Counter Roll, and to be entered, and cast up in his charge in
the said great Roll by the first Secondary of the Pipe, together with the
whole charge of his foreign Account and Greenwax, as is before observed, and
the said Sheriff to pay and answer to the King all and every part thereof
which shall remain due upon the foot of his account, and not by him formerly
paid, and answered at his said proffers, except only there shall be some good
cause of discharge by matter of Record, or order to be made in open Court for
any of those wherewith he so charged himself with oni as aforesaid: And to
such as he shall aver to be illeviable or to be dead, or within any liberty
so as he could not levy the same by his said Summons Nichell diem clausit
extrem. or such, or such a liberty, are to be in like manner marked against
their names and sums; and those that are so returned with Nichil or diem
clausit extrem. to be forthwith to be put into Cedula pipe, and sent to the
Lord Treasurers Remembrancers Office, so as stronger Process to the next
Sheriff may be made from thence against their bodies, lands and goods for
levying thereof to his Majesty's use, or Commissions to be made from thence to
faithful and circumspect men of every County for making inquiry into the same,
Westminster. 1. An. 3. E 1. cap. 19. Stat. An. 6. H. 4. c. 3.
according to former Statutes in that behalf provided: And if upon return of
the said Commissions it shall appear to the Court that any of the said parties
by whom any such debts are owing, are nothing worth, and that their debts are
desperate, they are (according to the foresaid new Statute of the Exchequer
called the Statute of Rutland) in ease of Sheriffs to be removed out of the
said Annual or great Roll, Stat. de Rutland anno 10. E 1.
into an exannual Roll, and not to be written any more in Process to the
Sheriffs, but to be only yearly read upon their accounts to see which of them
may be revived, and such as are like to be so revived and made good to be
reinserted into the said Annual Roll for new Process to be made thereupon as
the case shall require; and if upon return of the said Commissions it shall
appear that the Sheriff (or any for him) has received any of the said Farms
or debts, and concealed the same upon his account, the said Sheriff is
according to the said Statute of Westmin. Anno 3. E. 1 cap. 19. Stat de Westminster.
An. 3. E. 1 cap. 19.
to make answer thereof to the King, and to pay to the party grieved thrice so
much as he received, and to make fine at the Kings pleasure.

And the like Commissions are to be awarded into every County after the
determination of every account in the Exchequer by Sheriffs, Escheators, Stat.
anno 6. H. 4. c. 3.
Aulvegours, Customers, Controllers, and other the Kings Officers, and
acountants concealing and receiving to their own use that which rightfully
appertains to the King, for inquiry to be made thereof: And in case the said
Accountants upon return of the said Commissions be found guilty of any such
frauds and deceits, they shall incur treble the same to the King, and their
bodies to prison, until they have made fine and ransom to the King after the
discretion of the Judges.

And as concerning the several sums of money wherewith the Sheriffs shall
so charge themselves upon their accounts in the said Annual Roll, they are not
to depart the Court (without special license of the Treasurer and Barons,
until they have fully paid and satisfied the same, In libro ordin. ex part
Remerator. Thesaur. Term. H. l. Anno 32. Eliz.
or procured a discharge or Exon. de Anno for the same, upon good matter of
Record, or order in open Court: And upon the final determination of their said
Accounts, the said Sheriffs whole charge and discharge is to be read and cast
up in open Court, before the Treasurer and Barons of the said Court, in the
presence of the Treasurers Remembrancer, Clerk of the Pipe, Controller, and
other Officers whom it shall or may concern; and two Auditors at the least for
casting up the said accounts: And what every of the said Sheriffs shall be
found in debet upon his said account (all his Tallies, Allowances, and just
Petitions deducted) the said Sheriff is forthwith to pay to the King before
he be dismissed out of Court, or to be committed to ward until he pay the
same.

And if any Sheriff after his said Apposals, and charging himself with the
paticular sums aforesaid, shall depart the Court (without special license
aforesaid) before he has fully perfected his said Account, and is so delivered
out of Court, as aforesaid, his goods and lands are to be seized into the Kings
hands nomine districtionis, and the King to take the issues and benefit
thereof, without any part to go in deduction of his debt, or a Sergeant at
Arms to be sent for such delinquent Sheriff, who (if he be no privileged
person) is to be brought up and committed to Ward until he shall fully perfect
his account, and pay or discharge what is justly due thereupon, as is aforesaid.

In like manner, Lords of Liberties, Majors, Bailiffes, etc.
all Lords and Bailiffes of Liberties, Majors, etc. are to appear at the said
proffers at Easter and Michaelmas, and at the times by the Court prefixed to
perfect and finish their Accounts for all such moneys as they stand charged
withal; and to pay what is due to the Crown over and besides their just
allowances, and what they can by their claims, or for default thereof, their
bodies to remain without departing, and their liberties to be seized into the
Kings hands.

And as concerning such sums of money as by the Awards of the Court shall be
put into Cedula Pipe for stronger process to be made by the Treasurers
Remembrancer in regard of a diem claus. extrem. or the like, the said
Treasurers Remembrancer is forthwith at the next Liberate or Sealing day, to
make forth the strongest process to the Sheriffs (as the case shall require)
for leavying thereof; wherein by the long writ (called the Prerogative Writ)
the Sheriff has power to enquire (if the debtor be dead) to whose hands his
goods and Chattels are come, The long Writ called the Prerogative Writ, out of
the Treasurers Remembrancers Office, under the Test of the chief Baron.
and to put the same in safe custody for the King (who is to be first
satisfied;) and if he had any lands, what lands he had at the time he so first
came indebted, or at any time after, and to whose hands the same are come, and
to make seizure thereof. And if the debtor be living, to leavy the debt upon
his or their goods or lands; or for default thereof (Magnat. Dominis and
dominabus exceptis) to attach his or their body, with such other strong Clauses
for leavying thereof, as can be devised. And the Term following, the
Sheriffs are to be apposed upon all those Writs which were so sent forth for
debts in Cedula Pipe, before the Barons of the Exchequer in the Exchequer
Chamber; and if the Barons can find or learn that the Sheriffs have used any
negligence or connivence in executing their said Writs, they do usually amerce
the said Sheriffs according to their defaults, and sometimes set a pain on
their heads, unless they pay or show good cause of discharge or do better
service by a certain day: In all which causes the said amerciaments so set or
incurred, are forthwith to be sent down into the Pipe for process to be made
thereupon accordingly.

And the said Treasurers Remembrancer does in like manner recover such
amerciaments as are so imposed by the Court, and such reliefes as are belonging
to the King after the death of any person dying seized by whom such reliefes
are due, and such sums of money as any Sheriff shall charge himself withal by
way of fieri feci, and the like; as also all such extents and certificates of
the goods, and two parts of the lands of Recusants as are found by
Inquisitions, all which the said Treasurers Remembrancer does in like manner
send down into the Pipe to be put in charge in the said great Roll, and
prepares the originalls sent into his Office from the Chancery, and therein
marks Ingrossat. against all such Rents as are reserved upon any grants in Fee
Farm, or upon any other Farms or custodies for term of life, or years, or
for so long time as the same shall continue in the Kings hands, for the said
Clarke of the Pipe to draw down from thence yearly to be put in charge in the
said great Roll, after the title of Nova oblata. And the said Treasurers
Remembrancer out of his Office makes forth Writs of Distringas to all Sheriffs
against the Kings tenants for preserving of his Majesty's tenures and services,
Writers of Distringas.
and the Issues thereupon returned by the said Sheriffs in every Shire,
certifieth to the Clarke of the Estreats twice in the year to be by him sent
forth to the Sheriffs in the Summons of the Greenwax: And for the fines due to
the King for respiting the homage of his tenants, the said Treasurers
Remembrancer charge himself with all those fines which are drawn into the
Pipe, and by him answered unto the receipt, as also for all the Castle ward
rents in several Counties payable to the Castle of Dover, Stat. anno 32. H. 8.
And the Kings Majesty's Remembrancer in his Office records all fines and
other debts sent into his Office out of any other Court, and recovereth all
such Recognizances, Amerciaments, fi. fac. of Sheriffs moyties of forfeitures
about custom causes or upon penal Laws, and the like, and sends the
Records thereof into the Pipe, and also of such Bonds and Obligations as are
forfeited and recovered for the King, to be from thence drawn down and charged
for his Majesty's service in the said great Roll: And also makes forth the
writs of Distringas against all Accomptants, whose names are to be entered upon
the States of Accomptants in his Office, as well the Master of the horse, the
keeper of the Warderob, Treasurer of the Chamber, Treasurer at Wars,
Treasurer of the Navy, collectors of Subsidies and Customs, and all receivers
of the Kings Revenues, and other Accomptants whatsoever, who are to make their
accounts in the Exchequer, and against such as have had any money imprested to
them for the Kings special service, and the like, and to see Issues returned
against them until they shall perfect their said accounts before the several
Auditors thereunto assigned, and enter the same upon the Roll of the States of
Accomptant in his Office, and before the Treasurers Remembrancer upon the Roll
of Viewes in his Office, from whence the said accounts after they are declared
before the Treasurers and Barons of the Exchequer, and so entered as aforesaid,
are also to be sent into the Pipe, there to remain as the Kings and Subjects
evidence upon record for ever; as also to the end Process may be made from
thence for such supers and debts as are therein depending. And all such Issues
as are lost by any of the said Accomptants for their not accompting in due
time, and by the Sheriffs returned upon the said Writs of Distringas sent from
the said Office of the Kings Remembrancer, are in like manner twice in the
year to be estreated to the said Clarke of the Estreates, to be by him sent
forth in the Summons of the Greenewax accordingly. In his Office also is kept
the red Book of the Exchequer, being an excllent Treatise of the ancient
Rolls and Laws of the Exchequer, conceived to be collected by Gervasius
Tilburiensis, tempore H. 2. which book is commonly sent by the Cursiter Baron
into the Kings Bench and Common Pleas, or in the Term time to remove any
matter sued there against any Officer, Minister or servitor of theirs, or any
Accomptant there that prays his privilege in due time, upon which red book
so showed, and the party testified by the Baron to be of that Court as
aforesaid, his privilege is usually allowed. And both the said Remembrancers
do make forth copies to the Auditors of all Seisures made by Sheriffs for any
debts, or by reason of any Alienations, Outlawries, or other duties to the
King, upon the writs sent out of their Offices, to be by the said Auditors
respectively charged in the said Sheriffs foreign accounts. In which their
said foreign accounts the said Auditors which take these accounts are to enter
the particulars where with every Sheriff charge himself for the goods and
chattells of fellones outlawed and attainted persons, waifes, estraies and the
like according to the ancient course of the Exchequer.

And for that there may be some just cause of discharge of the Sheriff and
debtor by an absolute exo. or of the Sheriff for his year by an exo. de anno
of some part of the Seisures and Issues charged in his said foreign account,
or of some other part of the debts or farms charged upon him in the said great
Roll of the Pipe, or of some part of the Greenwax moncies charged upon him by
the said foreign Apposer as aforesaid; as for instance: There may be some just
cause for discharge of the Sheriff and debtor by an absolute exo. upon his
account of some seizure, debt or duty charged upon the said Sheriff as
aforesaid, in regard there was a preconveiance of the land by the debtor bona
fide before the debt grew due to the King, or that the debt or duty for which
the said seizure was made is fully satisfied and answered to the Crown; or for
that the like debt or duty it self is absolutely to be discharged by plea and
judgment, gist or grant from the Crown or by some other good matter of
record: And as there may be just cause for an absolute exo. to the Sheriff and
debtor, so there may be as just cause for an exo. de anno to the Sheriff upon
his account of some of the seisures and debts charged upon him as aforesaid,
either in regard the lands in seizure are in the Kings hands by reason of the
minority of the heir or owner of the said lands, or for that the said lands
were made in Iointure or in Lease for term of years or life before the debt
grew due, or the like, in all which several cases the Lord Treasurers
Remembrancer upon sight of such good matter of record, or other such just cause
allowed of by the Court as aforesaid, is (upon the desire and petition of the
Sheriff to be discharged thereof upon his account) to rule several petitions
to every Sheriff upon his or their said accounts respectively for an absoute
exo. or an exo. de anno for the same as the case shall require, which is to be
by him alleged and set down to every petition accordingly; howbeit the said
Treasurers Remembrancer is not to rule any such petition for an absolute exon.
or exon. de anno to any Sheriff of or for any Seizure, Farm, Debt, or other
sum of money whatsoever, but of such only as shall fully appear to him,
either by the Sheriffs foreign account it self, or by some Constat or
Certificate in parchment under the hands of the Clerk of the Pipe, or Clerk
of the Estreats respectively, to be part of the Sheriffs charge so charged
upon him in his account in the said great Roll; for that if such petition
should be allowed to the Sheriff of any sum, being no part of his charge,
the King should lose and be defrauded of so much thereby.

Moreover the said Lord Treasurers Remembrancer does upon Certificate from the
Justices of Assize (ratified and allowed under the hand of the Vndertreasurer
of the Exchequer for the time being) rule petitions for allowance to Sheriffs
upon their accounts for carriage or removing of prisoners, reparations of Gaols
and other extraordinary services done by Sheriffs in the time of their
Sheriffwicke: All which petitions are by the said Treasurers Remembrancer to
be entered upon Record in his Office, and to be sent to the Clerk of the Pipe
(for the time being) to be entered and allowed upon each Sheriffs account
respectively in the said Annual or great Roll of the Pipe, in deduction of so
much of each Sheriffs charge, so as one Record may be discharged by another,
according to the ancient course of the Exchequer.

And here (by the way) is to be noted, that the said Clerk of the Pipe is
not, nor ought not, to discharge or set off from any Sheriff, any Farm, debt,
or other sum of money whatsoever charged upon him in his account in the said
great Roll, but such only as shall appear to be paid into his Majestis
Receipt of the Exchequer, by Tallies to be joined and allowed in the said
Roll, Statut. anno 1 R. 2 cap. 5.
or such as shall appear to be discharged or set off by such matter of Record
as is laid down in the Sheriffs several petitions, as aforesaid; nor to give
any allowances to Sheriffs upon their said accounts, but such as shall either
be warranted by Tallies, de Regard, to be sevied in his Majesty's said
Receipt of Exchequer, or by some judgment of Court entered or to be entered in
one of the Remembrancers Offices: And if he do otherwise, the Controller of
the Pipe, either before or at the Sheriffs casting out of Court, is to inform
the Court thereof, so as the said undue discharges and misallowances may be
certified and made void. And if the said Controller, either through ignorance
or connivence, shall not discharge the trust reposed in him therein, he shall
be punished for his consent in like manner as he that admitted of such false
allowances, etc. and as he that took allowance thereof: namely, to pay so much
to the King, Stat. do Scaccorio Anno 51. H 3.
as the allowance amounted unto: To be imprisoned a year and forty days, and
to be punished at the Kings pleasure.

But hereunto may be objected, that if the Clerk of the Pipe be to give no
allowance to Sheriffs upon their accounts, but of such moneys only for which
Tallies are stricken in his Maties Receipt, and of such sums as are to be
allowed, set off, or discharged by judgment of Court, or such matter of Record
as is aforesaid: How comes it then to pass that allowance has been given to
Shiriffes upon their accounts in the said great Roll from time to time, by
acquittances of Noble men for their Creation moneys payable by Sheriffs out
of the profits of their Counties, and the like; and by acquittances of such
Receivers to whom the King has granted the receipt of the yearly profits,
arising of any certain or casual Revenue within the Sheriffs charge. To which
is answered, That the allowances given by the acquittances of Noble men and
others, for such sums of money as are payable to them by Sheriffs out of the
profits of their Counties (being to their own use) are always warranted by
judgment of Court, before any such allowance is to be given: And as to the
allowance of Acquittances for moneys of the natures aforesaid, paid or to be
paid by Sheriffs to Receivers as aforesaid to the Kings use, such Acquittances
are not (in truth) to be allowed by the course of the Exchequer, but by
Tallies of assignment to be first stricken in the Receipt for the same, in such
sort as is used at this day for his Majesty's Wardrobe and Household, and for
the postfines, Issues of Jurors, and the like, there being no such controlment
for Acquittances, Much easier to counterfeit Acquittances, then Tallies.
as is for Tallies, and it being much more easy to counterfeit Acquittances
then Tallies; albeit even Tallies have been counterfeited to the loss and
prejudice of the Crown, which could not be discovered before they were
rejoyned with their foyles, according to the ancient course of the Exchequer.
Besides, the Subject which really pays his money to a Receiver to the Kings
use, and takes his Acquittance for it, runs a greater hazard to pay the same
money again in case such acquittance be lost, and that the Receiver do not
satisfy the same upon his Account, which hazard is avoided by striking a Tally
for the same in his Majesty's Receipt, which is always extant upon Record for
the parties discharge, in case the Tally it self be lost.

And as it is to be noted, that the Clerk of the Pipe is not to discharge or
set off any part of the Sheriffs charge, but by Tallies to be leavied in his
Majesty's Receipt of Exchequer, judgment of Court, or such matter of Record,
as is before mentioned; so it may be likewise observed, that the Treasurers
Remembrancer is not to rule any petition upon the Sheriffs Accounts for debt,
recognizance, or other duty belonging to his Majesty, wherewith the Sheriffs
have charged themselves upon their accounts, but by matter of Record, or order
in open Court, and not upon any other warrant whatsoever, which is not grounded
upon such matter of Record, or order in open Court, Inter ordin. term. Hilar.
an. 32. Eliz. Reg. ez part Rem. Thesaur.
as aforesaid. For if way should be given to the Sheriff, to set off or
discharge himself upon his account of the farms, debts, or sums of money by
him taken into his charge at his apposall, upon ordinary suggestions that he
could not leavie the sum, or by reason of the poverty of the debtor, or in
favor of the subject to ease him from the rigor and penalty which the Law has
inflicted upon him for some offense, (which is only in the Kings power to
mitigate or remit) or upon any other ground then by matter of Record, or order
in open Court, as aforesaid, then it would follow, that the greatest part of
the Sheriffs totts and sums of money by him taken in charge at his apposals,
would be set off and discharged, and so his apposals would be of no force or
virtue, which by the ancient course of the Court, binds him to answer the same
to the King, unless some just cause be showed to the contrary, as before is
said: seeing he might (at his choice) have totted or nichelled the same at his
said apposals; and then also would follow, that the King should be divested of
the grace which properly belongs to himself for mitigating and remitting of
such forfeitures and penalties to his subjects as the case shall require, which
the late Queen Elizabeth (of famous memory) for the most part kept in her own
power for gratifying her loving subjects withal, by a general pardon of grace
at every Parliament.

Thus much may suffice to have spoken of the superior or upper Court of
Exchequer, touching the ancient course of passing Accounts by Sheriffs and
other Accomptants.

In the next place, before I pass from the superior Exchequer called
Scaccarinm Computorum, to the lower called the Receipt: It will not be amiss
to take a short view of the Officers there, and in whose gifts their Offices
are.

And first for the Lord Treasurer and Chancellor, their places are as ancient
as the Exchequer, and in the Kings gift.

The Undertreasurer or Vice-Treasurer was not known till the time of King
Hen. 7. at which time the Lord Treasurers Remembrancer was made Vice-Treasurer,
and whether of the Kings nomination or the Treasurers, is not known. Sir John
Baker being nominated Vice-Treasurer in the time of Hen. 8. had a patent from
the King of the said Office, under the great Seal, which is still in the Kings
gift.

The chief Baron and three other learned Barons, and the Puny or Cursitor
Baron are all in the Kings gift.

The said Cursitor Baron being so called because he is chosen most usually out
of some of the best experienced Clerks of the two Remembrancers, or Clerk of
the Pipes Office, and is to inform the Bench and the Kings learned Counsel
from time to time, both in Court and out of Court, what the course of the
Exchequer is for the preservation of the same, and of the prerogative and
benefit which his Majesty has thereby which the course of the Court most
commonly maintains and respects.

The two Chanoberlaines had in old time great Authority in the Exchequer, and
have kept the keys of the treasury Coffers, and were ever privy to the pells
of Introitus and exitus, of the which each of them are to keep a controlement
at this day, and anciently no money was issued out of the receipt without their
privity, their names being still continued in all privy Seals for payment of
money out of the receipt, though it is now delivered without them. Their place
in Court is next to the Barons, and they may sit and keep their places daily in
Court if they like to attend and hearken to the causes there without any
intermedling therein But at the election of the Sheriffs Crastino animarum
they use to be present, and may say their opinion for preferment or stay of men
to be Sheriffs, as the Barons and Justices do. Their places were anciently of
inheritance, but now are in the Kings gift.

The Kings Majesty's Attorney and Solicitor general have been always
reckoned amongst the Officers of the Exchequer, though they have audience and
come within the bar in all other Courts, their places being in the Kings
gift.

The Kings Rememcrancers Office has always since the first erection been in
the Kings gift.

The Treasurers Remembrancers Office implies by the title that it has been in
the Lord Treasurers gift, but for a long time it has been and now is in the
Kings gift.

The Office of the Clerk of the Pipe, or ingrosser of the great Roll, was
anciently in the Lord Treasurers gift till about the time of Ed. 3. since
which time it has been and now is in the Kings gift.

The Office of the Controller of the Pipe is at this day and always has been
in the gift of the Chancellor of the Exchequer, the said Controller being
anciently styled Clericus Cancellar. and the Clerk of the Pipe Clericus These.
and Cancellarius was and is still written upon the Controllers Roll and These.
anciently upon the great Roll, to distinguish between them: And for that
reason, some have been of opinion that the Chancellor sits above the Lord
Treasurer in the Exchequer Court, because of his superintendency and
controlement over his Roll.

The office of the Remembrancer of the first fruits and tenthes in the Kings
gift.

The Surveior general of his Majesty's lands, etc. in the Kings gift.

The Clerk of the Pleas in the Chancellors gift.

The foreign Apposer and Clerk of the Estreats in the Lord Treasurers gift.

The two Auditors of the imprests, in the Kings gift.

The seven Auditors of the Revenew, who have in charge before them the Revenew
annexed to the Exchequer upon the dissolution of the Augmentation Court, anno
1. Mariae Reg. and before whom the receivers general make their accounts
according to their several assignments by their letters patents under the
great Seal from the King. The other businesses which belongs to their places
as they are Auditors, or Clerks in the Exchequer for taking the accounts of
Sheriffs, Escheators, Customers, Controllers, Collectors of Subsidies, the
Cofferers Account, and the like, they have them by assignment from the Marshall
of the Exchequer from time to time in open Court, and so entered in his book,
to the intent no accomptant should take an Auditor of his own choice. Their
places are in the Kings gift.

The Auditor and Receivor general of the Duchy of Cornwall are in the Kings
gift in the vacancy of a Duke of Cornwall.

The Receivers general of the Kings Revenews, etc. being about two and twenty
in number, in the Kings gift.

The surveior of the Greenewax, in the Kings gift; this Office was erected in
the time of King James, upon the advice of the Lord Treasurer, Chancellor,
Undertreasurer, and Barons of the Exchequer, and the Kings learned Council,
as appears by a Table set up in the Exchequer, setting forth what the said
Officer is to do in his place.

The two Deputy Chamberlaines, being Joyners of the Tallies, in the two
Chamberlaines gift.

The Marshall of the Court, now in the Kings gift.

The two Parcell-markers being so called, because they were ordained in the
time of R. 2. to make the parcels of all Escheators accounts, and were wont to
receive out of the Treasurers Remembrancers Office, by a note under their
hands, all the Transcripts of Offices sent thither yearly out of the Chancery,
which were found by any Escheators; and out of those they were to collect into
a particular Roll, the parcels wherewith every Escheator was to be charged by
the Auditor upon his account; but the Escheators were in the time of Queen
Elizabeth, discharged from making accounts for any new Escheats, the same being
put in charge in the Court of Wards, so as there is little or no use of their
Offices at this day, but for the old Escheats remaining in the Escheators
accounts, whereof little or nothing is answered to the Crown by them: howbeit
they anciently made their accounts at large in the Exchequer, which are extant
at this day in the Pipe, and are still called upon the Scroll of accomptants,
and ought to strike a Tally for their proffers every year, which of late time
has been neglected.

The Clerk of the Nichils is in the Chancellors gift.

The Sealer of the Court is the Chancellors gift.

The Chief Usher of the Exchequer, is he that by inheritance has the keeping
of the Exchequer Court, the Exchequer Chamber, and the house, with all the
appurtenances, where the Court uses to dine when they sit about the Kings
business; he makes provision for all the necessaries both of the Exchequer,
and of the Receipt, and has allowance thereof at every Liberate: and sees to
all places of the Court, that all Doors, Chests, Records and things be in
safety from fire, water, or other spoil, etc. and has the oversight of the
rest of the Vshers, and the six ordinary Messengers of the Court, that they
make a true delivery, to the Sheriffs, and all others of the Kings Process, etc.

The two Praisers of the Court concerning uncustomed goods, in the Under
Treasurers gift.

The four ordinary Vshers of the Court, in the said chief Vshers gift.

The six ordinary Messengers which carry the process of the Court to Sheriffs,
etc. in the said chief Vshers gift.

Thus much for the names of the said Offices, in the said Superior Exchequer,
and in whose gift they are. But as to the particular duties which are incident
to every of the said offices, and to those of the Receipt, or what particular
Records every of them has in his custody, and of what nature and antiquity
they are, it is not my purpose to treat of in this place: for that would be a
very great work of it self; but only of so much as shall fall in my way,
concerning the managing and ordering of the Kings Revenues: howbeit thus much I
may say, that there are so many excellent Records in the Offices of the two
Remembrancers, Clerk of the Pipe, and in the several Treasuries both in the
upper and lower Exchequer. As they may indeed be called Treasuries where those
Records are kept, they being the greatest Treasure of the Kingdom; insomuch as
I have heard a great Lawyer say, That he never understood what Law was, till
he ^ame up those stairs. And to say the tuth, there must needs be more then
^rdinary matters, and great variety of taem found in that Court, whither all
the other Courts of the Kingdom, as rivers to the sea, in some kind or other,
have their resort.

The Offices in the inferior or lower Exchequer, commonly called the Receipt,
are these which follow, viz.

The four Tellors of the Receipt (whose Offices are in the Kings gift) do
receive all the Kings moneys which are paid into the Receipt by Sheniffes,
Customers, Farmers, and other Accomptants and Debtors whatsoever, and do write
a Bill thereof in parchment, expressing therein the sum by them received, and
of whom, and for what; which Bill they deliver (not to the party that pays
the money,) but put it down through a Trunk made for that purpose, into the
Chamberlaines Court for a Tally to be stricken for discharge of the party.

The Clerk of the Pell (whose Office is in the Lord Treasurers gift) keeps
the Pell in parchment, Clerk of the Pell.
called Pellis Recepte, wherein every Tellers Bill with his name on it, is to
be entered; and under every such Bill when it is entered, Recordatur to be
written in open Court, for a Controlment to charge the Teller with so much
money as in the said Bill is set down.

He alse anciently kept another Pell, called Pellis Exitus, wherein every days
issuing of any the moneys paid into the Receipt, was to be entered, and by
whom, and by what Warrant, privy Seal or Bill it was paid.

The Auditor of the Receipt (whose Office is in the Lord Treasurers gift)
takes up every Tellers parchment Bill, Auditor of the Receipt.
after it is marked Recordatur by the Clerk of the Pell, and entered by the
Controllers of the Pell, (who were anciently also to make entry thereof in a
Counter Pell) and fileth it upon a File; and then his Clerk that is called
Scriptor Talliar. and Contratall. writes double upon every Tally the whole
letter of the Tellers Bill, that when the Tally is cloven both the foil and
the stock thereof, may have like letter upon them.

The said Auditor does also enter, all the said parchment Bills in a Book
which is to him as Pellis Recepte; and by those he does see what every Tellor
receives weekly, and of whom, and makes certificate thereof to the Lord
Treasurer, etc. as he is commanded, how all the money of the Receipt
particularly is paid and received: and to that end, makes to every of the
Tellors a Debentur, before any of them can pay any money out of the Receipt, be
it upon Fees, privy Seals, or any Warrants whatsoever.

He likewise keeps the Lord Treasurers Key of the Treasury, where the ancient
Leagues of the Realm, the Perambulations of the Forests, the Records of
Iusticiar. Itiner. and diverse other ancient Records of the Kings Bench and
Common Pleas do lie both in the old Court of Wards, and in the old Parliament
House in the Cloister at Westminster, where no search can be made without the
said key come with both the Chamberlains keys thereof, where also the black
Book of the Recept, de necessariis Scacca. observanciis, agreeing in that
point with the red Book in the Kings Remembrancers Office, is kept.

The two Vnder-Chamberlaines be both the Chamberlaines Deputies for the
Recept, Two Vnder-chamberlaines.
and their places in the said Chamberlaines gift, the tallies so written upon
(as before) are delivered to them, and the one of them holding the Tally, and
the other the Cleaver and Mallet cleaves the Tally in the midst, and then one
of them taking the stock and the other the foil, and the Clerk of the Pell,
and his Controllers, their books, wherein the said tellers Bills are
recorded, the Cleaver says, exam. and reads the stock aloud, and his
fellow, the Clerk of the Pell, and his two controllers seeing the stock to
agree with them all, the said stock is delivered to the party that paid the
money for his discharge, and the foil cast into the Chamberlaines chest where
they keep all their foiles together with their knives and the book of
Doomesday, etc. until the joyners fetch away the said foiles which they keep
in their Office in the upper Exchequer to be rejoyned and examined with the
stock delivered to the party for his discharge, which is not to be allowed of
upon Record in the Pipe, by the first Secondary there, until the same be so
rejoyned and delivered in Court to the said Secondary by the said joyners with
their mark testifying that by their examination the same agrees with the
foil in their custody.

And in the said chest are also kept the keys of the Treasury under three
locks, whereof the Auditor of the Recept has one key belonging to the Lord
Treasurer, the two under Chamberlaines another key, and the Usher of the
Receipt (whose place is in the Kings gift) another, who attends by himself
or his Deputy, and is to do all things there which other Vshers ought to do
and to keep the Receipt as the Usher by Inheritance does the upper Exchequer.

The said under Chamberlaines make all searches in the Treasury for any
Records, at the suit of the parties, and copies and exemplifications of the
same, whereof the Fees are divided between them and the keeper of the Lord
Treasurers key.

The cutter of the Tallies is another Officer in the Receipt: The cutter of the
Tallies.
of the Lord Treasurers gift, who provideth seasoned and proportionable
hasells and cutteth them to fit lengths into fouresquare sides, to the end they
may the better be cloven and written upon, and casts them into the Court from
time to time as any of them be called for, and receives his dividend Fee (with
the Clerk of the Pell, the scriptor talliar. and Under Chamberlaines) of the
party that sueth it out.

The four ordinary Messengers of the Receipt, The four ordinary messengers of
the Receipt.
(whose places are now in the Kings gift) are Pursuyvants attending upon the
Lord Treasurer for carrying his letters and precepts to all the Customers,
Controllers and Shearchers throughout the land, who are to ride and go upon
any other his Majesty's Messages, where it is his Lordships pleasure to command
them.

Thus much in brief concerning the Inferior Court of the Exchequer, called the
Receipt.

I have been the more large in setting down the particular grounds and Rules
of the Exchequer, according to the common Laws and Statutes of this Realm,
and the ancient course of the said Court for the charging, discharging,
bringing in and answering of the Revenues of the Crown, both certain and
casual: and that especially for these reasons following.

First, that the wisdom and providence of our Ancestors may appear in
providing for the indemnity of the King and his Subjects; wherein,
principally, care is to be taken, that (as nothing is to be charged) so
nothing to be discharged but by matter of Record.

Secondly, that no one Officer is trusted alone with the bringing in, charging,
discharging, receiving, or issuing out of the Kings Revenues, insomuch as for
the better and more orderly controlment and security thereof, all the said
Revenues both certain and casual, are to be reduced from their original
fountains and heads, into the Annual or Great Roll of the Exchequer, Stat. de
Rutland. Anno 10. E. 1.
being the old Channel or Pipe for conveying the same into the Kings Receipt.
And from the said Annual or Great Roll (not only for the reasons formerly
alleged, but for controlment sake) process is first to be written to the
Sheriffs by the Controller of the Pipe, who yearly writes a duplicate of the
said Annual or great Roll, for the better controlment thereof. And that this
is, and ought to be so, the constant course now observed and continued in the
Offices of the two Remembrancers of the Exchequer, will make it unquestionable:
for that neither from the originals of the Chancery, nor for any other debts or
sums of money recovered for the King in either of their Offices, any process
is made to the Sheriffs by either of them, for leavying thereof, but the same
are at this day, (as formerly has been used) ^^st drawn down from thence,
and charged in the said Annual or great Roll, according to the ancient course
of the said Court, and the said statute of Rutland, Anno 10. Edw. 1. And the
like course has been always used and observed concerning the Accounts of
Collectors, Customers, Receivers of Bishops Temporalties, and all other
Accomptants whatsoever, within the survey of the Exchequer. For though they be
declared by the Auditors before the Treasurer, Chancellor and Barons, or all
or some of them; and entered in the Offices of both the Remembrancers, yet they
are not thereby fully determined, before they come to the Pipe, where they are
to remain upon Record for ever, as the Kings and Subjects evidence; and where
their Tallies being first examined, and joined with their Foyles, are to be
allowed, and the Debts and Supers therein depending (if any such be) entered in
the said great Roll, so as process may be written from thence for levying
thereof, as before is observed.

And as there is no one Officer in the Superior Exchequer solely trusted, so it
is most evident, that in the inferior Court there is to be a concurrence of
many Officers in the trust: for the Tellors Bill is not delivered to the party
which pays the money, nor trusted with any one Officer to charge the said
Tellor therewith; but it is entered with the Clerk of the Pell, and with the
Controllers of the Pell, and again entered with the Auditor of the Receipt, who
files the same: and the stock of the Tally delivered to the party for his
discharge; and yet this to be no discharge for him, till it be rejoyned with
the other part, and allowed in the great Roll. All which caution (without
doubt) has been by the great wisdom and experience of our Ancestors, found
necessary to be imposed and observed for preventing of the frauds and abuses
which otherwise would ensue to the Crown; many falsities having been anciently
discovered in Tallies for want of joining, as Hill. Record. Anno 3. E. 4. Rot.
10. ex part Rem. These. cum multos aliis, and both in the time of the late
Queen Elizabeth, and King James of blessed memory: Many such falsities having
been discovered in Tallies for want of joining; so as I may conclude this point
with Gervasius Tilburiensis, That no Officer is solely trusted with the Kings
Revenues, no not the Treasurer himself: And the reason which he gives for it,
is, that besides the controlment of the great Roll (being the Treasurers Roll)
by the Chancellors Roll, there was a third Roll to be ordained, Quia (says
he) triplex funis difficile solvitur.

And thirdly and lastly, that it may appear that the Sheriffs only were the
constant Officers and Ministers for leavying and bringing in the certain
Revenues and Debts of the Crown. And that the ordinary process of the Exchequer
to Sheriffs for leavying and bringing in thereof, was and is most sufficient
and efficatious (as to the King) and most secure and safe (as to the subject)
in case they shall conceal any thing upon their accounts which they shall so
receive, as has been formerly observed. And that there will be no need of
Resort to be made for the employment of Messengers, The employment of
messengers altogether illegal.
or to make use of any such Arbitrary or Illegal courses so burdensome to his
Majesty's subjects, for bringing in any part thereof, if the same be written
out to Sheriffs in due time, and the Sheriffs strictly holden to the
answering there of, without posting and setting off de Anno in Annum, his
Majesty's good debts, and Farms, but by just matter of Record, according to
the ancient course of the Exchequer, and the Laws and Statutes of this Realm.

And if the use of Messengers, or any other arbitrary course were allowable, it
is probable that the nupriall Queens of this Realm, participating so much of
the Regality of the Crown, having a Court, a Chancellor and Seal of their
own, might make some use thereof for bringing in the Arrerages of Rents, their
Aurum Reginae, and other debts and duties belonging to them in their own
particular estates; but it is so far otherwise, that by the common Laws of
this Land, they have the same power for bringing in their said debts and duties
as the King has, as appears by a Writ directed to the Sheriff of Norfolk
and Suffolk, out of the Exchequer 24. Maii, Anno 14. Edwardi primi. The tenor
of which Writ follows.

Edwardus Dei gratia Angliae Rex, Dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquitan.
Vic. Norff. and Suff. salutem,
Cum secundum antiquam consuetudinem approbatam, and hactenus optentam, Idem
modus in debitis Reginarum levandis and reddendis, qui and in nostris servari
debeat, ac debita nostra juxta candem consuetudinem a aebitor. nostris sunt
levanda and nobis reddenda antequam quibuscunque Creditor corundem de debitis
suis satissiat, Cumque Willielmus de Huntingfield charissime matri nostre
Alionore Reginae Anglie in xxxij. l'. teneatur prout nobis constat per inspect.
Rotulorum de Scaceario nostro, I demque Wilielmus teneatur quam plur. in
diversis pecuniarum summis prout tu retornasti coram Baron. in crastino clausi
Pasche prox. pretcrit. volentes ipsam matrem nostram prerogativa predict. quoad
debita sua levand. sicut aliae Reginae Angliae eadem in casu consil. sint
gavise, tibi precipimus quod de bonis and catall. and de exit terrar. ipsius
Willielmi in Balliva tua fieri facias predictas xxxij. l'. antequam debita
quorundam creditorum suorum leventur. Ita quod eas habeas ad idem Scaccarium
nostrum apud Westmonasterium a die sanctae Trinitate in xv. dies Waltero de
Castello custodi Auri ejusdem liberand. and hoc breve Test, etc.

Per Rotul. memor. de anno 54. H. 3. And that this course by Writs directed out
of the Exchequer to Sheriffs, and no other, was used as well in those ancient
times as in all the times sithence, even unto, and in the time of Hen. 8. for
bringing in the debts and duties belonging to the nuptial Queens of England,
appears by diverse like Writs and Records remaining in the Exchequer: And the
reason why such a legal course and no other was allowed to the said Queens,
for getting in their debts, I conceive was this, because the Subject might
demurre or take Issue upon any such writ where there was just cause, which he
could not do in case a messenger or other demand out of the Queens Court had
been made for the same.

I have the rather vouched this precedent here concerning the manner of levying
the Queens debts, in regard some of the Auditors of the Revenue having of late
moved and pressed the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury at the Council board
for signing of warrants to messengers for bringing in diverse supers and debts
as well within the Queens jointure as parcel of the Kings Revenues, depending
in the Accounts of general Receivors, which a noble Lord at that board (being
tender of all unjust vexations to his Majesty's Subjects) withstanding, as
conceiving the ordinary process of the Exchequer to be most proper and
sufficient for bringing in his Majesty's debts, a direction was made to the
Barons of the Exchequer to call unto them the Officers of the said Court and to
certify whether the employment of messengers in those cases were legal, who
certified their Lordships that their employment in that kind was not according
to Law; and that by the ancient course of the Exchequer, and the Laws of this
Kingdom, the Auditors ought to deliver the Accounts of the receivors and
ministers of the Revenew in charge before them into the Pipe every year by the
twentieth of March, so as process might be made from thence to the Sheriffs
for levying of the supers and debts depending in those Accounts; but I shall
have occasion to speak somewhat more of this in the ensuing discourse
concerning the great and superfluous charge and loss the Crown has been put
unto in bringing in those Revenewes, which was always carefully avoided by the
like wisdom of our Ancestors, it being provided by the foresaid Statute of the
Exchequer Anno 51. H. 3. that the Exchequer be not charged with mo persons then
is necessary. For as our Ancestors had one principal care in the constitution
of the Exchequer to see that the Kings Farms, Rents and other his sperate
debts, and duties were duly answered and not prolonged or posted off from
year to year, whereby they might either grow desperate, The prolonging of the
Kings good debts makes them desperate or grievances to the Subject.
or become grievances to the subject by being charged upon the debtors suerties
or the purchasers of their lands as has been formerly observed; so had they a
like special care to see that all unnecessary and superfluous charge in
bringing the said Revenewes into the Kings Coffers should be avoided, which
rules if they had been of late years observed in the Exchequer many great and
unspeakeable losses to the Crown, and many unsufferable grievances to the
Subject might have been prevented.

It is true that for some private ends, and other respects upon the great glut
of Revenew which came to the Crown in the time of Hen. 8. many new Exchequers
and Courts of Revenew were created and erected by Parliament (besides the Court
of the Duchy of Lancaster erected in the time of Hen. 4.) As the Court of
Angmentations, the Court of general Surveiors, the Court of first Fruits and
Tenths, the Court of Wards and Liveries. But it is well known what is become of
most of those Courts, as namely the Court of Augmentations, General Surveiors,
and first Fruits and Tenths, all of them being dissolved by Act of Parliament
in anno primo Mariae Regine, and turned into the old Channel, viz. annexed to
the Exchequer, where (be the Kings Revenew two millions or more) it may be as
well managed and brought in, as if it were but one; the reasons why the said
Courts were then so dissolved being in those days notoriously known and
openly declared, as namely, for that the Revenewes in those Courts, were in a
manner wholly wasted and devoured by the new and unnecessary Officers of those
Courts; the Court of the Duchy of Lancaster, and that of the Wards and
Liveries, being also offered by the Parliament at the same time to be by the
said Queen Mary in like manner dissolved by her letters patents and annexed to
the Exchequer where all the benefit arising by Wardships and Liveries was
before the erection of the said Court, Anno 32. Hen. 8. answered to the Crown.

And howsoever the said Court of Wards and Liveries (as being at that time a
profitable Court to the Crown) might in the same time of Queen Mary escape from
being reannexed to the Exchequer; nevertheless it is not a little strange that
the said Duchy Court of Lancaster should both then and ever since be continued
by it self, at so great a charge for so small a revenew, it having cost the
Crown since the said first year of Queen Mary near upon two hundred thousand
pounds, which might have been saved if the same had been then annexed to the
Exchequer, and there managed in such manner and sort as was then intended by
the Parliament.

But it may seem more strange when it shall be made to appear that the
general and particular Receivers, Bayliffes and Collectors of the Court of
Augmentations, which by the true meaning of the Parliament Anno 1. Mariae (when
the said Court was annexed to the Exchequer) were intended to be discharged and
put to their pentions, and the said Revenew to be from that time brought in and
answered by the Sheriffs of each County according to the ancient course, have
been ever since continued in the Exchequer to the unsupportable burden and
charge to the Crown, and infinite grievance of the Subject, it having cost the
Crown since the dissolution of the said Court Anno 1. Mariae (for the private
ends and respects of some few) not so little as six hundred thousand pounds,
which might have been saved if the Revenews of that Court had been managed in
the Exchequer according to the said ancient course, and in such sort as was
then intended by the said Parliament.

But besides all this to make good the old maxim, Vno inconvenienti concesso
mill sequuntur, it will appear that in all this time there has been no
manner of controlement of the Accounts of the said general and particular
Receivors, Bayliffes and Collectors of the said Revenews amounting to 100000
pounds per aunum and upwards, as namely, the Receivors have not been sworn to
their Accounts yearly, their tallies not joined, their accounts not entered
with the two Remembrancers, nor delivered into the Pipe as by an express
Article Anno 1. Inter Hill Record. an. 1 M^riae ex part Rem. These. Articulo 9.
Mariae upon the annexation of the said Court of Augmentations to the Exchequer
is ordained to be yearly performed by the twentieth of March, and so lately
certified by the Barous of the Exchequer as is formerly alleged; the said
Accounts having been ever since left to the determination and keeping of the
sait Auditors in their particular assignments without any manner of
controlement, by means whereof there may be many great concealements in the
said accounts which none of the Kings Officers in the Exchequer can discover,
but the Auditor himself.

And for the grievances which have been by the same means occasioned to his
Majesty's Subjects by reason of the multitude of Supers and Arrerages of Rents,
which from time to time ever since have depended in those Accounts upon the
Farmers, Bayliffes and Collectors of the said Revenewes. And upon the Receivors
themselves, some for 5000 l'. some 10000 l'. some more, some less, both in the
time of the late Queen Elizabeth, and the late King James: The infinite numbers
of estalments and seisures of the lands of Receivors and their sureties, and of
the lands which came from the said Debtors by purchase or descent, and orders
of Court concerning the same in the time of the said K. James before the Stat.
of 21 Iac. for discharging of old debts in his now Ma^^^^ time, together with
the loud outeries against messengers lately employed at the prosecution of some
patentees for old debts, for bringing in the like arrerages of Rents behind,
which depended in some of those accounts, some for 10, some 20, some thirty
year before they were sent in process, will sufficiently testify.

And as if the continuation of the foresaid Receivers, and other needless and
unprofitable Officers and Accomptants, had not been burdensome enough to the
Crown, there have been of late introduced and added two new Receivers, and two
new Auditors for the Revenue of Recusants, with sundry directions procured for
transferring the charge of the said Revenues from the great Roll of the
Exchequer to the said new Auditors, and for superseding of all process to
Sheriffs, other then for such debts owing by Recusants, as their Messengers
cannot levy; as also for the payment of so much thereof, as the said Sheriffs
should leavie to the hands of the said new Receivers respectively, which was
formerly used to be paid into the Kings Receipt. How far this bold attempt,
together with the Non-obstantes in the Leases of Recusants lands, might have
trenched as well to the subversion of the good laws made against Recusants, as
to the diversion and consumption of the said Revenue, (if this Parliament had
not been so seasonably called by his Majesty) may well be imagined.

And if the removing and altering of the ancient bounds between neighbor and
neighbor be forbidden by the Law of God as a great offense and a cursed
thing, by reason of the great trouble and unquietness which is caused thereby,
how much more do they offend which remove and alter the ancient bounds which
our forefathers have set between the King and his people, either in the
constitution of the Exchequer, or in the execution of the Laws and Statutes of
this Kingdom appointed and limited for the government and ordering of the
Kings Revenews there? In which case it were to be wished that some severe Law
might be made for the punishment of those which under any specious pretense
whatsoever go about to procure any warrant for the altering or removing any
the bounds formerly limited or ordained for the answering and bringing in of
the said Revenews, unless it be by Act of Parliament, seeing so great
mischiefs and inconveniences both to the King and Subject ensue thereby.

And if it be true that Sheriffs have been (time beyond memory of man) the
Receivors of all the certain rents and debts whatsoever belonging to the Crown
within the limits of their Bailywicks) other then such as are to be immediately
paid into his Majesty's Receipt of Excheq. or into his Chamber, Wardrob, to the
cofferer of his household, or the like, how absurd a thing is it for the
Sheriff, having received such rents ^r debts from the Kings Tenants or debtors
to pay the same over to one of the Kings Receivors, for him to pay into the
Kings Receipt, and not to pay the same immediately into the Kings Receipt with
the other moneies due upon his Account, or why the Farmer or Collector being to
pay his rent or charge into the Kings Receipt should not rather pay the same to
the Sheriff then to a Receivor who must be paid for portage besides other
allowances from the King. According to which supposition I conceive it would
seem a strange piece of husbandry to the Crown, if the Collectors or Farmers
of the great Customs and Collectors of the Subsidies in every County (who are
to pay their moneys into the Receipt) should be appointed to pay the same to
some of the Receivors, and the same Receivors to pay it into the Kings Receipt;
such kind of husbandry as this, is the employment of other Receivors besides
the Sheriffs for receiving the certain Rents and Debts of the Crown at this
day.

And for proof that the Sheriffs have always been the Receivors of the
certain Rents and Debts belonging to the Crown, and other Receivors in the
Exchequer avoided as unprofitable and needless, I shall not need to insist
upon any other proof for this, then what I have herein formerly set down, to
make it unquestionable, but that one Writ of 16. Hen. 6. directed from the King
to the Treasurer and Barons of the then Exchequer, which in effect was seconded
by an Act of Council in the time of Queen Mary.

The tenor of the said Writ anno 16. Hen. 6.
Henricus Dei gratia Rex, etc.
These. and Baron. de Scaccar. salutem.
Cum monstratum sit nobis qualiter dilectus noster Robertus Whittingham
Chivaler hab. officium Receptoris generalis omnium terr. etc. que fuerunt
Iohannis nuper Ducis Bedford. Avunc. nostri carissimi defunct. and quod
officium predict. non est ad commodum nostrum, quia vadia and feoda quae ea de
causa de nobis percepta sunt possunt been fore omissa. Et quod Vicecomites
nostri possunt been levare Revenciones in manibus nostris existen. prout fuit
ante hoc tempus. Ideo vobis mandamus quod dictum Robertum exoneretis ab officio
predicto etc.

By which it appears that this one extraordinary Receivor in the time of King
Hen. 6. was deemed a burden and unnecessary charge to the Crown, and therefore
according to the constant course of the Exchequer, thought fit to be discharged
of his Receipts, and the same to be transferred to the Sheriffs, prout fuit
ante hoc tempus, which was so done accordingly.

The like we shall find in the third and fourth year of King Philip and
Queen Mary, in a report made to their Majesty's by the then Lords of the
Council, upon some question (after the annexation of the Court of
augmentations to the Exchequer) whether the Sheriffs or Receivors were the
fittest Ministers for receiving the Rents and Revenues of the Crown; and
whether the Duchy Court of Lancaster ought not to be annexed to the Exchequer,
and all Manors to be demised in gross with their casualties at a certain
Rent, for cutting off all superfluity of expenses.

The Report is as follows.

SVmus in priori opinione, quod Vicecomes sit maxim idoneus qui recipiat
annuos redditus vestrarum Majestatum infra limits suorum officiorum, and de
illis respondeat vestris Majestatibus.

Et ad id quod dicitur Vicecomites male jam respondere de iis quae little fidei
committuntur putemus id eo fieri, vel quiae officiarii Scaccarii non urgeant
neque instent prout little officii est, vel quia ab initio male eliguntur: Et
utrique huic mal^ facillime succurritur si Vicecomites been eligantur.

Et quod Vicecomites s^nt ad hanc rem maxim idonei, movemur iis rationibus
quae sequuntur.

Vetera exempla hujus regni cum optime and cum maximo honor regeretur
ostendunt quod omnes annui redditus coram solvebantur per Vicecomites.

Nec putamus quod Vicecomites (prestrtim si been eligantur) erunt tam tardi in
pecuniis solvendis computisve reddendis, quam Receptores and sunt and semper
hactenus fuerunt.

Vicecomites (quoru^ officium annuum est) and annuatim computa reddunt, non
possunt celare pecunias vestrarum Majestatum quemadmodum Receptores solent.

Receptores enim (quorum officium perpetuum est) debita prioris anni solvunt ex
redditibus sequentis, quae fraus vitabitur si Vicecomites perficiantur huic
Cure: ac etiam annue expense quae nunc fiunt pro multis officiariis cessabunt.

Vicecomites eliguntur de honestioribus, Equitibus, sive Generosis singulorum
Comitatum: Receptores sunt plerunque homines nullius estimationis.

Vicecomites Eliguntur annuatim per vestras Majestates ex consensu Magnatum and
Judicum Regni: Receptores autem ass^^^untur per privatos favores amicorum.

Sumus etiam in priori opinione quod terrae and possessiones Ducatus
Lancastriae, possunt been reduci ad Scaccarium: Et quod fieri potest salvis
etiam omnibus Colonis sive tenentibus dict. Ducatus, suis libertatibus,
privilegiis and consuetudinibus, quibus omnibus frui and gaudere possunt,
Coloni and Tenentes praedicti, non minus integre in Scaccario, quam nunc
fruuntur in Curia Ducatus, and ad hanc opinionem movemur iis rationibus.

Annue expense quae fiunt pro multis Officiariis Ducatus cessabunt.

Terrae and possessiones Ducatus Lancaestriae, cum sint in multis and seperatis
Comitatibus possunt carum possessionum annui redditus per Com. illorum
Vicecomites uno labor colligi simul cum aliis redditibus.

Cum Ducatus Lancastriae jam descenderit ad Reginam unacum Corona, non videmus
quare non debeant ejusdem Ducatus terrae and possession. gubernari in Scaccario
quemaedmodum possessiones Principat. Walliae, Ducatus Cornub. Eboraci, and
eorum consilium.

Nobis etiaem non videtur praejudiciale sed vaelde utile vestris Majestatibus
quod Maneria and cum illis omnia casualia locentur ad firmam, reservatis
Boscis, Wardis, maritagiis, Miner. and Advocationibus Ecclesiarum.

Idem quoque putamus de sylvis ceduis quos subboscos diximus, quos utile
putamus ad firmam dimittere and movemur ad hanc opinionem iis rationibus.

Si locentur Maneria atque omnium aliorum generum terrae and possessiones cum
casualibus and subboscis annui. redditus vestrarum Majestatum erunt certi qui
nunc incerti sunt.

Annui sumptus reparationem Senescallorum little qui Nemora custodiunt, and
multorum aliorum officiar. cessabunt.

Multi annui redditus, and multa servicia, quae nunc partim, dolo malo, partim,
negligentia Senescallorum Balliorum and aliorum officiar. non exiguntur and ita
paulatim pereunt: semper solventur cum firmarii and propter privatum lucrum
suum, and propter obligationem qua tenebuntur diligentius illa curabunt.

Miseri Coloni, sive pauperiores tenentes quibus variis artibus extorquentur
pecuniae tam per officiarios quam per eor um famulos, honestius tractabuntur si
dicta Maneria cum casualibus and sylve cedue dentur ad Firmam honestis viris.

Lucra etiam illa quae ex casualibus and subboscis proveniunt, and nunc malis
artibus extorquentur per Officiarios, venient direct ad usum vestrarum
Majestatum, atque id sine ullo praejudicio pauperiorum Colonorum qui plus
favoris semper invenient in vicino firmario honesto quam in extraneis
emptoribus, Baliis, vel silvarum custodibus.

Et preterea potest aliis modis satis provideri contra firmariorum avaritiam,
contra Officiariorum vero infinitas frauds aliter provideri non potest, idque
long a experientia nimis cognitum est.

As by the said Report remaining in his Majesty's Library at White Hall,
(amongst other things) may appear.

Wherein it is most evident of what use and estimation Sheriffs (being but for
a year) have always been, for bringing in the Revenues of the Crown;
especially if they be well chosen, and held to the performance of their duties
by the Officers of Exchequer: with this further observation, How remiss the
Receivors were in those days, and had ever been in paying what they received,
and making their accounts in due time. Besides, it is well known how many
Receivors both in the time of the late Queen Elizabeth, and the late King
James, as is before observed, have broken for very great sums of money, which
were never paid at such a rate per annum, as the interest amounted unto: But it
cannot be proved that ever any one Sheriff broke in that kind.

Moreover, by the said Report may be observed the faithful advice given to the
Queen, by the said Lords of her Council, to demise all her Manors in Gross
with the Casualties and Woods, and so to make her Rents certain, and cut off
the great charge of Stewards, Bailiffes, and other Officers: for that
otherwise, Contra Officiarum infinitas frauds provideri non potest idque longa
experientia nimis cognitu^ est, as before is observed. On the other side, it
may be observed, whether the advice of those Officers who then advised the
Queen to keep the Royalties and Casualties of her Manors in her own hands by
appointing Stewards and Bailiffes of her own to manage the same, and only to
demise the Demeanes of every Manor at the old Rent payably half yearly, was
the best Counsel; we that have had the experience of those and our own times,
can best judge, as those Lords in their experience then found it, viz. that it
had been much better for the Queen to have demised the Manors in gross with
the casualties (as was by them prescribed) at a certain Rent; For that upon
several mediums cast up by the Auditors of the profits of Courts and
Casualties, and of the Fees of Bayliffes, and the Fees and Diets of Stewards
for keeping of Courts, it has appeared that the Fees and Dyets, of the said
Stewards and Bayliffes have in all times sithence exceeded the casualties three
thousand pounds per annum at least, besides the Fees of the Receivors,
Collectors and Auditors (causa exercitii) and the riding charges.

And for that it also appears that the best and most valuable and choicest
parts of every Manor have been demised at the old Rent for three lives and for
xxj. xxxj. and xl. years in reversion, book after book, insomuch as the
Crown has been by that means in a manner forestalled from making any
benefit thereof, as if the same had been granted in Fee Farm. So as I shall
be bold for the reasons aforesaid to conclude that the ancient course of
demising the Manors and Lands entirely with the casualties by the Lord
Treasurer for the time being by way of Custody with the ordinary proviso of si
quis plus dare voluorit de increme^to sine fraud vel malo ingenio, The
granting of the Kings lands in Custody by the Lord Treasurer with the proviso
of Si quis da re voluerit etc.
reserving the best Rent with the other exceptions before mentioned, was and is
the most prudent and safest course for the Crown; for that then upon all
occasions, either for provision for the royal Issue, or other urgent
occasions, the King might have his lands at his own disposal when he pleased.

But now at the close and upshot of all, The complaints of Sheriffs of their
excessive charge and trouble in passing their Accounts.
the case being cleared that the Sheriff is the only Officer appointed by the
Laws of this Kingdom for bringing in and answering the Revenues of the
Crown, I cannot stop mine ears against the loud cries which Sheriffs make
of the great and excessive charge and trouble which they are unjustly put unto
in passing their Accounts in the Exchequer.

1. By reason they have been enforced by the Officers of the Exchequer to take
into their charge all the seisures upon their foreign Accounts (leaviable or
not leaviable) and other dead Farms and desperate debts which they cannot
leavy.

2. To pay diverse new exacted and extorted Fees and Rewards upon the passing of
their Accounts.

3. To collect and leavy at their own charge the Greenwax moneys and other his
Majesty's casual Revenues and Debts, granted in Farm, and given to diverse
Farmers and other Patentees who take the benefit thereof.

4. To account before the parcel maker of the Exchequer for such fellons goods
and other like Escheates wherewith they have been and are charged by the
Auditors upon their foreign Accounts, when there were or are any such.

5. And for that also diverse Hundreds, Wapontakes and Gaols, parcel of their
Balywicks, which by several Acts of Parliament have been annexed to their
Counties, have been contrary to the said Statutes granted away to sundry
persons, and severed from their said Counties, so as they cannot have the
Bayliffes at their command, and yet are still charged upon their Accounts with
their said Bailywicks under the title de proficuis Com. By reason whereof all
men of quality have been of late much discouraged to take the said Office upon
them.

Which said complaints of theirs (being so just and true) may not be passed
over in silence, but some fit remedies applied for their better encouragement
according to the Laws of this Kingdom: the said Office of Sheriff being an
Office of high trust and authority, both for the service of the King and
Commonwealth; The sheriff anciently styled Firmarius and cu stos Cem.
and the Sheriff being anciently styled Firmarius and custos Co^.

And first, as to the injury offered to Sheriffs, in charging them with all
the seisures in their foreign Accounts, and with other dead Farms and
desperate debts which at their apposalls they aver to be illeviable; all
Sheriffs ought to be relieved herein by the foresaid Statute of Rutland An.
10. E. 1. which provides that nothing shall be written out to Sheriffs but
such debts whereof there is some hope that something may be leavied, and that
all dead Farms and desperate debts, are to be removed from the Annual into the
exannuall Roll, and not to be written out in process to Sheriffs, but only read
to them at their Apposalls to see if any thing may be revived: And that a
Commission be awarded out of the Treasurers Remembrancers Office to faithful
and circumspect men in every County (as is before prescribed) to inquire of the
several seisures charged upon Sheriffs in their foreign Accounts which they
cannot leavy, to see if the same can be revived and made good; and if upon
return of the said Commission any of the said seisures shall prove defective
and illeviable, that then the said seisures to be removed and discharged out of
the said foreign Account, and put into an exannuall Roll as aforesaid, and the
Sheriff to be charged no more there with until the same shall be revived: And
for the time to come Sheriffs to be charged with no more then is written
forth in process to them, nor with any Debt, Farm or sum of money which at
their Apposals they shall aver to be illeviable: they being many ways
punishable by the Laws formerly alleged if they shall violate their oaths
therein.

2. 3. And as to the wrong which Sheriffs have undergone by paying new exacted
and extorted Fees, It is the desire of every honest man that those beasts of
prey which have so unconscionably taken those new exacted Fees (who are in
truth a great scandal to the whole Court and State) may be reformed or quite
hunted out of the Exchequer; they will easily be found out, some of their
abuses to wards the King, and extortions toward the Subject appearing upon
Record; and other of them having surreptitiously procured a kind of new
Authority to exact what Fees they please of Sheriffs and Lords of Liberties
under color of an Account to be made to the King for a supposed nothing.

And that there may be a table in the Exchequer wherein the ancient due Fees of
all the Offices of the said Court may be regulated and moderated according to
the quality and quantity of all manner of businesses, with some relation to
what was taken in the time of the late Queen Eliz. and some penalty to be
inflicted by a Bill to be passed in Parliament upon such as shall take or exact
more then shall be therein set down and allowed for time to come.

4. And as to the trouble and charge which Sheriffs undergo for leavying of
the Kings debts granted to patentees, and for collecting the Fines, Issues,
Amerciaments, and other the Kings casual Revenues granted in Farm, whereof
the Farmers take the benefit, paying a certain Rent to the Crown: That either
some course may be taken that the said Farmers and Patentees may make some fit
allowance to the Sheriffs for their trouble and charge therein, or that his
Majesty may take the benefit of the Revenues of that nature in kind, as they
shall arise and grow due as was formerly used before the granting of the same
in Farm. It being observeable that both Judges and Jurors have been
discouraged to punish offenders when their Fines and Forfeitures come not to
the King but to private purses; and so Justice is many times left undone to the
encouragement of offenders, or the mercy of the King (where mercy is to be
showed) put into a wrong hand.

5. And as to the injury and loss which Sheriffs have had by reason of fundry
grantes made of the hundreds, Wapentakes and Gaols parcel of their Bayliwicks.
This will also require a present reformation, and as it will be very just to
right the Sheriffs herein, so it will be of no great difficulty, if the Law
may take place: for that there are several Acts of Parliament in the time of
King Ed. 3. that no Hundreds, Stat. annis 2. and 14. E. 3.
Wapentakes or Gaols which were then parcel of their Bailiwicks should be at
any time severed from the same, but that all grants of that nature should be
void. And there is no doubt but the Sheriffs might by force of the said
Statutes have righted themselves herein before this time, but that they have so
small a continuance in their Office.

But before I leave this point, I desire to be rightly understood, for that it
is not intended by this resumption of Hundreds or Wapentakes that any Hundreds
or Wapentakes should be resumed, which at the time of the making of those
Statutes, were the inheritance of any Bishop, Abbot, Lord, or other persons
whatsoever, and so continues at this day in the heirs or purchasers thereof, by
descent or mean conveyance: nor that any such Hundreds or Wapentakes, as were
then the inheritance of any person or persons as aforesaid, and are since come
to the Crown, by the Statutes of Dissolution, and suppression of Monasteries,
or the Attainder of any of ^hos^ persons, their heirs or assigns, or by any
gift, grant or exchange from them or any of them; for that in all these cases,
if any grant be sithence made from the Crown to any person or persons, of any
such Hundreds or Wapentakes, it may be lawful for the Grantees, and those
under whom they claim, to enjoy the same at this day against the Sheriffs,
notwithstanding the said Acts of Parliament.

And now for concluding of this point concerning the righting of Sheriffs, in
all the former or any other particulars wherein they are wronged, hindered or
vexed in passing their Accounts, compts, or in the execution of their Offices,
I conceive it would be the best way that some Bill were drawn in Parliament
for remedy thereof. And that in the same Bill the two ancient and excellent
Statutes of the Exchequer formerly remembered, viz. that of 51. H. 3. and that
of 10. E. 1. concerning the manner of passing Accounts, and charging and
discharging of the Kings Rents and Debts, in the Annual or great Roll of the
Exchequer, and the like, may be renewed and explained. And that according to
the said Statute of 10. E. 1. all Rents and Debts whereof there is hope that
something shall be answered for avoiding of all confusion and double charging
thereof, be only charged in the said great Roll, whether the said Rents be
paiable ad Ret. Scaccar. tantum, seu ad Ret. Scaccar. seu ad man. Vic. seu ad
man. Ballivorum vel Receptorum. And that the She^^ffes may be enjoined thereby
to (...) ready and full payment yearly at (...) ^^ceipt of Exchequer, or
otherwise (...) shall be appointed by warrant of the Lord Treasurer,
Chancellor, and Barons of the Exchequer, or any three of them (whereof the Lord
Treasurer to be one) of all their Receipts of all such sums of money arising
of the said Rents and Farms, being due at or before the Feast of Easter,
yearly, at the Feast of Pentecost then next following at the furthest; and
where they be due at Pentecost, those Rents to be paid before the Nativity of
S. John Baptist at the furthest. And where they be due at or before the Feast
of Saint Michael the Archangell, those to be paid at the Feast of the Nativity
of our Lord God then next following. And such Rents as shall be due at the
Feast of S. Martin, in the Winter, yearly, those to be paid at or before the
first of February at the furthest: And for default of such payments (being
thereof lawfully convicted before the Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer) to
forfeit to the Kings Majesty, Sta. anno 7. E. 6.
his heirs and successors (as in like cases has been ordained) two pence in
the pound, in the name of a pain for every day that the said money shall be
unpaid after the said several Feasts, or days of payment, etc. And that such
Farmers, Lessees, and Tenants as shall not either pay to the said Sheriffs,
their Deputy or Deputies (lawfully requiring the same) all such Rents and Farms
as shall be due and payable by them to the Kings Majesty, his heirs, etc. at
or before any of the said Feasts, as is aforesaid, yearly, or bring and pay the
same wholly into the Exchequer, by the foresaid several days and times after
every of the said Feasts so formerly limited and appointed, at the furthest;
and (being thereof lawfully convicted before the Treasurer and Barons) shall in
like manner forfeit to the Kings Majesty, his heirs, etc. for the non-payment
thereof, Anno 33. H. 8. cap. 39.
(as in like cases has been also ordained) two pence in the pound in the name
of a pain for every day after the said several days of payment, until they
shall pay and satisfy what was then due together with the said pains, etc.

And that the Clerk of the Pipe, and Controller of the Pipe for the time
being, together with such Auditor or Auditors for every Shire, City and Town
Corporate, and such other officers as the Lord Treasurer, Chancellor,
Undertreasurer, and Barons, or any three of them, (whereof the Lord Treasurer
to be one) shall think fit to appoint, Star. anno 51. H. 3.
shall once every year about the Feast of S. Margaret (being in Trinity Term)
make a true and perfect declaration to their Lordships in writing under their
hands, of all and every particular charge, times of payment and discharge in
each Sheriffs Account, as aforesaid: and of all and every other thing
concerning the promises; and which of the said Sheriffs, Farmers, or Lessees,
are behind with their payments: so as present order may be taken for bringing
in the same, together with the foresaid pains which shall be so due by them,
and the said Lora Treasurer, etc. to assign what sums of money due to any
person or persons for Annuities, Pentio^s, or Corodies, going out of any the
premises, charged upon the Accounts of Sheriffs, shall be paid by the said
Sheriffs, and which of them shall be paid out of the Receipt of the
Exchequer, as to their Lordships shall be thought meet.

And if some such Bill as this may be passed, for securing the Kings Rents to
be yearly paid upon such pains as aforesaid: And that the Sheriffs (passing
their accounts in due time) may be eased and righted in the former particulars,
and have three pence in the pound out of all such rents as they shall bring in,
and twelve pence in the pound for debts, as they have formerly had, his
Majesty will be duly answered his Revenewes with much more security, and at a
far less charge then he now is: And the high Sheriffs Office, which for its
great charge and trouble, has been of late years so much avoided, will
regaine its ancient credit, and encourage men of good ability and quality to
take upon them the under Sheriffs place.

But here I am admonished to make answer to some objections against the credit
of the said great Roll, Exceptions to abuses in the Pipe.
which in all times (as has been formerly observed) has been of so great
esteem for the safe conduct of the Revenues of the Crown, into the Receipt of
the Exchequer: which exceptions are, That diverse good Farms and Debts there in
charge, and (amongst many others) a great Fee Farm rent of 180l'. per annum.
odd money for the Manor of Crowly, and al. Com. Leic. due for the second year
of his now Majesty's reign, together with diverse other Rents and Debts, as
well in the said great Roll, as in the Recusants Roll being taken in charge, by
several Sheriffs (amounting to a great value) have been by the Cerke of the
Pipe, discharged, posted of de anno in annum, and prolonged without any just
ground or other legal warrant at all, and that many other abuses against his
Maties Subjects had bin committed in the said office, which in truth cannot be
denied: For that they are extant upon Record in a Bill exhibited to his
Majesty, against the said Clerk of the Pipe by the Kings late Attorney
General. And though they were committed in secret, yet have they (by the help
of that Roll so as is aforesaid by the wisdom of our Ancestors ordained for a
cotrolment) been discovered and brought to light, and such use has been
already in part made of that discovery for his Majesty's service, and more like
to be as may be very advantageous both for the King and Commonwealth, for
preventing the like abuses for time to come

But what speak we of abuses? Quae Regia in terris? what Country, what
government, what Guild never so wisely founded or strongly supported with
wholsesome Laws is free from some stains and corruptions? Quid non mortalia
pectora? What will not covetousness and ambition attempt where there is no Law
to punish? And where the Laws are not put in execution, it is all one as if
there were no Law; as is exemplified by the Frogs insulting upon Aesops log. So
as abuses being the faults of the persons (and not of the foundation) will grow
like ill weeds in every Commonwealth and Government, unless they be looked
unto and weeded out by putting the Laws in execution against them: but veritas
odium parit, men will be wary how they pull an old house upon their own
heads, or provoke a nest of waspes lest they be stung themselves. And for that
cause many men wanting that courage which is prescribed for Magistrates and
Officers in the Commonwealth by God himself, will rather think it better for
them to sleep in a whole skin (as they call it) and make shipwreck of their
consciences then to discharge the duty of their oaths: Howbeit for my own
part I was resolved in such a case rather to run all the hazards of envy
(which I expected and whereof I have had sufficient experience, and still
expect more) then to be wanting in the discharge of such a duty to the King
and Kingdom which in conscience I am bound unto, and thereby also make my
self equally liable to the same punishment with the offender, which by the
foresaid Statute of the Exchequer is to be inflicted upon the Supervisors for
their consent. Stat. ann 51. H. 3.


Now if after all this, (notwithstanding the former reasons and the constant
practice of former times) it shall at this day be thought any ways tolerable
or fit on the behalf of the King and Commonwealth, that the Revenues of the
Kings lands now in charge before his Majesty's Auditors amounting in the whole
to one hundred thousand pounds per annum, or thereabouts, and consisting at
this present (for the most part of Fee Farms and certain Rents) should still
be continued in the new way out of the old Channel, and be brought in by
Receivors and Bailiffs as they now are at so great a charge and hazard by
keeping so many hands in the Kings purse, I conceive the Sheriffs nor any other
officer (that has not some aim at his own private benefit more then his
Maties service) will desire, the alteration thereof for any ends of his own or
any ill will to those officers, but freely to leave it to the wisdom of the
King and his great Council: who have declared their purpose for establishing
and ordering the Kings Revenue, and for redressing the abuses of Officers, and
cutting off all superfluity of expenses concerning the same.

But if the said superfluous officers shall be dispensed withal to continue,
then that it may be with the cautions formerly mentioned, viz.

That the Receivors may be yearly sworn to their Accounts in the Exchequer
according to the ancient usage and ordinance in An. 1 Mariae Regine.

That their accounts (after they are declared and entered with both the
Remembrancers) be by the twentieth of March yearly delivered into the Pipe for
further process to be made thereupon for the supers and debts therein depending
according to the said Ordinance. Hill. Rec. ex part Rem. These. an. 1 Mariae
Art. 9.


And no messengers to be hereafter employed about the same for the reasons
formerly alleged.

As also that no process be made by the Treasurers Remembrancer for any Debts
or Arrerages supposed to be depending in any of the said Accounts by any
Constats or Certificates from the Auditors, but from the Accounts themselves,
so as they may be under the same controlment as before, etc.

And lastly, that all the said Receivors Tallies be joined and allowed upon
Record as all other Tallies are or ought to be.

It now remains that I should briefly set down the principal causes which
have hindered and retarded the due answering of the Kings Revenues and Debts:
occasioned the trouble and grievance of his Majesty's Subjects, and made the
bulk of the said Revenues and debts now in arreare to be so great.

And first, as I formerly observed, one bause is, for want of putting the said
Statute of the Exchequer, An. 51. H. 3. in due execution by injoyining the
Sheriffs at their Easter and Michaelmas proffers to bring in and pay so much
of the Rents and Debts sent forth unto them in the Summons of the Pipe, as they
then had or might have leavied: for the better effecting whereof, the Lord
Treasurer and Barons were anciently present at the said Proffers, and is now
personated by the Puny or Cursitor Baron only without any other of the great
Officers or Barons to give countenance and assistance to that service: And for
that there has not been a view made yearly to the Treasurer and Barons by the
Officers of the Exchequer, of what was answered by Sheriffs, Farmers and
Accomptants, and what was in Arreare and by whom, according to the foresaid
Statute of the Exchequer.

A second cause is, in that Sheriffs have not (according to the ancient course
of the Exchequer) been strictly holden to their Apposalls at their days of
prefixion; and for that many of them have been suffered with so much impuniy
to depart the Court in contempt of the said Court before they perfect their
Accounts. The Treasurer and Barons, being by the said Statute of 51. H. 3. to
be charged by oath not to attend to hear the Pleas of other men whilst they
have to do with the Kings own debts.

A third cause is, in that the goods and lands of such Sheriffs which are in
the case of contempt, as aforesaid, and neglect the passing of their accounts
in due time, have not been according to the said ancient course, seized into
the Kings hands, Nomine districtionis, And for that they or their under
Sheriffs have not been taken into the custody of the Marshall, before they
depart the Town, or committed to the Fleet, (as heretofore in some cases of
neglect and contempt, has been used) until they pass their accounts, and
answer the moneys due thereupon: As also for that in such cases of contempt,
when a Sergeant at Arms is sent for the high Sheriff, he continues them his
clients from Term to Term, and does not bring up their bodies to be
committed to Ward, till they pass their accounts, as he ought to do.

A fourth cause is, In that the Sheriff (contrary to the foresaid Statute of
Rutland) have been compelled to take into their charge diverse dead Farms,
Seizures and desperate Debts (being altogether illeviable, or for which there
is some just matter of discharge) for which they are nevertheless driven to
procure discharges de anno in annum, upon their accounts, to their great
damage and trouble, and their great hindrance to pass their accounts in due
time. As also for that to the like trouble and damage of Sheriffs, the Farms
and Rents granted in Jointure to the Queens Majesty; and other like Farms
granted for term of life, or years, absque computo, have not bin removed out
of the said annual Roll into a Roll of Reversions, or Exannuall Roll, till they
fall again to the Crown; by which means the subject also is dubly vexed,
both by the Queens and the Kings Officers, for one and the same thing.

A fifth cause is, In that all Debts and Farms in the Pipe, which are not
answered after one Summons, have not (according to the said ancient course)
been duly put into Scedula Pipe, for stronger process to be thereupon made by
the Treasurers Remembrancer for getting in the same: but some of them continued
to be still written in the Summons of the Pipe, to the great trouble of the
Sheriffs, and little or no fruit at all to the King.

A sixth cause is, in that diverse good Rents and Debts have for some private
ends been suffered to be posted off, de anno in annum, and discharged without
any good matter of Record, or other legal warrant, by means whereof the said
rents and debts, either grow desperate, or be made fit subjects for suitors to
beg from the King. And for that many Sheriffs have been cast out of Court, and
suffered to depart before they pay in their debets in the great Roll and
Recusants Roll; As also for that the Originalls of the Chancery, have not been
yearly sent into the Exchequer, so timely as they ought, nor the Roll of the
Inrolments of Leases which pass under the Exchequer Seal, made up and
Engrossed by the Clerk of the Pipe, in due time as it ought to be, for
charging all new Rents and Fines in the said Annual Roll, reserved upon any
new grant or demise from the Crown.

A seventh cause is, In that where the the Sheriffs do not good execution
upon the Writs sent forth by the Remembrancers upon Scedula Pipe, and otherwise
(as they ought) the amerciaments for their neglects and contempts therein, have
not been presently drawn down into the Pipe, and sent in process for leavying
thereof in Terrorem of all other Sheriffs, but suffered to sleep sometimes for
many years, or to be taken off or compounded for some small matter to the
King.

An eight cause is, In that Commissions have not been awarded out of the
Exchequer, according to the foresaid Statutes of Westminster. 1. Anno 3. E. 1. Cap.
19. and 6. H. 4. Cap. 3. for inquiry to be made into the Accounts and Receipts
of Sheriffs and other Accomptants, to the end the King may be recompensed,
and the subject relieved, in all such cases where it shall be found, that the
said Sheriffs have defrauded the King, or abused the Subject.

A ninth cause is: In that the Auditors of the Revenue have not (as has been
formerly observed) according to the ancient course of the Exchequer, and the
said Ordinance of Anno 1. Maeriae Articulo 9.) delivered engrossed in parchment
the Accounts of the general Receivors and Bayliffes of the said Revenues into
the Pipe every year yearly by the 21. of March, so as Process might in due time
be made from the said Accounts to the Sheriffs for all debts and supers
therein depending against the next liberate or sealing day of the Exche. but
have for some private respects heretofore, and still kept the said accounts in
their own hands (some whereof are said not to be engrossed for many years
together) by which means many great Arrerages of Rents and Supers have
heretofore sleyt in the same accounts for 10, 20, 30, years, etc. before they
were written forth in Process, which has not only occasioned great loss to
the Crown, but many grievances to the Kings Subjects by seizing the lands
which they purchased for valuable consideration of the said debtors, for which
if process had been made in due time, they might have bin paid by the debtor
himself, and a great part of the said arrerages recovered, which by reason of
long forbearance becomes desperate, as in the foregoing discourse has been
observed.

In like manner it may be here remembered, that by the like omission of Stewards
of the Kings Manors to send up the double of their Court Rolls to the Exchequer
to be kept in the Treasury there, as well for the King and Subjects evidence as
that it may appear what each Bayliffe is to be charged withal every year
for fines upon Copyholders, and other profits of Courts, according to the said
Ordinance of Anno primo Mariae; many great losses to the crown, and
inconveniences to the subject, have been occasioned, there being but few such
Court Rolls or any entries thereof to be found which are now extant, either in
the times of the late Queen Elizabeth, or the late King James. And that there
has been the like neglect of sending up Rentalls of the Kings Manors, which
once every seven year are to be renewed by the Steward upon presentment of the
Homage and to be returned up and sent into the said Treasury.

A tenth cause is: In that the Estreats of the Fines, Issues, Amerciaments, and
other Forfeitures, set, lost and forfeited before the Justices of the Kings
Bench, and Common Pleas, Justices of Assize and Jail Delivery, and Justices of
Peace, etc. commonly called Green-wax, have not been certified into the
Exchequer in such sort as by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm they ought
to be; but have been obstructed, diverted or suppressed, contrary to the said
Laws, to the encouragement of offenders, and the great prejudice of the
Crown, whereof diverse instances in that kind were lately made before the
Lords Commissioners for the Treasury, whereby it appeared, that sundry
recognizances and fines forfeited and imposed at the Assizes and Sessions in
the Country, in cases of great and Criminal offenses and misdemeanors, had
been some years since removed by Cerciorari into the Crown office, and both
these and many others of the like nature kept back and stopped there and in
other places, which were never certified into the Exchequer as they ought to
be, which every way turns to his Majesty's great prejudice, and loss:
whether they be pardoned or suppressed: For that if the King pardon or give
them away, the Farmers of the Green-wax will look for a Defalcation out of
their Rent, of so much as they amount unto, by reason of a covenant from his
Majesty, that he will neither pardon nor give any of them away during their
term, unless it be by a general Pardon in Parliament. In which case it had
been much better for the King, they had been altogether suppressed and lost,
then to be pardoned or given away, but by a general pardon in Parliament. In
consideration whereof, and of the inconveniences formerly mentioned, by letting
the Green wax to farm, and that the Fines in the Kings Bench are like to be
increased by putting down of the Star-chamber-Court, some composition may be
made with the Farmers (as the case shall require) and present order taken as
well for resuming the said Farms of the Green-waxe into his Majesty's hands;
as for the reforming of such abuses as tend to the suppressing or diverting any
of the said Greenwax as aforesaid.

But then in case of such resumption I cannot (in my duty) but make some
Remembrance of the complaints of the great abuses and disorders which were
committed in the managing of the said Revenue when it was in the Kings hands,
by the practice of some inferior Clerks and Bailiffes, etc. As namely,

That where diverse issues were estreated against Sheriffs out of several
Courts, Quia non habuit corpus, and against Noblemen and others, for not
appearing at the suits of diverse persons, either for payment of money owing by
Bond, or upon actions of account detin. or the like. (In which cases the
Plaintiffes could have no proceedings at Law for recovering of their rights, or
what was due unto them, without an appearance: and the estreating of the said
Issues to be levied for the Kings use, being the Coertion appointed by the Law
to procure such Appearances,) the said Issues were nevertheless by the undue
practices aforesaid, upon some ordinary suggestions, procured to be discharged
or respited till a general Pardon, or compounded for some small matter; which
in no sort ought to have been done by the Laws of the Kingdom, before
certificate had been made, that appearance was given to the Plaintiffs action,
or the debt satisfied, etc. to the utter subversion of justice.

And the like abuses were committed in procuring discharges for Recognizances
of such parties as had been bound over with Sureties to the Assizes or
Sessions for keeping a bastard child, or for performing some other public
service in the Country, or upon suspicion of Felony, etc. and the like,
without procuring any certificate from the Justices, or Country, that the
Parish was discharged, the service performed, or what the cause was for which
every such Rccognizance became forfeited; insomuch as the poorer sort, that
could use no means for their discharge, were (for the most part) left to be
written for; who if they had but a Cow, or any poor Utensills, were driven
from time to time, to make their peace with the Sheriffs Bailiffe in the
Country, with some of their poor estate which the said Bailiffes took (as it
were) nomine districtionis, to their own use, without answering any part
thereof to the King, to the greater impoverishing, and sometimes undoing of the
said poorer sort of the Kings subjects.

In consideration whereof, and for the better preventing of the like abuses for
time to come, it was in the time of the late King James, thought fit by the
Treasurer, Chancellor, Undertreasurer, and Barons of the Exchequer, All men's
care, no man's care.
that there should be for ever an Officer in the Exchequer called, the
Surveyor of the Green-wax, formerly mentioned, who should take special care to
see the said Revenue better managed, and from time to time to attend the Court,
and acquaint the Barons therewith, as the case should require.

And this was upon the matter agreeable with an ancient Statute made in Anno
27. E. 1. Stat. anno 27. E. 1.
By which it was provided, that at one time certain every year, one Baron and
one Clerk of the Exchequer, should go through every Shire of England, to
examine and view the Acquittances of Sheriffs and their Bailiffes, touching
Green-wax, and to inroll them: and also to hear and determine complaints made
against Sheriffs, and their Clerks and Bailiffs, that had been done concerning
the premises, and the offenders to be grie vously punished. It being
conceived, that the discontinuance of that good ordinance had occasioned the
many abuses and grievances aforesaid.

In the last place, the remedy for preventing the like abuses and misdemeanors
in general, (both toward the King and his Subjects) for time to come, is,
That special care be taken to see that the ancient course of the Exchequer,
and the Laws of the Kingdom formerly mentioned for the better and more timely
and husbandly answering, and the more due and legal charging and discharging
of the Kings Revenues, be strictly observed and kept, and to see, that due
punishment be inflicted upon the violators there of accordingly. As also to
see, that all those foregoing causes which hinder the Kings service therein,
and the quiet of his Maties subjects be removed: And especially that the
Sheriff in his year, according to his Process sent unto him out of the
Exchequer in the Lent Vacation and Summer Vacation (without any respect of
persons) do his uttermost to levy all such debts and sums of money as shall
be so written to him as a foresaid. And yet where I say, without respect of
persons, I desire to be rightly understood, that the persons of all the
English Nobility and their Dowagers, Barons and Baronnesses are exempted from
all arrests for the Kings debts, as by the Prerogative Writ before mentioned,
may appear: And so are the persons of all and every the Knights and Burgesses
of the Commons House of Parliament, so long as the Parliament continues.
Nevertheless (in my best understanding and observation) I do not find but
the Rents and Debts due to the King, have in time of Parliament been levied by
Sheriffs, upon the issues and profits of their lands and goods.

Moreover, forasmuch as the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, may be
much hindered by the negligence and connivence of the Officers of the Exchequer,
by reason of a late Statute, made in the one and twentieth year of the reign
of the late King James, whereby it is provided, that all and every Sheriff and
Sheriffs within the Realm of England, and Dominion of Wales, their Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, and their Lands, Goods and Chattels, shall be
absolutely discharged of all and all manner sum and sums of money which he
or they shall leavie or receive, unless such Sheriff or Sheriffs shall be
called in question for such sum or sums of money pretended to be leavied
and received by them, or any of them, and not accounted for within four years
next after they have finished, or shall finish their accounts, and had their
Quietus est.

That for preventing thereof, some Act may be passed in Parliament, that where
any Sheriff or Sheriffs which since the making of the said Act, or at any
time hereafter, have or shall procure and obtain any such Quietus est, by
means whereof they or any of them are, or hereafter shall be (by force of the
said Act) discharged or acquitted against the King, his Heirs or Successors,
of, or for any sum or sums of money by them leavied and not answered upon
their said accounts, or of, or for any untrue or double allowance upon their
said accounts, that in all such cases the Officer or Officers who have or shall
make any such Quietus est, and have not, nor shall not, within the time by the
said Statute limited, by some process, or other proceedings in the Exchequer,
called, or call the same in question against the said Sheriffs, their Heirs,
Executors, or their Lands, Goods or Chattels, for preventing the loss and
prejudice which otherwise may happen to the Crown thereby, and every Officer
by whose default any such sum or sums of money, by force of the said
Statute, shall be lost to the King, his Heirs or Successors (being thereof
lawfully convicted) shall pay and forfeit to the use of his Majesty, his Heirs
and Successors, all such sum and sums of money as the said King, his Heirs
or Successors, shall, or may lose thereby, to be recovered against the said
officers their Heirs, Executors, Administrators, their Lands, Goods and
Chattels, in such manner and sort as the same might have been recovered by the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm, against the said Sheriffs, if the said Act
had not been made. And that in all such cases, where by the Laws of this
Kingdom, and the course of the Exchequer, any Officer or Officers of the said
Court, are to deliver any Account or Accounts, into any Office or Offices of
the said Court, by and at some certain time; so as process may be made upon
such Supers and Debts, as are or shall be depending in the same accounts, upon
any person or persons: So as for default of their delivering in of any the said
accounts in due time, any the said Supers or Debts, shall be afterward
required and recovered against the purchasers of the Lands of any such Debtor
or Debtors, by whom the said Supers or Debts were so due, or against their
Sureties, which might have been recovered against the said Debtors themselves,
if the same accounts had been delivered in due time: that such Officer or
Officers so making default, in delivering of the said accounts in due time,
shall and may for their neglect therein (being thereof lawfully convicted) be
subject to discharge the purchasers of the said Debtors lands, and their
suerties against the King, his Heirs and Successors, and to satisfy and pay
what the said principal Debtors should have satisfied and paid, in case the
said Accounts had been delivered in due time.

And for that it is found by experience that the Vnder-Sheriffe that takes upon
him the execution of the whole Office, both in attending at the Assizes and
Sessions, and upon other Courts of Justice, returning of Iuries and other
service of the Country between party and party, cannot (in any such due time
as he ought) look into and attend the levying of the Kings Rents and other the
Debts and Duties sent forth in process to Sheriffs by several Writs of
Distringas, Fieri facias, Capias and Extent out of the two Remembrancers
Offices, and by the Summons of the Pipe and Greenwax: some such like Act may
be passed in Parliament for the better expediting of the Kings service, that
it may be lawful to and for such person or persons of ability and sufficiency
as shall be hereafter appointed by the Sheriff of every County (for whom he
will answer) to be his Deputy or Clerk for the leavying of the Kings Rents,
and other his Debts and Duties as shall be so sent out by the said Summons, and
for executing all such Writs out of both the Offices of the said Remembrancers
as aforesaid, (and for no other business) may continue in the said Office
year after year, so long as he shall be approved of, and allowed by the said
Sheriffs as aforesaid, without incurring any of the penalties and forfeitures
provided by the Laws against such Undersheriff or Sheriffs Clerk as shall
remain in his Office above one year: Stat. anno 23. H. 6.
And that notwithstanding any former Act, Statute or Ordinance to the contrary
heretofore made: Nevertheless that such Undersheriff, Deputy-Sheriffe, or
Sheriffs Clerk shall not thereby be exempted from taking any such oaths, nor
from any other penalties which by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm are to
be taken or undergone by them. Stat anno 27. Eliz. 12.


And in regard all the Sheriffs of this Kingdom do find themselves much
grieved and damnified by reason of the foresaid Statute made in the seven and
twentieth year of the reign of K. Ed. 1. by force whereof they are to answer
for all such issues by them returned against any person or persons their
mainpernors or pledges which shall be Nichelled or prove to be illeviable,
especially in the case of Writs of Distring. sent out of the Excheq. for the
homages and other services of the Kings Tenants: that some consideration may be
taken of the said ancient Statute in case of the said Sheriffs so far forth
as may stand with Justice, and the preservation of his Majesty's said. Rights
and Services. And that in further ease of Sheriffs, there may be a review of
the decree lately procured by the parcel makers for Sheriffs and Lords of
Liberties to account before them for Felons Goods and other Escheats, etc. the
same being found very grievous and burdensome to the said Sheriftes, and other
his Majesty's Subjects, without any profit to the King.

And in regard diverse ancient Farms and Rents now in charge in the Pipe, and
before his Majesty's Auditors for the revenue, and in the Court of the Duchy
of Lancaster, which by reason of sundry alienations of the lands and
hereditaments out of which the same are issuing, and for diverse other causes,
are now at this day very hard and difficult to be levied, by reason whereof
many of them are like to be utterly lost, unless they may (by some good and
lawful ways and means) be revived, and more of them like to be lost
hereafter: That for remedy herein, a perfect survey may be made of all his
Majesty's Honors, Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents and Heredaitments in every
Shire and Hundred, and what particular Rents and services either by way of Fee,
Farm, or otherwise in perpetuity, or for term of life or years are answered
for the same: And that inquisition be made for and concerning all the dispersed
Rents which are within the collection of the Bayliffes or Collectors thereof,
and of all other Rents within the collection of Sheriffs, or Receivors
general; and of what lands or other hereditaments the same are particularly
issuing, and where the said lands and hereditaments do lie, and in whose
possession they now are, and when and how to be paid. And that all good and
lawful ways and means may be used, as well by the view of ancient Records
and Inquisitions (where any such are to be found) as otherwise, for reviving of
all decayed Rents belonging to the Crown: And after the making of such
surveies, that some fit course may be devised for the better securing of all
the said petty and dispersed Rents (in the charge of the said Bailiffes and
Collectors of the same) from further decay: and for easing the King from the
great charge and hazard he now undergoes in the collecting thereof.

Jtem, that the state of the Kings Castles and Houses may be surveyed, and all
decayed Castles and Houses not useful for further service (if it shall be so
thought fit) converted to the best profit, and the Fees for the keeping thereof
discharged. And whether the like survey may not be made of all the Forests,
Parkes, Chaces and Warrens, not as yet dissaforested or disparked, (except such
as his Majesty shall reserve for his royal disport) and the waste number of
them to be converted to the best profit by the year, and to be letten as other
lands are, and with like condition, saving to every man a recompense for such
interest as he has.

And that the Farms of the Vlnages and Gaugers be surveied, that it may be
known what Rent is fit to be set upon them when the term expireth.

Many other parcells there are of the ancient Revenues (being flowers of the
Crown) as the Goods and Chattels, of Felones, Fugitives, and Outlawed persons;
the petty Fines and Amerciaments anciently set and affeered in the higher
Courts upon the Plantiffes and Defendants, pro falso clamore, quia non est
prosecut. etc. and the like, whereof little or no profit has of late been
made to the Crown, according to the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom; by
reason whereof diverse persons (finding they may do it with such impunity) have
been encouraged to violate the Laws, and to set on foot and maintain sundry
unjust and vexatious suits, etc. For remedy whereof, this may also be taken
into consideration, and some life given to those Laws in a moderate way, so
far forth as may stand with his Majesty's ancient Rights, the Justice of the
Kingdom, and the discouragement of such offenders for time to come.

And whereas there remains at this day a great bulk of Arrerages and Debts as
well in the Exchequer as in the Court of Wards and Liveries, and in the Court
of the Duchy of Lancaster, a great part whereof is conceived to be good, (as
having been suffered to sleep through the connivence or negligence of some of
the Kings Officers) other part thereof is supposed to be dischargeable by
Tallies, Acquittances, and some other good matter, but for want of the said
Tallies, etc. the Officers cannot discharge the same upon Record: and for the
residue (being the greatest part of the said bulk) it is conceived they are
illeviable, and in a manner desperate. Therefore that several Commissions may
be awarded to faithful and circumspect men in every County for making inquiry
into the same, according to the ancient course formerly prescribed, and those
that shall be found good to be speedily brought in and satisfied, and such as
have Tallies or other legal discharges for any part thereof to bring them in
for acquitting the same upon Record in such manner as by the foresaid Statutes
is provided; and for such part thereof as by the Acquittance or Acquittances of
any Sheriff, Bailiffe, Receivor, or other Collector, or by other good proof
shall be found to have been received to the Kings use by any of them and
concealed upon their Accounts, the delinquents to be proceeded against,
according to the foresaid Statute of Westmonast. the first anno 3. E. 1. cap.
19. and anno 6. H. 4. cap. 3. for terrifying of others from doing the like. And
for the residue that shall be found desperate, the same to be put into some
Exannuall Roll according to the foresaid Statute of Rutland, and to run no
more in demand, unless it shall appear that some estate has accrewed to any
of the said Debtors. And if the security given by Sheriffs at this day by
their recognizances in the Kings Remembrancers Office, with suerties, be not
sufficient; they may be ordered to give better security, as their receipts
shall grow greater.

To conclude, I have in these short advertisements (though with much weakness)
faithfully delivered the sum and substance of what I have gathered and
observed from the practice and experience of former times, to be at this
present taken into consideration, for the increase and better ordering and
answering of the Kings Revenues, and the ease of his Majesty's Subjects, which
may be of some use for steering a course in the answering and managing of all
the Revenues of the Crown of what nature soever: As also for the cutting off
all superfluity of expenses, unnecessary Pentions, Annuities, etc. and for
preventing the like abuses of Officers, for time to come; It having been
always held for a Maxim, that be the Kings Revenues never so great (as great
they had need to be by reason of his great occasions) yet unless care be
taken that his expenses be suited and balanced to those Revenues, and that
his Treasure be not purloyned, nor put into broken Cisternes, whereby it may
leake out, or run waste; his Majesty must still be in want.

That this will be displeasing to some, that make their gains out of the
loss and wrongs of the King and his people, I cannot be ignorant; howsoever I
presume this poor advertisement may (in some measure) be acceptable to all
that wish well to their King and Country, which is the only motive of my
taking this task upon me.

FINIS.
The Errata.
PAge 5. line. 6. read Estreated. page 8. line 1. Baronibus. p. 12. l. 12. the
four first days. p. 12. l. ult. sums. p. 16. l. ult. in contempt depart the
Court. p. 17. l. 24. carry by their claims. p. 19. l. 12. cases. p. 23. l. 4.
rules. ib. l. 9. or, to be left out. p. 61. l. 23. in his now Majesty's time,
to be quite left out. p. 96. l. 23. Sheriffs and other Accomptants. p. 100. l.
14. the Greenwax.


