ENGLANDS REMEMBRANCER, OR, A thankful acknowledgement of Parliamentary
Mercies to our English-Nation.

Wherein is contained a breife enumeration of all, or the most of GODS free
favors and choice Blessings multiplied on us since this Parliament first began.

By JOHN VICARS.



LONDON, Printed for Thomas Underhill, and are to be sold at the Bible in
Wood-street. M.DC.XLI.

ENGLANDS REMEMBRANCER, OR, A thankful acknowledgement of Parliamentary
Mercies to our English-Nation.
COme hither, each true Christian heart and see;
But, bring a joyful, thankful heart with thee.
Come see (I say) to Gods eternal praise,
His miracles of mercies in thy days. 1. Two Parliaments dissolved.

How, 2. A third called.
though two former Parliaments were broke,
A third is called, hopeful to strike the stroke
Of blessed reformation; to which end,
See how the Lord the peoples hearts did bend 3. Choice of Knights and
Burgesses.

To choose renowned worthies there to sit,
Maugre the adverse plots to have hindered it.
How God stirr'd-up our Scottish Brethren brave, 4. The Army of Scots our
friends.

As friends, not foes, justice (with us) to crave.
In which mean time, how by Heavens providence, 5 Soldiers turn Reformers.

Soldiers in the Country, with strange violence
Turned rude Reformers, 6 And haters of Papists and Pontificians.
hating the Popish-party
And Pontificians with despite most hearty.
Crossing the Papists and the Prelates plots, 7. Prelates plots crossed.

To force fierce wars betwixt us and the Scots,
To three great Kingdoms certain Desolation, 8. The Pacification.

All crossed by a blessed Pacification:
Scattering and batt'ring (that time) Spaines great Fleet, 9 Spanish-fleet at
Sea, vanquished by the Hollanders.

By honest Holland, who, their pride did meet,
How God begins t'avenge th'unpater'nd ruth, 10 M. Burton, D B^st. M. Pr^ns.
happy return from captivity.

Of that pair-royall-Witnesses of Truth, 11. And the rest of Christ's sufferers.

And all the suffering Worthies of the same,
Restoring them to comfort, credit, fame.
How God has shot those impious Canoniers
By cursed Canons to deep shame and fears, 12. Canons and Oath in the ^ynod
damned.

Of fatal, 13. And turned to their own ruin.
final fall, even by an Oath,
Whereby they hoped to get full Popi^h growth.
How Heaven discovered has a rotten-Sort
Of scandalous Baals-Priests of foul report; 14. Scandalous Priests discovered.

And open set a Door of restoration
For faithful Pastors happy re-plantation. 15. Golly Pastors restored.

How, 16. Plots harm the Prelates most.
by their own plots* God has strangely wrought
Papists and Prelates to decline to naught.
How by the very blood of traitorous foes 17. Traitors executed

The Lord begins the wounds to heal and close
Of Church and State, and, for this purpose, 18. Days of private humiliation
by godly Christians.
has
Kindled the fire of Supplicating Faith
And fervent Zeal in private humiliation,
Such, as the like was nere seen in this Nation;
And with transcendent sweet returns re-paid
Our prayers into our bosoms with blessed aid. 19. And returns of their prayers

How the Lord has, the Spirit of Unity
Shed on Both Houses, Courage and Constancy; 20. Blessed Union in Both Houses.

O, how their indefatigable pains
Our happy Hopes in Church and State maintains!
To see both Prince and People blessedly
Conjoined in a sugared Symphony
To sit and to consult with full content, 21. Agreement twixt King and
Parliament.

Till they themselves dissolve this Parliament.
And after it to sit triennially
To Church and States future felicity. 22. A trieniall Parliament enacted

To see Ship Money, 23 Ship money and Patie^ts damned
Pattents damned down, 24. Good men made officers of State.

And good men set in seats of high renown.
To see Non-Residents justly disgraced, 25. Non-Residents voted against.

To see our lazy Pluralists displaced; 26. Pluralist voted against.

And godly Lecturers by their flock elected, 27. Lecturers rightly chosen.

And droanish Deanes 28. Deanes and Chapters voted down.
and Prebends disrespected
And voted-down in Parliament. To see,
Oxford and Cambridge hopeful purged to be. 29. Universities reformed.

To see Gods Sabbaths more sincerely kept, 30. Sabbaths better sanctified

Of Carryers, Fruit'rers, Taverns soil well swept; 31. Printing Presses opened.

And Presses open wide to vindicate
The Sabbaths precious honor, which, of late,
By impious Prelates, Pontificks profane, 32. Sabbath-sports put down.

Had (by vain sports) received a deep-dy'd stain.
To see to th'Sacrament, 33 Lord's Supper rectified.
none (now) admitted
But such as piously are thereto fitted,
To see the Surplice and such Romish trash
From Parliament receive a deadly gash, 34. Popish Ceremonies sentenced.

Whereby no Popish gestures, vestures are
Impos'd'gainst Conscience on Gods Saints to wear.
And no man forced (now) at Church to stay 35 Liberty to hear the word more
freely.

Where is no preaching to promote Gods day.
To see Gods Outcasts called home again 36. Persecuted Pastors recalled

And sons of Beliall feel just shame and pain.
No High Commission, Sp'rituall-Court to see, 37 No High Commission Court
admitted.

Whereby Gods peoples hearts from fears are free,
Of their unjust Commands, lawless taxations
And all Churchwardens cleared from vile vexations. 38. Churchwardens freed.

To see our Seas and Cinque Ports fortified; 39. Sea's and Cinque Ports
fortifide.

That we may und'r our Vines securely 'bide.
But, specially to see, with exultation
From Both the Houses a blessed Protestation, 40. A blessed Protestation

Together, all true English-hearts to tie,
In a blessed league, Romes Strumpet to defy, Against all Popery and Popish
Innovations.

All Popish Innovations to disdain,
Christ's Truth toth' death constantly to maintain.
O, who cannot these Halcyon-dayes admire,
And with enflamed Zeal be set on fire.
To sound the praises of our bounteous Lord
Who these heart-cheering comforts does afford
Unto a Nation, in th'esteeme of most,
For Sin, forsaken, perishing and lost.
But, A proper Simile.
now, much like a Ship by swelling-waves
Tossed to and fro, England compared to a Ship tossed at Sea.
gaping to be the graves
Of all its heartlesse Mariners, but yet
A sudden calm and fair winds favoring it,
It Is brought in saf^ty to a harbor fair
Where all arive, where all preserved are:
So, O, even so, thy God in mercy free,
O England, England, Admonition to England.
thus preserved thee!
Hopeless and helpless: Lay this then to heart,
Rouse up thy Soul, perform thy praising part.
O great King CHARLES, Counsel to the King.
cheer-up thy soul, likewise,
Ponder these ponderous things, arise, arise,
High time to put-on resolutions rare,
To honor God, who with such honors fair
Has blessed thee and thy three Kingdoms, Reformation desired.
now,
A thorough Reformation in them vow. 5 Princely Petitioners to our King.

Remember also and Commiserate
Palatinate,
Germanies long lamentable woes;
Rochell, like Rachell in her childlesse throws.
Denmark in distress,
Holland thine honest, ancient friend no less.
Who All, with Us, and on Us, look for aid.
From thee, great Prince, who long have been ore-layd
With Romish rage and Spanish cruelty, Against Spain and Rome.

Still groaning, grieving, by their tyranny,
To forward which most blessed work, Helps at hand.
behold,
Thy prudent Peers 1. Peers.
resolved with courage bold,
Thy pious Prophets 2. Prophets.
with their prayers addressed,
Thy people 3. People.
all with hearts and purses pressed,
To give thee all their aid, to spend their blood,
To hasten-on this work so great, so good.
And, O our God, let thy good Spirit strike-in, 4. A Prayer.

To make the work complete, to pull-down sin,
To set-up Christ in his pure, powerful throne
To rule and reign in all our hearts, Alone.
So shall we All, all our remaining days
To thee our God eternal trophies raise
Of all obliged praises infinite,
Who, thus, to do us good, do take delight.
FINIS.

