The last Speech and Prayer with other Passages of Thomas Venner

The Chief Incourager and Promoter of the late Horrid Rebellion, immediately
before his Execution in Colemanstreet on Saturday last being the 19th of
January, 1660.

Together with the names of the rest that were condemned for the same Fact.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1660.

The last Speech and Prayer, with other passages of Tho. Venner.
ON Saturday the nineteenth of January one thousand six hundred and sixty, in
persuance of the judgment of the Court at the Sessions house in the Old Baily,
whereby sixteen of the late Rebels were condemned to be hanged, drawn, and
quartered.

Thomas Venner formerly a Cooper in London, but of late a pretended Preacher of
a private Congregation in Coleman street, was with Roger Hoskins a
Button-seller in Clements Lane, and a member of his Church drawn from Newgate
unto Colemanstreet aforesaid upon a Hurdle, where two Gibbets were erected for
their execution, being the place where they had first contrived, and where the
said Master Venner had first promoted, encouraged and at last unanimously
agreed upon the late Rebellion and Insurrection.

Being come to the Gallows, by reason of his many wounds he was taken out of
the Sledge by two of the Sheriffs Officers, and led to the Ladder, being come
to the foot thereof, one met him that was a brother preacher of his in former
time, but of late times better instructed, spoke unto him saying,

Now Mr. Venner you are going to your last home therefore confess your sins,
and acknowledge this great fault and wickedness, for which you are now to dye.
Venner. I now speak as I said before, that what I did was according to the best
light I had, and according to the best understanding that the Scripture will
afford.


D. But with all Gods people before death there must be confession of sin
according to the Scripture.


Venner. There must be conviction before there can be confession, which I
cannot find in my own conscience.


D. But David says, that we should pray against blood-guiltinesse, and desires
God to deliver us from it, and this surely must needs lie upon your spirit.


Venner. Do not be an instrument of Satan to take away that comfort I have
within me now I am going to dye.


Upon which, command was given that they should not speak any farther to him.

As he went up the Ladder, he used this expression.

The Lord judge between me and thee. And being upon the Ladder, with the Rope
about his neck, he spoke as follows.

Friends,

I Desire in the fear of the Lord to acknowledge why I am brought to this
place at this time: What I did was from the Word of the Lord, you ought to
believe that the Fourth Monarchy is come, and that it is the duty of the people
of God to look for liberty: And there is one thing that lies upon my spirit
for the Testimony of King Jesus, which is, and I do here declare it, that I
have done nothing but what was for the propagation of his Government and Rule,
and for the advancement of his Kingdom, according to the light which I had
given me: I have been very much wounded, and for five or six days before I
came hither I thought I should have died, but Gods providence has brought me
hither that I might declare unto you and to all the world that I dye for the
testimony of his truth.

Now the Lord help you and the Lord help us all to consider really that there
is no standing against God, for he will be too hard for you: now if you be of
his party it will hold and none shall resist you, but if not, know that he can
raise Servants out of the dust to do his own work.

And therefore Oh Friends do not rise against God, these are the last words I
must say; but the Lord will speak more by my death then by my life. Therefore
all that I have to say to you is this, All the Doctrines that ever I have
preached are truth, every word thereof was by the spirit of Truth, according to
the word and the best light which I had within me, and the same I now seal
with my Blood.

And therefore the Lord help you to lay it to heart and to your consciences,
and therefore Oh that I could speak it, for I am faint, and indeed I cannot
speak.

Here one told him again that David desired to be cleansed from
blood-guiltinesse, to which Master Venner said, how! a man blood-guilty in the
service of King Jesus?

Here he was desired now he was going out of the World, to make some kind of
confession to show some sign of Repentance of his fault.

To which he answered and said, that he had no fault to confess, end if what
he did for the glorification of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, he was there
ready to suffer for it.

At last he was bid to prepare himself for death, for he had but a few minutes
to live.

Venner. I will pray first


and so began. OH Good Lord; I am coming to thee; Oh Lord forgive me? Oh Lord
comfort me; into thy hands Oh Lord I commit my spirit: at which words he was
turned off the Ladder, and having hanged the space of a quarter of an hour, he
was out down and quartered according to his Sentence.

A List of the names of those that are condemned to dye.
Roger Hoskins. Leonard Jailer. John Allen. John Pym. William Gotsingham.
William Ashton. Giles Pritchard. Rich. Martin. John Smith. Tho. Hopkins. Will.
Corbet. John Elstone. Tho. Harris. John Gardener. John Wells, Robert Brierly.
FINIS.

