THINGS Worth thinking on; OR, HELPS to PIETY.

BEING Remains of some Meditations, Experiences, and Sentences, etc. never
published till now; and now are as an addition to them which were formerly made
public.

Together with a Sermon Entitled The BEAUTY of HOLINESS.

By RALPH VENNING, M. A. Heretofore Lecturer in Southwark.

Prove. 25.11. A word fitly spoken is like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver;
i. e. both inviting and taking, being lovely and desirable, because pleasant
and profitable. LONDON, Printed for Robert Duncombe, at the Golden Falcon in
Cateaten street, over against St. Lawrence Church; and for John Hancock, at the
end of Pope's Head Alley next Cornhil. 1664.

AN EPISTLE To the READER.
Good Reader.
IT is grown so much a Fashion, and judged so much a Civility, to salute thee
with an Epistle, that to avoid the imputation of either sullenness or
singularity; that the Book may not be altogether unmodish, and out of fashion;
that I may prevent thy wondering at my appearing in Print; I am willing to keep
up the Custom and to make an address to thee.

If thou strange what I mean to publish more things of this nature, having
Printed so many already, and tantum non almost promised to add no more, but
rather things of another nature; I will entreat thee ^o excuse me, if I give
thee not all the Reasons I have for this my being seemingly to blame. I will
not repeat what I have said for my self in the former Epistles to the First and
Second Part of my Milk and Honey; nor will I only say, It Is better to do a
little, than just nothing; or that He who cannot do what he would, must do what
he can or may: But this I will confess, That having been many times told and
persuaded to believe, that the former pieces have been welcome, and done some
good, as may in part be evinced from the several Impressions of them, I was
willing to hope the like success for these; and the more, for that to most of
the Sentences I have added Scriptures to make them the more clear and forcible,
which is an advantage the others had not. I could say more, and other things,
but I think it needless.

I must acknowledge that I do not make an Entertainment for, nor do I intend to
treat the Professors of Gallantry and Wit; and therefore I do not present
either a Romance or a Play-Book, but some little plain hints and helps for them
that have a mind to be seriously good, that they may learn (which is difficult,
though not impossible) to employ their thoughts and to do well, and so acquit
themselves, not only as Professors, but as them that are possessed of, and live
in the practice of piety. It Is but a little Book, which will not require much
time or money to be spent about it, and may serve for more and better uses,
than a mere diversion when thou have a little leisure and a mind to be alone,
whether at home or abroad, if thou do peruse it. If to be short will please
thee, here is brevity; if change will please, here is variety; if profit (omne
tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci) will please, I dare say it shall be thy
fault, if thou be not the better for it: For it has so direct a tendency, and
is so applicable to promote Religion, that thou can not choose but gain and
profit by it, if thou be but conscientious (as I suppose thee to be); and the
rather, it being so adapted to take the Memory, that it cannot but be almost as
grateful and pleasing as a piece of Poetry.

As to the other part of mine half-Promise of publishing some Sermons or
Treatises; this also I shall endeavor to do: For the present I send thee a
Token herewith, viz. one Sermon of the Beauty of Holiness, as a Pledge and
Earnest of my intention to make good my Promise, if God please. I shall say no
more, but only beseech thee to exercise thy self unto, yea in Godliness, and
not to trifle away thy precious Time, and sin away thy precious Soul. If this
contribute any thing to thy Times Redemption, or Souls Salvation (as I pray and
hope that it may and will) Give God the Glory, and pray for me. That while I
live, I may to the utmost serve the Will of God in my Generation: Which is the
great desire of him, who is a lover of all men, and would be glad, as he has
opportunity, to do good to all, but especially to the Household of Faith, as the
Exhortation is, Gal. 6.10.

R. V.

THINGS Worth thinking on; OR, HELPS to PIETY.
I. Century.
1. HOly things are too good, and sinful things are too bad, to be laughed at:
for all that is holy requires Reverence, and all sin (if it be our own) calls
for our Repentance; and if but other men's, it calls for our Sorrow, Psalm.
119.136. Phil. 3.18, 19. So that we must not play with sacred, nor sport with
sinful things, Ephesians. 5.3, 4.

2 It Is a poor thing, and 'twill afford but cold comfort, to have Religion
enough to save, and (it may be) to advance our Credits; yet not enough to save
our Souls: to have a name to live, and yet be dead, Rev. 3.2.

3 The true Religion will never save that man who is not true, but false,
whether in or to that Religion. It Is not enough to be Orthodox, if we be not
honest; nor to hold the Truth, if we hold it in unrighteousness. Hypocrisy or
Apostasy will ruin Protestants, as Infidelity does ruin Turks, Romans 1.18.
Heb. 10.38, 39.

4 Alas! How prone are some to think of, and wish to do that evil, which they
dare not, and (it may be) cannot do: so that they are sinners i^ heart and
affection, though not in act and conversation, Math. 5.28.

5 Whosoever loves and makes or tells a lie, witnesses this to be a truth,
viz. that he fears not God, but is afraid of man, Rev. 21.8. with 22.15.

6 Reason cannot show it self more reasonable, than to leave reasoning a^out
matters which are above Reason, Romans 9.19, 20. and Wisd. 12.12.

7 He that lets the Sun go down upon his wrath, and goes angry to bed, ^s like
to have the Devil for his bed-^ellow, Ephesians. 4.26, 27.

8 Troubles in the flesh (though sanctified) are troubles, Heb. 12.11. even
sweet Bryar and holy Thistle have their Prickles.

9 Prosperity was one of the blessings of the Old Testament, and Affliction is
one of the blessings of the New, Mark 10.30.

10 They who serve God as God would not be served, and glorify him not as God,
may and will be rewarded as they would not be rewarded, Romans 1.21, -- 24. Isa.
29.13, 14.

11 A meek and quiet behavior may commend us in the sight of men, but a meek
and quiet spirit will commend us in the sight of God, 1 Pet. 3.4.

12 As we should wish men, and exhort them to be more moral than they are, so
we should wish that they were, and endeavor that they may be more than moral:
for though a moral man may seem too good to go to Hell, yet if not godly (which
is by being in Christ Jesus) he will not be found good enough to go to Heaven,
Acts. 26.28, 29. Mark 10.21. and 12.3, 4.

13 A Christian should not be secure, when he is safe, nor afraid when he is in
danger; but distrust himself, and trust in God always, Prove. 3.5, 6.

14 Though a man may be hated, wronged, plundered and persecuted, yet he is
never undone, if he be not damned, Math. 10.28.

15 It Is worse for a man to be like a Beast, than if he had been a Beast, (as
to be lascivious like a Goat, than to be a Goat) for what is natural and
innocent in the Beast, is sinful in the Man: Oh, but how much worse is it, when
Man is worse than a Beast! Isa. 1.3.

16 Of all Fools, a Fool in honor looks most unlike a man, for he is like the
Beast that perishes, Psalm. 49.20.

17. An open hand is the Emblem and Argument of a soft and tender heart, as a
shut or close-sisted hand is the Emblem and Argument of an hard, i. e. an
uncharitable and covetous heart, Deuteronomy. 15.7.

18 They are the sorest punishments, that are made of sins, as an hardened
heart, which is the punishment of an hard heart, as 'twas in Pharaoh: and being
given up, which is the punishment of them who give themselves up to sin, Romans
1.24, 26, 28. Ephesians. 4.18, 19.

19 The hearts of men are so out of frame, that mending will not serve the
turn; they must be new made, or they will never be good, Ezekiel. 36.26.

20 The sins of those who are ours, may quickly be our sins; for where the
Relation is nearer, the Contagion is quicker, and the Infection stronger. As
Deuteronomy 13.6. Exodus 34.15, 16.

21 To meet with that evil we looked not for, will be as troublesome, as to miss
that good we did look for: to go to Hell, which few men, as not to go to
Heaven, which most men think they shall, Jer. 14.19. Math. 24.50.

22 No man errs more than he that says he cannot err; as no man lies more,
than he that says he never lied. If we say we have no sin, we deceive (and yet
confute) our selves, for we sin in saying so, 1 John 1.8. and do not only lie
our selves, but make God a Liar, who is the Truth, and cannot lie, 1 John 1.10.
So that they who pretend to infallibility and perfection, are (in not being so)
a contradiction to God and themselves.

23 They should hear the prayers of the poor, who would have God hear theirs,
Psalm. 41.1, 2. And as they should give to others, who would have God give to
them; so they should forgive others, as they would God should forgive them,
Math. 18.21, -- 35. Math. 6.14, 15.

24 Dead Trading on Earth calls on men to Trade for life in Heaven; and of all
Trades or Merchandise, none like that of godliness, if well followed, for it is
not only great gain at present, but for Eternity, 1 Timothy 4.7, 8. and 6.6.

25 They who act against their light and Conscience, are like to lose their
Light, and make shipwreck of their Conscience, 1 Timothy 1.19. and Romans 1.21. John
9.39.

26 It Is best to depend on him, who is absolutely independent, i. e. God, 1 Timothy 6.17.

27 None but holy ones shall see the Holy One; so God is called, and without
holiness none shall see God, Heb. 12.14.

28 An hypocrite is one of the worst of sinners, and will have one of the worst
of punishments. Fained sanctity is double iniquity; and he like the Firstborn
and Eldest Son of the Devil will have (as it seems) a double portion in Hell,
Mat. 24.51. not only Hell, but the Damnation of Hell, Mat. 23.33.

29 Be not envious; for it is not only one of the worst Diseases of the Eye, an
evil eye, but it is to be like the Devil, who is the evil one, and the envious
one: So that thou will be always troubled with sore eyes, even with the sore
and torment of the Devil; and with such eyes thou can never look upon God,
nor look up to God, Psalm. 37. Psalm. 73.

30 Solitariness (and living alone out of society) is a sly enemy, for it most
separates a man, not only from receiving, but doing good, which is one of the
great ends of a man's coming into the World, Eccl. 4.9, -- 12. Beside, the mind
of man best knows its good or evil by practice; Speculation is least acquainted
with it: and avoiding of company does but make the passions more violent, when
they meet with fit Subjects.

30 A man's happiness or misery is not so much from his condition as from his
mind. Some men have a Fortune sufficient to give content, but are not content
with a sufficient fortune, Job 20.22. Eccles. 5.10. and there are others, who
though they have but little, yet want nothing, having learned in all estates to
be content, Luke 22.35. Phil. 4.11.

31 All is but Lip-wisdome that wants experience, and it is but Knowledge falsely
so called: What is it to have religion in our books or heads, or tongues, if not
in our hearts? it is nothing but a form of Knowledge, Romans 2.20. which reaches
no further than a form of godliness: The excellency of the knowledge of
Christ, is to know him in union, communion, and conformity, Phil. 3.8, 9, 10.

32 The God of Nature never teaches unnaturalness; nor does the God of Order
teach or allow confusion, 1 Cor. 14.33.

33 Astrological predictions are either vain or infallible; if that, they are
not to be respected; if this, they are not to be prevented; and therefore on
both accounts are not to be heeded. Wisdom and Virtue are the best Prophets to
be consulted and followed, Isa. 8.19, 20. Isa. 46.13, 14, 15. Eccles. 11.4.

34 We are beholden to God, not only for supplying our wants, but for
chastising our wantonness, Psalm. 89.31, 32. His rod is the rod of the Covenant,
Ezekiel. 20.37. and his rebukes are from his love, Rev. 3.19. it is in very
faithfulness that he does afflict us, Psalm. 119.75, and we may therefore take
evil at his hand as well as good, Job 2.10. and bless him for taking as well as
giving, as Job 1.21. and say with David '^is good to be afflicted, Psalm.
119.71. for it comes from a good root, his love; and the fruit is good too,
seeing it is for the taking away of sin, Isa. 27.9. and to make us partakers of
his holiness, Heb. 12.10. So that however severely God seem to deal with us, we
have cause to thank him, 1 These. 5.18.

35 With contentment no estate, without it any estate is miserable, Phil. 4.11.
Eccles. 5.12.

36 Woes make the shortest time seem long; and joys make the longest time seem
short: oh, Eternity, Eternity is that which makes woes woes, and joys joys
indeed! Mat. 25.46.

37 It Is greater honor for any to be Gods servants, than it is that a great
many, and many great men are at their service. When David would have built the
Temple, says God to the Prophet, Go tell my servant David, 2 Samuel 7.5. but
when David had sinned in the matter of Vriah, it is only said, the Lord sent
Nathan unto David, 2 Samuel 12.1. the Title of honor my servant is left out. Our
honor dies when we live in and unto sin: God will not honor them with the
Name of his servants, who dishonor him by serving their own lusts, Romans 6.16,
-- 20.

38 It Is clear and evident, that it cost the Apostles as much (if not more)
pains to preserve them in the truth, whom they had converted, than it did to
convert them at first; as by their Epistles is apparent: and it is in it self
as great an instance of the power of God, Psalm. 110.3. compared with 1 Pet.
1.5. As wicked men need conversion, so converted ones need strengthening, Luke
22.32. and to be exhorted not to be high minded, but to fear, Romans 11.20. and
to take heed least they fall, 1 Cor. 10.12.

39 'Twas Saul's sad complaint, 1 Samuel 28.15. I am sorely distressed, for the
Philistines make war against me, and God is departed from me: So dolefully (and
more) will sinners one day cry out, sickness, sin, death and devils are upon
me, and God has forsaken me, and I know not what to do. Oh forsake not God by
sinning, least God forsake you for sinning against him, and his wrath come upon
you, Ephesians. 5.6.

40 When God saw all that he had done to be very good, he entered into rest,
Genesis 2.2. so when we can see what we have done to be good and well done, we may
enter into the rest of a good Conscience here, 2 Cor. 1.12. and shall enter
into the Rest, the Sabbatisme of glory hereafter, Heb. 4.9, 10. Let us labor
therefore to enter into that rest, and labor so, that rest may be the end of
our labor, Heb. 4.11. Rev. 14.13.

41 Next to impenitency take heed of late repentance: for though true
repentance is never too late, yet late repentance is seldom true; and if true
(as it may be) yet it must needs be very uncomfortable, because a man has
sinned as long as he could, and cannot live longer to give proof of his
repentance, Prove. 27.1.

42 Some men's repentance is very near as crazed and faulty, as their sin; they
repent of sin but sinfully: for their very repentance needs repenting of, as is
implied, 2 Cor. 7.10. seeing it flows but from a worldly sorrow: they would
make us believe they feel great remorse, and are inwardly much displeased with
sin, but as to amendment they show us none. As for that Repentance of old age,
it is for the most part but accidental, for they leave not sin, but sin leaves
them: and a sickbed Repentance is (too often) like (...) man, i. e. sickly:
and the recovery of the man to life, has many times proved his Repentance
dead, because he has not walked in newness of life, but returned like the dog
to his vomit, etc. 2 Pet. 2.32.

43 If the form of Godliness without the power cannot go to heaven, surely the
power of ungodliness must needs go to hell, 2 Timothy 3.5. Kom. 1.18.

44 There is but one way to heaven, Joh. 14.6. Acts 4.12. but there are many
ways to hell, as many as there are sins; and it is all one to the Devil, so we
go to hell, whether we go in the common road of Profaneness, or in the
(seemingly) pleasant walks of hypocrisy, Matthew. 24.51. with Luke 12.46.

45 He that would have his affliction short, or have ease under it, should
quickly and quietly submit to God: for when we subscribe to his wisdom and
submit to his will, it is as if, and as much, and better than if we had had our
own wills, Psalm. 39.9.

46 Self-penance is will worship, and mere Epicurisme, where pain is pleasant;
for as long as people impose it on themselves, they do not deny their town
will, but fulfill it, and while they beat down the body, they do but ^pusse up
the flesh, Col. 2.20, -- 23.

47 A seared conscience, an hardened heart, a being given up, is a kind of
forerunner and earnest of, yea as it were a sealing up of men to damnation;
for whereas the damned are in hell, hell is in these: and would any think
madness or the dead Palsy to be best, because such men feel nothing, having
lost their senses by their disease, which is a greater punishment than any
other, it being that of loss, Romans 1.28. Ephesians. 4.18, 19. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12. 1 Timothy 4.1, 2.

48 There is a necessity of disproportion and disparity between me^ and men;
for were all persons equal^ the world could not consist; Superierity and
Inferiority are the Pillan thereof; and therefore, we are so ofter called upon
to obey them that are over us, and that not for wrath sake, but for conscience,
Romans 13.5.

49 Man seems to be one of the weakest parts of the Creation, for there is
searcely a creature, by which he has not been conquered: A fly, the kernel of
a grape, etc. has overcome Conquerours: Mice, Lice, etc. were too hard for the
Egyptians. We need therefore pray as David, Psalm. 39.4. and with Moses, Psalm.
90.12. and to think of what is said James 4.14. for though we know that there
is but one way of coming into theworld, yet none knows how many ways there are
of going out.

50 It Is a known Maxim, that a Negative makes nothing known; for we know
things by discovering not what they are not, but what they are: and therefore
to give only negative Characters of Christians, is not to describe them, nor
can they only make them known to themselves or others: Hence throughout the
Scripture, the Negative and the Affirmative are for the most part joined
together, Romans 12.2. 1 Pet. 1.14, 15. Ephesians. 4.17, -- 25.

51 God in Scripture compares his Church to an Espoused Wife, and himself to an
Husband, yea to a Jealous Husband; how careful then must they be, who are
married to such an husband, to abstain not only from all pollution, but from
all suspicion of sin! 2 Cor. 11.2, 3.

52 There is a natural over-charitable affection in most men to their own ways,
Prove. 16.2. and 21.2. and (which yet seems strange) the worse they are, the
more men are inclined to favor them; but the reason is, because the worse they
are, the more they are their own: for men's sins are not so much from the Devil
as from themselves, and though he may tempt, yet it is they that sin, James 1.14.

53 He that by Grace is as good as the best, was by Nature as bad as the worst,
Ephesians. 2.2, 3.

54 Before the coming of Christ, the Father trusted the Son, that he would make
satisfaction; and since the coming of Christ, he trusts the Father, that he
shall have satisfaction, in seeing the travel of his soul safely delivered,
Isa. 53.11.

55 A Woman may sooner be delivered of a Child with ease, and in a dream, than
a man may repent without sorrow, 2 Cor. 7.10, 11.

56 In knowledge men (some men) are sometimes said to be like Angels, but no
man is like God but in holiness; so that holiness is a greater perfection than
knowledge; and for any to say, Cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from
before us, as Isa. 30.10, 11. is a language very unbecoming men; for it is like
that of Devils, Luke 4.34. Let us alone; art thou come to destroy us? what have
we to do with thee, thou Holy One?

57 The Humane Nature of Christ ascends as high as the Divine Nature descended,
that is, to the utmost possibility: God could step no lower than to become Man,
nor Man rise higher than to be one with God, John 1.14. Ephesians. 4.10.

58 A Christian should think he saves, yea, gains much by Christ, if he save
his soul, whatever losses he suffer for Christ, Heb. 10.34.

59 They may have what they will of God, who will have but what they may, 1
John 5.14. and they that will have more, are unreasonable.

60 Love is the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.3. for by it the members of the body of
Christ are united one to another, as by faith they are united to the head, Col.
2.19.

61 Jesus Christ suffered without any demerit of his, that we might be happy by
his merit; he died, not deserving it, that we might live, though we do not
deserve to live, but to die, 1 Pet. 3.18.

62 It Is one thing to be angry, another to hate; he that hates is angry, but he
that is angry does not always hate. God is often angry with his people, but does
never hate them; and many men are angry with their sins, but do not hate them,
whereas against sin we should express, not only anger, but hatred too, Ephesians.
4.26. Prove. 16.6. with 8.13.

63 Self-denial is lawful, and the only allowable Self-murder, yea it is
commanded, Matthew. 16.24.

64 Many people fear sin, who do not hate it, as some do a Lion: Wicked men may
fear it, because 'twill tha^e them and damn them; but good men fear it, because
'twill dishonor God, and defile them. The burnt-child dreads the fire, because
'twill burn, others the very coal, because 'twill black them, Genesis 39.9. Matthew.
15.18, 19, 20.

65 In all ages, God either preserved his people from, or supported them under,
or delivered them out of temptations and afflictions, 2 Pet. 2.9.

66 When any person goes to hear a Sermon, it is much (whoever he be) if he
learn not something he knew not before; or have something called to
remembrance, which he had forgotten; or be put in mind of something which he
had not practiced, at least not so fully and well as he ought; or be not
confirmed in what he has believed, Phil. 3.1. 2 Pet. 1.12. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
Matthew. 13.52.

67 There is a great difference between the Children of the Kingdom, and the
Children of the King: the Children of the Kingdom may be cast out, Matthew.
8.12. but not the Children of the King, John 6.37, -- 40

68 They who escape clean-hearted and untainted, clearhanded and uncorrupted
from managing the things of this World, escape by some wonder; the most
affected with it, are most infected by it, 1 Timothy 6.9, 10.

69 This world is, and all the enjoyments of it are mixed, and at the best are
but bitter-sweets: unallayed satisfactions are joys too heavenly to fall to any
man's share on Earth. Crowns are not without their cares, Psalm. 16.11.

70 We are much too blame that we do not trust God with our selves; but pretend
to rely more on our own conduct, than belongs to us: therefore do our desires
so often miscarry, and our intents so seldom attain the wisht-effects. God is
angry at our ascriptions to humane Wisdom, and crosses us often, that we may
learn to see, at what cost we trust our selves and neglect him, Psalm. 52.7. and
20.7.

71 One may wonder that so many reputed wise men (as Achitophel, etc.) should
play the fool so much as they do; but, one cannot expect that Wine should be
drawn out of pots full of nothing but water, unless it be by miracle; no more,
may it be expected, that men should act wisely, till they fear God, for that is
the beginning of wisdom, as the wisest of men tells us, Prove. 1.7.

72 One would be loath to call men fools, for it is a distasting and displeasing
word; yet as he said of the men of Athens, Though I will not call them fools, I
will say, they do the same things that fools do: and truly if wise men will
wear fools-coats, they cannot think it strange if they betaken for, and called
fools. All sin is folly, and they that wear that livery, whose pride compasses
them about as a chain, and violence covers them as a garment, Psalm. 73.6.
will be looked on with an evil eye and called foolish, though they prosper, v.
3. And he that would not have us say thou fool, without a cause, will allow it
to be said when there is cause, Luke 12.20, 21.

73 Those who prosper for a while (as Turk and Pope) without Gods counsel and
direction, they are but rods of his anger, and instruments of his indignation,
and shall prosper no longer than they are in their Executioners Office, Isa.
10.12. and 24.25. Yea, as Prosperity is Gods blessing on the good, it is his
curse on the wicked, Prove. 1.32, 33.

74 Sickness, and beating down the body, may weaken the acts, but not destroy
the lusts of the flesh; they may make unable but not unwilling to sin: This is
done only by the Spirit, Romans 8.13. If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die;
but if ye through the Spirit, do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.
And Gal. 4.24, 25. They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with its
affections and lusts: and if we live in the Spirit, let us walk in the Spirit.

74 As in good men, though the outward man perish, the inward man may be renewed
day by day, 2 Cor. 4.16. So in bad men, the lusts of the old man may be strong,
when the man is old and weak. Concupiscentia non senescit; Lust grows not
decrepit and feeble, when the man does, 1 Kings 11.4.

76 Some persons make so bold with none as with God, for whom we should have
the greatest reverence: and they who dare not take a man's name in vain, nor
give him the lie, yet dare to blaspheme the Name of God, and make him a Liar,
Luke 22.65. 1 John 1.10.

77 Wickedness may well be compared to a bottomless pit, into which it is more
easy to keep ones self from falling, than being fallen, to give ones self any
stay from falling infinitely: Take heed then of the first motions and
beginnings of evil, for then sin is weakest, and we are strongest; but if we
give way to and gratify it, sin grows upon us; that gets and we lose strength,
Prove. 23.27. and 3.18, 19. and 7.25, 26, 27. and 9.18. and 5.3, -- 14. Ephesians.
4.19. Therefore it is said to us, Enter not into the way of the wicked, no not
enter, not put a foot forward, Prove. 4.14. much less go; but as v. 15. 1. Avoid
it; 2. Pass not by it; 3. Turn from it; 4. And Pass away. We cannot stand at
too great a distance from sin, Psalm. 1.1.

78 All Love, but our Love of God, is best when (like other Rivers) it keeps
within compass; but that is best when (like Nilus) it overflows: Mediocrity,
which in all other Love is an excellency, is as to the Love of God an
imperfection. We may be too prodigal to creatures, and give them too much,
which we cannot to God: Less than all is too little; more than all, were not
too much, if 'twere but possible, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. Matthew. 22.37.

79 He that will learn of none but of himself, will have but a fool to his
Master, Prove. 1.7. and 3.5. and 26.12.

80 We have at any time sin enough to merit Gods wrath, Psalm. 130.3. but we
never have goodness enough to merit his favor; being at the best less than the
least of mercies, and beholden to him for what we do and give as for what we
receive, 1 Chronicles. 29.14.

81 The Grace of God is free, and freely bestowed upon us, without any merit or
motive in us. A meriting Creature (much more a sinner) is a contradiction in
adjecto, as the Schools speak. Doing all our duty (which is but payment of what
we owe, and is due debt to God) is so far from meriting, that it leaves us
under the Name of unprofitable, and God is not obliged to thank us for it, as
the infallible truth tells, Luke 17.9, 10. much further off are we then from
meriting, unless it be the name of more unprofitable, yea of idle and wicked
servants, seeing (having sinned) we have fallen short of our duty and Gods
glory, Romans 3.23. And as for motives, there were none in us, unless we will
speak foolishly in wit, and say, the want of motives was one, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8.
Ezekiel. 36.32.

82 It Is a notable Declamation, and a true one, which is made (somewhere)
against Lust in these significant terms. Lust is the Bewitcher of Wit, the
Rebel to Reason, the Betrayer of Resolution, the Defiler of Thoughts, the
Underminer of Magnanimity, the Flatterer of Vice, the Slave to Weakness, the
Infection of Youth, the Madness of Age, the Curse of Life, and (in the
conclusion) the Reproach of Death: Therefore read, 1 Pet. 2.11. and Titus 2.11,
12.

83 God has made it our duty to be happy; for we cannot please him, if we be
not pleased our selves: He takes no pleasure in that duty, wherein we take
none. Yea, he has made the means of our happiness a part of it, viz. his
Service, Psalm. 19.11. 1 John 5.3. Psalm. 40.8.

84 It Is a common infirmity in most (and in some it may deserve a worse Name)
that they are more ashamed to repent, than to offend, Jos. 7.19.

85 Some Attributes of God are such as proceed from his Nature; as Holiness,
Justice, Faithfulness, etc. Some, which though in his Nature, yet proceed from
his Will, as Grace, which refers to Unworthiness; Mercy, which refers to
Misery; Forgiving, which refers to Offense: of them it may be said, he cannot
but be viz. Holy, Just, etc. but of these, that he may choose whether he will,
viz. be Gracious, Merciful, pardoning, or not; and he is so but to whom he
will: for though he be infinitely rich in these, yet they might have for ever
remained in him, without any determination of his Will to save any man. But oh
what Kindness is this to man, that both his Nature and his Will are declared to
us! so that he is not only Gracious, etc. according to his Name, Exodus 34.6, 7.
but Faithful and Just to forgive and justify them that confess their sin and
believe in Jesus, 1 John 1.9. Romans 3.26.

86 Some of the Attributes of God are incommunicable to the Creature; a
Creature cannot be Infinite, Eternal, Absolute, and independently Perfect, etc.
but others are communicable, yea communicated in measure: yet these are so
little possessed and expressed by Creatures, that the Scripture makes them
peculiarly God's: for it is not only said, there is no God beside him, but that
there is none good but God, Matthew. 19.27. That he is the only Potentate, 1 Timothy
6.15. that he is only wise, 1 Timothy 1.17. and that he only has immortality, 1 Timothy 6.16. So that Creatures have great reason to be thankful for, but none to
be proud of, whatever Excellency God has imparted to them, Jer. 9.24. 1 Cor.
1.30, 31.

87 If God looked over his every-Days Work, and were not contented till He saw
that it was very good; much more should we look over ours, and not be pleased,
unless we can see all very good: for God sees and knows not only his own, but
our works. It Is said to every of the Angels of the Seven Churches, I know thy
Works; and many times over it is said, he will render to every man according to
his works, Psalm. 62.12. with 10, or 11. places to the same purpose in the
Margin there; not that we are justified by works, for that is by faith, Romans
3.28. but to show, that faith without works is dead, and that there is as great
need of works to justify our faith, as there is of faith to justify our
persons, James 2.17. to 26.

88 Sin being the greatest evil, and Holiness the greatest profit (it being
Gods glory, Exodus 15.11.) we may very willingly part with that good, the taking
away whereof shall take sin away with it, Isa. 27.9. and very cheerfully
undergo any evil, the design and end of God in it, being for our profit, to
make us partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12.10.

89 Sin being the disease, and Holiness the health of our souls, and the
chastenings of God being the Physic to effect this cure by; surely, we had
better take the remedy, though it make us sick, than keep our disease, which
will make us die, Heb. 12.9. the remedy is better than the disease, affliction
better than sin, Job 36.21. 'twere an ill choice to choose sin rather than
affliction; clean contrary to that of Moses, which was one of the Noblest that
ever was, who chose affliction, and not the pleasures of sin, Heb. 11.25.

90 Our Savior has reduced the Ten Commandments to Two, viz. The love of God
and our Neighbor; and it is great pity these Two Commands (like the Two Tables)
should be broken one against another! It Is to be feared that he who is false to
the second, is not true to the first Command: For he that observes not the
second, which is like the first, is not like to observe, nay it may be, does
not at all like the first, 1 John 4.20. He that is but a Publican as to the
second, is but a Pharisee as to the first Table: and though it is not good to be
a Heathen, yet of the two, 'twere better to be a just Heathen, which is
possible, than to be an unjust Christian, which (saving the Name) is a
contradiction, Romans 2.13. to 29. Matthew. 11.24.

91 Ungodly Men, yea Devils, may present themselves before the Lord, Job 1.6.
but Godly Men present ( i. e. make a present of) themselves unto God, Romans 12.1.

92 As we could not deserve, so we cannot requite the Lord for his kindness to
us; and indeed had God given to us, looking for any thing again by way of
recompense and requital, his mercies would have undone us: for we are so far
from being able to pay the utmost farthing, that of our selves (as of our
selves) being insufficient to think one good thought, 2 Cor. 3.5. the utmost
payment we could have made, would not have amounted to a farthing; beside, what
we return (even in our best estate) is but his own, 1 Chronicles. 29.14. and we are
beholden, not only for what we receive from him, but for what we do and give to
him; so then, that which is the effect of his love and grace, can never be the
reward of it: Less than the least of all thy mercies must be our Motto, as well
as Jacobs, Genesis 32.10.

93 Our Lord Jesus Christ loves and commends, countenances and encourages,
discretion, ingenuity and morality, Mark 10.21. and 12.32. yet deals plainly,
and tells them this is not enough, if the but one thing necessary be wanting:
this all is nothing at all, if we have no more. A man may not be far from the
Kingdom, yet never the near; the foolish Virgins came to the very Gate, but
were were without still, where are dogs, Rev. 22.15. Profane ones are afar off
indeed, yet Publicans and Harlots go into the Kingdom of God, before some who
pre^ended to have a Title to it, as being Children of the Kingdom, Matthew.
21.^1. with 8.12. They who were afar off (being sinners of the Gentiles) were
made near by the blood of Christ, Ephesians. 2.13. when the Jews, who were ^ear as
the natural branches, and of the Commonwealth of Israel, were cut off, Romans
11. Civil persons of good dispositions, of sweet, lovely and ^aking behaviors,
and very innocent conversations, seem to be near, as ^e Mark 10.20, 21. who
seemed to ^id fair for heaven, and marches on gallantly, till put to the
trial, and ^hen he retreats, though with grief that he cannot have heaven and
the world too; yet rather than he will part with his possessions on earth, he
will venture the loss of heaven, and rather have his part in Paris than in
Pa^adise: on which our Savior makes a close application (and a startling one)
to rich men, as it there follows. There are some Semi-Converts half or almost
Christians, Acts 26.28. and these seem nearer: but he that sits down at
halfway will never come to the end of his journey; but is still far off,
though he have gone so far. There are others who have the Name of Christians,
and are within the pale of the Church, and these are nearest of all the rest;
yet many of these also may be afar off: for what is the Name without the Thing?
if we be not found i^ Christ Jesus, New Creatures; yea, a^ our Savior tells us
with a Double Verily, except a man be born again, how near so ever he be to, he
cannot see (nor enter into) the Kingdom o^ God, John 3.3, 5.

94 They who lose their possessions, may and should in patience posses^ their
souls; and then, though patience cannot keep them from misery, ye^ it will keep
them from being miserable: for a man never loses very much if he lose not his
soul nor himself, Luk^ 21.19.

95 Our Savior bids his disciples Not fear them that can kill the body, for
that is the most and worst they can ^o: the worst? alas, is not that bad enough?
no, there may a worse thing ^efal us, viz. the destruction, i. e. the damnation
of body and soul in hell: It Is as if he said, you can at a cheaper ^ate and
more easily die than be damned; you are never undone (though killed) if not
damned; it is never very ^ll, if it be well with the soul: you have more reason
to fear God than man; for God has more power over you to do more good for, or
evil to you; though the body be in, the soul is ^ut of, man's reach, but both
are in the hand of God; therefore Matthew. 8.^8.

96 To go out of Gods way for life, ^s to go out of the way of life, John 5.39,
40. and 6.68. and 14.6. Acts 4.12. It Is not only lost labor, but the way to
death, to seek life out of or without Christ Jesus, Romans 9.30, -- 33. and 10.3,
4.

97 Take heed of temptation in a time of straights; for as man's extremity is
Gods opportunity to help, so it is the Devils opportunity to tempt, Matthew. 4.2,
3. and as God suits consolations, so the Devil suits temptations to our
conditions, Prove. 30.8, 9.

98 The service we do to men is never acceptable to God, unless we do it as
serving the Lord, Ephesians. 6.6, 7. Col. 3.22, 23.

99 Religion, which is to be our bufiness and pleasure too, is not for spare
hours, nor has it any hours to spare, Luke 1.75. 1 Cor. 10.31. We should be
religious in all things, and at all times.

100 He that is not good in secret, it may be feared, that he is but an
hypocrite in public, Matthew. 6.1, -- 6. and 23, 25, to 30.

THE Second Century.
1. THough Death may separate a Believer and his near and dear relations, yea
and make a separation between his soul and his body, yet it shall never
separate him from his happiness, from the love of God in Christ, Romans 8.38, 39.

2 All our attendances upon, and our addresses to God, speak not any need he
has of us; for he that gives all things, needs nothing, Acts 17.25. but
they speak the need we stand in of God, of his mercy and grace, Heb. 4.16. And
surely if God need not our services, he does not need our sins. Will thou lie
for God? Job 13.7. The wrath of man works not the righteousness of God, James
1.20. No evil is to be done for any good, Romans 3.8. and they who sin under the
pretense of service, and dishonor God under the Name of honoring, will have
no thanks for honoring, but severe judgment for sinning, 1 Samuel 15.20, -- 23.
Isa. 66.5. John 16.2.

3 We are forward to hear and pray, which are cheap and easy things; but when
self is to be denied, and lusts to be subdued, what we pray for, is to be
practiced, and what we hear is to be done, (which is the Spirit, Power, and
Life of Religion) ah how backward are we! alas, how many exercise themselves
unto Godliness (use the means) who do not exercise themselves in Godliness,
which is the end of means: Thus Religion dwindles away in, and persons content
(though they cheat) themselves by mere externals: but how sad will it be to go
as I may say religiously ( i. e. hearing and praying) to Hell! Ezekiel. 33.31.
James 1.23, -- 27. Matthew. 7.21, 22, 23, 26, 27, 28.

4 Take heed of doing that in, with, or for company, for which thy heart may
smite thee, and thou must repent, when thou art alone, Exodus 23.2. 1 Samuel 24.4,
5, 6.

5 They are sad joys and displeasing pleasures, which a man must repent of, or
be damned for; and such are all the pleasures of sin, or sinful pleasures: such
as sin puts us upon, or such as flow from sin.

6 Endeavor to maintain such thoughts of grace and sin, heaven and the world,
as you have or seem to have when you are at prayer; then we seem to look on sin
as ugly and odious; and on the world as vanity and emptiness; on grace and
glory as the most desirable things: but how little does our conversation say of
this? while at prayer, we seem to be fervent in spirit, but when off it (like
water taken from the fire) cold again, 1 Chronicles. 29.18.

7 A Christian should and will endeavor to use the world and sin as they used
Christ, that is; to crucify them, Gal. 5.24. and 6.14.

8 If the Law of the Members do oppress thee, cry out as Paul did, Romans 7.24.
and God will hear the cry of the oppressed, Psalm. 9.9.

9 God sometimes suffers others to be dis-ingenious toward us, to correct our
dis-ingenuity toward him; sometime by them of our own bowels, 2 Samuel 12.11.
and rather than fail, a dumb beast shall speak and rebuke man's madness, 2 Pet.
2.16.

10 All our grace is from God, who is the God of all grace, of all kinds and
all degrees of grace, the Author, the Preserver and Finisher of it, 1 Pet. 5.10.

11 The vanity and unsatisfactoriness of the things of this world, appears in
this, that a fancy, an humor, an ungrounded fear, will rob us of all the
comfort of it; and what are all these things, without the comfort of them? and
how many deprive themselves of much good, for fear of losing it, which is
(Nabal like) to die for fear of dying, 1 Samuel 25.37. Thus many kill themselves
while they are alive, for worldly sorrow is good for nothing but to work death,
2 Cor. 7.10.

12 It is as great a mercy to want that patiently, which God denies; as to use
that cheerfully which God gives, Job 2.10.

13 When we believe, we receive Christ into our selves, John 1.12. for he
dwells in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. and when we love, we give up our
selves to Christ, 2 Cor. 8.5. Faith then works by love, or (as the Greek has
it) is effectually wrought by love; the receiving of Christ into our selves by
faith, is warrantis'd by love, i. e. our giving up our selves to Christ.

14 Gods measure is ever best, so much health and no more, so much wealth and
no more is best for thee, as God sees good; for though we beg for daily bread,
it is fit that God should be our Carver, Prove. 30.8.

15 It Is a great evidence of pride and passion, when the want of one thing robs
us of all the comfort we should take in the rest, Genesis 30.1. beside inordinate
affection will choose for it self though on hard conditions, and is often
punished, with having it is will, as Rachel was, who no sooner had her wish, viz.
Children, but two, and she died.

16 God orders all our afflictions, for the quality of them, what they shall
be; for the quantity, how much and how great they shall be; and for the
duration, how long they shall be, Genesis 15.13. A stranger, afflicted, 400 years;
there is all three.

17 There is not more comfort from Gods giving us any thing we want, than there
is safety in waiting on God for the supply of our wants, Lam. 3.25, 26. and
surely, there is no mercy that is worth praying for, but is worth waiting for;
and if the mercy shall be ours, it is sit the time should be Gods, who does all
in the best time, even in due time, 1 Pet. 5, 6.

18 A mercy granted may not be in love, though it be the return of a prayer,
for God has granted some their desire in wrath, Psalm. 78.29, 30, 31. compared
with Psalm. 106.15.

19 If we have never so many and good means to bring about an end, it is God
must bless them; if but a sew means God can multiply them; if they be contrary,
God can use them; if there be none, God can create them or work without them.
When Jehosaphat knew not what to do, his eyes were to God, who is never at a
loss, but always knows what to do, and is never out of his way.

20 There never was man but died or was changed (as Enoch and Elijah) and never
shall be man, but must die or be changed: it has been the end of most men's
stories, and he died; and 'twill be of all men's to die or to be changed, 1 Cor.
15.51. Let us therefore prepare for death, and wait all the days of our
appointed time, till our change shall (for it must) come, Job 14.14.

21 God has further designs than men can reach, we see not all at once: the
best enjoyments do often issue from the greatest disappointments; so that we
have cause to bless God for crossing us, Genesis 50.20.

22 It Is a great sign, that the rod is in love, when thou do not only bear
but hear the rod, so as to learn the lesson of growing the better for being
beaten, Psalm. 94.12. 'Twas a pretty one, of a little child, when corrected,
Kiss me Mother and whip me again. Oh, when a rod begets love, it is an argument
that it is from love.

23 We should sear none but God, and be afraid of nothing but sin, and blessed
is he that so fears always, Prove. 28.14.

24 There are many Cordials that God will not give to his children, till they
be faint or sick; strong consolations are reserved for great tribulations, 2
Cor. 1.4, 5.

25 If we will take a true measure and make a right estimate of good or evil,
it must be as it relates to the soul, Matthew. 10.28. 2 Cor. 4.16, etc.

26 Man is Gods Creature, sin is man's, and misery is sins: Man was Gods Image,
sin is man's image, and misery is sins image; it is only by Christ Jesus that we
are freed from misery, sin and our selves, and brought to God and his Image, 1
Pet. 3.18.

27 We live by many Deaths; our Natural, Spiritual, and Eternal Life is by
death: Many Creatures are put to death to keep us alive; yea Christ Jesus died
that we might live; and we our selves must die that we may live. Oh how good is
God to us, who has made not only the Creatures ours, but Christ ours, and in
and by him death ours! Who makes every thing (the worst as well as the best) to
work together for good to them that love him, Romans 8.28. and though we are less
than the least of mercies, yet thinks not the best (even Grace and Glory) too
good for us, Psalm. 84.11.

28 Some men who seem free enough to confess their sin, are yet very impatient
at the reproof of it; the reason seems to be, because Confession is but like an
arrow shot from them, and the danger is going off, but Reproof is like an arrow
shot to them, and the danger is still approaching: beside, Confession is their
own act, but Reproof is another man's, and all our own acts on our selves are
more gentle and favorable, than others acts upon us; as a man that pincheth or
strikes himself feels it less (or at least regrets it less) than if another did
it. I need not add, that men reckon reproofs to be nothing but, or to differ
very little from reproaches, Prove. 9.7, 8. and 12.1. and 15.10.

29 It is the great work of a Christian, while he lives in the body, to be
crucifying the body of death, Romans 7.24. 1 Cor. 9.27. Romans 6. throughout.

30 They who use to think well often, cannot but do well sometimes; and they
that think of evil, are like to do evil: for vain imaginations produce vain
conversations, Matthew. 12.35.

31 It should be (and is) the desire of every gracious person to attend upon
God, without distraction, 1 Cor. 7.35. and to walk with God (as Enoch) without
interruption, Col. 1.9, 10.

32 It Is very great reason, that he who is Gods, should cease to be his own,
and to act for himself, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.

33 It Is as much (if not more) the desire of a gracious person, to hear what he
is to do, as what he is to enjoy; Commands to be obeyed, as Privileges and
Promises to be obtained; that he may be Gods to serve God, as that God may be
his to save him; that he may glorify God on Earth, as be glorified by and with
God in Heaven, Acts 9.6. Phil. 1.20, etc.

34 It Is our Heaven here to have God with us, and Christ with us; but 'twill be
our Heaven hereafter to be with God and Christ, Phil. 1.23.

35 Sincerity is good security, against others reproaches, 2 Cor. 1.12. and
against our own infirmities, Romans 7.25.

36 An evil mind (when it has power and opportunity) does not only follow the
sway of desires already within, but frames to it is self new desires not thought
of before, 2 Kings 8.12, 13.

37 They who love God, consider more what is, than why it is commanded, 1 John
5.3. and there is no service like his, who serves because he loves.

38 Sufferings for Christ Jesus are so far from separating his love from the
Sufferers, or theirs from him, that they the more indear each others
affections, Romans 8.35, -- 39.

39 Hope is a great succor and support to perplexed minds, Psalm. 42.5. Lam.
3.29. Romans 8.23, 24.

40 They who have defaced the I^^age of goodness and virtue in themselves, do
not love to see it in others: it is an eyesore to them; 1 John 3.12.

41 We should not so much consi^ler and love the things that do, as ^he things
that ought to please us, Matthew. 19.8.

42 Jealousy between relations and friends is the Frenzy of wise-folkes; the
well-wishing spite; an unkind carefulness; the way to lose that which we most
suspect and are unwilling to lose; the Self-Punishment for others faults; the
Cousin of Envy; the Daughter of Love; and the Mother of Fear, if not of Hatred,
Prove. 6.34.

43 It does hugely oblige us to, and should as much indear our obedience to
Jesus Christ, that he has given ^ife to us, who deserved death, yea and died
for us, that we might live, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15.

44 Take heed of flattering and idle busybodies, who spend their time in
telling of tales, and talking of nothing but vanity, 2 Thessalonians. 3.11. 1 Timothy
5.13. 1 Pet. 4.15.

45 It Is much more noble to love distressed Virtue, than to adore or enjoy the
Pomps and Vanities of this wicked world, Heb. 11.25. for we are equally
enjoined to forsake them, as the Devil, and all his works, and all the sinful
lusts of the flesh.

46 Whatever we part with and surrender up, in obedience to the will of God, we
are sure to receive it against with usury, Matthew. 19.29.

47 He who repents for not doing the Will of God, does do the Will of God,
Matthew. 21.31.

48 It Is more a Martyrdom to deny our selves, to mortify our sins, to submit
our Will to the Will of God; and a greater Argument of our love to him: then
it is to give our body to be burned, 1 Cor. 13.3.

49 Our Will in any evil, or to it, makes it cease to be an infirmity, and
makes it to be a sin, though it be not committed, Matthew. 5.28. but our Will in
and to any good, makes it a Virtue, though it be not acted; for then God
accepts the Will for the Deed, Matthew. 26.41. 2 Cor. 8.12. Heb. 11.17.

50 Many are apt to quarrel with God for nonperformance of his Promises, when
it may be they are not the Persons to whom, or have not performed the Condition
to which the Promises were made, Genesis 4.6, 7. Mat. 20.15.

51 If we are but naturally or prudentially patient and humble, and not so in
obedience to the Will of God, we may be said to be virtuous, but cannot be said
to be gracious, 1 Pet. 2.18, -- 21. 1 Pet. 4.19.

52 To gratify Nature is a duty, but to satisfy humor, or to gratify lust,
is a sin: We may pray for daily bread, and beg food convenient for us; but to
ask meat for lusts, to cater and project for the flesh to fulfill the lusts
thereof, is to sin against, to tempt, and to provoke God, Psalm. 78.18. Romans
13.13, 14.

53 The World shall never overcome them, for whom Christ has overcome the
World; but they shall have peace, even then, when they have tribulation, John
16.33.

54 Many men's senses ingross the men, as if they had no souls to mind, or had
souls only to mind their bodies: Their bodies are daintily fed, and richly
clad; They have Gentlemen^ bodies, and (too often) slaves minds: and of such
men (one says) all is good but the man, Luke 16.19, etc.

55 Terrors that are caused and exalted by a guilty conscience, are the most
intolerable and incurable of any other, Prove. 18.14.

56 Body and Soul are so united and do so sympathize, that they are refreshed
or pained together: the body never sends the stomach to tell us we have eaten
too much, but the foul feels it too; for when the stomach rises against the
meat, the conscience rises against intemperance; and as the one feels the
meat, the other does the sin of surfeiting. Let the Palate and Belly-pleasers
read Luke 21.36.

57 It Is a goodly thing to learn the Theory, of them that understand the
Practice of Religion well, Phil. 3.17, to 20.

58 What Is thy end in keeping so much a-do? is it to get wealth? yes: but why?
for contentment: well, if there be more without it, thou go the farthest way
about: since a man may as soon arrive to contentment, as (yea, and sooner than)
to that which he seeks but as a means to it, Luke 12.15. Heb. 13.5.

59 Why do so few men confess their sin? It Is because they are in them: it is
for him that is awake to declare his dream. Were men awake and their eyes open,
they would confess and cry out of sin, as the most ug^ly, hideous and dreadful
thing, and more frightful than the Devil himself, Acts 2.37. Romans 7.9. with 24.

60 It Is Treason against the Law of Love, and of God, for any to marry, unless
they Wed; that is, unless they love, and be true to their Love, Prove. 5.19.
Heb. 13.4.

61 Some have been admirable in the World, in whom their acquaintances have not
observed any remarkables. Few men have been admired of their familiars, for
(others see their excellencies, but) these see their imperfections. Every one
may represent an honest man upon the Stage, but in House and in Bosom to keep
rule and decorum, that is brave indeed, being (if at least it be) without art, 2
Cor. 1.12. Psalm. 101.2, etc.

62 Innocence toward God and Independency on man, are rare things, they most
contribute to our quiet and content: Guilt Godward, and beholdenness to men,
do often lie heavy; for Obligations are severe things, and leave not so much as
a man's will at liberty, for that stands bound by a title of gratitude: Nothing
(as the Italian Proverb) costs a man more dear than gifts: for what is sold a
man gives but his money, but for gifts and obligations a man gives himself; and
some men give away other men's rights, and their own conscience, for a gift
received, Exodus 23.8. Deuteronomy. 16.19. Prove. 17.23. Phil. 4.11, 12, 17, 18. Yet

63 A man does most freely enjoy what is given, when it is deserved, or can be
requited, and that a man is not under need, but has in his will or power to
live without it: for it is hard to think any Liberality so free, or Hospitality
so pure and hearty, as would not be attended with grudging, not to say
reproach, if the person were necessitous. A great deal of that which goes under
the Name of generosity and bounty, may be without love or charity, Phil.
4.11.17. 2 Cor. 11.7. to 10. and 2 Cor. 13. to 18. 1 Cor. 13.3. Prove. 23.7.

64 Some persons (as fearful ones) antedate their misery, and take it up
aforehand; and by thinking make themselves miserable before they are: they are
as sad for fear of suffering, as if they suffered; and for fear of the future,
lose the present; as if men should kill themselves for fear of dying, and make
themselves miserable, because they may be so. They grieve more than they need,
who grieve before they need, John 16.6. 1 Pet. 3.14. Phil. 1.27, 28.

65 In Hospitals, as an excellent person observes, we may see the various
shapes of humane misery, and how many souls are narrowly lodged in
Synecdochical bodies, who see their earthen Cottages moulder away to dust, limb
after limb, who survive and live but to see themselves dead and buried by
peece-meals. I apply it thus, Ah how should they who are whole and well, bless
God that they are not as other men are! We little think how much we owe God for
what we are not; that we are not sick, not lame, not deaf, etc. 2 Cor. 4.8, 9.
The Apostle rejoices in four Nots, So 2 Cor. 6.8, 9, 10. Twill much help us to
thank God for what we have, if we consider what others want; and to bless him
for what we are not, if we consider what we were, Romans 6.17. 1 Cor. 6.11. 1 Timothy 1.12, 13.

66 Many times that which should be the cause of compassion, becomes an
argument for cruelty, and more misery is laid on them, who are already
miserable; as if it were just to add affliction to the afflicted, and not to
pity, which is the least comfort to men in misery, Psalm. 69.26. and 71.11.
Zech. 1.15.

67 A man should measure his greatness by his goodness, and should not love
greatness, but that therein he may show his goodness in the greater glory, 2 Samuel 7.2. 1 Chronicles. 29.1, -- 16. Psalm. 16.2, 3.

68 None should cease to be good men, that they may appear to be good friends,
2 Samuel 13.3, 5.

69 We are most like God, when we are as willing to forgive, as powerful to
punish: and admirable is his virtue and praise, who having cause and power to
hurt, yet will not, 2 Samuel 16.9, -- 12.

70 Some Philosophers have written in the praise of Self-murder, as if in some
cases it were a noble act of courage: but surely had they understood Divinity
they would not have pleaded for that, which is a breach of Gods command, yea,
and contrary to the fundamental Law of Nature Self-preservation. Every man is
entrusted with Self-safety, and he that justly pursues it not, is his own
Traitor, much more he, who unjustly destroys it. There was never any creature
that willingly killed it self, beside man; and they that do so, aim (though
amiss) at some kind of safety, from want, or pain, or shame, or some other
mis-feared danger; as Achitophel and Judas did. So that killing one-self is but
a false color of courage, proceeding rather from fear and cowardice; for were
it not respecting of harm, a man would not regard what might be done to him;
and Hope being of all other, the most contrary thing to fear, and self-killing
being an utter banishment of hope, it must needs receive its ground from fear
and despair. He who said thou shall not kill, meant thy self in the first
place, for self love is the measure of love to others, Matthew. 22.39. On the
whole therefore these, and such others, must be false and foolish sayings, viz.
It Is better to die ( viz. thus) than live a beggar: better to die, than to live
in disgrace, etc. Oh no! It Is better to suffer than to sin; and that any should
take away thy life, than thy self. It Is a foolish thing and cowardly to put
ones self to death, to escape being put to death:

71 Vice it self is many times fain to take sanctuary of Virtue; and persons
that have offended, to seek their help from them whom they have offended; as
Shimei did, 2 Samuel 19.18, -- 22. we should carry it virtuously and friendly to
all, for who knows to whom he may be beholden: but they who will not be good
for Gods sake, will hardly be good, though they may do good, on other
considerations.

72 The great God is so good, that he not only condescends and humbles himself
to behold the things that are in Heaven and in Earth, Psalm. 113.6. but which is
the wonder of wonders, he does beseech and even beg men to be reconciled, to
receive his grace and favor, 2 Cor. 5.20. and surely, they will do very little
for God, who will not be entreated by him to be happy themselves.

73 However men may be exalted, they should consider that the beginning and end
of their bodies is but earth and dust, Genesis 3.19. and how rich soever they be,
they should yet entertain their thoughts with this, that as they brought
nothing in, so they must carry nothing out of this World, 1 Timothy 6.7.

74 If ever men may remember and mention their own noble deeds, it is then when
their just defense and others unjust dealings does require it, 2 Cor. 12.11.

75 It Is not good to vie slanders with men of tongue; that were only to be at
strife, who should be most foolish and most wicked, 1 Pet. 3.9. Prove. 26.4.

76 Though we may punish, we should never wrong an Offender: When we punish the
Malefactor, we should spare the Man; and make it appear that our anger is not
against the Man, that sins, but against the Sin, Psalm. 99.8. Deuteronomy. 2^.3, etc. A
just punishment may be, in the manner of doing, unjustly done.

77 Vengeance is a thing we should leave to God, and content our selves only
with a Vindication: Though we may right our selves, we may not wrong others.
And in taking Vengeance, we wrong God, our Neighbor, and our Selves, Romans
12.19, 20, 21.

78 He is a very gross Christian, that thinks it his duty to be a Clown or
Uncivil. The Apostle Paul seldom used handsomer language, or carried himself
more gentilely, or gave more terms of respect, than when he appeared before men
of Place and Power, Phil. 4.8.

79 We should not encourage Flatteries, nor Calumnies and Backbiting, by our
belief or hearing of them. If some did not take pleasure to hear and believe,
others would not be so much pleased to make or carry false reports, Lev. 19.16.
1 Timothy 5.13. Prove. 26.20.

80 Though our own inclinations would lead us to the most pleasing civilities,
yet our Neighbors need must overruled our judgment, to put on severity for
his profit, Jude 22, 23.

81 He that will not use the rod on his Child, is like to have his Child used
as a rod on him, 1 Samuel 3.13. 1 Kings 1.5, 6.

82 There Is nothing makes death evil, but the evil of our life: If sin be taken
away, death has no sting; but instead of being dreadful, it becomes desirable:
They therefore that would not be afraid of death, should close with Christ, who
makes it worth our while to live or die, Heb. 2.14, 15. 1 Cor. 15.56, 58. Phil.
3.20, 21. Revel. 14.13.

83 He that dissembleth with God is not to be trusted by man, John 2.23, 24. 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.

84 There Is scarce any thing more rare than true grief; there are tears fained,
tears of custom, and tears of decorum and fashion: Many weep gracefully without
grace. It Is only godly sorrow that is worth commending, 2 Cor. 7.11.

85 Youth excites delight, beauty desire, great wit admiration, virtue esteem
and respect, eminent goodness friendship; and (they say) to produce a Love
there must be a pleasingness also. Thus all things are parcel'd out, and none
has all together. It Is none but Jesus Christ that is altogether lovely; and
therefore seeing all desires are in him, he should be the desire of all: and no
soul can have content and satisfaction that is not married to him, and they
that are, want none, Cant. 5.10, -- 16.

86 The best policy is to prefer doing our duty before all enjoyments, and the
peace of ones conscience before any peace else, and the liberty of serving God
(whose service is perfect freedom) before the liberty of our persons, Acts
4.19, 20.

87 To go against reason and conscience for any other reason, is highly to sin
against God, who is God of reason and Judge of conscience, Genesis 39. James 4.12.

88 Love is the root and spring of all other affections and passions; a man
hates, because he sees somewhat in that he hates, contrary to what he loves;
and is therefore angry, because in that wherewith he is angry, there is
something which impedeth or hurts what he loves.

89 It Is a difficult thing to judge ^nes self aright: It Is best with some when
they think it worst, Revel. 2.9. and worst with some when they think ^t best,
Revel. 3.17.

90 God is the Father of mercies, (...) Cor. 1.3. Mercy is his Child, and ^omes
as freely from him, as a Child from a Father; and therefore he sent ^is own Son
(whose Father he is, and (...) whom he is a Father of Mercies) to ^e his
Love-Token to the World, John ^.16. Romans 5.8. 1 John 4.9.

91 We cannot live without breaking, either naturally or spiritu^lly; and this
necessity of breathing (that we may live) does sometimes ^rce out such sighs
and groans as are ^nutterable, Romans 8.22, -- 26.

92 It was sad with the Primitive Times, when they were undone for well-doing,
and must suffer evil, because they would out do evil: but though 'twere sad,
yet 'twas their glory; and for which they not only glorified God, 1 Pet. 4.13,
-- 16. but for which (as the Apostle speaks) God gave them thanks, 1 Pet. 2.19,
20.

93 A wicked man ((...)) is not a friend to himself; he flies and labors to
run away from himself like Adam, as well as from God; and is never in so bad
company, as when he is (and therefore ca^ seldom endure to be) alone, because
he is then with his own guilty conscience: and this makes men study sa^ many
Pastimes and Arts of diversion or to fall a building, as Cain did. They
endeavor to hide their faults, no^ only from others, but to conceal them from
themselves: they esteem their crimes not sufficiently hidden, if themselves see
them; they withdraw them from their own conscience, b^ bribing, blinding, and
searing it (...) much as they can.

94 Some men hate their own vice in others, as if they had not the trad^ of sin
enough to themselves, unle^^ they had a Monopoly and might ingross it.

95 When we go about any thing from the dictates of passion, we should (if at
least when in a passion we can) consider, whether we our selves may not
afterward be the first men, who will wish it undone.

96 He (in some measure) loves an evil, who is overcome by it, 2 Pet. 2.19. for
conquest of this nature is on the Will, which never chooses an object, till it
love it. There only we can have a perfect Conquest over sin, where there will
be a perfect hatred of it. Here (in the best) there is but an incomplete
restoration of the image of God: The body of Nature and body of Sin are born
and must die together.

97 There is scarce a more hateful quality in the eyes of God or Man, than that
of the Herodians, who lie in wait to catch and to accuse an innocent man, Mark
12.13.

98 Some men eat and drink so long, that they are good for nothing, b^^ either
to lie down and sleep, or to rise up and play, to live to day and die to
morrow, having made their belly the grave of their souls and dungeon of reason,
Romans 13.12. -- 14.

99 Many a man needs no more to undo him, than his own desires; they are so
bad, that no enemy could wi^^ them worse than to be themselves (a Covetous
Midas's) being always desiring and laboring for that, which they resolve never
to use, and which will be to their hurt and ruin Eccl. 4.8. and 5.13. and 6.2.

100 It Is a mavelous stupidity and illogical, that the more continual
experience men have of the Vanity o^ the World, the more greedy experiments
they make, to find (if they could find out) solidity in it.

Alas! fond Child
What has thee so beguiled
To seek for Honey in a nest of Wasps?
Thou may as well
find ease in Hell,
And sprightly Nectar from the mouth of Asps.
Shall the World always make fools of us? or rather, we of our selves? Shall we
never take warning by others nor our own harms? Let the time past suffice, etc.
1 Pet. 4.3.

THE Third Century.
1 What good man had not rather want the thing he most desires, than obtain it
by unlawful and irreligious means? but means passions and Gods directions
seldom agree: such as too much attend their own ends, seldom confine
themselves to Gods means, Romans 3.8. 1 Timothy 6.9, 10.

2 They confess their own weakness as to Truth and Justice, who choose rather to
contend and conquer by force, than by Argument, Acts 4.14, -- 17.

3 It Is a sin against Hospitality, to open your doors, and shut up your
Countenance; be sweet, gracious, and free, let your looks be the Crystal to
your Disposition. Though a churl may bid all Welcome, yet he thinks none so;
though he may say, Eat and drink, yet his heart is not with thee, and his
courtesy seldom comes, but for gain or falsehood, as Solomon tells us, Prove.
23.3, 6, 7, 8. And on the other hand, how generously soever you entertain,
never compel him to surfeit, whom you invited to feast; nor to be drunk and lose
his own by another health, Hest. 1.7, 8.

4. It Is better to be above, than but even with an enemy: He that revengeth is
but even with him (as the phrase is) but he that pardons is above him; for so
much as a man is better than another, so much he is above him, Matthew. 5.44, --
48. And on the other hand, let no man offend on the presumption of a pardon;
for he seems to be in love with a fault (like Shimei) who had rather be
forgiven, than be innocent. It Is better not to need, than to have a pardon.

5 All humane Reason is so intermixed with wit and fancy, that many times a man
can hardly tell which is which: Reason has so many shapes, colors and forms,
that we know not which to take hold of; experience and events have as many:
What shall we do then? To the Law and to the Testimony, Isa. 8.20. Search the
Scripture, 2 Timothy 3.14, -- 17. Ephesians. 4.14.

6 As it is impertinent, yea mere vanity and very folly, to make a profession of
love to God, and yet to express none to our Neighbor, 1 John 3.17. and 4.20.
So it is in vain to pretend love to men's souls, while we show no love to their
bodies. Surely no man will thank another for killing him, though he should tell
him 'twere in kindness: It Is worse than he, that as a mad man casts
Firebrarnds, Arrows and Death, and says, Am not I in sport? Prove. 26.18, 19.
No man cares for such biting Jests and hurtful Sports, much less for injurious
Courtesies and killing Kindnesses. Persons may complement, and say they will do
this and that (and I know not what) for your service and welfare; but who can
look for service, where he sinds unfaithfulness and violence, 1 Samuel 18.25.

7 That the evil of sin is the greatest evil, appears by this, as well as many
other arguments, that (though other evils may be complained of and lamented,
yet) there is none to be repented of, but this of sin.

8 A man cannot do himself a greater kindness, nor better service, than to
serve God with his best, his all, and to his utmost: For as wicked men by the
evil of sin, bring an evil reward, or reward of evil, viz. the wages of sin,
upon their own Souls, Isa. 3.9, 11. So they who serve God will find that in
keeping his commands there is great reward, Psalm. 19. no less than eternal Life
by the gift of God, Romans 6.23. and therefore say to the Righteous, it shall be
well with them, for they shall, yea they shall eat the fruit of their doings,
Isa. 3.10.

9. The good man's best, and the bad man's worst, lies in shall be's, Isa. 3.10,
11. in reversion. Here Dives had nothing but his good things, but hereafter he
had no good thing. Here Lazarus had his evil things, but afterward no evil
thing. The good man when he dies takes his leave of, and departs from all evil;
and the evil man when he dies takes his leave of, and departs from all his
goods, which was all the good he had. Now he is comforted, but thou art
tormented, Luke 16.25. Oh it is a sad thing to have ones portion of good only in
this life, Psalm. 17.14.

10. The things of this World, viz. the lusts of the Eye, the lusts of the
Flesh, and the Pride of Life (which some call The Worlds Trinity) the God which
Worldlings worship, have many charms, and are bewitching: Many have been
enchanted by the god of this World, to make this World their God; and there is
no conquering, no nor avoiding the influence and force of its Philters, which
work on the sense, but by Faith and being strong in Faith, Heb. 11.25. 1 John
5.4, 5.

11 Our great desire and endeavor should be to be men of truth; true to God
and his Glory; true to our souls and their happiness; true to men and all the
offices of Love we owe to them; and we should owe no man any thing but love,
Ephesians. 4.15. Romans 13.8. Falsehood and Hypocrisy is ungodly, unmanly, and
unfriendly; it is odious to God and all men that discover it, and must needs be
hurtful to them that act it; for Matthew. 23.33.

12 It Is to be our Prayer and Care, not only to receive mercy from God, but to
improve it for God, and return the praise to God, Psalm. 116.12. yea, and that
according to the benefits which we receive, Psalm. 116.12. 2 Chronicles. 32.25. and
then 'twill be a more blessed thing to give than to receive, Acts 29.35. For
thankfulness, and giving God the praise, is the completing and crowning of all
our mercies, without which they are scarce to be called blessings, Psalm. 40.1,
2, 3. There are six degrees of mercy, and the New Song is the sweet close and
glorious Crown of all.

13 A good man would gladly be preserved, not only from miscarriages, but
mistakes, for they occasion miscarriages, not only from presumption, but
ignorance; not only from the known evil of his ways, but the unknown and
undiscerned secrets of his heart: and is impatient till he be so upright, as
not only, not to commit the great transgression, but that the thoughts of his
heart, the words of his mouth, and the works of his hands, may be all
acceptable to his God, Psalm. 19.12, -- 14.

14 Oh what a sad life do they live, who live in pleasures! Life do I say? No,
no, they are dead while they live, 1 Timothy 5.6. If we will say they live, we
must say, that it is but like Bedlams, who (and their pleasures also) are run
stark mad: For to this purpose is that of Solomon, Eccles. 2.2. or else they
are degenerated and metamorphosed into Beasts, Jer. 5.8.

15 Fondness is the sickness of love, by which children are taught to rebel, 1
Kings 1.5, 6. If it proceed not so far, yet they are very ill bred; for such
persons (as som-body says) teach their children to be Gentlewomen, before they
teach them to be women; to bridie their chins more than their tongues or pride
and passions; how to behave themselves in a Dance, better than in Company; how
to wear fine clothes, than how to do virtuously: thus they are put off (being
puffed up) with show without substance. But let us learn to teach children (to
whom much reverence is due) by word and deed, by doctrine and example, if ever
we expect they should prove dutiful to God and to us, and of any use to others
while they are in the World, 1 Samuel 3.13. Tit. 2.4, 5. Prove. 22.6. and 23.13,
14. and 13.24. and 19.18. and 22.15.

16 He that keeps Israel does neither slumber nor sleep, Psalm. 121.4. And how
safely and quictly may they sleep, for whom God is pleased to wake and watch?
Psalm. 4.8. and 3.5. Prove. 3.24.

17 Will Worship and Will-suffering are both bad; as is clear from Col. 2.23. 1
Cor. 13.3.

18 It Is no cure of Passion to delay it: For that which Athenodorus prescribed
to Augustus, to repeat the Alphabet between passion and revenge, is but boyish
and slight, as diverting the mind to a trifle; which is only to cousen, and not
to conquer the distemper: It Is like the cure of Empericks, which may allay, not
free a disease: it is best to pluck it up by the Roots; and how that is done, see
Gal. 4.24.

19 They dispute best, and are mos^ like to prevail, who use hard arguments and
soft words, Prove. 15.1. and 25.15. John 7.46.

20 An hypocrite is one who seems to be what he is not, and would not seem (nor
be seen) to be what he is. Matthew. 23.25, -- 28.

21 All men offend in many things, James 3.2. and many men offend in all they
do, Genesis 6.5.

22 If sinners be damned, it is just with God to damn them; if they be saved,
it is mercy from God, Romans 6.23.

23 When the Law of God is written in our hearts to teach us, our hearts will
be in the Law of God to do it, Psalm. 40.8. Heb. 8.10, 11.

24 If it be thy custom to sin, know that it is Gods custom to punish sinners,
as Romans 8.28. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12.

25 He that has God for him, need not fear what any (Man or Devil) can do
against him, Romans 8.31.

26 We can call nothing properly our own, but our sins; for all things else we
owe (and should pay) an acknowledgment to God; yea, even for our very miseries,
they being not only less than our iniquity deserves, Ezra 9.13. but (though of
sins procuring) are designed by God, not only to correct us for our evil, but
to instruct us for our good, Heb. 12.10. and It greatly becomes us to bear, and
concerns us to hear the Rod, Mic. 7.9. and Mic. 6.9. for, Prove. 3.11, 12. and
Psalm. 94.12.

27 Conscience, Credit and Friendship, are three of the most valuable things in
the World; but Conscience above any, 2 Cor. 1.12.

28 All Divine Writings, viz. the Holy Scriptures, contain more matter than
words, they have an infinite (unsearchable depth of) sense and meaning: but
many humane Writings have more words than matter, 1 Timothy 1.4. Tit. 3.9. 2 Timothy
3.15, 16, 17.

29 Persons intelligent and pious, will not be apt to value any Discourse for
witty, that cannot please the Fancy without offending the Conscience: nor ever
think it a demonstration of a man's wit, that he will adventure to be damned to
be thought one, as they do that abuse the Scripture, and turn the Grace of God
into Lasciviousness, and are wanton, if not profane, though but in Jest, Jude
4. Ephesians. 5.3, -- 6.

30 Self-love will make us admire and magnify any one that will admire and
magnify us, Gal. 4.17.

31 The best use we can make of others dissolutions, is to prepare for our own;
and the death of others does naturally mind us of our mortality; which calls
upon us to live well, seeing we dye daily, and may dye to day before to morrow:
and if this night our soul should be taken from us without Repentance, we shall
not only dye, but perish, Luke 13.3.

32 As for such as aspire to posthume Glory, it is to be admired to see their
ambition projecting beyond the Grave, but themselves (it may be) stepping short
of Heaven: Oh what Fools are they (how much soever applauded for Wits) who
attempt things they shall never see, and provide torments they shall ever feel,
Luke 12.20, 21. Psalm. 49.11, 12, 13. 'Twill be cold satisfaction, to have a
name recorded and celebrated in any Book (for Beauty, Wit, Valor, Riches,
etc.) if it be blotted out of the Book of Life, Exodus 32.33. Rev. 13.8. or were
never written in it, Rev. 20.15.

33 They who will not do themselves the right to practice Religion, should not
do Religion the wrong to profess it, Psalm. 50.16.

34 Affected hardness is usually followed and frequently punished with
inflicted hardness. The harder men's hearts are, the more they sin, and the more
they sin, the harder their hearts are, Heb. 3.13.

35 Religion is no Book-craft, nor Paper-skill. Man indeed may teach the
Tongues, but God only the things: Man may teach the Grammar and Rhetoric, but
God teaches the Divinity of revealed Truths: Man may teach the ear, but God
only teaches the heart, 1 Cor. 3.7. Heb. 8.10, 11.

35 We are to do all we do to glorify God, and to do it so that God may be
glorified, 1 Cor. 10.31. which is not by communicating any glory to him, for
that we cannot, but by receiving his grace into us, that it may animate and act
us, and thereby we be like him and please him: For It Is all one in Scripture
Phrase, to glorify and to please God. Father, glorify thy self, John 12.28.
and, Father, thy Will be done, Matthew. 26.39.

36 Light, foolish and idle talk, has nothing of weight in it, unless it be,
that it is a burden to the hearers; and such men do best at last, viz. when
they make an end of talking, Ephesians. 4.29. Prove. 30.22. and 29.11. Eccles. 10.12,
-- 15. Prove. 26.7, 9. Eccl. 7.5.

37 Time and leisure is not given to any man, that he might do nothing, or
(which is worse) that they might do evil, but that they might do good and well,
Psalm. 90.12. Ephesians. 5.15, 16. As for Sports and Pastimes, the best of them come
so near to idleness, and the worst of them to vice, that as the one is not to
be allowed any, so the other no considerable part of our time, Eccl. 9.10. and
11.9. and 12.1.

38 Many men live as if they had no souls to save, or at least, as if they had
no mind to save their souls, Prove. 8.36. which some read (spernit animam) he
despises his soul, as if 'twere good for nothing but to be damned: and as we
read it, it is to show, that sinners do nothing but wrong and undo themselves;
they are Felones dese, self-murtherers, Luke 12.20, 21.

39 Some men (and some called Gentlemen) scorn to pray to God, as much as to
beg of men, Job 21.13, 14, 15. And some care for only so much Religion, as will
save their credit in this World, and not their souls in the other World: Virtue
and Godliness (they think) are good names and words, but they will have no
acquaintance with the things, 2 Timothy 3.5.

40 Some men instead of laying up their treasure in Heaven, lay up and place
heaven in their treasure, Luke 12.20, 21. They make Gold their God, Job 31.24.
yet (it may be) can be content to hear of honoring God, so long as it is not
with their substance, Prove. 3.9.

41 Without Gods assistance, we can do nothing, John 15.5. 2 Cor. 3.5. and
without Gods blessing, all we do will come to nothing, 1 Cor. 3.7.

42 We should rather heal than discover, yet rather discover than flatter the
vices of them with whom we converse, Gal. 2.14.

43 We should so speak, as that none may be the worse, but all the better for
hearing us; that all may be brought to the love of goodness and hatred of sin,
by our discourse, Ephesians. 4.29. Col. 4.6.

44 It Is very hungry-wit that can feed on such nauseous diet, as deridingly to
discourse of, and rejoice at, other men's infirmities or calamities, yea though
they be enemies, Prove. 23.17. Job 31.29. Prove. 17.5. Psalm. 35.15. And it is very
dwarfish-wit, base, low, and sordid (like that of Ziba) which cannot tell how
to advance it self, but by trampling on others reputation, 2 Samuel 16.3.

45 When riches increase, we should not be affected with them; nor when they
decrease, should we be afflicted for them: Transports and Torments are equally
to be avoided. A man should never lose the serenity and calmness of his mind,
either in enjoyments or in dis-appointments, in gains or losses. How and where
to learn it, see Phil. 4.11, 12, 13.

46 He has not spent his life ill, who has learned to die well: in order to
which we must above all endeavor that our sins may die, and we may see them
dead before our selves, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57.

47 He can never live contentedly, that fears to die. It Is no great thing to
live, slaves and beasts can do that; but it is a great thing to live and die
well, 2 Timothy 4.6, 7.

48 It Is a good and cheap time to die in, when to live is rather a burden,
than a blessing; and there is more evil in life, than good: and indeed there
are many things in life, worse than death; beside our sins, our sicknesses, and
sometime physic too, that many times we undergo many deaths to avoid one: but
yet it is best to submit to God both for time and way; and it is our duty to live
and use good means to live as long as we can, that we may bring glory to God,
whether by doing or suffering, Isa. 57.1. Phil. 1.20, -- 25.

49 The best way never to be crossed in our desires, is to make Gods Will our
own: by this we shall never miss of having our own free choice in all things,
Matthew. 26.39. and we should never say (Fiat volunt as mea nisi quia tua) our
will be done, but only as and because it is Gods, James 4.15.

50 Obedience and well doing is the good man's wages as well as work; and he
will be doing good, though he do good for nothing else: and they who do not
good, are (as we say) too good, that is starke-naught, and good for nothing at
all, Psalm. 14.4, 5.

51 The pain of getting, the care of keeping, and fear of losing, takes away
much of the comfort of having riches: See Solomon's Ecclesiastes.

52 He is the true Gentleman, who is Gods Servant, the Worlds Master, and Sins
Conqueror, Heb. 11.25.

53 It Is cold comfort to see ones enemy in a bad, and not ones self in a good
condition; that he is miserable, and we not happy: which we can never be, if
our sin be not subdued, as well as (and which is the worst of) our enemies.
It Is to be base, to conquer men, and be conquered by lusts, Prove. 16.32.

54 Man made sin, and sin unmakes (for it unmans, and by taking away the
likeness of God ungods) man: or man does sin, and sin does, undo man, Prove.
8.34. Ezekiel. 16.

55 He that is not so good as he may be in his present condition, is not like
to be as good as he should be in another condition: we do but flatter and abuse
our selves with promises and purposes of what we will be, while we neglect to
be what we ought, Eccles. 9.19. Deuteronomy. 5.27, -- 29.

56 He that does not do good for Gods-sake in a time of prosperity, is not like
to suffer evil for Gods-sake in a day of adversity: and so backward, Job 2.10.
Eccles. 7.14.

57 Ambition is never quiet, but restless and incroaching, crying like the
Horse-leech, Give, Give: at first it longs to be next the best, then to be
equal with the best, and then to be chief above the best: and what it ends in,
may be observed in Absalom, Haman and Julius Caesar, etc. They that will by
unlawful means climb highest, are like to fall lowest: for Pride is the Usher
to a Fall, Prove. 16.18.

58 Friends usually fail them that fly, as either suspecting the persons and
their cause, or fearing what they may suffer for their sakes, 1 Samuel 21.1. 1 Samuel 29.4, 5.

59 Man is not only born, but newborn to trouble, Matthew. 16.24. 2 Timothy 3.12.

60 It Is too usual in prosperity to forget the threatenings, Hos. 2.13. and in
adversity to forget the promises of God, Isa. 49.14, -- 17.

61 Many times when men come to a We will, God comes to a You shall: the
judgment is as their sin: and God is as much set on his will for judgment, as
men are set on their will for sin, 1 Samuel 8.19. Hos. 13.11. Psalm. 109.17, 18.

62 Worldly men are for the rudiments of the World, because they bring in the
things of the World; and cry out, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, because she
brings no small gain unto the Craftsmen, and by which they have all their
wealth, Acts 19.24, 35, 28. Hence it is that the Pope prevails more than a
General Council, because he has Places and Preferments to bestow, and they
have none, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5.

63 It Is made a question by some, which is better, the War that brings Peace,
or the Peace that brings War? but surely, we should endeavor to have Peace
with God and all men, and to War with nothing but the Devil, the Flesh and Sin,
Ephesians. 6.12.

64 Though men may pluck my heart out of my bowels, they shall never pluck the
truth (nor the love of it) out of my heart, was the saying of (and becoming) a
Martyr.

65 If the Word of God slay not the sin of man, yet twill slay the Man of Sin,
2 These. 2.8. and the man that goes on in sin, Hos. 6.5.

66 God made man to serve him, and he that serves God is a made man: for
Godliness is the making (the enriching and exalting) of a man. A man is made
for ever when he is newmade, 1 Timothy 4.8.

67 If Gods Precepts be far from our hearts, his Ear will be far from our
Prayers, Prove. 1.28.

68 Sleep, which is the Shadow of Death, is the Nurse of Nature, the
Parenthesis of our Cares, Griefs, and Troubles; and Death is the Periodus, the
full stop, point, or end of them all, if we die in the Lord, Revel. 14.13. The
Resurrection is the beginning of a new Verse, or Paragraph, yea of the whole
Tract of Eternal Life, to the Children of the Resurrection, John 5.29.

69 Though it be a misery to have a sinful heart, yet it is a mercy to see it
so; for Conviction is the first step to Conversion: and though there are many
vile enough (as to their state) to be damned, yet there are but few vile enough
(as to their sense in their own eyes) to be saved, or to cry out, What shall we
do to be saved? Acts 2.

70 The Professors of and Pleaders for merit, would be loath to use such
arguments before God in Prayer (which is a little day (or the emblem of the
Day) of Judgment) before God, as they do in dispute, before Men: as, I am
worthy for whom thou should do this. Though some did plead it for the man,
yet the man durst not plead it for himself, as Luke 7.4. with 7.

71 There Is not so great a difference, between the highest Saint in Heaven, and
the lowest Saint on Earth, for it is but (gradu) in degree; as there is between
the lowest Saint on Earth and the highest Man (if but a Man) on Earth; for it is
(specie) a difference in kind, Prove. 12.26. and God loves the lowest Saint,
more than the highest Angel does love God.

72 When Christians goods are spoiled and taken from them for Christ's sake, Men
take what is not, but God what is his own: and yet he will place it to their
account, and reward them abundantly, if not in this Life, yet in that to come;
if not in kind, yet in kindness, which is infinitely better, Heb. 10.34. Matthew.
19.29.

73 It might be just with God to make them go naked for want, who go naked for
wantonness; and to suffer them to be bespotted with the Name of proud, etc. who
bespot themselves for the fame of beauty: and though charity command me to
believe, that some women which hang out signs, will not lodge strangers; yet
these Mock-Guests (as one calls them) seem guilty of tempting others to tempt
them, Genesis 38.14, 15, 16. Prove. 7.15, 16, 17.

74 'Twere to be wished there were more and fairer proportion, between
Profession and Practice: That men would do as they say; and not only talk of,
but walk in Christ and the Spirit: and not only adorn themselves, their houses,
and their books, with fine, gay and golden clothing, hangings and covers: but
that they would adorn the inner man with a meek and quiet Spirit, and the outer
man with Good Works, and by both the Doctrine of God our Savior; for he is a
very piteous Christian, who in words confesses, but in works denies Christ,
Gal. 4.25. Col. 2.6. 1 Timothy 2.9, 10. 1 Pet. 3.4. Titus 2.10. and 1.16. How can
he be true to the Will of God, that is false to his own word?

75 Wicked men do not only depart from God, but bid God depart from them, Job
21.14. but woe unto them, when God takes them to their word, Hos. 9.12. and when
they shall hear that dreadful Sentence, Depart from me ye cursed, Matthew. 25.41.
Sin and damnation have one Name, departure from God.

76 We have great reason to acknowledge our beholdenness to God, for the time
that is past, and as great to own our dependence on God, for the time to come;
and are by both hugely and strongly obliged to glorify God, Dan. 5.23.

77 Thinking time, if well improved, may be some of our best time, and we may
be in good company when alone. There is a Story of a Gentleman, who on his
Deathbed laid this one command upon his wild son, and engaged him to the
performance of it by a solemn promise, viz. That he should spend some time
every day in retired thinking, but left him at liberty to think on what he
would: Being under this promise, and having this liberty, he addresses himself
to perform the one, and enjoy the other; one day recalling his past pleasures,
another contriving new delights; but at length becomes inquisitive after his
Fathers design and end, in requiring this penance: He knew his Father to be a
wise and good man, and therefore concluded his design to be so too; that his
intent could be no other, but to bring him to consider his ways, and whither
they tended, and what would become of him ^f he were not religious, but should
^ive and dye in his sin: which was by a divine hand set so home, that he was
restless till it was made effectual to his becoming a new man. Happy Command!
happy Promise! happy Performance! happy Time! happy Employment! happy success!
Somebody has a saying, that Consideration is half Conversion, and that a
considerative person is not far, nor is like to be long from the Kingdom of
Heaven. The great complaint God makes of men, is this, that they are not men,
i. e. rationally considering and reflecting on their ways, Isa. 1.3. and
44.19. As if 'twere impossible for men to act sinfully, if they would act
rationally; and therefore calls on them to show themselves men, Isa. 46.8. When
the Proding came to himself, he quickly went to his Father.

78 When men (as the Apostle Paul does often) use Hyperbolies in speaking of
Grace and Glory, it makes the highest of them, but seeming ones: for they are a
Thence, on which it is easy for a man to speak much, but impossible to speak
too much, or well enough; there is want in the words that are, and want of more
words than there are, to tell us the All of Grace and Glory, Ephesians. 3.18, 19. and
3.8. 2 Cor. 4.17. 1 John 3.1, 2, 3.

79 Of the two, Promises bind Faith more than threatenings do; and we should
ever be (as God is) more ready to promise than threaten, and to perform them,
rather than execute these, Psalm. 103.8, 9.

80 He must be of a very weak Understanding, or very perverse Will, who is so
illogical, as to conclude from the ill practice of men professing a good
Religion, that the Religion is bad; and will not distinguish between Fact and
Faith, Practice and Principle: and so is he that will give way to such
inconsequential reasonings, as to conclude from one bad, or some bad, that all
are so: That because Judas was a Traitor, none of the Disciples were true,
faithful and honest. It Is impertinent and absurd, to say, This is their
Religion, and they are all alike.

81 Conscience is a Deputy-God (as Moses was made a God to Pharaoh) 1. To
declare the Will of God. 2. To instigate to the doing thereof: And 3. To bring
Plagues and Terrors, if it be not obeyed, Romans 2.15.

82 To sin is humane-like, to grieve for it is Saint-like, but to persevere in,
and to boast of it, is Devil-like, John 8.44.

83 Every sin transgresses Gods Command; but they who prefer the Traditions of
men before the Commands of God, do make his Commands of none effect, Math.
15.6, -- 9. and Mark 7.7, -- 13.

84 A man may conceive more in an hour, than all the greatest of Kings or
Emperors did ever enjoy; as Rocks of Diamond, Heaps of Pearl, Mountains of
Gold; but it is impossible to think what God is able to do, or to conceive what
God will do for them that love him, Ephesians. 3.20. 1 Cor. 2.9.

85 It Is not the Faith of sense, which is seeing, nor the Faith of Reason,
which is knowing, but the Faith of Revelation, which is believing, that the
Gospel requires, He^. 11.1. John 20.31.

86 Where there is not quiet in passive Obedience, the sincerity of active may
be doubted, Job 4.3, 4, 5.

87 We should look to it, that we be gracious, as well as virtuous, and not
only be conformable to the dictates of Philosophy, but of Divinity: We should
do good, not only for others sake, or our own sake, or Virtues sake, but for
Gods sake. We then do well, (and shall hear it said, Well done good and
faithful servants) when the good we do is from the love of God as the
Principle, 1 John 5.3. by the Will of God as the Rule, Gal. 6.16. and to the
Glory of God as the End, 1 Cor. 10.31.

88 Some men are so impudently wicked, that though they take Gods Name into
their Mouth, yet they hate to be reformed; and because God is silent, they
think he gives consent, and that he is such an one as themselves, Psalm. 50.16,
-- 21. that God is as much a lover of sin as they are: for Mal. 2.17. they
stick not to say, Every one that does evil, is good in the sight of the Lord,
and he delights in them: or, Where is the God of Judgment? and Because
Judgment is not executed speedily, therefore their heart is fully set to do
evil, Eccles. 8.11. God is scarce known or acknowledged, but as he is a God of
Judgment, Psalm. 9.16. Now seeing nothing else but Judgment will convince them,
hence it is that David, Jeremiah, etc. do so often pray for Judgment on the
wicked, viz. that they may know they are but men, Psalm. 9.20. that they may
seek thy Name, O Lord, that they may know, that thou whose Name is Jehovah, art
most High over all the earth, Psalm. 83.16, 18. They pray for evil to do them
good, and seem to curse them that they may be blessed: For such cursings are
not the imprecations of their spirit, but the predictions of Gods Spirit, to
signify, not what they desire may be, but what God threatens shall be, their
condition, if they persist in their sin, and what they deserve for having
sinned. They that call for fire from Heaven, know not what spirit they are of.
Bless and curse not, yea bless them that curse you, and pray for them that
despitefully use you, and perhaps both they will be, and you will speed, the
better, Matthew. 5.44, 45. To curse any person or thing passionately, is an
infirmity at least, but to do it maliciously is impiety at the best.

89 No man can positively and infallibly say what God will do with the Man of
Sin, as to the particulars of his punishment, or the time of it; nor how God
will recover the World from under the power of Antichristianism: It Is to be
wished it may be (and some believe it will be) by the Sword of the Spirit, the
Word of God, rather than by the Sword of War and the wrath of man; by
conversion, than by confusion, by turning hearts, than by taking away lives.
Surely next to sin, nothing can be more cross and dreadful to a Christian
Genius and Spirit, than war. It Is sad to think of fighting and dying, but
sadder to think of damning. I should be very jealous of, and angry with my
self, should I find an inclination to please my self in the ruin, the death,
especially in the damnation of any person: and I am pretty confident, that if
it might pass according to the Votes of good men, they would all wish and pray,
that no one person might sin any more or perish for ever: and whatever shakings
yet remain for this world, till the Judgment Day, that they may begin and end
only in holiness, and be managed with a meek and quiet Spirit, Isa. 2.4. Hag.
2.6, 7. Jam. 3.13, -- 18.

90 To hold Communion with men that are sinners, and not to have Communion with
their sins, is an excellent sociable spirit: To extend it where the Rule
commands, and deny it where the Rule forbids, qualifies us to converse with God
and Men, 1 Cor. 5.9, 10, 11. Ephesians. 5.6, -- 17. 1 John 1.3, -- 7.

91 If we have not been thankful for great mercies, God may and sometime does
take them away, that he may bring us to have a great value, and to be thankful
for the least of mercies, Lam. 3.22. 2 Kings 20.16. -- 20.

92 The heart may be (allowably) touched and feel, when objects of (...) and
grief present themselves to, and are upon us. God allows us to give Nature its
due, provided we deny not him his due. Our blessed Lord and Savior was
sensible of such things, Heb. 4.15. and without it a man should be not only a
Stoic, but a Stock; and 'twould be no exercise or trial of grace, if matter of
grief and fear were not perceived and felt, Heb. 12.11.

93 God rested not from his work of Creation, till man was made; nor can man
rest from his pursuits after the Creation, till God be enjoyed, Psalm. 73.25.
Fecisti nos Domine propter te, nec acquiescimus donec ad te perveniamus, said
St. Austine; thou made us for thy self. O Lord, and we are not quiet, till we
come unto thee. And it is only in the God-Man Christ Jesus, that God is, and we
can be well pleased.

94 Love is the fulfilling of the Law, Faith the fulfilling of the Gospel, and
both the fulfilling of Christian Religi^^ ^^al. 5.6.

95 It is as clear by Scripture Light that Christ is God, as it is by Natures
light, that there is a God, Romans 9.5. Psalm. 14.1.

96 Though they that write or speak of the Holy Scripture, may decline a
Rhetorical style; the subject needs but few of its Ornaments, as not necessary;
and rejects many as indecencies, mis-becoming the Majesty of so sacred a thing,
1 Cor. 2.1, -- 5. and verse. 13. yet this great Apostle, that he might gain
upon, became all things to, all men, as being debtor to the wise and to the
unwise or unlearned, Romans 1.14, 15. and therefore we find him not only
dis^uting strenuously, and contending earnestly for the faith, Acts 17. but
using a flowing eloquence, and the flowers of Rhetoric very often, and
sometimes quoting their Poets too.

97 Through want to be destitute, or through will to deprive our selves of food
and raiment, is the one our misery, the other our folly, not any Mortification;
which is not in denying the body necessaries, but in abridging it of its
irregular sensual appetites, Col. 2.23.

98 Were the Scriptures sufficiently understood, they would be highly
venerated: and they that would keep others from reading of them, do (as Saul by
his rash adjuration) withold them from eating that honey, which being tasted,
did not only gratify the Palate, but enlighten the Eyes, Psalm. 19.7, -- 10.

99 There Is great difference between doing and being obedient to the Will of
God; The ground of Religious Obedience is, because God commands the things to
be done, more than that they are good in themselves: Doing a thing because most
suitable to Nature, or because it pleases us, speaks Morality; but doing it
because God commands it, and to please him, speaks true Religion and the
Obedience of Faith, Matthew. 7.21, 22, 23. 1 John 3.21, 22.

100 When men have sinned, how pleasant so ever they may taste it, yet they will
feel it lie so cross and scurvily in their breasts, that they will take no
pleasure to look into themselves, or be sensibly pricked and pained, if they
have the hardiness so to do, Genesis 4.13. Job 20.12, -- 14.

THE Fourth Century.
1 MAny persons that at first believed in Christ but upon report, are
afterward (by better acquaintance) brought to believe on him on his own
account, John 9.39, -- 42.

2 Is it not more truly honorable and glorious to serve that God, who commands
all the World, and will crown his Servant with glory; than to be a slave to
those passions and lusts, which put men upon continual hard service, and
torment them for it, when they have done? Matthew. 27.3, -- 5.

3 Two things should be much laid to heart by us, the sin of our Nature, Psalm.
51.5. Romans 7.24. and the Nature of Sin, 1 John 3.4.

4 If we come to Christ, he will not cast us out, John 6.37. but if we do not
come to him, we cast away our selves, Prove. 8.36. John 8.24.

5. The Commands of God show us what our power was, what our duty is, and what
our prayer should be: Da quod jubes, and jube quod vis, Give us Lord to do what
thou command, and command us to do what thou will, Psalm. 143.10.

6 The Work of Creation is called but the Work or Gods Fingers, Psalm. 8.4. or
his Hands at most, v. 6. and 19.1. but the Work of Redemption is wrought with
(...) Arm, Luke 1.51.

7 The Persons who are recorded to have been eminent in one particular Grace,
have yet miscarried in not acting according but contrary to that Grace: As
Abraham for Faith, yet denied his Wife from Unbelief: Moses for Meekness, yet
excluded Canaan for Passion: Job for Patience, yet how Impatient? for though he
never did as the Devil said he would, and his Wife tempted him to do, viz.
Curse God, yet he came near it, in cursing the Day of his Birth: Saint Peter
for Courage, yet denied Christ, and afterward (which was a spice of the old
disease) he dissembled for fear, Gal. 2.12.

8 When a Manichee contended with Saint An^stine, and cried out, Hear me, Hear
me, the good Father modestly answered, Nec ego te, nec tu me, sed ambo audiamus
Apostolum, I will not hear thee, nor do thou hear me, but let us both hear the
Apostle: so the Papists cry out, Hear the Fathers, hear the Fathers, but we may
answer, Let Us hear the Apostles and Prophets, who were the Grand and Great
Grandfathers, Ephesians. 2.20.

9 Man-fallen is Man-inverted, and turned clean-contrary to what he was: his
love is where his hatred should be, his glory where his shame etc. He accounts
strictness a sin, and sin a bravery, Tit. 3 3. Phil. 3. Col. 1.21. So that we
may exclaim as one does, Good God! Whither is man fallen! at first we practice
sin, then defend it, then boast of it; it is at first (perhaps) a burden, then
a custom, and then a delight: but at last 'twill be an hell! as in Cain and
Judas.

10 They are both deceived: (1) Who say, no matter how we believe, but how we
live; and (2) They who say, no matter how we live, but how we believe: The
truth is, We must believe and live in the Truth, or else we shall not be saved
by the Truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12.

11 Gods love to his, will not suffer him to depart from them, and their fear
of him and love to him, will not suffer them to depart from him, Jer. 32.40.
nothing shall separate them from the love of God in Christ, Romans 8.39.

12 When we are in Prosperity, we are prone to lay our hearts too near it,
Psalm. 62.10. and when we are in Adversity, we are as prone to lay it too near
our hearts, Psalm. 77.6, -- 9.

13 The fear of an higher Power in Heaven, should balance and byas them that
are high in power on Earth: The greatest men have at one time or other met with
their match, but the Great God never met with his, Job 31.13, 14. and 38.3. and
40.2, 8, 9. and 42.2, 3. 1 Cor. 10.22. Acts 5.39. and 23.9.

14 Books are a memory without us, and memory is a Book within us. God has his
Books too, which will be opened: happy they for whom, but miserable they
against whom they shall be opened, Mal. 3.16. Revel. 20.12.

15 God declares himself Three Ways, (1) By his Works to the Eye. (2) By his
Word to the Ear: and (3) By his Spirit to the Heart: Blessed are the Eyes
which see, the Ears which hear, and the Hearts which receive the declarations
of God, Matthew. 13.16. and Luke 8.15. but woe to others, Matthew. 13.13, 14. Romans
1.19, 20.

16 The New Creature is but a Creature, and though it have Communion with God,
it cannot be God: Divine it may, a Deity it cannot be. Let them consider it,
that talk so madly of being godded with God, etc.

17 An hard-heart is the Devils Cushion, he sits softest on an heart of stone,
2 Cor. 4.4. compared with Ephesians. 4.18.

18 A Wise Man may learn much of or by a Fool, but a Fool (especially the
conceited one) will not learn any thing of a Wise Man, Prove. 1.7. and 26.12.

19 Though we have learnt to call and celebrate the World and things thereof by
the great Names of Grandeur and Gallantry, by the pleasing Names of Pleasure
and Prettiness, by the affected Names of Honor and Happiness, by the taking
Names of Beauty and Bravery; yet we do but miscall and flatter it (yea abuse
out selves to boot) for it is proper Names are far otherwise: Vanity of Vanities
being it is first (Pronomen) and Vexatiof Spirit it is second and Surname,
(Cognomen) as the great and searching Antiquary found them to be, Eccl. 1.1, 2.

20 God will not be put off with a mouth full of good words; it is in vain to
say to him Lord, Lord, by way of Profession, Prayer, and Appeal, if we do not
do his Will: for though we may plead with him, and quote our many preachments,
etc. yet he will profess, that he never knew us, no not then when casting out
Devils, etc. but will bid us depart as Workers of Iniquity, even then when we
pretended to preach up Holiness, and to cast out the Devil and all his Works,
Matthew. 7.21, 22, 23.

21 They mourn for sin on the best account, who mourn for it as the worst of
evils, and herein the worst, (...) it is against God, Psalm. 51.4. and they that
do so, will mourn for other men's sins as for their own, for they are against
God also; and it may be feared, they never truly grieved for their own, who can
rejoice at other men's, 1 Cor. 13.6.

22 When we make other men's sins our own, they will make us smart as much as if
they were our own: And we may call other men's, our-other men's sins, not only
when we command and counsel, or take pleasure in their sin, but when we do not
reprove them for their sin, and use all due means to prevent or to remove their
sin, 1 Kings 12.28, 30. 1 Samuel 3.13.

23 Philosophy and Moral Discourses may teach men the Art of concealing their
Vices, the way how to cu^ off the luxuriant branches and excrescencies of
corruption: but the Scripture-Doctrine only teaches the way o^ subduing and
putting them to death, by laying its Axe to the root of the Tree the very
Heart. Moral Doctrine man kelp to make good men, but 'twi^ never make good
Christians; for w^ are such only by learning of Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 4.20, -- 24.

24 Alas! How often are many men's Virtues nothing else but the results and
effects of their Vices? It Is Covetousness makes some Temperate; and Ambition
makes others Liberal and Just; nay Lust makes some so religious as to pray,
James 4.3. but they either ask and miss, or else are punished with the grant
of their own desires. Oh what a sorry thing is man? how few are there that know
themselves? how often are the actions commendable, and not the man? Welfare
simplicity and godly sincerity, which make not only the actions, but the
persons approved, 2 Cor. 1.12.

25 Of all the store of Vanities which are in the World, Eccles. 1.2. Man is
one of the greatest, Psalm. 39.5. and of all men, the Irreligious Atheists, who
(brainsick that they are) endeavor to be worse than they can; for they offer
violence to the faculties and inclinations of their own souls: and wish that
with, and say that in their hearts, which for their hearts they cannot
steadfastly believe, Psalm. 14.1. so that though they may have a great deal of
security, it is impossible they should have any satisfaction.

26 We should be very careful to behave our selves so, as to give all persons
occasion to love us, at least to give none an occasion to hate or despise us,
Heb. 12.14. 1 Timothy 4.12.

27 What an uneasy and sickly condition is poor man in? full of impatiency and
discontent! all about him is Vanity, himself in his best estate is Vanity, yea
altogether, Psalm. 39.5. Weariness attends not only his labor by day, but his
sleep and rest by night: what of frights, what of dreams, what of very long
lying, the man's not at ease in an easy bed!

28 The most laborious and principal study is to study ones self, to know ones
self; how to live at home and converse alone: not only company, but Books
seduce us from it. Meditation is a large and powerful study to them that can
employ themselves in it. Too many peruse others more than themselves (as some
study Humane Writings more than Divine) it is more easy and a diversion; and we
being idle seek these things for pastime, as if time lay heavy on our hands,
and we had not employment enough in our selves, Psalm. 4.4. and 39.3, 4.

29 How many different and all very poor things, do many persons entertain and
comfort themselves with when they come to die; either the great Name and Estate
they shall leave behind them, or the confidence of their childrens worth, or
the avoiding of this lives mischiefs, or the revenge that hangs over their
heads who have been procurers of their death: such as these are the miserable
comforts that many men have. But on the other hand, how many are tormented with
the sting of sin and a guilty conscience, with the fear of dying and shame of
living, or with solicitudes and thoughtfulness of what will become of that and
them they shall leave behind. Ah how few can meet death half way, and welcome
it as a friend? Surely none but they who have kept faith and a good conscience,
2 Timothy 4.6, 7, 8. How few are fit and willing to die? Surely none, but they who
are in Christ Jesus, Phil. 1.23. Romans 14.8.

30 Here below there is no satisfaction (for any, but disquietment for all) but
them that are of an heavenly and divine mind, who live to and hope to live with
God, Psalm. 39.6, 7.

31 In the Old Testament, the Prophesies of the latter days were of good and
glorious times, but in the New Testament, the latter days are foretold to be
apostatizing and perilous; bad for suffering, and worse for sinning, 1 Timothy
4.1. 2 Timothy 3.1.

32 It Is natural to own and acknowledge a God, Romans 1.19. but to own and
acknowledge Jesus Christ to be Son of the Living God, is supernatural, Matthew.
16.17. and to know the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, is
Eternal Life, and this only, John 17.3.

33 The very questions and debates about the Souls Immortality, is a proof that
it is so: for as none can distinguish between rational and irrational, who have
not a rational soul; So none can distinguish between Mortal and Immortal, who
have not an Immortal Soul. Even so the controversies that are about the Mystery
of Godliness, do prove that without Controversy great is the Mystery of
Godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16.

33 Books that contain pleasure and profit are most likely to be liked, at
least it is most rational that they should; as profiting the more because they
delight, and delighting the more because they profit: by this rule the Book of
Books (the Bible) should be most acceptable, 2 Timothy 3.15, 17.

34 How poor a thing is man! and humane life! The Vanities of Childhood, the
wanderings and unsettlements of Youth, the Cares, if not Vexations of Married,
the desires and longings of Unmarried Folks, the diseases and other
ill-attendants of Old Age, make life a wearisome thing; yet few care, and fewer
are fit, to die. We may cry out as he, O Solon! yea O Solomon! Eccles. 11.1.
and 12.1. and 12.13.

35 Take man in his acquired accomplishments, as Learning, etc. by which one
would think to find him much refined and harmonized, yet here he is much-what
as he was before, giddy, straying and uncertain: There is no man, but on
examination and experience must yield, that time or more exact discovery, has
discarded, often dis-credited, if not wholly dis-opinioned his former opinions;
the inconsistency and ambulatoriness of the age of man will evince it. In
Childhood, the greatest good in our opinion was Play; then Pleasure, then
Conquest, then Honor, then Gain succeeded, confuted, and wore out each other:
and if there be so much of detrusion and justling in those opinions which be
natural to us, how much more in those that be acquired? so that in all
conditions from his Cradle to his Grave (where he must lie ere long) man does
little but lifquiet himself, Psalm. 39.6.

36 He that has most riches is most in debt, for he owes God, not only for
what he is, but for more than he is worth, Genesis 32.10. 1 Chronicles. 29.16.

37 He that looks often on beauty, is like to be troubled with sore eyes, Job
31.1. Matthew. 5.28. and (if he take not heed) with a sinning heart, for the eye
not only affects but infects the heart; as at first, so still, Genesis 3.6.

38 We may love him or her too too much, but we can never love them well, with
or for whom we can be willing to sin and venture to be damned, or at best to
buy repentance at a dear rate: for they are woeful pleasures, that we must
repent of or be damned for, and such are all the pleasures of sin, Prove. 7.22,
23. and 5.7, -- 14. and 7.24, -- 27.

39 Ever since Eve sinned, the daughters of men (as one says) have been
troubled with fits of the Mother, viz. Curiosity and Pride, and I may add, they
will never be cured till they do become the Daughters of Sarah, 1 Pet. 3.1, --
6. 1 Timothy 2.9, -- 15. As the Sons of Adam are cured of the bruise they got by
his Fall, in becoming the Sons of Abraham, Gal. 3.29. Romans 4.12.

40 Seeing we have lived here and must die, and yet live after death, and
others succeed us when we are gone, we are greatly concerned to send before us
a very good treasure, Matthew. 6.19, 20. 1 Timothy 6.18, 19. to carry with us a very
good conscience, 2 Timothy 4.6, 7. and to leave behind us a very good example,
John 13.15. Phil. 3.17. 1 Timothy 4.12.

41 Antichrist is not only one that opposes Christ, but also one that puts
himself in the place of Christ, pretending to act for him, but indeed acts
against him. See Dr. More's Idea of Antichristianisme. There were those that
were called Christ's, yet were Antichrists, Matthew. 24.23, 24. 1 John 3.4. 2 Ep.
of John 7. Many called Gods that were but Idols, and accordingly there are to
this day them that are called Christians in Name, but are indeed
Antichristians. Let Papists look to it.

42 In transgressing the First Table we do sin against God, yet may not sin
against man; but in transgressing the Second Table we sin not only against man
but against God also: and in many cases God has shown himself more offended
with the breach of the Second Table, than with omitting some duties against the
First, Matthew. 9.13. and 12.7. and Isa. 1.11, -- 16. and always declares them to
be but pretenders to the obedience of the first, who are not practisers of the
Second, 1 John 3.17. and 4.20. and is most severely angry with them that make
the duties of the first a Cloak for their breach of the second, Matthew. 23.14.

43 Many men do not only choose Hell, but purchase it, as Judas did; they will
not inherit Hell, but pay for it. They who (as Judas) sell their salvation, buy
their damnation.

44 The Irascible (as Anger, etc.) do more hurt than the Concupiscible (as
Love, etc.) Passions; these are indeed more sensual, but those are more
Devilish, Jam. 3.14, 15.

45 We do not more need the zeal of generous Love, than the caution of
well-advised Fear, which has resisted as many and as strong temptations, and
done as great things as Love, Genesis 22.12. Heb. 11.17. and God that bids us
love, bids us also fear him: both are to be exercised; and they are then well
employed, when we love to please the God we fear, and fear to displease the God
we love. Whom should we fear but God, who can do most against us? or love but
God, who has done, can and will do most for us?

46 Patience is an excellent temperate Grace, it was never injurious to any;
but as it is happy to it self, so it is always innocent to others: Its
ambitions of nothing but Martyrdom, Jam. 1.4.

47 There is no valor to that of Christian Fortitude, which had rather suffer
the greatest injuries, than do the least, Matthew. 5.39, -- 41.

48 Nothing is unthankful but evil Angels and wicked men: For not only the Ox
knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib, Isa. 1.3. but (Stories tell us
of) Beasts of Prey, who have usually no bowels of mercy, nor sense of Justice,
have yet a kind of ingenuity to remember benefits. Lions have done so.

49 As health consists in temperament, so the best way to preserve it is
temperance: And it is good for the Souls health also, 2 Pet. 1.6. and as good
health makes the Body, so a good Conscience the Soul (and both make the man)
happy.

50 Vain men having set their hearts on an earthly Beauty, idolize it with a
Divine Love; and we may observe them in their Courting, to run out into
deifying and adoring Complements: which plainly shows, that the natural
instinct and inclination of Love ascends to a Divinity. Oh therefore set your
affections on God above, where the way of life is to them that are wise, Prove.
15.24. For as it is impossible to look directly upward and downward with the
eyes of the body at the same time, so no less to love God and Mammon, Matthew.
6.24. Col. 3.1, 2. 1 John 2.15. Jam. 4.4.

51 Many persons celebrate and admire the Virtues of them that are dead, yet
cannot endure the same Virtues in them that are living, Matthew. 23.29, -- 32.
and thus, Many that were envied while they lived, have been Sainted when dead.

52 Some that dare not make a trade of sin, will yet make a recreation of it
now and then: They love what they do not (perhaps dare not) practice; they are
contemplative sinners, and play with wanton thoughts and wishes, Jer. 4.14.

53 The Covetous live poor to die rich: but what a mistake and missaying it is,
to say, such a man died worth so many thousands, when he left it all behind
him! he had been rich indeed, if (in the sense of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.18,
19.) he had sent it to Heaven aforehand: It Is probable he died the poorer for
leaving so much behind him: and indeed, no man dies rich (unless rich in grace,
in faith and good works, while he lived) but the rich depart as poor and naked
as any, and leave their wealth to others, 1 Timothy 6.6, 7, 8.

54 The Platonicks say, that the Soul is like a Chariot drawn with two Horses,
whereof the one (the Rational Part) is fair and generous; the other (the
sensual) deformed and resty: but its most evident, that not only the inferior
Faculties, but the superior also are corrupted; otherwise the Inferior could
not draw them away. The mind is free, and cannot sin, but from it self, though
urged and tempted by others: Not only flesh, but Spirit is filthy, 2 Cor. 1.7.
And the Apostle prays, that they might be sanctified, not only in body, but in
soul and spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.

55 Grace is a Panoply or Proof-Armour of Defense against temptations and
troubles, Ephesians. 6. and a Paradise of all pleasure, Prove. 3.17.

56 The World to come is the good man's hope, and the bad man's fear, 1 Cor.
15.19. Numb. 23.10. 2 Cor. 5.11. And it is observable, that there is no Religion,
but has instituted some kind of Heaven o^ Hell, places of reward and
punishment, suitable to its self.

57 Gods Word for things is the Christians Reason (and (...) signifies both
Word and Reason; for the Word is the reason of Faith) and his Testimony is
their Demonstration, Heb. 11.3. No man's ((...).) saying is to be compared with
Thus says the Lord.

58 Pride, Envy, and Malice, is the Devils sin; and such a man as is possessed of
these, is possessed as really as (and it may be more dangerously than) any
Demoniack, John 6.70.

59 Every man should be (for God is) no respecter of persons; for that trial
can never be fair, where affection is Judge, and furpasseth (as well as passes)
Judgment, Lev. 19.15.

60 The poor man's detained penny is a plague in the rich man's purse, Jam. 5.3,
4.

61 The proud man has no God, Exodus 5.2. Psalm. 12.4. The unpeacable man has
no Neighbor, Luke 10.29. The distrustful man has no friend, Prove. 27.10. but
the discontented man has not himself, Luke 21.19.

62 If we temper not our affections, they (to be sure) will distemper us:
beware of them; for where the wind of temptation and the Tide of corruption
meet, it is exceeding dangerous, Mat. 26.16.

63 Untryed Virtues are doubtful. It may be, they that sin not when there is
none, would sin if there were an occasion: But Chastity in Youth, as in Joseph;
Temperance in plenty, as in Daniel: Bounty in poverty, as in them of Macedonia,
2 Cor. 8.2. are Martyrdomes without Bloodshed.

64 It may be said of Morallity, as it is of the Air; compare it with the
Heavens, it is a kind of Earth; but with the Earth, and it is a kind of Heaven.
Or as its said of the Spirits in our bodies; compare them with the Soul, and
they are but Body; but with the Body, and they are a kind of Soul. So Compare
Morality with Divinity, and it is but sense; but with Sensuality, and it is
Divinity, Mark 10.21.

65 A Christian should be ready to take up the Cross, to bear the Cross, to
embrace the Cross, to love the Cross, yea, to glory in the Cross; but should
never worship nor adore the Cross of Christ; that is due to Christ, who was
crucified on the Cross, 1 Cor. 2.2.

66 Many persons pray (as S. Austine confesses he did before his Conversion)
as if they were (not only unwilling, but) afraid to be heard, and hear as if
they were afraid (or had no mind) to learn, and learn as if afraid to do, and
do as if afraid to please God, and please too but out of fear, and fear more
the evil of suffering than of sin, and are afraid of sin more as it is against
them, than as it is against God, Psalm. 51.4.

67 We have our wrinckles as well as spots; and if Christ's washing us in his
Blood does best fetch out our spots, stretching us on his Cross of suffering
will best fetch out our wrinckles, Ephesians. 5.26, 27. Heb. 12.10.

68 Some things God teaches us, not by Example, but by Command ( as all bodily
Virtues, if I may so call them) other things he teaches us by Command and
Example also ( all spiritual virtues, as Love, Holiness, etc.) in obeying them
we are his Servants, but in following these we are his children, Ephesians. 5.1. So
on the other hand, there are some sins, which the Devil does not act, but
command (as Riot, Intemperance, Bodily sins) in these men are but his slaves,
Ephesians. 1.2. 2 Timothy 2.26. but other sins he not only commands, but acts too (as
Pride, Envy, Malice, spiritual wickedness) in these men are his children (as
like him as any thing) and not the less like him because his sons, but the
more, Joh. 8.44. 1 John 3.10.

69 Considering every man his own and other men's miscarriages, we may
reasonably conclude, that man's righteousness is by Faith, and not by innocence,
Phil. 3.9.

70 We are bound no further (as to our selves) than to be wise and harmless,
Matthew. 10.16. Events are out of our hand, and should be out of our care (Chance
is to trouble only them that stand upon chance) and these two have in all Ages
proved more prevalent at the long run, than prosperous successe^^ which may
sometimes be the Dowry, but never the Inheritance of imprudent and improvident
persons, Prove. 1.32. Beside, if these two seem at any time to be without Gods
Protection, they will never be without his blessing, Phil. 1.27, 28.

71 Our very will is a direct state of imperfection, for it supposes weakness
of reason, and of love, to be at liberty to choose good and evil: It Is a mercy
that we may choose good, but a misery that we will choose evil, Jerem. 6.16.

72 It Is no denial of favor to us, but a gracious vouchsafement that God will
show us but his back-parts, Exodus 33.20, 23. for we cannot see his face and
live: all exceeding great and glorious sights are but oppressions to us. If we
cannot behold the face of the Sun and gaze on it, but to the blinding of our
eyes; how much more would it put them out, if God should let out his full glory
and light upon us and truly as that is a kindness to us, so it is, that God will
show us but the back-parts of our sin, (enough to humble us) for we could no
more look them than God in the face and live: As God would astonish us to death
with his (to us now invisible) glorious beauty, so sin would fright us to death
with its ugly deformity, Romans 7.9.

73 Some men have committed such sins, not only as they never thought they
should, but as they have protested against with abhorrency and scorn; witness
Hazael and Peter: It Is good therefore to watch and pray, least we enter into
temptation; to distrust our selves, and to be humble, least God should leave us
(as he did Hezekiah) to try us, that we might know all that is in our hearts.
There have been men also who have done more for God and acted grace beyond what
perhaps they thought they should, as Abraham in offering his Son; and others
who have suffered more than ever they thought they should be able to endure, as
Mr. Saunders the Martyr: so that as it is good to distrust our selves, it is good
to trust God, and wait for grace from him to our seasonable relief, Heb. 4.16.
Phil. 4.11, 13. 2 Cor. 12.9. yea, his grace is not only sufficient for us, but
enables us to act more good than we take notice of in many things: but God
knows it and will make it known, Matthew. 25.35, -- 40. From whence we may learn
this also, that the goodness which we show to them that are Christ's, extends
further than we think for, even to Christ himself, as he is pleased to reckon
it: so that to Heb. 13.2. Be not forgetful to entertain strangers, for thereby
some have entertained Angels unawares; I may add this also, some have
entertained Christ Jesus, though unawares.

74 The forwardness of Childrens inclinations to sin, appears by their
readiness to act it before it is taught them, and by their early learning the
sin that is taught them before they know what it is: how easily they act pride by
showing and by being shown, where they are fine; and revenge by giving a blow
to strike another with; and lying, not only by denying, but excusing their sin,
and putting it off (as Adam did) to others; as, 'twas not I, 'twas such an one:
as they are begot and brought forth, so they act in the Image of sinful man,
Psalm. 58.3.

75 There is a kind of omnipotency in grace, for it effects the resurrection of
them who were dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.1, -- 6. and not only Christ
that strengthens, but the person (through Christ strengthening of him) that is
so strengthened can do all things, Phil. 4.13.

76 How many (alas!) choose rather to be wicked, which is their sin, shame and
punishment, than to be good, which is their duty, reward and glory, Psalm.
19.11. Phil. 3.19.

77 To be wise below what is written, is to be but poorly wise; but to be wise
above what is written is to be richly foolish, 1 Cor. 4.6.

78 Contentment is the Elixar and Quintessence of Happiness, the Philosophers
Stone that turns all into Gold; The Christians Grace, which makes every
condition good, Phil. 4.11. The poor man is rich with it, and the rich man is
poor without it: This always makes a man as rich as he desires to be; and
certainly he knows not what he asks, that demands more, 1 Timothy 6.6, 8.

79 Wherever we live, we may and ought to live well, though we suffer evil.
There were Saints in Nero's House, Phil. 4.22. And Antipas lived and died well,
even where Satan's Seat was, under his very Nose, Revel. 2.13.

80 It Is a clear, but a sad sign, that though persons sit under the use, yet
that they are not under the power of Ordinances, while they abide under the
power of corruption, Gal. 4.20. Ezekiel. 33.31.

81 It Is good to be civil to all, useful to many, known to few, enemy to none,
and friend to what is next to none, to one, or two, or three at the most, and
they need be wise, for Though every thing may love, yet it is a rule,
He cannot be a Friend that is a Fool.


82 Many have wit enough to use, if they had but wit enough to use it well: or
some men have good wits, if wise men had them in keeping: but ill-used wit (or
playing the fool in wit) is worse than folly, Jerem. 4.22. Isa. 5.20, 21.

83 In the Creation God is a God without us; in providence, he is God above us;
in the Law, a God against us; in Himself, invisible to us; but in and only in
Christ Jesus he is Immanuel, God for us and God with us, Matthew. 1.23.

84 The Spouse of Christ has the privilege of being under Covert-barn; so
that if Satan will enter an Action, or commence a Suit against the Spouse, it
must be entered against Christ her Husband, who will certainly Nonsuit and Cast
the Devil, as he has often done: So that though the Devil be the Accuser of
the Brethren, yet Jesus Christ is their Advocate: and his Intercessions and
Pleadings for them prevail more with God, than the Devils Accusations and
Impleadings of them, Romans 8.31, -- 35

85 The King-Prophet David, said, that he should not be ashamed when he had
respect to all Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119.6. but alas! of how many may we say
that they are ashamed to have or to show respect to any of his Commandments!

86 As Jesus Christ the righteous is the Believers Lord, so also he is the Lord
their righteousness, Jerem. 23.6. 1 Cor. 1.30.

87 Nothing but the wounds and the blood of Jesus can heal the wounds of
conscience, or a wounded spirit, Isa. 53.5. Luke 4.18. 1 John. 1.7.

88 Blessedness and Salvation is annexed to many things, Matthew. 5. Heb. 6.9.
because some can better discern one qualification than another; but who ever
will be blessed or saved, must bring his Ticket with him, one or other thing to
which Salvation is annexed.

89 It Is an ill sign not to be chastened, and a worse not to bear chastening,
Heb. 12.7.

90 It Is possible for a man by strongth of memory to remember all or most of
what he hears at a Sermon, and yet to be (for all that) a forgetful Hearer,
James 2.22, -- 25.

91 If any man believe, he knows enough, as yet he knows nothing as he ought to
know, 1 Cor. 8.2. being ignorant of his own ignorance: it is true we may quickly
have knowledge enough to make us inexcusable, Romans 1.20. but never too much to
make us better, 1 Cor. 8.1, 2, 3.

92 God though he be absolute Lord, yet is pleased to annex reasons to his
Precepts, that he may draw us to obedience with the cords of a man, Hos. 11.4.
and also to teach the most mighty, to rule by reason and not by will only, for
the Almighty God does so, Ephesians. 1.11.

93 Divine Authority is to sway us above our reason, yea reason teaches us
that God is to be believed and obeyed in the things for which we can see no
reason but this (which is a great one) that he tells us and commands us so: and
hence it is that the Lord has so severely punished men's transgressing positive
Laws of Divine Institution, called (by the Schoolmen) Voluntary Precepts: for
in commanding them, Gods absolute Authority, and in obeying them man's obedience
most clearly appears.

94 It Is observed by the Lord Veralam, that there was never a miracle wrought
to convert an Atheist, because the light of nature might have led him to
confess a Deity; but many have been wrought to convert Idolaters and
superstitious persons, because no light of Nature declares the true Worship and
Will of God.

95 All those things which we make so much of, are but Mortality upheld by
sense and fancy, for a few minutes: they are rather seen than felt, courted
than enjoyed; and many times prove like baggage to an army, impediment a
Victoriae, the hindrances of Victory, Matthew. 19.23.

96 Some desire to know, only to know, that is Curiosity; some that they may be
known, that is Vanity; some to make profit of their knowledge, that is
Covetousness; some to edify and profit themselves, that is Wisdom; some to
better others, that is Charity; but some (which is best of all, being Godly
Wisdom and Love) that they may please God.

97 Only God is not taught by experience; all men (both wise and foolish) have
it for their School-Mistriss. God is so Wise and All-Knowing as to be above it,
and not to need it: but no man so wise, who may not be wiser than he is, and
none but fools think otherwise. The best growing in experience is to grow in
Grace, and the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior, 2 Pet. 3.18.

98 He who does evil for a good end, does religiously serve the Devil; and he
who does that which is good in it self for an evil end, does (what in him lies)
make God to serve the Devil; They both sin in the Name of the Lord, and at the
cost and charges of Divinity, Rem 3.8. John 16.2.

99 He that sins, and looks without repentance to escape Hell, scparates the
end from the means; and he that without faith and obedience looks for heaven,
does separate the means from the end: both pervert Gods Word and Providence,
Luke 13.3. Heb. 11.6. Heb. 5.9.

100 In Heaven is only rest without labor, Heb. 4.9. Revel. 14.13. In Hell is
only testless pain and torment, Luke 16.23. and sin makes the Earth (which is a
middle state between both) more like to Hell than Heaven, it being a place of
sore travel, Eccl. 1.13. and 4.8. and 5.16, 17.

THE Fifth Century.
1 MArtha's many things, and Mary's one thing, seldom consist together, Luke
10.41, 42.

2 God has most usually brought judgment on the World, when they have been
indulging their genius, and gratifying their sensual and carnal appetites in
eating, drinking, etc. As in Noah's and Let Us time on the Old World; Sodom and
Gomorrah; on Job's Children, Belshazzar, etc. See Isa. 5.11, 12, 13. Jerem.
51.39, -- 57. Amos 6.3, -- 7. Zach. 1.15. and so he will come again, just so,
Matthew. 24.38, 49, 50. Take heed therefore to your selves, least at any time
your hearts be overcharged with surfeting and drunkenness, and cares of this
life, and so that day come upon you unawares, Luke 21.34. 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.

3 In all matters of pleasure and joy, the more the union is, the more is the
delight. The presence of afriend yields more content than the absence, and the
embraces more than the presence: so in outward delights, those of Incorporation
are more than those of Adhaesion; as it is more natural to delight in our meat,
than in our garments, the one being inward union to increase our strength, the
other outward, and only to protect it. This is evident in spiritual joys and
pleasures, which arise from union with Christ and the Truths of the Gospel,
which are more united to our Souls by Faith, than by Sense, and have an
answerable joy, 1 Pet. 1.8. Our Union with Him and his Truth here, is that our
joy may be full, 1 John 1.4. but our union being not so close, our joy is not
so full as 'twill be hereafter, Psalm. 16.11. Matthew. 25.21. here our Masters Joy
enters into us, who can contain but little of it (quicquid recipitur, recipitur
ad modum recipientis) but then we shall enter into it, where our souls will
have scope enough, and an insinite Ocean of joy to swim in to all Eternity:
Then Sight will be a nearer Union than Faith is now, and more above it than
Faith is above Sense, and when we see him as he is we shall be like him, 1 John
3.2.

4 God delighted more (in his Vidit than in his Fiat) that his Works were good,
than that they were, and therefore the Day of his Rest or Sabbath, was more
holy than the Days of Working, Genesis 2.2, 3. and we our selves find that a
Review and Contemplation of a goed Act affords more joy than the mere Action.
Let us therefore when we have done a good Work, ask our hearts if, and see that
it be well done.

5 Our mutability and affecting of Variety does argue our imperfection. That
God (who is all) should not content us, is not more strange than true. We are
compounded, and all things (but God) are so, which speaks both their and our
defect: We are in love and pursuit of many things, and esteem not God more than
Heaven and Earth; we may say we do, but the lowing of Oxen and bleating of
Sheep (to allude to that of Samuel to Saul) our hankerings and honeings after
other things, does but too plainly declare, that in practice, fruition and
satisfaction, it is not so. 'Twill never be well with us, nor can we be at
ease, till our hearts and souls can and do say in truth, as Psalm. 73.25.

6 Philosophy tells us that the whole course of our life should be a Meditation
of Death, but Divinity tells us more, that it should be a continual Living to
God (the best preparation for death) that when we die, we may live with God,
which is best of all, Phil. 1.23.

7 Though Believers are not (all of them) delivered from the Earth of the
Grave, yet they are from the Hell of the Grave, 1 Cor. 15.54, 55.

8 A man that is tender of his conscience will never be prodigal of his credit:
for as a good conscience is a continual feast, to give a man a cheerful heart,
so a good Name is a precious ointment, to give him a cheerful countenance, 2
Cor. 1.12. Prove. 15.30. Eccl. 7.1.

9 Words receive weight from manners, and a man's speech is often better
believed for his life, than for his learning: A man may preach his heart out,
before he can preach any thing into the hearts of the people, if they do not
like and love him. As in Physic, to have a good opinion of the Doctor, does
incline us to look after the prescriptions, and also advantages the operation
of the Medicine; so in Preaching (and Writing of good Books (which are a kind
of Physic for the Mind) a good opinion of the Man does much facilitate and
help on the reception and insluence of the Truths delivered. He therefore that
would win the affection of any, must approve himself to (not their humor, but)
their judgment; and he that would prevail with their judgment, must approve
himself to their affection: for if judgment be prejudiced, we are not like to
win and gain affection, nor if affection be distasted, are we like to convince
their judgment. The Gospel, preached with a Gospel spirit and life, is most
like to prevail with both, being most true and lovely, which are the objects of
Understanding and Will, and Affections.

10 God seems to regard and reward our sufferings, more than our doings, for he
promises a reward but according to our works, Jerem. 17.10. but as to
sufferings a great reward, Matthew. 5.12. a far more exceeding eternal weight of
glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. and the exaltation of Christ himself is attributed rather
to his Selfdenial and Suffering, than to his doing, Phil. 2.8, 9.

11 The first thing that Christ complained of (after he went to Heaven) as
being concerned for it, was want of love to, yea enmity against his people,
Acts 9.4. and the next thing, was the decay and coldness of his peoples love,
Revel. 2.4. indeed he was a Prophet, and his words were true, Matthew. 24.9. --
12.

12 For a Conclusion, what I shall further say, is much-what the same as one
before me at the end of some meditations of his, has said, viz. How easy is
pen and paper piety, for one to write religiously! I will not say, it costs
nothing, but it is far more easy and cheap to work ones head than heart into
goodness; to write an hundred Meditations and Sentences, than to subdue the
least sin in ones soul. Be pleased also to know, that it is as easy and cheap
(if not more) to read as to write of Piety. And therefore we should both look
to it, that I write not, that thou read not in vain; least my writing and thy
reading, rise in judgment against me and thee. And as I think we should not on
this account forbear to write or read, so because of this we should be the more
conscientious in both, that we may profit by it, and give up our accounts with
joy and not with grief. The excellency of Divine Things is not in preaching or
hearing, writing or reading, praying for or professing of them, but in having
of and profiting by them; which is, when we are delivered to the Truth, taught
us, in, by and from the Gospel, Romans 6.17. Titus 2.11, 12.

Consider what Isay, and the Lord give thee Understanding in all things, 2 Timothy
2.7. Amen.
FINIS.
THE BEAUTY OF HOLINESS, Represented In a SERMON long since preached, but now
enlarged and published, To endear Holiness, that it may be beloved and
practiced as it deserves to be by all that profess it.

By RALPH VENNING.

Zach. 14.20, 21. In that day there shall be upon the Bells (or Bridles) of the
Horses, HOLINESS TO THE LORD, and the Pots in the Lords House shall be like the
Bowls before the Altar: yea every Pot in Jerusalem and in Judah shall be
Holiness unto the Lord of Hosts; and all they that sacrifice, shall come and
take of them, and sees therein: and in that day there shall be no more the
Canaanite in the House of the Lord of Hosts.

THE BEAUTY of HOLINESS. From Psalm. 93.5. the latter part.
Holiness becomes thine House, O Lord, for ever.
I Shall not concern my self at this time to consider these words as relative
(with respect or retrospection) to what precedes, but only as they are an
entire Proposition of themselves, acquainting us with the most decent and
becoming the most lovely and ravishing thing, the only true and everlasting
Beauty in this World and that to come; which is Holiness.

Holiness becomes thy House, O Lord, for ever. For the more clear and full
discovery of what is contained in this Text, I shall observe this Method.

First, To show what Holiness is.

Secondly, That Holiness is an absolute and incomparable Beauty.

Thirdly, That this Holiness becomes the House of God, and that for ever.

First, To acquaint you what Holiness is, as to the true notion and nature of
it; which I shall not gather from the notation or Ftymology of the word, but
from what the Oracles of Truth describe it to be. And that,

1. Negatively or exclusively, as to what it is not, but excludes and stands in
opposition to: It Is in the general opposed to and excludes uncleanness, 1 Thessalonians. 4.7. God has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto heliness. Yea, it
excludes not only all filthiness of the flesh, but that of the Spirit also, 2
Cor. 7.1. As perfect love, or a Plerophory and full Assurance, casts out
doubtings and fear, which has torment: So perfect holiness has no communion
with, but casts out all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, Ephesians. 1.4. S. Paul
makes them Synonymous and equivalent expressions, to be holy and to be without
blame: So 1 Thessalonians. 3.13. he prays, that they may be unblameable in holiness.
And again, Col. 1.22. holy, unblameable, and unreproveable, are in conjunction.
The same S. Paul tells us, that the reason why Christ so loved the Church as to
give himself for it, was, that he might sanctisie and cleanse it, and so
present it a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing,
but that it might be holy and without blemish. And as this is the description
of the Church Christ's Spouse, so it is of Christ the Churches Husband, the High
Priest that died for her, that he was holy, harmless, undesiled, and separate
from sinners, Heb. 7.26. We see then that holiness excludes uncleanness and all
filthiness, is unblameable, without spot or blemish, undefiled, etc. and thus
far it is amiable, and a most becoming thing. But

2. Affirmatively and Comprehensively. Holiness is conformity to God; which is
not merely or only a being separated, devoted and dedicated to God, but
answering the end of such Dedication, which is to be conformable and acceptable
to him; for to be holy and to be acceptable, are joined together with
conformity to God, Romans 12, 1, 2. Sin and holiness are contraries; that
therefore being nonconformity and contrariety to God, this must be conformity
and agreeableness to his Will. So that to be holy is to do all things suitably
and acceptably to God, to do all things (...), decently, and in order, just as
God would have them done; to do all things to glorify and to please God to the
utmost. It Is true, that Holiness is gradual, in some more, in some less; but
wherever it is, it is lovely in any and in any degree, but most of all in the
highest Degree. And this leads me to the

Second thing to be treated of and represented to you, viz. the absolute and
incomparable beauty of holiness: and that 1. positively considered, which will
be evinced and demonstrated by six things.

First, It Is the Name of God; and as his Name is, so is he, The Holy One, Isa.
57.15. And how excellent is his Name in all the earth! He is called the Holy
One, and the Holy One of Israel, many a time over in the Scriptures. His
Holiness is himself; for to swear by his Holiness and by himself, is the same
thing, as it is also to swear by his Great Name, Psalm. 89.35. Heb. 6.13. Jer.
44.26. compared. Now God being the (...) the altogether lovely, how beautiful a
thing must Holiness be! it being the Name of him who only is God, who only is
good, who only is wise, and all that is the perfection of beauty, and object of
desires.

Secondly, Holiness is the Will of God; and as his Will is holy, so his Will is
that we should be holy. S. Paul bids us in every thing give thanks, for this is
the Will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you, 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. So may I say, In
every thing be holy, for this is the Will of God in Christ Jesus concerning
you. His Word is the signification and discovery of his Will, and this is his
Will, your sanctification or holiness, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. And this is his word too,
1 Pet. 1.15, 16. As he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all
manner of conversation; for it is written, Be ye holy, because I am holy. O
what a lovely and beautiful thing is the Will of God! He works all things
according to the Counsel of his Will, and so should we. 'Twas the great
commendation of King David, that he served his Generation according to the Will
of God, Acts 13.36. and is for this said to be the man after Gods own heart,
because he would fulfill all his Wills, for the Greek is plural, Acts 13.22.
Yea, our Lord Jesus Christ, who is so often called The holy Jesus. gloryed in
this (because by it he glorified his Father) that he did, always did, and
delighted to do, the things that pleased him, or, which i^ all one, his Fathers
Will. Well the^ the Will of God being the Rule and measure of what is acceptable
and pleasing, lovely and beautiful in his eyes, Holiness must be transcendently
so, for this is the Will of God.

Thirdly, Holiness is the Work of God. All Gods works are worthy of him, and
like himself, rare and excellent to admiration and wonder: The Rule holds here
(operari sequitur esse) in this sense, the work is according to the worker. If
Apelles's and Titian's Pieces were so admirable, what are Gods! If the works of
the first Creation were good exceedingly, Genesis 1.31. of which Man was one of
the chief and holiness the chief excellency of Man; how much more the work of
the new Creation, which does mainly consist in holiness! He that has wrought
us to this self same thing is God, 2 Cor. 5.5. and he that sanctifies, or makes
us holy, is the Lord, Exodus 31.13. We are his Workmanship created in Christ
Jesus unto good works, which God has before ordained, that we should walk in
them, Ephesians. 2.10. And put on the New-Man, which after God is created in
righteousness, and true holiness. So that holiness being the work of God, it
must needs be lovely. Yea,

Fourthly, Holiness is not only the Name, the Will, and the Work, but it is the
Image of God and his likeness. The Image of God is not so much in our souls
being a spirit, as being holy: The Devil is a Spirit, but far enough from being
the Image of God. We were at first created in Gods Image, and after Gods
likeness, Genesis 1.26, 27. And the Apostle refers to this, Ephesians. 4.24. in (...)
Created after God, i. e. after the Image and likeness of God, viz. in
righteousness and true holiness. Christ Jesus is the holy One, and we are to be
conformed to the Image of him the Son of God, Romans 8.29. both in being holy,
and in suffering with him for being so, verse. 17. as well as in being
glorified. If I may allude to the Art of Limning, I would say, that an holy
life is the Picture of Gods, though not drawn perfectly and to the life; and I
think the Apostle favors the expression, Ephesians. 4.18. speaking of the Gentiles,
that they were alienated from the life of God, i. e. from holiness. And as to
the workers of iniquity Christ Jesus professes that he never knew them, Matthew.
7.23. Sin has so altered and disguised man from what he was when God made him,
that God knows him not, owns him not for the man he made.

Fifthly, It Is yet more, Holiness is the very Nature of God. There are some
Attributes that flow from the Will of God, as well as from his Nature, as
Mercy; which he may suspend and not exert, if so please him, and none can say
unto him, Why do thou thus? But the Holy Scriptures tell us, that there are
some Attributes which admit of a cannot be otherwise; God, says the Apostle,
cannot lie, cannot deny himself, so cannot do wickedly: He is True, Just,
Faithful, and Holy, and it is impossible he should be otherwise. And it is of
clear observation, that in the Holy Scripture, A Divine Nature and Perfect
Holiness are equivalent terms. Be pleased to compare 2 Pet. 1.4. whereby are
given to us exceeding great (or, the greatest) and precious promises, that by
these you might be partakers of a Divine Nature, having escaped the pollution
or corruption that is in the World through lust. Here you see that the design
and end of the promises is to make us partakers of a Divine Nature. Now compare
this with 2 Cor. 7.1. and there the use of the promises is to perfect holiness:
Having these promises (which according to St. Peter's Phrase, are the greatest,
for they are, that God will be a God and Father; and there is none greater to
promise, as there was none greater to swear by, than himself:) Let us cleanse
our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit (which is the same with the
corruption spoken of by St. Peter) perfecting holiness, i. e. till we be
sanctified throughout and perfectly, or in St. Peter's phrase, be made partakers
of a Divine Nature.

Sixthly, Yet once more, Holiness is not only the Name, the Will, the Work, the
Image, and the Nature, but it is the Glory of God, Exodus 15.11. Who is like unto
thee, glorious in holiness! It Is his great Title of Honor; It Is the Glory of
all his Attributes and Administrations; it is the Attribute, whereby God is
declared to be free from all impurity and imperfection: his Sovereignty would
seem and look like Tyranny, but that it is holy; his Patience would look like an
Indulgence and Toleration of sin (and so the World judge it, Mal. 2.17.) but
that it is holy; his Love would look like respecting of persons, but that it is
holy. Holiness is the ground of the Songs of Praise that are sung to his Glory
in Earth and Heaven, Isa. 6.3. Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts, the whole
Earth is full of his glory; which is repeated, Revel. 4.8. Holy, holy, holy
Lord God Almighty, which was and is, and is to come. This then that is the
glory of God, must needs be the perfection of the creatures beauty, and so it
will be found to be; for it is more to the glory of Angels that they are holy,
than that they are wise and mighty. Zion was called the Perfection of beauty,
but 'twas because of her being holiness to the Lord: the Spouse, the fairest
among Women, because she was undefiled: and the Church is called glorious,
because holy and without blemish. It Is the glory of Gods Sabbath, that it is an
holy Day: and of his Commandments, that they are all holy: and so of all his
Judgments too. What wants holiness cannot be, what is holy cannot but be,
glorious, according to it is degree.

Among all the things that have been or are famous for any perfection, Holiness
bears the bell: and though many have been justly celebrated, and their renown
has been spread abroad, for their beauty, yet this of Holiness excells them
all. You will find many high sounding words joined with beauty; as Glory and
Beauty, Exodus 28.2. and 40. Job 40.10. Joy attends it, but to see it, Psalm.
48.2. Praise attends it, as it is said of Absalom, 2 Samuel 14.25. Excellency,
Isa. 13.19. Ornament, Ezekiel. 7.20. Renown, Ezekiel. 16.14, etc. But the Beauty of
Holiness exceeds them all, and the rest is as a thing of naught where this is
not. That which may seem strange is, you may hear a Woman and a Queen calling
it Vanity, Prove. 31.30. Favor is deceitful, and Beauty vain; but a Woman that
fears the Lord, she shall be praised. For what? For a Beauty. Her own works
(such as the Apostle speaks of, 1 Timothy 2.10. in the language of my Text,
becoming Women professing Godliness.) Her good Works shall praise her in the
Gate. All the other glorious beauty is but a fading flower, Isa. 28.14. but
this is the lasting and abiding beauty, even for ever, as in the Text, as in 1
Pet. 1.24. with Isa. 40.6, 7. One rebuke of God, if he do but blow upon it,
makes the most glaring beauty to consume like a moth, Psalm. 39.11. yea of its
self it is in a consumption and dying daily. But wickedness makes not only the
person, but the beauty to be abhorred; Ezekiel. 16.25. There is more ugliness in
the sin, than there can be beauty in or on the person of a sinner, though an
Absalom among men, a very Nonesuch, or a Bathsheba among Women, who was very
beautiful, 2 Samuel 11.2. The glory of young men is their strength, Prove. 20.29.
What to do wickedly? no, but when such young men as St. John speaks of, 1 John
2.14. who were strong by the Word of God abiding in them, and overcame the evil
and wicked one; so that this strength of Holiness is the true glory of young
men. And they that pride themselves and glory in their being mighty to drink,
woe unto them, for they glory in their shame. As for old men, the same. Text
Prove. 20.29. tells us, that the gray head is their beauty; but when? for it
seems to need an interpretation: why then it is a crown of glory, viz. the hoary
head, when it is found in a way of righteousness, Prove. 16.31. So that we see
there is no glory allowed to any beauty, but that of Holiness. We may conclude,
as holy King David, I have seen an end of all perfection, but the perfection of
beauty, that is, the beauty of Holiness, which is as exceeding broad, as all
the Holy Commandments of God. Holy David was so taken with and inamoured of
this beauty, which is the glory of God himself, that he begs nothing but this
(or nothing like this) of God in prayer, Psalm. 27.4. One thing have I desired
of the Lord, and that will I seek after (his heart is fully set and resolved)
that I may dwell in the House of the Lord all the days of my life; what to do?
to behold the beauty of the Lord: a sight that passes all sights. And Moses
the man of God, prays to see this glory, Psalm. 90.16, 17. Let thy work appear
unto thy servants, and thy glory unto their children, and let the beauty of the
Lord our God be upon us, etc. The truth of it is, to see the glory and beauty
of the Lord is a sight, not only worth praying, but worth dying for, it being
no less than the Beatifical Vision.

I perceive I have been engaged sooner than I was aware of in the second thing,
the comparative consideration of holiness, and yet I must proceed and make
further progress, to evidence this, that nothing is worthy to be compared with
her, but that her beauty is incomparable: There are many pretenders and
competitors who are brought in by too many in this blinded world, to vie with
holiness: But if we will believe so clear, so great, and so just a judgment as
that of Gods, The beauty of holiness is beyond comparison and competition.

1. There have been and I am afraid there are (with a sigh be it spoken to
their shame) that prefer sin before the holy Jesus, and say as Isa. 53.2, 3.
There is no beauty that we should desire him: they despise and reject him, they
hide their faces from him, and have no esteem for him; but say as Isa. 30.11.
Cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us: and as the Devils, Let us
alone, or away, what have we to do with thee? art thou come to torment us? thou
Holy One, Luke 4.34. Woe! and alas! that the altogether lovely Jesus should be
thus undervalued! and that by them, whom he had infinitely obliged to serve and
honor him! He had for us a love that passes knowledge, such as never was the
like known, unexampled and never to be parallelled by any; great it was, like
that of his Fathers, who sent him into the World; from and in the strength of
this love he came, not only to make or give a Visit, but to save us with a
great Salvation, from sin and wrath: and shall not this man rule over us? and
be our Prince, who is our Savior? Oh dis-ingenious, ungrateful, foolish people
and unwise, thus to requite the Lord with contempt, scorn, and hatred for his
Goodwill! what alles this degenerate wicked World? that they see not his glory
as of the only begotten of the Father, full of all Graces and Truth of Beauty.
I must confess that the Son of God did appear with many seeming disadvantages
to sensual and sinful eyes; for he being to take a journey into this World,
where he was to taste of death, dis-robed himself of his Majesty and Glory,
becoming for a time not only little lower than the Angels, but was pleased to
put on our Country Cloths, and came habited into the World like one of us, yea
in the form of a servant, and in the likeness of sinful flesh: And though it
were manifest that he was God, yet without controversy, it is one of the great
Mysteries of Godliness, that he was God manifest in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16.
Being thus clad in his traveling cloths, he was not known nor taken to be for
what he was. Yet in truth this Selfdenial and condescension of his, is that we
are hugely beholden to him for; if he had not put on this Vail, we poor
weak-eyed mortals could not have seen his face and live. This humbling of
himself should indear him to us, as it did unto his Father, who declared from
Heaven that he was his Son, in whom he was well pleased, even now in this
humane dress, and while about the dispatch of this Worlds concerning affairs:
yea, the Father did not only love him, because he laid down his life, but did
put the Cup into his hand, yea (and which is wondrous strange) it pleased the
Lord to bruise him.

This then methinks should not be, nor indeed is it, either the only or
greatest cause that the holy Jesus has no more respect or esteem; but alas,
it is from hence, that such men love their sins more than their Savior: This,
this is the condemnation, that light, glorious and beautiful light is come into
the world, but men, too too many men, love darkness and deformity more than
Light and Beauty: but why? because their deeds are evil. A goodly reason
indeed! what sin because they have sinned? Will they love and hug their evil
deeds, and with them damnation? Will they refuse Salvation because they have
sinned, and that not out of modesty, but desperate willfulness; because sinned
they have, sin they will! Alas poor men!

But I pray what is this sin, that men are so much lovers of it? Is there any
beauty or comeliness why it should be desired? Ah no! As I would not, I need not
call it out of its Name, for a worse cannot be given it; It Is such a deformed
ugly hag, as is more odious than Death or Devil. It Is impossible to rail at it,
or to speak bad enough of it; the worst of words are too good to call it by;
it is so vile and abominable a thing, that no Name but its own is expressive of
it; and yet, as if that were not significant enough, the Apostle, Romans 7.13.
adds an exceeding to it, to denote its hyperbolical and inexpressible vileness.
It Is nothing but (...), Unlawfulness, Illegality, Disorder, Confusion,
Filthiness, Corruption, and every thing that admits of the name of bad and
evil, of odious and abominable. It Is good for nothing but to be hated, scorned,
and put to death. It Is worse than death, for it is the cause and sting of it
too. It Is worse than the Devil, for 'twas only sin that made Angels Devils: so
that the Devil may call it Father, more than it can call the Devil so. It Is not
only the cause, but the Hell of Hell, and if there were no other, 'twere
damnation to be a sinner; for as such, he is separated from God, and under a
Curse; and indeed sin and damnation have one Name, they are both a separation
and departure from God. This alas, would you think it? is the thing (shall I
say) that wicked and devilish men, and such as the Jews of old, prefer before
the holiness of blessed Jesus.

I cannot yet give over, but I must tell you, that this sin which the World is
so enamored of, is so rotten a thing, and has so stinking a breath, that one
cannot come near it without danger of being infected: Who can touch this pitch
and not be defiled? It Is infinitely worse and more contagious than the plague,
and we should abhor the garment spotted with this flesh. The face of it has
not one good feature, the air of it is ghastly, its complexion is so like Hell,
that 'twould fright any one that has not lost the eyes of his understanding:
Mean or measure it has none, it is altogether indecent and unsatiable, and is
never quiet till it have sent men to Hell, no nor there does it leave them, but
in its upbraids and torments is a continual fury and gnawing worm, yea, a fire
that burns everlastingly. It Is the ugliest thing that ever was, and most
misshapen; all the auxiliary Artifices that can be used, cannot straiten it,
nor make it handsome. It Is so ashamed of it self, that it dares not appear in
its own colors, nor own its Name: it disguiseth it self, so that its lovers
little know with whom they have to do. If good were not called evil, it could
not be hated; if evil were not called good, it could never be beloved. If Pride
were not new-named Decency; Wantonness, Affability and Complasance;
Covetousness, Frugality; Prodigality, Generosity, etc. And if Godliness were
not nicknamed Hypocrisy; and a Fear to sin, Cowardice and Pusilanimity;
Holiness, Preciseness; and Faithfulness, Folly; I say, were it not that the
Names are thus altered, it were impossible, but holiness would be greatly
desired for her beauty; and sin would be houted away and stoned to death; men
would take revenge on it and themselves too, repenting even in dust and ashes,
that ever they were so mad to prefer sin before holiness.

2. A second pretender to Beauty, and which is indeed a very taking thing, is a
Civil and Courteous Carriage and Behavior; I mean not such as is over nice and
ceremoniously formal (that is luscious) but a gentile graceful demeanor, joined
with an ingenious affability and becoming condescendingness; ah how winning is
this! We use to give such an one the the name of an accomplished, lovely,
obliging, and therefore an obtaining person. This way Absalom stole more
hearts, than his face ravished eyes, as you may see, 2 Samuel 15.5, 6. but this is
not so much to his praise, as his Treason is to his disgrace. Civility without
Sanctity, Ingenuity without Holiness, is more pretty than precious: some call
it splendidum peccatum a glittering sin; but I shall only call it, a well-acted
vanity, an insignificant ceremony, an handsome nothing. To be accomplished to
serve a Prince, and not be accomplished to serve a God, is no great commend to
any man. To be lovely in the sight of all men, and not to be lovely in the
sight of God, is a praise may sit a Pharisee or an Hypocrite, but will not
content a godly man.

3. Holiness excells, if compared with the charming and captivating beauty of
faces. Alas, what is it to be fair as Absalom, and celebrated as he beyond all
others, and be branded for Murder and Treason? It Is far from a glory, to have
beauty enough to inflame a Prince as Dinah had, and to be defiled as she was.
It Is said of Tire that she was perfect in beauty, but being lifted up because
of her beauty, God cast her down because of her being lifted up, Ezekiel. 28.17.
for God had purposed to stain the pride of her glory, as was foretold, Isa.
23.9. Bathsheba was very beautiful to look upon, but her sin was more her
shame, than that her praise.

You heard before how this Beauty of Holiness was preferred, and had the
commendation beyond that of the face, Prove. 31.30. And the Apostle gives the
holy hand, the honor above all, 1 Timothy 2.8. A white hand, if not innocent; a
neat hand, if not holy; though adorned with never so many rings and bracelets,
makes no fair show in the eyes of God, though lifted up to him in Prayer.

4. The Artificial beauty (which is short of the Natural) must therefore of
necessity fall short of this which is Supernatural. The Ornaments of Gold and
Silver, Garnishings with Precious Stones for Beauty, as 2 Chronicles. 3.6. Modish
garbs and dresses, which often bewitch and dazzle the beholders eyes, and has
many times more beauty than the wearer, is infinitely short of the beauty of
holiness. And therefore the glory of the Kings Daughter, Psalm. 45.13, 14. is
not given to her clothing, though of wrought gold, nor to her raiment, though
of curious Needle Work, but to her inner beauty, which is holiness, she was all
glorious within, viz. pure in heart; and her beauty is in forgetting her
fathers house, and in worshipping her Lord and King, who would then desire her
beauty, Psalm. 45.10, 11. for such he seeks to worship him, as do it in spirit
and truth, in the beauty of holiness. So St. Paul tells us, that the best
ornaments are not broidered hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly array, but
modesty, shamefastness, sobriety, and good works, which becomes women
professing Godliness, 1 Timothy 2.9, 10. That without this is nothing at all, but
this, though without that, is all in all: And so St. Peter also tells us, 1
Pet. 3.3, 4. that women should not reckon those outward ornaments their beauty,
but the hidden man of the heart, that which is not corruptible, a meek and
quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price; and that is the
praise we should be ambitious of, viz. which is of God and not of men, Romans
2.29. To be dressed to the approbation and admiration of men, to be renowned for
beauty, and not to have the approbation of God, will afford but cold comfort,
while we live and when we die. And therefore to declare the thing as it is, and
to dis-abuse this mistaken World, let me tell them that they do but mis-call
and flatter these sublunary things, when they attribute to them, and adorn them
with the fine words and specious titles, of beauty and bravery, delight and
delicacy, pleasure and prettiness, honor and happiness; alas these are but
great fancies, pompous shows, glittering and gaudy nothings. The rosiness of
the most orient beauty, the whistling of the most silken bravery, the chinking
of white and yellow dust, alias gold and silver, the sparkling glories, which
tempt and captivate, the amorous, the proud, the covetous, the ambitious sons
of men, will one day appear to be but the cheat of imagination; and that they
who have courted them, have jugled themselves out of true happiness into a
false one, and have espoused themselves to a mere paultry vanity; which if it
be any thing, is a something less than nothing, as the Prophet phraseth it,
Isa. 40.17. they will find by the disappointment of their hopes, that they did
but build Castles in the air, and their false joys will end in true miseries.

5. Holiness far surmounts the Morality and half refined Virtues of
Philosophers. Morality is indeed a very lovely thing in its kind, and is a
great rarity among men; 'twere to be wished there were as much among some
Christians, as there was among some Heathens: Christians profess more than they
did, but they did more than many who are profest-Christians. For this Christ
loved the young man, but yet 'twas not enough, the one thing necessary was
wanting, he was not sanctified. There are many fine things, that may glitter,
but be no gold; good inclinations, sweet dispositions, ingenious behavior,
seemingly virtuous conversations may make a fair show in the flesh, and yet
they who own them may be in the flesh, and so cannot please God, Romans 8.8. A
complexional or a constitutional meekness, etc. may be no virtue (which is a
conquest over opposition.) Philosophical Virtue, which they place in obeying
and conforming to the Placits of wise men and dictates of Reason, or performing
virtuous acts for virtues sake, may be far from holiness, which is as I cleared
above, a conformity to the will of God, as such, (sub intuitu divinae
voluntatis) with respect to his will and an eye to his glory. Education, Art
and Prudence may and do oblige to and produce effects very resembling and like
to them that are religious; but the sweetest innocence and most glorious acts,
if not the result and effect of union with Christ and the love of God, will
profit nothing, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3. Though such persons may seem too good to go
to Hell, yet without holiness, they will not be found good enough to go to
Heaven: but the person may be condemnable, when the acts may be, by themselves
considered, capable of commendation. See Matthew. 7.21, 22, 23.

Yet again as to this head, To teach or learn Moral Virtues apart from Christ,
is to have them apart from Heaven: they are indeed required of and to be
practiced by Christians, but so is more than they; and they, as springing from
the fountain, directed by the rule, and terminated in the glory of God in
Christ: Otherwise though we learn to conceal or disguise Ungodliness, we shall
never learn to be godly, and every thing but being and living godly in Christ
Jesus, leaves us under the first Covenant, which is too weak to save us.
Philosophy and Morality may make us civil and good men, but they will never
make us holy and good Christians. And as Doctor M. Causabon well observes,
Christless discourses are to little purpose; the truth is (says he) the
consideration of Christ laid aside, though good language, and excellency of wit
may go far with some men to persuade, and with all or most to please and
delight; yet bare virtue of it self, all things soberly considered, will prove
generally but a weak plea, and (as Brutus at his death is said to have bemoaned
himself) rather a Name, or Word, than reality.

6. and Lastly, The Beauty of holiness far exceeds and excells Pharisaical
righteousness. The Pharisees, if you would take their word, and believe of them
as they conceited of themselves, were righteous more than others; and therefore
despised others, and bid them stand afar off, as unclean in comparison of them
the more holy; but these were no incense, only smoke in the nostrils of God.
They had so obtained upon the credulous and easily deluded Vulgar, that they
also thought them Gods darlings and favorites, in so much that 'twas
Proverbial among the many, That if but two went to Heaven, the one would be a
Pharisee. Our Savior acknowledges, that to weak and dim-sighted eyes they did
appear beautiful, but to him who had an all-seeing eye, they were the most
errant Hypocrites in the world, a Generation of Vipers, that could not without
a miracle escape the damnation of Hell. And therefore he tells his Disciples
and all others most assuredly, Matthew. 5.20. That except their Righteousness
exceed that of the Scribes and Pharisees, they can in no case enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; no, in no wise, it is impossible.

It will be worth our while to take a more particular view of their overmuch or
excessive, and yet defective righteousness. 1. They were great Professors of
Religion, but were more so in words than works; for though they did in words
confess, yet in works they did deny God and Godliness, as Matthew. 23.3, 4. The
Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses Seat, All therefore whatsoever they bid you
observe, that ye observe and do; but do not after their works, for they say and
do not: They bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be born, and lay them on other
men's shoulders, but they themselves will not touch them with one of their
Fingers. And what they do, it is in hypocrisy, For all their works they do to
be seen of men. 2. Of all the Sects (for there were many) they were the most
precise, strict, and exquisite. As the Apostle, who was once of the number,
does confess, Acts 26.45. And 'twas for this that they were so much admired;
not for their Learning, their Wit, or Eloquence, but for their righteousness,
yet this is the thing our Savior censures and condemns in them, and on great
and just causes. For,

First, 'Twas but external and in appearance. They were like whited or painted
Sepulchers, which appear beautiful outward; but were like them within too, for
they were rotten and filthy, full of hypocrisy and iniquity, Matthew. 23.27, 28.
And therefore our Savior says unto them, Luke 15. Ye are they which justify
your selves before men, but God knows your hearts; and that your appearing
righteousness, which is but in show, though it be highly esteemed among men, is
an abomination in the sight of God.

Secondly, 'Twas but their own Righteousness, which is of the Law, not that
which is through the Faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by
Faith. Thus the same Apostle tells us, Phil. 3. Touching the Law, says he, I
was a Pharisee, verse. 5. and as to the righteousness which is in the Law,
blameless, verse. 6. and yet counted this but loss and dung, v. 8. that he might
win Christ, and be found in him, not having his own Legal righteousness, (which
was all he had as a Pharisee, and was all that the Pharisees had) but that he
might have the righteousness which is through Faith; for without that, which
infinitely exceeds the other of the Scribes and Pharisees, he believed what our
Savior said, That he could not enter into heaven, or be saved. Yet,

Thirdly, The Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees was but according to
the outside and Letter of the Law, as Matthew. 5. our Savior gives us to
understand. If they did not actually murder, or commit adultery, causless
anger and lusting after a woman in their heart, were to them no transgressious
of the Law. They had the Law in their hands and mouth, but not in their heart:
but they are the people that know righteousness, the people in whose heart my
Law is, says the Lord, Isa. 51.7. And therefore our Savior reflects this upon
them with a woe, in Matthew. 23.25. Te make clean the outside of the Cup and the
Platter, but within they are full of extortion and excess. Men's Legis est Lex,
the meaning of the Law is the Law; but this they had no mind to.

Fourthly, Their righteousness as to the Law, was but an observance of some of
the Commandments of God, for many of them they did transgress, as our Savior
taxes them, Matthew. 15.3. but then it is that we shall not be ashamed, when we
have respect to all the Commandments of God, Psalm. 119.6. and are like that
renowned pair, Zachary and Elizabeth, Luke 1.6. who were both righteous in the
sight of God, walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of God without
blame. Yea,

Fifthly, The Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees as to the Law, was
placed in Rituals and Positives, the lesser things of the Law, and that with
neglect of the real and most weighty things; as it is clear from what our
Savior reprehends and almost curses them for, Matthew. 23.23. Woe to you Scribes
and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye pay tithe of Mint, Annis and Cummin, but have
omitted the weightter matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, Faith, and (Luke
11.42.) the Love of God: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the
other undone. They were most unconscionably unjust and oppressive, while they
pretended conscience: and thought that these little ceremonial observances
would make amends for all their greater wickedness and villainies.

Sixthly and lastly, as to this head, Their conformity was not so much to the
Law, as to their and their Elders Glosses upon and Interpretation of the Law. I
confess at such easy and cheap rates men may pass for blameless (as
blasphemous and injurious Saul did) and be pretenders to, yea professors of
perfection: They owned the Scriptures, but preferred the Traditions of the
Elders (as the Papists do unwritten ones) before them: And as the Romanists
advance the Dictates of Pope and Councils before the written Word of God; so
these used to say, that the words of the wise, had more in them than the words
of the Law. For this our Savior takes them up roundly, and rebukes them
cuttingly as they deserved, Matthew. 15. and lets them know, that thereby they
did worse than transgress, for they made void the Commands of God, and rendered
them of little use and none effect: Ye Hypocrites, well did Esaias prophecy of
you and your ill doing, saying, This people draws nigh me with their mouth,
and honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me; and in vain
do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the commandments of men. Thus we see
that the whole frame of these men's Religion, was more of their own devising and
fashioning, than in conforming to the Institutions and Commandments of God, and
was indeed but an Apishmockery of the true and sound Religion. Except therefore
your righteousness exceed, etc.

But to proceed: 3. They were very Orthodox and sound in many of their Tenets
beyond the Sadduces, etc. They held the Immortality of the Soul, and
Resurrection of the Body, but lived so sensually as if neither were true; and
as if they preferred the uppermost rooms at a feast, before the Kingdom and
Glory of Heaven. They held, That there was One and but One God, and were right
as to pure Deisme, but God in Christ they could not bear; 'twas beyond their
patience to hear of Christ to be the Son of God; and though 'twere for life,
yet they would not come to him. Now it is not eternal life to know the only true
God, unless we know the Jesus Christ whom he has sent, John 17.3. And the
excellency of knowing Christ, is to know him so as to be found in him, to have
communion with him, and be made conformable to him. If we will believe St.
Paul, Phil. 3. He that thus has the Son, has life; and he that has not the
Son, has not life, 1 John 5.12. He that believes on the Son, has everlasting
life, and he that believes not the Son, shall not see life; but the wrath of
God abides on him, John 3.36. He was a child of wrath by Nature, and if he
believe not in the Son of God, he is still a child of wrath, and liable to
condemnation.

But to make haste with the rest of their Characters, They were much and long
in prayer; but though they called often on his Name, they departed not from
iniquity; but went from their prayers to their sins, yea, made their prayers
but for their sins sake, and for a pretense, that they might the more glibly
swallow down and devour (the hard to be digested) Widows-houses, Matthew. 23.
Their prayers were but a show, they sinned in the Name of the Lord, and at the
cost and charges of Divinity, wretches that they were.

They did not only pray, but fast too; they had learnt the Art of making sad
and sour faces, and of hanging down the head like a bulrush; yea, they
pretended to be so expert at and abundant in it, as if this more than any
thing else were their Masterpiece, and super-errogating (I might say
super-arrogant) excellency: they do not only plead it with God, as an argument,
Luke 18.12. but as a merit, Isa. 58.3. as if they deserved a Feast in Heaven,
for their fasting on Earth.

To their Fasting and Prayer, they added Alms also: and that it might not be
an unknown charity, (though God and the poor be the best witnesses and enough)
they sounded a trumpet, and were not content that their left hand knew what
their right hand did, unless it were also seen of men, which they minded much
more than doing good, Matthew. 6.1, 2. for they were extremely covetous (which no
pious man is charged with or sound guilty of in all the Scripture) yet as
covetous as they were, they were more ambitious, and parted with money, that
they might have a reward of praise and glory from men.

Zealous they were too (beyond all reason and religion) for the Sabbath; but
concerned themselves more for an Ox or an Ass, than for the health of men's
bodies, or the saving-health of men's souls, which is an undeniable evidence of
their hypocrisy, Luke 13.15, 16, etc. yet to do them right, and to give these
Devils their due, they took great pains to make Proselites, for they compass
Sea and Land ( Satans-walk, as the late learned Bishop Hall calls it, on this
very place and occasion) not to convert men to God, but to make a party of them
to themselves, and a prey to the Devil; and did nothing but undo themselves,
and to make their Proselites twofold more the children of Hell than
themselves, Matthew. 23.15.

Thus I have endeavored to clear up the Beauty of Holiness, and do avow it
against all gainsayers to be incomparable. You cannot but from all this learn
to believe, that all pleasures without holiness are but griefs; and the
pleasures of sin will be found so, either in repenting of, or being damned for
them: That all profit without holiness is but loss; for what will it profit a
man to gain the World, and (He that pays but a sin for it buys it too dear, for
he wrongs and is in danger) to lose his soul? Honor without holiness will end,
and that in disgrace. Civility, Gentility, Morality, Pharisaical Righteousess,
the greatest and all the beauty that is in the World, will never admit any
person to a sight of God without holiness; and they that miss that sight, miss
Happiness.

There are some captious and trifling objections, which this blind and
therefore peevish and quarrelsome World make against holiness; but I shall not
trouble you with them, they being clear and invincible arguments, that though
they may have seen her (in transitu) in her humane dress here below among men
(which is disadvantageous to her, being nothing so glorious as that she is
clothed with and wears above with God and Angels) yet that they never viewed
her with intellectual or believing eyes, nor ever had the happiness of her
ennobling heavenly and happyfying conversation, for then they would undoubtedly
be transported and rapt with her admirable and transcending Beauty, which would
not only oblige and warrant, but inspire and enable them to cry out with the
Queen of Sheba concerning the wisdom and glory of Solomon, 1 Kings 10.6, etc.
It was a true report, that I heard of thine Acts and of thy Wisdom, howbeit I
believed not the words, until I came and mine eyes had seen; and behold, the
half was not told me; thy Wisdom and Prosperity exceeds the fame which I
heard: Happy are thy men! happy be thy servants! Blessed be the Lord thy God,
who has set thee on the Throne, etc.

I see it is now high time to take into our thoughts the third thing which I
promised to treat of and entertain you a little with, which is, that this
lovely thing, The beauty of holiness, becomes the House of God, and that for
ever. Here I have two things to do:

1. To inform you what is meant by the House of God.

2. That Holiness becomes the House of God.

1. For the House of God. This Psalm having no title in the Hebrew (though the
Septuagint and thence the vulgar Latin give it one) we can speak nothing but
conjecturally, as to the occasion, date or Author of it; and it is better to say
nothing, than what is doubtful. Some would raise this House of God as high as
Heaven, which is indeed called the House of God, John 14.2. and the beauty of
this House is holiness, Isa. 57.15. I dwell in the High and Holy Place; and yet
this high and holy God is graciously pleased to prefer the little low cottage,
this country house, of an humble and broken heart, before that Throne of his;
indeed in this Text, it is but with him also, but Isa. 66.1. it is preferred
before it.

Others as to the Letter refer it to the Tabernacle, the little Ambulatory and
moving Temple in the Wilderness, and after; or to the Temple, the great and
fixed Tabernacle at Jerusalem, which was famed for beauty, yea the beauty of
holiness, by which Name it is often called: But as I remember, the Jews of Old
and Latter Time do grant that this is one of the Psalms, which relates and
belongs to the Messiah-Time, which our Divines do generally call the
Gospel-Time or Dispensation. And by this House of God, is by most, if not all
interpreters, meant and understood the People, or Servants, or Household of God.
Munster and Clarius (who often transcribes Munster word for word) express it
thus, Per Domum ornatam and perpetuo perstituram, intellige fidelium Ecclesam;
By this adorned House which is to endure for ever, they understand the Church
of the Faithful. Doctor M. Causabon in these words; holiness actively, that is
all manner of reverence in outward performances and duties; but especially an
holy life and conversation becomes them, that profess themselves to be
servants to so great and glorious a Majesty. And the Apostles, both St. Paul
and St. Peter speak of the House and Temple of God in these expressions, 1 Cor.
3.16, 17. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God? The Temple of God is holy,
which Temple ye are, 1 Pet. 2.5. Ye also as lively stones are built up a
spiritual house; so that the House is the Household or Family of God.

2. Holiness, all and all manner of holiness becomes all and every one of the
houses of God: It Is their desire and delight, their beauty and comeliness, as
the word imports, and is so rendered by both Jewish and Christian Interpreters.
Holiness of Doctrine and Worship, of heart and life, becomes the houses of God;
not only becomes them as their duty to be holy; but being holy is their
comeliness; It Is their greatest ornament and excellency in the eyes of God,
Angels, and all good men. As to fear God and keep his Commandments is the whole
or all (as duty, so happiness) of man, being opposed to all the rest, which the
wisest of Men and Kings properly and significantly calls Vanity and vexation of
spirit: so holiness is the all of their beauty and excellency in distinction
from the other exterior ornaments.

I told you before, that other beauty had many a great and big word attributed
to it, but we may allow them much more to be the Titles of Honor belonging to
this Beauty of Holiness: This then is the Glory, the Joy, the Praise, the
Excellency, the Diadem, the Crown, the Ornament, the Renown, the Perfection of
Beauty. Does not the Holy Spirit, who indicted the Scripture tell us so? and
what need we any further witness? If 'twere said but once by the Infallible
Truth, yet it were as true, as if said an hundred times over; and he that
believes not one, would not in likelihood believe ten or ten times ten quoted
Scriptures, though backed with the concurring Suffrages and Authorities of the
Fathers and Expositors, which the Holy Scripture needs not, and therefore I
shall not urge them: Only to indear the argument, and by that the thing, viz.
Holiness, it is worthy of a remark, that the Penman of this Text utters it by
way of admiration (O Lord!) which indeed speaks the unspeakableness of it: Oh
how amiable! How lovely! How beautiful! How becoming is Holiness! and how does
it become thine House, O Lord! There Is want in the words that are, and need of
more words than there are, to express it according to its worth and perfection.
And so in the New Testament, we may observe St. Peter speaking of it, with an
admiration beyond what he could utter, 2 Pet. 3.11. What manner of persons
ought ye to be, in all holy conversations and godlinesses! for so the reading
is in the Original Greek: not only single holiness and godliness, but
plurality, holy conversations and godlinesses; and that with an universality,
all holy, etc. yea with admiration too (...), quanti-quales, What manner, etc.

Having thus dispatched these three things:

First, The discovery of what Holiness is, in its proper Notion and Nature.
Secondly, That it is an absolute and incomparable beauty. Thirdly, That it
becomes and is the chiefest ornament of every House of God, both above and here
below. I may come to the Application in the language of St. Paul, Romans 8.31.
What shall we then say to these things?

1. I say by way of Inference and Information, That, Sin does not become, but
is the disgrace and reproach of the House of God. Our blessed Lord and Savior
had not patience (the Zeal of his Fathers House did so possess and eat him up)
to behold the Temple, the House of Prayer and Holiness, to be turned into a Den
of Thieves; he could not bear it, nor endure the sight, Matthew. 21.12, 13. When
he found in the Temple those that sold Oxen and Sheep, and Doves, and the
Changers of Money sitting, he made a Scourge of small cords and drove them all
out of the Temple, and said, Take these things hence, and make not my Fathers
House, an House of Merchandise. Certainly such things, as lofty and scorning
Pride, griping and sordid Covetousness, loathsome Lukewarmness, un-manning
Drunkenness, beastial Uncleanness, etc. are the spots, which diminish and
disparage the beauty of the House of God, as Saint Peter tells us, 2 Pet. 2.13.

It cannot be imagined that they who are enemies to holiness, can be friends
to, or lovers of God. They that live in sin, whose practice and delight is to
do wickedly, are so far from being the House of God, that they are but a Cage
of unclean birds; and like to that house, which the Devil calls his own, though
'twere swept and garnisht, Matthew. 12.44. To hate holiness, and to be in love
with sin, is by interpretation and true construction, to be in love with Hell,
and to hate Heaven, or to be in love with misery, and to hate happiness.

This is that which opens the mouths of Jews, Turks, and Indians, against the
Christian Religion; and, as by the Jews of Old, the Name of God and Christ is
evil spoken of by reason of these, Romans 2.23, 24. who by their evil deeds give
great occasion to the enemies of our best friend the Lord Jesus Christ to
blaspheme his Name. The Christian Religion is Magnetical and attractive, it is
of so pleasing an aspect, and happyfying a Nature and Influence, that did but
the Professors of it make their Profession good, I should not doubt almost, but
that the lovely and loving holy Jesus would quickly be the desire of and be
embraced by all Nations: whereas now, when they come among Christians, or
Christians go among them, and they see the Vileness, the Injustice, the
Wantonness, and the almost all manner of wickedness that attends and adheres to
many of their conversations, they are apt, though illogically enough, to say,
this is, or is this their Religion? as they did of Jerusalem of old, when her
beauty was departed from her, Lam. 1.6. and 2.15. Is this the City, that men
call the perfection of beauty, the joy of the whole Earth? Thus they twit and
taunt, clap their hands, hiss, and wag their head, and abhor the excellency of
Jacob and beauty of Israel.

And truly if the Professors of this excellent, lovely best, and only saving
Religion, would but do themselves the right to consider of it, it were
impossible but they would blush and be ashamed, that ever they should so much
wrong Religion, by giving such occasion to reflect such undeserved reproaches
on her: Alas, how will they answer it to Gods-Deputy, their Conscience? and if
not to that, how to God? for if our hearts condemn us, God is greater than our
hearts, and knows more by us, than we do by our selves, and therefore may
much more condemn us. With what faces can such persons appear before the Throne
of God; either here when they pray, or hereafter when they must be judged? I
will say to them, as Alexander is said to say to a soldier of his, and of his
Name, Either lay aside thy Name, or fight better: Either be not Christians in
Name, or be Christians indeed; for if they have a Name to live, and yet be dead
in sins and trespasses by living in them, they may die in their sins, and be
damned for all their Name. He that made them will not save them, if they be not
new-made and become newmen; for it is not being a creature, but a new creature,
that entitles to and assures of Salvation. Again,

2. Let me say to every House of God by way of dehortation, in St. Paul's words,
which are of God, 2 Cor. 6.14, etc. Be ye not unequally yoaked with
unbelievers; for what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and
what communion has light with darkness? and what concord has Christ with
Belial? or what part has he that believes with an Insidel? and what agreement
has the Temple of God with Idols? For ye are the Temple of the living God; as
God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will be their God,
and they shall be my people. Wherefore come cut from among them, and be ye
separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive
you, and will be a Father to you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says
the Lord Almighty. Having therefore these Promises, Dearly Beloved, Let us
cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness
in the fear of God. Who has given us these exceeding great and precious
promises, that by these you might be partakers of a divine Nature, having
escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust, 2 Pet. 1.4. And you
may hear another Voice from Heaven, saying, Come out of her my people, that ye
be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues, Revel.
18.4. Therefore once more in St. Paul's expressions, 1 Cor. 10.14, 15, etc. My
dearly beloved, flee from Idolatry: I speak as to wise men, judge ye what I
say: for why should we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than he?
v. 22. Of old, God would not permit his people linsie-woolsie garments, nor to
plow with an Ox and an Ass, nor to halt between God and Baal. Methinks
Protestants, if they remember the Name, should not incline to communion with
Papists in their Idolatry, which was the ground of our separation from them.

3. I would say this by way of caution, Let no man counterfeit and dissemble a
being holy: Simulata sanctitas est duplex iniquitas, to be an hypocrite, is to
be but a rotten post, though double gilt; It Is to be not only a sinner, but one
died in grain. Hypocrisy is a word taken from the Stage, as is well known, and
it is rather a playing, than an acting of Religion; It Is personating without
being a religious person: It Is an Art not an Act. And in Religion it is true
what they say of faces, that painting does not so much advance beauty to the
eye, as debase it to the judgment; and that handsomness, which is only
artificial, is real deformity. It Is not what is service in the eyes of men, or
what is celebrated by them for beautiful, but what is so in the sight of God;
as the Apostle, Col. 1.22.

4. This by way of Exhortation to the House of God, be then really, zealously,
and eternally holy; not for a day, as if ye put on no more but an holy days
face and sine cloths, but at all times and in all things. Whatsoever ye do from
the highest duty of Grace to the lowest of Nature, whether you eat or drink,
buy or sell, as well as whether you hear or pray, do all to the glory of God.
Jesus Christ has given himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of and in readiness
to every good word and work, to walk worthy of him to all well-pleasing, and to
serve him in righteousness and holiness all the days of our life; to length of
days, or for ever, as it is in the Text; and that though the floods lift up
their voice and waves, as it is a little before the Text, and to which it has
relation. We should be ambitious to be as holy, as Absalom was fair, and to
have as glorious a Name as the Old Temple had, which was the beauty of the
whole Earth, and of which it is said, That in it every one spoke of his glory,
or as it is in the Margin, every whit of it utters glory, viz. to God, whose
due it is.

I do the rather urge this, because the life of Religion lies in living in it,
and I scarce know any thing more wanting than an holy life; professing,
hearing, and praying there is great store, but where is holiness? alas, can we
find it in our hearts to live by God, and not live to God! Do we love to hear
of Christians Dignities, and shall we not love to hear of Christian Duties? of
Privileges, and not of Performances? of Consolation and not of Conversation
Doctrine? Can we lend our ear to hear what God has done for us? and shall we
not give that the hearing which is to be done by us? Surely our design in being
Christians should be like Gods, not only to save our selves, but to glorify
him.

If you will please to lend me a little more of your patience, I will endeavor
to set this Exhortation home by some obliging arguments:

1. The Lord of this House, the Pater-familias, the Father of this Family is
holy; and as I have already made appear, it is his Name, his Work, his Will, his
Image, his Nature, and Glory; therefore be ye also holy.

2. Your Profession is holy, and we should not only make a good profession, but
make it good. The House of God is as I may call it, an Holy Academy, where all
are to be holy professors, as well as professors of holiness. Profession is an
engaging thing, as St. Paul tells us, 1 Timothy 6.12. Fight the good fight of
Faith, etc. seeing thou have made a good Profession before many Witnesses.

3. Your Calling is holy, 2 Timothy 1.9. He has called us with an holy calling;
and 1 Thessalonians. 4.7. He has called us, not to uncleanness, but to holiness. We
are indeed saved by Grace, but we are to know and find, that the Grace of God
which bringing Salvation, has appeared to all men, teaches us to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and withal to live soberly, righteously, and
godlily in this present World; and so to look (or else we look in vain) for the
blessed hope and glorious appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ: for if we learn
not Graces teaching, we shall never enjoy Graces salvation. So that it clearly
appears, that holiness is the Christians (...), his Work and Employment: He is
out of his Calling and Element, when he is not conversant in holiness.

4. God has provided an House for you hereafter, as well as made you his House
at present. Our Savior a little before his Ascension comforted his Disciples
against all their troubles, with this, That in his Fathers House were many
Mansions, and he was going to prepare a place for them, John 14.1, 2. Yea, God
has prepared for them a City, Heb. 11.16. and St. Paul assures us upon his
knowledge, 2 Cor. 5.1. That if the earthly house of this Tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building of God, an House not made with hands, eternal in
the Heavens: so that we shall be no losers but gainers by dying: and seeing our
future house is holy, we who profess to be Gods House here, should be holy now.

5. You study what becomes your outward man, and its concerns, that not only
your persons but your houses, and cloths, etc. may all be neat and handsome;
and some had almost as lieve be out of their lives, as out of the fashion. And
shall Gods House, shall your heart and life be neglected, and left to disorder
and shameful indecency? Are ye for all beauty but that of holiness? Shall every
thing be adorned, but the Gospel and Doctrine of God our Savior? which is
adorned by nothing but holiness, which is not this or that particular grace,
but a complication of all graces, every one link contributing to make it more
glorious than a Chain of Gold about your Neck for ornament; as the Proverbs
some-where speak by allusion. I may reason it and expostulate with you as the
Prophet did to them who said, the time was not come that the Lords House should
be built, Hag. 1.4. Is it time for you to dwell in your cieled houses, and this
house lie waste? Oh repair the House of God.

6. To pretend to holiness and not to practice it, is to be but irreligiously
religious, to have the Name of a Saint and to be a sinner. To say of such or
such, that they are Saints, and not holy, is as great a contradiction and
absurdity, as to say, a man is and is not at the same time. In Words to confess
God, and in Works to deny him, is to disown their acknowledgement, to deny
their Confession, and to confess their denial of God: such an inconsistency is
an unholy Saint. And on this account it was that St. Paul was so justly severe
to sinful professors of holiness, that he wrote to the Church of Corinth, not
to company with Fornicators, yet not altogether with the Fornicators of this
World, or with the Covetous, or Extortioners, or Idolaters, for then must they
go out of the World: but not to keep company, if any man that is called a
Brother, be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or an Idolater, or a Railer, or a
Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such an one, no not to eat, 1 Cor. 5.9, 10,
11. Let not such things be once named among you, as becomes Saints, Ephesians. 5.3.
Let not any of these be your Name, for if you be named or called Drunkards, or
Unclean, though Christians, etc. When the Drunkard and the Unclean goes to
hell, what will become of the Christian? The sin will be of more force to damn,
than the Name will be to save; For, Know ye not, that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God? be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor
Idolaters, etc. (so living and so dying without repentance) shall inherit the
Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. And the same Apostle with the like zeal and
fervency asserts it, and vehemently urges it again, Ephesians. 5.5, 6. For this ye
know, that no Whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man who is an
Idolater, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God. Let no man
deceive you with vain words (as if you might be saved notwithstanding your
being such) for because of these things comes the wrath of God on the children
of disobedience, though they may by men be called the children of God: Be not
ye therefore partakers with them.

7. I pray consider this also, That though you may own your selves, yet if you
be not holy, God will not own you for his house: He delights indeed in the
habitable parts of the Earth, but which are they? not the Temples made with
hands, as St. Paul, Acts 17.24. but the humble, the broken, the pure in heart,
as was hinted before: and it is expressly said in that Psalm which speaks of
Christ Jesus, viz. 16. That his goodness extends to the Saints, which are
upon the Earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all his delight. These you see
are the habitable parts of the Earth, the houses in which he delights to dwell.
But if the house of God be defiled, he will forsake it as the Temple of old, 1
Cor 3.13. If any man defile or destroy the Temple of God, him shall God
destroy, for the Temple of God is holy; let no man deceive himself, etc.
Communion with God is our Heaven upon Earth, the only thing that makes it worth
our while to live. But what communion has God with Belial? If any man say that
he has fellowship with him, and walks in darkness, he lies; but if we walk in
the light as he is in the light, then have we fellowship one with another, 1
John 1.6. As the Devil is dispossessed when persons are converted to the faith,
the strong man is cast out, and such persons are delivered from the power of
Satan unto God; so when professing persons do wickedly, especially if they
apostatize from Faith and Holiness, God is turned out of the house which was
called his, and will not be an inmate, nor lodge, or sojourn in an house that
is so polluted with leprosy, and admits the Devil to re-possession.

8. Holiness is an endued Beauty. The lovers and admirers of this corporeal and
superficial takingness, do oftener woe than wed un-endued Beauty; for their eye
and tongue delight, they will complement it, and extract the essenses of wit to
give it Elogies even to adoration: but as Solomon says of Wisdom, so they of
Beauty, it is good with an inheritance. The poor wise man was so happy, as by
his wisdom to deliver the City, but so unhappy as not be regarded, by reason of
his poverty, Eccl. 9.15. But the Beauty of Holiness cannot want regard, nor go
un-espoused on this account, for the best, the greatest and incorruptible
inheritance is hers. Heaven its self is called the inheritance of the Saints or
holy-ones, Col. 1.12. and this inheritance is shared among them that are
sanctified, and none else, Acts 26.18. And this inheritance is both Light and
Life, Kingdom and Crown of Glory, which fades not away; and therefore
methinks the great and generous Gallants of this World, as they love to be
called, should be in love with and all enamored of Holiness, seeing Beauty and
Glory, Honor and Riches meet and center in her, as much and well as they are
annexed to her.

9. To gather and close up many things together, Holiness is the end of all
that God, the Father, Son, and Spirit have done and will do for us from first
to last; as also of all the means enjoined to, Privileges conferred on, Graces
wrought in, Duties to be done by us, Afflictions and Trials wherewith we are
exercised: It Is the end the Father has in Electing, Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen
us in him, viz. Christ, before the foundation of the World, that we should be
holy and without blame before him in love. As of the Fathers Election, so is it
the end of the Sons Redemption of us, Ephesians. 5.25, 26. He loved the Church, and
gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it: and so again Titus
2.14. He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. The Office and
Work of the Spirit is to sanctify; and he is called holy, not only as being so
in himself, but for making us so by his efficient power, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. God
has chosen you to salvation, not only through belief of the truth, but
sanctification of the Spirit, 1 Pet. 1.2. Elect according to foreknowledge,
through sanctification of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.1. Such were some of you, but ye
are sanctified, etc. by the Spirit of our God. It Is the end of all Ordinances
and means, and we should not take up with the means without the end. What is
preaching for, but to bring men into, and to build them up in holiness? Ephesians.
4.11, 12, 13. It Is the end of all Dignities and Privileges, of which the
Promises are principal; and why are they given us, but (as was said above) that
we might perfect holiness, and partake of a Divine Nature? Why is the great
Title of the Sons and Children of God bestowed upon us? but that we should be
followers of, and like to God our Father, as dear Children. It Is the end of all
graces wrought in and exercised by us; of faith, Acts 15.9. Purifying their
hearts by faith; and Acts 26.18. them that are sanctified by faith. So of hope,
1 John 3.3. And every man that has this hope in him, purifies himself, as he
is pure. So of knowledge, 1 John 2.4. He that says, I know him, and keeps
not his Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him: He has not
learned the truth as it is in Jesus, and therefore his knowledge is but a form
of knowledge, Romans 2.20. and knowledge falsely so called, 1 Timothy 6.20. It Is the
end and effect of love also, 1 John 5.3. For this is the love of God, that we
keep his Commandments, and they are not grievous. Commands from God who loves
us, and to us who love him, cannot be grievous; if they are so, it is for want
of love in us: for our Savior tells us, if we love him we will, and they are
the lovers and friends of him, who do keep his Commandments. It Is the end of
that great duty of Prayer; why or what do we pray for? but that we may be holy,
and do his will on Earth, as it is done in heaven. Surely what the Apostle prays
for in relation to the Thessalonians, 1 Ep. 5.23. should be every ones prayer
for themselves, that they may be sanctified throughout and wholly; and to walk
worthy of God to all well-pleasing, Col. 1.10. It Is the end of all Afflictions,
Chastenings, and Trials, that we might come out of them like Gold purified, 1
Pet. 1.7. that the fruit may be the taking away of sin, Isa. 27.9. and for our
profit, which is in this, that we might be partakers of his holiness, Heb.
12.10. Yea, it is the end of all mercies and deliverances, Luke 1.74, 75. that
being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we might serve him in
righteousness and and true holiness, without fear, all the days of our life.
Yet again, and so I conclude, It Is the preparation for, and our glory in Heaven
its self: It Is our preparation for the sight of God; for without Holiness, no
Man, how Wise and Learned, Rich and Honorable, Fair and Beautiful soever he
be, shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. and when we do see him, more Holiness will be
the effect of that sight, 1 John 3.2. when he does appear we shall be like him,
for we shall see him as he is; and this is called Glory, Col. 3.4. When Christ
our Life shall appear, we shall appear with him in Glory; and it is for the very
thing, viz. being holy, that the Church is called Glorious, Ephesians. 5.27.

Well then, These things being so, I entreat you to consider of what has been
said, and beseech God to give you Understanding in all things; that you may so
Know, as to Believe; so Believe, as to Love; so Love, as to Practice; so
Practice, as to Perfect Holiness, and be Eternally saved: and then I know, that
you will rejoice and sing the New Song, even Praise to God, and join with them
that say, Holy, Holy, Holy; and conclude with my Text, that Holiness becomes
thine House, O Lord, for ever.

Let all the People say, Amen; And, as the Arabic, adds, Allelujah.

FINIS.

