TRUE INFORMATION OF THE Beginning and Cause of all our troubles: how they have
been hatched, and how prevented.

WHEREIN We may see the manifold contrivances and attempts of foreign and
homebred Enemies, against the Parliament, Kingdom, and purity of RELIGION.
AND How all their Endeavors whether by Force or fraud, never prospered.

A Work Worthy to be kept in Record, and to be communicated to POSTERITY.

The people that will not understand, shall fall.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1648.

True Information of the beginning and cause of all our troubles, how they have
bin hatched and how prevented.
1 Parliament
1. IN the first year of King Charles his Reign, a Parliament being called at
Oxford, two subsidies were granted, no grievances removed, but the said
Parliament soon dissolved.

2 The sad effects which the dissolution of this Parliament produced, were the
loss of Rochell, by the unhappy help of Englands Ships.

3 The diversion of a most facile and hopeful war from the West Indies, to a
most expencive and successelesse attempt on Cales.

4 The bloody and unblessed attempt on the Isle of Ree, and thereby a
precipitate breach of peace with France, to our great loss.

5 A peace concluded with Spain, without consent of Parliament, contrary to a
promise formerly made to the Kingdom, by King James, a little before his
death; whereby the Cause of the Palatinate was altogether most shamefully
deserted by us.

6 The Kingdom suddenly billetted with Soldiers, and a concomitant project
set on foot for Germane Horfes to force men, by fear, to fall before arbitrary
and tyrannical taxations, continually to be laid upon them.

2 Parliament.
7 The dissolution of a second Parliament at Westminster, in the second year
after a declarative grant of no less then five Subsidies, and the sad issues
that flowed to the Kingdom thereupon.

8 As first, the violent exacting from the people of that mighty sum of the
five Subsidies, or a sum equal to it by a Commission for a Royall-Loan, as
it was called.

9 Many worthy Gentlemen imprisoned and vexed, that refused to pay it.

10 Great sums of money extorted from Subjects by Privy Seals and Excises

11 The most hopeful Petition of Right, blasted in the very blossom of it.

3 Parliament.
12 A third Parliament called, and quickly broken in the fourteenth year of
the King, and therein Parliamentary privileges extremely violated by after
illusage of some of the best and worthiest Members thereof, who were clapped up
close prisoners, denied all ordinary and extraordinary comforts of life, and
preservation of health, which might have proved perpetual to them, had not a
fourth Parliament (which afterward happened) necessitated their releife and
release.

13 And this third Parliament thus dissolved, O the miserable effects that
followed thereon also.

14 Scandalous and opprobrious Declarations published to asperse and besmeare
the proceedings of the last Parliament, and some of the best Members thereof;
yea, Proclamations set out to those effects, thereby extremely to dis-hearten
the Subjects, yea, and plainly forbidding them once to name a Parliament, or to
desire them any more.

15 Whence, immediately gushed out (this damme of Parliaments thus being
broken down) the violent inundations (even to a deluge of miseries) of mighty
sums of money, got by that strange and straining project of Knighthood; yet,
under a fair color and pretense of Law for it, and for all the rest that
followed.

16 As, the most burthensom Book of Rates; the most heavy and unheard of (till
then) taxation of Ship money; the enlargement of Forests, contrary to Magna
Charta; the injurious taxation of Coat and Conduct money; the forcible taking
away of the Trained-Bands Arms; the desperate design of ingrosing Gunpowder
into their hands and keeping it fast from the Subject in the Tower of London,
not to be had thence but at most excessive rates.

17 The destruction of the Forest of Dean, that most famous Magazine, and
Timber-store-house of the whole Kingdom, which was sold to Papists.

18 The monstrous Monopolies of Soap, Salt, Wine, Leather, and Sea-coal; yea,
almost of all things in the Kingdom of most necessary and common use.

19 Restraint of Subjects Liberties in their Trades and Habitations; for
refusal of which foresaid heavy pressures, many were vexed with long and
languishing suites, some fined and confined to prisons, to the loss of health
in many, of life in some; Some having their houses broke open, their goods
seized on, their studies or closets searched for writings, books, and papers,
to undo them; Some interrupted also in their Sea-Voyages, and their ships
taken from them, in an hostile manner, by projectors, as by pirates, or common
enemies.

20 The crushing cruelties of the Star-Chamber-Court, and Council Table, in
those days, chiefly, for the fomenting and increasing of most exorbitant
taxations, pressures and unjust suit, against the Subject.

21 Thus far for the miseries of the Commonwealth; now also for the Churches
danger, and distress, the amazing miseries of the Subjects Consciences also,
by the intolerable burden of Popish Ceremonies, Romish Innovations and such
like other outrages of the Arch Prelate of Canterbury, and his Prelaticall
Agents and Instruments, over the whole Kingdom, in matters of religion, divine
worship, and spiritual cases of Conscience.

22 The most palpable and abominable Romish Ceremonies used at the Kings
Coronation, and insolent and impious, false and destructive additions in the
Oath administered to the King, at his said first Inauguration to the Crown, by
that most arrogant Archbishop.

23 And the manifold other impious impositions in matters of religion, divine
worship and spiritual cases of Conscience; for refusing and opposing of which,
how was the honest-hearted and tender-conscienced subject, grievously oppressed
by fines, imprisonments, stigmatizings, mutilations, whippings, pillories,
gagges, confinements and banishments; yea, and that, into perpetual close
imprisonments in the most desolate, remote, and (as they hoped and intended)
remorslesse parts of the Kingdom.

24 The putting down, yea, utterly ruinating of that most famous and
honorable work, that ever this Kingdom saw, in a private way, for the
advancement of Gods glory in the propagation of the Gospel, I mean, the
Feoffees for buying in of Impropriations; Noy, the (then) Atturney-Generall,
openly in Court, accusing that blessed work to be a worse plot against the
Church (he meant the Prelaticall-Church sure,) than the Papists Powder Plot

25 The advancing (for the most part) none, to Ecclefiasticall Dignities and
Livings but Arminians; yea, Popish hearted Pontificians; Suspending, and
silencing with deprivations, degradations, and excommunications, almost all the
most pious, painful and Orthodox-learned Pastors over the Kingdom, whom they
could catch in their snares, and all this under a pretense of peace, unity and
conformity; in which foresaid cases, the High Commission (like the
Spanish-Inquisition) with its most pregmaticall pranks, was all along, most
intolerable and abominable.

26 Printing-presses, set open for the Printing and publishing of all sorts of
Popish and Arminian tenets; but, shut up and restrained from Printing, sound
and Orthodox Doctrines.

27 Nay, not only thus lamentably*molested us at home in England; but
attempted the like on our brethren in Scotland, endeavoring to impose upon
their consciences also, a New Liturgy, and a book of Canons, upon the first
introducing whereof into their Church, they not enduring them, threw stones and
stools at the Archbishop of St. Andrews head, and beat him out of the Church,
crying out a Pape, a Pape, and so rid themselves of them.

28 Upon which refusal of theirs, O what foul calumnies and scoffs were
immediately cast upon them, and they called and counted rebels and traitors;
yea, so proclaimed in all Churches in England.

29 An Army was also raised to oppress and suppress them, for thus resisting
the Arch-prelates most injurious impositions on them.

A mighty and tumultuous rising of Apprentices and young men, in Southwarke and
Lambeth side, with clubs and other weapons especially at the Archbishops
house, which put him into such a fright, as made him fly to Croyden, to convey
himself to some more private and remote place, and although Pharoahs Magisians
were so honest, that at the fight of the dust of the earth turned into lice,
they cried out it was the finger of God, but he grew more and more outrageous,
and caused one to be hanged and quartered, and his head set on London Bridge.

30 Our Brethren of Scotland likewise raising an Army in their own just
defense, and by force of arms, enforcing their own peace.

31 A first pacification being then made by the King, and some of his Nobility,
and ratified under hand and Seal twixt them and the Scots; yet was it shortly
after shamefully violated, and broken quite off by the Arch-prelate of
Canterbury, and the Earl of Straford, and burnt by the hangman at the Exchange.

4 Parliament.
32 A fourth Parliament was thereupon shortly after called again, by those
complotters means, but to a very ill intent, and another Parliament summoned
also at the same time by the Earl of Straford in Ireland, both of them only
to levy and procure moneys to raise another Army and wage a new War against the
Scots.

33 The Ships, and goods of our Brethren of Scotland, were, in all parts and
ports of this Kingdom, and of Ireland, also surprised and seized on for the
King; their Commissioners denied audience to make their just defense to the
King, and the whole Kingdom of Scotland and England too, hereupon much
distracted and distempered with leavying of moneys, and imprisoning all among
us that refused the same.

34 This Parliament also refusing to comply with the King, Canterbury and
Straford, in this Episcopal war against the Scots, was soon dissolved and
broken up by them and thereupon they returned to their former ways of waste
and confusion, and the very next day after the dissolution thereof some eminent
members of both Houses, had their Chambers, and Studies, yea, their Cabinets
and very pockets of their wearing clothes (betimes in the morning before they
were out of their beds) searched for letters and writings, and some of them
also imprisoned, and a false and most scandalous declaration was published
against the House of Commons in the Kings name.

35 A forced Loan of money was attempted in the City of London, to be made a
president (if it prevailed there) for the whole Kingdom, but some Aldermen
refusing, were sorely threatened and imprisoned.

36 In which interim, the Clergies Convocation continuing (notwithstanding the
dissolution of the Parliament) new conscience-oppressing Canons were forged,
and a strange Oath, with a monstrous etc. in it, was framed for the
establishing of the Bishops Hierarchy, with severe punishments on the refusers
to take it.

37 In this Convocation sore taxations were also imposed upon the whole
Clergy, even no less than six Subsidies, besides a bountiful contribution to
forward that intended war against our brethren of Scotland.

38 For the advancing of which said sums for this war, the Popish pontifician
party, and their scandalous priests were most free and forward; yea, and a
solemn prayer was composed, and imposed by the Bishops on their Ministers every
where to be used and read in all Churches against the Scots, as rebels and
traitors.

39 The papists also in a high measure enjoyed even almost a total toleration;
and a Popes Nuncio suffered amongst us to act and govern all Romish affairs,
yea, a kind of a private popish-parliament kept in the Kingdom, and popish
jurisdictions, erected among them.

40. Commissions were also (secretly) issued out for some great and eminent
papists, for martial Commands, for levying of Soldiers, and strengthening
their party with Arms and Ammunition of all sorts, and in great plenty.

41. His Majesty's treasure was by these means so extremely exhausted, and his
revenues so anticipated, that he was enforced to compel (as it were) his own
Servants, Judges, and Officers of all sorts, to lend him great sums of money,
and prisons filled with refusers of these and the other illegal payments; yea,
many High-Sheriffes summoned into the Star Chamber, and to the Councel-Board,
and some of them imprisoned for not being quick enough in levying of Ship
money, and such like intolerable taxations.

42. In sum, the whole Kingdom was now brought into a lamentable and
languishing condition of being most miserably bought and sold to any that could
give and contribute most of might and malice against us, and no hope of humane
help, but dolor, desperation and destruction, to be the portion of all.

43. In which interim, our Brethren of Scotland being entered into our Kingdom,
for their own just defense, the King had advanced his Royall-Standard at
York, where the cream of the Kingdom, Nobles, and Gentry, being assembled,
and a Treaty betwixt the prime of both Armies had at Rippon, for a fair and
peaceable accommodation, the King was, at last, enforced to take his Nobles
counsel, and in The Arch-Prelate of St Andrews in Scotland reading the new
Service-booke in his pontificalibus assaulted by men and Women, with Crickets
stools Sticks and Stones.

The rising of Prentises and Seamen on Southwark side to assault the
Archbishops of Canterburys House at Lambeth*

the first place, a cessation of Arms agreed on; and then this fifth present
Parliament, (the Parliament of Parliaments,) was necessitously resolved on* to
begin, November 3* 1640.

5. Parliament, Anno 1640. November. 3.
44. But, behold, a desperate plot and design was herein also, immediately set
on foot, to spoil or poison it in the very Embrio and constitution of it, in
the first choice of the Members thereof, by Letters from the King, Queen,
malignant and Popish Earls, Lords, Knights, and Gentry, posted into all parts
of the Kingdom, to make a strong party for them; But, by admirable divine
providence, this their plot was counterplotted, and wonderfully frustrated, and
the Parliament most hopefully congregated and settled.

45. Shortly after, a very formidable Spanish-Fleet, or Armado, appeared on our
English narrow Seas, in sight of Dover, and was coming in (as was, on very
strong grounds, more than probably conjectured) as a third party, to help to
destroy us; the Spaniards hoping, that by this time, we and the Scots were
together by the ears, but they were by Gods mercy, beaten off from us by our
Neighbors of Holland. And we fighting against them, we fought against our
friends.

The Soldiers in their passage to York, turn Reformers, pull down Popish
pictures, break down rayles, turn altars into tables, and those Popish
Commanders, that were to command them, they forced to eat flesh on Fridayes,
thrusting it down their throats, and some they slew.

46. In the time of ours and the Scots Armies residing in the North, which was
in June 1641. the popish and malignant Lords and Prelates, fearing the effects
of this present Parliament, complotted together to disaffect that our English
Army against the Parliament, and endeavored to bring it out of the North,
Southward, and so to London, to compel the parliament to such limits and rules
as they thought fit.

July 1641.
At the beginning of the parliament there was a diligent inquisition after
oppressions, and oppressors, and first upon the petition of Mistress Bastwick,
and Mistress Burton, two widowed wives, and a petition exhibited in the behalf
of Mr. pryn, Dr. Laighton, Mr. Smart, Mr. Walker, Mr. Foxley, Mr. Lilborn, and
many others, set at liberty, some being banished, and all close prisoners,
others fast fettered in irons, and their wives debarred from coming to them.

We the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House in parliament,
finding, to the great grief of our hearts, that the designs of the priests
and Jesuits, and other adherents to the Sea of Rome, have of late been more
boldly and frequently put in practice than formerly, to the undermining and
danger of the ruin of the true Reformed protestant Religion, in his Majesty's
Dominions established: And finding also that they have been, and having just
cause to suspect that there are still, even during this sitting in parliament,
endeavors to subvert the fundamental Laws of England and Ireland, and to
introduce the exercise of an Arbitrary and Tyrannical government, by most
pernicious and wicked councels, practices, plots, and conspiracies: And that
the long intermission, and unhappy breach of parliaments, has occasioned many
illegal Taxations, whereupon the Subject has been prosecuted and grieved:
And that diverse Innovations and Superstitions have been brought into the
Church; multitudes driven out of his Majesty's Dominions, jealousies raised and
fomented betwixt the King and his people, a popish Army levied in Ireland, and
two Armies brought into the bowels of this Kingdom, to the hazard of his
Majesty's Royal person, the consumption of the Revenues of the Crown, and
Treasure of this Kingdom: And lastly, finding great cause of jealousy, that
endeavors have been, and are used to bring the English The Soldiers in their
passage to York turn unto reformers pull down Popish pictures, break down
rayles* turn altars into Tables*

the English and Scotts Armies at first ready to fight, lovingly embrace each
other and part kind friends*

Army into a misunderstanding of this Parliament, thereby to incline that Army
with force to bring to pass those wicked Counsels, Have therefore thought good
to join our selves in a Declaration of our united affections and resolutions,
and to make this ensuing Protestation.

The Protestation.
I A. B. Do in the presence of Almighty God, Promise, Vow, and Protest, to
maintain and defend, as far as lawfully I may, with my life, power, and
estate, the true Reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the
Church of England, against all Popery and Popish Innovations within this
Realm, contrary to the same Doctrine, and according to the duty of my
Allegiance, his Majesty's royal Person, Honor, and Estate; as also the power
and privileges of Parliament; the lawful rights and liberties of the Subject,
and every person that makes this Protestation, in whatsoever he shall do, in
the lawful pursuance of the same. And to my power, and as far as lawfully I
may, I will oppose, and by all good ways and means endeavor to bring to
condign punishment, all such as shall either by force, practice, councels,
plots, conspiracies or otherwise, do any thing to the contrary of any thing in
this present Protestation contained. And further, that I shall in all just and
honorable ways endeavor to preserve the union and peace between the three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland; and neither for hope, fear, nor
other respect, shall relinquish this Promise, Vow, and Protestation.

The Earl of Straffords Speech on the Scaffold. May 12. 1641.
MY Lord Primate of Ireland, (and my Lords, and the rest of these Gentlemen) it
is a very great comfort to me, to have your Lordship by me this day, in regard
I have been known to you a long time, I should be glad to obtain so much
silence, as to be heard a few words, but I doubt I shall not; my Lord, I come
hither by the good will and pleasure of Almighty God, to pay the last debt I
owe to sin, which is death, and by the blessing of that God to rise again
through the merits of Christ Jesus to eternal glory; I wish I had been
private, that I might have been heard; My Lord, if I might be so much beholding
to you, that I might use a few words, I should take it for a very great
courtesy; My Lord, I come hither to submit to that judgment which has past
against me, I do it with a very quiet and contented mind, I do freely
forgive all the world, a forgiveness that is not spoken from teeth outward (as
they say) but from the heart; I speak it in the presence of Almighty God,
before whom I stand, that there is not so much as a displeasing thought in me,
arising to any creature; I thank God, I may say truly, and my Conscience
bears me witness, that in all my services since I have had the honor to
serve his Majesty in any employment, I never had any thing in my heart, but the
joint and individual prosperity of King and people; if it have been my hap to
be misconstrued, it is the common portion of us all while we are in this life,
the righteous judgment is hereafter, here we are subject to error, and apt to
be mis judged one of another; there is one thing I desire to clear my self
of, and I am very confident, I speak it with so much clearness, that I hope I
shall have your Christian charity in the belief of it; I did always ever
think the Parliaments of England, were the happiest Constitutions that any
Kingdom or any Nation lived under, and under God the means of making King and
people happy, so far have I been from being against Parliaments; for my death,
I here acquit all the world, and pray God heartily to forgive them; and in
particular, My Lord Primate, I am very glad that his Majesty is pleased to
conceive me not meriting so severe, and heavy a punishment as the utmost
execution of this sentence; I am very glad, and infinitely rejoice in this
mercy of his, and beseech God to turn it to him, and that he may find mercy
when he has most need of it; I wish this Kingdom all the prosperity and
happiness in the world; I did it living, and now dying it is my wish, I do
now profess it from my heart, and do most humbly recommend it unto every man
here, and wish every man to lay his hand upon his heart, and consider seriously
whether the beginning of the happiness of a people should be written in
letters of blood; I fear you are in a wrong way, and I desire Almighty God
that not one drop of my blood may rise up in judgment against you.

(My Lord) I profess my self a true and obedient Son to the Church of
England, to that Church wherein I was borne, and wherein I was bred; prosperity
and happiness,, be ever to it: and whereas it has been said that I have
inclined to popery, if it be an objection worth answering, let me say truly,
that from the time since I was one and twenty years of age, till this hour,
now going upon 49. I never had thought in my heart, to doubt of the truth of my
religion in England; and never any had the boldness to suggest to me the
contrary, to the best of my remembrance; and so being reconciled to the mercies
of Christ Jesus my Savior, into whose bosom I hope shortly to be gathered, to
those eternal happinesses that shall never have end. I desire heartily the
forgiveness of every man, both for any rash or unadvised word, or deed, and
desire your prayers: And so my Lords farewell, farewell all the things of this
world: Lord strengthen my faith, give me confidence and assurance in the merits
of Christ Jesus. I desire you, that you would be The Earl of Strafford for
treasonable practices beheaded on the Tower Hill*

be silent and join in prayers with me; and I trust in God that we shall all
meet, and live eternally in heaven, there to receive the accomplishment of all
happiness, where every tear shall be wiped from our eyes, and every sad
thought from our hearts: And so God bless this Kingdom, and Jesus have mercy
upon my Soul. Amen.

47 For the advancing of which design, the Earl of Straford, then prisoner in
the Tower, attempted an escape, with Sir William Belfore, then Leiutenant of
the Tower, promising and assuring him twenty thousand pound, and the marriage
of his daughter to Sir Williams Son, if he would but consent unto and assist
his escape; but Sir William hated such bribes, and so the neck of all that plot
was broken.

48 Then, they attempted by foul and false scandals on the Parliament, to
entice the Army of the Scots, (then, still in the North) to a newtrality, and
to sit still whiles our English Army acted the farther designs hatched and
hammered still in their heads and hearts but this plot prevailed not neither.

Anno 1641. October. 23.
49 About this time, that inhumane bloody rebellion and monstrous massacring of
almost 200000 innocent English Protestants, men, women and children, brake out
in Ireland, namely, about October 23. 1641. These accursed Rebels having had
their principal encouragements and Commissions to authorize them in that horrid
and hideous rebellion from the Court of England, and of purpose to have made
England the chief seat of the war, and all the papists, prelates, and
malignants utmost wrath and rage.

50 For the still effecting of this design, the malignant party in private,
much prevailing still; the design now went on, chiefly against the City of
London, for which purpose, the Leivtenant of the Tower, Sir William Belfore,
was (for his loyalty) displaced by the King from his Leivtenantship, and popish
Lord Cottington, made Constable of the Tower; but his dangerous designs being
soon discovered, he was as soon displaced; and Collonell Lunsford, was made
Leivtenant of the Tower; But, he also by the Parliaments petition and
importunity to the King, was displaced; and Sir John Byron, a desperate
malignant (who afterward proved the most bloody Lord Byron, in Cheshire) was
made Leivtenant of the Tower, in Lunsfords stead, but he also, on many just
jealousies being petitioned against, was at length, with much ado removed and
put out thence, and Sir John Coyners, by the power of the parliament, was put
in his place.

To the KINGS most excellent Majesty, and the LORDS and PEERS now assembled in
PARLIAMENT. The humble Petition and Protestation of all the Bishops and
prelates now called by His Majesty's Writs to attend the Parliament, and
present about London and Westminster for that Service.
THat whereas the Petitioners are called up by several and respective Writs,
and under great penalties to attend the Parliament, and have a clear and
indubitable right to vote in Bills, and other matters whatsoever debatable in
Parliament, by the ancient customs, Laws, and Statutes of this Realm, and
ought to be protected by your Majesty, quietly to attend and prosecute that
great Service. They humbly remonstrate and protest before God, your Majesty,
and the Noble Lords and Peers now assembled in Parliament, that as they have
an indubitate right to sit and Vote in the House of Lords; so are they, if they
may be protected from force and violence, most ready and willing to perform
their duties accordingly. And that they do abhominate all actions or opinions
tending to popery and the maintenance thereof; as also all propension and
inclination to any malignant party, or any other side or party whatsoever, to
the which their own reasons, and conscience shall not move them to adhere. But,
whereas they have been at several times violently menaced, affronted and
assaulted by multitudes of people, in their coming to perform their services
in that honorable House, and lately chased away, and put in danger of their
lives, and can find no redress or protection, upon sundry complaints made to
both Houses in these particulars. They likewise humbly protest before your
majesty, and the Noble House of peers, that saving unto themselves all their
rights and interests of sitting and voting in that House at other times, they
dare not sit or vote in the House of peers, until your Majesty shall further
secure them from all affronts, indignities and dangers in the premises. Lastly,
whereas their fears are not built upon fantasies and conceits, but upon such
grounds and objects as may well terrify men of good resolutions, and much
constancy. They do in all duty and humility protest before your majesty, and
the peers of that most honorable House of parliament, against all Laws,
Orders, Votes, resolutions, and determinations, as in themselves null, and of
none effect, which in their absence, since the 27. of this instant month of
December 1641* have already passed; as likewise against all such as shall
hereafter pass in that most Honorable House, during the time of this their
forced and violent absence from the said most The High Commission-Court and
Starr-Chamber voted down, and pluralities and non residencies damned by
Parliament.

Honorable House; not denying, but if their absenting of themselves were
wilful and voluntary, that most Honorable House might proceed in all their
premises, their absence, or this protestation notwithstanding. And humbly
beseeching your most Excellent majesty to command the Clerk of that House of
peers to enter this their petition and protestation among their Records.

They will ever pray to God to bless, etc. Jo. Eborac. Tho. Duresme, Rob. Co
Lich. Jos. Norw. Jo. Asa. Guli. Ba. and Wells. Gco. Heref. Rob. Oxon. Ma. Ely,
Golfr. Glouc. Jo. Peterburg. Morris Landaff.

52 The Bishops also had a pestilent plot about this time, to subvert and
overthrow the Parliament, by endeavoring to get the King to protest against
their proceedings in it; But twelve of them were thereupon presently impeached
of high treason, and ten of them imprisoned in the Tower of London, and
afterward, they were all disabled from ever sitting again in the Parliament.

Bishops Voted down root and branch: Nullo contradicente, insomuch that the
Citizens of London the same night, made bonfires, and had ringing of bells. And
for the better securing the City within, as well as without, the Parliament
published an Ordinance, thereby injoyning all Popish Recusants, inhabiting in
and about the City, all dis affected persons, and such as being able men, would
not lend any money for the defense of the Commonwealth, should forth with
confine themselves to their own houses, and not to go forth without special
license, as they would answer it at their perils, to the Parliament.

Another Ordinance was sent to the Lord Major, by which the Trained Bands were
authorized to apprehend many of the prime and richest malignants, dis*affected
persons in the City, whereof were four^ Alderman put in safe custody, in Crosby
house and some in Gressam College.

53. About which time, a Letter was sent to Mr. John Pym, (a most eminent
Member of the House of Commons) a most reviling Letter, therein calling him
Traitor, and in the said Letter enclosed a plague sore plaster, thinking
thereby to have destroyed him; But, God mightily preserved him from the
infection of it.

54. After this, the King himself (being guarded with about 500. armed,
ruffianly desperate Cavaliers or Soldiers) violently rushed into the House of
Commons, accused five of their most eminent Members of Treason, demanded their
persons to be delivered up unto him, intending to destroy all that resisted him
therein, but c^ost by the happy absence of the Gentlemen; this plot was
attempted, Januar. 4. 1641.

Anno 1642.
55. After this, one Binion, a Silkman of London, and the Kentish malignants,
wherein Sir Edward Deering had a principal hand, framed dangerous and
destructive petitions against the proceedings of the Parliament; but were both
most justly rejected, and themselves fined and imprisoned for them.

56. Immediately after this, things grew still worse and worse among the
malignants, the King himself in unjust discontent (by the desperate counsel
of the young Lord Digby) forsakes the parliament, and getting the Prince to
him, leaves London, and presently posts into the North, and there attempts to
get Hull into his hands, but was happily prevented and bravely opposed by Sir
John Hotham, then, in that time of his outward and seeming fidelity.

57. The King being at York, interdicts the Militia, then, set on foot, by the
Parliament, for their just safety and defense; and endeavoring to remove the
Term from the City of London, but in both is opposed by the Parliament, and
the messenger hanged.

58. The Lords and Gentry of Ireland and of Scotland too, petition the King to
At Ege-hill 16 pieces of Can^on shot against 80 of E: of Essex Liffegard and
not one man hurts, and those 80 brake in upon 1600 of the Kings, 4 of the
Parlia^: Reg: ran away, and 16 troops of Horse, so we wayre 6000 and they
18000, yet we took the Standerd and Cleste Sr: Ed: Varney Standerbearer in
the head and Slew the Lord Lindsey General of the Field.

The Queen when she went over beyond Seas* one of her Shipes where she had a
great Tresury Sprung a Leake and much was last and Spoiled, and when she
returned for England, she had a mighty Storm at Sea; brake the Mast of van
Trumpe-Ship and after 8 days boystrus turmoyle, she was driue^n back again,
there was broke and last ^ Ships of Ammunition and they that were driven bake
uere almost starved*

to return to his parliament, yea and the Gentry and Commons of Yorkshire do
the like, butare all rejected.

59. The King set on foot a most illegal Commission of Array, to clash against
the parliaments Mili ia, which occasioned much mischief and misery over the
whole Kingdom, but the parliaments Militia prevailed in most places and parts
of the land.

60. Three letters were intercepted, discovering a most desperate plot against
the parliament by the royalists, Commissary Wilmot, Ligby, Jermine, Crofts, and
others, which by Gods mercy failed them and came to nothing, but we in taking
some of their ships were advantaged thereby.

61. Sir Richard Gurney, then Lord Major of the City of London, proving a
desperate malignant and Array man, was crossed in his desires, and clapped up
prisoner in the Tower of London, by the power of the Parliament.

62. Proclamations and Declarations against the Parliaments proceedings were
Printed and published, and commanded to be read in all the Churches and
Chapels over the whole Kingdom within the Kings power.

63. Sir John penington, a brave Seaman, but a desperate malignant, was
constituted Admiral of the Seas, for the Kings service, but displaced and
dispossessed thereof by the parliament; and the most noble and loyal Earl of
Warwick (notwithstanding the Kings Letters and command to interdict him
therein, and to give way to penington) being put in by the power of the
parliament, and possessed of the Ships, kept and continued in the place and
office for the parliaments service.

64. Hull besieged by the Marquess of Newcastle for the King; and in that
interim one Beckwich a known papist, plotting to have betrayed it, by firing
it in four several places, and then assaulting it; yet Hull, by Gods mighty
providence was preserved* and the King after much loss of men and money,
enforced to forsake it.

The Citizens of London voluntarily proffered their service to attend and guard
the parliament by land to Westminster, to secure them from danger.

By Water also the stout Shipmasters and mariners, likewise made ready a great
number of long-boats, furnished with Ordnance, muskets, and other Sea-like
warlike instruments, their vessels also gallantly adorned with Flagges and
Stremers, together with martial music, Drums and Trumpets, so as it was a
rare sight, and when they came to White hall, and understood that the
parliament Worthies were safely arrived, the Trained Bands by Land, and the
valiant Seamen by Water, let fly their thundering shot both small and great,
their Trumpets sounding, and their Drums beating, in a triumphing and
congratulating manner, a singular testimony of their cordial affections.

The very same day, a numerous company of Buckinghamshire men, both Gentlemen,
Ministers, and others of that County on horseback, with their protestations in
their hats* partly in behalf of their Knight of the Shire, but especially to
petition the parliament, for Reformation of evils in Church and State, and to
assure their best services and assistance to the parliament, on all just
occasions, and out of Essex, Hartford, Berkshire, Surrey, and other Counties of
the Kingdom came, one after another.

65. The Earl of Essex was ordained Lord General over all the parliaments
Forces, for the preservation of the Kingdom, which he faithfully managed,
especially at Edge bill and Newbery and other places, can abundantly witness.

66. A plot to have blown up all the Lord Generalis Magazine of powder, and
another at Beverley in Yorkshire, to have slain Sir John Hotham, both intended
by one David Alexander* and hired thereunto, but both timely prevented.

67. Commissions granted to Popish Recusants to leavy men and arms against the
Parliament; but the Parliament published a Declaration or Protestation to the
whole world, of their just proceedings therein.

68. The King received the most bloody Irish Rebels petition, and permitted
their persons with great favor and allowance about him; calling, and counting
them good Catholic Subjects; but utterly rejecting the petition (exhibited by
the Lord General) desiring peace and reconciliation with him.

69. A Treaty of peace was really intended by the Parliament, but merely
pretended for a while, transacted by the Royalists; in which interim, that most
bloody bickering at Brainford, was committed by the Kings party, a piece of
villainy carried on therein, but (though with much loss on both sides, but
especially on theirs) by Gods great mercy the mischief prevented, and the City
of London mightily preserved.

70. A dangerous plot against the Kingdom, in new High-Sheriffes, for the
better collecting of the 400000 li. Subsidies, intended to have been confirmed
to the King in a former Parliament; but, that plot crossed by providence, and an
Ordinance set on foot for the successful association of Counties for mutual
defense one of another, against regal injurious taxations and oppressions on
them.

71. A design of the Royalists at Oxford and elsewhere, to proceed against the
prisoners as Traitors, and so to put them to death; by which Dr. Bastwick
Captain a Letter sent to Mr Pym,

Mr: Pym, do not think that a guard of men can protect you if you persist in
your traitorous Courses and wiked designs* I have sent a Paper-messenger to
you, and if this does not touch your heart, a dagger shall so soon as I am
recovered of my plaguesore: In the mean time you may be forborne, because no
better man may be endangered for you Repent, Traitor

Lilburt, were to have been tried for their lives, but presently by an
Ordinance for execution of a Lex talionis, and so of executing the royal
prisoners among us.

Anno 1643.
72. A notable plot against the City of London, imediately upon the Cities
preferring a petition to the King, by the hands of two Aldermen, and four
Commoners of the said City, in reply to which petition* the King sending as his
messenger, one Captain H^rn to the City, and the whole body of the City
assembling at a Common Hall, this Hern desires Fair play above board of them;
But the business being found to be a notable design of the malignant-Citizens
against the Parliament and the (then) Lord Major of London, and the Government
of their City, the major cry out in the hearing of Hern* they would live and
dye with the parliament, and so sent Hern away with a flea in his care.

73. Another plot contrived at Oxford, by a Letter sent to all the Freemen*
Iourneymen and Apprentices, of the said City to assemble at their several
Hills; and there the Masters and Wardens of all Companies to read the Kings
Letter to them, and to persuade them to yield to all the Kings commands against
the City; but this Letter was croft in the neck and nicke of it, and voted to
be evil and scandalous.

74. A plot also to betray Bristol into the Royalists hands by one Yeomans and
Bowcher, and diverse other their associates; but discovered, two principal
conspirators were by Martial Law condemned and hanged.

75. Cheapside-crosse, Charing cross, and all other Crosses, in and about
London utterly demolished and pulled down, and that abominable and blasphemous
book of tolerating sports and pastimes on the Lords days, voted to be burnt,
and shortly after accordingly burnt, together with many Crucifixes and popish
trinckets and trumperies, in the very same place where Cheapside-crosse stood,
and at the Exchange.

76. Mr. Pryn sent by the Parliament to the Tower of London, to search the Arch
prelate of Canterburies chamber and study there, where he was prisoner, who
accordingly searching his study, and his pockets of his wearing clothes (a just
requital of his dealing with Mr. Pryn and others) found the original Scotch
Service book, with the Archbishops own hand-writings in it, the cause of all
the Scots wars; and his Diary, Devotions, and discoveries under his own hands
of matters of high concernment.

77. The City of London to have been betrayed into the hands of the Royalists,
under a pretense of a petition for peace, plotted by Mr. Waller, a Member of
the House of Commons, M. Tompkins, M. Challenor, and others; and this plot,
termed by King Charles in his Letter to the Queen, one of his Fine Designs;
But Waller one of the prime complotters, was by the sentence of the Parliament
fined 10000 l. in his estate, and sent out of the Kingdom into perpetual
banishment, and Tompkins and Challenor hanged in London.

78. The breaking of Sir John Hothams rotten heart and infidelity to the
Parliament, in his attempted plot for the betraying of that mighty strong Town
of Hull into the Queens hands, which treachery was plotted and contrived
between Sir John the father, Captain Hotham his son, and Sir Edward Roades,
and began to be suspected by Sir John Hothams deserting of the noble Lord
Fairfax, by an intercepted letter of the Queens to the King, and diverse other
sumptomes of it, but especially by Captain Moyers letter to Mr. Ripley, and
Mr. Ripley's faithful acquainting the Major of Hull therewith, and their first
seizing on the Block-houses, Castles, and Commanders of them* and at length
their apprehending of the persons of Sir John Hotham, and Sir Edward Roades,
for which treachery Sir John Hotham and Captain Hotham his Son was also
apprehended, and both of them beheaded at the Tower of London.

The 2 of May 1643. the Cross in Cheapeside was pulled down* a Troop of
Horse and 2 Companies of foot waited to guard it and at the fall of the tope
Cross drom^es beat tru^pets blew and multitudes of Capes wayre thrown in the
Air and a great Shoute of People with joy, the 2 of May the Almanake says,
was the invention of the Cross, and 6 day at night was the Leaden Popes burnt*
in the place where it stood with ringinge of Bells, and a great Acclamation
and no hurt done in all these actions.

10 of May the Boncke of Sports upon the Lords day was burut by the Hangman in
the place where the Cross stood, and at Exchange.



Die Mercurij May 10. 1643,
By virtue of an Order of the House of Commons, and agreeable to a Bill passed
by both Houses of parliament, for suppressing of diverse innovations in Churches
and Chapels, this Committee does require you, and every of you* to take away
and demolish every Alter or Table of Stone within your Church or Chapel and
to remove the Communion Table from the East end of the said Church or Chapel,
and to place the same in some other convenient place of the body of the said
Church or Chapel, and to remove and take away all Tapers, Candlesticks, and
Basins from the Communion Table, and to take away and demolish all crucifixes,
crosses, and all Images and pictures of any one or more persons of the Trinity,
or of the Virgin Mary, and this Committee does further require you to demolish
all crucifixes, crosses, Images or pictures of any one or more persons of the
Trinity, or of the Virgin Mary, upon the outside of your said Church or
Chapel, or any open place within your parish* Whereof you are to give an
account to this Committee, before the 20 day of this month.

To the Churchwardens of the parish of, etc. and every of them.
79 A desperate plot for the betraying of the City and Town of Lincoln* by
the two Purfries, two Captains of Hull, who let in 60 Cavaliers by night, in
disguised habits, and who issuing out about 12 of the clock that night, to act
their design, where a plain fellow of the Town discharging a piece of Canon
upon them, slew 10 of them at one shot, the rest slain and taken by the
cen^inels and Sou^^ers of the Town, and so by Gods mercy the City preserved.

80 The Queen wrote a dangerous letter to the King, to come with all his force
to surprise London; but by Gods over power wisdom and good providence, the
King refusing that council resolved to take Gloucester first, which he
fiercely assaulted, but was as bravely repulsed, and by Gods blessing on Major
Gener^l Massies fidelity, timely aid coming to relieve the Town, it was
admirably freed, and by the Lord Generals Army, and the City of London
Regiamen^^ delivered.

81 A desperate rebellion raised by the Kentish malignants, but by Gods mercy
timely suppressed about Tunbridge, by the valor of Collonell Brown, and the
welaffected Gentry of the County of Kent*

82 A Ship bound from Denmark to the King, of about 300 tun, richly laden with
arms and ammunition; another Ship bound from Newcastle to Holland, laden with
Sea-coale, but in the midst thereof was found between 3 or 4000 li. hid in the
coals, sent to buy arms for the King; a third great Ship called the
Fellowship, of at least 400 tun, carrying 24 pieces of Ordn^nce, all these ^
ships taken by the parliaments ships, and made prize of.

83 The coming in of our brethren of Scotland with an army of at least 20000
horse and foot, invited thereunto by the parl. in the bitter depth of winter,
when they marched up to the middle in snow, and were forced to bring their
Artillery over the Ice of the frozen river of Tyne, and the Citizens of London
lent the Parliament a 100000 li. for the Scots first pay, to encourage their
advance to help us against the Kings forces.

On Tuesday the 23 of May, 1643.
The House of Commons diving into the depth, and searching to the root of the
Kingdoms great and grievous distractions, and deep distempers, and finding
that all Papists in the Kingdom, have (for the most part) been main and most
eminent yea, and most virulent actors, and abetters, of this present most
unnatural war against the Parliament, and that therefore they should be
proceeded against as traitors to the State and Kingdom, and thereupon also
having just cause to search and see into the prime and principal head or
leader of that perfideous faction, fell necessirily 23 May. 1643. Voted that
the Queen Pawning the Jewels of the Crown in Holland and there with buying
Arms to assist the War against the Parlamt and her own actual performances
with her popish army in the North was high Treason and transmited to the Lords*
images, Crucifixes papistorall books in Somerset and Jameses ware burnt and
Caphuchin friars sent away

May 1643 an ordinance for the making of Fortes, Tronches, and Bull works,
about the City, July-1-43. the Assembly of Divines met Dr. Jwiss Prolocutor.
120: the total May ^^ Challen or and Tomkins were hanged for seekeing to betray
the City.

into a long and serious debate, touching the proceedings of the Queen, in her
late being in Holland, and since her late coming back into the north of
England, not only in her countenancing, and encouraging, her aiding, and
assisting the present civil war, but in her actual performance in the same to
foment and advance it to the utmost ruin (as much as in her was) of our
Religion and whole Realine, for all which, and many other such like
misdemeanors, it was debated, and at last fully agreed, that she was as liable
to the censure of the Law, as any Subject in the Kingdom, whereupon it was put
to the question, whether the Queens pawning the Jewels of the Crown in
Holland, and therewith buying Arms and Ammunition, to be sent into England, to
assist the said war against the Parliament, and her own actual performances,
with her Popish Army in the North, were not high Treason, and it was resolved
most unanimously by the whole House for the affirmative, afterward it being
also put to the question, whether they should forthwith declare their
intentions to proceed against her by impeachment of high Treason* this also was
immediately resolved for the affirmative, and Voted that Articles of impeachment
should be speedily drawn up against her, which Votes the House of Commons
transmitted to the Lords for their assent.

The Bishop of Canterburies first prayer on the Scaffold, 10 Jan. 1644.
O Eternal God and merciful Father, look down upon me in mercy, in the
riches and fulness of all thy mercies, look upon me, but not till thou have
nailed my sins to the cross of Christ, look upon me, but not till thou have
bathed me in the blood of Christ, not till I have hid my self in the wounds of
Christ, that so the punishment that is due to my sins may pass away and go
over (...) and since thou art pleased to try me to the uttermost, I humbly
beseech th^e, give me now in this great instant, full patience proportionable
comfort, a heart ready to dye for thine honor, and the Kings happiness, and
this Churches preservation, and my zeal to these, far from arrogance be it
spoken, is all the sin, h^mane fralty, excepted, and all incidents thereunto,
which is yet known of me in this particular, for which I now come to suffer, I
say in this particular of Treason, but otherwise my sins are many and great,
Lord pardon them all, and those especially whatsoever they be which have drawn
down this present judgment upon me, and when thou have given me strength to
^eare it, then do with me as seems best in thine own eyes, and carry me
through death, that I may look upon it in what visage soever it shall appear to
me; and that there may be a stop of this issue of blood in this more then
miserable Kingdom; I shall desire, that I may pray for the people too, as well
as for my self: O Lord, I beseech thee give grace of repentance to all people
that have a thirst for blood, but if they will not repent, then scatter their
devices so, and such as are or shall be contrary to the glory of thy great
name, the truth and sincerity of Religion, the establishment of the King, and
his posterity after him, in their just rights and privileges, the honor and
conservation of Parliaments, ^^ their ancient and just power, the preservation
of this poor Church, in her truth, peace and patrimony, and the settlement of
this distracted and distressed people, under the ancient laws, and in their
native liberties, and when thou have done all this in mercy for them, O Lord,
fill their hearts with thankfulness, and with religious dutiful obedience to
thee and thy Commandments all their days: So Amen, Lord Jesus, and I beseech
thee receive my soul to mercy. Our Father, etc.

The Bishop of Canterburies last prayer on the Scaffold.
Lord I am coming as fast as I can, I know I must pass through the shadow of
death before I (...) come to see thee, but it is but um^ra mortis, a mere
shadow of death, a little darkness upon nature, but thou by thy merits and
passion have broke through the jaws of death; so, Lord, receive my soul, and
have mercy on me* Sr. Alexander Carow, Sr. John Hotham, Captin Hotham and the
Arch Bishop of Canterbury, beheaded on Jowerhill for Treason against the
Parliament 1645.

The Great Seal broken before the Lords and Commons on Tusday the 11 August
1646

and bless this Kingdom with peace and plenty, and with brotherly love and
charity, that there may not be this effusion of Christian blood amongst them,
for Jesus Christ his sake, if it be thy will. And when he said, Lord receive my
soul, which was his sign, the Executioner did his office.

84 A desperate plot of the Royalists to starve up the City of London, by
breaking into Surry, Sussex, Kent, and the other associated Counties, but
disappointed by the Parliaments Victories at Aulton and Alsford, fought by Sir
Walliam Waller, with the help of the City of Londons Regiments; and the
Royalists plots to hinder our brethren of Scotlands coming in to our help, by
letters and Ambassadors sent from France, and messengers from King Charles to
inveagle them to help from us; but all in vain by Gods good providence and
(...) to (...).

85 The King granted a cessation of arms with the bloody rebels of Ireland,
and afterward justified it by a Declaration of his, printed and published at
Oxford* but it was remarkeably observed, that he never prospered in any of his
great designs after that.

86 A Solemn League and Covenant taken by the Lords and Commons in Parliament,
and by the City of London, and all parts of the Kingdom, in the Parliaments
power, for a pure reformation of Religion and Church Government, and a mutual
defense betwixt us and our brethren of Scotland.

87 A notable plot by the Royalists to have Nottingham Town and Castle,
betrayed unto them, the Officers therein being proffered above 10000 li. to
consent to it; but prevented by Colonel Hutchinson, who was the Governor
thereof.

88 A General plot against the Protestant Religion over all Christendom, and
the Danes and Hollanders also, but God wrought a mighty overture therein by the
sudden breaking out of the Danes plot against the Swedes, and their
overrunning almost all Denmark thereupon, that he could do nothing.

89 A desperate plot against the City of London, under a pretense of
petitioning for peace, acted by Sir Basil Brook, Colonel Read, and one Mr.
Ripley, and Vilet, 2 Citizens of London, and others, but discovered and
prevented.

1645.
90 Two desperate plots for the betraying of Alsbury into the Royalists hands;
and another against Southampton, but all three timely discovered also, and
prevented.

91 One Mr. Edward Stanford, a Papist, plotted with Captain Backhouse a Capt.
of Horse, under Colonel Massy for the betraying of the city of Gloucester into
the Enemies hands, and proffered 5000 li. for a reward thereof, 200 li. whereof
was paid in hand to the said captain, but by Gods providence the plot
frustrated, and Gloucester safely preserved.

92 Englands great wonder to Gods glory, there being (about May 30 1644.) six
brave armies in this Kingdom, on the Parl. side, and other forces for defense
of the city of London, besides.

^3 A plot to have betrayed our whole Army in Cornwall in the West, but by Gods
blessing most of the Soldiers lives were preserved, though with the loss of
our Artillery.

95 Sir Alexander Carew, Sir John Ho ham, captain Hotham and the Arch*prelate
of Canterbury beheaded on Tower Hill for treason against the Parliament.

95. A peace only pretended by the Royalists at Uxbridge, and a treacherous
petition framed by the malignants of Buckingham shire, wherein one Sir John
Lawrence of that County was a great stickler, but the mischief of both was
frustrated.

96. A desperate assault on Melcomb-Regis, to have betrayed it into the
Royalists hands, wherein diverse of the malignant Townsmen had a principal
hand, and Colonel Goring and Sir Lewis Dives, were agents therein, but the
plot was frustrated, the Town and Forts recovered, and two ships with rich
prize from Rhoan in France, were seized on to make amends for their trouble.

1645.
97. Diverse Earls and Lords forsook Oxford, and came in and submitted
themselves to the Parliament.

98. A desperate plot in the West against the Parliament, by the Clubmen, but
by Gods providence turned to the Enemies greatest hurt in the issue.

99. A devilish sudden plot upon Scotland, which was almost overrun by
traitorous Montrosse, but as suddenly recovered again, by Gods blessing on
General David Lesley, and Montrosse discomfited and beaten away into the
mountains.

1646.
100. A Discovery of gross impiety in the Oxonians, pretending a desired
Treaty with the Parliament, for a well-grounded peace, and yet at that time the
Earl of Glamorgan, had a Commission to the ruin of all the Protestants in
Ireland, and so consequently of us in England also.

101. The Great Seal broken before the Lords and Commons, on Tuesday the 11.
of August 1646.

Die Sabbati 5. April. 1645.
Be it Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That all and
every person of what degree or quality soever, that has lived or shall live
within the Kings Quarters, or been aiding, assisting, or adhering unto the
forces raised against the Parliament, and has or shall come to inhabit or
reside under the power and protection of the Parliament, shall swear upon the
holy Evangelist in manner following.

The Negative Oath.
I A. B. Do swear from my heart, that I will not directly nor indirectly
adhere unto, or willingly assist the King in this War, or in this Cause
against the Parliament, nor any Forces raised with the consent of the two
Houses of Parliament, in this Cause or War. And I do likewise swear that my
coming and submitting my self under the power and protection of the
Parliament, is without any manner of design whatsoever, to the prejudice of
the proceedings of the two Houses of this present Parliament, and without the
direction, privity, and advice of the King, or any of his Council, or
Officers, other then what I have now made known. So help me God, and the
Contents of this Book.

And it is further Ordained by the authority aforesaid, that the Commissioners
for keeping of the Great Seal of England, for the time being, shall have
power, and are hereby authorized to render and administer the said Oath unto
any Peer, or Wife, or Widow of any Peer, so coming to inhabit as abovesaid.
And it shall be lawful to and for the Committee of the House of Commons for
Examinations, the Committee for the Militia in London, and all Committees of
Parliament in the several Counties and Cities of the Kingdom, to tender and
administer the said Oath unto every person so coming to inhabit as abovesaid.
And if any person (not being a Member of, or Assistant unto either of the
Houses of Parliament) shall refuse or neglect to take the said Oath, so duly
tendered unto him or her, as abovesaid, the said Commissioners and Committees
respectively, shall, and may commit the same person to some prison, there to
remain without Bail or Mainprize, until he shall conform thereunto.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

1646.
The King escaped out of Oxford in a disguised manner, with two only in his
company, one of which was Mr. Ashburnham: the King and the other Party going
for the said Ashburnham's men. The King carried a Cloak-bagge or Portmantle
behind him like a serving man.

Ordered that it be declared, and it is hereby declared by the Lords and
Commons in Parliament assembled, that what person soever shall harbor or
conceal, or know of the harboring or concealing of the Kings person, and
shall not reveal it immediately to the Speakers of both Houses, shall be
proceeded against as a Traitor to the Commonwealth, forfeit his whole estate,
and dye without mercy.

A Letter from the Commissioners of Scotland, concerning His Majesty's coming
to the Scotch. Army May 5. 1646.
RIght Honorable, The discharging of our selves of the duty we owe to the
Kingdom of England, to you as Commissioners from the same, moves us to
acquaint you with the Kings coming in to our Army this morning, which having
overtaken us unexpectedly, has filled us with amazement, and made us like men
that dream; we cannot think that he could have been so unadvised in his
resolutions, as to have cast himself upon us, without a real intention to
give full satisfaction to both Kingdoms, in all their just and reasonable
demands, in all those things that concern Religion and Righteousness;
whatsoever be his disposition or resolution, you may be assured, that we shall
never entertain any thought, nor correspondency with any purpose, nor
countenance any endeavors that may in any circumstance incroach upon our
League and Covenant, or weaken the union o^ confidence betwixt the nations,
that union to our Kingdom was the matter of many prayers, and as nothing was
more joyful unto us then to have it set on foot, so hitherto have we thought
nothing too dear to maintain it, and we trust to walk with such
faithfulness and truth in this particular, that as we have the testimony of a
good conscience, within our selves, so you, and all the world shall see that we
mind your interest with as much integrity and care as our own, being confident
you will entertain no other thoughts of us.

Signed May 5, 1646. LOTHIAN

His Majesty's letter to the Parliament of England touching his good intention,
not to prolong the war, but to secure his person, and labor the composing of
the differences betwixt him and the Kingdoms.

His Majesty's letter to the City of London, for satisfaction, and to assure
the City low he is grieved with the distractions of his people, and that
nothing on earth is The King Escapes out of Oxford in a disguised manner

more desired by his Majesty then, that, in Religion and Peace, with all the
comfortable fruits thereof; as also to show his full resolutions to comply with
his Parliaments in every thing for the settling of truth and peace, etc.

A Remonstrance exhibited in the name of the Lord Major, Aldermen and
Common Council of the City of London, to the High Court of Parliament.

Some particulars whereof are these following.

1 That some strict and speedy course may be taken for the suppressing of all
private and separate Congregations.

2 That all Anabaptists, Brownists, Heretics, Schismatics, Blasphemers, and
all such Sectaries as conform not, to the public discipline established, or
to be established by the Parliament, may fully be declared against, and some
effectual course settled for proceeding against such persons.

3 That as we are all Subjects of one Kingdom, so all may be equally required
to yield obedience to the Government either set, or to be set forth.

4 That no person disaffected to the Presbyterian Government, set, or to be set
forth by the Parliament, may be employed in any place of public trust.

His Majesty gave speedy order to several Officers for the surrender of the
Town Castles, and Forts, which then were in the hands of the Kings Commanders,
viz. Oxford, Worcester, Litchfeild and Wallingford.

A Petition delivered to his Excellency from the Officers and Soldiers in the
Army; touching their faithfulness in the Parliaments service doing Summer
service in the Winter season, etc. Further presented several designs of
theirs.

1. That an Ordinance of Indemnity with the Royal assent be desired.

2. That satisfaction may be given to the Petitioners for their arrears, both
in their former service, and in this Army before it be disbanded.

3. That those who have voluntarily served the Parliament in this Kingdom may
not be pressed to serve in another Kingdom, etc.

4. That those who have lost lives, limbs, or estates, may be provided for, and
relieved.

A letter from his Excellency to the several officers of the Army for the
advance of the Irish service, and prevention of all hindrances, etc.

1647.
The Apology in answer to his Excellencies letter, relating their sense of a
second storm now hanging over their heads by the malice of a secret enemy,
worse then the former now vanquished, expressing their sorrow that they cannot
desire their own security without hazard to his Excellency, etc.

A second Apology of all the private Soldiers in the Army to their Commission
officers.

Concerning the abuse to diverse well-affected to the Army by imprisonment, to
the ruin of their estates, and loss of their lives.

And for their candid intentions and endeavors declared no less then
troublers and enemies to the State and Kingdom, resolving rather to dye like
men, then to be enslaved and hanged like dogs, etc.

Whereunto were annexed diverse particulars agreeable to the former, delivered
in to his Excellency, March 21. 1646.

A Letter from his Excellency to the Earl of Manchester, concerning the votes
of both Houses, as also his grief of heart for the distractions betwixt the
Parliament and Army, desiring that all things may be determined in love, etc.

A Letter from his Excellency to both Houses concerning the Kings being brought
from Holdenby.

That some Soldiers secure the King from being secretly conveyed away.

That the Soldiers of Holdenby, with the Kings consent, brought him away from
thence, etc.

That his Majesty was unwilling to return back again to Holdenby, etc. And
that the removal of his Majesty from Holdenby, was no design, knowledge, or
privity on his part, etc.

A particular charge against the eleven Members impeached by the Army:

1. That Mr. Denzil Hollis being one of the special Commissioners for the
Parliament to present propositions to the King at Oxford, made private
addresses to the Kings party then in arms against the Parliament, and did
secretly plot and advise them against the Parliament, etc.

2. That the said Mr. Denzil Hollis, and Sir Phillip Stapleton, during the late
war, when the Earl of Lindsey went from the Tower to Oxford, sent several
messages of intelligence to the Earl of Dorset, etc.

3. That the said Mr. Hollis, Sir Phillip Stapleton, Sir Will. Lewis, Sir John
Clotworthy, Sir Will. Waller, Sir Joh. Maynard, Ma. Genesis Massy, Mr. Glyn, Mr.
Long, Col. Edward Harley, and Anthony Nicholas, in the months of March, April,
May, and June last; in prosecution of their evil designs, met in diverse places
with persons disaffected to the State, for holding correspondency with the
Queen of England now in France, and encouraged her party there. 4. And
endeavored to bring in foreign forces, and listed diverse Commanders and
Soldiers there to raise and leavy a new war. 5. And affronted diverse
Petitioners that came in a peaceable manner, boysterously assaulting them, etc.
6. Imprisoned some Members of the Army, and to dis-obliege the Army from the
Parliament.

The solemn engagement of the Citizens, Commanders, officers, and Soldiers,
etc.

Whereas we have entered into a solemn League and Covenant, for Reformation,
and defense of Religion, the honor and happiness of the King, and the peace
and safety of the three Kingdoms, all which we do imminently perceive not
only to be endangered; but ready to be destroyed. We do therefore in
pursuance of our said Covenant, Oath of allegiance, oath of every Freeman of
London and Westminster, and Protestation, solemnly engage our selves, and vow
unto Almighty God, That we will to the utmost of our power cordially endeavor,
that his Majesty may speedily come to his two Houses of Parliament, with
honor, safety, and freedom, and that without the nearer approach of the Army,
there to confirm such things as he has granted the 12. of May last: in answer
to the Propositions of both Kingdoms, and that with a personal Treaty with
his two Houses of Parliament, and the Commissioners of Scotland, such things as
are yet in difference may be speedily settled, and a firm and lasting peace
established; for the effecting hereof, we do protest, and re-oblige our selves
as in the presence of God, with our lives and fortunes to endeavor what in us
lies to preserve and defend his Majesty's royal person and authority, the
privileges of Parliament, and liberty of the Subject, in their full and
constant freedom, the Cities of London and Westminster, lines of The Sollomne
Engagement of the Citizens Commanders and Soldiers

Communication and parishes mentioned in the weekly Bills of mortality, and all
others that shall adhere with us to the said Covenant, and oath of Allegiance,
Oath of every Freeman of London, and Westminster, and protestation; nor shall
we by any means admit, suffer, or endure any newtrality in this common cause
of God, the King and Kingdom, as we do expect the blessing of the Almighty
God, whose help we crave, and wholly devolve our selves upon in this our
undertaking.

A Pamphlet of Paul Bests burnt according to the order of Parliament.

The Army marching toward the City, orders were given to the Traine-bands to
go to the works.

The Auxiliaries are raised to defend the City.

A Proclamation by beat of the Drum for all that are able to bear Arms, and
are not listed to come to receive them.

The House of Commons and the Lords likewise met according to the order of
adjournment, July 30. but neither of the Speakers.

At length they proceeded to a new election and voted Mr. Pelham a Counselor,
and Member of the Commons House Speaker pro tempore.

The Lords made choice of the Lord Gray to be Speaker of their House pro
tempore.

The Sergeant at Arms being absent with the Mace when the Commons chose their
Speaker, had the City Mace, and chose Mr. Norfolk Sergeant at Arms.

After which proceeding to debate the great affairs touching the City and
Kingdom, they voted as follows:

1. That the King come to London.

2. That the Militia of the City shall have full power to raise what Forces
they shall think fit to the same.

3. That they may make choice of a Commander in chief to be approved of by the
House, and such Commanders to present other officers to be approved of by the
Militia.

The Common Council made choice of Major General Massy to command in chief
all the City Forces.

Ordered by the Militia that all Reformadoes and other officers should the next
day at two of the clock beli^ted in St. Jamses fields.

And that the forces already listed should be put in a Regimentall way.

A great appearance in St. Jamses fields of officers and Reformadoes that were
listed.

Order given for staying of horses in the City, and many listed.

Most of the eleven Members sat in the House, and in the afternoon M. Genesis
Massy, Sir William Waller, and Col. Genesis Poyntz, were at listing the
Reformadoes.

Command given that all shops be shut up by sound of the Trumpet throughout the
City.

The Declaration of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council published.

A brief of which, that his Majesty was surprised at Holdenby, and no place
for his Majesty's residence allowed by the Army nearer then their Quarters;
therefore to settle peace, and establish true Religion, ease the Kingdoms
burden, establish his Majesty's just rights, maintain the Parliaments
Privileges, and relieve bleeding Ireland, they profess the maine of their
enterprise, etc.

A Petition in the names of many thousands well-affected Citizens for some way
of composure, etc.

At which time Col. Genesis Poyntz and other officers of the new list, attending
for their orders upon the Militia, came into Guild Hall yard, and most cruelly
hackt and hewed many of the aforesaid Petitioners, diverse whereof were mortally
wounded, whereof some since dyed.

The Earl of Warwick and Earl of Manchester having quit the Houses retired
into Essex, and sent word to the General they had cast themselves upon his
protection.

The Lord Say, Lord Mogrene, and diverse other Lords, with many of the House of
Commons, came to the Head quarters, desiring the Generals protection.

Six Aldermen, and twelve Common Council men are sent with a letter to the
General from the City, wherein they declare their unwillingnesse to a new War,
desiring his Excellency to receive the sense they apprehend the Army has taken
against the City.

A letter presented to the General from the inhabitants of Southwarke,
relating their withstanding the design of raising a new War, desiring some aid
from his Excellency for their protection.

General Massy sends out Scouts, but near Brainford thirty of his men were
chased by ten of his Excellencies, and took four of Genesis Massies.

A letter from the City to the General, showing their readiness to join with
his Excellency, and according to his direction to receive those honorable
Members that were forced to retire by reason of the tumultuous affront, and
willingly submit to be determined by both Houses as they shall think fit,
having recalled their late Declaration against the Armies proceedings, etc.

About two of the clock in the morning, Col. Rainsborough, Col. Huson, Col.
Pride, and Col. Thistel^el, with their several Regiments of Horse and Foot
marched into the Borrough of Southwarke; the great Fort was presently yielded
up to them without opposition.

His Majesty in a letter sent to the General, acquits himself of the great
scandal of having a hand in the late tumult, testifying his dislike thereof,
accounting it a very dishonorable way to be brought to London in a tumultuous
way.

The Members that were forced away return to sit in Westminster again guarded
by the soldiers.

The Houses being sat with their old Speakers.

The House of Peers upon debate passed an Ordinance for making his Excellency
Thomas Lord Fairfax, high Constable of the Tower of London.

The House ordered a gratuity of a months pay to be given to all the
Non-commission officers and private Soldiers, for their great service.

A Committee appointed to find out the chief promoters of the late design of
the Tumult at Westminster, and raising a new War.

His Excellency marches through the city with his Army, Horse and Foot, and
train of Artillery, without the least affront or prejudice to any; they were
marching through the city from eleven of the clock, until eight at night.

By many thousands young men and Apprentices of London, there was presented a
humble acknowledgement and congratulation to his Excellency for his many great
services to the Kingdom and City of London, resolving to live and dye with his
Excellency.

An Ordinance past both Houses for declaring all Votes, Orders, and Ordinances,
past both Houses, since the forcing both Houses July 26. until the 6. of this
present August 1647. to be null and void.

The Lords and Commons make a new Militia, consisting of 36. in number.

The line of Communication and works about the City demolished, and the
Ordnance drawn off.

Upon information of the eleven late impeached Members who had been very active
in the late design, it was ordered that they appear at Westminster, 16. October.

A letter from Lieu. Genesis Crumwel to the House of Commons acquainting Mr.
Speaker, that his Majesty had withdrawn himself at 9. the last night, his
Majesty having left his cloak behind him, and some letters in his withdrawing
room.

His Majesty's letter,
Hampton Court, Novem. 11. 1647.
Liberty being that which in all times has been, but especially now is the
condition, the aim and desire of all men. Common reason shows that Kings less
then any should endure captivity; yet I call God to witness with what patience
I have endured a tedious restraint, which so long as I had any hopes that this
sort of my suffering might conduce to the peace of these three Kingdoms, or
the hindering of more effusion of blood, I did willingly undergo, but now
finding by two certain proofs, that this my continued patience would not
only turn to my personal ruin, but likewise be of much more prejudice then
furtherance to the public good, I thought I was bound as well by natural as
political obligations to feeke my safety by retyring my self for some time
from public view both of my friends and enemies, and I appeal to all
indifferent men to judge, if I have not cause to free my self from the hands
of those, who change their principles with their condition, and who are not
ashamed openly to intend the destruction of the Nobility, by taking away their
negative voice, and with whom the levellers doctrine is rather countenanced
then punished; and as for their intentions to my person, their changing and
putting more strict guards upon me, with the discharging most of all the
servants of mine, who formerly they admitted to wait upon me, do sufficiently
declare: nor would I have this my retirement mis-interpreted, for I shall
earnestly and uncessantly endeavor the settleing of a safe and well-grounded
peace, where ever I am or shall be, and that (as much as may be) without the
effusion of more Christian blood, for which how many times have I pressed to be
heard, and yet no care given to me; and can any reasonable man think
(according to the ordinary course of affairs, there can be a settled peace
without it, or that God will bless those that refuse to hear their own King,
surely no? I must further add that (besides what concerns my self) unless
all other chief interests have not only a hearing, but likewise just
satisfaction given to them (to wit, the Presbyterians, Independents Army, those
who have adhered to me, and even the Scots) I say there cannot (I speak not of
miracles, it being in my opinion a sinful presumption in such cases to expect
or trust to them) be a safe and lasting peace: now as I cannot deny but that my
personal security is the urgent cause of this my retirement, so I take God to
witness the public peace is no less before mine eyes, and I can find no
better way to express this my profession (I know not what a wiser man may
do,) then by desiring and urging that all chief interests may be heard, to
the end each may have just satisfaction; as for example, the Army, (for the
rest, though necessary, yet I suppose are not difficult to consent) ought (in
my judgment) to enjoy the liberty of their consciences, and have an act of
oblivion or indemnity (which should extend to the rest of all my subjects) and
that all their arrears should be speedily and duly paid, which I will
undertake to do, so I may be heard, and that I be not hindered from using such
lawful and honest means as I shall choose: To conclude, let me be heard with
freedom, honor, and safety, and I shall instantly break through this cloud
of retirement, and shall show my self to be pater patriae.

C. R.

The copy of the paper entitled by the mutinous Agents; An Agreement of the
people etc. In brief: Having by their labor and hazard got their enemies into
their hands, they are resolved to avoid danger of returning into a slavish
condition, and the chargeable remedy of another war* etc. Do declare,

1. That the people of England being very unequally distributed by Counties,
etc. for the election of their deputies in Parliament ought more indifferently
to be proportioned, etc.

2. From the inconvenience arising from the long continuance of the persons now
in authority, this Parliament be dissolved, September the last 1648.

3. That the people of course do choose them a Parliament once it two years,
etc.

4. That the power of this, and all future representations of this Nation is
inferior only to those that choose them, etc.

5. That matters of Religion, and the ways of Gods worship, are not at all
entrusted to us by humane power, etc.

A great Tumult, Insurection, and Muteny in London breaking open diverse houses,
and Magazines of Arms and Ammunitian breaking open diverse Houses Seazing on
the Drumes, Gates, Chains, and Watches, of the City assaulted and Shot into
the L: Mayors house and killed one of his guard etc.



6. That impresting any of us, and constraining us to serve in the war, is
against our freedom, etc.

At this Common Counsel, Mr Alderman Fowk, and Mr. Alderman Gibs, by the
directions of the Committee of the Militia of London, did make a large Relation
of the great Tumult, Insurrection and mutiny, which happened in this City on
the last Lords day, and on Monday last, by many evil disposed persons, which
first began on the Lords day in the afternoon in the County of Middlesex, where
they seized the Colors of one of the Trained Bands of the said County, who
were there employed for the suppressing of such persons as did profane the
Lords day; and being dispersed by some of the Generals forces, did gather
together within the City of London and Liberties thereof, and in a Riotous
manner did break open diverse houses and magazines of Arms and Ammunition, and
took away Arms, Plate, Money and other things, and did seize upon the Drums of
the Trained-Bands of this City, which were beating to raise their Companies,
and armed themselves, and beat up Drums, and put themselves in a warlike
posture, and seized upon the Gates, Chains, and Watches of this City, and then
marched to the Lord Majors house, and there assaulted the Lord Major,
Sheriffs, Committee of the Militia of London, and other Magistrates of the
same; and did shoot into the Lord Majors house, beat back his Guards, killed
one of them, wounded diverse others, and seized, and took away a piece of
Ordnance from thence, with which they did afterward slay and wound diverse
persons, and committed many other Outrages: All which matters being largely
debated, and many particulars insisted upon, both for the Discovery and
Punishment of the said misdemeanors and outrages; and also for the preventing
of the like for time to come, It was at the last concluded and agreed by this
Common Council as follows:

First, this Common Council does generally conceive that this City was in
great danger, by reason of the said Outrages and Misdemeanors, and that if the
same had not so timely been prevented and stayed, the whole City would have
been exposed to the fury and rage of the said Malefactors, and this
Common Council does Declare, That the same Misdemeanor and Outrage was a
horrid and detestable act, tending to the destruction of the City, and that
they do disavow the same, and with an utter detestation do Declare their
dislike thereof. And this Common Council do appoint the Committee of the
Militia of London to make the same known to the Honorable Houses of
Parliament, and also to make an humble Request unto them, That an Order may be
issued forth from them to the several Ministers of this City and the places
adjacent, that they may be directed to give public Thanks to Almighty God,
the Author of this great and wonderful deliverance from that imminent danger
wherein this City and parts adjacent were involved. And further, the said
Committee are appointed by this Court, to apply themselves to the Honorable
Houses of Parliament, for the obtaining of a special Commission of Oyer and
Terminer, for the trying and punishing of the Malefactors that had a hand in
this detestable action, according to the known Laws of this Land. And this
Court with thankful hearts do acknowledge the instruments under God, by which
they obtained this Deliverance, to be by the Forces raised and continued by the
Parliament, under the command of his Excellency the Lord General Fairfax; and
to manifest the same, this Common Council do also Order, That the said
Committee of the Militia, in the Name of the City, as a thing agreed upon by an
unanimous consent, shall return their hearty Thanks to his Excellency, for his
speedy and seasonable Aid, afforded unto the City in this their great straight
and danger. And this Court with a general consent, do well approve of the
Endeavors of the said Committee of the Militia for London, for the raising of
the Forces of the City, and in their procuring of the said aid and help from
his Excellency in this Extremity, and what else they have done for the
appeasing and suppressing of the said Tumul s. And this Court do give Thanks to
the said Committee of the Militia, for their care and pains by them taken upon
this sad occasion: And they do appoint Mr. Alderman Fowk to declare the same
their Thanks to such of the said Committee as are not of this Court. And this
Court does also with all thankfulness acknowledge the pains and care of the
Right Honorable the Lord Major, and the Right Worshipful the Sheriffs of
this City therein. And this Court do generally declare, That it is the duty of
every Citizen of this City, by himself and all that do belong unto him, or is
under his command, to be ready upon all occasions to be ayding and assisting
unto the Lord Major, and the rest of the Magistrates of this City, for the
suppressing of all tumults and disorders within the same. And the several
persons now present at this Common council, by the holding up of their hands
have promised, That for the time to come they will use their utmost endeavor,
and be ready upon all occasions to do the same. MICHEL

A rising in Norwich, where they seized upon the Magazine, and those that fired
the same were destroyed, but those that were cordial friends to the
Parliament, being underneath, the house fell part of it upon them, that part
below them, and the powder, were all saved, one having his head seen, was
dug out, after he was out, he told of others, until all were dug out
without loss of life or limb.

Sir Marmaduke Langdale took Barwicke by virtue of a Commission from the
Prince. Sir Thomas Glenham, and Sir Phillip Musgrave, took Carlisle. Sir
Gilbert Errington took Harbotle Castle in Northumberland for the King.

The Commissioners of the Parliament of England presented a paper to the
Parliament of Scotland to declare against those in Barwicke and Carlisle, but it
was laid aside, no answer to any other papers, the Commissioners of the Kirk
of Scotland have declared against the Declaration of the Parliament of
Scotland, the Parliament past another Declaration, and putting it to vote
whether it should be sent at all to the Commissioners of the Kirk, it was
resolved in the negative: the Commissioners of War sit daily to put the
Kingdom into a posture; nothing talked of but War, diverse new colors
preparing for several Regiments.

The routing of the Welsh in Southwales under the command of Major General
Laughorne being 8000. Horse and Foot, took all their Ammunition and Arms. 25.
Captains, 32. Lieutenants, 27. Ensigns, 10. private Gentlemen. Soldiers in
custody 2000.

FINIS.

