THE COBBLERS SERMON Cried down, as a Cruel Cup-shot Counterfeit: OR, THE
SUM OF Mr. Humfrey Vincents Sermon, as it was Preached and Penned by his own
mouth and hand. Confuting the Matter and confounding the Author of that
base-blasphemous Pamphlet called The Cobblers Sermon. Mr. Vincent who has been
a Preacher these five and twenty years, preached these two Sermons at Saint
Georges Church in Southwarke in the year 1641. The one on Friday the 10. the
other on the Lords day, the 12. of December in the morning.

LONDON, Printed for George Higgins at Crown gate in Saint Toolles Street in
Southwark. 1641.

To the HONORABLE House of COMMONS, now assembled in PARLIAMENT. And namely,
To the right Worthy, and Worshipful Gentlemen, Mr. Humfrey Salloway, and Mr.
Robert Goodwin; His Majesty's Justices of the Peace: Two Members of the said
House.
Right Grave and Gracious Senators,
I Am become so far presumptuous (let any man say saucy, if I may not say
submissive) as first to present before you all these two ensuing Sermons:
because (the case and cause considered) I am not in the present passages
particular, personal, private; but the Church of Christ amongst us; has
herein also concernments, for the setting and settling whereof I see you both
studdy and struggle. For (marking both the man and the matter, I mean both my
self and my Sermon, my trade and that which I taught) an information herein
lies before you, what lies are brought oftentimes to you, when you are informed
that (now) such persons preach, and such are the points they preach on. For you
Two, Right Worthy and Worshipful friends and favorers; I am thus bold to know
you by name, now mine own case is come unto the Stake, as well as Christ's
cause is come upon the Stage; because the one of you, as you have above twenty
years since heard me preach diverse Sermons, so I doubt not but diverse times
since that time you have heard, that I have constantly continued in the very
same course of public preaching. The other of you can be best of all
instructed, that I did not preach these Sermons until I was importuned. Yea, I
doubt not, but it has been told you, that it was told me by an house like the
house of Cloe, how wicked and wilful were the most of those people, to whom I
delivered this Text which has such terror and thunder in it (having no
thought concerning my Sovereign, but of loyal and thankful subjection) and
that on the same day in the morning, in which I preached the first of these
Sermons, I preached to another kind of people, other kind of matter, that is
more pleasing, and so more proper. Now the God of Heaven (ye God on the Earth)
guide you and guard you, give you counsel and give you comfort; do great
things and good things for you, do great things and good things by you, for
his own praise, which he gives to no man; and his peoples peace which he has
left as a legacy to them: So prays he who prays your pardon, if not your
Patronage.

H. VINCENT.

To the honest, holy, humble, hearty one,
To them, to each of them, to them alone.
BEloved Friends: Mr. Calvin tells us that Saint Luke renders such a reason
for the writing of his Gospel, as a man would have thought would have taken him
off from writing any Gospel it all. Calvine on Luke 1. at the beginning. And I
must render such a reason of my staying yet in London, as a man would imagine
would make me fly and forsake London, that is to say, because my person and my
preaching was so (...), the 12. of December. After two Sermons preached there,
the one on Friday, the 10. and the other on the Lords day, the 12. of the same
Month; a pack of wicked, wilful worldlings inhabiting within that place, or
Parish, gave out in Print, that I was a Cobbler (I am glad they did not call me
Dawber, let no man say I mean or meddle with, or mention a Mason) and broached
sundry Blasphemies (I believe in the Tavern the same hour in which I preached
in the Tabernacle) calling them the Cobblers Sermon preached in Southwarke in
Saint George his Church, on December 12. And that it was preached by a Cobbler
of Holborne. Now as I who then preached a Sermon there, am no Cobbler, nor ever
was so, nor of any other Trade mechanical; so I did not preach in that Sermon
any thing at all for matter or manner, that has any correspondence or
coherence with that more then pestilent Pamphlet; which thing as they that
heard it have desiredly put their hands to, so (to make it more plain and
perspicuous) I am compelled to put pen to paper, and then to put in print the
same Sermon (I mean the sum and substance of it) as it came through mine
own mind from mine own mouth. That so this being compared with that lying
libell, the contrariety that is betwixt them may appear to all that run and
read them. And as I protest that I am no Cobbler, nor of any other trade
whatsoever (I think few in the world have spent fewer hours in things of the
world, or have so little skill in managing outward matters, I speak this to my
very shame) So I profess that here you have it directly as I handled it, I
mean the sum and substance of it, the particulars or passages in it. Pray for
me and my Brethren of the Ministry, that the Word of God may have free
passage, and that we may be delivered from unreasonable, and unruly men; for I
see by most evident experience that all men have not Faith. And thus praying
the God of Glory to make us able to bear reproaches, and careful to reap some
good from them, I commend all the Israel of God to the only God of Israel; and
abide an unworthy Preacher, and your faithful Friend.

H. VINCENT.

BE Packing Liars, look not hereupon;
This work shows VINCENT is not such an one
As you give out; this proves that he is not
Cobbler, or Mason: No such dawbing sot
Speaks so divinely, so distinctly, so
Directly. But why said I Pack? you will go
As far as Dover: (yea you will fly away
As fast as you ran out, and durst not stay
When you had heard his former Sermon: and
Saw him (to preach the latter Sermon) stand
Upright ith Pulpit, when by this you see
Your pack of Knavery: yet be ruled by me.
Stay, and ask him forgiveness; least hereafter
Such curelesse anguish do succeed your laughter;
As none but he can help you under God,
When he shall whip you with that three string'd rod
And then you cry: Thou Galileans Friend, Vincens.

Thou have overcome us we are damned ith end.
Vicisti Galilaei, was his song, Julian the Apostate.

And such an one will be your tune ere long.
And he that lives to see it, then will say,
Vincent has got the conquest and the day;
Unless you cry in midst of your woe,
Forgive us Lord, for wronging Vincent so;
Which thing I know he chiefly does desire,
And then Gods greatness, goodness will admire.
R. S.

To all my Friends in St. GEORGE his Parish in Southwarke.
Mr Friends (for I suppose I Have some such there)
Profit (I pray you) by these Sermons here,
And I will pray that God who must do all,
Would make his Spirit on your spirits fall;
That so in truth, and spirit you may do
What Press as well as Pulpet moves you to.
For I must tell you by these presents here,
If you practice not what I preached there,
That not alone the words which then I spoke,
Will you without excuses wholly make.
Not only all the lines which now I print
Will cry against you, and will never stint;
But more and chiefly all the wrongs which then
I did sustain from those unruly men
For preaching these unto you, will complain
That they (ith gracious sense) were felt in vain,
And surely then (ith grievous sense) you will see
That not a word, a line, a blow can be
Received in vain indeed, but record bear
Against all such as smite, and see and hear.
And I would have you be assured as well,
If all shall help one precious soul from hell,
I will esteem my sufferings there as sweet
As any thanks wherewith I elsewhere meet.
Read (Friends) remember, ruminate and do,
So you will be safe from hell, and crowned too.
Yours: H. Vincent.
Nomine sum Vincens, animas ego vincere quaero; O vincam, vincam, gloria magna
Deo.
The Sum of Mr. HUMFRY VINCENTS Sermons, as they were preached and penned by
his own mouth and hand.
ISAIAH 30. last verse: last branch. -- The breath of the Lord as a stream of
brimstone kindles it.
THe whole verse contains a short and sharp description of Tophet, that is
to say, (by way of allusion or application) of the torments of hell. It is here
two ways setforth; or here are two things set down concerning it.

1 The certainty of it. 2 The Severity of it.
The Certainty of it is set down by

1 The Antiquity of it, in these words, Tophet is prepared of old.

2 By the Generality of it, in these words, it is even prepared for the King,
if he be wicked and wilful (let us bless the Lord that we have a good King,
not such an one as that was)

The Severity is showed two ways also: by the

1. Extremity of it in these words, he has made it deep and large, the
burning of it is fire and much wood. 2. Eternity of it in these words, the
words of the text; the breath of the Lord as a river of brimstone kindles it.
Now the point of Doctrine taught from hence is this:

As long as God breaths, and as strong as God breaths, so long and so strong
shall the torments of hell endure.

Now because the Text is terrible, and the doctrine dreadful delivered thence,
I will first give these Cautions to take off the tartness of it (so far as
is lawful and possible) from broken, bruised, bleeding consciences.

First, I confess I am an Adamite, and have within me an Adamant, a rocky,
flinty, steely heart, or else I should (like Origin with his text and tears)
at least speak so pitifully, so pathetically, so passionately, so
compassionately, that this my teaching should have some coherence, some
correspondence with those torments I speak of. O to see how merry or mad
rather, many millions of creatures are, (who as Doctor Hall has taught us)
dance a galliard over the mouth of hell fire, the lake of brimstone, Where the
breath, etc.

Secondly, No man can find a fault with me, who finds not first a fault in
himself; since (as our Savior seems to expound it) their worm never dies,
and the fire goes not out: speaking in the third person as well as the plural
number, those torments Mark 9.
being so proper to the Reprobate, that Gods Elect shall never be touched with
them. And therefore as our Savior said to the women, fear not ye, for ye
seek Jesus, when he Matt. 28.
had made the Soldiers quake. So I professing that my scope and aim is to
make them quake who wage war against the Heavens, would not have Christ's
women to fear, we men and women who seek the Lord in the very truth and
uprightness of soul, must not fear any whit at all at the mention of hells
eternal torments, since they shall not be overwhelmed with them, nor once feel
them, though it may be may fear them.

Thirdly, as it was said by Christ to his Father, thou will not leave my Soul
in hell. So I will not (by Gods great blessing) leave your souls in the lake of
brimstone. But I will show you not only your case, but also the course you
must take to get out of it: I will first discover your misery, and after that
deliver the remedy. And therefore I cry concerning this discovery

Hands off, or heart on;
Hear all or hear none.
Fourthly, if ever I preach unto you again, after I have finished the point in
hand, I will tell you (God willing) of life everlasting. So that this Text
(like a John Baptist) as it comes roaring in the wilderness of wickedness, so
shall it be aforerunner of Jesus, a way maker for life everlasting, to make us
the more to prize it, and to praise the God of heaven for it, and to do every
thing, that we may attain it; according to that of the wisest Solomon, Prove.
15. 24. The way of life is above to the wise, that he may escape hell below;
that is, when a wise man considers, that he must go to hell below, unless he
go the way of life, that thought will be above objections, and all outward and
inward oppositions to the contrary, to make him esteem that way of life, and
all his life long to be walking in it.

Fifthly, so long as we are hearing of hell, so long we are yet out of hell. If
any man therefore should say, I will stay no longer to hear of hell, of the
lake of fire, and that breath of the Lord which as a river of brimstone
kindles it. And the Lord should meet him at the Church door, and smite him
dead, and tumble him down to hell (he departing in discontent at the truth and
text we treat on) he will wish within this minute that he were here again
hearing of hell, and not there howling in hell. O no doubt, but there are there
many millions who would give millions of worlds that they were not in hell, not
howling in hell.

Sixthly and lastly; Let no man say that he will go to disprove what I have
said, for (as the Prophet said to the King, If thou come again, God has not
spoken by me. 1 Kings 22.) So say I to those that go thither, if ever you
return from hell, my doctrine is utterly false, which says that the Torments
of hell shall endure forever and ever, even as long as Jehovah breaths. In
(almost) all othermatters, it is best to speak from self experience, but for
the torments of hell and the Pestilence, the Lord grant that we never know
further, then what we learn from Gods book and man's reports.

And so much for the Cautions, save only that I make profession, that what I
speak of the torments of hell is to preserve and keep you out of hell, that
you knowing the danger may strive to escape the damnation.

1. Now I come to answer a question. 2. And then to remove an objection. 3. And
then to render a reason. 4. And then to make application.


as long and as strong as God breaths, so long and so strong hels torments
abide. But yet on these grounds, or for these reasons there are degrees in that
lake of fire and brimstone.

First, Some commit more sins then others, and so shall be sure to have more
torments then others, according to those texts, Revel. 18. Romans 2. 4, 5, 6. And
therefore I would not have you sin at all, yet as often as I think on this, I
cry with Solomon, Be not over wicked, Ecclesiastes.

2. Some have more means to restrain them then others have, and so shall have
a deeper damnation then others have, according to that of our blessed Savior,
Matthew. 11. when he speaking of Bethsaida, Chorazin, and Capernaum, who had
abounded with means and mercies, It shall be easier for the land of Sodom in
the day of Judgment then for thee. And herein as our Savior informs us, that
if the blind lead the blind both shall fall into the ditch; we may say
applyingly, and that most properly: the people if they be blind shall fall up
to the knees in it; the Minister if he be blind, shall fall up to the middle in
it; the Bishop if he be blind, shall fall over head and ears in it.

3. There are some who not only have more means, but also more formal
knowledge, according to that of our blessed Savior, Luke 12. That servant who
knows his Masters will, and does things contrary thereto, shall be beaten
with many stripes. Many internal stripes in their spirits, whiles they abide
here on earth, many infernal stripes in hell in the lake of fire and brimstone.

4 Some have more hypocrisy then others, and accordingly shall have more
torments, as our Savior has also told us, Matthew. 23. Woe to you Hypocrites,
who under color of long prayers devour Widows houses, you shall receive
greater damnation. A Covetous fellow would feign cover and cloak his
Covetousness, and how I pray thee will thou do it? why I Will become a
professor of Religion, and so cover and cloak it entirely; And see how fairly
thou have covered it, before thou wast a professor, thou had a great C
written in thy forehead, but now thou have two Capital letters written there,
even a great C, and a great H: a Covetous Hypocrite; And when death and doom
appears, thou shall have one degree of Torments for being a covetous person,
another for being an Hypocrite, according to that of Ambrose, Dissembled Piety
is double iniquity.

5 Some have more censoriousnesse then others, and accordingly shall have
deeper damnation; as it is said by that son of Thunder, James 3. 1. My Brethren
be not many masters, knowing that ye shall receive the greater damnation. There
are some such meddling masters, that they will tattle of, and task every one,
one is precise in their opinion, because he loves not, but loathes a Ceremony;
another is profane in their esteem, because he can endure a controverted
circumstance. Nay, there are some so divilized that when they cannot impeach
men's practices, they will implead and improve their purposes, as the Devil
though he saw his good works, and heard his good words, would yet affirm that
he did it for his hedge, Job. 1. But let us know that whosoever when his
neighbor has done good actions will yet suspect evil affections, whereas in
the same Chapter wherein Christ says, Judge not, he says afterward, Ye shall
know them by their fruits. Matthew. 7. 1. 15, 16 shall as censurers, as
condemners have a deeper degree of torments.

Sixthly, Some have more authority then others, more power, more high places,
and of these especially my Text speaks as we may see by these words in the
context, It is even prepared for the King (as I said at first, so I say still,
let us praise God that we have a good King, and not such an one as this was)

Now for the Objection, it is of two sorts: for

First, Some object their Persons.

Secondly, Some object their Professions for the escaping of hell torments,
though they live, lie, and dye in their sins.

Concerning Persons. First, Some object their Prosperity.

Secondly, Some object their Poverty.

The Devil persuades rich men that howsoever they live as they list, yet they
never shall be damned, because they have place or power; But they must know
that for these causes they must needs be damned if they dye in their sins
(Remember still that I therefore show you the danger, that you may so escape
the damnation)

First, Because their consolation is received. Secondly, Because their
conversation is perceived. Thirdly, Because Gods expectation is deceived.
Fourthly, Because the Devil their master is damned already.
I say, first (hearken ye rich men) you who are rich must needs be damned, if
you be not blessed with a second birth, because your portion is paid you already,
according to the speech of Abraham to Dives, Remember son thou have had thy
good things; and that of our blessed Savior, Woe to you who are Luke 16.
rich, for you have received your consolation. And this I think makes many
Gentlemen turn Papists, that so proving a purgatory, Luke 6.
if it were possible, they might escape the lake of fire, since living in their
sins they cannot to heaven.

I say, secondly (give ear still you rich men) you of power and place must
needs be cast to that lake of fire, unless you be cast in a new mould, because
the Devil through your sides draws after him millions of souls; if Dives give
the poor man nothing, the text will tell us, that no man gave him. And so if
rich men give no bread of life to their poor souls, will not hear, repeat, and
read the Scriptures, none of their family, friends or familiars will feed their
poor souls, but make them fast, and quite famish them. Let Saul kill himself,
and his armor bearer will kill himself; let rich men kill their souls, and
all their neighbors will kill theirs also, if it be but for cursed company.
And this does make the Devil so desirous to get Landlords, and great ones on
his side: And this made Dives in hell so cager to have one sent to warn his
five Brethren that they come not to the place of torments, because he being the
heir drew them to do the Devil so much service. Therefore as we Ministers
shall shine as stars, if we win many to the paths of righteousness, Dan.
12. so shall they be tormented as Devils, who by their patterns as well as
their precepts draw others with them to the lake of fire and brimstone, Where
the breath, etc.

3. I say thirdly, (hearken still ye rich ones) you who are rich must needs be
damned, if ye do not walk in the paths of piety, because you frustrate the
Lord of his expectation. For to what end do ye imagine has the Lord filled
your bags and barnes, fed you with dainties and all kind of delicates, was it
for this, that you might offend him with his own blessings, with his own
benefits? as it were wound him with his own weapons? which of you would not be
provoked, exceedingly incensed, yea and enraged, if the man whom you have been
kind to, should fly in your faces with the fruits of your kindness? And I
assure you, that the God of heaven who has been so beneficial and bountiful
to you, that you cannot allege (as many poor creatures do) that they cannot
come to the preaching of the word, for fear their children should fall in the
fire at home, they having no servants, nor money to hire them, I assure you
that the God of heaven will not be mocked, though he seem to be frustrated,
but will cross your expectation as you cross him in that which he looks for;
that is to say, (as he says of the vineyard) I looked for grapes and behold
wild grapes, cut it down. Isai. 5. When you expect to be carried to heaven, he
will hurry you to the lake of fire and brimstone, and there in mockage will cry
Son to you, when you cry O Father Abraham.

I say fourthly (hearken once again ye rich men) you who have place and power
must needs be damned, if you have not power to bewail your sins, and take
care for your souls, because the Devil who is your master is damned already,
and appointed to torments. The devil, you know very well, is, as he is called,
the Prince of the world: every one is his slave, his very vassal, who lives in,
and loves his sinful courses, and will not be recovered, will not be reclaimed
from them. Now (as the same saving mouth has taught us) the servant is not
above his master, you must not think much to be dealt with as he is done to;
and thence is it, that Christ our Savior, when he had said, Depart ye cursed
to everlasting fire, to men who were great and glorious, rich in the world,
full of pomp and pride (for he endites them for not feeding him, for not
clothing him, which poor men cannot do) he adjoynes with the Devil and his
Angels, in the close of that his dreadful dismal rejection, Matthew. 25. 41. As
if he had said, you must not mutter, murmr or marvel, for you are but dealt
with as your master the Devil is dealt with. And these are the four reasons why
rich men must needs be damned, if they abide in their looseness, lusts and
lewdness. And I say again as I said before, that I speak it to this very
end, that seeing the danger, you might take warning and not go to the place of
torments, which the breath, etc.

Now you poor men you have heard this greedily, hearken I pray you now to some
reasons, wherefore you, if you be not poor in spirit must needs be thrown to
the lake of fire, which the breath, etc.

But first because you think that your Poverty is your Purgatory, I pray you
look on the Epistle of Jude, verse 7. where you shall see that Sodom and
Gomorrah, though it were bumt with material fire, and so the Inhabitants were
made examples by being so burned in it, yet this did not keep them from hell,
they suffer the vengeance of eternal fire: And you, though you be poor, may
yet go to hell after that extremity, yea you must, if you die in your sins,
and that for these three reasons or causes, and I say to you as I said to rich
men, I tell you to this end, that in the end you may escape it by true and
timely and tractable turning.

The first is drawn from the Initiation. The second drawn from the Invitation.
The third drawn from the Irritation.
For the first of these, God has even begun the torments of hell in you, if
you do not forsake your lusts, ere you loose your lives. Your poverty will not
be a preservation from, but a preparation to that lake of brimstone: your want
of drink is a very forerunning of your wanting Water when you come to hell. To
others it is a cross to you a curse, a very earnest of, and entrance into the
unspeakable unquenchable flames, the plague is begun, you are in the porch of
this ever-tormenting Tophet, as sure as the land of Canaan was a type of heaven
and endless happiness.

For the second: you are Gods especially invited guests, the Mat. 11. 5.
poor (says Christ) receive the Gospel: And he has sent me to preach glad
tidings to the poor, has exalted them of low Luke 1. 52.
degree. Now if a great Earl or Duke should come to lodge within your parish,
and should make choice of some of the riffe raffe refuse among you to keep him
company, and come to sup with him, and they should disdainfully refuse the
message, how would it provoke him and persuade him to be revenged. Hearken
therefore O ye of the poorer sort, has not God chosen the poor to make them
rich in grace and glory, does he not offer you by the preaching of his word to
become Heirs of the Kingdom which he has prepared, James 2. 5. Does he not
say to this effect to you, you who are the castoffs, the very castawayes of all
the Countries, have neither honors nor holes for your heads, I will make you
royal Monarchs, give you eternal Crowns, and Kingdoms perpetual, Thrones
which will ever abide with you. And will he not (think you) if ye refuse and
resist his offer be as exceedingly incensed as he was when he said, None of
them who were bidden shall taste of my Supper. Luke 14. 24. yea assuredly he
will throw you to Tophet, tumble you down to eternal torments with deep
disdain and unspeakable derision.

For the third: if you poor come not in at his glorious call to you, he has
now (to speak after the manner of man) no way to redress, no means to relieve
you. It is Gods course when he cannot bring us to him by other means, his word,
the motions of his Spirit, his mercies to affect and allure us, to do to us as
Absalom dealt with Ioab, when he would not come at his sending for: Go burn
his Corn (says he to his servant) and then he comes and expostulates the case
with him: And surely as it is the burden of the Psalmists song, when he slew
them then they sought him, Psalm. 107. So many Manasses, the Prodigal, and many
others have come to God in their poverty and misery, who when they were wealthy
waxed wanton, and kicked up the heel against him. And (commonly, ordinarily,
usually) when poverty cannot part men's souls and their sins, it parts them
and his Spirit, and he says, I will smite you no more, till I tumble you down
to the place of torments. O that therefore (for I say again, I say it for this
that you might be warned) O that ye poor would come in your poverty, least
after your earthly poverty, you meet with that hellish misery, where the breath
of the Lord as a river of brimstone kindles the fire.

So much to answer the objection in regard of men's Persons. Now I come to that
objection which respects Professions.



and yet contrary to Gods commandment will sell their drink to drunkards on
the Sabbath, whilst their poor families fast and famish in their own houses;
I say, such as say they are Protestants, and are not, shall above all the
people in the world be sure to be damned, severely tormented; and that for
these two reasons.

First, from Gods Protestations. Secondly, From Gods Preparations.
For the first of these: God has protested solemnly, sworn the damnation of
such as have his voice sounding in their ears, and will not hearken, will not
obey it. It is every day read in our Church, and wisely appointed by way of
preparation to other parts of Gods word and holy worship: To day if ye will
hear his voice, harden not your hearts; and then to such as refuse and resist
he says, I swear in my wrath that they should not enter into my rest, not into
Canaan a type of the kingdom of heaven, not into the kingdom of heaven, and
therefore necessarily must to hell. I never read, at least remember not, that
ever the Lord has sworn the death and damnation of Pagans. The mouth of the
Lord has spoken it, and it will lie heavy and hard on their souls to doom and
damn them to everlasting woe, unless at length they get the knowledge and
faith of the Lord Jesus. But as there is a main and manifest difference in
those words of our blessed Savior, Whosoever shall fall on that stone shall be
broken, but on whomsoever it shall fall it shall grind him to powder, Matthew.
21. So God himself turns Protestant for the cursing and confounding of such
false Protestants, as are and abide in their damned ways until they die, as
sure as he is truth who says, Verily, Verily (to such as professed the paths
of piety) except a man be borne again he cannot see the Kingdom of God.

For the second, that is, Gods preparations, we are to know that wilful
Protestants are

1. Fitted for, and then 2. Fatted for endless torments. They are 1. Fitted
with Sermons. 2. Fatted with Sacraments.

First I say, fitted with Sermons. Gods Ministers words will make you without
words; their speeches will make you not cloak you, but uncloke you; their
vocal trumpets will fit you to hear with horror the real trumpet at the last
day, if you wallow in the lusts of your souls, and walk in your sins without
repentance, 2 Cor. 2. In a word, the Word of life will be a savor of death to
death to you, as many of you as plead you are Protestants, and live the lives
of Pagans and Papists, profaning the sanctified Sabbaths of Christ by selling
beer to such beastly base Belly-gods, as make their wives for want of
maintenance not feast but fast; and ready to famish with their children and
servants at home in their houses.

Secondly, I say they are fatted with Sacraments. Foolish false and feigned
Protestants do daily drink down their own damnation in that most sacred Supper
of the Lord, so says S. Paul, 1 Cor. 11. 29. But because he foresaw that it
would touch and so trouble many men's minds, he says before, as I of this, and
of all my whole discourse concerning this dreadful damnation: What I delivered
to you, I received of the Lord, verse 23. as if he had said, if ye will needs
quarrel, quarrel with my Master, not with me his messenger. But you will say
that in so saying, I doom and damn without all remedy, for past help, past
hope also, if there be no cure there needs no care. To which I answer, that as
I and that Apostle say no more then your Common Prayer book says, which has
these very words and syllables: then we are guilty of the body and blood of the
Lord, we eat and drink our own damnation, etc. So I my self did three or
four times eat and drink mine own damnation also, even in the 17. 18. 19. 20
year of my life. Now the way to prevent our going into this Tophet, this place
of torments, is to take a deep vomit of sorrow, to purge out this poison, and
prevent everlasting perdition; and (as Solomon says to his son, above all
thy gettings get understanding) so say I to my self and every one, above all
our sorrow, let our chiefest sorrow be this, that we were guilty, and guilty of
Blood, yea and guilty of the blood of the Lord, as it is in the 27 verse. And
still I beseech you remember that I speak all by way of prevention.

Now I come to render the reasons of the doctrine delivered to you, to show you
why the torments of hell are so extreme, or as strong as the breath of the
Lord is: and then why they are everlasting, or abide as long as the breath of
the Lord abides.

For the first, Those torments are so extreme, because of the 1. Nature. And
then the 2. Number of those that must inhabit in that Tophet, that place of
torments.


And both these are set down together in one and the same Psalm and verse,
Psalm. 9. 17. The wicked shall be turned to hell, and all the Nations that
forget God.

The wicked shall be turned into hell. There is the Nature of the Inhabitants,
namely, that they are foes not friends, who must go thither.

And all the Nations that forget God. There is the Number of the Inhabitants.

For the first of these, we are to know that they are not Gods friends but his
foes who must there be tormented in fire and brimstone.

Indeed here on earth God has scourges for his very friends, his own
servants; and wicked men are jocund and joviall, glad at heart when they see
them so done to, so dealt with. But had they but eyes in their heads, that
sight would move and make that their laughter be turned to mourning, They would
consider what Solomon says, Prove. 11. last verse, Behold the Righteous shall
be recompensed on the earth, how much more the wicked and ungodly in the
horrible lake of brimstone. They would lay to heart that speech of a greater
then Solomon (which seems a commentary on that passage of Solomon) who when he
had said, that the workers of wickedness should cry to the mountains to cover
them, and to the rocks to fall upon them, adds this, if this be done to a
green tree, what shall be done to the dry? They would conclude as Peter does,
when Luke 23. 30. 31.
he had told us that Judgment begins at the house of God, 1 Pet. 4. 17. 18.
19. If the Righteous scarce be saved, where shall the wicked and sinner
appear? And if it begin with us, what shall be the end of those who obey not
the Gospel of Christ? And truly as our Savior said to clear the eyes, and
cheer the heart of his dropping and drooping Apostles, Consider the Lillies how
they neither sow nor spin, and yet your father feeds them, are not ye better
than they? So would I speak to fire and fright wilful men from their wicked
manners: Consider the Lillies among throns, for they neither swear nor be
drunk, and yet the Father of heaven feeds them with the bread of trials and
tribulations; and are not ye worse then they? and are not worse things
prepared for you in that terrible place of torments? yes assuredly such
unspeakeable woes and miseries as Solomon and Peter could not express, Christ
himself as he was the mediator man in the flesh would not reveal to us, and
therefore they speak interrogatively, How much more? what and where?

For the second: We are to believe that in hell all the wicked and ungodly, all
that profane the Lords Sabbaths by selling their wares without necessity, all
that live in any sin whatsoever without true and timely repentance. All in
this City Parish, in this City, in this kingdom, in this world, all that
ever were, that now are, that hereafter shall be, even all that forget God,
have no care to keep his commandments, they shall all meet together, all they,
and none but they, not one of the Saints of the Lord, no, not one of his
faithful sons and servants shall there meet, and be tormented in all
extremity to all eternity. And as this cries to such men as long as they are
on earth, O consider this you that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces,
when there shall be none to deliver you, Psalm. 50. 22. So the Lord when he
would express the horror of hell, its extreme and most terrible torments,
names a catalogue of such cursed ones, as must to the lake of fire and
brimstone. For instance, Revel. 21. 8. the fearful, and the unbeleeving, and
the abominable, and Murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers. and Idolaters,
and all Liars shall have part in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone
etc. As if he should say, when the Lord has his foes, as Nero of Rome desired
to have his all together, to cut off their heads all at a blow, when (as Iehu
once made enquiry) there is not one of the Lords Prophets there, not one of his
own people for whose sake, or at whose entreaty he used to stop or stay his
sury here on earth, when wicked men's sins made him send pestilences and
plagues, then he will put them to all extremity, breath upon them with the
utmost of his fury, use no moderation in, or mitigation of his heavy anger and
hot displeasure.

But you will say, it is true indeed that these reasons do make it manifest why
hell torments shall be so terrible; But why should they be perpetual? why
should we who sin but for a season, suffer so long as Jehovah breaths, that
is to say, for ever and ever?

To which I answer, that temporary sins deserve eternal or infinite torments
for diverse just and weighty causes, but I will only insist on two.

First, the Offendeds person. Secondly, the Offenders purpose.
For the first of these, we are to know that sin, the least sin, the first
sin that ever we act, is done against God, the God of heaven, against an
Eternal, an infinite God; as David acknowledges even then, when he had broken
only the second Table: Against thee, thee only have I sinned, Psalm. 51. And
surely most pat to our purpose does our book of Psalms translate and turn
into verse; both that and that which follows

For thee alone I have offended, commiting evil in thy sight:

And if I were therefore condemned, you were thy judgments just and right, And
to come and close with some of your consciences, (...) any here shall here
after profane the Sabbath by selling (...) base fellows, who let their
families fast at home; who of do you think you anger in this brother wicked
wilfulness, you will say a few Priests well it is true, you anger me an
unworthy preacher of the glorious Gospel (for I tell you still I aim at your
salvation in setting before you this death and damnation) But do you anger no
man else? yes one, he who is God and man, He who says, He that hears you,
hears me, and he that despises you, despises me, will be certainly angry
with you; and is there none else angry, yes it follows in that very place,
and he that despises me, despises him that sent me; So that God the
everlasting God is offended with you, when you break the Sabbath, by that or
any other profanation, by that or any other sin or iniquity. And how just it
is with the Lord to make you know whose Law you break by it, by damning your
souls eternally in hell for it, you may see by that which is done by Kings and
Princes when they are provoked. Do not Kings, when men commit treason (which
God Almighty preserve and keep us from) do they not hang up the Traitors
carcases, and then hang up by and by Proclamation, commanding in pain of the
like punishment, that none touch or take down those Traitors carcases? And why
(I pray you) do Kings do thus? not for further revenge on the lucklesse
creature, the livelesse carcass: No, but to make it a lasting monument, that
the thought of it might not rade in an hour, in a moment; yea if he could, he
would have it hang there for ever and a day, for ever and ever: And why all
this, but as for our warning, so to tell us that he is no peasant, petty puny,
but a Prince, a Potentate, a Majesty, a Monarch. And in like manner the God of
heaven, as he is known by his executing judgment; so he is known to be as he
is, an Everlasting, an Infinite Majesty, by appointing for such as offend him
an everlasting, an infinite punishment.

For the second, the offenders purpose, we know that the Lord does not look so
much at our actions, as he does at our affections; does not so much mark what
we practice, as what we purpose, according to that of the Prophet Jeremy, Chap.
17. 10. I the Lord search the heart, that I may give according to works. And
that which he has often in the book of the Revelation, I am be who try the
heart, and search the reins, that I may give every one of you according to the
works of your hands. As if he had said thus, I more mind what you desire to
do, then what you do indeed, both in your evil doing, and in your well doing,
in your disobedience as well as obedience. Now how does a wicked wilful sinner
intend to live and lie in his sins (for if he has a serious settled purpose
of true Repentance, God will second that first grace, and so he shall not to
hell at all) does he not intend to live in them still? does he not purpose to
live in them as long as he lives? yea as the Scripture tells us, that they
grow worse and worse. So they have never so much as a though indeed and truth
of turning to God. Yea, should they live ten thousand years, yea millions of
ages, yea even for ever and ever, they would be swearers, whores, drunkards,
prophaners of the Sabbaths for ever and ever, yea for this very cause they
would live, and live ever on the earth, if it were possible, that they may live
in their sins and iniquities, enjoy their lusts, wherewith they provoke the
Lord. And is it not just with God then, who says of the widow, she has given
more then they all, because she gave all she had, to bring men to endless
destruction, who sin here on the earth but a season, since they give the devil
all, all they are, and all they have, all the time they live on the earth, and
wish and desire they had more to bestow on him? yea assuredly for this very
cause also, because their purposes are everlasting, the Everlasting God does
most rightly, most righteously bring wicked men to everlasting woe and misery,
to that Tophet, that hell fire, of which it is said in the Text, The breath of
the Lord, etc.

And thus much of the Explication of the point, the Application (God willing)
shall follow on the Lords day in the morning, at which time I promised to
preach here again, at your Parsons request (as I am informed) and the
importunity of special friends; and what I have spoken is to prevent these
endless flames.

THis was the Sermon which did so perplexe
The Drunkards and their harbourers, so vex
Their very minds, made them so discontent
(As those two Prophets wordlings did torment) Rev. 11. 10

That they endeavored with all might and maine
That Vincent might by no means preach again
In that same Church: but whatsoere they muse
Vincent came thither, and did preach the Use
Of that same Doctrine: when they saw him there,
They fled (I verily believe) for fear.
Herod feared John, and Felix trembled too
When Paul did preach as Vincent there did do;
That is, when he did preach against that sin,
Which he then knew the Governor lived in.
But blessed be God when they were run away,
The Church was filled again to Vincents joy.
And surely God in wisdom did dispose,
That then his hearers should be those, not those.
I mean, that they should hear the means to be
From those eternal fiery flames set free
Who loathed their sins; not they who plotted ill,
And were resolved to continue still
In cursed courses. But ye foolish men,
Why did you fly from your own mercy then:
There Is sure none other way t'escape that flame,
Then that which he did in that Sermon name,
Which he then preached, and which here follows now,
No way but this does Jesus Christ allow.
Be are witness then, that you your selves condemned,
When you the means of your escape contemned.
THE SECOND SERMON.
IS AIAH 30. last verse: last branch. -- The breath of the Lord as a River of
brimstone kindles it.
THe Point of Doctrine is this. So strong as Gods breath is, and so long as the
Lord breaths, so strong are the torments of hell, and so long they will abide.

The Explication of the Point some of you heard on Friday night, I now come to
the Application of it, wherein you shall see that which I then said unto you,
that I delivered it to this very purpose, that you do that which Dives desired
to be done to his five Brethren, that is, may not come to that place of
torments.

And first this Text speaks terror or thunder to two sorts:

First, the Furious. Secondly, the Curious.
The Furious are of two sorts also:

First the Dissolute. Secondly, the Resolute.
For the first of these, there are some amongst us who are so dissolute in
their courses, that they fear nothing (if any thing at all) but the Laws of
men, their penalties and punishments. And when those things are passed over,
they think verily the worst is past: but alas it shows that they either read
not, or remember not, or at last and least respect not this Text and truth
before us. The Whoremonger thinks when he has paid the Paritor, that now the
worst is past, he may now to his harlot again, it is but paying so much money
again, but he forgets old Latimers new years gift, Whoremongers and Adulterers
God will judge, he thinks not on this old Tophet, where he must be for ever
tormented for it, if he does not get a pardon from, and make his peace with the
great Jehovah, deeply grieving for grieving his Spirit, by which men mortify
the deeds of the flesh, Heb. 13. 4. Romans 8. 13. The swearer swears he fears not
an oath, the worst is past, when his twelve-pence is paid (and o that our
prayers sped not the worse for want of making men pay their twelve-pences) But
a son of Thunder will thunder against him crying, above all things my
Brethren Jam. 5. 12.
swear not, not only chiefly, equally for fear of paying your shillings, but
lest ye fall into condemnation, lest you go to that place of torments, be
burned for ever and ever in those all furious flames of fire, which the breath
of the Lord, etc.

Thus of the dissolute, now for the resolute: there are some so set on their
sins, that when they he are what is said in the Scripture every where, that
is, no such and such can possibly come to the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9. 10.
Ephesians. 5. 5. Gal. 5. 19. 20. 21. they bid a flat farewell to heaven, resolving
never to part with their sins, till they of necessity must part with their
souls; we will have harlots to be our heavens, we will have Punks to be our
Paradises, (says the sensualist to himself, if not to his neighbors, having
gotten whoresfore, heads with neighing) whatsoever come of us in time to come,
though we loose or leave that heaven, which without these our lusts would even
be loathsome. But as from the doctrine now delivered, I would tell them, if I
heard them say to their souls, we will rather resolve to live unmarried, though
we walk in our uncleanness, then marry wives, and so having children be, and
be accounted beggarly and base; as I would then (I say) say to them, as Paul
says in another case, It is better to marry then burn, 1 Cor. 7. So I say to
them from this doctrine, that if they be not carried to heaven they must of
necessity be hurried to hell, where are inutterable, unceaseable torments:
which when they consider (O would they did consider it) they will cease to
wonder why our sweet Savior Jesus, who in one place calls the way to heaven,
a strait gate, Luke 13. 24. In another place calls it easy, saying, my yoke
is easy, my burden light, Matthew. 11. 29. For as it is straight four ways: or
in four respects. In respect of

1. Corruption. 2. Custom. 3. Company. 4. Combats.
So it is easy also four ways, or in four respects to Christians.

1. In regard of the love which they have to the Lord Jesus Christ; which love
makes all things delightful, desirable.

2. In regard of the hope of heaven which they expect to enjoy, when they have
finished their work in faith.

3. In regard of the ointment which they have received, and which enables them
to run with willingness the way of Gods most good commandments.

4. Chiefly by way of comparison; In regard of the terrible torments of hell,
which will seize with all severity upon all that will not wet their feet or
fingers in walking the narrow way, which leads to life everlasting. O what,
what would not be music, mellodious to the ear, mellifluous to the mouth to
those who are now in that place of torments, if it were tendered to them as a
condition of their coming out of it again to the earth? How sweetly would the
motion sound, the matter seem (as indeed it would be) if it should be said to
the souls in hell, you shall come out of your places of torments, so that you
will be due and diligent hearers, careful doers of the word of the Lord, and
will submit your selves to suffer scoffs and scorns, slanders and scourges,
fires and fagots, and all exquisite tortures that the wits and malice of men
and Devils could invent against them, impose upon them. And thus much for
terrifying of the Furious; now for the Curious, whom this Text also thunders
against, they are such as cannot be Sober-wise but Over-wise, who are always
prying into the Arc, asking (and that often with scorn and contempt) what God
was doing in all that time before he made the world in the first creation of
it. Now these men must be answered thus, and that from the words in this very
verse, the beginning of it, that is to say, that this Tophet, this place of
torments was prepared and that of old for such false foolish fellows as they
are; This old Tophet was God preparing all that time before the Creation for
them, even for them, unless they leave their disdain and derision, and leave
their carnal love to unedifying quirks and quiddities, and love sound and
solid discourses, to speak of things that belong to their Peace. As our
Savior says to his servants, Except ye be converted and become as little
children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of God: have no part or portion
at all in it; when they (as we see in the words foregoing) were asking him a
curious question, Who should be chief in the Kingdom of God? And surely as he
intimates that men would rather seek to get to heaven, then enquire who shall
be greatest in heaven: So do I advise and admonish you (remembering that I do
not aim at dooming or damning you, but at doing what I can, that you may
escape that dreadful damnation) that you busy your minds and mouths in
enquiring of God and men, what course must be taken that old Tophet may not
torment you, then in asking what he did ere the world was made, at which time
he was ordaining it. And thus much for the use of terror.

Now I come to a Use of reproof: and herein I reprove two sorts of persons.

1. The Impenitent. 2. The Impatient.
For the first, I call them Impenitent who would willingly do good duties,
whereof they are convinced, though they will by no means be converted, nor fall
about them, for fear of the threatenings and terrors of men. O that these men
would but think of this Tophet, that they would but hearken to the words of our
Savior, who when he had said, Beware of Hypocrisy, adds immediately after
another like instruction. And I say unto you my Friends, fear not them that
kill the Body and then can do no more, but I will show you whom ye shall
fear, fear him that can cast both body and soul to hell, yea, I say unto you
fear him, Luke 12. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. And surely as our sweet Savior says to his
hearers, if you cannot conceive Matthew. 13.
this Parable, how will you understand all Parables? So say I to those that
dare not do their duties for fear of humane punishments; if ye cannot endure
the breath of a man who carries his breath in his very nostrils, how will ye
be able to endure the breath of the living God, who spans the heavens. And sure
(as the Prophet says, If thou can not run with footmen, how will ye overrun
horsemen?) when a man feels himself unable to encounter the fury and frown of
a mortal, and therefore startles and stands at a stay, not daring to do what
his conscience cries out for; it should make him set about it, and see that he
be not by any means drawn from it, considering that otherwise he must for ever
be tormented in that Tophet, where no prayer can be heard, no pity be had. And
you verily are sharply to be reproved as forgetters of this Text, as neglecters
of this truth which speaks of hels extremity and eternity, which will seize
upon all those souls, who live and lie and dye in their sins, as many as are
drawn from the doing of what you are convinced, that it is the great Gods
commandment, or driven to any thing which you are persuaded God has prohibited
for fear of any thing that any man, all men can do to you for the doing of the
one and refusing the other.

Secondly, this doctrine of hels extreme everlasting torments reproves such as
are so Impatient, that they say none are so troubled as they are; whereas alas
there are millions of millions, who are already in the place of torments, and
would give a world of worlds (as they have not a drop of water for themselves)
that they might change estates with you, that they were on earth with all their
misery, with all their trouble and terror of spirit; yea, there are some so
discontent with their present condition, that they think to ease themselves
with their own destruction, by making away themselves as they say, and as it
is called: But out alas as they cannot do it, as they cannot make away
themselves at all (their eyes may be plucked out, their hands and feet may be
cut off, but the souls within them cannot be torn, or cannot possibly dye,
cannot at all be destroyed) so could they do it, could they tear it out of
their bodies and bowels, what would they gain or get by it? to what purpose or
profit were it? for then alas the same minute, the same moment, they drop down
to this Tophet, to these torments where they must forever be in woe and misery
unspeakable, uncessable, unconceiveable, uncomparable. And therefore to these
impatient ones I may say, as the Prophet Amos says to others in some thing
like them, Amos 5. 18. 19. 20. Woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord: to
what end is it for you? the day of the Lord is darkness and not light. As if a
man did fly from a Lion and a Bear met him, or went into the house and leaned
his hand on the wall, and a Serpent bit him. Shall not the day of the Lord be
darkness and not light? even very dark and no brightness in it? O how much
better were it for them (I am sure the other is much more terrible) to keep out
of hell as long as they can (like him that did eat and drink though he not
much mind to his meat, that he might keep as much as might be from the company
of damned dead ones) and not to run and rush in affection, and to desire to do
it in action into the lake of fire and brimstone, into the horrible place of
torments, where the breath of the Lord like a river of brimstone kindles it.

Now I come to the Use of Information, which flows from the doctrine now
delivered, that the torments of hell are as long and as strong as the force of
great Jehovahs breathings. And these Informations have relations,

1. To the High Priest. 2. To the Preacher. 3. To the People.
Concerning the first, that is, the high Priest, the Lord Jesus the only
Priest, if we speak strictly (and every true Christian it a Priest as well as
King, if we take the words largely, and not in such a retired meaning) this
doctrine informs us of these two things.

1. How needful it was for Christ to be God. 2. How thankful we should be for
Christ to God.
For the first of these, as the sufferings of Christ had not been proper to us,
so had they not been profitable for us, if Christ had not been God. For since
the torments of hell are so extreme and so everlasting, what could the death of
all the Apostles, yea of all the Angels (if it had been possible for them to be
passible) have done to the freeing of us from those extreme everlasting
torments; yea when we lie in the day of our deaths, gasping and going toward
heaven and hell for ever, then will Satan say unto us, now you must be damnd
for ever and ever: No (will we say) we are redeemed and freed from it, and that
by the precious blood of Christ. But he will reply unto us (as deriding our
help and hopes) It is unpossible that Christ his blood should free you from
hell, since it is to last forever, whereas the sufferings of Christ were

In the Extremity, but three days. In his Ministry, but three years. In his
whole Nativity, but three and thirty years.
And what coherence or correspondence have the torments of hell with such kind
of sufferings, what now will an Arrian answer? or any one else who is not
akilled as well as schooled in the doctrine, the excellent doctrine of Christ's
eternal Divinity or Deity? surely then there will be no way to escape the
eternal flames, and Satan's furious fiery dart, but by comforting his precious
soul as the Lord commands us to comfort his people, that is to say, by telling
and teaching them by that doctrine of Christ his Deity, that the Lord has
received double for all our iniquities and abominations; that is to say, that
by his sufferings who was an eternal person, and by his suffering the wrath of
his Father an eternal person, the Lord has freed us from an eternal lake of
brimstone, and brought and bought us an eternal weight of glory. And therefore
our Savior when he had promised to his people to give them eternal life,
concludes that promise with this confirmation, I and my Father are one: as if
he should say, as you by breaking my Fathers law, who was an eternal God, have
deserved eternal torments by your temporary sinning here for a season, so I
being an eternal person, have by my temporary sufferings in regard of time,
freed you from those eternal torments, and provided for you an everlasting
crown of glory: since I am as he is coeternall and coequall. See therefore how
meet it was that he should be God as well as man; All the Apostles, all the
Angels not being able to free one soul from one sin, and that the least one:
and see how needful also it is for us to say in the end of our lives, In the
beginning was the Word, and that Word was with God, and was God.

Secondly, this truth teaches us how thankful we should be to God for Christ,
since quanto gravior, tanto suavior, the deeper the misery, the sweeter the
mercy, when we are freed from the fear of it as well as the danger. And surely
the thought of these unspeakable, unquenchable flames sets an high price on
that more then precious blood which was shed for this very end, that we may not
be thrown to those endless torments. And therefore as Paul when he sets
himself to cry, I thank God through Jesus Christ, cries first, O wretched Romans
7. 24.
man that I am: and O death, where is thy sting? O hell, where 1 Cor. 15. 55.
is thy victory? So should we take a deep draught of the woefulnesse of hells
horror in our retiredst meditation, that it may move us to praise the Lord
for, and prize the cratch and the cross of our Savior. We should say as the
Church in another case, If the Lord himself had not been on our side, if he had
not endured extremities for us, the waters had drowned us, the Psalm. 124.
deep waters had gone over our souls; yea the fire, the fire of hell had for
ever burned our souls, and burned our bodies in the lake of brimstone, the
place of torments, where the breath of the Lord is most hot and heavy, and will
burn to the very bottom, without either brink or bottom: But praised be God,
who has not given us over as a prey unto their teeth. Yea, praised be God who
by the precious blood of his Son has freed us from those flames, and
purchased for us a Crown which cannot be taken or shaken. And certainly for
those that make Christ's blood a bawd for their sins, and think of his
shedding of it without adoring and admiring the mercy of the highest holiest,
heavenly, glorious Majesty, it is plain by the point now in hand, that they
were never soundly affright with the thought of hels endless easlesse misery;
they never cried out of the extremity of hels torments, never considered of
its eternity, never read, never remembered with any serious settled sollid
contemplation this present Text, that tells and teaches us that the breath of
the Lord like a river of brimstone kindles its fiery flaming torments.

And thus much of those two informations which concern the High Priest, the
Lord Jesus, the son of God. Now I come to those informations which concern
the Preachers of the Gospel; and they are two also, respecting

First, their Duty. Secondly, their Dignity.
For the former, this holy doctrine, that the torments of hell abide as long,
and are as strong as the breath of the Lord is, calls and cries to the
Ministers of the word to dig and doung, to do their duties to the very
uttermost in preaching and pressing the words of truth and soberness to, and
on the consciences of men committed to their charge and charity. And thus Saint
Paul pleads for his own and others utmost endeavors. 2 Cor. 5. 10. and 11.
verses, when he had said, We must all appear before the Judgment seat of
Christ, verse 10. he adds immediately as pondering on the weight and the
proper effect of that meditation: Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord we
persuade men, verse 11. as if he had said, when we duly consider how terrible
the torments are to which the Lord shall throw the most part, it should make us
willing to spend and be spent, to do all we can, and more then we can, more
then we can do as mere men, and without that meditation, to save (if it were
possible) the souls of all our hearers from it. O (we think) what more then
pity were it, that any one should dye and be damned, should be cast to those
fiery flames, which are so terrible, so everlasting, through any default of
ours, through want of spending our lights and our lives. And indeed the very
cause why many Ministers are so sloathfull, so very slack in doing their
duties, is their seldom or never thinking of these more then terrible
torments. O did they contemplate, consider deeply, duly, diligently, what is in
Tophet, the place of torments, they would (like Chrysostorne with his Heri, who
says the only way to keep out of hell, is often to think and speak of hell;
And like Calvin with his Cras, who said to him who would have had him have
spared himself, would you have Christ when he comes to find me idle) they
would preach (I say) the word which is appointed to save men's souls upon all
occasions in all opportunities. O that therefore (for I will not meddle with
that speech of old father Latimer, who says that if we could look down into
hell, we should see as many dumb dogs there, as would reach from Westchester to
Dover, neither will I mention that other passage which I lately had in another
place, concerning the crying out of the Dawbing preacher against the people,
and of the people against the Preacher; the people crying out in the lake of
brimstone, woe unto thee thou Dawber, for thou art the cause of our damnation,
because thou did not warn us: and the Preacher answering, woe unto you, you
profane ones, for you are the cause of my damnation, because I durst not warn
you) I say, O that therefore all Ministers would with Jerome think they hear
the trumpet sound, crying, Awake ye dead, and come to Judgment. O that (to
make them take heed to their flocks and families) they would think of this
present text which says concerning hell, and its fire, that the breath of the
Lord like a river of brimstone kindles it.

And thus of the duty which this truth puts Ministers on. And I say thus much
further of it, that the thought of it makes Ministers go home, and beg pardon
for their remissness, when corrupt and carnal men cry out of them for their
over earnestness. O we should never cease speaking of that which will never
have end. Now I come to speak of their Dignity, as it flows from the doctrine
here delivered, and therein I consider two things also.

1. The Excellency of it. 2. The Efficacy of it.
For the first of these, we are to say, in an holy, honest, humble sort (when
we think of the endless easelesse torments) Let a man thus think of us, 1
Cor. 4. 1. For what is it that dignifyeth Lawyers, but their Clients? or what
magnifies many Physicians, but their Patients? O if there were any one of them,
who had recovered, restored to life one dead many days and weeks, o what a
adoring, what many ways more then approving, applauding would there then be
among the beholders, all that see it would say he is eminent, excellent. And
surely every Minister who can say, and say in truth that he has won any one
to the truth from the lake of fire, this most terrible place of torments, he is
to be prized and praised God for, more then all the Lawyers in the kingdom,
more then all the Physicians in the world; Forasmuch as men have longer been
dead in sins and trespasses: and by how much this dreadful damnation is more
terrible then death of the body. Poor people (the more the pity) think our
work to be burying the dead: butah he that thinks on this truth, will see
matter of much more moment, even that which one aimed at, when he said to him
whom he enjoined to so low him, Let the dead bury the Mat. 8.
dead, but go thou and preach the Kingdom, to help poor souls from the lake
of brimstone; nay he that weighs this doctrine delivered, shall see cause why
the Apostles should say, It is not meet to leave the word of God and serve at
tables, since Act. 6.
collecting for the poor does but keep them from wanting drink, but
Ministers handling the Word of God will by the breathing and blessing of God
help poor souls from wanting Water. And whereas some Ministers think
themselves more worth then their fellows, because for sooth they are become
high Commissioners, and so neglect preaching themselves, and contemn and
condemn it in others, let them know that their being Commissioners is not at
all within their commission, they have work of more weight, of more worth,
could they but see it, and it is just with the Judge of heaven to cast contempt
on their proud presumptuous carriages, for leaving that honorable employment,
which the Angels desire to look into, but 1 Pet. 1. 11. 12.
may not meddle with, but speak to preachers to undertake as their proper
taskes and excellent trades, and fall about that which Paul would have the
least in the Church to be employed in, if not that which helps souls,
precious souls to the place of torments. But o how far was blessed Paul,
whose name is glorious, from doing so, who said (considering this matter, the
unspeakable unquenchable torments of hell) Christ sent me not to baptize, but
to preach the Gospel. So that we see that in 1 Cor. 1.
comparison of preaching, the chiefest means for the helping of men from
endless torments, burying of the dead, providing for the poor, yea Baptism
it self (though the Ordinance of God, and a proper, a peculiar, a particular
institution) are not at all to be mentioned or meddled with, save only as this
last is a means to keep men from hell, as our Savior has delivered it with
his own mouth saying thus, He that believes and is baptized shall be saved:
but he that believes not shall be damned. Now the more dreadful damnation is,
the more terrible those torments are; the more amiable, the more admirable
should their feet be to all that have souls, who are anointed and appointed to
preach the Gospel on this very manner, Mark 16. They therefore who think basely
on the servants of God, who serve in the Sanctuary in the times of the Kingdom
of grace for the keeping poor souls from hell, (the least whereof (as our
Savior informs us) is greater then John, yea John the Baptist, who yet was
feared of Herod the King, Matthew. 11. 11. Mark 6. 20.) did never truly consider
how terrible hell torments are, did never meditate truly on the matter that
here is taught, when it is said of hell fire, that the breath of the Lord like
a stream of brimstone kindles it.

And thus much of the excellency of Ministers preaching: Now from hence also I
gather the efficacy of their preaching. And I note this, because me thinks I
hear some of you say, that I make a great puther to little purpose; for
(think you) no man regards it, nor will reform any thing for it. To which I
answer, that as there was one good ground, though the three other grounds were
bad grounds; so I have good hope that some will be warned, at least some one,
though not every one. And the torments of hell are so extreme, so everlasting,
that if there be one soul saved from them, it is worth all our labor, yea,
the expense of the lungs and lights, yea of the lives of all the Preachers,
that ever lived to be the men, the means, the instruments to help that
precious poor soul to escape them. Yea, (for let us suppose the very worst,
the very utmost) if there were none, no not one who would be warned, yet this
that liberavi animam meam, I have delivered mine own soul from those
unspeakeable unquenchable flames is enough to support me and strengthen me
against all oppositions and objections. Surely I being importuned to preach the
first Sermon, and (besides the importunity of Christian Friends) requested by
your Pastor to preach this second Sermon, should have torments more then you,
be (as the Lord threatened Jeremy) consumed before you, have your blood laid to
my charge, have my soul guilty of your blood, if I should not speak unto you
what God has revealed, and I have received from his Spirit, as proper from the
Text, and profitable for you: and am free and far from guilt, if I do, and
discharge this duty, shall not be damned for not doing it, though not one
should believe and be obedient, and that freedom for that very end is worth a
world of carnal contentment, with the having of which the soul of the Dawber
may have an hell daily within, as a foretast of those endless torments, to
which he must be thrown for his dawbing and dallying with that Word, at the
hearing whereof our ears should tingle, our hearts should tremble, yea the
thought, the serious thought of these unspeakeable unquenchable flames will
make us say, that all Gods Ministers are in a sort also Samuels, that is, that
all their words are full of force and very fruitful, not a word falls to the
ground, because (like John the Baptist) they prepare the way for the son of
God, their sounding their vocal trumpets is a forerunning of that last
Trumpet, they have warned and made such way that the Lord shall be known to be
just when he judges, when he dooms and damns to eternal torments such as
would by no means use the means of their great salvation. There is a place in
Exodus the 10. verse, 1. wherein there is a duty enjoined to Moses with a
strange reason rendered to move him to the doing of it. Go and speak to
Pharaoh (says the Lord unto him) for I have hardened his heart, we would think
he should have said, go and speak to him for I have softened his heart, now
speak for this is a fit time to speak to him; for it is like as if the Lord
should have said to me this morning in my chamber, go now and preach at S.
Georges, for I have hardened their hearts, alas (should I surely have said if
the Lord had said so to me) to what purpose then should I go? what good am I
like to do, if thou have hardened their hearts? if thou have softened their
hearts, and so made way for my profitable preaching, I will go and speak unto
them, yea will spend my light and life for them. But as the Lord there
answered Moses, that my Name may be magnified and glorified, Exodus 10. 2. 3. So
would the Lord have answered me to such an objection, such an evil-will wanting
opposition to his sacred message and motive: I will have thee go and preach
unto them, now their hearts are hardened against, that thou may make them
without excuse, and me without shadow or show of any injustice, when I throw
them to Tophet, to the place of torments, when I doom them, when I damn them
to that doleful dreadful damnation. And hence it is, that as the Lord said to
the Prophet, They are a stubborn people, yet go and speak to them, that they
may know they had Prophets among them, Ezekiel. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. So the
Apostle gives thanks even for this (and looking on Gods glory triumphs also
in it) that he was to some a savor of death to death, as well as to others a
savor of life to life, 2 Cor. 2. 14, 15, 16. Indeed it is true, that in humane
apprehension that is a more grievous, not so gracious an end; but howsoever in
respect of our intent, we cry with the Prophet and Apostle, We have spent our
strength in Isai. Gal.
vain. I fear we have labored in vain, when we cannot stop souls from hell
and from galloping and gadding toward it; and say diggers and ditchers do
some good, but we (like unsavory salt) are good for nothing, no not for the
dunghill, since we serve for no use, in not keeping them from hels most terrible
torments (and alas that is our only employment) But yet letting alone our
intent, and respecting this excellent event, (the clearing Gods Justice and
just judgment, the removing all show of cruelty in the Lords damning, his
destroying of his creatures) we say our preaching is very powerful,
exceedingly effectual, could we say but as our Savior said, now they have no
cloak for their sins, John 15. 22. could we do but as he did, make the
wedding garment wanters Speechless, Matthew. 22. Did we bring but dew to water
the ground which will bring forth briars and thorns, that so it may be near to
cursing, whose end is to be burned, Heb. 6. 6. 7. 8. did we only fit them for
the fire, which the breath of the Lord at a river of brimstone kindles.

And thus of those Informations which concern the High Priest and the
Preachers. I now come to those which more properly concern the People; and
because I see time begin to slide away, I will turn those informations to
Exhortations, saying thus only by the way, that as I will have done as near as
I can at the end of the hour, so whosoever of age and discretion gets not
faith by the preaching of the word, where it may be had, and will not stay one
sand when the glass is run, (if extremity or occasion urge him, he may
depart with Gods leave and my love) the Devil when he dies, will not stay one
sand for his soul, but immediately it must to the fire, which the breath etc.

Now that which for this Text and truth, I am to inform the people of, and
exhort them to, is of three sorts, or I am to speak to three sorts of people.

1. To all both within and without. 2. To such alone as are without. 3. To such
alone as are within.
For the first, that which I would speak to all, is to advertise, advise, and
admonish them to make a serious enquiry in their souls, whether they be under
this dreadful damnation, or else be free and far from it, and so need not to
quake and quiver at my meddling with it, or mentioning of it. And here had I
time, I would give some motives to make you serious and settled in it; one or
two I cannot but name.

1. The fewest part of Professors at large shall escape this lake of fire, the
most part must be thrown into it; so says our Savior, Matthew. 7. 13. 14.
Matthew. 22. 14. Now if one (which the Lord keep you from) should tell you that
most of your houses are on fire, would you not leave me alone, as Christ and
Paul were left; would you not be jealous and suspicious saying with the
Apostles, when the Lord told them, one of them twelve should betray him; Is it
my house? is it my house? Nay I think you would rather speak peremptorily
saying, it is my house, my house is burned, every one of you one by one.

2. As we have but a short or a small time to provide our selves of what will
preserve us from those endless, easlesse torments (this life being a moment of
great moment, upon which depends our eternal abiding) so many are many ways
deceived concerning their certificates of escaping everlasting destruction, and
that through want of serious searching. (O this is the height of our woe, we
do not use to think of hell, till at length we be in hell, and then it is too
late to come out of hell) Much Copper-ware is abroad which is wholly
counterfeit, nothing current, but it lies us on our lives, yea on the eternal
estate of our souls to see that ours be not copper but current, for he to whom
we must pay it, as he will not take a grain of copper, so he knows current
from copper. Out alas we see Professors, yea and Preachers, yea in the days
of death and doom saying, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou
have taught in our streets, you we have prophesied in thy name, and in thy name
cast out Devils; and then Christ professing saying, Then will I profess unto
you, I know you not: We had no secret sacred acquaintance, no chamber, no
closet converse together, you did not search your souls to see how it was you,
or what was to be done by you, but for form and fashion only sometimes met in
the Congregation, Depart from me Mat. 7. 22. 23. Luke 13. 25 26. 27.
to everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, ye workers of
iniquity, be you preachers or be you professors.

These and many other motives or matters should persuade us, and prevail with
us, to be serious and solemn in the examination whether we be under these
torments yea or no, but alas the extremity it self, the easlesnesse and
endlesnesse of the woes in the lake of brimstone is enough to make us intent in
it, and want of time forbids to prosecute my further intent in it.

But you will say, by what signs or symptoms may we discover whether by Jesus
we be delivered from the wrath to come?

To which I answer, that as I believe that you have heard that whosoever
believes not shall be damned, Mark 16. So if I should prosecute that text
which says, The wicked shall be turned to hell, and all the Nations that
forget God, Psalm. 9. 17. I should be thought to forget my self, by taking too
tedious a task upon me. I will therefore confine my self to one most precious
portion of Scripture, wherein two sorts of persons are doomed and damned to
everlasting and extreme woe and misery, if they abide in that state and
condition.

1. The Ignorant. 2. The Disobedient.
God shall come from heaven (says Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8, 9.) in flaming fire,
to render vengeance to them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, which must be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power.

First therefore here is discovered the most doleful dreadful condition of
such as want the true knowledge of God, they must be punished with everlasting
destruction, and who reading this can choose to say with Perkin, Poor people I
pity you.

But you will say, as Saint Paul brings us i^, saying, We have all knowledge, 1
Cor. 8. 1, 2, 3. and therefore cannot be damned among the Idiots, among the
ignorant. And I say with the same S. Paul, If any man say he knows any thing,
he knows nothing as he ought to know.

But if any of you would approve your selves to have such knowledge as will
keep you from hell, from those endless easlesse torments, they must see that
the knowledge they boast of, have these three properties or qualities; that it
be

1. Feeding for the matter of it. 2. Feeling for the manner of it. 3. Feebling
for the effect of it.
For the first, he must see that it be feeding, sound, sollid, substantial
knowledge; such knowledge as Solomon speaks of, when he says, a righteous man's
lips feed many. And that which a greater then Solomon means when he says, This
is eternal life, that men know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent. It is not the knowledge of quickes and John 17. 3.
quiddities, foolish, frivolous, frothy phrases, but such knowledge as he
wished to Jerusalem with weeping eyes, when he said unto her, O if thou had
known in this thy day, the things that belong to thy peace; that is to say,
seasonable knowledge, in this thy day, and reasonable knowledge, the things
that belong Luke 9. 41.
to thy peace.

For the second, he must see that it be feeling knowledge, such knowledge as is
experimental, and so more excellent knowledge then Satan has, for Satan can
read that which is written, Romans 8. 1. There is no damnation to them that be in
Christ, in the third person; but he cannot say in the first person as it
follows, verse 2. The Law of the Spirit of life has freed me from the law of
sin and death. No, that is the proper privilege, the peculiar prerogative of
him that must not be damned, that can say We speak what we know, as he said,
by whom we are saved from the wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. and of whom it is
also said, in respect of his felt experience, forasmuch as he was tempted, he
is able to succor those that are tempted, Heb. 2. 18.

For the third, that knowledge which is breathed by that Spirit by which we are
sealed to the day of Redemption from endless torments is a feebling knowledge,
such a knowledge as makes a man humble, nothing less and worse, nothing in his
own eyes and apprehension. It is contrary to the common knowledge, which the
Apostle says, We all have, and whereof he speaks as follows, Knowledge
puffs up, 1 Cor. 8. It is a knowledge of God and our selves, how glorious and
gracious he is, great in himself, good to us; how grievous we are to him by
our continual sins and iniquities, and what unspeakable, unsufferable
torments are prepared for us, if we live and lie in them. It makes a man cry
out with Isaiah, Woe to me I am undone, for mine eyes have seen the King, the
Lord of hosts, Isai. 6. For from both these sorts of knowledge, the knowledge
of God and the knowledge of ourselves, slows and follows exceeding humility, a
faithful, free and full casting down a man to the dust of the earth; and a
lovely; lowly laying on a man's soul the due desert of being cast down to the
dungeon of hell. It makes a man say with sobs and sorrow, my breath is
exceeding unsavory, I have righteously, rightly merited to be thrown to that
fire of hell, which the breath of the Lord, etc.

Now then let us search our souls (if we hope to escape hell, because we think
we have knowledge) whether it be the knowledge of fundamental truths, or
foundation tenants, and whether we feel the power of it in working faith in the
Lord, the giver of it, and love to him, and to that word by which (as by an
instrument) he conveigheth it; and whether we can say from the force of the
same feeling, that the Lord is our God, who will keep us from the lake of fire,
whatsoever becomes of those who do not put their trust in him, because they
do not know his name, as the Prophet David delivers it. And finally whether
our faith which is thus ushered in by knowledge, be attended by that humility,
which bends and birds us to praise the Lord and please him in all things with
self denial, for freeing us from this Tophet, this place of terrible
torments. If it be such knowledge (alas I know the most are without it, though
alas and alas, they do not know it) you must know this also that you must not
quake when you hear of hell, and how terribly tormenting it is. But if you
have no knowledge of God at all, or have only such as all have who profess
the paths of piety: if it be such as is superficial only, and puff you up
with pride and presumption, then know that you have no knowledge, none worth
the having, none worth the heeding, for of such there can be no hearting. If
the Breath, that blessed wind which blows where it lists, does not breath
on you, do not bless you before you die this natural death, you must then
dye eternally, go to hell, be thrown to the fire, which the breath of the Lord
like a river of brimstone kindles it.

But that you may either be comforted or convinced concerning your ignorance,
it is fit to follow you further in the matter of disobedience. And because our
time is short, and you would take it ill at his hands who should take you of
disobedience, I will confine my speech herein to three Characters of true
Obedience. Know therefore that that obedience which will help from hell (as
being indeed obedience, and not a shadow, not a show of it) is

1. Glewing. 2. Groaning. 3. Growing.
For the first, true obedience is glewing, it gleweth or tyeth together, as all
the ends why we must work; Glory of God, thankfulness to Christ, evidence for
heaven, escaping of hell, credit, profit, each in his order: So it glueth the
commandments themselves, aims at one as well as another, though most at
those which the Lord most earnestly enjoyneth, and which it finds and feels it
self most backward to go about. He that said thou shall not commit Adultery,
says the son of thunder, said also thou shall not kill. James 2. 11. Now
then whosoever shall kill (does, and delights in any soul-killing sin) though
he does not commit Adultery, (or does any other evil act or action) as fire as
he is a transgressour of the Law whiles he lives, so sure shall he when he
dies (if he do not repent before he dies) be thrown to those fiery flames
which the broth of the Lord, etc.

2. That obedience which secureth from death and damnation is a groaning
obedience, that is to say, they that have it, do not only do their duties
hereafter, but also take a purge or potion of bitter sighings, sobs and
sorrows, for omitting former duties, neglected or contemned, and doing things
contrary to the commandment of the living Creator, loving Redeemer. O this,
this is the fount, the very foundation of all Apostasy, and so at last of all
tortures and torments. Men and women say to their sins, as those men said to
our Savior, when they besought him to depart their coasts, because by his
coming they lost their swine (as they supposed). But they do not receive a
potion for their formerly drunk in poison: some for carnal love to their
Landlords leave some sins, though they do not loath them; some for fear of
their friends and famillars do such duties as they do not delight in; many
for many ends do many things which may not be blamed, but are commanded, yea
and commanded unto their practice, by patterns and promises as well as
precepts, who were never broken in heart, for breaking those sacred saving
precepts, and breaking over those patterns and those promises. These wanting
that depth of earth can never got to heaven, but must to hell, if they do not
hereafter lament their not lamenting, before they began to be known to be of
that number* which must escape the fiery flames, which the breath of the Lord
like a river of brimstone kindles.

For the third; That obedience which goes for current in the court of heaven,
and says to such as profess it, that they cannot be cast to tormenting Tophet
is growing, it daily increases, grows duly bigger and better, more and more
savory, sollid and setting down all objections which strive to stop it in its
holy paths of purity, in the way in which he walks, in whom it is in life and
power, in truth and spirit. But alas men's growings blinder, baser, back warder
in all the things which helps toward heaven and would heave us higher had we
hearts to them, proves plainly to such as see it, that most men are made of
another kind of mould then they were composed of, in respect of Christianity,
then they were in those primative purest holy days, when Christians were so
glewed together, were so full of growing and groaning.

Now search (I beseech you) your souls, ye men and women, who would not be
damnd, see whether your seeming obedience glue you to Christians as well as
commandments, have opened your hearts with such dew-distilling sorrow for sin
ihat (as plants refreshed with rain) your souls grow more enamored with those
paths which are pleasant as well as pure leading from hell to life everlasting.
Of a truth (that I may grow nearer toward conclusion) as they who are so
qualified may not only qualify their fears concieved at the hearing of hell
crying weep and wail without end, at the thoughts of Tophet whose torments
have no end, but also make them truly merry at the very heart, because they are
free and far from the place and case, in which Gods fury for ever kindles the
fiery flames. So they who cull and choose, in their doing duties take on them a
profession without taking on or making confession of their false, foolish,
filthy ways or rather wanderings they that stand at a stay continually never
growing or groaning heavenwards, but grow weary of precise and punctual
performances, religious rules, doctrines, disciplines, are traviling toward
Tophet, and will run (unless they return) into that fire which my text treats
of, and which the breath of the Lord like a river of brimstone kindles.

And this be spoken to all in general: search your selves, ye search your
selves, O ye who would not be damned for ever, before the decree come forth,
before ye be as chafe; before the fierceness of the Lord come upon you,
before the day of the Lords wrath come upon you. Zeph. 2. 2. I am to speak to
those (being commonly the greatest number) who are ignorant or disobedient, in
such sort as is here discovered and so (should they dye in that case) would be
shortly in a doleful dreadful case, howling in hell, crying out that ever
they were borne, frying in the fire, which The breath of the Lord like a river
of brimstone kindles.

Now to these our blessed Savior cries again and again, And if thy hand
offend thee, out it off: it is better for thee to enter into life maimed, then
having two hands, to go into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched;
Where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched.

And if thy foot offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to enter halt
into life, then having two feet to be cast into hell, into the fire that never
shall be quenched. Where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched.

And if thy eye offend thee, pluck it out: is it better for thee to enter into
the Kingdom of God with one eye, then having two eyes to be cast into hell
fire. Where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched.

Mark that he would have the hand and foot off, and the eye out, but here is not
a word of the ear off, men and women must have their ears on still, as a
special means to keep them from the fire, there is no cropping ears in
heavens court, but they who will not part with their hair, how should we think
they will part with their hands, yea it is to be greatly feared, that since
these will come to our Churches, and carry Bibles, who will by no means leave
their lusts, as near as their hands, as dear as their feet, I say it is to be
feared, that they will be bound hand and feet, and be thrown to utter
darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth, and then they will become
speechless, having nothing to say for themselves, when their feet are bound
which brought them to the temple, when their hands are bound which handled the
Bible; when their hands are bound and then no fighting, when their feet are
bound, and then no flying. Mat. 22. 11. 12. 13.

And I call upon you as loud as I can, to do that which my master means, that
is to say, to avoid and abhor any thing, every thing, never so dear to you,
never so near to you, (unlawful profits, pomps or pleasures) which any ways
hurt or hinder from seeking the way of salvation, that so you may escape those
everlasting flames of fire: yea I beg of you, and beseech you, to do any
thing, every thing, all things, which will do any thing in that matter of
greatest moment toward the escaping of that Tophet, that place of torments. O
put to all you are, and all you have, all the powers of your souls and parts of
your bodies, employ, improve all your minutes as well as your mites, in saving
your selves from this froward generation, and so from those unspeakeable,
unconceiveable, unmatchable torments. Do as Solomon shows, that you should
do, as we showed at the beginning. The way of life is above to the wise, that
he may escape hell below, Prove. 15. 24. As if the spirit had said, if any man or
thing shall arise in your hearts to hold from heaven, show to your souls the
burning flames which are below in the lake of fire and brimstone, and you will
quickly show your selves wise men, you will esteem the word and the preaching
(a special means to make us able to say in truth we shall not be damnd) above
objections, above oppositions, above all that stops or stays us from seeking,
striving, struggling for life.

You will happily say, what must we do, that we may escape that place of
torments.

To the which I answer, that though time passes swiftly, I will show you,

1. What the word. 2. What the world would would have you do in the present
case.
For the first. The word (in a few words) bids us do these three things, as
we have them in three examples. Or these three Bs.

1. Believe. 2. Beware. 3. Bewail.
First carry the honey of this instruction and exhortation. First, the word
bids us Believe, thus S. Paul said to the Jailer, who put him and his fellow in
the inner prison, when he Acts 16.
had a commission to put them in prison; that Jailer after his putting them in
the inward prison, was himself put in the inmost prison, his very soul was set
in the stocks, he was afraid of the flames of hell, and cried out in the
anguish thereof, even to those whom he had misused: Sirs, what must I do to
be saved? O how, how shall I do? I fear the terrible torments of hell, what
course must I take to escape them? To this Paul answers, as I do to those of
you (if there are any here among you in the like case) Believe in the Lord
Jesus, and then shall be saved from that lake of fire and brimstone, which
otherwise will destroy and devour thee, sink thee, swallow thee in for ever.
And I from this very ground call upon you to cleave the clouds, to work
wonders, to reach the right hand of that Majesty on high (passing by all the
Apostles and Angels) and there to single out him, who is all in all with God,
to become all in all to us; to apprehend him for your own Savior, to apply
him to your own souls, to take down his person, his passion, his promises, to
make him your own by the lively says of Gods Elect. And I beseech you, O ye
who have souls, and have a Savior, who shed his blood to redeem those
precious souls, do not despair for any of your sins, be they never so many
millions, be they never such mighty mountains. I cannot stand to show you the
order which God uses in working faith in you. How first he tells you, that it
is possible, and then probable that God will pardon you after fears falling in
in the midst; and after a while will say to you sweedy, your faith has saved
you, your sins are forgiven you. But this I say to you, that there is such
infinite mercy in God, and such infinite merits in Christ, that if you can but
believe in him (and the Lord look upon you, to make you able to say hold on
him) you shall surely be saved from hell, you shall not be over whelmed with
those extreme everlasting torments, shall not be cast to the fiery flames,
which the breath of the Lord like a river of brimstone kindles.

Secondly, (for there is no time to tell you, how you must attain to that
Believing, namely by hearing the word of God, which is able to save your souls)
I say secondly, if you would Romans 10. James 1.
escape the everlasting terrible torments, you must Beware that you walk in the
way which the Saints and the Savior trod in. So says John when he saw the
Pharisees seek to avoid the wrath to come. Bring forth fruits (says he unto
them, when their Consciences cried against them, and set the torments of hell
Matthew 3.
before them) Bring forth fruits fit for amendment, says he, and begin not to
say in your selves, we have Abraham to our father. And do not you I beseech
you, dream that you can stop the cry of hell in your Consciences, by any
foolish frivolous figleaves, or if you could so curb and crush them, that yet
you are able to avoid that brimstone by pleading Pedegrees, pretending
prerogatives. No, there is no way but one with you, if ye walk not the way of
fruitfulness, be not careful, conscionable, circumspect in all Conversation,
in all acts of Christianity; Though it be Christ, even Christ alone, who has
freed us from hell, and fitted us for heaven, and for his sake shall all that
be chosen, be kept from those ever-burning flames; yet it is they, they alone,
none but they, who are fruitful as well as faithful shall escape the lake of
brimstone, all the rest, all that walk not warily, worthily must be extremely
and eternally hell-tormented. That is the way, and the means to escape, those
are the persons, who must be preserved from that most terrible place of
torments; In that, and after that men must fly from the wrath to come. And
therefore you must be such, must be so fruitful, must bring forth fruits fit
for a Christian calling, if you would not be thrown to Tophet, to that
extremely tormenting fire of hell, which the breath of the Lord like a river of
brimstone kindles.

Thirdly, whosoever of you would not be damned for ever and ever must look back
with godly sorrow (like those four beasts in that fourth Chapter of John's
Revelation, who had Eyes behind as well as before) on his former foolish, false
behavior; So says Peter to those three thousand, who when they had been
pricked in their hearts (frighted with fear of those fiery flames of hell,
feeling a kind of foretast of it in their very inwards) cried out, what shall
we do, with sighing soul and Acts 2. 37. 38.
sorrowful spirits. Repent, says he, be ye truly touched; sincerely, sweetly
terrified, troubled, that ye were so proud and presumptuous, that you duest
provoke the mighty Jehovah, who is able to tumble you down to hell to the place
of torments. Make your hearts bleed that your sins made him bleed; who shed
it to keep you from hells eternal flames. And surely forgiveness of sins
and faith in Christ to conceive it, and receive it, without which to escaping
of hell nothing at all, but being extremely, eternally damned, (...) must be
attained with any fruitful force and feeling, till a Converts soul become such
an one as will suck it in, and that it cannot be capable of, till it be soked
in brinish tears, or bitterer terrors, till is be afraid of Tophet, that so
fearing it, it might not feel that unquenchable fire of hell which the breath
of the Lord as a river of brimstone kindles.

And these be the three Bs which have the honey: These be the things which the
sacred Scripture: commends to such as have in their hearts wormwood and gall
for fear of hells extreme eternalls, when it counsels them by comforting,
and comfort them by counselling.

Now what the World would do, and that both lawfully and laudably, if a noise
of fire should fright them, we all know by much experience.

Suppose (which the Lord keep from you) that there should be a noise of fire
in your Town, what course would ye take for the quenching of it. I know
generally and negatively what you would do, that is to say, what you would not
do, for you world certainly hear me no longer, but would leave me alone (as
they did Christ and his chosen vessel Paul, and yet you should not, for I would
go along with you remembering what is written: I will have mercy and not
sacrifice, Hosea 6. 6. But what would you do, when you came to it, and sought
to quench it, I suppose you would get three things.

1. Company. 2. A Ladder. 3. Water.
For the first you would get Company, you would call upon one the other,
crying, Fire, fire, fire, fire, save us from it, help to quench it; And O that
you would do so directly, for the saving of your souls, for the preserving of
you from those torments which are extreme and endure for ever. O that you would
get together, that you would go one to another; that you ask one the other
the question, How does your soul? and, How does your soul? O would you say to
each other thus; What say you neighbor to that which we heard to day? Is it
true, that there is an hell, and that there are such torments in it? that they
are so terrible, so everlasting, that they never shall end, but abide for
evermore? O what, what shall we do? what will you do? what shall I do? I
fear I shall even be damned in hell, even in hell, and that in such extremity,
and that for all eternity. But me thinks I hear some of you say to me: I can
find in my heart to go to his house, but not to this house, he is a Puritan;
but I tell you, if there were a fire, such a fire in your town or houses,
there would no word at all of Puritan, but all the noise would be Neighbor,
neighbor, fire, fire, help neighbor, help. And O that the thought of this
fire which the breath of the Lord for ever kindles, would take away all
hostilitle, all carnal crooked conceit of enmity; and make you join hearts,
heads, and hands, for the quenching of it so far as concerns your escaping,
for the preserving of you from it (as Saul was forced to depart from David,
when he was near him at the mouth of the Cave, to the end he might save his
kingdom which the Philistines then had invaded.) O that you would walk and
talk together, like yet living creatures, and now loving neighbors, how you
might escape hell, the everlasting lake of fire and brimstone; I assure you it
would much avail you toward your freedom from the fiery flames; which The
breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone does kindle it.

Secondly, if there were fire in your Town, and houses (which the Lord
evermore keep same from you) you would immediately seek a Ladder: And, O that
(if any among you be stuck to the heart and stung with this Sermon at the
hearing of these unspeakable, unquenchable flames of hell.) O that you would
go to your Minister, (Ministers are Ladders, Jacobs Ladders reaching from
earth to the height of heaven) and say to him, when your souls are sinking;
Sir, be good to us, help us, beale us, heave us up from the sinks of sorrow;
we see death ready to seize on us, hell ready to swallow us utterly. Thus did
that Jailer, those Pharisees, those Converts before mentioned, they roated and
ran to their Preachers, crying, Acts 16. Mat. 3. Acts 2.
What shall we do to be saved? But O alas we the Ministers of the Gospel grow
greedy of filthy lucre, waxer wanton, in spending our time upon trifling
novelties, niceties, because we want work or purer employment, are not at all
enquired after concerning the sores of your souls, the bellowings and
breathings of them, the blemishes and breathes in them; where is there (almost)
a man among millions, who makes the moon for a man of God, one of a thousand,
to whom he may cry for counsel when his Conscience is almost confounded? But
you O people, who have precious souls in you, and which souls must surely be
turned to Tophet, if you be not turned topsieturvie from blindness and
badnesse to true Religion and holy Righteousness, do you that which the
fewest number do (they are many and often mighty ones, which walk in the way
which draws to destruction) get you Ladders, and get upon them, make your
Ministers mind their studies, when they hear you pouring out your hearts and
posing them, and putting them often times to their prayers, for more wisdom
to resolve your doubtaind difficulties. But chiefly (ah do it as you do not
desire to be damned) go speedily to those Ministers by whose work, men must be
saved, when you hear of hels extremity, and are afraid that you shall fall in
it. They will not with the Watchmen smite you, they will rear you, restore
you, recover you (they have more leisure and more learning then I have, more
time to do the thing which will stop your souls from sinking, and stir them
from despair as well as security) when Satan sets before you your due desert
of eternal damnation. Above all I desire and require you, that if any thing
has been spoken in my two Sermons, which puts any of you to your plunges, and
puzzles your souls by saying, you must be damned, that you enquire of some
Ambassador of Jesus Christ, whether it were true as well as terrible, holy
Doctrine as well as threatened deep damnation. And I for my part, if any of my
Brethren being a word for it, will be ready to recall and recant it, and show
you a softer way (if there be any such in the blessed Bible) to escape this
flaming fire of Tophet, which The breath of the Lord like a stream of
brimstone does kindle it.

The third thing that you would do, would be to cry, Water, water, should the
noise of Fire, fire, be heard among you (which the Lord to his good pleasure
keep far from you.) And O that this cry of Fire, Fire, this extremely
tormenting fire, this everlastingly tormenting fire, would cause you to cry for
a double Water, and double your cry for it, with single hearts and earnest
spirits. O that you would cry for the water of pardon for forgiveness of
sins, for the washing of your souls, through his blood, who came by Water
and blood, not by water only, but by water and blood, out of whose more then
precious side came Water and blood for the souls 1 John 5. 6.
even of Publicans and most profane ones, of vicious, villainous men or
miscreants. O that the fear of this quenchlesse fire would make you cry, Lord
have mercy upon us, (not as many try it, without any sense of misery, and so
without capability of mercy, tossing and tumbling the Name of the Lord, as I
would be loath to have my name tossed, crying, Lord have mercy upon us. Christ
have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us, in such haste and show of heat, as
if they meant to sell their Lords have mercy upon us for money, and would get
as many of them into their hands as they could to sell them hereafter;
(Whereas, if they thought of hell, of its extreme and eternal torments, it
would make them with deliberation, yea with the utmost of their devotion to
cry, Lord have mercy upon us, we are else undone for ever.) O, I say, that the
fear of this fire would make you cry, Christ have mercy upon us, and to
continue so crying, till your hearts he sprinkled from an evil conscience, and
your bodies washed with pure water. And I Heb. 10. 22
beseech you, as you would not suffer these unspeakeable, unquenchable flames,
do as our Savior bids and binds you, that is to say, Ask, Seek, and Knock
for that holy water, Mat. 7. 7.
and the Spirit, without which he tells and teaches us, that there is no
coming to the glorious Kingdom, and so by consequence, no escaping of hell.
Ask earnestly, and if no answer seem to come, Seek more earnestly, and if
you hear no answer yet, Knock most earnestly, for the water of the Spirit to
regenerate, renew, and restore you from the death of sin and the danger of
death, eternal death and dreadful damnation. Yea I would Knock down the
gates of heaven, (why should not I do a thing impossible, to escape the lake
of fire and brimstone, at well as the Lord bids us do a thing impossible to be
free from eternal damnation, saying, Make Eze. 18. 31.
you a new heart, and a new spirit, for why will ye die? though he knows that
we cannot move an hand toward making new hearts, and therefore promises by the
same Prophet, yea and that Eze. 11. 19 and 36. 26.
once and again, that he will give us new hearts and new spirits) rather then
feel the fury of God in the fierceness and fullness of it in that Tophet,
that place of torments, that hell of hels, which has such fire in it, that The
breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone does kindle it.

And thus much be spoken to such as have hitherto abode in darkness, by not
thinking on the place of torments (too much considering the time, not half
enough in regard of the thing,) you may now depart at your pleasure; I having
showed you the case you are in, and the course you must take to come out of it.
I have only two words to speak now to you* who have such knowledge and such
obedience wrought with in you either before this day it some good and Christian
perfection, or on this day in the beginnings of it, in the seeds or desires of
it, or sound preparations to it.

Now to you who are soundly wrought on, and so are freed from those extreme
everlasting torments, I am to persuade with you:

1. To praise the Lord for your own mercy. 2. To pity others in their misery.
For the first of these as often as you think on the extremity, and eternity
of the torments of hell, it must make you one by one cry with the sweet Singer
of Israel, Psalm. 86. 12. 13. I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with all my
heart: and I will glorify thy Name for evermore. For great is thy mercy
toward me: and thou have delivered my soul from the lowest hell.

And to provoke you to this duty of praise, which when we come to heaven, and
shall see that we cannot to hell, we shall continually be employed in, and
which we are so more backward to bring our hearts to, whiles we are in earth:
let us briefly think on these things:

1. First, if our Graces be well grounded, strongthned and stablished, we shall
be sure, without peradventures, that we shall not be thrown to the lake of
brimstone, Revel. 21. 7. 8.

2. If we had been dead only, and revived, recovered to life again, yea if we
had been but deadly sick, and had been restored to health again, we should say
with good Hezekiah, The living, Isai. 38. 19.
the living, they shall praise thee: How much more are we bound to do it, at
the freeing our souls from the place of torments.

3. Consider how many millions, nobler, richer, learneder then we are, are left
to themselves, and their souls to Satan, to be extremely eternally damned; And
God has made choice of us filly simple worms, who were first Elected, and
then Selected, and after Neglected of all mere moral men, and often in our
own souls Dejected in our own apprehensions, 1 Cor. 1. 26. 27.

4. Consider how many times, how many thousand times, the God of heaven did
call and cry to us, and yet we refused, and often resisted: He sent not only
his Son, and after his Son his Word to reveal his Son, but also his Spirit
from Sabbath to Sabbath, from Sermon to Sermon, and still we withstood our own
escape, our own deliverance, our own freedom from those flames, which have
none end, or ease at all in them.

5. He fetched us from it, called, culled, converted our souls from it, when
we were loath to come out of hell, loathest of all to come out of the way to
it, loather (it may be some of us) then ever in all our lives before. O the
Lord dealt with us, as he did in fetching Lot from Sodom, whiles we lingered,
he laid hands on us, the Lord being exceedingly merciful to us, saying, Fly
for your lives, Escape toward the mountain, lest ye be consumed in the lake
of fire and brimstone. And the cause why we so contemned our own mercy in that
our misery was our ignorance, our not knowing what case we were in, our
thinking our selves safe, and in the way to the Kingdom of Heaven, when alas
we were almost in hell, in the very path, the very porch of it.

6. And lastly, that as he sent when we never sought pardon, so he has not
only knocked off the bolts and bonds, not only freed us from hels most fierce
and fiery flames, but also fitted us in some measure for the wearing of Royal
Crowns of Glory: So that now we can think on hell without horror, without
astonishment because we can say with Paul to his Thessalonians, God has not
appointed us to wrath but to ab^^in^ Salvation by Jesus Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9.

The thought of these things should fill us full of joy and comfort, and make
us breathe out holy praises, and break forth into blessing the blessed
Majesty, crying with Paul, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in
Ephesians. 1. 3.
Christ: According as he has chosen us, before the foundation of the world;
when he rejected millions of millions to be extremely eternally damned: And
with Peter, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
according to his abundant mercy, in freeing us from those torments, which know
neither end nor ease, has begotten us again to a lively hope of an inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for
us, 1 Pet. 1. 3. 4. And wherein we shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of
our Father, when all the wicked of the world shall be cast into Matthew. 13. 42.
43.
that furnace of fire, which The breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone
does kindle it.

And thus much be spoken to you, concerning your own mercy.

Now a word of Information concerning others misery. The Prophet Jeremy in one
verse, Ier. 20. 13. breaks forth into this holy pang, this heavenly passage,
Sing unto the Lord, praise ye the Lord; and in the very next verse unto it, he
breaths forth this doleful dismal outcry, Cursed be the day wherein I was
born. The Apostle Paul (peradventure more proper and pat to our purpose) when
he had said, I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
Romans 8. 38. 39.
nor depth, nor any other creature, shall separate us from the love of God,
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord: (as looking on his own most blessed
condition, being engrafted into the blessed body of Christ, and endued with the
blessed Spirit of Christ, and so free from condemnation, as it is in the 1.
verse,) looking on his former familiars and friends, and seeing them subject to
death and damnation, has these words in the very next verse, Romans 9. 1. 2. 3.
I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bearing me witness in
the holy Ghost, That I have great heaviness, and continual sorrow in my
heart, For, I could wish that my self were accursed from Christ, for my
brethren my kinsmen according to the flesh: And surely since the torments of
hell are so unconceiveable, so uncessable, we should after we have rejoiced
and praised God for our own deliverance; groan and grieve for our carnal
friends case, and more then cursed condition. But as that Paul when he had
sighed and sobbed, with remembrance of, and respect to the terrible torments
that they must be thrown to, if they abode in their wicked wilfulness, adds
in the 1. verse of the next Chapter, his Prayer to that his Pity, saying,
Brethren, my hearts desire Romans 10. 1.
and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved. So must we not
only weep and wail, for fear of our friends damnation, but also do the
best we can, use our true and utmost endeavor, that such sinners may be
converted; and so escape everlasting torments. And though I could show (did not
time take me off) what special course fathers and mothers must take to help
their children from hell, and set it down in diverse particulars, yet I will
only show in gross or general terms what we are to do (even you people, as
well as we Preachers,) for all that dwell about us, and to whom we have any
access, toward their escaping that fire, which The breath of the Lordlike a
river of brimstone kindles.

And to pass by our holy walking (with which we may draw them to like that
Word, which is able to save our soul Jam. 1. 21.
from that fearful wrath to come:) And not to press you to press hardest by
Exhortation, when you receive most kindness from them, Luke 10. Luke 11. Luke
14. (O who would not endure any thing to keep any one from wanting water, who
will not see us here want drink, but will provide before we petition) nor to
call on them to number their days (which will make them to become wise, if
anything will, and not rush on their own deep destruction, for days, and
years, and ages past numbering, Psalm. 90. 12.) Nor to show you who must be
reproved, and who must not be reproved (which is not to be done in this time,
were it never so incident to the) Text, I will only show what rules every one
must use in speaking to such as we are to speak to, and that in these three
words only, namely you must use,

1. Piety. 2. Policy. 3. Pity.
Concerning Piety, Ye must

1. Take the Word of Grace to them. 2. Speak to the Throne of Grace for them.
In doing the first of these, ye must do two things carefully:

1. Bring with you the Lords Authority. 2. Leave them with a possibility of
mercy.
1. For the first, ye must be careful, that ye do not vent or utter your own
words; but the words of the living God, to show them their duly deserved
damnation, and its extremity and eternity. Ye must show them the words of the
Lord in the very Chapter and verse, as well as Book; And say, How? O how, will
ye answer in the dreadful days of death, and of doom, these words which are
the words which you must be judged by? What will you say, when the Books
shall be Joh. 12. 48.
opened? and this text be brought against you? which tells us that every one
who lives and dies in the course you walk in, must be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power, when he comes to render vengeance in flaming fire? what must the
Lord tear out this leaf for love of you? which says as ye evidently see, The
wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God? must He
be so far enamored of you, as for your sakes to be false of his Word, who are
so far out of love with him, that you hourly not only transgress, but
trample also under your feet his sacred Precepts and saving Promises? Surely
this is the way to win them, to work upon them, if there be any way; to say
with the Prophets and the Apostles, Thus says the Lord, The mouth of the Lord
has spoken it, and What I delivered to you, I have received from the Lord. And
I also (that I may awake and affect you) will follow the footsteps which I set
before you, and to my six Rules premised, I will add this as it were a
seventh, that is to say, that what I have said, they are not my words, but the
words of the Lord he was the Master, I but the poor Messenger; the words I
mean which I have had in the present Discourse concerning Tophet, or those
torments, or fiery flames of hell, which The breath of the Lord like a river of
brimstone kindles.

2. For the second: when ye have told them of the terrible torments due to
them, and almost at hand to swallow them up, and sink them down to the
bottomless pit; ye must at length (least they grow resolute, and wickedly
desperate, crying, past help past hope, past cure past care; Let us eat and
drink, for to morrow we shall dye. Let us revell and riot, we can but be
damned) I say ye must at length let them know, that if they come in, there is
yet hope in Israel concerning this very matter; Ezra 10. 2. Prove. 1. 20. 21.
22. 23. 24.
ye must give them to understand, that Wisdom cries even to scorners, yea to
those who have long (how long) delighted in scorning; yea let them know, that
she cries not burn ye, as we would imagine, and would do in the like case
also; But turn ye, and after Behold I will pour my Spirit on you. As I will
pawn my precious soul that none of you all shall go to Tophet, if you yet
repent and cleave to Christ, following the rules set before you, let your
sins and lives in time past, be never so many, never so wicked. And be sure
to put together, what the Lord has there conjoined (to make them readily
receive mercy, when the Lord in exceeding tender mercy tenders it) Because I
have called and ye refused, I have stretched forth my hand, and no man
regarded; I will laugh at your destruction, and mock when your fear comes;
when death begins to seize on you, and hell begins to swallow you, when you
fall to that fearful Tophet, to that unmatchable, unquenchable fire, which The
breath of the Lord as a river of brimstone kindles.

2. But as you must take the word of grace when you do go to them, so you must
go to the throne of grace before you go to them. Before you speak to them on
Gods behalf, speak to God on their behalf, to bless your councels and comforts
to them. And surely as those Ministers who following their masters footsteps
use to pray in private, before they preach in public, have the secrets of God
reveald to them and exceedingly edify and profit their people; whereas they
do little good, yea have their gifts and graces wither, who make not their
prayers in chambers, before they meddle with Scriptures in Churches. (O it is,
it is the pouring out the soul to God, which makes a man speak with power to
God) So ye, if in self-denial ye cast down yourselves before the Lord, and
before his footstool, when you see a fit person, a meet man or woman to work
on, saying, Lord thou have hearts in thy hands, and have wisdom and words
irresistible; O tell me, shall I speak to him, and if yea, make me able to
speak to him, give me an heart, and words of weight worth the speaking; and
give him grace to receive my warning from thee in deepest mercy, from me in
dearest love. O bless them sweet father, breath with them, that they may help
that precious soul from the lake of fire and brimstone; thou have freely given
me an heart to desire and seek their escaping hell. But thou desire and
seek it infinitely more then I, or any man, or all men, who have said and
that as thou live, I desire not the death of Ezekiel. 18.
the wicked. O be with us, be all to us, in speaking, hearing, doing, that the
poor precious soul to whom I am now going, may not go to the fire of hell,
which the breath of the Lord as a river of brimstone kindles.

And thus of the Piety which must be used in your helping poor neighbors from
hell: Now the Policy which must be used consists also in two particulars.
Ye must

1. Give them their own Commendations. 2. Draw from them their own
Condemnation.
For the first of these, ye must always remember to observe what good thing
they have in them, or what they do that is worthy of praise, though it be but
morally or civilly good, toward the Church or the Commonwealth. And be
careful to commend the good before ye begin to discover their danger, or tell
them what dreadful damnation awaits them, if they be not bettered before their
deaths. Thus not only did Paul deal with his people of Corinth, crying to
them, I commend you Brethren, before he cries, I commend you not, when he
speaks of their abuse of the sacred Supper, wherein they drink their own
damnation, 1 Cor. 11. 2. But also our Lord six times in two Chapters together,
cries, thou have done Rev. 2. and 3. Chapters.
these and these things well, before he cries, I have somewha^ against thee.
And surely this will (...) all the wormwood: and gall in the words, though
they favor never so strongly of extreme and eternal damnation. This will make
them clearly conceive, that ye do not vent any malice in anger, when they see
you as willing, as ready to commend what is good, as condemn the evil. And as
ye must reward any good in your children, as well as correct them when they do
evil (which correction is the way to keep them that they go not to hell below,
as the wisest of men has taught us seven times in his book of his Proverbs) so
let every man say to his neighbor in whom he sees any show or shadow of good,
when he goes to be a means to five him from hell: Surely Sir, I must commend
you, you govern well your wife and children, I do not see in them any
loytering, nor heart from any of them any swearing or lying; you are careful
for them, couvteous to us, free of your purse, full of honest hospitality: But
I must tell you (that commending the good makes way, opens the care to receive
any thing from the commender) that for all this you are not regenerate, you
know not what appertains to a sanctified heart, which you must needs get before
you dye, or be sure to be damned when you dye; had you more common gifts and
graces then had Herod or Iehu, or Judas. Yea sure you must soundly be
converted, truly touched and troubled for sin, or all your formal fairness
cannot keep you from the unspeakable, unquenchable flames, which The breath of
the Lord as a river of brimstone kindles.

2. For the other of the acts of holy policy, ye must make them condemn
themselves by some pretty proper simile, such as this is. Say to him: I pray
you neighbor, if your house were burning (which God keep you from) and you
were fast asleep on a bed, or your body like to be burned, if you be not away:
and then if one should come by you, and find you asleep in that danger, ought
he to a wake you, yea or no, must he awake you or let you be burned? He cannot
choose but answer, you ought, or else you show your self an enemy; and then
reply ye as the Prophet Nathan did to David: Thou art the man, to your self
belongs the simile; alas I see you asleep in your sins, your soul and body
both are about to be seized on by death and damnation, And surely I should
betray you if I should not awake you, and show you your danger. Or suppose you
were asleep, and your body ready to be burned, and two men should come by you
and see it; and the one of them should say to his fellow, let him alone, do
not awake him, do not stir him, for if you do, he will swear and storm,
rail and revile you with all vile and villainous reproaches: the other replies,
I fear not his anger, I care not one jot for his raging and railing, all my
fear is that he will be burned, all my care is, that he be not burned: Now
which of these two was the truly merciful, truly pitiful man? why as sure
as the Lawyer said, He was neighbor who showed mercy; as sure as Simon said.
He to whom he for gave much, will love most: So sure would he say to him that
asked him such a question; He was the merciful man who awaked me, and he
cruel, who would not do it. Then say ye, Thou art the man, some flatter you
for fear of loosing your face and favor, but I will not suffer you to sleep
in your sins. I will affright every vein in your soul and body, before I Will
suffer, you through my default, to be cast to the fiery flames of hell, which
The breath of the Lord like a river of brimstone kindles.

And thus of the acts of Policy. Now pity must also be used in speaking do
others to help them from hell. And because the time is past that I cannot come
to the comfort which come to the Saints from this holy doctrine (for out of
this strong comes sw^^^ and Gods children from hells extremity and eternity,
may gather the excellency and eternity of heaven, may be sure they shall not
be thrown into it, may with more patience endure any misery on earth, may be
the more joyful in their escaping such terrible torments, as well as more
certain of them escaping them, etc.) I say because I want time to deliver those
and such like holy comforts from the serious thought of the doctrine of hells
extremity and eternity. I will end it as I began it, in pressing the using
Pity, when we warn men and women to take heed of it. As I told you at the
beginning, that I should speak hereof with compassion, so in the end I call
upon all to use the like commiseration, as our Lord and his Apostle did, when
they told of destruction and damnation. Many walk (says blessed Paul) whose
end will be Phil. 3. 18.
damnation, and I tell you of it weeping. The enemy shall cast a bank about
thee (says Christ) but he said it with weeping eyes, for when he drew now to
Jerusalem, be beheld the City and Luke 19. 41.
wept over it. As it is related of Bias the Judge, that he never sentenced any
man with dry eyes. Show to them whom you do admonish, that you speak to them
of hell, and of their going to it, if they turn not, with grief of heart, with
groaning in spirit; knowing that the wrath of man does not accomplish the will
of God, (as the son of thunder has taught us) not James.
at all that part of his will, wherein he binds us to do our utmost in keeping
poor souls from the wrath to come, from the place of torments, the fire of
hell, of which it is said in the Text, that the breath of the Lord like a river
of brimstone kindles it.

FINIS.
WHen this last Sermon thus was brought to end,
Our Vincent from the Pulpit did descend
Into the Pew; and blessed be our Lord,
Who so much graced this Preacher of his Word,
That though his foes exceedingly desired
To interrupt him in it, and conspired
To that same purpose: yea besides although,
They had both power and policy enough
To do it; yet they could not for their heart
Touch him, or cause one person to depart
Till he had finished. But when that was done,
His foes by heaps did at the Church door run John 18. 1. Rev. 11. 7.

To do him mischief; And a wonder it is,
(But that we certainly may learn by this,
That God had other work for him to do,
And better souls for him to preach unto)
That knife, or Halberds, or that press of men
Had not destroyed his smoking body then.
But blessed be God at length he got away,
And preached at Mary Magdalens that day
Ith Evening: And since that (by Gods great power)
Full many a Sermon he has preached in our
Great London City. But no thanks to you
Ye preaching-hating, bloud-desiring crew
Of sottish slauderers; yea sure you should
Be sharply punished, for what you would
But could not compass; that you so might be
A warning unto others and to me.
Idem A. F. qui scripsit This was the Sermon, etc.
Qui punit, ponit.
MR. Packington before the Justices required me to produce the testimony of
some Ministers of my own Country, I therefore am compelled to produce this,
written by them, and subscribed every one with his own hand.
WE whose names are underwritten, do certify, that Mr. Humfrey Vincent, whom
we have known for a good space of time, is of a very honest life and
conversation; he has at our desires at sundry times preached in our several
Cures; The Lord has endued him with singular gifts which he has denied to his
Brethren, although faithful in their places. Indeed he is one of a thousand,
either to break, or to bind up (by Gods help) a broken heart. He is a John
Baptist to humble and to lay low a proud exalted spirit. He has been sent for
to preach in many places about us, where we have heard his Doctrine has been
sound, and his carriage as a Minister of the Gospel; and we hope he has done
much good in our Country.

In witness whereof, we Ministers of the Gospel have put to our hands.

John Needham. Preacher of Stafford. Seth VVood of Armitage Sampson Newton of
Canck. Thomas Thomas of Beckbury. William Fletcher of Albrington. Simon King of
Codsall. William Brue ton of Nosehall. George Baxter of VVenlock. William
Peake of Shemton. Robert Ashton of Bednall. Deliverance Fenny house of Shassal.
John Chapman of Dunn^ngton. William Madestart of Bridgnorth. Thomas Mocket of
Newport. Roger Linsh of Norton juxta Canck.
All these Preachers of the Word.


