The Ualiant RESOLVTION OF The Seamen, Listed under the Command Of the Earl
of Warwick, who upon Monday last most valiantly slew many of the Cavaliers,
that were coming from Kingston to take Sion-house. and how they were
constrained to sink their two ships; because the Cavaliers should not take
their Ordnance.

Also a trve Relation of the meeting of both Armies between Brainford and
Acton. Showing the behavior the Lord Robert, upon Brainford Bridge: slaying
many of the Cavalier^s with small loss of his own forces.

With the most valiant service of Colonel Hampden, and Collonell Hollis,
against Prince Rupert upon Turnham Green,

Together, With the most barbarous cruelty of of diverse Cavaliers, upon Mr,
Peircy his wife at Acton.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Hanson, November 16. 1642.

The valiant RESOLVTION OF The Seamen Listed under the command of the Earl of
Warwick, who upon Monday last most valiantly beat and slew a great number of
Prince Rubert his Fortes who were coming to take Sion-house.
Upon Satterday last being the 12 of November Prince Rubert, who before, had
lay scouting up and down with his Forces, taking advantage of the misty
Morning, advaunced his Eorces, and came toward Branford, the suddennes of whose
coming was such, that the Inhabitants of the said Town were insensible of his
coming neither had they the least inteligence of his Approach, by resaon
whereof he found but small opposition, until the Lord Roberts who did not lie
far off came with with his men. At the approach of the Lord Roberts with his
men, Prince Rupert had almost gotten the Bridge, but was stayed by him, so that
without the loss of any of his men he got in to the Town.

And planted himself and his men upon the Edge of the Hills, and a bout twelf
or one of the clock in the after none who began to play afresh upon the Lord
Roberts and his Forces, but their orduance did little or no execution which
caused a great discontent in the Cavaleirs and made them swear that the Divill
was in the powder there Bulets in their great cannon did not fly half way of
there intended purpose so that before, that before they could reach the mark
they aimed that their power and vigor was spent.

When Prince Rubert had played thus some certain time but to small purpose our
men who all this while had bin almost idle, the greatest part of their
ammunition being behind, were now encoraged with new suply of men and ammunition,
and although they before had sustained some small loss, yet they were not
thereby dismaide, but made good afterward for that they had suffered before
now Colonel Hampden and Collonell Hollis came in with their forces and with
them great store of Ammunition, of which before there was great need on the
Parliaments side.

And now being so well provided for the Enemy, they went bravely on, and with
undanted sperit played with their great pieces upon the Enemy, which peaces did
brave execution and service that in a small space there fell of the Cavaleirs
avery geat number, but of the Parliaments side very few.

The Cavaleirs perceiving their loss to be so great, and the loss on the
Parliaments side to be so small, upon Sunday Night at bout eleaven or twelve of
the clock did quit that place, and Prince Rubert with all his forces fell
back to Kingflon; which Town by the treachery of the inhabitants was
delivered up unto the Cavaleirs, and the townsmen have since pulled up the
Bridge; so that all passage for pursuit after them is hindered.

And I cannot here pass by the inhuman and most barbarous actions of the
Cavaleirs at their entrance into Acton, amongst the rest one example being of a
most barbarous nature, will render their conditions odious unto you. When they
entered the town first of all, and were seated therein, some of the Cavaleirs
went up and down to plunder where they had intelligence any store of money,
Plate, or jewels of value were; amongst the rest it happened that they came
unto one Mr. Pierce his house, but he not being then who is a Brewer in the
Town of Acton, they coming to this Mr. Pierce his house, did demand the Mr.
of the house, but he not being then within would not be content with that
answer but fell to pillaging; Mistress Peircy the Brewers wife, having not bin
delivered of a child above one week before, was very much affrighted at the
unruly carriage of the Cavaliers, and although she was weak yet thinking by
fair persuasions and promises to appease them for the present came down and
desired them that they would desist from such uncivil actions and that they
should have what they could desire, or the house could supply them withal.

These her fair speeches gave them but little or not satisfaction but the more
she entreated the more violent were they in the persecution of their violent
misdemenours, she perswads but they were still as death as adders, and at the
last one of them more cruel then the others, as she was standing by weeping
did cock his pistol, and shot her with her child in her little babe in her
Arms, such an act of barbarous cruelty I think scarce any Chrouicle can
parralell such unhumane acts.

Upon Monday, after the Cavaliers had lost Brainford, and sheltred themselves
in Kingston, after some time, some of them came over the water again and took
Sion-house, thinking by this means to stop all provision from coming unto the
City, but they were much deceived, for the Seamen who had listed themselves
under the Earl of Warwick took two small Pinisses mand with fourteen pieces
of Ordnance, and with them gave many a brave shot against the house, but could
do but little good by reason of the strength of the building could do small
execution.

Upon which they were constrained to draw away their ships, for want of the
tide to carry them back and likewise constrained to sink them least the
Cavaliers should seize one the Ordnance, and by this means they have defeated
the expectation of the Cavaliers.

FINIS.

