Qus VALERIVS MAXIMUS HIS COLLECTIONS Of the Memorable ACTS And SAYINGS OF
ORATORS, PHILOSOPHERS, STATESMEN, and Other Illustrious Persons of the Ancient
Romans, and Other Foreign Nations, Upon Various Subjects, TOGETHER With the
Life of that Famous HISTORIAN

Newly Translated into English.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Crayle at the Lamb in Fleetstreet, next
White-Fryers-Gate, and John Fish nigh the Fountain-Tavern in the Strand. 1684.

Fab: Maximus
portrait of Fabius Maximus

Lycurgus
portrait of Lycurgus

Caesar
portrait of Augustus Caesar

Alexander
portrait of Alexander the Great

Pyrrhus
portrait of Pyrrhus (or Pyrrhos)

Xerxes
portrait of Xerxes

Marius
portrait of Gaius Marius

Sylla
portrait of Scylla

Scipio: Afric^
portrait of Scipio Africanus

Themistocles
portrait of Themistocles

Pompey
portrait of Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus

Romulu^
portrait of Romulus

London printed for Samuel Speed.
portraits

To the Right Honorable HENEAGE Lord FINCH, Baron of Daventry, AND Lord High
CHANCELLOR of England.
May it please your Honor,
HAving lately experienced the Influences of your Honors Favors, I hold my
self in Duty bound to pay my Acknowledgements to the utmost of my power; which
is, in this Address to declare your Piety and your Bounty: For which reasons I
had been guilty of Injustice, had I sought for any other Patron, being lately
so generously remembered by your Honor. Thus I endeavor to show my Gratitude,
though the highest Pinnacle thereof bears no proportion with the large Pillars
of your Honors High Worth and Dignity; well observing what is in ancient Story
recorded of Lycurgus the Lacedemonian Lawgiver, that he slighted the making a
Decree against Ingratitude, imagining no man could be so sordidly wretched, as
to be guilty of that horrid Crime. Wherefore, to pay my Debt in the best Coin I
have, I humbly offer this to your Honors Patronage, it being a Collection of
the Acts and Sayings of Orators and Statesmen; and who can be more fit to
receive them than the far-excelling Tully of our Age? Of whom I may say as once
the ancient Roman, Omnium somnos tua vigilantia, omnium delicias tua industria,
omnium vacationem tua occupatio.

May it please your Honor not to give your Lordship any farther trouble; your
Acceptance and Pardon is humbly implored by

Your Honors Obedient, Devoted, and Obliged Servant, Samuel Speed.

THE LIFE OF VALERIVS MAXIMUS.
VAlerius Maximus, a Roman Citizen of a Patrician Family, spent his childhood
and youth in the study of Learning Then coming to be of age, he betook himself
to the Wars; where he is said to have served for some time, and to have sailed
with Sextus Pompey into Asia. Whence returning home, when he found himself
able to profit his Country by well speaking as well as doing, from which the
love of Honor had for some time diverted him, he resolved to put forth the
Acts and Sayings, the most remarkable, of the Roman City, and of foreign
Nations; which he very luckily finished. He flourished in the Reign of Tiberius
Caesar, and in his time, whose Numen he invokes, he wrote this History: For the
Roman Emperors, when by their virtue they had justly and uprightly managed the
Empire, were translated into the number of the Gods, and were called Divi
Imperatores. He derived his Pedigree by the Fathers side from the Valerian
Family; by the Mothers side, from the Fabian: from both which he obtained the
name of Valerius Maximus. Of his Death there is nothing certain reported.

AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE OF THE Contents of the Chapters.
A
OF Abstinence Page. 167 Of Arts Page. 408 Of Anger Page. 441
B
Of Bashfulness Page. 181
C
Of Constancy Page. 143 Of Continence Page. 167 Of Conjugal Love Page. 185 Of
Clemency Page. 203 Of Courage at the death of Children Page. 252 Of Chastity
Page. 256 Of Covetousness Page. 446 Of Cruelty Page. 434
D
Of Dream Page. 30 Of Degenerated Births Page. 129 Of the Desire of Honor
Page. 417 Of Deaths not Vulgar Page. 466 Of Desire of Life Page. 471
E
Of the Effects of Arts Page. 408 Of Eloquence Page. 403 Ease praised Page. 402
F
Of Frugality Page. 66 Of Foreign Institutions Page. 69 Of Fortitude Page. 104
Of Friendship Page. 189 Of the Fidelity of Servants Page. 291 Of the change of
Fortune Page. 295
G
Of Gratitude Page. 214
H
Of Humanity Page. 203 Of Happiness Page. 304 Of Honor Page. 417 Of Hatred
Page. 441
I
Of Innocence Page. 66 Of Illustrious men Page. 131 Of Ingratitude Page. 221 Of
Justice Page. 281 Of public Judgments Page. 346 Of private Judgments Page. 354
Of Industry Page. 363
L
Of Luckie Signs Page. 16 Of Liberality Page. 198 Of Love to Children Page.
244 Of Luxury and Lust Page. 427 Of Liars Page. 476
M
Of Miracles Page. 39 Of Matrimonial Ceremonies Page. 52 Of Magi^^rates Page.
56 Of Military Discipline Page. 76 Of Majesty Page. 95 Of Mean Births advanced
Page. 125 Of Moderation Page. 152 Of Modesty Page. 181 Of Moderation to
suspected children Page. 250 Of the change of Manners Page. 295 Of Memorable
old Age Page. 413 Of Motion of the Body Page. 406 Of Magnificent things Page.
421
N
Of Necessity Page. 334
O
Of Omens Page. 18 Of memorable Old age Page. 413
P
Of Prodigies Page. 22 Of Patience Page. 1^0 Poverty praised Page. 176 Of Piety
toward their Country Page. 238 -- Toward Parents Page. 228 Of Public Faith
Page. 287 Of Public Judgments Page. 346 Of Private Judgments Page. 354 Of
Pronunciation Page. 406
R
Of Religion Page. 3 Of Feigned Religion Page. 14 Of Foreign Religion Page. 15
Of the Right of Triumphing Page. 86 Of Reconciliation Page. 164 Of Repulses
Page. 331 Of Rackings Page. 358 On Revenge Page. 361
S
Of Shows Page. 62 Of the Severity of the Censors Page. 90 Of Self-confidence
Page. 133 Of Severity to Children Page. 247 Of Severity Page. 269 Of Stratagems
Page. 326 Of Study Page. 363 Of Similitude of Form Page. 474
T
Of Towardliness Page. 101 Of Things freely done Page. 262 -- Gravely done
Page. 276 Of the Truth of Wives Page. 290 Of Things wisely done Page. 306 --
Craftily done Page. 316 Of Testaments confirmed Page. 342 Of Testimonies Page.
359
W
Of Wills cancelled Page. 338 Of Women-pleaders Page. 357
Y
Of Yielding to Masters of Art Page. 412
Quintus Valerius Maximus OF Memorable things.
LIB. I.
The PROLOGUE TO AUGUSTUS TIBERIUS CAESAR.
I Have resolved with thy self, to collect together the Deeds and Sayings of
most note, and most worthy to be remembered, of the most eminent persons both
among the Romans and other Nations, taken out of the most approved Authors,
where they lie scattered at such a distance, that makes them hard to be known;
to save them the trouble of a tedious search, who are willing to follow their
Examples. Yet I have not been over-desirous to comprehend all: For who in a
small Volume is able to set down the Deeds of many Ages? Or what wise man can
hope to deliver the order of Domestic and Foreign story, which our
Predecessors have done in such happy styles, either with greater care, or more
abounding Eloquence? Therefore, Caesar, thy Countries only safety, thee I
invoke in the beginning of my Undertaking, whom the consent of Gods and men
has ordained the great Commander both of Sea and Land; by whose Divine
providence those Virtues, of which I am to discourse, are most favorably
cherished, Vices most severely punished: For if the ancient Orator: did well to
begin from the Omnipotent Jove, if the most excellent Poets did always call
some particular Numen to assist 'um; much the rather does my little Work, fly
to your protection: For other Gods we adore only in Opinion, you we behold
equal to your Fathers and your Grandfathers Stars in brightness, whose
resplendent Lustres have added not a little to the Ceremonies of our Religion.
Others we receive for Gods, Caesar's we make such. And because it is my
intention to begin with the worship of the Gods, I shall discourse briefly of
the nature thereof.

CHAP. I. Of Religion.
OBSERVED BY
1. The people of Rome. 2. Lucius Metellus, High-Pri^^^ 3. Titus Gracchus. 4.
College of Priests. 5. Q. Fabius Dictator, and C. Flaminius Mr. of the Horse.
6. Pub. Crassus High Priest. 7. The Disciple of Aemilia the Vestal Nun. 8.
Marcellus junior, Consul. 9. Lucius Furius Bibaculus. 10. Lucius Albinius. 11.
C. Fabius Dorso. 12. Q. Petillius Spurinus Praetor. 13. Lucius Tarquinius the
King. 14. Marcus Attilius Regulus. 15. The Roman Senate.
NEGLECTED BY
16. C. Terence Varro. 17. Appius Caecus, and the Family of Potinius. 18. A
Roman Soldier, and Brennus the Gaul. 19. P. Turullius Admiral. 20. Q. Fulvius
Flaccus Censor. 21. Q. Pleminio Legate for the Praetor.
Foreign Examples of Religion observed or neglected.
1. Pyrrhus King of Epirus. 2. Massanisa King of Numidia. 3. Dionysius the
Elder of Sicilie. 4. Thymasitheus Prince of the Liparitans. 5. The Soldiers of
King Alexander. 6. Perseus. 7. Athenians. 8. Diomedon an Athenian Captain.
OBSERVED.
1. OUr Ancestors appointed that the set and solemn Ceremonies should be
ordered by the knowledge of the Highpriests; the right Administration of these
Ceremonies, and authority for so doing, the observations of the Augurs, the
Predictions of Apollo, should depend upon the Books of the Sibyls; but that the
mysteries or Wonders should be unfolded according to the Rules of the Hetrurian
Discipline: For by the ancient Institutions, when we were to commend any thing
to the Gods, we gave our selves to Prayer; when any thing was earnestly to
desired of the Gods, then to Vows; when any thing to be p^^^, to Thanksgiving;
when enquiry after future succ^ss was made, to obtain by Request; when any
sol^mn Sacrifice was to be done, to sacrifice: By which ^^ans the
significations of Wonders and Thunders were likewise discovered.

So great also was the care of our Ancestors, not only to observe, but to
increase Religion, that by decree of Senate, ten of the Sons of the chief men
were sent out of their most flourishing and opulent City to the several people
of Hetruria, to learn the Order and Discipline of Ceremonies.

1. And when they had resolved to worship Ceres after the Greek manner, they
sent for Calcitana, or, as others say, Calliphimia, from Vilia, which had not
yet received the name of a City, to be their Priestess, that they might not
want a skilful Governess of the ancient Ceremonies of the Goddess: To whom
having in the City a most stately Temple dedicated, and being warned in the
Sibyls Books to appease the ancient Goddess Ceres in the time of Gracchus
Tumult, they sent ten persons to Enna, where they believed her Sacred Mysteries
were first instituted, to make an Atonement for themselves. And many times our
Emperors and Commanders having obtained great Victories, have ^^one themselves
to Pessinuntes, there to perform their ^^ows to the Mother of the Gods.

2. Metellus High Priest, when Posthumous the Consul, and also a Flamin of
Mars, desired Africa for his Province to make War in, commanded him under a
penalty not to depart the City, thereby to desert his Functions; believing that
Posthumous could not safely adventure himself in Martial Combats, when the
Ceremonies of Mars were neglected.

3. Praiseworthy was the Reverence of the Twelve, but more to be extolled, the
obedience of the Twenty four Fasces: for Titus Gracchus sent Letters to the
College of Augurs out of his Province, by which he gave them to understand,
that having perused certain Books belonging to the Sacred Mysteries of the
people, he found that the Tabernacle was erroneously taken at the grand
Consular Assemblies for Election, which he had caused to be made; which thing
being reported to the Senate, by command thereof C. Figulus returning out of
Gallia, Scipio Nasiea from Corsica, both laid down their Consulships.

4. For the same reason, P. Cloelius of Sicilie, M. Cornelius Cethegus, in C.
Claudius, for that the Entrails were less reverently brought to the Altars of
the Gods than they ought to have been, at several times, and in several Wars,
were commanded and compelled to leave the Flaminship. And because a Be fell
upon the head of Sulpicius while he was sacrificing, he lost the Priesthood.

5. The peeping of a Mouse being overheard, was the reason that Fabius Maximus
quitted the Dictatorship, and C. Flaminius ceased to be Master of the Horse.

6. To this we may add, that P. Licinius High Priest thought fit to give the
lash to a Vestal-Virgin, for that one night she had been negligent of the Holy
fire.

7. But Vesta her self saved the Handmaid of Emilia the Vestal, who had let
the fire out; for while she was worshipping, and had laid her Vail which was
very rich upon the Hearth, presently the fire caught hold thereof.

8. No wonder then that the indulgence of the Gods was so great in preserving
and increasing their Empire: for such a scrupulous care seemed to examine the
smallest concernments of Religion, so that our City is to be thought never to
have had her eyes off from the most exact worship of the Gods. And therefore
when Marcellus, five times Consul, having taken Clastidium, and after that
Syracuse, would have in performance of his Vows, erected a Temple to Honor and
Virtue: He was opposed by the College of Priests, who denied that one Domicil
could be rightly dedicated to two Gods. For if any Prodigy should happen, it
would remain doubtful to which Deity should be made Address: nor was it the
custom to sacrifice at once to two Deities, unless to some in particular. Upon
which Admonition of the Priests, Marcellus in two several Temples set up the
Images of Honor and Virtue; whereby it came to pass, that neither the
authority of so great a man was any hindrance to the College, nor the addition
of expense any impediment to Marcellus, but that all Justice and Observation
was given to Religion.

9. Lucius Furius Bibaculus has hardly any Example to parallel him, unless
that of Marcellus: Nor is he to be deprived of the praise of a^most pious and
religious mind, who while he was Praetor, being commanded by his Father,
Principal of the College of the Salian Priests, carried the Ancilia, six
Lictors going before him; though he might have pleaded an excuse from that
duty, by virtue of his place. But our City valued Religion above all things,
preferring it before the authority of all sovereign Majesty: therefore their
Emperors have not scrupled to obey in Sacred things; believing they should the
more easily obtain the sole command of humane things, if they were constantly
and truly obedient to the Divine power.

10. Which resolution has been also bred up in the breasts of private persons.
For when the City was taken by the Gauls, and that the Quirinal Flamen and the
Vestal Virgins were forced to carry the Sacred things, taking every one a share
of the burden, having now pals'd the Sublician Bridge, and ready to descend
the Rock that leads to Janiculum; they were spied by Alvanius, who was driving
a Cart wherein he had put his Wife and Children, who no sooner saw them in that
condition, but regarding public Religion more than private Charity, commanded
them to alight; and then placing the Holy things, and ordering the Vestal to
get in, he left his own intended Journey, and drove them till he came to the
Town of Caere; where, because they were courteously and reverently received, we
testify our thanks, and honor the memory of their Humanity: for thence it
came to be instituted, that those Sacred Rites were called Ceremonies, because
the Ceretans worshipped and observed them as well in the low as flourishing
state of the Commonwealth: And that Mean and Country Cart, on a sudden the
receptacle of so much Honor, came to equal, if not outvie, the glory of a
Triumphal Chariot.

11. About the same time, memorable was the Example of observed Religion which
Caius Fabius Dorso gave us: for when the Gauls besieged the Capitol, lest the
accustomed Sacrifice of the Fabii should be put by, clad in a Gabin habit, and
carrying the Sacred things in his hands and upon his shouldiers, he at length
passed through the midst of the Enemy to the Quirinal-Hill, where having
performed what was to be done, he returned to the Capitol with Divine Adoration
of his victorious Achievement, as if he had been a Victor indeed.

12. Great also was the care of preserving Religion among our Ancestors, where
Publius Cornelius and Baebius Tamphilus were Consuls: For the Laborers that
were digging a Field of Petillius the Scribe, at the foot of Janiculum, delving
somewhat deeper than ordinary, found two little Stone-chests; in one whereof
was a Writing, declaring, That it was the body of Numa Pompilius Son of
Pomponius: In the other were seven Books in the Latin Tongue, treating of the
right of the High Priest; and as many in Greek, discoursing of Wisdom. For the
preservation of the Latin Books they took especial care; but the Greek one,
(for there seemed to be some things therein prejudicial to their Religion)
Lucius Petillius the Praetor by decree of Senate caused to be burnt in a public
Fire made by the Officers belonging to the Sacrifices: for the ancient Romans
could not endure that any thing should be reserved in the City, which might he
a means to draw the minds of men from the worship of the Gods.

13. Tarquinius the King caused Marcus Tullius the Duumvir to be fow'd in a
Sack after the ancient manner, and to be thrown into the Sea, for that he had
for a Bribe delivered to Petronius Sabinus a certain Book containing the
Mysteries of the Civil Sacred things committed to his keeping. Most justly,
seeing that violation of Trust deserves the same punishment among men, as from
the Gods.

14. But as to those things which concern the Observation of Religion, I know
not whether Atilius Regulus have not excelled all that ever went before him,
who of a famous Conqueror being now become a Captive, through the wiles and
ambushments of Hannibal and Xantippus the Lacedaemonian, he was to the Senate
and people of Rome, to try if he could get himself, being but one, and old,
redeemed for several young and noble Carthaginians; who when he came, advised
the Senate to the contrary, and went back to Carthage, well knowing to what
cruel and inveterate Enemies he returned; but he had sworn so to do, if he
could not obtain the release of their Captives. Surely the Immortal Gods had
reason to have mitigated their fury; but that the glory of Atilius might be the
greater, they permitted the Carthagians to take their own inhumane courses: As
they who in the third Punick War would severely recompense the death of so
noble a Soul with the destruction of their City.

15. How much more religious toward the Gods did our Senate show themselves?
which, after the fatal overthrow of Cannae, decreed that no women should mourn
longer than thirty days, to the end the Rites of Ceres might be by them
performed. For now the greatest part of the men lying slain upon the bloody
accursed Earth, there was no Family in the City that did not partake of the
general Calamity. And therefore the Mothers and Daughters, Wives and Sisters of
the slain were compelled to put off their Mourning-weeds, and put on their
White-garments, and to perform the office of Priests. Through which constancy
of observing Religion, forced the Deities themselves to blush, and be ashamed
of raging any more against such a Nation, that could not be drawn from adoring
them that with so much cruelty destroyed them.

NEGLECTED.
16. It is believed, that the reason why Varro fought with so much ill success
at Cannae against the Carthaginians, was through the wrath of Juno: for when he
made public the Circensian Games, being Aedil, he set a young Player of
extraordinary beauty to watch in the Temple of Jupiter: which Fact being called
to mind after some years, was expiated with Sacrifices.

17. Hercules also is reported to have very severely revenged the abuse of his
Worship: for when the Family of the Potitii had entrusted his Ceremonies, the
Ministry whereof belonged to them as it were by inheritance, to be performed by
servants and persons of mean degree, of which Appius the Censor was the
occasion; all the flower of the Family, who were above thirty young men, di'd
within the space of one year; and the Name of the Potitii, that was branched
into twelve Families, was almost extinct; Appius also the Censor was stricken
blind.

18. A sharp Revenger also was Apollo, of an injury done to himself, who at the
Sack of Carthage being spoiled of his Rode of Gold, never ceased till the hands
of the sacrilegious Soldier were sound cut off among the broken pieces of his
Image. Brennus, Captain of the Gauls, entering into the Temple of Delphos, by
Destiny was compelled to lay violent hands upon himself.

19. Nor was his Son Aesculapius a less violent Revenger of contemned Religion,
who not enduring to behold a Wood consecrated to his Temple cut down by
Turullius to build Ships for the use of M. Antonie, by a strange power so
ordered it, that Turullius was by the command of Caesar, being judged to death
while he was in the midst of his business, executed in the very Wood: And so
the God ordained it, that being there remarkably slain by Caesar's Soldiers,
that with the same death he expiated the loss of those Trees that were cut
down, and secured the safety of those that were standing.

20. Nor did Q. Fulvius Flaccus go unpunished, who in his Censorship translated
the Marble Tiles from the Temple of Lacinian Juno to the Fane of Fortuna
Equestris, which he was, then building at Rome: for he no sooner had done it,
but he fell mad, and for very grief expired, hearing that of his two Sons, both
Soldiers in Illyria, one of them was dead, the other slain; by whose mishap
the Senate being warned, ordered the Tiles to be carried back to Locri.

21. Much after the same manner did they punish the covetousness of Q.
Pliminius, Legate to Scipio, in robbing the Treasure of Proserpina: for when he
was brought in Fetters to Rome, before he could come to his Trial, he died in
Prison of a most filthy Disease. The Goddess, by command of the Senate, had not
only her Money restored, but double the sum.

Foreign Examples of Religion, observed or neglected.
1. As to the Fact of Pleminius, it was well punished by the Conscript Fathers.
But against the sordid Violencies of King Pyrrhus, the Goddess her self
defended her self well enough: for the Locri being compelled to give him money
out of her Treasury, while he was sailing upon the Sea laden with his impious
Prey, by force of a mighty Tempest his whole Navy was cast away upon the shore
adjoining to the said City; where the money being found entire, was restored to
the most sacred Treasury of the Goddess.

2. But the Act of Massanisa was of another nature, whose Admiral having landed
in Melita, and taken out of the Fane of Juno certain Ivory-teeth of an immense
proportion, and given them as a Present to the King; Massanisa no sooner
understood from whence they came, but he commanded them to be carried back in a
Galley with five Oars, and put in the place whence they were taken, having
caused certain Words to be carved upon them, signifying that the King had taken
them ignorantly, and willingly restored them.

3. Dionysius, born at Syracuse, used to make Jests of his Sacriledges, of
which he committed more than we have now room to recount: for having plundered
the Temple of Juno at Locri, and satling upon the Sea with a prosperous gale,
laughing to his friends, he said, What a pleasant Voyage have the Gods granted
to us Sacrilegious Robbers! Having taken also a Cloak of Massy gold from
Jupiter Olympian, which Hiero the Turant had dedicated to him out of the spoils
of the Carthaginians; and throwing over the Statue a Woollen-mantle, told his
Companions, That a Cloak of Gold was too heavy in the Summer, too cold in the
Winter; but a Woollen Cloak would serve for both Seasons. The same person
commanded the Golden beard of Esculapius to be taken from his Statue in his
Temple at Epidaurum, saying, It was not convenient for Apollo the Father to be
without a Beard, and the Son to have so large a one. He also took away the
Silver and Golden Tables out of other Temples, where finding certain
Inscriptions, after the manner of Greece, that they belonged to the good Gods,
then said he, Through their goodness we will make use of them. He also took
away the little Statues of Victory, Cups and Crowns which they held in their
hands being all of Gold, saying, He did but borrow them, not take um quite
away: saying, It was an idle thing, when we pray to the Gods for good things,
not to accept um when they hold um forth to us. Who in his own person though he
were not rewarded according to his deserts, yet in the infamy of his Son, he
suffered after death what in his lifetime he had escaped.

4. For the avoiding whereof, Tim^sitheus Prince of the Liparitans by his
wisdom provided for his own and his Countries safety: for when certain of his
Subjects, using Pyracy, had taken a Golden cup of a very great weight, and that
the people were gathered together to divide the spoil, understanding that it
was consecrated to Apollo Pythian in lieu of their Tenths by the Romans, he
took it from them, and carefully sent it to Delphos.

5. Milisian Ceres, when Miletum was taken by Alexander, and that several
Soldiers were broken into the Temple to plunder it, on a sudden deprived them
all of their sight.

6. The Persians coming to Delos with a Navy of a thousand Ships, behaved
themselves more irreligiously than rapaciously toward the Temple.

7. The Athenians banished Diagoras the Philosopher, because he adventured to
affirm that he knew not whether there were any Gods or no; or if there were
any, of what nature they were. They also condemned Socrates, because he
endeavored to introduce a new Religion. They endured Phidias when he affirmed
that it was better to make the Statue of Minerva of Marble rather than of
Ivory, by reason it was more lasting; but when he added, that it was also
cheaper, they commanded him silence.

8. Diomedon, one of the ten Captains who at Arginusa won a great Victory to
the Athenians, but to himself the reward of Condemnation; being now led to his
undeserved Execution, spoke nothing else, but only that the Vows which he had
made for the safety of the Army might be performed.

CHAP. II. Of Feigned Religion.
ROMANS.
1. Numa Pompilius. 2. P. Scip. African the greater. 3. L. Cor. Sulla. 4. Q.
Sertorius.
FORRAIGNERS.
1. Minos King of Crete. 2. Pisistratus, Athenian. 3. Lycurgus, Spartan. 4.
Zaleucus of Locri.
1. NVma Pompilius, that he might oblige his people to the observance of Holy
things, feigned to have familiarity by night with the Goddess Egeria; and that
by her direction only, the worship of the Gods which he proposed was
instituted.

2. Scipio, surnamed the African, never went about any private or public
business, till he had been for some while in the Fane of Jupiter Capitoline;
and was therefore thought to have been begot by Jove.

3. Lucius Sulla, when he resolved to give Battle, embracing a little Image of
Apollo, which was taken out of the Temple of Delphos, in the sight of all his
Soldiers, desired the Deity to bring to pass what he had promised.

4. Q. Sertorius had a tame white Heart, which he taught ^o follow him over all
the cragged Mountains of Lusitania* by which he feigned himself instructed what
to do* or what not.

FOREIGN.
1. Minos ^ing of Crete was wont to retire himself every ninth year into a deep
and antiently-consecrated Den; and there staying some time, brought forth new
Laws, which he there feigned were delivered to him by Jupiter.

2. Pisistratus, to recover the Tyranny of Athens, which he had lost, made as
if Minerva her self had led him into the Castle; deceiving the Athenians by
showing an unknown woman who was called Phya, in the habit of Minerva.

3. Lycurgus persuaded the people that the Laws which he composed for the grave
City of Lacedaemon, were made by the counsel of Apollo.

4. Zaleucus, in the name of Minerva, was accounted the wisest man among the
Locrians.

CHAP. III. of Foreign Religion rejected.
1. By the Roman people. 2. P. Cornelius the Praetor. 3. Lucius Emilius Paulus.
THe new Custom which was introduced among the Feasts of Bacchus, when it grew
to Mad^^^^^ was quite taken away. Lutatius, who finished (...) Punick War, was
forbid by the Senate to go (...) to consult Fortune; judging it meet that (...)
^^^^^s of the Commonwealth should be gover^^^ (...) their own national Omens,
and not those of (...) Countries.

(...) Cornelius Hispallus, a foreign Praetor, in the (...) at Popillius Laenas
and M. Calpurnius were (...), by Edict commanded the Caldeans to depart (...)
Italy, who by their trivial tricks, and false interpretations of the Stars,
cast a gainful Mist before their eyes.

3. The same person banished those who with a counterfeit worship of Jupiter
Sabazius sought to corrupt the Roman Customs.

Lucius Emilius Paulus the Consul, when the Senate had decreed that the Temples
of Isis and Serapis should be destroyed, and that none of the Workmen durst lay
hands upon the Work, laying his Consular habit aside, and taking a Hatchet, was
the first that broke open the Gates.

CHAP. IV. Of Luckie Signs.
Which the ROMANS took.
1. Atius Navus the Augur. 2. T. Gracchus, Son of Titus Tribune. 3. P. Claudius
Pulcher, and L. Jun. Pullus. Consul. 4. Lucius Metellus High Priest. 5. M.
Tullius Cicero. 6. M. Junius Brutus Proconsul.
FOREIGN.
1. Alexander the Great. 2. King Dejotarus.
1. LVcius Tarquinius the King having a mind to add other Troops of Horse to
the Troops which Romulus had fortunately enrolled, being oppoed by the Augur,
in a great fury asked him, If that which he thought of might be done? Who
answering, That it might, the King commanded him to ^^eave a Whet-stone with a
Rator; which was no sooner brought, but Atius by an incredible act, made the
King admire the Effect of his Profession.

2. Titus Gracchus designing Tumult and Sedition, sought for Lucky Signs at
home; which fell out very sad, and contrary to his Expectation: for as he was
going out of doors, he stumbled in such sort, that he broke one of his Toes.
Then three Crows cawing on the wrong side, let fall a piece of a Tile just
before him: But he contemning all these Signs, and being expelled the Capitol
by Scipio Nasica the High. priest, was knocked on the head with a piece of
Chair of State.

3. P. Claudius, in the first Punick War, being ready to join Battle, yet being
willing to know the Signs after the old Custom, when he that kept the Birds
told him that the Chickens would not come out of the Penns, commanded them to
be cast into the Sea, saying, If they will not eat, let um drink; together with
Junius his Colleague, lost the Roman Navy for neglecting the Lucky Signs: Of
which two, one fell by the Sentence of the People, the other prevented the
ignominy of Condemnation by killing himself.

4. Metellus the High Priest traveling for Tusculanum, two Crows flew directly
toward his face, as if they went to stop his journey, yet hardly prevailed with
him to return. The next night the Temple of Vesta was burnt, and Metellus saved
the Palladium out of the fire.

5. M Cicero had his death foretold by an unlucky Sign: for being at the
Village of Cajeta, a Crow struck off the Gnomon of a Sun-dial before his face,
and by and by flying toward him, held him by the hem of his Garment, till his
Servants came and told him that certain Soldiers were come to kill him.

6. M. Brutus having rallied the remains of his Army against Caesar and
Antonius, two Eagles flew, one from one Camp, and the other from the other, and
encountering one another, the Eagle which came out of Brutus Camp being worsted,
fled.

FOREIGN.
1. Alexander being about to build a City in Egypt, Diocrates the Architect for
want of Chalk laid out the streets with Meal: By and by a vast number of Birds
from the next Lake, devoured the Meal; of which the Egyptian Priests made this
Interpretation, That that City should in time afford great store of Provision
to Strangers.

2. King Dejotarus, who was very prosperous in his Actions, was preserved by
the sight of an Eagle: for seeing the place whence she came out, he would by no
means go in there; and the house fell the next night equal with the ground.

CHAP. V. Of Omens.
Which the ROMANS took.
1. The Fathers Conscript. 2. M. Furius Camillus Dictator. 3. L. Aemilius
Paulus Consul. 4. Caecilia Metelli. 5. C. Marius in Exile. 6. Cn. Pompeius
Pro-Consul. 7. M. Brutus Pro-Consul. 8. C. Cassius Pro-Consul. 9. Q. Petillius
Consul.
FOREIGN.
1. The Prienians. 2. Apolloniates.
THe observation of Omens is founded upon a certain touch of Religion, as
depending not upon any fortuitous Chance, but upon Divine Providence.

1. Whereby it came to pass, that when the City was destroyed by the Gauls, and
the Senate was consulting whether they should remove to Veii, or rebuild their
own Walls, some Cohorts returning from Garrison, a Centurion crying out in the
place for public Assemblies to his Eagle-bearer, Fir your Ensign, we'll stay
here in good time: the Senate hearing his voice, took it for a good Omen, and
left off their design of going for Veii. In how few words was the Domicil of
the future Empire of the World designed? The Gods disdaining that the Roman
Name sprung from happy Omens, should change its Seat, or that the glory of
Victory it self should lie buried in the Ruins of a City already near decayed.

2. The Author of this most famous Work, Camillus, while he was praying, that
if the happiness of the people of Rome seemed to any of the Gods to be too
great, that they would satisfy their Envy by any mischief done to himself, at
the end of his Prayer suddenly stumbling sell down; which Omen is thought to
have related to the Condemnation which he afterward underwent. But deservedly
did Victory and the Prayers of this great man strive together for praise: nor
was the strife of his Virtue less, that he increased the Good fortune of his
Country, wishing all its evil fortune might fall upon his own head.

3. How memorable was that which befell L. Paulus the Consul! who being by lot
designed to make War with Perseus King of Macedon, in his return to his house
met his youngest Daughter at the door, and observing her to look something sad,
kissed her, and demanded the cause of her discontent; who answered, That Persa
was dead: that was the name of a little Dog which she highly esteemed, which
di'd a little before. Paulus laid hold of the Omen, and upon a fortuitous
saying, built the hopes of his future Triumphs.

4. But Cecilia the Wise of Metellus, when her Sisters Daughter required after
the ancient custom those Nuptial-Rites due to a Virgin of ripe years, gave
occasion to the Omen her self: for the Virgin having stain in a certain Chapel
for that purpose, and hearing no body speak to her mind, wearied with long
standing, she desired of her Aunt to let her have some place to fit down; to
whom her Aunt replied, I freely give thee my Seat: Which saying proceeding out
of Kindness, proved ominous in the Event, for not long after Cecilia dying,
Metellus married the Virgin of whom we speak.

5. The observation of Omens was certainly the preservation of Caius Marius, at
what time he was adjudged an Enemy by the Senate, lying at the house of one
Fannia at Minturnae for his security: For he observed an Ass-colt when he gave
him Meat, that neglecting that, he ran still to the water. At which sight
thinking that what was now offered by the Providence of the Gods, was to be
followed, being himselt otherwise very skilful in Religious Interpretations, he
desired of the Multitude that came to his aid, that he might be conducted to
the Sea: and so getting aboard a little Ship, he sailed into Africa, and so
avoided the Victorious Arms of Sylla.

6. Pompey the Great at the Battle of Pharsalia being overthrown by Caesar, and
seeking to save himself by flight, directed his Course to the Island of Cyprus,
to gather more Forces there; and approaching the City of Paphos, and viewing a
stately Edifice, he asked the Pilot the name of it; who answering, That it was
called Kings Evil, presently lost all that little hope which he had remaining:
nor could he dissemble it; turning his head another way, and weeping, betrayed
the grief which he conceived from so dire an Omen.

7. To M. Brutus an Event befitting the Murder which he had committed, was
designed him by an Omen: For after that wicked deed, as he was celebrating his
Brith-day, and studying for some convenient Greek Verse, by accident he pitched
upon one in Hom.

Me cruel Fate and Son of fair Latona slew.

Which God being by Caesar and Antonius given for the Sign, seemed as it were
to be the occasion of his overthrow.

8. With such a strange Ejaculation, the Fortune of Cassius amazed his ears,
who when the Rhodians begged of him that they might not be deprived of all the
Images of the Gods, made answer, That he had left the Sun: for having lost the
Field in Macedon, he was not only forced to leave the Effigies of the Sun,
which he had granted them as suppliants, but also the Sun it self.

9. Worthy of remark is that Omen under which Petillius fell in the Ligurian
War: for being to assail a Mountain that was called Letho, he boasted in his
Exhortation to his Soldiers, saying, This day I will take Lethum or Hell: And
fighting inconsiderately, confirmed by his death the truth of his fortuitous
Speech.

FOREIGN.
1. To our own, we may add two Foreign Examples of the same nature. The
Samians when the Prienenses sent to them for aid against the Carians, instead
of Ships and Men, puffed with Arrogance, sent them a little Skiff; which the
Samians interpreting as an Aid sent from Heaven, willingly received, and by a
true Prediction of the Fates, found her to be the Captain of the Victory.

2. Nor did the Apolloniates repent; for being pressed by the Illyrian War, and
craving aid of the Epidamnians, they answered, That they would lend the River
Aeas, running by the Walls, to their assistance. They replied, We accept your
Gift: and so gave the River the first place in the Army, as to their Captain.
After which having unexpectedly vanquished their Enemies, attributing the
success to the accepting the Omen, thenceforward they sacrificed to Aeas as a
God, and made him their Captain in all their Battles.

CHAP. VI. Of Prodigies.
Which fell out among The ROMANS.
1. To Servius Tullius. 2. Lucius Marcius Centurion. 3. People of Rome and
Veientines. 4. L. Sulla Pro-Consul. 5. The people of Rome at diverse times. 6.
C. Flaminius Consul. 7. C. Hostilius Mancinus. 8. T. Gracchus Pro-Consul. 9. M.
Claudius Marcellus Consul. 10. Cn. Octavius. 11. M. Licinius Crassus,
Pro-Consul. 12. Cn. Pompey the Great. 13. Julius Caesar Dictator.
FOREIGN.
1. Xerxes King of Persia. 2. Midas King of Phrygia, an Infant. 3. Plato the
Philosopher, an Infant.
OF Prodigies also, whether prosperous or unluckly, it is no way from our
purpose to discourse.

1. While Servius Tullius was an Infant and asleep, his Attendants beheld a
flame upon his head; which Prodigy Tanaquil the Wise of Tarquinius Priscus
admiring, she brought up Servius, who was the Son of a Servant, instead of her
own Son, and advanced him to the Throne.

2. Equal happiness in Event did that flame promise which blazed upon the head
of Lucius Marcius, Captain of the two Armies, which the deaths of P. and Cn.
Scipio's had much weakened in Spain, while he was speaking to his Soldiers: for
upon the sight of that, the Soldiers before fearful, now encouraged to recover
their wonted Fortitude, with the slaughter of 38000 men, and a great number of
Prisoners, they took two Camps of the Carthaginians crammed with spoil.

3. Also when after a long and sharp War the Veii could not be taken, though
besieged within their own Walls, and that the delay was no less terrible to the
besiegers than the besieged, the Gods themselves opened the way to an
unexpected Victory: for on a sudden the Lake Albanus, neither augmented by any
showers, nor assisted by the inundation of any other Stream, rose far above its
usual hight. To know the reason whereof, Messengers were sent to the Oracle at
Delphos, who brought for answer, That they should let the waters that over
swelled the Lake into the Fields: For so the Veii would come into the power of
the Romans. Which before the Messengers could bring back, a Southsayer of the
Veii, taken by one of our Soldiers and brought into the Camp, had also
declared; so that the Senate double admonished, both obeyed the Gods, and got
possession of the City.

4. Nor was this which follows an Omen of bad success: Lucius Sulla Pro-Consul
in the Confederate War, while he was sacrificing before the Pretorium in the
Country of Nolas, on a sudden beheld a Snake glide from the lower part of the
Altar; at the sight whereof, by the advice of Posthumus the Southsayer, he led
forth his Army, and got the strong Camp of the Samnites: which Victory was the
first foundation and step to his future greatness.

5. Chiefly to be admired are those Prodigies which happened in our City, P.
Voluminous and Ser. Sulpitius being Consule. An Ox his Lowing being changed into
Humane Speech, exercised the minds of all people with the strangeness of the
Accident. Little pieces of Flesh also fell like showers of Rain from the Sky,
of which a great part was d^voured by the Birds; the r^st lay many days upon
the ground, neither offensive to the smell, nor irksome to the sight.

At the beginning of another Tumult, Monster^ of the same nature were to be
seen. A Child of half a year old in the Cow-market, proclaimed a Triumph.
Another Child was born with an Elephants head.

In Picenum it rained Stones. In Gaul a Woolf came and took a Sword out of the
Sentinels Scabbard. Bloody Ears of Corn dropped among the Sheaves, as men were
reaping near Antium. The Waters of Cerite were mixed with Blood. And before the
second Punick. War, an Ox was heard to speak, Look to thy self. O Rome.

6. Cains Flaminius being inauspiciously made Conf^l, when he was preparing to
fight with Hannibal at the Lake of Thrasymene, commanded the Ensigns to be
taken up, when immediately his Horse stumbling, he was thrown to the ground and
pitched upon his head: and nothing regarding this Prodigy, when the
Ensigne-bearers told him they could not stir the En^^^nes, threatened to punish
um if they did not dig um (...) But of this rashness of his, would only he
^^^elf, and not whole people of Rome had felt (...) ^^^leful success: for in
that Battle 15000 Romans (...) slain, 6000 taken, and 20000 put to flight. The
(...) ^^^ss body of the Consul, Hannibal sought for, to have buried it, who had
done what in him lay to bury the Roman Empire.

7. The headlong obstinacy of Caius Flaminius, C. Hostilius Mancinus followed
with a vain obstinacy, to whom these Prodigies happened as he was going Consul
for Spain. Being resolved to sacrifice at Lavinium, the Pullets being let out
of the Bin, flew to the neighboring Wood, and though sought for with all
diligence imaginable, could never be found: And when he was about to go abroad
in the Port of Hercules, whither he went afoot, he heard a strange Voice,
crying, Stay, Mancinus: With which affrighted, and in his return putting into
Genoa, and there going aboard a little Boat, a Snake of a prodigious bigness
appeared, and suddenly vanished out of sight. Which three Prodigies he equalled
with the number of Calamities which befell him; an unfortunate Battle, a
shameful Truce, and a most dismal Surrender.

8. The sad Event of Gracchus, a most dangerous Citizen, who being an
inconsiderate person, and being forewarned, would take no advice or counsel,
makes his rashness less to be wondered at: For when being Pro-Consul, he was
sacrificing among the Lucans, two Snakes on a sudden creeping out of some
hidden place, having eaten the Liver of the Beast which he had sacrificed,
retired to their lurking holes. And whereas by reason of this accident the
Sacrifice was renewed, the same Prodigy happened again. The third Sacrifice
being slain, and the Entrails more diligently looked to, neither could the
Serpents be driven away when they came, nor be hindered in their flight; which
though as the Southsayers affirmed, it signified that the General was to be
careful of his own safety, yet was not Gracchus so careful, but that by the
treachery of Flavius, at whose house he lay, he was drawn to a place where Mago
hid himself with an armed power, who slew him naked and without defense.

The misfortune of the Consuls, equal Error, and an end not differing from
that of Titus Gracchus, draws me to the memory of Marcellus. He inflamed with
the glory of having taken Syracuse, and first of any driven Hannibal from the
Walls of Nola, having resolved either to overthrow the Carthaginians, or at
least to drive um out of Italy; and to that end purposing with a most solemn
Sacrifice to inquire into the will and pleasure of the Gods; The first Beast
that was slain before the fire, the Liver was found without a head; the next
had a Liver with a double head: which being viewed, the Southsayer with a sad
countenance said, That the Entrails did not please him: the first were
altogether bad, the second were not so good. Thus Marcellus being admonished
not to do any thing rashly, the next night adventuring to go out with a few men
to view the Enemies Camp, environed by a multitude of his Enemies in the
Country of the Brutii, by his death occasioned much sorrow and detriment to his
Country.

10. As for Octavius the Consul, as he feared a most direful Omen, so he could
not avoid it; for finding the head of the Image of Apollo broken, and so
pitched in the ground that it could not be pulled up, being at that time in
Arms against his Colleague Cinna, he from thence prognosticated his own ruin;
in the midst of which fear he came to a sad end, and then the fixed head of the
Image was easily set in its place.

11. Nor must we pass over in silence Marcus Crassus, who is to be reckoned one
of the greatest losses of our Empire, who was warned by many and most
remarkable blows of Fate, before so great a ruin.

As he was drawing his Army out of Carrae against the Parthians, he had a
mourning Garment brought him; whereas they should have brought him either a
white or a purple Robe, when he was going to battle. The Soldiers marched sad
and silent to their places, whereas they were wont to run with loud
acclamations: One of the Eagles could scarcely be pulled up out of the ground;
the other being pulled up, turned it self the quite contrary way to which it
ought to have been carried. These Prodigies were very great, but the Calamities
of the overthrow were far greater; the slaughter of so many fair Legions, so
many Ensigns, so much of the glory and beauty of the Roman Militia trodden to
the ground by the Horsemen of the Barbarians, hopeful Young men besprinkled
with the blood of their Parents, and the body of their Commander among the
promiscuous heaps of the Slain, thrown a common Prey to the Fowls of the air. I
wish I could speak what were more delightful; I relate the truth. Thus the Gods
contemned, become furious in their Anger; thus the Counsels of men are
chastized, when they think to outbrave Celestial Admonishments.

12. For the mighty Jove had abundantly warned Cn. Pompey, that he should not
try the utmost hazard of War with Caesar, casting his Lightning full in the
faces of his Battalions marching from Dyrrachium, covering his Ensigns with
swarms of Bees, affrighting his whole Army with Nocturnal Terrors, and the
flight of the Sacrifices from the Altars: But the Laws of invincible necessity
would not suffer a mind, otherwise remote enough from folly, to weigh those
Prodigies with a due consideration. And therefore while he extols his large
Power, his Wealth above private use, and all those Ornaments which from his
Youth he had contracted even to Envy, in the space of one day he lost um all.
In the Temples of the Gods, the Statues turned of themselves. Such a noise of
men shouting, such clattering of Arms, was heard at Antiochia and Ptolemais,
that the Soldiers ran to the Walls: Such a noise of Drums in the most secret
places of Pergamus: in the Temple of Victory a Palm suddenly sprang up under
the Statue of Caesar, in the Pavement between the Stones. Whereby it is plain
that the Gods did favor Caesar, and fain would have recovered Pompey o^t of
his Error.

13. To thy Altars and most Holy Temples I address my self, most Divine Julius,
that thou would'sr savourably suffer the falls of so many great men to lie hid
under the defense and tuition of thy Example: for we read that thou, the same
day thou sa^'st in the Golden Seat clothed with Purple, that thou might not
seem to have despised the honors which the Senate had with so much diligence
designed, and with so much duty offered, before thou would publicly show
thy wished for presence to the people, did spend some time in that religious
worship which was shortly to be given to thee; and offering a far Ox which
wanted a heart, the Southsayer told thee, the Omen concerned thy life, and care
of thy own preservation: Then was that M^rther committed by those persons, who
while they sought to ravish thee from the number of Men, translated thee to the
number of the Gods.

FOREIGN.
Let us conclude the Domestic Relation of such Prodigies with this Example,
left by dilating farther upon those of the Romans, I should seem to transfer
disagreeing Customs from the Temples of the Gods to private Habitations: I
shall therefore touch upon Foreign Presidents, which being related in Latin,
as they are of less authority, yet they bring with them something of a grateful
variety.

1. In the Army of Xerxes which he had amassed up against Greece, a Mare is
said to have brought forth a Hare, before the Army had yet passed the Mountain
Athos: by which kind of monstrous birth, the event of such vast preparations
was plainly showed: For he that had covered the Sea with his Fleets, the Land
with his Armies, was forced, like the most timorous Animal, with shameful
flight to recover his own Kingdom.

Before he had ruined Athens, while he was advising how to invade Lacedaemon, a
most wonderful Prodigy happened while he was at supper: For the Wine being poured
forth into the Cup, more than once, twice, or thrice, nay a sourth time, was
changed into Blood. Whereupon the Magi being consulted, advised him to desist
from his purpose. And had he had the least foo^^^p of Reason in his vain
breast, he might have prevented his ruin, being so often warned to take heed
of Leenidas and the Spartans.

2. While Midas, to whose Scepter all Phrygia once was subject, was a child, a
company of Ants laid a heap of Wheat in his mouth as he lay asleep. His Parents
desiring to know what the meaning of the Prodigy should be, the Augurs
answered, That he should be the richest of all men: Nor was the Prediction
vain; for Midas exceeded all the Princes of his time, in plenty of Gold and
Silver.

3. I should have by right and deservedly preferred Plato's Bees before Midas's
Emmets; for they were only Prognostications of frail and fading, these of
solid and eternal Felicity; while they brought Honey and laid it upon the lips
of the little Infant, sleeping in his Cradle. Which thing being reported, the
Interpreters of Prodigies declared, That a most singular grace of Utterance
should hereafter drop from his mouth. But to me those Bees, not bred upon
Hymettus covered with fragrant flowers of Thyme, but on the verdant Heliconian
Hills of the Muses, flourishing with all sorts of learning, seemed to distill
into his mouth the sweetest nourishment of Eloquence.

CHAP. VII. Of Dreams.
Of the ROMANS.
1. Artorius Physician to Augustus. 2. Calpurnia. 3. P. Decii, T. Manlii
Consul. 4. Of T. Atinius. 5. Cicero in Exile. 6. C. Sempronius Gracchus. 7.
Cassius Parmensis. 8. Arterius Rufus a Roman Knight.
FOREIGN.
1. Annibal. 2. Alexander. 3. Simonides. 4. Croesus. 5. Cyrus. 6. Himera. 7.
The Mother of Dion. Tyrant. 8. Amilcar. 9. Alcibiades. 10. An Arcadian.
NOw because I have touched upon the Riches of Midas, and the Eloquence of
Plato, I will show you how the quiet and safety of many men has been shadowed
out under several representations.

1. And where shall I sooner begin, than from the most sacred memory of Divine
Augustus? His Physician Artorius being asleep, the night before the day wherein
the Romans fought one against the other in the fields of Philippi, the
appearance of Minerva admonished him to warn Augustus, then lying very ill,
that not withstanding his sickness he should not abstain from the Battle: Which
Caesar hearing, caused himself to be carried in a Litter into the Field, where,
while be labored above his strength for the Victory, his Camp was taken by
Brutus. What other can we think then, but the Divine Benevolence so ordained
it, that a personage destined to immortality, should not be subject to a Fate
unworthy his Divinity?

2. Nor was it only the Dream of Artorius that gave warning to Augustus, who
had a natural perspicacity and vigor to judge of every thing, as a fresh and
domestic President: For he had heard that Calpurnia the Wise of his Parent
Julius, the last night that he lived upon earth, dreamed that she saw her
Husband lie stabbed and bleeding in her bosom; and being affrighted with the
strangeness of the Dream, was an earnest suitor to him to abstain from going to
the Senate the next day: but he, lest he should have been thought to have been
moved with a woman's dream, went the rather to the Senate House, where the
Murderers quickly laid violent hands upon him. It is not needful to make any
comparison between the Father and the Son, both equal in their Divinity: for
the one had made way for himself to Heaven by his own works, the other was to
let the world enjoy his Virtues a long time. Therefore the Gods were only
willing that the first should know the approaching change, which the other was
to defer; it being enough that one Honor should be given to Heaven, and
another promised.

3. Admirable also was that Dream, and famous in the Event, which the two
Consuls Decius Mus, and Manlius Torquatus dreamed, when they lay encamped not
far from the foot of the Mountain Vesuvius, at the time of the Latin War, which
was very sharp and dangerous: For a certain person foretold to both of them,
that the Manes and Terra Matter claimed as their due the General of one side,
and the whole Army on the other: But that which Captain soever should assail
the forces of the Enemy, and devote himself a Victim for the good of his Army,
should obtain the Victory. This the Entrails of the Sacrifices confirmed the
next morning to both Consuls, who endeavored either to expiate the misfortune,
if it might be averted, or else resolved to undergo the determination of the
Gods. Therefore they agreed, that which Wing should begin to faint, the other
should with his own life appease the Fates, which while both undauntedly
ventured to perform, Decius happened to be the person whom the Gods required.

4. The Dream which follows, seems to concern public Religion. A certain
Master o^ a Family having caused his Servant to be whipped, and brought him to
the punishment of the Fork in the Flaminian Circus, at the time of the Plebe^an
Plays, a little before the Show was about to begin, Jupiter, in a Dream,
commanded Titus Atinius, one of the Vulgar, to tell the Consuls, That he that
bad danced before the last Circensian Games, did no way please him; and that
unless the fault were expiated by an exact restoration of the Plays, there
would ensue not a little vexation and trouble to the City. He fearing to
involve the Commonwealth by Religion to his own disadvantage, held his peace.
Immediately his Son, taken with a sudden fit of sickness, died. Afterward
being ask^d by the same God in his sleep, Whether he thought himself punished
enough for the neglect of hit Command? yet remaining obstinate, was stricken
with a general weakness of body: At length, by the advice of his friends, being
carried in a Horse-litter to the Consuls Tribunal, having fully declared the
cause of his misfortunes, to the admiration of all men recovering his former
strength, he walked afoot to his house.

5. Nor must we pass over in silence, that when M. Cicero was banished the
City, by the Conspiracy of his Enemies, He diverting himself in a certain
Village in the Country of Atinate, and falling asleep in the field, as he
thought himself wandering through strange places and uncouth Regions, he thought
he met C. Marius in his Consuls Robes, who asked him, What he made there
wandering with so sad a Countenance? Whereupon Cicero making his condition known
to him, the Consul took him by the right hand and delivered him to the next
Lictor, to conduct him to his own Monument, telling him, That there there was a
more joyful hope of his better condition laid up for him. Nor did i^ otherwise
fall out; for the Senate made a Decree for his return in the Temple of Jupiter
built by Marius.

6. But C. Gracchus was most openly and apparently foretold, in a Dream, the
mischief of an approaching mischance: for being asleep, he saw the shape of his
Brother Titus, who told him, There was no way for him to avoid the same Fate
which he had undergone, when he was driven out of the Capitol. This many
related from the mouth of Gracchus himself, before he had undertak^n the
Tribuneship, wherein he perished. And one Caelius a Roman Historian, said, He
had heard much talk thereof while Gracchus was living.

7. But that which follows, far exceeds the dire Aspect of the foregoing
Narration. Antonius having lost the Battle of Actium, Cassius Parmensis, who
had taken his part, fled to Athens; where he fell asleep in the night, being
tired with care and trouble: He thought there came to him a person of a very
great stature, black Complexion, his Beard deformed, and long hanging Hair, who
being asked what he was, answered, Cacodaemon. Being affrighted with so horrid
a sight, and terrible a name, he called up his Servants, and demanded of them
if they saw any one in such a habit, either come in or go out of the Chamber:
Who affirming that no such had come there, he again betook himself to his r^st;
when immediately the same shape appeared to him again; where awaking
altogether, he called for a light, commanding the Servants to depart. But
between this night and the loss of his head, which Caesar took from him, there
followed a very short space of time.

8. But the Dream of Aterius Rusus, a Roman Knight, was more plainly hinted to
him: for he dreamed one night, at a time when th^re was a great F^ncing-prize
at Syracuse that he saw himself slain* which he told the next day to those that
sat by him in the Playhouse. It happened afterward, that n^er to the Knights
place, the Net-player was introduced with the Challenger, whose face when he
saw, he said, that he was to be slain by the Net-player; and immediately would
have departed. They endeavoring by discourse to put away his fear, were the
cause of the destruction of this miserable man. For the Net-player being driven
thither by his Antagonist, and cast upon the ground, as he lay along
endeavoring to defend himself, he ran Aterius thorough the body with his Sword.

FOREIGN EXAMPLES.
1. The Dream also of Annibal, as it was detestable to the Roman blood, so the
prediction thereof was certain, whose waking not only, but his sleeping was
fatal to our Empire. He had a Dream apposite to his purpose, and fitted to his
wishes: for he fancied a young man of humane shape, taller than ordinary, was
sent to him by Jupiter, to be his Guide and Conductor in his Invasion of Italy;
by whose command at first he followed his Footsteps, without casting his eyes
either one way or another: afterward, our of the eager desire in mortals to do
what is forbidden, looking behind him, he saw a Serpent of an immense magnitude
destroying all before it: After that he beheld prodigious showers of Hail, with
Thunder and dark Clouds. Being astonished, he asked, What that Monster meant?
to which his Conductor, Behold, said he, the waste and devastation of Italy;
therefore be silent, and commit the rest to Fate.

2. How gently was Alexander King of Macedon warned to take more care of his
life, had Fortune advised him so well to avoid the danger! for he knew that the
right hand of Cassander would be mortal to him, long before he felt it by the
event: for he believed he should be slain by him, although he had never seen
him. After some time, upon sight of him, beholding the resemblance of his
nocturnal fear, so soon as he sound him to be the Son of Antipater, repeating
the Greek Verse so much in favor of the credit of dreams, he banished from his
thoughts all suspicion of the Poison prepared for him as was publicly believed
by Cassander.

3. More indulgent were the Gods to the Poet Simonides, confirming their
admonition by the strength of repeated advice: For he coming ashore and finding
a dead body of a man, buried it; whereupon he was by the same body admonished,
that he should not set sail the next day: which he believing, staid ashore; but
those that went to Sea were all cast away. He was not a little glad that he had
trusted his life to the security of a Dream, rather than to the mercy of the
Sea: And being mindful of the benefit received, eternized the memory of the
person in a living Poem, raising him up a better Sepulcher in the memories of
men, than that which he had bestowed upon him on the shore.

4. Of great Efficacy also was that apparition to Croesus in his sleep, which
first occasioned in him great fear, afterward greater grief: For it seemed to
him that Atys, one of his Sons, the most excellent for strength of Body, and
endowments of Mind, and his designed Successor, was violently murdered.
Thereupon the Young Man, though he were usually sent to the Wars, was kept at
home. He had also an Armory stored with all sorts of Weapons, and that was
removed from him. He had Companions that used to go armed: They were also
forbid to come near him. Yet Necessity gave access to gri^f. For there being a
Wild-Boar, of an incredible bigness, that wasted the tilled fields of Mount
Olympus, and killed several of the Countrey-people, and the Royal aid being
implored, the Son extorted from his Father leave that he might be sent to
deliver the people from their Calamity: which he the more readily granted,
because the mischief was not threatened from Teeth, ^ut from Iron. But while
every one was intent and eag^r in killing the wild beast, obstinate Destiny
p^rsisting in her intended violence, directed a Spear into his Body, which was
intended against the Boar, and chose particularly that the right hand of him
should be only guilty of the Murder, to whose charge and tuition the Father had
chiefly committed his Son: which being contaminated with the blood of
Chance-medley, fearing his Country-god, at the prayer of the person, was
repurify'd by Sacrifice.

5. Neither was Cyrus a small argument of the inevitable necessity of Fate;
whose Birth, to which the Empire of all Asia was promised, Astyages his
Grandfather by the Mothers side sought in vain to hinder, by the predictions of
a Dream. He married his Daughter Mandane, for that he had dreamt that she had
overwhelmed all the Nations of Asia with her Urine, not to one of the Nobles,
lest the Right of Dominion might fall to his family, but to one of a small
fortune among the Persians. When Cyrus was born he caused him to be exposed,
having dreamt that a Vine growing out of the Secret Parts of Mandane, should
cover all his Dominions. But he was frustrated in all his endeavors and humane
Counsels, not being able to hinder the felicity of his Nephew, which the Gods
had so fully determined.

6. While Dionysius of Syracuse lived a private life, Himera, a woman of no
mean p^rentage, fancied in her Sleep that she ascended into Heaven, and having
there viewed the Seats of all the Gods, that she saw a strong man
yellow-hair'd, scurfie countenanced, bound in Iron Chains to the Throne of
Jove, and ^ying at his feet: and asking a young man who was her guide the
meaning th^reof, she was told that he was the ill fate of Sicily and Italy; and
when his chains should be taken off, many Towns would be ruined: which Dream
she declared the next day. Afterward seeing Dionysius, by the help of Fortune,
an enemy to the Liberty of Syracuse and the lives of the Innocent, freed from
his Cel^stial Chains, entering the Walls of the Himeraei, she cried out, This
was he that she had seen in her Dream. Which being related to Dionysius, he
caused her to be put to Death.

7. Safer was the Dream of the Mother of the same Dionysius; who, when she had
conceived him, fancied that she was brought to bed of a great Satyr: and
consulting the Interpreter of Prodigies, she understood that he should be the
greatest and most powerful of all the Greeks of his time.

8. But Amilcar General of the Carthaginians, while he was besieging Syracuse,
thought that he heard a voice proclaiming to him, that he should Sup the next
day in that City. With great joy, as if victory were promised him from Heaven,
he prepared his Army for the Assault; at which time dissension arising between
the Carthaginians and Sicilians, the Syracusans sallied out, took his Camp, and
brought him bound into the City. Thus deluded by his Hope, not his Dream, he
supped a Captive in Syracuse, not, as he had conceived, a Victor.

9. Alcibiades also beheld his lamentable end in a Dream, no way fallacious.
For being slain and unburied, he was covered with the same Apparel of his
Concubines, which he had seen himself clothed in, in his Sleep.

10. The following Dream, for its manifelf certainty, though somewhat longer,
craves not to be omitted. Two familiar Arcadians travailing together came to
Megara; one of which went to lie at his Friends house, the other at a common
Inn. He that lay at his Friends house dreamt, that he heard his companion
entreating his help, for that he was abused by the Innkeeper, which he might
prevent by his speedy presence. Leaping out of his Bed, he endeavored to find
the Inn where his friend lay. But Fate condemning his humane purpose as
needless, and believing what he had heard to be but a Dream, he went to Bed
again and to sleep. Then the same person came wounded and beseech'd, that since
he had neglected to assist him in his lifetime, he would not delay to revenge
his Death; for that his body slain by the Innekeeper, was carrying out at the
Gate in a Cart, covered with Dung. His friend, moved by his Prayers, made haste
to the Gate, and stopped the Cart which was described to him in his sleep,
apprehended the Innekeeper, and brought him to condign punishment.

CHAP. VIII. Of Miracles.
Among the ROMANS.
1. Castor seen in the Latin and Persian Wars. 2. Esculapius appearing in the
shape of a Serpent. 3. Words spoken by Juno Moneta. 4. Words spoken by female
Fortune. 5. Words spoken by a Sylvan in the war of the Veii. 6. Mars seen in
the Lucan War. 7. Penates returning from A ba to Lavinium of their own accord.
8. Julius Caesar seen after his death. 9. The Sepulcher of Pompey miraculously
found. 10. The Death of Appius Claudius, Pro-Consul, foretold by a Miracle. 11.
The Scepter of Romulus and Statues preserved from fire. 12. Men brought to
their graves revive.
FOREIGN.
1. Erus Pamphilius reviving after ten days. 2. An Athenian deprived of his
Memory. 3. A Woman suddenly struck dumb. 4. Egles the Samian dumb suddenly,
rec^vering his Speech. 5. Gordias the Epirote born after the death of his
Mother. 6. Jason Pheraeus cured of an Impostume. 7. Simonides the Poet escaped
the fall of a house. 8. The death of Daphidas the Sophister foretold by the
Oracle. 9. The death of Philip King of Macedom foretold. 10. The death of
Alexander miraculously foretold. 11. The chance of a Rower. 12. The strange
Teeth of King Prusias his Son. 13. Drypetine daughter to Mithridates born with
a double order of Teeth. 14. The accurate Sight of Strabo Lynceus. 15. The
hairy Heart of Aristomedes the Messenian. 16. The annual Fever of Antipater the
Poet. 17. The equality of Polystratus and Hippoclides in fortune. 18. Miracles
of Nature. 19. The Serpent of Regulus.
MAny Accidents also happen to men awake, and by day, as well as those which
are involved in the clouds of darkness and dreams; which because it is hard to
understand whence they proceed, or upon what reason grounded, are deservedly
called Miracles.

1. Among the great multitude whereof, this first occurs. When Aulus Posthumous
Dictator and Manilius Octavius Captain of the Tuscans were in fight with great
forces on both sides, at the Lake Regilius, and that for some time neither
Party gave ground; Castor and Pollux taking the Romans side, overthrow the
forces of the Enemy.

Also in the Macedonian War, P. Vatinius a Magistrate of Reate returning toward
the City by Night, thought he met two beautiful Men sitting upon white Horses,
who told him, that the day before Perseus was taken by Aemilius. Which when he
related to the Senate, he was by them committed to Prison, as a contemner of
their Majesty and Power. But afterward, when they understood by the Letters
from Paulus that Perseus was taken the same day, he was not only delivered out
of custody, but honored with a gift of Land, and vacancy from bearing Office.
It was also farth^r found, that Castor and Pollux did watch over the safety of
the Commonwealth, and travailed hard for the good of the same, for that they
were s^en to wash themselves and their ho^ses in the Lake of Juturna, and their
Temple adjoining to the Fountain opened of it self, nor being unlockt by the
hand of any person.

2. But then we may relate how favorable the rest of the Gods were to our
City. For when our City was visited with a triennial Pestilence, and that
neither through divine Compassion or humane Aid any remedy could be found ^or
so long and l^sting a Calamity; the Priests looking into the Sibyls Books
observed, that ther^ was no other way to restore the City to its ^^^m^^ health,
but by ^^tching the Image of Esculapius from Epidaurus. The City therefore
sending their Ambassadors thither, hoped that by its autho^^ty, the greatest
then in the world, they might pr^vail to obtain the only remedy against their
fatal misery. Neither did her hope deceive her. For her desire was granted with
as much willingness, as it was r^quested with earnestn^ss. For immediately the
Epidaurians carrying the Ambass^dours to the Temple of Esculapius; (distant
from the City some five miles) desired t^^m to take out of it whatever they
thought convenient for the preservation of Rome; whose free benignity the god
himself imitating by his celestial obedience, approved the courtesy of
mortals. For that Snake, which but seldom or never seen but to their great
benefit, the Epidaurians worshipped equal to Esculapius, b^gan to glide with a
mild aspect and gentle motion through the chief parts of the City, and being
three days seen to the religious admiration of all men, without doubt taking in
good part the change of a more noble Seat, hasted to the Roman Galley, and
while the Martiners stood affrighted at so unusual a sight, crept aboard the
Ship, and peaceably folding its self into several rings, quietly remained in
the Cabin of Q. Ogulnius, one of the Ambassadors. The Legates having returned
due thanks, and being instructed by the skilful in the due worship of the
Serpent, like men that had obtained their hearts desire, joyfully departed, and
after a prosperous Voyage putting in at Antium, the Snake, which had remained
in the Ship, glided to the Porch of the Temple of Esculapius, adorned with
Myrtle and other Boughs, and twisted itself about a Palm Tree of a very great
height, staying for three days in the Temple of Antium; the Ambassadors with
great care setting by these things wherewith he used to be fed, for fear he
should be unwilling to return to the Ship: after which he patiently suffered
himself to be transported to our City. The Amb^ssadours landing upon the shore
of Tiber, the Snake swam to the Island where the Temple was dedicated, and by
his coming dispelled the Calamity for remedy whereof he was sought.

3. Not less voluntary was the coming of Juno to our City. The Veientes being
taken by Furius Camillus, the Soldiers by command of the General going about
to remove the Image of Juno Moneta, which was there in principal adoration,
endeavored to remove it from the place where it stood. Among the rest, one of
the Soldiers asked the Goddess in sport, whether she would go to Rome; to
which the Goddess replying she would, the jest was turned into admiration. And
now believing that they did not only carry the Image, but Juno her self, with
great joy they placed her in that part of the Aventine Mountain, where now we
see her Temple stand.

4. The Image also of the Women's Fortune, about four miles from the City upon
the Latin Road, consecrated together with her Temple, at the same time that
Coriolanus was diverted from the destruction of the City by his Mothers tears,
was heard, not once, but twice to speak these words: In due manner have you
seen me, Matrons, and in due manner dedicated me.

5. But Valerius Publicola Consul, after the expulsion of the Kings, waged War
with the Veientes and Hetrurians, while the one sought to restore Tarquinius to
his Kingdom, the other sought to retain their new-recover'd Liberty: At which
time, while the Hetrurians and Tarquinius had the upper hand in the Right Wing,
there happened such a sudden Consternation, that not only the Victors began to
fly, but also drew the Veientes, struck with the same fear, along with them. On
a sudden a loud voice was heard from the adjoining Arsian Wood, said to be
uttered from the mouth of a Sylvan: But one more of the Hetrurians shall fall:
The Roman Host shall obtain the Conquest. The truth of the Miracle appeared by
the number of the dead Bodies told.

6. What say ye to the Assistance of Mars, which facilitated the Victory of the
Romans, is it not worthy of lasting memory? When the Brutians and Lucans with
most inveterate Hatred and great Forces sought the destruction of the City of
Thurinum, C. Fabricius Luscinus Consul on the other side endeavoring with all
his might to preserve the same, and that the event of things seemed dubious,
the Forces of both sides being met in one place, and the Romans not daring to
venture battle; a young man of a comely stature began to exhort them to take
courage; and finding them not very forward, laying hold of a Ladder, he posted
through the middle of the Enemies body to the opposite Camp, and setting up his
Ladder scaled the fortification; and then crying out with a loud voice, that
there was a step to Victory raised, he drew ours to assail, the Lucans and
Brutians to defend their own Camp, where after a sharp Conflict they were
utterly overthrown. For by the impulse of his own Arms, he delivered um over to
be slain and taken by the Romans; Twenty Thousand being slain, Five Thousand
taken, togeth^r with Statius Statilius General of both People, and Twenty
Military Ensigns. The next day, when the Consul told the Soldiers that he had
reserved a Crown for him who had showed so much Courage in taking the Camp, and
no young man was to be found to claim it, it was then known and believed that
Mars had taken the Romans part. And among other demonstrations of the truth of
the thing, there was a Headpiece found with two Plum^s, which had covered his
sacred Head. Therefore by command of Fabricius there was a Supplication to Mars
proclaimed, and thanks returned to him with great joy by the Soldiers crowned
with Laurel, in testimony of the assistance which they had received from him.

7. I shall relate now what being known in that age was faithfully deliver^d to
those which succeeded: Aeneas bringing his houshold-gods with him from Troy,
placed them in Lavinium: From thence they were by his Son Ascanius removed to
Alba, which himself had built: which lest it should seem a force put upon them
by the hands of men, they resolved to testify their good Will. Wherein I am
not ignorant how opinion hesitates in the asserting the truth of the motion and
voice of the Immortal Gods. However, because we do not make a relation of
things new, but only repeat what has been d^liver'd, let the first Authors
vindicate the truth. It is our part not to refuse as vain, what the sacred
Monuments of Story have consecrated for cer^ain.

8. Having made mention of that City, from whence our own had its first
original, heavenly Julius the glorious offspring thereof com^s into our mind,
whom C. Cassius (never to be named without remembering his public Parricide)
while he was laboring courageously at the Battle of Philippe, saw above mortal
Stature, clad in a Purple Robe, and an angry Count^nance, making toward ^im
with full speed; at which sight affrighted he fled, having first heard these
words uttered, What would thou do more, if it be too little to have killed?
Did thou not murder Caesar. O Cassius? But no Deity can be prevailed against;
therefore by injuring him whose mortal body still burns, thou have deserved to
have a god so much thy enemy.

9. Lentulus passing by the shore where the Body of Pompey (...) Great,
murdered by the treachery of King Ptolemy, was then at the same time burning;
altogether ignorant of his fall, cried out to his Soldiers, How do we know but
that Pompey may be now burning in yonder flame? The Miracle was, that he should
ignorantly speak so great a truth as it were by inspiration.

10. This was only the saying of a man; but that which came from the mouth of
Apollo himself was more miraculous, a clear evidence of the Delphick Pres^ge,
which foretold the Death of Appius. He in the Civil War wherein Pompey had
separated himself from his friendship with Caesar, through advice no less
baneful to himself than disadvantageous to the Commonwealth, being willing to
know the event of so great a Commotion; by his power in command (for he was
Governor of Achaia) caused the chief President of the Delphick Oracle to
descend into the innermost part of the holy Den, whence as more certain Answers
are demanded, so the over-abundance of the divine exhalation becomes more
noxious to those that give the Answer. The Virgin therefore through the impulse
of the inspiring Spirit, with a most dreadful tone, among other obscure terms
and aenigma's, thus returned to Appius: The War concerns thee nothing, O Roman:
Thou shall have for thy lot, that part of Euboea called Coela. He believing
that Apollo had forewarned him to avoid the danger of the War, retired into
that Country which lies between Rhamnuns a noble part of the Country of
Attica, and Caristus adjoining to the Chalcidic Bay, where consumed with
sickness before the battle of Pharsalia, he possessed the place assigned for
his burial.

11. These things may also be accounted as Miracles; that when the Chapel of
the Salii was burnt, there was nothing escaped the fire but the Kings staff of
Romulus. That the Statue of Servius Tullius remained untouched, when the Temple
of Fortune was consumed by fire. That the Statue of Claudia, placed near the
entry into the Temple of the Mother of the Gods, that Temple being twice
consumed by fire, once when Nasica Scipio and L. Bestia, another time when
Servilius and Lamia were Consuls, stood firm upon its Basis and untouched.

12. The Funeral Pile of Acilius Aviola brought no small astonishment to our
City, who being taken for dead both by the Physicians and by his Friends, when
he had been laid out for some time upon the Ground, the Flame no sooner coming
near his Body, but he rose up and affirmed himself to be alive, calling for the
assistance of his Schoolmaster, who only remained with him. But being
encompassed with the flames, he could not be drawn thence.

13. Lucius Lamia also, a person of the Pretorian Order, is said to have spoken
upon his funeral Pile.

FOREIGN Examples.
1. But the fate of Erus Pamphilus has rendered the foregoing relations less
miraculous; whom Plato affirmed that after he was thought to have been slain in
Battle, and had lain in the field ten days, when he came to be taken away and
laid upon the funeral Pile, he revived, and related strange things, which he
saw while he lay dead.

2. And since we are come to Foreign Examples, there was a certain learned Man
at Athens, who having received an unlucky hurt with a Stone upon his Head,
though he retained his Memory as to all other things very perfect, yet forgot
his Learning, which he had followed all his life time. A dire and fatal Wound
in the Soul of him that was wounded, as if having of purpose sought out every
sense, it had pitched upon that particularly wherein the Patient most
delighted, burying the singular Doctrine and Learning of the person in the
perpetual grave of Envy. To whom if it were not lawful to enjoy those Studies,
it had been better that he had never obtained a taste of them, than to want the
sweetness of what he once had in possession.

3. But more lamentable is the narration of the following mischance. For the
Wise of Nausimenes an Athenian happening to take her Son and Daughter in the act
of Incest, struck with horror of so monstrous a sight, became suddenly dumb,
so that she neither could express her present Indignation, nor ever after speak
a word. They punished themselves for their own wicked act, with voluntary
Death. Thus Fortune that in a rage took from her her Speech, from them their
Lives, was therein favorable to the Mother.

4. Aegles a Samian Wrastler born mute, when he saw the Rewards of a Victory,
which he had won, taken from him, out of indignation for the injury done him,
recovered his Speech.

5. Famous also was the Birth of Gorgias an Epirote, a very strong man, who
coming forth of his Mothers Womb as she was going to be buried, with his crying
caused them that carried the Beer to stand, affording a strange Miracle to his
Country, as one that received his Birth and being from the Funeral-Pile or his
Mother. For at the same moment she in her Death yields to fate, the other is
taken into arms alive before he was born.

6. A fortunate Wound was that which a certain person gave to Phaerean Jason,
endeavoring to have slain him. For striking at him with his Sword, he brake an
Impostume in that manner, which could neither be broken nor cured by any
skilled in Physic, delivering him from an incurable Disease.

7. Equally beloved of the immortal Gods was Simonides, who being saved from
imminent danger, was also preserved from after-ruine. For while he was at
Supper with Scopas at Cranon a City of Thessaly, news was brought him that two
young men were at the door, earnestly desiring to sp^ak with him. When he came
to the gate, he found no body there. But at the same mom^nt, the Roof of the
Dining Room fell down, and killed both Scopas and all his Gu^sts. What greater
wealth, than so much f^licity, which neither the rage of the Sea or Land could
take from him?

8. I am not unwilling to add to this the Story of Daphidas, that men may
understand how profitable it is to sing the praises of the Gods, and obey the
Divine Power. He being of their profession who are called Sophists, resolving
to ask a frivolous question of the Oracle of Apollo, in derision demanded,
Whether he should find the Horse he had lost, when in truth he had none at
all. To which the Oracle answered, That he should find his Horse, but be
killed with a fall off his back. B^ing upon his return, merry and laughing at
the trick he had put upon the Oracle, he fell into the hands of Attalus the
King, whom he had often abused with his scurrilous Verses, being out of his
reach: And being by his command thrown headlong down a Rock, which was called
The Horse, he received the just reward due to one that would go about to cavil
with the gods.

9. Philip K. of Macedon being also admonisht by the same Oracle to have a care
of the violence of a Chariot, caused all the Chariots in his Kingdom to be cut
to pieces, and always carefully shunned that place in Boeotia which is called
The Chariot; and yet he could not avoid that kind of death which was foretold
him: for Pansanias that slew him, had a Chariot engraven in the Hilt of his
Sword.

10. And this fatal Necessity which the Father could not avoid, was as severe
to his Son Alexander. For Calanus the Indian b^ing about to throw himself, of
his own accord, upon his Funeral-Pile, being asked by him whether he had any
thing to command or tell him made no other reply, but I shall shortly see thee.
Nor was his answer in vain, for the violent Death of Alexander speedily
followed his violent decease.

11. These Royal Funerals are equaled in Miracle by the fortune of a Rower in a
Galley, who standing at the Pump in a small Tyrian Vessel, and by the violence
of a Wave thrown out of the same, the force of a contrary Wave washed him into
the Vessel again: congratulating and bewailing, at one time, his miserable and
happy condition.

12. What more? Are we not to believe that there are certain Mockeries of
Nature in the Bodies of Men? tolerable indeed, because not horrid; yet no less
miraculous, because unusual. The Son of Prusias King of Bithynia, bearing the
same name with his Father, instead of an upper row of Teeth, had one continued
Bone, though neither deformed nor unfit for use.

13. Dripetine also the Daughter of Mithridates, born of La^dice the Queen,
having her mouth deformed with a double row of Teeth above and b^low, was her
Fathers Companion when he fled from Pompey.

14. No less admirable were the Eyes of that person, who is reported to have
had so sharp a sight, that he was able to discover the Ships going out of the
Port of Carthage, from the Promontory of Lilybaeum in Sicily.

15. More admirable than his Eyes was the Heart of Aristomenes the Messenian;
which the Athenians by reason of his admirable subtlety causing to be cut out,
(for they had often taken him, yet still by his cunning he escaped them) found
to be all over hairy.

16. The Poet Antipater the Sidonian, every year on the very day of his Birth
had a F^ver; and having lived to a great age, upon his Birth day died of a
F^ver.

17. Here we may very conveniently take notice of Polystratus and Hippoclides,
Philosophers, who were born the same day, followed the Precepts of the same
Master Epicurus, possessed the same Revenues, went to the same School, and
living long Friends together, at length both died the same day. So equal was
the fortune and friendship of their Society, that who would not think them
born, bred, and deceased in the very bosom of divine Concord her self?

18. Why all this should come to pass, either to the Children of Kings, or to a
most famous King himself, to a Prophet of a flourishing Wit, or be so
remarkable in the Lives of Learned Men, or among the Vulgar sort, Nature it
self, so fruitful in good or evil, has never given a reason. No more than why
among the wild Goats, which are bred in Crete, being wounded with darts, should
fly for present help to the Herb Dittany, which being eaten immediately forces
the Dart and Poison out of their Wounds. Or how it comes to pass that in the
Island of Cephalenia, whereas all other beasts in other places are re^resh'd
with drinking water, in that place they are wont to quench their thirsts by
receiving the wind into their mouths. Or why at Crotona, in the Temple of
Lacinian Juno, the ashes should remain undisturbed, and not to be removed, what
Wind soever blow. Or why one Fountain in Macedonia, another in the Country of
Calenum, should have s^ much the property of Wine, as to intoxicate men. These
things we do not so much admire, as think worthy of remembrance, being well
ascertained, that Nature may well assume to herself the greatest share of
knowledge, who has the painful charge of begetting all things.

19. And now seeing we are talking of things that exceed common reason, let us
give a relation of that Serpent, which Livie has so elegantly described. For he
says, that upon the Banks of the River Bagrada in Africa so great a Serpent
appeared, as hindered the whole Army of Attilius Regulus from the use of the
water: Many Sould^^rs she swallowed down her fi^^hy wide Mouth, many killed
with the hideous bangs of her Tall: and when they could pierce her with no Dart
or Spear, at length they were forced to plant their Engines of Battery against,
and bruise her to pieces with huge Stones and Flints of massy weight; and to
all both Horse and Foot seemed more terrible than Carthage it self. At what
time the stream being defiled with her Blood, and the air infected with the
stench of her Body, the Roman Camp was forced to remove. The Skin of this
Monster, he says, was 120 foot long, and sent to Rome.

LIB. II.
CHAP. I. Of Matrimonial Ceremonies, and Duty of Relations.
1. Good Signs preceding Marriage. 2. Marriage-Feasts. 3. Women praised for
living Widows. 4. First Divorce. 5. Matrimonial liberty and decency. 6.
Conjugal Love. 7. Modest Consanguinity. 8. The Feast of Charistia, or Love. 9.
Age honored. 10. Youth observed, and instructed by example.
WHile we are searching into the rich and potent kingdom of Nature, it will not
be unseasonable to take notice of the ancient and memorable Institutions, as
well of our own City, as of other Nations. For it is worth our while to know
the first original of those happy Manners, and that way of living which we now
enjoy under the best of Princes, seeing that the consideration of them may
perphaps be profitable to the present Customs.

1. Among the Ancients there was nothing either publicly or privately
undertaken, unless they had first observed the sign; from which Custom, the
South-sayers were always consulted before Marriages. And though they have left
off the marking of Birds, or bodings of good or bad luck, yet nominally they
follow the footsteps of the old Custom.

2. The Women supped with the Men sitting, but the Men lay down: which Custom
among men was observed in Heaven. For Jupiter is said to sup lying on his
Couch, while Juno and Minerva are invited to sit. Which kind of severe Custom
our Age more diligently observes in the Capitol than in their Houses: It being
more proper to adhere to the Discipline of Goddesses than Women.

3. They that were content to be married but once, were honored with a Crown
of Chastity. For they believed that Matron to have an incorrupted mind, and
sincere Loyalty, that would not leave the Chamber where she had first deposited
here Virginity; and esteemed the experience of many Matrimonies to be a sign
of some Incontinency.

4. There was no Divorce between Man and Wife till Five Hundred and Twenty
Years after the City was built. The first was Spurius Carvilius, who divorced
his Wife for being barren. Who though he appeared to have a good excuse for
what he did, yet there were that blamed him enough, being such as believed that
Conjugal Loyalty was to be preferred before desire of Children.

5. But that the Honor and Modesty of Matrons might be more sacred, when they
were called into Court, no man was permitted to touch them, that their Garments
might not be defiled by the contact of a strange hand. The use of Wine was
formerly unknown to the Roman Women, for fear it might bring them to any
disgrace, because the first degree to forbidden Venus is from father Bacchus.
Yet that their Chastity might not always occasion undecent retirement, but that
they might appear in a comely Garb of converse, through the Indulgence of their
Husbands they wore Purple, and ornaments of Gold. For then Corrupters of
Marriages were not feared, but Women might modestly behold, and chastely be
beh^ld.

6. When there was any diff^rence between Husband and Wife, they went to the
Chapel of the Goddess Viriplaca, which is in the Palace: and having liberty to
talk what they had a mind to, after the heat was over, they returned home very
good friends. This Goddess had her name from appeasing of men; worthy of
adoration, and to be worshipped not with choice but exquisite Sacrifices: as
being the Keeper of daily and Family-peace, rendering to men and women, under
the same yoke of Peace, what is due to the Majesty of men, and the Honor of
women.

7. This Modesty among Wives, is it not necessary among other Relations? ^o^
that I may be a small example, set forth the great force thereof: formerly
neither Father used to wash with his Son at age, nor Father-in-law with
Son-in-law. Whence it appears, there was as much Religion attributed to Kind^^d
and Consanguinity, as to the Immortal Gods; while among those that were thus
^i'd, it was no more lawful to strip themselves, than it was in the Temple.

8. Our Ancestors also instituted a sacred Feast, which was cal^^d Charistia,
where none were admitted but Kindred; that if there were any difference among
Re^ations, there might be a reconciliation by the help of Friends, in the midst
of their sacred Rites and holy M^rch.

9. Youth gave to Old Age such circumspect and manifold Honor, as if the ^lder
were the common Father of the younger. There upon Council-day, if any young man
waited upon any Senator, Relation, or Friend of his Father, to the Senate, they
stay without door till the other came to perform the same duty home again. By
which voluntary attendance they accustomed their bodies and minds to undergo
public Offices, and in a short time became more experienced in labor and
meditation. Being invited to a Feast, they diligently inquired who was to be
there, that they might not be forced to rise to give way to their Elder: and
when the Cloth was taken away, they always rose and went away first: and all
the time of Supper they were very sparing and modest in their discourse.

10. The Elder were wont to sing the famous deeds of their Ancestors, in Verse,
at their Festivals, thereby to stir up Youth by imitation thereof. What more
splendid or more profitable than this kind of Combat? Youth honored Gray
Hairs, and superannuated Age encouraged those who were ready to enter into
Action with the nourishment of their favor. What Athens, what School, what
foreign Education may I prefer to this Domestic Discipline? This raised the
Camilii Scipio's, Fabricii, Marcelii, and Fabii: and that I may not be tedious
in recounting all the lights of our noole Empire, thus the most glorious part
of Heaven the ^acred Caesar's obtained their fame.

CHAP. II. Of the Offices of Magistrates and Orders.
1. The Roman Fidelity and Taciturnity. 2. Authority of Magistrates, and
observance of the Latin Tongue. 3. C. Marius despising Eloquence. 4. Consular
Majesty. 5. Constancy of the Roman Ambassadors. 6. Vigilance of the Senate. 7.
Diligence of the Tribunes. 8. Abstinence of the Magistrates. 9. The Trial of
the Roman Knights, and Lupercalia.
1. SO high a Love had all our Ancestors for their Country, that there was not
a Senator, who for many Ages would reveal the Transactions of the Fathers. Q.
Fabius Maximus only, and he also through imprudence, going into the Country
and meeting P. Crassus by the way, told him what was done in order to
proclaiming the Second Punick War, remembering that he had been Questor three
years before, and not knowing that he was not yet put into the Senate by the
Censors, who were the only persons that gave admittance to those that had born
Honors in that Assembly. However, though this were but a harmless error in
Fabius, yet he was severely reprehended for it by the Consuls. For they would
by no means suffer Taciturnity, the best and safest bond of Government, to be
violated in the least. And therefore when Eumenes King of Asia gave
intelligence to the Senate, that Perseus was preparing to make War, it could
not be known either what Eumenes said, or what the Fathers answered, till
Perseus was taken. The Court was the faithful and deep breast of the
Commonwealth, environed and fortified with Silence; which they that entered,
soon cast off private Love, clothing themselves with public Zeal. So that I
may say, that one would have thought, that no man heard what was committed to
the ears of so many.

2. But our ancient Magistrates how they behaved themselves in bearing up the
Majesty of the Roman People, from hence may be observed, that among all their
other marks of Gravity, this they punctually maintained, not to talk with the
Greeks but in the Latin Tongue. And also causing them to lay aside the
volubility of their own language, forced them to speak by an Interpreter, not
only in our own City, but in Greece and Asia: That the honor of the Latin
Tongue might be spread with greater veneration among other Nations. Not but
that they had their Schools of Learning, but that they did not hold it
convenient that the Gown should in any thing be subject to the Cloak. Believing
it a poor and low thing, that the weight and authority of Government should be
tamed by the charms of Eloquence.

3. And therefore, Caius Marius, thou art not to be condemned of clownish
Rigor, not to let thy old age, crowned with a double Laurel, illustrious with
German and Numidian Trohies, be softened and overcome by the Eloquence of a
vanquished Nation. Perhaps, lest while he appeared a forrainer in the exercises
of his Wit, he might seem a Runagate from his native Rites and Customs. Who
therefore opened the way to the Greek Pleadings that now deafen our ears? Molo
the Rhetorician, as I am persuaded, who likewise sharpened the studies of M.
Cicero. For he was the first Stranger that was ever heard in the Senate without
an Interpreter; which Honor he received not undeservedly, having mainly
advanced the force of the Roman Eloquence. Of conspicuous felicity is Arpinum,
whether you respect the one as a great contemner of Learning, or the other as
the abounding Fountain thereof.

4. With great diligence this Custom also was observed by our Ancestors, that
no person might walk between the Consul and the last Lictor, though he went
along by virtue of his Office, unless he were a Child and the Son of the
Consul. Which Custom was so obstinately maintained, that Q. Fabius Maximus,
five times Consul, and besides in prime Authority, and honored with Age, being
requested to go between him and the Lictor, for fear of being overborn by the
crowd of Samnites, with whom he was going to treat, yet refused the Courtesy.
The like did that same Fabius when he was sent by the Senate to his Son Consul
at Suessa. For as his Son was dispatching Causes without the City, he took his
Horse to ride through the prease; but his Son seeing him afar off, sent a
Lictor to him, commanding him to alight and come afoot, if he had any thing to
say to the Consul. Whom Fabius readily obeyed, saying, Son, I did not this in
contempt of thy Authority, but only to try whether thou knew how to behave
thy self like a Consul or no: Nor am I ignorant what is my Duty to my Country;
but I prefer public Institutions before private Piety.

5. Having done with the Fabii, Men of an admirable Constancy offer themselves,
who being sent to Tarentum by the Senate to demand certain things; after they
had received many Injuries, one of them having a Pisspot thrown upon his
Clothes, they were brought to the Theater, or place of Audience, and finished
the whole business of the Embassy; but as to what they had suffered, they
uttered not a word, lest they might seem to talk more than what they had given
them in charge: for it was impossible that ^^y vexation at the affronts which
they had received, could make them alter the respect which they had to Ancient
Custom.

6. But I will pass from Customs grown obsolete through Vice, to the most
severe Institutions of our Ancestors, before the Senate sat continually in
that place which was called the Little Senate House; they never were assembled
by Edict, but b^ing cited they came immediately. For they thought the praise of
that Citizen much to be called in question, that was to be compelled to show
his Duty to his Country. For whatever is forced by Compulsion, is look^ upon as
rather done by Constraint than Duty.

7. We are likewise to remember, that it was not lawful for the Tribunes of the
people to be admitted into the Senate; but being placed upon Seats before the
Doors, there i^ behooved 'um diligently to h^ar and examine the Decrees that
were under Vote, that if there were any thing which they misliked, they might
hinder them from passing. And therefore the Letter T was wont to be subscribed
at the bottom of all the ancient Decrees of the Senate: by which Mark it was
understood that the Tribunes had consented. Who although it were their business
to lie pe^du for the good of the People, and to suppress the growth of
ambitious attempts; yet they suffered them to use Silver Vessels, and to wear
Gold Rings given them at the public charge, by the sight of such things to
render the authority of their Magistracy the more conspicuous.

8. Whose Authority as it increased, so their abstinence was most strictly
commanded: For the En^ra^is of the Sacrifices offered by the Tribunes, were
brought to the Questors of the Treasury. The worship of the Gods, and humane
Continence, was shown in those Sacrifices of the Roman people, our Captains
learning at those Altars what holy hands they ought to come prepared with. And
such honor they gave to Continence, that many times the Debts of those that
had well behaved themselves in the government of the Republic, were paid by
the Senate: For they esteemed it an unworthy thing, that the dignity of those
men should suffer at home, by whose industry the Commonwealth had obtained
splendour abroad.

9. The Youth of the Order of Knighthood, twice every year, were wont to show
themselves in a public Spectacle at the charge of some great Person, upon the
day of the Lupercal Feasts, which was the time of the approbation of Knights.
The Custom of the Lupercals were begun by Romulus and Remus, at such a time as
they were making merry, for that their Uncle Numitor had permitted them to
build a City in the place where they were bred up, under Mount Palatine, which
Evander the Argive had consecrated by advice of Faustulus their Foster-father.
For thereupon they made a Sacrifice, and having slain several Goats, and eat
and drank somewhat more largely than ordinary, they divided themselves, and in
their jollity made a sportive Combat together; the memory of which Pastime is
celebrated with annual succession of Holidaies. As for the Knights which were
named Trabeati, Quintus Fabius appointed their public Show upon the Ides of
July. He also, being Censor with Pub. Decius, in commemoration of a Sedition
which he had appeased, when the Comitia or public choice of Magistrates was
almost fallen into the hands of the meanest people, divided the whole Rout into
four Tribes, which he called City-Tribes; by means of which wholesome act,
being a man otherwise famous in Warlike Acts, he obtained the name of Maximus,
or Greatest.

CHAP. III. Of Military Institutions.
1. Soldiers first taxed by Pole. 2. Military Exercise. 3. The first use of
the Velites, or light-armed.
THe Modesty of the People is also to be commended, who by freely offering
themselves to the labors and dangers of War, prevented their Commanders from
putting those that were taxed by Pole to their Oaths; whose extreme poverty
being suspected, made them incapable of being trusted with the Public Arms.

1. This Custom confirmed by long use, C. Marius first brake, making Soldiers
of those that were taxed by Pole. A noble Citizen, yet by the Novelty which he
brought in, not so propitious to Antiquity. Not unmindful, that if Military
Sloth should persist to despise humility, he himself might be deemed a
Commander cess'd by the Pole. Therefore he thought it best to obliterate that
proud way of choice among the Roman Armies, lest the contagion of that mark
should spread it self to the obscuring his own glory.

2. The Discipline of handling Arms was recommended to the Soldiers by P.
Rutilius Consul, Colleague with Cn. Mallius: For not following the example of
any Commander before him, calling together the Teachers of the Gladiators, from
the Plays of Cn. Aurelius Scaurus, he first began to have the Soldiers learn
the way of shunning and giving blows, according to the reasons of Art; mixing
virtue with art, and art with virtue; strengthening virtue with the force of
art, and encouraging art with the force of strength.

3. The use of the Velites, or light-armed, was first experienced when Fulvius
Flaccus besieged Capua. For when our Horse, being in number fewer, were not
able to resist the frequent excursions of the Campanian Cavalry, Q. Naevius a
Centurion choosing out of the Foot certain that were nimble of body, armed with
light and crooked Spears and little Targets, ordered them with a swift running
jump to join themselves with the Horse, and by and by as swiftly to retire;
whereby the Foot being mingled with the Horse, with their Darts not only
infested the men, but the horses likewise. Which unusual way of Fight was the
only overthrow of the Campanian Treachery. For which cause Naevius the author
of it is still had in great honor.

CHAP. IV. Of Shows.
1. Theaters first built. 2. Places appointed for superiority. 3. The Original
of Comical Scenes. 4. Of Secular Plays. 5. First Secular Plays. 6. Ornaments
and pride of Plays. 7. First Gladiator, and Wrestling Shows.
1. FRom Military Institutions we are next to come to the City-Camps, that is
to say, the Theaters, for that upon them were many Combats oftentimes for
victory, invented both for the recreation of Men, and worship of the Gods; not
without some blushing tincture upon the face of Peace, to see Delight and
Religion contaminated with civil blood, merely for Scenical Ostentation.

2. They were begun by M^ssalla and Cassius, Censors; but by the authority of
Scipio Nasica, the whole furniture of all their work was publicly sold.
Afterward a Decree of Senate passed, that no one should have any seats in the
City, nor within a Mile thereof, or behold the Plays sitting, to the end that
Manhood in standing, joined with relaxation of the Mind, might be a mark of the
Roman Fortitude.

3. For Five Hundred Fifty Eight years, the Senate stood mixed among the common
People to behold the public Shows. But this custom Atilius Serranus and L.
Scribonius Edils abrogated, when they made Plays to the Mother of the Gods,
following the judgment of the Elder Africanus, and setting up seats for the
Senators distinct from the people. Which thing alienated the Affection of the
common people, and weakened the high esteem which they had of him.

4. Now I shall rehearse the beginning and first original Institution of
Plays. In the time that Sulpitius Peticus and Licinius Stolo were Consuls, a
most violent Pestilence had afflicted our City, then at peace abroad, with new
cares of preservation from intestine calamity: And there was no help in any
humane advice, all reliance was upon the strict and new worship of Religion.
Nor would the favor of the Gods lend any ear to the Verses composed for their
atonement, until the time which Romulus, upon his ravishing the Sabine Virgins,
consecrated with particular Festivals, which he called Consualia. Now as it is
the custom of men to pursue small beginnings with an ardent affection, the
young men added gesture to the pious and reverent words which they used toward
the Gods, though with a rustic and uncompos'd motion of their Bodies. Which
occasioned the calling of Ludius out of Hetruria, whose comely swiftness after
the manner of the Curetes and Lydians, from whom the Hetrurians had their
Original, was a pleasing Novelty to the eyes of the Romans: and because Ludius
was among them called Histrio, therefore all Players were afterward called
Histriones. At length the Discipline of praying advanced it self to the
measures of the Sa^yrs: whence first of all the Poet Livie took the affections
of the people with Historical Arguments. He being often bawled at by the
people, to please um having injured his Voice, at length by the assistance of a
Boy and a Musician performed his Action in quiet: for he always acted his own
Works himself. The Attellans were called in by the Osci; which sort of
recreation being tempered by the Italian Severity, continued without any
blemish; for they were neither removed from their Tribe, nor debarred of
Military Stipends.

5. And because it appears by their names whence the other Plays had their
derivation, it may not seem absurd to relate the beginning of the Secular
Games, the knowledge whereof is least certain. At what time the City and Country
was afflicted with a most violent Pestilence, one Valesius a certain rich man,
who led a country life, his two Sons and his Daughter being all desperately
sick, as he was reaching some hot water for um from the fire, kneeling on his
knees, prayed his familiar Houshold-gods that they would turn the evil from his
Children upon his own head. Presently he heard a voice, which told him his
Children should recover, if he would carry them down the River Tiber to
Tarentum, and there refresh them with hot water from the Altar of Dis and
Proserpina. Being troubled at this Prediction, because it was a long and
dangerous Voyage; yet hope overcoming his present fear, he carried the Children
to the Banks of Tiber, (for he lived in a house of his own, in a Village called
Eretum, adjoining to the Country of the Sabines) and in a little Vessel
sailing to Ostia, he put in about the middle of the Night at the Field of Mars.
At which time the Children being thirsty, and there being no means to relieve
um, for that there was no fire in the Vessel, the Pilot told him, that he had
discovered a smoke not far off. Who thereupon being commanded to go ashore to
Terentum, that was the name of the place, he hastily took a Cup, which as soon
as he had filled out of the River in that place where the smoke arose, he
returned very cheerful, believing that now he had obtained the footsteps of a
Remedy sent from Heaven, and in a field that rather seemed to smoke than have
any relics of fire; getting such fuel as by chance he met with, and
steadfastly pursuing the Omen, with continual blowing, he kindled a fire, and
brought warm water to the Children. Which they had no sooner drank off, but
falling into a quiet sleep, they suddenly recovered of their distemper. Waking,
they related to their Father, that they had seen they knew not what gods, which
wiped their Skins with a Sponge, and commanded them that they should offer
Sacrifices of black Beasts at the Altar of Dis and Proserpina, where the Potion
of water was first brought them, making withal Nocturnal Plays and Tables
covered. The Father, because he saw no Altar there, believing that it was
expected that he should build one, went to the City to buy one, leaving upon
the place certain Workmen to dig the foundation. They in prosecution of their
Masters command having dug a mat^er of 20 foot deep, at length beheld an
Altar inscribed to Father Dis and Proserpina. Which being told to Valesius by
his Servant, he left off his purpose of buying an Altar, and offered black
Sacrifices at Terentum, and provided Plays and covered Tables three whole
Nights together, for that he had three Children.

6. Whose example Publius Publicola, who was the first Consul, following, out
of a desire to recover the health of his Citizens, making public vows at the
same Altar, offered certain black Oxen to Dis and Proserpina, and caused Plays
to be acted and Tables covered for three Nights together, and then covered the
Altar with earth as it was before.

7. As Wealth increased, Pomp and Magnificence was added to the Religion of
Plays. To which purpose Q. Catulus imitating the Campanian Luxury, was the
first that covered the Seats o^ the Spectators with Canvas. Cn. Pompey before
any other tempered the heat of Summer, by bringing little Streams to run along
the sides of the Ways. Cn. Pulcher was the first that adorned the Scenes with
variety of Colors. Which afterward Antonie covered with Silver. Petreius with
Gold. Q. Catulus with Ebony. Luculius made them of turned work. Spinther
adorned them with Silver. Afterward Scaurus abolishing the use of Punick
Cloaks, brought in fashion a more exquisite kind of Garment.

8. The Gift of Gladiators Shows was first presented in Rome in the Ox-Market,
in the Consulship of App. Claudius and M. Fulvius. Another was given by Marcus
and Decius the Sons of Brutus, to honor their Fathers Funerals. The Shows of
the Wrestlers were presented at the charge of M. Scaurus.

CHAP. V. Of Frugality and Innocence.
1. The first Golden Statue in the City. 2. The Civil Law, with Holidays first
proclaimed. 3. The first examination of Witchcraft. 4. The first College of
Musicians. 5. The Frugality of the Ancients. 6. The Chapel of the Goddess
Fever.
1. NEver any man beheld a Golden Statue either in the City, or in any other
part of Italy, till there was one erected by M. Acilius Glabrio to his Father,
of the Order of Knighthood, in the Temple of Piety: Which Temple he himself
dedicated in the Consulship of Cor. Lentulus and M. Baebius Tamphilus; his
father having obtained the end of his Vow, when he had overthrown Antiochus at
the Battle of Thermopylae.

2 The Civil Law was for many Ages concealed among the most sacred Arcana and
Ceremonies of the immortal Gods, and only known to the Highpriests; but at
last made common by Cn. Flavius a Scribe, whose Father was a Slave manumitted:
He being also made the Charioter Aedil, though to the great offense and
indignation of the Nobility that were Freemen born, first ordained the
Publication of Holy Days. Coming to visit his Colleague that was sick, and none
of the Nobles, of which the Room was full, rising to let him sit, he commanded
his Seat of Office to be brought him; and so in vindication of his own Honor,
and scorn of their Contempt, sat down.

3. The examination of Witchcraft, formerly unknown to the Customs and Laws of
the Romans, came to be in use upon the detection of several Crimes committed by
certain ancient Matrons; who having secretly poisoned their Husbands, being at
length discovered by a Maidservant, above an hundred and seventy suffered
death.

4. The College of Musicians drew the eyes of the common people upon them,
being wont upon private and public Spectacles to play in Consort, in
vary-colour'd Habits and Masks. From thence they took farther liberty. Of old
being forbid to diet in the Temple of Jupiter, which was the ancient Custom,
in great discontent they retired to Tibur. But the Senate not brooking the want
of their service at the sacred Festivals, by their Ambassadors requested of the
Tiburtines, that they would send um back to Rome. They refusing to go, the
Tiburtines invited um to a great Banquet, and while they were overcome with
Sleep and Drink, put um in Carts, and sent um away. When they were returned,
they were restored to their former honor, and their privileges of Play
granted them. They used Masks, being ashamed of their being circumvented in
drink.

5. The plain Diet of the Ancients was a most certain sign of their Humanity
and Continency. For then the greatest men took it for no discredit to Dine and
Sup in open view. Nor had they any Banquets which they were ashamed to conceal
from the eyes of the People. They were so addicted to Continence, that the use
of Pulse was more frequent than Bread. And therefore that Cake, which was used
in their Sacrifices, was made only of Barley and Salt. The Entrails were
sprinkled with Barley; and they fed the Pullets whence they took their Omens,
with Pulse. For of old, they thought the Offerings of their Diet, by how much
the plainer it was, so much the more efficacious to appease the Gods.

6. Other Gods they adored, that they might do them good. But to the Disease
Fever they built a Temple, that she might do them the less hurt. Among which
there was one in the Palatium, another in the Court of Marians Monuments, a
third at the upper and of the Long Village. And there were all Remedies laid
up, proper for the sick. These were found out by experience to assuage the
heats of human rage, besides they preserved their Health by the most certain
assistance of Industry: Frugality being as it were the ^other of their Sanity,
an Enemy to luxurious Banquets, and altogether averse from riotous drinking,
and immoderate Venus.

CHAP. VI. Of Foreign Institutions.
1. Frugality of the Spartans. 2. Their Military Custom. 3. The Athenian
Custom against idle Persons. 4. Their Areopagus. 5. Their honor of Virtue. 6.
Their punishment of Ingratitude. 7. Various Institutions of the Massilienses.
8. The Ceii poisoning themselves. 9. The Law of the Massilienses concerning
armed Strangers. 10. The Custom of the Gauls in lending. 11. The Custom of
the Cimbrians and Cel^^berians in their first Onsets. 12. The opinion of the
Thracians of the misfortunes of Life. 13 The mourning of the Lycians. 14. The
Fidelity of the Indian Women to their Husbands. 15. Prostitution of the Punic
Women. 16. The Custom of the Persians in Education of Children. 17. How the
Numidian Kings preserved their Authority.
1. THe City of Sparta followed the same Rules, being the nearest to the
Gravity of our Ancestors: who continuing for some years most obedient to the
severe Laws of Lycurgus, would by no means permit the eyes of their Citizens to
behold the delicacies of Asia; lest being tempted with the Allurements of that
Country, they should degenerate into a voluptuous Life. For they had heard
that all manner of Excess, all kind of unnecessary Pleasures did there abound;
And that the Ionians were the first that used Anointing and giving Crowns and
Garlands at Feasts, and brought up the custom of a Second Course, no small
incitements to Luxury. And it is no wonder, that men delighting in Labor and
Patience, would not that the most indissoluble Nerves of their Country should
be weakened and broken by the contagion of foreign Delicacies: finding it
easier to decline from Virtue to Luxury, than to recede from Luxury to Virtue.
Which that it was no vain fear of theirs, their Captain Pausanias made
apparent, who after he had performed great Actions, was not ashamed to suffer
his Fortitude to be softened with the effeminate Behavior and Apparel of Asia.

2. The Armies of the same City were never wont to join Battle, till they had
heated their Courage with the sound of their Flutes, whose Tunes went all in
Anapaestic measures, whereby they were taught to assail: their Enemies with
smart and thick Blows. They also were wont to use Scarlet Coats, to hide the
Blood of their Wounds. Not that the sight thereof was any terror to them, but
that their Enemies should gain no heart or Courage thereby.

3. Remarkable was the Valor of the Lacedaemonians in War; yet no less
memorable were the most prudent Customs of the Athenians in Peace: Among whom
Sloth was ferreted out of her lurking holes, and brought to receive punishment
as a Criminal, in their public Courts of Justice.

4. There was also among them a most sacred Council, called the Areopagus,
where diligent enquiry was wont to be made; what course of life every one took,
and what every one did to maintain themselves; that men might be induced to
follow honesty, finding so severe account was taken of their Actions.

5. This Council first introduced the custom of giving Crowns to virtuous
Citizens, encircling first the famous Brows of Pericles, with two little
wreaths of Olive. A noble Institution, whether we look at the thing, or the
Person. For Honor is the most fruitful nourishm^nt of Virtue; and Pericles a
most worthy person for Posterity to take the example of giving Honor to desert.

6. What shall we say of that most memorable Institution among the A henians?
When a Servant manumitted by his Patron, and afterward convicted by him of
Ingratitude, the Servant was thereupon deprived of his Liberty. We dismiss
thee, said the Council, an impious contemner of so great a gift. Nor could they
be induced to believe that he would prove a profitable Member of the City, who
was so wicked in his own Family. Be gone therefore, and be a Servant, that
know not the value of being free.

7. The Massilians likewise to this day retain a very great strictness in
Discipline, through their observance of ancient Customs, eminent for their
love to the Romans. They perm t a man to make void the liberty which he has
given to his Servant, if they find the Servant to have deceived the Master
three times. The fourth time they give no relief to the Master, whose own fault
it was to let himself be injured so often. The same City is also a most strict
observer of Severity; for they give no admission to Mimicks to come upon the
Stage, the subject of whose Plays consisting generally in relations of
Adulteries, lest the Custom of beholding should beget a Custom of committing
the crime. They shut their doors against all that beg under pretense of
Religion; esteeming Simulation and Superstition two things not to be endured.
The Sword with which Criminals are put to death, has been there ever since the
City was built, so rusty, that it is scarce fit for the purpose, but still
remains to show the great veneration which they give to ancient Monuments.

There are also two Cossins at their Gates, in the one of which they put the
bodies of Freemen, in the other of Servants, and so put them in a Cart to be
carried to the Grave: the Funeral is p^rformed without lamentations or crying
for the Dead, making only a domestic Sacrifice, and providing a Collation for
the Kindred. For what avails it to indulge Human Passion, or to envy the Gods,
because they would not share their Immortality with us? Poison is also kept in
the City, and is given to those who give sufficient reason to the Six Hundred
(that is the name of their Senate) why they desire to die. Manly Courage being
tempered with Kindness, while the Senate takes care that they do not
inconsiderately make away themselves, yet are willing to give as easy a Death
as may be to those that upon good grounds desire it.

8. Which Custom I believe not to have had its orginal in Gaul, but to have
been brought out of Greece, finding it to have been observed in the Island of
Ceum, at what time going for Asia with Sextus Pompeius, I came to the City of
Julida. It happened that there was in the City a Woman of very great Quality,
but very aged, that had resolved, after account given to the Senate why she
desired to live no longer, to make her self away with Poison, thinking her
Death would be more famous through the presence of Pompey. Nor could he, a
person full of all Virtue, and of a sweet disposition, refuse her Petition. And
therefore after he had in a most eloquent Oration, that dropped from his lips
like Honey, used all the persuasions that might be to dissuade her from her
purpose, and saw he could not prevail, he permitted her to take her course. So
having past* the Ninetieth year of her Age, with a great magnan^mity and
cheerful Countenance, throwing her self upon a Bed, which was more gayly
trimmed than ordinary, and leaning upon her Elbow, beholding Pompey, The Gods,
said she, whom I leave behind* not those to which I am going, give thee thanks;
because thou neither do exhort me to live, nor loath to see me die. As for my
self, who have always been in Fortunes favor, lest out of a desire of life I
should find her frowns, I am willing to change the remnant of my breath for a
happy conclusion, leaving bebind me two Daughters, and seven Grand children.
After that exhorting them all to Unity, and dividing her Estate among them,
giving her Clothes and Domestic Sacrata to her Eldest Daughter, with a
wonderful cheerfulness she took the Cup wherein the Poison was mixed, in her
right hand: Then pouring out her Offerings to Mercury, and invoking his Deity
to grant her a pleasant Journey to the best part of the Infernal Region,
greedily she drank the Potion off. Then as the Poison seized her particular
parts, she told us; and when she found it approaching to her Bowels and Heart,
she called her Daughters to do their last Duty of closing her Eyes. Our People
admiring at so strange a sight, departed with tears however in their Eyes.

9. But to return to the City of the Massilians, from whence this Digression
made us wander; There is no person to enter their City with a Dart: But going
forth again, he that received it is ready to return it again; endeavoring
thereby to make their Entertainment as safe as courteous.

10. Going out of their Walls, we meet an ancient Custom of the Gauls, who
were wont to lend Money, to receive it again in the other World; being
persuaded of the truth of the Immortality of the Soul. I should call them
fools, but that they were of the same opinion as Pythagoras.

11. The Philosophy of the Gauls was covetous and usurious; that of the
Cimbrians and Celtiberians courageous and resolute; who in Battle-array
rejoiced that they should gloriously and happily die, but upon their Deathbeds
lamented that they should perish poorly in shame and misery. For the
Celtiberians thought it a crime to survive in Battle, when any Friend was
slain, for whose preservation he had devoted his life.

12. But the People of Thrace deservedly challenge to themselves the praise of
Wisdom, who at the Birth of Children weep, at the Funerals of Men rejoice;
taught by no other Precepts than the true condition of Human Nature. And
therefore, let all Creatures but extinguish in themselves the love of Life,
which compels them to act and suffer many ugly things, especially when it lies
in their power to make a happy and blessed end of living.

13. Wherefore the Lycians, when they have any occasion of lamentation, put on
Women's Apparel (...) that being moved with the deformity of the Habit, it might
be a motive to them to make a quicker end of their sorrow.

14. But why should I insist longer upon the praise of Men, though most
courageous in this kind of prudence? Let us observe the Indian Women, where it
was the Custom for one Man to have many Wives. Among whom so soon as the
Husband died, there used to be great strife and contention, which was the best
beloved by the dead. She that gets the Victory, triumphing for joy, is led by
her Kindred to her Husbands Funeral Pile; which being set on fire, with a
cheerful and smiling Countenance, the throws herself into the midst of the
flames, and is burnt with her Husband, accounting herself most happy in her
end. Bring forth the Cimbrian boldness, add to that the Celtiberian faith, to
this join the generous wisdom of Thrace, not forgetting the cunning custom of
the Lycians in Mourning; there is none of these that excels the Indian Funeral,
into which the pious Wife, assured to die, enters, as into her Nuptial Bed.

15. To their glory I will add the infamy of the Carthaginian Dames, that by
comparison it may appear more odious. They had among um the Temple of Dry
Venus, where the Matrons were wont to meet. There, by the injury of their
Bodies, they were wont to raise themselves Portions; accounting it no
dishonor, to tie the honest Marriage-Knot with such a dishonest Band.

16. But the Custom of the Persians was more laudable, who were never wont to
see their Children, till they were Seven Years old; that so they might the more
easily brook their loss, if they died in their Infancy.

17. Nor was the Custom of the Numidian Kings to be blamed, who were never
accustomed to give a Kiss to any Mortal. Esteeming it fitting, that Sovereign
Authority should be void of all common and familiar Customs, that might lessen
the Reverence due to Majes^y.

CHAP. VII. Of Military Discipline.
Observed by the Romans.
1. P. Scipio Emilianus Cos. 2. Q. Metellus Numidicus. 3. P. Rupilius Cos. 4.
Caius Cotta. 5. Q. Fulvius Flaccus Censor. 6. A. Posthumous Tubertus Dictator,
and T. Manlius Torquatus. 7. Quintus Cincinnatus Dictator. 8. Q. Papirius
Cursor Dict. 9. L. Calpurnius Piso Cos. 10. Q. Metellus Proconsul. 11. Q.
Fabius Maximus Proconsul. 12. P. African the Greater. 13. P. African the Less.
14. L. Emilius Paulus Proc. 15. The Roman Senate.
External.
1. The Carthaginian Senate. 2. Clearchus Captain of the Spartans.
I Now come to the principal Glory, and chief establishment of the Roman
Empire, remaining to this day in a healthy continuance of inviolable Liberty,
knit together with most firm and lasting cords of her Military Discipline, in
the safeguard of whose bosom Peace and Tranquillity securely repose.

1. Pub. Cornelius Scipio, who received his Surname from the ruin of Carthage,
being sent Consul into Spain, that he might curb the insolent spirit of the
Citizens of Numantium, grown proud and lofty through the r^^nisness of the
Captains his Predecessors, the same moment that he entered the Camp, made a Law,
that they should throw away all things whatsoever which they had about them,
that was only for bravery and pleasure, and otherwife unnecessary. Whereupon
there were above two thousand Whores, Sutlers and Hucksters turned out of the
Camp. Upon which the Army, being cleared of all that luggage and filth, that
lately for fear of death had shamed themselves with an ignomimous Truce, now
refreshed, and recovering new vigor and courage, in a short time laid the
fierce and haughty Numantium level with the ground. Thus Mancinus miserably
surrendering himself, was an argument of Discipline Neglected; Scipio gloriously
triumphing, published the reward of Discipline Revived.

2. Metellus following his example, when in the War with Jugurth he took the
command of the Army as Consul, corrupted through the Lenity of Albinus,
labored with all his might to recover the ancient Discipline. Nor did he aim
at particular parts, but immediately reduced the whole into Order. First he
removed the Sutlers out of the Camp, and forbid Meat ready dressed to be fold. He
permitted none of the Soldiers to have Servants or Horses to carry their Arms,
or to fetch or provide um Victuals. Then he changed the place of the Camp, and
fortified himself in the same manner, as if Jugurth had been at hand, with
Ditch and Breast-work. Now what was the event of Continence restored, and
Industry revived? It obtained frequent Victories, and innumerable Trophies from
that Enemy, whose back under an ambitious Commander, it had not been the good
fortune of the Roman Soldiers to see before.

3. Nor did they a little countenance Military Discipline, who not regarding
the affectionate ties of Kindred, did not refuse to revenge the breach and
neglect thereof to the infamy of their Families. For Publius Rupilius the
Consul, in that War which he waged in Sicily against the Fugitives, banished
his Son-in-Law out of his Province, for loosing negligently the Castle of
Taurominitanum.

4. Caius Cotta caused Pub. Aurelius Pecuniola, his near Relation, to be
publicly whipped (or rather run the Gauntlet) and to serve as a common Soldier
afterward, for that through his fault, in the absence of the Consul, who going
to Messana to consult the Auguries, had left him in command of the Army, the
Fortification was burnt, and the Camp almost taken.

5. Quintus Fulvius Censor turned his Brother out of the Senate, for that he
had presumed to s^nd home a Cohort of the Legion* wherein he was a Tribune,
without the leave of the Consul. What more difficult for a man to do, than to
send back with ignominy to his Country a person nearly related by Family and
Marriage; or to use the severity of Stripes to a person allied in a long series
of Blood and Kindred; or to bend his Censors frown upon the dear Relation of a
Brother?

6. But our City, which has filled the world with wonderful Examples of all
sorts, with a double face beholds her Axes reeking with the Blood of her
Commanders, lest the disturbance of Military Discipline should go unpunished,
pompous abroad, but the cause of private grief enough; uncertain whether to
perform the office of congratulating or comforting. And therefore with doubtful
thoughts have I coupled you two together, most severe observers of Warlike
Discipline, Posthumus Tubertus, and Manlius Torquatus; For I apprehend a fear
of sinking under that weight of Praise which ye have merited, and discovering
the weakenss of my Wit, while I presume to represent your Virtue as it should
be. For thou, O Posthumus Dictator, did cause thy victorious Son Aulus
Posthumus to be beheaded; thy Son whom thou did beget to propagate the
succession of thy renowned Race, and the secret instructions of thy most sacred
traditions, the allurements of whose infancy thou had cherished in thy Bosom
and with thy Kisses, whom a Child thou had instructed in Learning, a Man in
Arms; good, courageous, and obedient both to thee and to his Country; only
because without thy command, without thy leave, he had overthrown his enemies,
thy fatherly command was the Executioner. For I am certain, thine eyes,
orewhelm'd with darkenss in the brightest light, could not behold the great
work of thy mind. But thou Manlius Torquatus, Consul in the Latin War, did
command thy Son to be carried away by the Officer, and to be slain like a
Sacrifice, though he obtained a noble Victory, for that he had presumed to
fight with Geminius Metius Captain of the Tuscans, when provoked to the Combat
by him. Esteeming it better, that a Father should want a courageous Son, than
thy Country want Military Discipline.

7. Again, of what spirit think ye was Quintus Cincinnatus the Dictator, at
that time when the Aequi being vanquished* he compelled Minutius to lay down
the Consulship, because the Enemies had besieged his Camp? For he thought him
unworthy the greatest command, whom ^ot his Virtue, but his Trenches and his
Breastworks secured, and who was not ashamed to see the Roman Arms, trembling
for fear, shut up in their Turn-pikes. Thus the most commanding twelve Fasces,
with whom remained the chief honor of the Senate, of the Order of Knighthood,
of all the People, with whose Nod all Latium, and all the strength of Italy was
governed, now shattered and broken, submitted to the punishing authority of the
Dictatorship. And lest the breach of Military Honor should go unpunished, the
Consul, punisher of all Crimes, must himself be punished. By these Propitiatory
Sacrifices, as I may so say, O Mars the Father of our Empire, when we
degenerated from thy auspicious Discipline, thy Deity was appeased: By the
infamy of Kindred, Relations and Brothers, by the murder of Sons, and the
ignominious degrading of Consuls.

8. To the same purpose is that which follows. Papirius Cursor Dictator, when
Q. Fabius Rullianus Master of the Horse had contrary to his command brought
forth the Army to Battle, though he returned a Victor over the Samnites, yet
neither moved with his Virtue, with his Success, nor with his Nobility, he
caused the Rods to be made ready, and the Conqueror to be stripped. A spectacle
of wonder to behold Rullianus, Master of the Horse, and a victorious General,
his Clothes pulled off, his Body naked, to be lacerated with the stripes of an
Executioner, to no other end than to sprinkle the glorious honor of his
Victories, so lately obtained, with the fresh Blood of those Wounds, which he
had received in the Field, drawn from his Body by the knotted stripes of the
Lictor. At length the Army, moved by his Prayers, gave him the Opportunity of
flying into the City, where in vain he implored the aid of the Senate; for
Papirius notwithstanding persever'd in requiring his punishment, Wherefore his
Father, after having been Dictator, and three times Consul, was compelled to
appeal to the People, and upon his Knees to beg the assistance of the Tribunes
in the behalf of his Son. Neither by this means could the Severity of Papirius
be restain'd; but being entreated by the whole City, and by the Tribunes
themselves, made a protestation, that he forgave the Punishment mot to Fabius,
but to the City of Rome, and the Authority of the Tribunes.

9. L. Calpurnius Piso also being Consul, being in Sicily making war against
the Fugitives, when C. Titius Commander of the Horse being environed and
oppressed by the multitude of the Enemy, had with the rest of his Soldiers
delivered their Arms to the Enemy, he punished him with several marks of
Ignominy: He commanded him to march barefoot, in the first Ranks, from Morning
till Night, with a Jacket, the skirts whereof were cut off, and his Cloak slit
from top to bottom: he forbad him also the converse of Men, and use of Baths;
and the Troops which he commanded having taken away their Horses, he divided
them among the Slingers. Thus to his great honor did Piso revenge the great
dishonor of his Country, having brought it so to pass, that they who out of a
desire of Life, and deserving to be hanged, had suffered their Arms to become
the Trophies of Fugitives, and were not ashamed to permit the ignominious youk
of Servitude to be laid upon their Liberty by the hands of Slaves, might
experience the bitter enjoyment of Life, and covet that Death which they had so
effeminately avoided.

10. Not less than that of Piso was the proceeding of Q. Metellus; who at the
Battle of Contrebia having placed five Cohorts in a certain station, and seeing
them retire through the multitude of their Enemies, he commanded them
immed^^^^^y to endeavor to recover their ground again; withal severely adding,
that is any of them flying were found in the Camp, he should be used as an
Enemy; not hoping by this means to regain what they had lost, but to punish
them with the manifest hazards of the ensuing Combat: Yet they having received
this check, weary as they were, having no other encouragement but Despair,
renewed the fight, and with the slaughter of their Enemies recovered their
station. So that there is nothing like Necessity to harden humane imbecility.

11. In the same Province, Q. Fabius the Great being desirous to bring down the
fierce pride of a most haughty People, forced his gentle disposition for a time
to lay aside all Clemency, and to use himself to utmost Rigor and Severity.
For he cut ^ff the hands of all those that ran out of any G^rrison of the
Romans and were taken: That the sight of their maimed Limbs might b^eed in
others a fear of r^volting. For those rebellions H^^ds cut from their Bod^es,
and scattered upon the b^oody Earth, ^aught others to beware how they commi^ted
the ^^ke Tr^asons.

12. Nothing could be m^^e mild than the Elder Africanus; yet for the
establishm nt ^f Military Discipline, he thought it conv^ni^n^ to b^r^ow
som^thing of Severity from his own natural Lenity. For having taken Carthage*
and gotten ^^^o his power all tho^^ that had fled from the Romans to the
Carthaginians, he more severely punished the Roman than the Latin Fugitives. For
the first, as Deserters of their Country, he nailed to the Cross; the other,
as perfidious Allies he only b^head^d. I shall not urge this act any farther,
both because it was Scipio's, and for that it is not fitting that a s^rvile
Punishment should insult over Roman blo^d, though deserv^d y^^h^d, esp^cially
when we may, pass to other relations not dipped in domestic Gore.

13. For the la^ter Asricanus, the Carthaginian Power being d^stroy'd, made the
Fugitives of other Nations to fig^t with Beasts in the public Shows which he
mad^ for the people.

14. Lu. Emilius Paulus, after he had vanquished Perseus, c^us'd ^^l those that
he had taken that were guil^y of the same Crime to be ^hrown to the Elephants,
that by them they might be trod to death. A most profitable Example, if we may
be permitted modestly to judge of the actions of the greatest men without out
reproof. For Military Discipline requires a severe and quick way of punishment:
For force consists of Arms, which when they grow disobedient will soon oppress
others, unless they be brought low themselves.

15. But it is now time to make mention, not of what has been acted by
particular men, but what order the whole Senate took to preserve and defend
their Military Discipline. Lucius Marcius Tribune of the People having with
wonderful courage got together the remains of the two Armies of P. and Cn.
Scipio's, which the victorious Carthaginians had almost ruined, and being by
them unanimously made General, writing to the Senate a relation of his
transactions he thus begin: L. Marcius Propretor. Which usurped Title the
Senate would not permit him to take, knowing that it was the Custom for the
People, not the Armies, to choose the General. Which being a time that the
Commonwealth was in great danger, and had sustained great Loss^s, one would
have thought they should have rather flat^er'd the Tribune, who they saw so
fairly acting for the restoration of their former Honor. But no Overthrow, no
Merit could sway the Senate more than their Military Discipline. And we may
remember what a courageous Severity their Ancestors used in the Tarentine War:
Wherein the Forces of the Commonwealth being very much weakened and broken,
when they had received a great number of their Captive Fellow-Citizens, which
Pyrrhus had sent them of his own accord; they decreed, that they who had served
on Horseback, should serve among the Foot; and they who had served as Foot,
should be listed among the Slingers. Moreover, that none of um should come
within the Camp, nor be permitted to for^ifie the place assigned them without
the Camp, nor that any of um should make use of a Tent made of Skins. But they
propound^d the Ancient Custom of Military Discipline to all those that took
Double Spoils from the Enemy. These Punishments made them, that were late the
deformed Gifts of Pyrrhus, to be his most eager and fierce Enemies. The same
rigor did the Senate use toward them that deserted the Commonwealth at
Cannae: For when by the strictness of their D^cree they had reduced them to a
worse condition than they who are dead, and at the same time had receiv^d
Let^ers from Marcellus that they would send um to him, to assist him in the
storm of Syracuse; the Senate wrote ba^k, that they were not worthy to be
admitted into his Camp. But they would send um to him, provided he would do
with um as befitted the honor of the Commonwealth, That they should never
receive any Military Reward, nor be permitted to return into Italy while there
were any Enemies therein. Thus has Virtue always despised pusillanimous minds.
How hainously was the Senate offend^d that the Soldiers suff^r'd Q. Petellius
the Consul, most courageously fighting against the Ligurians, to be slain? For
they would neither let the Stipend of the Legion go on, nor pay them any
Arrears, for that they had not offered their Bodies to the Darts of their
Enemies for the safety of their Emperor. And that Decree of so noble an Order
remains a glorious and eternal Monument of Petellius fame, under which his
Ashes rest renowned in the Fi^ld by his Death, in the Senate by their Revenge.
With the same Courage, when Hannibal sent them the liberty to redeem Six
Thousand Romans which he had taken, and which were Prisoners in his Camp, they
scorned his Kindness; well knowing, that if Six Thousand Young Men had resolved
to die bravely, they could not have been taken basely. So that it was hard to
say, which redounded most to their Ignominy, that their Country had so little
esteem and ^a^e of them, or that their Enemies showed so little fear of them.
But if at any time the Senate showed themselves severe in the maintenance of
Military Discipline, certainly then they did it in a high measure, when they
imprisoned the Soldiers that had rebeliously poss^ss'd th^mselves of Rhegium,
and Jubellius their Captain being dead, had of their own heads chosen M Caesius
his Secretary for their Lead^r; and notwithstanding that M. Fulvius Flaccus
tribune of the People declared that they proceeded contrary to the Custom of
their Ancestors, yet persisted in their resolution. However, that they might
act with less envy, they order Five Hundred after they had been whipped for
s^veral successive days to be beheaded, ordering their Bodies to be buried,
and forbidding any Lamentation or Mourning to be made for them.

FOREIGN Examples.
1. This, Conscript Fathers, was gentle and full of mildness, if we consider
the violence of the Carthaginian Senate in ord^ring then Warlike Affairs; whose
Captains imprudently managing a War, though it proved success^ul, were
neverth^l^ss nayl'd to the Cross: Imputing what they did well, to the assisting
Favor of the Gods; what they did amiss, to their own Miscarriage.

2. Clearchus, Captain of the Lacedeamonians, preserved his Military Discipline
by a ^amous and notable Saying, continually pealing into the ears of his
Soldiers, that they ought to fear their General far more than the Enemy.
Openly declaring, that they must expect to suffer the same pains flying, which
they were fearful to r^ceive in fight. Nor did they admire to be thus threatened
by their Captain, when they called to mind their Mothers language, who when
they went to Battle were wont to admonish um, that they should either return
alive with their Arms, or else be brought back dead with their Arms. Thus
instructed within their own houses, the Spartans used to fight. But enough of
these Foreign Examples, having more plentiful, and those more happy, to glory
in of our own.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Right of Triumphing.
1. Two Laws concerning Triumphs. 2. The Contentions of C. Lutatius Consul, and
Q. Valerius Praetor about Triumphing. 3. Cn. Fulvius Flaccus despising his
Triumph. 4. Why Triumph denied to Q. Fulvius and L. Opimius. 5. Why also to
Pub. Scipio the Greater, and M. Marcellus. 6. The Banquets of those that
Triumphed. 7. Of those that never Triumphed upon a Civil Victory.
MIlitary Discipline being vigorously maintained, was that which won all Italy
to the Roman Empire, together with the command of many Cities, great Kings, and
mighty Nations; opened the Streights of the Pontick Sea, delivered up the
Barricadoes and Fortr^sses of the Alps and the vast Mountain Taurus; and of a
little Cottage of Romulus, made it the Pillar of the whole World. Out of whose
bosom since so many Triumphs have flowed, it seems seasonable now to discourse
of the Right of Triumphing.

1. Some Commanders have required Triumphs to be decreed them for light
Battles: and therefore there was a Law made* that no Captain should triumph
unless he had sl^m Five Thousand of his Enemies in one Set Field. For our
Ancestors beli^v'd, that the Glory of our City consisted not in the Number, but
in the Glory and Magnificence of her Triumphs. And lest so brave a Law might
come to be obliterated by too greedy a desire of the Laurel, it was supported
with another Law, which L. Marius and M. Cato Tribunes of the People brought
in. For that made it criminal for any Emp^rour to multiply in their Letters to
the Senate, the number of Enemies slain or Citizens lost. And they were also
commanded as soon as they entered into the City, to swear before the
City-Questors to the truth of what they had written to the Senate.

2. Having mentioned these Laws, it will be seasonable to relate what was
adjudged thereupon, wherein the Right of Triumphing was discussed and debated
among most worthy Personages. C. Lutatius the Consul and Q. Valerius the
Praetor had overthrown and utterly ruined a very great Navy of the
Carthaginians near the Coast of Sicily, wh^reupon the Senate decreed a Triumph
to Lutatius the Consul. But when Valerius requested that a Triumph might be
granted to him, Lutatius withstood it, lest through the honor of Triumph, the
lesser Authority should be made equal to the grea^er. The contention growing
higher and higher, Valerius sues Lutatius, pretending that the Carthaginian
Navy was not overthrown by his Conduct. Lutatius puts in Sureties to auswer.
The Judge betw^en them Atilius Calatinus mee^s, before whom Valerius pleads,
that the Consul was lame and lay in his Latter, and that he p^rform'd all the
Offices of the General. Then Calatinus before Lutatius made his defense: Tell
me (^^^d he) Valerius, if you two were of contrary opinions whether to fight or
not, wheth^r were the comm^n^ of the Consul or the Pr^tor to be ^b^^'d?
Val^ri^^ ^^^w^r^d, that he could not deny (...) the Cons^l was ^h^^^ly to be
ob^y'd. Ag^in, said Calatinus* ^f the C^^^^^^ and your Omens were di^^^rent,
which were first ^o b^ followed? The Consuls, r^p^^^d Valerius. Then said the
Judge, Seeing that upon th^se ^wo Qu^st^o^s, about the Chi^f Comm^nd and the
P^io^^ty of (...) us, thou Valerius have conf^st thy Adv^^sa^y to be s^p^r^o^r
in both* I am not to m^k^ any furtg^^ do^^. And ^h^rfore, Lutatius, though you
have as yet made no Defense, I give judgment on your behalf. A Noble Judge,
that in a business that was apparent, would not spend and trifle away his time.
More probable and justifiable was the Cause of Lutatius, who d^f^nded the Right
of a most Sovereign Honor. Yet was it not ill done of Valerius to r^quire the
Rew^rd of a prosperous and co^ragiously fought Battle; though it were not so
lawfully d^mand^d by him as by the other.

3. What shall we say to Cn. Fulvius Flaccus, who when the S^nate had decreed
him the Honor of Triumph, so much coveted by others, yet contemned and refused
i^? H^ving enough to ^o with other things that besel him. For he no soones
entered the City, but he was vexed with public ^ros^cutions, and at l^ng^h was
s^nt into Ex^le, to exp^a^^ the offenc^s which he had committed for wan^ of
Religion.

4. Wis^r th^r^fore were Q. Fulvius and L. Opimius, the ^^rst o^ which having
ta^^^ Capua, and the lat^^r fo^c'd the Fregellans to a surrender, both
r^qu^st^d of the S n^te lib^rty to Triumph. Both had done great things, yet
both m^ss^d of their desire. Not out of any ^nvy that the Conscript Fathers had
against um, but out of their care of preserving the Right of the Law; whereby
it was enacted, that Triumphs should be only decreed to those that had enlarged
the Empire, not to those who had only recovered what was in the possession of
the Roman People before. For there is as much difference betwe^n adding what
was not, and restoring what was, as there is betw^en the beginning of a good
Turn and the end of an Injury.

5. This Law whereof I speak was so carefully observed, that Triumphs were
denied to P. Scipio and M. Marcellus, though the first had recovered both
Spains, and the latt^r had taken Syracuse; by reason that they were sent to the
management of those affairs, without being advan^'d to any public Office of
Magistracy. Spain ravished from the Empire of Carthage, and the Head of Sicily
cut off, yet could not the Commanders join their Triumphal Chariots. But to
whom? To Scipio and Marcellus, whose very Names res^mbl^d an eternal Triumph.
But the Senate, though they coveted nothing more than to see crowu'd those
Authors of solid and true Virtue carrying upon their shoulders the safety of
their Country, thought better to reserve them for a more justly menrited
Laurel.

6. In this place I am to add, that it was the Custom for the General that
triumphed to invite the Consuls to Supper, and for them so invited not to go;
that no person on the Day of Triumph should appear of greater Authority, at the
same Feast, than the Triumpher.

7. But though any Commander had done great things and never so profitable to
the Commonwealth in a Civil War, yet he was not to have the Title of
Imperator, neither were any Supplications or Thanksgivings decreed for him, nor
was he to Triumph either in Chariot or Ovant. For though such Victories were
necessary, yet they were full of Calamity and Sorrow, not obtained with
Foreign Blood, but with the slaughter of their Countrymen. Mournful therefore
were the Victories of Nasica over T. Gracchus, and of Opimius over C. Gracchus.
And therefore Catulus having vanquished his Colleague Lepidus, with the havoc
of all his Followers, returned to the City, showing only a moderate joy. Caius
Antonius also, the Conqueror of Catiline, brought back his Army to their Camp
with their Swords clean washed. Cinna and Marius greedily drank Civil Blood,
but did not presently apply themselves to the Altars and Temples of the Gods.
Sylla also, who made the greatest Civil Wars, and whose Success was most cruel
and inhumane, though he triumphed in the height of his power, yet as he carried
many Cities of Greece and Asia, so shew^d not one Town of the Roman Citizen.

I am grieved and weary of ripping up the Wounds of the Commonwealth. The
Senate never gave to any one, nor did any one disire it, while the Fathers of
the City wept. But every one stretched out his hand for the Oaken Garland,
which was the Reward of him that had saved the Life of a Citizen. Afterward
the eternal glory of the Imperial Family.

CHAP. IX. Of the Severity of the Censors.
1. Of Camillus and Posthumous toward the Batchelours. 2. Of Valerius Maximus
and C. Junius Brutus toward Antonius. 3. Of Cato toward Flaminius. 4. Of
Fabricius toward Rufinus. 5. Of M. Ant. and L. Flaccus toward Domitius. 6. Of
Nero and Salinator to themselves and to the People of Rome. 7. Of Messala and
Sempronius to the four hundred Knights. 8. Of M. Regulus and P. Philius toward
the remains at Cannae. 9. Who after they were blemished came to the Censorship.
THe most indissoluble Cord of Military Discipline, and the strict observation
of the same, admonish me to pass from thence to the Censorship, the Mistress
and Guardian of Peace. For as the wealth of the People of Rome, by virtue of
their Commanders, increast to such a vastness; so their Modesty, Contigency and
Conversations were examined by the Censors Severity. A work equalling the glory
of Military Actions. For what avails it to be courageous abroad, and live ill
at home? To take Cities, conquer Nations, and lay violent hands on Kingdoms,
unless there be Reverence, Justice and Honor in the Courts of Law and Council?
For unless that be, Riches heaped unto the SKy will have no stable Foundation.
Necessary it is therefore to know these things, and to record the Acts of the
Censors Authority.

1. Camillus and Posthumous, being Censors, commanded them that lived unmarried
till they were old, to bring a sum of Money into the Treasury by way of
Penalty: deeming them worthy of further punishment, if they should complain of
so just a Constitution. Justly taxing them for not observing the Law of Nature
in begetting, seeing they had received Natures benefit in being born. Seeing
also that their Parents, by bringing them up, had obliged them to a debt of
continuing their Offspring. To this they added, that Fortune had given um a
long time to cxercise that Duty, and yet they to deprive themselves of the name
both of a Father and a Husband. Go therefore, said they, and pay that which may
be useful to the numerous Posterity of others.

2. This Severity M. Valerius Maximus and C. Junius Bubulcus Brutus imitating
in a punishment of the same nature, put L. Antonius out of the Senat^, for that
he had repudiated a Virgin, whom he had married without consulting any of his
Friends. But whether this Crime were greater than the former, I know not well
to determine: though this may be said, that by the former the sacred Rites of
Matrimony were only contemned, by the latter injured. With great prudence
therefore the Censors thought him unworthy to have admission into the Senate.

3. Thus Portius Cato removed L. Flaminius out of the number of the Senators,
for that he had in his Province caused a condemned person to loose his Head;
choosing the time of ^xecution at the will and for the sight of a Woman with
whom he was in love. He might have been forborne in respect of the Consulship
which he had born, and the authority of his Brother T. Flaminius. But the
Censor and Cato to show a double example of Severity, thought him rather to be
degraded, because he had with so notorious and foul a crime defiled the Majesty
of so great and high an Authority; and that he had thought it a slight matter,
to give same respect to the eyes of an Harlot delighted with humane Blood, and
the suppliant hands of King Philip.

4. Why should I m^ntion the Censorship of Fabricius Luscinus? All ag^s have
told us, and will still declare to us, that Cornelius Ru^^aus was by him turned
out of the Senate, because he had bought some Silver Household Stuff, to the
value of ten Pounds, as affording a bad example of Luxury.

5. M. Antonius and L. Flaccus removed Duronius from the Senate, because he had
abrogated a Law, whereby the costs of Banquets was limited, with very good
reason for so doing. For how impudently did Duronius in the Pulpits for
Orations utter these words! There are bridles put into your mouths, most worthy
Senators, by no means to be endured. Ye are bound and hampered in the bitter
shackles of Servitude. For there it a Law made, that ye ought to be frugal. Let
us abrogate therefore that command, so deformed with the rust of nasty
Antiquity. For what need of Liberty, if they that will kill themselves with
Luxury, may not?

6. Let us now produce a pair, linked together with the same Chain of Virtue,
and society in goodness, yet dissenting when they came to be struck with the
hook of Emulation. Claudius Nero, and Livius Salinator, in the second
Punick-war, strong supports of the Commonwealth; yet how divided was their
Censorship! For when they numbered the Centuries of the Horse, of which number,
by reason of the strength of their years, they themselves were, when they came
to the Polian Tribe, the Crier seeing the name of Salinator, began to doubt
with himself whether he should call him or no; which when Nero understood, he
caused his Colleague not only to be cited, but to sell his horse, because he
was condemned by the judgment of the people. Salinator also prosecuted Nero
with the same severity, giving this for a reason: Because he had not sincerely
returned into Friendship with him. To whom if any of the Celestial Deities had
signified that they in a long series of posterity should lay the foundation of
our Guardian Princes Family, they would soon have entered into a strict League
of indissoluble kindness, being such as were to leave their preserved Country
to thirty divided Offspring. But Salinator adventured to cast thirty four
Tribes among the Aerarii, because that having condemned him, they afterward
made him Consul and Censor, pretending they must either be guilty of very great
rashness or perjury. The Maetian Tribe only he left void of disgrace, who by
their Suffrages judged him neither to merit Condemning, or worthy of Honor.
How constant and resolute a Genius had that man? who neither by the sad event
of Condemnation, nor by the multiplication of H^nour, could be brought to carry
himself otherwise than severely in the Administration of the Commonwealth!

7. Four hundred Young Men also of the Order of Knighthood, being a great part
thereof, patiently underwent the Censors Mark of disgrace; all which M.
Valerius, and P. Sempronius, taking their horses from 'um, reduced into the
Order of Aerarii, for that being Commanded to work at the Entrenchments, they
neglected to go.

8. Shameful Cowardice was likewise by the Censors severely punished: For
Attilius Regulus, and Furius Philus, caused the Questor Metellus, and several
Roman Knights, to be degraded among the Aerarii, taking their horses from 'um,
because that after the overthrow at Cannae, they had made a resolution to leave
Italy; setting a great mark of Infamy upon them for another thing. For being
taken by Hannibal, and afterward by him sent as Ambassadors for exchange of
Prisoners, because they could not obtain their request, they would not return;
but it was convenient for all of Roman blood to keep their Faith, wherefore
Regulus the Censor noted them for Perjury; whose Father rather chose to suffer
utmost torment, than break his word with the Carthaginians. This Censorship
translated it self out of the City into the Camp, which would that the Enemy
should neither be feared nor deceived.

9. Two Examples, being alike, we have thought fit to add. C. Geta being
removed by L. Metellus and Cn. Domitius Censors from the Senate, was afterward
made Censor himself.

Also M. Valerius Messala having been disgraced by the Censor, was afterward
advanced to the Censors place. For such Disgrace sharpens Virtue: Shame
stirring them up to use all their endeavors to become worthy Citizens, to whom
the Censorship ought to be rather offered, than taken from them.

CHAP. X. Of Majesty. Of the ROMANS.
1. Q. Metellus Numidicus before the Judges. 2. Of the Elder Africanus before
Antiochus, and others. 3. Of Aemilius Paulus among the Macedonians. 4. Of the
Greater Africanus to the King Massinissa and Carthaginians. 5. Of Rutilius the
Exile among the Cities of Asia. 6. Of Marius proscribed among the Minturnians.
7. Of Cato Uticensis in the Senate. 8. The same toward the People of Rome.
Of FORRAINERS.
1. Harmodius and Aristogiton to Xerxes. 2. Xenocrates among the Athenians.
THere is also that Majesty among Illustrious Men, as it were a private
Censorship, without the Honor of Tribunals, without the attendance of
Officers, powerful in the obtaining of Greatness.

1. For what greater Honor could be given to any one, than what was given to
Metellus, though he stood accused of a Crime. For when he pleaded for himself
upon a charge of Bribery, and his Accounts were demanded by his Accusers, and
were brought forth to be inspected, the whole Council refused to look upon
them, lest they should seem to doubt of the truth of any thing that was therein
contained. For the Judges looked upon the Life of so great a man, as an argument
that he had prudently administered the Commonwealth. And though it an unworthy
thing, to balance a little Wax and a few Writings with the Integrity of so
famous a Person.

2. But what wonder, that due honor was given to Metellus by his
Fellow-citizens, which an enemy did not refrain to render to the Elder
Africanus? For Antiochus, in the War which he made against the Romans, having
taken his Son Prisoner, not only honorably entertained him, but also sent him
to his Father, laden with Royal Gifts, though he were then almost driven out of
his Kingdom by him. But the enraged King rather chose to reverence the Majesty
of so great a man, than revenge his own misfortune. To the same Africanus being
retired to his Country House in the Village of Liternium, several Captains of
Pirates being in the same place, came to see him: He believing they came to do
him some mischief, placed a Guard of his Domestic Servants upon the top of his
house, being well prepared with force and courage to beat them off. Which when
the said Captains perceived, immediately sending back their Soldiers, and
throwing their Arms away, they approach to the Lord, declaring themselves to be
his friends, requesting the sight and company of so great a man, as it had been
a favor from Heaven, and desiring him to vouchsafe them the secure spectacle
of his greatness. Which words when the Servants related to Scipio, he commanded
the doors to be unlocked, and the Captains to be let in; who reverencing the
Threshold as it had been some sacred Altar, or Religious Temple, with great
eagerness approached to kiss his hands. And after they had spent a long time in
admiration of him, leaving great Gifts in the Porch, such as they used to offer
to the Immortal Gods, they departed to their Ships. What could be more noble
than this effect and fruit of Majesty? What more pleasing to behold or enjoy?
His enemy appeased their wrath with admiration. His Presence stupefied the
joyful eyes of the Pirates. Should the Stars falling from Heaven offer
themselves to men, they could not be capable of greater adoration.

3. This happened to Scipio being alive; this other to Aemilius Paulus being
dead. For when his Funerals were celebrated, and that by chance certain Princes
of Macedon were then abiding at Rome as Ambassadors to the Senate, they
willingly offered themselves to carry the Funeral Bed. Which will seem so much
the greater Honor, considering that the forepart of the Bier was adorned with
the Trophies of his Macedonian Conquests. For how great must be the honor
which they give to Paulus, whom they would not refuse to carry, with the
Ensigns of their own calamity in the face of all the people! Which Spectacle
added to his Funeral a resemblance of another Triumph. For thus did Macedon
render thee, O Paulus, illustrious twice in our City: by their Spoils, safe and
victorious; venerable in his Death, by their Shoulders.

4. Nor was it a small honor done to thy Son Scipio Aemilianus, whom thou
giving in Adoption, would have to be the Ornament of two Families. For being
but a Young Man, and sent by Lucullus the Consul out of Spain into Africa, the
Carthaginians and Massinissa made him Arbitrator of the conditions of Peace, as
if he had been Consul and Emperor. Carthage ignorant of her Destiny: For that
very glory of aspiring Youth, by the indulgence of Gods and Men, was preferv'd
for the ruin of that City. Insomuch that being taken, it gave him the Surname
of Africanus; being destroyed, it occasioned the rise of the Cornelian Family.

5. What more miserable than Condemnation and Exile? Yet the Conspiracy of the
Publicans could not avail to diminish the Authority of Publius Rutilius. Who
going into Asia, all the Cities of that Province, heating where he was retired,
sent their Amb^ssadors to attend him. Who could now judge him an Exile, but
rather a Triumphet in such a place?

6. Marius also, being cast down into the depth of utmost Misery, escapt out of
the jaws of danger, by the benefit of his Majesty. For a public Slave, a
Cimbrian by his Country, being sent to kill him, as he lay shut up in a private
House in Minturnam, durst not attempt him, with his Sword drawn, though an old
Man, unarmed, and almost famisht; but struck blind with the brightness of his
Countenance, he stung away his Sword, and astonished and trembling ran away.
For the Slaughter of the Cimbrians presented it self before his eyes; and the
Calamity of his vanquished Nation quelled his Courage. The Immortal Gods
deeming it an unworthy thing, that Marius should be slain by one single person
of a Nation, who had subdued the whole. The Minturnians also taken with the
Majesty of his Person, thoug^ now under the burden on Misery, and unavoidable
Destiny, yet preserved him safe: Nor could the most* severe Victory daunt them,
for fear lest Sylla should revenge their preservation of Marius; though Marius
himself might have been sufficient to deter them from preserving Marius.

7. The admiration also of the stout and virtuous Life of Percius Cato,
rendered him so wonderful to the Senate, who having prefixed a day for the
Publicans to answer, contrary to Caesar's will, and being therefore by his
command carried by the Lictor to Prison, the whole Senate was not ashamed to
follow him, which thing did not a little soften the perseverance of his divine
Soul.

8. At another time, the same person beholding the Floral Plays which Messius
the Aedil set forth, the people were ashamed to require that the Mimicks should
appear naked; which when he understood from Favonius, his great friend, that
sat close by him, he departed out of the Theater, left his presence should
interrupt the custom of the Show. Whose departure the people loudly
applauding, renewed the ancient custom of Jesting in the Scenes; confessing
that they attributed more to the Majesty of one man, than they claimed for the
sake of the Generality. To what Riches, to what Power, to what Triumphs, was
this privilege granted before? A small Patrimony, Manners restrained within
the bounds of Continence: a small train of Followers, a house shut against
Ambition: One Image of his Paternal Genealogy; not the most comely Aspect, but
a Virtue hightned with all perfections. Hence it was, that whoever would
Characterize a just and famous Citizen, described him by the name of a Cato.

EXTERNAL.
1. We must give some place also to Foreign Examples, that being mixed with
those of our own Nation, the variety may be the more delightful. Xerxes having
taking the City of Athens, carried away the brazen Statues of Harmodius and
Aristogiton, who endeavored to free that City from Tyranny; which a long time
after Seleucus taking care to return to their proper places, when they came
into the Haven of Rhodes, the Rhodians inviting them that brought them into
their City, laid the Statues upon the sacred Cushions of the Gods. Nothing more
happy than such a Memory, that gave so large a Veneration to a little Brass.

2. How great Honor was also given by the Athenians to Xenocrates, famous for
his equal Piety and Wisdom! who when he approached the Altar, being
necessitated to give his testimony in confirmation that all which he had spoken
was truth; all the Judges rose and forbid him openly to take his Oath,
believing it proper to grant that to his Sincerity, which they were not to
remit to themseves in the place of giving Sentence.

LIB. III.
CHAP. I. Of Towardliness.
Examples whereof among the Romans in
1. Emilius Lepidus, a boy. 2. Cato of U^ica. 3. Cassius Longinus.
EXTERNAL in
1. Alcibiades the Athenian.
I Will now touch upon some certain Infancies and Elements of Virtue, and of a
Soul that in process of time is to advance to the top of Glory: Relating the
tastes thereof given from the certain Experiments of Towardliness.

1. Emilius Lepidus, yet a boy, going into the field, killed an Enemy, and
saved a Citizen; in memory of which action there is in the Capitol a Statue
garnished and girt with a Senator's virile Robe, by order of the Senate placed
there; esteeming it unjust that he should not be of age for Honor, that was so
ripe in Virtue. Lepidus prevented what was to Age ordained, by his Celerity in
doing bravely; carrying away a double Honor out of the Battle, of which his
years scarce admitted him to be a spectator: For the Arms of men preparing for
Combat, drawn Swords, the flight of Darts, the noise of Horsemen charging, the
furious violence of Armies joining, strikes terror into young men. Among all
which the childhood of the Emilian Family was able to deserve a Crown, by
carrying away the spoils of his Enemy.

2. This Courage was not wanting in the Childhood of M. Cato: For he being bred
up in the house of M. Drusus his Uncle, the Latins came to him then Tribune of
the people, requesting a City. At which time the boy being requested by
Poppedius Prince of the Latins, lying at Drusus house, to speak on their behalf
to his Uncle, with an unmoved countenance made answer, He would not: and being
again and again importuned, continued in his resolve. Then Poppedius taking him
up into the highest part of the house, threatened to throw him down headlong,
unless he would yield to his request; but nothing could make him alter his
mind: Which made them cry out, Happy is it for us Latins, and Allies, that this
is but a Youth, from whom were he a Senator, it were imp^ssible for us to
obtain our Petition. For in his tender mind Cato retained the Gravity of the
whole Court; and by his perseverance frustrated the Latins, who had a desire to
learn the Laws and Customs of our City.

The same person coming in his Virile Robe to kiss the hand of Sylla, and
seeing the heads of the proscribed persons brought into the Porch of his house,
moved with the horridness of the Spectacle, asked his Schoolmaster Sarpe^^
(...) there was no body to be sound that would kill so great a Tyrant? Who
making answer, That men wanted not will, but opportunity, his person being so
strongly guarded; The Lad d^sired he might have a Sword given him, affirming,
He could easily kill him, as being wont to fit upon his bedside. His master
perceived his courage, but would not allow of his intention; and afterward
always brought him to Sylla to be ^xamined. Nothing than this more admirable. A
Lad taken in the Workhouse of Cruelty, feared not a Victor, who at that time
murdered Consuls, whole Towns, Legions, and the greatest part of the Order of
Knighthood. Had Marius been in his place himself, he would have sooner
consulted his own safety, than the Death of Sylla.

3. Whose Son Faustus had a good Cuff on the Ear given him by C. Cassius, his
School fellow, for saying in vindication of his Father's Proscriptions, that
had he been a Man, he would have done the same. A worthy hand, that would not
embrue it self in the blood of his Country.

EXTERNAL.
1. And to repeat something of the Grecians, that Alcibiades, whose Virtues or
whose Vices were most pernicious to his Country, we cannot say; for with the
one he deceived his Citizens, with the other he oppressed um: He being a Youth,
and coming to his Uncle Pericles, and beholding him sitting melancholy in a
private place, ask^d him, why he showed so much trouble in his Countenance. Who
replying, that he had by command of the City built the Out-gates of the Castle
of Minerva, and was not able to give any account of the vast Treasure spent in
the service, and that therefore he was troubled: Rather should you endeavor,
said the Boy, to find out a way, how you should give no account. Thus a most
great and wise man, not able to counsel himself, follows the advice of a Child,
and so ordered it, that the Athenians engaged in a sharp War with their
Neighbors, had no time to look after Accounts. But let the Athenians consider,
whether they had most reason to lament or be glad for the Birth of Alcibiades;
whose Stories fluctuate in a doubtful opinion between admimiration and
detestation of the person.

CHAP. II. Of Fortitude. ROMAN Examples whereof are
1. M. Horatius Cocles. 2. Clelia the Virgin. 3. Romulus. 4. A. Cornelius
Cossus. 5. M. Marcellus. 6. The Duellers, T. Manlius Torquatus, M. Valerius
Corvus, and P. Scipio Aemilianus. 7. C. Atilius. 8. The Roman Knights at the
Battle of Verrugo. 9. The same in the Fight against the Samnites. 10. The Roman
Soldiers in holding in the Punic Fleet. 11. A Roman Soldier at the Battle at
Cannae. 12. Q. Licinius Crassus Procons. 13. Q. Metellus Scipio Procons. 14. M.
Cato of U^ica. 15. Porcia. 16. M. Cato Son of the great Cato. 17. Scipio
Nasica. 18. Emilius Scaurus. 19. Julius Caesar Procons. 20. Three Soldiers,
Vib^us Acceus, Valeriu^ Flaccus, T. P^denius. 21. Q. Cotius Achilles. 22. C.
Attilius. 23. Coesius Scaeva. 24. L. Sicinius Dentatus.
FOREIGN.
1. Jub^llius of Campania. 2. Gobrias the Persian. 3. Leonidas the Spartan. 4.
Othryadas the Spartan. 5. Epaminondas a Theban. 6. Theramenes of Athens. 7.
Theogenes of Numantium, 8. The Wife of Asdrubal, 9. Harmonia the Daughter of
King Gelo.
HAving done with the beginnings and growth of Virtue, we will now prosecute
the act it self, whose most ponderous force and efficacious nerves consist in
Fortitude. Nor am I ignorant, Great Founder of our City, Romulus, that the
first honor of this nature ought to be assigned to thee: but first suffer me,
I beseech thee, to prevent thee with an Example, to which thou thy self do
owe something of admiration; seeing that without the benefit thereof Rome it
self, thy own work, had not become so famous.

1. The Hetrurians making an irruption into the City over the Sublician Bridge,
Horatius Cocles kept the farther end thereof, and with an indefatigable Fight
sustained the whole body and force of the Enemy, till the Bridge was broken
behind him; and when he saw his Country freed from imminent danger, flung
himself armed into Tibur; whose Fortitude the Immortal Gods admiring, rewarded
him with a safe coming off. Being neither hurt with the height of the Fall, nor
the weight of his Armor, nor touched with the Darts that flew upon every side
of him. And thereby he drew the eyes of alt his Fellow-citizens, of all his
Enemies upon his own single person; the one amazed with admiration, the other
in a trance between joy and fear. And separated two great Armies closely
engaged; repelling one, and defending the other. And lastly, by his single
Strength was as great a guard to our City with his Shield, as Tibur with her
Channel. And therefore the Hetrurians departing might well say, They had
vanquished the Romans, but were beaten by one Horatius.

2. Clelia makes me almost forgetful of my purpose: Daring a most noble
Enterprise at the fame time, against the same Enemy, and in the fame Tibur. For
being given in Hostage among other Virgins to Forsenna, she escaped the Watch
in the Nightime, and getting a horse, me presently got to the River, which
she swam over; freeing her Country not only from a Siege, but from fear of
danger, holding out a Light of Virtue to men.

3. I now return to Romulus, who being provoked to Combat by Acro King of the
Cenicenses, though he believed himself Superior both in the number and courage
of his Soldiers, and that it was safer for him to fight with his whole Army
than in single Combat, with his own right hand he snatched away the Omen of
Victory: nor did fortune fall his undertaking; for having slain Acro, and
vanquish^d his Enemies, he brought away rich spoils and trophies, which he
offered to Jupiter Feretrius. For which let this suffice: for Virtue
cousecrated by public Religion, needs no private praise.

4. Next to Romulus is Cornelius Cossus, who consecrated his spoils to the same
De^^y, when being Master of the Horse, when he had slain the Captain of the
Fidenates in battle. Great was Romulus in the beginning of this commenced
Glory: and much was gained by Cossus, for that he would imitate Romulus.

5. Nor ought we to separate the memory of M. Marcellus from these Examples, in
whom there was so great a courage, that he set upon the King of the Gauls
environed with a great Army near the River Po, only with a few Horsemen, whose
head he presently cut off, and spoiled him of his arms, which he dedicated to
Jupiter Feretrius.

6. The same Virtue, and the same manner of Combat T. Manlius Torquatus,
Valerius Corvus, and Emilianus Scipio, made use of: for they voluntarily
challenged the Captains of the Enemy, and slew them; but because they did those
actions under the command of others, they did not dedicate their spoils to
Jupiter Feretrius.

The same Scipio Emilianus, bring in Spain under the command of Lucullus, at
the same time that Intercaria a strong Town was besieged, was the first that
got upon the Walls. Neither was there any person in the whole Army, considering
his Nobility, his hopeful Youth, and future Acts, whose safety ought to have
been more regarded and consulted. But then the most noble Young men, to enlarge
and defend their Country, sustained the greatest pains and perils; deeming it
below themselves to excel in Dignity and not in Virtue. Therefore Emilianus
chose a Warlike life, which others tor the hazard thereof avoid.

7. Among these, Antiquity offers a most famous Example of Fortitude. The
Romans being overthrown by the Army of the Gauls, and forced to retire into the
Capitol; and well knowing the Walls of their Fortresses not able to receive
their whole number, took a necessary resolution to leave their old people in
the open City, that the young men might be the better enabled to defend what
was left. Yet at that most miserable and calamitous season, was not our City
forgetful of their pristine Virtue: for though deprived of their Honor, they
sat with their doors open, in their Running-chairs, with the Habits of their
Magistracy and Priesthood, that in their night of sorrow they might retain the
Splendour and Ornaments of their past life, and might encourage the people more
courageously to undergo the burden of their Calamity. Their Aspect was
Venerable in the sight of their Enemies, who were not a little moved at the
Novelty of what they saw, considering the magnificence of their Ornaments, and
their strange kind of boldness. But who could imagine, but that the Gauls, now
Victors, would soon have turned their admiration into Laughter, and into all
manner of Contumely? Therefore Caius Attilius would not stay to expect that
injury; for he fiercely laid his Stick cross the pate of a Gaul that too
familiarly stroaked his Beard, offering his body freely to the Soldier that
out of madness came rushing to kill him. Thus Virtue knows not how to be taken,
and Patience knows no disgrace. To yield to Fortune it accounts sadder than any
death; and it invents new and generous kinds of perishing, if he may be said to
perish that comes to such an end.

8. We are now to give due honor and glory to the Roman Youth, who when C.
Sempronius Attarinus, Consul, had sought with ill success at the battle of
Verrugo, against the Volsci, lest our Battle just upon the point of flying,
should receive a Rout, di^mounting from their Horses, immediately rallied into
Foot-companies, and broke the Enemies Ranks; who being thus forced to retire,
the Roman Youth possess^d themselves of the next Hills, and so ordered it, that
the Volsci turning all their Force upon them, were the cause that our Legions
got in the mean time a very great refreshment to confirm their Courage. And
thus while they thought of obtaining the Trophies, the night separated born
Armies, uncertain whether they parted Victors or vanquished.

9. A noble Flower of the Order of Knighthood was he also, by whose wonderful
Fortitude Fabius Maximus Rullianus, Master of the Horse, was acquitted of a
Crime which he was like to have fallen into, of loosing a Battle to the
Samnites: For Papyrius Cursor being gone to the City to renew the inspection of
Entrails, he was left chief Commander in his absence: And although he were
doubtful of leading the Army out to battle, yet at length joining battle with
the Enemy, he sought not so unsucc^ssfully as rashly: For without question he
had the worst. At which the Young Nobility pulling the bridles off their
horses, spurred them with all their might against the very faces of the Enemy,
by an obstinate Gallantry restoring a Victory wrung out of the hands of the
Enemy, and the hope of Rullianus, which his Country now conceived of his being
the greatest of our Citizens.

10. But of what a prodigious strength were those Soldiers, who wading the
slippery Sea as they had been on firm Land, haled back the Punick Fleet by main
strength to the shore, though endeavoring to fly with the labor of all their
Oars?

11. About the same time, and of the same repute was that Soldier, who at the
Battle of Cannae, where Hannibal rather brake the power than the courage of the
Romans, when his wounded hands were unable to ho^d his Arms, graspimg a
Numidian about the neck that come to srrip him, he bit off his Ears and his
Nose, expiring in the midst of that revenge. An odd kind of Event in fight,
where the party killed is stronger than he that kills him: For the Carthaginian
liable to revenge, rejoiced the dying person, and the Roman was his Revenger at
the very conclusion of his life.

12. Publius Crassus making War in Asia with Aristonicus, b^ing set upon by the
Thracians, of which he had a great number for his assistance, between Smyrnae
and Elea; for fear he should come into their power, he avoided the shame by
resolving to die: For he thurst his Riding-rod into the eye of one of the
Barbarians, who enraged with the pain thereof, thrust Crassus into the side
with his Cutlace; and while he revenges himself, freed the Roman Emperor from
the shame of having lost his Honor. Crassus showed Fortune that she intended
to have punished a person altogether unworthy of so great an Indignity, as
being one that not only prudently but courageously broke the snares which she
had laid to entrap his Liberty, and restored his own Dignity to himself,
although now given to Aristonicus.

13. The same resolution Scipio made use of, who having unsuccessfully
endeavored to defend the cause of Pompey his Son-in-Law in Africa, endeavored
to fly into Spain; but understanding that the Ship wherein he was, was taken by
the Enemy, he ran himself through, and so falling down upon the Poop, when
Caesar's Soldiers asked for their Commander, he made answer, The Commander is
well: having power only to speak so much as to testify, to his eternal praise,
the Greatness of his Mind.

14. Not less the Moniment of Vtica were thy last breachings, mighty Cato; out
of whose Wounds flowed more Glory than Blood. For with a fierce Constancy lying
upon the Sword, thou were a most noble Example of Instruction, That to all good
Men Dignity and Honor without Life, is far better than Li^e without Honor.

15. Whose Daughter had no Womanish Spirit: who knowing the resolution that her
Husband Brutus had taken to kill Caesar, the night before the day wherein that
most horrid act was committed, as soon as Brutus was gone out of the Chamber,
she called for a Razor, pretending to pare her Nails; and as if she had let it
tall by chance, gave her self a Wound therewith. Upon the cry of the Maids
Brutus coming in, began to chide her that she had took the Barber's trade out
of his hands. To whom she privately whispered, This is no rash action of mine;
but as things now stand, a most certain proof of my Love toward thee. For I
was resolved to try, if thy purpose, should not succeed according to thy
desire, how bravely and patiently I could kill my self.

16 More happy in his Offspring was the Elder Cato, out of whose Loins sprang
the Family of Porcius. Who being in battle forely pressed upon by his Enemy,
his Sword fell out of the Scabbard; which though he saw encompassed with such
numbers of his Enemies, yet such was his obstinacy to recover it, that he would
not give over, till he had done it: so that at length he seemed not to have
wrung it out of the hands of dang^r, but to take it up in security. Which sight
so terrified his Enemies, that the next day they came to him to b^g ^^r Peace.

17. The Fortitude of the Gown may be mixed with Warlike Actions, deserving the
same honor in Courts of Justice as in the Camp. When T. Gracchus, having got
the favor of the People by his profuseness, endeavored to oppress the
Commonwealth, and openly declared, that the Senate being put to death, all
things ought to be transacted by the People; The Senate being summoned into the
Temple of Faith by Mucius Scaevola Consul, began to consult what at such a time
to do: and all being of opinion, that the Consul ought to govern the
Commonwealth by force of Arms, Scaevola denied that he would do any thing by
force. Then replied Scipio Nasica, Because (says he) the Consul, while he
follows the course of Law, does that which will bring both the Law and all the
Roman Empire in jeopardy; I as a private person offer my self to be commanded,
and to command according to your will. Then lapping his left hand in his upper
Coat, and listing up his right, he openly proclaimed, They who desire the
safety of the Commonwealth, let um follow me: at which words being followed
without delay by the honest part of the Citizens, he brought Gracchus to the
Punishment which he deserved.

18. Also when Saturninus Tribune of the people, the Praetor Glaucia, and
Equitius designed Tribune of the people, had raised most terrible Seditions in
our City, and no body durst oppose themselves against the fury of the people;
Emilius Scaurus was the first that advised C. Marius the sixth time Consul,
that he should defend the Laws and Liberty by the Sword; and presently
commanded Arms to be brought, and being come, put them upon his aged body, now
almost quite wasted with Age; and then leaning upon his Dart, stood before the
door of the Council-house; with the small remnants of his life, keeping the
Commonwealth from expiring: For the constancy of his mind encouraged the
Senate and the whole Order of Knighthood to revenge.

19. But as we have hitherto related the Fortitude of Arms and Arts, let us
remember the sacred Julius, the chief Glory of all the Stars, the truest
Pattern of Virtue. When he saw his men almost fainting through the innumerable
multitude and fury of the Nervae, taking a Shield out of a Soldiers hand, that
he beheld fighting but weakly, he began under the covert thereof to behave
himself with great Vigor; by which act he infused Courage into the whole Army,
and restored the tottering fortune of the Battle. The same person seeing the
Eagle bearer of the Martian Legion with his back turned in a posture of flight,
catching him by the Jaws he brought him back to his place again; and then
stretching his right hand toward the Enemy, he cried out, Why do thou go this
way? yonder is the Enemy which thou art to fight with. Thus with his hands one
Soldier, with his severe reprehension, corrected the timorousness of all the
Legions, and taught them who were ready to be overcome, how to vanquish.

20. But that we may proceed to one act of Manly Virtue: When Hannibal besieged
the Roman Army in Capua, Vibius Acceus, Colonel of the Pelignian Cohort, threw
an Ensign over the Carthaginian Rampire, cursing himself and his
Fellow Soldiers if ever they let the Enemy enjoy it; and so to recover it
again, he was the first that made the Assault, the whole Cohort following him:
Which when Valerius Flaccus, Tribune of the third Legion, turning to his own,
said, I see we are come here to be Spectators of other men's Virtue; but far be
it from us to suffer the Glory of the Romans to give place to the Valor of the
Latins. For my own part, I desire either an honorable death, or a happy Issue
of my venturousness; therefore am resolved to fall on though I am alone. These
words being heard, Pedanius the Centurion catching up the Ensign, and holding
it in his right hand, This, said he, shall be with me within the Enemies
Rampire: Let them follow that are unwilling it should be taken. With that he
slew into the Carthaginian Camp, drawing the whole Legion after him. Thus the
courageous Temerity of three men, made Hannibal who thought himself Master of
Capua, hardly to be safe in his own Camp.

21. Neither was Q. Curious any thing behind them in Fortitude; who for his
stoutness was surnamed Achilles; For not to reckon up all his famous Actions,
we shall make appear by two Achievements only, how great a Warrior he was.
In the time that Metellus was Consul, he was sent a Legate into Spain, carrying
on the Celtiberian War as Lieutenant under the Consul: hearing that he was
challenged out to fight by a certain Young man of that Nation, though he were
then just going to Dinner, he caused his Arms and his Horse to be privately
conveyed out of the Camp, lest the Consul should forbid him, or otherways
hinder him; and following the Celtiberian, that was vauntingly curvetting to
and fro about the field, slew him, and taking the spoils of his dead Enemy,
returned Triumphing to the Camp. He also compelled Piresius, one of the most
noble and stoutest among the Celtiberians, who also gave him a particular
Challenge, to yield to him: Nor was the noble Youth ashamed to give him his own
Sword and Soldiers Coat in the view of both Armies. And also requested, that
so soon as there was Peace between the Celtiberians and the Romans, that there
might be a str^ct League of Friendship between them.

22. Nor must we pass by C. Attilius; who being a Soldier of the tenth Legion,
and fighting on Caesar's behalf in a Sea-engagement, when they had cut off his
r ght hand with which he held a Ship of the Massilians, took hold of the Vessel
with his left: nor did leave fighting till the Ship was taken and sunk. The
Valor also of Cynaegyrus the Athenian, whose pertin^cy in pursuit of the Enemy
was not unlike this, Greece, so fluent in extolling the Praises of her own
Hero's, has sufficiently inculcated into the memory of Posterity.

23. The Naval-glory of Attilius, requires that we should rehearse the praise
of Caesius Scaeva a Centurion, under the command of the same Empires: For he
maintaining a Castle which was committed to his charge, and which a Captain of
Pompey's was sent to take with a great number of man, he slew all that
adventured to come near; and ^ighting afoot without the least giving back, at
length fell upon a vast heap of people that he had slain. His head, shoulders,
and thighs were cut and ma^gled, his eyes po^ked out, his Target p^^re^d
through in a hundred and twenty places. Such Soldiers did the Dis^^pline of
Divine Julius breed; of which the one with the less of his right hand, the
other with the loss of his eyes, terri^ied their Enemies: The one after his
loss a Victor, the other a looser, yet not vanquished.

But thy invinci^le Courage, O Scaeva, in every part of the nature of things, I
know not how to extol with adm r^tion enough, because by thy excellent Virtue
thou (...) it doubtful, whether thou did make a more noble Fight at Sea, or
speak a more illustrious Sp^^on by Land. For in the War wherein Caesar not
content to limit his fame within the bounds of the Ocean, laid his celestial
hands upon the Isle of Britain, being carried with Four of his Soldiers, and
set ashore upon a Rock near the Land, which the Enemy had possessed with a very
strong Army, after the Ebb, by the falling of the water, had made the passage
easy from the Island to the Rock, which was divided before; being assaulted
with a very great number of the Barbarians, Scaeva only keeping his station
immovable, the Darts flying about his ears, and the Enemy every way
endeavoring to assail him, fixed in the Bodies of his Adversaries as many
Piles with his single right hind, as would have served five Soldiers for a
Battle of a whole days continuance: at length, drawing his Sword and beating
back his Enemies, sometimes with the Point, and sometimes with the Hilt, he
became such a spectacle of Wonder, not only to the Romans, but to the Britains
also, which none but those that beheld it, could have imagined. At length,
Anger and Shame forced them that were tired to do their utmost, when he, run
through the Thigh, his Face battered with Stones, his Headpiece bruised in
several places, commits himself to the Sea, and laden with two Coats of Mail,
escaped through the Waves, which he had dyed with the Blood of his Enemies.
Coming to his General, not having lost his Arms, but well bestowed um, when he
deserved his praise, he begged his pardon. Great in fight, but greater in the
remembrance of Military Discipline: Therefore by the best Esteemer and
Discerner of Virtue, both thy deeds and words were rewarded with the honor of
a Centurions command.

24. But let the Memory of Luc. Sicinius Dentatus conclude all the Roman
Examples of the Fortitude of the Roman Warriors; whose Deeds, and the Rewards
of his Actions, may be thought to exceed the limits of belief; but for the
credit of the Authors, among whom we find M. Varro, who attest the same in
their Memorials, whom they affirm to have been in an Hundred and Twenty pitched
Battles; being endued with that Courage of Mind and Strength of Body, that he
se^m'd to carry away the greatest share of the Victory: And of these Battles
there were Eight wherein he sought upon Challenges, while both Armies looked on.
He is said to have saved fourteen Citizens, to have received forty five Wounds
upon his Breast, not having one Scar upon his Back. He followed nine several
Triumphal Chariots of several Generals, drawing the eyes of the whole City that
beheld the multitude and pompous glory of his Rewards. For he had eight Golden
Crowns, fourteen City-Crowns, and three Mural-Crowns, together with one
Obsi^^onal Garland, Chains one hundred eighty three, Bracelets one hundred and
sixty, Spears eighteen, Trappings twenty five. Ornaments sufficient for a
Legion, rather than for the use of a private Soldier.

FOREIGN.
1. That Blood was also confounded out of many Bodies into one, with great
admiration, in the Town of the Calibes, where Fulvius Flaccus having condemned
the chief of the City to loose their Heads for their Perfidiousness in
Campania, and that he was by Letters from the Senate ordered to see execution
done; Jubellius Taurea a Campanian freely offered himself to him, crying ou^ as
loud as he could, Because, said he, O Ful^^us thou art so desirous of shedding
blood, why do thou delay to sheath thy Sword in my Bowels, that thou may
have an occasion to boast, that thou did once ki^^ a stouter man than thy
self? Who replying that he would gladly do it, but that he was otherwise
ordered by the Senate; Behold me, then replied the other, upon whom the
Conscript Fathers have laid no commands, outwardly quiet enough, but meditating
a great* work in my mind: and immediately killing his Wife and Children, fell
upon his own Sword. What kind of person must we believe him to be, who was so
willing with the slaughter of himself and his Relations to testify, that he
would rather delude the Cruelty of Fulvius, than make use of the Mercy of the
Senate?

2. Again, how great was the Courage of Gobrias, who, when he freed the
Persians from the sordid and cruel Tyranny of the Magi, having thrown one of
the Magi down in a dark place, and lying with all his weight upon him, and
perceiving that one of his Companions in his noble enterprise was afraid to
kill the Tyrant, for fear of hurting him, cried out, Use not thy Sword ere a
whit the less timorously for fear of me; rather thrust it through us both, that
this fellow may die the more speedily.

3. In this place we meet with Leonidas, a Noble Spartan, than whose Design,
Enterprise and Issue there was nothing more courageous. For being placed in the
Streights of Thermopylae against the whole force of Asia, only with Three
Hundred of his Citizens, through the obstinacy of his Virtue, he drove Xerxes
to despair, who a little before was a burden both to Sea and Land; not only
terrible to Men, but one that threatened to chain the Sea, and setter the
Heavens: but being through the* perfidiousness of the Inhabitants of that
Country deprived of the advantage of the place, he resolved to fall, rather
than leave the station where his Country had set him. And therefore he exhorted
his people with so much cheerfulness to that Battle where they were sure to
perish, crying out, Fellow Soldiers, let us Dine like such as art to Sup in
the other world. Death was all their hopes* yet fearless they obeyed their
Leader, as sure of Victory.

4. The glorious Battle and Death of Othryades, is only seen in the praise,
rather than in the larger space of Thyarete. Who spoiling the enemy of Victory,
by Letters written with his own Blood; after his own fate, would not carry into
the bosom of his Country the bloody superscription of his Trophies.

5. But a most sad effort follows the most excellent effects of the Spartan
Virtue. Epaminondas, the chief Felicity of Thebes, and the first scourge of the
Lacedemonian Valor, when he had broken the ancient glory, and till that time
invincible public glory of that City, in the two Battles of Mantinea and
Leuctra, being run through with a Spear, and saluting for want of Blood and
Breath, ask^d those who endeavored to recover him. First, whether his Shield
were safe; and ^ext, whether the Enemy was quite vanquished: Which when he
found according to his desire, Fellow Soldiers, said he, this is not the end,
but a fortunate and auspicious beginning of my life: For your Epaminondas is
now born, because be thus dies. I see Thebes by my Conduct and Command the head
of all Greece. The strong and courageous City of Sparta submits, vanquished by
our Arms, and Greece freed from her bitter Tyranny. Not having Children, yet I
die not without Children, I leave Leuctra and Mantinea behind me. Then
commanding the Spear to be pulled out of his Body, he expired. Whom if the
Immortal Gods had suffered to enjoy his Victories, a more glorious Redeemer had
never entered the Walls of any City.

6. Nor was the Constancy of Theramenes the Athenian inconsiderable, being
compelled to die in Prison, where without any sign of fear he drank the Potion
prepared for him by the thirty Tyrants; and smiling upon the public Officer
that brought it; Tell Critias, quoth he, I drink to him, and therefore take
care that thou carry him the Cup, as soon as thou can. Now this Critias was
the cruellest or all the Tyrants. Certainly it is as easy to free a man's self
from punishment, as to endure punishment: and thus Theramenes, as if he had
died in his Bed, departed this life; by his enemies thought to have been
punished, in his own opinion yielding only to common fate.

7. But Theramenes received his Constancy from Learning and Education: But the
natural Ferity of the people taught Theogenes the Numantine to take the same
course. For the affairs of Numantium being in a low and lost condition, himself
excelling a^ others in Wealth, Honor and Nobility, getting a great quantity of
combustible matter together, he set his own Street, which was the fairest in
the whole City, on fire, and laying a naked Sword in the midst of it, he
commanded two persons to fight together, that the Head of him that was killed
might be cast upon the flames: and having by this strong engagement consumed
everybody else, at length he threw himself into the fire.

8. And that I may rehearse the destruction of a City at equal enmity with
ours; when Carthage was taken, the wife of Asdrubal upbraiding him with Impiety
for b^gging only his own life at Scipio's hands, taking her Children which she
had by him in her right and left hand, willing to die, the flung her self into
the flaming Ruins of her Country.

9. To this Example of Female-fortitude, I will add one stout Casualty of two
Virgins. When through the most pestiferous Sedition of the Syracusans, the
whole Family of King Gelo, afflicted with eneless Calamities, was reduced to
one Virgin-daughter, named Harmonia, and that the Enemy made several offers of
violence upon her; Her Nurse took a Child somewhat like her, and having
dressed it in royal Apparel, exposed her to the fury of her Enemies; who when
she was about to be slain, would not declare her condition. Harmonica admiring
her condition, and not willing to outlive so much Faith, called back the
Murderers, and confessing who she was, was the cause of her own death. Thus a
covert Lie was the bane of the one, the open truth the destruction of the other.

CHAP. III. Of Patience.
ROMAN Examples, whereof are two.
1. C. Mutius Cordus, first called Scaevola. 2. Pompey Ambassador to King
Gentius.
FOREIGN.
1. A Macedonian Youth. 2. Zeno Eleatean, 3. The other Zeno. 4. Anaxarchus
Abderite. 5. Theodorus of Syracuse. 6. The Indians. 7. The African slave
contemning Death and Torments.
FOrtitude has been apparent to the eyes of men by the famous Deeds both of
men and women: and by her incitement, Patience appears grounded upon as firm
foundations, not being endued with a less generous Soul, but so like the one co
the other, that she seems to have received her birth either with her or from
her.

1. For what has a greater resemblance to what I have formerly related, than
the Act of Mutius, who grieving to see our City vexed with a long and grievous
War, by Porsenna King of the Heturians, privately got armed into the Camp,
endeavored to have slain him as he was sacrificing before the Altar; But
failing in the Enterprise, and being laid hold on, he neither concealed the
cause of his coming; and besides that, with a wonderful patience showed how
little he feared any torment they could put him to: For as it were out of an
enmity to his right hand, because he could not use it in the slaughter of the
King, he held it in the fire, enduring it to be burnt off. Certainly the
Immortal Gods never beheld with more heedful eyes any Offering made them. And
it forced Porsenna himself, forgetful of the danger, to turn his Revenge into
Admiration. Return, quoth he, to thy own Friends, and tell them how I have
given thee thy life for seeking mine. Whose Clemency Mutius no way flattering,
more sorry to see him live, than glad of his own life, returned to the City
with a surname of eternal glory, being called Scaevola.

2. Most approved also is the Virtue of Pompey; who being sent upon an
Embassy, and taken by the way by King Gentius, and commanded to reveral the
Counsels of the Senate, thrust his finger into a burning Candle: which patience
of his made the King not only despair of getting any thing out of him by
force, but also very desirous of the friendship of the Romans. But lest, while
I strive to enumerate more Domestic Examples of this sort, I should be forced
to embroyl my self in the relations and stories of our civil Discords, which as
they contain the Relation of most famous men, so they renew the public Grief,
I shall pass to those of Foreign Nations.

EXTERNAL.
According to the ancient Custom of Greece, the most eminent Noblemens Sons
did always attend upon King Alexander when he sacrificed: Among which there was
one who while he stood before the King, holding the Censer, a live cole fell
upon his arm, which though it burnt his flesh so vehemently that the stink
thereof offended the nostrils of all the standers by, yet the Lad would by no
means discover his pain, fearing to disturb the Sacrifice by letting fall the
Censer, or to offend the Kings ears by complaining. The King pleased with the
patience of the Youth, and willing to make a mere certain trial thereof,
prolonged the Sacrifice beyond his wonted time; yet nothing would alter the
constancy of the Lad. Had Darius cast his eyes upon this wonder, he would have
known that Soldiers of such a race were not to be overcome, while in their
tender age he beheld them endu'd with such a strength.

There is that vehement and constant Discipline of the Mind, I mean Philosophy
excelling in Learning, ruler of the venerable Mysteries of Doctrne, which being
received into the breast of men, they presently lay aside all dishonest and
unworthy affections, and being armed with the true weapons of Virtue, advance
themselves above all fear and thought of pain.

2. I will begin from Zeno of Eleas; who being a most wise observer of the
nature of things, and most sedulous to kindle Courage and Vigor in the minds
of Youth, purchased Credit to his Precepts by Examples of his own Virtue: For
departing his Country, where he might have lived secure in Lib^rty, he went to
Agrigentum, then groaning under a most miserable servitude, confiding in his
Conversation and Manners, that he was in good hopes to work the Tyrant, though
a Phalaris, out of the ferity of his rude nature. After some time observing
that the Custom of Dominion was more prevalent than wholesome Counsels, he
stirred up and inflamed the minds of the most noble Youth with a desire of
recovering their Liberty. Which being revealed to the Tyrant, he called the
People into the Marketplace, and in their presence began to punish Zeno with
most exquisite torments; oftentimes asking him who were his Confederates in the
Conspiracy. Zeno would name none of them, but only those that were the Tyrants
chiefest Friends and Relations; and then upbraiding the Agrigentines with their
sloth and fear, raised such a sudden commotion in their minds, that they fell
upon the Tyrant and stoned him to death. It was not the suppliant Voice, the
miserable Cries of an Old Man upon the Rack, but his strong and serious
exhortation, that chang^d the Courage and Fortune of the whole City.

3. A Philosopher of the same Name, being put upon the Rack by Nearchus the
Tyrant, whose Death he had conspit'd, did not only appear a Conqueror of his
pain and punishment in concealing his Confederates, but showed himself more
covetous of revenge; and therefore telling the Tyrant that he had something to
declare, which it was fit that no body else should hear, he was thereupon
loosened from the Rack, and pretending to whisper in the Tyrants ear, when he
saw his time, caught his Ear in his Teeth, nor would let go, till with the loss
of his Life, the other had lost a member of his body.

4. Anaxarchus imitating the same Patience, and being put upon the Rack by
Nicocreon, Tyrant of Cyprus, when he could by no means be restrained from
casting the most bitter taunts and reproaches imaginable against the Tyrant,
who at length threatened to cut out his Tongue; This part of my body neither,
quoth he, effeminate Youngman, shall be in thy power: and presently biting it
off with his teeth, when he had sufficiently chewed it, he spit it into the
Tyrants mouth gaping for anger. That tongue wonderfully astonished the ears of
many, especially of Alexander the King, having before so wisely and eloquently
described the condition of the Earth, the situation of the Sea, the Motion of
the Stars, and lastly the Nature of the whole World, Yet he fell more
gloriously than he lived, seeing such a courageous conclusion approved the
illustriousness of his profession, and beautified with such a noble end. And
Anaxarchus did not only not forsake living, but rendered his Death more famous.

5. In vain did Hieronymus the Tyrant weary the hands of the Executioners with
the Tortures of Theodorus a most eminent person. For the Tyrant was forced to
break his Whips, loosen the Strings, take him from the Rack, and quench the
burning Plates, ere he could make him confess his Confederates. At length, by
accusing one of the Tyrants Guard, upon whose shoulders as upon hinges the
whole weight of the Government hung, he saved one of his most faithful Friends.
And by the benefit of his Patience not only concealed the Secrets of the
Conspiracy, but occasioned his own revenge. For Hieronymus, while he covetously
tears his Enemies flesh, rashly lost his Friend.

6. Among the Indians the Exercise of Patience is reported to be so obstinately
observed, that there be some that go naked all their days, hardening their
Bodies in the extreme cold of Caucasus, sometimes walking through fire without
any complaint. And by this contempt of pain, they gain no small honor,
receiving from thence the title of Wisdom.

7. Such things as these arise from minds high and fraught with knowledge: but
this is no less to be admired in a Slave.

A Barbarian Slave grieving for the loss of his Master, presently setting upon
Asdrubal, slew him. And when being apprehended he was tormented all manner of
ways, yet he constantly retained in his mouth the joy which he had in his
revenge. Virtue therefore not excited by the trouble of attaining, suffers her
self to be always possessed by vigorous Ingenuities; nor affords a taste of her
self large or thrifty according to the difference of the persons, but being
exposed equally to all, esteems more what it brings of desire than worth: And
therefore leaves thee to examine the weight thereof, by the consideration of
the benefits received by her, that thou may carry away with thee as much, as
thy Courage is able to bear.

CHAP. IV. Of those who being meanly born, have advanced to great Honors.
Among the ROMANS.
1. Tullus Hostilius. 2. Tarquinius Priscus. 3. Servius Tullius. 4. Terentius
Varro. 5. M. Perperna. 6. M. Porcius Cato.
FOREIGN.
1. Socrates the Athenian. 2. Euripides and Demosthenes.
HEnce it many times falls out, that Men born of mean Parentage arrive to the
highest pitches of Honor and Preferment; and on the contrary, that Men of most
Noble Extraction, falling into some disgrace, change that light which they
received from their Ancestors into darkness. Which will appear more apparent by
their Examples. I shall begin with those whose change from low to high degree,
affords a kind of pleasing Majesty.

1. A poor Country Cottage entertained the Infancy of Tillus Hostillur. His
Youth was employed in keeping sheep* his riper years governed the Roman Empire,
and doubly augmented it; his old age embellished with most excellent Ornaments,
shined in the highest Pinnacle of Majesty.

2. But Tullus though he were great, and admirable in his growing great, yet
was he but a private Example. But Tarquinius Priscus was by Fortune brought to
our City to possess the Roman Scepter: A Forrainer, because born at Coriuth; to
be scorned, as being begot by Demaratus a Merchant; and one to be ashamed of,
because his Father was an Exile: But by the prosperous event of his Condition
he became industrious, instead of ignominious, glorious instead of being
envied. For he extended the bounds of the Empire, and reformed the Worship of
the Gods with now Sacrifices: He increased the number of Senators, and
amplified the Order of Knighthood. And what was the perfection of his praises,
his most eminent Virtues were such, that the City hid no cause to repent that
she had rather borrowed a King from her Neighbors, than chosen one of her own.

3. But in Servius Tullius Fortune showed her greatest power, by givin^ (...) a
King born a stranger to this City; who happened to sway the Scepter many years,
to appoint a Lustrum four times, and to triumph thrice. Briefly, whence he
came, and how far he proceeded, the Inscription of his Statue sufficienty
witnesses, being intrig^'d (...) servile Sirnime, and a Royal Title.

4. By a si^^^ge ri^e Varro ascended to the Consulship, from (...) ^athers
Butchers stall: Yet Fortune thought it no^ ^^^^gh to bestow the twelve Fasces
upon one brought up by the gains of the most sordid Ware, unless she had given
him Emilius Paulus to be his Colleague: And she so insinuated her self into his
^avour, that when by his rashness he had ruined the Power of Rome, at the
Battle of Cannae, yet she suffered Emilius to be slain, but brought Varro safe
to Rome: Nay, she brought forth the Senate to meet him without the Gates, and
giving him thanks that he would be pleased to return; and so advanced him, that
the Dictatorship was allotted to the Author of their greatest Calamity.

5. Nor was Marcus Perperna a small disgrace to the Consulship, as being made
Consul before he was a Citizen; but in War more profitable to the Commonwealth
than Varro the General: For he took King Aristonicus, and revenged the
slaughter of Crassus and his Army. Yet was his death, whose life had triumphed,
condemned by the Papian Law: for they compelled his Father, not being able to
claim the privileges of a Roman Citizen, and prosecuted therefore by
Sabellius, to return to his Original Station. Thus was the name of Perperna
clouded, his counterfeit Consulship a kind of Government like a Mist, a fading
Triumph, and his Offspring a Sojourner in a strange City.

6. But the beginnings of Porcius Cato were searched for out by public Vote:
Who rendered his name most famous at Rome, which was scarcely known in
Tusculum. The lasting Monuments of the Latin Tongue were by him adorned,
Military Discipline reformed, the Majesty of the Senate increased, his Family
established, to which the last Cato was no small honor.

FOREIGN.
1. But to join Foreign Examples to the Romans; Socrates not only by common
consent of all persons, but by the Oracle of Apollo, judged to be the wisest
among men, was born of Phanarete a Midwife, and Sophroniscus a Stone-cutter;
yet he came to be one of the most resplendent Lights of Glory, and not
undeservedly. For when the Wits of most learned men were busied in blind
Disputations, and endeavored to set down and prove the measures of the Sun,
Moon, and the rest of the Stars, rather by multiplicity of words, than certain
Arguments, (for they undertook to tell the compass of the whole World) he
diverted men from these unlearned and unnecessary questions, and taught them to
dive into the nature of Man, and the secret Affections that lay hidden in his
breast: So that if Virtue be esteemed for its self, much more such a Master as
teaches the best Rules of life.

2. What Mother Euripides had, or what Father Domesthenes had, was unknown to
the Age they lived in: Yet the most certain opinion of the Learned is, That the
Mother of the one sold Pot Herbs, and the Father of the other dealt in Knives.
However, what can be more famous than the Tragedies of the one, and the
Orations of the other?

CHAP. V. Of those who have degenerated, being born of Noble Ancestors.
1. The Son of Scipio Africanus. 2. Q. Fabius, the Son of him, surnamed
Allobrogicus. 3. The Son of Clodius and Fulvia. 4. Marcus Hortensius Corbio.
HEre follows the second part of a double promise, to be made good by relating
the blemishes in the Coats of Illustrious men: Because we are now to relate the
stories of those that have degenerated from the glory of their Ancestors.

1. For what could be more like a Monster than the Son of the Elder Scipio
Africanus? who receiving his beginning from so Illustrious a Family, could
endure to suffer himself to be taken by a small party of King Antiochus; when
it had been better for him to have died a voluntary death, than between two the
most famous Sirnames, the one obtained by the destruction of Africa, and the
other got by the Conquest of Asia, to suffer his hands to be bound by the
Enemy, and to be beholding co his mercy tor a pitiful life, over whom Scipio
was to obtain, in a small time, a Triumph, most glorious in the sight of Gods
and men. Coming to claim the Pretorship, he appeared in the field with such a
spotted and bedaub'd white Gown, that had it not been for the courtesy of
Cicereus, who was his Father's Secretary, he would not have obtained the
honor. Though it had been no great matter whether he had a Repulse or a
Pretorship so obtained; for when the standers by saw what a soul Garment he had
on, they were the occasion that he neither durst place his Chair, nor hear
Causes. Moreover, they took a Ring off his singer, upon which the head of
Alexander was engraved: Good Gods! from what Thunder did ye suffer so much
Darkness to proceed?

2. Again, Q. Fabius Maximus the Son of Q. Fabius Maximus, surnamed
Allobrogicus, what a luxurious and dissolute life did he lead? whose other
Vices to obliterate, yet might his Manners be seen by one act of disgrace, that
Q. Pompey, the City-Pretor, would not let him meddle with his Father's goods.
Neither was there any person in so great a City, that would speak against the
Decree: For men grived to see that that money which was to maintain the
splendor of the Fabian Family, should be spent in Riot and Excess. Thus he
whom his Father's indulgence left his H^ir, the public severity dis-inherited.

3. Clodius the fair was in great favor with the people; yet his Wife Fulvia
wearing a Dagger, showed that he suffered his warlike Spirit to be subject to
the commands of a Woman. Their Son called also by the name of Clodius the Fair,
beside that he had led a slothful and effeminate life in his Youth, was also
infamous for his egregious dotage upon the most common Whores, and died a most
shameful death: For his belly being eaten up, he surrendered his life to the
greedy appetite of his own foul intemperance.

4. Hortensius Corbio also the Nephew of Quintus Hortensius, who in the
greatest plenty of ingenious and illustrious Citizens, attained the highest
degree of Eloquence and Authority, led a life more obscure and sordid, than all
the Strumpets put together. At length his Tongue was as common at the pleasure
and lust of every one in the Bawdy-houses, as his Fathers Oratory was
diligently employed for the good of his Fellow-Citizens.

CHAP. VI. Of Illustrious men, that delighted more than ordinary in rich
Apparel, and sumptuous adorning themselves.
1. Scipio the Greater. 2. Asiatic Scipio. 3. Cornelius Sylla. 4. C. Duilius.
5. C. Papirius Maso. 6. C. Marius. 7. M. Cato of U^ica.
I Am not ignorant what a dangerous Journey I have undertaken: Therefore I will
recall my self, lest while I continue to pursue the remaining Shipwracks and
Miscarriages of the same nature, I should intrigue my self in useless
Relations: I will therefore retreat, and suffer those deformed shadows to lie
hid in the deep Abyss of their own shame; thinking it more to the purpose to
declare what illustrious Personages have given themselves an unusual liberty in
their Habits and Dresses, the Authors of new Customs.

1. P. Scipio being in Sicily, there intent upon the reinforcing and
transporting his Army into Africa, as he that minded nothing more than the
ruin of Carthage, was at the same time accustomed to the Gymnasium, and wore a
Pallium, or long Mantle, and those finer sort of shoes called Crepidae. Yet did
he handle the Carthaginians never a whit the more softly for that: For his
Divertisement made him more eager, seeing that strong and active Wits, the more
they use Retirement, the more vehement they are in Command. Thereby p^rhaps he
also thought to win the favor of the young Gentry, while he followed their
Customs of Habit and Diet. For to those Exercises he applied himself, when he
had much and long tired himself, and had constrained his other Limbs to prove
their Strength by Military Labors, wearied with the one, recreated with the
other.

2. We likewise behold the Statue of Lucius Scipio with a Chla^ys or a short
Cloak about his Shoulders, and embroidered Slippers. In which Habit, as he was
wont to wear it alive, they clothed his Effigies.

3. Lucius Cornelius Sylla also, when he was Emperor, thought it no disgrace
to walk the streets of Naples mantled in a Short Cloak, and Embroidered Shoes
upon his Feet.

4. C. Duilius also, that first triumphed by Sea over the Carthaginians, when
he had been feasting, was wont to return home with Wax-Torches and Minstrels
going before him, causing his noble Success in War to be spread abroad by his
Nocturnal Revelling.

5. Papirius Maso also, not being able to obtain a Triumph, though he had
signally deserved of the Commonwealth, began a new way of Triumphing in the
Alban Mountain, and set a president for others afterward to follow. For when
he was present at any Show, he used a Myrtle instead of a Laurel Crown,

6. Unusual also was the act of Caius Marius, who having Triumphed over
Jugurth, the Cimbrians, and Teutons, was always used to drink out of a
Cantharus, or Kan. Because that Bacchus returning in triumph out of Asia, was
said to use that sort of Cup; that while he drank, he might seem to compare his
Victories with those of the God.

7. Marcus Cato also, being Praetor, pleaded the Condemnations of Scaurus, and
the rest of the Criminals, without his Tunic, only in his Purple Gown.

CHAP. VII. Of Self-Confidence.
Among the Romans, in
1. Scipio the Greater. 2. Scipio Aemilianus Coss. 3 Scipio Nasica Coss. 4.
Livius Salinator Coss. 5. P. Furius Philus Coss. 6. Licinius Crassus Procos. 7.
Cato the Greater. 8. Aemilius Sc^urus. 9. M Antonius the Orator. 10. The Roman
Senate. 11. Accius the Poet.
FOREIGN.
1. Euripides the Poet. 2. Antigenidas the Musician. 3. Zeuxes the Painter. 4.
Phidias the Graver. 5. Epaminondas of Thebes 6. Hannibal the Carthaginian. 7.
Cotys King of Thrace. 8. Androclidas, Leonidas, Agis, Spartans.
THese, and other Examples like these, are marks of a Virtue assuming something
to it self, by a new custom of Liberty. But by those that follow, it shall
appear how confident Virtue is of her self.

1. P. and Cn^ Scipio being with the greatest part of the Army very much
distressed by the Carthaginians, all the people of that Province taking part with
the Enemy, no other of our Captains daring to adventure thither; Publius
Scipio, being then but in the Twenty Fourth year of his Age, proffered himself.
Which confidence of his afforded both safety and victory to the Romans. And the
same confidence he had at home, he used in Spain. For when he was besieging the
City of Badia, he caused all those that came to his Tribunal, in matters of
Law, to put in Sureties to appear at a certain House which was within the Walls
of the Town the next day; and immediately taking the City, at the same time and
place that he had appointed, he caused his Chair to be placed, and there sat
in Judgment. Nothing more Heroic than such a Confidence, nothing more true than
such a Prediction, nothing more efficacious than such a Celerity, nothing more
worthy than such an Authority. Not less courageous, nor less prosperous was his
Passage into Africa: into which he transported his Army, contrary to the
command of the Senate. In which thing, had he not trusted more to his own
opinion, than the counsel of the Conscript Fathers, there would have been no
end of the Second Punic War. Equal to this was that Confidence of his, that
when after he was landed in Africa, he had taken several of the Scouts of
Hannibal's Army, he neither put them to death, nor in prison, nor inquired any
thing into the state and condition of the Enemy; but caused them to be led
through all the Companies of his Army: And then, after he had a^k'd them
whether they had taken a sufficient view of what they were commanded to take
notice of, causing provision to be given to them and their horses, he freely
dismissed us in safety. With which Confidence of mind he dampt the Courage of
the Enemy, before he had vanquished their Arms. But to come to the private acts
of his sublime confidence; when he was called to an account for Forty Thousand
Sesterces of the Money of Antiochia, he took the Book wherein his Expenses were
wrote down, and by which he might have cleared himself from the Accusation of
his enemies, and tore it publicly; disdaining that any doubt should be made of
what he had acted, as being the chief Commander: Pleading for himself in this
wise; I am not to give an account to your Treasury, most Noble Senators, having
commanded a foreign Kingdom, which by my Government and Conduct, I have made
more plentiful than twice an Hundred Thousand Sesterces. Neither do I think ye
are come to that height of malice, as to doubt of my Innocence. For when I had
subdued Africa wholly under your Jurisdiction, I brought nothing thence that I
could call mine own, but a Surname. They have not therefore rendered me
covetous of the Punic, nor my Brother of the Asiatic Treasure, seeing we are
both more wealthy in Envy, than in Money. Which stout defense of Scipio the
whole Senate approved.

Like this was another act of his. When finding that the urgent occasions of
the Commonwealth required Money to be taken out of the Public Treasury, and
that the Questors were shie of opening it, because it seemed to be something
against the Law; being a private person he demanded the Keys, and compel^'d the
Law to yield to Necessity. Which confidence gr^w from the assurance which he
had, that all the Laws were by that means secured. I will not be tired with the
relation of his Actions of this nature, seeing that he himself was never
wearied in the exercise thereof. P. Naevius Tribune of the People, or as some
relate, the two Pete^ii, had pr^fix'd him a day to appear before the People;
who appearing in great multitudes in the Forum, he ascended the Pulpit for
Orations, and putting a Triumphal Crown upon his H^ad; This day, said he, most
Noble Romans, did I compel Carthage, hoping great things, to submit to your
Laws: And therefore I hold it just that you go with me to the Capitol, to give
thanks to the Gods. Which most splendid Speech of his had as noble a success.
For immediately the whole Senate, the whole Order of Knight, and all the People
followed him to the Temple of Jupiter. The Tribune remained alone to plead to
the people without the people, being deserted in the Forum with great contempt
of his Calumny. At length, to avoid the shame, he went also to the Capitol
himself; and of an Accuser, became a great admirer of Scipio.

2. Scipio Aemilianus, the famous Heir of his Fathers Courage and Magnanimity,
being at the Siege of a strong City, and persuaded by some that he should place
round about the Walls thereof sharp Iron Spikes, and stop all the open Passages
with Planks covered with Lead, and stuck with Spikes, to hinder the Sallies of
the Enemy; made answer, that it was not for him to fear those that he sought to
take.

3. To what ever side of Memorable Examples I turn me, I am forced, nolens
volens, to remain in the Family of the Scipio's. For how can we in this place
pass over Scipio Nasica, illustrious for his magnanimous Mind and Saying? There
being a likelihood of great Scarcity, Curatius Tribune of the People compelled
the Consuls, in a public Assembly, to propose in Court the buying of Corn, and
sending Ambassadors to that end and purpose. For the hindering of which
design, being of little profit, Nasica began to make opposition; upon which a
great clamor arising among the People: Romans, said he, be quiet, for I
understand much better than you do, what the necessities of the Commonwealth
require. Which words of his they no sooner heard, but with a silence full of
veneration, they made it appear, how much a greater respect they had to his
Authority, than to their own want of Nourishment.

4. The stout mind also of Livius Salinator is to be delivered to Eternal
Memory; who, when he had defeated Asdrubal, and the Army of the Carthaginians
in Vmbria, and that it was told him that the Gauls and Ligurians were without
order, and without their Officers, scattered from their Colors, easy to be
overthrown with a small party; he made answer, That those were to be spared,
lest the Enemy should want Messengers of their great defeat at home.

5. This was a warlike presence of mind, that which we relate, though in a
person of the Gown, not less praiseworthy; which Furius Philus showed in the
Senate: For he compelled Quintus Metellus, and Quintus Pompeius, men of
Consular degree, being his professed Enemies, and upbraiding him because he did
not go into Spain, which province he had chosen, that he should send
Lieutenants thither, upon his departure from Rome to march along with him; a
confidence not only courageous, but almost rash, that durst admit so near him
two of his most Capital Adversaries; and trust the management of Affairs in the
breast of Enemies, which was hardly to be entrusted with his friends.

6. The act of this person, if it be not displeasing, certainly the purpose of
L. Crassus, who was the most Eloquent among his Ancestors, cannot admit of
reproof: who having obtained the Province of Gallia in his Consulship, in which
Province Carbo had condemned his Father, when he came to have an inspection
into Carbo's actions, he not only not removed him from his Dignity, but
assigned him a place in the Tribunal, and ordered nothing without his presence
in Council: So that sharp and vehement Carbo got nothing by his Gallick
Expedition, but only that he thereby understood that a guilty Father had been
banished by a just and honest man.

7. The Elder Cato being often called to plead for himself, yet never convicted
of any Crime, at length reposed so much confidence in his Innocence, that being
publicly questioned, he made Gracchus his Judge, to whom he bare a singular
hatred, by which excellency of his Courage he abated the envy of his
Prosecutors.

8. The same was the fortune of M. Scaurus, the same length of years, the same
courage of mind: Who being accused before the Pulpits for Orations, that he
had taken money of Mithridates to betray the Commonwealth, pleaded his Cause in
this manner: It is unjust, O Romans, said he, that I who have lived among one
sort of people, should come to give an account of my actions among another; yet
I will dare to ask ye all, the greatest part of whom could not possibly be
present at the Deeds which I have done, and the Honors which I have attained.
Varius Suetonensis says that M. Scaurus bribed by the King, has betrayed the
Commonwealth: Whom of the two do you believe? The people moved with admiration
of his Saying, with their loud Cries forced Varius to desist from his violent
and mad prosecution.

9. Contrariwise did M. Antonius, that Eloquent man: For he, not by refusing,
but by embracing his own defense, testified how innocent he was. Going Questor
into Asia, he was on his Journey as far as Brundusium; where being informed by
Letters that he was accused of Incest before the Praetor Cassius, whose
Tribunal, because of his severity, was called the Rock of the Guilty, though he
might have shunned it by the benefit of the Memmian Law, which forbids the Names
of them to be taken who are absent upon the Affairs of the Public, yet he
returned to the City; by which advice of a good Confidence, he not only
obtained a quick absolution, but a honester departure.

10. These that follow, are also splended Examples of noble Confidence. For in
that War which was undertaken against Pyrrhus, when the Carthaginians had sent
a Navy of an Hundred and Thirty Ships to Ostia, to the assistance of the
Romans, the Senate were pleased to send Messengers with Instructions to tell
their Captain, that they did not use to enter into Wars which they were not
able to carry on without the help of Strangers; and that therefore he might
return with his Navy to Carthage. The same Senate some few years after, when
the Roman power was almost broken by the Overthrow at Cannae, sent a Recruit of
Forces to the Army in Spain; whereby they showed, that although Hannibal was
with his Army at the Capene Gate, how little they valued his approach. Thus to
carry themselves in Adversity, what was it else, but to compel Fortune,
overcome with shame, to return to their side?

11. It is a great leap to descend from the Senate to the Poet Accius. But that
we may pass from him more decently to foreign Examples, let us produce him.
He, when Julius Caesar a great and powerful man came into the College of
Poets, would not so much as rise: not that he was forgetful of his Grandeur,
but that he believed himself superior in comparison of their Studies. And
therefore not guilty of the Crime of Insolence, seeing the contest was about
Volumes, not Statues.

FOREIGN.
1. Nor was Euripides to be accounted insolent at Athens, who, when the People
required him to strike out such a Sentence out of a certain Tragedy, appearing
upon the Stage, told um, That he composed Fables to teach them, not by them to
be taught. That Confidence is certainly to be praised, which weighing the
esteem of a man's self, arrogates so much to its self, as to keep contempt and
insolency at a distance.

And therefore his answer to Alcestides the Tragic Poet; who complaining to
him, that he could not make above three Verses the last three days, and that
with a great deal of labor too, when the other boasted that he could write an
Hundred; The reason is, said Euripides, because thine are only to last three
days, and mine are to last to eternity. For the fluent writing of the one,
perished within the first bounds of Memory; but the elaborate and constant
Style of the other will be carried through all Ages upon the wings of time.

2. I will add an Example upon the same Stage. Antigenidas the Musician, cried
out to a Scholar of his rare in his Art, but not approved by the People, Sing
to me and the Muses. For perfect Art, though it want the flattery of Fortune,
does not therefore want a just confidence in its self.

3. But Zeuxis having painted Helen, thought it not fit to expect what men
would say of his Work, but presently added these Verses out of Homer, Iliad. 3.

(...)
(...)
(...).
I cannot blame the man that for her strives,
Like an Immortal God she is --
So that the Painter did not arrogate so much to his Art, to think he had drawn
so much Beauty, as Leda might assume through her Celestial Birth, or Homer
express by his divine Wit.

4. Phidias also alluded to the Verses of Homer in a notable Saying. For having
finished the Statue of Jupiter Olympic, than which never humane hand did make a
more famous Piece, being asked by his Friend, whither he directed his mind when
he formed the Face of Jupiter of Ivory, as if he had seemed to fetch it from
Heaven; replied, that he made use of these following Verses; Iliad. 1.

(...).
(...)
(...).
-- With his black brows he to her nodded,
Wherewith displayed were his Locks Divine,
Olymyus shook at stirring of his Godhead.
5. But now the most renowned Captains suffer me no longer to insist upon mean
Examples. For Epaminondas, when his Citizens in anger commanded him in contempt
to take care of paving the Streets in the Town (which was one of the lowest
Offices among them) without any hesitation took it upon him, promising in a
short time to make the City most beautiful. By his wonderful Industry making
the most vile Office to be coveted for a great honor.

6. But Hannibal remaining in Exile with King Prusias, and being the occasion
of his giving Battle, though the other told him that the Entrails portended no
good Success, made this reply; Had thou rather, said he, believe a little
Calves flesh, than an old General? A brief and concise Answer, considering the
number of the Words; considering the sense, a copious reply, and of great
authority. For he that had wrung out of the hands of the Romans both Spains,
and having reduced the force of Gallia and Liguria under his subjection, had
opened a new Passage through the Alps, laying at the Kings feet the dire memory
of the Thrasymene Lake, the famous monument of the Punic Victory at Cannae,
Capua taken, and all Italy rent and torn, could not endure that his glory,
witnessed by long experiment, should be put in competition with the Liver of
one Sacrifice. And certainly, as to what concerned the exploring of Military
Sacrifices, and making conjectures of Warlike Conducts, the breast of Hannibal
was far above all the little fires, all the Altars of Bithynia, in the judgment
of Mars himself.

7. That saying also of King Cotys, was the mark of a most generous Spirit, who
so soon as he understood that the Athenians had given him a City, made answer,
that he would give them the Law of his Nation. Thereby equalling Thrace to
Athens, lest by accounting himself unable to requite such a benefit, he should
have been esteemed to have thought too meanly of his Original.

8. Nobly was it said also of both the Spartans, one of whom being reproved
that he went to battle being lame, replied, That it was his intention to fight,
and not to run. The other being told that the Sun used to be obscured with the
Darts of the Persians; A very good story, quoth he, for we shall fight the
better in the shade. Another Person, of the same City and Courage, made answer
to his Host, showing him the high and broad Walls of his City; If ye made um
for your Women, said he, ye did well; if for your Men, 'twas ignominiously done.

CHAP. VIII. Of Constancy.
ROMANS.
1. Q. Fulvius Flaccus. 2. Q. Fabius Maximus. 3. Q. Calpurnius Piso. 4.
Metellus Numidia. 5. Scaevola the Elder. 6. Sempronia Sister of the Gracchi. 7.
Pontius the Centurion. 8. Mevius the Centurian.
FOREIGN.
1. Blassius the Salapian. 2. Phocion the Athenian. 3. Socrates the Athenian.
4. Ephialtes the Athenian. 5. Dion of Syracuse. 6. Alexander the Great.
THere remains the labor of Constancy, as it were due to him that has
demonstrated an open and courageous breast endued with good Confidence: For
Nature has provided that whoever believes himself to have comprehended any
thing orderly and rightly in his mind, should stiffly defend it, and put it
into act against opposition; or if not done, should bring it to effect without
delay maugre all resistance.

1. But while I seek for an Example of what I propound, looking about me at a
distance, before all the rest, the Constancy of Fulvius Flaccus offers it self.
He at that time held Capua, which through the fallacious promises of Hannibal,
had resolved by their vile Revolt to put the Kingdom of Italy into the
Conquerours hands. Having therefore made a true value of the Enemies Crime, he
purposed with himself wholly to extirpate the Senate of Capua, who were the
Authors of that wicked Decree. To this intent he sent them all to Theana, and
Calena, laden with Chains, into two several Prisons, resolving to execute his
purpose, when he had done some other things which required a more necessary
speed. In the mean time a Rumor being spread of more favorable Proceedings
being intended toward them, lest they should escape their deserved punishment,
he took horse in the nightime, posts to Theana, where he put to death all
that were in custody there; thence hasting to Calena, he finished the work of
his severe Resolution: For though while yet the Campanians were bound to the
stake, he had received Letters in favor of them, he notwithstanding kept the
Letters as he received them in his left hand, commanding the Lictor to do his
duty; nor would he open them, till he knew it was too late to obey them. By
which Constancy of his he surmounted the glory of a Victory: For if we make his
Estimate by dividing the praise between himself, we shall find him greater in
Capua punished, than in Capua taken.

2. This was a Constancy in Severity; that which follows, a most admirable
Constancy in piety, which Fabius Maximus rendered indefatigable for the good of
his Country. He told out the Money to Hannibal for the Captives; being
publicly defrauded of it, he said nothing. The Senate had made Minutius Master
of the Horse, equal to him in Authory, he held his tongue, And although
provoked with many other injuries, he persisted in the same habit of mind; nor
would ever give his p^ssion liberty to be angry with the Commonwealth, so
steadfast was the love he bare to his Citizens. In his managing the War, was not
his Constancy the same? The Roman Empire broken at the overthrow at Cannae,
seemed scarce able to provide another Army; and therefore believing it to be
better to delay and weary the force of the Carthaginians, than to come to
Handy-blows with all his power, though provoked with the frequent taunts of
Hannibal, though he had many times a fair opportunity of well succeeding
offered, yet he would never recede from his own wholesome deliberations, not so
much as to the hazard of a Skirmish; and which is most difficult, he every
where appeared to be Superior both to Anger and Hope. And therefore as Scipio
by fighting, so he by not fighting relieved his Country: For the one ruined
Carthage by his Celerity, the other by his delay took care that Rome should not
be destroyed.

3. By the following Narration it will also appear, that Caius Piso being
Consul at a time of much turbulency and combustion in the Commonwealth, did
behave himself with a wonderful Constancy. The fury of the people being highly
moved by the delusions of M. Palicanus, a seditious person, endeavored to
commit a most foul act at the great Assembly for choosing Consuls, intending to
have given into his hands a most large Power, whose vile actions required
rather the utmost severity of punishment, than any the least mark of Honor.
Nor was the furious flame of the Tribunes Authority wanting to incense the
amazed Multitude. In this miserable and shameful condition of the City, Piso
being placed before the Pulpit for Orations, though not by the hands of the
Tribunes, and all flocking about him, and demanding of him whether he would
declare Palicanus Consul, now chosen by the Suffrages of the People, answered;
First, that he did not believe the Commonwealth had been overwhelmed with so
much darkness, as to act a thing so unworthy. And when the People still pressed
him to declare the Election, crying out, If it were unworthily done, let it be
so, he replied, I will make no declaration. With which short Answer he bare
away the Consulship from Palicanus, before he had obtained it. Thus Piso
contemned many terrible hazards, disdainining to renounce the well-grounded
rigor of his mind.

4. Metellus sirnam'd Numidian, for a perseverance of the same nature, endured
a storm much unworthy his Majesty and generous Manners. For when he perceived
what Saturninus in his designs of mischief aimed at, and what ruin they would
bring to the Commonwealth, if not timely prevented, he rather chose Banishment,
than to submit to his Laws. Could there be any person thought more constant
than this man? Who rather than he would act contrary to his judgment, suffered
the want of his own Country, where he had attained to the highest degrees of
Dignity.

5. However, though I prefer no one before him, yet may I not undeservedly
compare with him Scaevola the Soothsayer. Sylla having now quite defeated his
Opposers, and got the upper hand of his Enemies, and got possession of the
City, arm^d as he was, compelled the Senate to accomplish his most eager
desire, that Marius might be by them declared an open Enemy. Whose Will when no
one durst withstand, Scaevola alone being required, refused to give his opinion
in the Case. And when Sylla began with a frowning look to threaten him; Though,
said he, thou should show me the bands of Shouldiers with which thou have
surrounded the Senate, though thou threaten death never so often, thou shall
never make me yield, in hopes to keep warm my little and aged blood, to declare
Marius an Enemy, by whom this City and all Italy has been preserved.

6. What has a Woman to do with public Orations? If the Custom of our
Country be observed, Nothing. But where Domestic Peace and Quiet is tossed
upon the waves of Sedition, the Authority of Ancient Custom gives way. And
that which Violence compels, more avails, than that which Modesty persuades and
directs. And therefore, O Sempronia, Sister of Titus and Caius Gracchus, Wife
of Scipio Aemilianus, I will not comprehend thee in a Narrative envious of thy
worth, as absurdly inserting thee among the most weighty Examples of Virtue:
but because that being brought to answer before the People, by a Tribune of the
Vulgar, thou have not degenerated from the greatness of thy Ancestors in so
vast a confusion, I will eternize thy Memory. Thou were forced to stand in that
place, where the greatest Personages of the City were wont to be affronted. The
highest in Authority powered out their Threats against thee with a severe and
cruel Brow, backed with the Cries of the rude Multitude. The whole Forum eagerly
endeavored that thou should acknowledge with a Kiss Equitius, whom they
unjustly labor to impose upon the Sempronian Stock, as the Son of Tiberius thy
Brother: yet did thou thrust him from thee, a Monster brought out of I know
not what profundity of darkness, approaching with an execrable boldness, to
usurp a relation of Consanguinity, where he had nothing of Alliance.

7. The great Luminaries of our City will not take it amiss, if in the number
of their flaming Lights the virtue of the Centurions also make bold to show it
self. For as humble Degree ought to reverence Greatness, so ancient Nobility
ought rather to cherish than despise those who are but newly advanced, by acts
of Virtue. Wherefore then ought Pontius to be driven out of the Company of
these Examples, who being upon an Out-guard in Caesar's Army, and surprised by
a Party of Scipio's, when there was but one way left for him to save himself,
if he would serve under Pompey his Son in-law, fearless made this answer:
Scipio, I thank thee for thy kindness, but I have no occasion for my Life upon
any such condition.

8. C. Mevius a Centurion of divine Augustus, a person of mean Extraction, yet
of a heroic Mind, and observing the same Constancy of Resolution, having
signalized himself by many Personal acts of Valor in the War with Mark
Antonie; being at length taken by an Ambuscado of the Enemy, and brought before
Antonie to Alexandria, and being demanded what punishment he deserved: Command
me, said he, to be killed, for neither the benefit of Pardon, nor present Death
shall compel me to cease to be a Soldier of Caesar's, nor now to begin to take
thy part. But the more constantly he contemned his Life, the more easily he
obtained it. For Antonie immediately set him at Liberty for his Virtue.

FOREIGN.
1. Many other Roman Examples remain of this nature; but I must avoid
tediousness, and therefore suffer my Pen to slip to Foreign presidents. In the
first front whereof let Blassius appear, than whose Constancy there was nothing
more steadfast. He designing to restore Salapia, where he was born, to the Roman
Empire, being then garrisoned by the Carthaginians; to this purpose, with more
desire to compass his Plot, than hope of obtaining his end, he boldly
adventures to draw in Dasius, one that most fiercely disagreed with him in the
administration of Affairs, being wholly devoted to Hannibal, but one without
whose assistance he could not bring his design about. This man presently
reports to Hannibal all that had passed between him and Blassius, adding of his
own what he thought would increase his own commendation, and render his enemy
more odious. Hannibal calls them both before him; the one to justify, the
other to defend what he stood accused of. Now it falling out so that the matter
was brought before the Tribunal, while other matters of more moment were in
dispatch, Blassius with a fair face and low voice earnestly admonished Dasius,
to favor and assist the Romans: whereupon D^sius crying out, that he was
impudently solicited in the very presence of the Captain by the Prisoner;
which because it seemed incredible, and was heard only by one, and spoken by an
enemy, the truth was not believed. But not long after the wonderful Constancy
of Blassius drew Dasius to his par y, by which means he delivered up Salapia to
Marcellus, with Five Hundred Numidians that were there in Garrison.

2. Phocion the Athenian, when the Athenians had had prosperous success in the
management of an affair contrary to his advice, yet so obstinately defended his
own opinion, that he told them in his Speech, that though he rejoiced in their
Success, yet his Council was much the better, if they had followed it. For he
did not condemn what he saw well done, seeing it had succeeded, what they
undertook by ill advice; accompting the one fortunate, the other wisely
advised. Fortune makes rathness to be approved when it prospers by bad counsel,
which as it causes more vehement mischief, so the good it brings is the more
unexpected. The mann^rs of Phoci^n, pleasing, liberal and endued with all
swe^tness, were the cause that he was by the consent of all men adorned w^^h
the Surname of Good. And therefore Constancy, which by nature seems more rigid,
flowed more gently out of his m^^d Breast.

3. But the mind of Socrates, clad with the str^ngth of Viri^ity, produced a
more rugged ^^^mple of firm Resolution. The whole City of Athens, being carried
away with a most wicked and barbarous error, had pronounced a most sad
sentence against the ten Praetors, that had overthrown the Navy of the
Lacedaemonians at Aeginusae. It happened that Socrates was then in so great
Authority, as at whose discretion the People made their public Edicts; who
thinking it an unworthy thing, that so many and so well deserving persons
should unworthily be taken off by the violence of Envy, opposed his own
Constancy to the Rashness of the Multitude: Nor could he be compelled by the
Clamours and violent Threats of the People, to give his consent to their
public madness. Which being thus by his opposition hindered from raging in a
lawful manner, resolved unjustly to embrue their hands in the innocent blood of
the Praetors. Yet was not Socrates afraid of the Eleventh Fury of his enraged
Country, like enough then to have taken his Life also.

4. The next Example, though not of the same splendor, yet is it to be
accounted as a certain experiment of Constancy, as well in regard of the
Efficacy as the Fidelity of the person. Ephialtes at Athens was commanded to
accuse several persons, and among the rest to set down the name of
Demonstratus, whose Son was Democrates, a Youth of excelling Beauty, and by him
ardently beloved. The Accuser therefore, cruel by reason of his Office, but
considering his private affection miserable and guilty, when the Boy came to
entreat for mitigation of his Fathers punishment, prostrating himself at his
Lovers feet, Ephialtes could not endure to behold him; but with his head
covered, weeping and lamenting, suffered him to pour forth his Prayers in vain.
Yet nevertheless he condemned Demostratus, whom he had with a sincere fidelity
accused; having got the Victory, I cannot say whether with greater praise or
torment, because that before he inflicted punishment upon the Guilty, he
vanquished himself.

5. Him Dion of Syracuse exceeds, though by an example of a various nature. Who
being advised by certain persons to be more wary of Heraclides and Calippus, in
whom he had placed a great confidence, as now plotting designs against him,
made answer, that he had rather loose his Life, than out of fear of a violent
Death, make no distinction between his Friends and his Enemies.

6. That which follows is not only admirable for the thing it self, but also
illustrious, when we consider the Author. Alexander King of the Macedonians,
having in a very great Battle broken the Forces of Darius, being almost scalded
with the heat of the Weather and his Travail, threw himself into Cydnus, a
River running by Tarsus, eminent for the excellency of the water. Upon a
sudden, with drinking overmuch, his Nerves being stupefied with cold, and his
Arteries benumbed, he was carried in that condition to a Town adjoining to the
Camp, to the great consternation of the whole Army. While he lay ill at Tarsus,
in the extremity of his Sickness, the hopes of present Victory boiled in his
Breast. And therefore calling his Physicians, he sought for all Remedies to
restore his health; who all pitching upon one Potion, which was to be made and
given him by the hands of Philip his Friend and Companion, he received Letters
at the same time from Parmenio, advising him to beware of the treachery of
Philip, whom Darius had certainly corrupted. Nevertheless, after he had read
the Letters he drank off the Potion, and then gave the Letters to Philip to
^ead. For which constant opinion of the Reality of his Friend, he received a
most worthy Reward from the Immortal Gods, who would not permit the Remedy of
his Health to be disappointed by any surmised Suspicion of Treachery in the
delivery of it.

LIB. IV.
CHAP. 1. Of Moderation.
Among the ROMANS.
1. P. Valerius Poblicola Coss. 2. Furius Camillas Exile. 3. Marcius Rutilius.
4. L. Quinctius Cincinnatus Cos. 5. Q. Fabius Maximus Rullianus. 6. The Elder
Africanus. 7. Claudius Marcellus. 8. Sempronius Gracchus Cos. 9. Claudius Nero
Consul. 10. P. Scipio Aemilianus Cos. 11. Q. Mucius S^^vola. 12. Metellus
Macedonian. 13. Metellus Numidian. 14. Cato of Utica. 15. Calpurnius Bibulus
Proc.
FOREIGN.
1. Architas Tarentine. 2. Plato Athenian. 3. Dion of Syracuse. 4. Thrasybulus
the Athenian. 5. Stasippus of Tagea. 6. Pittacus Mitylene. 7. Seven wise men.
8. Theopompus King of Lacedaemon. 9. Antiochus King of Syria.
I Shall pass to the most wholesome part of Instruction, Moderation of Mind,
which will not suffer our Minds to be diverted from the right way by the
assaults of Rashness. Whence it falls out to be not only without reprehension,
but most wealthy in the treasures of praise; and therefore let us show the
effects thereof in men of Fame.

1. And that I may begin from the Cradle of Honor, P. Valerius, who for the
honor he bore the Majesty of the people, was called Poblicola; who after
Kingship was driven out of Rome, seeing the whole stress of their power, the
Ensigns of their Authority translated to himself under the Title of Consul, he
reduced the envious height of Magistracy to a Habit easily to be endured. He
made the Fasces give way to the Axes, in all public Assemblies laying them
down at the feet of the people: he brought the number of the Fasces to be less
by one half, and of his own accord took Lucretius to be his Colleague in
Authority; before whom, because he was the Elder, he caused the Fasces to be
carried first. He also enacted a Law in the Assemblies of the Hundreds, That no
Magistrate should strike or kill a Roman Citizen; so that the freer the
Condition of the City was, the more he by little and little extenuated his own
Authority. He also pulled down his own house, because that being seated in a
higher part of the City, it seemed to have the resemblance of a Castle. Thus
lower in his house, did he not appear higher in his glory?

2. I can no sooner forsake Poblicola, but I am pleased in coming to Furius
Camillus: Whose Translation and change from great Ignominies to highest
Command, was so moderate, that when his Fellow-Citizens, after that Rome was
taken by the Gauls, required his assistance, being then an Exile in Ardea, he
had no sooner began his Journey to Veii, there to take charge of the Army, but
that he understood all things were confirmed in most solemn manner in relation
to his being made Dictator. Magnificent was the Veientine Triumph of Camillus,
famous was his Victory over the Gauls, but much more admirable that his Pause:
for it was a harder labor for him to overcome himself than the Enemy; neither
avoiding adversity with too much haste, nor meeting adversity with too much joy.

3. Equal to Furius in Moderation, was Marcius Rutilius Censorinus: For being a
second time created Censor, he called the people together to an Assembly, and
in a Speech most sharply reprehended them, that they had twice conferred that
Office upon him; seeing that their Ancestors thought rather fit to abridge and
confine the time of holding the same, as being too great for one man. Both did
well, both Censorinus and the people: for the one instructed them to bestow
their high Honor with Moderation, the other entrusted themselves in the hands
of a moderate person.

4. Go to! L. Quinctius Cincinnatus, what a Consul was he? whose honor when
the Conscript Fathers would have continued not only for his egregious acts,
but because the people intended to continue the same Tribunes again the next
year, neither of which could be legally done; he hindered the endeavors of
both, not only restraining the endeavors of the Senate, but constraining the
Tribunes to follow the Example of his own Modesty.

5. But Fabius Maximus having observed that himself had been Consul five times,
and oftener by his Father, Grandfather, and Great-Grandfather, at the Assembly
of the People, where his Son was created Consul, pleaded very hard with the
people, That they would permit a vacation of Honor to the Family of the Fabii:
Not that he did mistrust the Virtues of his Son, for he was a person of great
Honor, but that the supreme Honor of the Commonwealth should not remain in
one Family. What more powerful than this Moderation, that could so overcome his
Fatherly affections, which are generally so strong in Parents?

6. There was no Gratitude wanting among our Ancestors to give the rewards due
to the Elder African; seeing that they have endeavored to adorn his greatest
Enterprises with equal Honors. Willing they were to place his Statue in the
great Halls of Justice, and Public Assemblies, over the Rostra in the Court;
and in the Temple of Jupiter himself, they were willing to adorn his Statue
with Triumphal Habits, and lay it upon the Cushions or Beds of the Gods in the
Capitol. They would have given him the Consulship as long as he lived, or a
perpetual Dictatorship. But he not enduring any Act of the People, nor Edict of
the Senate to pass in his behalf, carried himself with more Honor in refusing
those Honors, than he had got in obtaining them.

With the same strength of mind he defended the Cause of Hannibal in the
Senate, when his own Citizens by their Ambassadors accused him of raising
Sedition among um. Adding, that it did not become the Conscript Fathers to
meddle in the affairs of the Carthaginians; with a most high moderation
consulting the safety of the one, and the dignity of the other; which amounted
to a Victory, while both seemed to act the parts of an Enemy.

7. But Marcus Marcellus, who was the first that taught that the Carthaginians
could be vanquished, and Syracuse taken, when in the time of his Consulship the
Syracusans came into the City to complain against him, he would not permit the
Senate to hear the Cause, because his Colleague was by chance absent, lest the
Sicilians should grow fearful or remiss in their Accusation: But as soon as his
Partner returned, he himself was the first that put the Senate in mind of
calling in the Syracusans; and patiently heard them while they made their
Complaints. And though they were commanded by Levinus to depart, yet he caused
them to stay, that they might be present at his defense. Afterward when both
parties had been heard, he followed them going out of the Court, that the
Senate might be the more ^ree in passing their Sentence. And when their
Accusations were rejected, he courteously embraced them, suppliantly entreating
him to receive them into his protection. Moreover, having drawn Sicily by Lot,
he yielded that Province to his Colleague. And indeed so often may the Praises
of Marcellus be varied, as he made use of various degrees of Moderation toward
his Assocates.

8. How admirable did Tiberius Gracchus render himself! For being Tribune of
the People, though he bare a professed hatred to the Scipio's both African and
Asiatic; yet when the Asiatic Scipio not being able to pay the Money wherein he
was condemned, was therefore by the Consul commanded to be carried to Prison,
upon his appeal to the College of Tribunes, when no man would intercede for
him, he dissenting and departing from the College, made a Decree: And when
every one thought that in the writing thereof he would have used the words and
expressions of an angry enemy; In the first place he swore that he was not
friends with Scipio, and then recited this Decree of his own framing: That
whereas Cornelius Scipio had cast into Prison the Captains of the Enemy, led
before his Chariot on the day of his Triumph; it was unworthy and unbecoming
the Majesty of the Roman People, that be should be led thither himself. And
therefore he would not suffer it to be done. Then willingly the Roman People
saw how Gracchus had deceived them in their opinion, and extolled his
Moderation with deserved Praise.

9. Claudius Nero is also to be number^d among the choice Examples of principal
Moderation. He was partner in glory with Livius Salinator in the defeat of
Asdrubal. Yet he chose rather to follow him triumphing on Horseback, than to
accept of that honor of Triumph, which the Senate had equally decreed to him;
because the action was performed in Salinator's Province. Wherefore he
triumphed without a Chariot, so much the more renownedly, because only the
Victory of the one, but the Moderation of the other was thereby commended.

10. Nor does the Younger Africanus suffer us to pass him by in silence: Who
being Censor, when he mustered the Army, and in the Sacrifice then wont to be
made, the Scribe was also singing a solemn Hymn of Praise set down in the
Books, the Gods were supplicated to prosper and advance the affairs of the
Roman People: They are, said he, in a condition good and great enough, and
therefore I desire the Gods to preserve them safe as they are. And therefore
ordered the Song to be mended accordingly in the public Records. Which Modesty
the Censors when they mustered ever after used in their Prayers. Prudently
believing, that then the increase of the Roman Empire was to be sought, when
they sought for Triumphs but Seven Miles from the City. But when they now
possessed the greatest part of the World, that it was a piece of
over-Covetousness to desire more. Being happy if they lost nothing of what they
had already won.

Nor did his Moderation appear less in his Censorship before the Tribunal. For
when he was mustering the Centuries of the Horsemen, when he saw Licinius the
Priest appear according to his Summons; I know, said he, that he has perjured
himself in a set form of framed words for the nonce. And therefore if any one
would accuse him, he would be a witness: But (...) no man appeared, Deliver thy
Horse, said he, Priest, (...) buy the Censor's mark lest I be forced to act the
part of an Accuser, Witness and Judge against thee.

11. Which temper of mind is also taken notice of in Q. Scaevola, a most
excellent Personage: For being produced as a witness against a Criminal, when
he had answered that which seemed to make much against the party, he added at
his going away, that they ought not to give him only Credit, unless many
others did aver the same thing; for that to believe the testimony of one,
seemed to be of a very evil Example: Whereby he procured that Faith which was
due to his Sincerity, and at the same time gave wholesome advice for the Common
good.

12. I am sensible what Citizens, what Deeds and Sayings of theirs I am forced
to comprehend in a narrow compass of Oration; but when many and great things
are to be spoken concerning the renown of great men, there is no relation
comprehending infinite persons and transactions that can perform both. And
therefore our purpose is not to praise, but to record them all; and therefore
the two Metelli, the Macedonian and Numidian, two the greatest Ornaments of
their Country, desire leave to be briefly remembered. The Macedonian Metellus
had most eagerly contended with the African Scipio* and this Contention arising
out of an Emulation of each others Virtue, grew to most grievous and terrible
hatred of each other: but when he heard it reported that Scipio was slain, he
ran into the public street with a sad Countenance and confused Outcry, crying
out, Arm, arm, Citizens arm, the Walls of our City are defaced and ruined: For
Scipio was, violently slain at home in his own house. Oh unhappy Commonwealth
in the death of Africanus, but happy in the generous and kind Lamentation of
Macedonicus! For at the same time he made known how brave a Prince she had
lost, and how brave a one she enjoyed. He ordered his Sons also to be the
Supporters of his Bier, adding this voice of Honor to his Funeral, That it
would never be their fortune to perform that Office to a greater man. Where
were now those many Quarrels in the Court? those many dissentions before the
Pulpits for Orations? where the Gown-contests of so great Leaders and
Commonwealths-men? All these this most Venerable Moderation utterly cancelled.

13. But the Numidian Metellus driven from his Country by Popular Faction,
retired into Asia; where when he received Letters as he was at Tralles
beholding certain sports, reporting that with the universal consent of Senate
and People, his return to his own Country was freely granted him, he would not
stir out of the Theater till the Play was ended: Not showing any change of
gladness to those that sat next him of any side, but confined his great joy
within himself, carrying the Countenance in his Exilement, as at his
Restoration. So indifferently did he behave himself between Adversity and
Prosperity, by the advantage of his Moderation.

14. So many Families being numbered up famous for one kind of Virtue, is it
fit that we leave out the Portian Name, as wanting their share in this part of
Glory? The younger Cato will not so permit it, not a little trusting to no
small Exemplar of his own Moderation. He had brought the Cyprian Money with
great diligence and sincerity into the City; for which Office the Senate
ordained, that at the next Praetorian Assemblies Extraordinary consideration
should be taken: but he would not suffer it to be done, affirming it to be
unjust, that what was never decreed to any other, should be decreed to him. And
lest any new Custom should arise from his person, he rather chose the hazards
of the field, than to accept the kindness of the Senate.

15. While I am endeavoring from hence to pass to Foreign Examples, Marcus
Bibulus, a person of great Dignity, and sacred for his high Honors, lays hands
upon me; who when he lay in Syria, receiving News that two of his Sons, of
admirable hopes, were both slain by the Soldiers of Gabinius, the Murderers
of whom were afterward sent him bound by Cleopatra, to take the revenge of so
great a Calamity at his own pleasure. He, notwithstanding so great an advantage
was offered him, that a person so provoked could not desire a greater, yet
caused his Grief to give way to his Moderation, sending immediately back to
Cleopatra the Butchers of his own flesh and blood; telling her withal, That the
power of Revenge did not belong to him, but to the Senate.

FOREIGN.
1. Architas the Tarentine, while he almost drowns himself at Metapontus in the
Precepts of Pythagoras, after long labor and study, having freighted himself
with the whole Body of Learning, returned into his own Country; where when he
came to look after his Estate, he found, through the negligence of his Bailiff,
his Farms very much decayed and spoiled: Whereupon beholding his ill-deserving
Servant, I had most certainly, said he, punished thee according to thy desert,
but that I am angry with thee. And therefore he had rather let him go
unpunished, than in his anger punish him more than was just.

2. The Moderation of Architas was over-liberal, that of Plato more temperate.
For being over-vehemently provoked by a Servant that had committed a great
Crime, fearing he should himself exceed the measure of his chastisement,
committed the correction to his Friend Speusippus; deeming it an unhandsome
thing if he had done amiss, that the fault of his Servant, and the correction
of Plato should deserve the same reprehension: which makes me no less wonder
that he was so constantly moderate toward Zenocrates his Scholar. Plato was
informed that he had spoken ill of him many times. He without hesitation
slighted the accusation. The Informer very seriously asked him, Why he did not
believe him? who replied, That it was not credible that he whom he loved so
well should not love him as well again. At length when the envy of the
Makebate confirmed his story with Oaths, he affirmed, That he did not believe
him perjured; however, if Zenocrates did say such things of him, he would not
have said them, but that he thought it convenient to speak so. One would have
thought his Soul had not kept her Station in a Mortal Body, but in a Celestial
Tower, and as it were armed, that could so invincibly keep off the Incursions
of Humane Vices, keeping the whole number of Virtues in the close Fortress of
the breast.

3. Dion of Syracuse could not deserve equal Commendation with Plato for
Learning, but of his Moderation he gave a larger Experiment. He being expelled
his Country by Dionysius the Tyrant, went to Megara; where coming to give the
King of that City a Visit, but not finding admittance after a long and tedious
waiting, said he to his friend, This is patiently to be endured, for perhaps
when we were in Authority we our selves did something like this* By wtveh
tranquillity of Mind he made his own Exile more pleasing to himself.

4 Thrasibulus is next to be recorded: who when the people of Athens were
forced to leave their Country through the Cruelty of the Thirty Tyrants, and to
live miserably dispersed, and wandering without any home, brought them back to
their own Country. However, he made the victorious Restoration of their Liberty
more renowned by his most applauded Moderation: For he made a Law, That no
mention should be made of things past. This Act of Oblivion which the Athenians
call Amnestia, restored the shaken and decaying State of the City to its former
condition of Honor.

5. Not less admirable is this that follows. Stasippus of Tegea, when his
friends advised him by any means to kill or remove a person that was his Rival
in the Administration of the Commonwealth, though otherwise a very just and
upright person, denied to do any such act, scaring that the place in
Government, which a good man now enjoyed, should be possessed by one of a
perverse and evil disposition, coming in his room.

6. The breast of Pittacus was well endued with Moderation; who being become an
absolute Tyrant over his Country, when Alcaeus the Poet not only prosecuted
him with an inveterate hatred, but with the strength of his sharp Wit, only
gave him to understand what was in his power to do.

7. The mention which I have made of this man, brings to our consideration the
Moderation of the seven Wise men. A certain person had bought a Draught of
certain Fish^rmen in the Country ot Mi^esium; who bringing up a golden Table of
Delphos, of a very exceeding great weight, a very great Dispute arose; these
affirming the sale only of Fish, the person affirming he bought the Draught in
general. By reason of the novelty of the Accident, and the value of the
Treasure, the business was referred to the judgment of all the City: they
thought it convenient to consult the Oracle to whom the Table belonged: the God
answered, that it was to be given to him that excelled in Wisdom, in these
words:

(...).
Who first in Wisdom all excells, to him the Tripos give.
Thereupon the Milesians by consent gave the Table to Thales: he yielded it to
Byas, Byas to Pittacus, and so from one to another, at length it came to Solon,
who gave the attribute of chiefest Wisdom, as also the reward, to Apollo
himselt.

8. And to witness the Moderation of Theopompus, King of the Lacedaemonians;
who being the first Author of the creation of the Ephori, which were to be a
Curb to the Kingly power in La^edaemon, as the Tribunes were a Curb to the
Consular Authority in Rome; and for that cause repreh^nded by his wife, that be
had done that which would lessen the grandeur of his Children: I shall leave it
less, said he, but more lasting, Rightly said; for that power is most lasting
that g^ves limits to it self. Therefore Theopompus by binding a Kingdom in
legal Fetters, the more he withdrew it from Licentious power, the more he fixed
it in the good will of his Subjects.

9. But Antiochus being driven by L. Scipio to the utmost limits of the
Kingdom, beyond the Mountain Taurus, having lost Asia and all the adjacent
Kingdoms, thought himself bound, without d^ssimulation, to return thanks to the
Romans, that being freed from great Cares, they had confirmed him to govern a
moderate Territory. And indeed there is nothing so Illustrious or Magnificent,
which may not be tempeted by Moderation.

CHAP. II. Of Reconciliation.
1. M. Aemilius Lepidus and M. F^lvius Flaccus Censors. 2. M. Livius Salinator
and C. Claudius Nero Coss. 3. The Elder Africanus and T. Sempronius Gracchus.
4. M. Tullius Cicero and A. Gabinius. 5. P. Clodius Pulcher, and T. Cornelius
Lentulus. 6. L. Caninius Gallus and C. Antonius. 7. M. Caelius Rufus and Q.
Pompey.
WHich being demonstrated by many and most renowned presidents, let us pass to
a most rare Affection of the Mind, or the course of Hatred to Friendship, and
let us pursue it in a pleasant Style. For it the boisterous Sea prove calm, and
the stormy Sky appear with a serene aspect, and War making a change for Peace,
be no small cause of comfort; the asswagement of the bitterness of Hatred is to
be celebrated with a candid Narration.

1. Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, twice Consul, and high Priest, equal in the
Splendor of his Honors to the Gravity of his Life, bare an inveterate and
continued Hatred to Fulvius Flaceus, a person of the same dignity; which as soon
as they were both declared Censors together, he laid aside in the Field.
Believing it unreasonable for those to be at private difference, who were
coupled together in Supreme public Authority. That judgment of his mind the
present Age has approved, and the old Writers of Annals have recorded to us as
a thing most worthy of applause.

2. Nor would they let the illustrious advice of Livius Salinator for the
ending of Quarrels be unknown to Posterity. For though he went into Exile with
a burning hatred against Claudius Nero, angered at the testimony which he gave
against him; yet when the People had recalled him, and made him Partner with
Nero in the Consulship, he commanded himself to forget his own disposition,
which was most fiery, and the heavy injury which he had received. Lest by
denying to take the Consorship of Government, through the inward disaffection
of his mind, he should have acted the part of an evil Consul, by showing his
hatred to his Enemy. Which inclination of his mind to a better disposition, in
an unsafe and difficult conjuncture of affairs, wrought no small advantage to
the City and all Italy; while they supported with an equal strength of virtue,
were the first that broke the force and turned the fortune of the Carthaginians.

3. A fair Example also we find in the Elder African and T. Gracchus of Enmity
laid aside. For at the sacred Rites of that Table, to which they came with a
boiling Hatred each to other, from the same Table they departed entire Friends.
For Scipio, at the mediation of the Senate, not contented to enter into
Friendship with Gracchus in the Capitol, at the Feast of Jupiter; he there also
espoused his Daughter Cornelia to him.

4. This gentile humor appeared chiefly in M. Cicero: For he most vehemently
defended A. Gabinius accused of Bribery, who had expelled him out of the City
in his Consuship. And the same person preserved P. Vatinius from two public
Judgments, though he were always an enemy to his Dignity: As without any
imputation of Levity, so with some Praise. For with better pretense Injuries
are overcome by Benefits, than retaliated with obstinate Animosity.

5. Which act of Cicero's seemed so laudable, that P. Pulcher, his utter Enemy,
did not disdain to follow it. Who being accused of Incest by the three Lentuli,
received one of them into his protection, at the same time accused for
corrupting the People, to obtain an Office: and gave his mind wholly (beholding
the Judge, the Praetor, and the Temple of Vesta) to act all Friendship for the
same Lentulus, though the other at the same time endeavored to ruin his
reputation with a soul crime.

6. Caninius Gallus also showed himself wonderful in Courtesy both toward the
Criminal, and to his Accuser: For to Antonius, whom he had condemned, he gave
his Daughter; and Colonius, by whom he was accused, he made Overseer of his
Estate.

7. As for Caelius Rufus, though his Life were infamous, yet the Pity that he
showed to Q. Pompeius was to be applauded; who being cast at a public Trial by
himself, when his Mother Cornelia would not restore the Farms, which he had
conveyed to her in trust, at the request of Lentulus in a Letter, he with great
fervency made a Journey to her: He showed the Letter, which testified the
Necessity of Pompey; whereby he overcame the impious Covetousness of Cornelia.
A deed, for its most compassionate Humanity, to be applauded even in Caelius
himself; and to be imitated, though Rufus were the Author.

CHAP. III. Of Abstinence and Continence.
ROMAN Examples.
1. Scipio African the Elder. 2. Cato of Utica. 3. Nero Claudius Drusus and
Antonia. 4. Cn. Marrius Coriolarus. 5. Curious Dentatus Cos. 6. C. Fabricius
Lusenus ^os. 7. Q. Aelius Tubero Cos. 8. L. Aemili^s Paulus ^rocos. 9. The
Roman Ambass^dours Fabius Gunges, Cn. Fabii Pictores, and Q. Ogulnius. 10. L.
Calpurnius Piso. 11. Cato the Elder. 12 Cato of Utica. 13. P. Scipio Em^lianus.
14. The People of Rome.
FOREIGN.
1. Pericles the Athenian. 2. S^phocles the Athenian. 3. Xenocrates the
Academic. 4. D^^g^n^s the Cynic.
WIth great care and most deliberate study are we now to relate, how those
impetuous desires of Lust and Avarice have by Reason and Council been removed
from the breasts of great Persons. For that City, that Family, that Kingdom
easily remains in a lasting and firm degree of Establishment, where Lust and
Avarice challenge the least prerogative. For where those Plagues of Humane
kind have gotten sooting, there Injury prevails, and Infamy rages. But
forgetting those, let us call to mind Customs contrary to those most
pestilent Vices.

1. Scipio in the twenty fourth year of his Age, having taken New Carthage in
Spain, and conceiving in his mind prosperous hopes of taking the greater
Carthage, had regained into his power many Hostages, which the Carthaginians
kept close in that Town, and among the rest a Virgin of most surpassing Beauty
mature in years, though he were young, unmarried and a Conqueror, yet
understanding that she was of a Noble Family among the Celtiberians, and
affianced to Indibilis, one of the Princes of that Country, he sent for her
Parents and her Spouse, and delivered untouched to her own Friends, adding to
her Dowry the Gold that was brought for her Ransom. Which Continency and
Bounty of his so moved Indibilis, that he wrought with the Celtiberians to take
part with the Romans, thereby approving himself truly grateful for so great a
favor.

2. As Spain was a witness of this man's Abstinence, so did Epirus, Achaia, the
Cyclade Islands, the Seacoast of Asia, and Cyprus, give testimony to the
Continence of Cato: From whence when he had the charge of sending great sums of
Money, he carried himself as free from Wantonness, as from desire of Gain,
though he had opportunity enough to have been intemperate in both: For the
Royal Treasure was all at his charge, and he was forced every where to take up
his Lodgings in Cities the most fruitful of all pleasures. And this is
testified in writing by Minatius Rufus, his faithful Companion in the Cyprian
Expedition. Though I rely not altogether upon his testimony; the subject it
self is a sufficient proof, seeing that Cato and Continence were both born from
the same Womb of Nature.

3. Most certain it is that Drusus Germanicus, the glory of the Claudian
Family, a rare Ornament of his Country, and which is above all the rest, for
the greatness of his Actions, considering his Age, near approaching to the
Grandeur of his Imperial Father-in-Law and Brother, was eminently known to have
confined his love of Women within the particular and single affection to his
own Wife. Antonia also, a woman surpassing in Praise the Masculine Renown of
her Family, recompensed the love of her Husband with a Fidelity answerable: And
after his decease, in the Flower of his Age and Beauty, espoused her self to
the House of her Mother-in-law; so that in the same bed the Vigorous Youth of
the one extinguished, the experienced Widowhood of the other grew aged. And so
let this Chamber put an end to these Examples.

4. Let us now spend some time upon Examples of those who never cared for
money. Caius Marcius a young Gentleman of the Porcian Family, descended from
the Renowned Progeny of King Ancus; who had their surname from Coriolum a Town
of the Volsci by them taken: when for his noble acts of Fortitude, he was
praised at the head of the Army by Posthumous Cominius the Consul, and reward
given him of Military gifts, besides a hundred Acres of Land, his choice of ten
Captives, as many Horses with their Trappings, a Herd of a hundred Oxen, and a
great weight of Silver; yet he refused all, accepting of nothing but the
liberty of one Captive that was his Host, and one Horse for service: Through
which circumspect Moderation of mind, it is hard to judge whether he merited
most in deserving of refusing those Rewards.

5. But M. Curious, a most exact Rule of Roman Frugality, as well as a perfect
President of Fortitude, was not ashamed to show himself sitting upon a
Country-form before the fire at Supper in a Wooden platter. (You may guess at
his Dainties.) He contemned the Riches ot the Samnites, the Samnites admired
his Poverty: For when they brought him a great weight of Gold, sent him by
their Countrymen for a Present, and kindly desired him to accept of it, he
fell into a laughter, and presently, quoth he, You that are come hither upon a
needless, if I may not all it idle Embassy, go tell the Samnites, That Curious
had rather command rich men than be rick himself; and carry back that precious
gift invented to the evil of mankind; and remember that I can neither be
overcome in Battle, nor be corrupted with Money. The same person when he had
driven Pyrrhus out of Italy, nevertheless would nor touch the least part of all
those Royal spoils that did so enrich the City. Moreover, he would not exceed
the usual measure of Popular assignement, though the Senate gave to himself
Fifty Acres of Land, to the people but Seven Acres; esteeming him no good
Citizen, that could not be contented with what was given to others.

6. Of the same opinion was Fabricius Luscinus, greater than any person of his
time in Honor and Authority; in Estate not above the meanest: Who when the
Samnites, who were under his protection, sent him a Present of Ten pound of
coined Silver, Five pound weight of Gold, and as many Servants, he sent them
back to Samnium; by the advantage or his Continency rich without Money, and
attended without a Family; so much did he abound in Honor purchased by the
contempt of those things. Nor was the expectation of Fabricius unanswered in
the refusal of those Presents: For the Ambassador returning so Pyrrhus, and
hearing Cyrnas the Thessalian telling the King of a certain Athenian famous for
his Wisdom, who was of opinion that men should do nothing but for pleasure's
sake, looked upon it as a monstrous saying, and immediately decri'd that kind
of Wisdom, both before Pyrrhus and the Samnites. For though the Athenians did
glory in their Learning, yet there was no prudent person but would rather choose
to follow the self-den^^^ (...) Fabricius, than the Precepts of Epicurus: which
the event proved true: For that City which indulged so much pleasure, lost a
very large Dominion; but an industrious and laborious Country holds its own:
And this City could bestow that Liberty, which the other valued not.

7 One might easily conjecture Elius Tubero, surnamed Carus, to have been the
Disciple of Curious and Fabricius, to whom, being then Consul, when the Etolians
sent a vast present of Silver Plate, not only of a very great weight, but also
most exquisitely wrought; by reason that their Ambassadors whom they had
formerly sent to congratulate him, upon their return had related how they saw
him feeding only in Earthen Dishes: He immediately bid them be gone with their
Baggage, admonishing them withal, that they should not think that Continency
and Poverty wanted the same supply. How well did he prefer his own Domestic
meanness before the Etolian Splendor, if the succeeding Ages would have
followed his Example! But now to what a height are we grown, that Servants
refuse to make use of that Household Stuff, which would serve a Consul before?

8. But after the overthrow of Perseus, Paulus had so glutted the old
Hereditary poverty of our City with Wealth, that at that time the Roman people
first began to think of laying Taxes; yet no way enriched his own Family,
accompting it enough that he by his Victories got Honor, while others got the
money.

9. To this sound judgment of his, Q. Fabius Gurges, Cn. Fabius Pictores, and
Ogulnius, subscribed, who being sent Ambassadors to King Ptolomy, sent those
Gifts which they had privately received from the King, into the public
Treasury, before they would give an account of their Embassy to the Senate;
judging that there was nothing due for faithful service to the public, but the
reward of Praise. But now the Senate showed their gratitude, and the exact
discipline of our Ancestors. For what they had laid up in the Treasury was
restored to the Ambassadors not only by the Decree of the Senate, but by the
consent of the People, which was by the Questors with the same willingness
paid. Thus the Liberality of Ptolomy, the Abstinence of the Ambassadors, the
Equity of the Senate and People, had in all an equal share of applause.

10. That Calpurnius Piso was an Imitator of the Fabii and Ogulnii, the Story
makes manifest. The Consul having freed Sicily from the bloody War of the
Fugitives, like a Commander rewarded those with Gifts, whose assistance he had
made most use of; among the rest he gave to his Son, who had behaved himself
valiantly, a Crown of Three Pound weight of Gold, saying withal, That the chief
Magistrate should not take out of the public Treasure to expend upon his own
Family; and that therefore he would leave so much Gold over and above to the
Young man in his Will, to pay for it; that though he received his Honor
publicly, he should receive the price privately from his Father.

11. Let us see if we can find any great person in this age that makes use of
Goatskins for his Coverlid, and while he rules all Spain, has but three
Servants to attend him; that spent no more than Five Hundred Farthings and
somewhat over in his preparation for his Journey; that drank the same Drink,
and eat the same Meat which the Mariners fed upon; would not that be wonderful
indeed? Yet all this did the Elder Cato patiently endure, confining himself
with an extraordinary, delight to a pleasing custom of Frugality.

12. The Younger Cato was born at a great distance from the Continence of the
ancient times, coming into the world at such a time, when the City abounded in
Riches and all manner of Voluptuousness. Yet he having a command in the Civil
Wars, and having his Son along with him, nevertheless had but twelve Servants
with him; in number more than the former Cato used, but the alteration of the
times being considered, fewer.

13. I am not a little delighted in repeating the Acts of Illustrious Heroes.
Scipio Aemilianus, after he had born two Consulships, and been eminent for two
Triumphs of his own Conquests, yet went upon a great Embassy accompanied with
no more than Seven Attendants. And yet it is believed he might have purchased
more with the Spoils of Carthage and Numantium, but that the praise of his
great deeds should accrue to himself, the Spoils to his Country. And therefore
when he traveled through the Countries of his Associates and Allies, and other
foreign Nations, they were not accounted his Slaves, but his Victories. Nor
did men consider how much Gold and Silver, but how much weight of worth he bare
about him.

14. This Continence appeared in the very breasts of the generality of the
People, but it shall suffice to relate two Examples of ages far distant one
from another. Pyrrhus when he saw the violence of his fury at a stand, and that
the hearts of his Epirotes began to fail, designing to purchase the good will
of the Roman People, whose Virtue he could not overecome, had transported
almost all the wealth of his Treasures into our City. But when his Ambassadors
went from House to House with great Gifts fit for the use of Men and Women,
they could not find a door open to them. Thus the more stout than prosperous
defender of the Tarentine petulancy, was repulsed and defeated as well by the
Customs as Arms of the City; nor can I determine which was the greatest
Victory. In that storm also with which Marius and Cinna infested the
Commonwealth, wonderful was the abstinence of the People. For when they lest
the people at liberty to ransack the houses of them that were by themselves
proscribed, there was no man to be found that would lay hands upon the Prey of
civil Discord. For every one abstained from using violence toward them, as from
things consecrated to the Gods: Which compassionate abstinence of the common
people, was a tacit reproach to the Cruelty of the Victors.

FOREIGN.
1. And lest we should be thought to envy the same applause to strangers,
Pericles Prince of the Athenians, having for his Companion in the Pretorship
Sophocles the Tragoedian, whom he observed at the same time to utter certain
Expressions over-lavish in the praise of a beautiful Boy that passed by,
reprehended him in these words: That a Magistrate ought to keep his eyes front
lustful desires, as well as his hands from unlawful gain.

2. Socrates himself being now stricken in years, and being demanded by one
whether he yet minded his Youthful dalliances, The Gods have taught me better,
said he, for I fled from it of my own accord, as from a furius Contagion.

3. Of equal Continency was Xenocrates in his old Age; of whose opinion the
following Relation is no small testimony. Phryne, a noble Curtesan of Athens,
while he was in drink, laid herself upon the bed by him, having received a sum
of money to try if she could tempt him. But though he neither refused to hear
her flattering allurements, nor to let her stroke and handle him, but let her
lie dallying in his bosom, yet he at length put her off without prevailing in
her design. An abstemious act of a mind endu'd with wisdom. But the saying of
the Curtesan was very facetious: For the young men deriding her that she being
so handsome and witty, could not win the affection of an old man; and refusing
to give het what they had engaged, she made answer, The Bargain was to deal
with a Man, and not a Statue. Could this Continence of Xenocrates be more truly
demonstrated, more truly or properly by any one than by the expression of the
Curtesan her self? For Phryne with all her Beauty could not weaken nor move the
most constant Abstinence of the Philosopher.

4. What think ye of King Alexander? could he tempt him with his Riches? You
would have thought him a Statue, though equally assailed as well by the King as
by the Curtesan. The King sent Ambassadors to him with a Present of some
Talents, whom being brought into the Academy, was entertained according to his
custom, after his mean and poor fashion. The next day the Ambassadors asking
him if he would have his Money told out, I had thought, said he, by your
yesterdays entertainment, that you had understood that my condition does not
require Money. Thus while the King was desirous to buy the friendship of the
Philosopher, the Philosopher denies to sell it him.

5. The same Alexander having obtained the name of Invincible, could not
conquer the Continence of Diogenes the Cynie; to whom, as he was fitting in the
Sun, when he came and bid him tell him wherein he might do him a kindness, as
he lay in the shade, of a sordid conversation, but of a flout mind, quoth he,
As to the rest of thy pressers, by and by; but in the mean time, do not stand
between me and the Sun. Which words carried a deep sense with them: so
Alexander might sooner overcome Darius with his Arms, than remove Diogenes from
his low estate to love wealth. The same person being told by Aristippus at
Syracuse, seeing him washing Pot Herbs, that if he could but flatter Dionysius
he need not eat such trash, made this retort, quoth he, If thou could eat
this mean fare, thou needst not flatter Dionysius.

CHAP. IV. Poverty praised.
1. P. Valerius Poplicola. 2. Agrippa Menenius. 3. C. Fabricius Luscinus and Q.
Aemilius Papus. 4. Of Captains called from the Plough to command Armies. 5. C.
Attilius Regulus Cos. 6. M. Attilius Regulus: 7. L. Quinctius Cincinnatus,
Dictat. 8. The Elian Family. 9. Elius Tubero, and L. Paulus Emilius. 10. Cn.
Cornelius Scipio. 11. M. Emilius Scaurus.
THat Children are the greatest Ornaments to Women, we find written by
Pomponius Rufus in his Book of Collections, in these words. When a Campanian
Lady lying at the House or Cornelia, Mother of the Gracchi, showed her her
Jewels and other Ornaments, which were the fairest of any in that time,
Cornelia held her in discourse till her Children returned from School. And
these, quoth she, when they appeared, are my Ornaments. For he has all things
that covets nothing, and much more certainly than he that possesses all things.
For great Estates many times fail, but a good Habit of Mind is above the
violence of Fortune. And therefore what matters it, whether we put Riches in
the highest part of Felicity, or Poverty in the lowest degree of Misery?
Especially when the cheerful countenance of Wealth is full of many concealed
Bitternesses; and the more rugged and deformed aspect of Poverty many times
abounds with many sure and solid Contents.

1. The pride of Tarquin having put an end to Kingly Government, Valerius
Publicola with Junius Brutus his Colleague auspiciously began the Office of
Consulship. The same person having afterward born three Consulships to the
great content of the People, and by many and most renowned Actions having
enlarged the Grandeur of his Nobility: And yet this great Pillar of History
died, not leaving a Patrimony sufficient for the expenses of his Funeral, which
were therefore defrayed at the Public charge. It imports not to make any
farther search into the Poverty of so great a Person, for it is apparent what
he possessed when he lived, though being dead he wanted both a Bier and
Funeral-Pile.

2. We may well guess how high in Dignity Agrippa Menenius was, whom the Senate
and People chose Arbitrator of their differences, and to make peace between um.
For how great ought he to be, who was Umpire of the public Safety? This man,
unless the People had gathered among themselves the sixth part of a Penny to
make up the Sum, could not have defrayed his mere Funeral-Expences, dying so
poor that he wanted for the decency of Burial; and therefore the City divided
by pernicious Sedition, were content to be reconcile by the Ghosts of Agrippa,
who though they were poor, yet they had observed them to be religiously
sincere. Who as he had nothing while he lived that could be publikly taxed, yet
being deceased had the Concord and Unity of the City for his Patrimony.

3. I cannot deny but that there was Silver in the Houses of Caius Fabricius
and Q. Emilius Papus, the most principal men of their times. But Fabricius
seemed the more prodigal, because he had a Horn-foot to his Drinking-cup. But
Papus seemed more headstrong, who having received his Goods as hereditary,
would not alienate them for religions sake.

4. They were also certainly very rich who were called from the Plough to be
made Consuls s for pleasures sake they plough'd the sandy and barren Soil of
Pupinia, and ignorant of delicacy scattered those vast clods with c ntinued
sweat and labor; so that those whom the dangers of the Common wealth called to
be Emperors and Generals, their want at home (for why should truth conceal a
Surname?) compelled to follow the call of Cowherds.

5. They who were sent by the Senate to call Atilius to undertake the
Government of the Roman People, found him sowing in his Garden; but those
hands, hardened with Countrey-labour, establih'd the safety of the
Commonwealth, and defeated mighty Armies of the Enemies; and those hands that
lately held the Plough, now hold the reins of the Triumphant Chariot: Nor was
he ashamed, when he had laid down his Ebony Staff, to return again to the
Plough Tail. Well may Atilius comfort the Poor, but much more instruct the
Rich, how little the troublesome care of gathering Riches, advantages the true
desire of purchasing solid Honor.

6. Of the same name and blood, Atilius Regulas, the greatest glory and the
greatest calamity of the Punic War, when he had ruined the wealth of the most
insolent Carthaginian by the success of many Victories, and understood that his
authority was continued for the next year, upon consideration of his worthy
deeds; he wrote to the Consuls, that his Bailey of his little Farm that he had
in the Country of Popinia was dead, and that one that he had hired was gone
away with his Utensils of Agriculture, and therefore desired that a Successor
might be sent him, lest his land lying untilled, his Wife and Children should
want Bread. Which when the Consuls had related to the Senate, they caused his
ground to be let, and settled a Livelihood upon his Wife and Children, and
ordered those things that he had lost to be redeemed. Such was the Example of
Atilius's virtue to our Treasury, that every Age will boast of among the Romans.

7. Equally large were the Farms of L. Quinctius Cincinnatus: For he possessed
only seven Acres of Land; and of these he had lost three, forfeited for a Fine,
being bound to the Treasury; and with the rest of this little Land he paid
another Forfeiture for his Son Caeso, for not appearing when he was called to
answer the Law. And yet when he was ploughing only four Acres of this Land, he
not only upheld the dignity of his Family, but had the Dictatorship confetr'd
upon him. He accounts himself to live splendidly now, whose House stands upon
as much ground as all Cincinnatus Farm contained.

8. What shall I say of the Aelian Family? How rich were they? There were
Sixteen of that name, whose little Cottage stood where now the Marian Monuments
stand, and a small Farm in the Country of the Veii, that needed fewer men to
till it than it had Owners; and in the Parishes called Maximus and Flaminia
they had the ground where the Theater stood bestowed upon them for their virtue
by the Public.

9. That Family had not one scruple of Silver, before that Paulus, after he had
utterly defeated Perses, gave to Aelius Tubero, his Son-in-Law, five Pound
weight of Gold, out of the Spoils that were taken. I omit, that the chief
person of the City gave his Daughter in marriage to one whose Family and Estate
was so exceeding low. And he himself died so very poor, that unless he had sold
one Farm which he had left, there had not been sufficient for the Dowry of his
Wife. The minds of Men and Women were then most noble in the City, and the
worth of every Man was then in all things weighed against his Goods and Estate.
For every one made it his business to serve his Country, not himself: And they
rather chose poverty in a rich Empire, than riches in a poor Empire. And to
this noble resolution that reward was given, that it was not lawful to buy any
of those things which were due to Virtue; and the wants of Illustrious Men were
supplied out of the public Stock.

10. And therefore, when Cneus Scipio had written out of Spain to the Senate,
desiring that a successor might be sent him, for that he had a daughter now fit
for marriage, and that no portion could be provided for her, without he were
present: The Senate, lest the Commonwealth should loose a good Captain,
performed the office of a Father, and having with the advice of his Wife and
Relations agreed upon the Portion, caused it to be paid out of the public
Treasury. The Portion was two thousand pieces of brass money: whereby not only
appears the kindness of the Conscript Fathers, but the usual measure of the
ancient Estates may be guessed at. For they were so small, that Tatia the
daughter of Cato was said to have brought her Husband an exceeding Portion,
when she brought him ten thousand pieces of brass money. And Megullia, that
entered her husbands house with fifty thousand pieces of brass money, was called
for that reason, the Maid with the Portion. And therefore the Senate vindicated
the daughters of Fabricius Luscinus, and Scipio, from being portionless, by
their own Liberality, seeing their Parents had nothing to give them but their
wealthy honors.

11. What inheritance M. Scaurus received from his Father, he himself relates
in the first Book that he has wrote concerning his Life. For, says he, he had
but ten Slaves, and the whole value of his Estate, was but thirty five thousand
pieces of money.

These Examples therefore we ought to regard, and quiet our minds with the
Consolation thereof, who are always complaining of the scantiness of our own
Fortunes. We find no Silver, or a very small quantity, few Servants, seven
Acres of barren Land, domestic Indigency, Funeral expenses publicly defrayed,
Daughters without Portions: But we behold famous Consulships, wonderful
Dictatorships, and innumerable Triumphs. Why do we therefore with continual
reproaches torment a mean Fortune, as the chief evil of human kind? Who though
with not superfluously flowing, yet with faithful breasts, nourished the
Poplicolae, the Emilii, the Fabricii, the Curii, the Scipio's, the Scauri, and
all those other supports of Virtue equal to these. Let us rather pull up our
spirits, and comfort our minds, debilitated with the sight of money, with the
memory of former times.

CHAP. I. Of Bashfulness, or Modesty.
1. Of the people of Rome. 2. C. Terentius Varro Cos. 3. C. Cicereius
Candidate. 4. L. Licinius Crassus Candidate. 5. Pompey the Great. 6. C. Julius
Caesar Dict.
FOREIGN.
1. Spurina the Hetrurian. 2. The Spartan Ambassadors.
FRom whence it seems seasasonable to pass away to Bashfulness: for this
instructed the most just men to neglect their own private Estates, and to have
regard only to the public. A virtue worthy, that to her should be Temples
reared and consecrated, as to a Celestial Numen; as being the Parent of all
good Counsel, the Guardianess of the most solemn Offices, the Mistress of
Innocence; dear to her own, acceptable to Strangers, and in all places, and at
all times, carrying a favorable Aspect.

1. But that we may return from the praises to the actions thereof, from the
first building of the City, to the time that Africanus and T. Longus were
Consuls, the Senate and People sat at the beholding all Spectacles and shows
promiscuously together: yet not one of the people would venture to take place
before any of the Senate. So circumspect was the modesty of our Citizens; a
most certain experiment whereof appeared on that day, when T. Flaminius being
by the Censor removed from the Senate, was contented to stand in the hindermost
part of the Theater, though he had been Consul, and was the brother of
Flaminius the Vanquisher of Philip King of Macedon. Which the people no sooner
beheld, but they compelled him to take that place which his Dignity required.

2. Terentius Varro gave a great wound to the Commonwealth, by his rash giving
battle at Cannae. Yet by his refusing to take upon him the Dictatorship, which
after that was decreed him by the full consent of the Senate and People; by his
bashful modesty, made satisfaction for the fault of a most fatal overthrow: and
through his modest behavior, made men impute the public Calamity, not to him,
but to the anger of the Gods.

3. Let us behold a more famous piece of Modesty, Fortune, not without great
envy, had brought Cn. Scipio, the son of the elder Africanus, together with
Cicereius the Scribe, into the Common Hall for Election of Pretors; and very
much reprehended he was, that he had abused the Nobility and authority of so
great a person, by appearing at such an Assembly. But Cicereius turned his
crime to his praise. For when he saw himself preferred by all the Centuries
before Scipio, he went out of the Temple, and throwing off his Candidates
Garment, came in again and gave his voice for Scipio. Being more willing to
yield the Pretorship to the memory of Africanus, than to Challenge it for
himself. Nor was the reward of his Modesty small; for though Scipio obtained
the Pretorship, yet Cicereius was more applauded.

4. And that we may not presently leave the Common Hall, when L. Crassus stood
for the Consulship, and was by all persuaded after the manner of the
Candidates, to go round the Forum, and beg the voices of the people, he could
by no persuasions be induced to do it, though Q. Scaevola his Father in law, a
most wise and grave person, were present with him; whom he therefore desired to
depart, as ^^ne who proffered his service in vain: more regardful of the
modesty of his dignity, than mindful of the respect of his white Robe.

5. Pompey the Great, being overthrown at the Battle of Pharsalia, when all the
people came forth to meet him, as he was entering into the City of Larissa, Go,
said He, and perform this office to the Victor. A person not deserving to be
overcome, had he not been vanquished by Caesar: most gentle in Calamity; who
because he could not use his authority, made use of his modesty.

6. Which as it often appeared most eminent in Caius Caesar, so most remarkably
at his death: For being assailed with the points of many parracidical weapons,
when his divine Soul was separated from his mortal Body, could not be frighted,
after he had received above twenty three wounds, from his obedience to Modesty.
For he let down the lower part of his Gown with both hands, that he might fall
with the lower part of his Body covered. In this manner not men, but the
Immortal Gods, recover their own habitations.

FORRAIGNERS.
That which follows, I will ascribe to Forraigners, as happening before any
City was given to Hetruria. There was in that Country one Spurina, a young man
of surpassing beauty; whose lovely aspect, alluring the eyes of the most
Illustrious Ladies, and who therefore believing himself to be suspected of
unchastity by the Husbands and Parents of those women; with many wounds gash'd
and spoiled the beauty of his Countenance; choosing rather deformity for the
Guardian of his fidelity, than that his beauty should be the Incitement of
others Lust.

2. At Athens, a very aged person coming into the Theater, when there were none
that would rise to give him place, he came at length where sat the Ambassadors
of the Lacedaemonians. Who being moved with the age of the person, not only by
rising up showed their reverence to his aged years, but also gave him leave to
sit in the most honorable place among them. Which when the people beheld, with
great applause they approved the modesty of a Foreign City: And it is reported
that one of the Ambassadors should say, That the Athenians knew what was well
done, but neglected to do it themselves.

CHAP. VI. Of Conjugal Love.
Among the ROMANS.
1. T. Gracchus the Elder. 2. C. Plautius Numidian. 3. M. Plautius. 4. Julia
the Daughter of Caesar. 5. Porcia the Daughter of M. Cato.
FOREIGN.
1. Artemisia wife of Mausolus. 2. Hipsicratea, Daughter of Mithridates. 3.
Lacaena. Of the Family of the Minye.
FRom a gentle and mild Affection, I will proceed to another as equally honest,
yet somewhat more fervent, and of a more vehement Nature; and offer not without
greatest Veneration, as it were certain Images of lawful love, to the
Contemplation of the Reader, effectually relating the actions of established
and firm fidelity between married people, difficult to imitate, but profitable
to be known: seeing that when a man knows the most excellent Examples, it will
be a shame to him to follow the meanest.

1. Titus Gracchus having caught two snakes in his own house, a Male and
Female; and being told by the Soothsayer, that if he let go the Male, it
portended the death of his Wife; if he let go the Female, his own sudden
decease; following that part of the prediction that portended his own, rather
than the death of his Wife, he caused the Female Snake to be let go; and was so
hardy as to behold his own destruction in the death of the Snake killed before
his face. And therefore I cannot determine whether Cornelia were more happy
that she had such a Husband, or more miserable in his loss. O Admetus, cruel
king of Thessalia, and by a great Judge condemned of an unpardonable crime! who
were so content to change thy own life for the death of thy Wife, and could
enjoy the comfort of this light, after she had voluntarily submitted to dye,
only to prolong thy days: having a heart inferior to a woman's, before thou
had tried the indulgence of thy parents.

2. A meaner Victime to Misfortune than T. Gracchus, though of the Senatorian
order, was C. Plancius the Numidian, yet as to affection of the same nature,
equal to him in affection. For hearing news of the death of his Wife, impatient
of grief, he stabbed himself with his Sword; but by the timely coming in of his
Servants being hindered from executing his purpose, and the wound being dressed
and bound up, he no sooner found his opportunity, but cutting his Swathes, and
tearing open the wound again, he would not endure his soul oppressed with grief
to remain in his Bowels: Testifying by the violence of his death, what a
Conjugal flame he had shut up in his breast.

3. As of the same name, so endued with the same love, was M. Plautius. Who
being commanded to return with the Confederate Navy into Asia, and putting into
Brundusium, whither his Wife Orestella coming to visit him, fell sick and dyed:
after she was laid upon the Funeral pile, betwixt the last duties of anointing
and kissing her, he fell upon his naked Sword: whom his friends, as he was in
his Military Coat, and Booted, laid by his Wife. Whole Monument is yet to be
seen at Tarentum, with this Inscription, THE LOVERS TOMB. And it is not to be
questioned, but that if there were any sense left in departed Souls, that they
entered Elysium joyful of each others company.

4. The same Affection is noted in Julia, the daughter of C. Caesar. Who when
she saw the Garment of her Husband Pompey the Great brought home sprinkled with
Blood from the Common Hall where the Aedils were chosen, swounded away, and
with the suddainness of the fright miscarried; and presently expired, to the
great detriment of the whole world: Whose tranquillity had not been disturbed
with so severe a fury of so many Civil Wars, if the Amity of Caesar and Pompey
had remained linked with the Bonds of common Affinity.

5. All Ages will also with due admiration reverence thy most chaste fires, O
Porcia, Daughter of Marcus Cato, who understanding that her Husband Brutus was
overthrown and slain at the Battle of Philippi not having a weapon ready, did
swallow burning Coals, thy feminine Soul imitating the masculine Death of thy
Countries welfare.

FOREIGN.
1. There are some Foreign Amors just and honest, not shadowed nor obscured
with the vail of Ignorance, of which it will be sufficient to touch upon a few.
How much Artemisia Queen of Caria bewailed the Death of her Husband Mausolus,
might seem a light thing, to the most exquisite honors of all sorts which she
did him, and the Magnificence of that Monument, which became one of the Seven
Wonders of the World. For why should thou labor to recount all those
Honors, or insist upon the Glory of that Monument, when she her self would not
be satisfied without being the living and breathing Sepulcher of Mausolus, by
the testimony of those who report that she drank up his Ashes mixed in a certain
drink?

2 Hipsicratea also the Queen so entirely loved Mithridates her Husband, that
she let go all the reins of Affection. For whose love she apparelled her beauty
in Man's Apparel; and accustomed her self to manlike Exercises, cutting her
Hair, and betaking her self to her Horse and Arms, that she might the more
easily partake of his labors and dangers; and not only so, but after he was
overcome by Pompey, following him with an indefatigable Body and Mind in his
flight through many rough and barbarous Nations. Whose faithful society was a
great comfort and asswagement of the Misfortunes and Calamities of distressed
Mithridates: For with his Court and Family he seemed to wander, but with his
Wife only to live in Exile.

3. But why should I rummage Asia, why the immense Solitudes of Barbarous
Countries, why the lurking Holes of the Pontic Sea? When Lacedemon, the most
splendid glory of Greece, lays before our eyes a principal Exemplar of Conjugal
Fidelity, to be compared for the wonder of the action with the most and
greatest Miracles of that City.

4. The Minyans settled in the Island of Lemnos, and drawing their Original from
the ancient Companions of Jason, through success of time expelled by the
Pelasgi, wanting the wealth of others, seated themselves in the high Taygetan
Mountains: whom at length the Spartans entertained, as descended from the
Tyndaridae, which noble pair of Brothers had displayed their splendor in that
renowned Ship translated to the Stars; and thus mingled among them, they
enjoyed the same Laws and Privileges. But this good turn they turned to the
injury of the well deserving City, affecting the Kingdom, and therefore
committed to the public Prison, they were reserved for public punishment.
Which when they were to suffer, according to the Custom of the Lacedaemonians
in the Nighttime, their Wives, of noble Race, desiring leave of the Keepers to
take leave of their dying Husbands, entered the Prison, and changing their
Habits, gave their Husbands liberty, having covered their Faces under pretenc
of sorrow, to depart. Now what shall I add more in this place, but that they
were Wives worthy for the Minyans to marry?

CHAP. VII. Of the Bond of Friendship.
Among the ROMANS.
1. T. Sempronius Gracchus with C. Blosius. 2. Sempronius Gracchus with
Pomponius and Lucretius. 3. Lucius Rheginus with Servilius Caepio. 4. T.
Voluminous with M. Lucullus. 5. Lucius Petronius with P. Caelius. 6. Servius
Terentius with D. Brutus. 7. C. Laelius with Scipio, and M. Agrippa with
Augustus.
FORRAINERS.
1. Damon and Pythias. 2. Alexander the Great with Ephestion.
LEt us now consider the Bond of Friendship, potent and mighty, and no way
inferior to the strength and force of the Blood. In this more certain and
demonstrable, that this the chance of birth a fortuitous work produces; the
other the uncompell'd Will contracts, upon grounds and reasons of solid
judgment. And therefore it is an easier thing, and less subject to
reprehension, to slight a Kinsman than a Friend. For the one betokens a wicked
ungrateful disposition, the other only a levity of mind. For when the life of
man lies as it were in a solitude, without the guard of Friendship, so
necessary an assistance ought not unadvisedly to be chosen, but being once
approved, ought not in any measure to be despised. But the most sincere
Friendship always appears in Adversity; where whatever good offices are
performed, proceed from a constant kindness and affection. The adoration of
Felicity, being to be attributed more to Flattery than Love, is full o^
Suspicion, and still desires more than it expends. For men of unshaken fortunes
more desire friends, either for a guard, or for their society. For affairs that
go well and prosperously, as being favored with heavenly Success, have the
less need of other assistance. And therefore their Memories have lasted longer
in the Book of Memoires, who have deserted their Friends in Adversity, than
theirs who have only been the Companions of Prosperity. No man talks of the
familiars of Sardanapalus. Orestes is better known by his friend Pylades, than
by Agamemnon his Father. For the Friendship of the one consumed away in the
participation of Luxury and Delight; but the mutual Society of the other, in a
sad and hard condition, grew famous by the trial of their Miseries. But why do
I mention Foreigners, having first to do with our own Countrymen?

1. T. Gracchus was esteemed to have been an Enemy to his Country, and not
undeservedly; because he preferred his own Authority before the Welfare
thereof. Yet in this evil design of his, how faithful a Friend he had of C.
Blosius of Cumae, will be worth our while to relate. An adjudged Enemy,
suffering the highest Punishment, not permitted the honor of Burial, wanted
not however his kindness. For when the Senate commanded Rupilius and Laenax the
Consuls to proceed against all those that had been partakers with Gracchus, and
that Blosius presented himself before Laelius, to beg pardon for himself,
urging his familiarity with Gracchus for an excuse; when Laelius demanded of
him, whether if Gracchus had commanded him to set fire on the Temple of
Jupiter, would be have done it? That, said he, Gracchus had never commanded: He
had done enough and more, for he ventured to defend those Customs which the
Senate condemned. But that which follows was much more confident and more
dangerous; for being still pressed by Laelius to make an answer to his question,
he resolutely persisted, affirming, that if Gracchus had commanded him to burn
the Temple, he would have done it. Who could have thought he had been so
wicked, had he held his peace? Who would not have accounted him wise, had he
been less free in his speech, considering the necessity of the time? But
Blosius neither with an honest Silence, nor with a prudent Answer cared to
preserve himself, lest he should be thought to have silenced the memory of his
unhappy Friendship.

2. In the same Family equally prevalent Examples of Friendship arise. For when
all the Designs and Counsels of Gracchus were utterly defeated, and all his
Conspiracy brought to light; being deserted of all assistance, only his two
friends Pomponius and Laetorius, by interposing their own bodies, covered him
from the Darts that fell round about him. And of these two, Pomponius, that he
might more easily escape, withstood a whole body of Soldiers that eagerly
pursued him at the thrice-double Gate; nor could he be moved while he lived,
till at length having received many Wounds, he fell, and (though I am apt to
believe unwillingly) was forced to permit them passage over his dead Carcass.
Laetorius made a stand upon the Sub^ician Bridge, and till Gracchus was passed
over ma^^tain'd it with the heat of his Courage, till at length overpowr'd with
the multitude, turning his sword upon himself, he made a nimble jump into
Tiber, and so perished, showing that kindness to the friendship of one person by
his voluntary death, which Horatius Cocles, in the same place, had shown to his
whole Country. What renowned Soldiers might the Gracchi have had, would they
have followed the courses which their Fathers or Mothers Father had done? With
what a courageous fury might Blosius, Pomponius and Laetorius have assisted
them in the gaining Trophies and Triumphs, the stout Associates of such furious
enterprises! and taking part with an inauspicious friendship: but by how much
the more miserable, by so much are they the more certain examples of a generous
fidelity.

3. But L. Rheginus, if you examine him as to his sincerity due to the public,
was much to be blamed by Posterity; If you look upon the faithful pledge of his
fidelity, we are to leave him in the safe harbor of an applauded Conscience.
Who when Caepio Tribune of the people was thrown into Prison, by reason that
through his fault our Army was defeated by the Cimbrians and Teutons,
remembering the ancient friendship between them, set him at liberty; and not
content to have shown himself so much a friend, accompanied him also in his
flight. O great and most invincible Numen friendship; when the Commonwealth
had seized with one hand, to pull him out of the other with thy own arm! and
when she requires thee to be real, thou confin'st thy self to banishment. So
gentle is thy Dominion, to make men prefer punishment before honor.

4. Wonderful was this thy work, but more praiseworthy that which follows. For
call to mind, how thou have celebrated the constant love of T. Voluminous to his
friend without any damage to the Commonwealth; who being by descent of the
order of Knighthood, and having an entire kindness for M. Lucul^us, whom M.
Antony slew for taking part with Brutus and Cassius, having full Liberty to
fly, he stuck close to his dead friend; giving himself so much over to tears
and Lamentations, that by his extreme D^votion to his friend, he was the cause
of his own death. For by reason of his continued and constant sorrow, he was
carried before Antony: and standing before him, Command me, said he, O
Emperor, to be carried back to the body of Lucullus, and there slain. For he
being dead, I ought not to stay behind, being my self the Author of his unhappy
going to war. What more faithful than so much love? He sought to ease his
sorrow for his fri^nds death, by the hatred of his Enemy; to render him more
miserable, making himself more envied. Nor were Antonies Ears shut: for being
led where he desired, having kissed the dead body of Lucullus, and ^mbrac'd his
severed head, being lifted up to his breast, he laid down his own neck to
receive the Victors blow. Let Greece now boast of Theseus yielding to the
unlawful love of Pirithous, and for his sake entering into the Dominions of
Father Dis. They are vain that relate it, fools that believe it. To see the
mingled blood of friends, wounds sticking upon wounds, and death sticking upon
death, these are the true signs of Roman friendship; those, the stories of a
people accust^med to fain ridiculous wonders.

5. L. Petronius also claims to be a par^aker in this praise. He by the favor
of Caelius, being of a very mean Extraction, came to be advanced into the order
of Knights, and had very considerable military employments beside. For which,
because he could not pay his thanks when Caelius was in prosperity, he showed
himself nobly grateful to him in his adversity. Caelius was made Governor of
Placentia, by Octavius the Consul: Who after the Town was taken by Cinna's
Army, being old and sickly, and fearing to fall into the hands of the Enemy,
resolved to dye by Petronius's hand; who finding that he could by no
persuasions change his resolution, according to his desire killed him first,
and th^n joined his own death to his; that he might not sup^rvive him, by whom
he had attained to all his Honor. So that Magnanimity occasioned the Death of
the one, Piety the ^all of the other.

6. We are to join Ser. Terentius with Petronius, though it fell out that he
did not dye for his friend, as was his desire. For a noble In^^ntion is not to
be valued by the issuel^ss Event. For he was slain as much as in him lay, and
Brutus escaped the danger; who flying from Mutina, and receiving intelligence
of certain Soldiers sent by Antonius to ^ill him, endeavored in a certain
place, by the benefit of the Night, to steal that Life of his which deserv d
just Punishment. There Terentius assayling to break through with a faithful
Lie, favored by Darkness it self, feigned himself to be Brutus, o^f^ring his
Body to the fury of the Soldiers. But being known by Furius, whose charge it
was to execute the office of revenge, he could not hinder the punishment of his
friend by his own death. So that against his will he was comp^ll'd by fortune
to live.

7. From this dreadful and horrid face of Friendship, let us d^gress to the
more s^rene and placid countenance of Affection. And having brought it forth
where all things are full of Tears, Lamentation and Slaughter, let us place it
in the Palace of Prosperity, shining with Beauty, Honor, and abounding Wealth.
Come forth therefore from those Seats that are believed to be consecrated to
the Shades of the Blessed, here Decimus Lelius, there M. Agrippa, having wisely
and prosperously chosen the one the greatest Friend of the Gods, the other of
Men; and bring along with thee the whole Society, which under your Conduct,
laden with Praises and Rewards, receive the venerable Stipends of sincere
Fidelity: For succeeding Ages beholding your constant Minds, your stout
Enterprises, your inexpugnable Taciturnity, your diligent and watchful care for
the dignity and safety of your Friends, the public testimonies of your mutual
Love; and lastly, the most plentiful fruits thereof, the more willingly, the
more religiously shall be busied in exercising and admiring the Laws of
Friendship.

FORRAIGNERS.
1. My desire is to continue still in the Examples of my Native Country, but
the candor of the Roman City admonishes me to relate the Gallantry of other
Nations. Damon and Pythias, instructed in the sacred Secrets of Pythagorean
Prudence, had contracted such a faithful Friendship between themselves, that
when Dionysius of Syracuse would have put one of them to Death, and that he
that was to suffer had got leave to go home to his house, to settle his
affairs, the other was not afraid to be Surety to the Tyrant for his return. So
that now he was free from the peril of Death, that had his Neck but now under
the Axe; and he is now in danger, that was free before. And therefore all
people waited the event of an accident so new and rare. The day prefixed being
come, and the party not returning; and therefore every one condemning him of
folly, that had so rashly undertaken for the other; though he remained certain
of the Fidelity of his Friend: At the very Hour and Moment which Dionysius
prefixed, the other appeared. The Tyrant admiring the Courage of both, gave a
full pardon to so much Fidelity; farther desiring them to receive him into the
Society of their Friendship, promising a most strict observance thereof. Such
is the power of Friendship, to beget contempt of Death, take away the sweet
desire of Life, tame Cruelty, turn Hatred into Love, and to reward Punishment
with Kindness: to which there is almost as much worship due, as to the
Ceremonies of the Gods. For they are the Links of public, this of private
Safety. And as the Temples of the Gods are sacred Houses, so the faithful
Breasts of men are Temples filled with a certain holy Spirit.

2. Which King Alexander certainly believed to be a truth. Who being possessed
of the Camp of Darius, where all his Relations and Kindred were, he came with
Ephestion most of all beloved by him covering his side, to speak to them. At
whose approach the Mother of Darius taking heart, lifting up her Head as she
lay prostrate upon the ground, saluted Ephestion, flattering after the manner
of the Persians, mistaking him for Alexander, because he was more amiable for
his Stature and Beauty. But being made sensible of her error, in great fear
she sought for words to excuse it. There is no reason, replied Alexander, to be
troubled for this, for this is another Alexander also. Whom shall we
congratulate? him that said it, or him that heard it? While the King endued
with a great Soul, having already grasped the whole World, either by his
Victories, or in his thoughts, in so few words made so equal a division of it
to his Companion. O the Gift of a Royal Tongue, as fair to the Receiver as to
the Giver! Which I reverence as a private man, having had the experience of the
Bounty of a most wise and renowned person toward my self. And I do not doubt
but it may become me to think my Pompey to be like Alexander; while he will
have his Ephestion to be another Alexander. And therefore I should be liable to
a very great error, to pass over the Example of constant and kind Friendship,
without any mention of him: in whose mind, as in the breast of most loving
Parents, my prosperous condition of Life has flourished, my Misfortunes have
remained contented. From whom I have received all increase of profit freely
offered; by whom I have stood more firmly against mishap; who by his own
prosperous Conduct and good Omens, has rendered our Studies more pleasant and
delightful. And therefore I fed the envy of some with the loss of my best
friend, dividing my kindness, such as it was, to some that knew not how to make
use of it. But there is no Prosperity so modest, that can escape the teeth of
Envy. But in what retirement are some to be avoided, with what allurements of
kindness can thou restrain their inveteracy? There is no remedy but they will
rejoice and be tickled at the misfortunes of others, as well as at their own
good. They are rich in the Losses, wealthy in the Calamities, immortal in the
Death of other men. But while they insult over the miseries of others,
unexperienced in their own, let them have a care of the best revenger of their
Insolency, the Variety of Human Condition,

CHAP. VIII. Of Liberality.
1. Q. Fabius Maximus. 2. Paula Busa of Canusium. 3. Q. Considius a Roman
Knight. 4. The People of Rome to King Attalus. 5. The People of Rome to the
Greek.
FOREIGN.
1. Hiero King of Sicily to the Romans. 2. Gillias of Agrigentum to his
fellow-Citizens.
LEt us recall our work, that had straid in a pious Digression, in exposing our
own discontents, to its former course, and now take Liberality into
consideration; which has two probable Fountains, true Judgment, and honest
Benevolence. For when it springs from these then only is it duly founded: A
Gift being acceptable for its greatness, but somewhat more efficacious, when it
is reasonable.

1. Beyond the price of the thing, we find a most inestimable moment of an
opportunity, which with the expense of a small sum of Money rendr'd Fabius
Maximus highly applauded so many Ages since. He had received the Captives from
Hannibal, upon a Contract for so much Money. Which when the Senate would not
stand to, sending his Son to the City, he sold the only Farm which he had in
the world, and presently sent Hannibal the Money. If we consider the Sum, but
small, as being the price but of seven Acres of Land, and those lying in
Pupinia; but considering the Soul of the Giver, a most large sum, and far
exceeding the Money. For he would rather want his Patrimony, than that his
Country should be poor in Credit. So much the more to be commended, as it is a
more certain sign of a real meaning, to stretch beyond ability, rather than to
do the same act out of superfluity. For the one can do what he performs, the
other more than he is able.

2. Therefore a Woman of the same time, Busa by name, the richest in the
Country of Apulia, won her self an ample testimony of Liberality; though
perhaps not so great, if we compare her flowing Riches to the Poverty of the
Fabians. For though she relieved about Ten Thousand of our Citizens, the
remains of the Battle of Cannae, within the Walls of Canusium, yet she showed
her self munificent to the Romans, without prejudice to her Estate. But Fabius
for the good of his Country exchanged Poverty for Want.

3. We find also in Quinctus Considius a most wholesome Example of Liberality,
not without some profit to himself. Who when the Fury (...) Catiline had put
all the Commonwealth into such a tumult, that the Rich themselves, the Rents of
Possessions falling, were not able to pay their Creditors; he having the Sum of
one Hundred and Fifty Thousand Sesterces at use, would not suffer any of his
Debtors to be called upon, either for Principal or Interest: and as much as in
him lay, sweetened the bitterness of public Confusion by his own private Quiet:
opportunely testifying, that he made profit only of his Money, not of Civil
Blood. Now they who act with rigor in business of this nature, when they carry
bloody Money home, may hence learn to know, with what an accursed and impious
joy they rejoice, if they do not loath to read the Decree of the Senate, which
gave Considius public thanks.

4. Methinks the People of Rome seem to complain of me, that while I am
reporting the Munificence of particular persons, I am silent of theirs: For it
redounds to their great praise, that it should be reported, what noble minds
they have born to Kings, Cities and Countries: For the glory of all renowned
acts flourishes and revives by often rehearsal. After they had conquered Asia,
they gave it as a Gi^t to King At^alus to possess; believing the future Empire
of our City would be more high and splendid, if they should lay up the rich^st
part of the World, rather in the Treasury of their Gratitude than Profit. A
Gift more happy than the Victory it self. For to have possessed much, might
procure Envy; to have given away so much, could never want a glorious est^em.

5. It is impossible to praise sufficiently in writing the divine spirit of the
Roman People. For after Philip King of Macedon was vanquished, when all Greece
flocked to behold the Isthmian Games, T. Quincius Flaminius, having caused
silence to be made by sound of Trumpet, commanded a Crier to proclaim these
words: The Senate and People of Rome, and Q. Flamimus their General, command
all the Cities of Greece, that were under the Jurisdiction of King Philip, to
be free. Which being heard, the People were at first struck with a sudden
unexpected joy, and, not believing what they had heard, were for a while
silent. But upon the second Proclamation of the Crier, they filled the Sky
with such a cheerful din, that it is certainly repor^ed, that the Bi^ds, which
at that instant were flying that way, ^ell down amazed and ^err^^^ d with the
noise. They had great Souls, to take off the yoke of Servitude from the necks
of so many Captives, and to give Liberty to so many noble and opulent Cities.
To whose Majesty it belongs, t^a^ not only what they freely give, but also
their giving of it, be memorably eternized. There being the celebration of
gained applause, here of applause repeated.

FOREIGN.
1. Hiero, King of Syracuse, hearing of the overthrow which the Romans received
at the Lake of Thrasymene, sent to Rome three hundred thousand Bushels of
Wheat, two hundred thousand Bushels of Barley, and two hundred and forty Pound
weight of Gold: And not being ignorant of the Modesty of the Romans in
receiving such Gifts, he made as if he had presented them a Congratulation of
Victory, that he might compel them, moved by Religion, to accept of his
Munificence. Lib^ral first in his ready will to send, and prudent in taking
care that it should not be sent back.

2. I will add to him Gillias of Agrigentum, who may be thought to have had
the very bowels of Liberality. He was potent in Wealth, but more wealthy in the
Generosity of his Mind than in his Riches; and always more busily employed in
spending and finding ways to bestow, than in getting Money. So that his House
seemed to be a kind of Shop of Magnificence. For there all Monuments ^it for
Public Use were erected, there all Plays were set out for the delight of the
People, there were all preparations for Feasting, and thence the scarcity of
Corn was supplied. This to the g^nerality; privately the Sick were relieved,
Portions given to poor Maids, and comfortable Supplies to them that were broken
by Misfortune; Guests and Strangers courteously received both in City and
Country, and liberally presented at their departure. One time, among the rest,
he fed and clad Five Hundred Gel^^^si^n Horsemen, who were by Tempest forced
upon his Territories. What more? You would have said he had no Mortal Bosom,
but the very Breasts of propitious Fortune herself. For what Gillias possessed,
seemed to be the common Patrimony of all Men. For whose Prosperity and increase
of Wealth, not only the City of Agrigentum, but all the neighboring Regions
continually praid. Place on the other side the Chests of some shut up with
Locks, inexorable to all Pity; do you not think this expense far more laudable,
than that wary Parsimony?

LIB. V.
CHAP. I. Of Humanity and Clemency.
ROMANS.
1. The Roman Senate. 2. L. Cornelius Scipio, Cos. 3. T. Quinctius C^ispinus.
4. M. Claudius Marcellus, Procos. 5. Q. Metellus Macedonicus, Proconsul. 6. P.
Scipio Aemilianus. 7. The Elder Africanus, Procos. 8. L. Aemilius Paulus Cos.
2. 9. Cn. Pompey the Great, Procos. 10. Julius Caesar, Cos. 2. 11. Mark Antony,
Triumvir.
FORRAIGNERS.
1. Alexander the Great. 2. Pisistratus the Athenian 3. Pyrrhus King of Epirus.
4. Antigonus King of Macedon. 5. The Campanians. 6. Hannibal the Carthaginian.
WHat better Companions could I have found out for Liberality, than Humanity
and Clemency! The first of which shows it self in want, the second in business,
the third in doubtful Fortune. Now when we know not which to esteem best, yet
the commendation of that seems to crave precedence, which takes its
denomination from the Godhead it self.

1. I will begin with the most humane and merciful Acts of the Senate. Who when
the Ambassadors of the Carthaginians came to the City about the Redemption of
Captives, immediately without receiving their Money, restored them above two
thousand seven hundred and forty young men. I may well think that the
Ambassadors themselves were amazed to see such an Army of Enemies set at
Liberty, so much Money despised, and so many Carthaginian Injuries forgiven,
and that they thus said to themselves, O Munificence equal to the favor of the
Gods of the Romans! and happy our Embassy beyond our wishes, For we have
received a kindness which we never deserved. Nor was this a smaller testimony
of the Senate, who when Syphax, formerly a most opulent King of Numid^^. their
Captive, was dead in the Prison of Tibur* ordered him to be interred at the
Public Expense; that to whom they had given Life, they might also add the
honor of Burial. The same Clemency they used toward Perseus, who dying at Alba
where he was kept in safe custody, sent down a Questor to bury him at the
Public Charge, not permitting his Royal Relics to lie dishonored. These
things they performed to Enemies and Captives after their Death. The n^xt were
their Favors shown to their Friends in prosperity and living. After the end of
the Macedonian War, Musicrates, Massinissa's Son, being sen^ back to Paulus,
with those Horsemen which which he ^ad brought to the assistance of the Romans
to his Fath^^, his Fleet being scattered by Tempest, and himself putting in
sick at Brundusium: The Senate no soon^^ had news thereof, but they sent a
Questor thither, not only to defray the Expenses of him and his Retinue, but
also to take care for the providing all things necessary for the restoration of
his Health; and that they might not want Ships to carry them s^^e and well into
Africa, they ordered to be given to each Horseman a Pound weight of Silver, and
to every Footman f^ve Hundred Sesterces. Which so ready and complete Humanity
of the Conscript Fathers, might perhaps have so far prevailed upon Massinissa,
that had his Son died in the Expedition, he had the less grieved for it. The
same Senate, when they heard that Prusias King of Bithynia was come to
congratulate their Victory over Perseus, sent Cornelius Scipio, then Questor,
to meet him as far as Capua: and ordered that the best House in Rome should be
hired for him; and that he and his Retinue should be entertained at the Public
Charge. And indeed in the reception of that great King, the whole City seemed
to have the countenance but of one entire Friend. So that he, who came an
entire friend to our City, returned with a double affection for us. Neither was
Egypt ignorant of the Roman Clemency: For King Ptolomy being thrown out of his
Kingdom by his younger Brother, and coming to Rome with a small Attendance, and
in a mean Habit, to crave aid of the Senate, took a Lodging in the house of an
Alexandrian Painter. Which when the Senate understood, sending for the Young
man, they made a very great excuse, for not having sent the Questor to meet him
after the ancient Custom, and for not providing entertainment for him; as not
happening through their negligence, but through his sudden and private Entry.
After which they accompanied him to a public House, desiring him to lay by his
mean Habit, and fix them a day to wait on him. They also took care to send him
Gifts by the Questor every day; and by these degrees of kindness advanced him
from Expulsion to the Royal Throne. So that he had more hope in the assistance
of the Roman People, than fear of his own Misfortune.

2. To come now from the Conscript Fathers in general to particular Senators;
Lucius Cornelius the Consul in the first Punic War, when he had taken the City
Olbia, for the relief of which Anno Captain of the Carthaginians valiantly
fighting was slain, buried his Body out of his own Tent, bestowing a noble
Funeral upon it. Nor was he ashamed to appear at the Exequies of an Enemy,
believing that his Victory would be the less envied both by Gods and Men, when
there was so much of Humanity mixed with it.

3. What shall I say of Quinctius Crispinus, whose Gentleness and mild
Disposition, the potent Affections of Anger and Glory could not disturb? He had
entertained with great civility Badius of Campania at his house, and with great
care recovered him from a dangerous Sickness: Who after the revolt of the
Campanians, provoking Crispinus to fight with him at the head of the Army;
Crispinus, who knew himself to be above him both in Strength and Courage, chose
rather to give him good council than to overcome him. What do thou go about
to do, Madman, said he? Or whither do thy foolish desires carry thee? Must thou
needs rage with a public Impiety, that art fallen from private Charity?
Could thou find none among all the Romans, upon whom to exercise thy
villainous arms, but only Quinctius, to whose Houshold-gods thou owe both a
return of honor and safety? The League of Friendship and our Hospitable Gods,
with us sacred Pledges, though with you of no account, will not suffer me to
combat with thee. Nay, if in the shock of both Armies, I should have known thee
overturned by the force of my Buckler, I would have recalled my Sword from thy
Neck. And therefore it is thy crime, that thou did intend to kill a Guest;
but the Death of a Guest shall not be mine. And therefore seek out some body
else for the courage of thy right hand, for mine has learnt to save. But Heaven
gave to both a deserved Issue; for Badius was slain in the fight, Quinctius
valiantly fighting came safe off with honor.

4. And now the Clemency of M. Marcellus, how famous and how memorable an
Example ought we to account it? Who after he had taken Syracuse, from the
Castle took a view of the City below, once flourishing, now almost ruined in
Misery: he beholding the miserable state thereof, could not refrain from Tears.
So that if some person that knew him not had beheld him, he might have been
thought the Looser, not the Victor. This consolation had thou in thy
calamity, fair City, that though it was not lawful for thee to stand safe, yet
thy fall was gentle under such a Conqueror.

5. Quintus Metellus warring in Spain against the Celtiberians, lying at the
Siege of Centobricum, when the Engine was fixed, and he was just ready to beat
down that part of the Wall which was fittest to be battered, preferred Clemency
before an approaching Victory. For when the Centobricenses had opposed the Sons
of Rhetogenes, who had fled to him, against all the shot of the Engine, lest
the Children should be cruelly killed in the sight of their Father (though
Rhetogenes himself bid him not fear to go on with his Battery for all that) he
raised his Siege. By which act of Clemency, though he took not one City, yet he
took the hearts of all the Celtiberians, and thereby so far prevailed, as not
to want many Hostages to keep them faithful to the Roman people.

6. Splendidly also did the Humanity of the Elder African appear, who having
taken the City of Carthage, sent to all the Cities of Sicily, to fetch the
Ornaments of their Temples, which the Carthaginians had taken from them, and to
take care to restore them to their proper places. A Kindness acceptable both to
Gods and Men.

7. Equal to this was the Humanity of his Grandfather. His Questor selling the
Captives at the Spear, sent him a Boy of a very excelling Beauty, and very well
h^bited; whom when he understood to be left an Orphan by his Father, and
educated under the tuition of his Uncle Massanisa, and that without his leave
he had immaturely taken Arms against the Romans; he not only thought it
convenient to pardon the error of the Youth, but to give that respect which
was due to the Friendship of a Prince so deserving of the Roman People. And
therefore having bestowed a Ring, a Gold Button, and a broad embossed Tunick, a
Spanish Jacket, and a Horse with all Furniture upon him, he sent him to
Massanisa with a Convoy to attend him. The Romans believing these to be the
greatest fruits of Victory, to restore the Temples their Ornaments, and Kings
their Kindred.

8. Nor is the Memory of L. Paulus to be forgot, who when he heard that
Perseus, a Captive now, before a King, was brought before him, went to meet him
in all the Ornaments of a Roman General, and with his right hand raised up the
King, endeavoring to cast himself at his feet, and in the Greek tongue bid him
be of good cheer; and bringing him into his Tent, caused him to sit next him in
Council, not thinking him below the honor of his Table. Range the Army in
view, which conquered Perseus, and the Story which I have related, it may be
doubted which sight would be most delectable. For though it be a renowned thing
to overcome an Enemy, yet is it no less praiseworthy to take compassion of him
in misery.

9. This Humanity of L. Paulus teaches me not to forget the Clemency of Cn.
Pompey: Who having overthrown Tigranes King of Armenia, who not only made cruel
Wars with the Romans himself, but also protected Mithridates, a most inveterate
Enemy to our City, would not suffer him to lie prostrate at his feet; But
giving him words of comfort, caused him to put the Diadem, which he had cast
away, upon his Head again. And having laid certain commands upon him, restored
him to his former Dignity.

10. How noble an Example of Clemency afforded was Cn. Pompey, how miserable an
Example of Pity desired! For he that had impa^'d ^he Brows of Tigranes with
Regal Ornaments, his Head dispoy^'d of Three Triumphal Crowns, could not find
a Burial-place in that, which was but now, his own world: But cut from his
Body, wanting a Funeral Pile, was p^esented as a Gift of Egyptian Perfidie,
lamentable in the very eyes of the Victor: For as soon as Caesar beheld it,
forgetful of his Enemy, he put on the Countenance of a Father-in-law^; and
then, as became himself, he caused the Head of Pompey to be burnt with most
precious Odours, and paid his Tears to the memory of him and his Daughter. For
if the mind of that divine Prince had not been so tender, He that a little
before was accounted the Pillar of the Roman Empire (so Fortune turns the
scales of Humane Affairs) had lain uninterr'd. Caesar also hearing of the Death
of Caro, was heard to say, That he envied Cato^s glory, as Cato had envied his;
giving his Estate safe and whole to his Children. And certainly it would have
been no small part of Caesar's divine endeavors, to have been the safety of
Cato.

11. And certainly the Soul of Mark Antonie did not want the knowledge of equal
Humanity. For he gave the Body of Mar. Brutus to his Freeman to bury. And that
he might be the more honorably burnt, caused him to be covered with his own
Imperial Robe; believing him as he lay, not an Enemy, but a Citizen, all hatred
now forgotten. And when he understood the Freeman had taken away the Imperial
Garment, in great anger he commanded him to be punished, using first this
Speech; Did thou not know, said he, the Funeral of how great a man I
committed to thy charge? His stout and pious Victory at Philippi the Gods
willingly beheld, nor could they stop their eats at these words of generous
Indignation.

FORRAIGNERS.
1. From commemorating Roman Examples, being carried into Macedon, I am
compelled to set forth the Manners of Alexander. Whose Fortitude in War, as it
deserved infinite renown, so his Clemency merited high respect and love. He,
while he visits all Nations with an indefatigable swiftness, being overtaken at
a certain place with a storm of Snow, observed a Macedonian Soldier, decrepit
with age, almost nummed with Cold, himself sitting in a high Chair near the
fire. Who therefore considering not the quality, but the age of both, descends
from his seat, and with those hands with which he had subdued the wealth of
Darius, takes the benumbed Soldier and leads him to his own seat, saying, That
that would be wholesome to him, which was Capital among the Persians, to sit in
the Kings Chair. What wonder then if they thought it a pleasure to serve such a
Captain so many years, to whom the safety of a Common Soldier was more dear
than the grandeur of his own Person? The same Personage also yielding not to
any Mortal, but to Nature and Fortune, though faint with the violence of his
distemper, yet leaning upon his Elbow, he reached out his right Hand to all that
would take their leaves of him. Who would not run to embrace that hand, which
now oppressed by Fate, sufficed to embrace an Army, with an Humanity as vivacious
as his Courage?

2. Humanity is of no robust nature, yet we may declare the Clemency of
Pisistratus, Tyrant of Athens. Who when a Youngman inflamed with the Love of
his Daughter, meeting her in the Street, kissed her; and being therefore desired
by his Wife to punish him, made answer, If we punish those that love us, what
must we do to those that hate us? A worthy Saying; to which we must add, that
it came out of the mouth of a Tyrant.

Thus he took the affront offered his Daughter; thus the injury done to himself
more commendably. For being incessantly taunted and reviled by his friend
Thrasippus at Table, he so restrained his anger and his tongue, as if he had
been one of the Guard reviled by the Tyrant: and as he went away, thinking he
had retired sooner than ordinary for fear, he kindly invited him to stay.
Thrasippus being in the heat of his drink, spit all in his face, and yet he
could not move him to revenge. He pulled away his Sons also, desiring to
intercede for the abuses of him that was their Father. The next morning when
Thrasippus intended to punish himself with a violent death, the Tyrant came to
him, and giving him his faith that he should still remain in the same degree of
favor with him, kept him from the execution of his purpose. Had he done
nothing else worthy of honor or memory, yet by these very acts of his he had
sufficiently recommended himself to Posterity.

3. Patient and gentle also was the mind of King Pyrrhus, Who hearing that some
of the Tarentines at a great Feast had spoken largely in his disgrace, he
called for those that were present, and demanded of them, if they had spoken
those things which he had been t^ld. Whereupon one or them made answer, If our
Wine had not failed us, those things which we spoke of thee, would have been
but baubles and trifles, to what we should have said. This so pleasant excuse
of their Drunkenness, and simple confession of the truth, turned the Kings
Anger into laughter; by which Clemency of his he so far prevailed, that the
sober Tarentines gave him thanks, and those that had been drunk wished him
well. The same height of Humanity caused him to send Mico with a Convoy for the
greater safety of the Roman Ambassadors, whom he heard were coming toward him
for the redemption of Captives. And for their more honorable reception, he
himself with a Body of Horse richly attired went out of the Camp to meet them.
Not so much corrupted with the success of Prosperity, as so hinder all prospect
of respect from them with whom he was at greatest Enmity.

4. Of which mild temper he received the due reward at the last hour of his
death. For when he had invaded the City of Argos with most dismal Omens, and
that Alcyoneus the Son of King Antigonus had brought his head cut off, with
great joy, as a most happy act of Victory to his Father, laboring in the
defense of the City; Antigonus rebuking his Son for insulting over the ruin of
so great a man, forgetful of humane Calamity, took up his Head from the ground,
and covered it with the Hood wherewith his own head was covered, after the
manner of the Macedonians, and caused it, being returned to the body, to be
honorably burnt. And when his Son Helenus was brought a prisoner to him, he
commanded him to bear a Royal Mind, and to continue his Regal Habit, and
moreover gave him the bones of Pyrrhus, enclosed in a Golden Chest, to carry
into his Country of Epirus to his Brother Alexander.

5. The Campanians also, when our Army was compelled by the Samnites to pass
under Gallowses at Caudium, entering their City not only unarmed but naked,
received them as kindly as if they had entered in Triumph, bearing the Spoils
of their enemies before them. Immediately presenting the Consul with all the
Ensigns of his Honor, and bestowing upon the Soldiers Clothes, Arms, Horses
and Provision, taking away the want and deformity of the Roman overthrow. Had
they been as constant against Hannibal for the Roman Empire, they had not given
an occasion for the rage of the cruel Axes.

6. Having made mention of a most bitter Enemy, with those actions or kindness
which he performed to the Romans, I shall make an end of the subject in hand.
For Hannibal having sought the body of Aemilius Paulus slain at Cannae, with
all diligence, as much as in him lay, would not permit it to lie unburied. He
also caused the body of T. Gracchus, who fell unhappily into the ambushment of
the Lucans, to be honorably buried, and delivered his bones, to be carried
into his own Country, to our Soldiers. When Marcellus was slain in the
Country of the Brutii, while with more eagerness than consideration he
endeavored to spy the actions of the Carthaginians, he sought him out, and
laid him upon the Funeral Pile, clad in a Carthaginian Jacket, and adorned with
a Crown of Gold. And therefore the sweetness of Humanity penetrates into the
very breasts of rude Barbarians, mollifies the cruel and severe eyes of
Enemies, and bends the most insolent pride of Victory. Nor is it a difficult
thing for Clemency to find an easy passage through hostile Weapons, and
Swords drawn hand to hand. It overcomes Anger, throws down Rage, and mingles
hostile Blood with hostile Tears. Which produced that admirable Speech of
Hannibal, delivering his judgment at the Funerals of the Roman Captains.
Wherefore Paulus, Marcellus and Gracchus brought him more honor by their
Funerals, than by their Deaths. For he deceived them with his Punic subtilty,
but honored them with his Roman Clemency. And you, brave and pious Souls, have
enjoyed Obsequies not to be repented of; for as you fell more desirably in your
Country, more nobly for your Country; so ye recovered the honor of that last
office due to ye, which by misfortune ye had lost.

CHAP. II. Of Gratitude.
Among the ROMANS.
1. The Roman Senate. 2. The Roman Youth. 3. The Roman People. 4. M. Minutius
Rufus Master of the Horse. 5. Q. Terentius Culeo. 6. Citizens redeemed in
Greece. 7. Q. Metellus Pius Cos. 8. Caius Marius Cos. IV. 9. L. Sylla Dictator.
10. The Libitines.
Of Foreign Kings.
1. Darius of Persia. 2. Mithridates of Pontus. 3. Attalus of Asia. 4.
Massanisa of Numidia.
NExt let us take a view of the grateful and ungrateful effects and actions of
the Mind, that Virtue and Vice may receive their due reward, from a due
estimate of the value of either. However, because they are distinguished by
contrary ends and designs, we also intend to separate them in writing: And
therefore let us begin with those things, that rather deserve praise than
reprehension.

1. And that we may take our rise from public Acts, let us take into our
consideration Marcius Coriolanus, who invading his own Country, and having
brought a very great Army of the Volsci to the very Gates of the City,
threatening the utter destruction of the Roman Empire; yet at the intercession
of his Mother Vituria, and his Wife Volumnia, he was persuaded to give over his
violent Enterprise. In memory whereof the Senate gave very great Privileges to
the Order of Matrons. For they ordered that men should give the upper hand to
Women in the street, as acknowledging the Women's Garm^nt to have been a greater
safety to their City than their Arms: They added also a new distinction of
Coifs to the adornments of their Ears; they also permitted them to wear Purple
and Gold Laces; and more then all this, they erected a Temple and an Altar to
Women's Fortune, just in the same place where Coriolanus's wrath was appeased,
to testify their grateful acknowledgment of so great a benefit, by their
religious respect and reverence that they had of it.

For which the Senate was no less famous at the time of the Second Punic War:
For when Capua was besieged by Fulvius, there were two Women in the Town that
would by no means be persuaded from showing eminent signs of good Will toward
the Romans; the one named Vestia Opidia the Mistress of a good Family, the
other Cluvia Facula an Harlot; one which daily sacrificed for the success of
the Roman Army, the other still supplied the necessities of the Roman Captives.
The Town being taken, the Senate restored them both their Liberty and their
Goods; and if they had any other Boon to crave, bid them freely demand it, for
that they were as free to give it. It was more wonderful that the Senate had
leisure, in a time of so much Exultation, to return thanks to two mean Women,
than that they took upon them to do it.

2. What more commendable than that of the Roman Youth, who in the Consulship
of C. Nantius and Minutius listed themselves voluntarily to give assistance to
the Tusculanes, who were entered into the Territories of the Aequi, who had a
little before most stoutly defended the Roman Empire. A new thing, to hear the
whole Army listing themselves, lest their Country should seem to want a
grateful mind.

3. A great Example of Gratitude was that of the People toward Q. Fabius
Maximus: Who dying after he had born Five Consulships, with great su^^ess and
advantage to the Commonwealth, strove ^ho should bring in most Money to advance
the s^^endour and magnificence of his Funeral. Let us prize the Reward of
virtue, when we find brave ^en to be more happy in their Burials, than the
sl^^thful in their Lives.

4. With no small glory was another piece of Gratitude shown to the other
Fabius, yet living. For when Minutius, Master of the Horse, was made equal in
Commission with him being Dictator, by an Act of the Senate, which was never
done before, and dividing the Army had fought apart with Hannibal in Samnium;
yet he seeing the great Overthrow he had like to have had by his own Rashness,
had not Fabius come in timely to his relief, he presently acknowledged him for
his Father, and commanded him to be saluted Patron and Preserver by his own
Legions; and laying down his Commission of Equality, submitted the Mastership
of the Horse to the Dictatorship, as of right it ought to have been; correcting
the impudent error of the Vulgar, by the grateful signification of his Mind.

5. A Story to be related upon as good grounds, is, that Terentius Culeo, a
Pretorian by Birth, and of the Senatorian Order, should follow as he did the
Triumphant Chariot of the Elder Scipio, with his Cap in his hand bare-headed,
for that being a Captive to the Carthaginians, he had been retaken by him. And
therefore he deservedly returned, in view of the whole people, the
acknowledgment of a Benefit received from him, as from his Patron, who was the
Author of his Liberty.

6. But when Flaminius triumphed over Philip, there was not only one, but two
thousand Roman Citizens that followed his Chariot bare-headed; who having been
taken in the Punic Wars, and being sold into Greece, had been by his care
collected together and restored to their former Freedom. The Honor of the
General seemed redoubled that day, who at the same time let the People see
their Enemies by him overcome, their Fellow Citizens by him preserved: Also
their preservation was doubly acceptable to all, seeing that so many, and those
so grateful persons, had recovered their deserved Liberty.

7. Metellus, as famous for his Tears as others for their Victories, obtained
the name of Pious, for his passionate and constant Love of his Father in
Exilement: This man being Consul, was not ashamed to entreat the People on the
behalf of Q. Calidius, Candidate for the Pretorship, because that he being
Tribune, was author of the Law by which his Father was recalled. He always
after called him also the Patron of his House and Family. Nor did he thereby
any way derogate from his greatness which he had obtained; seeing that it was
not the Lowness of his Spirit, but the Gratefulness of his Mind, which made
him submit the grandeur of his Dignity to the greatest desert of an inferior
person.

8. And therefore the Gratitude of C. Marius was not only eminent, but seemed
to be the effect of a violent Passion: For observing two Cohorts of the
Camertians to have bravely withstood the Fury of the Cimbrians, contrary to the
Condition of the League, he immediately made them free of the City. Which act
of his he both truly and nobly excused, saying, That in the noise and hurry of
Battle, he could not hear the words of the Civil Law. And indeed it was a time
then, wherein there was more need to defend, than hear the Law.

9. Sylla in the Combat of Praise every where follows the footsteps of Marius.
For being Dictator, he not only uncovered his Head to Pompey being a private
person; but rising in his Chariot, did alight from his Horse. And this in the
Public Assembly he declared himself to have done willingly, remembering that
the other when he was but two and twenty years of Age had taken his part, with
his Fathers Army. There were many remarkable things in Pompey, but I know not
whether any thing happened to him more remarkable than this, that the surplusage
of his kindness caused Sylla at length to forget him.

10. And while we talk of Men in high Splendor, let there be some place for
meaner Gratitude. For Cornutus the Praetor being commanded to bargain for the
Funerals of Hirtius and Pansa; they who provided all Necessaries for Funerals,
belonging to the Temple of Libitina, promised the use of their things and their
attendance gratis; because they were slain fighting for their Country. And by
their constant and earnest desire procured, that the ordering of the Funeral
might be at the rate of Sesterce Money, though at their own charges. Whose
praise, setting the Law aside, their condition rather augments than extenuates;
seeing them the only contemners of gain, that lived by no other thing than gain.

FOREIGN Examples.
Let not their Ashes take it ill, if Kings of Foreign Nations come next in
order to be mentioned after this sordid tribe, which either was not to be
mentioned at all, or else to be placed in the last part of Domestic Examples.
But since honest acts done by the meanest ought not to slip our Memory, while
they obtain a distinct and proper place, they neither seem to be added to the
one, nor preferred before the other.

1. Darius being yet a private person, was mightily taken with a short Vestment
of Syloson the Samian; and by his more curious viewing of it, caused Syloson to
give it him freely, who so much desired it in his mind. But how great a value
he put upon that small Gift, he soon made known when he enjoyed the Empire,
giving to Syloson the whole City and Island of the Samians for his possession.
Not that he honored the price, but the opportunity and season of the Gift; and
rather considered from whom the Gift came, than to whom it was given.

2. Magnificently grateful also was King Mithridates, who made an exchange of
all his Prisoners taken from the Enemy, for one Leonicus a most stout preserver
of his own person from eminent danger, who was taken in a Sea Fight by the
Rhodians: accompting it more noble to give his most bitter Enemies an
advantage, than to be unmindful of one that had so well deserved of him.

3. More liberal yet were the People of Rome, for they gave all Asia for a Gift
to King Attalus. Though Attalus was not behinde-hand in the Justice of his last
Will and Testament, by which he returned it to them all back again. So that the
Munificence of the one, and the Gratitude of the other, cannot be set down in
so many words of praise, as the vast Cities given in friendship and religiously
restored.

4. Nor can I tell whether the breast of Massanisa were not in as high a
measure replete with the pledges of Gratitude. For he by the benefit of
Scipio's and the Roman friendship being put into the possession of a very large
Kingdom, by a most constant and loyal Amity continued the memory of that noble
Gift to the very end of his life, which he enjoyed to a very great age.
Insomuch that not only all Africa, but all other Nations knew him to be more
faithful to the Family of the Cornelii, and the City of Rome, than to himself.
He, though he were very hard put to it by the Carthaginians; and was hardly
able to defend his own Kingdom, delivered to Scipio Aemilianus, Nephew to the
other Scipio, the greatest part of the Numidian Army, when he was sent for into
Spain to the assistance of Lucullus, preferring former benefits before the
present danger. He now near his end, leaving great Riches and Fifty Sons behind
him, besought M. V. Manlius, then Proconsul in Africa, to send Scipio
Aemilianus who then was under his command to him; believing he should die more
happy, could he but commit his last words and breath to his Embraces. But his
death preventing the coming of Scipio, he gave in charge to his Wife and
Children to acknowledge but one people in the world, the Romans; and but one
Family among the Romans, that of the Scipio's. That he left all entire to
Aemilianus, giving him the sole power of making a division, and that whatever
he ordained, they should observe as inviolable, as if he had left it by Will.
Thus died Massanisa, having prolonged his life through many and diverse
varieties of changes to the hundredth year. By these and such other Examples,
is well-doing increased and continued among men. These are the Motives, these
the Incentives, for which we burn with a desire of well-deserving. And
certainly these are the greatest and the most splendid sort of Riches, to be
accounted opulent in bestowing Riches. The religious regard whereof since we
have so far prosecuted, let us now show how it has been contemned, that we may
the better know the difference, which is most acceptable and laudable among men.

CHAP. III. Of Ingratitude.
1. The Senate of Rome to Romulus. 2. The People of Rome toward Camillus and
others. 3. Of Sextilius toward C. Caesar the Orator. 4. Of Popilius toward M.
Cicero. 5. Of Cn. Pompey the Great toward Cn. Carbo.
FOREIGN Examples.
1. Of the Carthaginians toward Hannibal. 2. Of the Spartans toward Lycurgus.
3. The Athenians to Theseus.
1. THe Senate placed by the Parent of our City in the highest degree of
Honor, yet miserably tore him in pieces in the Senate House; and thought it no
crime to take away his Life, who had given life to the Roman Empire. That rude
and fierce Age contaminated with the Blood of their Founder, the known Piety of
posterity cannot dissemble.

2. This ungrateful error of a debauched mind shortly after caused the sad
repentance of our City. Camillus, the most triumphant Enlarger, and the most
certain Defender of the Roman Power, yet could not preserve himself in his own
City, whose safeguard he had established, increased and enlarged. For being
accused by L. Apuleius Tribune of the People, for having embezled the Spoils of
the Veientines, he was by a hard, and as I may say Iron Sentence, condemned and
sent into Exilement. And at such a time, when having lost a most hopeful Son,
he was rather to have been relieved with Comfort, than to have been laden with
Calamities. But his Country unmindful of the extraordinary Merits of so great
a Person, heaped the affliction of Exilement upon the loss of his Son. Poorly
done, for Fifteen thousand Pence (a pitiful Sum) to deprive themselves of so
great a Prince. The Elder African, when Rome was almost quite broken by the
Arms of the Carthaginians, when she lay bleeding to death, and bleeding out the
very last drop, restored her again, and made her Mistress of all Africa; in
recompense whereof, his Contrymen confined him to a poor Village near a
stinking Lake; of which he seemed to be sensible to his death, causing this
Inscription to be put upon his Tomb: INGRATEFVL COUNTRY, THOU HAVE NOT SO MVCH
AS MY BONES. What more unworthy the necessity which they put him to, what more
just than his complaint, or more moderate than his revenge? He denied his ashes
to a City, which he had preserved from being reduced to ashes. Therefore was
this revenge a greater unkindness to ungrateful Rome, than the violence which
Coriolanus offered to it. For he only affrighted Rome, this man made Rome
ashamed: not being willing, such was his piety, to complain of their Severity,
till after his Death. For, no question, it was a kind of comfort to him, that
his Brother had suffered the same before; who after he had overthrown
Antiochus, and reduced Asia under the subjection of the People of Rome, was by
the People accused of converting the public Money to his own private use, and
thrown into prison.

No less inferior in Virtue was the Younger Africanus, nor yet more fortunate
in his end. For after he had quite reduced to nothing two Cities, Numantia and
Carthage, both threatening destruction to the Roman Empire, met with his
murderer at home, but not with one to revenge his death in all the Forum. Who
can be ignorant that Scipio Nasica was as famous for Counsel, as the other two
Scipio's were for War? Who kept T. Gracchus from strangling the Commonwealth
with his pestiferous hands; yet he, because of the low esteem which his
Citizens had of his Virtue, under the specious pretense of an Embassy, went
into a voluntary Exilement, as far as Pergamus, and there spent the remainder
of his days, never sought after by his ungrateful Country.

I still keep in the same name, not having yet done with the complaints of the
Cornelian Family. For P. Lentulus, a most famous Citizen and eminent Lover of
his Country, after he had overthrown C. Gracchus in a pitched field in the
Country of Aventinum, as a reward of that Victory, whereby he preserved the
Laws, Peace and Liberty of his Country, was not permitted to live in the City,
and therefore wea^i^d with envy and slander, he begged a Lieut^nancy of the
Senate; and having made a set Speech, wherein he prayed to the Immortal Gods
that his ingratetul Country might never have occasion to use him again, he
went into Sicily, and there spent the remainder of his days.

3. But what Satyr can be sharp enough, what words severe enough to express the
Ingratitude of P. Sextilius? who being defended and fairly brought off from an
Accusation highly Criminal by C. Caesar, yet betrayed and delivered him up to
the cruelty of his enemy, coming to his house tor shelter in the time of
Cinna's proscription. Had his accuser implored the same kindness upon his
knees, it had bin inhumane to have denied him. For those that injuries do cause
us to hate, misery makes us to compassionate. But Sextilius betrayed not his
Accuser, but his Protector, to the cutthroat hand of his most inveterate
adversary: if for fear of death, unworthy of life; if for hope of reward, most
worthy of death.

4. To repeat another Example of the same nature. M. Cicero had defended C.
Popilius Lenas of the Country of Picena, with no less Care than Eloquence,
when his Cause was very doubtful. This Popilius afterward, being neither in
word or deed injured by Cicero, of his own accord begged of M. Antonius, that
he might be the person to be sent by him to cut his Throat in his Banishment;
and having obtained that detestable Commission, away he flew overjoyed to
Cajeta; and that very person, I need not say who was the author of his dignity
and safety, but also one who ought to have been respected by him to the utmost,
that very person did he command patiently to lie down, and have his head struck
off. And thus laden with the head of the Roman Eloquence, and the most famous
right hand of Peace, he returned with joy to the City, as if he had brought
along with him the Spoils of some Enemy. Letters are too imperfect to set forth
this Monster, seeing there is not another Cicero living to bewail his unhappy
fate.

5. What shall I say of thee, Great Pompey, I know not: While I consider the
vastness of thy great Fortune and Renown, that once orespread the Sea as well
as the Land. But though we should be silent, the Death of Cn. Carbo, by whom
thou were protected in thy youth, when contesting in the Forum for thy estate,
slain by thy command, will never be forgotten: by which ungrateful fact, thou
did seem to stand more in awe of Sylla's Power, than to consult thine own
Honor.

FORRAIGNERS.
1. But lest other Cities should insult, after we have confessed our own
Infirmities; we find that the Carthaginians had an intention to have killed or
banished Hannibal, after that for their honor and for the enlargement of their
Empire, he had slain so many of our Generals, and cut to pieces so many of our
Armies; that had he but slain so many common Soldiers of his Enemies, it had
won him renown sufficient.

2. Lacedaemon never bred a greater or more profitable Citizen than Lycurgus;
being a person that the Pythian Apollo did not disdain to speak to, when he
consulted the Oracle, and told him, He knew not whether he were to be accounted
a Man or a God. Yet neither the Integrity of his Life, nor the constant Love
which he bare his Country, nor all the wholesome Laws which he had made, could
preserve him from the hatred of his Citizens. For sometimes they threw stones
at him in the Streets; they put out one of his Eyes, and at last utterly
banished him out of his Country. What may we think of other Cities, when a
City so famous as this for Constancy, Moderation and Gravity, proved so
ungrateful against a Citizen so well deserving?

3. Take Theseus from Athens, and either there would have been no such thing as
Athens, or else not half so famous. For he reduced his scattered Countrymen
into one City: and gave the shape and form of a City to a wild and clownish
People before. When he was but a Youth, he quel^'d the usurping Tyranny of
Minos: He tamed the boundless insolency of the Thebans: He assisted the Sons of
Hercules; and wherever Enormity was grown headstrong and monstrous, he
overcame it by his Virtue and his Power. Yet was he banished by the Athenians,
and the Island Scyros, less than the Exile, became only famous for his Tomb.
Solon also that made such wholesome Laws, and so famous withal, that had the
Athenians used them still, they had been still the Lords of great Territories:
Who took Salamine a strong Fortress that threatened their ruin, and was but a
little distance from them: Who foresaw the Tyranny of Pisistratus, and was the
first that durst advise the People to resist him by force of Arms; in his old
age lived an Exile in Cyprus. Nor was it his hap to be buried in his own
Country, of which he had so well deserved. The Athenians had dealt well by
Miltiades, had they, after the Battle of Marathon, wherein he overcame the
Persians, with their loss of three hundred thousand Men, sent him presently
into Exile, and not kept him in prison till he died: Nay more than that, they
would not suffer his Body to be buried, till Cimon his Son had surrendered
himself into the same place. A sad Inheritance for the Son of so great a
Captain, who was himself afterward one of the greatest Captains of that Age.
Aristides also, who was the Rule of Justice all over Greece, and the greatest
example of Continence that ever was, was commanded to depart his Country.
Happy Athens, could they have found out any one that had been either a Good
Man, or a Lover of his Country, after this man was gone, with whom Sanctity
itself seemed to go along! Themistocles was a notable example of all that had
experience of the Ingratitude of their Country: For when he had settled Athens
in Peace, and raised it to be the most famous, the most wealthy, the Mistress
of all Greece, he found his Contrymen so incensed against him, that he was
forced to fly to the mercy of Xerxes, whom he had ruined before. Phocion, who
was endowed with two qualities which are the best to appease Wrath and Fury, I
mean Eloquence and Integrity, was forced by the Athenians to fly his Country:
and when he was dead, he was not permitted so much as one turf of Athenian land
to cover his bones. Certainly then it must be looked upon as a public piece of
Madness, by common consent, to punish the greatest Virtues as the greatest
Crimes: which not being to be any where endured, ought to have been more
especially exploded and abominated in Athens, where there is a Law against
Ingratitude. And not without reason, because he looses and abolishes the
commerce of doing and receiving Benefits, which is the support of human Life,
that neglects to return Kindness for Kindness. How severely therefore are they
to be reprehended, who having most just Laws, but being very wickedly inclined,
rather choose to obey their depraved manners, than their Laws? So that if it
could happen, that those great Persons, whose misfortunes I have related, could
appeal to any other Cities, do you think they would not quickly have silenced
those talkative People, as ingenious as they were? Marathon glitters with the
Persian Trophies; Salamis and Artemisium beheld the Ruin of Xerxes Navy: Those
Walls that were pulled down, rise more glorious from their ruins. But what are
become of all those great Men that did these great things? Answer Athens for
thy self. Thou have suffered Theseus to be buried in a little Rock; Miltiades
to die in Prison, and Cimon his Son to wear his Fathers chains; Themistocles a
Victor to prostrate himself at the Knees of that very person whom he had
vanquished; Phocion also, Solon and Aristides, to forsake their Houshold-gods,
when at the same time ye give divine Honor to the Bones of O^dipus, infamous
for the Death of his Father, and for marrying his Mother. Read therefore thy
own Law, which thou art bound by oath to observe; and since thou would not
give due Reward ^o Virtue, make just atonements to their injured Ghosts. They
are silent; but whoever reads the ungratetul acts of the Athenians, will be
severe and free to eternity to reproach so great a Crime.

CHAP. IV. Of Piety toward Parents.
ROMAN Examples.
1. Cn. Marcius Coriolanus. 2. Scipio Africanus the Great. 3. T. Manlius
Torquatus. 4. M. Aurelius Cotta. 5. C. Flaminius Tribune. 6. Claudia, a Vestal.
7. A Daughter that gave her Mother suck in Prison.
External Examples.
1. Pero, a Daughter, gave her father suck in Prison. 2. Cimon the Athenian. 3.
Two Brothers Spaniards. 4. Cleobis and Bython, Amphinomus and Anapus. 5.
Scythians. 6. Croesus 's dumb Son. 7. Pulto.
BUt leave these Ingrates, and talk of those that have been accounted pious;
for honest subjects are more pleasing than Stories of the wicked. Let us come
then to those, who have been so fortunate in their Offspring, as never to
repent the promotion of Generation.

1. Coriolanus, a person of a vast Courage and deep in Counsel, and well
deserving of his Country, yet almost ruined under the oppression of an unjust
Sentence, fl d to the Volsci, who were Enemies to the Romans. For Virtue gets
esteem wherever it goes. So that where he only sought for refuge, in a short
time he obtained the chief command of all things. And it happened that he, who
was by the Romans refused for their Leader, had like to have proved their most
fatal Enemy. For the Volsci having often overcome our Armies, by his Conduct
and Valor, came up and begirt the very walls of Rome. For this reason the
People that were so haughty, as not to value their own happiness, were forced
to supplicate an Exile, whose offense they would not pardon before. Ambassadors
were sent to appease him, but they could do no good: the Priests went in their
religious Habits, but returned without obtaining any favor: The Senators were
at their Wits end, the People trembled both Men and Women bewailed their
approaching Calamity. But then Veturia Coriolanus's Mother, taking along with
her Volumnia his Wife, and Children also, went to the Camp of the Volsci: Whom
as soon as h r Son espied, O my Country, thou have overcome my anger, said he,
by virtue of this Woman's tears, and for the Wombs sake that bare me, I forgive
thee, though my enemy; and immediately he withdrew his Army from the Roman
Territories. And his Piety encountered and overcame all Obstacles, as well his
reveng^ of the Injury received, the hopes of Victory, as the fear of Death upon
his return. And thus the sight of one Parent changed a most severe War into a
timely Peace.

2. The same Piety inflamed the Elder Africanus, hardly past the age of
Childhood, to the succor of his Father, and armed him with manly strength in
the midst of the Battle. For he saved the Consul, being desp^rately wounded in
the Battle which he lost to Hannibal upon the River Ticinus: nothing terrified
either by the weakness of his Age, the rawness of skill in War, or the event of
an unfortunate Fight, which would have dau^t^d an old Soldier; he thereby
merited a Crown conspicuous for its double Honor; he having recovered from the
jaws of death, a Father and a General.

3. Those famous Examples the City only received by hearsay; these they beheld
with their eyes. Pomponius the Tribune had accused T. Manlius Imperiossus to
the People, for that he had exceeded his Commission, out of hopes of making an
end of the War, and for sending away his Son, which was a person of very great
hopes, from public employment, to follow his own coun^^ey-affairs. Which when
Manlius understood, he came to the City, and went by break of day to
Pomponius's House; who believing that he came to aggravate his Fathers Crimes,
by whom he had been (...) used, commanded all the people out of the Chamber,
that he might the more freely take his Examination. The Son having thereby got
an opportunity so sit for his turn, drew his Sword which he had brought
privately under his Coat, compelled the threatened and terrified Consul to
swear, that he would forbear any farther prosecution of his Father: So that
Imperiossus never came to his Trial. Piety toward mild Parents is commendable:
But Manlius, the more severe to him ^is Father was, the greater praise he
merited, by the assistance which he gave him; being invited by no allurement of
Indulgence, but only natural Affection to love him.

4. This sort of Piety did M. Cotta imitate, the very same day that he put on
the Coat of Manhood; when as soon as he descended out of the Capitol, he accused
Carbo who had condemned his Father, and being condemned prosecuted him to
punishment; ennobling his early Youth, and first attempt in public business,
with a famous action.

5. Paternal Authority was equally reverenced by C. Flaminius. For when he
being a popular Tribune had published a Law for dividing the Gallick Land to
every particular man, in opposition to the Senate, and quite against their
wills, contemning both their threats and entreaties, and not at all terrified
with the threats of an Army, which they menaced to raise against him, if he
persisted in his obstinacy; was got into the Pulpit for Orations, reading his
Law to the People; yet when his Father pulled him away, he came down obedient
to Paternal Command: no man murmuring in the least to see him break off in the
midst of his Speech.

6. These were great effects of Manly Piety; but I cannot tell whether the act
of Claudia the Vestal Virgin, were not as forcible and as courageous. Who, when
she saw her Father pulled out of his Triumphal Chariot, by the rude hand of a
Tribune, with a wonderful celerity interposing her self between them, appeased
the highest Authority in the City, inflamed with Anger and Malice. So that the
Father rode in Triumph to the Capitol, the Daughter to the Temple of Vesta. Nor
could it be righty decided to which most praise was due, whether to him whom
Victory, or her whom Piety attended.

7. Pardon me most ancient Hearths, pardon me eternal Fires, if the context of
our work lead us from your most sacred Temple, to the more necessary rather
than magnificent part of the City. For no Misfortune, no Poverty cheapens the
price of Piety. Rather the trial of it is the more certain, by how much the
more miserable. The Praetor had delivered to the Triumvir a noble Woman to be
put to death in Prison* being condemned for some heinous Crime. But the Keeper,
compassionating her case, did not strangle her presently. All the while he gave
her Daughter liberty to come to her, after he had diligently searched that she
carried her no food, believing that in a little time she might be starved to
death. But seeing her live many days without any alteration, he began to
consider with himself by what means she kept herself alive; thereupon more
diligently watching her Daughter, he observed her giving her Breast to her
Mother, and pacifying the rage of her hunger with her Nipples. The novelty of
which wonderful sight, being by him related to the Triumvir, by the Triumvir to
the Praetor, by the Praetor to the Council of the Judges, they granted the Woman
her pardon. What will nor Piety invent, that for the preservation of a Parent
in prison, found out so strange a means as this? For what more unusual, what
more unheard of, than that a Mother should be nourished by the Breasts of a
Child? One would think this were against the course of Nature, but that Nature
commands us in the first place to love our Parents.

FOREIGN Examples.
1. The same is to be said of Pero's Piety, who preserved her Father Cimon,
fallen into the same misfortune, and in Prison, nourishing him like an Infant,
in his decrepit Age, with the Milk of her Breasts. Men's eyes are fixed, and in
an amaze, when they behold this piece of Piety represented in painting.

2. Nor can I forget thee Cimon, that did not fear to purchase the Burial of
thy Father, with a voluntary surrendering thy own person to imprisonment. For
though afterward it happened, that thou were both a famous Citizen and a
renowned Captain, yet did thou get more honor in the prison than in the
Council Chamger. For other Virtues deserve admiration, but Piety merits Love.

3. Nor must I forget the two Brothers, whose Courage was more no^^e than their
Birth. Who being born of ^ow P^^entage in Spain, grew famous by their D^^ths,
laying down their Lives for the support of their Family. For they having agreed
with the Paciaeci for twelve thousand Pieces of Money, to be paid to their
Parents after their Death, upon condition that they should kill Epastus, Tyrant
of that Country; not only performed the exploit, but bravely fell in
performing it. With the same hands revenging their Countrymen, punishing
Epastus, providing a maintenance for their ancient Par^^^s, and purchasing
renown to themselves. Therefore now they live in their Tombs, because they
chose rather to support their Fathers in their old Age, than to preserve their
own.

4. A more known pair of Brothers were Biton and Cleobis, Amphinomus and
Anapus: The first, because they drew their Mothers Chariot to the Temple of
Juno, to perform the Ceremonies there: The other, because they carried their
Father and their Mother upon their Shoulders, through the midst of Aetna's
flames: but neither of them lost their Lives.

5. Nor do I go about to detract from the honor of the Argives, or to cloud
the glory of the Sicilians. But I hold the light of knowledge to the ignorance
of a more obscure Piety: which makes me renew the memory of a piece of Scythian
Piety. For Darius invading their Territories with a mighty Army, they retreated
before him to the very utmost Solitudes of all Asia. Thereupon being by his
Ambassadors questioned, when they would make an end of flying or when they
would begin to fight; they made answer. That they had neither tilled Lands, nor
any Cities which were worth fighting for; but when they came to the Monuments
of their Ancestors, then he should know how the Scythians were wont to fight.
By which pious answer, that fierce and barbarous Nation redeemed themselves
from the scandal of Savageness. Therefore is Nature the first and best Mistress
of Piety, which neither wanting the help of Speech, nor the use of Letters,
through her own silent and proper Power infuses Charity into the breasts of
Children. What is then the profit of Learning? That their Wits should be more
polite, but not more honest. For true Virtue is rather born than acquired.

6. For who taught such People as wander up and down in Carts, that shelter
their naked Bodies in the Woods, and live by destroying Cattle like Dogs, to
give Darius such an Answer? She that taught Croesus's Son, that was born dumb,
to speak for the preservation of his Father. For the City of Sardis being taken
by Cyrus, when one of the Persians not knowing who the person was, furiously
was going about to have killed his Father, called back the Sword that was just
at his Throat, by crying out aloud to the Soldier, that he should not kill
King Croesus. So that he, who till that time was mute, recovered his Speech for
the safety of his Father.

The same Charity armed a Youngman of Pinna (surnamed Pulto) in the Italian
War, with the same strength of Body and Mind: Who being Governor of the City
when it was besieged, when the Roman General caused his Father to be brought
forth, and threatened to put him to death before his face, unless he would
deliver up the Town, made a Sally, and recovered his Father out of the Enemies
hands. Doubly famous, ^or that he preserved his Father, and yet did not betray
his Country.

CHAP. V. Of Fraternal Benevolence.
1. P. Africanus the Great. 2. M. Fabius Vibulanus Cs. 3. T. Caesar Augustus.
4. A certain Soldier.
NExt to this kind of Piety follows Fraternal Benevolence. For as it may be
accounted the first Bond of Friendship, to have received many and great
Benefits; the next tie is, that we have received them together. For how
abundantly pleasant is the remembrance of those things! Before I was born I
lived in the same House, My Infancy lay in the same Cradle, The same Persons
were Parents to both, The same Vows were made for both, and we enjoy the same
honor by our extraction. A Wife is dear to a Husband, Children dear to a
Parent, Friends are acceptable, and Acquaintance are delightful; but when you
have read what follows, there is no Benevolence that exceeds Brotherly Loving
Kindness.

1. And this I speak by the testimony of Scipio Africanus, who though he had
contracted a most strict Friendship with Laelius, yet he besought the Senate
that they would not transfer to him his Brothers Provincial Lot which they had
taken from him, and promised to go himself Lieutenant to his Brother: So that
the Elder became inferior to the Younger Brother, the stout and courageous to
the faint-hearted, the renowed to a person of no fame; and, which is more, he
that was already Africanus, to him that was not yet Asiaticus. So that he
assumed one of the most noble Sirnames, and gave the other. He received the
Imperial Coat of one Triumph, and gave the other; greater by assistance, than
his Brother by Superiority of Command.

2. But Marcus Fabius the Consul having overthrown the Veientes and Hetrusci,
in a most remarkable Fight, would not accept of a Triumph, which was offered
him with the full consent of the Senate, and eager desire of the People;
because his Brother, a person of Consular Dignity, was killed bravely fighting
in that Battle. How great was the zeal of Fraternal Charity that was lodged in
that breast, that could not be extinguished by the splendor of so high an
honor?

3. For this Example Antiquity is famous; that which follows has been no small
Ornament to our Age, who have had the honor to see the Fraternal Yoke of the
Claudian and now also the Glory of the Julian Family. For so great a Love had
our Prince and Parent for his Brother Drusus, that when he understood at
Ticinum, whither he came a Conqueror to embrace his Parents, that his Brother
Drusus lay dangerous sick in Germany, in a frightful amaze he flew out of Town.
And the Journey which he made appears from hence to have been so swift, as if
he had rode it at one breath; for passing the Alps and the Rhine, he posted
day and night, changing his Horses, above two hundred Miles, through several
barbarous Nations but newly conquered, in the company of Antabagius only, who
was his guide. But in all that hazard and danger, when he had forsaken the
company of Men, the most sacred name of Piety, and the Gods that are the
favorers of all laudable Virtues, even Jupiter himself, the faithful Preserver
of the Roman Empire, accompanied him. Drusus also faint and weak, at that very
moment when there is little or no distinction to be made between Life and
Death, ordered the Legions with their Ensigns to go and meet his Brother. He
also ordered a Praetorium to be erected for him upon the right hand, and would
make him take the Consular and Imperial Dignity: and at the same time he
submitted to the Majesty of his Brother, and the s^roak of Death. Nor can any
president of Fraternal Love be compared to these, unless it be the Examplar of
Castor and Pollux.

4. However it cannot be a dishonor to the Memory of the most famous
Emperors, to mention here the strange Love of a certain Soldier toward his
Brother. For he being in pay under Pompey, and having slain a Soldier under
Sertorius, that pressed him very hard; when he came to strip him, and found him
to be his own Brother, cursing the Gods for giving him the Victory, he carried
him near the Camp, and putting a rich Garment upon him, laid him upon a Funeral
Pile. Which ass^on as he had kindled, with the same Sword wherewith he had
slain his Brother, he thrust himself to the heart, and falling upon his
Brother, was burnt in the same flames. He might have lived Innocent, had he
pleaded Ignorance; but he rather chose to make use of his own Piety, than the
pardon of others; and for that reason to accompany his Brother in Death.

CHAP. VI. Of Piety toward their Country.
1. L. Junius Brutus first Consul. 2. M. Curtius the Roman Knight. 3. M.
Genutius Cipus Praetor. 4. Q. Aelius Paetus Praetor. 5. P. Decius Consul. 6. P.
Decius Brother of Publius Consul. 7. Africanus the Great. 8. The Roman
Citizens.
FOREIGN.
1. Codrus King of the Athenians. 2. Thrasybulus the Athenian. 3. Themistocles
the Athenian. 4. The Philaeni, Brothers. 5. Aristotle the Stagirite.
WE have seen Piety to private Relations, we are now to show it toward our
Native Country; to whose Majesty paternal Authority, almost equal to that of
the Gods, has ever submitted, and to which Brotherly Affection willingly
yields, and with a great deal of reason too. For a Family may be ruined, and
yet the Commonwealth be safe; but the ruin of the Commonwealth necessarily
draws with it the destruction of every Family. But how can we express in words,
what so many have testified at the expense of their own Lives?

1. Brutus the first Consul meeting Aruns the Son of Tarquin the Proud, whom he
had expelled from his Kingdom, in the field ran at him with that fury, that
running each other in the body with their Spears, they fell both dead at the
same time. I may very well add, that the Roman People paid dear for their
Liberty.

2. But when the Earth suddenly sunk in the midst of the Forum, leaving a wide
hole; and that the Oracle had returned for answer, that nothing could fill up
that concavity, but that which the Roman People most valued; Gurtius a young
Gentleman, noble in Birth and Mind, understanding that our City did excel in
Virtue and Warlike Prowess, putting on all his Warlike Ornaments, and getting
up a Horseback, he put spurs to his Horse, and rid full speed into the dismal
Precipice, upon whom the Citizens in his honor cast Fruit and Grain, and then
the Earth miraculously closed again. Many wonderful things did afterward adorn
the Forum. Yet never did any one come near the Piety of Gurtius to his
Country: For which, as deserving the chief place of Honor, I will add
another somewhat like it.

3. Genucius Cipus being Praetor, and just coming out of the City in his Habit
of General, there befell him a most unheard of Prodigy. For of a sudden
somewhat started out of his Forehead like Horns: and a Vice answered, that he
should be a King, if he returned into the City again. Which lest it should
happen, he condemned himself to perpetual Banishment. A noble act of Piety,
which considering the honor it deserves, is to be preferred before seven
Kings. In testimony whereof, a brazen Image of his Head was set up upon the
Gate out of which he went.

4. Genucius bequeathed the inheritance of his praise, than which a greater
could not be given, to Aelius the Praetor. For when a Crow came and sat upon
his Head, as he was sitting in Judgment, the Soothsayers affirmed, that if he
preserved the Crow, his Family should flourish, but the condition of the
Commonwealth be most miserable; but the Crow being slain, the quite contrary
would happen to both: took the Crow and wrung off his neck in the view of all
the Senate. He lost seventeen Soldiers of his Fam^ly, all stout men, at the
Battle of Can^ae. But the Commonwealth soon after recovered it^ glory. But
these Examples Sylla, Marius and Cinna laughed at as ridiculous.

5. Decius, who first brought the Consulship into his own Family, seeing the
Romans ready to fly and almost overthrown in the Latin War, vowed his own Life
for the safety of the Army, and presently, putting Spurs to his Horse, he flew
into the midst of his Enemies, seeking his own Death and the Safety of the
Commonwealth: and having made a great slaughter, at length orewhelm'd with the
multitude of Piles and Darts, the Victime fell. And from his Blood and Wounds
sprang an unlookt for Victory.

6. There might have been but one example of such a General, had he not begot a
Son answerable to him in courage. For he in his fourth Consulship, with the
same devotion and stoutness in fight; with the same event of fortune, sustained
the weak and sinking force of our City. And therefore it was a difficult thing
to understand, whether it were more profitable for the Roman City to have the
Decii Commanders, or to loose them: For living, they kept her from being
vanquished, but by their death it overcame.

7. The Elder Scipio did not loose his Life for the Commonwealth, but he
carefully provided against the destruction of the Commonwealth. For when our
City, after the Battle of Cannae, expected nothing else but to be the Victor
Hannibal's prey; and that therefore by advice of L. Metellus, the relics of
the broken Army were consulting to forsake Italy: He being a young Tribune, and
drawing his Sword, threatened death to every man that would not take an Oath
never to forsake his Country: And not only showed an example of Piety himself,
but recalled it back, when it was just forsaking the breasts of others.

8. To come from particulars to generals; How was the City equally divided in
their flames, and equally inflamed with the Love of their Country! For the
Treasury being emptied in the Second Punic War, that there was not enough for
the performance of their divine Ceremonies; the Publicans going to the Censors,
promised to let out their Money, in the same abundance, as if Money had
abounded in the City, and not require a Farthing profit till the War was ended.
The Masters also of the Slaves whom Sempronius Gracchus had made free, for
fighting so stoutly at Beneventum, forbore to ask any Money for their Service.
In the Camp it self there was not a Knight, not a Centurion that desired any
Pay. The Men and Women also brought what Gold and Silver they had, nay the
Children also brought their Purple Coats and Golden Hearts, that hung about
their Necks, which were the ensigns of their Ingenuities. Nor would any one
take advantage of the benefit of the Senates Decree, whereby such and such were
freed from Taxes. For they were not ignorant, when Veia was taken, when the
Gold which Camillus had vowed as the Tenth of their Spoil should have been sent
to the Oracle of Apollo, but could not be purchased, that the Matrons brought
in all their Golden Ornaments into the Capitol. They had also heard, that the
Thousand Pound of Gold, which was to be paid to the Gauls, when they besieged
the Capitol, was made up by their Liberality. And therefore out of their own
Goodness, and admonished by the Example of Antiquity, they thought they were
not to be outdone.

FOREIGN Examples.
1. But I will touch upon some few Foreign Examples to the same purpose. The
King of the Athenians, Codrus, when he saw his Territories wasted and invaded
by vast numbers of his Enemies, despairing of humane assistance, sent to the
Oracle of Apollo, and by his Ambassadors desired to know, which way he might
avoid that terrible War. The God returned for answer, that it would be ended
when he fell by his Enemies hand. Which was not only spread about among his own
People, but in the Camp of the Enemy: who thereupon commanded that not a man
should touch the body of Codrus. Which when the King understood, he threw off
his Royal Robes, and in a servile Habit threw himself into the midst of a
Squadron of the Enemy, that were out a forraging, and wounding one of them with
a scythe, provoked the soldier to kill him; by whose Death Athens escaped
ruin.

2. From the same Fountain of Piety flowed the soul of Thrasybulus. For he
being desirous to free his Country from the oppression of the Thirty Tyrants,
and was going about the enterprise with a small number of Men, one of his
Company said to him; How much will Athens be indebted to thee, if they regain
their Liberty by thy means? The Gods grant, answered he, that I may have then
paid them what I owe them. With which Wish he heaped a greater honor upon his
renowned work of destroying the Tyranny.

3. But Themistocles, whose Virtue made him Conqueror, his Countries injury
the General of the Persians, that he might not be forced to invade it, having
instituted a sacrifice, he drank up a full Beaker of Bulls Blood, and fell
before the Altar a renowned Victime of Piety.

4. There follows an Example of the same nature. When Carthage and Cyrene
contended most obstinately for a spot of ground; at length it was agreed to
send certain Young Men from such a distance, and where ever they met, that
place to be the bound of both their Territories. But in this Agreement two
Carthaginian Brothers, called Philaeni, were too hard for the other, setting
out sooner and making more haste: which when the Young Men of Cyrene
understood, they for a long time complained of their fallacy; but at length
they resolved to recompense the injury by proposing a severe condition. For
they proposed to the Carthaginians, that that place should be the bounds agreed
upon, provided the Philaeni would suffer themselves to be buried there. But the
event disappointed their expectation; for they without any delay delivered
their bodies to be buried. Who, because they rather desired large bounds to
their Country, than large limits of Life, lie entombed in honor, the Punic
Empire being extended by the resignation of their bones. Where are now the
proud Walls of Carthage? Where is the Maritime Glory of that Port? Where is
their Navy, so terrible upon every shore? Where are all their Armies? Where
their numerous Squadrons of Horse? Where those Souls that were not satisfied
with the vast tract of Africa? All these things Fortune divided between two
Scipio's. But the destruction of their Country did not abolish the memory of
that noble Act performed by the Philaeni. So that mortal courage or strength
can purchase nothing immortal, but Virtue alone.

5. This Piety was inflamed with youthful Z^al. But Aristotle, hardly able to
maintain the relics of old Age in his wrinkled Members, so strongly labored
for the safety of his Country, that he snatched it out of the hands of the
Macedonians, almost levelled with the ground and in their possession, as he lay
in his little Bed in Athens. So that Stagira was no less famous for being
subverted by Alexander, as for being restored by Aristotle. Hence it is
apparent, how kind, nay how profuse in their piety in their Country, all
ages, all degrees of men have been: And how the truth of wonderful Examples,
evident to the world, has subscribed to the Laws of Nature.

CHAP. VII. Of the Love and Indulgence of Fathers to their Children.
Among the ROMANS.
1. Q. Fabius Maximus Rullianus. 2. Caesetius Flavus. 3. Octavius Balbus.
FOREIGN Kings.
1. Seleucus of Syria. 2. Ariobarzanes of Cappadocia.
LEt the Indulgence of pious and dear Affection of Parents toward their
Children set sail; and carried with a fair gale, return home laden with a
grateful portion of sweetness.

1. Fabius Rullianus after he had been Five times Consul, and every time
honorably discharged his Office, admired for all the Virtues and Merits of his
Life, did not disdain to go Lieutenant to his Son Fabius Gurges, then marching
to put an end to a difficult and dangerous War, going into the Field as it were
with a Soul without a Body: His old age being more proper for the ease of a
Bed, than the labor of Combats. He also followed the Triumphers Chariot, whom
he had formerly carried in his own: and appeared not the Companion, but the
Author of the Triumph.

2. Caesetius the Roman Knights sat was not altogether so glorious, yet his
Indulgence to his Son was no less; who being commanded by Caesar, now Victor
over all his foreign and domestic Enemies, to disinherit and abjure his Son,
because that he being Tribune of the People had accused Caesar to the People of
affecting the Empire, ventured to give him this Answer, Thou shall rather take
from me, O Caesar, all my Sons, thou compel me to disinherit this one, by my
own act. But he had two sons besides, that were hopeful Yong-men, to whom
Caesar had largely promised great Preferment. However he preserved the other
safe, through the Clemency of the divine Prince; Yet who would not think, but
that he did more than humane Wit durst do, that would not stoop to him, who had
subdued all the World under his command?

3. But I cannot tell whether Octavius Balbus were not more kind and ardently
affectionate toward his Son. For he being proscribed by the Triumvirs, and
being got out of a Backdoor of his House, hearing a false report that his son
was killed at home, he returned to the slaughter which he had avoided, and
delivered himself up to be murdered by the soldiers. The moment wherein he
saw his son safe, being of more value to him than his own security. Oh
unfortune eyes of that Young Man, with which he could not avoid beholding a
most loving Father expiring for his sake!

FOREIGN Examples.
1. But let us come to things more pleasant to the ear. Antiochus the son of
King Seleucus, distractedly in love with his Mother-in-law Stratonice,
considering with what unlawful flames he burnt, covered the impious wound of
his breast with a pious dissimulation. Thereupon different Affections being
included in the same Marrow and Bowels, unlimited Desires and excessive Modesty
had consumed his Body to nothing. He kept his bed, like one ready to expire.
His Relations mourned; the Father was overwhelmed with sadness, lamenting the
loss of his only son, and the want of succession, and the face of the whole
Court was rather Funest, than Royal. But this cloud of sadness was soon
dispelled by the foresight of Leptines the Mathematician, or as others say, of
Erasistratus the Physician; who sitting upon Antiochus's Bedside, observing
him to blush when Stratonice entered the Chamber, and that his Pulses beat with
more life; but that he waxed pale, and fetched deep sighs, when she departed
again: At length found out the truth, and declared it to Seleucus. Who without
any more ado parted with his dearest Wife to his son: attributing his Love to
Chance, but the concealing it to death to his Modesty. Let us now consider
Seleucus as a King, an Old Man, and a Lover, and then it will appear how many
and how difficult obstacles did Paternal Indulgence overcome.

2. Seleucus parted only with his Wife, but Ariobarzanes parted with the
Kingdom of Cappadocia to his son in Pompey's presence: whose Tribunal when he
ascended, and by him invited sat down also in the Running-C^air, he beheld his
son sitting by the Secretary in a seat below his Dignity. Thereupon he
presently descended from the Running-Chair, and taking his Diadem from his own,
put it upon his sons head, and began to urge him to ascend to the place from
whence he came. The Young Man wept, his Body trembled, the Diadem fell out of
his hand, nor could he go any further: And, which was almost incredible, he
that parted with a Kingdom was glad; he that was to accept it, sad and
sorrowful. Nor had that famous contest had an end, had not Pompey interposed
his Authority; For he called the Prince King, commanded him to take the Diadem,
and constrained him to sit down by him in the Running-Chair.

CHAP. VIII. Persons severe toward their Children.
1. L. Junius Brutus first Consul. 2. Cassius Viscellinus. 3. Titus Manlius
Torquatus the Lawyer. 4. M. Aemilius Scaurus. 5. A. Fulvius.
1. THe Lenity of the foregoing Parents was Comical, the Severity of these that
follow Tragical. Lucius Brutus that equaled Romulus in honor; for he founded
Rome, and this the Roman Liberty. He coming to the Supreme Power, and
understanding that his Sons endeavored to restore Tarquin, caused them to be
apprehended, and to be whipped with Rods before the Tribuna; and after that,
caused them to be tied to a stake, and then ordered the Serj^ant to cut off
their Heads. He put off the relation of a Father, that he might act like a
Consul: and rather chose to live Childless, that to be remiss in public
revenge.

2. Cassius following his Example, though his Son were a Tribune of the People,
and were the first that had promulgated the Agrarian Law, and by many other
Popular Acts had won the hearts of the people, when he had laid down his
command, by advice of his Kindred and Friends, condemned him in his own house
for affecting the Kingdom: and after he was whipped, commanded him to be put to
death; and consecrated his estate to Ceres.

3. Titus Manlius Terquatus, famous for his many great Dignities, and a person
of rare experience in the Civil Law and the Pontifical Ceremonies, did not
think it necessary to consult his Friend in an act of the same nature. For when
the Macedonians had by their Ambassadors complained to the Senate of D.
Silanus his Son, who was Governor of that Province, he besought the Senate,
that they would determine nothing in that affair, till he had heard the
^^fference betwixt his Son and the Macedonians. Then with the general consent
of the Conscript Fathers, and of them that came to complain, he sat and heard
the cause in his own House, wherein he spent two whole days alone, and the
third day, after he had diligently examined the testimonies on both sides, he
pronounced this Sentence: Whereas it has been proved, that Silanus, my Son,
has taken Money of our Allies, I think him unworthy to live either in the
Commonwealth, or in my House, and I command him forthwith to get out of my
sight. Silanus struck with the sharp and cruel Sentence of his Father, would
not endure to live any longer, but the next night hanged himself. Now had
Torquatus done the part of a severe Judge; he had made satisfaction to the
Common^^^th; the Macedonians had their revenge; and one would have thought,
that the Fathers rigor might have bin mollified by the unfortunate end of his
Son: But he would neither be present at his Funeral, nor listen to them that
came to consult him about his Burial.

4. But M. Scaurus, the Light and Ornament of his Country, when the Roman
Cava^ty was worsted by the Cimbrians, and deserting the Proconsul Catulus, took
their flight toward the City, sent one to tell his Son, who was one of those
that fled, that he had rather meet with his carcass slain in the field, than
see him guilty of such a shameful flight. And therefore if there were any shame
remaining in his breast, degenerate as he was, he should shun the sight of his
enraged Father: For by the remembrance of his youth, he was admonished what
kind of Son was to be owned or contemned by such a Father as Scaurus Which
message being delivered him, the young man was forced to make a more fatal use
of his Sword against himself, than against his enemies.

5. No less imperiously did A. Fulvius, one of the Senatorian Order, keep back
his Son from going into the field, than Scaurus chid his for running away. For
he caused his Son, eminent among his equals, for his Wit, Learning and Beauty
to be put to death; because he took part with Catiline, being seduced by ill
counsel: having brought him back by force, as he was going to Catiline's Army,
and uttering these words before his death, That he did not beget him to join
with Catiline against his Country, but to serve his Country against Catiline.
He might have kept him in till the heat of the War had been over; but that
would have bin only the act of a cautious, this was the deed of a severe Father.

CHAP. IX. Of those that used Moderation toward their suspected Children.
1. L. Gellius Publicola. 2. Q. Hortensius the Orator. 3. One Fulvius. 4. A
certain Parent.
BUt to temper this incensed and sharp Severity with a mixture of Clemency, let
us join acts of Pardon to exactness of Punishment.

1. L. Gellius, a person that had gone through all the Offices of Honor, even
tot he Censorship, when he had almost discovered his Son to be guilty of most
heinous Crimes, as lying with his Mother-in-law, and plotting with her to take
away his Fathers Life, did not presently run to revenge himself, but after he
had consulted almost the whole Senate, after he had charged him, gave him the
liberty to speak for himself, and after a strict Examination and Trial, he
acquitted him. Had he hasted to cruelty out of the motions of Anger, he had
committed a greater crime, than that which he sought to punish.

2. Quintus Hortensius, who in his time was the Ornament of the Roman
Eloquence, showed a singular example of Patience to his Son. For when he knew
him to be so debauched, that he could not endure his impiety, and for that
reason being about to make Messala his Sist^rs Son his Heir, he told the
Senate, while he was defending him from an accusation of bribing the Peoples
voices, that if they condemned him, he should have nothing left but the Kiss of
his Nephews. Intimating by those words which he inferted in his Oration, that
he reserved his Son, rather in the torment of his mind, than among his
pleasures: Yet that he might not invert the order of Nature, he left his Estate
to his Son, and not to his Nephews. Moderately using his Affections: For that
in his life he gave an impartial testimony of his manners, and being dead he
did him the honor which was due to his blood.

3. The same thing did Fulvius, a man of great Fame and Dignity. For when he
had besought the Senate, that his Son, being suspected of Parricide, might be
sought for by the Triumvir, and apprehended by the Senates Warrant; he not only
surceas'd to prosecute him, but also left him all his Estate after his decease.
Constituting the person whom he had begot, not the person whose wickedness he
had experienced, for his Heir.

4. To these merciful Acts of great men, I will add one new and unusual
Example of an unknown Parent: Who finding that his Son lay in wait for his
life, and not believing that any ^rue-born and truely-begotten Child could ever
harbor such lewd and wicked thoughts, took h^^ Wife one day aside, and asked
her very seriously, whether: he Child were supposititious, or whether she had
conceived him by another? But being assured by her Oaths and Asseverations,
that he had not any reason to be in that manner jealous; he at length took his
Son with him into a private place, delivered him a Sword which he had secretly
brought along with him, and bid him cut his throat; telling him withal, that he
needed make use neither of Poison nor Thieves to complete his Parricide. The
immediate thought of which act, not by degrees, but so suddenly possessed the
breast of the young man, that flinging away his Sword, Live Father, said he,
live; and if you are so dutiful, as to permit such a Son to pray, may you excel
me in length of days. But I beseech you withal, let not this my Love seem the
more ignoble, because it proceeds from penitence. O Solitude more sacred than
Bloodshed! O Woods more free from cruelty than home it self! O Sword more kind
than nourishment! O more happy benefit of Death offered, than of Life bestowed!

CHAP. X. Of those who have courageously born the Death of their Children.
ROMANS.
1. M. Horatius Pulvillus, Cos. 2. 2. L. Aemilius Paulus. 3. Q. Marcius Rex.
FOREIGNERS.
1. Pericles the Arhenian. 2. Xenophon. 3. Anaxagoras.
HAving made a relation of such Parents as patiently brooked the Injuries of
their Children, let us speak of such as have born their Death courageously.

1. Horatius Pulvillus being to dedicate a Temple in the Capitol of Jupiter, as
he was holding the post, and ready to pronounce certain solemn words, news was
brought him that his Son was dead: But he neither took his hand off the post,
nor made the least interruption in the Dedication of the Temple, nor altered
his countenance from the public Ceremony to his private Grief; lest he might
seem rather to have acted the part of a Father, than a High Priest. Bury the
carcass then, said he.

2. A great Example, and no less renowned than the former, is that which
follows. Aemilius Paulus, the pattern of a most happy, yet a most unfortunate
Father, of four Sons which he had, all hopeful and beautiful youths, had
translated two into the Cornelian Family by right of Adoption, and only
reserved two to himself. One of which died four days before his Fathers
Triumph. The other alive in the Triumphal Chariot expired the third day after.
Thus he that was so liberal in bestowing Children upon others, was himself left
childless in a short time. Which Misfortune, that you may know how
magnanimously he brook'd it, he made plainly apparent in an Oration which he
made to the People, concerning the Actions which he had done for them, by
adding this little clause: When in the highest success of my felicity, I was
afraid, most noble Romans, that Fortune would do me some mischief or other; I
prayed to Jupiter, Juno and Minerva, that if any thing of Calamity threatened
the Roman Government, they would exhaust it all upon my Family. And therefore
it is very well; for according to my wishes, they have so ordered it, that you
should rather compassionate my private, than I bewail your public losses.

3. I will only add one Domestic Example more, and then permit my Story to
wander. Q. Marcius Rex the Elder, Colleague with Cato in the Consulship, lost a
Son of eminent hopes and piety, and which added to his calamity, his only
Child. Yet when he saw his Family ruined and ended by his death, he so
suppressed his grief by the depth of his prudence, that immediately he went
from his Sons grave to the Senate House; and as it was his duty that day,
immediately summoned all the Senators together. So that had he not generously
sustained his sorrow, he could not have equally divided the light of one day
between a sad and mournful Father, and a stout Consul; not having omitted the
good offices of either.

FOREIGNERS.
1. Pericles Prince of the Athenians, in four days having lost two most
incomparable Youths; the very same time, without any alteration in his
Countenance, or discomposure in his Speech, made a public Oration to the
People. Nay, according to Custom, he went with his Coronet upon his Head, that
he might not omit any thing of the ancient Ceremony for the wound of his
Family. Therefore was it not without cause, that a person of his magnanimous
spirit, obtained the Surname of Olympian.

2. Xenophon, the next to Plato in the happy degree of Eloquence, when he was
performing a solemn Sacrifice, receiv^d news that the eldest of his Sons, named
Gryllus, was slain in the Battle of Mantinea: However, he would not forbear the
appointed worship of the Gods, but only was contented to lay aside his Garland;
which yet he put on again upon his head, when he understood, that he sell
courageously fighting; calling the Gods to which he sacrificed to witness, that
he more rejoiced at the noble manner of his Death, than sorrow'd for his loss.
Another person would have removed the Sacrifice, would have thrown away the
Ornaments of the Altars, and cast away the Incense all bedabl'd with tears. But
Xenophon's body stood immovable to Religion, and, his mind remained fixed in
the advice of prudence. For he thought it a thing far more sad to submit to
grief, than to think of the loss which he had suistain'd.

3. Neither was Anaxagoras to be suppressed. For hearing the news of his bons
death: Thou tellest me, said he, nothing new or unexpected: For I knew, that as
be was begot by me, be was mortal. These expressions were the voice of Virtue,
seasoned with most wholesome Precepts, which whosoever rightly understands,
will consider, that Children are so to be begot, as that we may remember, that
the Law of Nature has prescribed them a Law of receiving and yielding up their
breath, both at the same moment: And that as no man ever died that did not
live, so no man ever lived that must not dye.

LIB. VI.
CHAP. I. Of Chastity.
ROMANS.
1. Lucretia. 2. L. Virginius. 3. Pontius Aufidianus Roman Knight. 4. P.
Maenius. 5. Q. Fabius Maximus Servilianus. 6. P. Attilius Philiscus. 7.
Claudius Marcellus. 8. Q. Metellus Celer. 9. T. Veturius 10. C. Pescentius. 11.
Cominius. 12. C. Marius. 13. Certain private persons that vindicated private
Adulteries.
FORRAIGNERS.
1. Hippo a Grecian. 2. Chiomara, wife of Orgiaguns. 3. The Teutons wives.
WHence shall I summon thee forth, fair Chastity, the chief support of Men and
Women! For thou inhabitest the Hearths consecrated to Vesta, by the ancient
Religion. Thou broodest upon the Cushions of Jupiter Capitoline. Thou the
pillar of the Palatium, renderest famous the most illustrious Houshold-Gods,
and the most sacred Genial Bed of Julia, by thy fixed habitation there. Thy
Guardianship defends the honor of young Youth. And out of respect to thy
Deity, riper age continues incontaminate. Under thy protection the Matrons
Stole, or long Garment is reverenced. Come hither then, and know what thou thy
self would have others do.

1. Lucretia the first Example of Roman Chastity, whose manlike Soul was, by
the mistake of Fortune, enclosed in a female Body, being constrained to suffer
herself to be ravished by Sextus Tarquinius, the son of him firnamed the Proud;
when she had before an assembly of her Kindred and Friends lamented in most
passionate expressions the Injury which she had received, stabbed herself with
a Dagger, which she had concealed under her Garment. Whose magnanimous Death
gave the people an occasion to alter the Kingly Government into Consular.

2. Neither would Virginius brook an injury of this nature, though a person of
a very Vulgar extraction, but of a Patrician spirit; for lest his Family should
be dishonored, he spared not his own flesh and blood. For when Appius
Claudius, the Decemvir, confiding in his power, violently prosecuted the
defiling of his Daughter, he brought her forth publicly into the Marketplace
and slew her: choosing rather to be the Murderer of a chaste, than the Father
of a contaminated Daughter.

3. Nor was Pontius Aufidianus endued with less Courage of Mind, being a Roman
Knight, who finding the Virginity of his Daughter prostituted by a Pedagogue to
Fannius Saturninus; not content to have put the wicked Servant to death, he
killed his Daughter. And that she might not celebrate dishonorable Nuptials,
he married her to a bitter Funeral.

4. What shall I say of Pub. Maenius? What a strict Guardian of Chastity was
he! For he punished a Freeman of his, for whom he had a great kindness, only
because he had kissed his Daughter, being of woman's estate; though it might
seem not to have bin done so much out of Lust, as by a mistake of breeding, or
long acquaintance. But he thought fit to imprint the Discipline of Chastity
into the apprehension of the tender Maid, by the severity of his servants
punishment; and taught her by so severe an Example, that she was not only to
preserve her Virginity, but her Lips uncontaminated for her Husband.

5. But Quintus Fabius Maximus Servilianus, after he had born many great
Offices with renown, coming to the Censorship, questioned his only Son for the
doubtful loss of his Chastity: and he underwent the punishment, by banishing
himself out of the reach of his Father.

6. I should have said the Censor had been too rigid, but that P. Attilius
Philiscus, who suffered his body to be made use of by his Master for gain,
proved so severe a Father afterward: For he slew his Daughter, because she
played the whore. How sacred then ought we to think Chastity was, in our City,
where the Procurers of Lust, did so cruelly chastise it?

7. The Example of a most excellent person and a memorable act follows. M.
Claudius Marcellus, one of the Aedils that rode in the moving Chair of State,
accused Scantinius a Tribune, and summoned him to answer before the People;
because he had given out, that his Son had been abused in his Body. But he
averring that he could not be compelled to appear, because he was priviledg'd,
and calling the Tribunal power to his assistance; the whole College of
Tribunes denied to intercede in a cause where Chastity was called in question.
Scantinius therefore being cited, was condemned by that very witness, who was
accused by himself. For it is said, that the Youngman being produced before the
Judgment Seat, with his eyes fixed upon the ground, observed a most resolute
silence by which modest silence he most of all prevailed in his revenge.

8. Metellus Celer also was a most severe chastiser of Libidinous Intent;
summoning Cn. Sergius Silus to answer before the People, for only proffering a
sum of Money to the Mistress of the Family, and condemning him for that single
Crime. For then not the deed alone, but the very intention was brought into
question; and it was more harm, to have willed an error, than it was
profitable not to offend.

9. Thus far the Juridical Gravity: here follows the extrajudicial. T.
Veturius, son of that Veturius, who was delivered bound to the Samnites for
making a dishonorable Truce with them, when by reason of the ruin of his
Estate, and the great Debts of his family, he was forced to yield himself in
his youth bound to Plotius, and was by him severely whipped, because he would
not permit him to make use of his Body, complained thereof to the Consuls: Who
acquainting the Senate with the matter, sent Plotius to prison. For they
endeavored to preserve the Chastity of the Roman blood safe, in what state or
condition soever.

10. And what wonder if all the Conscript-Fathers made this decree? C.
Pescennius, in Capital matters Triumvir, loaded with the public chains
Cornelius a most noted soldier, and one that had been four times advanced to
be a Centurion of the Triarii, or old Soldiers; because he had had private
familiarity with a Youth born of free Parents. From whence appealing to the
Tribunes, when he spoke nothing of the Fact, but only said, That he was ready
to put in ball, and to make it out, that the Boy bad made a public
prostitution of his body for Money; they absolutely refused to take any
cognizance of the matter. Insomuch that Cornelius died in prison. For the
Tribunes thought it too mean a thing for our Commonwealth to make bargains with
men, how stout soever, and to sell Domestic pleasure at the price of Foreign
danger.

11. After the punishment of a lustful Centurion, the severe usage of Mar.
Laetorius Mergus, a Military Tribune, and his ignominious Death, is next to be
related: who was cited before the People by Cominius, one of their Tribunes,
being accused by his Muster-master for a force upon his body. Nor would
Laetorius abide the Trial; but first of all privately fled before Judgment,
and then slew himself. Yet though he had satisfied Natures debt by his Death,
yet was he by the People condemned for the crime of Unchastity; the severe
Discipline of the Camp, which was the most certain Guardian of the consecrated
Eagle, and of the Roman Empire, prosecuting him even to his Tomb. Because he
had committed a force upon the body of him, whose Master and Commander he was.

12. This moved Caius Marius, then when he pronounced C. Luscius his Sisters
son, and a Tribune of the People, to be legally slain by C. Plotius a common
Soldier; because he durst impeach him before the people, upon an accusation of
abusing his Body.

13. But to give a slight account of those, who have made use of their own
instead of the public Law, in the vindication of their Chastity: Sempronius
Musca caused C. Gallius to be whipped, for being taken in the act. C. Memmius
also caused L. Octavius to be handled after the same manner for the same fact:
Carbo Accienus was gelt by Vibienus, Pontius by P. Cernius, being both taken in
the Act. A certain person also took Cn. Furius Brochus in the fact, and
delivered him over to be abused by the whole Family: who counted it no
detriment to indulge their own Anger.

FORRAIGNERS.
1. And that I may add Foreign to Domestic Examples, a Grecian woman named
Hippo, bring taken by the Enemies Fleet, flung herself into the Sea, that she
might preserve her Chastity: whose body wasting to the Erechtean shore, was
buried by the Seaside, and lies covered with a little hillock to this day. But
Greece having committed to eternal memory the honor of her Sanctity, makes her
every day more famous.

2. A more vehement this, that which follows a more considerate Example of
Chastity. The Army of the Gallo-Graeci being all defeated and taken by Cn.
Manlius, upon the Mountain Olympus, the wife of Orgiagon, a woman of
extraordinary Beauty, was taken likewise and forced by the Centurion, to whose
custody she was committed. When she came to that place, where by the Consuls
command the Centurion had sent to the friends of the Woman to bring her
Ransom, while the Centurion was weighing the Gold, with his eyes fixed upon
the quantity, the Gallo-Grecian in her own language commanded those of her own
Nation to kill him; and then with the Head cut off in her hand, she went to her
Husband, and casting it at her feet, she related the injury done her, and her
own revenge. What part of this Woman can any one say was in the power of the
Enemy, but her Body? for neither could her Mind be vanquished, nor her
Chastity taken.

3. But the Wives of the Teutons besought Marius their Conqueror, that they
might be sent by him as a Present to the Vestal Virgins, affirming that they
would abstain from the company of men as sacredly as they should. But that
request not being granted them, the next night they all hanged themselves.
'Twas well the Gods did not infuse the same Courage into their Husbands in the
field. For had they imitated the Virtue of their Wives, they had questioned the
Triumphs of the Teutonic Victory.

CHAP. II. What things were freely said or done.
Among the Romans.
1. The Ambassadors of the Privernates. 2. Lucius Marcius Philippus Cos. 3.
Scipio Aemilianus. 4. Cn. Calpurnius Piso. 5. M. Cato of Utica. 6. Cn. Lentulus
Marcellinus. 7. M. Favonius. 8. Helvius Mancia Fermianus. 9. Delphilus the
Tragedian. 10. Marcus Castricius the Placentine. 11. Servius Sulpitius Galba.
12. A. Casellius the Lawyer.
Forraigners.
1. Machaera a Macedonian woman. 2. A Syracusan Woman. 3. Theodorus the
Cyrenean.
AS I did not invite Liberty, attested as well by the Words as by the Sayings
of vehement Spirits; so I will not exclude it coming in my way. Which being
situated between Virtue and Vice, if it keep it self within the bounds of
Moderation, may deserve Praise; if it launch out further than the limits of due
respect, is to be reprehended: becoming thereby more grateful to the ears of
the Vulgar, than approved by Wisemen; and is more secure in the pardon of
others, than in the providence of the person. But since we have resolved to
prosecute all the parts of Humane Action; let us relate the Story upon our own
credit, and let others judge as they think fit.

1. Privernum being taken, and those persons put to death, who had caused the
Town to rebel; the Senate moved with indignation, considered what they should
do with the rest of the Inhabitants. Thus their safety was in a fluctuating
condition, at the same time subject to the Victors, and those that were
incensed against them. But when they saw there was no way but to submit and
petition, they could not forget that they had some Italian blood in their
Veins. For the chief in Court being examined among them, what punishment they
deserved; made answer, What punishment they deserved, who thought themselves
worthy of Liberty. He had taken Arms in words, and had inflamed the incensed
minds of the Senators. When Plautius the Consul favoring the cause of the
Privernates, put a stop to his stout answer, and asked him again, What kind of
Peace the Romans should make with them, granting them their pardon? But he with
a resolute Countenance returned again, If ye grant us good Conditions, let the
Peace be perpetual; if bad, as short as you please. By which stern Repartie he
brought it to pass, that the vanquished were not only pardoned, but enjoyed the
Privileges of our City.

2. Thus the Captain of the Privernates spoke in the Senate. But L. Philippus
the Cousul did not forbear to make use of the same liberty against the same
Order. For upbraiding their sloth before the Rostra, he told them, The
Commonwealth stood in need of another Senate; and was so far from repenting for
what he had said, that he commanded L. Crassus, a man of great Dignity and
Eloquence, to be laid hold on for murmuring against it. But he, thrusting back
the Lictor, Thou art no Consul of mine, said he, because I am no Senator of
thine.

3. What! Were the people safe from the assaults of Liberty? No, it both
assailed them, and found them patiently suffering. Carbo a Tribune of the
People, and a most turbulent assertor of the Gracchian Sedition, and a most
absolure firebrand of the growing Civil Wars, having haled P. Africanus from
the very Gate of the City to the Rostra, as he returned with Triumph from the
ruins of Numantium, there asked him his opinion of the death of Gracchus,
whose Sister he had married: that by the authority of a person so much in
credit, he might add fuel to the fire already begun: Not doubting, but that in
regard of their near relation, he would have spoken somewhat affectionately in
behalf of his Brother that was put to death; but he answered, That he was
legally slain. Upon which saying, when the whole Assembly incensed with the
Tribunitian fury, began to make a great Clamor, Hold your peace, said he, you,
to whom Italy is but a stepmother. And when they began to set up another Cry,
You shall never make me fear, said he, those free, whom I brought hither bound.
Thus were the whole People reproved by one man with contempt. What an honor
they gave to Virtue! They presently were mute. The Numantine Victory fresh in
Memory, his Fathers Macedonian Conquest, his Grandfathers Carthaginian
Trophies, and the Necks of two Kings, Perseus and Syphax, chained to their
Triumphal Chariots, stopped the mouths of the enraged Multitude. Nor did silence
proceed from fear, but because through the aid of the Cornelian and Aemilian
Families, many fears of the City and Italy were put to an end; the People of
Rome were not free, in respect of Scipio's Liberty.

4. And therefore we need the less wonder that the vast Authority of Pompey
contested so often with Liberty. Nor was it without great applause that he took
things patiently, because it was his fortune to be a laughing stock to the
license of all sorts of men. Cn. Piso when he had indicted Manilius Crispus, and
saw him, though apparently guilty, to be protected by Pompey; being carried on
with a youthful heat and desire of accusation, he taxed the potent defendour
with many great and heinous Crimes: Being then examined by him, why he did not
accuse him himself? Do but thou, said he, give Sureties to the Commonwealth, if
thou art accused, that thou will not raise a Civil War, and I will cause the
Judges to sit upon thy head, before they sit upon the head of Munilius. Thus by
the same Judgment he maintained two persons guilty; Manilius by his Accusation,
Pompey by his Liberty: and the one he fulfilled by Law, the other by the
profession of his good will, not being able to go any farther.

5. What therefore is Liberty without Cato? No more than Cato without Liberty.
For when he sat Judge upon a Senator, that was very guilty and infamous, and
that there were Certificates produced under Pompey's hand, in favor of the
party accused, he presently caused them to be laid aside, reciting the Law,
wherein it was enacted that no Senator should make use of any such assistance.
The fact is not much to be wondered at, considering the person; for what might
seem sauciness in another, was in Cato known to be Fidelity to his Country.

6. Cn. Lentulus Marcellinus the Consul, when he was complaining in a set
Speech of Pompey's prodigious power, and that all the people began to cry him
up; Shout, said he, shout while you may, brave Romans, shortly it will not be
lawful for you to do it, and go unpunished. Thus was the power of a potent
Citizen nipp'd, on the one side by an envious complaint, on the other side by a
sad lamentation.

7. To which eminent Citizen, having his thigh bound about with a white Shash,
It matters not, said Favonius, upon what part of the body the Diadem be worn.
Upbraiding his Kingly Power, by cavilling at a tittle piece of cloth. But he
turning his head neither one way nor other, was mighty careful how he
acknowledged his power by any cheerfulness in his looks, or how he showed his
Anger by any Severity: and by that patience laid himself open to the meanest
and lowest fort of people.

8. Helvius Mancia Formianus, the Son of Libertinus, when he was very old
accused Libo to the Censors: In which contest when Pompey the Great upbraided
him with his low condition, and his old age, and told him withal, that he was
sent from the Grave to be an Accuser; Thou tellest no untruth, Pompey, said he,
I come from the infernal shades to accuse Libo. But when I was there, I saw Cn.
Domitius Ahenobarbus all bloody and weeping; for that being of a noble
Extraction, of an upright Life and Conversation, and a great Lover of his
Country, he was put to death in the flower of his youth at thy command. I saw
there also Brutus, famous in the same degree, hacked and hewed, complaining
that the same calamity befell him, first through thy perfidy, and then by thy
cruelty. I saw Cn. Carbo a zealous defender of thy youth and of thy paternal
estate, in his third Consulship, laden with those chains which thou did cause
to be put upon him; and upbraiding thee, that contrary to all equity and
justice, he was slain by thee a private Roman Knight, when he was the greatest
Officer in the Commonwealth. I saw in the same habit and condition, a person of
the Pretorian Order, Perpenna, cursing thy Cruelty; and all with one consent
bewailing their hard fate, that they should fall uncondemn'd, under such a
young hangman as thou. It was lawful for a Member of a Municipal Town, that
still had a twang of his Fathers servitude, with an unbridled rashness and an
unsufferable malice to recall to mind the wide wounds which he had received in
the Civil War, now grown dry with age. And therefore at that time he was in the
strongest condition to reproach Pompey, as well as in the safest.

9. Diphilus the Tragedian, when in the Apollinary Plays he came to that Verse,
wherein there is this Sentence, Our misery is, Magnus; he pronounced the words
pointing full upon Pompey: And being rebuked by the People, immediately fell to
act him, as a person that carried himself too great and busy in Authority.
With the same petulancy he repeated those other words, The time shall come when
thou shall bewail that virtue.

10. The mind of Marcus Castricius was also inflamed with Liberty, who being
the chief Magistr^^e at Placentia, at what time Cn. Corbo the Consul ca^^^ a
Decree to be made, that the Placentines should g^^^ Hostages, neither obeyed
his Authority, nor sub^^^ted to Greater Men. And to one that told him, H^ had
many Swords, he answered, And I years. The Legions were amazed to behold such
stout Relics of Old Age. And Carbo's anger surceas'd of it self, having so
little matter to rage upon, knowing how small a part of his life he should
deprive him of.

11. But the Accusation of Ser. Galba was strangely presumptuous. Who forbore
not to tax the sacred Julius himself after all his Victories, as he sat in the
Seat of Judicature. Caius Julius Caesar, said he, I took up money upon my bail
for Pompey the Great, thy Son-in-Law, in his third Consulship:What shall I do?
Must I suffer? He deserved to have been turned out of the Court, for upbraiding
him so openly with the sale of Pompey's Goods. But he more mild than Clemency
it self, caused Pompey's Debt to be paid him out of his own Treasury.

12. A. Caesellius a famous Civilian, yet how saucy and impertinent! For no
Favor, no Authority could compel him to make a Bill of sale of those Goods
which the Triumviri had given away. By that Judgment of his excluding the
purchases of Victory out of all course and form of Law. The same person, when
he had spoken many things against Caesar's Faction, and that his Friends
admonished him to be silent: There were two things, he answered, most bitter to
most men, that gave him the boldness which he took; that was to say, old Age,
and want of Children.

FORRAIGNERS.
1. A Woman of another Country intrudes among so many Men; who being
undeservedly condemned by King Philip in his drink; I would appeal to Philip,
said she, but it must be when he is sober. The smart sentence roused him; and
by her present courage she compelled the King to examine the business more
strictly, and to give a juster Sentence. So that she extorted that Justice
which she could not get by fair means: borrowing her assistance rather from her
frankness of Speech, than from her Innocence.

2. The next now is not only a stout, but a lepid and witty liberty of speech.
A very ancient Woman, when all the Syracusans prayed for the Death of Dionysius
the Tyrant by reason of his Cruelty and Oppression, on, prayed every day to the
Gods for his life and safety. Which when the Tyrant understood, admiring her
undeserved kindness, he sent for her, and enquired of her what merit of his
made her so careful of him? Then Truly Sir, said she, the reason of my design
is very well grounded: For when I was a Girl, and that a very severe Tyrant
ruled over us, I desired his death; he being slain, one more cruel came in his
place: then I prayed that he might be taken out of the way; after whom, we
began to feel thee worse than all the rest: And therefore fearing lest if thou
should die, a worse than thee should succeed, I pray to the Gods for thy
safety. Which facetious boldness, Dionysius himself had not the face to punish.

3. Between these and Theodorus the Cyrenean there might be a kind of match
made for stoutness of mind; as virtuous, though not so fortunate. For when
Lysimachus threatened to put him to death; Truly, said he, You think you have a
great purchase, because you understand the virtue of Cantharides. But when the
King, being incensed at his Answer, commanded him to be nailed to the Cross;
Fright your Courtiers, said he, with that Sentence; for it is all one to me,
whether I stink under ground or above.

CHAP. III. Of Severity.
ROMANS.
1, The Roman People. 2. P. Mutius Scaevola, Tribune of the People. 3. The
Senate of Rome. 4. M. Curious Dentatus, Cos. 5. L. Domitius Ahenobarbus. 6. M.
Horat. Tergeminus. 7. The Senate of Rome against Incest. 8. The Kinsmen against
Witches. 9. Egnatius Metellus. 10. C. Sulpitius Gallus. 11. Q. Antistius the
Old. 12. P. Sempronius Sophus.
FORRAIGNERS.
1. Lacedaemonians. 2. Athenians. 3. Cambyses King of Persia.
IT is necessary we should arm our selves with Cruelty, while we treat of the
terrible and horrid acts of Severity; that having laid our more humane thoughts
aside, we may be at leisure to give ear to Rigor. For such inexorable Revenge,
such several sorts of Chastisement will come to be known, as, though they may
be accounted the fortresses of the Law, yet should hardly be inserted into the
number of peaceful Pages.

1. M. Manlius was thrown headlong from the place from whence he had repulsed
the Gauls; Because he endeavored wickedly to have oppressed that Liberty, which
he had so courageously defended. Of which sharp Sentence, this was the Preface;
I looked upon thee as Manlius, when thou dravest the Senones headlong down the
Rock; when thou he came a Changeling, I looked upon thee as one of the Senones
themselves. There is a Character of eternal Memory fixed upon his punishment.
For, for his sake it was enacted, that no Patrician should inhabit in the
Capitol or in the Castle, because he had a House, where now stands the Chapel
dedicated to Juno Moneta. The same Indignation of the City brake forth against
Sp. Cassius: to whom the suspicion of desiring Sovereignty did more harm, than
three magnificent Consulships and two pompous Triumphs did him good. For the
Senate and People of Rome not contented with putting him to Death, pulled his
House down over him when he was dead, that he might be punished also with the
destruction of his Houshold-Gods. Upon the Ground they built a Temple to
Tellus. Thus the Habitation of a powerful man, is now the Monument of Religious
Severity. The same end had Sp. Maelius by the Sentence of his Country, for the
same crime.

So that we find how great an antipathy the Ancients had against the Enemies
of their Liberty, by the very Ruins and Walls of their Houses. And therefore
the Houses of M. Flaccus and L. Saturnius, most seditious Citizens, were pulled
to the ground after they were slain. At length Flaccus's ground, after it had
long remained unbuilt, was adorned by Q. Catulus with the Cimbrian spoils.

Titus and Caius Gracchus were eminent in our City for their Nobility, and the
hope which was conceived of them: But because they endeavored the subversion
of the Commonwealth, their Bodies lay unburied, and the last Offices due to
Mortality were wanting to the Sons of Gracchus, and the N^phews of Africanus.
Their familiar acquaintance also, lest there should be any Friends of the
Commonwealths Enemies left, were shut up in a hollow Oak, and tumbled headlong
to the bottom of that place in the Prison, which was therefore called Robur.

2. The same thing did P. Mucius a Tribune of the People think lawful for him
to do, as the People and the Senate had done before; who burnt all his
Colleagues alive; because, being set on by Sp. Cassius, they strove to hinder
the Election of Magistrates, to the public hazard of the common Liberty. Never
was any thing more confidently acted than this Severity. For he, a single
Tribune, durst inflict that punishment upon nine of his Colleagues, which nine
Tribunes durst not exact from one Tribune.

3. Severity hitherto, a most rigid Guardian and Assertor of Liberty, was
equally as truculent also in the preservation of Discipline and Dignity. For
the Senate sent M. Clodius to the Corsi, because he had concluded an
ignominious Peace with them: And because they would not receive him, caused him
to be put to Death in Prison. When once the Majesty of the Empire was broken,
how many ways did obstinate Anger vindicate it! They nullified the Accord, they
deprived him of his Liberty and Life, and dishonored his Carcass with the
ignominious contumely of the Prison, and the Gemonian Precipice. And indeed he
had deserved this extraordinary chastisement of the Senate. But Cn. Cornelius
Scipio, the son of Hispallus, had the experience of it, before he deserved it.
For the Province of Spain falling to him by lot, they made a Decree, that he
should not go thither, with a reason added, Because he could not behave himself
as he ought to do. And therefore the Questor Cornelius had very like to have
suffered upon the Law of Bribery, for living in dishonor without any
Provincial employment. Neither was the Severity of the Senate less to C.
Vettienus, who cut off the Fingers of his left hand, because he would not be
forced to the Italian War. For they confiscated his estate, and imprisoned him
as long as he lived; causing him to spend his days and waste that life
ignominiously in a Jail, which he refused nobly to venture in the Field.

4. This Example Curious the Consul imitating, who being forced to proclaim a
sudden listing of Soldiers, when none of the Youngmen appeared, having caused
Lots to be made for all the Tribes, he commanded the first Name that was drawn
to be cited: And because he did not answer to his Name, he made a public Sale
of the Youngmans goods. Which as soon as the Youngman had notice of, he ran to
the Consul's Tribunal, and appealed to the College of Tribunes: But there
Curious making a Speech, and declaring that the Commonwealth had no need of a
Citizen that knew not how to obey; and so sold both his Goods and the Youngman
too.

5. In the same manner did L. Domitius stand to his panpudding. For when he was
Propraetor in Sicily, there being a Boar of an extraordinary size presented to
him, he commanded the Shepherd that had killed him to be brought before him:
and enquiring of him with what Weapon he had killed the beast; when he found he
had killed him with a Pike-staff, he caused him to be crucified: having
published a Proclamation before, for suppressing the Robberies that were
committed in the Island, that no person should carry a Dart. Some would take
this to be the height of all Severity; for it may be disputed on both sides.
But the reason and necessities of public Government will not suffer the Praetor
to be counted over-rigorous.

6. Thus Severity exercised it self in the punishment of Men: Not was it less
sedulous in the chastisement of Women. Horatius, one of those that fought the
three Curiatii, by the conditions of the Combat Victor over all the rest of the
Albans, when returning home from that renowned field, he found his Sister, a
Virgin, bewailing the death of one of the Curiatii, to whom she was betrothed,
more tenderly than became her age, ran her through with the Sword with which he
had so well merited of his Country: not thinking them chaste Tears, which were
shed for a fond and immature Affection. For which fact being endited before the
People, his Father defended him. Thus the inclination of the Virgin toward the
memory of her promised Husband, was chastised by a fierce Brother, while the
Father asserted and defended the Chastisement.

7. The Senate afterward following the same Example of Severity, commanded Sp.
Posthumous Albinus and Q. Marcius Philippus, the Consuls, to enquire after
those Women who practiced Incest at the Feast of Bacchanals: By whom when many
were condemned, their Kindred punished them all at home; and the ignominy of
public shame, was corrected by the severity of the chastisement: Whereby the
more the Women had shamed our City by their lewd carriage, so much the more
fame they brought to it by the Severity of their Punishment.

8. But Publicia who poisoned Posthumous Albinus the Consul, and Licinia who
poisoned Claudius Asellus, their Husbands, were strangled by order of their
next Relations. For those severe men did not think it necessary, where the
crime was so evident and notorious, to spend time in a public Trial. And
therefore as they would have defended the Innocent, they were the early
punishers of the Guilty.

9. The Crime of these was great, that excited Severity to so sharp a Revenge:
but Egnatius Metellus exercised his Severity for a far more inconsiderable
matter, who beat his Wife to death for drinking Wine. For which fact he was so
far from being accused, that he was not so much as reprehended: every one
believing, that for good examples sake, she had undergone the punishment of
violated Sobriety very justly. For indeed, whatever woman covets the immoderate
use of Wine, shuts the door to all Virtues, and opens it to all Vices.

10. Terrible also was the Matrimonial frown of C. Sulpitius Gallus, who
divorced his Wife, because he understood that she went abroad with her head
unvailed. A rigid Sentence; and yet there was some reason for it. For the Law,
said he, confines thee to have no other Judges of thy Beauty but my eyes; for
these adorn thy self, be thou only fair to these, and do thou believe their
judgment: The farther sight of thee, where it was needless, must of necessity
be suspicious and criminal.

11. Nor did Qu. Antistius Vetus think otherwise, who divorced his Wife,
because he saw her talking in the street with a certain ordinary freed Woman:
for being incensed at the fault, he prevented the crime; and avoided the
injury, that he might not revenge it.

12. To these we must add P. Sempronius Sophus, who divorced his Wife, because
she went to see a Play without making him acquainted therewith. While this care
was taken of old to prevent the Crimes of Women, they were free from offending.

FORRAIGNERS.
1. But though the Roman Examples might suffice to instruct the whole world,
yet will it not be irksome to know what Forraigners have done. The
Lacedaemonians caused the Books of Archilochus to be thrown out of their City,
because they thought them not modest and chaste enough to be read. For they
would not have the minds of their Children seasoned with those things, which
would be a greater mischief to their Manners than a profit to their
Ingenuities. And therefore they punished the greatest Poet, or the next to the
greatest in the world, by exiling his Verses, because he made smutty Satyrs
against Lycambis, who had injured him.

2. But the Athenians put Timagoras to death, because that in the Salutation
which he gave Darius, he flattered him after the manner of his own Country:
taking it in indignation, that the honor of their whole City should be, as it
were, submitted to the Persian Slavery by the flatteries of one single Citizen.

3. But the Severity of Cambyses was more than extraordinary, who caused the
Skin of a certain corrupt Judge to be flayed from his body, and nailed upon the
Seat, where he commanded his Son to succ^ed him.

CHAP. IV. Of things gravely said or done.
ROMANS.
1. T. Manlius Torquatus. 2. P. Scipio Aemilianus. 3. C. Popilius Laenas. 4. P.
Rutilius Rufus. 5. M. Junius Brutus Proconsul.
FOREIGNERS.
1. The Cinninienses. 2. Socrates the Athenian. 3. Alexander the Great. 4. The
Lacedaemonians. 5. Paedaretus the Spartan.
TEnacious Memory keeps in strict remembrance the great and most excellent part
of applause which those things deserve among renowned men, which were gravely
said or done by them. Among the plentiful Examples whereof, let us select,
neither with too sparing or too liberal a hand, those which may rather satisfy
than satiate expectation.

1. When our City was in a strange confusion upon the Overthrow of Cannae, when
the Safety of the Commonwealth hung with a slender thread upon the fidelity of
our Allies; That they might continue the more steadfast in the defense of the
Roman Empire, the greatest part of the Senate moved, that the Princes of the
Latins might be admitted among them. As Annius formerly and the Campanians
averi'd, that one of the Consuls ought to belong to Capua, and the other to
Rome: so sick was then the condition of the Roman Empire. Then Manlius
Torquatus, of the race of him who had overthrown the Latins, near the River
Veseris in a memorable Battle, with a loud voice declared, That if any of the
Associates durst come to give his vote among the Conscript Fathers, he would
kill him with his own hand. The threats of this one single person, both
restored the pristine heat to the languishing spirits of the Romans, and
hindered Italy from advancing themselves to equal Privileges with our City.
For as before they were broken by the Arms of the Roman People, so now they
gave over, vanquished by this man's words.

Equal to this was the Gravity of Manlius: For when the Consulship was
conferred upon him by the consent of all men, and that he refused it by reason
of the Infirmity of his Eyes, yet for all that was vehemently urged to accept
it; Choose, said he, some other person upon whom to confer this Honor; for if
ye compel me to take it upon me, neither shall I endure your Customs, neither
will you endure the Severity of my Government. If the voice of a private person
was so heavy, what would the Fasces of the Consul have bin?

2. No less mean was the Gravity of Scipio Aemilianus, both in the Court, and
in his Assembly-Speeches: Who, when Mummius was his companion in the
Censorship, though noble, yet effeminate and weak, declared in a public Speech
before the Rostra, that he would have acted for the Majesty of the
Commonwealth, whether his Citizens had given him a Companion or not.

The same person, when Ser. Sulpicius Galba and Aurelius Cotta, Consuls,
contended in the Senate whether of the two should be sent against Viriatus into
Spain, and that there happened to be a great dissension among the Fathers, while
they all expected him to declare his opinion; I think it not fit that either of
them should be sent, said he, in regard the one has nothing, and the other
never knows when he has enough. Believing, that want and covetousness were
Mistresses both alike un^i^ ^o ^each good government. By which saying he
obtained that neither were sent into the Province.

3. But C. Popilius being sent Ambassador to Antiochus, to command him to
surc^ase the War which he waged against Ptolomy; when he came to him, and that
the King with a cheerful and friendly Countenance held him out his right Hand,
he would not give him his own again, but delivered him the Senates Letters:
which when Antiochus had read, he told him, he would consult his Friends. But
Popilius incensed at his delay, Before thou go out of this circle, said he,
give me the answer which I shall return to the Senate. You would not have
thought him an Ambassador that spoke, but the whole body of the Senate: For
immediately the King affirmed, that he would give no farther occasion for
Ptolomie to complain. And then at length Popilius took him by the hand as an
Associate. Behold the force of a concise and efficacious Gravity of Mind and
Speech! At the same time it terrified the Kingdom of Syria, and protected Egypt.

4. But I cannot tell whether I should first consider the Words or Deeds of P.
Rutilius, for there lies an admirable stress in both. When he withstood the
urgent request of a certain Friend, and the other very much offended upraided
him in these words, What need have I then of thy friendship, if thou will not
do for me what I desire? made this answer, What need I of thine, if for thy
sake I should do any unhandsome action? To these words were agreeable those
deeds, when rather through the dissension of the two Orders, than for any fault
of his own, he was arraigned, he neither put on sorry Clothes, nor laid aside
the Senatorian Ornaments, nor made any Supplication to the Judges, nor spoke
any thing unworthy the splendor of his past years: But so ordered it, that his
Trial was rather an Experiment, than any Impediment of his Gravity. And when
Sylla's Victories gave him liberty to return into his own Country, he rather
chose to tarry in Banishment, than to do any thing against the Laws. And
therefore more justly might we have given the Title of Happy to the Manners of
so grave a Man, than to the prosperous Arms of the other more potent
Conqueror. Which Sylla usurped, but Rutilius deserved.

5. M. Brutus, the Murderer of his own Virtues, before he was the Parricide of
the Parent of his Country (for by one foul deed he overthrew them all, and
defiled his memory with an unexpiable detestation) as he was going in to his
last Battle, to some that told him it was not convenient to fight: Boldly, said
he, I go into the Battle; for this day either all things will be well, or I
shall have nothing to care for. For he presumed he could not live without
Victory, nor dye without Security.

FORRAIGNERS.
1. The person beforementioned puts me in mind to relate what was said to
Decius Brutus in Spain. For when all Lusitania had surrendered it self to him,
and only the City of Cinninia obstinately held out, and that the Consul thought
to have bought them out, they presently made answer to his Commissioners, That
their Ancestors had only left them their Swords to defend their City, but no
Money to purchase their Liberty from a covetous General. A Saying more noble
for Romans to have spoken, than to have heard from others.

2. Nature led them into these paths of Severity. But Socrates, the most famous
Pillar of the Grecian Learning, when he was to plead his own Cause at Athens,
and that Lycias had repeated to him an Oration composed by himself, for him to
make use of in the Court of Judicature; humble, suppliant, and accommodated to
the danger that threatened him; Take it away, said he, for if I could be brought
where I might repeat it, in the farthermost deserts of Scythia, there I should
think I deserved death. He contemned Life, that he might not want Gravity;
choosing rather to dye like Socrates, than to live like Lysias.

3. As great as he in Wisdom, Alexander, as great in War, showed himself to be
of the same mind. For Darius having tried his force in two Battles, and
therefore offering him a part of his Kingdom, and his Daughter in Marriage
with Ten Hundred thousand Talents; when Parmenio told him, that if he were
Alexander he would accept the Condition: He made answer, And so would I, were I
Parmenio. An expression worthy of the two Victories, and deserving the third
which he obtained.

4. This was the effect of a magnanimous Mind in Prosperity; That more
generous, whereby the Lacedaemonian Ambassadors testified to his Father the
miserable condition of their fortune. For when he imposed most intolerable
Burdens upon their City, they made him answer, That if he should persist to
command them things more grievous than Death, they would prefer Death before
his Commands.

5. No less grave was the Saying of that Spartan, who excelling both in
Nobility and Sanctity of Mind, being put by the Magistracy which he petitioned
for; I rejoice exceedingly, said he, that my Country produces men more worthy
than my self. By which Speech he equaled the honor he was put by.

CHAP. V. Of Justice.
ROMANS.
1. The People of Rome. 2. The four Tribunes of the People. 3. Ti. Gracchus
Censor. 4. College of Tribunes of the People. 5. Cn. Domitius Ahenobarbus. 6.
Licinius Crassus the Orator. 7. Cor. Sylla Consul.
FORRAIGNERS.
1. Pittacus of Mitylene. 2. Aristides the Athenian. 3. Zeleucus the Locrian.
4. Charundas the Thurian.
It Is now time to enter the sacred recesses of Justice, where always the
respect of just and honest Actions is conversant with Religious Observation.
Where Modesty is studied, and Desire gives way to Reason; there nothing is
reputed profitable that is not honest. Of which our City among all Nations is
the most certain and principal Example.

1. When Camillus the Consul besieged the Falisci, a Schoolmaster brought over
to the Roman Camp several Youths, and those the most noble in the City, under
pretense of taking them to walk abroad. Not questioning but they being in the
power of the Romans, that the Falisci would submit themselves to our General.
Upon which affair, after consultation, the Senate decreed that the Youths
should be sent home, lashing their Master all the way, while his hands were
tied behind him. Which Justice of theirs overcame the Minds of those, whose
Walls they were not able to expugn. For the Falisci overcome by their
Kindnesses, not by their Arms, opened their Gates to the Romans. The same City
oftentimes rebelling, but always broken by adverse Fortune, was at length
constrained to yield to Q. Lutatius the Consul. Against which when the Roman
People desired to have shown the extremity of their Revenge, when they
understood from Papyrius, who by the Consuls command had writ the Articles of
Surrender, that the Falisci had surrendered themselves to the Faith, not to the
Power of the Romans, they laid aside all their Anger, lest they should be
wanting to their Justice; suppressing the force of their Hatred, which is not
easily overcome; and the pride of Victory, which easily begets Licentiousness.
Another time when P. Claudius having by his prosperous conduct taken the
Camerini, had sold them under the Spear according to custom, though thereby
they saw their Exchequer filled with Money, and their Empire enlarged: yet
because it did not seem to be done according to the Rules of Honor and
Justice, they sought them diligently out, and redeemed them again; assigning
them a place of habitation in Aventinum, and restoring them their Lands: They
gave them Money also to build Chapels and purchase Sacrifices; and by their
Justice gave the miserable an occasion to rejoice in their destruction, being
so raised again.

What I have related was confined within our own Walls and the neighboring
parts; what I now relate has flown over all the world. Timochares the Ambracian
promised Fabritius the Consul, that he would poison Pyrrhus by the assistance
of his Son, who was his Cupbearer. Notice whereof being given to the Senate,
they sent Ambassadors to give Pyrrhus intelligence of it, admonishing him to be
careful against such kind of treachery. Remembering that their City was built by
the Son of Mars, and that War was to be carried on by Arms, and not by Poison.

2. Admirable was the Justice of the four Tribunes of the People at the same
time. For when L. Hortensius their Colleague had cited C. Atratinus (under
whose command they had rallyed the Roman Army, and restored the Battle against
the Volsci at the Lake Verrugo) to appear before the People; they swore, that
it would be a shame to them, if their General should be guilty. For those noble
Gentlemen would not endure to behold him as a Gown-man under the last
extremity, whose Life, when in Arms, they had defended with their own Wounds
and Blood. Which Justice of theirs so moved the Assembly, that they caused
Hortensius to desist.

3. Nor did they show themselves less noble in that which follows. When Titus
Gracchus and C. Claudius had exasperated the greatest part of the City, by
carrying themselves so severely in the Censorship, Rutilius the Tribune accused
them before the People of High Treason; moved not only by the public
consternation, but his own private interest, because they had ordered a part of
his wall to be pulled down for the benefit of some Publick-place. In which
Judicature, while many Centuries of the first Classis openly condemned
Claudius, but all consented to quit Gracchus; Gracchus cried out aloud, That if
his Colleague suffered, he would undergo the same punishment as he did. Which
Justice of his diverted the storm from both their heads and fortunes. For the
People absolved Claudius, and Rutilius released his Action against Gracchus.

4. The College of Tribunes also got great applause: for when one of them, L.
Cotta by name, under the protection of his sacred Authority, denied to pay his
Creditors, they decreed, that if he would neither pay his Debts nor give
Security, they would assist the Creditors in their Appeal: thinking it unjust,
that the public Majesty should be a protection to private Knavery. Thus the
Tribunitial Justice drew out Cotta lurking in the Sanctuary of his employment.

5. Of which to come to another Example, Cn. Domitius Tribune of the People
cited Marc. Scaurus before the People, being then Prince of the City, to ruin
him, if fortune had favored him; or at least to eclipse his renown by a
Criminal Accusation. While he was thus eagerly thirsting after the blood of
Scaurus, a Servant of Scaurus came to him by night, and promised him to
discover many great and heinous Crimes, to advance his Accusation. As a Master
and an Enemy he considered and weighed in his mind the Impeachment with
different thoughts, Justice overcame his Hatred: For immediately shutting his
own ears, and the Impeachers mouth, he caused him to be carried to Scaurus. An
Accuser, I will not say, to be beloved, but rather to be applauded by the
person accused; whom the People, as well for his other Virtues, as also for
this reason, created Consul, Censor, and High Priest.

6. Nor did L. Crassus behave himself otherwise as to the same Example of
Justice. He had always born a most perfect hatred against the Name of Carbo,
as his professed Enemy; and yet when a Servant of Carbo's brought him a Cabinet
of his Masters, containing several Writings, which he might have made use of to
his ruin, he sent the Cabinet, locked as it was, and his Servant bound, to his
Master. What Justice may we conjecture then flourished among Friends, when
Enemies and Impeachers one of another so nobly behaved themselves!

7. Sylla desired not so much his own safety, as the ruin of Sulpitius Rufus,
whose Tribunitial rage continually vexed him. But when he was banished, and
that he understood that he was betrayed by his own Servant, where he lay
skulking; that the Fidelity and Justice of his Decree might be permanent, he
caused the Freed-man for his perfidiousness to be thrown down the Tarpeian
Rock, together with his freed-mans Cap, which he had purchased by his
Treachery. A most insolent Victor at other times, now most just in his
Authority.

FORRAIGNERS.
1. But that we may not seem to forget the Justice of Foreigners, Pittacus of
Mitylene was one to whose merits his Citizens were either so much engaged, or
else had so much confidence in his Virtues, that they offered him the Sovereign
Authority of their City; which he so long kept as the War continued with the
Athenians about the Sygaeum, or possession of a piece of ground so called. But
after he had by a Victory settled Peace, he presently resigned his Authority
against the will of the Mitylenians, that he might not be the Lord of his City
any longer than the necessity of affairs required. And when by the consent of
all the People the half of the Land was offered him, he utterly refused the
Gift; esteeming it below himself, to lessen the glory of his Virtue by the
greatness of his Prey.

2. I must now relate the Prudence of another, that I may also relate the
Justice of another. When Themistocles had given the Athenians wholesome advice
to betake themselves to their Vessels, and after that Xerxes and his Army were
driven out of Greece went about to restore the ancient dignity of the City, and
laid up Treasure secretly to raise his City to the Dominion over all Greece; he
told the People in public, that he had found out something, which if fortune
would suffer it to be brought to pass, there could nothing happen greater or
more for the honor of the Athenian People; but that it was not a thing to be
divulged: and therefore desired them to appoint some person, to whom he might
privately reveal it. Aristides was deputed. Who when he understood that
Themistocles intended to have burnt all the Lacedaemonian Navy that lay in the
Road of Gytheum, that it being destroyed, the Dominion of the Sea might belong
to them, returned to his fellow Citizens, and told them, That Themistocles was
hammering that which was very profitable, but very unjust. Presently the whole
Assembly, when they heard it was unjust, bid him say no more of it, and
commanded Themistocles to desist from his Enterprise.

3. Nothing more prevalent than the following Examples of Justice: Zaleucus the
Locrian having strengthend his City with most profitable and wholesome Laws;
when his Son, condemned for Adultery, according to the Law made by himself, was
to have lost both his Eyes, and all the City interceded for the Son, for some
time he obstinately refused it, but at length, constrained by the entreaty of
the People, first putting out one of his own Eyes and then one of his Sons, he
left the use of sight to both. Thus he rendered to the Law the punishment which
it claimed, with a most admirable mixture of Justice; dividing himself into a
merciful Father and a just Legislator.

4. But something more severe was the Justice of Charundas the Thurian. He had
pacified the Harangues of his Citizens, that were seditious even to blood and
violence, making a Law that if any person entered the Common Hall with his Sword
on, he should be presently put to death. Some time after, having been in the
Country and coming home, he presently called a Hall, and forgetting himself
entered the Hall with his Sword on. Whereupon being minded of the breach of his
own Law, by one that stood next him; Well, said he, the same person shall
establish it; and immediately drawing his Sword, fell upon it and died. When it
was lawful for him to have defended or excused his error, he rather chose to
make the punishment public, than put a slur upon Justice.

CHAP. VI. Of Public Faith.
Among the Romans.
1. The Roman Senate. 2. L. Manlius, M. At ilius Cos. 3. The Roman Senate. 4.
The Elder Africanus. 5. The Roman Senate.
FORRAIGNERS.
1 The Saguntines. 2. The Petellines.
WHen this Image is set before our eyes, the venerable Divinity of Truth
stretches out her right hand, the most certain pledge of human Safety. Which how
it has flourished in our City, all Nations have been sensible of, and we shall
make evident in a few Examples.

1. When Ptolomey the King had left the People of Rome to take the tuition of
his Son upon them, the Senate appointed M. Aemilius Lepidus, the High Priest,
to be Guardian to the young Infant, and sent him to Alexandria for that
purpose; making use of the sanctity of a famous and most upright person, whose
public Abilities had been sufficienty known among them, lest the credit and
dignity of the City should have been any way injured. This became not only the
preservation, but the ornament of the Royal Infancy; so that when he came of
age, he knew not of which he had most to boast, whether in the Fortune of his
Father, or the Majesty of his Tator.

2. Famous also was the succeeding piece of Roman Integrity. A great Navy of
the Carthaginians being overthrown near the Coast of Sicilia, the Captains of
the Enemies, quite out of heart, began to think of making some overtures of
Peace. But when it was argued who should go, Amilcar refused, for fear lest the
Romans should serve him as the Carthaginians had served Cor. Asina the Consul,
whom they had detain^d a Prisoner in Chains. But Hanno, better understanding
the Roman Faith, very confidently profer'd himself. To whom as he was in
treaty, when a Tribune of the People spoke, and bid him take heed he had not
the same usage as the Consul Cornelius had had; both the Consuls commanding the
Tribune to be silent: Hanno, cried they, from that fear the reputation of our
City frees thee. It had made them famous, that they could be Masters of so
great a Captain of their Enemies; but much more famous, that they would not.

3. The same reputation the Conscript Fathers observed in defending the
Privileges of Ambassadors. For when M. Aemilius Lepidus and C. Flaminius were
Consuls, Culeo the Praetor by an order of the Senate caused L. Minutius and L.
Manlius to be delivered to the Carthaginian Ambassadors by the Heralds
themselves, because they had laid violent hands upon them. The Senate regarding
more their own Honor, than the persons for whose sake they did the Justice.

4. These Examples the Elder Africanus following, when he had taken a Vessel
wherein were several persons, and many of the chiefest among the Carthaginian
Nobility, yet he dismissed them all untoucht, because they told him, they were
sent as Ambassadors to him; though he knew it to be an excuse of their own
framing, to avoid the present danger; that the Faith of the Roman General might
rather seem to be deceived, than implored in vain.

5. Let us not forget that noble Act of the Senate, by no means to be omitted.
Q. Fabius and Cn. Apronius Aediles, by reason of a Tumult that happened, had
sent away the Ambassadors that came from Apollonia to Rome. Which so soon as
the Senate understood, they caused them to be delivered up to the Ambassadors
by the hands of the Heralds, and sent a Questor to convoy them to Brundusium,
lest they should receive any injury in their passage. Could such a Court as
that be said to be a Council of mortal Men, and not rather the Temple of Faith?
Which was no less admired by our Allies, than it was religiously observed in
our City.

FORRAIGNERS.
1. For before the miserable slaughter of the two Scipio's in Spain, and the
destruction of as many Armies of the Roman Nation, the Saguntines being
restrained within their own Walls by the victorious Arms of Hannibal, when they
could no longer resist the Carthaginian power, they brought forth all their
most precious things into the Marketplace, and kindling the Pile, threw
themselves into the common and public fire, that they might not be accounted
false to our Alliance. I cannot but believe, that Faith her self, surveying
humane affairs, looked with a sorrowful countenance, beholding such a religious
observance of her Laws condemned by such a fatal Event to the Arbitration of
unjust Fortune.

2. By an act of the same nature, the Petellines obtained the same applause.
Who being besieged by Hannibal, because they would not forsake our Alliance,
sent Ambassadors to the Senate, imploring relief. But the Romans, because of
their losses at Cannae, not being able to succor them, gave them liberty to
provide the best they could for their own safety. So that they were free to
accept of Conditions from the Carthaginians. However, they, turning their
Women, aged and infirm people out of the City, obstinately defended their Walls
to the last: So that their whole City expired, before they would lay aside
their respect to the Roman Alliance. Nor did Hannibal take Petellia, but the
sepulcher of the Petellian Faith.

CHAP. VII. Of the Truth of Wives to their Husbands.
1. Aemilia, the Wife of the Elder Scipio. 2. Thuria, the Wife of Q. Lucretius
Vespillo. 3. Sulpitia, the Wife of Lentulus.
1. THat we may not omit the Truth of Women in Matrimony, Aemilia the Wife of
the Elder Africanus, the Mother of Cornelia, Mother of the Gracchi, was so
dutiful and patient, that though she knew her Husband had a kindness for one of
her Maids, she took no notice of it; because she would not blemish the
Conqueror of Africa with the guilt of Unchastity. And so far she was from
revenge, that after her Husbands death, she set her Maid free, and gave her in
marriage to a Freed man of his.

2. When Q. Lucretius was banished by the Triumvirs, Thuria his Wife kept him
out of harms way, between the head of the Bed and the ceiling of the Chamber,
not without great danger to her self. And so true she was to him, that while
others that were banished, as he was, wandered in pinching extremity, in remote
Countries among Enemies, he all the while lay safe in the bosom of his Wife.

3. Sulpitia being kept up very strictly by her Mother Julia, for ^ear she
should follow her Husband Lentulus Crustellio, banished by the Triumvirs into
Sicily; nevertheless made her escape in a disguise, and with only two
Maidservants and two Menservants got safe to him. Banishing her self, that
she might not fail in her duty toward her Husband.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Fidelity of Servants to their Masters.
1. The Servant of M. Antonius the Orator. 2. The Servant of C. Marius. 3.
Philocrates the Servant of C. Gracchus. 4. Pindarus the Servant of C. Cassius.
5. The Family of Plotius Plancus. 6. The Servant of Urbinius Anapio. 7. The
Servant of Antius Restio.
IT remains that we relate the Fidelity of Servants to their Masters; so much
the more praiseworthy, by how much it was least expected from them.

1. Marcus Antonius, a most celebrated Orator in the days of our Ancestors,
was accused of Incest; whose Accusers were obstinately importunate with the
Judges that his Servant might be examined for a witness; because they pretended
that he carried the Lanthorn before him, when he went to commit the Fact. He
was at that time a beardless Youth, and saw himself ready to be sent to the
Rack, yet never budg'd for it. But when he came home, and saw Antonius very
much troubled about the business, he earnestly begged of his Master, that he
might be put to the Rack; affirming, that they should not force a tittle out of
his mouth to do him a prejudice. And with a wonderful patience he performed his
promise: For being lashed with many stripes, set upon the Wooden-horse, and
seared with burning plates of Iron, he overthrew the whole force of his Masters
accusation, by standing firm to his preservation. Fortune might be deservedly
blamed, for having imprisoned so pious and stout a Soul in the Body of a Slave.

2. But the Consul C. Marius, whose ill success was miserable at the Siege of
Praeneste, seeing it in vain to escape through a little Mine under ground, and
slightly wounded by Thelesinus, with whom he had designed to live, was run
through and slain by his Servant, to free him from the cruelty of Sylla; though
he had large promises made him, to deliver him up to the Victor. The seasonable
assistance of whose right hand, no way seems inferior to the Piety of those
who have protected their Masters in safety. Because at that time not Life, but
Death was most beneficial to Marius.

3. Equally illustrious was the following Example. Caius Gracchus, that he
might not fall into the power of his Enemies, laid his neck to be cut off by
his Servant Phil^crates. Which when he had cut off with a swift blow, he thrust
the Sword still reaking with his Masters blood into his own Bowels. Others call
this Servant Euporus: I dispute not about the name, only I admire the stoutness
of a servile Fidelity; the nobleness of whose Soul had the generous Youth
imitated, he had avoided the threatening danger, by the benefit of his own and
not his Servants hand. But now he gave way that the Carcass of Philocrates
should lie in more splendor than that of Gracchu^ his Master.

4. Another sort of Fury, and another sort of Nobility, but the same Example of
Fidelity. For Pindarus, the Freed-man of Cassius, having slain his Master by
his command, after he had lost the Battle of Philippi, preserved him from the
insultings of his Enemies; nor was the Servant ever seen after. Which of the
Gods, Revenger of the most heinous Crimes of Mortals, so benumbed that Valor,
that ventured to the destruction of the Parent of the Empire, that it should so
abjectly trembling submit it self at the knees of Pindarus, to avoid the
punishment of public Parricide, which it deserved from the hands of a most
pious Victor? Thou, thou it was, most divine Julius, that did exact the
revenge due to thy celestial wounds, compelling that proud Head; so perfidious
to thee, to implore the sordid aid of a Slave, driven to that extremity of
fury, that he neither defir'd to live, nor durst to dye by his own hand.

5. Of these calamities C. Plotius Plancus, the Brother of Munatius Plancus
both Consul and Censor, was a sad partaker; who lurking in the Territories of
Salernum, after he had been banished by the Triumvirs, discovered the Sanctuary
of his Safety by his effeminate way of living, and the odours of his sweet
Ointments. For thereby the industrious care of those that persecute the
miserable, smelt out his secret haunts: By whom the Servants being apprehended,
and long tortured, denied they knew where their Master was. Then would not
Plancus endure that Servants, so faithful and exemplary, should be any longer
tormented; but discovered himself, and offered his Throat to the Soldiers
weapons* Which contest of mutual good Will, makes it difficult to be decided,
whether the Master were more worthy, who had the trial of such a constant
Fidelity in his Servants; or the Servants, who were freed from the severity of
the Rack, by the just compassion of their Master.

6. What shall I say to the Servant of Vrbinius Panopio, how admirable was his
Faith? Who understanding that certain Soldiers, having found where his Master
was, by the treachery of his Servants, were come to the Town of Reate to kill
him, changing his Ga^ments with him, and putting on his own Ring, he put his
Master out at a Backdoor, and retiring himself into his Masters Chamber and
into his Masters Bed, suffered himself patiently to be killed in lieu of
Pan^pio. The act is soon related, but the commenda^^on which it deserves is not
so easily given. However, Panopio tes^i^i^d how much he was beholding to his
Servant, by raising him an ample Monument, with a grateful Inscription.

7. I might be contented with these Examples; but the wonder of the Fact
compells me to relate one more. Antius Restio being proscribed by the
Triumviri, when he saw all his Servants busy upon rapine and ransack, in a
tempestuous night withdrew himself from his House. Whose flight being observed
by a Slave that he had kept severely in Chains, and one that he had burnt in
the Forehead with contumelious Letters; the Slave never left till he had
overtaken him, to the end he might attend him in his misery* By which most
exquisite and dangerous officiousness, he completed the full measure of a most
signal Piety. For when they, whose condition was better at home, minded nothing
but the ransack of their Master, he thought the sa^ety of that person, who had
been so cruel to him, to be the greatest profit he could enjoy. And when it had
been enough to have laid aside his Anger, he added Charity. Nor did his good
Will end here, but be used a Stratagem to preserve his Master. For when he
perceived the Soldiers were at hand, he hid his Master, and making a Funeral
Pile, got a poor old man whom he slew and threw him into the flame. When the
Soldiers ask^d him for Antius; pointing to the Pile, I have thrown him, said
he, into that Pile, for his cruelty to me. The Soldiers, believing the
probability of the Story, went their way; whereby Antius had time to provide
for his safety.

CHAP. IX. Of the Change of Manners and Fortune.
Among the ROMANS.
1. T. Manlius Torquatus. 2. P. Africanus the Elder. 3. C. Valerius Flaccus the
Flamin. 4. Q. Fabius Maximus. 5. Q. Lutatius Catulus. 6. L. Cornelius Scylla
the Happy. 7. T. Aufidius. 8. P. Rupilius. 9. P. Ventidius Bassus. 10. L.
Cornelius Lentulus Lupus. 11. Cn. Cornelius Scipio Asina. 12. Licinius Crassus
the Rich. 13. Q. Servilius Caepio. 14. C. Marius. 15. C. Julius Caesar.
FORRAIGNERS.
1. Polemon the Atheman. 2. Themistocles the Athenian. 3. Conon the Athenian.
4. Alcibiades. 5. Polycrates. 6. Dionysius of Syracuse. 7. Syphax King of the
Numidians.
A Considerate Change can either add much to the Trust, or diminish the Care
of worthy men; whether we consider our own condition, or the nature of others:
For when we perceive some to have risen from low and contemptible beginnings,
why should we not then have better thoughts of our selves? Knowing, that it is
a foolish thing, to forejudge ones self of perpetual infelicity, and to change
our hope, which sometimes rightly favors uncertain things, into certain
desperation.

1. Manlius Torquatus, when he was a Youth, was looked upon to be of so dull
and heavy a disposition, that he was sent into the Country by his Father
Lucius Manlius, a person of great worth, to follow the Plow, as bring unfit
either for public or private business. Afterward he pleaded for his Father,
being accused for some misdeameanour, and carried the Cause for him. He cut off
his Sons head, though a Victor, because he had fought against his command with
the Enemy: and with a most splendid Triumph, he revived his Country groaning
under the Latin War. Thus his adverse Fortune clouded him in his Youth, that he
might shine more glorious in his Elder Years.

2. Scipio Africanus the Elder, whom the Immortal Gods decreed to be born, that
there might be a person in whom Virtue might show it self in all its variety,
is reported to have led a debauched life in his younger years; remote from the
crime of Luxury, yet more soft and idle than his Punic Trophies, or his yoaking
the conquered Carthaginians.

3. C. Valerius Flaccus also, in the time of the Second Punic War, began with a
lewd course of life: But being chosen Flamen by P. Licinius the High Priest, to
the end he might reclaim him; applying himself to the care of the sacred
things, and the observation of the religious Rites, and guided by Religion it
self, the Captain of Frugality, he became as great an Example of Sobriety and
Piety, as he was before of Luxury.

4. No person led a more debauched Life than Q. Fabius Maximus, who afterward
by the signal Victory which he obtained against the Gauls, purchased to himself
and his posterity the Surname of Allobrogicus. Yet in his elder years, our City
could boast of no such Ornament as he was, nor was any person so renowned as he.

5. Who is ignorant how highly the Authority of Q. Catulus was advanced, at
that very rhyme when there was a crowd of famous men living? Whose younger years
you will find to have been guilty of much Luxury and Softness. Which however
was no impediment to him, but that he became the Prince of his Country, had
the honor to have his name shine in the Capitol, and by his own courage to
bury a Civil War that was rising with a mighty force to seize the Commonwealth.

6. But L. Sylla, till he came to be Questor, led a life infamous for his
Whoring, Gaming and Drinking. Whereupon it was reported, that Marius being
engaged in a very smart War in Africa, complained that they had sent him such
an effeminate Questor. But his Virtue, having as it were broken down the fences
of wickedness, made a shift to chain the hands of Jugurth, quell Mithridates,
withstand the billows of the War of our Allies, break the power of Cinna, and
compel him that had despised him, when his Questor in Africa, to fly a
proscribed Exile into the same Province for safety. Which so various and so
contrary acts, he that shall with a serious mind consider, would believe there
were two Sylla's in one man. I would have called him a vicious youth, but a
brave man, had he not himself assumed the title of Happy.

7. And as we have admonished Nobility to regard itself by the benefit of
repentance, let us add a few Examples of those that dared aspire from meaner
beginnings. T. Aufidius, who once had the gathering but of a small pittance of
the Asiatic Tribute, afterward ruled all Asia, as Consul. Nor did our Allies
disdain to obey his Fasces, whom they had seen flattering the Tribunals of
Forreign^rs. For he behavd himself faithfully and nobly: plainly demonstrating,
that his former way of living, was only the effect of Fortune; but that the
present advancement of his Dignity, was to be attributed to the greatness of
his parts.

8. Publius Rupilius was no Toll-gatherer in Sicilia, but only a mean Officer
under them; so miserable poor, that he had nothing to keep Life and Soul
together, but a small Office that depended upon the leave of the vanquished.
Yet from him, Consul afterward, all Sicilia received their Laws, after he had
freed them from the terrors of a smart War of the Pirates and Fugitives. I
believe that the very Ports themselves, if there be any sense in mute things,
admired the wonderful change in the Condition of that man. For the same person
that they had teen exacting the daily Customs, the same person they saw giving
Laws to Navies and Armies.

9. To this increase of Dignity I will add a greater. When Asculum was taken,
Cn. Pompeius, the Father of Pompey the Great, prostituted to the eyes of the
People P. Ventidius, a beardless Youth, in the Triumph that he had obtained.
Yet this was that Ventidius, who afterward triumphed at Rome over the
Parthians, and revenged the death of Crassus, miserably foiled in a strange
Country. Thus he that a Captive dreaded imprisonment, now a Victor crowns the
Capitol with his success. And this is farther remarkable of the same person,
that he was made Praetor and Consul both in one and the same year.

10. Now let us consider the diversities of Chance. L. Lentulus was deposed by
the Caecilian Law, of his Consulship, being convicted of Bribery, and yet was
created Censor with L. Censorinus. Thus Fortune shuffl^d him between Honor and
Disgrace; condemning him in his Consulship, and honoring him with the Office
of Censor when he was condemned; neither suffering him to enjoy a lasting
happiness, nor long to abide in a miserable condition.

11. Thus Fortune showed her power also in Cn. Cornelius Scipio Asina. Who when
he was Consul, being taken by the Carthaginians at Liparae, and had lost all by
the right of War, yet by the favor of Fortune recovered all, and was again
created Consul. Who would have thought he should have been brought from the
Fasces to the Fetters of the Carthaginians? Who would have thought again, that
from the Punic chains he should have advanced himself to the highest degrees of
Honor? But yet he was from a Consul made a Captive, and from a Captive became
Consul.

12. What? Did not the vastness of Crassus Wealth give him the Surname of Rich?
Yet Poverty afterward laid upon him the shameful title of a Bankrupt; his
Goods being sold by his Creditors, because he could not pay the principal;
beside the bitter Sarcasme wherewith every one that met him, saluted him,
calling him still, Rich Crassus.

13. Q. Caepio excels Crassus in severity of Fortunes inconstancy. For he
having obtained the splendor of the Praeto^ship, the renown of a Triumph, the
dignity of a Consulship, the glory of the High Priesthood, insomuch that he was
called The Patron of the Senate; yet died in J^yl, and his Body tortured and
dilacerated by the cruel hand of the Hangman, became a spectacle of horror to
the Roman People in the public place of Execution.

14. The Life of Marius was a strange contest with Fortune; for he withstood
all her opposition with a stoutness of mind and body. Being thought unworthy
the low honors of an Arpinate (for whom it was not lawful to aspire high) he
ventured to stand for the Questorship at Rome. And by his patience in bearing
repulses, he rather broke by force, than was admitted into the Senate. He had
the same repulses when he stood for the Tribuneship and Aedileship in the Field
of Mars. Standing for the Praetorship, he carried the lowest degree, which
notwithstanding he obtained with great difficulty; for being accused for
bribing Voic^s, he was hardly acquitted by the judges. Yet from that Marius, so
meanly born at Arpinum, so despised at Rome, and so abhorred a Candidate,
sprung that Marius who subdued Africa, drove King Jugurth before his Chariot in
Triumph, who utterly subdued the Armies of the Teutons and Cimbrians, whose two
Triumphs were beheld in the City, and whose seven Consulships were registered
in the Annal-Books; who had the luck to be created Consul returning from
Banishment, and to proscribe his Proscriber. What mere mutable or inconstant
than his condition? Who among the miserable was most miserable, yet among the
fortunate shall be found most fortunate.

15. But Julius Caesar, whose Virtues gave him admission into Heaven, at the
beginning of his youth going into Asia, being taken by Sea-Rovers, was forced
to redeem himself for fifty Talents. For so small a sum as that, would Fortune
have the brightest Constellation in the world sold in the Pirates Market. Why
then should we complain of her, when she spares not the associates of her
Divinity? But the celestial Numen revenged his own injury: For presently after
pursuing the slaves, and taking them, he crucified them every man.

FORRAIGNERS.
1. We have been intent in relating our own, let us be more succinct in the
repetition of Foreign Examples. Polemo, a young Athenian Gentleman, but
infinitely debauched, and one that gloried in his shame, rising from a Banquet,
not after Sunset, but after Sunrising, as he went home saw Xenocrates the
Philosopher's door standing wide open. Drunk as he was, richly perfumed, gayly
clad, and with his Garland upon his Head, he entered the School, that was full
of Grave and Learned Men; and nothing ashamed of the manner of his entry, he
sat down to throw his drunken Jests upon the noble Disputes and wholesome
Precepts that were then uttered. The company being offended, Xenocrates kept
his temper, and began to dispute of Modesty and Temperance. The Gravity of
whose Speech causing Polemo to repent, he first threw his Garland to the
ground, presently after he withdrew his arms ( a token of Modesty among the
Athenians) under his Cloak; shortly after he left his feasting Mirth; and
lastly, laid aside all his Debauchery; and being cured with the wholesome
Medicine of one Oration, of an infamous Glutton became a famous Philosopher.
For his mind was only a Pilgrim in wickedness, not an Inhabitant.

2. It troubles me to remember Themistocles in his Youth; whether I consider
his Father that disinherited him, or his Mother that hanged herself to see the
wicked course of life her Son led; when he himself afterward became the most
famous person that ever Greece brought forth; and was the pledge either of hope
or despair between Asia and Europe. For the one had him the Patron of her
Safety, the other entertained him as the Surety of Victory.

3. Cimon in his youth was looked upon as a fool; but the Athenians found the
benefit of his foolish commands: Compelling them to condemn themselves of
stupidity, who had accused him of Folly.

4. Two distinct Fortunes shared Alcibiades between them. The one, that
assigned him a splendid Nobility, vast Wealth, Beauty incomparable, strength of
Body, a most piercing Wit, and the passionate love of his Contrymen: The
other, that inflicted upon him Condemnaton, Banishment, Sale of his Estate,
Poverty, the hatred of his Country, and a violent Death. Neither the one nor
the other altogether, but by intermission, like the ebbing and flowing of the
Sea.

5. Polycrates, the Tyrant of Samos, lived in such a prodigality of Fortunes
favors, that he was admired even to Envy, not without cause; his endeavors all
prosper'd; his hopes reaped the fruit of what they desired; his wishes were no
sooner named than granted: To desire, and be able to perform, was the same
thing. Once only Fortune changed her coutenance, when he threw a Ring, which he
highly esteemed, into the Sea, that he might not be said to have undergone no
misfortune; which however he presently recovered, the fish being taken that had
swallowed it. But he could not always hold this prosperous course of felicity,
that swelled his full sails: For Orontes, one of Darius's Commanders, having
taken him, caused him to be crucified upon the highest top of the Mycalensian
Mountain. From whence the City of Samos, long oppressed by his severe Tyranny,
with the joyful eyes of freemen beheld his stinking Arteries, his members
besmeared with Blood, and that left hand, to whom Neptune had restored the Ring
by the hand of the Fisherman, the sad spectacle of Misfortune.

6. Dionysius also when he had entered upon the Tyranny of Sicily, by his
Fathers Will, the Lord of a vast Wealth, a Captain of Armies, an Admiral of a
Navy, potent in Horse, yet was forced to teach School at Corinth, for his
livelihood: And at the same time, of a Tyrant being now become a Schoolmaster,
he warned his Elders by such a change, how little they were to trust to Fortune.

7. Next to him follows Syphax the King, who underwent the same severity of
Fortune; to whom however at the same time, Rome by Scipio, Carthage by
Asdrubal, made their addresses for his Friendship. But while he stood thus
courted, that he seemed to be an Arbiter of Victory between the greatest and
most potent People in the world; In a short time after, he was brought chained
by Laelius to Scipio, and now lies prostrate at the feet of him, whom he
thought it favor enough before, as he fate upon his Throne, to take by the
hand. Thus merely vain, and fragil, and like the baubles Children play with,
are those great things which we call Human Power and Wealth: On a sudden they
abound, and vanish as soon: In no place or person fixed upon a stable
foundation; but tossed hither and thither by the uncertain state of Fortune,
miserably they precipitate them into the depth of Calamity, whom but now they
had exalted as high as Heaven. And therefore they are neither to be esteemed
nor accounted Felicity, which to the end they may redouble a desire of enjoying
them, are wont to oppress with a heavier weight, those that they flattered
before with their most indulgent savours.

LIB. VII.
CHAP. I. Of Happiness.
1. Q. Metellus the Macedonian. 2. Gyges the King of Lydia.
WE have related several Examples of the Inconstancy of Fortune; for there are
very few that render her propitious. Whereby it is evident that she is generous
and free of her Adversity, but very sparing of her Prosperity.

1. Let us see then with how many degrees of favor she prosecuted Metellus
from his Infancy to his Death, with an incessant indulgence. She gave him his
birth in the Capital City of the World: She gave him most noble Parents: She
furnished him with admirable parts of Nature, and strength of Body: She married
him to a Wife conspicuous for her Chastity and Fertility: She graced him with
the Honor of Consulship, the Imperatorian Dignity, and the Splendor of a
renowned Triumph: She so ordered it, that at the same time he had three Sons
living, Consular men; one also a Censor and Triumpher; and the fourth a Praetor.
She married him Three Daughters, whose Issue he received into his own bosom:
And among all these Children born, so many Youths coming to age, so many
Nuptial Torches, such an abundance of Honor, Empire and Congratulation, not
one Funeral, not one Tear, or the least cause of Sadness. Consider the Heavens,
and we shall hardly meet with so perdurable a condition there; while we find
the greatest Philosophers lodging grief and pain in the very breasts of the
Gods. Nor was his end unlike the course of his Life. For after he had lived a
fair age, an easy Death carried him off from the last farewels and embraces of
his dearest Pledges; and he was carried to his Funeral-Pile upon the shoulders
of his Sons and Sons-in. Law through the City.

2. A noble Felicity this; yet the following was preferred by the Divinity it
self. For when Gyges, pust up with the riches and power of his Kingdom of
Lydia, went to enquire of Pythrian Apollo, whether any Mortal was happier than
he; The God made answer with a low voice, from the hollow retirement of his
sacred Den, that Aglaus Sophidius was more happy than he. He was the poorest of
the Arcadians, but the elder of the two: one that never had increased the
bounds of his own land; contented with the Income of a poor Farm. But Apollo
meant the true, not the obscure end of a happy Life: and therefore gave that
answer to one that insolently gloried in the splendor of his fortune, That he
rather approved a Cottage in a calm security of content, than the cares and
anxieties of a Court; a few clods of earth void of fear, than all the fertile
Acres of Lydia encumbered with continual dread; and one or two yoke of Oxen
easily maintained, than Armies of Horse and Foot, burdensome even to vast
expenses; and a small Barn subject to no man's Envy, than Exchequers exposed to
the covetous desires and rapacious violence of all men. Thus while Gyges
labors to find a God to favor his vain opinion, he learns wherein the true
and solid Happiness consists.

CHAP. II. Of things wisely said or done.
By the ROMANS.
1. App. Claudius. 2. P. Scipio Africanus. 3. Q. Caecilius Metellus. 4. L.
Fimbria. 5. Papyrius Cursor. 6. The Senate of Rome.
FORRAIGNERS.
1. Socrates the Athenian. 2. Solon the Athenian. 3. Bion of Prienne. 4. Plato
of Athens. 5. Antigonus the King. 6. Xenocrates the Philosopher. 7.
Aristophanes the Comedian. 8. Thales the Philosopher. 9. Anaxagoras of
Clazomene. 10. Demas the Athenian. 11. Anacharsis the Scythian. 12. Agesilaus
the Spartan. 13. Hanno the Carthaginian. 14. Herennius Pontius the Samnite. 15.
The Cretans.
I Will now treat of that sort of Felicity, which is altogether in the habit of
the Mind, and is not to be obtained by wishes, but is bred in the breasts of
men, and advances it self by things famously said or done.

1. It is reported that Appius Claudius was often wont to say, That the People
of Rome were better to be trusted with Business than Idleness: Not but that
they understo^d the pleasure of a calm condition, but because he found that
potent Empires were excited to Virtue, by the vicissitude and agitation of
Human Affairs. And certainly Business, terrible to name, preserved the customs
of our City in their best condition but Rest, that has a softer name, first
filled it full of Vice.

2. Scipio Africanus was wont to say, That in affairs of War, it was a shameful
thing to cry, I had not thought. Believing that the ^^^nsactions of the Sword
ought to be carried on with a serious and well-examin'd deliberation. For that
Error is never to be retrieved, that is committed in the heat of War. The same
person denied that an Enemy was to be fought with, but only when there was a
kind opportunity, or a pressing necessity. Both prudently said. For to omit an
opportunity of acting with success, is the greatest madness in the world: And
he that is compel^'d to a necessity of giving Battle, yet abstains from
fighting, shows a p^ece of slo^^^ of (...) p^stiferous consequence. And of
those th^^ co^^m^ these ^^^^^^ties, one part knows not how to make use of the
benefit of Fortune, the other k^ows not how to ^esist the injury of Fortune.

3. It was also both a grave and lofty Sentence, which Metellus spoke in the
(...). Who upon the ruin of Carthage plainly consess'd. That he kn^w not
whether that Victory might bring more advantage or more mischief to the
Commonwealth. For as it was advantageous by the Peace which it occasioned, so
by removing Hannibal, it had done harm. For by his March into Italy, the
sleeping Courage of the Romans was roused up: And it was to be ^ea^'d, that
being freed from so formidable a ^^val, it would relapse into its former
drowziness. So that he r^ckon'd it to be as great a mischief for the Nerves of
their ancient strength to be weakened, as tor their Houses to be burnt, their
Lands to be laid waste, and their Treasures to be emptied.

4. How prudent an act was that of Fimbria the Consul! Who being made an
Arbitrator by M. Lutatius Pythia, a Roman Knight, upon a Security that he had
given to an Adversary or his, that he was an honest Man, would never deliver
his judgment, lest he should injure the fame of a person unblemished by
pronouncing against him, or affirm him to be a good man, considering how many
qualities were required to make a man such.

5. From the Civil, we will exhibit a Military Act of Prudence. Papirius
Cursor, Consul, desirous to rise from the Siege of Aquilonia to give the Enemy
battle, was ^o'd by the Augur that the Entrails of the Fowl pro^^s'd all things
prosperously, when there was no such thing. Afterward being informed of the
fallacy, he took it however for a good Omen to him and his Army, and gave
Battle: But he placed the Impostor in the Forefront, that the Gods, if angry,
might revenge themselves upon the right person. And it happened so, whether by
Chance or by divine Providence, that the first Dart which was thrown by the
Enemy, hit the Impostors Breast, and struck him dead. Which when the Consul
understood, with a renewed confidence, he fell upon the Enemy, and took
Aquilonia. So suddenly did he apprehend, which way the injury done to the
General was to be revenged; how violated Religion was to be expiated; and how
Victory was to be obtained. He acted the part of a severe Man, a religious
Consul, and a stout General: with one kind of thought forcing at the same time
the limits of fear, the manner of punishment, and the means of hope.

6. Now I will pass to the Acts of the Senate. When the Senate sent Claudius
Nero and Livius Salinator Consuls against Hannibal, and sound that as they were
equal in Virtue, so they were at as great an ^^mi^y one with another; they made
it their business to make them friends, that they might not n^glect the public
for their private dissentions. For unl^ss there be a true concord in such
Commands, there is a greater desire to keep another from doing go^d th^n to act
well themselves: But where there i^ an inv^t^rate Hatred, they are greater
Enemies to one another, than the Adversary they go to fight with. Those very
men being accused by Cn. Baebius, (...) Tribune of the People, for their
Severity in the C^nso^ship, were by the Decree of the Senat^ freed from coming
to their Trial: freeing from the fear of J^dgment that Honor, which was to
take, not to give an account. The same Wisdom of the Senate put Ti. Gracchus
the Tribune to Death, for dari^g ^o promulgate the Agrarian Law: yet most
pru^^ntly ordered, that the Land should ^^d vid^d to ev^ry man by the
Triumvirs, according to the Law. Thus, at the same time, they took away both
the Autho^ and the Cause of a most turbulent S^dition.

How prudently did the Senat^ behave th^ms^lves to King Massinissa! For when
they had ex^^ri^^c'd the faithful and ready service which he had done them
against the Carthaginians, they made a Law, whereby they gave Massinissa a
freedom absolute from the power of the People of Rome. By which act, they (...)
only reclaimed the kindness of a person, who had so well deserved of them, but
secured themselves from the barbarity of the Numidians, Mauritanians and other
Nations adjoining, who before would never rest at peace.

FORRAIGNERS.
1. I should want time to relate Domestic Examples: For our Empire increases
and protects it self, not only by strength of body, but by vigor of m^nde.
Therefore let the Roman Pru^ence be silently for the most part laid up in
admi^ation, and give way to foreign Examples of this nature. S^crates, a kind
of terr^strial Oracle of humane Wis^ome, was wont to say, That there was
nothing more to be asked of the Immortal Gods, but that would be pleased to
give us what things were good for us. In reg^rd they kn^w what was p^^s^^able
for every one; but for our par^s we beg those things oft-^im^s, which it were
better we should be without. For, oh thou mind of Mortals, wript up in thick
clo^ds of darkness, how do thou d^ss^^e thy blind Prayers into wide Error!
Thou cov^^est R^^hes, so p^rnitious to thousands. Thou desi^^st Honors, sa^al
to M^^titudes. Thou gr^ppl^st Kingdoms, As oftentimes ^r^^^^^lm'd with c^^mity.
Thou l^yst hands upon spl^^did Wedl^cks, which as they ennoble, as oftentimes
^^^rturn whole Families. Cease then foo^ishly to g^p^^^^er the future causes of
many mischiefs as the only happinesses to be enjoyed; but submit thy sel^ to
the judgment of Heaven. For they that are able to give, are b^st able to make
the choice.

He was also wont to say, That they took a very short and c^mpendious way to
Honor, who so behaved themselves, a^ to be readly such, as they would seem to
be. Wher^by the (...) us, that men should rather follow V^rtue it self, th^^
the ^^^dow of Virtue. The same person, when a Young man asked him Whether he
should Marry, or altogether abstain from Wedlock, made him answer, That let him
do which he would, he should be sure to repent. For on the one hand said he,
there is solitude, want of Children, extinction of Family and a man's estate
heir'd by a stranger: On the other hand, perpetual solicitation, continual
wrangling, twittings in the teeth about the Dower, the frowns of Kindred, the
twatling of the Mother-in-Law, the private, friend, and ambushments of
Cuckoldry, with the uncertain hopes of Children. Thus he would not suffer the
Young Man, in a contexture of b^d accidents, to make his choice in a matter of
pleasure and delight.

The same person, when the wicked fury of the Athenians had pronounced Sentence
against his Life, and that he had received the venomous Potion given him by the
hand of the common Executioner, with a stout and constant resolution, putting
the Cup to his mouth, made this answer to his Wife Xantippe, crying out in the
midst of tears and lamentations that he died innocently What then? said he,
had thou rather I should have died an offender? Oh profound Prudence, that!
that would not forget it self, at the very Exit of Life.

2. How wisely did Solon aver, That no man could be accounted happy, while he
was yet alive! being subjedt to the doubtful chances of fortune, even to the
last gasp. Therefore does the Funeral-Pile consummate the extent of Humane
Felicity, which exposes it self to all the assaults of Misfortune. The same
person, when he beheld one of his Friends in a deep affliction, brought him to
a high Tower, and bid him survey every part of the lower Buildings: which when
he had done, Consider now with thy self, said he, bow many occasions of
lamentation formerly there were, and still are in those meaner roofs, and will
happen hereafter, and cease to bewail the common inconveniences of Mortals, By
which act of consolation he showed, that Cities were but the miserable cages of
human Miseries. The same person was won^ to say, That if all people were bound
to make a beap of their misfortunes in one place, it would so happen, that
every man would rather carry his own home again, than hear his share of the
common heap. From whence he collected, that we ought not to account those
things most intolerably bitter, which we suffer by chance.

3. Bias, when the Enemy had invaded his own native Co^ntrey Priene, and that
all people whom the ravage of War suffered to get safe away were upon their
flight, laden with the weight of what they esteemed most precious, being asked
why he carried away nothing of his own Goods? I, said he, carry all my Goods
about me. For he carried them in his Breast, not upon his Shoulders; not to be
seen by the Eye, but to be prized by the Mind: Which being preserved in the
little Sanctuary of the Mind, are not to be injured by the hands either of
Gods or Mortals: and as they are always at hand with them that tarry, so they
never desert them that fly.

4. Short in words, but abounding in sense was the Sentence of Plato, who said,
The world would then be happy, when wise men reigned, or Kings began to be wise.

5 Of a piercing judgment also was that King, to whom, as they report, when the
Diadem was brought, before he put it upon his Head, he held it in his hand, and
having a long time paused upon it, Oh noble rather than fortunate Linen, cried
he, which he that knew with what cares, dangers, and miseries it was attended,
would not take it up from the ground.

6. How much to be applauded was the answer of Xe^^crates! who being present at
the reviling speeches of another with a seal'd-up silence, and asked why he
curbed his tongue so, being alone, made answer, Because he had once repented
him of speaking, but never of b^lding his tongue.

7. The Precept also of Aristophanes is more exaltedly prudent, who in one of
his Comedies brings in Pericles the Athenian sent back from Hell, and
prophesying that a Bear was not to be cherished in the City. Admonishing, that
the active Wits of noble and stirring youth ought to be curbed: but being red
with overmuch savor and profuse indulgence, let them not be hindered from
gaining the Supreme Power. For it is a vain and unprofitable thing to resist
that force which is fostered by thy self.

8. Wonderfully Thales; who being asked whether the deeds of men escaped the
knowledge of the Gods; Not their premeditated acts, said he. Intimating, that we
ought not only to preserve our hands clean, but our minds pure, if we believe
our thoughts to be known to the Gods.

No less prudent is that which follows; The Father of an only Child consuited
Themistocles, whether he should marry her to a poor learned Man, or a rich Man
of no esteem? To whom, I had rather choose a man, said he, wanting Money, than
Money wanting a Man. By which saying he admonished a fool to choose a
Son-in-Law, before the Wealth of a Son-in-Law.

Much to be applaud^d was that Epistle of Philip, wherein he chides Alexander,
endeavoring to ingratiate himself with large gifts into the hearts of some of
the Macedonians: What reason, Son, persuaded thee to this vain hope, That thou
should think those persons will be faithful to thee, whose kindness thou art
forced to purchase with Money? Love only breeds love. Yet was Philip rather a
Purc^aser, than a Victor of Greece.

But Aristotle, when he sent his Disciple Callisthenes to Alexander, admonished
him either to say nothing to the King, or else to talk pleasantly. But he for
reproving him, because he prided himself to hear the Macedons salute him after
the manner of Persian flattery, and for that he sought to reclaim him against
his will, to the an^ient ^us^omes of his Forefathers, being commanded to be put
to death, too late repented his neglect of the wholesome counsel that had bin
given him.

Thus Aristotle taught, that it became not him to speak either way of himself:
For to praise himself was a vanity; to speak ill of himself, a folly. A most
wholesome Precept was it of his likewise. That we should consider Pleasures
that were passing off. Which by so representing he diminished; for so he
exposed them fainting and full of repentance, which rendered them the less
desirable.

9. No less prudence was it in Anaxagoras, who being asked whom he thought the
happi^st person: None of those, said he, whom thou imagin'st happy; but thou
shall find him among the number of those whom thou accomptest unfortunate. Not
the person that abounds in Ri^^es, but the manurer of a small Farm, or the
faithful and persevering observer of unambitious M^ximes; more happy in
retirement than in outward show.

10. Wise was the saying of Demas also. For the Athenians denying to attribute
divine Honors to Alexander; Take heed, said he, lest while you are so careful
to keep Heaven, you loose the Earth.

11. How subtily did Anacharsis compare the Laws to Spiders Webs? For as they
detained the weaker Animals, and let go the stronger so the other bound the
poor and needy, and let go the rich and potent.

12. Nothing more prudent than that act of Agesilaus: For having discovered a
Conspiracy against the Lacedaemonians by night, he presently abrogated the Laws
of Lycurgus, that forbid the punishment of those that were not condemned. But
having apprehended and put to death the Offenders, he presently restored them
again: providing both ways, that wholesome punishment should not be thought
u^just, nor be prevented by Law. Therefore that they might be always, it was
necessary, that for some time they should not he.

13. But I cannot tell whether the Counsel of Hanno were not more eminently
prudent. For when Mago related the event of the Battle of Cannae to the Senate
of Carthage, and produced three Bushels of Gold Rings in testimony of the
success, he demanded whether any of their Allies had revolted from the Romans
after so great a defeat? When he heard that none were fallen off to Hannibal,
he presently advised, that Embassad^urs should be sent to Rome to treat of
Peace, wh^^ Counsel had it bin followed, neither had Carthage (...) overcome in
the Second, nor ruined in the Third P^nic War.

14. Neither did the Samnites pay less severely for the same Error, when they
neglected the wholesome Counsel of Herennius Pontius; who excelling the rest in
Authority and Prudence, being consulted by the Army, and the Commander thereof
his own Son, what they should do with the Roman Soldiers taken at the Caudine
Forks, answered, That they should be sent home untouched. The next day being
asked the same question, he made answer, That they should be all destroyed:
Either that they might merit the good will of an Enemy by an extraordinary
Benefit, or impair his force by a considerable loss. But the improvident
rashness of the Victors, despising both counsels of profit and advantage, by
putting them under the Yoke, incensed them to their ruin.

To many and great examples of Prudence, I will add one small one: The Cr^tans
when they would most vehemently curse those they h^te wish they may take
pleas^re in an ill Costume; and in the Modesty of their Wish, find a most
efficacious event of their revenge: For to desire any thing in vain, and to
persevere in that earnest desire, is a pleasure next to ruin.

CHAP. III Of things craftily spoken or done.
Among the ROMANS.
1. The President of Diana 's Temple. 2. L. Junius Brutus. 3. P. Scipio
Africanus the Elder. 4. Q. Fabius Lubeo. 5. Antonius the Orator. 6. Q.
Sertorius. 7. Q. Fabius Maxitnus Verrucossus. 8. M. Volalius Saturninus Aedil.
9. Sentius Saturninus. 10. A certain Father.
FORRAIGNERS.
1. Alexander the Great and an Ass-driver. 2. King D^rius 's Groom. 3. Bia^ of
Priene. 4. Anaxime^es. 5. Demo^henes the Orator. 6. A certain Athenian. 7.
A^^^^bal the son of Gis^ go the Carthaginian. 8. A^^bal the son of Amil^^r. 9.
The Tusculans. 10. ^^llius Attius Captain of the Volsci.
THere is another sort of saying and doing, declining from Wisdom to the name
of ^unning: which would not meet with the credit of what it propounded, did it
not assume the force of Craft; and seeks for applause rather in a hidden path,
than in an open way.

1. In the reign of Servius Tullius, a certain Landlord in the Sabine
Territories had a Cow of an extraordinary bigness and beauty. Which certain
Authors of the Oracles said was sent into the world by the Immortal Gods, to
the end that whoever offered it to Diana of Aventinum, his Country should
obtain the Empire over the whole World. The Master rejoicing to hear such
tidings, drove the beast with all speed, and presented it before the Altar of
Diana in Aventinum, desirous to give the Honor of Supreme Empire to the
Sabines. Of which the President of the Temple having notice, put it into the
Owner's head, that before he slew the Sacrifice, he should wash himself in the
water of the next River: who for that reason hastening to Tybur, while he was
gone, the chief Priest offered the beast, and by a pious theft of the
Sacrifice, rend^r'd our City the Mistress of so many Cities and Nation.

2. For which sharpness of Wit, Junius Brutus is in the first place to be
commended. For when he found all the Promising Nobility to be cut off by King
Tarquinius his Uncle, and that his Brother was by him put to death, because of
the forwardness of his Wit, counterfeited himself to be a Fool; and by that
fallacy concealed his own vast parts. Going also to the Oracle of Delphos with
the Sons of Tarquin, whom their Father sent thither with rich Presents and
Sacrifices in honor of Pythian Apollo,he carried Gold as a Present to the
Deity, hid in a hollow stick; fearing that it was not safe to worship the
Celestial Deity with an open Liberality. After that, the Young Men, having
performed their Father, s commands, consulted Apollo, which among them all
should be the person that should reign in Rome. The God made answer, That he
should obtain the Soveroignty, that gave his Mother the first kiss. Then Brutus
threw himself so down, as if he had fallen by chance, and kissed the Earth, the
common Mother of all things. Which crafty Riss given to the Earth, gave Liberty
to our City, and the first place in our Annals to Brutus.

3. Scipio also the Elder embraced the aid of Craft, For as he was to say from
Sicily into Africa, finding it necessary to complete a Body of Three Hundred
Horse out of the stoutest of the Roman Foot; though he had not time to exercise
them, what the streitness of Time denied him, he attained by the Sagacity of
his Counsel. For of all the young Gentlemen, which were the noblest and the
richest, that he carried with him out of Sicily unarmed, he choose out Three
Hundred, whom he ordered to furnish themselves with gay Weapons and select
Horses, as if he intended to carry them along with him to the storming of
Carthage. Who obeying his command, as well in reference to the speed, as in
respect of a far distant and dangerous War, Scipio told them, he would release
them from the Expedition, upon condition they would deliver up their Weapons
and Horses to his Soldiers. The Young Men effeminate and fearful, greedily
accepted the Condition, and willingly delivered up their preparations to our
Soldiers. Whereby the Subtilety of the Captain provided, that what was out of
hand commanded, though severe at first, should be looked upon as a greater
benefit, the sear of service being remitted.

4. That which follows is also to be related. Q. Fabius Lubeo being by the
Senate appointed an Arbitrator to settle the Bounds between the Nolans and the
Neapolitans, when they came to the business, admonished both apart, that laying
aside all Covetousness, they should rather abate, than pretend to too much.
Which when both sides had contented to, moved thereto by the authority of the
person, there was some ground left. Thereupon the Bounds being set as they had
agreed to, that which was left he adjudged to the People of Rome. But though
neither the Nolans nor Neapolitans could in Justice complain, Sentence king
given by their own consent; yet by a new kind of mental reservation, it brought
a new Tribute to our City. The same person, being according to Articles to have
half the Navy of King Antiochus, whom he had overthrown in Battle, cut all the
Ships in two, and so deprived him of his whole Navy.

5. Now are we to excuse Marcus Antonius, who said, That he never published any
Oration, to the end that if any Judgment of his formerly given should chance to
hinder him that he should next defend, he might aver that he never spoke it.
Which seemed a reasonable excuse for a fact hardly allowable. For he was still
ready not only to make use of his Eloquence, but to injure his Modesty to save
his Client.

6. But Sertorius, upon whom Nature had with an equal indulgence bestowed both
strength of Body, and sagacity in Counsel, being compelled to be Captain of the
Lusitanians by the proscription of Sylla, when he could by no means persuade
them but that they would fight with the whole Army of the Romans, by his crafty
Counsel brought them to do as he intended. For he placed in the sight of all
the Lusitanians two Horses* one a stout beast, the other weak and infirm. After
that he caused the Tail of the strong Horse so be pulled hair by hair from him,
by a weak old man; and the Tail of the weak Horse to be torn all at once from
him* by a young fellow of an egregious strength. His commands were obeyed. But
while the Youngman toiled himself in vain, the decrepit old man did his
business. Then to let the Barbarous Assembly understand the meaning of his
project, he added, That the Roman Army was like the tail of the Horse, which
might be easily overcome in parts; but that whoever assailed the body entire,
should sooner loose than gain the Victory. Thus the Barbarous rough-hewn
Nation, rushing on to their own destruction, saw with their Eyes the advantages
which their Ears had refused.

7. Fabius Maximus, whose business it was to overcome by abstaining from fight,
having in his Camp a Nolan Footman of prodigious strength, yet suspected for
his Fideliry, and a Lucan Horseman of equal stoutness, both captivated with the
same Curtezan; to the end he might not loose the advantage of two such
Soldiers, dissembled his suspicion to the one, and as to the other he somewhat
surpassed the bounds of true Discipline. For by praising the one in the public
Tribunal, and loading him with all manner of commendations, he made him
constant to the Romans, and an enemy to the Corthaginians; and the other he
suffered to redeem his Mistreiss privately, that he might become an exact Spy
for our side.

8. I will come now to those that saved themselves by Craft. M. Volusius a
banished Aedile of the People, disguising himself in the habit of a Priest of
Isis, while he begged as he traveled upon the Road, kept himself from being
known who he was. And in this disguise he came to the Camp of M. Brutus. What
more miserable than Necessity, which constrained a Magistrate of the People of
Rome, laying aside his Robes of Honor, under the disguise of a foreign
Religion, to beg from Town to Town? But all these were either too desirous of
Life, or too covetous of the Death of others, who could either endure such
things themselves, or compelled others to undergo such difficulties.

9. Something more noble was that shift, at a dead lift, of Sentius Saturninus
Vetulio, who hearing his name among those that were proscribed by the
Triumvirs, presently laid hold upon the Ensigns of Authority born before the
Praetor, and pretending himself a public Lictor, or Sergeant, he did it with
that confidence, that in the midst of all his enemies, he hid himself from
their sight in the midst of day light. After that coming to Puteoli, and
pretending himself in public employment, he so carried himself, that he
commanded a Vessel to carry him without control into Sicily, the safe refuge
of the proscribed Party at that time.

10. One more slight Example, and then to Forraigners. A certain person,
extraordinarily indulgent to his Son, being desirous to retrieve him from a
dangerous and unlawful Amor, intermixed his paternal Indulgence with the craft
of wholesome Counsel. For he desired him before he went to his Mistress, to
make use of that sort of Venery which was common and permitted. Whereupon the
Youngman, listening to his Fathers entreaties, finding himself satiated by a
lawful act, ceased to prosecute any farther his unlawful heat of concupiscence.

FORRAIGNERS.
1. Alexander King of the Macedonians, admonished by the Oracle that he should
put to death whoever he met first coming out of the Gate, met a Driver of
Asses, whom he commanded to be presently carried to execution. The Ase-driver
thereupon besought him, wherefore he went about to put an innocent person to
death, that had done him no offense? To whom when the King repeated the command
of the Oracle; If it be so, O King, said the Ass-driver, the Oracle assigned
another to dye, and not me: For the Ass that I drove met thee before I did.
A^exander pleased with the crafty Repartie of the poor fellow, and willing to
be reclaimed from his error, took an occasion to satisfy Religion with the
death of the meaner Animal. Here was an extraordinary mildness joined with
subtilty; but a more extraordinary subtilty in the other Kings Groom, is this
which follows.

2. For the fordid dominion of the Magi being overthrown, Darius the King,
joining with others of the same Dignity, made a noble contract with them, that
they should be on Horseback by Sunrising so ride to such a place, and that he
should enjoy the Kingdom whose Horse first neigh'd. But while the Competitors
for so great an honor only waited upon Fortune, Darius by the pure invention
of Ebar the Master of his Horse, attained his wish: For he coming to the place,
put his hand which he had but a little before thrust into the privy parts of a
Mare, to the Nostrils of his Masters Horse; who provoked by the Scent,
immediately neighed. Which the rest of the Competitors no sooner heard, but
immediately throwing themselves from their horses, and prostrating themselve?
upon the ground (as is the manner of the Persians) they saluted Darius King.
How vast an Empire was thus obtained by so slight a piece of Cunning!

3. Bias, whose wisdom has bin more durable among men, than his Country of
Pri^ne, (for the one hill remains, but the footsteps of the other are hardly
now to be seen) was wont to say, That men ought so to converse in point of
Friendship, as to remember, that it might change into the severest Animosity.
Which Precept at first sight seems to be a piece of craft, and not congruous to
reality, which is the delight of familiarity: But look upon it with a more
intent consideration, and it will be found very profitable.

4. The saf^ty of the City of Lampsacum consist^d by one ad of Subtlety: For
when Alexander threatened nothing but the destruction of i^, and saw his Master
Anaximenes coming toward him without the Walls; for ^ear his prayers should
assuage his anger, he swore not to grant whatever he petitioned for. Then said
Anaximenes, My Petition is, that thou would destroy Lampsacum. This quick
reply saved a City, famous for its Antiquity, from the ruin to which it was
destined.

5. The Cunning of Demosthenes was also a notable help to a young Maid, who had
received Money to keep from two Gu^sts, upon that condition, that she should
restore the Money when they came both together. After some time, one of them in
a Mourning Habit, as if his Friend had bin dead, comes and receives the whole
Money: Which when she had paid, the other comes and demands his share. The poor
Maid was at a loss, as well for the Money, as for Money to defend the Suit; and
thought of nothing but hanging hers^lf. But opportunely Demosthenes undertaking
her Cause, The woman, said he, is ready to pay the Money d^p sited in her
custody; but it is not for her to do it by the contract. For it wa^ agreed
between ye, that the Money should not be paid, till both came together.

6. Nor was this imprudently acted. A certain Athenian, hated by all the
people, being to plead for his Life before them, upon a sudden began to demand
the greatest employment of the Magistracy among them. Not that he thought to
obtain his desire; but that the People might have wherewithal to blunt the edge
of their first Anger, which is usually the sharpest. Nor did his Policy deceive
him: for when the People had spent their malice in hissing him out the
Assembly, and had disgraced him by laying him aside, when he came to plead for
his Life, their malice turned into compassion, as if they had done enough
against him before. For if he had ventured his life among them while they were
thirsting after Revenge, he had found their Ears stopped against all Mercy.

7. Like to this was the following piece of Cunning. The Elder Hannibal being
overthrown by Duilius in a Sea Fight, and fearing the lots of his Head for the
loss of his Fleet, by an admirable act of Subtilty mitigated his crime: For
before the news of his Overthrow got home, he sends one of his Friends to
Carthage in a gentile Habit. Who coming into the Senate House; Hannibal, said
he, has sent me to advise with you, Whether, if he meet the Roman Admiral and
find him too numerous, he shall fight or no? When the whole Senate were
unanimously for fighting; Then, said he, he has fought, and is overcome. And
then it was too late to condemn the fact, which they themselves had approved.

8. The other Hannibal finding Fabius Maximus's delay so prejudicial to his
Victories, to render him suspected of spinning out the War, while he wasted all
other parts of Italy with Fire and Sword, he only spared his Farm. And the
crafty act of kindness had taken effect, had not the piety of Fabius and the
wily tricks of Hannibal bin too well known to the City of Rome.

9. The Tusculans also saved themselves by the acuteness of their Councils. For
when by their frequent Rebellions they merited the total destruction of their
City, and that Furius Camillus was sent for the same purpose with a very
powerful Army, they all came forth to meet him in their Gowns, bringing him
provisions, and offering him all other as at Peace and Friendship, while their
Shops were open as at other times. By which Constancy of theirs, they not only
obtained our Friendship, but became also incorporated with our City.

10. But wicked was the counsel of Tullus, Captain of the Volsci; who being
eager to make War upon the Romans, finding after the loss of several Battles,
that his own People began to incline to Peace;by a subtle way of reasoning,
made 'em do what he pleased. For it happening that a great multitude of the
Volsci went to Rome to behold the Public Shows, he told the Consuls, he was
afraid they would contrive some mischief, being so numerous; advised them to be
careful, and presently left the City himself. This the Consuls related to the
Senate, who though they knew no reason for it, yet upon Tullus's. words, voted
the Volsci to depart the City. By which contempt the Volsci incensed, were
easily induced to Rebellion. Thus with a Lie, masked in Kindness, did a cunning
Captain deceive two Nations: The Romans being moved to abuse the Innocent, and
the deceived Volsci to revenge the injury.

CHAP. IV. Of Stratagems.
ROMANS.
1. Tullus Hostilius King. 2 Sext. Tarquiniu^ 3. The besieged in the Capitol.
4. M. Livius and C. Claudius, Consuls. 5. Q. Metellus surnamed the Macedonian.
FORRAIGNERS.
1. Agathocles King of Syracuse. 2. Hannibal.
BUt this part of Subtilty is to be applauded, as being free from all reproof:
the acts whereof because we have no word to express, we are forced to borrow
the word Stratagem from the Greek.

1. Fidene, a City that kept the growing infancy of our City waking, and
nourishing her Virtue with neighboring Trophies and Triumphs, taught her to
aspire farther, was assailed by Tullus Hostilius all his forces At that time
Metius Suffetius, in the field, when the Battles were ready to join, discovered
the falsity of his heart, which he had a long time kept concealed. For leaving
the wing of the Roman Army, he drew Off to a Hill, where he resolved to be a
Spectator rather than an Assistant; intending either to triumph over the
vanquished, or to fall upon the weary Victors. No question but it discouraged
our Soldiers to see themselves forsaken by their Allies, at the very time when
they were going to fight their Enemies. To prevent which, Tullus riding swiftly
about the Battalions, cried out, That Metius had drawn off by his command, and
that he was to fall upon the back of the Fidenates when he gave the sign. And
by that cunning of an expert General, he changed their Fear into Confidence,
and filled their breasts with Cheerfulness instead of Consternation.

2. And that I may not presently leave our Kings; Sextus Tarquinius, the Son of
Tarquinius, fretting to see that the Gabii could not be taken by his Father's
Army, found out a trick more powerful than Weapons themselves, whereby he
over-reached the Town, and joined it to the Roman Empire. For he betook himself
to the Gabii, counterfeiting himself to be fled from his Fathers stripes and
severity. After that procuring the good will of every one by his kind and
winning behavior, when he had won that, he sent his Servant to his Father, to
tell him how he had every thing in his hands, and to desire him to know what he
should do. The old man's Craft was answerable to the youngs man's subtilty. For
Tarquin pleased with the news, yet not confiding in the Messe^ger, returned no
answer, but carrying him into the Garden, struck of the heads of the highest
and biggest Poppies with his Cane. The young man understanding his silence, and
what he had done, concluded there was another meaning in the thing: which was,
that he should either banish or put to death all the Chief Heads of the Gabii.
Whereby he deliveir'd up the City empty of defenders, and yet the peoples;
hands were not tied.

3. Prudently also and prosperously was it provided by our Ancestors, when our
City being taken, the Capitol was besieged by the Gauls, who despaired of
taking it any other way than by famishing the besieged. For by how cunning an
act of deliberation did they deprive the Victors of their only motive to that
obstinacy, by casting Loaves of Bread out of the Capitol into several parts of
the Besieger-Line! At which sight they were so amazed, and thought us to be so
well stored, that they were constrained to raise their Siege. Certainly Jupiter
himself took compassion of the Roman Courage, which then borrowed assistance
from Craft; seeing them in the height of want, to waste the support of Life:
And therefore he prosper'd the cunning Stratagem with a prosperous event.

4. The same Jupiter afterward became propitious to the crafty Councils of our
Captains. For when Hannibal ^^^^assed one side of Italy and Asdrubal had
invaded the other; that the conjoined forces of two Brothers might not too
heavily and sorely oppress the already-too-weak condition of our affairs, here
Claudius Nero supplied his vigorous Counsel, there Livius Salinator providently
provided. For Nero curbing Hannibal in the Province of the Lucans, making a
show of still attending the Enemy (for so the reason of War required) with long
and speedy marches hastens to the assistance of his Colleague. Salinator being
then in Vmbria by the River Metaurus, and resolved to fight the next day, with
an extraordinary Policy received Nero by night. For he ordered the Tribunes to
be received by the Tribunes, the Centurions by the Centurions, the Horsemen by
the Horsemen, the Foot by the Footmen; and so without any tumult, he ingrafted
two Armies into one, in the same ground that was hardly able to contain that
which he had before. Whereby it happened that Asdrubal knew not that he fought
with two Consuls, before he was by both overthrown. And thus was the Punic
faith, so infamous over all the world, deluded at its own Weapon: while the
Roman Prudence delivered up Hannibal to the Wiles of Nero, Asdrubal to the
Deceit of Salinator.

5. Memorable also was the Counsel of Q. Metellus, who together with the
Proconsul warring against the Celtiberians in Spain, and finding himself too
weak to force Contrebia the Metropolis of that Country, revolving many
thoughts in his mind, at length he found a way to bring his business to
perfection. He made tedious marches, sometimes he fell upon this Province,
sometimes upon another; sometimes he assailed these Passages of the Mountains,
and sometimes others: and all this while, as well his own Officers, as the
Enemy, were amazed to see him whirl from one place to another in that manner.
For which reason being asked by one of his intimate friends, why he made such a
loose and scattered kind of War? Forbear to enquire, said he: for if I thought
my shirt knew the meaning of this design of mine, I would cause it to be
burnt. How far did this dissimulation extend? Or what was the issue of it? But
when he had involved both his own Army and the Enemy in the same error,
faining to march another way, he suddenly turned back upon Contrebia, and so
surpised it unawares. So that if he had not suffered his thoughts to search
after Wiles and Stratagems, he might have lain before Contrebia all the days of
his life.

FORRAIGNERS.
1. Agathocles, King of the Syracusans, was boldly cunning: For when the
Carthaginians had possessed the greatest part of his City, he transported his
Army into Africa, to dispel fear by fear, and force by force; and not without
success. For the Carthaginians affrighted at his sudden coming, willingly
redeemed their own security by the safety of the enemy; So that it was agreed,
that at the same time Africa should be freed from the Sicilians, and Sicily
from the Carthaginians. For had he persever'd to preserve the Walls of
Syracuse, they had been still vexed with the miseries of War, while Carthage
had enjoined the benefits of Peace. But now threatening her with the same ruin,
while he rather invades the wealth and fortunes of others, than defends his
own; the more justly he deserted his Kingdom, the more safely he received it
again.

2. What did Hannibal at the Battle of Cannae? Had he not ensnared the Roman
Army in many intanglements of subtle Stratagem, before he went to fight? In the
first place he took care to get the Sun and Wind, and so to secure himself from
the flying of the Dust. Then in the very time of fight, he caused great part of
his Army to counterfeit a flight; which when the Roman Legion followed, as it
was divided from the rest of the Army, he provided that they should be cut to
pieces by the Ambush which he had laid to entrap them. Then he ordered four
hundred Horse to go to the Consul like Revolters; who being commanded to lay
aside their Weapons, and to retire into the Rear of the Army, in the heat of
the Fight, drawing their Swords, which they privately concealed between their
Vests and Armor, cut the Hams of the engaged Romans. Thus was the Punic
Fortitude furnished with Deceit, Ambushment, and Fallacy. Which excuses our
Courage for being so circumvented: Since we were rather deceived, then overcome.

CHAP. V. Of Repulses.
1. Aelius Tubero. 2. Scipio Nasica. 3. Aemilius Paulus. 4. Metellus the
Macedonian. 5. Cornelius Sylla. 6. Cato of Utica.
THe Condition of the Field of Mars well represented, may also instruct the
ambitious more strenuously to sustain the less prosperous events of the
Elections. While the repulses of eminent and famous men being set before their
eyes, they may stand for honor not with less hope than judicious ones of mind;
and may remember, that it is no crime for something to be denied by all to one
man, when sometimes single persons have thought it lawful to resist the wills
of all. Knowing that what cannot be obtained by Favor, must be sought by
Patience.

1. Q. Aelius Tubero being desired to spread the Dining-Chamber by Fabius
Maximus, who was to feast the people in the name of P. Africanus his Uncle,
spread the Punic Beds with the Skins of K^ds; and instead of Silver Dishes,
brought forth Samian. By which uns^emliness he so offended all the company,
that when he stood for Praetor, depending upon L. Paulus his Grandfather, and
P. Africanus his Uncle, he was forced to suffer the shame of a repulse. For
though privately they approved thriftiness, yet publicly they were very
curious to be splendid. And therefore the City* not believing the Guests of one
Banquet, but that all her Inhabitants had layn upon Goat Skins, revenged the
discredit of the Banquet, by the shame of not giving him their voices.

Pub. Scipio Nasica, the glory of the Gown, who being Consul pronounced War
against Jugurth, whose holy hands received the Idaean Ma^ron, leaving Phrygia
to grace our Altars and our Habitations; who by the strength of his authority
suppressed many fatal Seditions; who was Prince of the Senate for many years:
when he was a young man, and stood to be the Aedil in the Running-chair, took a
certain person by the hand, whom he grasped with his own, and finding his
friends hand to be hardened with labor, he asked him, whether he used to walk
upon his hands. Which question being heard by the standers by, came to be in
the mouths of all the People, and occasioned Scipio to be repulsed. For all the
People thinking he had upbraided them with the poverty of the Rustic Tribe,
discharged their anger upon his contumelious Jest. Thus our City, by recalling
the Wits of the Noble Youth from Insolence, made many and profitable Citizens;
and added the due weight to honor, not suffering them to be sought for by
those that were secure of them beforehand.

3. There was no such Error to be found in Aemilius Paulus; and yet sometimes
he stood for the Consulship in vain. However, the same person, when he had
wearied the field with his repulses, being afterward made twice Consul and
Censor, arrived to the highest degree of Honor. Whose Virtue injuries did not
break, but sharpen; for being incensed at the dishonor, he carried to the
field a more eager desire of the Supreme Dignity, that he might overcome the
People by his perseverance, since he could not stir them by the splendor of
his Nobility, and the endowments of his Mind.

4. Only a ^^w, and those disconsolate Friends, accompanied Quint. Caecilius
home, ashamed and full of grie^, whom afterward the whole Senate and People
followed brisk and jovial to the Capitol, having triumphed over the false
Philip. The greatest part also of the Achaean War, to which Mummius lent his
helping hand, was completed by this person. Could the people then deny the
Consulship to him, to whom they owed, or were likely to owe two most famous
Provinces? And yet that act made him a better Citizen; for he thought he was to
carry himself the more industriously in that Consulship which he found so hard
to be obtained.

5. Who more powerful, who more opulent than L. Sylla? he disposed of Empires
and Kingdoms; he abrogated old Laws, and made new; and yet in that field of
which he was afterward Master, he lost the Praetorship which he stood for.

6. But to relate the greatest crime of the Elections, M. Portius Cato, who was
more likely to grace the Praetorship with the gravity of his manners, than to
receive addition of splendor from it, could not once obtain it at the peoples
hands. Voices of Madmen, how well were they paid for the error they committed!
For the honor which they denied to Cato, they were forced to give to Vatinius.
And therefore to speak the truth, the Praetorship was not then denied to Cato,
but Cato was denied to the Praetorship.

CHAP. VI. Of Necessity.
1. The People of Rome after the overthrow at Cannae. 2. The Casilinates in
their Siege. 3. The Praenestines besieged. 4. The People of Rome in the Wars of
Marius. 5. C. Caesar at Munda. 6. The Asiaticks in the Parthian War.
FORRAIGNERS.
1. The Cretans besieged by Q. Metellus. 2. The Numantines besieged by P.
Scipio. 3. The Calaguritans.
MOst bitter are the Laws of abominable Necessity, and most severe her
Commands, which have compelled not only our City, but also foreign Nations to
suffer many things grievous, not only to the understanding, but also to the
hearing.

1. For in the Second Punic War, the Youth of Rome being exhausted, the Senate,
at the motion of Titus Gracchus Consult elect, ordered, that Servants might be
publicly bought, to serve against the Enemy. Which being reported by the
Tribunes to the people, three persons were chosen out to buy four and twenty
thousand Servants; who swearing them to be true, faithful and courageous, while
the Carthaginians continued in Italy, sent them away to the Camp. Out of Apulia
also and the Territories of Fidicule two hundred and seventy Horsemen were
bought to supply the Horse. How great is the violence of bitter Chance! That
City which till that time loathed to have Soldiers whose heads were never
taxed, that very City is now constrained to hale the bodies of Slaves from
their servile dens, and Freemen from the Cottages of Shepherds, to be the chief
strength of their Army. Generous spirits therefore must sometimes give way to
convenience, and submit to the power of Fortune, where he that chooses not the
safest Counsel, yields to him that follows the most specious Advice. But the
slaughter of Cannae so amazed our City, that by the industry of Marcus Junius,
then ordering the affairs of the Commonwealth as Dictator, the spoils of the
Enemies fixed in the Temples consecrated to the Gods, were taken down for the
service of the Wars, and the youth of the Nobility were forced to take Arms;
and six Thousand condemned persons were also listed our of necessity. Which
things considered in themselves, seem to look somewhat odly; but weighed in the
balance of necessity, they appear to be helps fit for the severity of the
times. By reason of the same Overthrow, the Senate wrote back in answer to
Otacilius and Cornelius Mammula, the one Propraetor of Sicily, the other of
Sardignia, who both complained that they had neither Money nor Provisions for
their Armies, That they had not Money in the Treasury for distant expenses, and
therefore bid them take the best course they could to provide for themselves.
Whereby the Senate put the Government quite out of their own hands* and
abandoned Sicily and Sardignia, two the k^^^^st Nurses of our City, the
str^^gth and support of ^^ei^ Wars, subdued with so much blood and sweat, in a
few words, to the severe command of Necessity.

2. The Casilinates wanting Victuals, and being closely besieged by Hannibal,
took all the Leathern Thongs from their necessary uses, and the Leather Covers
from their Targets, and boiling them in water, were forced to feed upon them.
Consider but the bitterness of the Calamity, and what could be more miserable?
If you consider their Constancy, what greater mark of Fidelity? Who rather than
they would desert the Romans, maintained themselves with such a sort of Diet,
when such fat Fields, and such a fertile Soyls, joined so close to their Walls.

3. When that Town was so besieged, and so faithfully held out, it happened that
one among Three Hundred Praenestines having taken a Mouse, would rather sell it
for Two Hundred Denaries, than eat it himself, notwithstanding the famishing
condition he was in. But Providence allotted both to the Buyer and the Seller,
the end which they both deserved. For the covetous person being starved to
death, enjoyed not the spoils of his Avarice; but he that was at so great an
expense for his own preservation, though he bought it dear, yet since it was
out of Necessity, lived.

4. In the Consulship of C. Marius and Cn. Carbo, who contended in a Civil War
with Sylla, and at what time the Commonwealth did not seek for Victory, but
that the Public was to be the Victors reward; by a Decree of the Senate, the
Gold and Silver Ornaments of the Temples were melted down, to pay the
Soldiers. For it was a worthy contention, whether the one should be permitted
to satiate his Cruelty with the banishment of the Citizens, or whether the
Immortal Gods should be robbed. But it was not the will of the Conscript
Fathers, but thine, Dire Necessity, that occasioned that order to be made.

5. When the divine Ju^ius's Army besieged Munda, and that they wan^ed matter
to raise their Battery, they made up the height, which they wanted, with the
Bodies of dead M^n. And because they wanted Stakes, they drove in their Piles,
and French-Darts to strengthen 'em, Necessity teaching them a new way of
Fortification.

6. And that I may add the heavenly mention of the Son, to the remembrance of
the celestial Father; when Phraates King of the Parthians threatened to break in
upon our Provinces, and that the adjoining Regions were terrified at the news
of their coming, there was such a Famine in the Region of Bosphorus, that the
Soldiers exchanged so many Slaves for a single Vessel of Oil, and so many
Slaves for a Bushel of Wheat. But the care of Augustus, under whose Protection
the world then was, soon provided a Remedy for that Calamity.

RORRAIGNERS.
1. The Cretans had no such help: who being besieged by Metellus, and reduced
to the utmost Extremity, rather tormented than quenched their thirst with their
own and the Urine of their Cattle. For fearing to be overcome, they suffered
that, which the Victors would not have forced them to have endured.

2. The Numantines being besieged by Scipio, when they had consumed all other
things, at length were constrained to feed upon Mans-flesh. So that when their
City was taken, there were many found with the joints and members of the slain
in their bosoms. But Necessity has no excuse for this; for there was no
necessity for them to live, to whom it was so lawful to dye.

3. But the horrid impiety of the Calagurritans exceeded the obstinacy of the
former: who to the end they might appear the more faithful to the ashes of the
slain Sertorius, being besieged by Pompey, having devoured all other creatures
in their City, fell to feast upon their Wives and Children. And to the end the
Armed Youth might nourish their Bowels with their own bowels the longer, they
were not afraid to salt up the unfortunate remainders of the dead b^dies. Think
you it would be an exhortation prevalent enough in the field, to exhort such
Soldiers to sight for the safety of their Wives and Children? It had bin more
proper for so great a Captain to have punished such an Enemy, than to seek for
Victory. For Revenge would have purchased them more Liberty, than Victory could
win them Honor; in comparison of whom Serpents and wild beasts were gentle and
merciful creatures. For those dear pledges of Life, dearer to them than their
lives themselves, were the Dinners and Suppers of the Catagurritans.

CHAP. VII. Of Wills cancelled.
1. A Father that disinherited his Son. 2. M. Anneius Cars^olanus. 3. C.
Tettius. 4. Sulpitia the mother of the Trachali. 5. Terentius. 6. Naevianus. 7.
Juventius.
LEt us now go to that sort of business, which among all the actions of Men, is
the last thing done, and their chiefest care: And let us consider, what Wills
have bin cancelled after they were legally made; or might have bin cancelled
when they stood firm, and transferred the honor of Inheritance to others than
those that expected it.

1. Which that I may do according to the order which I have proposed, I will
begin with the Father of a certain Soldier, who hearing a false report of the
death of his Son from the Camp, made other Heirs in his Will, and died. The
Youngman returning home after the war Was ended, found the doors shut against
him, by the error of his Father, and the impudence of his Friends. For how
could they show themselves more shameless than they did? The Soldier had spent
the flower of his youth in his Countries Service, had undergone most dreadful
Labors and Dangers, showed the Wounds which he had received in Battle, and
only begged that lazy Drones, a very burden to the very City it self, might
not possess his Ancestors Inheritance. Therefore laying aside his Arms, he was
forced to commence a Gownwar in the Court of Justice. A hard case, while he is
forced to contend for his Fathers estate with wicked Heirs before the
Centumviri; though they could not choose but give their Opinions for him, while
the Sentence of the Court gave him the day.

2. Marcus Anneius the Son of M. Carseolanus, a famous Roman Knight, adopted by
Sufenas his Uncle, cancelled his Fathers Will, who had left him out of it, by
the Sentence of the Centumviri, before whom he tried the Cause; though
Tullianus, the familiar Friend of Pompey the Great, who was a witness to it,
were made Heir. Therefore he had more to do with the power of a person potent
in Court, than with the ashes of his Father. Yet though both did what they
could to hinder him, he obtained his fathers Goods. For L. Sextilius, and P.
Popilius, whom M. Anncius, as being his nearest Relations, had made Heirs of
the same part which was given to Tullianus, durst not contend by their Otahs
with the young man. Though they might have bin sent for at that time by the
highest Authorities then in being, to have defended the Will. And it was some
pretense for the Heirs, that M. Anneius was translated into the Family of
Sufenas. But the strong tie of procreation overcame both the Fathers Will, and
the Authority of so great a Personage.

3. C. Tettius, an Infant born of Petronia the Wife as Tettius as long as he
lived, being disinherited by his Father, was restored to his Inheritance by the
Decree of the divine Augustus, doing like a Father of his Country: In regard
that Tettius had so unjustly abrogated the paternal Name, by giving away his
estate from a Son, so legally born to his own Right.

4. Septicia also, the Mother of the Trachali of Ariminum, being angry with her
Sons, out of spite when she was now past childbearing married Publicius an old
man, and l^ft both her Children out of her Will. Who appealing to the divine
Augustus, he disapproved both the Marriage, and disannul'd the Will. For he
ordered that the Sons should have their Mothers estate, and commanded the
Husband to restore her Dower; because she did not marry out of hopes of having
Children. If Justice her self had given sentence in this case, could she have
pronounced a juster Sentence? Thou despisest those whom thou have begot; thou
marriest past Childbearing; thou breakest the order of Wills out of a violent
humor, and do not blush to give all thy Patrimony to a person, to whose
feeble body thou have prostituted thy old Age. And therefore, while thou thus
behavest thy self, thou art cast down to Hell by the voice of heavenly Thunder.

5. Famous is the Constitution of C. Calpurnius Piso, Praetor of the City. For
when Terentius complained before him, together with his eight Sons, whom he had
bred up to be men, that one of his Sons whom he had parted with in Adoption,
had disinherited him; gave him the possession of the young man's estate, and
would not suffer the Heirs to go to Law. The Paternal Majesty of the man moved
Calpurnius doubtless, together with the gift of Life, and the benefit of
Education: but that which more moved him, was the number of his other Children
that stood by, seeing seven Brothers and a Father disinherited by one Child.

6. How prudent was the Decree of Mamercus Aemilius Lepidus the Consul!
Genucius, a certain Priest of Cybele, besought the Praetor of the City, Cn.
Orestes, that the goods of Naevianus might be restored to him, the possession
whereof he had by Will obtained. Mamercus being thereupon appealed to by
Surdinius, whose Freed-man had left Genucius his Heir, disannulled the Praetors
Sentence, saying, That Genucius, who had of his own accord suffered himself to
be gelt (for so are all the Priests of Cybele) was not to be reckoned either a
man or woman. A Decree befitting Mamercus, befitting the Prince of the Senate;
whereby he provided that the Tribunals of Magistrates should not be polluted by
the obscence presence, and scandalous voice of Eunuchs.

7. Q. Metellus was a much more severe Praetor than Orestes: Who would not give
Vecilius, the Pandar the possession of the Goods of Juventius, left him by
Will. For that noble and grave Personage did not think the condition of a Court
of Judicature and a Brothel-house to be the same. Neither would he approve the
fact of that man, who had thrown away his estate upon an unclean stable; nor
give the same right to one that made a public profession of Dishonesty, as to
a Citizen of a good Conversation.

CHAP. VIII. Of Testaments confirmed, and unlookt for Inheritances.
Of the ROMANS.
1. Sempronius Tuditanus. 2. Aebucia. 3. Q. Metellus. 4. The Brother of
Pompeius of Rhegium. 5. Q. Caecilus. 6. T. Marius. 7. Valerius Heptachordus. 8.
T. Barrulus. 9. M. Polilius.
HAving contented our selves with these Examples of cancelled Wills, let us
give a hint upon those that have remained confirmed, when there was cause
enough for them to have bin cancelled.

1. How publicly and scandalously was Tuditanus no^ed for a madman! being one
that threw his Money among the People, and trayl'd his Cloak after him in the
Forum, as if it had bin the garment of a Tragedian; so that he was the laughter
of all that beheld him, besides many other pranks of the same nature which they
beheld. He made his Son Heir by his Will: which T. Longus by the Judgment of
the Centumviri in vain endeavored to have disannulled, as being next of kin.
For the Centumviri thought it more proper to consider what was written in the
Will, than who had wrote it.

2. The conversation of Tuditanus was Frantic; but Aebucia, who was the wife
of L. Menenius Agrippa. made a Will that was Madness it self. For having two
Daughters of equal virtue, Plaetoria and Afrania, through the inclination of
her own mind, rather than for any offense or miscarriage, she only made
Plaetoria her Heir: and to the Children of Afrania, out of her vast Patrimony,
she left only twenty thousand pieces of Money. However Afrania would not
contend by Oath with her Sister, rather choosing patiently to honor her
Mothers Will, than to violate it in Court; showing her self thereby so much the
more unworthy the Injury done her, by how much the more patiently she bore it.

3. Q. Metellus committed a womanish error, less to be admired. For he, though
there were several eminent and famous young men, of the same name, living in
our City at the same time, and that the Family of the Claudii, to whom he was
most nearly related, were then very numerous, left Carinates only his Heir;
neither did any one attempt to question his Will.

4. Pompeius also Rheginus, a Tramontane, being by his Brother left out of his
Will, and that to prove his Injustice, he had in a full Assembly of both Orders
recited two former Wills made and testified in the public place of Elections,
by which this Brother was made Heir of the greatest part, only there was
premised to him the sum of an hundred and fifty Sesterces; after he had long
complained to his Friends that soothed his indignation, took a resolution not
to trouble the ashes of his Brother in a Court of Judicature. Yet they, whom he
had made his Heirs, were so far from being so near a kin by the Fathers side,
that they were not the next to him; but strangers and poor. So that the Silence
seemed to be wicked, and the Pride contumelious.

5. Happy in their Impunity, but whether these Wills were not worse in
offending, is the Question. Quintus Caecilius by the dilig^nt endeavor and
great Liberality of L. Lucullus, having attained to a handsome degree of
Dignity, and an ample Patrimony; when he had fully resolved that he alone
should be his Heir, and on his Deathbed had given him his Rings from off his
Fingers; yet by his Will adopted Pomponius Atticus, and made him Heir to all
his Estate. But the Roman People tying a Halter about the neck of the Carcass
of that decei^ful and fallacious person, dragged him along the Highway. Thus
the wicked wretch had a Son a Heir, such as he desired but a Funeral and a
Grave, such as he deserved.

6. Neither was T. Marius Vrbinas worthy of any other; who by the favor of the
divine Augustus the Emperor, being raised from the lowest condition of a
common Soldier, to the highest commands in the Camp; and being by them
enriched, not only at other times declared, that he would leave his fortunes
to him that had bestowed them on him, and but the day before he died protested
the same thing to Augustus himself; when as he had not so much as mentioned his
name in his Will.

7. Lucius Valerius, whose surname was Heptachordus, having experienced the
enmity of Cornelius Balbus in Court, as being plagued by his advice and
management with several private Suits, and at length by a suborned witness
being by him accused of a Capital Crime, leaving out his Advocates and Patrons,
lest him sole Heir; cowed by such a dread, as turned his resolutions topsie
turvie. For he loved his Ignominy, loved the dangers, and seemed to wish he
had ^in condemned: being so kind to the author of those mischiefs, and hating
his defenders.

8. T. Barrulus upon his Deathbed delivered his Rings to Lentulus Spinther,
whose kindness and friendship he had felt, as to his only Heir; yet left him
nothing at all. How strangely at that very moment of time (if it be of that
force which we believe it to be) did Conscience punish that abominable
creature! For between the very thoughts of his Ingratitude and Fallacy, he
yielded up his last breath, as if some Tormenter had crucified his soul within
him. For he knew that his passage from life to death was hateful to the Gods,
and would be detested by the Infernal Spirits.

9. Marcus Popilius upon his deathbed beheld Oppius Gallus a Senator, with
whom he had been familiar from his youth, as the Laws of ancient friendship
required, and gave him the most loving words imaginable. For he thought him
only worthy, of all that stood by him, of his last embrace and kiss: moreover
he delivered him his Rings, to ensure him of that Inheritance which he was
never likely to enjoy. Which Rings laid up in his Purse, and assigned to him by
those that were present, Oppius, (a diligent man, but a mere mock of his dying
friend disinherits himself, and returns them diligently to his Heirs. What
could be more dishonest or more unseasonable at this time and place? That a
Senator of the Roman people, just ready to die, not only as a man to the world,
but also as a public person to the Senatehouse, should have such a trick put
upon him, against all the sacred Laws of friendship, when his eyes were set in
his head, and he drawing his last breath?

LIB. VIII.
CHAP. I. Of signal Public Judgments.
Absolved.
1. M. Horatius Tergeminus. 2. Ser. Sulpitius Galba. 3. A. Gabinius. 4. P.
Claudius Pulcher. 5. Tuccia, the Vestal. 6. L. Calpurnius Piso. 7. Q. Flavius,
the Augur. 8. Cosconius Callidianus. 9. Atilius Calatinus. 10. M. Aemilius
Scaurus, jun. 11. Aurelius Cotta. 12. Callidius of Bononia. 13. The two Cloelii
of Tarracinum.
Condemned.
1. L. Scipio Asiatick. 2. C. Decianus. 3. Sex. Titius. 4. Claudia the daughter
of App. the blind. 5. M. Mulvius, C. Lollius, L. Sextilius, Triumvirs. 6. P.
Villius, the Triumvir. 7. M. Aemilius Porcina. 8. A certain Father of a Family.
Two Burnt.
1. A Matricide. 2. A Mistress of a Family.
ABSOLVED.
NOw that the doubtful motions of Judgments may more easily be endured, let us
relate for what causes they that labored under Envy, were either acquitted or
condemned.

1. M. Horatius being condemned by Tullus the King for having slain his Sister,
was acquitted by appealing to the people. The one was incensed by the Cruelty
of the Murder, the other by the reason of the fact inclined to Mercy:
believing the immature love of the Virgin more severely than impiously
punished. And thus the brothers arm being saved by so stout a correction,
reaped as much honor from the blood of his near relation, as from the blood of
an enemy.

2. Before, the Roman people showed themselves fierce preservers of Chastity;
afterward more mild Judges than Justice it self required. For when Servius
Galba was severely accused by Libo, a Tribune of the People, for that being a
Praetor in Spain, he had put to death a great number of the Lusitanians,
contrary to his Faith given them; and that Cato, at that time very aged, in an
Oration upon public Record, had made good what the Tribune had done; so that
the party accused had not a word to say for his own defense; yet when with
tears in his eyes he only recommended to the Assembly his little Children, and
the young Son of Sulpitius Gallus, nearly related to him, he so appeased the
wrath of his Judges, that he, who was but just now ready to be condemned by the
Vote of all, had hardly in an instant one Vote to his prejudice. Pity, not
Equity, ruled that Indictment; since that Absolution that could not be granted
to Innocence, was given out of respect to the Children.

3. Like to this was that which follows. Aulus Gabinius, in the height of
Infamy, being by the accusation of C. Memmius exposed to the suffrages of the
People, seemed to be past all hope. For the Indictment was full, the Defense
weak, and his Judges such as with a precipitate malice desired his punishment.
The Officers and Imprisonment hovered before his eyes, and yet all vanished
away by the interposition of propitious Fortune. For Sisenna, the Son of
Gabinius, by an impulse of consternation, throwing himself a Suppliant at the
feet of Memmius, besought there some asswagement of the Tempest, where the
whole fury of the Storm first arose. Whom the Victor beholding with a stern
countenance, and tearing his Ring from his finger, suffered for some time to
lie grovelling upon the ground. Which sad spectacle wrought that effect, that
Laelius the Tribune by a general consent ordered the prisoner to be set at
liberty. Teaching us, that no man ought insolently to abuse the successes of
Prosperity, nor over-weakly to be cast down by Adversity.

4. Which is made manifest by the next Example. Publius Claudius, I cannot tell
whether to the greater detriment of Religion or his Country (in regard he
contemned the ancient Customs of the one, and lost a noble Navy of ^other)
being exposed to the anger of the People; when it was thought he could no way
avoid the punishment that he deserved, saved himself from Condemnation, by the
benefit of a sudden storm. By which means the Trial being laid aside, it
pleased the People never to bring it on again, as if the Gods themselves had
forbid it. Thus was he saved by a Land-storm, whom a Sea-tempest had like to
have brought to condemnation.

5. By the same sort of assistance the Chastity of Tuccia, a Vestal Virgin, and
accused of Incest, escaped out of a black cloud of Infamy. Who trusting to the
sincerity of her Innocence, ventured the hope of her safety upon a doubtful
argument. For, snatching up a sieve, Vesta, said she, If I have always attended
thy Rites with clean and chaste hands, grant that I may take up water out of
Tiber in this, and carry it to thy Temple. Nature gave way to the rash and bold
Imprecation of the Priestess.

6. Lucius Piso also being accused by Claudius Pulcher, for having done great
and intolerable injuries to the Roman Allies, by a luckly chance escaped the
fear of an unquestioned ruin: For at the same time that they were about to
give severe Judgment against him, there fell a sudden shower, which filled his
mouth full of dirt, as he lay prostrate at the feet of his Judges. Which
Spectacle changed the whole Trial from Severity into Pity and Clemency. For
they believed he had given full satisfaction to their Allies, by being
compell's to prostate himself so submissively, and rise again with so much
deformity.

7. I will add two that escaped by their Accusers own fault. Quintus Flavius
the Augur was accused by Valerius the Aedil, and proved guilty to the People;
and being condemned by the Votes of fourteen Tribes, cried out he was
innocently condemned. To whom Valerius made answer with a loud voice, that he
cared not whether he were put to death Guilty or Innocent, so he were put to
death. Which violent speech brought over the rest of the Tribes to his
Adversaries side. He had cast his enemy: when he certainly thought him ruined,
he restored him; and lost the victory, even in the victory it self.

8. C. Cosconius found guilty by the Servilian Law, and for many evident and
notorious crimes condemned, was saved by one Verse recited in the
Sessions House by Valerius Valentinus his Adversary, signifying by a Poetical
Joke, that he had defiled a noble Youth and a free Virgin. For they thought it
unjust that he should go away Victor, who rather deserved to give the Palm from
himself, than to take it from another. Therefore was Valerius rather condemned
by the Absolution of Cosconius, than Cosconius freed at his Trial.

9. I will touch upon those also whose Crimes having ruined all their hopes,
have been pardoned for the renown of their Relations. A. Attilius Calatinus
being condemned for having betrayed the Town of Sora, and a person otherwise
infamous, only a few words of Q. Maximus, his Father-in-law, saved from the
threatening danger: wherein he affirmed, that if he found him guilty of that
crime, he would break often his affinity. Presently the People yielded up their
own to the judgment of one man; believing it an unworthy thing, not to believe
his Testimony, whom they had entrusted in the greatest Dangers of the
Commonwealth.

10. M. Aemilius Scaurus also guilty of Bribery, made so lame and pitiful
defense at his Trial, that his Accuser said openly, that he should have liberty
to name an hundred and twenty witnesses for himself; and that he would be
content to have the prisoner acquitted, if he could produce so many in the
Province, from whom he had never taken any thing. Yet, though he could not make
use of so fair a condition, he was freed for the sake of his Nobility, and the
fresh memory of his Father.

11. But as the Fame of Great men has prevailed to protect the Guilty, so has
it as little availed to oppress them: rather it has bin a safeguard to them in
the height of Prosecution. P. Scipio Aemilianus accused L. Cotta to the
Praetor; whose cause, though it were full of deep crimes, was seven times
delayed, and the eighth judgment acquitted him. For those wise men were loath
it should be thought that his Condemnation had bin, because his Accuser was so
great a person. And therefore I believe they reasoned thus amongst themselves:
We must not admit him that seeks the life of another, to bring Triumphs,
Trophies and Spoils to the seat of Judgment: Let him be terrible to his Enemy;
but let not a Citizen, trusting to his high Merits and great Honor, prosecute
a Citizen.

12. Not more eager were those Judges against a most noble Accuser, than these
were mild toward a Criminal of a far lower degree. Callidius of Bononia, being
taken by night in the Husbands Bedchamber, being brought to answer for the
Adultery, he buoyed himself up among the greatest and most violent waves of
Infamy, swimming like corn in a Shipwreck, laying hold upon a very slight kind
of defense. For he pleaded, that he was carried thither, for the Love of a
Servant-boy. The place was suspected, the time suspicious, the Mistress of the
house was suspected, and his Youth suspected: But the confession of a more
intemperate Lust, freed him from the Crime of Adultery.

13. The next is an example of more concernment. When the two Brothers of
Cloelius were brought to answer for Patricide, whose Father was killed in his
bed, while the Sons lay asleep in the same Chamber, and neither Servant nor
Freed-man could be found upon whom to fasten the suspicion of the Murder: They
were both acquitted, only for this reason, that it was made appear to the
Judges, that they were both found fast asleep with the door open. Sleep, the
certain mark of innocent security, saved the unfortunate. For it was adjudg'd
impossible, that having murdered their Father, they could have slept so
securely over his wounds and blood.

PERSONS Condemned.
1. Now we will briefly touch upon those, to whom things beside the question
did more harm, than their own Innocence did good. L. Scipio, after a most noble
Triumph over King Antiochus, was condemned for taking Money of him. Not that I
think he was bribed to remove beyond the Mountain Taurus, him that was lately
Lord of all Asia, and just going to lay his victorious hands upon Europe. But
being otherwise a man of a most upright life, and free far enough from any such
suspicion, he could not resist that envy that haunted the two famous Sirnames
of the two Brothers.

2. Scipio was a person of high splendor. But Decianus, a person of unspotted
Integrity, was ruined by his own tongue. For when he accused P. Furius, a man
of a lewd life, because that in some part of his Declamation he ventured to
complain of the Death of Saturninus, did not only not condemn the Guilty, but
suffered the Punishment appointed for him.

3. The same case overthrew C. Titius. He was innocent, and in favor with the
People for the Agrarian Law. But because he had the statue of Saturninus in his
house, the whole College of Magistrates with one general consent ruined him.

4. We may to these add Claudia, whom though innocent of a crime, an impious
Imprecation ruined. For being crowded by the multitude, as she returned home
from the Plays, she wished that her Brother, by whom we had the greatest loss
of our Naval Forces, were alive again, that being made often Consul, he might
by his ill conduct rid the City of the pesterment of the People.

5. We may pass to those whom the violence of Condemnation snatched away for
flight causes. M. Mulvius, Cn. Lellius, L. Sextilius Triumvirs, because they
did not come so quickly, as they ought, to quench a Fire that happend in the
Holy way, being cited before the People at a prefixed day by the Tribune, were
condemned.

6. Publius Villius also, Nocturnal Triumvir, being accused by Aquilius the
Tribune, fell by the Sentence of the People, because he was negligent in going
his watch.

7. Very severe was that Sentence of the People, when they deeply fined M.
Aemilius Porcina, being accused by L. Cassius, for having built his House in
the Village of Alsium a little too high.

8. Nor is that Condemnation to be suppressed of one, who being over-fond of his
little Boy, and being by him desired to buy him some Chitterlings for Supper;
because there were none to be got in the Country, killed a Plough-Ox, to
satisfy the Boys desire. For which reason he was brought to public Trial:
Innocent, had he not lived in the ancient times.

Neither Quitted nor Condemned.
1. Now to say something of those, that being questioned for their Lives, were
neither quitted nor condemned. There was a Woman brought before Popilius Lenas
the Praetor, for having beaten her Mother to Death with a Club. But the Praetor
adjudged nothing against her, neither one way nor other. For it was plain, that
she did it to revenge the death of her Children, whom the Grandmother, angry
with her Daughter, had poisoned.

2. The same demur made Dolabella Proconsul of Asia. A woman of Smyrna killed
her Husband and her Son, understanding that they had killed another Son of
hers, a hopeful young man, which she had by a former Husband. Dolabella would
not take cognizance of the Cause, but sent it to be determined by the Areopagi
at Athens. Unwilling to set a woman at liberty, defiled with two Murders, nor
to punish her whom a just Grief had moved to do it. Considerately and mildly
did the Roman Magistrate: nor did the Areopagite act less wisely, who examining
the cause, bound the Accuser and the Criminal to appear an hundred years after,
upon the same ground as Dolabella acted. Only he by transmitting the Trial,
they by deferring, delayed the difficult Sentence, or Condemnation or Acquittal.

CHAP. II. Of remarkable private Judgments, whereby were condemned
1. T. Claud. Centumalus. 2. Octacilia Laterensis. 3. C. Titinius Minturnensis.
4. A certain person for riding a horse farther than hired for.
TO Public Judgments I will add private ones, the Equity whereof in the
Complainants will more delight than a great number offend the Reader.

1. Claudius Centumalus being commanded by the Augurs to pull down some of the
height of his House, which he had built upon the Coelian Mount, because it
hindered them from observing their Auguries from the Tower, sold it to
Calpurnius Lanatius, concealing the command of the Augurs. By whom Calpurnius
being compelled to pluck down his House, brought Marc. Porcius Cato, father of
the famous Cato, to Claudius as an Arbitrator, and the form of Writing,
Whatever he ought to give him, or do in good Equity. Cato, understanding that
Claudius had for the nonce suppressed the Augurs Edict, presently condemned him
to Calpurnius; with all the Justice in the world. For they that sell according
to Conscience and Equity, ought neither to enhance the hopes of the Bargain,
nor conceal the Inconveniences.

2. I have recited a Judgment famous in those times: Yet what I am about to
relate, is not quite buried in silence. C. Visellius Varro being taken with a
great fit of Sickness, suffered a Judgment of three thousand pieces of Money,
as borrowed of Otacilia Laterensis, with whom he had lived as her Gallant: With
this design, that if he died, she might claim that sum of the Heirs; coloring
the Liberality of his Lust, under the title of a Debt. After that, Visellius,
contrary to Otacilia's wishes, recovers. Who offended that she had lost her
prey by his recovery, from a close Friend began to act like an open Usurer,
challenging the Money, which as shamelesly as vainly she gaped for by a void
contract. Which Aquillius, a man of great authority and knowledge in the Civil
Law, being chosen to be Judge of, consulting with the Principal Men of the
City, by his Prudence and good Conscience foiled the woman. And if by the same
form Varro might have been condemned, and the adversary absolved, no question
but he would have willingly punished his fo^l and unwarrantable folly. Now he
stifled the calumny of a private Action, and left the crime of Adultery to
public Justice.

3. Much more stoutly and with a souldierlike Gallantry did Marius behave
himself in a Judgment of the same nature. For when T. Titinius or Minturnum
married Fannia his wise, because he knew her to be unchaste, and having divorced
her for the same crime, would have kept her Dower: he b^ing chosen Judge, and
having examined the business, took Titinius aside, and persuaded him to proceed
no farther, but to return the woman her Dower; but finding that all his
persuasions were in vain, and being forced to pronounce Sentence, he fined the
woman for Adultery a Sesterce, and Titinius the whole sum of the Portion.
Telling them, that therefore he had observed that method of judgment, because
it seemd to him apparent, that he had married Fannia whom he knew to be a lewd
woman, that he might cheat her of her estate. This Fannia was she, who
afterward, when Marius was proclaimed an Enemy, received him into her house at
Minturnum, all bedaubed with mud and dirt, and assisted him what lay in her
power; remembering that he had adjudged her for Unchastity, out of his rigorous
manner of life, but that he had saved her Dower, out of his Religion and Piety.

4. That Judgment was also much talked of, by which a certain person was
condemned for theft, because having borrowed a Horse to carry him to Aricia, he
rode him to the furthermost cliff of that City, What can we do here but praise
the Modesty of that Age, wherein such minute excesses from Honesty were
punished?

CHAP. III. Of Women that pleaded Causes before Magistrates.
1. Amasia Sentia. 2. Afrania, the wife of Licinius Buccio. 3. Hortensia Q. F.
NOr must we omit those Women, whom the condition of their Sex, and the
Garments of Modesty could not hinder from appearing and speaking in public
Courts of Judicature.

1. Amaesia Sentia, being guilty, before a great concourse of people pleaded
her own cause, Titius the Praetor then sitting in Court; and observing all the
parts and elegancies of a true Defense, not only diligently but stoutly was
quitted in her first Action by the sentences of all. And because that under the
shape of a woman she carried a manly resolution, they called her Androgynon.

2. Afrania, the wife of Licinius Buccio the Senator, being extremely affected
with Lawsuits, always pleaded for herself before the Praetor. Not that she
wanted Advocates, but because she abounded in Impudence. So that for her
perpetual vexing the Tribunal with her bawling, to which the Court was
unaccustomed, she grew to be a noted Example of Female Calumny. So that the
name of Afrania was given to all contentious Women. She dyed when Caesar was
Consul with Servilius. For it is better to remember when such a Monster went
out of the world, than when she came in.

3. Hortensia, the daughter of Q. Hortensius, when the order of Matrons was too
heavily taxed by the Triumvirs, and that none of the Men durst undertake to
speak in their behalfs, she pleaded the Matrons cause before the Triumvirs, not
only with boldness, but with success. For the image of her fathers Eloquence
obtained, that the greatest part of the Imposition was remitted. Q. Hortensius
then revived in the Female Sex, and breathed in the words of his Daughter:
Whose force and vigor if his Posterity of the Male Sex would follow, so great
an inheritance of Hortensian Eloquence would not be cut off by one action of a
woman.

CHAP. IV. Of Rackings.
Endured by
1. The Servant of M. Agrius. 2. Alexander the Servant of Fannius. 3. Philip
Servant to Full. Flaccus.
ANd that we may finish all sorts of Judgments, let us recite those Tortures,
to which either no credit at all was given, or else rashly too much faith.

1. The Servant of M. Agrius was accused to have murdered the servant of C.
Fannius, and for that reason being racked by his Master, he constantly
affirmed, that he did commit the fact. Thereupon being delivered up to Fannius,
he was put to death. In a little while after, he that was thought to be slain,
returned home.

2. On the other side, Alexander, the Servant of Fannius, being suspected to
have murdered C. Fl. a Roman Knight, being six times tortured, denied that he
was any way concerned in it. But as if he had confessed it, he was condemned by
the Judges, and by Calpurnius the Triumvir crucified.

3. Fulvius Flaccus the Consul pleading, Philip his Servant, upon whom the
whole testimony lay, being eight times tortured, would not utter a word to his
Masters prejudice. And yet he was condemned as guilty, when one eight times
tortured had given a more certain argument of Innocence, than eight once
tormented had afforded.

CHAP. V. Of Testimonies void or confirmed.
1. Of the Caepio' s and Metelli's against Q. Pompey. 2. Of Aemilius Scaurus
against several. 3. Of L. Crassus against M. Marcellus. 4. Of Q. Metellus, the
Luculli, Hortensii. and Lepeius, against Gracchus. 5. Of M. Cicero against P.
Clodius. 6. Of P. Servilius Isauricus, against a certain person.
1. IT follows that I relate pertinent Examples concerning Witnesses. Cneus and
Servilius Caepio, born both of the same Parents, and having, ^^^^ted through
all the degrees of Honor to the height of Greatness: Also the two Brothers Q.
and L. Metellus, of the Consular and Censors Dignity, and the other that had
triumphed, giving in severe testimony against Q. Pompey A. F. who stood accused
of Bribery: the credit of their testimony was not quite abrogated, by the
acquittal of Pompey; but it was done so, that an Enemy might not seem to be
oppressed by power.

2. M. Aemilius Scaurus, Prince of the Senate, prosecuted C.Memmius for
Bribery, with smart testimony. He followed Flavius, accused by the same Law,
with the same fierceness; he profestly endeavored to ruin C. Norbanus, for
Treason put to the public rack: yet neither by his Authority, which was very
great, nor by his Piety, of which no man doubted, could he do any of them any
harm.

3. L. Crassus also, as great among the Judges, as Scaurus among the Conscript
Fathers: For he governed their Opinions and Judgments by the potent and happy
salaries of his Eloquence; Prince of the Court of Judicature, as the other of
the Senate: Yet when he shot a Thunderbolt of Testimony against Marcellus, it
fell heavy indeed, but vanished in smoke.

4. Again, there was Q. Metellus the holy, the Luculli, the Hortensii, M.
Lepidus, what weight did they not only lay upon the life of C. Cornelius
accused of Treason, but also denied that the Commonwealth could stand, so long
as he were safe? All which Ornaments of the City, it shames me to relate it,
were all kept off by the shield of Justice.

5. What! M. Cicero, who by the warfare of the Law attained to the highest
Honors and the noblest place of Dignity, was he not as a witness thrown out of
the very Camp of his Eloquence, while he swore that Clodius was at his house in
Rome? for by that one argument of his absence, the Prisoner fended off the
villainy which he had committed. And so the Judges rather chose to acquit
Clodius of the Incest, than Cicero of the Infamy of Perjury.

6. Among so many Witnesses of high degree, I will relate one, whose authority
is confirmed by a new manner of reasoning in Court. Publius Servilius, a
Consul, a Censor, a Triumpher, who added the name of Isauricus to that of his
Ancestors, when walking by the Court he saw several Witnesses produced against
a Criminal, he placed himself among the Witnesses, and to the great admiration
of the Parties Friends and Accusers, thus began: This person, said he, most
reverend Judges, that pleads, what Country he is of, or what course of life he
leads, or whether he be deservedly or wrongfully accused, I know not: But this
I know, that meeting me once in the Laurentine Way, as I was traveling along,
in a very narrow passage, he would not alight from his horse; which whether it
belong to your cognizance, I know not, do you consider that; I thought it not
fit to conceal this matter. Presently the Judges condemned the Party, scarce
hearing any other Witnesses. For the Grandeur of the Speaker prevailed with
them, and his Indignation at the contempt of his neglected Dignity; believing
that he, that scorned to reverence Princes, would not stick to run into any
wickedness.

CHAP. VI. Of those who committed themselves what they revenged in others.
1. C. Lic. Hoplomachus. 2. C. Marius, six times Consul. 3. C. Licinius Calvus
Stolo. 4. Q. Varius Ibrida.
NOr must we pass over in silence those, who committed themselves what they
condemned in others,

1. C. Licinius surnamed Hoplomachus, desired of the Praetor that his Father
might be deprived of his estate, as one that consumed it. What he requested he
obtained. But he himself, in a short time after, when the Old Man was dead,
presently wasted a great sum of Money, and several Farms left him by his
Father. Worthy that vicissitude of punishment; as one that rather chose to
consume his estate, than take it as an Heir.

2 C Marius had acted the part of a great and faithful Citizen, in ruining or
L. Saturninus, who held forth a Cap to the Slaves, like an Ensign, inviting
them to take up Arms. But when Sylla invaded the City with his Army, he
himself fled to the assistance of the Slaves, by holding forth the Cap, as the
other had done. Therefore while he imitates a fact which he had punished, he
found another Marius, to ruin him himself.

3. But Caius Licinius Stolo, by whom the Plebeians were empowred to sue for
the Consulship, when he had made a Law that no man should possess above five
hundred Acres of Land, he purchased a thousand himself; and to cover the
matter, made over the half to his Son. For which reason being prosecuted by
Popilius Laenas, he was the first that fell by his own Law: And taught us, that
nothing ought to be imposed, but what every one first imposes upon himself.

4. Q. Varius, because of the obscurity of the place where he was born,
surnamed Ibrida, or half-Citizen, being a Tribune of the People, made a Law
against the Intercession of the College of Tribunes; wherein there was a
command to enquire by whose treachery the Allies were stirred to take up Arms,
to the great detriment of the Commonwealth. For first he stirred up the War of
the Allies, and then the Civil War. But while he acts the part of a pestiferous
Tribune, before that of a certain Citizen, his own Law cut him off, entangled
in his own domestic snares.

CHAP. VII. Of Study and Industry.
Among the ROMANS.
1. M. Cato the Greater. 2. Cato of Utica. 3. M. Terentius Varro. 4. C. Livius
Drusus. 5. Paulus the Senator and Pontius Lupus. 6. Crassus Mutianus. 7. Q.
Roscius, the Comedian.
FOREIGNERS.
1. Demosthenes of Athens. 2. Pythagoras of Samos. 3. Plato of Athens, 4.
Democritus of Abdera. 5. Carneades the Cyrenaean. 6. Anaxagoras the
Clazomenian. 7. Archimedes of Syracuse. 8. Socrates the Athenian.. 9. Isocrates
the Athenian. 10. Chrysippus of Tarsus. 11. Cleanthes of Assium. 12. Sophocles
of Athens. 13. Simonides of Ceji. 14. Solon of Athens. 15. Themistocles of
Athens.
WHerefore do I delay to commemorate the force of Industry? By whose active
spirit the Stipends of Warfare are corroboraetd, and the glory of the Forum is
enflamed; all Studies are cherished in her faithful breast: Whatever is
performed by the Hand, by the Mind, by the Tongue, by her is added to the heap
of applause; which being an admirable virtue, strengthens her self yet more by
her own Constancy.

1. Cato in the fourscore and sixth year of his age, while he persists with a
youthful vigor in defending the Commonwealth, accused of a Capital Crime by
his Enemies, pleaded his own Cause: Yet no man ever observed so large a Memory,
a greater strength of Body, or less hesitation of Speech. Because he kept all
those things in equal condition, and perpetually exercised by Industry. And at
the very conclusion of his laborious life, he opposed his own most eloquent
Defense to the Accusation of Galba touching Spain,

The same person desired to learn the Greek Language: How late, we may thence
guess, in that he was an old man before he learnt to read Latin. But when he
had won great Honor by his Eloquence, he did it to make himself skilful in the
Civil Law.

2. Whose wonderful Offspring, nearer to our age, Cato also, burned with such a
desire of learning, that in the very Court it self, before the Senate filled,
he would be reading Greeks Books. By which Industry he showed that some want
time, others have more than they need.

3. But Terentius Varro, an Example of Humane Life, and one that might be truly
called, A space of years; not so much for his years, which were equal to an Age
of Time, as for the vivacity of his Style. For in the same Bed his Breath, and
the course of his egregious Works expired.

4. Livius Drusus, man of the same perseverance, who defective in vigor of Age
and Eyesight, most bountifully interpreted the Civil Law to the People, and
composed most profitable Monuments for them that desire to learn if. For though
Nature might make him old, and Fortune blind, yet neither could prevent him
from being vigorous and quick-sighted in mind.

5. But Paulus the Senator, and Pontius Lupus a Roman Knight, famous Pleaders
in their times, having both lost their sight, with the same Industry continued
at the Bar. Therefore were they also more frequently heard, amid the concourses
of some that were delighted with their Wit, and of others that admired their
Constancy. For they that are disheartened by such Misfortunes, generally desire
dismission, adding voluntary to fortuitous darkness.

6. Now P. Crassus, when he came Consul into Asia against King Aristonicus,
with so much care he comprehended in his mind the knowledge of the Greeks
tongue, that he understood it, though divided into five Dialects, in all its
parts and quantities. Which mightily won him the love of the Allies, while he
answered every one in the Language wherein they made their requests before his
Tribunal.

7. Let not Roscius be left out, a notable Example of Theatrical Industry, who
never exposed to the People any other Action or Gesture, but what he had
studied before at his own house. Therefore did not the Art of Playing make
Roscius esteemed, but Roscius made the Art of Playing esteemed; whereby he
obtained not only the favor of the people, but the familiarity of Princes.
These are the rewards of an intent, anxious, and never-ceasing Study: For which
reason the person of a Player is not impudently inserted among the praises of
so many great men.

FORRAIGNERS.
1. The Grecian Industry also, because it was very advantageous to ours, ought
to receive the fruit which it deserves from the Latin Tongue. Demosthenes,
upon the mentioning of whose name arises in the thoughts of the hearers the
perfection of the greatest Eloquence, when in his youth he could not pronounce
the first Letter of the Art which he so much affected, with so much labor
vanquished the defect: of Pronunciation, that no man ever pronounced it
naturally more freely. Then again, having a shrill squeaking Voice, harsh to
the ear, he brought it at length to a grave and acceptable Tone. Then being but
a weakly man, he borrowed from labor and practice, that strength of Body which
nature had denied him. For he comprehended several Sentences in one breath, and
pronounced them walking up hill with a swift pace. And standing upon the
Seaside, made his Declamations to the roaring of the Waves, that he might
enure his ears with patience to the clamours and noises of tumultuous
Assemblies. He is reported also to have accustomed himself to speak much and
long with stones held in his mouth, that he might speak with more freedom when
it was empty. He warred against Nature, and came off Victor; with a most
obstinate strength of mind overcoming her malignity.

2. And that we may ascend to a more ancient act of Industry, Pythagoras, a
most perfect work of wisdom from his Childhood, and inflamed with a desire of
understanding all Honesty and Virtue, went into Egypt, where being accustomed
to the language, he searched the Commentaries of all the ancient Priests, and
brought away the Observations of innumerable Ages. Then traveling into Persia,
he delivered himself up to be taught by the exact prudence of the Magi: From
whom he treasured up in his docible mind the Motions of the Stars; their
Courses, their Effects, Properties, and Force, being courteously explained to
him. From thence he visited Creet and Lacedaemon, into whose Laws and Manners
having made inspection, he descended to the Olympian Games; where when, to the
admiration of all Greece, he had given evident demonstration of his multiplied
knowledge, being asked by what Title he went by, he made answer, that he was
not Wise, (for that title belonged only to the seven most excellent men) but a
Lover of Wisdom. He also traveled into part of Italy, then called the bigger
Graecia, in the chiefest and richest Cities whereof he showed the effects of
his Studies. Whose burning Funeral-Pile Metapontus beheld with eyes full of
veneration: A Town more famous for Pythagoras Tomb, than the monument of its
own ashes.

3. Plato having Athens for his place of Nativity, and Socrates for his Master,
both place and man fertile in Learning; fraught also himself with a celestial
abundance of Wit, when he was accounted the wisest of all Mortals, to that
degree, that if Jupiter should descend from Heaven, he could not make use of a
more elegant or happier Eloquence; yet for all this he traveled to Egypt,
where he learnt from the Priests of that Nation, the manifold secrets of
Geometry, and the reason of their Celestial Observations. And at the same time
that the studious Gentlemen of Athens sought for Plato, whom every one strove
to have his Tutor, he by visiting the riddle-like Banks of Nile, and vast
Regions, extended Barbarism, and the winding Canals of a strange Country, of
an Ancient Master became a Scholar. No wonder then that he traveled into
Italy, there from Archytas of Tarentum, Timaeus, Arion and Caetus of Locri, to
learn the precepts of Pythagoras. For so great a plenty, so great an abundance
of Learning was every where to be collected, that it might easily be dispersed
from one place to another, through the whole world. He had also under his head
at above fourscore years of age, when he lay a dying, the jeasts of Sophron. So
that the last hour of his Life was not free from the exercise of Study.

4. But Democritus, for all his vast wealth, which was so great, that his
Father could have given a Banquet to the Army of Xerxes, that his mind might
be more free for the study of Letters, keeping a small pittance to himself,
gave all the rest to his Country. Then abiding at Athens for several years,
spending all his time in gaining and practicing learning, he lived unknown in
the City, as he testifies in a certain Volume. I am in a maze at so much
Industry, and therefore must go on.

5. Carneades was a laborious and diuturnal Soldier of Wisdome's: For after
the expiration of ninety years, he made one end of Living and Philosophizing.
He had so addicted himself to the works of Learning, that when he sat down to
eat, busy in his thoughts, he would forget to reach his meat. But Melissa,
whom he kept as a Wife, dutiful to supply his hunger, never went to interrupt
him, but fed him. So that he lived only in his Soul, which was encompassed with
a superfluous body. Being to dispute with Chrysippus, he purged his body
beforehand with Hellebore, to explain his own mind more attentively, and refel
his adversary more powerfully. Which Potions he made afterward to be coveted
on purpose by such as were covetous of applause.

6. What can we think was the zeal of Anaxagoras for Learning? Who returning
home after a long Travel, and seeing his estate lie untilled and waste; I had
not been safe, said he, had not these decayed. An expression becoming
far-fetched Wisdom. For had he labored more in the manuring his Lands than
his Mind, he had remained Master of his family at home, but had not returned
into his Country the great Anaxagoras.

7. I might say that the Industry of Archimedes was very profitable, but that
it gave him life, and took it from him again. For when Syracuse was taken
Marcellus was sensible that his Victory was much delayed by his Engines, yet
infinitely taken with the Prudence of the person, he commanded the Soldiers to
spare his Life; assuming perhaps almost as much glory in saving Archimedes, as
in destroying Syracuse. But while Archimedes was making Figures with his mind
and eyes fixed upon the ground, a Soldier, that was broken into his house to
plunder, with his drawn Sword asked him who he was. The Philosopher was so
intent, that he returned him no direct Answer, but parting the dust with his
finger, Have a care, said he, of spoiling this Circle. Thereupon, as one that
slighted the Victor of the Empire, the Soldier cut off his Head, and blended
his blood with the Lineaments of his Art. Thus the same Study gave him his
Life, and deprived him of it again.

8. Most certain it is that Socrates, when he was stricken in years, began to
learn Music; believing it better to learn that Art, late than never. How
little an accession of knowledge was that to Socrates? Yet the obstinate
Industry of the person, to so much wealth and treasure of Learning, would also
add the profitable Elements of Music. Thus while he thought himself poor lo
learn, he made himself rich to teach.

9. And that we may reduce the Examples of a long and successful Industry to
one head; Isocrates composed that most noble Book, entitled (...), when he was
fourscore and four years of Age, yet a work full of life and spirit. By which
it appears, that the members of learned men growing old, yet their Minds, by
the benefit of Industry, retain the full vigor of Youth. Nor did he end his
days, till he had five years enjoyed the fruit of the admiration of his work.

10. Lesser bounds terminated the life of Chrysippus, yet was he not
short-lived; for he left behind him the thirty ninth Book of his Logicks, a
book of exact nicety, begun in the Eightieth Year of his Age. Whose Study in
delivering the monuments of his Wit, took up so much time and labor, that a
longer life would be requisite to understand the depth of his writings.

11. Thee also, Cleanthes, so industrious in searching after, and so
laboriously delivering Wisdom, the Deity of Industry could not but admire;
when she beheld thee in thy youth, maintaining thy self by carrying water in
the Night, in the Day a diligent hearer of Chrysippus, and till the Hundredth
year within one, with attentive care instructing thy Disciples. With a double
labor thou have taken up the space of one Age, making it uncertain, whether
thou were a better Scholar or a Master.

12. Sopholces had also a glorious combat with Nature, as liberal of his
wonderful Works, as she was liberal in giving him long Time to compose them.
For he lived near an Hundred years, his Oedipus Coloneus being written by him
just before his death. By which one Tragedy he won the honor from all the
Poets in that way: Which Jophon, the Son of Sophocles, would not have concealed
from Posterity, and therefore caused it to be inscribed upon his Fathers Tomb.

13. Simonides the Poet at Fourscore years of Age boasts himself, that he
taught Verses, and contended for the prize at those years. Nor was it but
reason that he should long enjoy the fruit of his own Wit, who was himself to
communicate them for the benefit of eternity.

14. Now for Solon, how industrious he was, he has declared in his Verses:
Wherein he signifies, that he grew old, always learning something; and the last
day of his life confirmed it. For as his Friends were sitting by him, and
discoursing among themselves upon some subject or other, he listed up his head,
then just about to bow to fate; and being asked why he did so; That when I
understand, said he, what it is you are disputing upon, I may dye. Certainly
Sloth had bin banished from among mankind, if all men should come into the
world with the same Spirit that Solon le^t it.

15. How great was the Industry of Themistocles! Who though he had the care of
the greatest affairs of his Country upon his shoulders, yet was able to
remember the particular names of all his fellow-Citizens. And being through
high Injustice driven from his Country, and compelled to fly to Xerxes, whom a
little before he had vanquished in battle, before he came into his presence, he
accustomed himself to the Persian language, that having purchased commendation
by labor, he might render the Tone of his voice familiar, and so customary to
the Kings ear.

16. The Applause of both which sorts of Industry, two Kings divided between
them: Cyrus remembering all the names of his Soldiers; Mithridates learning two
and twenty several Tongues spoken within his Dominions. This first, that he
might address himself to his Army without a Director: The other, that he might
discourse to the people, whom he governed, without an Interpreter.

CHAP. VIII. Of Ease praised.
ROMANS.
1. P. Aemilianus and C. Laelius. 2. Mutius Scaevola, Augur.
FORRAIGNERS.
1. Socrates of Athens. 2. Achilles in Homer.
EAse, because it seems to be contrary to Industry, but chiefly to Labor,
ought to be briefly touched upon: Not that which extinguishes, but which
recreates Virtue. For the sloathful ought to avoid the one, and the brave and
stout may desire the other. They, that they may not live like Drones; these,
that by a seasonable intermission from toil, they may be the fitter for Labor.

1. The famous pair of Friends, Scipio and Laelius, united together not only by
the bond of Love, but by an association of all other Virtues; as they performed
the journey of a painful life with equal steps, so they generally relaxed from
business by consent. For it is certain, that at Caieta and Laurentum, they used
to gather up Shells and little Stones upon the Shore. And this L. Crassus often
reported from the mouth of Q. Scaevola, who was Son-in-Law to Laelius.

2. As for Scaevola, as he was the most certain witness of their Relaxation, so
he himself was wont to play at Ball; having used to delight himself in that
sort of exercise, when the weight of his business was over. Sometimes he was
wont to spend his time at Chess and Tables, after he had bin long ordering the
Rights of his Citizens, and the Ceremonies of his Gods. For as he acted
Scaevola in serious things, so he showed himself but only Man in his Sports and
Recreations, as whom Nature will not suffer to abide continual Labor.

FORRAIGNERS.
1. This Socrates saw, to whom no part of Wisdom was obscure: which made him
that he did not blush, when Alcibiades, setting a reed between his legs,
laughed at him for playing with his little Children.

2. Homer, a Poet of a Celestial Wit, seemed to be of the same mind, when he
fitted the soft Harp to the Martial fingers of Achilles, to ease their Military
pain with the soft recreations of Peace.

CHAP. IX. Of the force of Eloquence.
In ROMANS.
1. Mu. Valerius Maximus Dictator. 2. Marcus Antonius the Orator. 3. C.
Aurelius Cotta.
STRANGERS.
1. Pisistratus of Athens. 2. Pericles of Athens. 3. Hegesias of Cyrene.
THough it be certain that the force of Eloquence is infinitely prevalent; yet
is it convenient that it should be displayed under proper Examples, to the end
the power thereof may be the better testified.

1. The Kings being ejected, the Common People in dissension with the Fathers,
betook themselves to Arms, and pitched upon the Banks of the River Anio, upon
the holy Hill. So that the state of the Common wealth was not only bad, but in
a most miserable condition, the rest of the body being divided from the head.
And unless Eloquence had befriended Valerius, the hopes of so great an Empire
had bin ruined in its Infancy. For he by an Oration reduced the people,
glorying in a new and unwonted freedom, to their obedience to the Senate,
brought them to take sober counsels, and joined the City to the City. Therefore
to eloquent words, Wrath, Consternation and Arms gave way.

2. Which also restrained the Swords of Marius and Cinna, raging with an
impetuous desire of shedding Civil blood. For certain Soldiers being sent by
their Captains to take off the Head of M. Antonius, stupefied with his
language, they returned their drawn Swords unstained with blood into their
Scabbards. Who being gone, P. Antronius, who had not heard the voice of Mar.
Antonius to the Soldiers, performed the severe command, barbarously obsequious
to his Masters. How eloquent therefore may we think him to be, whom none of his
Enemies durst adventure to kill, who would but admit his charming language to
his ears!

3. Divine Julius, the perfect Pillar as well of the celestial Deities as of
humane Wit, demonstrated the force of his own Eloquence, saying in his
Accusation of Cn. Dolabella, whom he convicted of Bribery, that the best cause
in the world had been extorted from him by the Patronage of C. Cotta. For then
the greatest force of Eloquence complained. Of which having made mention,
because I can bring no greater Example at home, we must travel abroad.

STRANGERS.
1. Pisistratus is reported to have prevailed so far by speaking, that the
Athenians taken only with his Oration, permitted him the Regal Sway: And, which
was more, when Solon, the greatest Lover of his Country, endeavored all he
could to the contrary.

2. But Pericles, together with his happy endowments of Nature, carefully
polished and instructed by his Master Anaxageras, laid the yoke of Servitude
upon the free necks of the Athenians. For he swayed the City, and carried
affairs which way he pleased. And when he spoke against the Will of the People,
his language nevertheless was pleasing and popular. and therefore the
calumniating Wit of the Old Comedy, though it would be snarling at his Power,
yet consess'd, that there was an Elequence sweeter than Honey that hung upon
his Lips; and that it left certain stings in the minds of them that heard it.
It is reported that a certain person, who being very old, chanced to hear the
very first Oration of Pericles a young man, who at the same time had heard
Pisistratus then decrepit with age, could not contain himself from crying out,
That that Citizen ought to be looked after, because his Oration was most like to
the Oration of Pisistratus. Neither did the man sail in his judgment of the
Speech, nor the presage of his disposition. For what was the difference between
Pisistratus and Pericles, but that the first held the Government by force of
Arms, the other governed without force?

3. What may we think of the Eloquence of Hegesias the Cyrenian? Who so
represented the miseries of Life, that his words taking deep root in the hearts
of his hearers, begot a desire in many to seek a voluntary Death? And therefore
he was forbid by King Ptolomie to dispure any farther upon that subject.

CHAP. X. Of Pronuntiation, and apt Motion of the Body.
In ROMANS.
1. C. Gracchus. 2. Q. Hortensius. 3. M. Tullius.
STRANGERS.
1. Demosthenes the Athenian.
BUt the Ornaments of Eloquence consist in apt Motion of the Body, and due
Pronuntiation: Wherewith when she has furnished her self, she assails men three
ways; by invading their Minds, and delivering up the ears of the one and the
eyes of the other to over-persuasion.

1. But to make this good in famous men; C. Gracchus, more happy in his
Eloquence than his Designs, because he strove with a turbulent Wit rather to
disturb than defend the Commonwealth, as often as he spoke to the People, had a
Servant that understood Music behind him, who with an Ivory Pipe regulated the
tone of his Voice, raising the note when it was too low, and pitching it lower
when it was too high and eager: Because heat and violence of action, did not
suffer him to be a true Judge of the equality.

2. Quintus Hortensius thinking there was very much to be ascribed to a decent
and comely motion of the Body, spent more time in practicing that, than in
studying for Eloquence. So that it was hard to know, whether the Concourse were
greater to hear or see him: So mutually did his Aspect serve his words, and his
words his Aspect. And therefore it is certain, that Roscius and Aesopus, the
most skilful Actors in the world, would be always in Court when Hortensius
pleaded, to carry away his postures to the Stage.

3. Now as for M. Cicero, he has himself declared, how great a value he set
upon both these things, of which we have discoursed, in his Oration for
Gallius, reproaching Callidius the Accuser, that when he affirmed that he would
prove by Witnesses, Writings, and Examinations, that the Party accused had
prepared poison for him, he did it with a smooth Countenance, a faint Voice,
and a calm manner of speaking, whereby he detected as well the fault of the
Orator, as the argument of his weak cause, concluding thus; Could thou do
thus, M. Calidus, unless thou did but counterfeit?

STRANGERS.
1. Consentaneous to this was the judgment of Demosthenes, who being asked what
was the most efficacious part that belonged to speaking, answered, (...), or
dissimulation of Speech and Gesture. Being again and a third time asked the
same question, he gave the same answer; confessing that he owed almost all to
it. Therefore was it rightly said of Aeschines, who leaving Athens because of
the Judicial Ignominy put upon him, and going to Rhodes, when he had there
repeated his own Oration against Ctesiphon, and the Oration of Demosthenes for
him, with a loud and pleasing voice, and that all admired the Eloquence of
both, but somewhat more that of Demosthenes; What would ye have said, replied
he, had ye heard him himself? So highly did so great an Orator, and now so
inveterate an enemy, adore the force and efficacy of his Adversaries Eloquence;
confessing himself not to be a competent reader of his works: having
experimented the vigor of his Eyes, the weight of his Countenance, and the
persuasive Motions of his Body. And therefore nothing can be added to the work:
yet in Demosthenes a great part of Demosthenes is absent, which is read rather,
than heard.

CHAP. XI. Of the rare effects of the Arts.
Among the Romans.
1. In the Astrology of C. Sulpitius Gallus. 2. In the Divination of Spurina.
Among Strangers.
1. Pericles's Astrology. 2. Apelles' s painting, and Lysippus the Statuary's
Art. 3. Alcamenes 's Vulcan. 4. Praxiteles 's Venus. 5. Euphranor 's Neptune.
6. Timanthes 's Agamemnon. 7. Nealces 's Horse.
THe Effects also of the Arts repeated may afford something of pleasure:
Whereby it will appear immediately how profitably they were invented. Things
worth remembrance will be treasured up in a light place; and the labor of
bringing them forth, will not want its reward.

1. The great care of Sulpitius Gallus to furnish himself with all manner of
Learning, was very profitable to the Commonwealth. For being Lieutenant General
to L. Paulus, waging War against Perseus, and the Moon happening to be ecclpsed
in a fair Night, whereby our Army was so terrified, looking upon it as some
strange Prodigy, that they had almost lost all their Courage; he by a skilful
discourse of the order of the heavenly Bodies, and the nature of the Stars, rid
them of all their vain fears. So that the Liberal Arts of Gallus were in some
measure the occasion of that famous Victory of Paulus. For had he not
vanquished our Soldiers fear, the Roman General could not have overcome his
Enemies.

2. More efficacious was the knowledge of Spurina in following the admonitions
of the Gods. For he foretold to C. Caesar, that he should have a care of the
next thirty days as fatal, the last of which was the Ides of March: Upon that
day in the morning, when they both met at the house of Calvinus Domitius, cries
Caesar to Spurina, Do thou know that the Ides of March are now come? And he,
Do thou not know, that they are not yet past? The one had cast off all fear,
believing the time suspected to be over; though the other did not think the
last Minute to be void of danger. Would to Heaven the Diviner had rather failed
in his Augury, than that the Parent of our Country had failed in his Security!

STRANGERS.
1. But to dive into Foreign effects; When upon the Suns being eclipsed upon a
sudden; the Athenians were all in a maze at the unusual darkness, believing
their own ruin to be foretold by the Celestial Portent; Pericles went into the
crowd, and discoursed what he had learnt from his Master Anaxagoras, touching
the Course of the Sun and Moon: nor did he permit his fellow-Citizens to
tremble any farther with vain fear.

2. How great was the honor that Alexander the King gave to Art, who would not
suffer himself to be painted by any other but Apelles, nor to be cast in
Plaster by any other than Lysippus?

3. The Vulcan of Alcamenes, made with his own hands, fixes the eyes of all
Athens upon it. For among all the rest of the foregoing marks of curious
Workmanship, they admire also this, that he stands with one foot, hiding under
his garment his dissembled Lameness: artificially signifying not the deformity,
but the certain and proper mark of the God.

4. Whose Wife Praxiteles place in Marble in the Temple of the Gnidians, as it
were breathing, by reason of the Workmanship, not safe from the lustful
embraces of Macareus the Perinthian. Which renders the error of a Horse more
excusable, who seeing the Picture of a Mare, neigh'd after it: and the barking
of Dogs, at the sight of a Dog painted; and the Bull moved to Lust, upon sight
of the brazen Cow in Syracuse, cast to the Life. For why should we wonder to
see irrational Creatures deceived by Art, when we find a sacrilegious Desire
in Man raised up at the sight of a dumb stone?

5. But Nature as she suffers Art sometimes to emulate her works, so sometimes
she dismisses it, quite tired with labor in vain; which the hands of the
famous Artist Euphranor experimented: For when he painted twelve Gods at
Athens, he finished the Picture of Neptune with the most Majestic Colors he
could invent, intending yet to have outdone that in the Picture of Jupiter. But
all his Invention being exhausted in the former work, his last endeavors could
not come near his expectation.

6. What shall we say of that other famous Painter, who representing the
doleful Sacrifice of Iphigenia, when he had placed about the Altar Calchas sad,
Ulysses sorrowful, and Menelaus lamenting, by wrapping up of Agamemnon's face
did he not confess, that the bitterness of the height of grief could not be
expressed by Art? Therefore his Picture moistened with the tears of the
Southsayer, her Friends and Brother, he left it to Affection to judge of the
Father's Grief.

7. And that I may add one Example of the same Art; A famous Painter had
painted a Horse, new coming from being hard exercised, so rarely, that all that
could be said was, that the Horse was not alive. But when he came to add the
froath to his Nostrils, so great an Artist spent many days without any
satisfaction to himself. At length, vexed to see himself disappointed, he took
up a Sponge that lay next him bedaub'd with all sorts of Colors, and went
about to rub out his own work. But Fortune directing his hand first to the
Nostrils of the Horse, the Sponge did that by chance, which all his Art could
not effect. So that what his own Shadows could not, Chance completed.

CHAP. XII. That we must yield to the best Masters of Art.
As was done by the ROMANS.
1. Furius and Caesellius in the Praediatorian Law.
By STRANGERS.
1. Euclid in Geometry. 2. Philo in Architecture. 3. Apelles in Painting.
NOw that we may not doubt but that every one is the best Actor and Discourser
in his own Art, let us by a few Examples make it appear.

1. Q. Scaevola, a most famous and most certain Interpreter of the Law, as
often as he was consulted upon the Praediatorian Statute, sent his Clients to
Furius and Caesellius, who studied that part. Whereby he rather commended his
own Moderation, than lessened his authority; confessing that they were best
able to give advice in that matter, whose daily practice it was. Therefore are
they the wisest Professors of their Art, who have a modest esteem of their own,
and a cunning respect for the Studies of others.

STRANGERS.
1. This opinion lodged in the learned breast of Plato. Who when the
Undertakers came to confer with him about the manner and form of the holy
Tower, sent them to Euclid the Geometrician, giving way to his Knowledge and
Profession.

2. Athens glories in its Arsenal, not without cause: For it is a work worthy
to be seen for its cost and Elegance. The Architect whereof, Philo, is said to
have given so eloquent an account in the Theater of his purpose, that the most
eloquent of people were swayed as much by his Eloquence, as by his Art.

3. Wonderfully was it done by that Artist, who suffered himself to be
corrected by a Cobbler, as to the Shoes and the Latchets: But when he began to
talk of the Thigh, forbid him to go beyond the Foot.

CHAP. XIII. Of Memorable Old Age.
In ROMANS.
1. M. Valerius Corvus. 2. L. Metellus, the High Priest. 3. Q. Fabius Maximus.
4. Perpenna the Censor. 5. Appius Claudius the blind. 6. Women, Livia, Terentia
and Clodia.
Strangers.
1. Hiero King of Sicily, and Massanissa King of Numidia. 2. Gorgias Leontinus.
3. Xenophilus of Chalcis. 4. Argantinus King of the Gaditans. 5. Aethiopians,
Indians, and Epimenides the Cnossian. 6. The Epii, a people of Aetolia. 7.
Dantho, and two Kings of the Lachnii.
LEt Old Age, prolonged to the utmost, have a place in this work, among the
Examples of Industry, but with a particular Title and Chapter. That we may not
seem to have forgotten those, to whom the Gods were principally indulgent.
Insisting upon which, every one may make himself more happy in respect of his
ancient felicity; and may affirm the happiness of our age, than which none was
ever more happy, by prolonging the safety of a wise and great Prince, to the
longest bounds of humane life.

1. M. Valerius Corvus lived out his hundredth year; between whose first and
sixth Consulship were forty six years complete. Nor did his full strength of
body not only not fail him, in the highest employments of the Commonwealth, but
also for the manuring his Land: a desirable Example of a Commonwealths man,
and a Master of a Family.

2. Which space of years Metellus equaled: And the fourth year after his
Consular Government, being created Pontifex Maximus when he was very old, he
governed the Ceremonies of Religion two and twenty years, his tongue never
tripping in pronouncing the Votes, nor his hand trembling in preparing the
Sacrifices.

3. Q. Fabius Maximus threescore and two years held the Priesthood of the
Augurship, having obtained it when he was a strong man. Which two times being
added together, will easily complete the age of an hundred years.

4. What shall I say of M. Perpenna? who outlived all those that he called over
in the Senate, when he was Consul; and only saw seven remaining of the
Conscript Fathers, whom as Censor with Lu. Philippus he had chosen; more
durable than the greatest Order in the world.

5. I might conclude the life of Appius with his misfortune, because he lived
long after he was blind; but that he had five Sons and five Daughters, and a
multitude of Clients in his Protection, and in that condition most stoutly
governed the Commonwealth. At length weary with living, he caused himself to be
carried into the Senate House in a Litter, to hinder peace from being made with
Pyrrbus upon dishonorable Conditions. Can this man be thought blind, by whom
his Country purely discerning that which was honorable, was compelled to open
its eyes?

6. Several Women have been no less eminent for long Life, whom it shall
suffice only to name. For Livia the wife of Rutilius numbered fourscore and
seven, Terentia the wife of Cicero a hundred and three, and Clodia the wife of
Aufilius, having outlived fifteen Children, and hundred and fifteen years.

STRANGERS.
1. I will add to these, two Kings, whose long life was very advantageous to
the People of Rome. The King of Sicily, Hiero, numbered ninety years. Massanissa
King of Numidia, reigning threescore years, was superior to all men in vigor
of age. Cicero in his Book of Old Age, reports of him, that no shower or cold
could compel him to cover his head. He was wont also to keep his station for
several hours, and would never stir from hard labor, till he had tired the
young men: And if it were requisite for him to do any thing sitting, he would
oft-times for a whole day sit in the same posture, without moving his body for
ease, either one way or other. When he led his Army a Horseback by day, he
never alighted that night; omitting none of those labors, which youth is wont
to endure, when he was of that extreme age. And so vigorous he was in reference
to Women, that he begat his Son Methymnatus, when he was fourscore and six
years of age. The Country also which he found untilled, by perpetual culture
he left very fruitful.

2. Gorgias also of Leontium, the Master of Isocrates and several other great
men, by his own saying was most happy. For when he had lived an hundred and
seven years, being asked why he would live so long: Because, said he, I ayle
nothing to accuse my Old Age. What could be longer or more happy than such a
tract of Life? For being entered into the second Century of years, he neither
found any cause of complaint in it, nor left any behind him of it.

3. Xenophilus of Chaleis wanted two of his years, yet not inferior in
enjoyment of health. For as Aristoxenus the Musician says of him, Free from
all the inconventencies of old Age, he died in the full splendor of consummate
Learning.

4. Arganthonius the Gaditane reigned so long, as would have sufficed another
to live. For he governed his Kingdom fourscore years, being forty years of age
before he came to the Throne: For which there are most certain and credible
Authors. Asinius Pollio, not the least part of Roman Eloquence, in the third
Book of his History, relates him to have lived an hundred and twenty years: No
mean example of sinewy vigor.

5. The Ethiopians render the long life of this King less admirable; whom
Herodotus writes to have exceeded an hundred and twenty years: and the Indians,
of whom Ctesias delivers the same. And Epimenides the Gnossian, whom Theopompus
reports to have lived an hundred fifty and seven years.

6. Hellanicus also avers, that certain of the Epii, who were a people of
Aetolia, lived two hundred years; with whom Damasthes agrees, adding this
moreover, that one Litorius among them, of an exceeding great strength and
stature, completed three hundred years.

7. Alexander, in his Volume of the Illyrian Tract, affirms, that one Dantho
lived full out five hundred years, without the least complaint of Age. But much
more liberal is Xenophon, who gives to the King of the Lachnii eight hundred
years of Life. And that his Father might not take it ill, he allows him six
hundred.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Desire of Honor.
Among the Romans.
1. P. Africanus the Greater. 2. D. Brutus Gallaicus. 3. Cn. Pompey the Great.
4. Sulla the Happy. 5. A certain Knight. 6. C. Fabius Pictor.
STRANGERS.
1. Themistocles of Athens. 2. Alexander the Great. 3. Aristotle the Stagyrite.
4. Pausanias of Macedon. 5. Herostratus.
Honor, whence it arises, or of whatsoever it may be the Habit, or how it
ought to be purchased, and whether it may not be neglected by virtue, as
unnecessary, let them take care that employ their Contemplations upon these
things, and who are able eloquently to express what they have prudently
observed. I in this work being content to find out Authors for deeds, and
deeds for Authors, shall endeavor to find out by proper Examples, how great
the desire of it is wont to be.

1. The Elder Africanus would have the Effigies of Ennius placed among the
Monuments of the Cornelian Family, because he thought his Acts illustrated by
his Wit. Not ignorant, that as long as the Roman Empire might flourish, and
Africa lay captive at the feet of Italy, and that the Capitol possessed the
Pillar of the whole World, their Remembrance could not be extinguished;
especially enlightened by the Beams of Learning: A man more worthy of Homer's,
than a rude and unpolished Eulogy.

2. The same was the honorable mind of D. Brutus, a famous Captain in his
time, toward Accius the Poet: With whose familiar Courtship and acute applauses
being mainly delighted, he adorned the Entries of the Temples, which he had
consecrated out of his Spoils, with his Verses.

3. Neither was Pompey averse from this affectation of Glory, who bestowed upon
Theophanes the Mytelenian, a Writer of his Acts, a whole City, in a Harangue
before the Soldiers. Prosecuting the Grandeur of his Gift, with an accurate
and approved Oration.

4. L. Sulla, though he minded no Writer, yet he so vehemently assumed to
himself the honor of Jugurth's being brought to Marius by King Bocchus, that
he wore that Delivery in his Seal-Ring. Afterward how great an admirer of
Honor, the slightest footstep whereof he adored!

5. And that I may add to Generals the noble mind of a Soldier; When Scipio
was dividing the Military gifts to those that had done bravely; T. Labienus
putting him in mind of giving a Golden Bracelet to an eminent and stout
Knight; which the General refusing to do, that the honor of the field might
not be violated in him, who had served but a little before, he gave the Knight
Gold himself out of the Galli^ plunder. Neither did Scipio put it up silently:
For, said he to the Knight, thou have the Gift of a rich man. Which when he had
taken, casting the Gold at Labienus feet, he held down his Countenance. But
when Scipio said to him, The General gives thee Silver Bracelets, he went away
with a cheerful Countenance. So that there is no Humility so great, which is
not touched with a desire of Glory.

6. It is also sought sometimes out of the lowest things. For what meant C.
Fabius, that most noble Commonwealths man? For when he painted the walls of the
Temple of Safety, which C. Junius Bubul^us had consecrated, he inscribed his
Name upon them. For that only Ornament was wanting to a Family most famous for
Consulships, Priesthoods, and Triumphs. And though he stoopt to a mercenary
Art, yet he would not have his labors obliterated, how mean soever: they were
following the example of Phidias, who included his own face upon the Shield of
Minerva, in such manner, that if it were pulled away, the whole work would be
quite spoiled.

STRANGERS.
1. But better had he done to have imitated Themistocles, had he bin taken with
foreign Examples; who is reported to have bin so pricked with the sting of
Honor, that he could not sleep a nights; and being asked, what he did abroad
at that time of the night, made answer, That he could not sleep for the
Trophies of Miltiades. For Marathon roused up his noble Mind to ennoble
Artemisium and Salamis with Naval Glory. The same person going to the Theater,
and being asked whose voice was most pleasing to his ears, made answer, His
that shall sing my acts the best and loudest. He added as it were an honorable
sweetness to Honor it self.

2. The Breast of Alexander was insatiable of Applause; who when Anaxarchus his
Companion, by the authority of Democritus, affirmed, that there were
innumerable worlds; How miserable then, said he, am I, that have not conquered
one! Man thought his Honor too much confined, that had not all that which
suffices for the Habitation of the Gods.

3. I will add the thirst of Aristotle after Honor, as great as that of a
King and a young man. For he had given certain Books of Oratory to Theodectes
his Disciple, to put forth in his own name: and being afterward vexed that he
had let go the Title to another, insisting upon some things in his own Volume,
he adds, that he had discoursed more plainly of them in the Books of
Theodectes. Did not the Modesty of so great and so diffusive a Science withhold
me, I would say, he was a Philosopher, whose great parts ought to have been
delivered to a Philosopher of a nobler Soul. But Honor is not contemned by
those that desire to introduce the Contempt of it. For to those very Volumes
they diligently set their Names, that what they take away by Profession, they
may attain by Usurpation of Memory. But this dissimulation of theirs, whatever
it be, is more to be endured than the purpose of those, who while they labor
for eternal Memories, strive to become famous by wickedness.

4. Among which I know not whether Pausanias may not be first mentioned; for
when he had asked Hermocrates how he might suddenly become famous, and that the
other had answered, By killing some great person, presently went and slew
Philip. And indeed what be coveted he had; for he rendered himself as
infamously famous for the Murder, as Philip was eminent for his Virtue to
Posterity.

5. But this desire of Glory was sacrilegious. For there was one found out, who
would set on fire the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, that by the destruction of
that lovely Pile, his name might be known to the whole world. Which fury of his
mind he discovered upon the Rack. Yet the Ephesians had taken care, by a
Decree, to abolish the memory of the worst of men, had not the eloquent Wit of
Theopompus comprehended the fact in his History.

CHAP. XV. What Magnificent things befell to every one.
To ROMANS.
1. P. Africanus the Greater. 2. M. Cato the Censor. 3. P. Scipio Nasica. 4. P.
Scipio Aemilianus. 5. M. Valerius Corvus. 6. Q. Mutius Scaevola. 7. C. Marius.
8. Cn. Pompey the Great. 9. Q. Lutatius Catulus. 10. Cato of Utica. 11. L.
Marcius a Roman Knight. 12. Sulpitia Ser. daughter of Q. Flaccus.
STRANGERS.
1. Pythagoras Samian. 2. Gorgias the Leontine. 3. Amphiaraus the Prophet. 4.
Pherenica a Grecian Woman.
WHat Magnificent things have deservedly befaln every one, being put to public
view, will afford delight to ingenious minds: because the value and force of
the Rewards, and the contemplation of Honors, is equally to be considered.
Nature affording us a kind of pleasure, when we see Honor industriously
coveted, and gratefully repaid. But though the Mind is carried here
immediately to a splendid House, the bountiful and most honored Temple, it
will be better restrained. For to him to whom the ascent to Heaven is free,
though the greatest, yet they are than what are due, which are bellowed on
Earth.

1. To Scipio Africanus the Consulship was granted long before his time. To
whom what was assigned him in his lifetime, would be too long to relate,
because they are many; and not necessary, as being in part already related. And
therefore I will add what is at this day eminent. He has an Image placed in
Great Jupiters Temple, which when there is any Funeral of the Cornelian Family,
is fetched from thence: So that to that only Image is the Capitol like a
Porch, or place where those Images are usually placed.

2. As truly as was the Senate House it self to the Elder Cato's Image, from
whence it is brought forth upon the same occasions of that Family. A Grateful
Order, that would have so profitable a Member always dwell with them, wealthy
in all the Gifts of Virtue, and great rather by his own Merit, than by the
benefit of Fortune; by whose counsel Carthage was ruined, before it was laid
waste by the Sword of Scipio.

3. A rare Example of Honor arises also from Scipio Nasica. For by his Hands,
and into his House, before he was yet a Questor, the Senate by the command of
Pythian Apollo, would have the Mother of the gods received and entertained,
when recalled from Pessinuntes. Because the same Oracle ordered those Offices
to be done to the Mother of the gods by a most holy man. Unfold all the Fasti,
set all the Triumphal Chariots together, and you shall find nothing more
splendid than such a preeminency in Manners.

4. The Scipio's often produce their Ornaments to be remembered by us. For
Aemilianus was made a Consul by the People, when but a Candidate for the
Aedil-ship. Which the Army advised the Senate ought to be done. So that it is
hard to know, whether the Authority of the Conscript Fathers, or the Counsel of
the Soldiers added most Honor to him. For the Gown made Scipio Consul against
the Carthaginians, but the Sword desired him. And again, when he went into the
field to the Election of the Questors, to give his voice for Q. Fabius, the Son
of Maximus's Brother, they brought him home a Consul. To the same person the
Senate gave a Province without Lot, first Africa, then Spain. And these things
neither to an ambitious Senator nor Citizen; as the most severe course of his
Life, and his clandestine Death, being slain by treachery, declared.

5. As for M. Valerius, the Gods as well as his Fellow-Citizens made him famous
for two things: The first by sending a Crow for his defense, when he fought
hand to hand with the Gaul; the other giving him the Consulship at three and
twenty years of Age. The Valerian Family assumes the name of Corvinus: The
other is added as an Ornament, glorying as well in the earliness of the
Consulship, as in the priority of being made so.

6. Nor was the Glory of Q. Scaevola, whom L. Crassus had for his Colleague,
less illustrious, who obtained Asia, and so stoutly and so justly held it, that
the Senate by their Decree propounded Scaevola as a President and Example for
others, that were to go into the several Provinces of the Empire.

7. Those words of the Younger Africanus pruduced the seven Consulships and two
Triumphs of C. Marius; for he was full of joy to his dying day: Who when he
served on Horseback under that Captain, Scipio being asked at Supper, if any
thing cross should befall him, whom the Commonwealth would have equally great
with him; the General looking upon Marius, sitting a little below him, Even
this man, answered he. By which Augury it cannot be well conjectured, whether
the most perfect Virtue more certainly foresaw a Rising virtue, or whether he
more efficaciously inflamed him to it. For that Military Supper portended to
Marius the most splendid future Suppers in the whole City. For when the
Messenger brought the News, at the beginning of the Night, that the Cimbrians
were overthrown, there was no man that offered not at his Table^, as it had
been the Altar of the Immortal Gods.

8. Now what large and new Honors were heaped upon Pompey, partly by the
flattery of Favor, partly by the noise of Envy! Being a Roman Knight, he was
sent Consul into Spain, with equal command to Pius Metellus Prince of the City.
Before he had stood for any Honor, he triumphed twice. The beginnings of
Magistracy he took from the chief Command. The Third Consulship he swayed
alone, by the Decree of the Senate. He triumphed at once over Mithridates,
Tigranes, and several other Kings, Nations, Cities, and the Pirates.

9. Q. Catulus also was, by the voice of the People of Rome, within a little
advanced to the Stars. For being asked by him in the Common Hall, whether they
persever'd to repose the whole management of all things in one Pompey, they
cried out with one voice, In thee. The great force of a judgment of Reputation,
which equaled Catulus, included in the space of two Syllables, to the great
Pompey, with all the Ornaments that I have related.

10. The reception of M. Cato returning out of Cyprus, with the Royal Money,
may seem wonderful: To whom at his landing the Consuls, and other Magistrates,
the Senate and all the People of Rome attended oat of duty. Rejoicing not at
the vast weight of Gold and Silver, but for that Cato had brought back the Navy
safe.

11. But I cannot tell whether the Example of the unusual Honor done to L.
Marcius be not one of the chief; whom the two Armies upon the death of P. and
Cn. Scipio, torn and shattered by the Victory of Hannibal, chose him their
General, when their safety was reduced to the last gasp, leaving no place for
Ambition.

12. Deservedly Sulpitia deserves to be remembered after the Men, the Daughter
of Servius Paterculus, and the Wife of Fulvius Flaccus: Who when the Senate,
upon the Decemvirs inspection into the Sibylls Books, had decreed that the
Image of Venus Turn-heart should be consecrated, whereby the minds of the women
might be changed from Lust to Chastity; and that of all the Matrons an hundred,
out of an hundred ten were chosen by Lot, to give judgment concerning the most
chaste Women, she was preferred before all the rest.

STRANGERS.
1. But because Foreign Honors may be related without any diminution of our
Roman Majesty, let us pass over to them. The Hearers of Pythagoras gave him so
much Veneration, that they accounted it a Crime to question what they had
received from him: And being asked the reason, they only answered, that He had
said it. A great Man, but no farther than his School hitherto. However, the
same veneration was given him by Cities. The Crotoniates earnestly desired of
him, that their Senate, which consisted of a Thousand People, might take advice
of him. And that opulent City, so frequently venerating his House after his
death, made it a Chapel to Ceres. And while that City flourished, a Goddess
was worshipped in the remembrance of Man, and a Man in the remembrance of a
Goddess.

2. Gorgias of Leontium so far excelled all persons of that Age in Learning,
that at all Assemblies he was wont to ask, what subject they would hear him
dispute upon; and for that reason all Greece set him up a Statue of massy Gold
in the Temple of Apollo; when the rest, of his time, had only gilded Images.

3. The same Nation by consent strove to honor Amphiaraus, by reducing the
place where he was buried, into the form and state of a Temple, and ordering
Oracles to be there taken. Whose Ashes possess the same Honor as the Pythian
Den, Dodona's Brazen Dove, or the Fountain of Hammon.

4. Nor was that a vulgar Honor done to Phere^ice, to whom alone of all women
it was permitted to be present at the fight of Wrestling, when she brought to
the Olympic Games her Son Euelea, begot by Olympionices, while his Brothers
having obtained the same Laurels, sat by her sides.

LIB. IX.
CHAP. I. Of Luxury and Lust.
Roman Examples.
1. C. Sergius Orata. 2. Clodius the Son of Aesopus the Tragedian. 3. Women
opposers of the Oppian Law. 4. Cn. Domitius and L. Crassus Consuls. 5. Q.
Metellus Pius. 6. C. Scribonius Son of Curious. 7. P. Clodius his judgment. 8.
Gemellus a Tribunician Traveller. 9. L. Catiline.
STRANGERS.
1. Hannibal Son of Amilcar. 2. Vulsinians. 3. Xerxes the Persian King. 4.
Antiochus the Syrian King. 5. Ptolomey King of Egypt. 6. The Egyptians. 7. The
Cyprians.
LEt Luxury, a flattering Crime, more easy to accuse than shun, be inserted
into this Work of ours: Not to receive any Honor, but that coming to know her
self, she may be compelled to Penitence. Let Lust be joined with her, because
it arises from the same Principles of Vice. Nor let them be separated from
reprehension, or amendment, that are tied together by a double error of the
Mind.

1. C. Sergius Orata was the first that made hanging Barns; which cost having
but a slight beginning, extended it self almost to Seas of Hot-water.

The same person, because he would not have his Palace subject to the power of
Neptune, invented peculiar Seas to himself, and separated sholes of diverse
sorts of Fish within the large circuits of vast Moles, to the end no Tempest
whatever should deprive his Table of his desired Dainties. He also burdened the
(till then) desert Banks of the Lake Lucrinus with stately and high Buildings,
that he might keep his Shellfish fresh. Where while he plunges himself too
deep into the public Water, he was hurried to the Judgment Seat by Considius
the Publican. Where L. Crassus, pleading against him, said, That his friend
Considius erred, if he thought that Orata, being removed from the Lake, would
want Oysters: for if he could not have them there, he would find them upon the
Tiles.

2. To this man Aesopus the Tragedian ought rather to have given his Son in
Adoption, than to have left him the Heir of his Goods; a young man not only of
a desperate, but a most furious Luxury. Of whom it is reported, that he gave
vast prices for Birds that could sing or talk, to have them served up at his
Table instead of Fig-peckers; and that he used to put Pearls of high value,
dissolved in Vinegar, into his drinks; as if he had strained to throw away a
most famous Patrimony, like some burden too heavy for his shoulders. Since,
some in imitation of the Father, others of the Son, have extended their hands
farther. For no Vice ends where it begins. This it is that fetches out Fish
from the various shoares of the Sea, and spreads our Kitchins with Oysters. For
the pleasure of eating and drinking was found out by Art and Cost.

3. But the end of the second Punic War, and the overcoming of Philip King of
Macedon, made us with more confidence addict our selves to Luxury. At what time
the Matrons were so bold as to beset the House of the Brutii, who by the
abrogation of the Oppian Law, were prepared to intercede for that which the
women desired should be taken away; because it did not permit them to wear a
colored Garment, nor to have about them above half an Ounce of Gold, nor to
ride in a Chariot to any place within a Mile from the City, unless it were to
the Sacrifices: and they obtained, that the Law kept for above twenty years,
should be abolished. For the men of that Age did not foresee whither the
obstinate Plots of Women would tend, nor how far a boldness that had vanquished
the Law would tend. For could they have looked into the contrivances of female
cunning, that brings in something of sumptuous Novelty every day, they had
stopped the progress of Luxuy at its first entrance.

4. But what do I talk any more of Women? whom weakness of Mind, and the
affectation of greater employments denied them, incites them to bestow all
their time in trimming up themselves, when I find Men fallen into this
divertisement, unknown to the ancient Continence? And let it appear to their
reproach.

Cneus Domitius, upon a quarrel with L. Crassus his Colleague, objected to him,
that he had Hymettian Pillars in his House. Whom Crassur immediately asked,
what he valued his own House at? When he answered, Threescore Sesterces. And
hove much, think you, said the other, if I should cut ten little shrubs out of
it? Thirty Sesterces, said the other. Which then is the most Luxurious of the
two, replied Crassus, I that bought ten Pillars for an hundred thousand pi^ces
of Money; or thou, that valuest the shadow of ten small Trees at thirty
Sesterces? An expression forgetful of Pyrrhus, unmindful of Hannibal, and
yawning with the abundance of Foreign Luxury; because they had rather bequeath
the Daintiness and curiosity which they themselves had begun, to their
Posterity, than retain the Continence which their Forefathers had left them.

5. For what meant that Prince of his time, Metellus Pius, when he suffered
himself to be received at his first coming, with Altars and Frankincense? When
he beheld the walls of the Rooms spread with Attalican Tapestry, as a sight
that pleased him? When he permitted long Plays at tedious Festivals? When he
wore his Triumphal Garment at the celebration of great Banquets, and
contentedly received Crowns let down from open places, as it were from Heaven,
upon his celestial Head? And where were these things? Not in Greece ox Asia,
where Severity itself might be corrupted with Luxury; but in a wild and warlike
Province, when a formidable Enemy, Sertorius, would not let the Roman Armies
lie quiet; but goar'd them continually with the Lusitanian Darts. So much had
he forgot the Numidian Camp of his father. Whence it appears how swiftly Luxury
insinuates it self. For he that in his Youth beheld the ancient Customs, in
his old Age introduced new.

6. The same change was in the House of the Curii; while our City and
Judgment Seat beheld the rigid Brow of the Father, and the high Debt of six
hundred Sesterces of the Son, contracted by the ignominious Injury done to the
Noble Youth of Rome. Therefore at the same Time, and under the same Roof, two
several Ages lived; the one of Frugality, the other of vicious Prodigality.

7. By the Sentence against P. Clodius, what strange Luxury appeared in him,
what a savage Lust? Who, though guilty of Incest, that he might be acquitted,
bought whole nights of the Matrons and noble Youth, at vast rates, to pleasure
his Judges withal. In which horrid and abominable Crime, I know not which first
to detest; whether him that first invented that way of Corruption; or they that
suffered their Chastity to mediate to Perjury; or they that valued Adultery
beyond Justice.

8. Equally abominable was that Banquet, which Gemellus a Tribunitian
Traveller, of good Parents, but one that had betaken himself to a Servile
employment, prepared for Metellus Scipio Consul, and the Tribunes of the
People, to the great scandal of the City. For having set up a Stew in his own
House, he prostituted therein Mucia and Fulvia, both taken away from Father and
Mother, and Saturninus a Youth of a Noble Family. Bodies of infamous suffering,
brought to be the scorn of drunken Lust! Banquets not to be celebrated by
Consuls and Tribunes, but to have been punished.

9. But enormous was the Lust of Catiline: For being mad in love with Aurelia
Orestilla, when he saw one Impediment to hinder him from being married to her,
poisoned his own and only Son, almost of age; and presently kindled the Nuptial
Torch at his Funeral-Pile, bequeathing his want of Children as a gift to his
new Bride. But behaving himself at length with the same mind as a Citizen, as
he had showed himself a Father, he fell a just Sacrifice to the Ghost of his
Son, and his impiously-invaded Country.

STRANGERS.
1. But the Campanian Luxury, how profitable was it to our Country? For
embracing invincible Hannibal in the arms of her Allurements, she fitted him to
be vanquished by the Roman Soldier. She called forth a vigilant Captain, she
invited a courageous Army to long Banquets, and with plenty of Wine, the
fragrancy of Ointments, and the lascivious softness of Venery, inveagl'd them
to Sleep and Pleasure. And then was the Punie fierceness broken, when it lay
encamped among the Perfumers of Capua. What then more ignominious than these
Vices, what more hurtful; by which Virtue is worn out, Victories languish,
Honor stupefied is turned to Infamy; and the vigor of Body and Mind quite
weakened and broken? So that it is hard to say which is worst, to be subdued by
them, or by the Enemy.

2. Which infested the City of the Volsinians with sad and direful slaughters.
It was rich, it was adorned with Customs and Laws: it was the Head and
Metropolis of Hetruria. But when once Luxury crept in, it fell into an Abyss of
Injuries and Infamy, till she became subjected to the insolent power of her
Servants. Who at first in a small number daring to enter the Senate House, in a
short time overturned and mastered the whole Commonwealth. They ordered Wills
to be made at their own pleasure. They forbad the Meetings and Feastings of the
Freemen, and married their Masters Daughters. Lastly, they made a Law, that
their Adulteries committed with Widows and Married-women should go unpunished;
and that no Virgin should marry a Freeman, unless some of them before had had
her Virginity.

3. Xerxes, out of the proud imitation of his vast wealth, grew to that height
of Luxury, that he propounded Rewards to them that should invent any new
Pleasure. What a ruin befell a most wide Empire, too deeply plunged in Pleasure
and Voluptuousness!

4. Antiochus the King not a whit the more continent; whose blind and mad
Luxury the Army imitating, had most of them Golden Nails under the soles of
their Shoes; and bought Silver Dishes for their Kitchins; and bad their Tents
of Tapestry-work adorned with Gold and Silver. A booty more desirable by a
needy Enemy, than any delay to a stout Soldier from Victory.

5. Ptolomey the King lived by the accession of his Vices, and was therefore
called Physcon: Than whose Wickedness there could be nothing more wicked. He
married his eldest Sister, married before to their common Brother; then having
vitiated her Daughter, he divorced the Sister, that he might marry the Daughter.

6. Like to their Kings were the People of Egypt, who under the command of
Archelaus, sallying out of their City against A. Gabinius, when th^^ were
commanded to entrench themselves, cried out, That that was a work to be done at
the public Charge. And therefore their Courages, weakened with the softness of
Pleasures, could not stand the fury of our Army.

7. But more effeminate were the Cyprians, who suffered their Women to lie upon
the ground, for their Queens to tread upon, when they ascended into their
Chariots. For for men, if men they were, it had been better not have lived at
all, than to live obedient to such a soft Command.

CHAP. II. Of Cruelty.
In ROMANS.
1. Cor. Sylla Dictator. 2. C. Marius seven times Consul. 3. L. Junius
Damasippus. 4. Munatius Flac us.
STRANGERS.
1. Carthaginians. 2. Hannib^l. 3. Mithridates. 4. Numulizinthes King of
Thrace. 5. Ptolomey Physcon. 6. Darius Ochus. 7. Artaxerxes Ochus. 8. The
Athenians. 9. Perillus of Sicily. 10. Hetrurians. 11. Certain Barbarians.
THis last Society of men carried a lascivious Countenance, Eyes greedy after
Novelty of delight, and a Mind transported through all the allurements of
Pleasure. But the horrid habit of Cruelty is of another na^^re; savage
Countenance, violent Minds, terrible Utterance, Mouths full of Threats and
bloody Commands; to which being silent, is but to increase its fury. For how
shall she set bounds to her self, unless she were recalled by the bridle of
reprehension? In short, since it is her business to make herself dreaded, let
it be ours, to have her in abomination.

1. L. Sylla, whom no man can either sufficiently praise or dispraise; who
while he seeks after Victory, represents himself a Scipio to the Roman People;
while he exercises Cruelty, a mere Hannibal. For having egregiously defended
the cause of the Nobility, cruelly he overflowed the whole City, and every part
of Italy, with rivers of Civil Blood. Four Legions of the adverse party,
trusting to his Faith, and following his Banners, in a public Village, in vain
imploring the compassion of his faithless arm, he caused to be cut in pieces.
Whose lamentable cries pierced the ears of the trembling City: and Tibur was
compelled to waft away their memberless Bodies, impatient of so heavy a
burden. Five thousand Praenestines, hope of safety being granted them by
Cethegus, being called forth without the Walls of the Free-town, after they had
thrown away their Arms, and lay prostrate upon the ground, he caused to be
slain, and their Bodies to be thrown about the fields. He caused a Record to be
made of four thousand seven hundred murdered upon the dire decree of
Proscription. Nor content to rage against them who had born Arms against him,
he added also to the number of the proscribed, several peaceable Citizens,
whose names he collected by the Nomenclator: He also drew his Sword against the
Women, not satisfied with the slaughter of the men. That was also a sign of
incredible Insatiety, that he caused the Heads of the miserable creatures,
newly cut off, and as yet retaining their Physiognomies and Breath, to be
brought into his presence, that what he could not devour with his teeth, he
might with his eyes. How cruelly did he carry himself toward M. Marius the
Praetor, who being dragged in the sight of the people to the Sepulcher of the
Lutatian Family, he would not put him to death, till he had dug out his
eyes, and broken the several members of that unfortunate person. Methinks I
hardly seem to relate Truths. And yet because M. Plaetorius fell into a Swoon
upon the Execution of Marius, he presently flew him. A new Punisher of Pity,
with whom to behold wickedness with an averse mind, was to commit a Crime. But
sure he spared the shades of the Dead? No. For digging up the ashes of C.
Marius, whose Quaestor once he was, though afterward his Enemy, he scattered
them upon the river Anio. Behold by what acts he thought to obtain the name of
Happy!

2. Of which Cruelty however C. Marius mitigates the envy. For he out of an
eager desire of prosecuting his Enemies, wickedly unsheathed his Anger; with an
ignoble Severity dismembring the honored Body of L. Caesar of the Consular and
Censor's Dignity; and at the Sepulcher of a most abject and seditious person:
For that mischief was wanting to the miserable Republique, That Caesar should
fall a Victime to Varius. Hardly were his Victories of equal value; which when
he forgot, he became more criminal at home, than praiseworthy for his
Victories abroad. The same person, when the Head of M. Anthony, cut off, was
brought him, betrayed much insolence both of thought and words, as he held it
in his joyful hands, in the midst of a Banquet; suffering the Sacred's of the
Table to be contaminated with the Blood of a most famous Commonwealths man and
Orator. More than that, he received P. Annius, that brought it, reaking with
the fresh blood, into his Bosom.

3. Damasippus had no praise; and therefore his memory may be the more severely
prosecuted: by whose commands the Heads of the principal Men of the City were
mingled with the heads of the Sacrifices; and the headless Body of Carbo Arvina
carried about, nailed to the Gallows. So that the Pretorship of a most
licentious man could do much, or the Authority of the Commonwealth nothing.

4. Munatius Flaccus, a more stiff than approved defender of Pompey's party,
when he was besieged by Caesar in Spain, within the walls of Attegua, he
exercised his savage Cruelty after a most truculent manner. For after he had
killed all the Citizens which he thought well affected to Caesar, he threw them
headlong from the Walls. He also murdered the Women, calling their Husbands
first that were in Caesar's Camp to the walls, to the end they might behold the
slaughter of their Wives. Nor did he spare the Children laid upon their Mothers
laps; suffering the render Infants to be some dashed against the stones, others
to be thrown up and to fall upon the stakes. Which things, intolerable to be
heard, were executed by Lusitanians, at the command of a Roman; by whose
assistance, Flaccus well fortified, withstood the divine Labors of Caesar,
with a doting obstinacy.

STRANGERS.
1. Let us pass to those, for which though there be the same grief, yet there
is not the same reason for our City to blush. The Carthaginians put Attilius
Regulus to death after a doleful manner. For having cut off his Eyebrows, and
shut him up in a little wooden case, wherein there was nothing but sharp nails,
they suffered him to linger with continual watching, and in a long series of
pain. A kind of Torment not worthy him that suffered, but becoming the Authors
of it. The same Cruelty they used toward our Soldiers, whom being taken in a
Seafight, they fastened under the bottom of their Ships, that being crushed to
death by the weight of the Keel, they might satiate their barbarous ferity, by
an unusual kind of death.

2. Their Captain Hannibal, whose chiefest Virtue consisted in Cruelty, made a
Bridge over the River Vergellus with the bodies of the Romans, and so led over
his Army, that the Earth might experiment the wickedness of the Carthaginian
Landforces, as the Sea had beheld the barbarity of their Mariners. Those whom
he had taken prisoners, picking out the nearest of Kin that he could, he
compelled to fight by pairs, till he made them destroy one another. Those that
were tired he left upon the Road, with the lower part of their Feet cut off.
Deservedly therefore, though too slow the punishment were, the Senate forced
him, when a Suppliant to King Prusias, to a voluntary Death.

3. As truly had they reason to abominate Mithrictates, who with one Epistle
slew fourscore thousand Roman Citizens, dispersed over Asia as Merchants,
defiling the hospitable Gods of so large a Province, with blood unjustly shed,
though not unrevenged. For which intolerable torment, at length he compelled
that Vital Spirit to submit, that contended with the poison. Thereby attaining
those torments, which he had made his own friends to suffer at the beck of
Gaurus his Eunuch, to whom his obedient Lust could deny nothing.

4. Numulizinthis Diogiris the King of Thrace's Daughters Cruelty, though not
so much to be admired, considering the Barbarity of the Nation, yet the
horridness will not let it be passed in silence: who held it not unlawful to
cut living men in two in the middle, or for Parents to feed upon the bodies of
their Children.

5. Again Ptolomey Physcon comes upon the stage; a little before, a most
dreadful Example of lustful Madness, now of Cruelty. For what more horrid than
this? He caused his own Son Menephites, whom he had got upon Cleopatra his
Sister and Wife, a lovely and hopeful Youth, to be killed in his presence; and
sent the Head, Feet and Hands cut off, and put into a Chest, covered over with
the Child's Garment, as a Birthday Gift to the Mother. As it altogether
ignorant of the mischief he had done, and never the more unfortunate, for
having rendered Cleopatra miserable in the loss of Children common to both, and
himself odious to all. With so blind a fury does the height of Cruelty rage,
when she thinks to strengthen herself by her own acts! For when he understood
how he was hated by his people, he sought a remedy for his fear in wickedness;
and that he might reign more safely when the people were murdered, he
surrounded the Gymnasium, full of young people, with fire and sword, and slew,
partly by the flame, and partly by sword, every individual person of the whole
multitude.

6. But Ochus, who was afterward called Darius, bound to the Persians by a
most bloody Oath, that he should not put to Death either by Sword, Poison,
Starving, or any other manner of violence, any of those that had conspired with
him against the Seven Magi, found out a way of Death, by which means he might
rid himself of those persons that were burdensome to him, and yet save his
Oath. For he filled a place, made up with high walls, full of Ashes, and
putting a leaning rafter underneath, he placed them in it, after he had highly
feasted them; so that when sleep should seize them, they might fall into that
insidiary heap.

7. More open, but more horrid, was the Cruelty of Ochus Artaxerxes, who buried
his Sister and Mother-in-Law Ocha alive: and stabbed his Uncle to Death with
Darts, after he had deprived him of an hundred Sons and Nephews; for not the
least injury done him, but because they had the highest applause among the
Persians for Probity and Fortitude.

8. Guided by the same wicked Suspicion, the Citizens of Athens, by a Decree
unworthy their Honor, cut off the Thumbs of the Aeginensian Youth; that a
People potent in Shipping, might not be able to contend with them at Sea. I
cannot pardon the Athenians, borrowing a remedy for their fear from Cruelty.

9. Cruel also was that Inventor of the Brazen Bull, wherein when poor
Creatures were locked, and fire put under it, they seemed in the midst of their
long and tedious torments to low like the beast, that their lamentations and
howlings expressed in Humane Sounds, might not reach the ears of Phalaris the
Tyrant, to move his compassion. Which because he would be wanting to the
miserable, the first Author deservedly experimented the torment of his own
Invention.

10. Nor were the Hetrurians a little cruel in the Invention of Punishment, who
tying the bodies of the living back to back, and face to face together, so that
part might answer part, suffered them to lie till they were putrified to Death.
Most bitter Tormenters of Life and Death at once.

11. Like those Barbarians, who are reported to set men in heaps of the Bowels
and Entrails of killed beasts, and these to feed and keep them alive, till
being putrified within, they might be eaten up by the Vermin that breed in
putrified bodies. Can we complain of Nature, for having made us liable to many
and dire inconveniences of Sickness; or take it ill, that Celestial Strength
should be denied to humane condition, when Mortality has invented so many
Torments to ruin it self, by the impulse of Cruelty?

CHAP. III. Of Anger and Hatred.
1. M. Livius Salinator. 2. C. Marcius Figulus a Lawyer. 3. Patricians. 4.
Roman Youth. 5. Roman Army. 6. Roman People. 7. Q. Metellus Proconsul of
Macedon. 8. L. Cor. Sylla.
FORRAIGNERS.
1. Alexander the Great. 2. Amilcar Son of Barchas the Carthaginian. 3. Annibal
Son of Barchas the Carthaginian. 4. Semiramis Queen of Assyria.
ANger and Hatred stir up great Commotions in he breasts of Men. This swifter
in its motion, the other more obstinate in the desire of Mischief. Both
affections full of Constermation, and never without the violent torment of
themselves: For it suffers pain to inflict misery; anxious with a bitter care,
lest revenge should happen to miss. But there are most certain images of their
propriety, which the gods would have conspicuous in great men, by some more
than ordinary Act or Saying.

1. When Livius Salinator, waging war with Asdrubal, was about to leave the
City, being admonished by Fabius Maximus that he should not fight before he
understood the courage and force of the Enemy, made answer, that He would not
refuse the first opportunity of fighting: And being asked by the same person,
why he would needs be so hasty; That as soon as may be, said he, I may either
win honor by the overthrow of the Enemy, or rejoice in the ruin of my
Fellow-Citizens. Anger and Virtue divided his speech between them. The one
remembering an unjust rebuke, the other intent upon the honor of Triumph. But I
cannot tell whether it were the same thing to say this, and to overcome in the
same manner.

2. Thus far Passion carried a man of a fierce Soul and accustomed to War. But
C. Figulus a most mild man, famous for his learning in the Civil Law, was
thereby rendered forgetful both of P^udence and Moderation. For being provoked
by being repulsed from the Consulship, so much the rather, because it had been
twice given his Fathers; when many came to him the next day for counsel, turned
'^m all out a doors: Are ye ready at asking Counsel, said he, and know not how
to make a Consul? Smartly and deservedly spoken: Yet it had been better not
spoken. For what wise man could be angry with the People of Rome?

3. Nor are they to be approved, though protected by the splendor of their
Nobility, who being offended because that Cn. Flavius, a man of mean extract,
was made Praetor, took off their Gold Rings and Trappings from their Horses,
and threw them away; showing the impotency, not the strife of vexation.

4. These were the motions of Anger in single or but few persons against a
Commonwealth: There are also the same in the Multitude against the Princes and
Captains. Manlius Torquatus returning after a most renowned and complete
Victory over the Latins and Campanians, when all the Old-people went forth to
meet him, the Youth never stirred; because he had put his Son to death, for
fighting successfully against the Enemy. His equals compassionated his too
severe punishment. Nor do I defend the Act, but only show the force of Anger,
that could divide the Ages and Affections of a whole City.

5. So much could it prevail, that it detained and kept back all the foot of
the Roman People, sent by Fabius the Consul to pursue the Enemy, when they
might easi^y have ruined and cut them off, when they called to mind that he
had put a stop to the Agrarian Law. The same passion rendering the Army offended
with Appius their Captain useless, (whose Father standing for the Nobility,
opposed the conveniences of the Commonalty) by a voluntary flight they turned
their back to the Enemy, because they would not suffer their Captain to
triumph. How often the vanquisher of Victory? despising its congratulation in
Torquatus; in Fabius, omitting the greatest part; in Appius, preferring
shameful flight before it.

6. How violently it carried it self in the breast of the Roman People, at that
time when the Dedication of the Temple of Mercury was granted to M. Plaetorius,
a Centurion, by their Suffrages! The Consuls being also terrified; Claudius,
because he withstood the relief of his Debts; and Servilius, because he had but
weakly defended their cause which he undertook, Can Anger be denied to be of
force, when it sets the Soldier above the General?

7. It has not only pulled down Authority, but commanded as disorderly. For
when Q. Metellus, first as Conful, then for the Consul, had subdued almost all
Spain, and understood that Pompey the Consul, his enemy, would be sent to
succeed him; he dismissed all that pretended to be acquitted from service; gave
license to the Soldiers to go take their pleasure, never setting any time for
their coming again. He left the Magazines upon the Borders free to the plunder
of the Enemy: He ordered the Cretans Bows and Arrows to be broken and thrown
into the River: He forbid any Victuals to be given to the Elephants. By which
acts as he gratified his Passion, so he sufficiently sullied the glory of his
great Deeds: and lost the honor he had won, being a greater Vanquisher of the
Enemy, than of his own Passion.

8. What became of Sylla, too obedient to this Vice! After he had shed the
blood of others, did he not shed his own? For burning with indignation at
Puteoli, because that Granius Prince of the Colony did not pay in so quickly
the Money to the Decurio's, which he had promised for the repair of the
Capitol, with a concitation of mind more than ordinary, and an immoderate
force of speaking, he vomited up his last breath, mixed with blood and threats.
Not failing by old Age, as not being above threescore; but raging with an
Impotency, nourished by the miseries of the Commonwealth. So that it is a doubt
whether Sylla or Sylla's Anger were first extinguished.

FORRAIGNERS.
Now it behooves us to fetch Examples from unknown persons; yet there is
something of shame in reproaching the Vices of great men. But since the faith
of our design admonishes us to comprehend every thing, the Will must give way
to the Work; that the Considence of declaring necessary things may not be
wanting, while we justify the proof of great things.

1. Alexander was kept from Heaven by his own Anger. For what hindered but that
he might have risen thither, had not Lysimachus thrown to a Lion, Elytus run
through with a Spear, Callisthenes put to death, lost him the fame of three of
his greatest Victories, by the unjust slaughter of so many friends.

2. How excessive the Hatred of Amilear toward the Roman People! For beholding
four Sons of tender Age, and the same number of Lions whelps; He bred them, he
said, to the ruin of our Empire. Fairly brought up, as it happened, to the ruin
of their own Country.

n"3" 3. Of which Sons Hannibal so followed his Fathers steps, that when he was
about to cross the Army over into Spain, and sacrificing for good success, the
Son then but nine years of age, holding his hand upon the Altar, swore, that
as soon as his Age would permit him, he would be a most bitter Enemy to the
Romans; that he might express to his father how willingly he accompanied him in
the War then afoot. The same person, that he might show the Hatred between Rome
and Carthage, happening to stumble, and raise the dust with his foot, Then,
said he, there will be an end of the War between these two Cities, when one of
them is reduced into dust at this is.

4. In the breast of a Boy the Force of Hatred was not so prevalent, but that
it equally prevailed in a Woman's breast. For Semiramis Queen of the Assyrians,
when it was related to her, as she was combing her hair, that Babylon was
revolted, with one part of her hair loose and dishevelled, she hasted to its
recovery; nor would she bring her hair, till she had reduced the City, into
order. And therefore her Statue is placed in Babylon, in the same posture as
she hastened to her Revenge.

CHAP. IV. Of Covetousness.
ROMANS.
1. M. Crassus and Q. Hortensius. 2. Q. Cassius Longinus. 3. L. Septimuleius.
FORRAIGNERS.
1. Ptolomey King of Cyprus.
LEt Avarice be brought forth that lurks in hidden places, but a devourer of
open prey; unhappy in enjoyment, but most through Insatiability.

1. When certain persons had suborned a false testimony against Minucius
Basilius in Greece, who was very rich, to confirm it, they put into his Will,
as Heirs, two of the most potent men of our City, M. Crassus and Q. Hortensius,
to whom Minutius was altogether unknown. Though the fraud were evident, yet
both covetous after the Estate, neither refused the gift of a Foreign Crime.
How great an offense have I slightly related! The Lights of the Court, and
Ornaments of the Seat of Judicature, what they ought to have punished, invited
by the bait of dishonest gain, they protected by their Authority.

2. But it was of greater force in Q. Cassius, who let go M. Silius and A.
Calpurnius, being apprehended in Spain with daggers, on purpose to have killed
him; having agreed with the one for fifty, with the other for sixty Sesterces.
It may be a question, whether if they had given him as much more, he would not
have offered them his throat also.

3. But above all, the Avarice of L. Septimuleius was most notorious: Who being
a familiar Friend of Gracchus, not only cut off his Head, but carried it fixed
upon a pole through the City; because Opimius, the Consul, had promised a
reward in Gold to him that should do it. Some report, that he filled the hollow
part of his S^ull with melted Lead, that it might be the heavier. Whether he
were seditious, or died for a good Example, yet the wicked hunger of his friend
should not have bin so greedy after such injuries to the dead.

FOREIGNERS.
1. The Covetousness of Septimuleius deserved hatred, but the Avarice of
Ptolomey King of the Cyprians is to be laughed at. For having by mean devices
scraped together great Riches, and saw that he was like to perish for their
sake; and for that reason having shipped all his Wealth, was got out to Sea,
that by bulging the Vessels he might perish at his own leisure, and frustrate
his Enemies hopes, could not endure the sinking of his Gold and Silver, but
carried back the future reward of his own Death. Surely he did not possess, but
was possessed by Wealth, being in his mind a miserable slave to Money.

CHAP. V. Of Pride and excess of Power.
ROMANS.
1. M. Fulvius Flaccus Cos. 2. M. Livius Drusus Tribune of the People. 3. C.
Pompey the Great, three times Consul. 4. M. Antonie Triumvir.
FOREIGNERS.
1. Alexander the Great. 2. Xerxes King of Persia. 3. Hannibal the
Carthaginian. 4. The Carthaginian and Campanian Senate.
1. NOw that Pride and Excess in Power may be brought upon the Stage, Fulvius
Flaccus Consul, Colleague with M. Plautius Hypsaeus, being about to make Laws
very pernicious to the Commonwealth, of making free Citizens of Rome, and
citing such before the People, who would not change their City, could hardly be
persuaded to come into Court. Then when the Senate partly admonished him,
partly besought him to desist, he gave them no answer. He might be accounted a
Tyrannical Consul, who had thus carried himself against one Senator, as Flaccus
did against the whole Body of so Majestic an Assembly.

2. Whose Majesty was no less affronted by the contumely of M. Drusus, a
Tribune of the People, who made nothing, because Philip the Consul interrupted
him in his Speech, to take him by the throat and to hale him to Prison, not by
the hands of an Officer, but of a Client; with that violence, that the Blood
gushed out of his Mouth. Also when the Senate sent to him to come into Court;
Rather, said he, why does not the Senate come to the Hostilia to me? I am
ashamed to add the rest: The Tribune despised the Authority of the Senate; the
Senate obeyed the Tribunes words.

3. How insolently Pompey! who coming out of the Bath left Hypsaeus prostrate
at his feet, accused of bribing for Voices, a Nobleman and his Friend;
upbraiding him withal with a contumelious Scoff, telling him, that he came to
spoil his Supper. Yet he was not ashamed to require Scipio, his Sons
Father-inlaw, condemned by certain Laws which he had made himself, to the ruin
of many Noblemen; governing the Commonwealth according to the caresses of his
Nuptial Bed.

4. Vile was the Scoff of M. Antonie both in word and deed. For when the Head
of Caestius Rufus, a Senator, was brought him, being a Triumvir, the rest
turning aside, he caused it to be brought near, and diligently viewed it. And
when all the standers by listened to hear what he would say; This fellow, says
he, I never knew. A haughty scorn of a Senator, but the excess of pride toward
a man slain.

FOREIGNERS.
1. Enough of our own, now for Foreigners. The Virtue and Felicity of
Alexander the Great was eclipsed by three most evident degrees of Insolence.
For, contemning his Father Philip, he acknowledged none bat Jupiter Ammon for
his Father: Laying aside the Customs and Manners of the Macedonians, he
assumed the Garments and Laws of the Persians: despising Mortals, he emulated
to be a God. Nor was he ashamed to deny himself to be a Son, a
fellow-Countryman, and a Mortal.

2. Xerxes, in whose name Pride and Impotency inhabit, how insolently did he
use his own power, when being to proclaim War against the Grecians, and calling
the Princes of Asia together; That I might not seem, said he, to take my own
advice, I have assembled you: But remember, that it is your part rather to obey
than to give Counsel. Arrogantly said, had he returned a Victor to his
Country: But so shamefully beaten, I know not whether more insolently or
arrogantly.

3. Hannibal, puffed up with the success of the Battle of Cannae, neither
admitted any of his Countrymen into his Tents, nor gave answer to any but by an
Interpreter, and despised Maharbal, affirming with a loud voice before his
Tent, that he saw a way how he might sup in a few days in the Capitol. So
unusual a thing it is for Happiness and Moderation to lodge together.

4. There was a kind of emulation between the Carthaginian and Campanian Senate
for Insolency. For the one washed in a Bath apart from the Vulgar; the other
made use of a different Judgment Seat. Which Custom retained in Capua, is
evident in an Epistle of C. Gracchus written to Plautius.

CHAP. VI. Of Perfidiousness.
ROMANS.
1. T. Tatius King of the Sabines. 2. Ser. Sulpitius Galba. 3. Cn. Domitius
Ahenobarbus. 4. Q. Servilius Caepio, Cos.
FOREIGNERS.
1. The Carthaginians. 2. Hannibal the Carthaginian.
LEt Perfidiousness, a close and crafty Mischief, be fetched out of its lurking
holes. Whose most efficacious properties are to lie and deceive: the fruit it
reaps from some crime committed: then certain when it holds Cruelty in bonds;
bringing as much mischief to Mankind, as Faith and Truth afford quiet and
safety. Therefore let it be as much dispraised, as the other praised.

2. In the reign of Romulus, Sp. Tarpeius was Governor of the Tower, whose
Daughter, a Virgin, going to fetch Water for the Ceremonies, without the Walls,
Tatius corrupted with Money to let in his armed Sabines into the Castle,
promising as a Reward what they woreupon their left hands; which were Bracelets
and Rings of Gold of a considerable weight. The Sabines having got into the
place, when the Virgin demanded her reward, they killed her with the weight of
their Arms; As it were performing their promise, in regard they also carried
their Arms on their left hand. Let there be no blame, while impious Treason
was revenged with a quick Punishment.

2. Servius Galba was a man highly perfidious. For having assembled together
the people of several Cities of Portugal, upon pretense of treating for their
good, he partly killed and partly sold seven thousand of them, among which were
the flower of their Youth, after he had picked them out and disarmed them. Thus
the greatness of his Cr^me exceeded the Calamity of the Barbarians.

3. Too great a desire of Glory made Cn. Domitius, a person of Noble Extraction
and Merit, to become perfidious. For being offended at Betultus, King of the
Arverni, for that he had persuaded both his own people and the Allobroges,
while he was in the Province, to fly to the Protection of Fabius his
Successor; Sending for him under pretense of speaking with him, and having
received him under his roof, he caused him to be fettered, and sent him away by
Sea to Rome. Which act of his the Senate could neither approve nor disannul,
lest Besultus, being sent back into his Country, should raise a new War.
Therefore they sent him to Alba to be secured.

4. The slaughter of Viriatus admits a double accusation of Perjury; as to his
friends, because he was killed in their hands; in Q. Servilius Caepio the
Consul, because he was the Author of the fact, and promised impunity: not
deserving, but buying his Victory.

FOREIGNERS.
1. But that we may take a view of the Fountain of Perfidie it self; The
Carthaginians pretending to send Xanthippus the Lacedaemonian home, who had
served them, and by whose assistance they had taken Atilius Regulus, sunk him
in the midst of the Sea. What was the aim of so much Villainy? That the
companion of their Victory should not live? He lives however to their reproach,
whom they might have left untouched, without any loss of their Honor.

2. Hannibal also by strangling in the smoke and steam of Baths the Nucerini,
who upon his Faith given came out of an impregnable City; and by throwing the
Senate of the Acerrani into Wells, while he professed War against the People of
Rome and Italy, did he not wage a more severe war against Faith and Honesty?
making use of lies and deceits, as of famous and noble Arts. By which means,
though he might have otherwise left a real fame behind him, it is now to be
questioned which was most eminent, his Greatness or his Wickedness.

CHAP. VII. Of Seditions.
The Roman People against
1. C. Marius, 6 times Cos. 2. Q. Metellus the Censor. 3. A. Numius, the
Candidate. 4. A. Sempronius Asellio.
The Roman Soldiers against
1. Gratidius the Legate. 2. Q. Pompey the Consul. 3. C. Carbo the Legate.
BUt let the Acts of violent Sedition among the Gownmen, as well as of the
Armed, be related.

1. Lu. Equitius, who feigned himself to be the Son of Ti. Gracchus, and stood
for the Tribuneship with L. Saturninus against Law, was by C. Marius in his
sixth Consulship carried to the public Goal. However, the People broke open
the Gates of the Prison, and taking him out again, carried him upon their
shoulders in public triumph.

2. The same person, because Q. Metellus the Censor refused to admit him into
the Roll for the Son of Gracchus, endeavored to have stoned him to death,
affirming that Gracchus had but three Sons. Of which one served in Sardinia,
the second an Infant at Praeneste, the third born at Rome, deceased after his
Fathers death; neither ought the unknown rubbith of a noble Family to be
remembered. When the improvident Rashness of the provoked Multitude extended it
self in the mean time impudently and audaciously against the Consulship and
Censorship, and assailed their Princes with all manner of Petulancy.

3. That was only Madness; this a bloody Sedition. For the People compelled A.
Numius, the Competitor of Saturninus, nine Tribunes being created, and but one
vacancy remaining for two Candidates, to fly to his own house: and then
dragging him out from thence, slew him; that by the slaughter of an honest
Citizen, they might make way for a pernicious Disturber to get into Authority.

4. The Consternation of the Creditors against Sempronius Asellio the Praetor,
brake forth into a most intolerable Rage. Whom, because he underook the cause
of the Debts, being stirred up by L.Cassius the Tribune, they dragged from the
Altar, as he was sacrificing before the Temple of Concord, and slew him in his
Robes of Authority.

Of the Roman Soldiers.
1. The Sedition of Citizens is to be detested; but if we look into the Camp,
an equal indignation will arise. When the Province of Asia was, by the
Sulpician Law, decreed to C. Marius a private person, to prosecute the War
against Mithridates, the Soldiers slew Gratidius, sent by him to L. Sulla the
Consul, to receive the Legions from him. Offended, without doubt, that they
were to be commanded by a person of no Honor, that had served under a person
of the highest Dignity. But who may endure a Soldier correcting the Decrees of
the Commonalty with the Death of a Legate?

2. That in the behalf of a Consul so violently acted; this against a Consul.
For when Q. Pompey Colleague of Sylla ventured to contend with Cn. Pompey, being
sent to the Army by the command of the Senate, the Soldiers corrupted by the
delusions of an ambitious Captain, fell upon him, as he was beginning to
sacrifice, and slew him, as if he himself had been the Victime. And the Court,
forced to give way to the Camp, durst not revenge so great a Crime.

3. That Army also was wickedly violent who killed C. Carbo, the Brother of
Carbo thrice Consul, endeavoring to amend the loose Discipline of the
Soldiers, crept in through the liberty of the Civil Wars; and rather chose to
be contaminated with the greatest of Crimes, than to alter their loose and
depraved Manners,

CHAP. VIII. Of Rashness.
1. P. Africanus the Greater. 2. C. Caesar twice Consul. 3. The Roman Army.
FOREIGNERS.
1. Hannibal. 2. The People of Athens.
Sudden also and vehement are the Instigations of Rashness; by the strokes
whereof the minds of men are disordered, not being able to foresee their own
dangers, nor prosecute the facts of others with a due consideration.

1. For how rashly did the Greater Africanus cross the Sea out of Spain, with
two Galleys of five Oars, to Syphax the King, trusting his own and his
Countries safety in the faithless breast of one Numidian! So that in one moment
it was a doubtful question, whether Scipio should be the Captive or the
Conqueror of Syphax.

2. The doubtful attempt also of C.Caesar was protected by the Heavens. For
impatient of the Legions crossing from Brundusium to Apollonia, leaving the
Banquet, out of a pretense of being sick, he went aboard a small Ship, and in a
most rigorous Tempest s^eers out of the River into the very mouth of the
Adriatic Sea; and commanding the Ship to keep her course, long tossed by
contrary Waves, at length he was forced to return.

3. Now what a most execrable Rashness was that of the Soldiers? For they were
the cause that Albinus, a person famous for his Nobility, Conditions, and great
Honors, through false and vain suspicions was stoned to death in the Camp.
And, which admits of no excuse, denied their Captain, praying and beseeching,
the power of answering for himself.

FOREIGNERS.
1. Therefore I wonder the less, that the severe and cruel Hannibal would not
admit the guiltless Pilot to make his defense; who returning out of Italy from
Petilia, not believing he could reach between Italy and Sicily so soon, killed
the Pilot, thinking he had betrayed him. But at length, when he found what the
Pilot had said to be true, pardoned him too late; when he could pay no respect
to his Innocence, but that of a Sepulcher. And therefore in the midst of a
narrow and tempestuous Frith, stands an overlooking Statue, exposed to the eyes
of them that sail to and fro, in remembrance of Pelorium and the Punic Rashness.

2. The Athenian City was also mad to Rashness, which put to death unheard ten
of their chief Generals, returning from a noble Victory; and all because they
could not bury the slain Soldiers, through the tempestuousness of the Sea:
Punishing Necessity, when they should have honored Virtue.

CHAP. IX. Of Error.
1. Of the Roman People. 2. C. Cassius Longinus, Proconsul. 3. The Guard of
Lartis Tolumnius King of the Veientes.
Error is next to Rashness: as equally prejudicial, so to them also it least
knows: because it commits mistakes not willingly, but out of false
imaginations; which being far spread in the breast of men, if I should omit it,
I should be guilty of the Error which I blame. Therefore let us recite a few
Mistakes.

1. C. Helvius Cinna, Tribune of the People, returning home from Caesar's
Funeral, was torn by the hands of the People, mistaken for Cornelius Cinna,
upon whom they thought to have spent their rage; provoked against him, because
that being Caesar's Kinsman, he had made an abusive Oration against him that
was impiously slain. And so far irritated they were by the same Error, that
they carried the Head of Helvius, as if it had been the Head of Cornelius,
fixed upon a Pole, about the Funeral-pile of Caesar. A cruel expiation of Duty
and Mistake.

2. For Error caused C. Cassius to punish himself. For in the midst of that
various and unknown event ^o the Captains themselves, of the fight of four
Armies at Philippi; Titinius the Centurion being sent by him in the Night to
see in what condition Brutus was, while he fetched several compasses about,
because the darkness of the Night did not suffer him to know whether he met
Foes or Friends, it was long before he returned. Cassius therefore believing
him to have been taken by the Enemy, and that they were absolute Masters of the
field, hastened to end his life, when Brutus's forces were in part safe, and
Masters of the Enemies Camp. But the Courage of Titinius is not to be forgot,
who stood a while astonished at the unexpected sight of his Captain wallowing
in his own blood, then bursting into tears; Though imprudently, General, said
he, I was the cause of thy death, this imprudence shall not go unpunished;
receive me a companion to thy fate; and so saying, threw himself upon the
liveless trunk, with his Sword up to the Hilts in his own Body: And intermixing
blood with blood, they lay a double sacrifice, the one of Piety, the other of
Error.

3. But certainly Mistake did a great injury to the family of Lartis Talumnius
King of the Veientes; who after he had through a lucky cast at Dice, cried to
his Play-mate, Kill; the Guard, mistaking the word, fell upon the Roman
Ambassadors, and slew them, as they were just entering the Room; interpreting
Play as a Command.

CHAP. X. Of Revenge.
In ROMANS.
1. Of the Papyrian Tribe of the Tusculans against Polias. 2. Of the people of
Utica against Fabius Adrianus.
FORRAIGNERS.
1. Thamyris and Berenices Queens. 2. Certain Youths of Thessaly.
THe Stings of Revenge as they are sharp, so they are just, while they meditate
to repay received Injuries. Of which a few Examples will serve.

1. M. Flavius, Tribune of the People, reported to the People against the
Tusculans, that by their advice the Privernates and Veliterni would rebel. Who
when they came to Rome in a most miserable and suppliant manner, with their
Wives and Children, it happened that all the rest of the Tribes being for Mercy,
the Polian Tribe alone gave judgment that they should be first whipped, and
then put to death; and the multitude of Women and Children to be sold for
Slaves. For which reason the Papyrian Tribe, in which the Tusculans being
received into the City, had a strong Vote, never made afterward any Candidate
of the Polian Tribe a Magistrate; that no Honor might come to that Tribe,
which as much as in them lay, had endeavored to deprive them of their Lives
and Liberty.

2. But this Revenge both the Senate and the consent of all men approved. For
when Adrianus had sordidly tyrannized over the Roman Citizens at Vtica, and was
therefore by them burnt alive; the matter was never questioned in the City, nor
any complaint made against it.

FOREIGNERS.
1. Famous Examples of Revenge were both Queens: Thamyris, who having caused
the Head of Cyrus to be cut off, commanded it to be thrown into a Tub of humane
Blood; upbraiding him with his insatiable thirst after Blood, and revenging
upon him the Death of her Son, who was slain by him. And Berenice, who taking
heavily the loss of her Son, entrapped by the snares of Laodice, got armed into
her Chariot, and following the Kings Life-guard-man that had done the Mischief,
after she had missed him with her Spear, she sell'd him with a Stone; and
driving her Horses over his Body, rid directly through the bands of the adverse
party to the house where she thought the body of the slain Child lay.

2. It is a hard thing to judge whether a just Revenge or not were the ruin of
Jason of Thessaly, preparing to make war against the King of Persia. For he
gave leave to Taxillus the Matter of his Games, complaining that he had been
abused by certain young men, that he should either require thirty Drams
from them, or to give them ten Stripes. Which last revenge when he used, they
that were lashed, killed Jason; valuing the measure of the punishment by the
pain of the Mind, and nor of the Body. Thus by a small provocation of
ingenious Shame, a great Undertaking was subverted. Because that in the opinion
of Greece, there was as much expected from Jason, as from Alexander.

CHAP. XI. Of things naughtily said, and wickedly done.
ROMANS.
1. Tullia Servilia. 2. C. Fimbria Tribune of the People. 3. L. Catiline. 4.
Magius Chilo. 5. C. Toranius. 6. Villius Annalis. 7. The wife of Vettius
Salassus.
FOREIGNERS.
1. Two Spanish Brothers. 2. Mithridates the King. 3. Sariaster the Son of
Tigranes. 4. L. Aelius Sejanus.
NOw because we pursue the good and bad things of humane Life, let us go on
with what has been naughtily said, and wickedly done.

1. But where shall I better begin than from Tullia? as being the ancientest in
time, the wickedest and most monstrous Example of Impiety. Who, when her
Charioteer, as she was riding in her Chariot, stopped his Horses; upon her
enquiry finding that the dead body of her Father, Servius Tullius, lay in the
way, caused the Charioteer to drive over it; that she might hasten to the
embraces of Tarquinius, who had slain him. By which impious and shameful haste,
she not only stained herself with eternal Infamy, but also the very Village it
self, which was called, The wicked Village, after that.

2. Not so horrible was the Act and Saying of C. Fimbria; though considered by
themselves, both very abominable. He had ordered it, that Scaevola should be
killed at the Funeral of C. Marius; whom after he found to be recovered of his
Wound, he resolved to accuse to the People. Being then asked what he could say
truly of him, whose conversation was not to be blamed; answered, that he would
accuse him, For not receiving the Dart any further into his Body.

3. L. Catiline, Cicero saying in the Senate, that there was a great fire
kindled by him; I perceive it, said he; and if I could not quench it with
Water, I would with Ruin. What can we think, but that the stings of his
Conscience moved him to finish the act of Parricide which he began?

4. The Breast of Magius Chilo was deeply troubled with Madness: Who with his
own hand snatched away Marcellus's Life that Caesar had given him. For being an
old Soldier under Pompey, he took it ill that any of Pompey's friends should
be preferred before him. For as he was upon his return from Mitylene to the
City, he stabbed him with a Dagger in the Port of Athens. An Enemy of
Friendship, an Intercepter of divine Favor, and the Ignominy of public Faith,
which had promised the Life of so great a person.

5. To this Cruelty, to which there seems no addition to be made, C. Caius
Toranius exceeds in heinousness of Parricide. For adhering to the Faction of
the Triumviri, he described to the Centurions the marks, the age and lurking
places of his proscribed Father, a famous person, and of the Praetorian Order,
to the end they might find him out. The Old Man more concerned for the life
and advancement of his Son, than for the remainder of his days, enquired of the
Centurions whether his Son were safe, and whether he pleased his Generals. One
of which made answer, Being showed by him, said he, whom thou so much love,
we are come to be thy Executioners; and presently ran him through. Thus fell
that unhappy man, more miserable in the author of his Death, then in his Death
it self.

6. Which was the bitter Lot of L. Villius Annlis. Who coming into the Field to
the choice of his Son for Qu^^^, and knowing himself to be proscribed, flew to
his ^ion. But the wickedness of the Youngman was the cause, that he was not
safe in his Protection: For he delivered him up to the Soldiers, that followed
his steps, to be slain in his presence. Twice a Parricide, by Counsel, and
beholding the slaughter.

7. Vettius Sallassus proscribed, had an end no less bitter; whom being hidden,
what shall I say, whether his Wife delivered him to be slain, or slew him her
self? For how can we think the Crime less, where the hand is only absent?

FORRAIGNERS.
1. But this fact, because Foreign, shall be more calmly delivered. Scipio
Africanus celebrating the Memory of his Father and his Uncle at New Carthage
with a Gladiatory gift, two Kings Sons, their Father being dead, entered upon
the Sand; promising there to fight for the Kingdom, that their Combat might
make the spectacle mere famous. Them when Scipio admonished rather to contend
in words than blows who should reign, and that the elder submitted to his
advice; the younger, trusting to his strength, persissed in his Madness. But
the issue of the Combat was, that the more obstinate Impiety was punished with
Death.

2. Mithridates much move wickedly; who not only made war with his Brother, but
with his own Father himself for the Kingdom. Wherein, how he got assistants to
help him, or durst invoke the gods, is to me a wonder.

3. But why should we wonder at a thing as not usual with those people? When
Sariaster so conspired with his friends against Tigranes his Father, King of
Armenia, that all of them let themselves blood in their right hands, and drank
it up. Hardly were such a bloody Conspiracy to be endured for the safety of a
Parent.

4. But why do I slay upon these Examples, when I see all Villainies exceeded by
the thought of one Parricide? And therefore I am transported to dilacerate it
with a pious, rather than strong affection. For who, the says of Friendship
being extinct, can find words enough to send to the Abyss of due execration
the person that endeavored the subversion of all Mankind? Could thou, more
cruel than the Cruelty of Bar^arism it self, have ruled the reins of the Roman
Empire, which our Prince and Parent governs with his protecting Arm? Or while
thou were so mad, could the world have remained steady? Thy purpose was to have
represented the mad intentions of thy fury, and to have outdone the City taken
by the Gauls, the slaughter of the three hundred Noblemen, the Battle of Allia,
the Scipio's ruined in Spain, Thrasymene, Cannae, and Aemathia, reaking with
Civil Blood. But the Eyes of the Gods were awake, the Stars were also watchful;
the Altars, Beds and Temples were full of the present Numen. There was nothing
permitted to grow drowsy, that was to watch over the head and safety of
Augustus. And in the first place the Author and Defender of our safety by his
divine wisdom provided, lest his famous works should have been buried in the
ruin of the whole world. Therefore Peace remains, the Laws are in force, and
the order of public and private Duty stands fast. For he that endeavored to
subvert all these, by violating the bonds of Friendship, trod under foot with
all his Family by the Roman People, has now his punishment in Hell, if he
deserve to be there.

CHAP. XII. Of Deaths not Vulgar.
ROMANS.
1. Tullus Hostilius King. 2. The two Mothers. 3. Mu. Juventius Thalna. 4. Q.
Lutelius Catulus. 5. L. Cornelius Merula. 6. Herennius Siculus. 7. Licinius
Macer. 8. Cornelius Gallus and T. Haterius.
FORRAIGNERS.
1. Coma the Brother of Cleon Captain of the Fugitives. 2. Ae^chylus the Poet.
3. Homer. 4. Euripides. 5. Sophocles. 6. Philemon. 7. Pindarus. 8. Anacrcon. 9.
Milo the Crotoniate. 10. Polydamas of Syracuse.
THe first and last day contain the condition of humane Life; for it is of
great concern with what lucky Omens it begins, and how it ends. And therefore
we account him happy that begins his Life with prosperity, and ends it with
quietness. The middle course of time is sometimes rugged, sometimes calm;
always deceiving hope, while we wish it long, and yet idly consume it. For by
using it well, a short time becomes long, exceeding the multitude of years in
the number of famous actions. But not to wander farther, let us mention those
that have died no Vulgar Deaths.

Tullus Hostilius the King was struck with Thunder, and burnt together with his
whole Palace. A singular Lot of Fate, by which it happened, that the Pillar of
the City, taken away in the City it self, was reduced into that condition by
the flame of Heaven, that the Citizens might not have the honor of bestowing
the last Funeral Rites upon it, the Palace being both Funeral-Pile and
Sepulcher.

2. It Is a strange thing that Joy should do the same as Thunder; and yet it
did. For news being brought of the slaughter at Thrasymene; One Mother meeting
her Son safe in the Gate, expired in his arms; another upon the false news of
her Sons death, sitting melancholy at home, at the first sight of him, when he
returned, fell down dead. An unusual accident, that they whom Grief could not,
Joy should kill.

3. But I wonder the less because they were Women. Juventius Thalna, Colleague
with T. Graccbus the Consul, sacrificing in Corsica, which he had newly
subdued, and receiving Letters that Supplications were decreed by the Senate,
as he was intently reading them, a mist rose before his eyes, and he fell down
dead before the hearth. What can we think, but that too much Joy was the cause
of his Death? What if Numantia or Carthage had been delivered to him!

4. C. Catulus, a Captain of a greater Spirit, and Partaker with Marius in the
Cimbrian Triumph, by order of the Senate, had an end more violent. For by the
same Marius afterward commanded to death, covered himself up in his Bed,
heated vehemently hot, and daubed with new Lime, and so stifled himself.

5. At which time also L. Cornelius Merula, of Consular Dignity, and Priest of
Jupiter, that he might not be a scorn to the Insolency of the Victors, opening
his Veins in the Temple of Jove, avoided the denunciation of his Death.

6. A sharp and stout end was that of Herennius the Sicilian, who was both a
Friend and Southsayer to C. Gracchus. For being for that reason carried to
Prison, at the very threshold of Ignominy he knocked out his own Brains against
the post of the door, and there died: One degree more swift than Public
Justice, or the hand of the Executioner.

7. As violent was the. End of C. Licinius Macer, a Praetorian, the Father of
Calvus, being guilty of Bribery; while the Suffrages were separating, went into
the place of Judgment, and seeing M. Cicero, who assembled the Judges,
preparing to plead, he sent to tell him, that he died not condemned, but
guilty, and that his estate could not be confiscated; and haying so said,
stopping his Mouth and Nostrils with his Handkerchief, and holding his Breath,
he prevented his punishment by Death. Which being known, Cicero forbore to
pronounce Sentence. Thus an Illustrious person freed himself from an unusual
sort of Death, from the shame of Condemnation, and his Family from Want.

8. This a stout Death, the next ridiculous. For Cornelius Gallus, and ^.
Haterius a Roman Knight, expired at their Venery. But what imports it to
reprehend the Fate of those, whom not their Lust, but the condition of humane
frailty brought to an end? For the end of Life being ^xpos'd to various and
occult Causes, sometimes certain accidents gain the title of Supreme Fate, when
they rather happen at the time of Death, than any way hasten it.

FOREIGNERS.
1. The Deaths of Strangers are also very remarkable; as that of Coma, the
Brother of Clean the greatest Captain of Thieves in his time. For he being
brought to Rupilius the Consul after the taking of Enna, which the Thieves
kept, being examined touching the force and designs of the Fugitives, resuming
time to collect himself, he covered his Head, with his Knees bent, and holding
his Breath, he expired in the hands of his Keepers, and in the sight of the
supreme Command. Let the miserable torment themselves, to whom it is more
profitable to dye than live, with timorous and dubious counsel how to end their
Lives: Let them sharpen their Knives, temper Poisons, take Halters, view
Precipices, as if it required some preparation or exact method to separate the
strict society of Soul and Body. Coma made use of none of these, but his Soul
being shut up in his breast, sound its own way.

2. The Death of Aescbylus, though not voluntary, may be however related for
the novelty. For walking out of the ^^w^ where he lived in Sicily, he sat down
in a conve^^^^ place; upon whom an Eagle bearing a Tortoise, deceived by the
baldness of his head, let fall the Tortoise to break it, that he might come at
the flesh. And by that blow the beginning of a higher Tragedy was stifled in
the birth.

3. Nor was the cause of Homer's Death vulgar: Who is said to have died for
grief, because he could not answer a question which the Fishers put to him.

4. More sad^ was the destiny of Euripides. For returning to the house where he
lay in Macedonia, from supping with King Archelaus, he was torn to pieces by
Dogs. A fate too severe for so great a Wit.

5. Sophocles being very old, and having rehearsed a Tragedy at the public
place for tri^l of Wit, after a long dispute remaining at length Victor by one
voice, died for joy that he had won.

6. Philemon was carried off by immoderate laughter. For an Ass eating certain
Figs that were prepared for him, and set before him, he called the boy to drive
him away: who not coming till the Ass had eaten them all up; Because then
come so late, said he, prithee give the Ass some Wine too; and prosecuting
his Jest with an intemperancy of Laughter, stopped up the passages of the
Spirits.

7. But Pindarus laying his head in the School on a Boy's lap, who was his only
delight, and composing himself for rest, was not known to be dead, till the
Master of the Exercising-place, where he lay, going to shut the doors, sought
in vain to wake him. Certainly the same favor of the Gods granted him his
Poetic Eloquence, and such an easy Death.

8. As happened also to Anacreon, though he had outlived the age of man, whom,
cherishing his old age with the juice of Raisins, the more thick moisture of
one Grape sticking in his Throat, carried off.

9. I will add those, whose Exit and Intent were alike. Milo the Crotoniate,
as he was traveling, seeing an Oak clest with Wedges, trusting to his
strength, went to the Oak, and thought with his hands to pull one from the
other. But the Wedges falling out, the Oak closed again, and there kept him,
till with all the Palms and Victories he had won, the wild beasts came and
devoured him.

10. Polydamas also, the Wrastler, being forced by stress of weather to shelter
himself in a Cave, which being weakened and ready to fall, while his Companions
ran away, he only stood still, thinking to have upheld the weight with his
Shoulders. But being oppressed with a weight more powerful than humane strength,
the shelter which he sought from the shower, became the Sepulcher of his own
mad fate. These Examples may teach us, that Vigor of Mind and vast Strength
of Body are not always companions. Nature not affording two such great Benefits
together, that the same person should at once be the most strong and the most
wise.

CHAP. XIII. Of Desire of Life.
ROMANS.
1. Mu. Aquilius Consular Legate. 2. Cn. Carbo thrice Consul. 3. D. Junius
Brutus Proconsul.
FORRAIGNERS.
1. Xerxes King of Persia. 2. Massinissa King of the Numidians. 3. Alexander
King of the Phereans. 4. Dionysius the Tyrant.
NOw because we have touched upon some casual, some courageous, some rash
terminations of Life; we may now add some that are low-spirited and
effeminate. That by the comparison it may appear, how Death may be sometimes
not only more stoutly, but more prudently desired.

1. Mu. Aquilius, when he might have bravely died, chose rather to be an
ignominious slave to Mithridates. Whether shall we say he best deserved the
Pontic punisshment, or the Roman Empire? Since he permitted private Ignominy to
be the public Shame.

2. Cn. Carbo is a great blot to the Latin Annals, who in his third
Consulship, being sent to be put to death in Sicily by Pompey, humbly and with
tears in his eyes begged of the Soldiers, that he might have time to ease
himself before he suffered, that he might enjoy that miserable moment of a
pitiful Life: and so long he delayed, till his head was sordidly cut off as he
sat. The words relating so much Pusillanimity, are at variance among
themselves, neither friendly to silence, because they deserve not to be
concealed; nor familiar to rehearsal, when the subject nau^eates.

2. Brutus with how much shame did he buy an unhappy and small moment of Life!
For being taken by Furius, whom Antonius had sent to apprehend him, not only
withdrew his Neck from the Sword; but being admonished to hold still, he swore
in these words, As I live, I will hold it sorth. O contemptible delay of fate!
O stolid and silly Oath! But these are thy deliriums, out of an immoderate
desire of the sweets of Life, expel^^ng that measure of Reason, which teaches
to love Life, yet not to fear Death.

FOREIGNERS.
1. Thou the same sweetness of Life did compel Xerxes to shed tears for the
armed Youth of all Asia, of which there would be none remaining in less than an
hundred years. Who thereby seemed to me, while he bewailed others, to deplore
his own condition. Happy rather in the multitude of his Riches, than in the
deep Reflection of his thoughts. For who but meanly prudent would bewail that he
was born mortal?

2. I will relate others now, who having others in suspicion, fought to have a
more exquisite care of themselves. Nor will I begin from the most miserable,
but one that was accounted the most happy among a few. Massinissa the King
reposing but little faith in Men, secured himself with a guard of Dogs. What
meant so large an Empire? What so great a number of Children? What the Roman
Friendship so strictly allied to him? If to secure all these, he thought
nothing more powerful than the barking and biting of Dogs?

3. Alexander was more unhappy than this King; whose mind on the one side
Love, on the other Fear tormented. For being infinitely enamored of his Wife
Thebe, going to her from a Banquet into her Chamber, he caused a Barbarian
Fugitive to go before him with his Sword drawn. Nor did he put himself to bed,
till he was diligently searched by those about him. A mixed Punishment, through
the anger of the Gods, that he could neither command his Lust nor his Fear. Of
whose Fear the cause and end was the same. For Thebe slew Alexander, provoked
by his Adultery.

4. Dionysius Tyrant of Syracuse, how long a story might he make of this fear?
Who prolonged a Tyranny of two and forty years, in this manner: He removed his
Friends, and substituted in their places men brought from the most fierce of
Nations, and stout Servants picked out of wealthy Families for his Guard; and
out of fear of a Barber, taught his Daughters to shave: into whose hands, when
they came to ripe Age, not daring to commit Iron, he ordered his Beard and Hair
to be burnt off with the flame of the skins of Walnuts. Nor was he a more
secure Husband than he was a Father. For having married at the same time
Aristomache of Syracuse, and Cloris of Locris, he never lay with either till
they were searched. And he entrenched his Bed, like a Camp, into which he went
over a wooden Bridge, leaving the outward Chamber Door open to his Guards, and
carefully locking the inner himself.

CHAP. XIV. Of Similitude of Form.
ROMANS.
1. Cn. Pompey the Great, with Vibius and Publicius. 2. Cn. Pompey Strabo with
Menogenes the Cook. 3. P. Scipio Nasica with Serapius. 4. P. Lentulus and Qu.
Metellus Consuls, with Spinther and Pamphilus the Players. 5. M. Messala and C.
Curio with Menoges and Bubuleius Scenics.
FOREIGNERS.
1. Antiochus King of Syria with Artemon. 2. Hybras the Orator with a Servant
of the Cymaeans. 3. A Sicilian Fisher with a Roman Praetor.
COncerning the likeness of Countenance and Proportion, the more Learned
dispute subtily. And some are of opinion, that it answers to the original and
composition of the blood. Nor do they draw a mean Argument from other
Creatures, which are like those that beget them. Others deny this to be the
Constitution of Nature, but an Accidental Chance of Conception. And therefore
many times the beautiful bring forth deformed, the strong produce weak
Children. But because the Question is doubtful, let us produce a few Examples
of noted Likeness.

1. Vibius of a good Family, and Publicius the Freed-man were so like Pompey
the Great, that changing their condition, they might have been saluted for him,
and he for them. Certainly, wherever Vibius or Publicius came, all men's eyes
were upon them; every one remarking the form of a mighty Citizen in persons of
mean degree. Which kind of Mockery became almost hereditary to him.

2. For his Father also was so exceeding like Menogenes his Cook, that a man
fierce in Courage and potent in Arms could not avoid that sordid name upon
himself.

3. Cornelius Scipio a young man, illustrious for his Nobility, abounding in
many famous Sirnames of his Family, could not escape the servile Appellation of
Scrapio; being so like a Killer of the Sacrifices who was of that Name. Nor
could the Probity of his Life, nor the Antiquity of his Family, any way prevail
against the Scandal.

4. A most generous Colleagueship was that of Lentulus and Metellus. Yet both
were looked upon as Players, so like they were to two Histrio's upon the Stage.
For the one got the surname of Spinther, an Actor of the Second Parts; and if
the other had not had the surname of Nepos from his Ancestors, he had had the
surname of Pamphilus, an Actor of Third Parts, whom he so much resembled.

5. But M. Messala, of Consular Dignity, was forced to receive the surname of
Menogenes; and Curio, abounding in wealth, that of Barbuleius: the one by
reason of the likeness of their Faces; the other, because of the likeness of
their Gate.

FOREIGNERS.
1. These are enough for Domestics, because they are particularly remarkable
in reference to the persons, and not obscure in relation to common knowledge.
There was one Artemon by name, and related to the Royal Family, who was
affirmed to be very like to King Antiochus: Whom Laodice having murdered her
Husband, to conceal the fact, laid in her Husbands Bed, to counterfeit the King
as sick. And by his Countenance and Voice deceived all people that were
admitted to see him, and believed that Laodice and her Children were
recommended by dying Antiochus to their care.

2. Hybreas of Mylasa, an Orator of a smart and copious Eloquence, was so like
a Servant of the Cymaeans, that swept the Wrastling-School, that all the eyes
of Asia took him for his own Brother; so like he was in all the Lineaments of
Face and Members.

3. But he that was in Sicily so like the Praetor, was of a petulant
disposition. For the Proconsul saying, That be wondered how he should come to
be so like him, when his Father had never been in that Country; But mine,
answered the other, went frequently to Rome. Revenging by that means the Injury
done to his Mothers Chastity, by a Suspicion thrown upon the Mother of the
Proconsul: yet more boldly than became a man that was under the Lash and Axe of
Authority.

Chap. XV. Of those who by lying have thrust themselves into Families which
they never belonged to.
1. L. Equitius Firmanus. 2. Erophilus the Farrier. 3. The false son of Octavia
Augustus 's Sister. 4. The false son of Sertorius. 5. Trebellius Calca. 6. C.
Asinius Dio, false.
FOREIGNERS.
1. Rubria of Millain false. 2. Ariarathes the false King of Cappadocia.
THe former was a tolerable piece of Impudence, and only dangerous to himself.
That which follows is no way to be endured, and not only privately, but
publicly dangerous.

1. For that I my not omit Equitius; a Monster out of Firmum in Piceni, whose
manifest lie in counterfeiting himself the Son of T. Gracchus, by the turbulent
mistake of the Vulgar, was defended by the power of the Tribune.

2. Herophilus the Farrier, by claiming Marius seven times Consul for his
Grandfather, so set himself forth, that most of the Colonies of the Veterane
Soldiers, and noble free Towns, adopted him for their Patron. Nay when Caesar,
having overcome young Pompey in Spain, had admitted the people into his
Gardens, he was saluted in the next space between the Pillars by the Multitude.
And had nor Caesar prudently prevented the storm, the Commonwealth had suffered
as much by him as by Equitius. But being banished out of Italy by him, after he
was taken into Heaven, the other returned into the City, and durst attempt to
plot the killing of the Senate. For which reason being by the command of the
Fathers put to Death in Prison, he had the late reward of a quick intention to
do mischief.

3. Neither was the Deity of the World, Augustus himself, ruling the world,
exempt from this kind of Imposture: There being a certain person that durst to
affirm himself born of the womb of his most dear Sister Octavia; saying, that
for the infirmity of his body, he was put out to the person that bred him, and
his Son taken in in his stead. Thus at the same time endeavoring to deprive a
most sacred Family of the Memory of their true Blood, and to contaminate it
with the contagion of a Lie. But while he soared to the utmost degree of
boldness, he was by Caesar condemned to the Galleys.

4. There was also one who affirmed himself to be the Son of Q. Sertorius,
whose Wife would by no means be compelled to acknowledge him.

5. Trebellius Calca, how steadfastly did he justify himself to be Clodius! And
while he contended for his Estate, was so favorably received by the Court of
Judicature, that the tumult of the people would hardly give way for a just and
legal Sentence. However, the Constancy of the Judges would not give way, either
to the Calumnies of the Claimer, nor the fury of the People.

6. Much more stoutly was that done by him, who when L. Sylla ruled in chief,
brake into the house of Asinius Dio, and expelled his Son out of doors,
clamouring that it was he that was Dio's Son. But when Caesar's Equity had
freed the Commonwealth from Sylla's Tyranny, a juster Prince steering the helm
of Government, the Impostor died in Jail.

FOREIGNERS.
1. While the same Prince governed, the Rashness of a Woman was punished at
Milan, upon account of the same Imposture. For attesting herself to be one
Rubria, and claiming by that means an Estace that belonged not to her; though
she wanted neither favor nor Witnesses, yet the invincible Constancy of Caesar
disappointed her of her hopes.

The same person compelled to just punishment a Barbarian affecting the Kingdom
of Cappadocia, and affirming himself to be Ariarathes, who was certainly known
to have been slain by Mark Antony; though at the same time he had deluded most
of the Cities and People of the East.

FINIS.

