THE RIGHT NOTION OF HONOR: As it was delivered in a SERMON BEFORE THE KING.
At NEWMARKET, October. 4. 1674. Published by his Majesty's special Command. WITH
ANNOTATIONS: The Contents whereof are in the following Leaf. By NATH. VINCENT,
D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty, and Fellow of Clare-Hall in
Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXV.

The Contents of the Annotations.
THE occasion of publishing this Discourse, after its suppression for so many
years.

A sure Expedient for attaining the greatest Honor.

This conception proved agreeable to the Divine Economy, in several
Particulars.

An account of the excellent Life, and a Specimen of the admirable Morals, of
that old Chinese Philosopher Cumfusu. Wherein we find the happy influence of
the Natural, and the Improved sense of Honor, upon the Manners of that People,
and the Prosperity of their Empire, in ancient times.

The contrary Sentiments of Ambitious, Revengeful or Mistaken Men, represented
in Historical Parallels between the old Politic Frights of Tyranny and Slavery
in other Countries, and the like seditious Clamours among our selves in the
late Rebellion.

HOnestatem voco intelligibilem pulchritudinem. S. August. Honestum idem quod
decorum spirituale. Dionys. de Div. Nomin. Formam ipsam and tanquam faciem
honesti vides, quae si oculis cerneretur, mirabiles amores, ut ait Plato,
excitaret sapientiae. Cic. Caesar cum quosdam ornare voluit, non ipsos
honestavit, sed ornamenta ipsa turpavit. Idem.

(...). Hierocl.

See the last Particular of the Sermon.

PSALM. VIII. part of Verse v. -- And have crowned Him with Glory and Honor.
THOUGH there is not any thing in the World, that has been always more valued
and desired than Honor, yet there is nothing that has been so little
understood, and explicated. True Honor does answer the Esteem that has been
always set upon it. It is the best of our seize in this Life: Nay, it is
all we can return to God himself, for all the Blessings he heaps upon us. Next
under God, our greatest Obligations are to our Prince, and to our Parents: Now
the Honor we pay to the Fathers of our Country, for the security of our
Persons and Fortunes, and to those that bred us for our Nurture and Education,
is the fullest Account of our Duty to both. Our Labors, Hardships, and
Dangers; the sharpest Pains, the cruellest Tortures, the worst of Deaths we can
undergo, have no greater temporal Reward than Honor. When God Almighty would
make a Creature, as happy as any thing could be, lower than an Angel, he
created Adam: of whom the Psalmist says, That his Maker gave him Dominion over
the Works of his Hands, and put all things in subjection under his Feet. In
short, He made him a King, and crowned him upon his Birthday, he crowned him
with Glory and Honor.

The Psalmist in this place describing the infinite Goodness of God, in
creating Man after his own Image, and in repairing afterward that Image in
him, calls His original Righteousness, and the Supplies of Grace after the
Fall, his Honor. For as we call the Perfections of the Divine Nature, to which
we owe our Being and Happiness, the Honor of God; so the Integrity and the
Renovation of humane Nature, are the Honor of Man, because they make him
capable of doing good. An Honor so great, that to express it fully, the
Original reads the former parts of the Verse thus, Thou have made him little
lower ((...)) than God, or almost a God. Now as we call the infinite
Perfections of God, and the Moral or Religious Excellencies of Man, their
Honor, upon account of the Benefits conferred by God upon Man, and by good Men
upon their fellow Creatures, so is it likewise in the case of Temporal,
Secondary, Imperfect Honor. Humane Authority, Power and Greatness is called
Honor, because it seems to imply and suppose in the Possessors, those
Perfections which tend to the Use, Benefit, and Welfare of Mankind. Thus
Magistrates, even when they are corrupt, are honored, because by their Station
and Condition, they are in many respects useful, and have always more Power and
better Opportunities of doing good than inferior Persons: From whose better
Resolutions, for the time to come, we cannot expect so much of public Benefit.
For this Reason, when Noblemen are dissolute, our Parents vicious, the Aged
profligate, there is still something of Respect, and Honor due to them, though
the Proportion of it is strangely lessened, by their defects and miscarriages.
That which I have here undertaken, is to give an account of Honor, both in its
best Sense, and in its largest Extent. To which purpose I conclude, That Honor
is the greatest Excellency both of uncreated and finite Nature, that we form
our Apprehensions of any Excellency according to its Title to Esteem, and that
we have the highest and most just Esteem of those Perfections by which we are
most of all relieved, supplied, assisted and comforted. What I have been
hitherto describing, I thus define; True Honor is eminent and beneficial
Goodness attested: And in the common imperfect Notion of it, It is any degree,
capacity, or resemblance of signalized Worth.

This Definition, as it comprehends the Particulars of my following Discourse,
so it serves us to make a Judgment of those two Conceptions of Honor, which
are as distant in their Sense, as their Age in the World. The one is old, the
other very new: the former is from Plato, Aristotle, and their Followers; the
latter from the Leviathan and his Disciples. According to the old Notion, it is
nothing but a Mark or Inscription upon supposed Goodness: According to the new
one, It is only an Instance, or Argument of Power. Honorable, says the
Leviathan, is whatsoever Possession, Action or Quality, is an Argument and Sign
of Power. His Comment is as bad as his Text, for he goes on thus. Covetousness
of great Riches, and Ambition of great Honors, are Honorable; as signs of
Power to obtain them. Nor does it alter the case of Honor, whether an Action
(so it be great and difficult, and consequently a sign of much Power) be just
or unjust: For Honor consists only in the Opinion of Power. For proof of
this, he mentions the fabulous Rapes and Thefts of the Heathen Gods, and he
says, That till there were constituted great Commonwealths, it was thought no
dishonor to be a Pirate, or a Highway-Thief.

Now he that makes Power to be the Foundation of Right, must make Honor to be
the effect of Power, though never so ill gotten. When an Usurper is to be
upheld and defended; Injustice, Violence, Ambition, Cruelty, Theft, Murder,
Sacrilege and Oppression, must be of his Lifeguard. I must needs say, That
although the old Opinion of Honor is defective, it is far more tolerable than
this Novel and lewd Extravagancy.

Would we then know what is to be understood by true and solid Honor, we must
be instructed by the Principles of Religion, and not the bare Dictates of
Natural Reason; we must learn it from the School of Christ, and not of Plato,
Aristotle, or any other, and worse Philosopher. So that the Heads of my
following Discourse will be these two Particulars.

I. According to the Opinion most Men have of Honor, it is either nothing at
all, or a very slight; empty, imaginary business.

II. The Christian Institution does give us the only true account of Honor,
and does advance us to the highest degrees of it.

I. For the first Particular, It is certain, that Honor is a greater reality
than most People make it. It must be something more than what it is represented
to be by the Leviathan-Philosophy, if there be any such thing in Nature. For
Power alone, and as it is distinguished from Goodness, is no sign or instance
of Honor.

Power opposed to Goodness is no Perfection, or Excellency. If Greatness were
nothing more than the Commission of great Robberies at Land, or Piracies at
Sea, the Ambition of great Honors, the Covetousness of great Riches, the
Gratification of Envy, Malice, Revenge and Cruelty; the worst of Creatures
would be the most Honorable, and the Prince of Darkness would be the greatest
Prince in Nature.

Power, when it is injurious and hurtful, when it is employed in the Oppression
of those it should preserve, is no real excellency. To destroy and ruin is the
basest and most degenerate Action that the worst of Men, and even the Devil
himself can be guilty of.

The Being and Welfare of Mankind are the Reasons of that Honor we pay unto
the Author and the Instruments thereof. But if to destroy and oppress is
unworthy and misbecoming a generous Mind; the Power so to do, abstractly
considered, can never be Honorable; nor plead a Title to the Significations of
that kind Esteem and beneficial Opinion in which external Honor does consist.

So that Honor is just the contrary to what the Leviathan would make it. It
must he something else than what he calls by that Name, or there is no such
thing in Nature. And indeed, as it is better described by the Schoolmen, and
their Masters the old Philosophers, we can never make any thing of it, that we
can call substantial and solid.

As I do not give the name of real Honor to any Excellency that is only the
Foundation or Reason of it, so neither can I grant that Appellation to the
Externals of it, to that respect and deference which is often paid, where it is
not at all due. I call Honor attested Goodness, since in the best common
account of it, it is only (...). Arist. Rhet. l. 1. c. 5.
a sign or proof that others think well of us; and so Honor shall be sometimes
given, not for the sake of any good Actions, but only of a Power or Obligation
to perform them.

It is commonly said to have its being in those that pay it, and not in those
that receive it. It is something, belike, we call ours, which we can neither
command nor secure; our own undoubted Right, that is always possessed and
disposed of by other People.

According to these Men, it is only a splendid Slavery, or a Mass of uncertain
Riches; a dangerous Trust, or a barren Title; a Formality, a Show, a Ceremony,
an Inscription; the late reward of macerating Study, or of the cruel hardships
of the Camp; the easy Spoil of Flattery, Malice, Ambition or Avarice; not so
often conferred upon known Merit, as revoked upon Mistake or Prejudice: the
mark of the Envious, and the frequent purchase of the Undeserving; though long
expected, and gained with Labor, Care, and Toil, yet quickly forfeited by
Negligence, Passion, Mischance, or Indiscretion.

Now Honor, which is the most valuable Enjoyment in this World, and which, in
its Perfection, is the Blessedness of the World to come; that which is the
greatest Gift we can receive from God or Man, must certainly amount to
something more than we can find in the foregoing Description of it. Which
brings me to the second Particular.

II. The Christian Institution does give us the only true account of Honor,
and does advance us to the highest Degrees of it. It shows us what Honor is in
God, and in Man.

I. We are instructed by the heavenly Doctrines of our Religion, in the Nature
and Reasons of that Honor we render unto God. It is observed, that the
Greatness of earthly Potentates concerns only their Subjects and Allies, those
they protect or assist, and is not regarded by the Inhabitants of far distant
Countries.

Honor is never paid as a just Debt, but to those Excellencies by which
Mankind is some way or other bettered, profited, or endeared. The Excellencies
of the Divine Nature do then only affect and ravish us, when we consider that
we owe our Happiness, Preservation, and Being, to them. We therefore adore and
reverence the Divine Goodness, Bounty, and Mercy, because we are thereby not
only redeemed from infinite Misery, but surrounded with innumerable Blessings.

God Almighty never appeared with so much Glory in the World, as when in the
second Person of the Trinity, he condescended for the recovery of Mankind, to
take our Nature upon him, and to humble himself even unto the Death of the
Cross.

When the Son of God came down from Heaven, the way he took to illustrate his
Glory, was by doing the greatest Good, and by making Peace between God and Man.
When he was to prove his Divinity, he wrought not one Miracle, only to surprise
and astonish the Beholders, not one that did not show he was sent to bring
Health and Salvation to the Sons of Men, and to be the great Example, and
effectual Promoter, of Goodness and Piety.

This was the end of the Creation, for this reason did the Heavens declare the
Glory of God, and the Firmament show his Handywork, that the manifestation of
his Goodness might be the Glory of his Power.

He framed the World by his omnipotent Hand, not that his Creatures should for
ever stand gazing, wondering and amusing themselves at his Power, but that they
should be led on by the consideration of it to admire his Goodness.

He is unchangeable in his Nature, and cannot receive any Additions to his
Glory and Happiness, by all our Praises and Services. This therefore was his
Motive, That it was a proper Work, an action hugely befitting, suitable and
congruous to infinite Goodness, to communicate, discover and manifest it self,
in the exercise of that immense Wisdom and Power with which it is joined.

Finite Beeings were not created upon account of any Use, Benefit, or new
Satisfaction to their Maker, who was entirely happy from all Eternity, in the
Contemplation of himself, and the infinite Ravishments of his
inexpressibly-glorious Nature. But he spoke us into Being, and exercised his
Almighty Power in the Production of all things, because it was the most natural
Use of inexhaustible Goodness, to diffuse, open and exert it self in all the
Varieties of the greatest Love, and the wisest Contrivance: To the end he might
behold in every Region, through the vast Tracts of Nature, ten thousand times
ten thousand Myriads of Representations, and clear Images of his boundless
Goodness: That he might not only be entertained at the dawning of the World,
with those first Anthems in the Celebration of his glorious Bounty by the Sons
of the Morning, and with the Adorations, Praises and Thanksgivings of his
Church throughout all Ages of the World; but likewise by all the bright Legions
of Angels, by all the Companions of the glorified Order, by the whole Quire of
Heaven, enthroned Martyrs, rejoicing Sufferers, triumphant Captives, crowned
Saints, comforted Mourners, and the Spirits of just Men made perfect; ascribing
Rev. 4. 11. c. 5. 13. c. 19. 1.
Honor, Salvation, Blessing, Glory and Power unto our God for ever and ever.

Thus we see that Honor in God, so far as it commands the due regard of
intelligent Beeings, is the Manifestation of the Divine Goodness in our
Temporal or Eternal Happiness.

2. Christianity alone does rightly inform us, what Honor is in Man: Namely,
that it is both the reward and the discharge of his Duty.

(1.) Honor in Man is the reward of his Duty, either in this World, or in the
next. It is here, the Benefit that accrues to us from the good Opinion of wise
and good Men; it is what we gain by our Moral or Religious Excellencies, by our
Services in the Church or in the State; in the Court or in the Camp; by our
Tongues or Hands; by our Pens or Swords.

It is the Princes Favor, the sense of good Laws, the munificence of Founders
and Benefactors, in the encouragement of that virtuous Industry to which the
corrupted Nature of Man is of all things the most averse.

In reference to the other World, Honor is that Goodness which does entitle us
to the Divine Favor and Acceptance; whereby we are admitted into the nearest
Relation unto himself; by which good Men become his adopted Children, a chosen
Generation, a royal Priesthood, not Servants only, which is Honor enough, but
the Sons of the most High, and more than that, Kings and Priests unto God:
Hereby they receive the Inheritance as well as the Adoption of Sons, and the
Kingdom prepared for them, from the beginning of the World; immortal Honor,
and an exceeding weight of Glory.

(2.) Honor is not only the Reward, but it is likewise the discharge and
exemplary Performance of our Duty. Honor, (quite contrary to what the
Leviathan asserts) is that quality or action which is a sign of extraordinary
Goodness. To turn his Words, I assert the contempt of great Riches, and the
refusal of great Honors to be Honorable, as they are Signs of that unusual
Goodness which does at the same time both deserve and despise them.

The Hebrew words for Glory and Honor (...) and (...) signify a recommendable
quality and endowment, as well as Promotion or Ornament. The latter without the
former is the least part of Nobility; which is then complete and perfect, when
Power and Goodness meet together.

We therefore find in S. Paul's Instructions 1 Timothy 5. 17.
to Timothy, That there is a greater Reverence due to our Superiors, than what
their mere Power and Authority requires of us; That the Elders who rule well
are to be counted worthy of double Honor. In the sight of God, and the opinion
of all good Men, Persons of Honor are far less noble by their Birth, and the
highest Extraction, than by Virtue and humble Piety.

Upon this account it is; that in the History of the Patriarchs, Japhet the
eldest Son of Noah, is thrust down beneath his two younger Brothers, and Sem
the second Son is named and reputed as the Eldest. For this reason Abraham was
named before Haran the eldest Son of Terah, Isaac was set before Ishmael, and
Jacob advanced above his elder Brother Esau. Hence it was, that Jacob, in
Blessing his Sons, laid his right Hand upon Ephraim's Head, who was the
Younger, and his left upon Manasseh the firstborn.

When Aristotle bequeathed to the Schools the common received Notion of Honor,
he taught the World to believe that Honor has its being (...). Eth. Nicom. c.
rather in those that yield it, than in the Persons honored. When he
maintained this, he had a regard only to the Ceremonies, the attire and
externals of Honor, not to the Foundation and Original, the Reasons and
genuine Causes of it. For he adds at the same time (...). Eth. Nicon. c. 3.
, that People seem to pursue Honor in hopes to be accounted good Men.

He says, that (...).
in all those things or actions which are justly rewarded with Honor, there is
Honesty and Virtue. This he delivers as a plain Demonstration, and makes it
(...). Rhet. l. 1. c. 9
a necessary Consequence, for Virtue to be honorable. He shows us with great
acuteness, the nature and connection of Honor and Virtue, when he determines
the former to be (...). l. 1. c. 5.
the proof of an opinion in others, which is a benefit to our selves, and the
latter to be that (...). l. 1. c. 9.
Power in us whereby we are beneficial unto others. They are (...). l. 1. c. 5.
honored (says he) in Justice, and in the highest degree, that do good in the
World: But yet still the Man is honored that has the Power of doing Good.

These Sentiments of Aristotle have passed for sound Divinity among the
Scholastic Doctors: who tell us, That bad Governors and vicious Parents are
to be honored, as they have the Stamp, Commission, or Authority of Almighty
God: That Nobility and Age are honorable, merely as Signs or Resemblances of
that Virtue, which is the eternal Reason of Honor.

So that when the forementioned Qualifications are wanting, then it is that Men
give Honor where Honor is not due, then are they guilty of the old Idolatry
of throwing Stones to Mercury's Heap, reproved by (b) Solomon; and S. Paul's
respect (h) Prove. 25.
of Persons.

This we are taught even by Nature it self; for all Mankind has naturally
something of the Nation, as well as of the Sense and Desire of Honor. There is
an old Pagan Empire on the further side of Asia, where the Religion and
Learning, which they had for above two thousand years, was to study the repair
of Humane Nature, the perfection of Government, and the Reasons of Honor.
Their Emperor (whom they styled the Son of Heaven) was for the most part a
Philosopher, and always a very improved Person. Their Nobility was not from
Families, but from Wisdom and Knowledge: And as Men grew eminent for their
Intellectual and Moral Endowments, so they were accordingly enriched and
preferred.

There are Instances enough from whence we may conclude, that by attending to
the sound Dictates of Reason, we may raise our selves to greater Honor, than
by any other Methods, besides Christian Piety, and the most ennobling Precepts
of our Religion. Which is the last Particular.

2. As the Doctrine of our Savior gives us the truest Account of Honor, so
its due Practice does advance us to the highest degrees of it. As our natural
Principles of Justice, Honesty, and Goodness, were our first embellishment, so
the recovery and improvement of them, by the Grace of the Gospel, is the
highest degree of Honor that mortal Man can arrive at.

That which is the greatest Perfection, is likewise the greatest Ornament of
Humane Nature.

Upon this account it was, that Plato in Alcib. Conviv. Phadr.
(...), among the Greeks, and Frigidus and Sylvis Aquilo decussit honorem.
Virg. Georg. 2. Hunc virum bonum dixisti, and honoris causa appellasti Cic. pro
Q. R.
Honor with the Latins were used to signify both Honesty and Beauty. For as
the clearness of the Complexion, and the proportion of Parts, is the Beauty of
the Body; so the Purity of the Mind, and the Harmony, or correspondence of our
Actions to the Principles of Reason and Religion, is not only the Beauty, and
charming sweetness of the Soul, but an Honor like that which we pay unto God
himself.

Such is the Beauty of Holiness, so lovely are the Features of Goodness, that
it is admired by all the World, and the very worst of men; like the innocence
of its Divine Author, to which Pilate bore witness, when he sacrificed it to
the malice of the Jews.

On the other hand, there is nothing so foul, misshapen, and ugly as Sin,
there is no Monster so deformed, no Beast so filthy; could we see it in all its
lineaments, we should find it more hideous than the Devil himself in his worst
shape; it is far more black than it was ever yet painted.

But now the everlasting Righteousness of the Gospel does ennoble and raise us
as many Degrees above Nature, as the seize of Nature and Reason all one
can advance us above the level of Beasts.

By the conduct of Reason we are brought to the Honor of being temperate,
liberal, just, merciful, kind, and faithful: But by our Christian Institution,
and the guidance of the Spirit of Grace, it is our Glory, and Crown of
rejoicing, that we do not only abstain from the filthiness of the Flesh, but
the uncleanness of the Spirit; that we are so far from invading what is our
Neighbors, that we do not so much as look upon it with a covetous, or impure
Eye: That we can be kind where we expect no return, and love others besides our
Friends, and pity those Enemies which other Men hate.

When Sin had filled the World with Contention, Fierceness, and Cruelty; when
the Teeth of the old Serpent that were sown in the accursed Earth, had sprung
up in a Race of Men that were all in Arms against one another; how glorious was
that Christian Charity that could forgive an Injury, do good to an Enemy, pray
for a Persecutor, and relieve an impoverished Oppressor!

Surely there is no Honor in this World so great as to desire, contrive and
promote the Welfare of all Mankind: to be concerned like the Providence of God,
for the good of the whole Creation.

That Christian Charity which thinks no evil, is more glorious, as well as
more lasting, than all the greatness of this World: Nay, the Glory which shall
be revealed hereafter, is not worthy to be compared unto it, for that will but
make us like unto the Angels, this will make us like unto God.

Such Honor have all good men in the most private Capacity, which one would
think sufficient to satisfy any pardonable Ambition, and yet it is not to be
named with the Glory of Pious Greatness.

The Virtues of Princes and Grandees, are the greatest Temporal Blessings to
Mankind. Our Savior speaking of the Kings of the Gentiles, says, they were
styled (...), Benefactors. Such, they always are, or ought to be.

They that govern should be eminently bountiful and Pious. The World had been a
foul reproach to him that made it, if when he erected the Government of it, he
had not given Power, Credit, and Superiority to Goodness, and debased
wickedness by the distinct Characters of shame and hatred.

Had the Almighty committed the Government of the World to the monstrous
Leviathan; had Violence been the Rule and Standard of humane Affairs; had
Cruelty been allowable, and Rapine just, the World had quickly been tumbled
into the Confusions of its first Chaos.

It is the Glory of good Princes and Potentates, that they are the Instruments
of the Divine Providence in preserving Mankind from those Desolations, into
which their wild Passions would certainly plunge them.

That the World might subsist, when Sin had discomposed it, God was pleased to
ordain and separate some particular Men for the conduct and protection of the
rest: to be more his Image, than others of the same Race: to represent him
after a more lively manner in that Goodness to which we owe our Being and
Preservation; and withal to derive and convey it unto those, who continually
depend upon it.

The World is upheld, and the order of things maintained by the Charity and
good Offices of good Men to one another: not of all good Men alike, but of
those more especially, who were born for that very end of a better Race, and
were sent into the World better stocked with generous Principles than other
People. They are of that strain, where the Men are Valiant and Just, and the
Women Chaste, out of a Sense of the Obligations they lay under by their very
Birth and Extraction. They are Persons whose natural Elevation of mind
withholds them from sordid Advantages, and base Pleasures.

Justice and Charity, Mercy and Pity, Love and Benignity, are as great
Ornaments to our selves, as Benefits to others. But these excellent Virtues are
never so beneficial to the World, as when they are improved into Christian
Graces, and are the Fruits of the Spirit.

It is the truest and highest Nobility for Men to be as great in their Piety,
as in their Stations; to have the good report of a good Conscience, and not to
blot their Escutcheons by staining their Christian Profession.

When Princes execute Justice and Judgment, when they deliver the Oppressed,
and assert the Cause of the Innocent: when they are nursing Fathers to the
Church of Christ, a terror to evil doers, and a praise to them that do well,
when they walk before God with a perfect Heart, and whilst they are enthroned
upon Earth, have their Conversation in Heaven, then it is that they are Crowned
with Glory and Honor.

Now to the King Immortal, Invisible, the only wise God, be Honor and Glory
for ever and ever, Amen.

ANNOTATIONS.
PAge 15. The Munificence of Founders and Benefactors, etc.

When His Majesty was pleased to command the Printing of the foregoing Sermon;
the mistake of some Persons, and the ill will of others, furnished the Author
with an Allowed Excuse.

The undeserved Usage he then met with, and his continual Discouragements ever
since, have so far unfitted him to appear in the World; that the Preacher, and
his Notes, had still lain hid together in the same Closet, had not the Sense of
his Obligations to the College that bred, and maintains him, prevailed above
that of his many Defects, and the great Honor of obeying the King, in a
Command, that was equally indulgent and dispensable.

He had no other Motive to the Publication of these Papers, neither did he need
any other, than the desire of his honored and worthy Colleagues, to recommend
in a printed Epistle, the present attempt to finish our fair Building; and our
design of a College Hall, of which great convenience we have as yet no more
than the bare Foundation.

To which purpose, that our Paper-Messenger may find his way to all the liberal
Hands in the Nation, he is furnished with a Guide, and Fellow Travelers. Or
else this first Note, for the sake of which the rest were communicated, as well
as the Discourse to which they all belong, may pass for a Use of Exhortation at
the end of the Sermon; as it urges the best practice of our Duty, and the
noblest Exercise of Honor; in the following Periods.

A General Address to all bountiful Encouragers of Religion and Learning, in
the behalf of Clare-Hall in Cambridge: which remains half built, after all the
endeavors of the Society for more than Forty years to finish it.
OUR College, which as to its Antiquity, is the Second in the University, has
from the very Age in which it was Founded, been always Unhappy, either in the
Ruins, or the Defects of its Building. It did at one time suffer so much by
Fire, that a very considerable part of it (wherein were the Master's Lodgings,
the Treasury, and what was therein reposited of greatest Value) was to the
irreparable damage of the College consumed.

But long before that time, and when it had numbered but sixteen years, the
whole Fabric was by a casual Fire burnt to the ground. This occasioned the
resigning of its first Foundation by Richard Badew (as the University Tables
relate more particularly) into the hands of the incomparable Lady Elizabeth de
Burgo, one of the three Co-heiresses of Gilbert the last Earl of Clare and
Gloucester, who bestowed upon the then ruined Society a new College, and upon
the College, unendowed before, such fair Revenues, as justly required that it
should be called for ever after by her own Excellent Name.

But yet the most valuable part of a College, a Chapel, was wanting for above
two hundred years; till the Society had by their good Husbandry saved so much
Money, as with the Gift of a hundred Pounds built one, with a fair Library over
it.

Within another hundred years, what our Foundress built for us decayed: part of
it fell down: and that the College and its Inhabitants might not be buried
together in the same Ruins, that new and unfinished Fabric we now enjoy was
begun: of which, (to justify Scholars, against those that charge them with
Luxury and Profuseness) at least one half was erected, with that Stock which
many years frugality had treasured up; and with that Credit, which brought
indeed a heavy Debt upon the College, but which, by the wary management of our
Revenue, we have since discharged. The other, and greater part was built by the
Contribution of some large, and many small Sums: by which charitable
assistance we had fair hopes of finishing our College, had we not been
prevented by the late Troubles.

Since His Majesty's Happy Restoration, we have obtained an Addition; upon
which, and the Avenues of our College, we have expended above two thousand
Pounds. And yet we have still got no farther than half our Building, in the
completing whereof, we are now engaged.

We have begun with our own private Subscriptions: but we are unable to
proceed, without those liberal aids from abroad, which (without considering
either the former products of our Education, or our future usefulness to the
Public, or the ornament we shall add to the University, or the general
satisfaction we shall hereby give to Scholars, and all that favor them) the
Beauty and Elegancy of our Building alone, without the help of other Topics,
does beg with more Rhetoric, than we our selves can ever command.

In this Affair, we do at once both importune and serve our Friends, whilst we
offer to their Improvement the best of Opportunities. For as there is no
disposal of Wealth so commendable, so there is none so necessary, as that we
now solicit.

Since Piety, and useful Knowledge are of greater Consequence to the Welfare of
Mankind, than any thing in the World besides: that ingenuous liberality which
is necessary to the support of them, is the clearest proof of Christian
sincerity, and as much our Privilege as our Duty. Since we are Debtors to
Heaven for all that we are, and have; our right is undeniably forfeited, nay,
and our Possession too is endangered, when we fail in those expressions of
Thankfulness, which are all the return we can make, but are no part of Payment
without the Divine Acceptilation even of the easy condition which entitles us
to the satisfaction of our Redeemer, which does at once both discharge and
renew our Debt, which makes the least offering an acceptable Sacrifice, and our
perishing Riches to become an immortal Treasure.

Since we have so high a value for Wealth, and are so very unwilling to part
with it, when it is against our Interest to keep it, and when we are forced to
leave it; propitious Heaven, in the Opportunities of pious Munificence, has put
it into our Power to be always Rich. This is the way to receive the greatest
Benefit from our most dangerous Enemy Wealth, which lays retrenched in the
Bowels of the Earth, as if it were conscious to its self of the innumerable
Mischiefs it has done, by its Sallies into the open World.

For Persons of great Estates and Fortunes, to make no other returns of all
their Plenty, but in those shameful Excesses which Beasts are never guilty of,
is that which every Man, while he continues a Man, condemns: for the Wealthy to
provide freely for their present harmless Satisfaction, and for the future
happy Subsistence of their Offspring, is what Nature, allowably enough, does
suggest: but for these Persons, while they design their Contentment, not to
forget their Safety; while they study the happiness of their Heirs, to think of
their own, and to bestow, at least one Legacy upon their better part, is what
Christian Wisdom does with the highest Reason dictate.

So that if rich Men desire the satisfaction of the best and truest Improvement
of their Fortunes, if they would do all the good they can both to themselves
and others; the greatest temporal Good they can receive, by the consent of all
the wise Men that ever lived in the World, is the Honor that is gotten by good
Actions; and the greatest good they can ever hope to do, is that disposal of
their Wealth, which upholds and cherishes the two best things of this World,
Piety and Learning: whereby the truly Charitable will have the Happiness, not
only of future and infinite Recompenses, but they will likewise attain that
end, which is always the meaning, but never the effect of paternal Fondness, an
Immortality here upon Earth.

By this means they will inherit the just esteem of wise Men, of such as know
how to use their Fortunes, and that do not love their Money better than
themselves. They will continue in this World, even when they are possessed of a
better, and by their bountiful Donations, they will, in all succeeding Ages,
still remain here, exercising the greatest Charity, that is, instructing the
Ignorant, reclaiming the Vicious, and relieving the Necessitous.

The fair Monuments of their Piety will out-last all others: and if the World
should happen to survive them, yet the Memory of them will not be lost till
Charity it self shall fail. Their excellent names will not then be buried, when
they shall become too great a weight for the Pillars that bear them: they must
needs live, being repeated thrice every year in public and solemn
Commemorations, with the greatest Honor that can be paid them by ingenuous
Men; in a Society collected from the distant parts of our own Country, from
whence their Charity and Fame will be carried or sent abroad to all others, and
sent down to all Posterity; with the Sculpture of our Building, the History of
our Benefactors, and with the just, sincere, and eternal Acknowledgments of

The Master, and Fellows of Clare-Hall.

PAge 17. Japhet the eldest Son of Noah, etc. We cannot conclude the respective
Ages of the Sons of Noah, from the Order in which they are named. For then Ham
would be the second Son. But that he was the youngest is plain from Genesis 9.
where it is related v. 22. That when Ham saw the nakedness of his Father, he
told his two Brethren without: and v. 24. That when Noah awoke from his Wine,
he knew what his younger Son had done unto him.

Neither can Sem be the firstborn. For Noah was six hundred years old when the
Flood came upon the Earth, Genesis 7. 6. He was five hundred years old when he
begat his eldest Son, Genesis 5. 32. The Son whom at that Age he begat, could not
be Sem; for he was not an hundred years old, till two years after the Deluge,
Genesis 11. v. 10.

Forasmuch then as Noah's eldest Son was an hundred years old when he entered
the Ark, and Sem was then but ninety eight; it follows evidently that Japhet
must be the eldest of the Sons of Noah.

These Particulars are confirmed by the general Sense of the Jewish Doctors.
(...) says R. Solomon Jarchi, of the Sons of Noah, Japhet the last named, is
the eldest. But there is better Authority for the Assertion. The Septuagint
Version says it expressly, Genesis 10. 21. (...). They here call Japhet in the
plainest words can be spoken, the elder Brother of Sem. Flaminius Nobilius
having compared the Copies of the Septuagint, reports their Agreement in this
reading.

Neither is it only in Pagnin, Arias Montanus, Tremellius, the Polyglott
Interlineary, and our last English Translation, The Brother of Japhet the
Elder; but the Sense, Propriety, and constant Grammatical Construction of the
Hebrew do fully prove it. For when these words are to be expressed in the Holy
Language, Sem the elder Brother of Japhet, it must be (...)* But if we will
have the forementioned words to be the English of (...) we shall never be able
to find, in any part of the Scripture, the like Interpretation: much less can
we tell how the Hebrew should express those last words of this Text any other
way, without departing from its Idiom, or involving its Sense in an ambiguous
Phrase.

PAge 19. Throwing of Stones to Mercury 's Heap. If we enquire what Mercury's
Heap was, we shall see what Reasons S. Hierom had for this rendering of Prove.
26. 8. Sicut qui mittit lapidem in acervum Mercurii: ita qui tribuit honorem
insipienti. Whom our English, according to its usual regard to him, should thus
follow in translating the Text, As he that throws a Stone to Mercury's Heap;
so is he that gives Honor to a Fool. The payment of Honor, where it is not
due, is compared to the blind Idolatry of the Gentiles in worshipping Mercury
by throwing Stones to his consecrated Pile.

This is the account of the (...) in Homer, Odyss. 16. which was an elevated
place in that City of Ithaca, from whence Eumaeus saw the Rivals of Ulysses
returning.

-- (...)
(...).
Eustathius upon this place informs us, that Demosthenes the Thracian, who
wrote a Paraphrase upon Homer (long since lost) concludes, that the place where
Eumaeus had this prospect, and which was called (...), had its name from the
Ceremonies of Mercury. He reports it to signify besides a heap of Stones in
the Highway.

Such were the Terminales lapides among the Romans, for showing the Bounds of
their Lands, which Lib. 4. de Coronis, c. 4.
Paschalius upon a Distich in the first Elegy of Tibullus observes to have been
adorned with Crowns and Garlands.

Although there was no Statue in the place, yet every Heap of Stones was
Sacred. Which Heaps were increased by the superstitious Diligence of Passengers
throwing Stones to them in Honor of Mercury. This Idolatrous Practice is
mentioned in the Talmudic Book Sanhed. c. 7.
Sanhedrin (...) He that throws a Stone to Mercury, is a Person that commits
Idolatry, for Mercury is thus worshipped.

This Pagan Rite had its Original from a Fable of Mercury, which is not
commonly met withal. The Story is, that when he had killed Argus, and was to
be tried for the Fact in a Senate of the Gods, he pleaded Jupiter's Commission.
The Gods were thereupon afraid to condemn him: and that they might not incur
the displeasure of their King, they threw down those Stones, by which they were
to give their Suffrages, at the Feet of the Criminal: which did not only
discharge him from Punishment, but was likewise the occasion of the
forementioned Ceremony, as well as the gathering of Votes in Judicature by
Stones.

This (...) does also signify an Altar erected to Mercury: or the Basis of his
Image: or those Stones which showed the distances of Miles, and Furlongs:
Mercury being, not only the Tutelar Deity, but said likewise to have been the
first Officer for the Highways, and to have begun the clearing of them from
great Stones. These Stones were laid together by the Ways side, and upon the
foregoing account they were styled (...), Mercurial Heaps.

These Remarques explain that old dark Inscription,

Deo Merc --
Viaco
M. Attilius
Silonis F.
Quir. Silo
Ex voto.
We have here likewise an Illustration of that passage in the Epigram:

-- Apollinis aras
Arcanumque Vii --
This Arcanum Vii was the mysterious Religion of the Cabiri in Samothracia: of
which Cabiri Mercury is reckoned for one, in that old Distich that recites them,

Juno, Vesta, Minerva, Ceres, Diana, Venus, Mars,
Mercurius, Jovi', Neptunus, Vulnanus, Apollo.
We are told by Drusius out of an Arabic Book against the Alcoran, that it was
a Practice of the Indians, to pile up Stones in Honor of their Gods. From them
it was carried over into Arabia: where the worshipping of Venus with the same
Ceremony, was the only piece of Idolatry which Mahomet retained at Mecha. The
Arabian Convert agrees to this Sense of Salomon's expression. Neither is the
forecited Passage one of the weakest Arguments for our subscribing to S.
Hierom's translating the Expression, Acervum Mercurii.

Why we should not follow the Septuagint, and translate the Hebrew Word, a
Sling, we have moreover these Reasons. That since the Hebrew Word (...)
signifies a heap of Stones, since the Superstition of those Mercurial heaps was
spread through the East many Ages before Solomon, since the very name of
Mercury was formed out of this Word Margemah; since Manetho, though a fabulous
Writer, is confirmed by Josephus in his Opinion, That they were Seth's Pillars:
To interpret the expression, As he that ties a Stone in a Sling, is a sense
which those that are best acquainted with the Pagan Rites, and the Jewish
Learning, cannot admit of as the most obvious, true, natural, and worthiest of
the wise Author of the saying.

Besides all this it is certain, that Margemah is of the same signification
with (...) Markolis the Talmudic name of Mercury, and of his Image or Statue.
They are used promiscuously by the oldest Jewish Writers. The Medrasch on the
Proverbs thus paraphrases the passage, (...) Whoever honors a Fool, is like
him that throws a Stone to Mercury.

This is not the only instance in the Old Testament, that shows the Antiquity
of the Pagan Idolatry. Orion and the Pleiades are mentioned by Job: Whose
youngest Daughter is called in the Hebrew, The Horn or Ray of Beauty, that is,
says the version of the Seventy, The Horn of Amalthaea, (...), Job 42. 14.

In the desolation of Babylon, Isai 13. 21, 22. it is said by the Vulgar Latin,
and the Maronites, That Satyrs shall dance, and Sirens lodge there. Sirenes and
Daemonia illic salt abunt.

So likewise in Ezechiel's Vision, chapter 8. v. 14. At the North Door of the
Temple, there sat Women lamenting Adonis, concluded by S. Hierom to be
understood by Tammuz. Mulieres sedebant plangentes Adonidem.

Now S. Gregory Nyssen in his ninth Homily on the Canticles, gives good
satisfaction to those that wonder at the mention of Poetic Fables in the holy
Oracles of God.

PAge 19. There is a Pagan Empire on the further side of Asia.

It is that Empire where all Nobility is from Worth and Knowledge, where none
are born great but those of the Royal Family, where Men are honored and
advanced then only when they deserve to be so.

The principal Sect among them, called Jukia, has no other charge, but to mind
the business of Government, and the practice of Moral Virtues.

This people, the Inhabitants of Cathaia, and the Northern China, have little
Philosophy that is considerable, besides Morality. Their chief Science is the
Moral Contemplation of Man: In which it is their business to consider the
Offices of Princes and their Subjects, of Parents and Children, Husbands and
Wives, Brethren and Friends. They have three thousand Rules concerning Decency,
Civility, Modesty, and the Virtues of that Rank. Prudence is one of their most
admired Virtues: And next to that they esteem Courage, when it is employed in
the conquest of our selves.

They value Justice, because it directs us to look into our selves, when we
determine any thing referring unto others: In which they place the highest
degree of Humane Perfection. They say they are lovers of Virtue for no other
Reason, but because it is its own abundant Recompense. They do not concern
themselves in any enquiries about future matters; alleging, they have not yet
attained the knowledge of those things that are before their Eyes.

They understand little, and dote very much in Natural Philosophy. They hold a
double Metempsychosis, that of Pythagoras, and the transmigration of the Soul
into new Passions and Desires. They affirm all the Events of this Life to be
Good or Evil, according to our Opinion and Judgment of them.

The great things that are reported of them are credible enough, if it can be
made out, That they are the Posterity of the old Seres: Quos Lusitani perperam
Sinas appellarunt, says the very learned Mr. Is. Vossius in his late Tract, De
Art. and Scientiis Sinarum: And when we receive the account of their Socrates,
that Divine Philosopher Cumfusu.

Now Ptolemy, Mela, Pliny, Strabo, Salinus, Dionysius and others, make the
Country of the Seres to border Southward upon India without Ganges, and to be
that very Tract which is now called China. Pliny taking notice of the
simplicity of their Manners, says, they are very unlike their Neighbors the
Scythians.

Those very places which Ortelius, Mercator, and the generality of Modern
Geographers make the Boundaries of China, are named by the Ancients as the
Confines of Serae. Ptolemy sets their Country (whose Metropolis, he says, was
called Sera) in the Neighborhood of Scythia, on the outside of the Mount
Imaus, next India without Ganges, and on the further side of Asia. The same
situation is given them by Ammianus Marcellinus, who asserts their Country to
reach Southward as far as India, Ganges and the forenamed Mountain Imaus. In
Pomponius Mela, we find the Serae, and the Chinese to be the same people: And
that the Persians and Saracens call the Inhabitants of Cathaia, Seres. Solinus
carries us through the Scythian and Eastern Ocean to this Country; which
Pausanias says, derives its name from the Worms that supply the Inhabitants
with Silk, which according to him and others, as we find in Suidas, are called
in Greek (...), Seres.

This appears further from their great plenty of Silk, and their skill in
weaving it: Which was first called Serica, from their Country. Their Art is
thus set out by Dionysius in his Periegesis, v. 755.

(...),
(...).
(...).
Weaving rich colored Robes they Flowers strew,
Such as Dame Natures Tapistry does show,
Such as the Spiders finest Art out-go.
There have been those Opinions, and Reports of their great Antiquity, that
might give some occasion to the vast Extravagancies of the Chinese Chronology.
They are the oldest people that were known to Pliny: Primi sunt hominum qui
noscantur Seres, is his account of them. And Tertullian in his Book De Cultu
foem. says they were Weavers, Ab initio rerum, from the beginning of the World.
Primos hominum Seres cognoscimus, are the Words of Julius Solinus, The Seres we
know to be the first Generation of Men.

Besides this, the exact similitude of Temper, in the Historical Accounts of
both, is a sufficient Argument of their being the same people. The best
description of the Seres, we have from Eusebius in these Words: (...). The Law
of the Seres is against Murdering, Whoring, Thieving, and all worshipping of
Images. And in that most spacious Country you shall not see a Shrine, a
Fornicatress, an Adultress, a Thief arraigned, a Murderer tried, a Man slain.
(He goes on disputing against Fate.) The Influence of Mars belching Fire from
the midst of Heaven, has never forced the Liberty of any man's Will to give a
fatal Stab to another. The Conjunction of Venus and Mars did never force any
Man in that Region to an adulterous Embrace, though Mars is there to be seen in
the midst of the Heavens every day, and in every hour of the day there are
Children born among the Seres.

The like Citation of Vigerus in a Note upon this Passage, may be supposed to
be taken from an Author of good Credit and Antiquity, though he does not name
him.

That the Seres were the Ancestors of the Chinese, appears in other Instances.
The Chinese wear no Weapons, travel without Arms, and have little or no esteem
for Soldiers. The like account we have from Strabo of the Seres: that they
reckoned it a crime for men to exercise themselves (...), in the Arts of War.
He likewise mentions their (...), their Frugality, and Healthfulness. As
Lucian, when he speaks of the most long-lived Nations, names the Seres in the
first place, and ascribes their Longevity to their Temperance.

Ammianus Marcellinus tells us they lived quietly, Strangers to Arms and Wars,
nulli finit imorum molesti, troublesome to none of their Neighbors, the most
frugal of all Nations in a most plentiful Country, that they studied the
tranquillity of Life, and avoided the Conversation of the rest of Mankind.

Mites quidem, says Pliny of them, they were meek People, but fled from
Strangers like Beasts, and had no Communication of Language with any other
Country. To which Solinus adds, that they traded with Merchants without verbal
Conference, Mercium pretia oculis aestimantes, buying and selling with their
Eyes, and allowing Merchants only to cross their first River. This is the same
Character that we find of them in Stephanus de Vrbibus, namely that they were
(...), a People that would not mingle with other Societies.

This shieness and aversion to Strangers was found to be the temper of the
Chinese by Marcus Paulus Venetus, who first discovered them to the Europaeans;
and is confirmed by many others, who give us surprising Relations of the
Innocence and Honesty of the Chinese in the days of their great Master of
Morals CVMFVSV, and in the Ages after him.

The Chinensian Socrates CVMFVSV, by the Precepts of his admirable Philosophy,
did work a perfect Reformation in the Manners of the People. He restored the
use of Weights and Measures, the decence of Funerals, the duty of Children in
maintaining their indigent Parents, and the Integrity of Merchants in their
Affairs. He prevailed with the Men of the Age to be just and kind; and the
Women to be chaste, humble, and quiet.

He brought the whole Empire to the Temper of a single well-ordered Family.
They had for one another the tenderness of Parents, the affections of Brethren,
and the sincerity of the best Friends. Nothing could be lost in the Country:
but whatever was dropped upon the Highway, was always left there by those that
found it, for the returning Owner.

Strabo says as much of the Seres in the same Age, that they had the strictest
Justice, and (...), a Process even against bad Language. That they should so
far exceed their Posterity the modern Chinese, who are now lascivious,
malicious, and false Pretenders to Virtue, will be no matter of wonder to us,
when we shall have considered either the Doctrine or the Person of their
excellent Tutor, the oriental Socrates, the Divine CVMFVSV.

He thus begins his first Book.
TA HIO CHI^ TAO SAI MIM MIM JE SAI SIN^ MIN SAI CHI YU^ XEN CHI^ CHI HEU YEU
TIM TI^M HEU NEM SIM SIM LH^ HEU NEM NGA^N NGA^N LH^ HEU NEM LIU LIU LH^ HEU
NEM TE UAE YEU PUEN MO MO SU YEU CHU^M XI CHI^ SO SIE^N HEU SE KIN TAO Y. etc.

The intent of great Men in Knowledge and Instruction, does consist in the
enlightening of our Spiritual Power conveyed to us from Heaven, by the Virtues.
It does consist in renewing the World by Exhortation and Example. It consists
in settling firmly upon the chiefest good. When People know wherein they are to
settle, then they have the end. When they have resolved themselves in the end,
then they can be at rest. When their mind is at rest, then they can strengthen
it. When they have strengthened the Mind, then they can distinguish Good from
Evil. When they have made this distinction, then they can attain the end, by
acting according to Reason. There is in things that which is more and less
Excellent, as the Body and the Branches in the Tree. Affairs have an end and a
beginning. To obtain effectively the perfection of Good, is the end; to know
where we are to settle firmly, is the beginning. To know those things that are
to be preferred, and those that are to be undervalued, is to approach to the
knowledge of great Men.

His next Paragraph is this.

When the Ancients would make proof of the Spiritual Power in Government, they
took care in the first place to govern their Kingdoms well: when they would
govern their Kingdoms well, their first care was the right ordering of their
Families: when they would order their Families well, it was their first
business, to attire their own Persons with the Ornaments of Virtue: when they
would deck themselves with the Virtues, they first fashioned their Hearts: when
they would fashion their Hearts, they first confirmed their Intentions in the
banishing of every disguise: when they would confirm their Intentions, they
would first enlarge their Understandings: which enlargement of the
Understanding, consists in the comprising of Matters, in forecasting
business, in making a convenient provision for every present occasion; or
rather by penetrating that most perfect Harmony of Nature in Humane Reason. For
when Matters are dived into, the perfection of Knowledge is attained: when the
perfection of Knowledge is attained, the Intention is confirmed: when the
Intention is confirmed, the Heart is rightly managed: when the Heart is
managed, the Man is completed: when the Man is completed, the Family is
rightly ordered: when the Family is rightly ordered, then the Kingdom is well
governed: when our Kingdoms are well governed, the Empire will be also
peaceable and calm.

This is the beginning of the first Treatise in the former part of CVMFVSV's
Works, being a Discourse concerning the Perfection of Man, and of Government.
In his other Tracts, there are many excellent Moral Discourses, the style
whereof shows the Chinese Eloquence to consist chiefly in Climaxes.

His Writings have less Art, but more of the true Spirit of Morality, than is
to be found in Plato himself, and the most esteemed of the old Greek and Roman
Moralists. He has other Books of Dialogues, Odes, Sentences, and Moral
Dissertations. He wrote the Annals of the Chinese Kings from Fohi, who
according to their Chronology lived before Moses. He wrote of Political
Virtues, of Court days and Vacations, of Presages; of the Rewards of good Men,
and the Punishments of the Wicked: and upon many other Subjects. It was his
Motto, Lay nothing upon another, that you would not bear your self. Like a true
Socrates, he asserted and worshipped the one true God. He commonly invoked
Heaven, but in a Metonymical Sense. Which we have the more reason to believe,
because the Chinese in his time had no Idols.

He is thought to have prophesied of our Savior Christ: for he would always
disown his own Perfections, and refuse the Commendations of his Piety with this
reply, SI^ FAM^ YEU XIM GIU, The Holy one is to be looked for in the West.
Fifty years after our Savior, one of their Emperors moved by this Tradition,
and by a Dream, that there came and appeared before him out of the West a
God-like Man, sent some Persons of his Court to make enquiry after the true
Law: who wanting either courage or skill to sail further than the Red Sea,
brought home, and first planted in China the Idolatry of the adjoining
Countries.

CVMFVSV was born above five hundred years before Christ, about the beginning
of the Persian Monarchy, and probably was contemporary with Cyrus. At nineteen
years of Age he married, and having in a few years buried his Wife, continued
single.

He never used Concubines, according to the Custom of his Country. His Life was
every way answerable to his Discourses. His Moderation and Piety, his constant
watchfulness over himself, his contempt of Riches, Honors, and Dangers, his
unwearied Industry in propagating Moral Knowledge is to be read in his Books,
as well as in the Stories of his Life.

He is still had in so great Veneration by his Countrymen, that the great
Office of Mandarin has been always chosen out of his Family, which to this
very Age has been exempted from Tribute. His Books use to be read every where
throughout the Country, and his Philosophy taught in all the principal Cities
of China.

There is an ingenious Merchant, a Fellow of the Royal Society, who has put
into the hands of one of his Colleagues, several of CVMFVSV's Books, brought
from Siam, where they were printed, in order to an English Edition of them, and
of a Lexicon and Clavis to the Language, and to a new World of Learning.

The foregoing Specimen is sent abroad, to give some account of those great
Rarities, and to quicken the publication of them; out of a just respect to the
worthy Owner of the only Copies in this part of the World.

PAge 23. That Christian Charity which thinks no Evil.

(...). 1 Cor. 13. 5. Charity suspecteth no evil. Where the case is doubtful
(says Grotius upon the place) it always interprets in the best Sense.

It thinks no evil either of Superiors, or Equals, where it sees none.
According to the excellent temper of the Laws by which our Nation is governed;
it presumes every Man to be good, who does not appear to be otherwise.

But ever since Man degenerated, it has been the greatest part of his temporal
Misery, to esteem himself upright and wise, and other Men Villains and Sots.
Which makes him disobedient to his Governors, and unjust to his Neighbors. He
looks upon his Neighbors as Dotterels, and his Governors as Harpies. He
reckons it as easy to catch the former, as difficult to escape the deadly
Talons of the latter.

Since the time that Men had reason to be afraid of one another, their Fears
have undone them. Ever since they have been unable to govern themselves, they
have been afraid of their Rulers: lest they should invade their Properties, and
by altering their Religion, make way to their Civil Rights.

Through the want of Christian Charity, and that Faith from whence it proceeds,
People are so void of good Thoughts, and so full of jealous Surmises; they have
so great a concern for their Pelf, and so little trust in the Providence of
God, that when their Fortunes are as safe as if they were the only care of
Heaven; for seditious Men to convince them that their Prince will have no
regard to Rules and Constitutions, but intends to govern them by Arbitrary and
lawless Administrations, they have no more to do, but only to tell them so.

Upon the first strong report, they believe themselves to be Slaves: and indeed
they are so, to their own Passions. They feel more smart from their own Fears,
than they can suffer under the Whips of Infidels. For want of crueller Masters,
they become Tyrants to themselves.

Rags and Prisons with a quieter mind would be great Blessings to them. For
they are of a Temper which makes Prosperity an Egyptian Plague. They that have
nothing to lose are in a much happier condition. For Poverty is not so great an
Evil, as the fear of falling into it.

But the great Riddle is, that these Men should be wounded and tortured, by
that which never touched them, by something at a distance from them, which they
cannot prove by one Argument will ever be nearer: nay which has nothing at all
of Being, more than it received from their distempered Imaginations, yet
frights and distracts them, more than any thing that is real and certain.

It is indeed very strange for a Kingdom to be thunderstruck by an
undiscernable clap of Tyranny that melts and consumes all the Rights of the
People, and yet not one Man hurt in his Person or Fortunes.

The true State of the Case is this. When the guilty Conscience tells a Man
plainly what use he himself would make of Sovereign Power: when the Wretch has
done all the Mischief he can to his Inferiors; and has thought wickedly of his
Prince, that he is altogether such an one as himself, it is no wonder that he
fears Him first, and then hates Him.

This is the account of all the Commotions, Tumults, Seditions, and Confusions
that ever yet were, or perhaps ever will be raised by discontented or seduced
Persons in all the Governments of the World. When designing Miscreants
undertake the embroiling of their Country, the People ferment immediately upon
the bare report of approaching Slavery.

They believe all that is told them, unless it be then, when it happens that
there is any thing of truth in the Relation. Where there is any just cause of
suspicion and mistrust, they are everlastingly secure. It is an expense of
thinking too great for their stock, to examine the following Particulars.

Whether their Governors have not been injured by the malicious and crafty
Insinuations of some bad Men?

Whether they have any better, or other Argument than their own confidence,
that they are not imposed upon?

Whether the Grievances which their Leaders make so great a noise with, be any
other than the Necessities which their chargeable Vices have brought upon them?

How it comes to pass, that the Evils which terrify and afflict them, which
are said to grow and increase upon them every day, are commonly hushed and
untalkt of, and laid asleep for such long Intervals, and never heard of but
from Malcontents in some high Contest with the Government; that the popular
clamor of Grievances should prove the most dangerous sort of Thunder, and
never be heard but in times of great Heat?

In a few words, what should be the reason, that in a Country which in its own
Productions, and in foreign Supplies, in the easiness of its Government, in the
Wealth, Safety, and Privileges of the People, exceeds all other upon the face
of the Earth; in a time of Peace, and open Trade, and universal Prosperity,
there should be those sudden hideous outcries of Grievances, pressing to death
the Men that do not feel them, nor understand what is meant by the word, nor
know what to complain of, till they are instructed by the idolized Mutineers?

The Credulity, Fickleness, and Levity of the common People, have in all former
Ages been the Engines with which politic Atheists have ruined the best
Governments. Neither is it a Prophecy, but a clearer prospect of an effect in
its unhappy Causes, to say, that scarce any Country will be embroiled hereafter
without this old Artifice, without the help of this Weapon, which after all the
execution it has done in the World, is still as sharp as ever, and will never
want an edge as long as there is Ambition and Revenge to whet it.

This has always been the temper of the Multitude, in all times and places by
the just judgment of the Almighty upon their disobedience to God and Man.

Upon any noise of Oppression and Tyranny, though the Alarm be never so false,
the People fall immediately into the cold and hot Fits of an incurable
State-Quartan, they are presently lightheaded, and presently after stark
raving Mad.

That the pretended danger of Tyranny and Slavery, or an Invasion of the
Peoples Rights, Religious or Civil, has been the chief, and for the most part,
the only Incentive to all the Sedition that ever disturbed the Peace of
Kingdoms and Commonwealths, in any Age or Country whose Records have come to
our hands, may be concluded from the following Instances; and proved by
thousands more, ready to be produced.

THE INSTANCES.
WHen Aristagoras was endeavoring to strengthen the Ionian Faction, being the
Person who headed that People when they revolted from the King of Persia, he
used this Topic, when he urged Cleomenes King of Sparta to join with him in
his Rebellion. There is (says he) a design to introduce a despotical
Government, and to seize the Ionian Liberties. Therefore in the name of the
Grecian Gods, redeem the Ionians from Slavery.

When Hannibal invaded Italy, at his crossing the Alps, he made a long Speech
to his Army. Which, when the Historian reported, he polisht the sense of one
part of it, in these Expressions. That Wealth which the Romans possess, and
which has been the vast Gain of so many triumphant Victories, it is all yours,
and the owners of it into the bargain. Draw your Swords for those mighty Spoils
in the name of the assisting Gods. We begin the War, and march into Italy with
our infesting Banners, being like to prove as much the bolder Warriors, as the
hopes are greater, and the Resolutions stronger in him that makes the Assault,
than in the Man that opposes it. Besides our Courage is raised by Discontents,
Wrongs, and Indignities. I, your Commander, in the first place, then you all
that were to besiege Saguntum, should have been demanded to undergo the most
exquisite Tortures. These Men, the cruellest, and proudest in the World, pursue
their own ends in every thing that is Arbitrary.

When the Athenians had begun a War with Syracuse, they endeavored to bring
over the Camarines to their Alliance. Hermocrates being then employed in the
Embassy of Syracuse, alleges, that the Athenian Expedition would in the event
be fatal, not only to Camarana, but to all Sicily. It is his whole business to
lay open the Athenian Designs, beginning at the very Original of their
Government. The Athenians (says he) come into Sicily, with that pretense which
you have been told of, but with that intention which we all do now suspect: not
to restore the Leontines to their Country, but indeed to make themselves
Masters of ours. You have then your choice: either certain Slavery without the
hazard of a War; or joint hopes with us of a Conquest, which will deliver you
from those base Masters, and from our perpetual Enmity.

When Mucianus a Malecontent under the Reign of Vitellius, had a design to set
up another Emperor, he thus urged Vespasian to depose Vitellius, and to take
upon him the Government. They that deliberate upon great Attempts, should first
compute, whether that which they undertake is profitable to the Commonwealth,
honorable to themselves, easy, or at least probable to be effected. O
Vespasian! I invite you to an Imperial Charge, which will be as advantageous to
the Public, as glorious to your self. We are not to encounter that acutest Wit
of the deified Augustus, nor that most wary Experience of the aged Tiberius,
nor the Family of Caius, or Claudius, or Nero, settled in the Government by long
Possession. Besides the enduring of those, you did likewise yield to the
Nobility of Galba. But to be still careless, and to suffer the Commonwealth to
be infected, and destroyed, would be stupid sloth, though you were sure your
Slavery would continue as safe, as it is ignominious.

When the Lithuanians rebelled against the Roman Emperor Valentinian, he was
assisted by the Franks in their Suppression: and he rewarded their Service by
ten years Exemption from their customary Tribute. Which time being expired,
they refused to submit to their former Taxes. Hereupon the Emperor having
fought, and defeated them, drove them out of their Country: insomuch that they
were forced to follow their Commander Marcomir into a part of Germany, to which
they gave the name of Franconia. Being assembled to consider what form of
Government would be fittest for them, Quadrek, one of their greatest Lords,
stands up at the Debate, and speaks thus in favor of Aristocracy. It is the
hardest thing in the World to find a King or a Prince that is duly
accomplished: but suppose we could be furnished with one that has all the
Perfections requisite to a Throne, yet there is danger still, that this Person,
after some time, may come to make his Will his Law, and fall off to
Licentiousness and Tyranny. After many of the common, and fully answered
Arguments against Monarchy, he ends thus. But forasmuch as I find the Herald
going to proclaim Pharamond King, and in so doing, to assist at the Funerals of
the name of Franks, for my part, that my Eyes may escape the sight of that
miserable fatal Ceremony, I will depart immediately into a voluntary Exile, in
which I shall rather choose to end my days, than to live here, and see the
Native Liberty of my Country destroyed, the Equity of the Laws trodden under
foot, insulting Tyranny set up, and all of us reduced to endless Slavery. To
this Harangue the Historian subjoyns Pharamond's reply in an excellent defense
of Monarchy. Amongst other things, he shows the Benefits of that Form of
Government; and that the Liberty of the People consists in obeying their
Prince: for which obedience they can no more be called Slaves, than those
Seamen who in a Tempest observe the orders of their Pilot.

When Count Candidian was commissioned by the Emperor Theodosius to keep the
Peace and prevent Tumults at the Council of Ephesus: he being a great Favourer
of the Nestorian Faction, gave order for stopping all Packets, both by Sea and
Land, that no Letters might pass to inform the Emperor, or any other Person of
what was transacted in the Synod. But he himself in the mean time, writes to
the Emperor against Cyrill, and other Bishops. First he throws this Calumny
upon them, that they were so overhasty in opening the Assembly, that they would
not stay for the arrival of John Bishop of Antioch. Then he belies them, and
says, that all the Bishops that were at Ephesus, were not at the Synod, that
they were not all summoned, and that there were Differences among those that
were present. With these Letters of Count Candidian, Nestorius sends his to the
Emperor to the same effect and design, only with this difference, that
Nestorius patched up more lies, which he set off with that variety of fair
Pretenses, that they would easily find belief with Persons unacquainted with
the Proceedings. That profligate Jugler, in his Epistle to the Emperor,
represents himself, not only as a Professor of the Nicene Faith, but as a most
resolute Defender of it: and craftily pretends, that he came to Ephesus purely
upon that account. In relating the Transactions of the Synod, he begins with
the foulest Lies. He denies that the Bishops of Egypt were willing to stay for
John Bishop of Antioch, who had sent Messengers to give them notice that he
should quickly arrive. He adds, that the Bishops of the contrary Party had
acted Tyrannically, had given out Menaces, had dispersed their Guards about the
City to raise Tumults, and that they came shouting to his House, and threatened
to kill him. That the Leader of them all was Memnon Bishop of Ephesus. Then he
complained that all the Churches of Ephesus were shut against him, and that he
had not so much as the liberty to take the Communion. Upon these, and such like
cunning Suggestions, he petitions the Emperor (for all his Designs and
strongest Efforts drove at that) to issue out Orders for adjusting the number
of the Synod: in which he pretended there were wanting two Bishops out of every
Province. In the conclusion, as if he had been cruelly oppressed by the
Orthodox, he ends his Letter with this Expression: If we cannot prevail for
this, we desire only that care may be taken for our safe return to our several
Habitations, for they threaten our very Lives. He was subtle in his request;
desiring to be sent back to Constantinople, when he had been deposed from that
See: a piece of Craft like his Petition for a new Council, when he was already
condemned in one lawfully assembled. There subscribed with him to this Epistle,
to gain him the greater Credit, nine Bishops, all rank Nestorians.

When that Incendiary Catiline had plotted the Ruin of the Government, and of
Cicero, in his Letter to Q. Marcius, among other things altogether as bad, he
writes thus. We call God and Man to witness, that we have not armed our selves
either against our Country, or to invade others; but only to secure our own
Persons from Injuries: whilst by the Prevalency and Cruelty of Usurers we are
miserable, and necessitous: most of us are kept out of our Country, but all of
us out of our Offices and Estates. There is not a Man among us, who according
to his Hereditary Right, can have the Benefit of the Laws; or when he has lost
his Patrimony can keep his Liberty. We do not ask for Power or Riches, which
are the Occasions of all the Wars and Contests that disturb Mankind, but for
Liberty, which no good Man is willing to lose sooner than his Life. He
encourages those that were engaged with him in his Conspiracy with these
Expressions. What I have been contriving, I have told you separately: but since
that Communication, every day, has put my thoughts into a greater heat, when I
have considered that condition of Life which we are to expect, unless we
recover our Liberties. Rouse your selves then! and open your Eyes upon that
fair object you have so often wished to see, your Liberty. Your Affairs, your
Opportunities, your Dangers, your Poverty, and the noble Spoils of War, will
persuade you better than my Oratory. I offer my self to you to be either your
General, or your Fellow-Soldier: neither my Mind, nor my Body shall ever be
wanting to your Service. I hope I shall assist you in these Affairs as your
Consul, unless I am wrong in my account, and that you are better prepared for
Slavery than Empire.

When the Mechanics of Florence, and especially the Weavers, were grown
jealous of their Governors, in the Reign of the Emperor Charles the First:
after many private Meetings in the night, one of the boldest of them exhorts
his Companions to persevere in their Sedition with this Harangue. Were we now,
my Fellow Soldiers, to consider, whether we should betake our selves to our
Arms, whether we should fire the neighboring Houses, and plunder the very
Temples themselves, I should vote with those who would be for advising further
upon it: and it may be, I should rather choose secure Poverty, than dangerous
and uncertain Gains. But forasmuch as we have drawn our Swords, and committed
very many Outrages, I suppose we have nothing else now to determine, but the
course we shall take to defend our selves 'till we can secure our Indemnity. I
can easily believe that we had no ground but our Poverty for the Resolutions we
have taken. Yet since the whole City is in an uproar, and all the Inhabitants
are got together to destroy us, since there are so many extraordinary
Assemblies of the Lords and Magistrates to contrive a way to ensnare us, and to
make themselves strong enough to cut us off, there are two things especially
that we are to take care of. One, that we may not be called to an account for
what we have done within a few days past: the other, that for the time to come,
we may live in a better enjoyment of our Liberties, and more to our
contentment. Therefore that we may gain an Act of Pardon for our past Crimes,
it is my opinion that we must commit new ones: which must be aggravated by
Burning, Plundering, and such like Barbarities: in which we must get as great a
number of Accomplices as we can. For where multitudes offend, it is rare to
have particular Persons singled out for punishment. By this means a way will be
opened for us, to gain those Points that will support our Liberties.

When the Moors of Granada, under the conduct of Jacob Almansor the Saracen,
were possessing themselves of the Provinces between the Pyrenees and the
Mediterranean, the event of the War was for a long time doubtful. And though
the Moors were conquered in the Field, yet in their minds they remained
impregnable. The greatest part of them, to secure their Goods and Estates, with
the most execrable dissimulation, pretended to be Christians, and continued in
Andaluzia. But pressed with the Kings Edicts concerning Religion, and remaining
obstinate in the Superstition of their Country, they retreated into the
neighboring Mountains, and lived by Theft and Robbery. France being then
embroiled, and the Arms of Spain employed against the rebelling Netherlands.
The Moors took this opportunity to appoint private Conventions. All Ages and
Conditions of People among them, sent their Burgesses to Cales. There did they
agree upon the methodizing, and timing their Conspiracy. It was ordered in
their Assembly, that their design should be communicated by Widowers to
Widowers, by Husbands to Husbands, and by young Bachelors to those of their own
condition. The Season pitched upon is Winter, and Christmas judged the fittest
time: when the nights are long, when the Solemnities of the Festival fill the
Churches, and empty the Houses: when the Kings Ships lay dispersed in several
Havens, without Soldiers, and with a few Sailers: this was their fittest
opportunity for descending from the Mountains without making a noise. They hold
a Parliament: where Ferdinando Caguer thus applies himself to their Unconstancy
and Fears. How long, O my Friends, Colleagues, and Fellow Soldiers, shall we
suffer our selves to be baffled, by means of our slothfulness! How long shall
the most petulant of Mankind treat us like People of a servile Condition, nay
and worse than Slaves. Our Wives, Children, Estates, are wholly at their
disposal: neither after so many Ages, and a Servitude imbittered with the
severest Pressures, does any hope of Liberty dawn upon us. New Burdens, new
Contributions, new Taxes, are daily imposed upon us. As many Tenants as there
are in the City, so many of the cruellest Tyrants do we feel galling our Necks.
We miserable Wretches are forbidden commerce with God and Man. Among the
Christians we pass for Morisco's, and are charged with their abominable Errors:
among the Moors we are suspected for Christians, insomuch that they will not
give us a word, nor bestow an Alms upon us, nor make a Bargain with us. We
therefore, because we keep our Faith, and purchase a miserable Life by a
slavish Obedience, are afflicted on all sides: We are not more odious to one
Party, than suspected by another.

When the Milaneses had been at War with the Emperor Frederick for a long time,
and with various Success; they were at length conquered, and their City
besieged. Being forced to surrender upon Discretion, the Emperor, to prevent
their future resistance, rased their City. Afterward the principal Cities of
Lombardy entered into a League, to re-build and fortify Milan: whereunto they
bound themselves by a Fanatic Oath, which contained an hypocritical
Declaration of Faith and Allegiance to the Emperor. When this dutiful Rebellion
was debated by the Deputies of the several Cities of Lombardy, in the Church of
St. James at Pontida in Bresciano, they were settled in their design by the
Discourse of Pinamonte Vimercato, in which there were these Passages. I do
believe that every one of you Brethren, Friends, and Representatives of our
most loving and faithful Allies, knows perfectly the Devastations, Ruins,
Murders, Robberies and Violences acted upon every Sex and Age; the Gabels,
Grievances, and Wrongs done us by Frederick, and other barbarous Persons
commissioned by him, naturally Enemies to the Italian name. But forasmuch as
this evil Plant is not yet fully rooted, I suppose our present Union may
deliver us from the perpetuity of that Slavery which grows every day more Heavy
and Cruel.

The Parallel, Instances in the beginning, and Progress of the late Rebellion.
THE Lord Digby in his Speech for triennial Parliaments, Jan. 19. 1640.
complains that The Liberty and Property of the Subject, is fundamentally
subverted, and ravished away by the violence of a pretended Necessity.

Mr. Bagshaw in the beginning of his Speech against Episcopacy, Feb. 9. 1640.
says it does entrench upon the Rights and Liberties of the Subject, as well as
those of the Crown.

Mr. Waller in his Speech before the Commons 1640. upon the King's demand of a
Supply, has this Passage: Let us give new Force to the many Laws which have
been heretofore made for the maintaining of our Rights and Privileges; and to
restore this Nation to its fundamental and vital Liberties, the Propriety of
our Goods, and freedom of our Persons.

Denzill Holles at a Committee of both Houses in the Painted Chamber May 4.
1641. speaks these words: They find (viz. the Commons) Jesuits and Priests
conspiring with ill Ministers of State to destroy our Religion: they find ill
Ministers conjoined together to subvert our Laws and Liberties.

Sir Henry Vane in his Speech for abolishing Episcopacy urges, that it is
prejudicial to the Civil State, as having so powerful and ill an Influence upon
our Laws, the Prerogative of the King, and the Liberties of the Subject.

In the Articles against Sir Richard Bolton Lord Chancellor of Ireland, John
Lord Bishop of Derry, Sir Gerrard Lowther, and Sir George Radcliffe, this was
the Leader, that they intending the Destruction of the Commonwealth of this
Realm, have traitorously confederated and conspired together to subvert the
Fundamental Laws and Government of this Kingdom, and in pursuance thereof, they
and every of them have traitorously contrived, introduced and exercised an
arbitrary and tyrannical Government against Law throughout this Kingdom, by the
Countenance and Assistance of Thomas Earl of Strafford, then chief Governor of
this Kingdom.

The first Article of the Impeachment of the Lord Keeper Finch was, that the
said John Lord Finch has traitorously and wickedly endeavored to subvert the
Fundamental Laws and established Government of the Realm of England, and
instead thereof, to introduce an arbitrary, tyrannical Government against Law,
which he has declared by traitorous and wicked Words, Counsels, Opinions,
Judgments, Practices and Actions.

The same Article begins the Impeachment of the Earl of Strafford, after the
reading whereof, Mr. Pym in his Speech upon it, has these words: If this
Treason had taken effect, our Souls had been enslaved to the spiritual Tyranny
of Satan; our Consciences to the Ecclesiastical Tyranny of the Pope; our Lives,
Persons, and Estates to the Civil Tyranny of an arbitrary, unlimited, confused
Government.

The Speeches in the Parliament of the Third year of King Charles the First,
delivered by Sir Francis Seymour, Sir Robert Philips, Sir Benj. Rudyard, and
many others, which are of the same note and strain with those already
mentioned, are more easily met with: and therefore the Reader is referred to
them in the first Volum of Mr. Rushworth's Collections.

Those of Oliver Cromwell are greater Rarities: and therefore it will not be
amiss to pick out some of the Flowers in two or three of them.

His Speech in the Painted Chamber at his dissolving the Parliament Jan. 22.
1654. has these fine strokes.

Page 17. Religion was not the thing at the first contended for: but God
brought it to that Issue at last, and gave it unto us by way of Redundancy: and
at last it proves to be that which was most dear unto us: and wherein consisted
this, more than in obtaining that Liberty from the Tyranny of Bishops, to all
Species of Protestants, to worship God according to their own Light and
Consciences?

Page 18. Those that were sound in the Faith, how proper was it for them to
labor for Liberty, for a just Liberty, that Men should not be trampled upon
for their Consciences!

Page 27. -- Though some may think it a hard thing, without Parliamentary
Authority to raise Money; yet I have another Argument, from the good of the
People of this Nation, if they would be safe, and have no better Principle:
whether they prefer the having of their will, though it be to their
destruction, rather than comply with things of necessity: that will excuse me.

Page 28. The People will prefer their Safety to their Passions, and their real
Security to Forms, when necessity calls for Supplies. Had they not been well
acquainted with this Principle, they had never seen this day of Gospel-Liberty.

Cromwell 's Speech to the Parliament in the Painted Chamber, Sept. 4. 1654.
has this remarkable Sentence.
-- IT would have been worthy such a meeting as this, to have remembered that
which was the rise, and gave the first beginning to all these turnings and
tossings that have been upon us: to have given you a Series of the Transactions
(not of Men but) of the Providence of God, all along unto our late Changes: as
also the ground of our first undertaking to oppose that Usurpation and Tyranny
that was upon us in Civils and Spirituals.

His Speech to the Parliament in the Painted Chamber Sept. 12. 1654. supplies
us with these Imitations of the old wheedling Cant.

-- Speaking of the Government he says, If God will not bear it up, let it
sink. Then speaking of the Long Parliament, When they were dissolved (says he)
there was not so much as the barking of a Dog.

-- Poor Men, under this Arbitrary Power, were driven like Flocks of Sheep, by
forty in a Morning to the Confiscation of Goods and Estates, without any Man
being able to give a reason that two of them had deserved to forfeit a Shilling.

-- So then what was the business? It was a Conversion from a Parliament, that
should have been perpetual, to a legislative Power always sitting: and the
Liberties, Interests, and Lives of the People, not judged by any certain known
Laws and Power, but by an Arbitrary Power, which is incident and necessary to
Parliaments: to make Men's Estates by an Arbitrary Power liable to Confiscation,
and their Persons to Imprisonments; sometimes by Laws made after the Fact
committed: often by taking the judgment both in Capital and Criminal things to
themselves, who in former times were not known to exercise such a Judicature.

-- And as I have appealed to God before you already, I know (and I hope I may
say it) though it be a tender thing to make Appeals to God; yet in such
Exigencies as these, I trust it will not offend His Majesty: especially to make
them before Persons that know God, and know what Conscience is, and what it is
to lie before the Lord. I say, that as a principal end in calling that
Assembly, was the settlement of the Nation, so a chief end to my self was, that
I might have opportunity to lay down the Power that was in my hands. I say it
to you again, in the presence of that God who has blessed and been with me in
all my Adversities and Successes; that was to my self the greatest end.

A desire perhaps (and I am afraid) sinful enough, to be quit of the Power God
had most providentially put into my hands, before he called for it, and before
those honest ends of our fighting were attained and settled. I say the Authority
I had in my hand, being so boundless as it was, I being by Act of Parliament
General of all the Forces in the three Nations of England, Scotland, and
Ireland (in which unlimited condition I did not desire to live a day) did call
that Meeting for the ends before expressed.

The Preamble to the Protestation charge the Government with endeavors to
subvert the Fundamental Laws of England and Ireland, and to introduce the
Exercise of an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government.

The Petition of the Londoners against Episcopacy, complains, That the said
Government is found, by woeful Experience, to be a main cause and occasion of
many foul Evils, Pressures, and Grievances of a very high nature unto His
Majesty's Subjects, in their Consciences, Liberties, and Estates.

That Masterpiece, and Idea of Sedition, the Remonstrance of the State of the
Kingdom, extant in Husband's Collections, and elsewhere, has this vein of
Rhetoric running through all the parts of it.

That Mystery of Iniquity, and foul Scandal to the Reformation, the solemn
League and Covenant, expresses all along a most passionate concern for the
Liberties of the People.

The Petition of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of London in Jan.
41. Which presses that the Tower may be put into the hands of Persons of Trust,
etc. represents their great Dangers, Fears, and Distractions, upon account of
Designs driving on, which tend to the utter ruin of the Protestant Religion,
and of the Lives and Liberties of His Majesty's Loyal Subjects.

The Petition of the Lord Fairfax and the Army to the House of Commons Jan. 15.
1649. has these words. Having by our late Labors and Hazards made it appear
to the World, at how high a rate we value our just Freedom, and God having so
far owned our Cause, as to deliver the Enemies thereof into our hands, we do
hold our selves bound in mutual duty to each other, to take the best care we
can for the future, to avoid both the danger of returning into a slavish
Condition, and the chargeable remedy of another War.

What these Wretches meant by their Freedom, Right, Liberty, and Property, they
did not fail to explain in a little time: when they usurped and exercised a
sovereign, unlimited, and absolute Power over the King himself, and all his
Subjects: when the Protestation was a sufficient Law, to enforce the bringing
in of Money, Plate, and Arms for the Service of the Commonwealth: when there
were Ordinances made for Sequestring the Estates of those who persisted in
their Loyalty and Duty to the King: when they seized the Revenues of the Crown,
and the Church: when they raised Money without the King's Authority, to carry
on a Rebellion against him: when they maintained their Army with free Quarter:
when they revived a distinction declared to be Treason by two Acts of
Parliament, the distinction between the Kings natural and political Capacity;
between his Person, and his Power or Authority: when they distinguished between
the equitable and literal sense of the Law, to give liberty to the Subject, to
interpret the King's Laws according to his own pleasure, and to justify all
contempt and disobedience: when they asserted the Legislative and Judicative
Power to be in the two Houses of Parliament without the King: lastly when they
declared themselves to be the irrevocable Trustees of the Peoples Lives,
Liberties and Properties, without being obliged to give an account of their
Trust.

What remains, is only the Reader's business: which is to compare the late
Occurrences in this Kingdom with the foregoing Parallels. Whoever does so, if
he be not blinded by Prejudice, will quickly find, that it is no new thing, for
Men to pass among the Ignorant for great Patriots who have rased out of their
minds all natural sense of Honor and Honesty; for Vermin, and the Pests of
Humane Society, to set up for Heroes, and the Saviors of their Country; and
then for the popular Herd to be led away to their Ruin, by the breath of
Panthers, and the smooth faces of Harpies.

It must therefore be needless to add any thing further upon this Argument,
more than the following Consideration.

As there are at this day, and have been in former Ages, though in a very small
proportion to good Monarchs, Tyrants in many parts of the World, so it is at
this present, as it has been always heretofore, the hard Fate of the best
Princes, to be tormented with the Jealousies of their Subjects: to be charged
with the affectation of Tyranny, then constantly, when there is the least
ground for it: to be always as much mistrusted by the crazy-headed Rabble while
they live, as they are pitied and admired when they are dead.

Now it is likewise the same uncharitable corrupt Temper, which renders the
People as vexatious to their fellow Subjects, as they are to their Sovereign.

The number is strangely small of the Men, who have any regard to those
Principles of everlasting Righteousness, which hinder us from tearing and
destroying one another: of those few that have, and are the wisest, because the
best of Men, there is not one of many hundreds, who considers the mischief this
is done to the World, by the easiness of most Persons, in receiving, and
uttering scandalous Reports.

Some People think to make themselves great, by lessening or undermining
others: but of those that design it, there are very few who succeed.

Injustice and Calumny are equally pernicious to the World in general, and to
the Men that manage by those Arts. For till Integrity and Charity become the
universal Resolution of Mankind; till the Experiment comes to be tried, whether
Sincerity, Justice, and Benignity, are not better Measures than Deceit and
Malice, surer and readier ways to Prosperity, the World can never be happy: and
therefore it is too probable, that it will remain to its Dissolution, a Mass of
Sin and Misery.

The Author's Misfortunes are too little to come into this account. Yet those
two reports which were raised upon his Preaching the foregoing Sermon, should
not be quite forgotten. One was concerning his Dress, the other about the
delivery of his Sermon. As to the former, it is a matter of Dispute between
Persons of different Years and Tempers, who can never agree upon the Point of
Decency in Attire. But what it is to read a Sermon, both young and old, the
Candid and the Morose, the Spightful and the Kind, do all agree in their
Verdict, however they are divided in the other Case.

Now, whenas the preceding Sermon, which was spoken as readily without Book, as
any thing perhaps, that has been delivered before His Majesty (which is well
enough remembered at the Court) was said to be read word for word, and that
report, as false as it was, divulged and credited in all parts of the Kingdom,
it supplies us with the following Conclusion.

If a private Person may at any time be brought upon the Stage, and exposed to
the censure of the World, by Men as little as himself; it is no wonder a
Government should be suspected and endangered, when great, united, subtle
Factions, make it their business to misrepresent it: when its Friends are
modest, slow, unactive, and secure: when its Enemies are bold, restless, and
implacable: when the People are distrustful, fickle, conceited, petulant, and
mutinous, to that degree of madness, that if the Devil of Sedition goes out of
them for a while, and the unclean Spirit walks through the dry places that were
lately covered with Blood, and a torrent of Miseries, he can find no rest, till
he returns to his House from whence he came out: that House, where he roars out
his pretended Fears of Superstition and Slavery, in those hideous yells which
fright the common People out of their Wits. When he comes to the House, he
finds it empty, and swept, and garnished too with the fairest Pretenses for
Religion, Law, Right, Liberty, and Property. Then goes he, and takes to him
seven other Apostate Spirits, a select number of corrupt and disgraced
Ministers of State: they enter into the House, and dwell there; and the last
State of that miserable possessed People, is worse than the first.

ERRATA.
Page 3. l. 6. r. part. p. 9. l. 4. r. Arias Montanus, etc.

THE END.

