A DISCOURSE OF Monsr. VIGIER TO The Lord Abbot Goddon, Great Dean of the
Cathedral Church of TOVL in Lorrain.

Concerning the Book of Monsr. ARNAVD, Doctor of the Sorbon; ENTITLED, The
Perpetuity of the Faith of the Catholic Church, touching the EVCHARIST,
Maintained against the Book of Monsieur CLAUDE.

Englished out of French.

In which Discourse is very briefly discovered the Vanity and Ineffectualness
of that Pompous Volume of the SORBONIST.

In the SAVOY: For Joh. Martin Printer to the Royal Society, at the Sign of the
Bell in S. Paul's Churchyard, and a little without Temple Bar. 1670.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS DISCOURSE.
THe occasion and design of it.

I. Reflection, where it is showed by the acknowledgment of Monsieur Arnaud
himself, that he might have cut off three Fourths of his Book, without taking
away any thing Essential. II. Reflection, which shows, that people have not
been forward to have this Book of Monsieur Arnaud, because there is expected a
Volume of his, of more importance. III. Reflection, wherein is noted, That the
fierce and insulting Spirit, wherewith Monsieur Arnaud treats Monsieur
Claude, has made us averse from the reading of it. IV. Reflection, wherein the
Author answers to three Crimes, wherewith Monsieur Arnaud unduly charge those
of the Protestant Communion. The first is, that it is possible, the Church
should subsist no more. The second that they have introduced detestable Morals
The third, that they favor and support by their Principles the Errors of the
Socinians. V. Reflection, where the Author examineth the proofs of Monsieur
Arnaud, for the first Supposition of the Book of the Perpetuity, which consists
in the Union of all the Oriental Churches with the Roman, about the matter of
the Eucharist in the time of Paschasius. VI. Reflection, in which the Author
evinceth, that Monsieur Arnaud has no way proved the second Supposition of the
Book of the Perpetuity, which consists in the Adoration of the Body of Jesus
Christ present upon the Altars, in the time of the same Paschasius.
SIR,
YOu have demanded my thoughts, concerning the success, which Monsieur Arnaud's
last Book against M. Claude has met with amongst Us, in so pressing and civil
a way, that I could not defend my self against it. I pretend not to penetrate
into your heart, nor to divine a thing which you have concealed from me;
possibly I should not miss the mark, nor be much wide from your thoughts, if I
should believe, that the opinion you have had of my sincerity, in speaking of
things without prejudice, and the Idea you have formed of the Triumphs of M.
Arnaud's Book, have induced you to desire this of me, thinking it to be an
infallible means to make me acknowledge the Injustice of our Cause touching the
important subject, and even to make ^^ forsake my party: But, I shall conte^^
my self to give you satisfaction wit^ out entering into this examen; an^
whatever it be, I shall only tell you this to point, that neither my sincerit^
nor Monsieur Arnaud's Book have giv^^ me the least disposition to answer ^^
thing in favor of this motive, if it that which has set you on work.

And indeed, Sir, I shall tell you fr^ly, that this Work of M. Arnaud h^^ not
found that success, which his frien^^ exspected from it, nor obtained that
influence, which some of our profess^^ might apprehend fram the same was
expected with impatience on besides: On the one, he was looked u^ as a
Victorious General, carrying terr^ with him every where; and, one ^^ should
discomfit his Enemies at the f^ encounter; who should make as m^ Conquests as
he had Readers; who sho^^ dissipate at his first setting out the ^sions and
enchantments which the Rhe^rick of M. Claude was bold to carry ^ven into the
Cabinet of the greatest per^ns amongst them: On the other, he ^as considered as
a formidable enemy, that was able at least, by the strength of ^is Eloquence
and Wit to disturb the Joy they possessed, to cast things back ^gain into the
hazard of a new Com^at, and to make a victory doubtful, which seemed could not
be disputed with them in reason, after that the most Learned and the most
Ambitious of all Societies had found to their great regret, that they had not
been able to succeed in it.

Neither of the two parties were much in the wrong: For, what, I pray, was not
to be expected from so learned and polite a Pen as that of M. Arnaud, and of
his Friends the Gentlemen of the Port Royal? What was not to be believed of
those worthy Defendants of the sentiments of Great St. Augustine, touching the
Efficacy of Divine Grace? What was not the Book of M. Claude, whos^ cause and
profession are none of the most favor d, to fear of the Eloquence, Power,
Dexterity, Credit, and good Fortune of those Gentlemen, who so frequently have
beaten the innumerable troops of the Molinists, who have divided your Schools
and your Churches, between Victorious and Sufficient Grace; who have been
capable to persuade men, that the Council of Trent was not against them; who at
a time, when their virtue was seen to succumb to the number of their
Persecutors, have found in the Wisdom of our Incomparable Monarch, and in the
extraordinary Prudence of the Pope, a return which was beyond their hopes, and
which has been the most splendid and the most glorious, that ever was seen in
a like conjuncture.

In the mean time, the Book of M. Arnaud has made much less noise, since it
has appear d, than it did before it came abroad; His triumphs are only in ^he
magnificent Attestations of his Ap^robators, and M. Claude has not re^eived
the least wound from it.

Whence, I pray, Sir, comes this no^able difference? Is it, that Monsieur
Arnaud, tired by his first combats, has not had the same vigor against this
last Adversary? Is it, that being employed in things more essential to him, he
has not used all the attention which was requisite for this famous Answer? Is
it, that he has neglected himself from the consideration of this conjuncture
of time, not being favorable to Us? Or lastly, is it the fault of the Cause
rather than of its Advocat? Sir, you may say what you please of it; as for me,
I esteem that there is something of all that in it, and you will perhaps be of
my opinion, when you shall have made together with me the following
Reflections, which will give more light to the Reasons, which make me judge,
that that Work of his has not met with among Us, nor possibly even among the
sincerer sort of your party, those Applauses, and that Approbation, which you
exspected from it.

The First Reflection.
THe Book of Monsieur Arnaud is very big, and this has been the first
stumbling stone, many persons being unwilling to buy it, some by reason of its
great price, and others, because they had not so much time to read it. I know
many of both Religions, who never had it, upon either the one, or the other
account; and it is certain, that ten times more of them would have been sold,
if the Book had been of the price and bigness of his first Work. And indeed,
Sir, so big a Volume scareth people, and they dare not undertake to read it,
that they may not be obliged to quit it in the middle, and possibly sooner, by
reason of the several occupatio^ we all have. Besides, Monsieur Arnaud,
methinks, has had but little care of our salvation; for, this Book being, in
his opinion, and in that of his approbators, a plain and entire conviction of
us, and an easy means to reduce us into the bosom of their Church, is it not
true, Sir, That his zeal for so great a work should have obliged him to have
made it more common, more popular, more easy to buy, and to read it? What does
he know, whether of hundreds of persons, who have not seen his Book, and who
would have read it, if it had been much less, the half, or the third part,
would not have been converted? What does he know, whether Tire and Sidon would
not have repented, if they had seen the Miracles that have been done in
Chorazim and Bethsaida? So that, methinks, he should have so ordered it, either
by a gratuitous impression, or by retrenching three parts of four of his Book,
that all sorts of persons might have got it.

It may be, Sir, you will think this, what I say of a gratuitous Impression,
somewhat new and difficult to practice. But, if you consider, that those
Gentlemen of the Port Royal have made above Five hundred presents of this Book,
according to the relation of their Stationer, will not you avow to me, that,
since the conversion of those that shall read it is concerned, those presents
would have been better employed for the Salvation of Men, ^han for the payment
of a civility, which aim^th but at the honor of the World? Heaven should have
carried it from Earth, and Cha^ity from Interest, whereto we are oftener car^ied
by Custom, rather than by Inclination. And do not tell me, that this Book has
been given to Catholics, to confirm them in their Religion: For you do not
doubt, that almost none of those, to whom it has been presented, had any need
at all of these elucidations, nor any scruple of their Belief. You know also,
that the Shepherd in the Gospel leaves his Ninety and nine sheep, of which he
is assured, to go and seek after that one which is gone astray. And if those
Gentlemen had pleased, they might have made Presents, and given Alms, acquitted
themselves of the duties, which respect and friendship demanded of them, and
gained good will among their Adversaries. You see well enough, Sir, that I
speak for the interest of our people, and for many, who would have been very
glad to have seen this Book, and were not in a condition to buy it, nor to read
it after they had got it.

But let us set aside this Liberality and this Zeal; they are works of
supererogation, to which a Man is not obliged; and when mere Counsels do cause
trouble, pain, and some loss, we do easily exempt our selves from them. But as
to the second condition, which I would have wished from Monsieur Arnaud, viz.
The shortning of his Book, to make it more common amongst us, he cannot blame
it forasmuch as it would have turned both to hi^ own account, and to that of
others, since i^ would have taken off half his pains in composing it, as well
as that of ours in reading it.

Do not think, Sir, that this retrenchment would have taken away any thing of
the force of Monsieur Arnauds Book; on the contrary, it would have contained
nothing but what is essential and solid, whereas in the condition it is now in,
it may be said in the general, that it is weak and useless throughout. For, it
does not bear it self up equally; he often tells us one and the same thing,
which has nothing but an amplification, and a paraphrase of his Refutation;
and he gives us several useless and impertinent discourses. I believe, Sir, you
your self have perceived this truth, and it were not difficult to make it out
to any who should doubt of it. In short, the first Book might be reduced to a
Douzen Lines, instead of the Twelve Chapters it contains. For, since it was
only written to Justify the Method of the Book of the Perpetuity; that is to
say, to Justify, that the Author had not been obliged to answer to the whole
Book of Monsieur Aubertin, and might have followed The way of Prescription,
rather than that of Discussion; It was sufficient to observe so much in three
or four words, since that is a matter of common sense, and without
controversy: Nor has Monsieur Claude blamed that method ^rther than to show,
that it is not so sure as ^e other; but he has not omitted to stick to ^e
same, and to answer to it exactly: So that was to no purpose, to go about to
multiply ^arrels, and to write a Book, to prove what ^d not belong to the
Question.

The Four following Books, viz. The Se^ond, Third, Fourth, and Fifth, and then
the Twelfth, which do largely treat of the consent of the Schismatic Churches
with the Church of Rome, concerning the points of the Reality, of
Transubstantiation, and of the Adoration of the Eucharist, are pieces besides
the business, and not at all necessary. The first Treatise of the Perpetuity
touched but one word of it: Monsieur Claude in his first writing had answered
to it in Four Lines; in the refutation Monsieur Arnaud did somewhat enlarge
upon it; which did obliege Monsieur Claude to make a longer answer thereto. But
all that has been hitherto done by slight touches, and as it were transiently;
whereas now Monsieur Arnaud makes it his principal. The thing is (and it is
that which has swelled the Work) that Monsieur Arnaud has not here taken
Monsieur Claudes sense aright, and labored to verify that which was not denied
him: For he pretends to prove every where, that Monsieur Claude has been in
the wrong, in denying that the Eastern Churches believe the Reality; and almost
all the passages, which he alleges, tend only to make out the contrary. But,
Sir, he has taken pains in vain, and in this encounter he sights with his own
shadow; because it ^ not be found, that Monsieur Claude has nied, that the
Greek Churches did believe Reality in the time of Pascasius, or that the
believe it still: He has only maintain^ that they never believed
Transubstantia^ and Adoration; which is far differing fr^ the other. For,
although we may well a^^ from Adoration and Transubstantiation to ^^ality, yet
may we not conclude also from t^ Reality to Transubstantiation and Adoration
seeing that the Lutherans do reject these t^ latter; and yet believe, as you
do, that the take with the Mouth of the Body, the tr^ Body and the true Blood
of Jesus Christ. S^ that, if Monsieur Arnaud would precisely ^fute the opinion
of Monsieur Claude, he m^ make it his business to prove, That the Gree^ and
other Eastern Churches have believe Transubstantiation, and adored the
Eucharist but this he has not so much as thought of, an^ yet has made a
strange noise of what he f^ thereth upon Monsieur Claude, though Mo^sieur
Claude has not said it. And so he ha^ produced with much pomp and show suc^
testimonies and allegations, which are not ^ all to the purpose of that
contest, which is b^twixt them.

But it may be, Sir, you will not believe m^ upon my word, and you will hardly
perswad^ your self, That Monsieur Arnaud should have deceived himself in a
matter of this nature, where there needs no more but to read ^t is therefore
just, I should make this good ^o you, and allege before you those passages,
^here Monsieur Claude speaks of it, because ^ou have told me, That you have not
seen his ^rst writing. It is therefore this, what he has ^aintained: There
remains only for me to say a word touching the opinion of the Greeks, and of
^he other Christians, which the Author says, do ^gree with the Roman Church;
which is, That I maintain, that Transubstantiation, and the Ado^ation of the
Sacrament, are two things unknown ^o the whole Earth, except the Roman Church;
for neither the Greeks, nor the Armenians, nor the Russians, nor the Jacobites,
nor the Aethiopians, nor any other Christians, but those that submit themselves
to the Pope, believe any thing at all of those two Articles. This is all he
says of it in that place; where you see plainly, that he speaks not a word of
the Real Presence, and that he confines himself to the two points of
Transubstantiation and Adoration: And after ^he same manner does he declare
himself in his Answer to the Second Treatise of the Perpetuity, the Second
Part, the Eighth Chapter, viz. I should have nothing more to do concerning
this, if the Author had not, as he has, called in to his succors the
Schismatic Churches; but since he has thought fit to join the question of
their condition, with that of the condition of the Latins, it is just to
satisfy him also in that. I said therefore about the end of my Answer, that
the Adoration of the Sacrament is a thing, wherewith the whole world is
unacquainted, except the Roman Church, etc. And in the seque^ of that Chapter,
he answers to what Monsieu^ Arnaud had alleged upon the subject of thi^
Adoration; and this is one of the Points denied by Monsieur Claude. Of the
other, viz. Transubstantiation, he speaks in his third part, the eighth
Chapter, where he examines the proof^ of Monsieur Arnaud, but he speaks no
where of the Manducation of the Body of Christ; and if he says sometimes
(which is very seldom) that the Greeks, or the Fathers, have not believed the
Real Presence, he presently explains himself, calling it afterward, the Local
Presence, and such an one as is believed at Rome, to show, That he speaks
only of the manner of Manducation. But it is time, to run through the other
Books of his Volume.

The Sixth may be reduced to a most certain, and most evident Proposition,
which is, That the words which express what is to be believed of the Eucharist,
have always been explained by Believers, either in a Literal Sense, or in a
Metaphorical Sense, and that therefore the Church has always distinctly
believed, either the Real Presence, or the Real Absence. These are the words of
Monsieur Arnaud in the Preface; whereupon he adds afterward, That none other
perhaps than Monsieur Claude would have obliged him to treat of this point,
and that every man of good sense must agree in it at first sight. Whence you
see, Sir, that instead of this Sixth Book, there needs only four or five
Lines, according to the acknowledgment of Monsieur Arnaud; and that the sole
wilfulness of Monsieur Claude has been the cause of this length. But if this
wilfulness is imaginary, if Monsieur Claude has not only agreed to, but also
positively maintained, what Monsieur Arnaud imputes to him to have denied, is
it not true, That we ought also to cut away this Sixth Book as useless, and
supposing a thing which is not? But it is easy to verify this last
Proposition, in the two parts of the Note of Monsieur Arnaud: One knows not,
whether he accuses Monsieur Claude for having denied the principle he puts,
and the consequence; or, whether he accuses him only for having denied the
sequel, although he agree about the principle; that is to say, One knows not,
whether he will say, that Monsieur Claude would not acknowledge that the words,
This is my Body, this is my Blood, have been always taken in the Literal Sense,
or in the Metaphorical Sense, and that consequently Believers have always had a
distinct belief of the Presence or Absence Real? Or, whether he meant only,
that Monsieur Claude agreeing about the Thesis, has denied the Consequence
which Monsieur Arnaud draws from it. For his words relate to both these parts;
yet I will believe, that Monsieur Arnaud has only thought of the Consequence,
since the whole Book of Monsieur Claude speaks of nothing else, but of the
Metaphorial Sense of the Sacramental words, and that particularly the fourth,
fifth, and sixth Chapters of the Second Part, are only spent to evince, That
the Expressions of the Fathers, calling the Eucharist the Body of Christ, could
be taken in no other, b^ a Metaphorical Sense.

Let us see therefore, whether Monsieu^ Claude has denied, that Believers have
always had a distinct belief of the Presence o^ Absence Real, as Monsieur
Arnaud impute^ to him in his whole Sixth Book. For my part* I know not, whether
I mistake, but methinks, that Monsieur Claude has maintained the contrary in
many places. In his first Answe^ ( Page 9) he says; The Body of Christ is
believed to be present in the Eucharist four mann^ of ways: And after he has
explained them he adds, And all the ways of Presence a^ Real, each in its kind
or order: This truth hat^ been always believed, and is so still. And afterward
in his Fifth consideration, which hat^ been the principal subject of the
dispute upon this matter, he says ( Page 12) Before the Transubstantiation
came into the World, every one believed, That Jesus Christ is present in the
Sacrament, and that his Body and Blood a^^ there really received by the
Believing Communi^cants. But in the Third Chapter of his Second Answer, you
have two precise passages Thus when the Author tells us (says Monsieu^ Claude)
that those who took the Instructions o^ the Fathers in a Metaphorical Sense,
had ^ distinct and clear Idea of the Real Absence; i^ he means, that they
believe Christ to be Corporally Present in Heaven, without thinking on wh^ was
said afterward, that he is at the same time ^ Heaven, and on Earth; there,
after the ^anner of a Body; here, after the manner of ^ Spirit: To reject
formally this opinion, I avow, that Believers had in that sense a very distinct
^dea of the Real Absence. And af^erwards ( Page 273.) he maintain that in the
first Eight Centuries, The Positive Doctrine, which we be^ieve, was then taught
so clearly, strongly and distinctly, that it dispelled all the difficulties,
which could arise from these Expressions; The Bread is the Body of Christ, the
Bread is changed into the Body of Christ. Is not this enough, Sir, to prove
that Monsieur Claude has not maintained, as Monsieur Arnaud imputes to ^im;
That for the space of a thousand years, people knew not what the Eucharist was,
and that Believers had not a distinct knowledge of the Real Presence or Absence.

But if you suspect Monsieur Claude, if his words, his protestations, his
complaints are not sufficient to you, I shall furnish you with a witness which
you will not reject, and that is Monsieur Arnaud himself, who has written the
Fourth Chapter of this Sixth Book purposely to prove, That Monsieur Claude
(Page 551.) has entangled himself in two considerable faults; the one is, that
he has explained his sentiment amiss; and the other, that he has granted him
in effect all he desired. By the first, he pretends that Monsieur Claude has
not refuted what was the Question, and that he has indiscreetly carried the
Dispute to the distinct belief of Transubstantiation, which (...) did not think
upon; since he only though^ on the Real Presence, separate from all the
difficulties, which the circumstances and the way^ of this Presence may beget.
By the Second h^ maintains, that Monsieur Claude grants in the matter of the
Real Presence or Absence, a^ what is sufficient to his design.

Thus you see a truth avowed by both parties. Monsieur Claude has disputed
against the distinct belief of the Transubstantiation ^ and Monsieur Arnaud
has never maintaine^ this distinct belief. Monsieur Arnaud hat^ maintained the
distinct belief of the Real Presence, and Monsieur Claude grants it, even by
the acknowledgment of his Adversary. Wh^ need then, to examine at large the
Systeme o^ Monsieur Claude, since it clashes not with the Sentiments of
Monsieur Arnaud? And to what purpose, to make a Book to prove, Tha^ there has
always been in the Church, a distinc^ belief of the Real Presence, if Monsieur
Claud^ has not denied it; if he has strongly stoo^ up for it, at least for
the space of the fir^^ Eight Centuries; and if he has spoken only of
Transubstantiation in reference to the Nint^ and tenth? But let us pass on to
the other Books.

The Positive proofs, says Monsieur A^naud in his Preface, That have been
alleage^ in the Seventh and eighth Book, to show, The the belief of the Real
Presence, and of Transubstantiation was established in the Gre^^ Church, and in
the Latin, in the eighth, ninth, and tenth Centuries, are only Accessory
proofs, and such as we might be altogether without. We shall not quarrel with
him concerning this, we being much of his mind, that these two Books might
have been very well spared. And so he would have obliged us in retrenching
them.

There is only the Ninth, which is Essential, continues Monsieur Arnaud,
because it shows the impossibility of the Change; and yet in this Book there
are things, which are not necessary but to confound the stubbornness of
Monsieur Claude, and which an Adversary of more sincerity than he, would have
saved us the pains of writing. So that the whole Volume of Monsieur Arnaud
might have been reduced to this Ninth Book, and even of this somewhat might
have been pruned away.

The Tenth (so goes on Monsieur Arnaud) contains some useful consequences, but
such as are only designed for a further clearing of the truth. But if these
consequences be of use, yet the Book is very useless, because it contains
nothing but what has often been said before; and that, besides that in each
Chapter Monsieur Arnaud shows the sequels of his Examen and Ratiocinations,
each Book has at the end a Chapter express, which contains the breviate, the
Conclusion and the Consequences; or, if you will, one Book contains the
Consequences of two or three precedent ones. And so this Tenth Book can be
nothing else but a tedious Repetition o^ what has been very often alleged.

As for the Eleventh, Monsieur Arnau^ says nothing of it, and he has reason,
it being a piece, which serves not at all to the main subject of the contest,
and regards only Personal Complaints, wherein Readers are bu^ little concerned.

The Second Reflection.
It Is strange enough, that M. Arnaud has taken the pains of composing a Volume
of ^ hundred and fiftysheets, of which not so ^uch as the tenth part is
absolutely necessary, ^ I have showed from his own words; and ^at yet he has
not been willing to terminate ^at famous Controversy, which keeps both ^arties
in exspectation, and has referred the ^nswer to one part of M. Claude's Book
to another tlme.

He gives us notice of this design even in ^is very Preface, and declares
himself parti^ularly about it in the second Book, the first ^hapter; His Book,
says he, in speaking of ^he Book of M. Claude, Is properly the mix^ure of two
Books, of which the one respects the ^reatise of the Perpetuity, the other, the
common ^ause of the Church: He has blended and con^ounded them out of design,
and we shall distinguish them out of a contrary design. We shall therefore
represent first, the proofs of the Book of ^he Perpetuity, and the precise
Answers he makes thereto: which shall be the subject of this Vo^ume, and so
contain the Answer to his first Book. And we shall reserve for a second Volume,
what be alleges in general against the cause of the Church, and what the
Church alleges against the Doctrine of the Calvinists; which shall m^ the
Answer to his second Book.

Truly, Sir, it is to abuse ones leisure, ^ give us accessory proofs, and such
as we can ^ without, of things not essential, of con^quences said over and over
again; and yet divide the Book of M. Claude into two part for to Answer but to
one of them, in a Boo^ ten times as big. It had certainly been mu^^ better, to
have omitted the things which we^ not absolutely necessary, and to have take
pains in the main, and in the essentials.

And it is this management of M. Arnaud which has been the second reason, why
m^ have not been so earnest to have his Book and which has not so greatly
satisfied People because they exspect the second Volume as t^^ most important.

For, what advantage soever M. Arna^^ may attribute to his method of
Prescription which he has examined in this first Volume that of Discussion,
which he reserveth for the other, is the most sure, and the least perple^ed;
the inconveniences, which he finds ^ this, being found in his, because that
is to ex^min the reasonings he alleges to show t^^ impossibility of the
change, which we preten^ to have happened in the time of Paschasius in the belief
of the Eucharist; and it must discu^^ besides the proofs which we produce to
evince^ that all the World was not, as he pretends, o^ the sentiment of
Paschasius, and that he ha^ many Adversaries.

So that, if there be difficulties and prolixi^es to know aright the belief of
the Fathers in ^is matter, for as much as some want that ne^^ssary help of
profiting thereby, which is the un^^rstanding of Tongues; others have not
leisure ^ make this examen with a reasonable care and ^^actness; and others
have not reach enough to ^^mpare so many proofs together, as Monsieur Arnaud
says; Why will not he admit, that the same obstacles are found in his Me^hod?
Have the Simple and Ignorant, for those sake it has been principally brought
to ^ight, the knowledge of Tongues, which is necessary to learn the History of
the time of ^aschasius, and of the opinion of the Greeks and Latins? Have they
more leisure to make this examen with a rational care, then that of the
sentiment of the Fathers of the six first Centuries? Have they capacity enough
to compare the proofs, which he and M. Claude shall produce in their Books; and
not enough to compare the proofs of the Cardinal du Perron, and M. Aubertin?

Sir, I must needs confess my ignorance, and I understand not the difference
there is between the difficulties of these Methods; on the contrary, I find,
that that of M. Arnaud has two things to clear, whereas the other has but
one; For, that of Prescription must examine the force and truth of the reasons
upon which it is grounded, and besides examins, as well as that of Discussion,
the passages of many Greek and Latin Authors, which were necessary to be
alleged by both sides, to know ^ verity of the suppositions of this Book of
P^petuity.

But then, it is certain, that what remains t^ be done by M. Arnaud, is much
more impo^tant than what he has done; for, a man re^sons very ill of the
impossibility of a thing when another proves, that the thing has act^ally
been done. M. Claude maintains, the there has been made a Change in the
Doctrine of the Eucharist, and that the Antie^ Church was of our belief; which
he will prov^ by the Writings of the Fathers of that time And M. Arnaud
imagines, that we may satisfy our selves upon bare reasonings, by which he
pretends to prove the impossibility of thi^ Change. You see, Sir, that We go
naturally t^ work, to know whether the thing have happened, when there are
great appearances for it, when our men do positively maintain it* and offer
proofs to evince it; and, that i^ such a case as this we do little hearken to
those, that will persuade us by some abstra^ and Metaphysical ratiocinations,
(having need of proof) that the thing could not b^ done.

Add thereto the evident advantage of the proof of this fact above the Method
of Prescription, which is, that there is never an end in Ratiocinations. Our
mind is too fierce to confess it self overcome by the wit of another; it
acknowledges no Superiors in this kind of disputes, and always finds answers,
^hether true or apparent, to disentangle it ^f, either in the difficulty of the
question, or ^ the strength of our wit, or in the weakness ^ that of our
Adversary: whereas we do ^ore easily acquiesce in the truths, which the ^her
Method teaches us, because in that case ^e do not yield to the reasoning of
our adver^^ry, but to the authority of the Ancient Church, and to the
Testimonies of the Fathers, who assure us of the practice and doctrine of their
time, and by that means of the true sense of the Passages of the Scripture,
which are contested.

The Third Reflection.
THat Imperious and Insulting way, where M. Arnaud deals with M. Claude ev^
where, is none of the least reasons, which h^ kept our People from reading his
Boo^ There are found in it at every turn injuri^ and expressions of contempt;
and it seem^ that his Treatise was made on purpose ^ paint him in the blackest
colors, that can ^ used for the picture of the most extravaga^ of men. He does
perpetually descend from the Cause to the Person, and without staying as other
Authors do, to refute in particul^^ what is opposed against him, he presently
fal^ upon the genius, spirit and humor of M* Claude, of which he takes
pleasure to dra^ an odd Picture; so that, if he be to be ^ liev'd, there never
was a Writer more extravagant, more ridiculous, more absurd, more deceitful,
and more prevaricating, than M* Claude. If I should give you the collectio^ I
have made of the fine qualities, which M* Arnaud gives him, I assure my self,
that yo^ would startle at it, and I persuade my sel^ even of the sincerity of
M. Arnaud, that if h^ saw this pourtrait, he would disown it, and blame the
heat of the dispute, which hat^ made him write so many things contrary to hi^
profession, and to the Laws of Christianity. ^ shall only give you here a
pattern of it, by which you may judge of the whole Piece. It ^ in the first
Chapter of the seventh Book, p. ^14, where speaking of the genius of M. Claude,
^e has these words: His Spirit (of M. Claude) ^, as by diverse Experiments we
have already ^een able to discover, never to regard how things ^re in deed, but
only how he would desire they should be; to have no respect to truth, nor so
much as to probability, but only to the interest of his cause; to dispose of
Histories and real Events with more liberty, then men dispose of the Chimerical
adventures of Romances; to build upon the vacuum of his imagination, as upon
the most real and the most solid foundation; not to stick to make all the World
speak and think madly, so they do but speak and think according to his desires
and pretensions; to prefer the most petty reasons to the strongest and
clearest proofs; and, topropose and deliver all that in a fierce, bold,
contemning and insulting manner; by giving to himself such applauses, as he
would gladly receive from others, and treating his Adversaries, as he would
that others should treat them.

Some do imagine, that there are secret reasons, that have obliged M. Arnaud,
thus to exceed the bounds that ought to be in the Disputes of Learned Men. I
will not dive into them; but I am assured, that those transports are not
always equitable, and because I have examined the cause thereof carefully, I
would show you two or three examples of it, if it were not besides the subject
of this Discourse, nor an undertaking of what is M. Claude's province, who has
the Pen in hand to send himself, and needs no Second.

But, at least you will not think it strang^ that we are scandalized to see the
public D^fendant of our Cause so evil entreated, a^ that this manner of
proceeding gives us an opinion of that which is maintained by ^ Arnaud.

The Fourth Reflection.
IF we have cause to be concerned for Monsieur Claude, this observation will
show, That we have a more sensible interest, and which more directly relates to
us all, considering it concerns the generality of our Churches. And indeed,
Sir, I was surprised to see, that Monsieur Arnaud makes a stay to reproach us
with the irregularities of the first Authors that forsook their Communion, and
to wrangle about their Mission, in a Book which has nothing at all to do with
that; besides that he knows, that we have answered a thousand times those
ungrounded Objections.

But there is more than this, which is, that Monsieur Arnaud fathers those
opinions upon us, which are none of ours, and goes about to decry our Religion
from Consequences, which he devises at pleasure, or which he borrows from
those, who have invented them. I will only relate to you Three Examples of
them.

In the Third Chapter of the First Book, page 19. He weaves a prolix Discourse,
to show, that we have no short way of knowing the true Church, and that a man
must examine in particular all the Points that are proposed. It is not
difficult to answer what he says thereupon, but I leave that to Monsie^
Claude, who will not fail to make it out, The the way of the Scripture is much
more easi^ shorter, and furer, than that of the Church by the very
acknowledgment of many of the^ own Doctors. I only note, that in that
Ratiocination he accuses us as if we believed That it is possible, that the
Church should subsist no more. Whence he infers, That w^ cannot avoid
discussing all the Dogmes of a Sects, present and passed, subsistent and
extinct, and to search in the Catalogue of a^ the Heresies, Whether we may not
find ther^ the Church of Jesus Christ.

I know not, what may have made Monsieu^ Arnaud to impute unto us such a pretty
Vision: But this I know, that never any man o^ our Communion has said it, and
I challenge Monsieur Arnaud to show me one only Author amongst us, who has
believed, that it could come to pass, that the Church should subsist no more.
We believe just the contrary, and know, That the World does not subsist but
upon the account of the Church; that there has never been a moment, and that
there never will be any, to the end of the World, wherein it can be said with
truth, that there is no true Church. Jesus Christ, who cannot lie, has
promised to be with us to the end of the World, and to secure his Church
against the power of Hell. We say indeed, That some of the parts of this
Universal Church can perish, and that that Eternal Subsistence is not fastened
to the Church of Rome, ^r the Grecian, nor the Ethiopian, nor to ^^ her
particular Members; we have too sad ^^ experience to doubt of it. We say also
^^rther, That the true Church has her degrees of Light, as the Moon; that she
is at times ^^ oppressed by Tyrants, and so obscured by the darkness of Errors,
that one can hardly discern her; and that a great Prophet cried out, That he
was alone remaining in the midst of Idolaters, when God answered, to comfort
him, That he had reserved Seven thousand Souls, that had not bowed their knees
to Baal. But these things conclude nothing against the existence of the Church,
and Monsieur Arnaud is much out, when he says, That, according to us, it is
possible, she should subsist no more.

He has no more reason in another place of his Work, (in the Tenth Book, chap.
1. page 6.) where he says, That we have introduced amongst us Detestable
Morals, which constitute an essential part of our Religion. I profess to you,
Sir, that I could hardly believe my own eyes; I imagined, that they failed me,
or that the Printer had mistaken: I read it over and over, an accusation so
heinous, so scandalous, so ungrounded; and with all that, I could not resolve
to believe, that such a thought had escaped a clear-sighted, wise, and sincere
man, and one that so much preaches up Integrity and Candor: But I was yet much
more astonished, when I was assured, that he was at work to publish our Morals,
that as the first Book we shall see of him, and t^^ he pretends to justify,
that they are such, he has described them here in short.

Sir, you are one of his Friends, coun^ him to employ his time better, and to
lea^ such calumnies to those base and ridiculo^ Spirits, those Quacks of
Religion, those i^norant Methodists, the Cutlers, Apothecari^ etc. that are the
famous Disciples of o^ Veron. Tell him, that a Doctor of the Sor^ ought not to
amuse the World with such trif^ and fictions; that it becomes him to be mo^
serious, and to say nothing, but what he ^ clearly prove.

I know not, how he will order himself making this Book; but I am very well
assure that, in what manner soever he compose it, (...) most simple will
presently discover the wea^ness; the honester sort, even of their Relig^on,
will look on it with contempt; and it w^ work nothing amongst us, and his
reputati^ will but suffer the more by it.

Yet I doubt not, but the Book will sel^ we do naturally love Detractions and
Nove^ties; and when Monsters are not in a cond^tion to hurt us, they commonly
excite o^ curiosity. The Book will certainly have the advantage, that it will
teach us things we kno^ not.

But, Sir, whence may Monsieur Arnaud we this new Light? where has he made
this ^^w Discovery? How comes he to see amongst (...), what never any one of
ours has seen; ^^d how comes it to pass, that we have not ^^en aware of these
Detestable Morals, of which he speaks so positively? Whence ^omes it, that
none of those, that have forsaken our Communion, and listed themselves (...)
yours, never thought on it to accuse us of ^at Looseness, nor have taken for a
Motive of ^^eir Change, such Detestable Morals? Whence ^^mes it, that your most
famous preachers search with care, and read with esteem, the Sermons of
Monsieur de Moulin, Monsieur Mestrezat, Monsieur le Faucheur, Monsieur Daille,
Monsieur Gache, and other Ministers, without ^^ving there found, what Monsieur
Arnaud ^^proaches us with, although those writings do ^^eifly treat of Manners?
Whence comes it, that even our Fellow-Citizens of your Religion, that your
Magistrates have hitherto made no complaint of our Conversation? How comes it
to pass, that the Edicts of His most Christian Majesty have not thundered
against those Detestable Morals? And how is it, that they suffer in the Kingdom
such a pernicious irregularity, and a Religion, which for its Essential part
has Morals of that nature?

Truly, Monsieur Arnaud has made a strange step, and he says too much to be
believed. For the crime, which he charge us with, is the blackest and the
most execrable that can be imagined, and never was so m^ said of the most
barbarous and the most i^pious Nations. There are among Heath^ some infamous
people, who glory in what call Vice, and know not what we call Virtue but those
Crimes are not authorized by Law and are no Essential part of their Religion
They are people, whom the Justice of G^ gives over to the disorders of their
corrup^ed nature, and who even sin not in many thi^^ they do, because they have
no knowledge n^ rule, to direct them what they ought to do, to avoid: But that
Christians, enlightened the Light of the Gospel, should make pr^fession of
Detestable Morals by a principl^ their Religion, is so surprising, that I can^
hold telling you again, that I can hardly co^ceive, how Monsieur Arnaud came to
fall^ to such a delusion, as to believe and spe^ it.

When he is maintaining against us, that o^ Senses and our Reason are mistaken
in the m^ter of the Eucharist, he is not the only m^ that maintains it; their
whole Church saith^ same thing: And to prove this Proposition he alleges the
Power of God, the Text the Holy Scripture, and the Testimonies the Fathers; but
here Monsieur Arnaud go^ about to do something more; for without proof, and
without miracle he will, that o^ Senses and our Reason are perpetually goi^
astray; and although we read and hear da^ Exhortations to Piety, Ho^iness, and
Repe^^^nce, he will that these things speak nothing of that they speak, and
that this is nothing but Detestable Morality.

I know, that certain Spirits of the mean^st rank have drawn ridiculous
consequences out of some of our Tenants, and accused us, That we make God the
Author of Sin; that we make all Sins equal; that we deny the necessity of good
Works; that we Preach Libertinism, and the infallible assurance of Salvation,
how sinful soever we be; but none has been yet found, that has gone so far,
as to affirm in general, that our Morals are Detestable.

But I must confess to you my being surprised on this occasion: I have, without
thinking on it, put Monsieur Arnaud among these Spirits of the last rank, who
feed only on poisons, and who cannot speak of their Adversaries, without
making Satyrs: For after I had written, what you have just now read, I have
found a passage in his Ninth Book ( Chap. 9. p. 931.) which confirms what I
have told you, touching the design of Monsieur Arnaud of writing our Morals,
and teaches me part of the Principles, upon which apparently he must build
this great Work.

He speaks in that place of Penitential Exercises, and says, That it is not to
be wondered, that they seem vain and superstitious to the Calvinists, that is,
to a sort of people who are assured of their Salvation, who believe that their
greatest irregularities do not make them loose the quality of being the
Children of God; and that althoug^ they wallow in the shamefullest disorders,
th^^ are nevertheless as Just as the Blessed Virgin their pretended imputative
Righteousness not being susceptible of plus or minus, of more or les^ And
somewhat after that, he says again, The we believe the Penitential Works to be
useles^ both to satisfy for the sins passed, and to assu^ us of our Salvation;
of which we esteem o^ selves to be sure already without repentance an^ good
works. And as he is not a man to advanc^ things of this nature without proof,
he assure^ us in the Margent, That all these accusations sha^ be made good in
an express Treaty.

Thus what I was told, that he was busy i^ writing our Morals, is found true,
and i^ the execution of what he has promised i^ this place. And it appears
also by these Specimens, that he will draw up against us the same accusations,
which I have just now spoke of.

Indeed, Sir, this is intolerable, that Monsieur Arnaud should so licentiously
abuse the credit he has gained, that he should go abo^ to imitate troubling
Busi-bodies, and to warrant such impertinent calumnies, which have been so
often and so solidly refuted? Does h^^ not know, that in matter of accusation,
bar^ suspicion and apparences are not sufficient, an^ that there must be
positive proofs, and as clear as the Sun? Does he not remember what himself
has said (in his Second Book, Chap. 6 p. 153.) That we ought well to
distinguish b^^^een Consequences, and Tenets formally main^ined. For it cannot
be concluded, That those ^o maintain an opinion, maintain all the con^^quences
of it, if those consequences are ill de^iced; and although they were well
deduced, it not just to impute them to them, if they advow them not, and it do
not appear, that they have ^en them, and approved of them.

Let Monsieur Arnaud take his measures by his own Maxim, let him in the Examen
of our Morals allege none, but our clear and formally maintained passages,
without pettifoggery, without equivocation, and without consequences drawn
after his fancy; and I am sure, that, if he will keep within these bounds, as
he is obliged to do, his Book will be soon made, or rather not be made at all.

In the mean time, Sir, although I believe, that you are too intelligent to
have made any ill judgment of our Morals, upon the Authority, or rather the
Passion of Monsieur Arnaud, I shall, by way of anticipation, in a few lines
refute the Book he is writing of them, and to show you the places whence he
must take, what we believe in this matter.

We have therefore no other Morals than those, which Jesus Christ has taught
us; and the Prophets and Apostles are our Casuists and Doctors, which we
consult in all our difficulties. The sum of these Morals is, To love God with
all our heart, with all our soul, with all our thoughts, and our neighbor as
our selves, not doing to others what we would (...) have done to us.

The Authentic Acts, wherein we expl^ at large our Sentiments in this matter,
are o^ Confession of Faith, and our Catechism. The^ it is, Sir, where you may
see these Moral which Monsieur Arnaud calls Detestable. B^ I am apt to believe,
that he will be alone (...) his party, and that you will not be of his op^nion,
when you shall have understood, thi^ there we teach, That God governs and orde^
all things by his Providence even the Wicked and Devils In the Confession of
Faith, Art. 8. Art. 8, 22.
Without being the Author (...) Sin, and that their wickedne^^ cannot be
imputed unto him since his Will is the supreme an^ infallible Rule of all
equity. That we are regenerated to newness of Life by Faith, which given us
Grace to live holily, and in the fear of God, and which is so far from making
us remiss in the duty of a good and holy life, that on the contrary it begets
and excites it in us, necessarily producing good Works. Catechism. Sect. 25.
That we ought not to take the Name of God in vain, nor speak of him, but with
fear and humility: Ibid. Sect. 26, 27.
That we ought to mortify our flesh, and to renounce and deny our selves that
so God may govern us by his Spirit. Ibid. Sect. 28, 29, 30.
That we ought to observe the Ordinance instituted in the Church for hearing
the Word of God, and having communion in the Public Prayers and Sacraments:
That we ought to obey Father and Mother, honor them, and assist them to the
best of our power: That we ought not only be without all violence and hatred,
but love our neighbor, and procure his Salvation with a sincere affection: That
we ought to abstain from all impurity, and keep our selves chaste, not only in
deed, but also in our desires, words, and gestures: That we ought not to take
an other man's goods, neither by force nor by craft and ill practices: That
perjury and evil speaking are sins condemned by the Law of God: That we ought
to be so perfect, that not only evil actions, disorderly affections, and
simple desires to sin are blameable, but that even the thoughts, and the simple
temptations to evil, although we do not consent thereto, are criminal before
the severe Tribunal of Gods Justice.

This, Sir, is the Abridgment of our Morals, that make an Essential part of our
Religion; which, I am sure, you will not think Detestable, and by it you may
see, how great is the transport of Monsieur Arnaud, and whether I had not cause
to make this injury one of the Motives, which has made him very suspectful to
us, and turned us away from reading his Book: Not to insist now, that he has
given matter to Monsieur Claude of a just recrimination, and to examine the
Morals of the Jesuits, and that of the Jansenists, which have raised so much
noise; together with the Regulations of the Church of Rome, for the tax of the
Absolution of every sin, of the Bull of Indulgence, of Dispensations, and the
like.

The third Example, which I shall allege is not less considerable. You know,
that the Doctrine of the Gospel consists in these two* points, namely Faith and
Repentance; Belie^ and a good Life. Monsieur Arnaud accuses our Morals to be
detestable, and he does no less concerning our Doctrine; since he affirms, That
although the Trinity and all the other Mysteries of our Faith be asserted by
innumerable, very clear, and very convincing proofs both in Scripture and
Tradition, yet these proofs sound very ill in the mouths of the Calvinists, who
so weaken them by their false principles, that they make them incapable to
persuade the Socinians and all others that are in an error: And one may see,
that these detestable Heretics have done no more but advanced the principles,
which the Calvinists have furnished them with, by not enduring to be kept
within those arbitrary bounds, to which the first Reformers thought fit to
confine themselves: So that this Heresy may in reason be called an Extension
of Calvinism. Those false principles, of which he speaks, are, That we renounce
the Tradition and Authority of the Church, and that we reduce our selves to the
Scripture alone, explained by our Reason, and by our private Spirit.

You cannot but see, Sir, that this discourse is altogether injurious, and that
first of all, it insinuates into the minds of those who read ^, as if we had a
great Conformity with the ^ocinians, and our Religion were an Abridg^ent of
their Heresy, seeing that their Heresy ^s said to be nothing but an Extension
of our Religion. Whereas hitherto there has not ^een, God be thanked, any
contestation be^wixt us about these important truths, which those unhappy men
fight against; and the most impudent calumny never durst quarrel with us upon
this point: And our Confession of Faith, our Catechism, the writings of our
Doctors against these Heretics, and all your own writers themselves do highly
justify us. Whence then has Monsieur Arnaud this sullen bitterness? Does he
think, he shall be believed upon his word, and that an accusation of this
nature shall be received without proof? He will say, it may be, (and that is
all that can be said, somewhat to excuse him;) That he meant not to charge us,
as if we did formally maintain the errors of the Socinians about the Trinity,
but only, that we have the same principles concerning the Rules of our Faith;
that both they and we reject the Authority of the Church; that without this
Authority Heretics cannot be convinced; and that thus, the Socinians being
gone out from us, and even having driven farther, than we, this principle, that
the Scripture alone is the Rule of Faith, we have furnished them with arms to
fight against our most Sacred Mysteries.

But if he would say no more than this, he has very ill delivered himself, and
for so eloquent a man as he is, his Discourse nec^ too much comment to make it
to be understood: For a man shall never conclude a^ thing else from it, but
that we partake of the Heresy of the Socinians, which is a mere calumny; and
it is always very ill argued, t^ accuse people of all the Errors of those, wit^
whom they have some things common: It i^ as if I should say, that the Roman
Religion i^ an extension of the Errors of the Greeks, and that it has advanced
their principles, because both do pray for the dead, and you believe a
Purgatory, which is not believed by the Eastern Churches. It may well be said,
that both have some common opinions; but that infers nothing for the rest of
their Tenants: And although the Socinians cut away the Authority of Councils,
and of Tradition, from being Rules of Faith, as well as we do, yet it cannot be
said without injustice, that their Heresy is an extension of our Belief in
general. All that can be concluded from it, is, that we have that principle
common; which signifies nothing, forasmuch as there is no Heresy, which has
not something common with the true Church. And not to pass out of our Argument,
the Socinians believe and adore one only God; they believe, and desire Heaven;
they believe and fear Hell, as well as we: Is it therefore to be said, that we
therefore hold their other Tenants, which we detest and oppose both, with all
our power? Certainly Monsieur Arnaud has taken his measure very ill in this
matter. But, Sir, you ^ay observe besides, that he not only mis^kes in this
conclusion, but that the Passion he ^d to decry our Religion by such an odious
^^mparison, has hindered him to see diverse ^otable faults, upon which he has
built that ^onsequence, in such a manner, that there are hardly more lines than
faults in his Ratiocination.

First, It is not true, and it is even dangerous to affirm, That the Mystery of
the Trinity has need of Tradition, and of the Authority of the Church. If the
holy Scriptures did not clearly assert it, we should always be doubtful,
because that Tradition and the Authority of the Church are not common
principles, and they have need of a great discussion to be known.

Secondly, It is not true, that we renounce Tradition and the Authority of the
Church in this point, nor in many others. Our Confession of Faith receives the
Creeds of the Apostles, of Nice, and of Athanasius; the Councils, that have
confirmed them, and the Doctors, that have maintained them against Heretics.
We only desire, that whatever men do say may be examined by the Word of God,
which is the only Rule of our Faith, and to which the Church is subject,
according to the Sentiment of the Fathers, and the chief Doctors. And as to the
private Spirit, by which Monsieur Arnaud says we believe the Scriptures are to
be expounded, that is a mear Chimera, which has been so often refuted, that it
i^ wonder, he should amuse people with t^ kind of Objections.

Thirdly, It is not true neither, that the S^cinians do absolutely reject the
Councils, ^ the Fathers, nor that they have advanced ^ principles about this
point, as Monsieur ^naud says; their Books are full of passag^ of the
Ancients, which they expound af^ their way, but they will not suffer that the
should be opposed to the holy Scripture Monsieur Arnaud himself cites a place
(...) Socinus, which destroys wh^ he says here. The first Book. cap. 5. page
42.
All the things (it is Socinus speaki^ of the Fathers, and of t^ Councils) and
others of the same kind are serve men of understanding and good sense, on^ to
let them know, what was the Faith of t^ Church at that time, and to induce them
not (...) recede without reason from the Doctrines the were then received: But
to go about, resolute to maintain opinions against the clear Testimoni^ of the
Scriptures, because the Fathers approve ^ them, is, to endeavor to subvert
designedly t^ Divine Truth.

Fourthly, The Ratiocination which Mo^sieur Arnaud makes upon what I have bee^
examining, is not square, and cannot be maintained. For though it were true,
that w^ should altogether reject the Authority of Tradition, and of the Church,
since the Socinians do the same, how do we, by this principle ^ervate in
respect of them the proofs of the ^inity? And how can Monsieur Arnaud ^agine,
that we should convince them more ^sily, if we received that Authority, seeing
^at they reject the same equally? Does he not ^ow, that we do not reasonably
combat ^ainst our Adversaries, by our principles, but ^ely by theirs, or by
common principles, in which they agree with us? So that, maintain^g as Monsieur
Arnaud does, that we weaken ^e proofs of the Trinity, by rejecting the
^uthority of the Church, and that if we did ^ceive the same, we should more
strongly op^ose those Heretics; it is just, as I should say, that a man who
should reject the Gospel, ^ould weaken the proofs of the Deity and ^carnation
of Jesus Christ, in respect of the ^ews; for it is the same thing to dispute
against the Socinians by Tradition since they ^enounce it, as to dispute
against the Jews by ^e Gospel which they believe not. Before we ^n act by the
authority of a principle, it is ^ecessary, that all the parties should agree
about it, or we must prove the authority of that principle.

Thus you see, that Monsieur Arnaud, to make an odious comparison to our
disadvantage, has drawn a false consequence, and built upon false Propositions.

You will say doubtless, that these Reasons, which regard the out-work of
Monsieur Arnauds Book; his particular conduct, his way of writing, his
resentments, and his personal differences with Monsieur Claude, do (...) weaken
the substance of the truth he the establishes, nor the proofs of the Book of ^
Perpetuity, and that, that at least must h^ made some impression on those, who
have (...) the leisure and care of reading it all; and, you know, that I am of
that number, you wo^ also know, what I think of that, and will (...) be content
to know only, what others ha^ said or might have said of it.

It is easy, Sir, to satisfy you also in t^^ point, and I shall therefore add
to the for^ Reflections, such other Observations as shall (...) you see, that
when Monsieur Arnauds Bo^ shall be considered only in its Essential pa^
severed from all the Objections I have be^ examining, the weakness of his
proofs a^ reasonings, (which are, often enough, ver^ embarussing and
contradictory) does there so evidently appear, that he could not expe^ from it
a very favorable success.

But, Sir, you will remember, if you pleas^ what you desired of me, and what I
promise you; which is, you know, that I underta^ not to examine Monsieur
Arnauds Book that concerns Monsieur Claude particularly who will acquit
himself, I am sure, very we^ and very generously of it. My design only to tell
you, what effect this Book has ha^ amongst us, and how it has been received
b^ us, together with the Reasons in general which have kept it from making that
famou^ progress, which you thence exspected. Wha^ ^ath been observed of it
already, has fur^ished Reasons considerable enough, and what ^ am going to
note further, will furnish other ^ore important ones, because it will more
^early touch the Ratiocinations of Monsieur Arnaud about the Ground of the
Defense of ^is Book concerning the Perpetuity.

The Fifth Reflection.
YOu know, Sir, that the only design of t^^ Book about the perpetuity of the
Faith of ^ Catholic Church concerning the Eucharist, an^ of the Treatises
which have been written a^terwards for its defense by M. Arnaud, is (...) show,
that the Change, which We say has happened in this point, is impossible, and
nothi^^ but a Chimera and Fiction of our Ministers.

You know also, that the two Grounds (...) this proposition do consist, in the
Union of the Greek Churches (about this point) with the Latin Church at the
time, at which we a^ sign this change, which is in the ninth an^ tenth Century;
and in the Distinct belief, which all the people of the World had then and
before, of the Real Presence of the Body o^ Jesus Christ in the Eucharist, in
consequence o^ which he was there adored by all Christians.

To speak the truth, this was no ill fetch, an^ if it were well proved, the
consequences which are drawn from thence, would be ver^ strong: For, it is not
to be conceived, the an Innovation of this nature should insensibl^ slide into
the Universal Church; that the Greeks, separated from the Latins, should have
taken new Tenants from these, which the looked no otherwise upon than
irreconcileab^^ enemies; that none should have perceived ^ther that the one
part did no longer adore that made their chief worship, and the prin^^pal
subject of the ordinary Adoration of all Nations, or that the other part did
begin to ^dore what they were not wont to adore, and which was nothing but a
creature; or lastly, if (...) Change so considerable had been perceived, that
all the World should have remained in ^^lence; that no public complaints
should ^ave been made on one or the other side; and that there should have been
no Councils assembled to remedy it, as was done when Beren^er opposed himself
in the Eleventh Age to ^he Opinion of the Roman Church about this point.

And therefore M Claude, who saw very well, that these Principles could not be
granted without some prejudice to him, denied them both, and maintained, that
the Greeks did not acknowledge Transubstantiation, because this is the only
medium you admit to make men believe the Real Presence, such as you receive it;
that Paschasius, the Introducer of this opinion, does not establish it but by
craft, by keeping the ancient terms, and by way of explication of the Faith of
his Pre^essors; that the Adoration which is opposed as an invincible medium to
make people find the Change, if there had been any, was unknown to the Greeks
and Latins of that time.

But what injurious reproaches has not M. Claude exposed himse f to by this
denial? What storms and tempests has he not raised The Schools did never so
much exclaim against the opinion of the Motion of the Ear^^ And if he had
openly maintained in the Pulp^^ at Charenton, that Paris was destroyed, and ha^
no more any being in nature; or that it is v^ry dark at full noon when the Sun
shine brightest, and the Air is least over-cast, (...) could not have been
accused of a great^^ blindness, and a more ridiculous temerity than to advance,
that the Greeks did not b^lieve Transubstantiation, the Local Presenc^ and
Adoration, in the ninth and tenth Cent^ry, and that they have still the same
Sentiment^ Indeed, says M. Arnaud on this occasion, ((...) his Refutation, p.
465.) It Is not tolerable (...) advance evident falsities with that confidence
without alleging proofs, and a man can hard recede more from sincerity.

But, if the proofs, he produces himself o^ these two Essential points,
conclude nothing and are not necessary, neither by our Princ^ples, nor by his
own; if he himself destroy by his own Maxims what has been establish in his
Book of the Perpetuity; may we not say that his wrath is unjust, that he has
ensnare^ himself in his own net, that he evidently contradicts himself, that
his Book of the Perpetui^ty can produce no effect, and that his defenc^ is
weak, and to no purpose?

Let us then briefly examine these two Capital and sole Grounds of his Book of
the Per^^tuity, and let us refute them by M. Arnaud, their own Defendant.

The First consists, as I said, in the Union of ^he Greeks with the Church of
Rome about the ^ucharist in the time of Paschasius, whom we ^ffirm to have
introduced in the Ninth Century the opinion of the Substantial Presence, and of
Transubstantiation; and which got strength, and increased, and diffused it self
through all the West, during the Tenth Age.

It Is pretended, that this Change could not be made, because the Oriental
Churches had at that time the same belief which we now oppose, and which they
could not receive from Paschasius, nor the Latin Church, seeing they had
perhaps never heard of the former, nor seen his Book, neither were they in a
condition to receive from the latter any Change in their Tenants, by reason of
the animosity which was between these Churches; On the contrary, the Greeks
would have been very glad to have exclaimed against the conduct of the Latins,
if they had met with so fair an occasion, since they declared and published
their demeanor in Writing about far slighter matters.

To destroy this ratiocination, which is strong, if it were true; We have
asserted, that neither at the time of Paschasius, nor in the following Century,
the Schismatic Churches did at all believe Transubstantion, nor the Adoration
of the Sacrament. So that, if M. Arnaud does not prove this Proposition, the
first Pillar of his Edifice in the Book of the Perpetuity falls to the ground:
But, if it b^ himself that furnishes most of the Instrumen^ to pull down this
Pillar, his Enemies wi^^ discourse of it sufficiently, and his Friends as you,
Sir, and I, who have a great estee^ for him, shall not be able to forbear
calli^^ him the Destroyer of his own workmanship.

Let us therefore examine the Proofs b^ alleges of the Opinion of the
Orientals, concerning these weighty points, in the Ninth ar^ Tenth Age; for the
Controversy is not o^ other Ages, and the force of the ratiocinatio^ of the
Perpetuity-Book is altogether confine to these two Centuries.

For the Ninth, M. Arnaud produces the testimony of Nicephorus, Patriarch of
Constantinople, of whom he cites two passages, taken out of two of his
Treatises against the Ic^noclasts, (Image-breakers) who called the Bread and
Wine of the Eucharist, the Figures and Images of the Body of Jesus Christ.
These passages are reducible to these four Propositions.

The First, That the Image and the thing thereby represented are altogether
opposite, in so much, that it is a folly to maintain, that they are the same
thing.

The Second, That if sometimes the Bread and Wine were call d the Images and
Antitypes of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, that was before the
Consecration.

The Third, That Nicephorus and the other Greeks, adversaries to the
Iconoclasts, did ^t call the Oblations designed for the Sacra^ent of the
Eucharist, the Image of the Body of Christ, but the Body of Christ it self.

The Fourth, That these Oblations are changed ^to the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ, after the same manner as the Bread and Wine are ^onverted into our
substance.

M. Arnaud bears himself much upon these ^xpressions, which are nothing but
Copies of the Discourses of the Fathers in the second ^ouncil of Nice against
the Iconoclasts; Mean time I am sure, that not only he would be unwilling to
maintain in earnest any of these ^our propositions, but also that he directly
opposes them in his Treatise.

The first, That the Image is different from what it represents, and that it
cannot be granted, that what Jesus Christ has given us to eat, should be both
together his Image and his Body, is a Truth not to be contested, in what Tense
soever it be taken. Nicephorus makes use of it to ill purpose, to prove against
the Iconoclasts, that there is in the Eucharist, after the Consecration,
neither Figure, nor Image, nor antitype, but only the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ, because he believed the Impanation of the Word, that is, that the Bread
and Wine were personally united to the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, and made
one and the same Body and Blood, by this Hypostatical Union.

But M. Arnaud, who is not of this opinion, cannot allege for himself the
opinion of this Author, which agrees not at all with the Belief of the Roman
Church: And therefore h^ avoweth every where, that there is Figure an^ Antitype
even after the Consecration, an^ maintains against the position of Nicephorus
that the Eucharist is Figure and Truth, Imag^ and Body both toge her.

I know very well, that to save Nicephoru^ and the Second Council of Nice
blameless, for having condemned their Adversaries, because they had called the
Eucharistical Oblations (...) Figure and Image, although according to M. Arnaud
there was one popular sense of these words, which was exclusive of the verity,
an^ another popular sense, which was not exclusive when they were applied to
the Eucharist (wherein it would be hard to save himself from a manifest
contradiction:) I know very well, I say, that M. Arnaud supposes, that at the
time o^ the II. Council of Nice and of Nicephorus, the word Figure and Image,
which was not exclusive of the verity, was very rare, and that therefore the
Iconoclasts would not use it, leas^ those expressions should be taken in the
other popular sense, which is exclusive of the verity.

To this I answer two things; one, that this Distinction of Figure exclusive,
and not exclusive of the Verity, was unknown to those Authors (the Adversaries
of the Image-breakers,) and to others, who maintained, that the Eucharist was
not an Image and Antitype: And M. Arnaud makes them think ^d say, what they
never thought nor said; ^ey never imagined this distinction, nor ^er declared
themselves about it, after the ^anner that M. Arnaud would have it; their
^^spute would have been at an end in a moment, or rather there would have been
no dispute between them, seeing the Fathers of that Council of Nice and
Nicephorus had no more to do but to tell the Image-breakers, that it was true,
that the Bread and Wine of the Eucharist were Images and Figures of the Body
and Blood of Jesus Christ, but that they were Images which contained the Truth
it self: their difference would have been thereby determined, since M. Arnaud
believes, that the Iconoclasts did at the bottom agree with their Adversaries.

This therefore is not the sense of the Greeks, who have asserted, that there
was no Figure in the Eucharist; but, their opinion was, that there was neither
Figure exclusive, nor Figure inclusive; neither Substance, nor Accidents of the
common Bread, and that there was nothing but the Body of Jesus Christ, that is,
that the Bread was truly his Body by an Hypostatical union. And this is evident
by all the expressions of those men; which I hope to prove more largely another
time.

I answer secondly, That the reason, which M. Arnaud produces to excuse
Nicephorus and the Council of Nice, is not true: These very terms (of Images,
Figures and Antitypes) being, says he, in the seventh Book, Chap. 7. pa. 708,
become less ordinary, would have a^pear'd offensive, because the understanding
a^ding no more to it, they beget no more but the I^^ of what they precisely
signify; and therefore ^ is not to be wondered, that the Fathers of (...)
Council of Nice were scandalized at the wo^ Image, which the Iconoclasts
employed, because (...) appears by the Authors of the seventh Age, the it was
but little used in respect to the Eucharist.

But whence is it that M. Arnaud has learned that at that time the Word Image
applied (...) the Eucharist was little used? He cannot produce one only Author
for it. For, to say that the Eucharist is not an Image, as Anastasius Sinaita
does, that concludes nothing, because that Anastasius acknowledged in the
Eucharist no Figure at all, neither exclusive no^ inclusive; nor did he ever
say, that this wor^ Image was no more in use in his time, though it had been
theretofore; on the contrary, he maintains, that, if the Eucharist have bee^
called an Image, that was before the Consecration, that is, before it was the
Eucharist. And thus Anastasius has been alleged to ill purpose, as also some
other Authors that have followed him, to prove, that the word Image, applied to
the Eucharist, was little in use, since he denies, it was ever used.

Besides, Is not this observation plainly refuted by the Council of
Constantinople, against which that of Nice was called together, since that in
this Assembly, composed of more then 300 Bishops, the word Image is given to
the Eucharist? Is not such a considerable num^er of Bishops rather to be
believed concern^ng what was in use in their time, than two or ^hree particular
Authors? And, if they have ^alled the Eucharist an Image of the Body and blood
of Jesus Christ, is not that a convincing proof, that the popular sense, which
it had in this respect until then, as M. Arnaud will have it, did obtain still,
and that therefore this expression was blamed to ill purpose by the Fathers of
Nice, and by Nicephorus?

But, let us go no further than to M. Arnaud, to find the refutation of what he
has said concerning this matter; he will free us from all pain himself, and
furnish us with an answer, which he cannot refuse without disowning his reasons.

You saw but lately in the passage I related out of him, that, according to his
opinion, we are not to wonder, that the Fathers of the II. Council of Nice, and
the Patriarch Nicephorus, were scandalized at this, that the Council of
Constantinople, held by the Iconoclasts, had called the Bread and Wine in the
Eucharist a Figure and Image; for as much as from the Seventh Age that word was
little more in use as to this matter.

But then M. Arnaud, remembering no more this answer, asserts on the contrary,
That we are in the wrong, when we allege for our defense the Passages of the
Fathers, wherein the Symbols are call d by the name of Figure: And that we
cannot thence conclude, (in his tenth Book, cap. 4. pa. 22.) that therefore the
B^ of Christ is not there enclosed, because, besil^ that the same Language is
found in the seven^ and eighth Ages, it is found also in the eleven^ Age, and
at the time when they were condemne^ who denied the Real presence, and yet
those, w^ were the greatest Enemies of the Error of B^renger, were neither
offended nor scandalized (...) it.

So that when it pleases M. Arnaud, the term of Figure and Image had no more*
from the time of the Seventh Age, that popular sense, which made it to be
received under the notion of a Figure, enclosing the Truth and therefore the
Fathers of the II. Council o^ Nice, and Nicephorus, had reason to be
scandalized at it in the Eighth and Ninth Age; and afterward when he pleases,
this same word was in use in the seventh and eighth Age, and even in the
eleventh, and was employed without any offense or scandal.

This shows sufficiently, how much Passion and eagerness of Victory, whatever
it may cost, cloudeth in great Wits the light they had received either from
Nature or Grace.

The same proves also, that the Second Proposition out of the passage of
Nicephorus, is not more reasonable: For it is not true, that the Symbols were
not called by the Fathers Antitype, Figure and Image, but only before the
Consecration; The contrary might easily be proved; but it is needless, since M.
Arnaud, too intelligent not to know a thing of this nature, heartily
acknowledges the error of Nicephorus, and of the Fathers of Nice in this
matter. See his seventh Book, Chap. 7. p. 708. and Chapter 8. p. 717.

The two last Propositions, drawn out of the passage of Nicephorus, viz. That
the Bread and Wine are truly and properly the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ,
and that it becomes such by the virtue of the Holy Spirit, changing these
Oblations into the Body and Blood of Christ, even as the Bread and Wine, and
Water, are changed into our substance: These two Propositions, I say, will
appear to you more formal for your Belief, and more express to prove the
intention of M. Arnaud; But do not, I pray, stand upon the outside, nor the
Exterior sense of these words; consider them attentively, and you will find, that
these two opinions are as contrary to their Doctrine as to ours.

First, It is not true, according to you, that the Bread is the Body of Jesus
Christ; and I challenge Monsieur Arnaud, to produce me only one of your
Doctors, that approves this Proposition. On the contrary, all are agreed
amongst you, that the word this, in this Enunciation of our Savior, Take, eat,
this is my Body, does not signify, This Bread: And when your Writers do
allege the passages of the Fathers, which say, That the Bread is the Body, to
prove the Reality, they give explications to this manner of speaking, because
^t cannot be true, being taken in this sense, That the Bread is the Body; for,
it is m^^ certain, That the Body of Jesus Christ is n^^ made of Bread, that the
substance of the Bread is not his Body, that the Accident^ which you take for
the Symbols, Signs, Figures and Images of the Body of Christ, are not ^
neither, nor indeed can be.

Secondly, What Nicephorus says of the Conversion of the Bread into the Body
o^ Jesus Christ, after the manner of the change o^ Meat into our Substance, is
a mere Parado^ amongst you, as well as amongst us; the Tra^^ substantiation
has nothing like it, and instea^ of changing the substance of the Bread into
the Body of Christ, it wholly destroys the Substance, and reduces it to
nothing, t^ substitute in lieu of it the Body of Jesus Christ, after an
invisible and incomprehensible manner. Thus, Sir, you see, that this fir^
Testimony of the Belief of the Greeks in the Ninth Age, deposes nothing in
favor of Monsieur Arnaud, since himself dares not maintain any one of its
Propositions.

This Reflection may serve for Answer to the Second and third Testimony of
Monsieur Arnaud.

Theodore Abucara, Bishop of the Latin^ speaks like Nicephorus (in the Seventh
Book o^ Monsieur Arnaud, Chap. 9. page 719, 720.) viz. That the holy Spirit
descends upon the Oblations, and by the Fire of his Divinity, converts the
Bread and Wine into the Body an^ blood of Jesus Christ, just as the stomach
^angeth the nourishment into its own Body.

And Peter of Sicily, speaking of the Pauli^n Heretics, who said, That instead
of ^ead and Wine, Jesus Christ had given nothing ^t words to be instead of
Symbols and Figures, ^ith, They deny the dreadful and divine Tran^bstantiation
of the Body and Blood of our Lord, which is made in the Mysteries. And in
another ^ace, The Bread, says he, is presented visibly upon ^e Altar, and the
Holy Ghost descends invisibly, ^nctifying the Oblations, and making them, not
^e Antitypes, but the very Body and Blood of ^r Lord, and our God.

I grant, that they speak not in these terms ^ Charenton, but Monsieur Arnaud
must also ^cknowledge with the same sincerity, that nei^er do they speak so in
the Sorbonne, and that ^ere they will never say, That after the Con^cration
there is no Figure and Antitype in ^e Sacrament, and that the Body of Jesus
christ is made of Bread, as our Bodies are ^ourished and increased by the meat
we eat. and this suffices me to show, That these ^estimonies are useless to
Monsieur Arnaud; ^r, he has undertaken to prove, That the ^reek Church was in
the Ninth and tenth Ages ^f the same opinion, which now obtains in the church
of Rome, about the Reality, Transub^antiation, and Adoration. This is his main
^oundation, and these Testimonies are not able ^o prove it, because they are
not of your opini^n, and do believe what you believe not.

If you shall ask me, what then was the Belief in this point, I will tell you,
that sin^ Anastasius Sinaita, and possibly before, t^ Greeks did believe, that
the Bread was hyp^statically united to the Body of Jesus Chr^ making by this
means one and the same Bod^ as the Body of Jesus Christ, united to the
D^vinity, does constitute one only Person which makes that we say, Man is
God, a^ God is Man. Some did declare themselv^ more grossly and more rudely than
others, ^ rather carried this opinion to unconceivab^ extravagancies, and to
affrightful Erro^ For, they believed, that by reason of t^ Change, and of this
Assumption of the Bre^ into the Body of Christ, which made it o^ and the same
Body, this Body of our Savio^ was seen, felt, eaten, bruised by the Teet^ and
in the Stomach reduced to the condition of common meat.

These, Sir, are the Testimonies, whi^ Monsieur Arnaud recites to prove, that
the Greeks in the Ninth Age were of your opi^on. Judge you, whether he has hit
well; a^ let him not say now, that we attribute to the Greeks amiss, the
Heresy of Stercoranism. hope to show that in another piece; here I sha^
content my self to prove it by Monsieur A^naud himself, who contradicts himself
in the point so evidently, that I am altogether su^prised at his not perceiving
it, or that he ha^ not been advertised of it by so many Learn Bishops, and
Doctors of the Sorbonne, wh^ have given him their Approbation with so much
pomp, and will persuade us, that they have read his Book very attentively.
Indeed, a good advertisement upon that and the like other contradictions, would
have been much more advantageous to him, than all their Encomiums. But let us
make proof of this Accusation.

Monsieur Claude answering the Objection drawn from the pretended union of the
Greeks and Latins in the Council of Florence, had said, That if by virtue of
this union the Greeks seem to have tacitly suffered the Transubstantiation of
the Latins, the Latins have likewise suffered the Stercoranism of the Greeks,
and that there was no more reason to conclude from thence, that the Gresks are
Transubstantiators, than that the Latins are Stercuranists.

Hereupon Monsieur Arnaud asserts, (in his Fourth Book, Chap. 3. page 356.)
That this Stercoranism of the Greeks is a mere Chimera, which has not any
solid ground; that it is true, that Hubert had accused Nicolas of it, but that
that was from a consequence at random, and that there appears not any trace or
sign of it in all the Writings of the Greeks. And some Lines after he affirms,
That it is a thing very false, and very improbable, that the Greeks have held
this Error. He had asserted the same thing before (in his Second Book, cap. 6.)
in answering an accusation of Cardinal Hubert, who did object to Nicolas this
Stercoranism, and of Dalger, who charge all the Greeks there with.

But now, as if Monsieur Arnaud were an^mated by two opposite Spirits, or had
lost hi^ memory, he has changed his mind since h^ Fourth Book to the Seventh.
We are goi^ to find him to be in a good understandi^ with Monsieur Claude
about this point, a^ to confirm what just now he called a pu^ Chimera, and a
thing very false, and very inprobable.

Examining the difficulties, which occur i^ a passage of Anastasius, a
Religious Man o^ Mount Sina, which he had alleged to mak^ out the Belief of
the Greeks of the Seventh Age, and not being able to extricate himself he is
constrained, after Monsieur de Marca, to grant, that this Author was a
Stercoranist believing, That the Body of Jesus Christ wa^ corruptible in the
Sacrament; and he endeavors also to prove, That this was the opinion of
Anastasius, by comparing other places of the same Author. He alleges the
example which he had already produced elsewhere of that Sicidite Friar, who
taught under the Emperor Alexius Junior, that the Body of Jesus Christ was
corruptible, and who had at that time some Followers, (in his Seventh Book,
Chap. 2. page 629.) And thence he concludes, That it would not be at all
strange, the like thought^ were come into the mind of Anastasius Sinaita. He
confirms the same thing in his discourse upon the Book of Bertram (which is in
the ^welfth Book of this Volume, Chap. 3. p. 33.) ^here, speaking of the Belief
of those, against whom he thinks Bertram had written, and ^ho imagined, as he
esteems, that there was ^o vail nor figure at all in the Eucharist, and that
the object of Faith was not distinguished ^om that of Sense, and that the very
Body of Christ was properly seen and felt, he adds, We may gather from diverse
places of this piece, that this opinion, though difficult, falls yet na^urally
enough into the mind, since it seems it is that of Anastasius Sinaita, and of
those other Greeks, who have said afterward, that the Body of Jesus Christ was
corruptible in the Eucharist; so that there is no cause to wonder, that there
were men in the Ninth Age, which understood the Eucharist in the same sense, as
it was understood of many Greeks.

Thus you may see it sufficiently proved, That Monsieur Arnaud asserts in one
place, that there have been Greeks Stercoranists, and in another, that
Stercoranism is a Chimera, and that there appears not any trace of it in their
Writings. When you see him, Sir, you may ask of him the untying of this
contradiction. But let us see, whether the Testimonies of the Tenth Age will be
more favorable to him than those of the Ninth, we have been examining.

He recites but two of them; but both do savor of the barrenness of the
Deserts, whence he has taken them, and they are useless, and deserve rather
pity than answer.

The first (in the Seventh Book, Chap. 9. page 722. and in the Refutation, page
243.) i^ drawn out of an Extract of the Life of a^ Anchorite called Luc, who
being gone to consult the Archbishop of Collen, to know what he should do to
receive the Divine Mysteries that Archbishop answered him, That if by ^
inevitable necessity a Priest could not be had up^ their Mountain, they must
put on the sacred Table the Vessel, wherein the pre-sanctified Mysteries are,
then spreading a Linen Cloth, the must lay down the sacred little parts, and
bu^ing incense, they must sing Psalms suitable to the Mystery, or the Canticle
called Trisagion, together with the Creed; then adoring it by bendin^ three
times the knees, and joining the hands, they shall take with their mouth the
sacred Body ^ Jesus Christ our Lord. See how Monsieur A^naud has cited this
passage in his Refutatio^ of the First Book of Monsieur Claude, where you sinde
the word adoring in bigger Letters to show the importance of it, and that there
in consists the force of the Argument which i^ taken out of this place.
Monsieur Claude d^ complain of it in his Answer, and accused the Author of
Falsification, because the word ^doring is not in the Greek.

Is it not true, Sir, that if, before havin^ seen the Book of Monsieur Arnaud,
this di^ference had been barely related to you, an^ you had been well
persuaded, that this word which is contested, is not in the Text, yo^ would
doubtless have believed at first, tha^ Monsieur Arnaud was too candid not to
own frankly, that the Latin Interpreters, which he followed, made him err, and
that he should have consulted the Greek Text in an allegation of that
consequence: Yet you may see, that your conjecture would have been in vain,
since Monsieur Arnaud does not yield to the truth which he sees, but labors to
confirm this Traduction by windings and turnings, and by subtleties unworthy a
man of his understanding and credit.

Let us freely avow, Sir, that the spirit of man is a strange piece; there is
no evidence, he will not darken; no darkness, for which he will not pretend to
find light, when he finds himself engaged to maintain what he has advanced,
and believes, That it were a shame for him to retreat one step in the face of
his adversary; but let us avow also, That truth has an admirable power, and it
she be not always crowned by the hands of her own enemies, she is often opposed
with so much weakness, that it is easy to see her advantage, and withal the
perplexities entangling those who resist her motions.

You see here a manifest example. Monsieur Arnaud grants, that in the Text
there is only this, And then bending the knees three times; and that the word
adoring is not there; and yet he goes about to maintain this Translation. Is
not this an effect of that self-love, which casts away many of the greatest
men, and which is never laid down but in our grave? Can it be the sole passion
of contesting with Monsieur Claude even of the clearest things What may have
obliged him to be obstinate against such an evidence? Can it be a defect of his
understanding, and can he seriously believe, that a Translator has the liberty
th^^ to add to his Text, and so strangely to satisfie^ it by a paraphrase and
an explication of his own fancy, under the pretense of having translated it
according to the Sense, and not according to the Letter? Or can he believe,
that to bend the knees, may be faithfully rendered by the word adore? You may
make such Reflections upon it as you please; as for me, I am altogether
persuaded, that Monsieur Arnaud is deceived, and that he says nothing to
maintain his Proposition, but what is extremely weak. But since I have not
undertaken to refute his Book, and that that were to usurp the right of
Monsieur Claude, I keep my self within the subject of this Letter.

For this purpose, you will please to observe two things, which will show you
the delusion of Monsieur Arnaud in the Allegation of this passage.

First, That according to the truth of the Text he concludes nothing, nor
proves at all the point, for which it is cited.

Secondly, That even according to the false Latin Translation, which Monsieur
Arnaud has followed, it is alleged to ill purpose, and makes nothing for the
opinion of the Greeks.

There needs no great discourse to prove ^hese two truths; a little common
sense is sufficient to discover their evidence.

For first, all that can be drawn from the true place, is this, That the
Eucharist is called the Body of Christ, and that it is received kneeling. But
this is not to any purpose; because, if all those who use this expression and
this ceremony, are of your Religion in this point, you will not find many,
against whom the claps of the fulminating Council of Trent can be justly
directed, in regard that the Lutherans receive the Eucharist kneeling, and
believe they eat the true Body of Jesus Christ; and those of our Communion in
England take also the Sacrament on their knees; and there is not any Protestant
person either in France or elsewhere, who doubts that he eats and drinks truly
and really the Body and Blood of Christ: We only differ about the manner of
this Manducation; we distinguish the Sign from the thing signified, and we
stick not to give to the Sacrament the name of the Body of Christ, conformably
to the words of its Institution, the more to note the truth and efficacy of the
Union there is betwixt them

Whence you see, that such kind of expressions as these, which in the Letter
seem more conform to your Belief, are yet not contrary to ours; they have their
warrantable use; they are very true according to their intention, and are not
at all incompatible with our Sentiments: Which is plainly made out, in that we
make use of them without scruple; and it is a Rule, which Monsieur Arnaud has
laid down, and for the proof of which h^ employs the Fourth Chapter of his
Tenth Book: That when those, who believe a Doctrine, use terms which are
objected to them as inconsistent with their Doctrine, it is a^ evident mark,
That those expressions may stand very well with their belief, and are no^ in
reason to be opposed as being contrary to them. For example, he says, It is
objected to us, that the Fathers have often called the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, the Figure, the Antitypes and Symbols of the Body of Christ; tha^
they have given it the name of Bread, Wine the Fruit of the Vine; that they
have said, i^ was not Common Bread; that they have asserted, that the Body of
Jesus Christ, which w^ receive in the Sacrament, is Spiritual and Mystical.
But, notwithstanding all these Conformities with our ordinary expressions,
Monsieur Arnaud esteems not, that they prejudice at all the Sentiment of the
Fathers, or that it may be concluded from thence, that they did not believe the
Reality and Transubstantiation, because the highest Transubstantiators have
used the same terms; which may have their truth, respect being had to what is
exterior to the Sacrament.

By the Application of which Rule, you see, Sir, it is not difficult to answer,
not only to this passage, but also to all those, which Monsieur Arnaud, and
your other Doctors can ^^^edge out of the Fathers, where the Eucha^ is called
the Body of Christ, since that is ^erm which we do not reject, and which may
^ve a very true sense according to us; and ^ cannot be objected to us, because
it is not compatible with our Belief, but consists with as naturally, as it
does with yours.

But I answer Secondly to this passage, that Monsieur Arnaud is very much out,
when he ^oposeth it to us as the mind of the Greek Church. It is an
instruction of the manner, how an Anchorite is to receive the Sacrament, in the
absence of a Priest; and he that speaks and gives the instruction, is an
Archbishop subject to the Church of Rome, as Monsieur Arnaud has said himself,
Page 244. of the Refutation. For, though he be a Greek by Nation, and have
written in Greek, that concludes not, that these men were of the Greek
Religion; so that, although there were in the Text, then adoring or bending the
knees thrice, (as Monsieur Arnaud had translated it) yet it were no great
wonder, that in the Tenth Age, in which time we grant, that Transubstantiation
was received in the Church of Rome, ^an Archbishop, subject to this Church,
should speak conformably to what was practiced in his time.

The second example of the Opinion of the Greeks of the Tenth Age, will not
prove more favorable to Monsieur Arnaud than the first. It is of a She-saint
called Theochriste, (in the Seventh Book, chap. 9. page 726.) who prayed a
Hunter, that had by chance met b^ in the Isle of Paros, to bring her the next
ye^ the Eucharist; which having been done b^ him, this holy Woman took it with
great r^spect, cast herself on the ground, and w^ tears in her eyes said that
Verse of the So^ of Simeon: Lord, now let thou thy serv^ part in peace, for
mine eyes have seen thy Saour, which thou have prepared before the face ^ all
people.

This passage, which has been cited by Cardinal Perron, is taken out of
Metaphrastes, ^ Author whom Cardinal Barronius accuse^ for often delivering
Fables, Lies, and Pha^cies; so that in reason, we may suspect what ever he
relates. But to wave this, as also that, in all appearance, this Author was a
Stercoranist, since he speaks, somewhat before this place, of a piece of the
Flesh of Jesus Christ which is a thought, no more savoring of Rome than of
Geneva; Monsieur Claude had answered very well, that this passage could not
work in us what it aimed at, since the Reformed Churches of this Kingdom, after
the Communion fall down upon their knees, and sing the whole Song of Simeon,
and yet do no^ therefore believe Transubstantiation, nor the Adoration of the
Sacrament. Besides, he observes, that this History shows the contrary of what
is pretended, since, if then it had been believed, as it is now, that it were
the very Body of Jesus Christ, they would not have trusted a Hunter with it, to
have ^^rried it upon his Faith to any one.

Monsieur Arnaud answers nothing to this ^^st note, which yet is not
inconsiderable; ^^d to the first, he contents himself to say, ^^at the
application, which this Saint made of ^^i^ Verse of Simeon, is an effect of the
balief of ^^e Real Presence, which the Calvinian devotion ^^ it self will never
raise to this motion; and if ^^y Calvinists practice it, it is upon this
ac^^mpt, that the truth of the Ancient Faith, which they have abolished out of
their hearts, ^mains yet engraven in some of their actions and ^ords.

If Monsieur Arnaud is satisfied with such ^swers as these, a very little will
content ^im. As for us, we are more difficult, and ^re far from believing, that
a Ceremony, which ^e our selves practice, should be contrary ^o us. Monsieur
Arnaud is deceived; first, ^n that he remembers not his own maxim, which ^
lately noted upon the former passage, viz. that there are expressions, which
seem contrary, or which in one sense are contrary, but ^et in another sense
agree very well; which is ^hen proved, when those expressions are used ^y
those, who are of a belief contrary to that, which is pretended to be conform
to the very same expressions. Secondly, in that Monsieur Arnaud imagines, that
this part of the Song of Simeon produces a motion repugnant to our Tenants;
which is not so, since all our Churches have used it for so long a time,
without finding this repugnancy. This comes from thence, that Monsieur Arnaud
is li^ versed in our way, and that having been (...) thereto employed in other
affairs, and ^ against many other Adversaries, he has ^ yet had much leisure
to peruse our Books, ^ seen our Belief otherwise than in some ^ your most
famous Doctors, such as are ^ Cardinals Bellarmine and Perron, who disge^ it
very often, and impute opinions to (...) which we have not. And it is from this
infe^ed Spring, that Monsieur Arnaud intend^ draw our Morals, which he means to
fig^ against, with consequences built in the A^ And if he frames also our
Doctrine after ^ mode, certainly we shall appear to be strang^ people; we see
already a proof of it in ^ Book, where he says frequently, that we believe, we
receive nothing in the Sacrament^ but the Figure of the Body of Christ; which
is very far from our Sentiments. Were it ^ for this want of knowing what we
believe Monsieur Arnaud would never go about ^ object against us such kind of
passages, no^ others, that are more formal, which we man use of as well as you.

I cannot altogether blame him in this; h^ does what he can, he has no better
coynt^ pay that, which he stands engaged for; and ^ he cannot oppose good
Reason and Authority he pretends to save himself in the crowd (...) his
witnesses, good or bad: But, if he ha^ found any Greeks of those Ages, who ha^
said, That the Sacrament of the Eucharist is ^ ^s a testimony of the union we
have with Jesus christ, forasmuch as he is not only once dead and risen again
for us, but also feeds and nou^^shes us truly with his Flesh and Blood, that ^e
may be one with him, and have communion in ^is life; and though he be in Heaven
until he ^ome again to judge the whole world, yet we are ^o believe, that by
the secret and incomprehensible ^ertue of his Spirit, he nourishes and quickens
^s with the substance of Body and Blood. Or such words as these, That we must
believe those promises, which Jesus Christ, who is the infallible truth, has
pronounced with his own mouth, viz. That he will make us truly partakers of his
Body and Blood, that we may possess him wholly, so that he may live in us, and
we in him: Or, That God there gives us really and effectually what he
represents: Or, That this Mystery surpasses the reach of our senses, and the
whole order of nature. If, I say, Monsieur Arnaud had found some of the Greeks
speaking after this manner, with what pomp would not he have set them out? He
would not have failed to tell us, that between those people and us, there were
no good understanding at all; such words as these, The Body and Blood of
Christ, Reality, Substance of the Body and Blood of Christ: And these, We must
believe in the promises of Jesus Christ, who will make us truly partakers of
his Body and Blood; that in this Mystery we are not to stand upon our Senses,
nor the order of Nature: Such expressions, I say, would be, according to
Monsieur Arnaud, as so many Thunderclaps against us, and as formal De^sions
for you, as the Council of Trent it se^^ Mean time, Sir, if you would know, ho^
much he would find himself deceived, a^^ with what little ground he would
object the^^ passages as contrary to us, you may observe the^ they are the very
terms of our own Confession of Faith, and of our Liturgy.

You may thereby judge, that these express^ons, which are common to both
parties, a^^ which they both make use of, are not prop^^ to decide our
Controversy, and that they cannot in reason be objected against the one, o^
the other; that there must be other proofs t^ d^c^are, what was the opinion of
those, who used them; that the doctrine elsewhere justified will show and
determine the sense o^ those expressions, but that they being alon^ cannot
precisely make out the doctrine of those who have used them.

This Observation might serve for an Answer to the whole Book of Monsieur
Arnaud; mean time this is not a place to consider it at large, I hope I shall
one day set it out better in another Treatise, wherein, God permitting, I shall
prove, that the true Belief of the Ancient Church about this point of the
Eucharis^^ is very hard to be known, that there are innumerable perplexities in
it, and that, if the Fathers have believed the Reality, as I see no reason to
doubt but they did, they have believed it in such a manner, which neither you,
nor we, nor any other Christian Society would approve of.

You may see, Sir, by this examen, that M. Arnaud has not performed what he
had pro^ised for the Defense of his Book of the Per^etuity, as to the matter of
his first supposition, whereby he did pretend to show the Impossibility of the
Change (which we maintain ^o have happened in the Church about the Ninth and
Tenth Age,) upon this account, that the ^chismatick Churches had the same
Belief with ^he Roman; which could not be but by a con^inual succession of the
same Doctrine, which ^hey had received from their Ancestors, and could not have
taken from Paschasius, as a person unknown to them: You may see, I say, the
weakness of this ground by that of the proofs, which he has produced of the
Belief of the Greeks in those two Centuries.

But there is more than this; for Monsieur Arnaud does not only not prove,
That the Greeks were of your opinion in the time of Paschasius, and the
following Age; but he altogether forgets the other Schismatic Societies, about
whom he made so much noise, who were comprehended in the first Supposition, and
from whose opinion, as well as from that of the Greeks, he did pretend to draw
the Fundamental Reasons of his Systeme.

I know very well, that he treats in his whole Fifth Book of the Belief of
the Oriental Churches, of the Muscovites, the Syrians, the Armenians, the
Nestorians, the Jacobites, the Maronites, the Cophtes, and the Ethi^pians: I
know also, that Monsieur Claude having said, that in the Examen of the Change,
happen^^ in the Ninth and tenth Century, The questi^^ was not of the whole
Earth, but of the We^ that is, of the Communion of the Pope: Mo^sieur Arnaud
greatly triumphs; and y^^ may see, how he paraphraseth upon th^^^ words,
according to the sense he attributes^ Monsieur Claude, viz. Let it be so, that
(...) is not the Question, I will not put my self to (...) trouble of
explaining, how the Doctrine of (...) Real Presence and of Transubstantiation
was introduced in the East, in the Patriarchats of Constantinople, of
Alexandria, of Jerusalem, (...) of Antioch, in the Churches of the Armenia^ the
Nestorians, the Jacobites: Nor will I at (...) trouble my self to divine, how
it has penetrat^ into Ethiopia, Muscovy, Mesopotamia, Georgia, Mingrelia,
Moldavia, Tartaria, and (...) Indies. It is better to say, It is not there; t^^
will make the shorter work, and by this mea^ I shall free my self from a great
embarasment (in the Ninth Book, Chap. 3. page 886.) And after he had affirmed
in the following Page that it is material to know, how the Belief o^ the Real
Presence could be introduced into all those Countries, as well as into the
Lati^ Church, he adds ( Page 888.) I see very well that Monsieur Claude, as
bold as he is, succum^ under the greatness of this undertaking, he is terrified
with it, he renounces it, he asks grace he would gladly that that might not
make a part of the question. The question is not, says he, of the whole Earth;
what shall one say? The^^ is no way of contenting him: It is the question, in
despite of him, since this Belief is established over all the Earth: It is a
thing, which depends neither from him, nor from me: It is a necessary part of
this great question, and which draws after it all the rest. Thus, since by a
forced confession of his weakness he acknowledges, that be cannot say, There
is made an Universal Change of Belief in all the East, he must abandon all the
rest, and acknowledge, that all his means are ruined, all his engines shattered,
all his projects overturned, and all his Suppositions destroyed.

But for all this, Monsieur Arnaud is very much out, and he says nothing in
his whole Fifth Book, that may serve to prove the first Supposition of the Book
of the Perpetuity. To show you plainly his illusion, you may remember, that, to
prove the Impossibility of the Change, which we say was made by Paschasius in
the Ninth and tenth Age in the Point of the Eucharist, the Author of the
Perpetuity, and Monsieur Arnaud after him (if himself be not that Author, as it
is very likely he is) has taken for his first Supposition, that it was
impossible, this Change should befall the whole Earth, because the Greek
Churches, and the others separated from the Communion of Rome, could not have
heard any thing of Paschasius, and were enemies to the Latin Church, of which
they would have scorned to receive new opinions in such an important point.

To support this ratiocination, it has be^^ supposed, that at the time, to
which We assign^ this Change, all the Oriental Churches did believe the Real
Presence, such as you believe i^ now; and because M. Claude would not gra^^
this, M. Arnaud has undertaken to prove it.

To this end, he has begun with the Gre^^ Church, and pretends to have made
out the Belief she had in the Ninth and Tenth Age. He has done more, for he
has recited her sentiments in the Seventh and Eighth Age, which preceded
Paschasius, and in the Ages which have followed him until now. I have examined
above, what he has said about the Nin^ and Tenth Age, because there are no
other but those, that are essential and able to serve the question.

But as to the other Oriental Churches, M. Arnaud looses his ground; for
although the whole force of the supposition of the Book, he defends, consists
in proving their conformity with the Latin Church in the Ninth and Tenth Age,
he sets that time aside, and almost all the Ages following unto our times, and
contents himself to prove, that in the latter Ages, but principally in that,
wherein we now are, those great Societies have been, and are found to be in
your Belief of the Reality, which very thing he proves but very weakly, and
which was not that which was properly denied by Mr. Claude, who had concluded
himself to asser^ and maintain, that Transubstantiation and the ^doration of
the Sacrament were received on^y in the Roman Church, without speaking of ^he
Real Presence.

Now in this proceeding M. Arnaud is very ^alpably deceived two ways, (for I
will rather say, that he is deceived, then that he would ^eceive his Reader;)
the first, in that he ^raggeth to have done, what he has not done, ^or thought
on; the other, in that all his proofs ^ould be useless, if they were without
excep^ion.

The proof of these two Assertions is easy. For, as to the first, there needs
no more but to use our eyes, and read his passages.

In the Ninth Book, p. 865. M. Arnaud, speaking of the Change made by
Paschasius, says; This vision supposes, that the Real Presence has not been
believed but in the Latin Church, and we have showed, that it has been
acknowledged formally and clearly by the whole Greek Church, and by all the
Orient, both before and after Berenger.

And, in the ninth Book, Chap. 3. pa. 889. M. Arnaud says again; If he tell
us, that it is Paschasius that has invented this Doctrine, and that it could
not fall into any other Man's mind than his; we shall show him the infinite
number of Christians, who know neither Paschasius nor ^his Book, and yet in all
times have made profession of this Doctrine: And so he is convinced of temerity
and imposture. If he tell us, that the Popes have contributed by their
Authority and Violence to make it to be received, we show him those vast
Nations, where the Popes exercise i^ Jurisdiction at all, and which yet do as
much a^ here to the Belief of the Real Presence, as the people that submit most
to the Holy See.

In the ninth Book, Chap. 10. pa. 951. 'T^ certain (says M. Arnaud) that one
of the most remarkable circumstances of this Change ^ Belief touching the
Eucharist, is, that it must ^ supposed to have happened at the same time in ^ the
parts of the World, and in all the Christi^^ Societies, in the East, in the
West, among the L^tins, the Greeks, the Muscovites, the Armenian^ the
Nestorians, the Indians, the Cophtes, the A^thiopians, the Jacobites. This
circumstance al^^ shows clearly the Impossibility of this pretend^ Change;
wherefore we thought our selves oblig^^ to show so largely, that all the
Societies, separ^ted from the Roman Church, were united wit^ the same in the
point of the Real Presence, and ^ Transubstantiation; and I think, we shall ^
be complained of, that we have not proved ^ enough.

It is then very certain, that, according ^ M. Arnaud, the Belief of the
Schismatic^ Churches in the time of Paschasius, is an essential Circumstance
against the Change, ^ which this Monk is accused. It is also certain that M.
Arnaud pretends to have proved the Belief in an invincible manner; he is high^
content; and he insults thereupon over M^ Claude very fiercely: but in truth
it is a mee^ bravado; he has not so much as thought ^ it, and those clear and
formal proofs, thos^ proofs, which he takes to be so satisfactory, are visions
of the passion of M. Arnaud.

Take the pains to read his whole Fifth Book; if you can find there one only
passage, proving, that the Oriental Churches, the Muscovites, the Armenians,
the Nestorians, etc. did believe in the time of Paschasius, and before
Berenger, the Real presence and Transubstantiation, I will undergo such a
condemnation as you shall pass upon me: But I am well assured, you will not
find a word there of that assertion.

I am contented to keep you company in this discussion, and to assist you in
the examen. Let us then follow M. Arnaud, and see, whether he has acquitted
himself of this important proof, as he braggs; but this shall be only within
the compass of the design of this Letter, that is, in the Circumstance of the
Time; This being sufficient for me, who leave the rest to M. Claude.

In the four first Chapters he treats of the Belief of the Muscovites: but M.
Arnaud, who confesses, (in the fifth Book, Chap. 1. pa. 424.) that he speaks
only of the opinions they have at present, to conclude from thence what they
believed formerly, does himself sufficiently show us, that these people are to
be taken out of the Catalogue of those, whom he pretends to have believed
Transubstantiation in the time of Paschasius.

It Is the same with the Syrians, of whom he speaks in the fifth Chapter, and
for the opinion of whom in the Ninth and Tenth Age (...) produces not one
certain passage.

He examins the Sentiment of the Arme^ans in the 6, 7, 8, and 9 Chapters. But
the ancientest testimony is taken since Berenge^ and consequently without that
fatal Epoch^ which is in question: Besides, he grants, the these people have
been accused long ago, the they believe not the Real Presence and
Trasubstantiation, by Authors of their Religion against whom he finds
difficulty enough to defend them; and even at present Thomas Herbert, an
Englishman, who has traveled i^ their Country, relates in the second
Impression of his Book, that they believe not the Real Presence; which Mr.
Arnaud could no answer, but by accusing his Interpreter of a signal Imposture,
and affirming, that there i^ no such thing in the English Original: B^^ this
accusation, which doubtless was pronounced too rashly and too passionately,
come from thence, that M. Arnaud got the Book o^ the first Impression
interpreted to him, where that Note of this Author is not; whereas M* Vilfort
has translated into French the Secon^ Impression, where it is, as you know,
Sir, the M Arnaud has acknowledged himself.

In the Tenth Chapter he treats of the Nestorians; and in the Eleventh of the
Jacobites Therein he applies to both the same rules, and goes about to prove
their Belief by Negative proofs; but besides the weakness of such a testimony,
he finds no Authors to support ^^ose proofs but in the Thirteenth Age, that is,
^ur Ages after Pascasius.

The Maronites (of whom he speaks in the ^welfth Chapter) submitted
themselves to the church of Rome at the end of the Twefth ^ge, and although
that Union did cool for ^ome time, yet it was very solemnly renewed under the
Popes Leo X. and Clement VIII; so that it is certain, they do now follow the
Roman ^eligion, except certain Greek Ceremonies. M. Arnaud agrees to these
Truths, so that if ^e means to oppose to us with reason the ex^mple of that
People, he must prove, that in ^he Ninth and Tenth Age they did believe
Transubstantiation; and this it is, what M. Arnaud pretends to make out by
positive passages, taken out of the Notes of Abraham Ethollensis, a Maronite,
upon the Catalogue of the Chaldaick Books of Abdiesu.

The first is ascribed to John Maron, who lived, as he says, between the Sixth
and Seventh Age, where it is said, That the Bread, which Jesus Christ took into
his hands, blessed, consecrated, and called his Body, is the Body and Blood
taken from the Virgin Mary; And that the same hand, which in the beginning took
the dust of the earth, and by changing it, formed the Body of Adam, changes
also this Bread, and makes of it the Body of the Word, taken from the blessed
Virgin, and by changing this wine makes of it the blood taken from the same.

The second is taken out of the Syriack Constitutions of the Church of the
Maronites, put into the Arabic Tongue by David Archbishop of the Maronites, in
the Year 105 where it is said, That the Apostles did eat Flesh, and drank the
Blood; that the Bread (...) made Flesh, and the Cup is truly the Blood (...)
Christ.

Much might be said to these places; (...) the latter of them, which
Ethellensis relate^ to be but a Translation made into Arabi^ An. 1053, carries
with it visible marks (...) its being suppositious: for, it was made lo^ before
the reunion of the Maronites with the Roman Church, and yet he says, that our
S^viour at the time of the Institution of the Sacrament, took Vnleaven'd Bread;
which (...) an evident token, that this Book is much newer, because that all
the Greeks, and other Schismatic Societies have always believed that the
Eucharist was not to be dispensed wit^ unleavened Bread. And then he says
also, tha^ Jesus Christ lifted up this Bread with his hands which no Evangelist
relates, and therefore is mere Invention of the Author; as is that also which
he alleges in the third place, The Jesus Christ declared to his Apostles,
that the Lamb, which God had commanded Moses to offer, was the Figure of this
Bread, which had been made Flesh and was now his Body; and that the Blood,
which ran out of it when it was sacrificed, was the Figure of this Cup, which
was no^ Blood.

So M. Arnaud may but quote passages, he looks not very near to them, nor
examins strictly whether they be receivable. I pray, ^^k him, Sir, Whether he
believes in earnest, ^t this passage be before the year 1053; and ^hether he
knows not, in what Author, he that the Author of these pretended Constituti^^s
of the Maronite Church, has found this ^mparison, which our Savior made to
his ^postles, of the Pascal Lamb with the Bread of ^^e Eucharist; of which no
Evangelist, no ^postle, not any of the Fathers, nor any Coun^^l ever has
spoken a word.

As to the first passage, if it be truly cited, ^he Author was of the opinion,
which was ^ommon amongst the Greeks of that time, of whom S. Iean Damascen made
himself as it ^ere the Head in the Eighth Age; viz. That ^he Bread was made the
Body of Christ by the ^nion made with his natural Body, by the operation of the
Holy Ghost; or he was of the opinion of those, who believed, that the Bread was
the true Body of Christ, and was corruptible. But you are of neither of these
two opinions. What ever it be, M. Arnaud, who quoteth this place as conform to
your Belief, dares not sign it; and, if he should do it, I am sure, that the
number of his Approbators would not secure him from the Censure of the Sorbon,
which will never approve of the Doctrine of this Author, viz. That the Body of
our Lord is made of Bread, and his Blood of Wine, as Adam was made of the dust
of the Earth: And if, notwithstanding these words, alleged by M. Arnaud in
great Letters, he changes the Bread, and makes of it the Body of the Word,
(which do plainly no^ that the Bread is the matter of the Body ^ Christ,) you
will not have them thus expoun^ed, you cannot give them a more favourab^ sense
than that of John Damascen, who d^ believe the Assumption of the Bread and i^
Union to the Body of our Savior: which ^ another opinion, which you reject as
well ^ we. And thus both these places are altogethe^ useless.

What he says, in the Thirteenth Chapter, ^ the Cophtes and Aethiopians, will
not serv^ him better; for he only speaks of the Belief they have now, which
is a very ill arg^ment to prove their Belief in the Ninth an^ Tenth Age. It Is
true, he pretends to prov^ their Opinion further off, by Liturgies of thos^
Nations, but to no purpose for the matter i^ hand, because he notes not, nor
can note, the these pieces were in the Ninth and Tenth Age^ such as we have
them now; and secondly, because all those Liturgies, which are pretended to be
ancient, are not so, and additions have been made to them from time to time, as
Cardinal Bellarmin did acknowledge, who in hi^ fourth Book of the Eucharist,
Chapter 13. answering the Greeks who alleged them, says, That many things have
been added to them. And indeed they are very differing from on^ another in
their several Editions; especially M. Arnaud telling us, that the Ethiopick
Liturgy is conform to that of St. Basil, sufficiently declares to us the
uncertainty of that by the uncertainty of this: For, though it may ^ true, that
St. Basil has made a Liturgy, ^ cannot be that, which is alleged by Proclu^
^^triarch of Constantinople; for in that which ^ have, the Trisagion revealed
to this same ^oclus is found; and the Greek is much more ^ple than the Syriack.
Neither can it be the ^turgy ascribed to St. Chrysostom, which ^ardinal Perron
says, the Egyptians, Cophtes ^^d Aethiopians used, since in this there is
^ention made of persons, which lived long af^^r St. Chrysostom.

There is then nothing certain in all that, and ^ least there is nothing
certain for the time of ^aschasius, and the Age that follow d him, which is the
only point in question. For as to ^^e Age wherein we live, or the precedent
^ges since Berenger, no consequence can be ^rawn from thence. And this is the
second il^sion of M. Arnaud touching this matter.

And indeed, since the whole force of the ^rgument, proposed by the Author of
the Per^etuity against the possibility of the change made by Paschasius,
consists, in that the Greek Churches, and the others, separated from the Church
of Rome, had the same Belief, which ^his Monk is accused to have introduced; to
what purpose is it to speak of the opinion, which this People entertains at
present? For I enter not into an examen of the proofs of M. Arnaud; I leave
that to M. Claude, and I will suppose, that all these proofs are convincing:
But I maintain, that they are useless to the present Question, for as much as
the cannot be any consequence drawn from the ^lief that now is, to that which
was former^ since there may have happened a change since ^ establishment of the
Doctrine of Transubs^tiation in the Latin Church, either by the ^ture and
commerce of the Latins and Greek^ or by the voyages of the Portugals and oth^
Nations in the Oriental Churches.

The example of the Maronites manifes^ proves what I say; for no consequence ^
be made from the Belief they now have touc^ing the Procession of the H. Ghost,
and U^leavened Bread, to that Belief which they ha^ when the Greeks made a
Schism upon the^ points: One cannot, I say, object to the oth^^ Oriental
Churches, that there has been ^ change about these Doctrines in the Rom^
Church, for this reason, that the Maronit^ would have opposed it; and to prove,
that i^ the time of the Schism this people did believ^ the same thing with the
Church of Rome, o^ cannot allege their present Doctrine, since 't^ certain,
that this People has changed the^ Belief above 400 years ago. Thus, thoug^ it
were true, that all the Eastern Churches di^ now believe Transubstantiation,
yet that concludes nothing for M. Arnaud, because ^ change may have been
introduced during the space of 800 years among those Nations, a^ it was
introduced in the Western about t^ Ninth and Tenth Age: And M. Arnau^ argues,
as if I should say, that Berenger i^^oduced nothing new in France about the
mat^r of the Real Presence, and that this Change ^as impossible, because that
some people, ex^remely remote from this Country, and who ^ever heard of
Berenger nor his Books, were ^ound at that time in the Belief of Berenger; and
that thereupon to prove the Doctrine of ^he People in the time of Berenger, I
should ^roduce proofs of the Belief of many Provin^es of the East and
West Indies, which have ^ow the same opinions with Berenger; which would not be
difficult to do, since the English and Hollanders settled in that Country, would
be able to give us sufficient testimonies thereof, and Liturgies withal,
written in the Language of those Nations.

You see, Sir, by these Examples, that to saisfie the argument of the Book of
the Perpetuity, the question is not of the present opinion of the Eastern
People; and by the Examen I have been making, you may find also, that the
triumphs of M. Arnaud about this point are imaginary, and that he has not
proved at all, that in the time of Paschasius, and the following Age, the
Schismatical Churches were of his opinion. And this is that which I undertook
in the beginning of this Section to show; We must now proceed to inquire into
the other supposition, on which the Author of the Book of the Perpetuity
grounds his impossibility of Change attributed to Paschasius; but, this will
well deserve a particular Reflection.

The Sixth Reflection.
IT is surprising enough, that Monsieur ^^naud should so perpetually delude his
R^^der. I have already observed to you, S^ in my First Reflection, that he has
fought w^ almost nothing else, but his own shadow, (...) only defended that
which was not denied, that which was not in dispute; and I ha^ been lately
proving it more particularly to the First Supposition, in the preced^ Section.

I intend to show you in this, the like d^viation as to the Second Supposition
of t^ Book of Perpetuity. Monsieur Arnaud e^ploys the whole Sixth Book to
maintain i^ but (as I have already observed it in my (...) Reflection) this
whole Book is useless, s^ it only proves, that the Christians had in t^ time
of Paschasius a distinct Belief of the R^ Presence of Jesus Christ in the
Sacrament, (...) of his Real Absence, and that Monsie^ Claude had not contested
with him about the but only carried the Question to Transubsta^tiation and
Adoration.

Thus to bring things to the true state of t^^ Question again, and to the force
of the Arg^ment of the Author of the Perpetuity, we m^ examine them otherwise
than Monsieur Arna^^ does. For, since we do all agree, that the people in the
time of Paschasius were to be^ieve the Presence or the Absence of Jesus Christ,
we ought indeed to find out that which makes the difficulty, and upon which
the Author of Perpetuity has pressed his Impos^ibility of that Change, which
we accuse Pas^hasius of. Now this cannot be the bare Belief of the Real
Presence, or Absence, because of ^he ambiguity there is in these general terms,
^eeing that we believe both of us, that we are ^o eat the Body of Jesus Christ,
and that it is ^resent in the Sacrament; so that the mere Doctrine of this
could not cause a division in ^he minds of Men; there must be something ^lse,
which was, the Manner of this Presence, that is, the Transubstantiation, and
the worship which necessarily followed this Doctrine, which ^s the Adoration.

As for Transubstantiation, that has made no ^mpression upon the Author of the
Perpetuity, ^o form his Argument of that, he has not ^ad it in his eye: And
Monsieur Arnaud ^rants this in his Sixth Book and elsewhere; ^eeing very well
that he was not able to prove, that the people in the Ninth and tenth Age ^ad a
distinct Belief of Transubstantiation.

But as to Adoration, that serves for a sole ^round to the second Supposition
of the Au^hor of the Perpetuity; that he sets out on all ^ccasion, and presses
it incessantly; and that division of the Spirits, which, according ^o him,
would have been found among Believers, in case that Paschasius had introduce^
new Doctrine, is grounded only upon (...) diversity of the Worship, which it
w^ have caused; and upon this Ratiocinati^^ that they would have looked upon
one ano^^ as Impious, or as Idolaters.

Mean time Monsieur Arnaud in this wh^ Sixth Book, where he treats of the
Sec^ Supposition of the Book of the Perpetu^ says not a word of this
Adoration, whi^^ lone made up the force of this Second Sup^^sition.

But as I do intend to show his weakne^^ both these Suppositions, I am obliged
to things into their true order, and to bring (...) into the right way, to
examine whether has well proved, that in the Ninth and te^ Age, the people did
so believe the prese^ of the Body of Christ upon the Altars, as give it the
Sovereign worship of Latria. (...) if he prove not that, this second Supposit^
remains destroyed, and all the reasonings its Author, grounded upon the
accusation Impiety or Idolatry, which this change wo^ have caused, will be
useless, and the Imp^sibility of that change, which we alled^ grounded upon
this principle, will be noth^ but a Chimera, and a Vision.

Monsieur Claude finding, that the Supp^tion of the Author was convincing, if
it w^ true, has maintained, that Paschasius be^ his change with the Doctrine,
and not with Worship; that he taught Transubstantiation, (...) ^t Adoration;
and that the Doctrine of the ^rporal and Substantial Presence having been ^ght
by way of explicating the ancient ^octrine, and having by this way little by
lit^ surprised and drawn to him the minds of ^ople, the Adoration followed
after with all (...) Ceremonies and Pomps; and that conse^ently that Division
of Spirits, which the ^w opinion of Paschasius would have caused, ^ould not
have obliged the people to an open ^pture of communion, as the Author of the
^erpetuity did pretend, because both did agree (...) one and the same public
worship, which ^d not yet received any Change.

He extends this Ratiocination farther, and ^ the Eighth Chapter of the second
Part of is Answer to the second Treatise of the Per^etuity, refuteth accurately
all what Monsieur Arnaud had there said, concerning the A^oration, and he
proves these Four particu^ars.

First, That the Adoration of the Sacra^ent was unknown to the Ancient Church.

Secondly, That the first Authors of Transub^tantiation, neither pressed it,
nor publicly established it.

Thirdly, That it was not constituted by pub^ick Decrees, but some time after
these Councils, which condemned Berenger.

Fourthly, That the Schismatic Churches did not receive it.

How, think you, does Mr. Arnaud clear himself from these Propositions. Truly
Sir, in a pitiful manner; and although this be t^ most important part of his
Book, he dare^ not look the difficulty in the face, he loo^ only side-ways on
it, he fights against it flying and speaks almost not of it, but occasionally.

For the first Question, which concerns the Belief of the Ancient Church, he
gives ove^ the proofs thereof to the victorious arms ^ his Adversary, and
replies not a word t^ them.

The second, which is the only Essenti^ for the defense of the Second
Supposition o^ the Perpetuity-Book, has no more advantag^ than the first, and
Monsieur Arnaud give^ not any succors to it, and that rather out o^ weakness,
than negligence.

For the two remaining, he says somewh^ more of them; but because what he
says o^ them is little considerable, and serves nothin^ to the purpose of
this discourse, I shall no^ insist on it, but shall only confine my self t^ my
design, and show, as in the former Section That Monsieur Arnaud has not at all
proved, that in the Ninth and tenth Age, the people did adore the Sacrament of
the Eucharist, and consequently has not at al^ made out the Second Supposition
of the Boo^ of Perpetuity, grounded on this Adoration which would have made, as
he pretends the Followers of Paschasius to be looke^ upon as Idolaters, by
those who were not of his opinion, if it had been new, an^ which at the same
time would have obliged his ^ollowers to hold his Adversaries for Im^ious.

I leave to Monsieur Claude to examine that concerns the Belief of the Latins
and Greeks of other Ages, because that respects ^im in particular, and makes
nothing for the ^ook of Perpetuity.

Monsieur Arnaud treats not of this matter ^n its true order; the Sixth Book,
where he ^peaks of the Second Supposition of the Book ^f the Perpetuity, was
the place to examine it, because it was not to be separated from the distinct
Belief of the Corporal Presence; ^he force of the Argument of that Author
consisting in the Adoration of the Body of Jesus Christ present, as I have
observed above. Neither does he handle this Question directly, and with a
design to refute what Monsieur Claude had said of it; but he speaks of it
occasionally in his Tenth Book, where he at ^arge sets forth the consequences
of the Nine foregoing Books. Let us now see what he there says of it.

It is in the Ninth Chapter of this Tenth Book that he speaks of this
Adoration, and he there employs Twelve Pages, only to tell us these Three
things.

First, That he has proved positively in the Books preceding this, That the
Adoration has been practiced over all the Earth.

Secondly, That there is an Interior Adoration, and another Exterior, and that
the latter is of many sorts, of which, none is necessary.

Thirdly, That the Universal consent ^ the Belief of the Real Presence (which
he pretends to have proved) carries necessarily wi^ it the Belief of the
Adoration.

But these three Propositions are either false, or useless to the matter under
consider^tion.

As to the first, I do not examine the Positiv^ Proofs of Adoration, which
Monsieur A^naud may have alleged in his Work, as t^ the Ages which have
followed the Tenth, because that belongs not to our Question: But assert, that
he has not one, neither of the Latin nor the Greek Church, for the time o^
Paschasius, and the Age next following; which is the thing in question in the
Second Supposition of the Book of the Perpetuity, that being founded upon the
Presence of Jesus Christ adored on the Altars by the Faithful; up^ the
impossibility of the insensible Change which we put in the Ninth and tenth Age
upon the diversity of the Worship, which thi^ Change would have introduced upon
the noise and upon the rupture of the Communion* which this newborn Idolatry
would have caused; upon the great division, which would have been in all
Families, in all Towns, an^ in the whole Earth, by such an extraordinary and
surpressing innovation as this; which would have caused, that the people would
^ave looked upon one another as Impious or ^s Idolaters.

These, Sir, are the exaggerations of the Author of the Perpetuity. But he has
laid a ^oundation without Proof, and Monsieur Arnaud abandons him in his
greatest need, ^eeing he does not verify this decisive matter of fact at all.
It is true, he brags to have done it; but what he has done, belongs not to the
fatal Epoch, which is in question, and at most, regards only the time
posterior, and principally the Opinions of the Oriental Church at present,
because Monsieur Clau^e had extended thither the difference of the Adoration.

As for me, who examine only what is essential, and the true difficulty, I
insist only on the Supposition of the Book of the Perpetuity, which Monsieur
Arnaud has undertaken to defend, and I maintain, that he has not any Positive
Proof, That in the Ninth and Tenth Age the people did adore the Eucharist.

What I say, may be easily verified; there needs no more but reading, and the
perusing of the places, where Monsieur Arnaud speaks of this Adoration.

Concerning the Greeks, he examines their Belief, during the Seventh, eighth,
ninth, and tenth Ages, in his Seventh Book; but of all that he alleges of the
two last Age, which are in question; there is nothing that can serve for his
subject but the two examples, which the Author of the Perpetuity had been to
look for in Deserts, and had applied to the Adoration of the Eucharist; the one
is of a^ Anchorite, called Luc; and the other, of a Solitary Woman in the Isle
of Paros. But I have showed in the precedent Reflection, that these passages,
which Monsieur Arnaud had quoted in the matter of the Real Presence, were of no
use to him, the former, because it stands upon the unfaithful interpretation of
the Greek Text, the word adoring, being foisted in; the other, because it
concludes nothing but by a Consequence drawn by Monsieur Arnaud, which is so
pitiful an one, that all our Churches do practice, after the Reception of the
Sacrament, the self-same thing which was done by that Solitary Woman.

As to the Latin Church, Monsieur Arnaud examines the Sentiments thereof,
during the Age of Paschasius, in his Eighth Book; but there is not one word in
it of the Adoration of the Sacrament. Thus you see the Second Supposition of
the Book of the Perpetuity, altogether destitute of Positive Proofs. Let us now
examine, whether the other Propositions of Monsieur Arnaud are able to supply
this defect.

The second ( Page 74. of the Tenth Book, Chap. 9.) contains the distinction
between Interior and Exterior Adoration, and the Observation he makes, that
the latter may be extremely diversified, and that there is not any Exterior
sign that is in its nature fixed to the Sovereign Adoration; this Ceremony
differing according to places and times; so that it cannot be concluded, as
does Monsieur Claude, That, if certain Exterior marks of Adoration, which are
used in one Church, are not practiced ^n another, the Adoration is not believed
nor practiced in this Church.

But this discourse, which is very true, has nothing that conduces to the
Question, I grant, that the Feast of the Sacrament; the Sound of the Bell for
advertizing the people to adore it, either at the Mass, or when carried in the
Streets; the Solemn Procession, wherein it is publicly adored with
extraordinary pomp; the Confraternities established for its honor; the exposal
of it made on Altars; are not marks absolutely necessary of the Exterior
Adoration; a Church that practices none of all these Ceremonies, may adore the
Sacrament, and use other tokens thereof. Nor has Monsieur Claude said the
contrary, in the manner Monsieur Arnaud has represented, for to cause great
exclamations against him. He has only asserted, That if the Ancient Church,
or the Church of the time of Paschasius, had adored the Eucharist, she would
not have failed ( Page 402.) to do, at least as near as might be, the same
things, which the Latin Church has done after the establishment of the
Transubstantiation. And in another place ( Page 403.) he says, That if the
Ancients had believed what the Roman Church believes this day, they would have
done, at least, a good part of what she does. And so his Pr^position is not so
general as M. Arnaud ha^ made it.

To consider things at the bottom, M. Claud^ has reason, and M. Arnaud
concludes nothing: For, what ever it be else, it is not ^ answer pertinently,
to examine the least of the Objections of M. Claude, and to pass by the rest
without saying any thing to them. And i^ this examen, it does not satisfy the
intention of the Book of the Perpetuity, to go about t^ show, that the
objection made to it is not considerable; he ought to have gone further, an^
proved, what was alleged as matter of Fa^ by the Author of that Treatise.

In short, although M. Arnaud endeavou^ to wind himself, as much as he can,
out of the proof of the exterior Adoration, seeing very well that he cannot
make it out; yet he i^ constrained to acknowledge, that the people ought to
adore the Sacrament, not only with a^ Interior Adoration, but also an
Exterior, by some action of outward respect (in the Tenth Book, Chapter 9. pa.
76.) and by some outward actions of Adoration, whatever they be, (ibid, p. 78.)
And, without these visible and external marks of Worship, given to the
Sac^ament, how could the proposition of the Book of the Perpetuity be
maintained? How could the people look upon one another, either as Impious, or
as Idolaters? How could the Novelty of this Belief and religious respect have
made a Noise, and caused a rupture o^ Communion, if this Worship, which would
^ve been the cause of all the scandal, had ^nly been Interior, if the
Adoration had on^ been in the Breast, and if in the outward ^ctions there had
been no difference?

So that, it being certain, that this Adorati^n ought always to have had
exterior marks, M. Arnaud was not to content himself to show, that those,
which M. Claude opposes to him, might be separated from it, and that it was
sufficient there were others; but he ought to have showed us, which were those
other marks, and proved, that they had been observed in the time of Paschasius,
and in the next following Age? But this he has not thought upon; and if he
should think on t hereafter, I dare say, he would not be able to give us any
one positive proof of the Exterior Adoration of the Sacrament, in those two
Ages, leaving him the choice of all the tokens, by which he shall endeavor to
make us acknowledge this Adoration.

But as he is very able and very dextrous, he has not failed to see the
weakness of these two Propositions I have been examining, that is, the weakness
of the positive proofs of the Adoration; wherefore, for his last and principal
defense, he makes consequences his refuge, when he says (the same Chap. p.
73.) The Adoration is really enclosed in the Belief of the Real Presence, and
absolutely inseparable from it; so that, having proved the Consent of the
Societies of the East, in the Doctrine of the Real presence, we have proved
their Consent i^ the Adoration. Mean time (so he says some pages after, viz.
p. 78.) M. Claude, by an incredible subversion of reason and common sense, by
committing in one and the same subject all the faults that can be committed in
it, at the sam^ time that he will not acknowledge, that the Doctrine of the
Real presence cannot be severed from the interior Adoration, and from some
kind of exterior worship, and that he pretends, that since Paschasius unto
Alger, that is, for near 300 years, the Real Presence has bee^ believed
without adoring Jesus Christ in the Eucharist, is not wanting at the same time
to dra^ extravagant conclusions from these particular ways of Adoration, which
are not necessary consequences of the Doctrine of the Real Presence, nor of the
Adoration, to the end that he may she^ by the defect of these Practices among
certain people, that they did not adore Christ in the Eucharist.

Behold, Sir, a terrible Censure, and a fierce accusation against honest M.
Claude. Yet I think not, that he will find any great difficulty in freeing
himself from it, and what he is accused of, is so easy to be overthrown, that
it is matter of wonder, how Mr. Arnaud came to be so prejudiced against his
Adversary, that he did not perceive his own delusion, and the distemper of his
Gall. If a man would proceed against him with the same style, would there not
be more reason to accuse him for drawing extravagant conclu^^ons from diverse
particular ways observed (...) the celebration of the Eucharist, as of
^ceiving it on the knees, or of saying a ^erse out of the Song of Simeon after
the ^ommunion; which he objects to us as in^incible proofs of the Adoration;
although ^hey be not only no inseparable marks thereof, but besides so
indifferent things, that Pro^estants themselves do observe them? Whereas M.
Claude has all on his side, and reasons very well, when he proves, that the
Sacrament has not been adored, ^n a time when nothing was said, nor done of
what is said, and done now about this matter. And this note remains inviolable,
until Mr. Arnaud shall destroy it by a proof of contrary actions, or by
alleging other Ceremonies than those, which are at this day in use: which is
that he has not done, nor will be able to do. So that I see not, what cause he
had to make so much noise. Nor is there more cause for the ground of Mr.
Arnauds Proposition; and I do maintain, that if there be an incredible
subversion of reason and common sense, it is to be met with in the discourse of
M. Arnaud rather, than in that of M. Claude.

And indeed the Proposition of M. Arnaud is false, both in its principle and
consequence; he lays an ill foundation, and if it were certain, the
conclusion, he draws from thence, is not warrantable. Thus may be returned to
him what he so liberally bestows on M. Claude, by saying with more Justice, the
he has done, That he has committed in ^ and the same subject all the faults
that ^^ be committed in it.

First, It is not true, That the Adoration really included in the Belief of the
Real P^^sence, and altogether inseparable therefrom. F^^ which we need no other
proof but the practi^ of the Lutherans, who do very well separa^^ these two
Beliefs, and believe the Real P^^sence, without adoring neither the Euchar^^
nor Jesus Christ, enclosed in the Sacrament.

But because it may be answered, that t^^ Lutherans do what they do because
they believe not the Transubstantiation as you, a^ do fear, least they should
adore the substan^^ of the Bread together with the Body of Christ I say
secondly, two things: First, that there ^^ as much danger to Adore the
Accidents, which remain according to you, as the Substance the Bread, which
remains according to them and that therefore this consideration should oblige
you to separate the Adoration from the Belief of the Real Presence. Secondly,
that all the necessary consequences of a^ opinion have not always their
effect, as M. Claude had noted p. 421, who had alleged some examples of it, to
which M. Arnau^ would not take the pains to answer. However (...) be, there are
great reasons, in my opinion, no^ to Adore the Sacrament as you do, although
the Corporal presence be believed; and these are the reasons, which I hope I
shall have op^ortunity one day to show you (in another ^reatise) or the like,
which might oblige Pas^basius and his Followers not to introduce this ^doration
into the Public Service of the church; so far is it from being a necessary
^onsequence to adore Jesus Christ on the Al^ars, and under the Accidents of
Bread, that ^n the contrary, in this conjuncture, it is a ne^essary sequel of
the Soverain veneration we ^owe him, not to Adore him there, least we should
fall into the sin of Adoring the Creature in stead of the Creator, or at least
jointly with him.

Besides, it is not true, that M. Arnaud has proved the Consent of all the
Societies of the East, in the Belief of the Real Presence, in the Ninth and
Tenth Age, as I have showed above, and by consequence it is not true, that he
has proved their Consent in the Adoration. So that there is neither positive
nor consequential proof of the chief matter in controversy betwixt him and M.
Claude: And by the Examen of these three propositions, you see, Sir, that the
Second supposition of the Book of the Perpetuity, grounded upon the Adoration
of the Eucharist, on which he laid the greatest stress, has not been better
defended than the First; And that so we must not wonder, that this Work has
not had that effect amongst us, which he expected from it, because that,
besides the extraneous and accessory reasons, I have observed in my four first
Reflections; I have made out, that he has not at all proved the pretended
impossibility of that Change, of wi^ we accuse Paschasius; and that the two
Supp^sitions of the Book of the Perpetuity, on wh^ that impossibility was
grounded, are Supp^sitions in the Air, Chimerical, without P^^ and Reason.

Thus you see, Sir, in general, what are ^ thoughts concerning the Book of
Monsie^ Arnaud, and the Reasons, which, in ^ Judgment, have kept it from
finding that applause and success, which many expected from it. It may be, you
will not be of my mind However, you have required, I should te^ you without
complacency, what I believed of it. I have done it with a design, only to
please you, notwithstanding the troublesom^ interruptions I have from the
unhappy Sui^ of Law, which have detained me in this Tow^ these two years,
remote from my House, and from my Books. And this consideration may also excuse
the faults of a Tract I have made in haste, and among so many Distractions. I
do not pretend to meddle in so famous a Controversy, as this is, between two
such Illustrious Champions; although I could not be accused of temerity, if I
did, since the Cause is common, and that others have sometimes appeared in the
field, without being called to it. Yet, Sir, if any one should go about to
quarrel with me for it, you will not take it amiss, that I make you the cause
thereof, and call upon you for my warrant, to show to the Republic, that your
command alone did cause my engagement, and that I could not refuse to your
merit, and to the honor of your friendship, a thing of this nature.

At least, I persuade my self, that those two persons will have no cause to
complain of my conduct. For, as to Monsieur Arnaud, it is indifferent to him,
to combat with one or the other, besides that, I look not at all ^or an answer
from him; this Discourse was not made for that purpose: And if I accuse him of
weakness in his reasonings and proof, ^ confess ingenuously, that it is rather
the fault of the matter, than of the Workman. But he would follow a Plane,
which the Author of the Perpetuity had traced against the Rules; and ^e would
prove the Belief of the Real Pre^ence by abstract and metaphysical by ways, and
by mere Ratiocinations, which are not ^ble to prove it. He would pass on
further, and maintain, That the Fathers had believed ^ransubstantiation and the
Adoration of the ^acrament; and this is a mere Paradox. Thus ^e subject, he
has undertaken to defend, has ^onstrained him to conclude himself within
^ertain Suppositions, impossible to be main^ained. He has wanted neither
dexterity, or light, nor heat; but he has wanted a ^bject capable to receive
the form which was ^tended for it. I am therefore not unwilling (...)
acknowledge his merit and his great parts; ^d, all I can say about this matter,
is, That (...) has done in it whatever could be done, all that he has defended
a very ill cause with a very good grace, and an admirable abundance.

As to Monsieur Claude, I believe not, that he will be offended at this small
discourse. It was not made for his defense; I should be presumptuous, if I
thought, he needed a second; and if I should offer hi^ so weak an one, in case
he needed any. H^ work, which has made such a noise, which has charmed his
Friends, and astonished ^ Adversaries, which has expressed Elogie^ from the
most passionate persons for your Religion, makes us hope for another, which
shall accomplish his Triumph, and assure (...) him the Victory, which Monsieur
Arna^^ has gone about to dispute with him, rath^ by Number than Valor, and
rather by t^ Bigness, than the Reasons of his Book. Neither do I attempt any
thing upon his right; leave him still all the particulars to be exa^ned; I
enter even but a little upon the esse^tial considerations, neither do I speak
of the farther, than I was obliged to answer the d^sign of this Discourse.
Certainly we foll^ very different ways, and as we have no c^merce together, and
that he will not see t^ Discourse before it is published, nor I but then, I
believe not, that we do mee^ the same path. I do not pretend to share his
Laurels, and as my whole end has b^ only to satisfy you, I there stop the
wh^ success of this Discourse, wherein I have (...) only the Right of Nations,
and the Libe^ received in the Republic of Letters, to ^eak ones mind of the
work of another.

But it is time to make an end of this Tract, which is too long already, and
much longer, ^an I purposed to make it at the beginning. I ^ve no more to add
to it, but only this re^uest, that you would continue to love me; wish it with
all my heart; you are good and ^enerous, and therefore I promise to my self ^at
favor, notwithstanding the Disputes of ^ome and Gerova, since in the hopes,
that we ^all meet one day in Heaven in the same ^inde, and the same felicity, I
am on Earth as ^uch as I can be

SIR, Your very humble and very obedient Servant VIGIER.
PARIS. Janu. 28. 1670.
FINIS.

