AN ELEGY Upon the DEATH of that HOLY, REVEREND and LEARNED Minister of CHRIST,
Mr. RICHARD BAXTER, Who in the 77th Year of his Age departed this Life December.
the 8th 1691.
By N. VINCENT Minister of the Gospel, a true Mourner at his FUNERAL.
BLess't Man! In singing forth thine Elegy,
Now every Muse should turn Melpomene was the weeping Muse of the Nine.
Melpomene!
There Is not an Eye, that saw what is worth; but will
For loss of Thee, a shower of Tears distill!
Who would thy Life in Truth describe, must tell,
Its Length, and Usefulness, was Miracle.
That Tongue, by which, Thy Parts and Grace are shown,
Must be an Angels, or one like thy own.
He that did wish the Apostle Paul to hear,
Thy powerful Preaching, Praying, if his Ear
Had once been bless't with: this would granted be,
Only Inspired Ones excelled Thee!
Thy (...) thee, Star; and truly None,
Brighter than Thou, in this (...)
The Sun of Righteousness did sure dispense
Such Light to Thee, with so great Influence
The Prince of Darkness was (how often!) foiled;
His strongest Holds thrown down! his Weapons spoiled!
Thee Spiritual Father, a large Offspring call;
Thy Crown thy Glory, and thy Joy; these all
Will at the last be found; and These with Thee
Will live, love, praise unto Eternity!
Thou did aloud the Unconverted Call;
Heaven bless't thee with Success, so that the fall
Of Many into Hell was hindered; Greater skill,
To win Souls to thy Lord; and to his Will
To subject them; Who in this Age has had?
The worst of all the Ages that were bad.
Hard Hearts before Thee melted, and their Grief
Was Angels Joy, when some of Sinners chief
Repented; then Heavens Sons were glad to see
Those so near Hell, snatched out of Misery.
Thou wast the Worlds Eclipse; Thy noble flight
Toward the things Eternal, out of sight
Of Mortal Eye: was to the Worldlings shame,
And strong Conviction. Conscience did them blame,
Because their Hearts were placed on, what thy Feet
Did trample under, as it was most meet;
Earths Vanities deserved no better treat.
Thy Faith did make Thee Mammon's Conqueror
Wealth, Pleasure, Honor; even the whole Worlds store
Was in thine Eye contemptible and poor.
This Age of Infidels might plainly see
That Christ did dye, and rose again, in Thee!
How wondrous was thy Art (when Hearts did groan
Burdened with Sin and Sorrow; making moan,
Because of Wounds intolerable) to apply
That Panacea signifies an ^niversal M^dicine curing every Malady.
Panacea of Iniquity,
The Blood of Jesus Christ! Thou did divide
The Word aright, and most exactly guide,
That trouble might be true; yet not exceed
Due Measure and o'rewhelm: when once the need
Of Christ and Grace was seen, sweet was thy Word
Reviving, Comfort, Peace, it did afford.
The Merciful High Priest did Thee employ,
And no man more, to make them reap in joy,
Who sowed in tears. Now surely at thy Grave
Tears would become a Deluge; where to have
Relief, we should not know, but that we all
In thy Divine Discourses practical;
Thee living, breathing, speaking still may find,
Though dead, This Treasure Thou have left behi^d.
In Controversies Theological,
Thy skill was great; the Adversaries all
Of Truth and Thee, thou easily did confound,
And unto Error give a mortal Wound,
A readier Disputant who ever was?
(...) through the Schools of Learning pass.
Both Universities may (...)
That neither from Thee honor can receive!
But though Thou wast so able to defend
The Cause of Truth, yet once to see an end
Of strife and wrangling, was thy Heart's desire:
Strife, thou well knew'st, is a consuming fire.
It Is thy great glory, in this wrangling Age,
^hen Pride, Malignity, and brutish Rage
Are all so high, Thou were a Man of Peace.
That sharp Contentions in the Church might cease,
Was thy desire in praying, and thy aim
In Preaching, Writing, Blessed we proclaim
^^ ee from thy Lord's own Mouth. Matthew. 5. 9.
Thou sparedst none
(...) real Faults, on every side, were shown:
^^y Wisdom was without Hypocrisy,
(...) had not Partiality.
(...) Patience in Affliction, and thy Faith,
(...) exercise sufficient; yet who says
^^at either failed, would wrong thee. Surely He
Whose Arms all things uphold, did sustain thee!
To preach, pray, study, praise, though in great pain,
^s Thou did, was peculiar: Ah! it is vain
To seek thy Equal, who does bear the Rod
So well, and does so very much for God!
But Death has eased Thee of all thy pain,
Nor Sin, nor Trouble, shall thou feel again.
The King of Terrors, the last Enemy,
Long looked for, was not Terrible to Thee.
When Usher, Gataker, and Vines did sleep,
Thou said Three Nations should consent to weep:
Let these three Kingdoms join in doleful moan,
The Tears of All, Thy Death deserves alone.
Saecula vix referent, quem tulit una dies.
LONDON: Printed for Thomas Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside. 1691.


