THE COBBLERS END, Or His (LAST) SERMON, Being A true Relation of that SERMON,
Which was preached in St. Georges Church in Southwark By a Cobbler last Sabbath
day, being the 12. of December, 1641. who most impudently, and insolently stepped
up into the Pulpit, and broached his Brownisticall and Erroneous Opinions to
his Auditors.

This is none of your lying Flashes,
But all is most real Truth.
His Text was taken out of the 30. Chapter of Esaiah, and the last verse. For
the fire of Hell is ordained from the beginning, yea even for the King it is
prepared. etc.

London, Printed for I. H. 1641.

The Cobblers End: OR His (last) Sermon.
THe Brownists are acknowledged to be the Caterpillars of Religion, who do
daily strive to contaminate the sincere purity thereof; for they will not be
exhorted by Apostolical confirmation, and Prophetical Institution of the
sacred word of God, but according to the traditions of their own roving
fancies they ordain no Orthodox, but Heretical opinions, and (that I may use
their own words) as the spirit of Error^ moves them, they will broach new
Doctrine to their long eared Auditors. But lest I should seem to deviate from
my intended subject, I will with out any digressing aberration proceed herein.

There have bin a six reptitious Lecture continued in St Georges parish in
Southwark, in the succession of about three weeks, and last Friday (being the
appointed day for the aforementioned ^ectur^ one Vincent preached there at the
same parish, but his Doctrine was so Schismatic, that there was a great
mutiny among the confluxe of the popular vulgar. Yet notwithstanding by the
peculiar, and particular suggestions of some of the said parish, being of his
own tribe, he was appointed to preach on the Sabbath day immediately
succeeding without the general assent, on consent of all the Parishioners, and
being supposed by his external gesture to be some Scholar, he had more
admittance, then otherwise should have bin granted him. And being confident of
his resolute insolency, he nominated his text, and proceeded according to the
Tenor of these words following.

HIs text was taken out of the 30: Chapter of Esaiah, and the last verse. For
the fire of Hell is ordained from the beginning, yea even for the King is it
prepared, etc.
Which words he said like the four rivers, that were divided into four heads
to water the garden. So his Text was divided into three parts.

1. The Damnation ordained. 2. The time when, from the beginning. 3. The
disrespect of persons, yea for the King it is prepared.
And thus he began with his first point, viz. the Damnation ordained: that all
those who would not preach as Cobblers, and Tinkers, were damned. Secondly, that
those who heard the book of Common Prayer (being in their imaginary
supposition Popish) were damned. Thirdly, that those, who would admit of
Bishops, and such Romish priests were damned. Fourthly, that those who preached
or prayed otherwise, then the spirit moved him, did offend God, and those that
offend God should be damned, therefore by consequence, he that did not pray
extempore, or preach according as the spirit shall enable him, shall without
doubt be damned.

And with that he cried, fire, fire, so vehemently, that I wonder some did not
spit on his face to quench and extinquish the flaming fire of his lustful
mind, and concupiscence. Then he proceeded to his second particular, viz. the
time when from the beginning: and then he affirmed positively that all men were
from the beginning pre-destinated to be damned. But this we know (as his other)
is a maine point of blasphemy. And moreover that no learning, either moral, or
divine, was requisite for the Ministerial function, but altogether as the
spirit moved them.

And withal he gave his assertion, and direct astipulation to hear rather a
Cobbler, Felt-maker, Tinker, Horserubber, as those reverend fathers, Mr Green,
Mr. Marler, Mr. Spencer, etc. then any other Scholar, who shall premeditate
his Sermon.

Thus he proceeded in his erroneous opinions, and heretical doctrine,
scolding, and railing at all men, and all professions, that he could recall
into his memory, still crying with a deplorable exclamation, fire, fire, but to
what effect I know not, unless he himself did fear Hell-sire for his
abominable, and scandalous words.

But to omit many of his ridiculous proofs, he at length came to his third
point of doctrine, viz The disrespect of persons, it is appointed for the King
himself: but if I should describe in an apparent declaration each particular
Schism, that he obstinatly produced in this regard, I should be more blamed
for expressing it, then he was for speaking it: yea, I should be more ashamed
to demonstrate that, which he was not ashamed to declare.

Therefore (judicious Reader) I omit the subsequence of his facinorous
inference to your better mental reservation: neither will I rub the Cicatrix
of this wound, least it should bleed afresh. Wherefore when the alarm of his
obstreperous tongue was ended in this prior division, he proceeded unto some
other particulars, which were not less dangerous, and heretical in
explication, then the former.

First he affirmed that all Bishops were contrary to the word of God, and
therefore Diabolical. Secondly, that the book of Common-Service was diducted
out of the Popish Liturgy, and therefore ought not to be admitted, or have any
approbate allowance in our public Assemblies, and Congregations. Thirdly, that
every one might exercise the talent, according as the spirit shall enable them:
for first, whatsoever comes from the spirit is truth. Secondly, the spirit
cannot suggest a man amiss. Thirdly, that the spirit guides a man's thoughts to
the right object of heavenly things. Fourthly, that he which is led by the
spirit, is an absolute child of God.
Therefore he did assure them to embrace all those good Admonitions, which he
had declared unto them; for he would warrant them that they did all proceed
from the holy spirit.

Also, diverse other things he did peremptory affirm in his Pulpit, all which
would be too long for me to relate. Therefore least I should trespass too far
on your element patience, J will consummate all in a word, and conclude; While
my daily prayers shall be, that the Parliament would take these premises into
their grave consideration, etc.

The Relati^n of the Combustion in Saint George his Parish in Southwarke,
LAst Sabbath Day, being the 12. day of December, Mr. Mason the Curate of the
said Parish Church should have preached, and there were diverse Brownistically
intended, that had presented the name of one Vincent unto him to preach for
him, who was a Cobbler living in Holborne, and the Curate asked him whether he
head warrant or no to preach, he answered, that it was nothing to him, and he
would preach in spite of his teeth. With that he crawled up into the Pulpit,
like a Jackanapes, and preached there according to his wisdom, I should have
said according as the spirit moved him. And after Sermon there was a great
hurrying over the pewes, and many came to defend him, and flinging a gray Coat
over his shoulders, they covered his knavery. But the Churchwardens, the
chiefest of the Parishioners, and especially Sir John Lentle, Justice of Peace,
commanded that he should be apprehended: who is now to answer at the
Common-Counsell for his blasphemous words.

FINIS.

