^RODIGIES and Apparitions or Englands Warning Pieces ^eing a Seasonable
Description, ^y lively figures and apt illustration ^^ many remarkable and
prodigious fore-runers and apparent Predictions of Gods Wrath against England,
if not timely prevented by true Repentance. Written by J. V.

Are to be sold by Tho Bates in old B^^^ and by, Ralphe Markland near the
(...)



PRODIGIES and APPARITIONS, OR, ENGLANDS Warning-Pieces.
HIstories do report and make mention of Tamberlane, Tamberlaine the Scourge
of the Turk.
that famous Warrior, and great scourge of the Turk, (as he was termed) that
in his battles, especially in his intended siege and assault of a City or
Town, his custom was, first, to hang out a white flag or banner, A white-flag.
in the sight of the Besieged; thereby intimating to them his tender of mercy
and favourable-quarter to them, if they would instantly yield and submit to his
mercy. But if that would not serve, but that they resolved to stand it out
against him, and put it to the hazard of war; then he hung out a red flag,
in token, A Red-flag.
that now there was nothing but death and destruction to be expected upon their
refusal of his proffered favor and mercy to them. Even so Almighty God, the
great and supreme Sovereigne of all Nations and Kingdoms, and the most
terrible heart-tamer and wonder-working-King of all Kings, who with the word of
his mouth and breath of his nostrils, is able to subdue the mightiest Kings,
Kingdoms and people, and to cast down al strong holds and mightiest mountains
before him, as those Heathen Kings, Dan. 3.26. and 6.26.27.
Nebuchadnezar and King Darius freely confessed. Yet, I say, though he be so
mighty and terrible a God, when he is provoked to wrath by the sins and
transgressions of a nation or people, he never punishes, but he first
admonishes; and heerin like this foresaid Tamberlane, before he intends the
ruin of a Nation or a Kingdom, Gods White-flag of mercy.
he first holds out the white flag of his proffered grace and mercy, on their
true repentance and hearty reformation from their evil courses and
conversation, but if this will not work kindly on them, but they will
obstinately and stubbornly stand out and refuse his mercy and proffered grace
and favor, then at last, Gods Red-flag of wrath and confusion.
he hangs out his red-flag of wrath and confusion and suddenly consumes his
proud and rebellious opposers, all insolent and incorrigible sinners, who have
thus made themselves incapable of mercy and compassion, and are so become as
combustible stubble in the presence of a terrible and angry God, Heb. 12.29.
who as a consuming fire, devoures them, as in a moment. For, as the Prophet
says, Esaias. 33.14.
who is able to stand before, or to dwell with everlasting burnings? Now, this
merciful course of our merciful God in thus hanging out first this white-flag
of favor and merciful premonitions (which is the thing mainly intended to be
described in these following figures and ocular-Emblemes of prodigious
portentious, and apparitions) before he inflicteth severe punishments on his
sinning Servants: The Lord uses to manifest unto them diverse ways, but most
especially and most remarkably, these two ways. 2 Sorts of Gods White-flagges.
Either by his Prophets and faithful Preachers, declaring his word and will to
his people; as Jonas in Ninevie, 1. The word preached.
and all the Prophets else to the people of Israel, in their constant
proclaiming mercy to Penitents, but judgment and wrath to obstinate sinners
and refractorie transgressors: Or else, by sending prodigious signs and
wonders among them, either by fearful apparitions in the air, 2. Signs and
wonders and Apparitions.
monstrous births, heart-frighting-voyces and exclamations, oftimes unknown
from whence or by whom uttered, and such like. And this last course, the Lord
has also frequently taken, with a provoking and impenitent people in all ages
and times. And this is the thing which in this little Treatise is mainly
intended to be declared and insisted upon.

Namely, to show, that even of late also, in these our modern times (as well as
in former and ancient ages) we, being by our sins and transgressions, a greatly
provoking people, incensing and exasperating the high indignation and wrath of
the Lord against us; yet he has among us also shown himself to be God that
changes not, Psalm. 7, 12.13.
full of compassion and slow to wrath; bending his bow, whetting his sword,
holding up his arm, ready to let it down, yet loath to strike, that so by these
preparations to the blow before it falls heavy upon us, we might see and shun
and avoid it by our true and cordial repentance. Now in the first place, I
shall very briefly give you a taste and sight of what God has done in this
nature and kind in former ages and times, and so pass on succinctly to our
own times, which I say is here mainly intended.

A Jove omne principium. Heb. 12, 2.
And, first, to begin with him who is the beginning and end of all things, even
the Lord Jesus Christ, our most precious and dear Savior, the author and
finisher of our faith, that glorious Lord of life, and Prince of peace; who
being born into the world in the days of an Emperor of peace, Augustus
Caesar, then Emperor of Rome, yet bringing into the world not only peace,
Mat. 10, 34.35.
but a sword also; peace to penitent and brokenhearted believers, and a sword
of variance and revenge to proud and impenitent sinners: Therefore at his
birth, The admirable Star in the East, seen at Christ's birth.
what a most admirable and unparalleled Star was seen in the East? so great
and so miraculous a Star as has puzzled and posed the greatest and most
learned Astronomers and Mathematicians of the world. A white Flag. Joh. 3, 16.
A white Flag of mercy indeed, yea of everlasting redemption from Sin, Death
and Hell, if graciously accepted with firm faith, and found universal
obedience. A red Flag. Heb. 2, 2, 3.
But a red Flag of wrath and confusion; yea of horror and perdition, if
obstinately rejected, or lazily neglected by sin, and ignorance, and
infidelity. Again, a little before the destruction of that great and most
magnificent Metropolis of the whole world, Jerusalem, I mean; Jerusalem
what fearful and prodigious fore-warnings were sent to that City, to
foreshew them the wrath to come? As, first, 1. Blindness of mind.
a fearful blindness and stupidity of mind, or hardness of heart (the most
fearful forerunner of wrath toward them, of all the rest) not to see or
believe those wonderful fore-warnings, which God then sent among them.
Secondly, a Comet, 2. A Comet like a sword.
like a sword, and a bright shining light, in their Temple, round about their
Altar, in the midst of the night. Thirdly, 3. A Cow which brought forth a Lamb.
a Cow, (which should have, then, been sacrificed) that brought forth a Lamb,
in the midst of the Temple. 4. The Brass gate of the temple opened of it self.
5. Armed men and chariots in the air. 6. A voice in the Temple.
Fourthly, the great and massy brazen gate of the Temple, which opened of it
self. Fifthly, fearful and hideous sights and apparitions in the air, of
mighty companies of Chariots and armed men in an hostile manner. Sixthly and
lastly, a voice was heard in the Temple crying out, Let us go hence. With
other such like, mentioned by Josephus in his famous history of the Jews, page
738.

But, to come nearer to our own times. Are not the fearful apparitions and
signs in the heavens, and prodigies on the earth, Germany.
often seen in Germany, by the inhabitants thereof in many places, notable
forerunners and predictions of Germanies succeeding misery, still fresh in
the memory of many yet living; who have been both eye and ear witnesses of the
manifold and most lamentable distresses and destructions which have befallen;
and, even to this day, lie still very heavy on that (once) most famous and
flourishing Eden of the whole Christian world, Germany the Eden of Europe
now, made a desolate defart, and bare and barren wilderness.

But, all this while, that we have only heard that our neighbors houses have
been so fearfully on fire; what use have we of England made thereof? How have
we endeavored to keep the flame off from our own houses and habitations?
Certainly, we have not made that holy and humbling use thereof as we might and
ought to have done, considering our means of grace and reconciliation,
wherewith we have been, even lifted up (like Capernaum) to heaven; Mat. 11.23
England like Capernaum.
far beyond our neighbors round about us. We have not been wise by other men's
harms, as mere humane and worldly wisdom might have taught us to be: But
have, contrariwise, drunk wine in bowls, as the Prophet complains, and
stretched our selves on our beds of Ivory, Amos, 6.6.
none of us hardly being grieved for the afflictions of Joseph, in the
aforesaid Germany, and now also of late and lamentably bleeding Ireland.
Wherefore the Lord has (and that most justly) come nearer home to our own
doors, and begun to make us (who were only supine spectators of others
miseries) now, unhappy spectacles to others of imbred and homebred devouring
destructions.

Nor yet, I say, in all these our selfe-procured sorrows, can we justly tax
the Lord in the least measure, with any more harsh or hasty proceedings
herein, with us, then with any of his other servants in bypast times, but
have been, every-way wholly left without excuse. For, England left without
Excuse.
has not the Lord for these many years together both called upon us by by his
faithful and painful Preachers of the word forewarned us to fly from the
wrath to come? 1. Ministers to admonish us.
Have they not frequently and servently cried out and told us, Luke 1.33.
that except we repent we also should perish? Yea, when this one great and
maine means of reclaming us his people from our sins, would not serve, has
not the Lord used that other more terrible and heart-frighting course (here, 2.
Prodigies to fear and fright us.
mainly intended in this treatise) of Prodigies, Signs and Apparitions in the
air, and other most degenerating, unnatural and wonder-striking contingents
amongst us here at home? As now I intend more exactly and particularly to set
forth and show to the Reader whereby we shall easily discern and discover to
our own hearts (if we will not be too wilfully blind, which as I showed
before, was the first and worst sign of smart and sorrow in Jerusalem, and
more then marble-hearted) most apparent prints and even visible footsteps and
impressions of Gods highly conceived indignation and provoked patience, turned
into enforced fury by our constant and unconscionable sinning against him, and
now resolved to execute the utmost severitie of his wrath upon us, if now at
last we hasten not most heartily to prevent and divert it, by true and timely
repentance and reformation.

And now, I say, that we may no longer look abroad into foreign parts, nor
many years past, for examples of this sort, I shall desire the Reader to
remember what yet may be fresh in memory among us: An Introduction to the first
Emblem or Apparition.
That in the Reign of King James, that so peaceful a Prince, who so much
delighted in the name and work of Peace, both at home and abroad, that he had
this Motto given to him, Beati Pacifici, Blessed are the Peacemakers. And so
successefully had he prosecuted his affections therein, that (as here you may
see in this Emblem, or following Figure) Every man fate under his own Vine,
and under his own fig tree, even from Dan to Beersheba, all the days of the
said King James, our so peaceful King; as it Every man Sitting under his vine
and under his own fig gtree, enjoying all good things, in the days of King
James. But, on the 18th of November 1618 A great Blazing-starr, with 7 long
streams appeared, much damping men's hearts.


HEre, every one sits under his own Vine,
All, under their-own Figtrees sup and dine,
In Pleasures, Treasures, and all joys increase,
In pleasant Plenty, amiable Peace.
But, whiles this Peace and Plenty brings forth Pride,
Luxury, Loosnes, and all sins besides;
Gods wrath is kindled, Heaven therewith offended,
Lets England see his judgments sore, intended.
By a strange Blazing-starre, which every day,
Betimes ith'morning did bright beams display;
Which, as a Warning piece, the Lord thus sent
To rouze-up England, timely, to repent,
And to prevent his judgments, thus, foreshown,
Lest (still) secure England be overthrown.
See, here, th'indulgence of a gracious God,
Who, ere he strikes, first, shows and shakes his Rod.
was said of King Solomon also, 1 Kings 4.23.
that Prince of Peace. But this peace, being but a mere external and sensual
peace, and so the mother of Luxury, Libertinisme and profaneness (whereof the
whole Kingdom did then, and so all along, to this very day) too risely and
rankly abound, together with all kind of sinfulness; Piety being then turned
into Court-Policy, and sincerity into outside and Diabolical hypocrisy. The
Lord therefore, even about the year 1618. November 18, sent a visible
demonstration of his just wrath and displeasure; namely, A Comet or blazing
Star.
a great Comet or Blazing Star (as there also you have it in the Emblem) with
seven streams, which continued to the 16. of December. following, rising every
morning about three or four of the clock, and so continued shining most
clearly and bright, till day light appeared, the streams of it blazing
upwards. Now what this Comet or Blazing Star might portend and prognosticate,
has been evidently seen and known amongst us, by real and sensible
experience, ever since; not only over all Christendom in general, The effects
of the said Comet, or blazing Star.
as in Germany, Rochel in France, and still fresh bleeding and lamentably
dilacerated and forlorn Ireland; but even within our own bosoms in England
also, as in the death of Queen Anne, and of King James also himself, Death of
great ones.
not long after; yea and many most eminent Peers and Nobles of this Land,
suddenly taken away, but by what stroke is not yet fully discovered, though
greatly suspected; as, the Marquess of Hamilton, the Duke of Richmond, and the
Lord Belfast, etc. all eminent Common wealths men, fierce and furious wars
also and rumors of wars, Nation against Nation, and Kingdom against
Kingdom. And (as I touched before) we now see our too secure Kingdom must also
share in these common calamities, now fallen upon the earth, England having
sinned, and done very foolishly, England must also come under the lash of Gods
justice and greatly incensed indignation against it, as well as Germany,
Rochell and Ireland.

Before I can leave the blazoning of this Blazing-star, I must give the Reader
one more remarkable note and observation on it. Namely, that at the first
appearing of this Star, we were all in peace, and (seeming) serene
tranquillity, but indeed (as was forementioned) such a peace as justly rendered
us settled on the lees of carnal security. Even as if this Star had been sent
among us in special to fore-warne us of our present too loose security, and
therefore future ensuing infelicity, if not speedily prevented by true and
unfeigned repentance. A remarkable note on the rising of the blazing star.
For, it first appeared, as I said, the 18 of November, the day after the
annual memorial of Queen Elizabeth's (of ever most famous memory) most happy
inauguration to the Crown of England, the day when we began to enjoy the
liberty of the Gospel, and deliverance from that former most formidable yoke of
Romish Egyptian bondage and slavery, under bloody Babylonish and terrible
conscience-curbing taskmasters, and which so blessed liberty, we have now in a
good and great measure enjoyed, at least, these threescore years. And this, I
say, seemed most particularly to be delineated out unto us, by this notable
Comets appearing just on the next day to the 17 of November, as if the Lord
would, thus, have expostulated with us. O England, ungrateful and unfruitful
England, thou have, now, these sixty years by my free favor and bounty,
enjoyed my Gospel of pure peace, together with the sweet and amiable peace of
this my Gospel, but have been, all the while but little the better (if not far
the worser) by it. Well, though I confess I know not what I could have done
more for England, my choice vine, my pleasant plant, Esaias 5.1, 2, 3, etc.
then I have done, having so hedged, dug and dressed it; yea, and watered it
with the dewes and drops of heaven: and now that I expected it should have
brought me forth sweet grapes of faith and pure obedience, it has contrariwise
brought forth the wild grapes of sin and rebellion; though, I say, it deserves
(like the fruitless Fig Tree) to be cut down, Luke 13.7.
and not suffered to encumber the ground any longer: yet, out of my mere mercy
and indulgence to England, I will let it alone one year of patience more, and
only shake my rod over it, with this prodigious apparition, and celestial
sign of my just displeasure, as a premonition thereof to move it to
repentance, which if it cordially fall upon, well and good; if not, whereas,
all this while, I have been severely whipping and scourging other
neighbour-nations, especially her sister Ireland, to make England (if it might
be) wise by others woes, my leaden-heeles of long-sufferance, patience, and
compassion, shall be found to have Iron-hands of wrath without remedy; and then
I will do my work, Esaias 28.21.
my strange work, and bring to pass my act, my strange act; and when I begin,
1 Samuel 3.12.^
I will also make an end. The Lord, timely, open the eyes of Englands
understanding, that she may see (yet) in this her day, the things that concern
her eternal peace; left, hereafter they be everlastingly hid from her.

A second warning-piece (worthy our serious notice) of Gods gracious
longanimity and patient forbearance, toward us, notwithstanding our
pertinacious provocations, and refractory rebellions toward him, may be this.
A prodigious-birth, and monstrous Man-child, borne in Old-bride-well, about
October 3. 1633. having two heads, two A Man-child, born in old-Bridewell
precinct, having two distinct Heads, two Hearts, two arms and the Stump of
another growing-out from the back. Shown to King Charles and y Queen, Anno Dom:
1633 Buried October ye 3d.


BEhold, good Reader, here, a monstrous birth,
To damp thy sins delight, and mar such mirth,
A Man-child born in most prodigious sort,
Which for undoubted truth thou may report.
Two distinct heads it had, and eke two hearts,
Two arms, whence grew a stump. In other parts
Like other children. What may this p^^tend?
Sure monstrous plagues do monstrous sins attend.
The sins of Heads, in government abused,
The sins of hearts, opinions false infused,
And broacht abroad to raise up foes and factions,
And Arms and Armies to confound with fractions,
Dis-joynted States (like stump-like Ireland)
Whiles brothers thus against brothers lift their hand.
This (surely) God seems hereby to foretell,
That having Plagues must hideous Sins expel.
hearts, two arms, and a stump, beside. A monstrous birth, a man-child born
with two heads, 2 hearts, two arms and 2 stump.
This child was borne of poor parents, inhabitants in that precinct. Which
foresaid Birth, being so mavelous and prodigious a Monster in nature, was
carried and showed to King Charles our Sovereign, and his royal consort, the
Queen, who greatly astonished at the sight thereof, Shown to King Charles and
the Queen.
most graciously and charitably sent the poor woman, the mother of it, five
pieces, to refresh her in her present poverty and weakness.

Now, whereas, peradventure, An Object.
some may here object and say; Why do you count this such a wonder which is
(as the Naturalists and Philosophers affirm and write) but a deficiencie and
weakness of nature?

Whereunto I answer, Answer.
This is an objection indeed, but of a mere naturalist and carnal man, who is
willing only to look upon external and secondarie causes, not considering the
wonders and operations of Gods hands. David could say, Psalm. 139.24.
that a man in his ordinary, natural, and well-composed generation, is
fearfully and wonderfully made; how much more terribly and wonderfully, when
the Lord is pleased to frame such a fearful and wonder-striking birth in the
womb of his creature, so contrary to nature? And did not the Lord Jesus Christ
himself, the fountain of wisdom and understanding, (yea far more wise then
all the Naturalists and Philosophers that ever were or will be) tell his
Disciples, who curiously questioned the cause, Joh. 19.3.
why that man (mentioned in the Gospel) that was borne blind from his mothers
womb; was so made by God, that the Lords mighty power might be manifested in
him? And although it cannot be denied but that sometimes such monstrous births
are produced by defect of nature: yet its as true that frequently the Lord is
pleased to cause such monstrous productions from his creatures, as predictions
and forerunners of some fearful judgment to come for sin. For otherwise,
God could have given power (as in an ordinary way he does) to have brought
forth to perfection.

But it is confessed clearly, by that wise and famous Historian Josephus,
fo^ementioned at the beginning of this Treatise, who there, brings in that
strange and unnatural birth of the Cow which brought forth (in the Temple of
Jerusalem) a Lamb instead of a Calfe, and which he there introduces as one of
the fearful forerunners and signs of Jerusalems ensuing misery and
desolation; to which prodigious birth, this also, me thinks, may fitly be a
parallel, and justly be taken for a fearful prediction of wrath to come, if
not prevented by timely repentance.

And why may we not yet farther consider, even with particular application,
this monstrous birth, to this effect? That God, by these two heads, two hearts,
two arms, and a stump of another in this child, might let us now see his
hastening judgments and wrath on our Kingdoms of England and Ireland, A
particular application of this strange birth to our strange times.
wherein has been too manifestly seen to our sorrow, such divisions; by two
heads, the King and this renowned Parliament, some siding with the one, and
some with the other: by two hearts, Papists and Protestants, or Malignant and
well affected Christians, some standing for Truth, and some for Error; some
for Christ, and some for Antichrist; some for Gospel and a holy Reformation,
and some for beggarly Ceremonies and Romish trash and trumpery; two arms or
armies for just defense in England and Scotland, and a miserable and monstrous
stump of an arm in lamentably torn and mangled Ireland. And this use, I
remember our brethren in New England, not long since made of another most
prodigious and misshapen and monstrous birth, A most prodigious and monstrous
birth also in New England.
brought forth by a Gentlewoman of that New Plantation, who had been a maine
fautrix, if not original broacher of very many most wicked, dangerous, and
damnable opinions in their Church: God having declared his high displeasure
thereat, by her so fearful monstrous and misshapen birth, which, as a godly
Minister there related, had as many external and corporal deformities in its
body, as she maintained diversities of most dangerous opinions. Which was all
of it, I say, testified for most true, by some of the most learned and godly
Pastors and people amongst them.

Again, have we not had many most remarkable warnings and fearful forerunners
of Gods displeasure against us for our sins and transgressions, by most
hideous and horrour-striking-thunder-claps, Thunder and lightning.
and spirit affrighting-Lightnings, doing much and most fearful hurt, burning,
defacing and spoiling our very material Churches and houses in this Kingdom,
most manifestly giving us to understand that something, surely, is much amiss
even in our Churches and worship and service of the Lord our God (as I shall
afterward more particularly and truly show) in our most sumptuous and
superfluously huge built Churches and Cathedral Minsters, indeed far more
like Heathen Temples then Christian Churches. And as an undoubted testimony of
Gods displeasure herein, Churches mightily defa^ed and destroy^d by thunder
and lightning.
take first that most memorable and terrible, yea never to be forgotten
example of Gods wrath and deep indignation manifested by thunder and lightning,
against superstitious superfluous and idolatrous impieties in our Churches of
England, Withcomb in Devonshire a mighty fair Church.
which God was pleased to manifest upon the Parish Church of Withcombe in
Devonshire, (besides diverse other Churches in other places, much about the same
time also, which is the more remarkable) being a very fair Church, and but
then newly trimmed, having a very fair Tower with great and small pinnacles,
and reported to be one of the fairest and most famous Church steeples in all
the Western parts of England; which I have here described and set forth in
this Figure and Emblem for the Readers better content and satisfaction.

Which said fair Church and steeple was most fearfully and furiously assaulted
with most hideous thunder and lightning on the 21. day of October 1638. (which
also was so much the more admirable, October 21. 1638. being the Lords day. In
the winter season.
being in the Winter season) which was the Lords Day, and in the time of their
Church Service or Evening Prayer (still the more observable) in the midst of
the performance of which duties, I say, on a sudden there was heard most
fearful and heart-damping claps of thunder, much like the roaring noise or
rattling reports of great A most prodigious and fearful storm of wind
lightning and thunder, mightily defaceing Withcomb-church in Deuon. burning and
slayeing diverse men and women all this in service-time, on the Lords day
October: 21. 1638


HEre, Reader, open thine eyes and ears and heart,
Consider what this figure does impart.
Behold, and tremble to behold and see,
How Christ, Gods Lamb, a Lion fierce can be:
When Sin does patience into passion turn,
And make sweet favor, like fierce fury burn.
When Bethel is a baudie-Babel made,
God will his fair Jerusalems invade.
When, for pure worship of his sacred name,
We, Idol-Altars, Popish-Rites will frame:
O, how the jealousy of God does burn!
All Idol-worship, quite, to over-turne.
Shall England (thus) pretend a reformation,
And, yet, uphold Romish abomination?
Surely (as here) God will let England know,
If these continue, God will angry grow.
Canons, and musket shot discharged; upon which, presently followed a most
fearful Fog, The storm begun.
and almost palpable darkness all over the Church, and a most strong and
almost stifling Stygian stink and loathsome smell of brimstone, together with a
most boisterous and blustering blast of wind and clap of thunder, The fearful
effects of it.
which struck in at the Northside of the steeple or tower, and tearing through
a strong wall came into the Church through the highest window, The steeple
torn.
and bare before it sheere away, a great part thereof, and with a mighty power
it also struck away the Northside wall of the Church, The north side wall
broken.
and violently battered and shook it very much, passing on toward the Pulpit,
and in the way took with it the lime and sand from off the wall, grating the
wall much and mightily defacing it, it having been but lately new whited and
trimmed, as aforesaid. The pulpit strangely defaced.
It tore away also most fiercely the side Deske from the Pulpit, coloring the
pulpit it self of a black hew, and leaving it as moist as if it had been newly
washed over with ink. In which time there was also a most terrible and
heart-astonishing lightning, A fearful flash of lightning.
which did both mightily affright the people, and even scald their skin with
the extreme heat thereof; insomuch as the greatest part of them fell
prostrate, some on their faces, and some on their knees, and some one upon
another, screeking and crying out in a most pitiful and patheticall manner.

The Ministers wife, there present, The Ministers wives case.
had her Ruff and Linen next her body, burnt off, and her body it self
grievously scorched. One Mistress Ditford, A Gentlewoman also sitting with her.
sitting in the seat with her, had her Gown, two Wast-coats, and her linen
next her body also grievously scorched. Another woman frighted with this
fearful spectacle, A woman running out of the Church.
running out of the Church, had her clothes set on fire, her body scorched,
her flesh torn on her back in a most grievous manner. One Master Hill, A
Gentleman slain. Sir Richard Reynolds his Warriners most fearful death.
a Gentleman had his head smitten against the wall, and died the very next day
of it. Sir Richard Reynolds his Wa^^iner had his head cloven, his skull rent in
three pieces, whereof two fell in the next seat, the other fell down in the
seat where he sat: his brains fell entirely whole into the next seat behind
him, his blood dashed against the wall; some of the skin of his head, flesh and
hair, to the quantity of an handful, was carried into the Chancell, his body
left in the seat, as though he had been alive, sitting asleep, and leaning on
his elbow resting on the desk of his Pew, with the forepart of his head and
face whole. O most terrible and fearful power of the Lord! Another man by him.
A man that sat before him, in the same seat, was scalded and burnt all over
on that side next the said Warriner. A third man most grievously slain.
In the second seat behind the Warriner, a man was in a most grievous manner
burnt and scalded all over his body, so as he was all over like raw flesh, and
lived in great misery about a week after, A Dog killed.
and then died. A Dog neere-the Chancell door, was fiercely whirled up three
times, and the last time fell down dead. Some seats in the body of the Church,
were torn up, and overwhelmed up-side-down; A strange preservation.
yet they that were in them had no harm, notwithstanding that they were
thereby thrown out of them into other seats four or five pewes higher. Eight
Boys at the rails of the Altar thrown on heaps on each other.
About the number of eight boys sitting about the railes of the Communion
Table (here we may observe what a superstitious Church it was, like, almost
all the rest of our Churches in these miserable days) were all of them taken
up by the violence of this so terrible a storm, and thrown on heaps within
the railes, but had no hurt at all. A beam fell down but hurt none.
A beam was broken in the midst, and fell down between the Minister and his
Clerk, but neither of them hurt thereby. The Church was also very much defaced
and torn in many parts of it, and a great stone near the very foundation, A
foundation stone torn up.
was torn up and removed thence. Other stones were violently thrown out of
the tower, Stones but of the Tower thrown down thick.
as thick as if there had been an hundred men throwing them, some stones of
them of such a weight and bigness, as no one man was able to lift. One of the
Pinacles of the Tower was tumbled down into the Church. A pinnacle tumbled down.
A man sitting on the Church-beere, at the lower end of the Church, had the
said beer torn in pieces under him, and himself thrown into a seat by the
wall, but h^d no other hurt. A great stone thrown an hundred yards off. A
Bowling alley and a Tavern near the Church defaced.
A great stone was thrown about an hundred yards from the Church, and sunk
into the ground so deep and so fast, that it could hardly be seen afterward. A
Bowling-alley also near the Churchyard, was strangely turned into deep pits;
and a Wine-Taverne nere the Church, had the side thereof next the Church torn
up, and the top or covering broken and carried off, and one of the rafters
broken into the said house.

And was not here a most terrible Brief notes on the premises.
and almost an incredible print and impression of Gods threatened wrath and
indignation against both the internal and external vanity and impiety of such
profuse and superfluous Church-buildings, vain and needless, I say, now under
the Gospel, though in the time of the Leviticall Law, The Jews Temple under the
Law most sumptuous and why?
most requisite and lawful in most gorgeous manner to be set out, as typifying
Christ Jesus in all his excellencies and graces; and therefore these fearful
examples may serve as a remarkable caution and fore-warning of Gods displeasure
herein. But because it is likely, our superstitious Cathedralists will be apt
to object in their carnal incredulity, Ob. One Swallow makes no^ a summer.
that one Swallow makes not a Summer, and so one single testimony is not
sufficient to confirm so weighty a conclusion and inference as I would fain
gather from these fearful premises. Answ.
I shall therefore in the next place give the Reader other remark^ble examples
of Gods semblable undoubted displeasure with the vanity and impiety of our
Churches and Church government, and services too long exercised among us to the
high indignation of the Lord especially now of late, Prelaticall
Church Government.
since our Prelates began so grossly to tyrannize over the consciences of Gods
people) and then say, whether thou can not easily be induced to believe with
me, this truth, which I have hence collected, and which the Lord by these
fearful examples, seems most plainly to have indigitated and demonstrated to
us. And therefore to cry out with the Prophet in holy admiration and trembling,
Who would not fear thee, ^er. 10.7.
O King of Nations, to whom it belongs justly to punish sinners?

In January also then next ensuing, there was very great hurt done, in and upon
diverse other Churches, in other parts of this Kingdom, by thunder and
lightning, and mighty stormy weather, to the great and terrible astonishment of
the inhabitants and beholders. As namely upon the 14. Janu. 14. 1639.
day of the aforesaid month, about five of the clock at night, 3. Churches in
Kent defaced with thunder and lightning.
three Churches were wasted and defaced with fearful thunder and lightning,
and most violent winds; the one was Micham in Kent, also Greenhith and
Stone-Church, both in the said County of Kent. And upon Whitsunday 1640. in the
Parish Church of S. Anthony in Cornwall, And Saint Anthonies in Cornwall, 1640
great hurt was done by terrible thunder and lightning, the people being then
in the Church at their Sabbath days exercises. As here thou see it summarily
and briefly delineated in those following Figures or Emblemes.

3 or 4 Churches more, as namely Micham and Greenhith in Kent also
Stone-church, all fearfully defaced with lightning and thunder, the January
following And St: Anthonies Church in Cornwall, Anno Dom: 1640


ANd, here, again, that All may clearly see,
False-worship, and Idolatry to be
The sin of England: God, in other places,
More Houses of such worship, much defaces,
With fearful storms, lightnings, fierce claps of thunder,
Churches and Steeples rends and cleaves asunder.
Though many other sins do England stain,
Tet, this, of all the rest, is died in grain.
Idolatry and Superstition base,
The Lord will not endure in any case.
And therefore shows, by so many examples,
With how great wrath under his feet he tramples
Such Romish-trash, and all Will Worship vain,
And, only, will unmixed Truth maintain.
Be warned, then, betimes, England take heed,
Lest wrath, without redress, does make thee bleed.
More full observations on all these Church-ruines.
Now all these considered together, with the time of the year, the Winter
season, and the day whereon they fell, the Lords day, and (that, which is so
much the more remarkable) in the time of their Sabbath days duties; tell me,
can any man be so Atheistically minded and blindly or obstinately opinionated
as to think that these so fearful and formidable affrightments immediately
from heaven, Whether they were naturally occasional or otherwise.
can be merely casual or contingent by natural concurrences only, and not
rather immediate demonstrations and forerunners of Gods high indignation for
the great sins and provocations of our Clergy and Prelaticall
Church Government. Certainly it were mere madness, or at least gross carnal
security, if not diabolical delusion, to say, or think otherwise. For, if we
look on our late most intolerable superstitious and idolatrous times, not
silently-creeping, but audaciously running, and (with the Romish-whores
unblushing face) breaking out upon us, and impudently and too frequently
practiced among us by crossing and Jesu-cringing, altar-worship, railing in of
our Communion-tables turned into altars, Popish, sumptuous and superstitious
adornation and bedawbing of Churches with crucifixes and other Popish pictures,
apish gestures, vestures, and such like beggarly-rudiments and ceremonies, as
the Apostle calls them; making more, Gal. 4.9. Col. 2.20.
by far, of the mere walls, and dead stones of their Churches, than of the
living stones of Gods House and Temple. What other thing could be discovered by
all these, but a most disloyal apostasy, and almost a general backsliding and
defection from our first love the Lord Jesus Christ, and from his found faith,
to Antichrist, Arminianisme, and Atheistical profaneness, both in Priest and
people.

And may we not then justly conceive and believe that the Lord, by these so
fearful, and I dare say unparalled examples of wrath on (even) these
material Churches, might truly indigitate and point-out unto us his holy
purpose to ruinate this Romish-rubbish, to purge his holy Temple and worship,
from these outside formalities and fopperies, and to set up and establish a
more pure and powerful, a more precious and glorious internal, spiritual,
simple, and plain unmixed-worship to himself, and such faithful and
fruitful worshippers, Joh. 4.23.
as should worship him in spirit and in truth, in plain simplicity and
singleness of heart; for, such worshippers, now under the Gospel, has he
chosen to himself, as our Savior Christ Jesus himself assures us, whose
infallible heavenly authority I choose rather to believe, then the best and
most reverend (pretended) antiquity of primitive Fathers, and humane
authorities, so urgently and instantly pressed upon us by our late
Romish-hearted Prelates, and Pontifician Doctors whomsoever.

What a most notable warning-piece also did the Lord make visible unto us by
Sea, about the month of September, 1640. namely, that Spanish Fleet which came
(without control) most audaciously upon our English coasts, with many and
mighty Vessels full fraught and furnished with arms, ammunition, and many
thousand Soldiers (almost such another formidable and affrighting Armado, as
that was in 1588.) thinking then also to have swallowed us up, and to have
found us and our brethren of Scotland together by the ^ares, that so they might
with the more ease have unresistibly set firm footing, and securely have
landed on our English shore, and so have stepped in between both parties, and
have made up their mouths with a fat and full prey of three rich and royal
Diademes at once; which, indeed, has been the long expected prize of the
Spaniards most greedy appetite and hungry hope to have made up his long dreamed
of universal Monarchy; as here you see it set forth and described in this next
Figure or Emblem.

A second Spanish-Armado, much like that in, 1588 hovering about our English -
Sea's near Deal and Dover, hoping to have made England their pray and to have
found us fighting with our brethren of Scotland; but beaten back and destroyed
by Van Trump and his Dutch Fleet An: Dom: 1642.


ANd, here, another Warning-piece we had,
A ^righting Storm, by Sea, to have made us sad,
Had not Heavens wisdom, power and providence
Prevented it, and been our strong defense.
A Spanish Fleet, floating upon our Seas,
Hopeful to land upon our Land with ease;
To find us fearlesse, or engaged in fight,
With Scotland, through intestine d^epe despite.
But, whiles they hovered about Deal and Dover,
Watching occasion us to triumph over,
Whiles we-our-selves dreadlesse of danger were,
So near our ruin, yet, so void of f^are,
The Lord a Fleet of Dutchmen to them sent,
To pay their pride, their mischief to prevent.
This Warning-piece we, therefore may ad ^ire,
Preserved thus strangely from destruction dire.
But it pleased the Lord to direct the Dutch Fleet, at that time abroad at Sea,
under the command of Van Trump their Admiral, to meet with them, and (before
Deal and Dover) to fight with them for us, when we little thought of fighting
for our selves, though ready to be made a prey to this devouring
Spanish-Leviathan. Here, I say also, did the Lord, by them, ring us such a
peale of thundering Canon, as it were knocking at our doors to awaken us out of
our mavelous Lethargy of ease and carnal security, or of blockish stupidity,
as might have been thought sufficient to have made us recollect our thoughts,
open our eyes and look about us, and see the hand of God lifted up against us,
yet loath to let the stroke fall so heavily upon us, to our irrecoverable ruin
and destruction, as our sins most justly deserved, had he in his justice so
dealt with us.

On Thursday also, August 4. 1642. about 5. of the clock in the afternoon, at
a Town called Alborough in the County of Suffolk, there was heard in the
air, and evidently seen, a mighty sound of drums beating very loud, after
which was also heard at the same time, a long and fierce peale of small shot,
as of Muskets and such like, and then as it were a discharging of great
Ordnance in a pitched field; all this continuing about an hour and a half, and
then there was a mighty and terrible report or noise of them all together: At
the ceasing whereof a black stone was as it were shot out of the sky, being
about eight inches long, and five or six inches broad, and about two inches
thick, which was taken up by two men which stood by and heard the foresaid
noise, and the whistling of the stone over their head as it past by them (but
they could not see it) they found it by means of a little dog, who followed
it by the sent, and ran barking to and fro, till they following the dog, were
brought to the place where it lay, covered with earth and grass. The men that
found it brought it to London, and presented it to a Burgess of Parliament,
upon whose ground it was found, and by him was shown to diverse others. One
Captain Johnson, and one Master Thompson, men well known in those parts of
Suffolk, being at a Town called Woodbridge, hearing of this mavelous noise
toward Alborough, verily supposing that some enemy was landed, and had made
some sudden onset or invasion upon the Town, took horse and rode hastily
homeward, the rather because they heard of the battle louder and louder, and
being on their way near Alborough, they met with the greatest part of the
townsmen, who were generally run out of their houses, round about, much amazed
with such an uncouth noise of war. But after all this, there was, for certain,
suddenly heard a most joyful noise of sweet music, Admirable sweet music
heard plainly, after all that terrible noise
and of sundry rare musical instruments sounding in a most melodious manner,
for a good space together, and at last it all concluded with a most harmonious
noise, as it were of delicate ringing of well-tuned bells.

A most terrible representation of a great fight in the Air at Alborough in
Suffolk, drum's beateing; Canons and Musketts-shooting, a black stone shooting
out from the clouds found by a tugg, on the ground, but all, at last, ending
with most melodious music, and ringing of belles as an triumph of some
victories Aug: 4. 1642.


OF all the Warning-Pieces to us sent,
See here a Masterpiece of wonderment.
A mighty battle fought (as 'twere) in the air,
Which Alb'rough Townsmen mightily did scare:
For first, they heard Drums beating loud alarms,
Great Canons shooting, as in fields of Arms,
Thick and quick vollies of small shot; likewise
A stone most black breaking forth from the skies,
Which whistling through the air, did pierce the ground,
And (by a Dog) where it fell down, was found.
But suddenly this frighting fear was past,
And, by melodious music turned at last
Into much joy and great alacrity,
Bells (as 'twere) ringing most harmoniously,
As if the Lord would hereby let us see
His gracious love at last to set us free
From all our fore-felt fears, and terrors great,
To crown us with a conquest most complete,
Shown in this figure Tragi-comicall:
Heaven say Amen to this. So pray we all.
Now this Tragi-Comicall Warning-piece (for so methinkes I may fitly call it)
which we have here described and set forth, as well as a figure and expression
of that nature might be; beginning so terribly, and concluding so sweetly, did
far transcend, in prognosticating comfort, in the issue, all the forementioned
mavelous prodigies and predictions, either in Jerusalem, Germany, or
elsewhere among us; and may therefore (surely) serve as a sovereign antidote
against our too much fainting and affrighting fears. The Lord our good God
seeming hereby to foreshew us (as blessed Mr. Brightman also, that famous
Divine, and faithful servant of the Lord, in his most bright and learned
revelation of the Revelations of Saint John, has even prophetically written)
that Englands terrible storm of woes and wars now begun in it, by Papists,
Atheists, and profane Malignants, whom God has stirred up to disturb its
abused peace and plenty, and as a just punishment of Englands great sins and
enormities, though for a while it may seem sharp, yet shall be short, and
prove sweet in the issue, fanning away the chafe, and burning up the dross
thereof, and making way for a glorious peace and perfect reformation, and for
the setting up of Christ's Throne, and advancing of his Scepter, in the power
and purity of holy ordinances, in the issue and conclusion.

It is our part therefore, in faith, patience, and prayer, to possess our
souls, and to wait on the Lord for the happy performance of the same in his due
time, and by that way which is best pleasing to his most wise providence. And
the Lord in mercy perfect our expectation thereof in his appointed season. Amen
and Amen.

I have made no mention all the while, of the many strange, fearful, and
unaccustomed Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, which have been seen from year
to year both in other parts, and also in our own English Horizon; which also
by the judgment of the best Astrologers and Mathematicians, have and do
prognosticate and declare unto us, many notable changes and overtures of States
and Kingdoms; as also that late and memorable conjunction of Saturn and
Jupiter among us in February last, 1643. which has been written of long before
it fell out; and which (with all the rest) does prognosticate and demonstrate
unto us (as so many Warning-pieces) the great alteration and vicissitude of
Kingdoms, Countries, times and things in Church and State; especially, I say,
this late and great conjunction of those two celestial Planets as Mr. Booker
in his Prognostication for this instant year 1643. does most notably declare
and manifest unto us.

But of these, and some other such like strange apparitions in the air, I
shall desire (with wise King Solomon) all my Christian brethren and friends) to
take holy and wholesome counsel which the Spirit of God prompts the children of
wisdom to embrace and follow, viz. A prudent man fore-sees the evil (or
approaching storm) and hides himself from it. And what better, nay what so
safe a hiding place as the clifts and holes of the Rocks, even the wounds of
the Lord Jesus Christ, that immovable and everlasting Rock of our Salvation,
and under the holy and heavenly wings of the Sun of Righteousness; where
only (as the Prophet says) is true and infallible Soule-healing comfort
indeed, to all truly penitent, and conscience-wounded sinners, who with godly
sorrow, and unfeigned repentance and reformation, by faith in prayer, seek and
sue unto him; which, the Lord give us all wisdom and grace so to do. Amen.

FINIS.

