THE Foundation of God stands sure.

OR, A Defense of those Fundamental, and so generally believed Doctrines. Of
The Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Divine Essence. The Satisfaction of
Christ the second Person of the Real and Glorious Trinity. The Justification of
the Ungodly by the Imputed Righteousness of Christ.


Against the Cavils of W. P. J. a Quaker, in his Pamphlet entitled, The Sandy
Foundation shaken, etc.

Wherein his and the Quakers Hideous Blasphemies, Socinian and
damnably-heretical Opinions, are discovered and refuted; W. P's ignorance,
weakness, falsehoods, absurd arguings, and folly, is made manifest unto all.

With a Call unto all such who in the simplicity of their hearts have been
deluded by the Quakers, to come out from amongst them.

And an Exhortation to all Christians, as they desire their Salvation, to
beware of their damnable Doctrines, and not to come near the Tents of these
enemies of Jesus Christ lest they be swallowed up in their ruin.

By Thomas Vincent, sometime Minister of Maudlins Milk-street, London.

1 John 5.7. For there are Three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these three are One.

Mat. 20.28. The Son of Man came to give his life a ransom for many.

Romans 4.5. To him that works not, but believes in him that justifies the
ungodly, his Faith is counted for Righteousness.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1668.

CHAP. I. The INTRODVCTION.
WILLIAM PENN Entituleth his Pamphlet, The Foundation shaken; which however he
terms a Sandy Foundation, he acknowledges to be, at least, our Foundation:
In the beginning of his Epistle to the Reader, he does inveigh against Human
Tradition; amongst which he numbreth not only those things which are
Circumstantial, but also those Doctrines which Protestants generally believe to
be Essential: And at the latter end of his Epistle he confesses, the Doctrines
of the Trinity, Satisfaction, and Justification by imputed Righteousness, to be
cardinal Points, and chief Doctrines, firmly believed as Articles of Christian
Faith, which he tells us he has endeavored the total enervation of. It is
plain then, that this man strikes at the Root, and labors to overthrow the
Foundation of Christianity, as we have built upon it, that he might overthrow
the faith of weak and unestablished Christians: But the Foundation of God
stands sure; the great Fundamental Truths concerning our Lord Jesus Christ,
his Godhead being the second Person of the Trinity, equal with the Father; his
Satisfaction which he made to God's Justice for Man's sin; and Justification by
his imputed Righteousness; are like a Rock which cannot be moved; against
which, what ever waves do arise and beat, for removal of, though the noise and
clamors be great, yet the attempts will be in vain; the Rock remains where it
was, and the waves of opposition are broken to pieces. It is possible indeed
that the Faith of some may suffer shipwreck by such assaults, because, they
were never well-grounded, fastened and fixed in the Principles of Religion;
because, they never received the truths of the Word either with true saving
Faith, or true sincere Love; and therefore, the Lord has threatened to give
such up unto strong delusions to believe a lie, that they might be damned, 2
These. 2.10, 11, 12. These are the persons who hear Christ's Word, and do not
practice accordingly; therefore, our Savior compares them to them that build
their house upon the sand, upon which the rain descends, and the floods come,
and the winds blow and beat, and it falls, and the fall therefore is great,
Mat. 7.26, 27. This is the Sandy Foundation which W. P. and the Quakers may
shake, and overthrow, and be instrumental to pull down into the same ruin and
destruction with themselves: But such who have built upon the Lord Jesus Chrst,
who is the only true Foundation, 1 Cor. 3.11. Such who have built indeed upon
the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, whereof Jesus Christ himself is
the chief Cornerstone, Ephesians. 2.20. They have built upon the Rock, (upon which
whosoever stumbleth and falls, will be broken to pieces; but upon which,
whosoever builds, is safe) therefore are not tossed to and fro with every
wind of doctrine; neither is it possible (because of Christ's care and
undertaking for them) that they should be overthrown by any of the blasts of
Satan, or any of his instruments, Mat. 24.24. If it were possible they shall
deceive the very Elect. The Quakers, however, some of them, and those of the
chiefest and Ringleaders, have at sometimes let fall from their Black-mouth
most hideons Blasphemies, and vented most damnably-heretical Doctrines: as for
instance, George Fox positively affirmed thus, I am equal with God; this was
deposed at a general Sessions in Westmerland. James Nayler said in the hearing
of Mr. Baldwin, a man of eminent trust and integrity, That he did witness, that
he was as holy, just, and good, as God. In the Quakers book called, Readiness
Errand to Damascus, it is asserted, That there is no distinction of Persons in
the Godhead. Nayler and others have spoken to this effect, That whosoever
expects to be saved by him that died at Jerusalem, shall be deceived. I might
mention many other such Blasphemies aed Heresies; See The perfect Pharisee, by
the Newcastle Ministers at the beginning. I say, though the Quakers have
sometimes spoken out their Blasphemies and corrupt Doctrines, yet for the most
part they are so subtle, that they do not suffer the inward shape of their mind
to appear so plainly abroad, lest every one should run from them with loathing
and abhorrency; and however the import of their words be Blasphemy and Heresy,
yet they shroud their meaning under ambiguous phrases; and especially at their
first assault and endeavors to gain Proselites and Followers, they cover the
hook with the pleasing bait of sugared words and fair speeches, whereby they
deceive those that are unskilful in the word of Righteousness, and in the
method of their erroneous ways; whence it is that many ere they are aware, and
not knowing whither they are going, are drawn into their pernicious ways, by
reason of whom the way of truth is evil spoken of.

But W. P. being himself a Quaker, and speaking in their name and vindication
as, himself tells us, page 36. and they dispersing his books, and calling for
an answer; and he being counted amongst them one of their chief, because of
some smattring of learning which they conceit he has, and which he himself
seems to have a high conceit of (which how groundless it is, shall be
discovered in the places where he does attempt to show something of a Scholar)
does in his Pamphlet plainly assert and stand up for those Quaker-Doctrines
which I shall prove to be blasphemous and damnable Heresies. And has openly
made it known to the World, that the Quakers in those three great points which
he does militate against and endeavor the refutation of, are Rank Socinians,
who more grossly err in the Fundamentals of Religion, than the Papists
themselves. And because W. P. does take occasion from the meeting with me and
others in disputation (if it might be so called, where nothing was directly
answered) to put forth his Pamphlet, and because he gives but a lame and in
somethings a false account of transactions; therefore, I shall I give a true
and brief Narative of what passed at the meeting for Conference, with answer to
his Postscript. 2 Establish the truths he objecteth against, by Scripture and
Argument; 3 Answer his Objections against those truths. Lastly, Apply my self
to deluded Quakers, for the recalling of them, and to all other Christians for
the cautioning and establishing of them against the attempts of such as would
draw them aside into the dark and dangerous Path, which does as certainly lead
to Hell as the broad way of Profaneness.

CHAP. II. A brief Narrative of T.V's meeting with some Quakers in
Spittle-yard, with the occasion and transactions there, and some exceptions to
the account which W.P. has given thereof.
MY first meeting wit the Quakers was upon desire at the house of a friend in
Houndsditch, in order to the preserving of some who were tempted to go amongst
them; I met there several Quakers two of which were the chief speakers: It
would tire the Reader, as I believe it did the Hearers, to give Relation of all
their wild and impertinent discourse; I could not get them to speak out, and
plainly to assert some of their Principles; I believe it was through fear lest
their mouths should be stopped before the people; yet after many words, they
asserted the Perfection of Saints in this Life, and the place of Scripture
which they brought for the proof of their assertion was, 1 John 3.9. Whosoever
is born of God, does not commit sin. Unto this I answered, That the words in
the Original were (...), (one of them interrupted me at the mention of the
Original words, saying, It was the smoke of the bottomless pit) that the
signification was, Does not make it his business to sin; and the meaning was,
that such as were born again, did not make a trade of sin, did not go on in a
course of sin; or did not commit sin, that is, with the full bent of the will
as the wicked do, But that it could not be understood of not committing sin at
all; because, the same Apostle in the same Epistle, Chap. 1.8. tells us, If
we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. There
he speaks of himself and others that were born again, and plainly
acknowledges they were not without sin. It was further urged, that if all that
were born of God were perfectly free from sin; then it would follow, that who
ever found any sin in them, were not born of God, consequently in a state of
nature, and so if they should die with any sin remaining they would certainly
go to Hell, and so none there, yea none in the world would be saved. Moreover I
appealed to the experience of the best of them, whether they could say they
were wholly free from sin, whether they had no irregular thoughts nor
affections: this they would not ^ffirm, neither did they absolutely deny: when
they pleaded the perfection the Apostle Paul speaks of, Phil. 3.15. I
replied, that the same Apostle v. 12. acknowledges that he had not as yet
attained, neither was yet perfect; and if the Apostle Paul who had arrived to
so great a height in grace that he was (how ever as some think little in
bodily stature) yet taller by the head and shoulders than others in regard of
his grace and spiritual seize; how could Audacious Quakers (who if
Quakers indeed because of their damnable Opinions, I am confident have not the
least degree of true grace) boast of perfection, as if they had got above the
Apostle himself. I told them that all true Believers were perfect in a sense,
they were Evangelically perfect, but not legally, not absolutely perfect; they
had perfection of parts, but not perfection of degrees; and in this sense (...)


