THE LIVES Of the Illustrious ROMANS: Writ in LATIN by SEXTUS AURELIUS VICTOR,
And TRANSLATED By several Young Gentlemen EDUCATED by Mr. MAIDWELL.

Fingit equum tenera decilem cervice Magister
Ire viam, quam monstret eques, Venaticus ex quo
Tempore cervinam pellem latravit in aula,
Militat in Silvis catulus: nunc adhibe puro
'Pectore verba Puer, nunc te melioribus offer.
Horace. LONDON, Printed for S. Smith, and B. Walford; at the Prince's Arms in
S. Paul's Churchyard, 1693.

To the Right Honorable, JAMES Earl of Abingdon, etc.
My LORD,
SInce I have had the Honor of Educating Three of your Sons, I hope with no
small Assurance of your Satisfaction, and one of them is amongst our
Translators; it might be thought a Crime not to Dedicate our Endeavors to your
Lordship, that others may perceive our Duty to so Honorable a Father, and so
Noble a Friend. I must ever be a Faithful Witness, how Zealous and Obliging you
are to promote the Advantage of Education; and that in all Points of Generous
Breeding you have endeavored to transmit those Ancient and Hereditary Virtues
of your Illustrious Family to your Posterity. To whom then should Aurelius
Victor Consecrate his Illustrious Romans but to your Lordship? In whom are
united those great Names of Bertu and Norris; Names so Glorious in our Annals,
that the Actions of Heroes cannot be remembered without them, for they both at
Home and Abroad have highly Celebrated the True English Nobility and Virtue.
It Is an Injury to name Particulars, where there are so many eminent Characters
of both Sexes, who have Immortalized the former, and now Adorn the present Age.
My Lord, your most Conspicuous House is like Virgil's Sacred Tree, where there
never will be wanting a Golden Bough:

-- Primo avulso, non deficit alter
Aureus, and simili frondescit Virga Metallo.
I observed much of this Innate Worth from the Conversation of your Sons, who
in the various Scenes of Youth ever discovered ex Traduce, a strong Bias to
Sincerity and Honor. My Lord, I will stop my just Encomium, and not incur the
Censure of a common Dedicator, though I need not fear such a Criticism from the
vast Merits of my Cause; yet give me leave in Gratitude to declare, I am
infinitely obliged to your Lordship for your constant Encouragement in my
Scholastic Way of Life; for your Approbation of my general Method of a Learned
Academy, where our English Youth might be instructed in all Exercises, and the
several Parts of Solid Learning, without the Varnish of a Foreign Excursion;
whence much Money is exported, without the Importation of any Staple Commodity:
And at last it appears,

Coelum, non animum mutant, qui trans Mare currunt. I remember your Lordship
once discoursing with me, mentioned your Recommendation to the Reverend Dr.
Fell, that Excellent Bishop of Oxford, how beneficial it might prove to Young
Gentlemen to have an Academy erected for their Service in that University: That
Arts and Sciences ought to be united, and as formerly at Athens and Rome,
cohabit in one place. I cannot tell what were the Objections or Impediments of
so useful a Proposition, whether that Wise Governor thought the Design and
Fatigue too great, considering the Lazy Temper of our Degenerate Youth, or the
Fantastic Frugality of many Unhappy Parents, who are more Generous to a
Foppish Dancing Master, than a Worthy Tutor, preferring the Motions of their
Sons Feet, to the Idea's of his Brain; and think the Bill of an Extravagant
Tailor, more satisfactory than the Salary of his Industrious Preceptor.

Hos inter sumptus, sestertia Quintiliano
Vt multum duo sufficient, res nulla Minoris
Constabit Patri, quam Filius.
For my part, after some Years spent for the Public Good, I rest with
pleasure, Conscious to my self, that I ever did my Duty, and have done
considerable Service, as well present, as future to many Noble Families, that I
have never been a Pedant, but made the Gentleman and Scholemaster mix together,
that I have designed amongst us a Schola Illustris, Comprehensive of inward and
outward Accomplishments, and that I shall leave a Scheme for some more Worthy
Undertaker, who may deserve a public Support, and Distinction, so much to our
Detriment neglected in England, and so promoted in every eminent City of
Europe. I confess the Satyrist cries out,

Declamare doces, O ferrea pectora Vetti. The Life of a Schoolmaster is indeed
very sollicitous, though ever judged Honourarable by all Good Men, and the
Cares of it intolerable, except the happy Genius of the Master, with good
Circumstances, somewhat alleviates the trouble. Then since my Qualifications
render me the more easy, I will change the Name, and not the Thing, and go on
for some time in my former Course and Method without the Reflection.

My Lord, Give me leave to publish on this Occasion, under your Patronage, my
future Determination as to my Employment: I presume your Sentiments may agree
with other Persons of Quality, to whom I have Communicated my Thoughts, with
which I have labored long ago, who have desired me not yet to be tired out,
but to contract my Society to a less Number, to turn my Domestics into French,
for a constant Obligation to facilitate the Language, to choose my Pupils, to
admit young Gentlemen to have single Rooms with Servants, that we may live our
Collegiate Life with more Profit and Pleasure, excluding forthwith all those of
a violent and stubborn Temper.

Dii Majorum umbris tenuem, and sine pondere terram,
Spirantesque crocos, and in urna perpetuum ver,
Qui Praeceptorem Sancti voluere Parentis.
Esse loco. --
This Resolution is much respected, and in the Opinion of many must produce the
happy effect of Civility and Learning. To the promotion of which I have found
nothing from experience more Charming to Youth than the Practice of
Translation, and Reading of History with the assistance of Geography and
Chronology, which like the three Graces ought Hand in Hand to perform their
measures, and have always been the Rule of our Studies. Cicero signalized his
Judgment when he said, That a Man without History is always a Child, and
therefore for its value it is styled by him as Testis Temporum, Lux Veritatis,
Vita Memoriae, Magistra Vitae; from hence with Livy we are by former Examples
encouraged to Virtue, and deterred from Vice. Thus the great Polybius
pronounces it, --

(...). But History is lovely to every Eye from its Natural Beauties, and wants
not to be dressed with these ends of Gold and Silver: It Is no less evident that
Translation fixes it, and emproves at once two Languages. I hasten to beg Your
Lordship's Pardon for this Familiar Epistle, asking leave to introduce these
Young Translators who without any trick appear in their Primitive Simplicity
before you.

My Lord, I conclude with my most profound Respects, and most humble Thanks for
all Your Favors, for the access and ease of Your Conversation, for Your Kind
Wishes, which Great and Good Qualities none Expresses and Extends more than
Your Lordship; who, besides Your many Virtues, which in Reverence I shall not
now mention being so well known, are by Your Condescension, so truly great and
Noble. I heartily pray that all things may fortunately succeed according to
Your desires to Your Self and Your Noble Relations, and that You would believe
me to be,

MY LORD, Your Lordships most Obedient, and most Humble Servant, L. MAIDWELL.

THE LIFE OF Sextus Aurelius Victor.
SExtus Aurelius Victor was first published by the Learned Andreas Schottus,
and flourished under the Emperors Constantius and Julian; for in the Life of
Marcus Antonius the Philosopher, He says, That Nicomedia in Bithynia was
destroyed by an Earthquake in his time, in the Consulate of Cerealis, which was
the next year after the Ninth Consulship of Constantius. And that in his Reign
when Flavius Philippus was Consul, the Eleventh Century, contrary to Ancient
Custom, was celebrated without and Solemnity. Hence without doubt he was the
same Aurelius Victor, who was Consul with Valentinian Junior, A. U.C. 1121, and
certainly the same Person, whom Ammianus Marcellinus mentions in his 21 Book,
to be an Historian of great Reputation of his Sobriety, and of Consular
Dignity, whom Constantius made Governor of Pannonia, and afterward honored
with a Brazen Statue, and the Praefecture of Rome. In the Life of Severus he
owns himself to be the Son of a mean illiterate Countryman, and to have
advanced himself by his Virtue and Learning. It Is very probable he was a Pagan
in his Religion, as many privately were in the time of Constantius, and openly,
like good Courtiers, in the Reign of his Successor Julian the Apostate; this
may be gathered from his approving of Adrian's Sacrifice to his beloved
Antinous. with the Complement of a Pious and Devout Action. Yet after all it is
much disputed, whether this Victor, who writ the Lives of the Caesar's, be the
Author of the Illustrious Romans. For our Book, 'though it goes under his name,
is of a far different style, and gives you better Latin than that of the
Emperors, which is harsh and unequal, yet sententious, and may recommend the
Writers Judgment, though not his Phrase. Therefore some have rather ascribed
these Lives to Cornelius Nepos, Pliny Junior, or Suetonius; Others will have it
to be according to the Title, amongst whom is the Learned Vossius;

-- Si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti, si non, his utere mecum.
THE LIVES Of the Illustrious ROMANS. Writ in Latin by SEXTVS AURELIUS VICTOR.
TRANSLATED by Mr. JOHN AUSTEN, From the Building of Rome, to the Year 244.
PROCA King of the Albans.
PROCA King of the Albans had two Sons, Amulius and Numitor, Before the Bir^^
of Christ. 810.
to whom he left his Kingdom with the Condition of Reigning yearly by turns.
Amulius, at the Expiration of his Term, refused to surrender the Kingdom to his
Brother: and intending to deprive him of Issue, made Rhea Silvia his Daughter
chief Priestess of Vesta, that she might always live a Maid. But she was got
with Child by Mars, and brought forth Romulus and Remus. Which surprise
provoked Amulius to imprison her, and throw her Children into the Tiber, but
they being preserved by the Ebbing of the Water, and left upon the Shore, their
Cries invited a She-Wolf to hasten to their Relief, and give them suck. Some
time after they were found by Faustulus, the King's Shepherd, and by him
brought home to his Wife Acca Laurentia to take care of them. These young
Princes, when grown up, slew Amulius, and restored their Grandfather Numitor to
his Kingdom, and then by the help of the Shepherds, who in great numbers joined
them, they built a City, which Romulus called Rome, he having had the better
Fortune in Augury to see twelve Vultures, and his Brother but six. And that he
might begin to secure his City by the Observation of Laws before he built Walls
for its Defense, he gave order that none should presume to go over his Rampire,
which Remus leaping in derision, is said to have been killed with a Mattock by
Fabius Celer the Centurion.

ROMULUS First King of the Romans.
U. C. Or from Building of Rome, the first Year.
Romulus, to increase his People, set up an Asylum or Place of Refuge, for all
Strangers, and of them composed a great Army. But considering the want of
Wives, he sent Ambassadors to demand them of his Neighbors, Before Christ, 750.
which being denied, he pretended, in Honor of Neptune, the Celebration of
Horse-Races, called Consualia; and when a great Concourse of Men and Women came
to see those Sports, he gave a certain Signal to the Romans to take away the
Maids by force. One of which was so beautiful, that she moved the Spectators to
inquire where they carried her; It was answered, to Captain Thalassius. Which
Marriage proving very fortunate, it was ordained, they should invoke the Name
of Thalassius in all future Nuptials. The first who made War for this Rape were
the Caeninenses, against whom Romulus marched in person, and overcame them,
killing Acro their General, in a single Combat, and consecrating his rich
Spoils to Jupiter Feretrius in the Capitol. Then the Antemnates, Crustumini,
Fidenates, Vejentes, with the Sabines, were Confederates against them on the
same Account; who approaching nigh to Rome, seized the Virgin Tarpeja, as she
went to the Tiber to draw Water for the Sacrifices. King Titus Tatius proffered
her the choice of any Reward, if she would let his Army into the Capitol; To
which she consenting, demanded all they wore on their Left Arms, meaning their
Rings and Bracelets, which being promised with Equivocation, and the Gate left
open, the Satines gained the Castle, and by Titus's Order pressed her to death,
with the Shields, carried also on their Left Arms, Romulus drew out his Forces
against Tatius, who had possessed himself of the Tarpejan Hill, and fought him
in the place, now the Roman Forum where Hostus Hostilius, one of his best
Officers fighting valiantly was slain. By whose death the Romans were
discouraged, and began to give ground; yet after that Disorder, upon Romulus's
vowing to erect a Temple to Jupiter Stator, if he would stop his Army's Flight,
the Soldiers made a stand, either by Accident, or some Divine Instinct. In this
Juncture the Women came between both Armies, and mediating with their Fathers
and Husbands, at last procured a Peace. Romulus then made a Solemn League with
the Sabines, and received them into Rome, as Fellow Citizens; uniting the
People by the common Title of Quirites, from Cures, a Town of the Sabines. He
established an hundred Senators, who for Reverence were styled Fathers, and
instituted three Centuries of Knights; the first were called Ramnenses, from
his own Name; the second, Tatienses, from Titus Tatius; and the third, Luceres,
from Lucumo. He divided the common People into thirty Companies, and
distinguisted them by the Names of the principal Women; But after the Muster of
his Army at the Lake Capra, he was never seen more. From which Accident a
Dissension arising between the Senators, and the People, Julius Proculus, a
Nobleman, came before them, and affirmed upon Oath, that he saw Romulus on the
Hill Quirinalis, in a more splendid and august Form than heretofore, as a Proof
of his being Deified, who commanded them to cease from Seditions, and to love
Virtue; Thus they should become Lords of the World. The Romans believed him, as
one of great Authority among them; therefore they built Romulus a Temple upon
the Hill Quirinalis, and worshipped him as a God, by the Name of Quirinus.

NUMA POMPILIUS, Second King of the Romans.
After the Consecration of Romulus, the People growing mutinous from a long
Interregnum, and the want of a Successor, Numa Pompilius, the Son of Pompo was
sent for from Cures, a Town of the Sabines. He came to Rome with the assurance
of good Omens: and that he might soften this fierce People with a Sense of
Religion, he instituted many holy Rites; built a Temple to Vesta, and appointed
the Vestal Nuns. He ordained the three Flamens for the particular Sacrifices of
Jupiter, Mars, and Romulus, and constituted the twelve Salii Priests of Mars,
the chief of which was called Praeful. He created the High Priest, and built a
Temple for Janus, (who was represented with two Faces) the Gates of which were
shut in Peace, and open in War. He divided the Year into twelve Months, by
adding January and February, and made many profitable Laws, pretending he did
all those things by the Direction of his Wife the Nymph Egeria. None of his
Neighbors made War upon him, out of the great respect they had of his Justice.
He died a natural Death, and was buried in the Mount Janiculus; where many
years after a certain Man, by Name, Terentius, as he was ploughing, found a
Stone-Chest with fourteen Books in it, which containing many slight and
frivolous Reasons about their Religious Ceremonies, were burnt in prudence by
an Order of the Senate.

TULLUS HOSTILIUS Third King of the Romans.
Tullus Hostilius, for his good Service against the Sabines, U.C. 82.
was made King. Before Chapter 668.
He proclaimed War with the Albans, which was ended by a Combat of three
Brothers on each side; the Horatii on the Romans, and the Curiatii on the
Albans. He demolished Alba for the Treachery of Metius Fufetius, their General,
and commanded the Inhabitants to remove to Rome. He built that Senate House,
from him called Hostilia, and added the Mount Caelius to the City. At last, as
he imitated the Example of Numa Pompilius in his Sacrifices, he by mistaking
the Ceremonies performed to Jupiter Elicius, so enraged the God, that he was
struck dead with a Thunderbolt, and his Palace burnt with Lightning.

The HORATII and the CURIATII.
U. C. 86.
The Romans and the Albans having for a long time carried on a War under
Hostilius and Fufetius, Before Chapter 664.
and finding their Forces daily to decrease, they resolved to determine it with
the loss of a few. The Romans chose out three Brothers, called Horatii; and the
Albans the three Curiatii, for this Combat, in which two of the Romans were
presently slain, and the three Albans wounded. Now Horatius, who survived,
perceiving this, and judging himself unable, tho not wounded, to fight with
three, feigned a Flight, and by this Stratagem killed them one by one, pursuing
him as their Wounds would permit them. The Conqueror in his return, laden with
the Spoils of his Enemies, met his Sister, who wept when she saw the
Embroidered Coat of her slain Lover, one of the Curiatii. This Indiscretion
provoked him in his rage to kill her, for which bloody Fact he was condemned by
the Duumviri, two Judges appointed for that purpose. But apappealing to the
People, with the assistance of his Fathers Supplications and Tears, he obtained
his Pardon, yet to expiate his Crime, he was forced to go under a Gibbet, which
is to be seen at this day in the Highway, and called Sororium.

METIUS FUFETIUS.
Metius Fufetius, U. C. 88.
the Alban General, observing himself much hated by his Citizens for putting an
end to the War by the Combat of the Horatii and the Curiatii, Before Chapter 662.
to make amends, secretly stirred up the Vejentes and the Fidenates against the
Romans. Now Tullus, upon account of the League between them, demanded
Fufetius's Auxiliary Forces; who before the Fight drew his Army upon a Hill,
expecting the Event of the Battle, with a design to fall in with the Conqueror.
Tullus understanding his Design; gave public Notice that Metius was posted
there by his Order; by which Artifice the Enemies were terrified, and easily
overcome. And when Metius came the next day to congratulate him for his
Victory, he was by King Tullus's Command tied to four Horses, and for his
Treachery pulled in pieces.

ANCUS MARCIUS Fourth King of the Romans.
Ancus Marcius, U.C. 113.
Numa Pompilius's Grandson by his Daughter, was not unlike his Grandfather,
Before Chapter 667.
either in his Justice, or Piety.

He overcame the Latins; added the Hills Aventinus and Janiculus to Rome; new
walled the City, and confiscated the timber of some Woods for public Shipping.
He laid a Tax on Salt Pits; was the first that built a Prison, and planted a
Colony at Ostia, situate at the Mouth of the Tiber, very convenient for Trade.
He also instituted the Office of Heralds, to assist Ambassadors in demanding
satisfaction: which Custom was borrowed from the Aequiculi, a People of Latium,
and reported to have been found out by Rhesus at the Siege of Troy. Thus having
settled these things; in a very short time, he was taken away by an untimely
Death, and by that Misfortune could not complete the Character of so great a
King as his Subjects expected from him.

LUCIUS TARQUINIUS PRISCUS Fifth King of the Romans.
Lucius Tarquinius Priscus was Son of that Damaratus of Corinth, U.C. 137.
who flying from the, Tyrant Cypselus, Before Chapter 613.
settled in Etruria. He was first called Lucumo, and came to Rome from
Tarquinii, a City of the Tusci. In his Journey thither an Eagle took off his
Cap, and after a high Flight replaced it on his Head; Which Tanaquil his Wife
observing, she from her great Skill in Augury, knew by that Omen, he should
obtain the Kingdom. Tarquinius by his Riches and Industry raised himself to
great Honor, and became a particular Favorite to King Ancus, who dying, left
him Guardian of his Children; but he governed in his own Name, and ruled with
such Justice, as if he had been lawful Successor. He chose an hundred new
Senators, whom he styled the Inferior Order, and doubled the Centuries of the
Knights; but durst not alter their Names, being discouraged by Accius Navius
the Augur, and fully convinced of his Art by the Experiment of the Whetstone
cut ^n two by a Razor. He overthrew the Latins; built the Circus Maximus for
public Shows, and instituted the great Roman Games for manly Exercises. He
triumphed over the Sabines, and ^ hose Latins who were called Prisci. He
fortified the City with a Wall of Stone, and rewarded the Valor of his Son,
who at the Age of thirteen years wounded his Enemy in a Battle, giving him a
Coat edged with Purple, and a Necklace with a Golden Boss, which were the
Ornaments of Gentlemen's Sons. At last he was trapan'd out of his Palace by a
Plot of Ancus's Children, and murdered by their Appointment.

SERVIUS TULLIUS Sixth King of the Romans.
Servius Tullius was the Son of Publius Corniculanus, U.C. 175.
and the Captive Ocrisia. Before Chapter 575
He whilst he was brought up in Tarquinius Priscus's Palace, a lambent Flame
was seen to circle his Head. Queen Tanaquil upon her Observation judged it as a
certain Prediction of his future Dignity: and thereupon persuaded her Husband
to breed him up as he did his own Children. When he came to Man's Estate,
Tarquinius Priscus made him his Son-in-Law. And after the King was murdered,
Tanaquil told the People from a Window, that her Husband had received a
dangerous, tho not a mortal Wound, and desired that till he was cured, they
would submit to Servius Tullius. Thus he got the Kingdom precariously, yet
governed it with great Justice. He often conquered the Etrusci, and added the
Hills Quirinalis, Viminalis, and Esquilinus to Rome. He raised a Fortification
with Trenches about the City; and divided the People into four Tribes, called
Palatina, Esquilina, Suburrana, and Collina, allotting the poorer sort a
proportion of Corn out of the public Granary. He settled Measures and Weights,
with the Distinction of the Citizens into Classes and Hundreds, and was the
first that made a Register of Estates, till then unknown in any Country. He
persuaded the Latins to build a Temple to Diana on the Mount Aventinus, in
imitation of that at Ephesus. After it was built, a certain Latin had a
Cow-calf of a wonderful Bigness, and 'twas told him in a Dream, that that
People should be Sovereign over the rest, whose Citizens should sacrifice that
young Cow to Diana The Latin drove the Cow to Mount Aventine, and declared this
Secret to a Roman Priest, who cunningly told him he ought first to purify his
Hands in a clear running Stream, and whilst the simple Latin went down to the
Tiber, the Priest sacrificed the Cow; by this prudent Trick procuring Glory to
himself, and Empire to his People.

TULLIA.
Servius Tullius had two Daughters; one of a fierce, U.C. 216.
and the other of a mild Disposition; Before Chapter 534.
and from his Remark, that Tarquinius Priscus had two Sons of the fame Temper,
he married his fierce Daughter to Tarquinius's mild Son, and his mild Daughter
to his fierce, that he might qualify their Minds by the Difference of their
Natures. It happened both the good natured died, either a natural Death, or
else by Poison. Upon which the ill natured married from, the similitude of
their Humors. Soon after Tarquinius Superbus, by the instigation of his Wife
Tullia, having made a party, assembled the Senate, and began boldly to demand,
as Lawful Heir, his Father's Kingdom. Of which when Servius was informed, he
went to the Senate, where he was flung down slairs by Tarquinius's Order, and
slain as he fled to his Palace. Tullia made haste to the Forum, and was the
first that saluted her Husband King, who ordered her to retire from the Crowd.
She going home beheld, without any Compassion, her Father's dead Body lie
exposed in the Streets, and commanded her Coachman, abhorring the Cruelty, to
drive over him. Whence that Street was called Sceleratus, or Wicked; and this
bloody Tullia afterward banished with her Husband Tarquin.

TARQUINIUS SUPERBUS Seventh King of the Romans.
U.C. 219.
Tarquinius Superbus obtained his Surname Before Chapter 531.
name from his Pride. He traitorously usurped the Kingdom by murdering Servius
Tullius: yet by his great Valor he conquered the Latins; and the Sabines; took
from the Volsci their Capital City Suessa Pometia, and gained the Town Gabii,
by the Policy of his Son Sextus, who pretended to revolt from him for his
Cruelty. He was the first that instituted the Latin Feasts as public Marts for
all the Neighboring Cities. He built Galleries for the Spectators in the
Circus, and made the great Common-Shoar, which Ditches were called Quiritium,
because in that Work be had employed all the People* He in laying the
Foundation of the Capitol, found the Head of one Tolus* whence 'twas predicted,
that Rome* should become the Head of all Nations. He was banished Rome,
together with his lascivious Son Sextus, for the Rape he committed, during the
Siege of Aradea, upon the chaste Lucretia, and fled to Porsenna, King o^
Etruria, by whose Assistance he endeavored to regain his lost Kingdom; but
after several Repulfes, he retired to Cumae, a City in Campania, finishing
there the Remainder of his Life very ignominiously.

Mr. HENRY EWER: From the Year 244. to 388. U. C.
L. TARQUINIUS COLLATINUS and LUCRETIA his Wife.
WHilst Tarquinius Collatinus, U.C. 244.
who was Tarquinius Superbus his Sister's Son, Before Chapter 506.
served under his Uncle, with others of his Relations, at the Siege of Ardea,
an accidental Discourse falling out at a merry Entertainment between the young
Princes, concerning the Excellencies of their Wives, they agreed to make
Experiment of this Preference, and all take Horse for Rome; where the Kings
Sons surprise their Careless Wives, diverting themselves at a luxurious
Banquet. Thence they go to Collatia, where Lucretia lived, and find her
spinning among her Maids, for which, in all their Opinions, she was esteemed
the most virtuous. But Sextus Tarquinius falling in love with her, came back
that night with a design upon her Honor; and by the privilege of a Kinsman
being kindly entertained at Collatins his House, he brake into Lucretia's
Chamber, and ravished her. She the next day sends for her Father and Husband
from the Camp, and after the Discovery of the Rape, she stabs her self, with a
Dagger secretly concealed under her Garment. This horrid Crime engaged them in
a Conspiracy to ruin Tarquin's Family, and by their Banishment to revenge her
Death.

LUCIUS JUNIUS BRUTUS First Roman Consul.
L. Junius Brutus, U.C. 245.
also Tarquinius Superbus his Sisters Son, Before Chapter 505.
fearing the same Misfortune which his Brother had suffered, who for his great
Riches and Wisdom was killed by his jealous Uncle, pretended himself a Fool,
and from thence called Brutus. He once, for sports sake, being admitted a
Companion to the young Princes Titus and Aruns going to Delphi to consult the
Oracle, he presented Apollo with a hollow Stick filled with Gold, and when
'twas answered by the Priestess, that he would be most powerful at Rome, who
should first kiss his Mother, he immediately kissed the Earth, the common
Parent of all things. Afterward, in revenge of Lucretia's Rape, he combined
with Tricipitinus, and Collatinus, to extirpate the Tarquins. Upon whose
Banishment he was created the first Consul, and was so zealous for the good of
the Commonwealth, that he spared not his own Sons and Nephews, who were
plotting with the Vitellii, and the Aquillii, to restore the Tarquins, but
brought them into the Forum, where he caused them first to be whipped, and then
beheaded. At last, in a Battle against them, he and Aruns the King's Son
fighting together with implacable Hatred, killed one another. His Body was
brought into the Forum, where his Colleague extolled him in a Funeral Oration,
and the Roman Matrons mourned for his a whole year as the Defender of their
Chastity.

HORATIUS COCLES.
When Porsenna, U.C. 245.
King of the Etrusci endeavored to restore the Tarquins, Before Chapter 505.
and at his first Attempt had taken the Hill Janiculus, Horatius Cocles, so
surnamed from the loss of his Eye in a former Battle, stood on the Wooden
Bridge, and there singly maintained his Post against the Enemy, until the
Bridge was broken behind him, with which he fell into the Tiber, and armed as
he was, he swam safe to his own Party. For this Noble Action the Republic
conferred on him as much Land as he could plough round in one day, and his
Statue was set up in the place where they celebrated the Feasts of Vulcan.

MUTIUS SCAEVOLA.
Whilst Rome was besieged by King Porsenna, U.C. 245.
Mutius Cordus, Before Chapter 505.
a Man of true Roman Resolution, went to the Senate, promising to kill the
King, if they would suffer him to go over to the Enemy as a Deserter. With
their permission he went into Porsenna's Camp, and by Mistake killed a Nobleman
in a Purple Habit in the stead of him For which being seized, and brought
before the King, as he was sacrificing, Mutius thrust his Right Hand into the
Fire, punishing it on this manner for killing the wrong person. When he was
commanded to be taken from the Flames, by the Clemency of Porsenna, in return
of his Kindness, he told him, that three hundred Men, as resolute as he, had
obliged themselves by Oath to attempt the same thing. At which Porsenna was so
terrified, that receiving Hostages he put an end to the War. The Senate, as a
Reward for this, gave Mutius some Land beyond the Tiber, from him called the
Mutian Fields, and erected a Statue in Honor of him.

CLAELIA.
Porsenna received, U.C. 245.
among the Roman Hostages, Before Chapter 505.
Claelia, a Virgin of a Noble Family, who by a Deceit put upon her Keeprs,
escaped out of his Camp by night, and swam the Tiber with a Horse, which she
accidenlly found. But the King demanded her back by his Ambassadors, and had
her restored, yet was so great an Admirer of her Courage, that he gave her
leave to return to Rome, with any other Hostages she should desire, she chose
the young Men and Maids whom she knew were most exposed to the Violence of the
Soldiers. For which brave Action, the Romans set up her Statue on Horseback in
the Forum.

The three hundred and six FABII.
U.C. 274.
In the War between the Romans and the Veientes, Before Chapter 476.
the Fabian Family proposed to the Senate, the carrying it on by themselves at
their proper Expense. They marched out three hundred and six, under the Command
of Fabius the Consul, and after great Success in several Skirmishes, encamped
at the River Cremera. But the Veientes who put their greatest Confidence in
Stratagems, placed Cattle in Veiw on the other side, which the Fabii going to
seize, fell into an Ambush, and were all cut off. The day therefore whereon
this happened was numbered in the Calendar amongst the Unfortunate, and the
Gate at which they went out, called Scelerata, or Unhappy. One only of that
Family, by reason of his Minority, was left at home; and from him the Name was
continued to Fabius Maximus, who by his avoiding Battle, much weakened
Hannibal's Army; for which by his Detractors he was named Cuncta or Delayer.

PUBLIUS VALERIUS POPLICOLA.
Publius Valerius, the Son of Volusus, triumphed three times; U.C. 245.
first over the Veientes, Before Chapter 505.
then over the Sabines, and lastly over them both. But because he chose no
Consul, in place of Brutus his Colleague, and dwelt in Velia a place of great
strength in Rome, he was suspected to have aimed at the Government. At his
knowledge hereof being much disturbed, he complained to the People for
entertaining such ill thoughts of him, and to justify himself, he sent
presently to have his House pulled down. He also ordered the carrying of Rods
without Axes in the City, and laid them down as a Mark of Respect before a
popular Assembly, making a Law for appealing from the Magistrates to the
People; for which Popularity he was called Poplicola. And after four
Consulships died so poor, that he was buried by public Collection, and mourned
for one year by the Matrons, as Brutus his Colleague had been before him.

AULUS POSTHUMOUS.
King Tarquin after his Banishment fled to Mamilius, U.C. 257.
Lord of Tusculum his Son-in-Law, Before Chapter 493.
who with the Assistance of the Latins, engaged the Romans in great
Difficulties. They chose therefore Aulus Posthumous Dictator, who fought the
Enemy at the Lake Regillus, where when the Victory was doubtful, Cossus, the
General of the Horse, used this Stratagem, he ordered them to unbridle their
Horses, that it might be impossible in their Charge to stop their Carrier. By
which rough shock they routed the Latins, and took their Camp. In this Action
were observed, among them two young Men very remarkable for their Valor,
mounted on white Horses, whom the Dictator, after a search for, that he might
reward them according to their Merit, could not find, therefore supposing them
to be Castor and Pollux, he consecrated a Temple to them both.

L. QUINCTIUS CINCINNATUS.
U.C. 292.
The Justice of Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus was very exemplary in disinheriting
his undutiful Son Kaeso, Before Chapter 458.
who to revenge that, and the Scandal laid upon him by the Censors, fled to the
Volsci, and the Sabines, then in War with the Romans, under the Command of
Claelius Gracchus, by whom Q. Minutius the Consul, with his Army, was blocked
up in Mount Algidus. But Quinctius being made Dictator, the Messengers that
carried his Commission, found him ploughing without his Clothes, beyond the
Tiber, where putting on his Robe he marched directly thither, and freed the
Consul; for which he was presented by Minucius with a Crown called
Obsidionalis, particular to those who had valiantly raised a Siege. He totally
routed the Enemy, took their General Prisoner, and made him walk before his
Triumphal Chariot. This War was so soon ended, that he laid down his
Dictatorship the sixteenth day after he had received it, and returned again to
his Affairs in the Country. In a second Dictatorship, twenty years after, he
commanded Servilius Ahala, General of the Horse, to execute Spurius Maelius,
who ambitiously aimed at the Subversion of the Government; and pulled down his
House; From whence that place was called Aequimolium.

MENENIUS AGRIPPA LANATUS.
Menenius Agrippa, surnamed Lanatus, U.C. 259.
was chosen General against the Sabines, Before Chapter 491.
and triumphed for his Victory over them. In his time the People mutined
against the Senators, and marched out of Rome to the Sacred Hill, not able any
longer to endure the Burden of their Taxes, and the continual Services of the
War, nor would be brought back to their Dwellings. Agrippa therefore told them
this Fable; Once the parts of the Body supposing the Belly to he idle, and
useless quarreled, and denied it their assistance But when by this Folly they
themselves began to grow weak, and understood that the Meat which the Belly
received wat disposed by its power through the other Members they were soon
reconciled. Thus the Senate and the People; as one Body, b^ Discord are ruined,
but by Concord flourish By this Moral he reduced the stubborn Multitude, and
created Tribunes o^ the People to defend their Liberty, against the Haughtiness
of the Nobility. This Menenius died so poor, that the People made a Collection
for his Funeral, and the Senate set up a Monument for him at the public Charge.

C. MARCIUS CORIOLANUS.
Caius Marcius styled Coriolanus, U.C. 260.
from his taking Corioli, Before Chapter 490.
a City of the Volsci, when his General Posthumous offered him any Reward he
would ask, for the brave Actions he performed in that War, he, an eminent
Example of Valor, and Friendshep, only took a Horse, and a Friend of his, who
was amongst the Captives. In his Consulship, when Provisions were scarce, Corn
by his Order was brought out of Sicily, and sold to the People at a dear rate;
that he might constrain them by this Severity to mind their Husbandry, and not
promote Sedition. Upon an Accusation by Decius, Tribune of the People, he was
banished, and flying to the Volsci, sided with them, under the Command of
Attius Tullus, against the Romans, encamping within four Miles of the City: And
would not be appeased by any Embassy from Rome; till at last, by the
Intercession of his Mother Vetruria, and his Wife Volumnia, with a great number
of Matrons in their Retinue; he put an end to the War, and was afterward put
to death as a Traitor, by the Volsci. For this there was a Temple built,
Fortunae Muliebri, To Good Fortune procured by Women.

C. LICINIUS STOLO.
Fabius Ambustus had two Daughters, U.C. 388.
whom he married, Before Chapter ^62.
one to Licinius Stolo, a Plebeian, the other to Aulus Sulpitius, a Nobleman.
The Wife of the Plebeian making a Visit to her Sister, whose Husband was
Tribune of the Soldiers, at that time of equal Power with a Consul, discovered
her ill Breeding by her Fright at the sight of the Rods and Axes placed by the
Lictors at the Door, for which her Sister deriding her, she complained of the
Affront to her Husband, who by the assistance of his Father-in-law, when he was
made Tribune of the People, established a Law, that one of the Consuls should
always be chosen out of the Commoners. This, although much opposed by Appius
Claudius, took effect; and Licinius Stolo was first created Consul. He also
made another Law, that no Plebeian should have above five hundred Acres of
Land; and yet he having five hundred Acres in his own Right, enjoyed as much
more in the Name of his Son, who was out of his Tuition, for which Violation,
he was called to an Account; and was the first that suffered by his own Act.

Mr. RICHARD TEMPLE. From the Year 302. to 434. U. C.
LUCIUS VIRGINIUS the Centurion.
U.C. 104.
WHen the Roman People could no longer bear the Insolence of their Factious
Tribunes, Before Chapter 446.
they set up the Decemviri, who by their Office drew up new Laws upon twelve
Tables, collected from those which Solon gave the Athenians: and whilst these
Ten Magistrates were designing by agreement to continue the Government amongst
themselves, one of them, by Name Appius Claudius, fell passionately in Love
with Virginia, the beautiful Daughter of Virginius the Centurion, then in the
Service of the State at Algidum. Which Maid, when he could by no means debauch,
he suborned his Client Marcus Claudius to demand her for his Slave, as born in
his Family, but stolen away by Virginius. He thought his Point not hard to gain,
since he himself was to be both Judge and Party. Her Father knowing this came
to Rome on the very day of her Trial, where finding his Daughter cast, he
desired leave to take his last Farewell of her; so going aside, as it were, for
private Discourse, stabbed her, and throwing her Body on his Shoulders, fled to
the Army; by that fad Spectacle animating the Soldiers to revenge that Crime.
They first creating ten Military Tribunes, seized on Mount Aventinus, forced
the Decemviri to abdicate their Power, and punished them all either by Death or
Banishment, only Appius Claudius was found dead in Prison.

The Image of AESCULAPIUS brought to Rome.
U.C. 462.
The Romans afflicted with a grievous Pestilence, Before Chapter 288.
sent to consult the Oracle of Apollo at Delphi, and being ordered to fetch the
Image of Aesculapius from Epidaurum a City of Epirus, they immediately
dispatched away ten Ambassadors, of whom Quintus Ogulnius was chief in the
Commission. As soon as they entered the Temple, and were wondering at the
Largeness of the Statue, a Snake crept from under the Pedestal, which rather
moved Respect than Fear, and gliding through the middle of the Town, to the
admiration of all, went into the Roman Gally, and rolled it self up in Ogulnius
his Cabin. They came with the God as far as Antium, a Port in Italy, where the
Sea being very rough, the Snake leapt over Board, and went directly to the
Neighboring Temple of Aesculapius: yet after some few days returned to the
Gally, and as they rowed up the Tiber, it leaped into the little Island, that
was formed of Tarquin's Palace, thrown into the River, where a Temple was built
to Aesculapius, and the Plague suddenly stopped.

FURIUS CAMILLUS.
U.C. 358.
When Furius Camillus besieged the Falisci, Before Chapter 392.
the Schoolmaster of the Town, by a pretense of taking a Walk, came over to him
with most of the chief Citizens Sons; but instead of being kindly received by
Camillus, he was orderd for his Perfidiousness to be bound and whipped back into
the Town by his Scholars: which obliged the Falisci, transported with such a
remarkable Act of Justice, to yield up themselves, and their Town to him. He
had the Honor of a Triumph for taking the City Veii after ten years Siege, yet
was accused for having had his Triumphal Chariot drawn with white Horses, an
Honor only lawful in the procession of Jupiter, and the Sun; also that he had
unequally divided the Plunder they tool at the Sacking of Veii: for which,
cited to his Trial by Apuleius the Tribune of the People, he was found guilty,
and banished to Ardea. About this time the Galli Senones forsaking their own
Country for its Barrenness, came into Italy, and besieged Clusium, a Town in
Etruria. Three Ambassadors were sent from Rome to advise them to desist from
their Enterprise, and one of them, by name Quintus Fabius, in a Battle,
contrary to the Law of Nations, killed the General of the Gauls; This so
enraged them, that upon denial of surrendering the Ambassadors, according to
their Command, they marched directly toward Rome, and beat the Romans on the
sixteenth of the Kalends of August, at the River Alia, which Day was ever after
reckoned in the Calendar amongst the Nefasti, or Unlucky, and called Aliensis.
The conquering Gauls entered the City, and at first sight of the Senators,
dressed in their Robes, and sitting in their Ivory Chairs, worship's them as
the Tutelar Gods of the Place; but when they found them to be Men, they killed
them with all imaginable Contempt. The Remainder of the Youth fled with Manlius
to the Capitol, and there besieged by the Gauls, were freed by the singular
Valor of Camillus, who in his absence was chosen Dictator, and having gathered
the scattered Troops of of the Roman Army, surprising the Gauls by a sudden
Onset, gained an absolute Victory over them: by his advice, the Romans rebuilt
their burnt Houses, and were hindered from settling themselves at Veii. Thus he
restored the City to her Citizens, and the Citizens to their City.

MARCUS MANLIUS CAPITOLINUS.
Manlius, U.C. 365.
for the Repulse he gave the Gauls at the Capitol, Before Chapter 385.
called Capitolinus served sixteen years as Voluntier in the Army, he had seven
and thirty Military Rewards given him, and thre^ and thirty Honorable Scars on
hi^ Breast. It was he, when the City was taken, that advised the Remainder of
the Romans to fly to the Capitol, and one night alarmed by the Gabling of a
Goose, beat off the Enemy, scaling the Hill; for which Action he was styled
Patron by his Citizens, who in Gratitude brought him a Donative of Corn out of
their particular Allowance, tho they were in great want of it themselves, and
gave him a House, at the public Charge in the Capitol. These Honors so puffed
him up, that he created himself many Enemies, and was accused by the Senate,
for not having made a just Distribution of the Plunder, he had taken from the
Gauls: also for paying out of his own Estate the Debts of those, who according
to Law, had been turned over as Slaves to their Creditors: he was thrown into
Prison, upon suspicion of aiming at the Crown, but set at Liberty by the
unanimous Vote of the People: relapsing into the same Crime, and persevering in
it, he was found guilty: yet upon his looking toward the Capitol, and the
Remembrance of his good Service performed there, he was reprieved, but then
condemned in another place, was thrown down the Tarpejan Rock. His House was
demolished, his Goods confiscated, and the Manlii ever after obliged to
renounce the Praenomen of Marcus.

AULUS CORNELIUS COSSUS.
The Fidenates, U.C. 318.
ancient Enemies of the Romans, that they might fight without any hope of
Pardon, Before Chapter 432.
killed the Roman Ambassadors that were in Treaty with them, against whom
Quinctus Cincinnatus was sent Dictator, with Cornelius Cossus, General of the
Horse, who with his own hand killed King Lartes Tolumnius, and was the second
from Romulus, that consecrated the Spoils of a slain General to Jupiter
Feretrius.

PUBLIUS DECIUS the Father.
U.C. 417.
Publius Decius Mus was Tribune of the Soldiers in the Samnite War, Before Chapter
333.
under Valerius Maximus, and Cornelius Cossus the Consuls. When they were
blocked up by an Ambush of the Enemy, in the narrow Pass of the Mountain Gaurus
in Campania, he with a Detachment granted him upon his request again'd an Hill,
frightened the Enemy, and at Midnight escaped safe through their sleeping
Guards. For which considerable Service, the Army presented him with an Oaken
Crown, called Civica, the honorable Reward of such as saved the Life of a
Citizen in Battle, and with another named Obsidionalis, for raising the Siege.
In the Latin War he and his Colleague Manlius Torquatus encamped at the River
Veseris, where both the Consuls dreamed, the same night, the Conquest would be
theirs, whose General should fall in the Battle, comparing their Dreams, they
agreed, that he, whose Wing happened to be worsted, should vow himself to the
Infernal Gods, the Left Wing, which Decius commanded, giving way, he with great
resolution repeating some Solemn Prayers after Valerius the High Priest,
devoted himself with his Enemies to the Infernal Gods, so rushing into the
Battle, by his death, procured Victory to the Romans.

P. DECIUS the Son.
Publius, U.C. 447.
the Son of the former Decius, Before Chapter 303.
in his first Consulship triumphed over the Samnites, and consecrated the best
of their Spoils to Ceres: in his second and third Consulate he performed many
noble Actions both at home and abroad. In his fourth with Fabius Maximus
Rullianus, when the Gauls, the Samnites, the Umbri and the Tusci entered into a
Confederacy against the Romans, their Army being drawn up in Battle, and in the
Fight his Wing giving ground, he, encouraged by the great Example of his
Father, sent for Marcus Livius the Pontifex, and leaning on his Spear, repeated
after him the usual Form of Prayer, thus devoting himself together with the
Enemy to the Infernal Gods, he rushed into the Battle, and bequeathed Victory
to his Soldiers. His Body was magnificently interred, and he praised in a
Funeral Oration by his Colleague.

TITUS MANLIUS TORQUATUS.
Titus Manlius Torquatus, U.C. 395.
for the Dullness of his Parts, and the Impediment of his Speech, Before Chapter 355.
was sent by his Father to live a private Life in the Country; upon Information
that his Father was accused by Pompeius, the Tribune of the People, he came by
night to Rome, and having got an opportunity to discourse the Tribune in
private, with his drawn Sword, forced him in great fear to lay aside his
Accusation. In his Tribuneship of the Soldiers, under Sulpicius the Dictator,
he in a Duel killed the Gaul that challenged the Romans, and taking off his
Chain, put it on his own Neck, whence he as called Terquatus. In his Consulship
against the Latins, to maintain his Discipline, he beheaded his own Son, tho
victorious, for fighting against his Order, and beat them at the River Veseris,
where his Colleague Decius devoted himself to the Infernal Gods.

MARCUS VALERIUS CORVINUS.
U.C. 407.
Valerius was Tribune of the Soldiers under Camillus, Before Chapter 343.
in pursuing the dispersed Troops of the Gauls out of Italy; and with great
Bravery fought the Gaul, who by a Challenge had terrified the whole Roman Army.
A Crow from Break of Day sat upon his Helmet, and in the Fight assisted him by
flapping his Wing in his Enemies Eyes, which Victory honored him with the
additional Name of Corvinus. His Prudence was of great Consequence to the
Commonwealth, when a great number of poor Debtors, not able to pay their
Creditors, had attempted to seize Capua, and forced Quinctius to head them, in
appeasing that Sedition by taking off the Debt.

SPURIUS POSTHUMOUS.
U.C. 433.
Titus Veturius and Spurius Posthumous in their Consulship warring with the
Samnites, Before Chapter 317.
were drawn into an Ambuscade by their General Pontius Thelesinus, who sent out
some pretended Deserters to tell the Romans, that Luceria, a City in Apulia,
was besieged by the Samnites. Two Roads lead to this place, the one longer, but
safer; the other shorter, yet more dangerous; the Romans; in great haste to
raise the Seige, by taking the shorter way, fell into the Ambush: the place,
where this Misfortune happened, was called Furculae Caudinae. Caius Pontius,
when he had taken them, sent for his Father Herennius, to consult his Judgment
in this matter, who answered, He would either have them all killed, to weaken
their Forces beyond hopes of Recovery, or else sent away without Ransom, that
they might be for ever obliged to him for such a generous Favor; but he
rejecting both these Propositions, made them all Slaves, and entered into a
League with dishonorable Conditions on their part, which the Romans so
disliked, that Posthumous their General was delivered up to them to disannul
the Articles, but not received upon that Account by them.

LUCIUS PAPIRIUS CURSOR.
Lucius Papirius, from his swiftness called Cursor, U.C. 434.
was sent Dictator against the Samnites, Before Chapter 316.
perceiving the War to be undertook with ill Omens, he returned to Rome to
consult the Soothsayers for better Divination, and left the Command of the Army
to Fabius Rullianus, with Orders not to fight upon any Occasion, yet he enticed
by a fair Opportunity fought the Enemy, for which Papirius, at his return,
would have beheaded him. For the safety of his life he escaped to Rome, where
it was not in the Power of the Tribunes to defend him: nevertheless by his
Fathers Tears, and the Peoples Entreaty, he was at last pardoned, and Papirius
triumphed over the Samnites. He was very pleasant in his Conversation, and a
great Lover of Jests, as appeared one time, after having severely reprimanded
the Praetor of Praeneste for his Cowardice, he ordered the Lictors to make
ready their Axes; and when he saw him sufficiently terrified with the fear of
Death, commanded them only to cut up the Roots that hindered their March.

The HONORABLE Mr. ROBERT BERTIE. From the Year 434. to 511. U.C.
QUINCTUS FABIUS RULLIANUS.
U.C. 434.
Q. Fabius Rullianus was the first of his Family, Before Chapter 316.
for his Valor called Maximus: when he was General of the Horse, under
Papirius Cursor, he conquered the Samnites, but had like to have been beheaded
by the Dictator, for fighting without Order, in his absence. He first triumphed
over the Apuli, and Lucerini, then over the Samnites; thirdly over the Gauls,
the Umbri, the Marsi, and the Tusci. In his Censorship he distinguished the
Libertini, in respect of their Votes, into four inferior Tribes, and would not
be chose Censor a second time, declaring it was not for the good of the
Commonwealth to have the same Men often Censors. He first instituted the
Cavalcade of the Roman Knights on the Ides of July from the Temple of Honor,
upon white Horses to the Capitol. At his death so much Money was collected for
him by public Contribution, that his Son made a public Feast, and gave a Dole
of raw Flesh to the People.

MANLIUS CURIOUS DENTATUS.
U.C. 404.
Manlius Curious Dentatus first triumphed over the Samnites, Before Chapter 446.
whom he conquered as far as the Adriatic Sea. At his return to Rome, he thus
signalized the Greatness of his Victory in an Affembly of the People: I hvae
taken so much Land, that it would turn a Desert, had I not taken so many
Prisoners to inhabit it; and have taken so many Men, that they must perish with
Hunger, had I not taken so much Ground for them to subsist on. He triumphed a
second time over the Sabines, and thirdly entered the City with a less Triumph,
called Ovation, for conquering the Lucanians. He drove Pyrrhus, King of Epirus,
out of Italy. In the Division of the public Lands, he gave forty Acres a Man
amongst the People, and reserved but forty for himself, professing, that none
ought to be reckoned a Roman Citizen who could not be contented with it. He was
so moderate in his Desires, that he answered the Samnite Ambassadors,
proffering him a great Present of Gold, as he was at Dinner upon roasted
Turnips; I had rather eat these Turnips in this Earthen Dish, and govern them
that possess such Riches. When he was accused of converting to his own use the
public Money, he produced for his Vindication a Wooden Cruet which he used at
his Sacrifices, solemnly swearing, he never had any thing more of the Enemies
Spoils, in his House. He brought the Aqueducts of the River Anio into Rome, at
the Expense of the same Plunder; and in his Tribuneship forced the Senate to
make the Law from him, called Curia, by which Magistrates might be elected out
of the Plebeians; for which many Obligations the Republic conferred upon him
an House, and five hundred Acres of Land in Tiphata.

APPIUS CLAUDIUS CAECUS.
Appius Claudius Caecus, U.C. 462.
in his Censorship, Before Chapter 288.
tho he admitted the Libertini into the Senate, prohibited the Musicians from
public Feasting, and playing on Pipes in Jupiter's Temple Two Families called
the Potitii and the Pinarii had for many Ages been constituted to perform
Sacrifices to Hercules, he bribed the Potitii to instruct the common Slaves in
those Religious Ceremonies, for which Offense he was struck blind, and the Race
of the Potitii utterly extinguished. He violently opposed the Communication of
the Consulship to any Plebeian, and would not gratify the Ambition of Fabius
Rullianus to have absolute Command without Decius Mus in the War against the
Samnites. He conquered the Sabines, Samnites, and Hetrurians: and paved the way
as far as Brundusium, whence it was called the Appian Road. He finished the
Aqueduct which was brought into Rome from the River Anio, and was the only Man
that kept the Censorship five years together. When a Peace was concluding with
King Pyrrhus, and his Ambassador Cineas had corrupted many of the Senators,
Appius, old and blind, was brought in his Litter into the Senate, and with a
noble Speech broke off those base Propositions.

PYRRHUS King of Epirus.
Pyrrhus, U.C. 472.
King of Epirus, was by his Father descended from Achilles; Before Chapter 278.
by his Mother from Hercules; he ambitiously aimed at the Empire of the World,
and perceiving the Romans very powerful, consulted the Delphick Oracle about
the Fortune of the War, whom Apollo thus ambiguously answered: Aio te Aeacida
Romanos vincere posse.
O, Pyrrhus, you the Romans shall overcome.
He interpreting this to his own Fancy, made War with the Romans, by the help
of the Tarentini: and disordered Laevinus the Consul's Army by the City
Heraclea, with the strange sight of his Elephants; but after the Fight when he
beheld the Roman Soldiers, slain only by honorable Wounds in their Breasts; he
cried out, With such brave Men as these could I soon conquer the whole World:
and answered his Friends, congratulating his Success, What do I gain by such a
Victory as costs me the Flower of my Army. Then he marched on, and encamped
twenty Miles from Rome, generously restoring the Captives to Fabricius, without
Ransom, where seeing the new Army of Laevinus so suddenly recruited, he
declared he underwent the same Difficulty against the Romans, as his Ancestor
Hercules with the Serpent Hydra. He was routed by Fabricius and Curious, and
fled to Tarentum, thence passed over into Sicily, yet once more to try his
Fortune, he returned to Locri in Italy, and robbed Proserpine's Temple; but
endeavoring to carry off the Treasure, his Fleet was driven back by a Storm,
and wrecked upon the Shore. Thence returning into Greece, as he besieged Argos,
he was slain with a Tile thrown down on his Head. His Body was carried to
Antigonus, King of Macedonia, and magnificently enterr'd.

FABRICIUS.
U.C. 477.
The year after the victorious Romans had driven Pyrrhus to Tarentum Fabricius
was sent General against Before Chapter 273.
him; he had been formerly Ambassador to Pyrrhus, and tho he was proffered a
fourth part of his Kingdom, would not be brid'd from his Honesty. When he and
the King encamped near one another, Pyrrhus's Physician came to him by night,
promising to poison his Prince, if he would reward him accordingly; Fabricius,
detesting the Fact, commanded him to be bound, and carried back, that his Lord
might know what this Traitor had designed against his Life. In admiration of
which generous Action the King is reported to have said; This is that
Fabricius, whose Integrity it is harder to corrupt, than to turn the Sun from
its Course.

DECIUS MUS.
Volscinii, a noble City of Hetruria, U.C. 487.
was almost ruined by its Luxury; Before Chapter 263.
for very indiscreetly they had freed their Slaves, and admitted them into the
Senate, who in return, by a Confederacy, became their Masters. After they had
thus suffered many Indignities they secretly begged Aid of the Romans; Decius
Mus was presently sent to their Assistance, who overcame these insolent Freed
Men, and either put them to Death in Prison, or delivered them again in
subjection to their Lords.

APPIUS CLAUDIUS CAUDEX.
Appius Claudius, U.C. 488.
surnamed Caudex, was Brother to Appius Caecus, after the Settlement of the
Volsinienses, Before Chapter 262.
he was sent Consul to free the Mamertini in Sicily, whose Castle Hiero, King
of Syracuse, with the Carthaginians, had besieged. He first passed the
Streights of Sicily in a Fisher-Boat to view the Enemy, and the forced the
Carthaginian General to withdraw his Forces out of the Citadel. Returning to
Rhegium, he with his Infantry took a five Bank'd Galley of the Enemies, and
with that Vessel transporting a Legion into Sicily, drove the Carthaginians
from Messana. Hiero surrendered himself to him upon Terms, at the Battle of
Syracuse, and was so terrified with the Danger of the War, that he desired the
Friendship of the Romans, and proved ever after very faithful to them.

CAIUS DUILIUS.
U.C. 258.
Caius Duilius was Admiral in the first Punick War against the Carthaginians,
Before Chapter 492.
and finding them very powerful at Sea, rigged out a strong Fleet: his Enemies
laughed at his Invention of Grapling Irons, with which he took thirty, and sunk
thirteen of their Ships. Hannibal, the Carthaginian Admiral, fled to Carthage,
and pretended to demand Instructions of the Senate, as yet ignorant of his
Misfortune. They unanimously voted he should fight the Enemy: I have fought,
says he, and lost the Day. Thus he escaped Crucifixion; for among the
Carthaginians, the General, that had the Misfortune fortune to be beaten, was
so punished. Dailius had this perpetual Honor confen'd on him, to return in
public from Supper with Flambeaux and Trumpeters before him.

ATILIUS CALATINUS.
Atilius Calatinus was sent General into Sicily against the Carthaginians, U.C.
494.
he forced the Enemies Garrisons out of Enna, Before Chapter 256.
Drepanum, and Lilybaeum, their best and strongest Cities, and took Panormus.
He ravaged the whole Island, and with a few Ships, beat the Enemies great
Fleet, under the Command of Amilcar. But making haste to raise the Siege of
Camerina, he was shut up in a narrow Pass by the Carthaginians, where
Calpurnius Flamma, one of his Tribunes, drawing out three hundred Soldiers,
gained a Hill, and by his Valor freed the Consul, tho his whole Party was cut
off, and he found half dead by the Consul: After this the Romans became a
Terror to their Enemies, and Atilius obtained a Glorious Triumph.

MARCUS ATILIUS REGULUS.
M. Atilius Regulus in his Consulship U.C. 497.
triumphed for his Conquest over the Salentini: Before Chapter 253.
he was the first Roman General that passed over with a Navy into Africa: his
Fleet suffered much by a Shipwreck: yet he took from Amilcar, the Carthaginian
Admiral, sixty three Galleys, besides two hundred Towns, with two hundred
thousand Captives. Whilst he commanded abroad, his Wife and Children, by reason
of their Poverty, were kept at the Public Charge. The next year he was taken
by the policy of Xanthippus, a Lacedaemonian Captain, who served the
Carthaginians, and cast into Prison. He was sent Ambassador from thence to
Rome, to treat about the Exchange of Prisoners, promising, upon his Oath, to
return, if he could not obtain it; but he more consulting the Benefit of his
Country, opposed it in the Senate, and not regarding the Prayers and Tears of
his Wife and Family, returned to Carthage, where, in revenge, they put him into
a Wooden Chest, stuck full of Nails, by which horrible Torture, and for want of
Sleep he died.

CAIUS LUTATIUS CATULUS.
C. Lutatius Catulus, U.C. 511.
in the first Punick War commanded three hundred Sail against the
Carthaginians, Before Chapter 239.
and in a Fight near the Islands Aegates, between Sicily and Africa, took and
and sunk six hundred of their Ships, laden with Provisions and other
Necessaries, under their Admiral Anno, by which great Victory he put an end to
the War; and at their Entreaty made a Peace with them on these Terms, that they
should march out of Sicily, Sardinia, and the other Islands between Italy, and
Africa; giving up all Provinces in Spain, as far as the River Iberus.

Mr. BLAKWELL PARKYNS. From the Year 511. to 563. U.C.
HANNIBAL the Carthaginian General.
HAnnibal was Son to Hamilcar, U.C. 534.
General of the Carthaginians, Before Chapter 216.
in the first Punick War, who brought him, when but nine years old, before the
Altar, solemnly to swear perpetual Hatred to Rome. From that time he served in
those Wars under his Father, after whose Death he sought all Occasions of
Breaking with the Romans. To which end, he, within six Months after, destroyed
the City Saguntum in Spain, then in Confederacy with them. From whence making
his Way over the Alps, he passed into Italy, and beat Publius Scipio at
Ticinum; Sempronius Longus at Trebia; Flaminius at the Lake Trasimenus; also
Paulus and Varro at Cannae. And might further have carried his Victories, by
taking Rome it self, had he marched directly thither, and not turned aside into
Campania, to enjoy the Pleasures of that rich Country. But after this, when he
had encamped his Army within three Miles of the City, he was beat back by great
Storms of Wind and Rain. His Troops were first weakened by Fabius Maximus; then
repulsed by Valerius Flaccus; next put to flight by Gracchus and Marcellus; and
being recalled into Africa, he was there totally routed by Scipio. From thence
he fled to Antiochus, King of Syria, and incited him to make War against the
Romans; after whose Overthrow, he was necessitated to retire to Prusias, King
of Bythinia, to whom Titus Flaminius was sent on an Embassy to demand him; but
he prevented his being delivered up by drinking a Poison, carried for such an
Occasion, in the hollow of his Ring, and so died. At Lybissa, a Town of
Bythinia he was put into a Stone Coffin, with this Inscription on it,

Here lies HANNIBAL.

Q. FABIUS MAXIMUS.
Quintus Fabius Maximus Cunctator was called Verrucosus, U.C. 535.
from a Wart he had on his Lip; and Ovicula, Before Chapter 215.
from his mild Nature. In his Consulship he triumphed over the Ligures, and
weak'ned Hannibal by his prudent Delaying to give him Battle. He suffered
Minutius, General of his Horse, at his Request, to have equal Power in the Army
with himself; yet after that Arrogance, refused not to relieve him, when he had
brought his Troops by ill Conduct into great Danger. He shut up Hannibal in the
Plains of Falernus, and kept Manlius Statilius from revolting to the Enemy, by
his generous gift to him of a Horse and Arms; also obliged a brave Soldier of
the Lucanian Squadron, who often left the Camp, and neglected his Duty, being
transported with a violent Passion for a beautiful Woman, by buying and
presenting her to him. He retook Tarentum from the Carthaginians, and the
Statue of Hercules, which he brought from thence, he placed in the Capitol. And
when the Senate would not approve of his Ratifying the Articles, made between
him and the Enemy, about the Redemption of Prisoners, he sold his Estate for
two hundred thousand Sesterces, with which he preserved his Honor, and
performed his Contract.

PUBLIUS SCIPIO NASICA.
Publius Scipio Nasica was a Man so eminent for his Virtue, that he had the
Image of Cybele, Mother of the Gods, by order of the Senate, committed to his
Care, to be kept in his House, till her Temple should be built. He was so
superstitious, that when he understood himself to be chosen Consul by Gracchus
with ill Omens, he abdicated his Office. In his Censorship he pulled down the
Statues, which many, out of Ambition, had erected for themselves in the Forum.
And in his Consulship took Delminium, chief City of the Calmatians. Out of
Modesty he refused the Title of General, offered him by the Soldiers, as he did
the Honor of a Triumph conferred on him by the Senate. He was so very
eloquent, so well skilled in the Law, and so extremely wise in all his Affairs,
that he was called Corculum, or The Prudent Man.

M. CLAUDIUS MARCELLUS.
Marcus Marcellus slew Virdumarus, U.C. 530.
General of the Gauls, in a single Combat, Before Chapter 220.
and was the Third from Romulus that dedicated the rich Spoils of a slain
General to Jupiter Feretrius. He first taught Soldiers to retreat without
turning their Backs, and by taking Advantage of a narrow Pass at Nola, made
Hannibal know, he was not invincible. Syracuse, a City in Sicily, was taken by
him after three years Siege, and when the Senate, upon some false Accusation
denied him the Honor of a Triumph, he conscious of his just merit triumphed
from his own Authority on Mount Alban. In his fifth Consulship he was unluckily
drawn into an Ambuscade, by Hannibal, and slain. His Funeral was solemnized
with great Pomp; but his Bones, as they were sent to Rome, were intercepted by
Numidian Pirates, and lost.

LIVIA CLAUDIA the Vestal Virgin.
Whilst Hannibal wasted Italy, U.C 549.
the Romans consulting the Books of the Sybils, Before Chapter 201.
sent for the Image of the Goddess Cybele from Pessinuns, a Town of Phrygia.
And as they came up the Tiber against the Stream, the Ship on a sudden stopped
in deep Water, from whence it could by no Means be moved, till by Direction in
the same Books, they understood that it might be drawn up the River by the Hand
of a very chaste Woman. Whereupon Claudia, a Vestal Virgin, unjustly suspected
of Incontinency, entreated the Goddess, that if she knew her to be chaste, she
would vouchsafe to follow her, then tying her Girdle to the Ship, she drew it
up the Tiber. The Image of the Goddess, whilst her Temple was building, was
placed in the House of Scipio Nasica, so honored from the general Opinion of
being the best Man in Rome.

M. PORCIUS CATO CENSORIUS.
M. Porcius Cato was born at Tusculum, U.C. 557.
but invited to fix at Rome, Before Chapter 193.
by Valerius Flaccus. He was Tribune of the Soldiers in Sicily; and behaved
himself with great Valor whilst he was Questor under Scipio, as he did with
great Justice, when Praetor. In that year of his Pretorship he conquered
Sardinia, and was there instructed in the Greek Tongue by Ennius the Poet. In
his Consulship he Hispania Tarraconensis; and to secure them from rebelling, he
sent his Orders to all the Cities to demolish their Walls, which every one of
them imagining as only sent to them in particular, readily obeyed. In the
Syrian War against Antiochus, being Tribune of the Soldiers, under Marcus
Acilius Glabrio, he gained the Pass of Thermopylae, at the Streights of Mount
Oeta, and by that prevention routed the Enemy. In his Censorship he turned
Lucius Flammius, who formerly had been Consul, out of the Senate, because in
his Government of Gaul, to please his Miss, he ordered a Captive to be brought
out of Prison, and killed before her. He was the first that built a stately
Piazza, calling it Porcia, after his own Name, and opposed the Luxury of the
Roman Matrons, when they demanded the Privilege of wearing their rich
Ornaments, taken from from them by the Oppian Law. He was so indefatigable a
Prosecutor of ill Men, that in the fourscorth year of his Age he accused Galba
for robbing the Lufitanians in his Pretorship, and was himself impeached four
and forty times, but always honorably acquitted. In the Debates of the Senate,
in the third Punick War, he was for demolishing Carthage; his natural Vigor
lasted so long, that he had a Son at fourscore, whose Effigies was often
brought out to honor a Funeral Solemnity.

C. CLAUDIUS NERO, and ASDRUBAL HANNIBAL's Brother.
Asdrubal, U.C. 545.
the Brother of Hannibal, passed into Italy with great Recruits, Before Chapter 205.
for the strengthening his Army, and the Roman Empire had then been utterly
ruined, if he had once joined his Brother: But Claudius Nero, whose Camp was in
Apulia near Hannibal, leaving part of his Forces behind him, drew out a large
Detachment of his choicest Men, and marching directly against Asdrubal, joined
M. Livius his Colleague, at a Town called Sena, by the River Metaurus in
Calabria, where they two together beat Asdrubal. After this Victory Nero
returned to his Camp with the same speed, and threw Asdrubal's Head before his
Brother Hannibal's Trenches. At which sight Hannibal publicly declared, he was
overcome by the ill Fortune of Carthage. For this good Service Marcus Livius
entered Rome with a greater Triumph, and, Nero with a less, because the Action
was not performed within his Province.

P. CORNELIUS SCIPIO.
Publius Scipio, called Africanus, U.C. 551.
for his Courage and Conduct in the Conquest of Africa, Before Chapter 199.
was supposed to be the Son of Jupiter, for before his Mother was with Child of
him, a Serpent, supposed the Genius of Jupiter, was seen in her Bed, and in his
Childhood a Snake twined about him without doing him any harm. The Dogs never
barked at him, although he went into the Capitol at Midnight, nor did he ever
undertake any Business, till he had sat meditating a good while, near the
Image of Jupiter, as if he received Directions from that God. He but eighteen
years of Age, by his singular Valor, saved his Father's Life at Ticinum; and
so great Influence was the Authority of Scipio, that he put a stop to the young
Noblemen, and hindered them from leaving Italy, and conducted the Remainder of
the Army, after the Defeat of Cannae, through the Enemies Camp to Canusium. At
four and twenty he was sent Praetor into Spain, and took Carthago Nova, now
Carthagena, the same day he came before it, when his Soldiers brought him a
young Maid, whose Beauty attracted every one to be a Spectator, he out of
Modesty would not see her, but gave order, that she should be restored to her
Father, and betrothed Lover, a Prince of Cel^iberia. He beat Asdrubal and Mage,
Hannibal's Brothers, out of Spain, made a League with Syphax, King of
Mauritania, and received Massanissa into the Number of the Allies. Returning
home after these Victories, he was made Consul before he was old enough,
according to Law, and by the Consent of his Colleague passed over into Africa,
and forced his way through Asdrubal's and Syphax's Camp in one night. He
vanquished Hannibal after he was recalled out of Italy, and imposed new Laws
upon the conquered Carthaginians, In the War against Antiochus he was his
Brother's Lieutenant, and his Son that was taken Prisoner was returned without
Ransom, in honor of the Father. Being accused of Extortion by the Petilii, and
Naevius, Tribunes of the People, with great assurance, he tore his Book of
Accounts in pieces, before the People, and said, This day I conquered Carthage;
'twas a good piece of Service to the Commonwealth, let us go to the Capitol,
and return our public Thanks to the Gods. Then he left the ungrateful City,
spending the rest of his Life in exile; and at his death begged of his Wife,
that his Body should not be carried back to Rome.

MARCUS LIVIUS SALINATOR.
In his first Consulship triumphed over the Illyrians, yet sometime after was
maliciously accused by all the Tribes, except the Metian, for embezelling the
public Stock. In his second Consulship he was joined with his Enemy Claudius
Nero, but rather than the Government should sustain any prejudice from their
Variance, he was freely reconciled to him, and upon their Victory over
Asdrubal, Hannibal's Brother, rode in Triumph into the City. He was also chose
with the same Nero in his Censorship, and set a Poll-Tax upon every Tribe,
except the Metians, taking away their Pension, because they had either
condemned very unjustly at first, or else had done very ill, in conferring so
great Honors upon him, after a former suspicion.

TITUS QUINCTIUS FLAMINIUS.
Was the Son of that Flaminius who who was killed at Trasimenus. He was sent
Consul into Macedonia, and guided by King Carops's Shepherds into the Province.
He routed King Philip, and took his Camp, receiving from him his Son Demetrius
for an Hostage, tho afterward he made him pay a great Ransom before he
restored him to his Kingdom. He took also the Son of Nabis, King of Lacedemon,
as a Pledge for his Fidelity, and at last made Proclamation by the common Crier
at the Nemaean Games with general Applause, that all the Graecians should enjoy
their ancient Liberties. This was he that was sent to Prusias to demand
Hannibal.

MARCUS FULVIUS NOBILIOR,
In his Pretorship conquered Spain, for which good Service he entered the City,
with a less Triumph, called Ovation. The Aetolians and Ambracians were routed
by him in several Battles, who in the Macedonian War had first sided with the
Romans, but afterward revolted to Antiochus, King of Syria. He drove them into
their City Ambracia, and by a Blockade forced them to surrender, yet he
plundered them of nothing but their Statues, and Pictures, which were carried
before him in Triumph. His Friend Quintus Ennius wrote a noble Poem in
commendation of this Victory, tho it was sufficiently famous of it self, and
needed not the Art of a Poet to set it off.

Mr. HEARY MOLINS D'AVENANT. From the Year 563, to 660. U. C.
L. SCIPIO ASIATICUS.
SCipio Asiaticus, U.C. 563.
Brother to Scipio Africanus, Before Chapter 187.
was a Man of a weak Constitution, yet upon the Account of his Valor in
Africa, was recommended by his Brother for Consul, and having him for his
Lieutenant General, beat Antiochus, King of Syria, at Mount Sipylus in Caria,
where the Enemies Bows, by reason of the excessive Rain, were made useless. He
took from him part of his Hereditary Kingdom, and from his Success gained the
Name of Asiaticus. Some time after he was accused for embezelling the Public
Treasure; but Gracchus, Tribune of the People, satisfied of his Integrity, tho
his Adversary, stopped any farther Proceeding, yet Marcus Cato, the Censor,
afterward took from him his Horse as a particular Mark of Disgrace.

ANTIOCHUS King of Syria.
Antiochus, U.C. 560.
King of Syria, trusting too much to his own Power, Before Chapter 190.
waged War with the Romans, under pretense of recovering the City of
Lysimachia, built by his Ancestors in Thrace, and then in the possession of the
Romans. In a short time he seized on all Greece, with the adjacent Islands, but
ruined himself by Luxury in the Island Euboea. Upon the Approach of Acilius
Glabrio, he drew up his Forces in the Straits of the Mount Oeta, called
Thermopylae, and after their Defeat, by the Conduct of Marcus Cato fled into
Asia. He had as bad Success with his Fleet, which under Hannibal, his Admiral,
was beaten by Lucius Aemilius, Regillus, he thought to oblige Scipio Africanus,
by releasing his Son, taken Prisoner at Sea, without any Ransom, whose Father,
by way of Requital, advised him to make Peace with the Romans: but Antiochus
despising his Counsel, ventured to fight L. Scipio at Mount Sipylus, where he
was overcome, and chaced beyond Mount Taurus. He was at last killed by one of
his Nobles, whom he had affronted with a Blow in his Drink.

CNAEUS MANLIUS VULSO.
Cnaeus Manlius Vulso, U.C. 563.
as soon as he was chosen Consul, was sent to succeed Scipio Asiaticus, Before
Chapter 187.
in his Government, and being too ambitious of a Triumph, made War upon the
Pisidae and Gallograeci, Confederates with Antiochus, whom he very easily
conquered. Amongst other Prisoners of War, the Wife of King Orgiagon was
committed to the Charge of a certain Centurion, who ravished her, but she
studying Revenge, concealed the Rape; and after some time having agreed for her
Ransom, by an Artifice had this Adulterer delivered up to her Husband, by whom
he was slain.

L. PAULUS AEMILIUS MACEDONICUS.
U.C. 584.
L. Paulus Aemilius was his Son who was slain at the Battle of Cannae. He in
his first Consulship, Before Chapter 166.
which he got after a Repulse at three Elections, triumphed over the Ligures,
and to magnify his Actions, exposed to public view a Picture, wherein all his
Exploits were painted. In his second Consulship he took Perses, King of the
Macedonians, Philips Son, at Samothracia, an Isle in the Aegean Sea, but with
great Humanity pityed him whom he had conquered, and permitted him to sit down
by him, tho afterward he led him in Triumph. At which joyful Solemnity he lost
two of his Sons, yet with the greatest moderation turning himself to the
People, he made it his request to Fortune, that if any Disaster threat'ned the
Commonwealth, it might be compounded for, by his private Afflictions. In reward
of his Noble Actions he had the Privilege granted him by the People, and
Senate, of wearing a Triumphal Robe at the Circensian Games. He was one that
hated Avarice, and laid up so little Wealth, that after his Death, all his
Estate was sold for the Payment of his Wifes Dowry.

TIB. SEMPRONIUS GRACCHUS.
Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus was descended of a Noble Family, U.C. 573.
and of so generous a Temper, Before Chapter 177.
that he would not suffer his Enemy Scipio Asiaticus to be cast into Prison. In
his Pretorship he subdued Gaul, in his first Consulship Spain, and in his
second he Conquered Sardinia, from whence he brought so many Prisoners, that
the long Continuance of their Sale gave occasion for the Proverb, Sardi
venales, Here are Sardinian Slaves to be Sold. When he was Censor he divided
those Freemen, who belonged to the Country Tribes, into four City Tribes. Tho
he secured himself by his own Interest, yet his Colleague Claudius was accused
for this Innovation, but escaped after two Classes had found him Guilty, by the
zealous Protestation of Tiberius, who vowed, if they condemned his Friend, to
be banished with him. He was a rare Example of Conjugal Affection, when the two
Snakes crawled out of his Bed, upon Consultation the Oracle answered, That if
the Male was killed, Tiberius should die; if the Female, Cornelia.
Nevertheless, he moved with a tender compassion for his Wife's Safety, ordered
he Male to be slain.

PUBLIUS SCIPIO AEMILIANUS.
P. Scipio Aemilianus was the Son of Paulus Macedonicus, U.C. 606.
but adopted by Scipio Africanus; Before Chapter 144.
he showed his Courage whilst he served under his. Father in the Macedonian
War, upon the Defeat of King Perses, by pursuing the Chase so eagerly, that he
did not return to the Camp till Midnight; and when he was Lucullus's Lieutenant
in Spain, at the Town Intercatia he killed one, that challenged him, in a
single Combat, and was the first that scaled the Walls of that City. He was
Tribune under Marcus Manilius, in the first year of the third Punick War, and
by his Conduct and Valor Relieved eight Cohorts, that were blocked up by the
Enemy; for which good Service he was presented with an Obsidional Crown. When
he stood only Candidate for the Aedileship, he was unanimously chosen Consul,
tho not of Age, as the Law requires, and within six Months, as it were, to
confirm the good Opinion of the People, demolished Carthage. He was then sent
into Spain, where having restored the Discipline of the Army, he forced
Numantia to Surrender, for want of Provisions, and was from thence called
Numantinus. He did nothing without his Friend Caius Laelius, and in many
Embassies to several Princes, took none but him with the small Retinue of two
Servants. His noble Exploits at last made him so haughty, that he disobliged
the Commonwealth, by saying Gracchus was deservedly Murdered, and when many
murmured at this severe Expression against his own Kinsman, he bade them be
silent, for according to their Deserts, Italy was but their Stepmother, and
they were all no better than his Slaves. In his Censorship he Affronted his
Colleague Mummius, who was indeed a Man of heavy parts, by this arrogant
Expression in the open Senate, I wish you had given me a Companion fit for
Business, or none at all. Soon after his violent opposing the Party which
promoted the Division of the Lands, he was found dead at his own House, and
carried out to he buried with his Head covered, lest there should be any
suspicion of a violent Death from the Blackness of his Face. His Estate was so
small, that he left but Thirty two Pounds of Silver, and two and a half of Gold.

CAIUS HOSTILIUS MANCINUS.
U.C. 615.
Caius Hostilius Mancinus went Consul against the Numantines, Before Chapter 135.
tho forewarned by the Augurs, and called upon by a strange Voice to stay at
home, upon his Arrival at Numantia he designed to regulate the Army formerly
commanded by Popilius, and for more Advantage decamped to a privater place.
That day the Numantines, after an old Custom proffered their Daughters in
public to be Married; it happened, that two young Men Courted the same pretty
Woman, her Father told the Rivals, He only should marry her, who slew an Enemy,
and brought him his Right Hand. Both of them going out to execute this Order,
and observing the Romans to draw off in as much haste as if they fled,
acquainted their own party with it, who presently sallying out with Four
thousand, slew Twenty thousand of the Romans. Mancinus, by the advice of his
Questor, Tiberius Gracchus made a League with the Enemy, upon their own Terms,
which being disliked by the Senate, Mancinus was delivered up to the
Numantines, but not received for satisfaction by them. This unfortunate General
was degraded, and durst not return to the Camp, yet afterward by good Omens of
the Soothsayers he was advanced to the Degree of Praetor.

L. MUMMIUS ACHAICUS.
L. Mummius was surnamed Achaicus, U.C. 606.
from Conquering Achaia: Before Chapter 144.
in his Consulship he was ordered to prosecute the War against the Corinthians,
and and had the Honor of a Victory, which, in merit, was rather due to his
Predecessor. For after Metellus Macedonicus had routed the Enemy at Heraclea, a
City of Elis in the Peloponnese, and killed their General Critolaus, he
hastened with his Sergeants, and a few Horse to Metellus's Camp to share the
Good Fortnne of the Battle, and with more ease defeated the Enemy at Leutopetra
in the Isthmus of Corinth. Diaeus their Commander fled, in despair set his
House on Fire, killed his Wife, threw her into the Flames, and then poisoned
himself. Mummius plundered Corinth, and adorned Italy with their Pictures and
Statues, yet so modente, as to carry none to his own Horse.

Q. CAECILIUS METELLUS MACEDONICUS.
U.C. 606.
Quinctus Caecilius Metelluss obtained the Title of Macedonicus, Before Chapter 144.
from subduing Macedonia. In his Praetorship he overcame the Impostor
Andriscus, who assumed the Name of King Philip, he routed the Achaians twice,
but Mummius intercepted the Glory of the Triumph. The People, to show their
Hatred toward him for his Severity, with much Difficulty chose him Consul,
after he had missed it at two Elections. He vanquished the Arbachi in Spai^,
and with great Courage before the Town Contrebia, made those Cohorts which gave
way to rally and regain their Post; he was so close and surprising in his
Counsels, that he answered one of his Friends, inquiring into his Resolutions,
He would bur his Coat, if he thought it knew his nind. He was the happy Father
of four valiant Sons, who carried him to his Grave, three of whom he saw
honored with a Consulate, and the other with a Triumph.

Q. CAECILIUS METELLUS NUMIDICUS.
U.C. 643.
Q. Caecilius Metellus in his Consulship triumphed over Jugurtha, Before Chapter
107.
King of Numidia, and from thence called Numidicus; when he was Censor he
signalized his Integrity by refusing to inroll in the public Register the Name
of Quinctius, who scandalously pretended to be the Son of Tiberius Gracchus,
and chose rather to be banished than agree to the Law which Apuleius by
violence imposed upon them. He lived in Exile at Smyrna, and at last was
recalled by Calidius, Tribune of the People. He always discovered a Constancy
in his Temper, as appeared in the Theater, by not reading the Letter which was
brought him till the Show was over, and by not making a Funeral Oration in
Commendation of Lucullus, his Sister Metella's Husband, who had been the only
person wrought upon to recant his Vote against the Agrarian and Frumentarian
Laws.

Q. METELLUS PIUS.
He was the Son of Metellus Numidicus, U.C. 660.
and honored with the Cognomen of Pius for his Filial Duty, Before Chapter 90.
and continual Intercession with Tears to have his Father recalled from
Banistment. He showed his Valor in the Social War, in which he commanded as
Praetor, and killed Q. Popedius, General of the Marsi. He was sent Consul into
Spain, where he defeated the Herculeii, Lieutenants to Sertorius, and forced
him out of that Country. In his Youth, when he was Candidate for the
Praetorship, and Pontificat, he was preferred to his Competitors of Consular
Dignity.

The HONORABLE Mr. WASHINGTON SHIRLEY. From the Year 619, to 670 U. C.
TIBERIUS GRACCHVS
Tiberius Gracchus, U.C. 619.
Grandson to Scipio Africanus, by his Daughter Cornelia, Before Chapter 131.
was Quaestor under Mancinus in Spain, and consented to the making of that
dishonorable League with the Numantini: but by his plausible Eloquence escaped
being delivered up to them. When he was Tribune of the People he made two Laws,
one that no person whatsoever should possess above Five hundred Acres of Land,
the other that the Estate which Attalus King of Pergamus bequeathed to the
Commonwealth, should be divided among the People. His Colleague Octavius
zealously opposed the former; and was therefore turned out of his Office
contrary to all Precedents. At the following Election, in hopes of continuing
another year in his Office, he came into the Assembly, tho the Predictions of
Augurs were against him, and went directly toward the Capitol, putting his
Hand to his Head, by which Gesture he desired the Protection of the People: but
the Nobility thought that he then demanded the Crown: and Mucius the Consul
being tardy in pursuing him, Scipio Nasica commanded all those that wished well
to the Safety of; the Commonwealth to follow him, and seizing upon Gracchus in
the Capitol slew him: Lucretius the Aedile took up his Body, and threw it into,
the River Tiber, from whence he was nicknamed Vespillo. Nasica, that he might
be out of the way; and secured from popular Odium, went under Color of an
Embassdor into Asia.

CAIUS GRACCHUS.
U.C. 629.
Caius Gracchus was made Quaestor of that unhealthsul Island of Sardinia,
Before Chapter 131.
and at the expiration of his Year left the place, contrary to Law, before any
one came to succeed him. He bore the Blame of the Revolt of Asculum and
Fregellae. When he was Tribune of the People he set up the Laws about the
Division of Lands, and Distribution of Corn among the People, and was for
sending Colonies to. Capua and Tarentum. He made Fulvius Flaccus and C. Craslus
Joint-Commissioners with himself for the Division of the Lands. Minucius Rufus,
Tribune of the People, opposing his Actions as seditious, he went with his
party for security into the Capitol, yet after he saw Atilius, one of Opimius,
the Consul's Sergeants, killed by the Crowd, he came down into the Forum, and
imprudently broke up the Assembly held there by Minucius Rufus, Tribune of the
People; for which Misdemeanour he was summoned to appear before the Senate, but
in defiance to them, he armed all his Servants* and possessed himself of Mount
Aventine, where he was routed by Opimius, and leaping from the Temple of Diana
for* fear of being taken Prisoner, sprained his Ancle: his Friend Pomponius
stopping those that pursued him at the Gate called Trigemina, and Publius
Laetorius detaining others at the Wooden Bridge, he made his Escape into the
Goddess Furina's Wood, when he was killed, either by Euphorus his Servant, or
by himself. It Is reported, that his Head was carried by Septimuleius his
Friend, to Opimius the Consul, and sold for its Weight in Gold. And that
through Covetousness he filled it with Lead, to make it the heavier.

M. LUCIUS DRUSUS.
U.C. 640.
Marcus Lucius Drusus descended of a Noble Family, Before Chapter 110.
was very eloquent, but ambitious and proud. In his Aedileship he gratified the
People with a most magnificent Show, at which time Remmius his Colleague
advising something for the Good of the Commonwealth, he answered him
arrogantly, What have you to do with my Commonwealth? When he was Quaestor in
Asia. he would not appear in public with the Badges of Honor, that nothing
might be taken notice of, as greater than himself. When he was Tribune of the
People he promised the Latins to make them free of the City, he divided Lands
amongst the Common People, and by way of Exchange. granted the Roman Gentlemen
the privilege of sitting in the Senate House, and the Senators the management
of the Court of Judicature. He was so extravagantly liberal, that he declared,
he had left no Magistrate for the future any thing to give away, but the
Heavens and the Dirt of the Earth. Hence wanting Money, he did many things
beneath his Honor. For Money he delivered up to King Bocchus, Magulsa, a
Prince of Mauritania, who had left his Country for fear of the King's
displeasure, and was devoured aftertwards by an Elephant: and also he concealed
in his House Adherbal, Son to the King of Numidia, residing at Rome, as an
Hostage in hopes of receiving a large Ransom from his Father. He was so
haughty, that he threatened to throw his Adversary Servilius Caepio, headlong
from the Tarpeian Rock, for opposing him. And when Philip the Consul would not
consent to his Laws about the Division of Lands, he twisted his Neck before the
People so violently, that a great quantity of Blood gushed out at his Nostrils,
which he, to upbraid him for his Luxury, said, Was not Blood, but the Gravy of
Thrushes. Ar last he was hated, as much as he had been formerly beloved; for
tho some People were glad at their receiving of the Lands, yet others were
vexed at their being turned out. Many of the Gentlemen were pleased with the
Liberty of coming into the Senate, but they whose Names were omitted by the
Censor, took it ill.

The Senators were satisfied with the privilege of having power in the Courts
of Judicature, but were displeased that the Gentlemen should be ranked with
them. Whereupon Livius in great perplexity how to put off the Demands of the
Latins who pressed to be made free of the City according to his promise, on a
sudden fell down in the Street, either of an Epilepsie, or having drunk on
purpose some Goats Blood He Was carried home half dead, public Prayers were
made for him over all Italy, and when the Latins designed to kill the Consul at
the great Festival on Mount Alban, he gave Philip notice to take care of
himself; for this he was afterward accused in the Senate, and assassin'd in
the Street one time as he was a going home, by Philip and Caepio, as 'twas
generally suspected.

C. MARIUS the Father.
Caius Marius was seven times Conful, U.C. 650.
born of mean Parentage at Arpinum, Before Chapter 100.
but by degrees advanced to the highest Places of Honor. Whilst he was
Lieutenant under Metellus in Numidia he got the Consulship, by accusing him,
and taking Jugurtha prisoner, led him in Triumph before his Chariot. He was
chose Consul for the year ensuing, nemine contradicente, and triumphed for his
Victory over the Teutones in Gaul at Aquae Sextiae, and the Cimbri in Italy in
the Claudian Fields. In his sixth Consulate which he enjoyed six years
successively, by a Decree of the Senate he put to Death Apuleius Saturninus,
Tribune of the People, and Glaucias the Paetor, for raising a Sedition. When he
would have supplanted Sulla by Sulpicius's Law, and been General in his stead
in the War against Mithridates, he was driven out of Rome by his power, and
forced to hide himself in a Marsh at Minturnae. Upon his Discovery he was cast
into prison, and by his Majestic Look frightened the Gaul that was sent to
execute him. Whence escaping in a small Vessel, he passed into Africa, and
lived there a long time in Banishment. But at last recalled by Cinna the
Consul, he broke open all Workhouses, and mustered up an Army of Slaves, and
glutting his Revenge by the Slaughter of his Enemies, in his seventh
Consulship, some say, the killed himself.

C. MARIUS the Son.
U.C. 670.
Caius Marius the Younger invaded the Consulship at Five and twenty years of
Age, Before Chapter 80.
which over early Honor, his Mother with Tears lamented; for he was as cruel as
his Father, and beset the Senate House, murdered his Enemies, and threw their
Bodies into the River Tiber. In his Preparations for the War against Sulla,
whilst he lay down in the open air to refresh himself, tired out with watching
and labor at Sacriportus, his Forces were routed as he slept, and he came up to
them only time enough to run away amongst them. He fled from thence to
Praeneste, where Lucretius Offella blocked him up, and trying to make his
escape through some subterraneous Passages, but finding them all secured he
desired Pentius Gelesinus to kill him.

LUCIUS CORNELIUS CINNA.
U.C. 665.
Lucius Cornelius Cinna was a very wicked Man, Before Chapter 85.
and by his unparalled Cruelty almost ruined the Commonwealth. In his first
Consulship he would have made a Law for recalling the Exiles, but was opposed
by his Colleague Octavius, and turned out of his Office. Upon which he left the
City, and making all the Slaves free, by their assistance vanquished his
Enemies, killed Octavius, and got possession of Mount Janiculus. He made
himself Consul a second, third and fourth time; and then as he was preparing
for a War against Sulla, he was stoned to death by his Army at Ancona, for his
insufferable Cruelty.

C. FLAVIUS FIMBRIA.
Caius Flavius Fimbria, U.C. 665.
one of the cruellest of Cinna's Officers, Before Chapter 85.
went Lieutenant under Valerius Flaccus the Consul into Asia, but was dismissed
upon some private Grudge, and to revenge himself by his corrupt Practices he
prevailed with the Army to revolt, and killed their General. Then seizing on
the Insignia that belonged to the Consul, he took the Government upon himself,
and beat Mithridates out of Pergamus, giving Orders that Ilium should be burnt
because they did not open their Gates soon enough to him, and put all the
Officers in the Garrison to the Sword, but Minerva's Temple received not the
least Damage by the Flames, preserved in every ones Opinion by the Power of the
Goddess. Soon after he was blocked up by Sulla at Pergamus, and seeing his Army
desert him, slew himself.

VIRIATHUS LUSITANUS.
Viriathus a Lusitanian, U.C. 619.
by reason of his great Poverty was at first a Day-Labourer, Before Chapter 131.
then for his Activity a Huntsman, for his Boldness a Robber, and at last a
great Commander. He waged War against the Romans, and beat first their General
Claudius Unimanus, and afterward Caius Nigidius. He was willing to make peace
with the Romans while his Arms were successful; but after he was routed by
them, and had yielded up all things else upon the seizure of their Arms he
renewed the War. And Caepio finding that he could overcome him no other way,
hired two of his Guards to kill him, as he lay drunk upon the Ground, but the
Senate did not approve of this Victory, since it was bought by Treachery.

The Honorable Mr. JAMES CAVENDISH. From the Year 642, to 689, U. C.
MARCUS AEMILIUS SCAURUS.
MArcus Aemilius Scaurus, U.C. 642.
was descended of a Noble Family, Before Chapter 108.
yet poor; for his Father, tho a Senator's Son, was a Collier by Trade. He at
first doubted with himself whether he should aim at great Employments in the
Commonwealth, or get an Estate by turning Banker, but being very eloquent he
soon grew famous. For his good Service in Spain he was made a Cornet of Horse,
and served under Orestes the Consul in Sardinia. When he was Aedile he minded
doing of Justice more than courting the People with public Shows: he was
Lieutenant under Calpurnius in the African War against Jugurtha, whom he much
opposed in the beginning, but at last was corrupted by him: when he was Consul
he made a Law about regulating Expenses, and the Freed Men giving their Votes.
He was so haughty, because that Publius Decius the Praetor did not rise up and
salute him as he passed by, he commanded him to stand up, tore his Gown, and
broke his Chair of State in pieces, and ordered that none should have any
Causes tried before him. In his Consulship he conquered the Gantisci and
Ligures, and triumphed over them. When he was Censor he paved the Aemilian Way,
and made the Mulvian Bridge, he was a Man of such Credit and Interest, that
upon his private Advice, Opimius took up Arms against Gracchus and Marius,
against Glaucias and Saturninus. He would never look upon his Son for deserting
his Post, which Disgrace made him kill himself. Growing old he was accused by
Varius, Tribune of the People, for stirring up the Latins and the Allies to
Rebellion. Whereupon he said to the People; Varius of Sucro says, That Aemilius
Scaurus stirred up the Allies to take up Arms; but Scaurus denies it: Whether
of the two think you more worthy of Credit?

LUCIUS APULEIUS SATURNINUS.
Lucius Apuleius Saturninus, U.C. 658.
Tribune of the People, was a seditious Man, Before Chapter 92.
and to ingratiate himself with the Soldiers of Marius's party, made a Law,
That an Hundred Acres of Land in Africa should be divided amongst the old
Soldiers, and made his Colleague Baebius, that opposed this Law, fly for it,
stirring up the People to stone him. To make himsel more popular, he broke in
pieces Glaucias the Praetor's Chair, because he, by keeping a Court on the same
day, that he held an Assembly about dividing the Land, had drawn away a great
part of the People. He suborned a Freeman to pretend he was the Son of Tiberius
Gracchus, and Sempronia, Gracchus's Sister was produced to justify it, but she
would not be prevailed upon, either by Entreaty or Threats to bring such a
scandal upon her Family. Saturninus, after Aulus Nonius, his Competitor was
slain, was again chose Tribune of the People, and planted new Colonies in
Sicily, Macedonia and Achaia, and brought Land with the Gold which Caepio had
sacrilegiously taken from Tolosa in Gaul. He banished all them that would not
consent to his Laws. And he told many Noble Men that opposed them whilst it
accidentally thundered, that if they would not be quiet and submit, it should
pour down a storm of Hail. However Metellus Numidicus chose rather to be
banished than swear to them. When Saturninus was a third time Tribune of the
People, that he might make his Companion Glaucias the Praetor-Consul, he cause
Memmius, who opposed him, to be killed in the Campus Martius. Marius taking
Arms by virtue of an Order of the Senate, which required the Consuls to take
care of the Commonwealth, pursued Saturninus and Glaucias into the Capitol,
and there besieged them, and cutting the Water-Pipes, forced them to surrender.
But he hid not keep his Word with them; for the ordered Glaucias to be
strangled, and Apuleius flying into the Capitol, was Apuleius flying into the
Capitol, was killed by the Stones and Tiles thrown at him. Rabirius, one of the
Senators carried his Head into several Houses, to make sport with at their
Entertainments.

LUCIUS LICINIUS LUCULLUS.
U.C. 680.
Lucius Licinius Lucullus was of a Noble Family, Before Chapter 70.
eloquent and rich, and presented a very magnificent Show to the People in his
Quaestorship. He reconciled Ptolemy, King of Alexandria to Sulla the Consul,
and by Murena brought over to him Mithridate's Fleet, he administered Justice
very impartially during his Praetorship in Africa. Being sent Consul against
Mithridates, he relieved his Colleague Cotta, that was blocked up at Chalcedon,
a City of Bithynia. He raised the Siege of Cyzicus, starved and cut off
Mithridates's Forces, and drove him out of his Kingdom Pontus, and beat him a
second time with great success, when Tigranus King of Armenia had joined him
with his auxiliary Forces. He was extravavagant in his Clothes, and delighted
much in Statues and Pictures: afterward when from a Disorder in his Head he
began to dote, he was committed to the Guardianship of his Brother Marcus
Lucullus.

LUCIUS CORNELIUS SULLA.
L. Cornelius Sulla was surnamed Felix, U.C. 669.
from his good Fortune. Before Chapter 81.
When he was a little Child, and carried about in his Nurse's Arms, a Woman met
him, and said, God bless thee, Child, thou will prove fortunate to thy self,
and thy Country. But who that Woman was, no Body could tell, for she was never
heard of afterward. When he was Quaestor under Marius, Bocchus King of
Mauritania delivered up Jugurtha to him. In the Cimbrian and Teutonick Wars he
was chosen Lieutenant General to Marius, and did good service. He was first
Praetor at Rome, and then sent Praetor into Cilicia. In the Social War against
the Italian Confederates, he overcame the Samnites and the Irpini. He opposed
Marius's taking down, out of Envy, the Pictures of Bocchus's delivering up
Jugurtha to him: being Consul in Asia, he routed Mithridates at Orchomenum and
Chaeronaea, and overcame his General Archelaus at Athens, and retook the
Piraean Haven. He overcame the Dardani, and the Eneti, in his March: and after
his Province was taken from him by the Sulpician Law, and given to Marius,
returning upon this Affront into Italy, and corrupting his Adversaries Army, he
made Carbo fly for it; he overcame Marius the younger at Sacriportus, and
Telesinus at the Gate of Rome, called Collina. Upon these Defeats, and the
Death of Marius at Praeneste, by a public Edict he surnamed himself Felix, or
The Fortunate: he was the first that proposed the Tables of Proscription, and
cut off Nine thousand that surrendered themselves in the Campus Martius: he
augmented the number of Priests, and lessened the Power of the Tribunes. And
after he had settled the Affairs of the Commonwealth, resigned his
Dictatorship, and finding upon this, that he grew contemptible, he went to
Puteoli, and there died of the lousy Disease called Phtiriasis.

MITHRIDATES, King of Pontus.
Mithridates, King of Pontus, U.C. 664.
descended from one of the seven Persian Heroes, Before Chapter 86.
that killed the Impostor set up by the Magi, could speak two and twenty
Languages, and was so strong, that he could drive a Chariot and Six Horses.
Whilst the Romans were quarrelling with the Allies, he beat Nicomedes out of
Bithynia, Ariobarzanes out of Cappadocia, and sent Orders all over Asia, to
have every Roman massacred that should be found there on a certain day, which
was done accordingly. He seized on Greece, and all the Islands that belonged to
the Romans, except Rhodes. But Sulla beat him in a pitched Battle, took his
Fleet by the Treachery of Archelaus, and totally routed him at the City
Orchomenus, and might have cut off his whole Army, had he not been in haste to
go against Marius, and so was glad to make peace upon any Terms. Afterward
upon his making Head against the Romans at Cabira, he was overcome by Lucullus,
and and at another time by Pompey, who gave him Battle by Night. Thence he fled
into his own Kingdom, and upon the Rebellion of his Subjects, headed by his Son
Pharnaces, finding the Tower beset, the place of his Retreat, he took a Dose of
Poison, which having little effect, because he had formerly taken so many
Antidotes, when Sithocus the Gaul was sent to execute him, and was startled at
his Majestic Look, he bade him do his Office, and assisted his trembling Hand
in the performance.

CNAEUS POMPEIUS MAGNUS.
U.C. 689.
Cnaeus Pompeius the Great sided with Sulla in the Civil War, Before Chapter 61.
and behaved himself so well, that he was mightily beloved by him. He retook
Sicily from the proscribed persons that fled thither, without any opposition,
turned Hiarbas out of Numidia, and restored Massinissa, he rode in Triumph into
the City when he was but Six and twenty years old, and tho he was but a private
Man, forced Lepidus to leave Italy, for endeavoring to rescind Sulla's Laws of
Proscription: when he was sent Praetor into Spain, instead of the Consuls, he
conquered Sertorius, and not long after cleared the Sea of Pirates within Forty
Days, he forced Tigranes to surrender, and Mithridates to poison himself. Then
with great Fortune, and no less Expedition, he went first into the North
against the Albani, the Colchi, the Heniochi, Caspii, Iberi, and in the East
struck Terror into the Parthians, Arabians and Jews. He was the first Roman
that went as far as the Hyrcanian or Caspian, the Red or Arabian Sea. Upon the
Division of the Roman Empire, Crassus had the Government of Syria, Caesar of
Gaul, and Pompey of Rome. After the Death of Crassus he commanded Caesar to
disband his Army, but he refused to do it, and coming against Pompey, drove him
out of the City, and beat him in Pharsalia, from whence he fled to Ptolemy,
King of Alexandria, and was by his command killed by Achillas and Pothinus, two
of his Lifeguard. Septimius, Captain of the Guard, stabbed him in the sight of
his Wife and Children, and cut off his Head, which until that time had been
looked upon as Sacred, his Body was thrown into the River Nile, but taken up by
Servius Codrus, and buried with this Inscription upon his Tomb. Here lies
Pompey the Great. His Head was wrapped up in a Cloth by Achillas, and presented
with his Ring to Caesar, who could not forbear Tears at the sight of it, and
gave order to have it burnt with many rich Perfumes.

Mr. JAMES LLOYD. From the Year 670, to 722 U. C.
JULIUS CAESAR.
Caius Julius Caesar, U.C. 697.
in honor of his great Exploits, surnamed Divus, Before Chapter 53.
went Voluntier into Asia, in the Retinue of Thermus the Praetor, where, by
conversing too often with Nicomedes, King of Bithynia, he was suspected of
Incontinency. After this he applied himself to the Bar, and prosecuted
Dolobella for Bribery, and had him condemned. In his Voyage to Rhodes, where he
designed to study under Apollonius Molo, he was taken by Pirates, and paid a
great Ransom, yet in revenge he soon after took the same Pirates, and crucified
them. When he was chose Praetor he subdued Lusitania, and all Gaul on the other
side of the Alps, and twice crossing the Ocean with his Fleet, conquered
Britain. Upon Pompey's denying him a public Triumph, he drove him out of Rome
by Force of Arms, and beat him at Pharsalia in Thessaly; yet when his Head was
brought to him in Egypt by Achillas, he wept, and gave order to have it
honorably buried: and took the occasion of King Ptolemy's Guards setting upon
him, to expiate the Murder of Pompey upon them and their King. The Terror of
his very Name put Pharnaces, the Son of Mithridates, to flight. He overcame
Juba and Scipio in Africa, the two Pompeys in a Battle at Munda in Spain; and
then forgiving his Enemies, laid down his Arms with all private Grudges, for he
commanded, that only Lentulus, Afranius, and Faustus the Son of Sylla should be
put to Death. He was made perpetual Dictator by the Senate, and assassin'd in
the Senate House by some Conspirators headed by Brutus and Cassius, with Three
and twenty Wounds. When his Body was laid before the Pulpit, where Marc Anthony
made his Funeral Oration, some say, the Sun was Eclipsed.

OCTAVIANUS CAESAR.
U.C. 721.
Caesar Octavianus was adopted from the Octavian into the Julian Family: Before
Chapter 29.
Julius Caesar made him his Heir, and to revenge his Murder, he conquered
Brutus and Cassius in Macedonia, who were principally concerned in that
Conspiracy; and at the Streights of Sicily overcame Sextus Pompeius, the Son of
Cneus Pompeius, when he endeavored to recover his Father's Estate. Upon the
Coast of Actium, near the Gulf of Ambracia, he totally routed the Fleet
commanded by Marc Antony, who was deeply in love with Cleopatra, and governed
Syria as Consul. The rest of the World was subdued by his Lieutenants. The
Parthians, in honor to him, of their own accord, sent him the Standards which
they had formerly taken from Crassus. The Indians, Scythians, Sarmatians and
Dacians, although he had not conquered them, sent him Presents. He shut the Gates
of Two-faced Janus's Temple with his own Hand, never shut but twice before his
time, once in Numa Pompilius's Reign, and a second time after the first
Carthaginian War. The Senate made him perpetual Dictator, and styled him Divus
Augustus for his noble Actions.

CATO PRAETORIUS.
Cato Praetorius, U.C. 689.
great Grandson to Cato the Censor, Before Chapter 61.
was ever so firm to his Principles, that in his youth whilst he was brought up
in his Uncle Drusus's House, Quintus Popedius Silo, chief Magistrate of the
Marsi could not persuade him either by Bribes or Threats to say, That he would
side with the Allies. When he was Quaestor he was sent into Cyprus to fetch the
Money that King Ptolemy's Estate was sold for, and brought it safe to Rome with
great Integrity. He was so upright and just, that contrary to others, he voted
the Death of the Catilinarian Conspirators. In the Civil War between Caesar and
Pompey, he sided with the latter, and after his Overthrow, marched the Army
through the Deserts of Africa, where he delivered up his Command to Scipio that
had been Consul, as superior to him, who was but a Praetor. When his party was
beaten, he went to Utica, where advising his Son to submit to Caesar's Mercy,
he killed himself, having first read over Plato's Book of the Souls
Immortality, and Happiness after Death.

U C. (...).
MARCUS TULLIUS CICERO. Before Chapter 61.

Marcus Tullius Cicero was born at Arpinum, his Father was a Roman Knight,
descended from King Titus Tatius. At Seven and twenty years of Age he showed
his Eloquence and Boldness of Speech in the Cause between Roscius and Sulla's
Party, and immediately after to secure himself, went to Athens to follow his
Studies, and was a constant Auditor of Antiochus the Academick Philosopher,
from thence to improve his Eloquence he went into Asia, and so to Rhodes, where
Molo the Grecian, who was the greatest Master of Rhetoric in those Days, was
his Tutor, and is said to have wept when he parted with him, because he thought
the Graecians, then reputed the most eloquent Men in the World, would be
outdone by him. He was Quaestor in Sicily, and in his Aedileship condemned
Caius Verres for Extortion in his Government. He governed Cilicia under the
Title of Praetor, and cleared it from the Robbers, who had long pestered the
Country. In his Consulship he put to death all that were Confederates in
Catilin's Conspiracy: afterward he was banished by the Malice of Publius
Clodius, at the instigation of Caesar and Pompey, whom he had lashed as
severely as he formerly did Sulla's Party, upon suspicion of their aiming to
get the Government into their Hands; Piso and Gabinius the Consuls were
prevailed upon by Clodius to join in this Affair, and had for this Service the
Provinces of Macedonia and Syria assigned them. Yet soon after Pompey himself
asserting his Cause in the Senate, he was recalled, and in the Civil War sided
with him; upon whose Overthrow Caesar freely pardoned him; after Caesar was
murdered, he joined with Augustus: and declared Mark Antony an Enemy to the
Commonwealth. When Caesar, Lepidus and Antony had made themselves Triumviri,
there was no likelihood of their Agreement till Tully was cut off by the Table
of Proscription, Antony sent Executioners to kill him; and as he lay asleep at
his House at Formiae, he had warning of his approaching danger by a Crow, which
pulled him by his Cloak: they killed him in his Litter, as he was making his
Escape, and brought his Head to Antony.

MARCUS BRUTUS.
Marcus Brutus was in the Conduct of his Life like his Uncle Cato, U.C. 710.
he learned Philosophy at Athens, Before Chapter 40.
and Rhetoric at Rhodes. In his youth he was amorous; Antony, Gallus and he
were in love with Cytheris the Actress. He would not go Quaestor into Gaul,
being opposed by some good Men. He was in Cilicia with Appius Claudius: and
when his Colleague was accused of Extortion by Dolabella, he himself had
nothing laid to his Charge. In the Civil War between Caesar and Pompey he was
sent for out of Cilicia by Cato, and sided with Pompey, however Caesar pardoned
him, and sent him Proconsul into Gaul; yet notwithstanding all Caesar's
kindness to him, he was one of the Conspirators that killed him in the Senate
House. Hence being sent into Macedonia, because Caesar's old Soldiers were
incensed against him, he was overcome by Augustus at Philippi, and so in
despair desired his Friend Strato to kill him.

CAIUS CASSIUS LONGINUS.
U.C. 710.
Caius Cassius Longinus was Quaestor in Syria under Crassus, Before Chapter 40.
and after he was slain, retreated into Syria with the Remainder of the Army.
He beat Osaces, King Orodes''s General, at the River Orontes in Syria. He was
nicknamed Caryota, because he bought up the Dates in Syria, and sold them at an
unreasonable rate. When he was Tribune of the People he opposed Caesar, and in
the Civil War served under Pompey, as his Admiral. However Caesar pardoned him,
tho after all, he and Brutus were the chief of the Conspirators that assassined
him, and cried out to one that was afraid to kill him, I would have you stab
him even through me. Then having raised a great Army, and joined Brutus in
Macedonia, was overcome by Antony at Philippi, where, thinking that Brutus
suffered the same ill Fortune with himself, tho he really had worsted Caesar,
he bade his Freed Man Pandarus put an end to his unhappy Life. But some say
that Antony cried out, I have overcome him, before he had notice of his Death.

SEXTUS POMPEIUS.
Sextus Pompeius, U.C. 714.
after his Overthrow at Munda in Spain, Before Chapter 36.
and his Brother Cnaeus's Death, got together the Remainder of the Army, and
passed over into Sicily, where he broke open the Workhouses, and arming the
Slaves, blocked up the Sea, and plagued Italy, with want of Provision, by
taking all the Ships that traffick'd thither. This good Success at Sea so
puffed him up, that he declared himself the Son of Neptune, and sacrificed to
him Bulls, with gilt Horns, and a Horse. He was facetious in Conversation, for
during the Peace when he treated on Shipboard Antony and Augustus Caesar, he is
reported to have said, not improperly, Hae sunt meae Carinae: which might be
taken in two Senses, These are my Ships; or, This is my House: which Antony had
taken possession of in the Street at Rome called Carinae. But soon after Antony
broke the League, and Sextus being beat at Sea by Agrippa, Augustus's Admiral,
fled into Asia, and was killed by Antony's Soldiers.

MARC ANTONY.
U.C. 721.
Marc Antony was Julius Caesar's Companion in all his Expeditions, Before Chapter
29.
at the Feasts dedicated to Pan, kept on the Fifteenth of February, he offered
to put a Diadem upon his Head; and when he was killed, made an Order that
Divine Honors should be paid him: he dealt perfidiously with Augustus Caesar,
but was beaten by him at Mutina, starved out of Perusium, and fled into Gaul,
where he joined himself with Lepidus, and slew Decimus Brutus, having first
corrupted his Army. Thus having recruited his Forces, he returned into Italy,
and was in favor again with Caesar. When he was Triumvir his Uncle Lucius
Caesar was the first Man that he proscribed. When he was sent Commander into
Syria, he made War upon the Parthians, and was so beaten by them, that he
scarce brought off with him a third part of 15 Legions into Egypt, where he
fell in love with Cleopatra, and was routed by Augustus in a Sea Fight on the
Coast of Actium. Whence he returned to Alexandria, and sitting on his Throne in
his Royal Robes, killed himself.

CLEOPATRA Queen of Egypt.
Cleopatra, U.C. 721.
the Daughter of Ptolemy, King of Egypt, Before Chapter 29.
being banished by Ptolemey who was both her Husband and Brother, for
endeavoring to deprive him of his Kingdom; in the Civil Was presented her self
to Caesar at Alexandria, and by her Beauty and Caresses prevailed upon him to
kill Ptolemey, and settle the Kingdom upon her. She was so lewd, that she would
often prostitute her self; and so beautiful, that many lost their Lives to
possess her Love. After this she joined her Interest with Antony, and was
beaten with him at Actium, and under pretenee of sacrificing to his Ghost at
his Tomb, she put Serpents to her Breasts, and died.

FINIS.

