A HEAVEN or HELL UPON EARTH: OR, A DISCOURSE CONCERNING Conscience.

By Nathanael Vincent, M. A. Minister of the GOSPEL.

Acts 24. 16. Herein do I Exercise my self, to have a Conscience void of
Offense toward God, and toward Man.

Multi quaerunt Scientiam, pauci Conscientiam; si vero tanto studio and
sollicitudine quaereretur Conscientia; quanto quaeritur secularis and vana
scientia, citius apprehenderetur, and utilius retineretur. Bernard. de
Interior. dom. cap. 21. (...). Hierocl. in Pythag. aur. Carm. page mihi 213.
214. London, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Three Bibles and Crown at the
Lower end of Cheap Side. 1676.

TO THE Much Honored, Sir Nathanael Herne, Henry Ashurst, Sen. Esquire Mr. Abr.
D'olins, Merchant. John Gould, Esquire Mr. Kiffin, Merchant.
Grace, Mercy, and Peace be Multiplied.
Honored Sirs,
IF a Wish might be Granted, to hear the Apostle Paul in the Pulpit, one would
be ready to Wish again, that Christ or Conscience might be the Subject of his
Sermon. Were He to Preach, how would he set forth Christ, who is the Beloved
Son of God! the brightness of his Fathers Glory! who is Adored by all the
Angels! and deserves to be the Desire of all Nations! How plainly and
impartially would he deal with Conscience, examining, searching, and reproving
it, and thereby commend himself to it in the sight of God. One Vnicuique Liber
est sua Conscientia; and ad hunc Librum discutiendum and emendandum, omnes alii
inventi sunt. Bernard. De Interior. Dom. Cap. 28.
of the Fathers calls Conscience a Book, and Affirms, that other Books were
invented, that the Errata in this might be Corrected. The Scriptures themselves
were given by Inspiration of God, to this End, that the Evils of Conscience
might be Discovered, and the Man of God made Perfect, thoroughly furnished unto
all good Works.

It Is therefore a bad World, because Conscience seems to be Exiled and Banished
out of it. Conscience has in these Days lost its Power, and does not Exercise
that Authority which by right it should, as Gods Vicegerent here below: But
Men's Wills and Lusts have got the head; so that neither God is feared, nor Man
regarded: And for their own Souls, they are least of all concerned. If it be a
sad Sight to see Beggars on Horseback, and Princes Walking as Servants upon
the Earth, much more is it to be Lamented, that Men's Corruptions, which ought
to be held in perpetual Restraint, should sway and Command all; and Conscience
the mean while be slighted, stifled, stupefied, and kept under; which, as a
Prince should be Obeyed in every thing, and from God give Laws to the whole Man.

What One said of a good Magistrate, may be applied unto a good Conscience,
that (...).
It Is a Benefactor and Friend to Mankind. 'Twill never be well with us till
this have a Resurrection. This is the way to obtain a Blessing from God, the
way to have Prosperity, Trade, Reputation; (and which is more than any, than
all these) the Honor and Credit of the Christian Religion revived; which has
sunk in the esteem of many, because so little of Conscience has appeared in
those who have Professed it.

That thus it may be, is the end, both of this Book, and of its Author.

And I have Dedicated it unto you (Honored Sirs) who are of different
Persuasions, to show that great Respect I unfeignedly bear unto you All; and
because Persons of all Persuasions have need to study the Subject here Treated
of. How many bad Consciences are there of every Opinion! And if all of every
Opinion would but look well to their Consciences, and be so self-denying, as to
lay aside their Passions and their Interests: This would be one of the most
probable means to bring all to a better Agreement. They are the Carnal and
Hypocritical of every Party, who endeavor to make breaches wider, that are the
Quarrellers and Disputers. The truly Conscientious abhor Contention; the
sincere are very inclinable unto Peace.

I shall add no more, but Conclude this my Address to you with an earnest Wish,
that All of every Persuasion may imitate You All in regard of
Conscientiousness, Moderation, and Wisdom. And it is not a Complement to tell
you, that in thus Wishing, I Wish well to the whole Nation, and to the Churches
of Christ in it.

Your most Humble Servant for Jesus sake, Nathanael Vincent.

An ADDRESS TO THE Conscience of the READER.
Conscience,
MY Expectation is greater from Thee, than from any thing in the Reader
besides. I make no question, but what I have written being opposite unto the
sinful and corrupt Inclinations of men, will also be displeasing to their
Humor; but I have hope that Thou will side with me. It Is easy to convince
Thee, that Sin is to the prejudice of the whole Man; that a Redeemer is to be
prized by Sinners who are under the worst kind of Bondage; and that Holiness is
for men's Honor, and Interest, and Safety. It Is easy to convince Thee, that
those Pleasures and Advantages which are offered in Temptation, are
inconsiderable, and that it is the height of Folly to yield unto the Tempter,
to forsake an All-sufficient God, to hazard an immortal Soul, and venture the
enduring of Eternal Misery, for the sake of those Profits and Delights which
are so mixed and unsatisfactory while enjoyed; and which can continue at
longest but a very short season.

And since it is most certainly thus, O Conscience, keep not silence, produce
the Word of God, and there show how the Lord has given thee a Negative Voice,
and allows nothing to be done that may defile or wound thee. Protest loudly and
peremptorily against all Sin, call Heaven and Earth to witness, and God himself
unto thine assistance; Vigorously oppose the Enemy of Mankind, who has his
Name Apollyon, because he endeavors to destroy all. Bestirre thy self, and
join with Me in endeavoring to hinder the everlasting Ruin of every Reader
who shall take this Book into his hand.

My design is not to turn People to a Party, but to turn them unto God; that
which I preach up is Faith in our Lord Jesus, and Purity in Heart and
Conversation: And surely such a design Thou can not but approve; such a
Doctrine Thou must needs grant is faithful, sound, and consequently worthy of
all Acceptance.

O Conscience, I am pleading for God! that He who is so Great and Good may be
obeyed, and that the Sons of Men would submit their Wills to His: And this is a
thing but very equal, since their Wills are corrupt and foolish, and strongly
inclined unto what is mischievous to themselves; but His is wise and gracious,
and never commands any thing but what is really for the Profit of him that is
to yield Obedience.

I am likewise, O Conscience, pleading for Thee, that Thou may be allowed the
free Exercise of thy Authority and Power; and may be hearkened to whenever
thou do declaim against Sin, and urge unto those Duties which the Lord
requires. The design of this Book is, that Thou may be more fully enlightened;
that thou may be more pure and peaceable; that those wounds which Sin has
made in thee may be healed; and that wounds which are so intolerable may for
the future be prevented; and above all that thou may not be forced to torture
Thy self and any Reader for ever in another World.

O Conscience, next unto the Spirits gracious and powerful Concurrence, (which
with my whole Soul I do implore) the Success of this Treatise will very much
depend upon Thy Faithfulness in doing of thy Office. Bid the Reader mind what
he reads, apply to himself what he minds, practice what he applies; and having
begun to practice, never grow weary of well-doing. Tell him, it is not enough to
profess Religion, nor to Nos qui non habitu sapientiam sed mente praeferimus,
non magna eloquimur sed vivimus. Minut. Foel. page mihi 94.
talk at a great rate, nor to be highly esteemed among men Quid mihi prodest si
me continuis laudibus totus mundus attollat? Non malam Conscientiam sanat
praeconium laudantis; nec bonam vulner at conviciantis opprobrium. Augustine.
To. 7. l. 3. contra Lit. Petilian. Donatist. page mihi 168.
for Godliness, as long as God and Thou do know that his Heart is not upright
and sincere.

Now that the Readers Conscience may be better, his Heart better, his
Conversation better, and more to the Honor of God, and Credit of Christianity,
and that it may be best of all with him at Death and Judgment; is, and shall
be the Prayer of

Nathanael Vincent.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Text divided and opened. Page 3 Six Doctrines raised. 4 Doct. 1. There is
a Conscience in Man. ibid. This proved first by the Light of Nature. 5 Secondly
by Scripture-Arguments. 9 Thirdly, it is evident by Experience. 12 The Reason of
the Name Conscience. 25 Several Descriptions of Conscience, out of Origin,
Aquinas, etc. 29 Conscience defined. 31 Conscience is a Power in the Soul of
Man. ibid. Conscience implies some Knowledge of the Will of God. 32 A
Threefold Light whereby Conscience is directed. ibid. Conscience urges a
compliance with the Will of God. 37 Conscience bears witness. 40 This Witness
is an Accusation upon doing evil. 42 Six things observable concerning the
Accusations of Conscience. ibid. This witness of Conscience is an Apology upon
weldoing. p. 46. It Is the Office of Conscience to Judge. 48. It passes a
sentence of absolution. ibid. And of condemnation. 49. Six reasons why God has
placed a Conscience in Man. 54. Use. 1. Of Information. Eight weighty Truths
inferred from this Doctrine. 59 Use. 2. Be excited to bless God for giving
such a power as Conscience, this urged by several arguments. 63 Conscience of
all other Powers does struggle most to prevent men's ruin. 65. Use. 3. Of
Encouragement to Ministers Conscience sides with them. 67 Use. 4. Think not you
shall ever be able to extirpate Conscience. 68 Use. 5. Be exhorted to heed
Conscience. 69 Motives to persuade unto this. 70 Doct. 2. To have a good
Conscience should be every ones greatest care. 73 Several things premised that
we may the better understand in what sense Conscience since the fall may be
said to be good. 74 1. The goodness of Conscience lies in its illumination and
being rightly informed. 81 What kind of knowledge, the knowledge of a good
Conscience is. 82 Of an erring Conscience and how far it binds. 83 Of a
dubious Conscience. 85 Of a scrupulous Conscience. 86 The way to have
Conscience well informed. 88 2. The goodness of Conscience lies in the due
exercise of its authority and power. 92 The Power and Authority of Conscience
is of great extent. page 92 Directions given how this power of Conscience may
be put forth. 97 3. The Goodness of Conscience lies in its be wakefull and
attentive. 100 How Conscience may be made attentive. 104. 4. The Goodness of
Conscience lies in its tenderness. 105 The properties and signs of a tender
Conscience. 106 How Conscience may be made tender. 111 5. The Goodness of
Conscience lies in its faithfulness in witness bearing. 119 The way to have
Conscience faithful in its testimony. 122 6. The goodness of Conscience lies in
its purity. ibid. The characters of a pure Conscience. ibid How Conscience may
be made pure. 127 7. The goodness of Conscience lies in the calmness and peace
of it. 131 True peace of Conscience set forth. 132 How this peace may be
attained. 137 8. The goodness of Conscience lies in its being void of offense.
142 Directions to prevent taking offense. 144 Directions to prevent giving
offense. 145 Wherein the acts of a good Conscience and the acts of the Spirit
of God are to be distinguished. 147 Eight reasons why it should be every ones
care to have a good Conscience. 152 Use 1. Of Reproof which is directed, 160 1.
To those whose Conscience are ignorant. 161 2. To those whose Consciences are
large. 164 3. To those whose Consciences are at peace, but that peace has no
solid ground. 166 Ten signs of a false peace of Conscience. 167 How
unreasonable to give way to this false peace. p. 176 4. They are to be
reproved, who offer violence to their Consciences. 181 Of a Seared Conscience.
ibid. Of a Despairing Conscience, and the torture of it, in five particulars.
183 5. They are to be reproved who go about to wound and to ensnare the
Consciences of others. 186 Use 2. Of Direction, 1. How secure Consciences may
be awakened. 189 2. How awakened and troubled Consciences may be comforted. 202
Several Mistakes about trouble of Conscience. ibid. Six sorts of trouble, which
are not right. 203 Eight differences between MELANCHOLY and trouble of
Conscience. 207 Right trouble of Conscience described in eleven particulars.
213 Ten grounds of Consolation proposed for the comforting of troubled
Consciences. 226 Objections of those under trouble of Conscience, 1. Concerning
the greatness of Sin; answered. 251 2. It Is too late to come to Christ;
answered. ibid. 3. They fear they are judicially hardened; answered. 254 4.
They are not able to come to Christ; answered. 255 5. They have backsliden
after Illumination; answered. 257 6. They do all for fear of Hell; answered.
258 Use 3. Of Exhortation: Let it be your care to have a good Conscience, this
backed with eight arguments. 260 Use 4. Of Advice to them that have a good
Conscience, Be thankful for this unspeakable Gift. 270 Compassionate them that
are without it. 272 Keep a good Conscience. p. 274 Several Directions how to
keep a good Conscience. ibid. 275, 276. Be not acted only by Conscience, but
let Love constrain you to Obedience. 276 Doct. 3. A good Conscience will make
men set themselves as before God continually. 277 We are always before God.
278 How we are to look upon God when we set our selves before him. 279 What
it is to set our selves before God. ibid. 280, etc. Why we should do thus. 283
The Application. 288 Doct. 4. A good Conscience has a great and lasting
influence upon the Life and all the Actions. 291 There is no Action but
Conscience is to examine. ibid. A good Conscience will not admit of loose
Principles. 292 'Twill not abuse Christian Liberty. ibid. It takes notice what
Principles we are acted from. 293 It eyes the matter of our Actions. 294 Our
Obligation to the Moral Law. ibid. The Precepts of the Gospel. 295 A good
Conscience looks to the Manner of our Obedience. ibid. And to the End of it.
ibid. A good Conscience particularly has an influence upon our holy Duties. 296
The works of our Calling. 297 Our Words and Discourses. 299 The Manner of
spending our Time. ibid. Our Natural Actions. 300 Our Recreations. ibid. Our
carriage in Relations. 301 Behavior in Prosperity and Adversity, etc. p. 302
Application. 303 Doct. 5. A good Conscience steels a man's heart with courage,
and makes him fearless before his Adversaries. 305 The Grounds of this
Fearlesness. 306 The Uses. 307 Doct. 6. Those that are truly Conscientious,
love their Enemies, and wish them no worse than if they were their Brethren.
308 The Reasons of this. ibid. 309 The Application. 309, 310 The Conclusion of
the whole Discourse in an Address to Conscience. 311, etc.


There is in Man a Conscience.
ACTS 23. 1. And Paul earnestly beholding the Council said, Men and Brethren, I
have lived in all good Conscience before God until this Day.
IN the foregoing Chapter the Apostle Paul declares at large unto the Jews, the
miraculous manner of his conversion to the Christian Faith: and being thus
converted, he was very forward to propagate that Faith which once he
endeavored to destroy. He tells them plainly, that in opposing Jesus of
Nazareth, he had been (...), a fighter against God himself; and that the Stone
which heretofore he had stumbled at, is that chief Cornerstone which is laid
in Zion for a Foundation; on which whoever builds, his building shall never
fall. This he perceived evidently in his way to Damascus, as he was journeying
with Authority and Commission to persecute the Christians; Christ himself both
meets and stops him. at Midday he saw a Light from Heaven above the Brightness
of the Sun; which did both strike him Blind with its excessive Shining, and yet
also opened his Eyes, to behold his former Error, in setting himself against
the Lord of Life and Glory.

The design of this Relation was to convince the Jews, and to persuade them to
embrace that Jesus who was crucified indeed, that he might redeem them from the
curse, which they could never escape by any other means; but lives by the
power of God, and is exalted far above all Heavens that he might fill all
things.

Well; They hear the Apostle with patience, until he told them of his
Commission to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles; and then a most Satanical Envy
and Fury stops their Ears, and they cry out; Away with such a Fellow from the
Earth. And truly from the Earth they had quickly sent him, if the chief Captain
Lysias, understanding that he was a Roman (that is; though a Jew by birth, yet
having the privilege of a Roman Citizen) N^runt historiae Romanae periti,
quosdam in provinciae civitate fuisse donatos, si de Republica been meriti hanc
sibi mercedem a Proconsulibus rogarent; ita nihil absurdi est natum fuisse
Romanum civem, qui tamen ex provincia remota oriundus nunquam in Italia pedem
posuisset. Calv. in Act. Apost.
had not rescued him out of their hands.

Being thus delivered from the multitude, he is brought and set before the
Council. He stands alone indeed to make his defense; but as the Lord stood by
him to strengthen him, so he brings with him a good Conscience, which was as
much, nay, more to make him undaunted, then if he had had a thousand witnesses
of his innocence. And Paul earnestly beholding the Council, said, Men and
Brethren, I have lived in all good Conscience before God unto this day.

The words contain the Apostles profession, in which several particulars are
very remarkable.

1. He professes that he had lived in good Conscience; he speaks of Conscience
to his Adversaries, that he might awaken Their's to do their Duty, that hereby
they might be hindered from doing wrong to him, but more wrong to themselves by
unrighteous judgment. He farther adds, that his Conscience was good, and did
not at all accuse, but clear him.

2. He had acted as before God; and had good Assurance that God approved of
what he had done: he had cause to be confident, that the Supreme and Most
Righteous Judge would not condemn him; but was pleased at that, for which the
Jews were so much offended. Chrisost. observes (...). Chrysostom. in Act. Apost
(...).
that the Apostle speaks thus to take away the Jews prejudice against him, and
to convince them that he had done nothing which was injurious to them, or
worthy of the bonds which were upon him.

3. He had approved himself unto God and Conscience in all things, he was not
ruled by carnal interest, or fleshly Wisdom, but there was simplicity and godly
sincerity, in the whole course of his conversation, since his first conversion
to the Christian Faith.

4. Neither was this only for a while, but even unto that very day wherein
there were such loud exclamations against him, as if he were unfit to live any
longer in the World.

5. You are to take notice of the persons before whom he professes all this;
and those were the Council of the Jews. And;

1. He steadfastly and earnestly looks upon them, to show both his Courage and
his Innocence: he is not afraid to face them, neither does he cast down his
eyes through guilt or shame.

2. He calls them not only Men, but Brethren. His Brethren they were according
to the Flesh, and though full of hatred against him, yet he had a Brotherly
love to them, and his Hearts desire was that they might be saved.

I shall observe from the Text, several points of Doctrine.

1. God has placed a Conscience in Man. The Apostle had a Conscience and 'twas
a good Conscience, all others have a Conscience likewise either good or evil.

2. To have a good conscience should be every ones greatest care. Every one
should strive to resemble the Apostle, and be able to say, I have lived in good
Conscience.

3. A good Conscience will make men to set themselves as before God
continually. I have lived in good Conscience before God.

4. A good Conscience has a great and lasting influence upon the Life and all
the Actions. I have lived in all good Conscience, and that unto this day.

5. A good Conscience makes a Man fearless, and and steels his Heart with
courage, when he stands before his Enemies. Paul earnestly beheld the Council.

6. Those who are truly Conscientious, love their adversaries, and wish them no
worse then if they were their brethren. Paul said, Men and Brethren:

Doct. 1. God has placed a Conscience in Man. Such a thing as Conscience is
supposed in the Text, else 'twere not capable of being good or bad. To have a
Conscience is common to all; though to have a good one, as the Apostle had, is
very rare.

In the handling of this Doctrine, I shall undertake three things. First I
shall prove that there is a Conscience in Man. Secondly, I shall tell you what
this Conscience is. Thirdly, I shall assign the Reasons why the Lord has given
unto Man a Conscience. After these three things are dispatched, will follow the
Application.

1. In the first place I am to prove, That there is a Conscience in Man There
is great need that this should be made evident, because Ita in multorum animis
extincta est conscientia, ut licet interdum tacitos ejusdem stimulos sentiant;
tamen quae de ea audiant pro ludibrio habeant; ac si figmentum, somnium and
inane (...), esset Conscientia. Baldwinus, De Conscientia, lib. 1. cap. 1.
many regard Conscience no more, then if it were a (...) a mere Bugbear, to
fright those who are timorous; then if it were a dream or fancy. But as the
reason why the fool says in his Heart there is no God, Ps. 14. 1. it is not
because there is no God indeed: but because being afraid of God, he wishes
there were none at all. So the true cause why stupid sinners say there is no
such thing as Conscience, is this, Conscience does accuse, and reproach, and
disquiet them, and they first wishing there were no such thing, employ their
corrupt reason to argue against it. But I shall prove that there is really a
Conscience in Man three ways. First, By the Light of Nature. Secondly, By
Scripture. And lastly, By Experience.

1. That there is such a thing as Conscience is evident. By the Light of
Nature. Though there is a further light which shines from the Word of God, yet
the light of Nature is much to be regarded: for those Truths are of very great
importance and use, that by this light are made manifest. Praemisit Deus
Naturam Magistrum, submissurus propheliam, ut facilius credas prophetiae,
discipulus naturae. Tertul.
The light of Nature informs us of an eternal Power and Godhead, Romans 1. 20.
The same light also tells us of a Conscience, which is ever with us, always
observes us, and unto whose Power and Authority we ought to submit our solves.
The Apostle speaks fully to this purpose, Romans 2. 14. 15. The Gentiles which
have not the Law, are a Law unto themselves, which show the work of the Law
written in their Hearts, their Conscience also bearing them Witness, and their
Thoughts the mean while accusing or else excusing one another.

1. There is a Law written in the Hearts of the Gentiles. They were not
altogether unacquainted with the duties of the first Table; but knew that as
there is a God, so this God is to be loved, pleased, praised, served; and that
there should be a trusting in him; that he should be Worshipped with a pure
mind. 'Twas the saying of Cato. Si Deus est animus, nobis ut carmina dicunt,
Hic tibi praecipue sit pura mente colendus, Cato De moribus, lib. 1. did. 1.
If God be a Spirit then with a pure mind chiefly he is to be Worshipped. But
as to the second Table of the Law, they were more fully instructed concerning
the duties therein required. They knew that Parents were to be honored, that
Murder was to be abhorred, that Adultery was not to be committed, that Theft
was a sin to be avoided, that they were not to bear false Witness against
others, nor to Covet what belonged to them. Now by this Law in their Hearts,
the Consciences of the Heathens were informed, and obliged; and hereby they
were able to discern the difference between Good and Evil. Seneca says, that
Scias subesse animis etiam ad pessima abductis, boni sensum, nec ignorariturpe
sed negligi. Sen. Epist. 97.
there is a sense of good even in those minds that are carried away unto the
Commission of the greatest Evils, neither are they ignorant what is abominable,
but neglect what they understand.

2. The Consciences of the Heathens did bear them witness, in this respect the
Lord may be said not to have left himself without a witness, even in them to
whom his written Word never came. The Gentiles took notice of something within
themselves, which as it did urge them to what was good, and endeavored to
restrain them from evil, so it took notice of all they did, and was ready to
witness for them or against them, according as the Law written in their Hearts
was observed or transgressed. It Is a notable injunction of Pythagoras;
(g)(...), Pythag. Aur. Cor.
Above all others reverence thy self, that is; chiefly regard Conscience the
witness within thee, and be afraid and ashamed to do any thing before this
witness, which may be matter of just accusation against thee.

3. The Thoughts of the Gentiles did accuse them upon their doing Evil. These
accusations were accompanied with great Torment; and this torment was the more
tormenting because Conscience could not be avoided, but guilty sinners were
forced to hear the disquieting reproaches of it. The Fable concerning Tityus,
who after he attempted to Ravish Latona, was adjudged to have a Vulture to feed
upon his Liver, which grew with the Moon, and consequently was still the
Vultures food; Natal. Com. lib. c. 19.
did signify the gripings of a guilty Conscience for sin, which are incessant.
The Furies which the Poets talk of, are the torments of an accusing Conscience;
and such kind of punishments are a great deal worse than the severest judge on
Earth is able to inflict, Juvenal, Satyr. 13. speaks notably to this purpose.

-- Cur tamen hos tu
Evasisse putes, quos diri conscia facti
Men's habet attonitos, et sur do verbere caedit
Occultum quatiente animo tortore flagellum?
Poena autem vehemens et multo suaevor illis
Quas et Caeditius gravis invenit, aut Rhadamanthus
Nocte dieque suum gestare in pectore testem.
Which verses may be thus translated into English.

But think thou, he escapes, whose conscience makes
Whips that, unheard, his guilty Soul still shakes?
The Judge Caeditius cannot here invent,
Nor Rhadamant in Hell, a punishment
To equal his, that is day and night oppressed,
Bearing about his Witness in his breast
4. The Thoughts of the Gentiles did excuse them, upon well doing. They found a
great satisfaction, in going according to the dictates of their own
Consciences; and this tended very much to their support Conscientia rectae
voluntatis maxima consolatio rerum incommodarum. Cicero.
under the greatest calamities that befell them; their sleep was sweet, and so
were their enjoyments; nay, Adversity it self was sweetened, when Conscience
gave them its approbation. Tully speaks excellently Illud vero est hominis
magni and sapientis, libidinem, odium, invidiam, metum, cupiditatesque omnes
amovere; maximeque, aestimare conscientiam mentis suae, quam ab Diis
immortalibus accepimus, quae a nobis divelli non potest. Quae si optimorum
consiliorum atque factorum testis inomni vit a nobis erit, sine ullo metu, and
summa cum honestate vivemus. Cicer. Orat. pro A. Cluentio.
That is the part of one that would be Great and Wise, to put away Lust, and
Hatred, and Envy, and Fear, and all carnal Affections; and most of all to mind
his Conscience. This we have received from God, and this cannot be separated
from us. And if this be a witness to us, that we follow and practice the best
Counsel, our Life will be without Fear, and with the greatest Honesty. You see
what contentment and peace did ensue, when the Heathens made it their care not
to go contrary to the light in their own minds. And though I dare not affirm,
because Conscience did excuse them, that God did justify them, (for there is
no way of being justified before God, that is revealed to us, but by Faith in
our Lord Jesus) yet it is not at all disagreeable to Truth, to say that the
satisfaction which they had, was some reward of their well-doing, and a very
great encouragement thereunto. Thus it appears by the light of Nature that
there is a Conscience in Man.

2. This Truth is more fully evident by Scripture. This Book of Scripture has
no Error in it, it is given by inspiration of God, who as he cannot be deceived
himself, so he cannot lie unto others. Titus 1. 2. Now if you hearken to the
Scripture, that there is a Conscience may be proved many ways.

1. Conscience is often expressly spoken of. The Lord who made Man, and who
perfectly knows what is in Man; tells us of such a thing as Conscience. Not
only in the Text is Conscience mentioned, but in diverse other places. Heb. 9.
9. Which was a figure (speaking of the Tabernacle) for the time then present,
in which were offered both Gifts and Sacrifices for Sins, which could not make
him that did the Service perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience. The
Conscience of Man could not be purified or purged by the Legal Sacrifices, but
all these were typical of that Sacrifice which Christ offered up of himself
unto God, which alone can purge the Conscience from dead Works, Heb. 9. 14. So
also 2 Cor. 4. 2. We have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not
walking in craftyness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully, but by
manifestation of the truth commending our selves to every man's Conscience in
the sight of God. We are to speak unto Conscience to commend our selves unto
Conscience: how could this be, were there not a Conscience?

2. That work of the Spirit called Conviction, proves a Conscience. When the
Spirit comes to work upon any, he first convinces them of Sin, and afterward
of Righteousness, Joh. 16. 8. he first shows by what they are fallen, and then
how they may be raised and recovered. But Conscience is that which is the
Subject of this Conviction. When Christ said unto the Scribes and Pharisees,
who brought an Adulteress before him; He that is without Sin among you let him
first cast a Stone at her it is said, when they heard it, being convicted by
their own Conscience, Apparet hic quanta vis est malae Conscientiae. Quum impii
isti hypocritae Christum suis cavillis eludere in animo haberent; simul tamen
ac eorum conscientias una voce pungit; perculsi diffugiunt hoc malleo frangenda
est hypocritarum superbia. Calv. in Johan.
they went out one by one, beginning at the eldest even unto the last, Joh. 8.
7, 9. When the Law came with power upon the Apostle, and 'twas interpreted, and
the extent of it showed by the Spirit, Sin revived, and he died, Romans 7. 9.
that is, his Conscience was awakened to take notice of Sin, and he perceived,
that he was a dead, condemned man by Law; and that there was no way to be
delivered without a Mediator. In conviction the Conscience is struck at, there
is the alarm heard, which causes such Terror and Confusion; and if there were
no Conscience there could be no Conviction.

3. Sinning against Conscience hightens transgerssion, but this supposes a
Conscience to be sinned against. Our Lord says plainly, He that knows his
Masters will, and goes against the Light of his Conscience, prepares not
himself, nor does according to the will of his Lord, he shall be beaten with
many stripes, Luke 12. 47. When sinners do not like to retain God in their
knowledge; when they are troubled because Conscience puts them in mind that the
Lord observes them; when they imprison as it were the Truth in Unrighteousness,
and stifle the Light that stirs in them, because they love the works of
Darkness; this is to sin with an high hand, and will add much both unto Guilt
and Punishment.

4. Several Duties which are enjoined and urged in Scripture, suppose a
Conscience in us, because Conscience is a Principal agent in the performance of
them. We are commanded to search and try our ways, that we may turn unto the
Lord our God, Lam. 3. 40. but it is the work of Conscience thus to call us to an
account; and to examine how our Actions, and that Rule which is given us, have
agreed together. We are commanded to try and prove our selves, whether we be
in the Faith, whether Christ be in us yea or no? 2 Cor 13. 5. Now it is
Conscience which takes notice of the Characters of true and unfeigned Faith
which the holy Ghost has given; it is Conscience also which applies these
Characters; and then draws the conclusion either that we are not believers if
our Faith be dead, and we only name the name of Christ, but have no will to
depart from iniquity: or that we are Believers if our Faith purify our hearts,
if it work by love, if it overcome the world, so that all things are counted
loss that we may win Christ who is truly precious. Finally we are commanded to
judge our selves that we may not be condemned with the world. 1 Cor. 11. 31,
32. But this judging is an act of Conscience. And truly it Judges under God,
and by his Authority, and therefore its Judgment is the more to be minded.

5. All men in Scripture are divided into good and bad, and in both there is a
Conscience. The Apostle tells us, that in the defiled and unbelieving there is
a Conscience though a polluted one. Tit. 1. 15. and though for a while it may
seem to be asleep, though it may be so unfaithful as seldom to admonish; yet at
length 'twill awake, and then 'twill be found that it knows and remembers all
misdoings. The Regenerate likewise have a Conscience which is enlightened and
purged, and renewed, by the Blood, and Word, and Spirit of our Lord Jesus.

3. As it is clear from Scripture, that there is a Conscience in Man, so it is
evident by experience. And here I shall make an appeal unto every ones sense
and observation, in three following questions.

1. What is it that speaks to you when Nemo minus solus, quam cum solus.
alone, and tells you that there is an All-seeing God, but Conscience? NOTE.
Whenever Conscience performs its office aright, it is enlightened and acted by the
Spirit of God. The Spirit therefore is to be acknowledged, for without him
Conscience would have no light or life or power or feeling.
It Is this which brings to your remembrance, that the Lord who is so holy is
always present, that no darkness or retired corner can hide you from him, but
he compasses your path and your lying down, and is acquainted with all your
ways.

2. What is it but Conscience that forbids the yiedling to temptations even
unto the most secret sins? Secret places can hide the Sinner from the eye of
man; and there are some Sins, namely heart wickednesses which man can take no
cognizance of: and yet we are checked when we are giving way to these, which
shows there is a Conscience as well as a God privy to them. When Satan and a
deceitful Heart do plead for Sin, and persuade to it by this argument, that
never any are likely to know it; yet even then conscience declares against it,
and cries out Oh do not that abominable thing which God hates. 'Twas well said
by one of the Ancients to the Gentiles: Vos conscios timetis, nos conscientiam.
You are afraid lest others should be conscious to what you do, we fear even our
own Consciences.

3. What is it but Conscience that impresses a fear of a Judgment which is to
come? Beatus erit quisquis non sine memoria divini judicii omnia gesserit.
Hillar. in Psalm. 118.

Rythm. Bernard. Expavesco miser multum, Judicis severi vultum. Quem latebit
nil occultum, Nec manebit quid inultum. Et quis nostrum non timebit, Quando
Judex apparebit, Ante quem ignis ardebit, Peccatores qui delebit?

It many times with a great deal of Power does mind us of such Scriptures: God
has appointed a day wherein he will Judge the World in Righteousness, Acts 17.
31. We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his Body, according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5. 10. And Conscience knowing these Terrors of the Lord,
persuade Men to Repentance, and to labor, that whether present or absent, they
may be accepted of him. 'Twas a saying of Tertullian, Conscientia est
prae-judicium extremi judicii. Conscience is a Judging before the last
Judgment; but still it tells of, and referrs to the last Judgment, that hereby
the Heart may be overawed.

4. What is it but Conscience which urges unto secret Duties, the Omission of
which the World can take no notice of? There is a Monitor within us, which
tells us that our Father is, and sees in secret, and will reward openly such as
secretly and sincerely seek him, Mat. 6. When our Hearts (the desperate
wickedness whereof is not quite cured in the best of us) draw back from Prayer
in the Closet, Conscience then presses to it, and pleads the Command, the
Advantage, what an Evidence it is of uprightness to be often with God alone.
This same Monitor likewise puts us upon the searching into, and study of the
Scripture, for it is the Character and property of the Blessed Man to have his
Delight in the Law of the Lord, and in that Law to Meditate Day and Night,
Psalm. 1. 2.

5. What is it but Conscience that applies Truths particularly, which are more
generally delivered in the Ministry of the Gospel? I grant indeed that this
application is the Work of the Spirit of God, but the Conscience of Man is made
use of herein by the Holy Spirit. The Preacher shoots a great many Arrows. The
Spirit does direct them to particular Persons, and Conscience takes notice
where the Arrow sticks. The same Language which was in the Prophet Nathan's
Mouth to David after his so foul a fall, is in the Mouth of Conscience. The
Word speaks in the general, The Soul that sins shall dye, the Wages of Sin is
Death. But then Conscience cries out, Thou art the man that have sinned, and
therefore Death and Destruction will quickly over-take thee, unless there be a
coming by Faith unto a Savior, and a turning out of thy Destructive ways.

6. What is it but Conscience which does comment upon Afflictions? Folly is
bound up in thy heart, says Conscience, therefore thou feel the Rod to drive
it far from thee. Thou art Worldly-minded, therefore thou meetest with Losses
to wean thee from that, which if still doated on, will both deceive and ruin
thee. Thou art too much like a slothful Servant, therefore, says Conscience,
Affliction is sent to make thee mend thy pace, and follow them who through
Faith and Patience inherit the Promises. -- Tempestuous times
Amaze poor mortals and object their crimes. Herbert.

When Joseph's Brethren were all put into Ward in Egypt, their Consciences
commented upon their Restraint, and brought their injurious handling of their
Brother to remembrance, Genesis 42. 21. And they said one to another we are verily
guilty concerning our Brother, in that we saw the anguish of his Soul when he
besought us, and we would not hear, therefore is this Distress come upon us.

7. What is it but Conscience that traces us in all our Actions? Conscience
takes notice what Principles we are Acted by, what Ends we aim at; it Observes
both the Matter and the Manner of our Actions. Conscience Examines whether Love
to the Lord constrain us to his Work, whether the pleasing, honoring, and
enjoying of God be our great Design, whether our Hearts and Affections be in
our Services. After thy Praying, and Hearing, and Receiving are ended, do
thou not find something within thee, running over all thy performances, and
calling thee to Account, whether thou have Prayed with Faith and Fervency,
whether thou have heard believingly and with attention, whether thou have
received worthily? This is Conscience.

8. What is it but Conscience which haunts us upon miscarriages? Its Mouth is
full of Reproaches, and these Reproaches are unanswerable. After sins,
especially presumptuous ones have been committed, there is a secret gnawing
within, and that is the Worm of Conscience. (...). Plutarch. De his qui sero a
Numine puniuntur, page mihi 554.
Plutarch compares the pleasure of sin which is offered in Temptation, unto a
Bait, and this is presently and greedily devoured, but afterward Conscience,
as an Hook, holds the sinner, and does torment him. It Is a sore trouble to have
an House that is really haunted with Spirits, to be disturbed with noises,
voices, and frighting Apparitions. It Is likewise exceeding grievous to be
haunted with an evil Conscience, to have this continually Objecting the guilt
which we have contracted, and affrighting us with the Wrath of God, the Chains
of Darkness, and the Vengeance of Eternal Fire, which are threatened against the
Workers of Iniquity.

9. It Is Conscience reflecting upon our sincerity which produces such Peace and
Satisfaction. The Persons whom we converse with, and that take notice of our
Actions, are not competent Judges of our sincerity; for it is not in their Power
to look into our Hearts: But Conscience, as it does discern, so it approves
uprightness. That Italian Philosopher and Poet, Petrarch, has an Excellent
saying, What though thy Neighbors celebrate thy Name? they deceive one
another, and all deceive thee. Be not lifted up with the Testimony of others,
there is within thee a more uncorrupted and certain Witness, and that is thy
Conscience; ask this concerning thy self, and give credit to it. And in another
place he says, Vulgus te notum faciet, virtus clarum, conscientia securum
Petrarch.
The People will make thee known, Virtue will make thee Famous, but it is
Conscience approving thee that makes thee comfortable and secure.

Oh Conscience, how insuperable are thy Consolations! Though Satan the Accuser
of the Brethren call me Hypocrite, though Romish Pseudo-Catholicks do call me
Heretic, though furious and uncharitable Protestants do call me Schismatic,
yet if Conscience rightly informed by the Word of God say I am sincere, I shall
have Peace, whoever endeavor to disturb me.

Thus have I proved at large that there is a Conscience in Man: I now add these
following particulars.

1. This thing, called Conscience, is in every one; there is no Man without it.
You may as well suppose a Man without an Understanding as without a Conscience;
and without a power to know any thing, as without a power to reflect upon
himself. Every reasonable Soul, being capable both of Sin and Grace, is endued
with a power of reflecting upon it self, that sin may be condemned, and Grace
may be approved. All are called upon to consider their ways, Hag. 1. 5. 7. but
to take our own ways into consideration, is the work of Conscience, Conscience
therefore is in all. Let none therefore sin presumptuously and securely, as if
they had no Conscience at present to Observe them, or at any time to Reproach
and torture them.

2. This Conscience, when awakened, will deal plainly with the greatest. It
regards not the high Estate of Persons, but will tell them their own without
Flattery. Pharaoh at first cries out, Who is the Lord, that I should Obey his
Voice? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go, Exodus 5. 2. But
afterward the Lords Miracles which he wrought, and the Plagues which he
inflicted upon the Egyptians, awakened the Conscience of Pharaoh, and he cries
out unto Moses and Aaron, I have sinned, the Lord is Righteous, and I and my
People are wicked, Exodus 9. 27. He speaks this Language unto Moses, because
Conscience had before spoken the same Language to him, and had told him of his
sin and wickedness, and the Righteousness of that God whom he had exalted
himself against.

Conscience did fly in the Face of Belshazzar, though so great a Monarch, when
the Hand did write his doom upon the Wall, and put him into such a
consternation, Sa. Danyel. Life and Reign of Henry 1 page 65, 66.
that his countenance was changed, the joints of his Loins were loosed, and his
Knees smote one against another, Dan. 5. 6. After King Henry the First had put
out the Eyes of Robert his Eldest Brother, and had lost William his Eldest and
only Son in a Storm at Sea, this sudden clap of Gods Judgment did make his
Conscience shrink with terror; his sleeps were very tumultuous and full of
Affrightments, wherein he would often rise, and take his Sword, and be in Act
as if he defended himself against assaults of his Person: And the Historian
says, the King was never seen to Laugh afterward. Sir Walter Rawleigh
Observes, how the Consciences of Kings have been startled when Death has been
within view, and have forced them to do what before they refused, and then adds
these words, Hist. of the World, lib. 5. c. 6. Sect. 12. page 669.
O eloquent, just, and mighty Death! whom none could advise, thou have
persuaded; what none has dared, thou have done; and whom all the World has
flattered, thou only have cast out of the World and despised: thou have drawn
together all the far-stretched greatness; all the Pride, Cruelty, and Ambition
of Man, and covered it over with these two narrow words, Hic jacet, here it all
lies buried. Conscience respects not the Persons of Princes, but will fly in
the Face of the proudest of them when God does give it a Commission.

3. Conscience is not to be escaped; we can no more fly from Conscience than
we can run away from our selves. When the Lord gives this Officer a Command and
Power to speak, we are forced to hear it: as David speaks concerning God
himself, Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? Whither shall I flee from thy
presence? If I ascend into Heaven, thou art there; if I make my Bed in Hell,
behold, thou art there; if I take the wings of the Morning and fly to the
uttermost parts of the Sea, thy Hand will reach me; if I say the darkness shall
cover me, the Night shall be light about me, Psalm. 139. 7-11. So truly these
words may in part be applied unto Conscience. Whither shall we go from our own
Spirits? whither shall we flee from the presence of our Consciences? 'Twill go
after us to Heaven, 'twill follow us down to Hell; if we travel into the
remotest Regions, we cannot shake off Conscience, but 'twill be our Companion
and Observer. No darkness can hide any thing from its view, but the Night
shines as the Day, the darkness and the light are both alike to it. Hieroclus
upon Pythagoras calls Conscience (...) a Keeper most intimate and unavoidable.
Nec fugere nec fugare potes, You can neither fly from it, nor cause it to fly
from you.

Very Devout is that Meditation of Bernard. Peccata mea celare non possum
quoniam quocunque vado conscientia mea mecum est, secum portans quid in ea
posui, sive bonum sive malum: Servat vivo, restituet defuncto depositum quod
servandum accepit. Si male facio adest illa, si autem been facere videor and
inde extollor, adest illa: adest vivo, sequitur mortuum; ubique mihi gloria vel
confusio inseparabilis pro qualitate depositi. Sic sic in domo propria, a
propria familia, habeo accusatores, testes, judices and tortores. Bernard.
Meditat. devot. cap. 13. page (mihi) 1060.
My sins I am not able to conceal, because where ever I go my Conscience is
continually with me, and carries with it what I have put in it, whether it be
good or evil. It keeps for me living, it will restore to me dying, what I have
delivered to be kept by it. If I do evil, Conscience is present; if I seem to
do good, and am lifted up with Pride, Conscience is present. It accompanies me
all my Life long; 'twill follow me after Death, and will be my inseparable
either Glory or Confusion, according to the Quality of what it has Observed in
me. Thus, thus in my own House, in my own Soul, I have Accusers, Witnesses,
Judges, Tormentors, if I dare to give way unto Iniquity.

4. Though Conscience may seem to be quite banished, and for the present does
no more its Office, than if there were no such thing, yet this Exiled and
Banished thing will at last return; or to speak more properly, this Conscience,
that was imagined to be in a dead sleep, or altogether careless, will show that
it has been too much present with the guilty all along. These six particulars
are here to be Observed.

1. Some great Affliction may awaken Conscience. When the Widow with whom
Elijah sojourned, her Son fell sick, and his sickness was so sore, that there
was no breath left in him, her Conscience was exceedingly startled, and she
said to Elijah, What have I to do with thee, O thou Man of God, art thou come
unto me to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay my Son? 1 Kings 17. 17, 18.
The Locusts which were so very grievous that came over all the Land of Egypt,
extorted a Confession from Pharaoh's Conscience, though his Heart was before
hardened: He called for Moses and Aaron in haste, and said, I have sinned
against the Lord and against you; now therefore forgive, I pray thee, my sin
this once, and entreat the Lord your God, that he may take away from me this
Death only, Exodus 10. 16, 17. How does Affliction give new Eyes, and make sin
appear in other colors than before it seemed to have! When the Body of a
sinner is first struck with a Disease, and the mind apprehends this Sickness
may prove deadly, and that now being Arrested, the sinner must quickly appear
before the Judgment Seat. Ohthen, what a commotion is there in the Soul, and
how fierce and clamourous is the Conscience which before was deeply silent!

2. Conscience may awake after a fall into some scandalous sin. When the long
covered Hypocrisy is detected, and the sly sinner which waxed worse and worse,
and yet was secure, at length does commit some sin that the World cries shame
on: Oh then Conscience may join in with the Worlds clamors, Non aurem solam
percutit iracundia criminantis, verum etiam conscientiam mordet veritas
criminis. August. l. 3. contra lit. Petilian. Tom. 7.
and tell him that now his sin has found him out, and that Heaven has revealed
his iniquity, and that because he has despised God, he has been suffered to do
that which has made himself to be lightly esteemed.

3. Conscience may awake at the hearing of a powerful Sermon. The messengers of
the Lord are commanded to lift up their Voices like a Trumpet, and the design
is to startle Conscience, and that sinners may be made sensible of and to know
their Transgressions, Isaiah 58. 1. God speaks thus to the Prophet Ezekiel,
chap. 6. 11. Smite with thine hand, and stamp with thy foot, and say, Alas! for
all the evil abominations of the House of Israel. These gestures, this
earnestness and crying out of abominations, is used to affect the Hearts which
before were stupid. And truly the Word of God has oftentimes taken impression,
even upon those whose Souls were more than ordinarily senseless. The Apostles
hearers were mockers, and yet the Word being set home they were pricked at the
Heart, (and said,) Men and Brethren what shall we do? Act. 2. 37. Now when the
Word does awaken the Conscience there is more ground to hope that God has a
design to work a saving change, and that the troubles of Spirit are but as it
were the pangs which fore-run the new Birth.

4. Conscience may awake when Death is within view. I grant indeed that it is
too common for the ungodly to die stupid, and that there may be no bands in
their death, Psalm. 73. but yet experience shows that the approach of death does
also fill many ungodly ones with horror and amazement. What made Balaam to cry
out, let me dye the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his?
Number. 23. 10. Surely he had pre-apprehensions how terrible a thing it is for the
ungodly to dye. When nature is almost spent and the earthly Tabernacle is
tottering and falling to the ground; when Physicians are at a loss, and
friends stand by weeping, and it is whispered in the room, Alas he cannot live
many hours to an end. Ah then Conscience may wake in terrible fright and the
sinner may be confounded, and as death comes with its sting, so it may prove
indeed the King of terrors.

5. To be sure at judgment Conscience will be awaked thoroughly, though sinners
possibly may look death, yet they cannot look the Judge in the face without
being daunted. He will strike terror into the Hearts of those sinners that
were most obstinate and unbelieving. We read that at the great day, the Books
will be opened, Rev. 20. 12. The Book of Scripture will be opened, for by that
every one must be judged. The Word that I have spoken, says Christ, the same
shall judge at the last day. The book of Conscience will also be opened, and
what things are found written there, will be taken notice of, and must be
answered for. No Conscience at that day can be stupid. The Heavens passing away
with a great noise, and the Elements melting with fervent heat, and the Earth
and the works therein being all in a flame: every unjustified and unsanctified
sinners Heart will smite him; and as the Judge will condemn him, so he will be
condemned by his own Conscience. Chrysostom (...) Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Romans
(...).
advises every one to look into his own Conscience presently, and to be strict
in self-searching that he may not be condemned with the world, for it is a
dreadful Tribunal which all must appear before, and the trial of every one will
be through, and impartial.

6. Conscience will be with the ungodly in Hell to all Eternity. Could we go
down indeed to the gates of Hell, and have some discourse with the damned
there, and ask them concerning their Consciences, they would answer that a
great part of Hell lies there, and that they feel within them a Worm
continually gnawing, and which will never dye: they would answer, that their
Consciences now cannot be silenced, that there is no respite from their
clamours, that they are continually upbraiding them with their madness in
sinning; and their more than madness in refusing to turn to God, and to come to
Christ for Life and for Salvation. Barnard has a very useful passage. Optimum
est tunc sentiri vermem conscientiae cum possit etiam suffocari: itaque mordeat
nunc ut moriatur, and paulatim desinat mordere. Mordendo rodat interim
putredinem, and rodendo consumat, ut ipse quoque pariter Consumatur, nec foveri
incipiat in immortalitatem. Vermis inquit eorum non morietur, and ignis eonum
non extinguetur. Bernard. de Conversione ad Clericos, cap. 6. page 845.
It Is best of all says he, that Worm of Conscience should be felt presently
while it is possible to destroy this Worm. Let it bite now that it may dye, and
by degrees give over biting at all. Let it feed upon and eat away corruption,
that it self also may at length be consumed; for it is sad to cherish this worm
against hereafter, for then the worm will never dye, and the Fire will never be
quenched.

I have finished that first particular, which was to prove that there is a
Conscience in Man. In the second place I am to tell you what this Conscience
is. And first I shall speak of the Name. And secondly, of the thing it self.

1. I shall speak of the Name. Conscience (in Latin Conscientia, into which the
Greek word (...) which the Holy Ghost uses in the original, is very well
translated) is so called for several reasons.

1. It Is called Conscience, because it is Cordis scientia Conscientia est cordis
scientia, cor enim and se novit, and multa alia; cum se novit appellatur,
Conscientia; cum praeter se alia, nominatur Scientia. Bernard. de Interior.
dom. cap. 22.
the knowledge of the Heart. The Heart of Man is capable of knowing it self and
other things; when it understands other things this is science, but when it
reflects upon it self this is Conscience. And indeed the Heart is in a special
manner observed, both by Conscience, and by the Lord himself. Conscience if it
be rightly informed, will not be contented with a Conversation which Men look
upon as blameless; unless the Heart be upright and pure. Nam scelus intra se
tacitum qui cogitat ullum,
Facti crimen habet -- Juv.

If a man harbor malice in his breast, Conscience will charge him with
Murder. If he look upon a Woman to lust after her, it will call him before
God, Adulterer. If he abound never so much in profession, and external
performances, yet if when he honors God with his lips, his Heart be removed
far from him; Conscience will say he is a mere Hypocrite.

2. It Is called Conscience because it is concludens scientia, a concluding
knowledge, which is gathered from some premises that went before. Conscience
therefore is styled by some a practical Syllogism, in which the major or first
proposition is the Word of God, the minor or second proposition is from a
reflecting on our selves, whether we have done according unto or against the
Word of God. And the conclusion, is a passing sentence upon our selves,
according to the same Word. The Scripture says, To be carnally minded is
death; and the Conscience of a sinner, adds, but I am carnally minded, and I
savor nothing else but what is carnal, and therefore I am a Child of Death.
And again thus, He that loves the World, the Love of the Father is not in him;
but says the Conscience of a worlding, I love the World, am greedy after it,
and desire nothing comparable to it, therefore I neither Love the Father, nor
have an interest in his Love. On the other hand, the Scripture affirms, He that
receives Christ is the Son of God, but says the Believers Conscience. I am
willing to receive Christ, to rule me, and to save me; therefore I am the
child of God. And again; those are blessed that Hunger and Thirst after
Righteousness; but says the Believers Conscience, I Hunger and Thirst after
Righteousness, I desire to be made truly Holy, to be sanctified throughout in
Body, Soul, and Spirit, therefore I am in a blessed State.

3. It Is called Conscience, because it is cum alio scientia, a knowledge
together with some other. Conscience supposes that we are known to some other,
as well as to our selves, and this is the best reason why it is called
Conscience. But you will ask me who does know us as well as our selves?

1. The all-seeing God does know us perfectly. (...), quia sciamus cum
legislatore Deo; ejus lege insinuante se animis nostris, and his idem
testantibus. Vossius, de Orig. and prog. Idol. l. 3. c. 42.
The Apostle tells us that there is not any Creature that is not manifest in
his sight, but all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him, with whom
we have to do. Heb. 4. 13. The Psalmist speaks to the same purpose, Psalm. 94.
8, 9, 10. Understand, O ye brutish among the People, and ye Fools when will ye
be wise? He that planted the Ear shall He not Hear? He that formed the Eye,
shall He not See? He that Teaches man Knowledge, shall not He Know?
Questionless His Eyes run too and fro, beholding the Evil and the Good. And
indeed if there were not a God who knows us as well, nay, better than we do our
selves; we should not regard our own being privy to our wickedness; there is
so much Self-Love, that we should not stand in awe of our own knowledge: but
when we consider that the Lord also knows us, this causes Grief, and Fear, and
Trouble when we do Evil.

2. Our Lord Jesus who is ready to judge the quick and dead, does also know our
works. In all those Epistles which he sends to the seven Churches of Asia, he
says, I know thy works. It Is expressly said, that Jesus knew all men, and
needed not that any should testify of Man, for he knew what was in Man. John
2. 24. 25. He understands the very secrets of the Heart, as well as what
appears in the practice: and our Lord being to give every one his final doom,
and to pass that sentence which can never be repealed, surely his knowledge
should damp the fiercest Temptations, and make us diligent that we may be found
of him in peace, without spot and blameless.

3. The Elect Angels are witnesses of more than we are aware of. Upon this
score it is that the Apostle in his charge to Timothy, mentions the Angels, as
well as God and Christ. 1 Timothy 5. 21. I charge thee before God, and the Lord
Jesus Christ, and the Elect Angels that thou observe these things. Says
Calvin, Angelos Christo adjungit, non tanquam Judices sed tanquam futuros
testes negligentiae aut temeritatis, ambitionis aut malae fidei, adsunt enim
spectatores propter injunctam sibi ecclesiae curam. Calvin.
he adjoyns the Angels to Christ, not as if they were to be Judges, but because
they are witnesses of our miscarriages. The work of the Angels lies very much
here in the Church Militant, they are Ministering Spirits, sent forth to
Minister for them that are Heirs of Salvation; they rejoice at the Conversion
of a Sinner; and surely then the sins of men displease them, and they are ready
upon Gods command to be the instruments of his revenging justice upon those who
dare to Rebel against him.

4. The Devils who are ready to be our Accusers, are also our Observers: They
tempt us to sin, and if we yield to their Temptations, are forward to cry out
against us. Satan indeed is a Spirit, and so invisible; but We are not
invisible: he knows where we are, and what we do; nay, he can give a very
shrode guess at our very thoughts, and he does accordingly suit his baits and
Temptations with mavelous subtlety. And because the Enemy observes us, and if
we do wickedly, though secretly, will accuse us before God and take advantage
against us to get us more under his power; therefore it infinitely concerns us
to be sober and vigilant against this Adversary, and to resist him, being
steadfast in the Faith, who goes about like a Roaring Lion seeking whom he may
devour. 1. Pet. 5. 8.

Thus you see the reason of the Name Conscience, it implies that others know us
together with our selves. Ah! let us not flatter our selves with hopes of
secrecy in sinning. More eyes than we imagine, behold us when we are committing
the most concealed abominations. Devils look on, for they egg us to them.
Angels look on and are angry. God looks on, who hates Sin with a most perfect
hatred. Christ also takes notice, whose wrath is terrible; for who can appease
it? whose Eyes are as a Flame of Fire, and who has said, I will make all the
Churches to know that I am he which Searches the Reins and Hearts, and I will
render to every Man according to his Deeds, Rev. 2. 23.

2. Thus of the name Conscience, next of the thing it self. And here I shall
not trouble you with those debates and disputes in the Schools about
Conscience. I shall not take up time in determining those questions, whether
Conscience be a distinct faculty in the Soul, from the understanding, or an Act
of it? whether it is to be restrained to the understanding, or belongs also to
the will and affections? whether it be an habit or no? These and such like
questions will have a small influence unto the bettering of Conscience, and
therefore I wave them.

Origin gives this description of Conscience, that Spiritus corrector and
paedagogus animae socialis, quo separatur a malis and adhaeret bonis. Origin.
lib. 2. in ep. ad Romans
It is a Spirit which accompanies the Soul as a Schoolmaster and corrector,
whereby it is separated from what is evil, and adheres and cleaves to what is
good. If by Spirit here Origin mean a good Genius or Angel (as some interpret
him:) then it is to be reckoned among his phancyes which have no
Scripture-foundation: but if by Spirit, he mean a man's own Spirit, then it is a
profitable description; for Conscience is indeed a Schoolmaster to instruct us
in our Duty, and 'twill correct us sharply when we sin, and the lashes given by
this Corrector are very dreadful; and that which Conscience aims at, is, that
we may be deterred from Sin, and follow after Righteousness.

Aquinas defines Conscience after this manner; Conscientia est actus quo
scientiam nostram ad ea quae agimus applicamus. Aquin. primae Qu. 79. artic. 13.
Conscience is an act whereby we apply our knowledge unto those things which we
do. Now he makes three ways of applying our knowledge; 1. When we take notice
what we have done, or not done; and so Conscience is said to Testify. 2. When
we judge that this or that is to be done, or not to be done; and so Conscience
is said to Bind. 3. When we pronounce what we have done, to be well or ill
done, and so Conscience is said to Excuse, or to be full of Remorse.

Amesius tells us, that Conscienta est judicium hominis de seipso, prout
subjicitur judicio Dei. Ames. De Cons. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Conscience is a Man's judgment of himself, as he is subject unto the judgment
of God. The Lord has given unto Man his Word for his Rule, and the Lord himself
will be his judge, now Conscience is persuaded that this judgment is certain,
and that an account of our selves and actions must shortly be rendered;
therefore it passes a judgment presently. It meddles not so much with others,
only so far as Duty toward them is to be performed; or we make our selves
partakers of their Sins. But Conscience has chiefly to do with our selves; and
truly it tryes and judges concerning both our Estates and Actions, whether we
be in an Estate of Nature or of Grace, whether our Actions be Good or Evil.

Others do call Conscience, the Soul of Man recoiling and reflecting upon it
self. These Recoyls are Terrible and beat us to the Ground, nay strike us down
to the very brink of Hell many times; when we look back upon our miscarriages,
and our Sins are set in order before us, and our eyes are held waking, so that
we can neither shut them nor look away. These reflections also are accompanied
with great pleasure, when the Lord does work in us both to will and to do that
which is good of his own good pleasure, and then shines upon his own
workmanship; so that we know both that God has made us upright, and takes
Pleasure in our uprightness. 1 Chronicles. 29. 17.

But the Definition which I shall give you of Conscience, and at large Explain,
is this; Conscience is a power of the Soul in Man, whereby we understanding the
Will of God, are impelled to comply with it; and do bear witness concerning
our selves and actions, and accordingly judge, that is, acquit or condemn our
selves. This Definition I shall take into parts that you may the better
understand it.

1. Conscience is a Power in the Soul of Man. It Is a Power or faculty because
it produces acts, and is not got or lost as habits are; but is inseparable
from the Soul, immovable from the Subject. I will not affirm that Conscience
is really distinct from the understanding; but it is the understanding it self
acting by way of Reflection. The Understanding does Act directly, when it
apprehends what is True and False, what is Good and Bad; Absolutely and without
Respect. But it Acts by way of Reflection, when it applies what it apprehends,
and Reflects thus; Is that which is True and Good embraced, which is so worthy
of all Acceptance? Is that which is Evil and False, Rejected and abhorred?

This Power called Conscience is very notable: the Eyes of the Body indeed, can
look every where but inward; but the Eyes of the Soul can look within as well
as abroad. And this looking within is very needful, and of great use; for till
we come to know our selves, we shall know nothing else after a right manner.
The Heathen Poet complains, -- Nemo in sese tentat descendere, Nemo; No man
does endeavor to descend into himself; But Conscience taking the Word, which
is the candle of Lord, does thus Descend, and makes a Discovery of us to our
selves.

2. Conscience implies some knowledge of the Will of God. Knowledge is the
Light which Conscience is directed by, and the Will and Law of God is that
which binds the Conscience. Distinguitur Conscientia a nuda veritatis
apprehensione, assensum enim aliquem, eumque firmum in sese continet semper.
Amesius. De Consc. lib. 1. cap. 1.
The Will of God is not only understood, but also an assent is yielded to it,
and there is a persuasion, that it is indeed his Will; Hence it is that
conscience does more peremptorily call for Subjection to it. Were there no
Light or Understanding of the Lords will, Conscience could not Act at all.
There is a threefold Light which is given for the illumination of Conscience,
that Gods Will and Man's Duty may be the better understood: Natural, Moral,
Evangelical.

1. The Light of Nature does discover many things, and informs the Conscience
of several duties; though this Light does not tell us one word of Christ in
whom (*) Perseus. Satyr. 4.
we have Righteousness to justify us, and Strength to perform what God
requires; yet when Men are about to Sin, this Light does oppose many of the
works of Darkness; and so renders them the more inexcusable, when they give way
to their iniquities. The Lord is pleased to grant the Light of Nature to them
unto whom the Gospel never came, and by a diligent improvement of this one
Talent, how many Sins might they avoid, which being committed will make their
misery the greater in another world. Conscience was busy in the very Gentiles,
and told them that such and such things were forbidden, but the restraints of
Conscience were but feeble. -- Video meliora proboque
Detcriora sequor --

Therefore Medea cries out Though I see and approve what is good, yet I follow
and practice what is evil. And Horace complains, Gens humana ruit per vetitum
nefas. Conscience tells mankind that wickedness is forbidden, and yet
notwithstanding they rush into it, and are at length ruined by it.

Though Christians who enjoy the Oracles of God, have from thence a fuller
understanding of the Lords Will; yet the Light of Nature is not to be
neglected. And those Sins which are against the Light of Nature, as injustice,
perjury, whoredom and the like, are carefully to be Eschewed: And such
abominations will be the more Abominable if Acted by those who have a further
light than that of Nature to instruct them.

2. There is a Light which may be called Moral, whereby Conscience is informed
concerning the will of God. This Light shined, as it were, from Mount Sinai
when it was on fire, and the Lord was pleased to speak himself the ten Words or
Commandments to the People. These Commandments are delivered at large, Exodus
20. and in these he does more fully show us what is good, and what he does
require of us; and indeed nothing but what is good in it self, good to us, is
required; and hereby our Obligation to Obedience is heightened, when the
Authority of the Lawgiver, and the profitableness of the Laws go hand in hand
together. A great part of the Scripture is but the Commentary which the Holy
Spirit himself has made upon the ten Commandments: and truly the Commentary and
the Text are of equal Authority, and both alike to be regarded by the
Conscience.

That Scripture, Ephesians. 5. 31. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger be put
away from you, with all kind of malice, is a Commentary upon that Precept, Thou
shall not kill. And that Scripture, Gal. 3. 5. Mortify therefore your Members
upon the Earth, Fornication, Uncleanness, Inordinate affection, and evil
concupiscence, is a Commentary upon that Commandmandment, Thou shall not commit
Adultery. I might instance in the rest, to show that the Commands of God are
exceeding broad, and extend not only to the whole Conversation, but even to
the very thoughts and affections: there is not one Member of our Bodies but is
under a Law, to be employed as an Instrument of Righteousness unto Holiness,
Romans 6. 19. There is no power of our Souls but God requires it should be
subject to him, and exercised for him. The Law is so pure and Spiritual, that
it cannot allow of a wicked thought, of a carnal desire, of a bad intent or
design. All this Conscience must be informed of, that it may be the more
faithful in charging us to endeavor after an universal Obedience, and
conformity of our whole man unto the will of God.

3. There is a Light which may be styled Evangelical. The Light of the Gospel
also serves to enlighten the Conscience; it is called by the Apostle, the
glorious Gospel of the blessed God, 1 Timothy 1. 11. and from God the Author of
it, does flow its Authority, to bind the Conscience to Obey it. The Gospel as
it contains Promises exceeding great and precious, so also Precepts which are
so suited unto our present state, as that by the power of the special Grace of
God which is vouchsafed to us, we are able to Obey. So that though the Law is
weak through the Flesh, and we are not able to keep it, and obtain Life by that
means; yet the Gospel does abate of the Laws rigor; and if we believe in
Jesus, and are holy in sincerity, notwithstanding we fall short of absolute
perfection; our Grace being true shall through Christ be accepted and rewarded.

It Is well that Conscience is to be directed by the Light of the Gospel, for
the Law Nihil gravius, nihil miserius conscientia territa lege Dei and
conspectu peccatorum. Luther. Tom. 4. in Psalm. 128.
considered in it self, and not in the hand of a Mediator, can discover nothing
to the Conscience of a Transgressor, but matter of horror and desperation: For
the Law being broken, Life is lost, and the curse is due; nay, every
transgression has power sufficient to lay us under the curse, Gal. 3. 10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the
Book of the Law to do them: and having thundered out the curse, the Law leaves
a Man under it, and does not tell him of any Remedy. But now the Gospel
commands Repentance, which the Law allows not of, and encourages to Repentance,
by assuring us, if we Repent we shall not perish, but our sins shall be blotted
out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord,
Acts 3. 19. The Gospel also does command a sinner to come to Christ, to believe
in him, 1 John 3. 23. This is his commandment, that we believe on the Name of
his Son Jesus Christ. That is, that we receive him as Lord and Savior, and
accept those benefits of pardon, Grace, and Glory which he has purchased, and
freely proffers to us. And thus by this command Conscience is obliged to do
that as a Duty, which is one of the greatest Privileges imaginable.

You see what binds the Conscience, namely, the will of God discovered;
partly, by the Light of Nature, but principally by the Law and Gospel. Constat
synteresis latiore sensu partim ex principiis moralibus in natis cum eorum
conclusionibus; and partim ex iis quae Deus insuper homini praescripsit, sed
utramque partem constituit voluntas Dei revelata, qua homo intelligit fibi suum
officium praescriptum esse. Hinc lex Dei sola obligat conscientiam, per legem
autem intelligigimus volunt atem Dei revelatam ita ut contineat etiam illa quae
in Evangelio praescribuntur. Amas. l. 1. De Consc. c. 2. p. 5.
All these Discoveries of the will of God are to be kept safe in the
Conscience; one part of which is therefore called (...), which signifies to
keep; because practical Truths are to be Treasured up there: we must be
acquainted what is the will of God, and do that will as well as understand it.
The adequate Rule of Conscience is the will of God, and of this will in his
Word there is the fullest Revelation; here man's Duty is prescribed and shown,
and so far as the Word commands, Conscience is obliged, and no further. As God
alone knows the Conscience, and has power to punish it, so he alone can bind
it. I acknowledge that for Conscience sake we are bound to obey the just
commands of Men that are in Authority over us: but the Obligation upon
Conscience to do this comes not from them, but from Gods command, that we
should be Subject to them, and to be ready unto every good Work, Tit. 3. 1.

3. As Conscience implies a knowledge of the will of God, so it is the Office of
Conscience to impell us to comply with his will which is made known to us. The
Prophet speaking concerning the Spirit bringing the Word to remembrance, tells
the Children of Israel, Isa. 30. 21. Thine Ears shall hear a word behind thee,
saying, This is the way, walk in it when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye
turn to the left. These words may very aptly be applied unto Conscience, which
is as a Voice within us, saying concerning forbidden paths, These are not the
way, and therefore turn out of them; but concerning commanded Duties, These are
the way, and therefore practice them. When Joseph was solicited by his
Mistress to commit folly, and the temptation was strong, considering the
circumstances which he was in, It was Conscience that minded him of his
Obligation to his Master, which he ought not to requite by defiling of his Bed;
and especially how evil and heinous such a deed would be in the Lords eyes: and
he comes to a fixed resolution not to yield, not to go contrary to his
Conscience and Duty. How (says he) shall I do this great wickedness and sin
against God? Genesis 39. 9. Conscience is not only a witness to testify
concerning us, nor only a Judge to pass Sentence upon us, but also a Law
commanding and stirring us up unto our Duty, and when it does thus excite us to
Obedience, First, it uses Gods Name and Authority: Secondly, it charges under
the greatest penalties: Thirdly, it sets before us the Lords great goodness.

1. Conscience to impell us to Obedience uses Gods own Name and Authority. Thus
says the Lord, says Conscience: These commands are the commands of God, they
are enacted by Him who is the supreme Lawgiver, who has power to save and to
destroy, James 4. 12. The Thessalonians when they received the Word of God
which they heard of the Apostles, they received it not as the word of Men, but
as it is in Truth the word of God, which works effectually in them that
believe, 1 These. 2. 13. Conscience charged them to receive the Gospel, because
the Gospel of God; and they did receive it, though hereupon they were exposed
to never so great Afflictions and Tribulations. Conscience looks beyond
Instruments, which are but Earthen Vessels, Men of like passions with our
selves; and eyes that God who employs and sends them. In the Publishing of a
Proclamation, who says, Thus says the Town Clerk? No, every one concludes,
Thus says the King. This is really the will of God, says Conscience, and
therefore do not dare to be obstinate against it. It uses the same Language
which the Apostle Paul does to Timothy, after it has urged unto Duty, and to
take heed of sin: I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall
Judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4. 1.
Here is such a Name and Authority used as may well make us to stand in awe.

2. Conscience charges us under the greatest penalties. It tells us indeed of
temporal plagues, and Spiritual Judgments, and how much sin may cost us in this
present World; but that is not all, nor the worst of all; it also makes Hell
naked before us, and takes off that covering which is upon Destruction, and
bids us look down, and then asks this Question, How will you be able to dwell
with devouring fire? How will you be able to inhabit everlasting burnings? Is
it good, says Conscience, to Live without God in this World, and with a curse
to depart for ever from him in the next? Isit good to enjoy the pleasures of
sin, which are but for a season, and then to be tormented in those Flames which
never can be quenched? To run into sin, is to rush into a Battle against that
God, against whom none ever hardened themselves and prospered. To run into sin
is a mad venturing to leap into Hell; think of this when tempted. Oh how
slender are the penalties wherewith Humane Laws are backed! Those Statutes
which were made by severe Draco, which are said to be writ with Blood, because
he punished every fault with Death; had not such a dreadful penalty annexed to
them, as the Laws of God: For what is the Death of the Body, if compared with
the Damnation of the Body and Soul for ever? Luke 12. 4, 5.

3. Conscience that it may persuade us to Obedience, sets before us the Lords
great goodness; bids us behold his goodness as well as his severity, Romans 11.
22. It tells us, that if we depart from God, we forsake our own Mercies, we
leave our Rock and Fortress, and betray our selves into the hands of Enemies.
It uses the cords of Love to draw us after God, as well as the Reins of fear to
restrain us from sin.

It brings Mercies to remembrance, all which (and oh how great is the Number of
them!) are as so many Obligations to Obedience, and withal assures us that God
is such a Master, that if we follow him fully, we shall not want renewed and
multiplied encouragements in his Service. What Nathan spoke unto David after
his sin, Conscience does speak after the same manner before, to keep us within
the bounds of our Duty. God has delivered, he has loaded thee with benefits,
and if these are too little, he is willing to give more; and therefore leave
him not, but cleave unto him.

All these ways does Conscience take to move us to do the will of God; and
indeed especially at some times its impulses are very vehement and strong; it
fills its mouth with Arguments, and evidently lays before us the
unreasonableness and danger of sin, and uses a rest less importunity to
dissuade us from it; and if Conscience, notwithstanding all this, be stifled,
hereby we shall vastly increase our guilt, and our sinning will become by far
the greater provocation.

4. As it is the Office of Conscience to impell us to comply with the will of
God, so also to bear Witness concerning our selves and Actions. As it tells us
what we should do, so what we do it exactly observes. It Is very evident from
Scripture, that this witness-bearing is a main part of the work of Conscience,
Romans 9. 1. I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my Conscience also bearing me
witness in the Holy Ghost. So 2 Cor. 1. 12. the Apostle speaks of the testimony
of his Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity he had had his
conversation in the World. Conscience is such a witness as is more than a
thousand other witnesses, for it is privy to all we do; it will many times cry
out against us when others flatter us. Magna vis est Conscientiae Judicis, and
magna in utramque partem; ut neque timeant qui nihil commiserint; and poenam
semper ante oculos versari putent qui peccarint. Cicero, Orat. pro T. An.
Milone, page 553.
And if it testifies good concerning us, it will not be controuled by men's
censures, nor by Afflictions, which are seeming tokens of Gods Anger. Job's
burden was very heavy, his griefs and calamities were more weighty than the
Sand, so that his words were swallowed up. His Friends charge him with
Hypocrisy, and yet Conscience witnessing for him does prevail, Job 27. 5. Till
I dye I will not remove my integrity from me, and his Heart winessing to his
Righteousness and sincerity he goes higher, Job. 16, 12. Also now behold my
witness is in Heaven, and my Record is on High. Three things are implied in
this witnessing of Conscience.

1. A recollection of what we have done. It has a notable faculty in running
back upon the footsteps which we have taken. Cambdens Remains, page 26.
The old English word for Conscience was In-wit, because it knows whatever is
within us, whatever is done by us. Those which we read of, Jer. 8. 6. who when
God hearkened and heard, did not speak aright, did not say What have we done?
it is a sign their Hearts were hardened, and their Consciences for the present
cast into a dead sleep. But here I must say that Conscience, though asleep is
like Noah, who knew what his younger Son had done to him, and how he had looked
upon his nakedness when he was asleep. Conscience when it wakes will
understand all that was done before; and the sooner it begins to reflect, the
better will it discharge its duty.

2. This witnessing of Conscience implies a comparing of what we have done with
that rule which God has prescribed us. What was feigned concerning Janus that
ancient King of Italy, that he had two faces, may truly be affirmed concerning
Conscience; with one face it looks forward toward the Word which is the rule
of Righteousness, and with the other it looks backwards toward our selves, and
then inquires whether there be that purity and uprightness of Heart, and that
living soberly, righteously, and godly, which the Word does so expressly call
for.

3. The witnessing of Conscience implies its bringing in evidence pro or con,
for or against us, according as we have, or have not taken heed to that rule,
which whosoever walks according to, Peace and Mercy shall be upon them, Gal. 6.
16. The witness of Conscience is an accusation upon doing Evil, but an apology
upon doing well.

1. This witness of Conscience is an accusation upon doing Evil. Conscience
does charge the soul with guilt and this is a very heavy charge, where sinners
are not without, or past feeling. The Conscience of David when Nathan came to
him, presently seconded Nathan. The Prophet accused him, Thou art the Man, his
Conscience also sides with the Prophet, and he accuses himself: I have sinned
against the Lord, 2 Samuel 12. 13. An accusing Conscience made David so sensible
of his need of mercy, and so earnest that he might obtain it; the sight of his
sins caused most deep dejection of spirit. The thirty eight psalm is called a
Psalm of David to bring to remembrance. His conscience was busy in reflecting
and accusing when he wrote it; and how does he complain, v. 3! There is not any
rest in my bones because of my sin, for mine iniquities are gone over my head
as an heavy burden, they are too heavy for me, I am troubled, I am bowed down
greatly, I go mourning all the day long, v. 4. 6.

There are six things to be observed concerning the accusations of Conscience.

1. Conscience accuses undeniably, it does not charge the sinner upon hearsay,
or upon surmise, but upon its own knowledge; I accuse of nothing, says
Conscience, but what I saw done with my own eyes, and when I saw it I wrote it
down, with all the aggravating circumstances of it in my own Book of
remembrance, and here you may find it registered. You may as well deny that you
see at all, when you see most plainly, as deny Consciences accusing testimony.
We find therefore in Scripture, that when Conscience has brought to remembrance
sins committed a great while before, its testimony even then could not be
denied. Joseph's Brethren many years after their cruelty toward their Brother,
cry out We are Verily guilty: Conscience accused, and they could not deny it.
Job's Conscience told him of the sins of his youth, when he was grown up to
riper years, and he acknowledges them, Job. 13. 26. For thou writest bitter
things against me, and make me to possess the iniquities of my Youth.

2. Conscience accuses boldly, as it is said of Death, that it comes as easily
to the Princes Palace, as the Beggars Cottage; so it may be affirmed concerning
conscience, 'twill come and speak as plainly to the highest, as to the meanest.
It Is not (...) a respecter of persons: Conscience has no more reason to fear
the greatest, than the poorest. Can the greatest man punish his Conscience for
being plain with him? He may indeed wound it more and more, but this will in
the end only increase his own smart and anguish. Prophets and Ministers have
not access unto some, nor an opportunity to tell them of their misdoings, and
if they have, and do discharge their duty, they may suffer for it. John the
Baptist was sent to Prison for reproving Herod, and afterward his life was
taken away: But though Herod was no more troubled and rebuked by John, yet his
own Conscience does fearlesly and impartially deal with him, and therefore when
he heard of the fame of Jesus, he cries out John is risen from the Dead; which
shows that his Conscience flew in his face about him.

3. Conscience accuses of high matters, of such crimes the least of which
deserves damnation. There is nothing which Conscience does accuse of but sin,
and sin is the Transgression of a Law, and that Law is the Law of God, and this
God is an infinite Majesty, and therefore sin does merit an infinite
punishment. Though Papists call some sins venial, and make but light of them;
yet a serious Conscience looks upon every sin as justly deserving Eternal
condemnation: the Apostle speaks indefinitely concerning sin, without excepting
any. The Wages of Sin is Death, Romans 6. ult. and by Death he means Eternal
Death, for it is opposed unto the gift of God, which is Eternal Life by Jesus
Christ our Lord. Among Men there are indeed some petty faults, which a
Malefactor is not so afraid when accused of; but how pale does he look, when
Felony, or Murder, or Treason is laid to his charge, alas the Gallows, the
Gibbet, Hanging, Drawing, Quartering; he now fears. Conscience brings in an
indictement against the sinner for nothing but what is damnable, for every sin
against the great God, is so; in its own Nature. And if every sin makes the
Soul liable to the vengeance of Eternal fire, how may the sinner be amazed when
all his iniquities are set in order before him!

4. Conscience accuses a man to himself. Luther tells us concerning a certain
Cardinal that was wont to say. Conscientia est mala bestia quae facit hominem
stare contra seipsum. Conscience is an evil Beast, for it makes a man to stand
against himself. When Conscience is our accuser, our accuser is within us, and
we can go no where without this accuser. A man by this means becomes (...) a
self-punisher. These self accusations do break a man's spirit, they imbitter all
Temporal comforts, and Oh! how bitter then do they make affliction?

5. Conscience in its accusations lets us understand, that God understands
better then it self what it lays to our charge. The Apostle tells us, that God
is greater than our Hearts, and knows all things, 1 John 3 20. This Text
plainly informs us that God knows by us more than we know. Many sins slip out
of Our memories, but none out of Gods. Hos. 7. 2. They consider not in their
Hearts that I remember all their wickedness, now their own doings have beset
them round, they are all before my face. When Conscience is awakened, and we
are beset round with our own doings, this causes the perplexity, that they are
all before Gods face, he remembers all, though we are not able to number half
of them. Moses cries out, We are consumed by thine anger, by thy wrath are we
troubled, Thou have set our inquities before thee, our secret sins in the light
of thy Countenance, Psalm. 90. 7. 8.

6. Conscience is many times incessant, and not to be silenced in its
accusations. Augustine Qui malas habent uxores domus suas intrare nolunt, ad
forum exeunt and gaudent; coepit hora esse qua intraturi sunt ad domum suam and
contristantur. Intraturi sunt ad taedia, ad murmura, ad amaritudines, ad
eversiones. Si ergo miseri sunt, qui cum redeunt ad parietes suos timent;
quanto miseriores, qui ad conscientiam redire nolunt, ne litibus peccatorum
evertantur? Vt possis libens redire ad cor tuum, illud munda. Aufer
cupiditatem, sordes; aufer labem avaritiae, malas cogitationes, odia, non dico
adversus amicum, sed etiam adversus inimicum; aufer ista omnia Intra cor tuum;
and gaudebis Aug. in. Enarrat. in Psalm. 33. page (mihi) 237, 238.
compares a clamorous Conscience to a brawling Woman, whose Tongue being set on
fire of Hell, never lies still but is continually shooting forth bitter words.
Now Solomon tells us, It Is better to dwell in the corner of a house top than
with such a Woman in a wide house, Prove. 25. 24. nay, It Is better to dwell in
the Wilderness than with a contentious and angry Woman, Prove. 21. 19. But how
much more intolerable are the reproaches of an enraged Conscience! Flashes of
Hell fire do issue as it were out of the mouth of it, it is continually
bringing guilt unto remembrance, and speaking of those Flames unto which this
guilt does render the Soul that sins, obnoxious and liable.

Thus the witness of Conscience is an accusation upon doing evil, and such an
accusation as may very much be dreaded.

2. The witness of Conscience is an Apology upon doing well. It will bear
witness for those that are sincere, when they walk before God in Truth and
with a perfect Heart. It must indeed be granted that in many things all (even
the very best) do offend, Jam. 3. 2. But conscience takes notice of the bent
and desire of the Soul to please the Lord, and how burdensome and bewailed
infirmities are. Conscience will excuse and defend if there be a will to do
good, though evil at the same time be present; as it was with the Apostle
himself. Romans 7. 21. Conscience having looked into the Gospel, understands,
that God does not deal with Believers, according to the terms of the Covenant
of Works, which had a promise of Life only upon condition of perfect obedience,
but Death was threatened upon the least transgression. No, no, they are not now
under the Law, but under Grace, and in the new Covenant, sincerity is accounted
and accepted as our perfection before God, through Christ Jesus. Now
Consciences excusing or defending is of great force and weight. It Is not to be
checked by the reproaches of men, nor by the accuser of the Brethren.

1. Conscience excusing us is not to be checked by the reproaches of Men. How
(eager as I hinted before) were Jobs friends in their censures and accusations?
They thought his Religion was but a mere show, and that he had used the Form of
Godliness only as a cover for his wickedness and injustice. Hark how he
speaks to them, Job 19. 2, 3. How long will ye vex my Soul, and break me in
pieces with words? these ten times have ye reproached me, you are not ashamed
that you make your selves strange unto me; and yet notwithstanding all, as long
as his Conscience did clear him, his confidence is not shaken; and he says, the
Righteous (surely including himself) shall hold on his way, and he that has
clean hands shall wax stronger and stronger, Job 17. 9.

2. Consciences excusing us, is not to be checked by Satan the Accuser of the
Brethren. As Job's Friends did censure him, so Satan accused him of
Mercenariness and selfishness in his Religion: Does Job fear God for naught?
But put forth thy hand now, and touch what he has, and he will curse thee to
thy Face. These were the words of Satan, Job 1. 9. 11. But instead of this,
when all was taken away, Job blesses the Lord; nay, when his Bone and Flesh
were touched, he says, Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we
not receive evil? Job 2. 10. Job's sincerity is proved, and approved, is
evident to himself; and Satan, who it is likely enough was busy to disturb him,
is demonstrated to be a Liar.

As the Devil does hide the faults of the profane and secure from their eyes,
so he is continually objecting to the sincere their failings and imperfections:
by his good will he would have us see no sin at all, or nothing else but sin;
and from the remainders of Corruption, he is bold to call the Saints
Hypocrites, though these remainders are never so much their burden. But if
Conscience does give testimony, that they delight in the Law of God after the
inward Man, and that the evil in themselves, they hate, and desire to be
delivered from the Body of sin and Death: Notwithstanding Satan's slanders,
they give thanks to God because there is now no condemnation to them, being in
Christ Jesus, Romans 7. latter end, compared with Romans 8. the beginning. So much
for this Office of Conscience, which is bearing witness, both by way of
Accusing and Excusing.

5. It follows in the Definition, that it is the Office of Conscience to Judge,
that is, to acquit, or to condemn us. Judging lies in these two things, in
absolving and condemning. The Judge, if Righteous, does acquit the Innocent,
does condemn the guilty. Now, condemning and not condemning, or absolving, are
both ascribed unto Conscience, by the Apostle, 1 John 3. 20, 21. For if our
heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and knows all things;
beloved, if our hearts condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God.
There is a kind of a Tribunal erected in the Soul of Man, and after Conscience
has brought in Evidence, and Acted the part of a Witness, then it Acts the part
of a Judge, and passes Sentence, which is twofold: A Sentence of Absolution, a
Sentence of Condemnation.

1. Conscience as a Judge passes a Sentence of Absolution; and, if being
rightly informed, Conscience grounds its Sentence upon Scripture; we may
conclude that what it looses on Earth is loosed in Heaven. When Conscience does
declare to the true believer, that he is justified by his Faith, and has Peace
with God through our Lord Jesus Christ; it says no more than what God himself
has plainly spoken, Romans 5. 1. When it declares unto humbled and penitent
Souls, who are humbled because they have sinned and perverted that which is
right, and see that it has not profited them; and who also confess, and are
willing to forsake their Iniquities: when it declares unto such, that Mercy and
abundant Pardon belongs to them; truly there is plain and sufficient warrant
from Scripture for this Declaration. To be absolved in the Court of Conscience
is matter of great consolation, and if Conscience draw its conclusions from
Scripture-premises, it may be called (...), strong consolation, such as has a
firm basis and Foundation.

When Conscience does absolve, much is contained in this Sentence; it
pronounces us free from punishment, and also sentences a reward unto us; it
shuts Hell, and opens Heaven: for a reward, and the greatest that can be
conceived, (nay, how great cannot be at present conceived) is surely though
freely promised unto them that are sincere Believers. It Is indeed a reward of
Grace, not of Debt; but because of Grace, therefore the more sure, Romans 4. 16.
Therefore it is of Faith that it might be by Grace, to the end the promise
might be sure to all the Seed. Conscience in Judging does Act as Gods
Vicegerent: He himself will Judge at last as it (if it have light and purity)
does Judge at present. And those who are now acquitted in the Court of
Conscience, shall be also absolved at the great Tribunal. The Apostle having
said, We have known and believed the Love that God has to us, presently speaks
concerning boldness in the day of Judgment, 1 John 4. 16, 17.

2. Conscience, as a Judge, passes a Sentence of Condemnation, Exemplo
quodcunque malo committitur ipsi,
Displicet authori: prima est haec ultio quod se,
Judice, ne mo nocens absolvitur.
Juvenal. Satyr. 13.

and this Sentence is passed upon the Impenitent, the Hypocrites, and the
Unbelievers; and because the Scripture does condemn these, we may truly say,
that what Conscience binds on Earth is bound in Heaven. I grant indeed, that if
Conscience should pass Sentence according to the Law of works, every Child of
Adam (the Holy Child Jesus excepted) would be condemned. Hark what that Man
after Gods own heart said, Psalm. 130. 3. If thou Lord should mark Iniquity, O
Lord, who shall stand? And Psalm. 143. 2. Enter not into Judgment with thy
Servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. His Conscience saw
so much (and God saw a great deal more) of sin, that in strictness of Law and
Justice it told him he was a condemned Man. But by the Law of Grace they who
turn from sin, and believe in Christ, are acquitted. But as for those who will
not come to Christ that they may have Life, but prefer their fleshly and
worldly Lusts, and those things wherewith these lusts are gratified, before the
Lord of Life and Glory; as they are condemned by the Law of Works, so likewise
by the Law of Grace: Conscience therefore doing its Office, passes a dreadful
Sentence upon them, and tells them, that the wrath of God abides on them, John
3. ult.

But here 'twill be needful to note a difference between Consciences condemning
a sinner now, and the Lords condemning him hereafter: that Sentence which
Christ will pronounce at the last day, will be peremptory, unalterable;
therefore that Judgment is called Eternal Judgment, Heb. 6. 2. There is no
appeal from that Tribunal, no reversing of the Sentence; but those that are
then condemned, Go they must, and that immediately into everlasting punishment;
as the Righteous, on the other hand, into Life Eternal, Mat. 25. ult. But when
Conscience does at present condemn a sinner, it does not preclude and shut up
the door of hope against him; its Sentence of condemnation is but conditional,
in case of continuance and obstinacy in sin. But if the unbeliever will believe
in Jesus, and the impenitent will mourn for their Iniquities, and turn from
them to God, then they shall no longer be under condemnation; but as sin has
Reigned unto Death, so shall Grace Reign through Righteousness unto eternal
Life by Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 5. 21.

I have told you how the Office of Conscience is to Judge, that is, to acquit
or condemn. Now, there are four things that come under this Judgment of
Conscience. Our Actions, our Communication, our Thoughts and Affections, our
Estate to Godward.

1. Conscience judges of our Actions and Conversation; and if our Conversation
be such as becomes the Gospel, if we shine as lights in the midst of a crooked
and perverse Generation, then it says, Well done. But if we profess to know
God, and in Works deny him, being abominable and disobedient, and to every good
work Reprobate; Conscience condemns such doings, and says many times in plain
terms, that our profession is but mere Mockery.

2. Conscience judges of our Communication; though words are commonly called
wind, yet Conscience does not make light of them. It does approve of Holy and
Edifying Discourse; when out of the abundance of the Word of God in the heart,
the mouth speaks that which is good, and which may administer grace unto the
hearers. For when they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another, the
Lord hearkened and heard it; and a Book of remembrance was written before him
for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his Name, Mal. 3. 16. But
Conscience does condemn corrupt communication, especially where the Tongue
shows it self an unruly evil full of deadly poison, by that filthy talking,
lying, swearing, cursing, backbiting, which proceed out of the mouth. And it
does not stick to say, The Tongue being not bridled, all Religion is but vain,
James 1. 27.

3. Conscience judges of our Thoughts and Affections; these as they ought to be
agreeable to Rule, so they come under censure. The Law is so large, that it
reaches to our very Thoughts. The wicked man is to forsake his thoughts as well
as ways, else he cannot be a sincere Convert, nor obtain Mercy, Isa. 55. 7.
Conscience here is very prying, because these internal Acts, these thoughts,
and desires, and designs, do very much discover what the heart is. If wicked
thoughts, which are all vain and unprofitable, and likewise hurtful, are
suffered to lodge in the heart, and are delightful and welcome Guests to it,
it is a sign the heart is unrenewed: but if these thoughts when they arise in
the heart, are a burden, are conflicted with, and help is implored against
them, that God himself would show his power, and bring them into Captivity;
this speaks the heart sanctified. If there be a will and desire in the heart to
sin, though want of Opportunity, or fear of Disgrace hinder the Act, Conscience
will condemn this as a transgression of the Law, which does require inward
Rectitude, as well as outward Righteousness. And on the other hand, if there be
a sincere desire and purpose to obey the Lord, Conscience judges this to be
Obedience, because God is pleased to account it so. Abraham is said by Faith to
have Offered up his Son Isaac; nay, it is twice said, that he Offered him up,
Heb. 11. 17. when he only had a purpose to have done it.

4. Conscience does judge concerning our State to Godward; Whether we are or
are not reconciled to him. If we Live and walk after the Flesh, if our main
care is to provide for the Flesh, and we account it our greatest happiness to
fulfill the lusts of it, and we are resolved to please our Flesh, though God be
never so much Angered; truly Conscience may then judge our state to be bad. But
if we walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, if our hearts are renewed
by the Spirit, and in our lives we are led by him, then Conscience may judge us
to be in Christ, and that there is therefore no condemnation to us, Romans 8. 1.

I must here Observe, that Conscience may condemn a particular Act, when the
Estate is not condemned. David's carriage toward Vriah was very foul, yet his
state was not altered from Grace to Nature: Asa his trusting in an Arm of
Flesh, and imprisoning the Prophet that rebuked him, were Acts to be condemned,
yet his State was good, and it is said of him, that his heart was perfect with
God all his days, 2 Chronicles. 15. 17. compared with Chap. 16. 2, 3. 10. But if the
state be bad, all particular Acts must needs be bad also: If the Tree be
corrupt, the Fruit will be like it; for though Conscience may approve of some
thing done by a man in a Natural state, as being good for the Matter of it, yet
if it Judge aright, it must condemn it as evil, in regard of the Manner.

Thus have I at large explained the Definition which I gave of Conscience, That
it is a Power of the Soul in Man, whereby we understanding the will of God, are
impelled to comply with it, and do bear witness concerning our selves and
Actions, and accordingly Judge, that is, acquit or condemn our selves.

In the third place, I am to assign the Reasons why the Lord has given unto Man
a Conscience. The Reasons are three.

1. Conscience is given unto Man that it may be a remembrancer, to put him in
mind of God. To remember God is man's great Duty, he cannot begin too soon to do
this; therefore, says Solomon, Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy
Youth, Eccles. 12. 1. and after we have begun, we must hold on; for there can
never be any good reason why the Lord should be forgotten. How many Millions of
things are there which are appointed to put us in mind of God? The invisible
things of him from the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood
by the things that are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead, Romans 1. 20.
The Sun, the Moon, and all those thousands of shining Stars that our Eyes
behold in the Firmament; the Fowls that fly in the Air, the Beasts of the
Earth, the great Sea, and the Creatures that pass through the paths of it; the
Trees, the Plants and Flowers that grow in the Field; are all as so many
remembrancers to bring God to the thoughts of the Children of Men; so that they
are without excuse if they forget him.

But besides all these, there is a Monitor within, something in their own
Breasts, and that is Conscience, which will be telling them of God, which will
be telling them of his Power and Presence; and that which Conscience does
infer from hence, is this; Let all the Earth fear the Lord, let all the
Inhabitants of the World stand it awe of him, Psalm. 33. 8. Conscience does
Comment upon the Creatures; How glorious is that God who made all these! and he
that made can also destroy: and therefore his Anger is to be dreaded. He Rules
and Governs the World; He forms the Light, and create^ Darkness; he makes
Peace, and creates Evil; and therefore surely it is wisdom to please him, and
the height of madness to provoke him.

2. Conscience is given to Man, that it may put him in mind of his own great
Interest and concern, which is to secure his Soul, and to provide for Eternity.
It Is not without reason that the Natural Man is called flesh in Scripture, Genesis
6. 3. The flesh does so prevail against the Soul, as to take up his whole time
and care. His great enquiries are, What shall I eat? what shall I drink? and
wherewithal shall I be clothed? Mat. 6. 31. And thus he would live, as if he
had no Soul to save or lose, if Conscience did not put him in mind of that
precious Jewel which he is entrusted with, and bring to his remembrance that of
our Lord Jesus, Mat. 16. 26. What is a Man profited, if he shall gain the whole
World, and lose his own Soul? Or what shall a Man give in exchange for his
Soul? Conscience tells us of a Soul which is of greatest value, and which is in
greatest danger. It calls a Man a Fool for saying, Soul, take thine ease, eat,
drink, and be merry, thou have Goods laid up for many Years. Sumptuous Fare
cannot satisfy the Souls hunger, the most delicious Wines cannot quench the
Souls thirst; nor purple and fine Linen cover the Souls Nakedness. These
things only gratify the senses, but some thing that is higher, and more
durable must be looked after, that may be a proper and suitable good unto the
Soul of Man, which is of a Spiritual and Immortal Nature; and if you ask what
that is? I Answer, the Eternal and All-sufficient God. Magnus es Domine, and
laudabilis valde, magna virtus tua, and sapientiae tuae non est numerus. Tu
excitas ut laudare te delectet; quia fecisti nos ad te, and inquietum est cor
nostrum donec requiescet in te. Augustine. Confess. l. 1. c. 1.


3. Conscience is given to Man, that it may tell him of his Duty, and urge him
to the performance of it. Such is the corruption of Man's Nature, that he hates
Instruction, and is apt to cast the Law of God behind his back Psalm. 50. 17.
but Conscience observes what that Law requires, and says it is Holy, just and
good, and therefore does protest against the Transgressing of it. Conscience
tells us that God is a better master than sin and Satan; He rewards his
Servants with Life and Joy, but They theirs with Eternal Death and VVoe. The
Apostle speaks of all men, even the Heathens, that there is (...); The work of
the Law written in their Hearts, Romans 2. 15. The Consciences of Men are the
Tables where the Laws of God are written, and Conscience is continually opening
these Tables, and commanding men to read and do their duty. I grant indeed that
there is a writing of the Law in the Heart, which is promised in the new
Covenant, which all men have not, but is peculiar to Believers, and when this
promise is made good to any, not only are their minds enlightened but their
hearts changed; there is a sutablenesse between their renewed wills, and the
Laws of God, so that now they are desirous to keep them, as before they were
violently bent to break them. But the writing of the Law in the Conscience is
commune, and Conscience understands this Law that it may press obedience to it.

4. Conscience is given to man that it may warn and caution him against the
Tempter. It is as it were the Watchman which gives notice of this Enemies
approach. Of all the powers of the Soul the Devil does least like this, for it
does most withstand him. When Satan promises great matters to those whom he
tempts, Conscience says that a Liar is not to be believed. Either he will not
give what he promises, or if he does, what he gives had better not be given,
because it is given to the sinners hurt. '(...), the gifts of Enemies are no
gifts at all, or worse then none. When Satan pretends to aim never so much at
our advantage, or advancement, or delight, Conscience sees the Snake in the
Grass, and tells, that the Devil is a Murderer, and in every temptation is
carrying on a murtherous design against us. When Satan comes with the sweet cup
of sinful pleasures, Conscience says, Drink not, for there is rank poison in
it. When Satan transforms himself into a Friend, and seems to consult our
safety, and ease, and gain, Conscience cries out, Take heed, a Murderer is
near you, and therefore yield not to him, give him no admission.

5. Conscience is given unto Man that it may give Testimony to the Word of God,
and side with it against all carnal reasonings and Affections. Our Lord Jesus
had to do with Hearers which were captious, which were still ready to start
their frivolous objections against himself, and against his Doctrine, as when
he said, if I be lifted up from the Earth, that is Crucified, I will draw all
men to me; they presently object, Christ abides for ever, and how then can he
be lifted up? Joh. 12. 32. 34. Now he does not answer directly to their
objection, but applies himself to their Consciences, and tells them, 'twas but
a little while that the light was to be with them, and therefore says he, Walk
while ye have the Light, lest Darkness come upon you; for he that walks in
Darkness knows not whither he goes, v. 35. So the Apostle did commend
himself to every man's Conscience in the sight of God; and adds, if our Gospel
be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, 2 Cor. 4. 2, 3. Conscience is more
ready to close with Truth; the Affections hang off because Truth does thwart
them while they remain carnal. The Consciences of the Jews, many of them, were
convinced that Jesus Christ was the true Messiah, but their Hearts were against
following of him, for they loved the Praise of men more than the Praise God,
Joh. 12. 42, 43. When a corrupt will says concerning a precept, This is an
hard saying, it is too strict: Conscience will confess, it is just and good to
be obeyed. When a carnal mind phansies absurdities Prodigiosus certe humani
ingenii furor, quod injustitiae potius Deum insimulat, quam ut se coarguat
caecitatis. Calv. in Epist. ad Romans c. 9. v. 14.
in the mysteries of the Gospel, and says, how can these things be? Conscience
is modest, and replies, that God is True, and man's understanding is shallow,
and therefore man is to believe what God speaks, for certain, though he cannot
fully comprehend it.

6. Conscience is given unto man, that this may side with the Lord when he
passes Judgment at the great approaching day. This day is called a day of the
Revelation of his Righteous judgment, and whatever punishments he does
sentence the Sons of Men unto, they will not be able to charge him with the
least injustice. Their own Consciences will acknowledge every crime that the
Lord then shall lay to their charge; and when they are thrown down into that
Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone, Conscience will be ready to speak the
same language which you read, Rev. 16. 5. 7. Thou art Righteous O Lord, which
art, and wast, and shall be, because thou have thus judged. Even so Lord God
Almighty, True and Righteous are thy judgments. Si reus Conscientia sua
premitur silet actacitus expectat suam damnationem, suo jam silentio damnatus.
Calv. in Epist. ad Romans c. 3. v. 19.
God will be justified when he speaks, and clear when he judges: and sinners
Consciences will clear him fully, and will acknowledge that his ways are
equal, but theirs have been unequal. Every mouth will then be stopped and the
guilty will have nothing to object against their Judges proceedings.

I come in the last place to the Application.

Use. 1. Shall be of information: several weighty Truths may be inferred from
this Doctrine.

1. If there be a Conscience in Man, learn from hence, that there is a God.
There are many arguments to prove this great fundamental Truth: the Creatures
would never have had a Being unless God had given a Being to them. If ever
there had been altogether nothing, there never could have been any thing.
His works do abundantly declare both his Being and his Glory. But if we look
into our selves, we shall find this Truth written plain upon our own souls. We
are (as I said before) so full of self-love, that we should not at all regard
our own knowledge of our misdoings, if Conscience were not convinced of the
Godhead, whose judgment we cannot possibly escape. The Psalmist indeed tells
us that the fool has said in his Heart there is no God, Psalm. 14. 1. but in
this he rather speaks what his wishesare, than what he is really persuaded of.
For it has been observed concerning those who have been most Atheistical, that
Conscience has pricked and terrified them sometimes; and the dread of God has
(when they have heard it Thunder, or have been in some great calamity,)
returned upon them.

2. If there be a Conscience in Man, learn that God is omniscient. If the Lord
did confine himself to Heaven, and there enjoying his own blessedness did not
at all take notice what is done here below, we should sin securely, and not be
troubled that we have a Conscience perpetually observing us: But therefore
Consciences eye is regarded because God looks on as well as Conscience. Our
Hearts know much by us, but God is greater then our Hearts and knows all
things. Can any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him, says
the Lord? do not I fill Heaven and Earth, says the Lord? surely it concerns us
to walk circumspectly and exactly, since there is not any Creature that is not
manifest in his sight, but all things are open and naked unto the eyes of that
God with whom we have to do, Heb. 4. 13.

3. If there be a Conscience in Man, learn that God is Holy and Righteous.
Therefore Conscience speaks so much against sin, and reproaches after the
commission of it, because it is contrary to Gods holy Nature, and his Justice
has a sword to be revenged upon the sinner. Secure Transgressors are apt to
imagine God altogether such an One as themselves; but Conscience when it awakes
tells them that this imagination is groundless; that he is Glorious in
Holiness, that he is not a God who has pleasure in wickedness, neither shall
evil dwell with him, the foolish shall not stand in his sight, he hates all
the workers of iniquity, Psalm. 5. 4, 5.

4. If there be a Conscience in Man, learn that God is Great and Mighty, and
that it is a fearful thing to fall into his hands. It Is the consideration of his
irresistible strength, and the power of his Anger which puts Conscience into
such horror after the commission of Wickedness. Hark what the Prophet
speaks, Nah. 1. 5, 6. The Mountains quake at him, and the Hills melt, and the
Earth is burnt at his presence; yea the World and all that dwell therein; who
can stand before his indignation? and who can abide in the fierceness of his
anger? his fury is poured out like fire, and the Rocks are thrown down by him.
The impressions of this anger must needs be terrible, therefore Conscience
causes such perplexity, therefore the wounds of the Spirit are so intolerable,
because it is the hand of a great angry God that makes these wounds.

5. If there be a Conscience in Man, learn that God is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him, Heb. 11. 6. this is the ground and foundation that
Conscience has to show for that encouragement which it gives unto well-doing.
Conscience could not set Cursing and Death before us, if God were not righteous
and just: neither could it set Blessing and Life before us, if he were not good
and gracious. It Is well for us that there is Mercy and forgiveness with the
Lord, and that with him there is plenteous Redemption, else no Conscience could
have any peace, but every sinner, unless strangely stupid, would be overwhelmed
with trouble and sorrow.

6. If there be a Conscience in man, learn from hence the Immortality of the
Soul: Morte carent animae semper que priore relicta,
Sede novis domibus habitant vivunt que receptae.
Ovid Metam. l. 15.

Beasts who dye for good and all, and whose all dies together, have no
Conscience to disquiet them. Man has a Conscience, therefore his Soul dies not.
It Is evident by the light of Nature that the Soul is immortal. Many of the
Heathens dreaded sin upon this account, lest their Souls after death should be
punished for it. But in the Scripture this Truth is evidently delivered. Christ
says, Man cannot kill the Soul, though he can kill the Body, Mat. 10. 28. But
if the soul did dye or sleep with the Body, then Man would be able to do the
one as well as the other; nay, he could not kill the Body but he must needs
kill the Soul at the same time. Besides, the Apostle says, we are willing
rather to be absent from the Body, and to be present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.
8. Now what of Paul but his Soul could be absent from his body, and present
with the Lord? The Soul then is certainly immortal. How many awakened
Consciences upon deathbeds have dreaded the Souls immediate punishment! how
many Saints upon deathbeds have been ravished with the assured hopes of their
Souls being presently with Christ upon their dissolution!

7. If there be a Conscience in a Man, learn The certainty of a judgment to
come. The coming of the Lord to judgment Conscience is frequently bringing to
our thoughts; I judge you says, Conscience at present; but One greater,
infinitely greater then I will judge you hereafter: all must stand before his
bar. Hark what Solomon says, Eccles. 12. 13, 14. Let us hear the conclusion of
the whole matter, fear God and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole of
man; for God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing,
whether it be good or whether it be evil. When Paul reasoned of Righteousness,
Temperance and Judgment to come, Faelix trembled, for his Conscience was
convinced, his Conscience judged him, and condemned him as guilty of
unrighteousness, and he fears that God would much more condemn him.

8. Is there a Conscience in Man, learn what it is that lays some restraint upon
the lusts of Men, and hinders them from running into such excess of Riot as
Nature would incline them to. When once sinners get victory over their
Consciences, and become past feeling, then they give themselves over to
Lasciviousness, to work all Wickedness and Uncleanness with greediness. Ephesians.
4. 19. If there were no such thing as Conscience among the Sons of Men, though
the World is very bad, yet it would be ten thousand times worse than it is.
Earth would be more akin to Hell, though it is too much, too near akin already.

Use II. Be excited to bless the Lord that he has given unto man such a Power
as Conscience. (...) Chrysostom. in Genesin, (...).
Alas! we know not how to value Privileges: the Word of God is an inestimable
blessing, but who is thankful for it? Nay, most had rather be without it.
Conscience also is of admirable Use, but most are troubled at it, as if 'twere
a thing sent on purpose to torment them before the time. But by several
Arguments I shall make it evident, that you have great cause to be thankful,
that God has placed Consciences in you.

1. Conscience is such a Power as escaped but in man's fall of any other Faculty.
The will of Man is full of enmity against God, and therefore his heart is said
to be deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? Jer.
17. 9. But though there is no good or rectitude in the heart, yet there is some
Light remaining in the Conscience, and though the heart be extremely evil,
willing to deceive, willing to be deceived, yet the Conscience has some kind of
tenderness and faithfulness left in it, unless by long custom in sin it be
made senseless and stupid. I readily yield that Conscience is corrupted also in
a great measure by the Fall; the Apostle tells, us that unbelievers mind and
Conscience is defiled, Titus 1. 15. There is a great deal of difference between
the Conscience of Adam in the state of Innocence, and the Conscience of a
Natural Man. Conscience is less acquainted with the will of God than it was: It
has not that Power and Authority to command Obedience that once it had; it is
prone, (especially in some things,) to be erroneous, and mistaking, to urge to
sin instead of Duty: it does not with such strength and vigor oppose
temptation, as it ought. But yet still it is a great Mercy that Conscience does
so much as it does; the light of it might have been totally extinguished, and
the Lord might have suffered us to have run full-speed in our wicked ways to
Destruction, without any Monitor within to check or control us.

2. Conscience takes part with God against sin and Satan. 'Twas the saying of
an Heathen Poet, (...). Conscience is a God unto all Mortal Men; the reason is,
because it sides with God, and assents to the equity of his Commands. It
declaims against sin, and calls the Devil an Enemy who tempts to the commission
of it, and calls the sinner a Fool and Madman for yielding: it consents unto
the Law of God that it is good, and is not satisfied, if God be displeased, if
his Law be transgressed. Oh, let us be thankful for Conscience, for by
endeavoring to hinder our departing from God, and our provoking him to Anger;
It does consult our Peace, our Profit, our Happiness, and would have us lifted
up above those slavish fears, which are so great a torment to the Soul
reflecting upon its evil doings. (...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
Philemon. Comicus, intra Poet. Minor. page 523.



3. Conscience takes part with the Soul against the Flesh. It cannot patiently
endure that a vile Body should be only minded, and a precious Soul totally
neglected. How often does Conscience upbraid us with this? That if our Bodies
lack Food, we are extremely sollicitous to provide for them, and prevent their
starving: but our Souls may want Spiritual food Days, Months, Years together,
and yet we are not concerned. That if our Bodies want Clothing, we are ashamed
to be seen, and are not contented till we have gotten Raiment to cover their
Nakedness: But our Souls may be Naked, Wretched, and Miserable: And this
Nakedness is perceived by the Holy Eye of God, yet we blush not, nor apply our
selves to Christ for the white Robe of his Righteousness to cover them.
Finally, That if our Bodies are Distempered, we send for a Physician, and are
eager to be Cured: But our Souls may Labor under many Spiritual Plagues; as
Hardness, Pride, Covetousness, Concupiscence, which Distempers, if not healed,
will prove Mortal in the worst sense; and yet Christ the Physician of Souls is
not valued, neither do we cry to be healed, but seem rather to be fond of our
Maladies. Quae laedunt oculos festinas demere? siquid
Est animum; d^ffers curandi tempus in annum?
Horat. Epist. 2. ad Lollium.

Thus Conscience does reproach us, to make us ashamed of our Folly and grow
wiser: Withal telling us, that if our Souls miscarry, our Bodies hereafter
must be tormented, which now we are so tender of: but if our Souls are secured,
the Body will be safe in the same bottom.

4. Conscience, of all other Powers, does struggle most to prevent our Ruin:
or rather when our other Powers are forward to promote our Destruction,
Conscience endeavors to hinder it. Man is his own chief Enemy, and has the
greatest hand in his own undoing. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, Hos.
13. 9. If you look into Scripture, you will find how sinners are bent to
transgress, they will not be made clean; all that is in them, (Conscience
excepted) joins together to make them miserable. Their eyes are full of
Adultery, and cannot cease from sin, 2 Pet. 2. 14. Their Tongue is a fire, a
World of Iniquity, that it defiles the whole Body, and sets on fire the
course of Nature, and is set on fire of Hell, James 3. 6. Their Throat is an
open Sepulcher, the poison of Aspes is under their lips, Romans 3. 13. They work
Iniquity with both hands earnestly, and their Feet are swift in running to
evil. Their Wills are exceeding obstinate and perverse; they are resolved to
burn in Hell before they will turn from sin; Why will ye die, O house of
Israel? Ezekiel. 33. 11. They will not be persuaded to Repent, though one should
rise from the Dead, and tell them of those unquenchable and furious Flames in
which the damned are tormented, Luke 16. ult. Their Affections are strong and
vehement for Sin and Vanity, they love sin better than themselves, and a vain
perishing World before an infinitely better and enduring Substance. Thus all in
Man conspires unto his overthrow: only Conscience opposes and warns him of his
danger, and urges him not to be a Devil to himself, nor in the worst sense to
be a self-murtherer, that is to say, a Soul murderer.

5. You have reason to be thankful for Conscience, for this helps to make the
World habitable. There would be no Living upon Earth if Conscience were
altogether Banished. Every Man (as one says) would be a Cain to his Brother, an
Amnon to his Sister, an Absalom to his Father, a Judas to his Master, a Saul to
himself, if Conscience did not help to lay some restraint. The goodness of God
toward the World is to be admired, in that he has given a Conscience among
Men, all things else would quickly run to Confusion, Wickedness would grow
high, so as to become intolerable, and Men would be nothing else but Plagues
and Tormentors one to another.

Use III. Here is great encouragement unto Ministers, that there is a
Conscience in Man. The Lusts of Men are against us, because we strike at them;
their Humors are against us unless we sinfully endeavor to comply and please
them. But their Consciences are for us, and so much the more for us, by how
much more faithfully we discharge our Duty. The sharpest rebukes Conscience
will say are needful, and will tell the sinner, that he that hates Reproof, is
Brutish, Prove. 12. 1. And when we denounce the most dreadful threatenings, when
sinners come home, Conscience will denounce them over again, and bid them to
cast away those Transgressions which are threatened so terribly. We read indeed
of a Rebellious People, Lying Children, Children that would not hear the Law of
the Lord; they said to the Seers, see not; and to the Prophets, Prophecy not
to us right things; speak unto us smooth things, Prophecy deceits, get ye out
of the way, turn aside out of the Path, cause the Holy One of Israel to cease
from before us. But all this was the Language of their Corruption, and not of
their Consciences. Hark what Solomon says, Prove. 28. 23. He that Rebukes a
Man, afterward shall find more favor, than he that flattereth with his
Tongue: The reason is, because in cool Blood, and when he comes seriously to
consider, Conscience will tell him, that sin deserved Rebuke, and that Rebuke
was an Argument of the Love of him that gave it.

Use IV. Since God has placed a Conscience in Man, let me give you this
Caution. Do not think that you are able to extirpate Conscience. You may be
weary of it, but you cannot be rid of it: This Witness, this Judge will be ever
with you, whether you will or no. Augustine has an Excellent passage to our
present purpose. Ad quem locum tutus fugio? ad quem montem? ad quam speluncam?
ad quae tecta munita? quam arcem teneam? quibus muris ambiar? Quocunque iero
sequor Me. Quicquid enim vis potes fugere, Homo, praeter conscientiam.
Augustine. Enarrat. in Psalm 39. page (mihi) 164.
To what place shall I fly for safety? To what Mountain? To what Cave? To what
Tower or Fortress? Within what Walls may I be secure? Wherever I go, I must
needs follow and be with my self. O Man, thou may fly other things, but not
thy own Conscience. Aquinas does Argue very unreasonably, that Conscientia est
actus quia potest deponi. Conscience is not a Power or Habit, but an Act,
because it may be lost; for the contrary unto this is most certainly true.

I grant indeed that you may drown the Voice of Conscience, so that it may
speak to little purpose: I grant further, that you may stupifie and silence it,
that it may not speak at all; nay, you may sear it as with an hot Iron, but yet
these four things must be added.

1. Conscience remains still, and may awake of a sudden. Some Providence or
other, some remarkable Judgment, Personal or National, may startle it, or the
approach of Death may rouse it out of that dead sleep in which before it lay.

2. All Excuses for sin will then appear to be vain. Those Reasons which you
thought so strong for sin, and against the ways of God, when an awakened
Conscience weighs them in the Balance of the Sanctuary. Tekel may be writ upon
them, how light and wanting will they be found? Therefore that Challenge is
made, Isa. 41. 21. Produce your Cause, says the Lord; bring forth your strong
Reasons, says the King of Jacob.

3. All Endeavors to stop the mouth of Conscience may then prove to no
purpose. When thou think of the Blood of Christ, it may reply, thou have
trampled it under Foot; when thou think of the mercy of God, it may reply,
that thou have abused, and turned his Grace into wantonness: thus it may thrust
away all the Encouragements of the Gospel.

4. There may be such horror in thy Conscience, as may be greater than the
greatest torments: All thy pleasures then will shrink and dye away. 'Twas a
saying of Luther, Vna guttula malae Conscientiae, totum mare mundani gaudii
absorbet. One little drop of an evil Conscience can swallow up a whole Sea of
Worldly Joy.

Use V. Be exhorted to heed Conscience. As every one should have an Ear to hear
what the Spirit of God says; so also what his own Spirit, his own Conscience
says to him.

1. Heed Conscience in its Admonitions, as to things that are to be done; dare
not to go contrary to the dictates of it. If Conscience say, go, go; if come,
come; if do this, do it.

2. Heed Conscience in its censure of things already done. If Conscience
Observe any fault, Oh go and bewail it, desire the pardon of it, and that Power
may presently be given to thee, that thou may for the future abstain from it.

Now the motives to prevail with you to heed your own Consciences, are these.

1. Conscience speaks from God to you. When it bids you to depart from evil and
do good, and dwell for ever more, Psalm. 37. 27. This is not the voice of
Conscience only, but really of God himself. This duty says Conscience I
command, this sin I forbid, yet, not I, but the Lord. Conscience is Gods
Officer, and presses whatever it presses still in Gods Name. It sets the Lord
before us, and charges us as we value his loving kindness which is better than
Life, as we value fellowship with him, that we endeavor to do that which is
good in his sight. And as we would escape his anger, and his smoking jealousy
which will utterly consume us; that we beware of that which is worst of evils,
sinning against him.

2. Consider the Power of Conscience, if we take Power for Authority, God has
given great Authority unto the Conscience; And a Man must rather disobey Kings
and Emperors then disobey Conscience. Nebuchadnezzar commanded the three
Children to Worship the Golden Image that he had set up; Conscience commanded
them to refuse to Worship it. They obey Conscience, and rather than Conscience
should fly in their faces for idolatry, they venture to be cast into a fiery
furnace, Dan. 3. If we take Power for Ability, Conscience is a thing of greater
force and strength. If it be good, how can it sweeten any condition though in
it self never so calamitous! but if Conscience be bad, it is sufficient to put
gall and bitterness into all your Comforts.

3. If you heed Conscience, it is the way to have you and your Consciences agree
together. Conscience will dwell with you and you cannot help it, Oh therefore
hearken to it, and satisfy it, for this will be much for your own peace and
satisfaction. There is a twofold Peace which it highly concerns us to look
after, Peace above, and Peace within. Peace above with God we should be
sollicitous about, there is no contending with Him that is Almighty. Let the
Potsherds strive with the Potsherds of the Earth, but woe unto him that striveth
with his Maker, Esa. 45. 9. How earnest then should we be, that being justified
by Faith we may have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. And next
unto peace with God, we should endeavor after peace within, even peace of
Conscience; and if we hearken and do what an enlightened Conscience commands,
and walk before God in Truth. Conscience will speak Peace, and that peace it
will be true.

4. Consider, That in the hour of distress and especially at the time of your
dissolution the good Word of Conscience will do more good to you, than all the
World. A clear Conscience makes a triumphant Saint before he does expire. Mark
the perfect man and behold the upright, for the end of that man is Peace, Psalm.
37. 37. How many have looked death in the face, undaunted, because Conscience
has born witness to their sincerity. Melch. Adamus in vita Lutheri, page 154,
155.
When Luther was sick of his last distemper, and grew toward his end, he waked
at midnight, and perceiving his Earthly Tabernacle was falling to the ground;
he brake forth into Thanksgiving to God for revealing Christ to him, whom he
believed, whom he professed, whom he loved, whom he celebrated, and whom the
Pope with the Company of the wicked did persecute. Then he prayed to his
Heavenly Father to receive his spirit, and added, though I must now lay down
this Body, yet I know most certainly that I shall ever be with the Lord, and
none shall pluck me out of his hand. Here was a Conscience clear, a Death
without Fear, and an abundant entrance into the Everlasting Kingdom.

5. Heed Conscience, for 'twill go with you to the bar of God. Quando Deus
judex erit, alius testis quam Conscientia tua non erit. Inter Judicem justum,
and Conscientiam tuam noli timere nisi causam tuam. Augustine. Enarrat. in Psalm.
37. page (mihi) 323.
and certainly 'twill be sad to be followed to that Tribunal, by a guilty
Conscience crying out against you. If Conscience excuse you, and plead for you
before your Judge, how sweet and comfortable will that be, if it produce
sincere obedience, and the Righteousness of Christ apprehended by Faith to
cover all your guilt, and make up all your imperfections; this will make you
lift up your heads with joy and confidence. But if Conscience does accuse you
of impenitency in sin all your days, though it often warned you to mourn, and
turn; these accusations, as they cannot be evaded, so they will be
unconceivably terrifying and confounding to you.

6. Heed Conscience, for 'twill remain in you forever, 'twill be Eternally with
the Saints in Glory. After a Believer has fought the good fight, has finished
his course, has kept the Faith, has been acquitted at the judgment seat, and
has received the Crown of Righteousness, then Conscience will be fully at rest.
Work is now done, danger is now past, and the possession of the inheritance is
secured, Rev. 3. 12. Him that overcomes will I make a Pillar in the Temple of
my God, and he shall go no more out. Conscience also will be eternally with the
reprobates in misery. And as Job's Messengers, did tell him that his Cattle
were destroyed, and his Substance taken away, and they only were left alone to
tell him. So Conscience will speak after the same manner unto the damned. O you
self-destroying Sinners, your consolation is all received, your good things are
come to an end; your profits and Pleasures are quite fled away and gone. And I
only am left alone to tell you, To tell you of your madness in loving sin, in
idolizing a vain World, in slighting Salvation, and bringing your selves
(notwithstanding all warnings) into Eternal misery.

I have done with the first Doctrine. That God has placed a Conscience in Man.

Doct. 2. The second Doctrine is this. To have a good Conscience should be
every ones greatest care. This is one end of the Commandment, not only that
there may be Love, a pure Heart, and Faith unfeigned, but also a good
Conscience, 1 Timothy 1. 5. so 1 Pet. 3. 16. Sanctify the Lord God in your
Hearts, having a good Conscience, that whereas they speak evil of you as of
Evil doers, they may be ashamed who falsely accuse your good Conversation in
Christ. It Is the observation of Augustine Ecce quid prodest plena bonis arca,
inanis Conscientia? Bona vis habere, and bonus non vis esse? Non vides te
erubescere debere de bonis tuis, si domus tua plena est bonis, and te habet
malum? Quid enim est quod velis habere malum? Nihil omnino; non uxorem, non
filium, non filiam, non servum, non ancillam, non villam, non tunicam, postremo
non caligam, and tamen vis habere malam vitam. August. De verbis Domini, Sermon.
12. pagin. mihi 57. Tom. 10.
that Men are willing to have all things else good, but their Consciences are
bad, and they themselves are Evil. There is no man but desires his Wife should
be good, his Children good, his Servants good, the House that he dwells in
good, the An he lives in good, the Food he eats good, the Clothes he wares
good, he does not care to have any thing bad about him. How comes it to pass
that he is too well content to have a bad Conscience within him? This is our
natural folly which it highly concerns us to be Cured of.

In the prosecution of this point, I shall first declare what a good Conscience
is. Secondly, I shall show how the acts of a good Conscience, and the Acts of
the good Spirit of God are to be distinguished. Thirdly, produce some reasons
why it does so highly concern every man to have a good Conscience. Lastly, Make
Application.

In the first place I am to open what a good Conscience is, and before I speak
to this, it will not be amiss to premise these particulars.

1. Conscience was good, very good in Adam, when he was first made, and so
continued while he remained in the state of innocence. Oh the Light, and Grace,
and Peace that was in Adams Soul, when he was newly come out of his Creators
hand! There was a far sweeter Paradise within, than that Eden in which he was
placed. When the Lord was about to form Man, he said Let us make Man in our
Image, after our Likeness, Genesis 1. 26. and ver. 27. it follows, so God created
Man in his own Image, nay it is doubled, in the Image of God created he him. As
Man did ressemble God in Holiness and Righteousness, so he did resemble him in
Peace and Blessedness. Man was made upright, there was nothing in him, that
either God or Conscience did disapprove of. His Purity was without spot, his
Righteousness without any mixture of sin, his joy was without grief or remorse,
his peace calm, without the least storm or trouble.

2. The Conscience of Man was defiled and wounded by his fall. Sin did throw
the Apostate Angels quite to Hell; the chains of Darkness in which those evil
Spirits are, may well be interpreted partly to be their guilty and tormenting
Consciences, which they can never be freed from, but will keep them trembling
till the great day. And truly sin did throw Man down to the very brink of Hell.
Who can conceive that horror which was in Adams Soul till the promised Seed
was spoken of, till he had an intimation of the Messiah? We are not chiefly to
take notice of the act of eating the forbidden fruit, but Adams Mind in Eating.
How great was his Pride! he would have been as God: how cursed his unbelief! he
makes God a Liar, and credits the Father of Lies before him. Nay, since this
Tree was appointed for trial, whether man would continue good, or become evil,
his Eating of it showed a contempt of that Covenant, and promise of Life which
God had made with him. By all this how was his Conscience polluted! Adam where
art thou? says God, Genesis 3. 9. Thou were near me once, but whither art thou run
away? I placed thee in an happy state, but whither art thou fallen; into what
depths of misery have thou plunged thy self?

3. The Conscience of every natural Man in the World is Evil. Since all are
conceived in sin, and shapen in iniquity, it follows that the nature of Man is
corrupted, there is no part or power in man, but the contagion of sin has
reached. In me that is in my flesh, there dwells no good thing, says the
Apostle, Romans 7. 18. Now our Lord calls all natural men; Flesh: That which is
born of the Flesh is Flesh, John 3. 6. And if in the Flesh there dwells no good
thing, Surely a good Conscience is not to be found in any carnal man breathing.
I affirmed before, that Conscience has escaped best of any Faculty, in the Fall,
and yet it must needs be acknowledged, that this has been bruised, this has
been Wounded.

The Light which Conscience now has, if compared with what it had before the
Fall, is no more than the light of a Candle compared with the Sun: it is Night
still though the Candle burns; and only the Sun can make it Day. Something of
God and of his Will, natural Conscience knows; but how insufficient is that
knowledge! Conscience urges Men to Duty, but it is Natural to it to permit them
to place a confidence in what they do, as if by their Obedience some amends
were made for their transgressions; and this is a great fault in it, and a very
grand Impediment unto the receiving of the Gospel, which informs us, that we
must Rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the Flesh, Phil. 3. 3.
How dull and sluggish is Conscience Naturally in the Executing of its Office!
As Eli spoke something to his Sons, but faintly; and therefore he is blamed
exceedingly, that his Sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not. So
the ungodly make themselves vile, and Conscience does not restrain them: it is
not so peremptory in its prohibitions and commands; so fierce in its
accusations, neither does it Judge with such Authority as it ought.

4. It Is possible and usual for a Conscience to appear good when it is stark
naught. Though all Gold glisters, yet all is not Gold that glisters. All Grace
shines, yet all is not Grace that shines. There is a Conscience, that is so
mistaken, as to call good evil, and evil good, as to put darkness for light,
and light for darkness, Isa. 5. 20. And if evil be called good, and darkness
light; how eagerly, and resolutely will evil be Acted, and the Works of
Darkness be engaged in! The Jews when they Persecuted the Son of God, thought
they did God good Service: Here was a Conscience that seemed Zealous for God,
but was indeed against him. Men's Consciences in many cases entertain high
self-conceits, where there is no ground, Prove. 30. 12. There is a Generation
that are pure in their own eyes, and yet are not washed from their filthiness.
So Laodicea did say, I am Rich, and increased with Goods, and have need of
nothing: But this was the Ignorance and unfaithfulness of their Conscience.
Christ says to them, Thou know not that thou art wretched, and miserable,
and poor and blind, and naked, Rev. 3. 17.

5. It Is necessary that the Spirit work a saving change before the Conscience
of any can be truly good: this is to be found only in them that are New
Creatures. None can be said to have good Consciences, that are under the Power
of Satan, that serve diverse Lusts and Pleasures, that walk after the Flesh,
that are workers of Iniquity; but such are all who never were regenerated by
the Spirit. It Is the Blood of Christ must purge the Conscience from dead works.
But none can be said to be in Christ, nor to have a purged Conscience but they
who have been New created, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Therefore if any Man be in Christ he
is a New Creature, Old things are past away, behold, all things are become New.
I grant that Conscience may be awakened in many unregenerate sinners, but the
bare awakening of it is not sufficient to prove it good; for then in Hell there
would be Excellent Consciences, for all there are awakened thoroughly.
Notwithstanding awakenings, Conscience in the ungodly continues evil, as long
as the guilt of sin remains unremoved, and the Soul is still under the Dominion
and Power of it.

6. The Consciences of the regenerate are not good, in respect of Legal
Perfection and Exactness. The first Adam, before his Apostasy, was able to
reach this Exactness, which the Law required; he was able to Obey the Law of
God without Offending in a tittle, Christ also the second Adam, did fulfill the
Law without the least Transgression all his days. He was like unto his Brethren
in other regards, but sin is excepted, Heb. 4. 15. So Heb. 7. 26. Such an
High Priest became us, who is Holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from Sinners,
and made higher than the Heavens. But truly the best of Saints fall short.
Surely they are unacquainted with the Law of God, that imagine they are able
perfectly to Obey it; it may justly be suspected that they put short glosses
upon it, and then fancy they fulfill it: but questionless they are ignorant of
its strictness and Spirituality.

As it is said of God himself, that he is of purer eyes than to behold Evil, and
cannot look upon Iniquity, Habak. 1. 13. So it may be said of his Law, it is
purer than to allow any evil, than to approve of the least Iniquity. No
Conscience therefore, in a Legal sense, can be affirmed to be good, for the
Holy Ghost does not stick to say, There is not a Just man upon Earth that does
good and sins not, Eccles. 7. 20. The Consciences of Saints see sin but in
part, therefore David cries out, Cleanse me from secret sins, who can understand
his Errors? Psalm. 19. 12. and Psalm. 139. 23, 24. Search me, O God, and know my
heart, try me, and know my thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in me,
and lead me in the way everlasting. And as the Consciences of the best are
capable of more light than they have, so more purity and tenderness may also be
attained.

7. Conscience may be good according to the Law of Grace, though sin is not
totally purged away. This very Apostle Paul, which says, he had a good
Conscience before God, does yet say, Not as though I ha^ attained, or were
already perfect, Phil. 3. 12. Nay, he does acknowledge that sin did dwell in
him, he complains of a Law in his Members, and cries out, O wretched Man that I
am! who shall deliver me from the Body of this death? Romans 7. 20, 23, 24.
Conscience is good in a Gospel-sence, though sin remain, as long as it does not
Reign in us, and we are no longer willing to Obey it in the Lusts of it. Now,
if you ask me, in what regard Conscience is good notwithstanding some
remainders of evil: I Answer,

1. Conscience is good comparatively; how vast a difference between Saints and
Sinners! How careful the one, how careless the other! How are the former afraid
of offending God! how are the latter presumptuous and bold! How are their
Hearts set in them to do evil! When Noah is said to be a Just Man, and Perfect
in his Generation, Genesis 6. 9. This is hinted, that he was Just, compared with
the men of his Generation; and his Righteousness was the more to be admired,
since he kept himself unpolluted by their wickedness.

2. Conscience may be said to be good sincerely, when in the spirit of a man
there is no guile, as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 32. 2. When there is no sin, but
the soul consents to be delivered from it, and no Grace but the soul desires to
be enriched with it; and no Command, but it is willing to Obey it, and where it
falls short it is grieved; and because it has not attained, therefore it is
continually pressing toward the Mark, and perfecting Holiness in the fear of
God. Perfecti et non perfecti, Phil. 3. Perfecti viatores, nondum perfecti
possessores, et noveritis, quod perfectos viatores dicat, qui jam in via
ambulant. Quid est ambulare? Breviter dico, proficere, ne forte non
intelligatis, and pigrius ambuletis. Semper tibi displiceas quod es, sivis
pervenire ad id quod nondum es. Nam ubi tibi placuisti, ibi remansisti. Si
autem dixeris, sufficit, periisti. Semper add, semper ambula, semper profic.
Noli in via remanere, noli retro redire, noli deviare. Aug. De verbis Apostoli.
Ser. 15. page mihi 338. Tom. 10.


3. Conscience may be said to be good, so as to be accepted. We Serve a very
gracious Lord, who is not extreme to mark our Offenses, though we come short in
point of performance; yet if he sees we unfeignedly desire and purpose to
please him, such is his Fatherly indulgence, that he does accept us, not
according to what we have not, but according to what we have. I know, O my God,
says David, that thou tryest the Heart, and have pleasure in uprightness, 1 Chronicles. 29. 17. If upon trial of the heart, he finds it is turned toward
himself, he takes delight in it.

4. Notwithstanding many failings which are un-allowed of and mourned over,
Conscience may be said to be good, so as to be rewarded. Evangelical good
works, though they are not meritorious, yet they are rewardable; therefore a
reward is spoken of, and assured in Scripture to Believers, Rev. 22. 12.
Behold, I come quickly, and my Reward is with me, to give to every Man
according as his work shall be. God promises to be himself a Reward to Abraham,
Genesis 15. 1. and so he will be to all the Children of Abraham. Christ will
Reward them with Salvation that do Obey him, Heb. 5. 9. And being made perfect
he became the Author of Eternal Salvation unto all them that do Obey him. If
Conscience bear us witness that we are diligent in Trading with those Talents
which are delivered to us, we may be assured that at last we shall hear, Well
done good and Faithful Servants, Enter you into the Joy of your Lord. We may
wonder exceedingly that such a Reward should be promised to a good Conscience
(and shall we not wonder much more when that Reward is Actually received?)
Since our Obedience is so lame, and our goodness so imperfect: But we must
remember that the Saints imperfections are covered by Christ, and in him all
the promises of God; and surely then the promises of Reward are yea and Amen, 2
Cor. 1. 20. And therefore Eternal Life, which is the Reward promised and
expected, is also called a free-gift, and said to be given through Jesus Christ
our Lord, Romans 6. 23.

These things being thus premised, I am to tell you what a good Conscience is.

Bernard speaking of a good Conscience, does very well, and also wittily
affirm, Faelix Conscientia, in qua veritas and misericordia obviaverunt sibi;
justitia and pax osculatae sunt. Bern. de Int. Dom page: 1060.
That Conscience is truly good, where Mercy and Truth are met together, and
Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other. The truth of the Gospel does
reveal the mercy of God in Christ, and this mercy must by Faith be apprehended;
Peace follows upon the obtaining of mercy, and if the Peace be of the right
kind, 'twill be joined with the Love and Practice of Righteousness.

The goodness of Conscience is of great extent; one single thing is not
sufficient to constitute it good. I shall therefore in several particulars show
wherein the goodness of it does consist; and also as I go along, which will be
highly needful, direct you how this goodness may be attained to in every part
of it.

1. The goodness of Conscience lies in its Illumination, and being rightly
informed. Conscience is to be a guide, but that is not to be called a good
guide, which is either blind, or does mistake. If the Light that is in thee be
Darkness, how great is that Darkness? Mat. 6. 23. Upon this score Wisdom and
Knowledge in Scripture are so much commended; and we are so frequently
commanded to seek, and to get Understanding, Job 28. 18, 19 No mention shall be
made of Coral, or of Pearls, for the price of Wisdom is above Rubies. The topaz
of Aethiopia cannot equal it, neither shall it be valued with pure Gold. So,
Prove. 3. 13, 14, 15. Happy is the Man that finds Wisdom, and the Man that
gets Understanding; for the Merchandise of it is better than the Merchandise
of Silver, and the gain thereof than fine Gold. She is more precious than
Rubies, and all the things thou can desire are not to be compared to her. And
Prove. 4. 7. Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get Wisdom, and with all
thy gettings get understanding. It Is confessed that Conscience may be
enlightened, and yet remain bad, no improvement being made of the Light of it;
but yet this is certain, that Conscience cannot be good unless it be
enlightened. As we say, there may be Knowledge without saving Faith, but not
saving Faith without Knowledge: So here, there may be Knowledge without this
goodness of Conscience, but not a good Conscience without this Ingredient of
Knowledge.

But you will ask me, what kind of Knowledge is that which is in a good
Conscience? I Answer,

1. The knowledge of a good Conscience is so extensive, as that it understands
all things that be of Necessity to be believed and practiced, in Order to
Salvation. No Fundamental Article of Faith, or Duty of Christianity but is
known. The Conscience cannot be good unless there be a knowledge of the only
true God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, John 17. 3. Unless we are
acquainted with what the Lord requires of us; namely, to Repent of sin, to
believe in Jesus, to do justly, to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with our God.
Though that Promise, John 16. 13. When the Spirit of Truth is come, he shall
guide you into all Truth, may have a special reference to the Apostles, who
were to publish the Gospel unto all Nations, and so had need to be certainly
informed themselves; yet it is applicable unto all Believers, they shall by the
Spirit be led into all Truth Necessary to be known and Obeyed.

2. The Knowledge of a good Conscience is true, in Opposition unto Error and
Falsehood. It Is a Beam which comes from the Father of Lights, with whom is no
variableness, neither shadow of turning, James 1. 17. All true Wisdom is from
above; it is through the Precepts of the Lord, that Conscience does get a right
Understanding; and hence it comes to pass, that false ways are discovered and
abhorred, Psalm. 119. 104. It Is very sad to have an Erroneous Conscience, for in
this case Conscience does back the Devils commands with God's Authority. An
Erring Conscience does bind the Person, I confess, so that he sins if he does
not heed his Conscience; for Interpretatively, he goes against the Will of God;
for Conscience, though it command what is evil, yet requires it as that which
is conceived to be good, and what God has commanded. He that shall injure or
affront a Private Person, thinking him to be the King, is justly censured to
have Acted against the King, because, suppose the King had really been in his
reach, he would have affronted him. So, he that goes against Conscience which
errs when it tells him, This is the Will of God, would go against Conscience,
supposing it were really the Lords Will. So, that it is certain the Person is
bound by an Erring Conscience: But truly, to speak properly, there cannot be an
Obligation unto the Error of the Conscience, there cannot be an Obligation to
the Evil that an Erroneous Conscience puts us upon. All proper Obligation is
from the Law and Will of God, but the Word of God does forbid all evil; nay,
forbids the least Evil to be done, whatever good is likely to follow upon the
doing of it. Their damnation is just who do evil that good may come, Romans 3. 8.

A man whose Conscience erreth is under a miserable kind of necessity of
sinning; if he goes against his Conscience he sins, because Conscience commands
him in Gods name; if he go according to his Conscience he sins, because
Conscience is mistaken, and commands what God has really prohibited and
forbidden. What great enemies are Seducers and false Prophets unto Conscience?
they Preach up their Errors as the Truths of Christ, and hereby they mis-inform
and ensnare souls; and truly where there is a presumptuous and unwary boldness
as to error, as if there were no danger of it, or in it, a thousand to one but
Conscience may quickly be corrupted. But here it may be demanded, what shall a
man do whose Conscience errs? I answer it is his duty to put away such a
Conscience, and to entreat the Lord that he may be rightly informed. A good
Conscience is thus informed, and speaks to us nothing but what is true in the
Name of the Lord. It does beware of false Prophets, and will not follow
strangers, it is a great enemy to diverse and strange Doctrines, Heb. 13. 9. It
dislikes Superstition, will worship, and all humane inventions, its fear of God
is not taught by the precepts of men: but what is from heaven, that it minds:
what God would have done that it enquires after, and is acquainted with. If you
ask me here whether a good man's Conscience may not err? I answer, in some
smaller things it may, but this erring is no part of the goodness of his
Conscience, and therefore both himself and others should endeavor his being
brought to a better understanding.

3. The knowledge of a good Conscience is certain, in opposition unto
dubiousness; it is grounded upon that Revelation which the Lord has made of his
own will. A good Conscience looks into, and searches the Holy Scriptures, and
is fully assured that what is made known, either as a matter of Faith or
Practice, is indeed the Mind of God; for all Scripture is of Divine
inspiration, 2 Timothy 3. 16. This certainty of Knowledge the Apostle does
emphatically express, when he calls it The Riches of the full assurance of
understanding, Col. 2. 2. Conscience which is good, is certain both of the
mysteries of Faith, and the duties of Religion, and entertains the one, and
urges unto the doing of the other.

This certainty is opposed unto dubiousness, when the Conscience through
infirmity and weakness is at a loss, and knows not what to do in some cases:
Just as a man Traveling meets with two ways and knows not which is the right,
when he turns to the right hand he doubts, and so turns to the left, and when
he turns to the left Hand, he doubts whether that will bring him to his
journies end, and so is ready to turn back to the right again. Saints
themselves may thus be in doubt sometimes; but this is no part of the goodness
of their Conscience; but an Argument only of their weakness. And in this case
as the Lord is earnestly to be sought to make their way plain before them, So
they are to follow the Footsteps of the Flock, and in those doubtful matters,
to observe which way the Holiest and best, both of Ministers and Saints do go,
and to accompany them. When the Spouse says, Te^l me (O thou whom my Soul
loves) where thou feedest, where thou make thy Flocks to rest at Noon: for
why should I be as one that turns aside by the Flocks of thy Companions?
Christ answers, If thou would know, O thou fairest among Women, go thy way
forth by the footsteps of the Flock, and feed thy Kids beside the Shepherds
Tents, Cant. 1. 7, 8. and So Prove. 2. 20. That thou may walk in the way of
good men and keep the paths of the Righteous. Misapprehend me not, I do not
make this a general rule, that we are in all things to follow good men. But
where the Conscience doubts on both hands, and is afraid it sins which side
soever it takes. In this case the Footsteps of the Flock are to be minded, and
we must keep close to the Shepherds Tents; and being humble and teachable, this
weakness and dubiousness may be cured; and the Lord may bless means of
instruction, to make us see that plainly, which before we were in the dark
about.

4. The knowledge of a Conscience is satisfying; in opposition unto
scrupulousness. As wisdom is profitable, so also delightful, Prove. 2. 10.
When wisdom enters into thy Heart, and Knowledge is pleasant to thy Soul. As
there is great contentment when the will embraces and enjoys good, so there is
great satisfaction when the understanding and Conscience have found out and do
entertain Truth. But on the other hand scrupulousness is very tormenting. These
scruples are things which arise from weak and sometimes from no ground at all,
and the Lord does permit Believers themselves to be exercised with them, to
correct former sins against Conscience, and also to try their present
tenderness. In Melancholy persons these scruples are most frequent, and in them
whose knowledge is but small.

A scurpulous Conscience differs from a doubting, in that a doubting is afraid
on both hands, a scrupulous is satisfied on one part, but is sollicitous and
full of fear in reference to the other. He had a scrupulous Conscience that did
question the lawfulness of eating all things, but he was satisfied concerning
eating Herbs, Romans 14. 2. Now this scrupulousness is really a fault as well as
a vexation of Conscience, and therefore by well weighing of things; and
diligent looking into the word; and not making more sins than the word declares
to be so; and by understanding better our Christian liberty; we should
endeavor to be rid of our needless scruples. These scruples if we take not
heed, will be so much attended to, as that weightier matters may be neglected;
they will make the service of the Lord less comfortable: and Satan will get
advantage to represent his yoke as the more heavy and burdensome. But when
Conscience is freed from these, it is just as if a stone should be taken out of
our shoe; Conscientia scrupulosa nomen habet a scrupo, qui est lapillus in
calceo hominem laedens, and in incessu impediens. Bald. de Consc. l. 1. c. 10.
with greater ease, and cheerfulness we shall go, nay Run in the way of Gods
Commandments.

5. The knowledge of a good Conscience is operative, and incites to practice.
That passage of our Lord is deeply engraven upon a good and honest heart, Joh.
13. 17. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. Barely to know
will not make us happy, nay, 'twill make us more miserable, because more
inexcusable. Though a good Conscience eyes the obedience and sufferings of
Christ, and there is an hope of acceptance and pardon only upon that account;
yet because by Faith the Law is not made void, but established, therefore it
urges obedience to the Law. The Covenant of Grace having first said, Believe on
the Lord Jesus and thou shall be saved, in a qualified sense also says, Do
this and Live. Sincere obedience is required, or else Life will never be
obtained, Rev. 22. 14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments that they may
have right to the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the gates into the
City. The Light of a good Conscience urges to the casting off the works of
Darkness and to walk circumspectly, and to do this without delay. As the
Egyptians, when their firstborn were destroyed, hastened the Israelites to be
gone; for said they we be all Dead men: So Conscience hastens us to part with
such a deadly thing as sin, and bids us not delay to keep Gods Righteous
Judgments.

You see what kind of knowledge is that of a good Conscience: but here the
great enquiry will be, how may Conscience be well informed, and this kind of
knowledge obtained?

1. That Conscience may be well informed, the Scripture must be well searched.
Holy men of old dug in this Mine for knowledge, and found their labor well
bestowed. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul; the Testimony of
the Lord is Sure making Wise the simple, Psalm. 19. 7, There is more of God
revealed and made known in a leaf of the Bible, than in the whole Book of
Nature. Horace does commend Homer the Writer of the Trojan War, upon this
account. Qui quid sit pulchrum, quid turpe, quid utile, quid non; Before and
melius Chrysippo and Crantore dixit. Because he tells best of all what is Fair
and Lovely, and what is Foul and Filthy, what is Profitable, and what is
Hurtful. But what are Homers Writings, compared with the Holy Scripture? This,
this, does most fully inform the Conscience what is good and what is evil, and
what will do us good, and what will be evil and injurious to us.

The Scripture must be searched, we must look beyond the surface, Truth
sometimes lies deep, therefore Solomon uses that expression. Prove. 2. 4. 5. If
thou seek her as Silver, and searchest for her, as for hid Treasures, then
shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the Knowledge of God. As
the Scripture contains such a full discovery of the Will of God, so there are
several promises made, that it shall be a guide unto the Conscience, and direct
us in a safe way, Prove. 6. 22, 23. When thou go, it shall lead thee; when
thou sleep, it shall keep thee; when thou awakest it shall talk with thee;
for the Commandment is a lamp, and the Law is Light, and the Reproofs of
Instruction are the Way of Life. So Prove. 4. 12. 13. Take fast hold of
Instruction; let her not go, for she is thy Life; when thou go thy steps
shall not be straightened; and when thou runnest thou shall not stumble.

2. That Conscience may be well informed; The Spirit of God must be begged for.
Conscience does very much imitate the Spirit. Does the Spirit reprove for sin?
so does Conscience. Does the Spirit Comfort? so does Conscience. Does the
Spirit move us unto our duty? so does Conscience. And indeed it is by the aid
and Grace of the Spirit that Conscience does all this. And as Conscience is a
weak thing; So also a dark thing without the Spirit. Hark to the Apostle, 2
Cor. 3. 17, 18. Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is Liberty; but we all
with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into
the same image from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. The
Spirit in the glass of the Gospel, does give the Mind and Conscience such a
sight of the Beauty of Holiness, as that there is a change wrought in the very
Heart; the Image of God, which does consist in Righteousness and True Holiness,
is instamped upon it. We should with great earnestness ask the Spirit, for as
he is the Spirit of Holiness, so also the Spirit of Truth, of Wisdom and
Revelation, who alone can open the Eyes of the Understanding, Ephesians. 1. 17. 18*
And besides our Heavenly Father has promised to give the Spirit unto them that
ask him, with much more willingness than Earthly Parents will give bread to
their own Children.

3. That Conscience may be well informed, We must walk with the wise; that is
the way to be wise our selves, Prove. 13. 20. He that walks with the Wise
shall be Wise, but a Companion of Fools shall be destroyed. There is a
destructive infection in Sin and error, therefore those cautions of our Lord.
Take heed what you Hear, and Take heed whom you Hear. And the Apostle tells us
that the Words of false Teachers will Eat like a canker, or like a Gangreen.
Gangreens spread strangely, and the gangrened member is cut of for the
preservation of the Body. On the other side there is a kind of sanative or
healing contagion i^ Wisdom; by conversing with Saints, and Spiritual guides,
that are humble, and holy, and well instructed in the things of God, by degrees
we shall come to have our senses better exercised to discern both Good and Evil.

4. Let this be your design in desiring that Conscience may be informed well;
that you may do well, according to that information. When Christ asked the
blind man that had had sight miraculously given to him, Do thou Believe on
the Son of God? he answers, Who is he Lord that I might Believe on him? Joh. 9.
35, 36. He asks who he was, as being very ready to Believe on him. So should
we inquire, Lord what is thy will, that we may do it? what are thy Commands
that we may yield obedience to them? What is the reason why the Lord will teach
the humble? it is because these desire to know, that they may Do what is
required, they have submitted themselves unto God, and he sees that if they are
entrusted with the Talent of Knowledge, they will Trade with it.

5. Beware exceedingly of false Lights. If a false Light get into the
Conscience, what sad work will it make there? When men take a lie to be truth,
how zealous are they in a bad matter? It Is a high piece of cursed art in the
Devil to wind himself into the Consciences of men; he gets into their wills
and into their affections more easily. He lays before them his ordinary baits
of pleasures and profits and preferments. And in all this, he is no other than
the God of this world; here is no need of any great Metamorphosis, for he knows
that these things will easily take with the foolish and corrupt hearts of
sinners. But that he may get into the Conscience, he acts more subtly. He
transforms himself into an Angel of light, and he transforms his instruments
too, so that they seem to be the Ministers of Righteousness, 2 Cor. 11. 14, 15.
he puts sheeps clothing upon the ravening Wolves, that they may more easily
prey upon the flock of Christ. Surely the cunning of this enemy, especially
since we are warned, should make us wary.

But since every light does pretend to be true, how shall we know which is
false? Certainly we must try the Spirits by the written Word, Esa. 8. 20. To
the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this Word, it is
because there is no Light in them. The Word is of Divine Authority, whoever
rejects it, has no understanding; whoever does wrest it (that is, does make
some passages of it to speak against it self, and the whole design of it) he
does it to his own destruction; nay though an Angel from Heaven, should Preach
a Doctrine contrary to it, we must stiffly oppose him, and boldly say, He is
accursed, Gal. 1. 8.

2. As the goodness of Conscience lies in its illumination and being rightly
informed; So in the due exercise of its Authority and Power. The force of
Conscience is very great when it is exerted; so that good men have looked upon
themselves as Debtors, and not to have paid their debts unless they have done
their duty, Romans 1. 14. I am a debtor both to the Greeks and to the Barbarians,
both to the wise and to the unwise, so as much as in me is, I am ready to
Preach the Gospel to you that be at Rome also, they have looked upon themselves
as bound in Spirit, Act. 20. 22. And now behold I go bound in the Spirit unto
Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall befall me there: and being thus
bound in Spirit he could not give himself a latitude and dispensation, though
the Holy Ghost did witness in every City, that Bonds and Afflictions did abide
him. Conscience has made good men to conclude themselves under a necessity to
obey, and they have professed they could not do otherwise, 1 Cor. 9. 16.
Necessity is laid upon me, yea, woe is unto me if I Preach not the Gospel, and
so Act. 4. 20. We cannot but speak the things which we have Seen and Heard. Now
what that Power and Authority is which a good Conscience exercises, I shall
show you.

1. Conscience has Authority and Power to control the commands of the highest
Potentates on Earth, if they agree not with the Law of God. Darius makes a Law,
that none should ask any Petition of any God or Man for thirty days together,
but only of himself who was the King, Dan. 6. 7. 9. But Daniels Conscience told
him, that that Law which did restrain prayer from the God of Heaven, was
impious: and therefore though the penalty was being cast into the Lions Den, He
went to his House, and he opened his Window, to show he was not afraid or
ashamed, either of his God, or of his service, and he kneeled upon his knees,
and three times a day, prayed and gave thanks before his God, as he did
afore-time, v. 10. When the Jewsh rulers laid injunctions upon the Apostles,
which were contrary to what Christ had enjoined, they speak thus; Whether it be
right in the sight of God that we should obey you rather than God, judge ye,
Act. 4. 19.

But here I must add, that when the Commands of Magistrates are broken, because
against Conscience; we had need to look to it, that Conscience have sufficient
warrant from the Word of God. For though we suffer never so peaceably and
patiently, the penalty which humane Laws inflict; it is no reputation to the
Government, that the Laws are such, as good men and Conscientious cannot
comply with: and of this reputation, so far as possibly we may, we ought to be
very tender. Certainly we are to obey Magistrates, and to be ready unto every
goodwork, and only when they command evil are we exempted from obedience.

2. Conscience has authority and power to cross our secular; interest though
the gain, if unlawful, which is offered, be never so great. In all debates
concerning profit, God allows Conscience a Negative voice. Those pleas for
unlawful courses which are urged from the advantageousness of them, Conscience
says are naught; and that it is a mad venture, to hazard the salvation of the
soul, for a little of the Mammon of unrighteousness. When Achitophel gave
counsel to Absalom which was likely to destroy David. Absalom says let us hear
what Hushai the Archite also advise 2 Samuel 17. 5. Hushai answers, ver. 7. The
counsel of Achitophel is not good. So when the carnal mind does counsel not to
stand upon strict points of honesty, where gain is to be gotten; Conscience
will deal plainly, and say, this counsel is not good: Isre tibi melius suadet,
qui ut rem facias, rem,
Si possis recte, si non quocunque modo rem?
Horat. Epist. 1

for they that will thus be rich, do fall into temptation and a snare, and into
many foolish and hurtful lusts which drown men in destruction and perdition.
The corrupt mind indeed, which is destitute of the truth, does suppose that
gain is Godliness; but the good Conscience thwarts it, and says, Godliness
with contentment is great gain.

3. Conscience has authority and power, to prohibit and forbid the practice of
the most beloved sin: Concerning a Delilah, or an Herodias, 'twill say, It Is
not lawful for thee to have her. As in the natural body, whatever the
constitution be, there is a mixture of all the four humors, but one usually is
predominant, from whence a man is denominated, Sanguine, or Phlegmatic, or
Choleric, or Melancholic: So in the body of sin though there are the seeds of
all wickedness; yet some particular corruption commonly is most prevalent. Now
conscience has authority to strike at this that is the favorite. Conscience
told David he could not be upright before God unless he kept himself from his
own iniquity, and therefore he abstained from it, Psalm. 18. 23. The sin that
naturally is most beloved, there is most reason to hate it, for God is most
dishonored, and the soul is most defiled, and endangered by it. And if
Conscience may make bold to check Temptations to the most beloved sins, surely
it may caution against any sin whatsoever, and indeed, it does not go beyond
its authority when it forbids as much as God himself does: for it is Gods
under-officer to prevent as much as may be all trangression.

4. Conscience has power and authority to enjoin the most difficult duties.
It Is difficult to ponder the path of our feet, and in all places, and
relations, and capacities, and employments, to walk circumspectly; it is
difficult to set a watch before the door of our lips, that sinful and idle
words come not out, which will but tend to make our account sad at the day of
judgment: it is difficult especially to keep our hearts with all diligence,
that God may have them, and the world and sin may not run away with them. How
much pains will it cost us, to conflict with wicked and impertinent thoughts:
to observe the first stirrings of corruption, and to quench these sparks
presently before they be blown up into a flame; to engage in a constant combat
with the flesh, which is continually lusting against the Spirit! But though all
this be difficult, and the flesh cries out, These are hard sayings, yet
Conscience urges to it, and puts us in mind, that the word is the more to be
loved because it is very pure, Psalm. 119. 140. and, that the more we keep from
sin, the greater is our freedom, perfection, peace.

5. Conscience has Power and Authority to press unto the greatest hardships
and sufferings for Christ's sake. The Gospel is called (...) the Word of the
Cross, 1 Cor. 1. 18. not only because it Preaches Christ Crucified, but also
a conformity to him as crucified. And as our Lord was Crucified before he was
glorified, so we must be willing to take up the Cross, that we may come to the
Kingdom, to follow him in his Temptations, that we may follow after him to the
Throne. Conscience tells us that there is no reason to be offended in Christ,
for he never calls us to part with any thing but what is vain, nor to endure
any thing but what he will sanctify and sweeten to us, and we are not to think
much of afflictions, that are but light, that are but for a Moment, that work
for us, and that work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory,
2 Cor. 4. 17.

And when tempted in the time of persecution to fall away, Conscience also
lays before us, the wrath of God, which is ten thousand times more dreadful
than the wrath of persecutors, and 'twill be but a poor relief to be delivered
out of their hands, and to fall into the hands of the Living God. When Spira
against his Conscience had renounced the Protestant Religion, and in Word had
publicly owned the Romish corruptions: Alas what did he get by it? the
torments of his Conscience were worse than any Inquisition; and the despair he
was overwhelmed with, made his condition worse than if he had endured the very
uttermost of Papal cruelty. Some of his words were these: What a dangerous
thing is it to dissemble upon any terms in those matters where the Glory of God
is concerned! what a fearful thing is it to be near and almost a Christian! Oh
that God ^ould let loose his hand from me! that it were with me now as in times
past! I would scorn the threats of the most cruel Tyrants, bear torments with
invincible resolution, and Glory in the outward profession of Christ, till I
were choked in the flame, and my Body consumed to ashes.

Thus great is the Power and Authority of Conscience, and a good Conscience
does Exercise this Authority; but because the Consciences of most seem to have
lost all Power, therefore I shall direct you how this Power of Conscience may
be put forth with vigor. Would you be under the Power and Authority of
Conscience? then,

1. Meditate upon this, how Holy and equal the Law is. Since we are reasonable
Creatures it is fit we be governed by some Law or other, Omnium quae in hominum
Doctorum disputatione versantur nihil est profecto praestabilius, quam plane
intelligi nos ad justitiam esse natos, neque opinione sed natura Jus
constitutum esse. Cicero, de leg 1. p. 221.
and what Laws are comparable to the Law of God? man stands in need of a Law
that may put bounds to his Will and Affections, as well as regulate his
Conversation; humane Laws only reach the latter, but the Law of God
principally requires Holiness in the former. The Angels themselves are not
without a Law: the Apostate ones transgressed it, and were cast down to Hell:
God spared not the Angels that sinned, 2 Pet. 2. 4. the Elect Angels are
affirmed to do the Commandments of God, and to hearken to the Voice of his
Word, Psalm. 103. 20. And truly all the Commands of the Lord are Holy just and
good, the more we obey these, the greater is our Liberty and freedom from the
Power and Tyranny of Sin and Satan unto whom whosoever are subject, they are
defiled, degraded, debased, and made miserable by that subjection.

2. Consider not only the equalness of the Law, but the greatness and goodness
of the Lawgiver. Conscience tells you of a Lord, who has right to rule you. He
has given you your Being, and upholds you in your Being you could not live or
move or be without him. And therefore by all right imaginable, he is your owner
and your Governor. We are Debtors says the Apostle, not to the flesh to live
after the flesh, for if we live after the flesh we shall dye, Romans 8. 12, 13.
he does not expressly say we are Debtors to God, this was so evident there was
no need to express it. The Lord is so great that he may claim obedience from
us, for we owe him whatever we have and are: and his goodness does fully match
his greatness. He is Optimus and Maximus, there is abundant reason then, why
you should listen unto Conscience pressing you to give him the pre-eminence
before all other Lords whatsoever. No King comparable to the King of Saints,
how ready is he to defend them; how much does he consult his subjects welfare.

3. Would you be under the Authority and Power of Conscience? fix this upon
your Spirits, that a good Conscience always uses its Power for your good. I
may here apply those words which the Apostles uses concerning Magistrates, Will thou not be afraid of this Power? do that which is good, and thou shall have
Praise of the same, for Conscience is the Minister of God to thee for good.
Name a sin which a rightly informed Conscience does bid thee abstain from,
which is not really a mischievous and hurtful, as well as a moral evil; and
thou have leave to keep it. Name a duty which such a Conscience urges, which is
not for thy profit, and thou shall never be blamed for the omission of it. What
the Lord wishes Conscience speaks over again. Oh that there were an Heart in
you, that you would fear your God, and keep all his Commandments always, that
it might be well with you forever! Deuteronomy. 5. 29. Conscience aims at this
perpetually, that it may be well with you and well for ever with you; nay, even
then when it puts you upon the suffering of penal evils it does design your
good: they that are persecuted for Righteousness sake receive an hundred fold
in this Life, they have so much of grace, and of the Presence of God, as is an
hundredfold better than any thing that is taken from them, then in the World to
come they are assured of everlasting Life.

4. Think seriously of the destructiveness of those courses which Conscience
would hinder you from taking. Thou art not able to hurt the Lord by thy
iniquity; the Clouds are higher than thou, but He is infinitely higher than the
Clouds. If thou sinnest what do thou against him? says Elihu; or if thy
transgressions are multiplied, what do thou unto him? Job 35. 5, 6. His
blessedness is so great, and out of the reach of any Creature, that by sin thou
art not able to disturb it, though failing in Duty toward him thou art justly
punished: So that thou hurtest not him, but thy self by sin. Do they provoke me
to anger, says the Lord? Do they not provoke themselves to the Confusion of
their own Faces? Death is at the end of the broad way, says Conscience, and
therefore go no longer, no further in that way, but turn thy Feet into the way
of Peace; If thou go on still in thy trespasses, thy Feet really go down to
Death, and thy steps will most certainly at length take hold on Hell.

5. Would you be under the Power and Authority of Conscience? Beg that the Lord
himself would stand by, and assist this his own Officer; and then its Authority
will be Exercised to purpose: Then strong holds and Imaginations will be cast
down, and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God,
and every thought will be brought into Captivity unto the Obedience of Christ,
2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. When the under-Officer is opposed, an higher Magistrate comes
with a greater force to help him in the discharging of his Duty. If the King
himself with a great Military power should be ready to assist a Constable,
supposing he were resisted, none would then dare to withstand. When the God of
Heaven does Second and strengthen Conscience, then all within a Man bows before
it, and yields unto it. As it is the presence of God and his gracious concourse
that does bring Faith and Love, and other Holy habits of the Soul into powerful
exercise, so it is this which does make Conscience vigorously to do its Office.
That Is the Second thing implied in a good Conscience: The due Exercise of its
Authority and Power.

3. The goodness of Conscience lies in its being wakeful and attentive. What
Physicians say concerning Melancholy, that it has a tendency either to
stupifaction or to distraction, may truly be affirmed concerning sin; that it
has a tendency either to stupifie the Conscience, and cast it into a deep
sleep; or to terrify the Conscience, and to make it even distracted with the
sense of the Lords Anger. There is a strong inclination to a Lethargy in every
Natural Man's Conscience, and this Disease does grow more and more upon him. But
in a good Conscience this Disease is in a good measure healed, and great care
is taken lest there be a relapse into this sleepy sickness. How often are we
called upon in Scripture to Watch, Mark 13. ult. What I say unto you, I say
unto all, Watch. Christ had before urged this Duty of Watching, upon his
Disciples: Here he repeats it, and extends it unto all. But watch we cannot,
unless our Eyes are open, unless our Consciences are awake. Now, this
wakefulness and attentiveness of Conscience discovers it self in these
particulars.

1. The attentive Conscience eyes the Rule. In Sacris Scripturis inveniuntur
illa omnia quae continent fidem moresque vivendi. Aug. de doc. Christ. l. 2. c.
9.
What was said of Apollos, may be affirmed of a good Conscience, that it is
mighty in the Scriptures. What is the meaning of that injunction laid upon the
Children of Israel, That they should bind the words and Commands of God, for a
sign upon their hands, and that they should be as frontlets between their eyes,
and that they should write them upon the Posts of their Houses, and upon their
Gates? Deuteronomy. 6. 8. 9. The meaning is this, that their Consciences should always
remember, and have a regard unto the Word of God: when they sat in their
Houses, when they walked by the way, when they did lie down, and when they rose
up. Be ye not unwise, says the Apostle, but understanding what the Will of the
Lord is, Ephesians. 5. 17. Conscience regards not what is for our Carnal Interest,
what is for our Credit and Reputation among the generality of Men, what is for
our ease, and the way to sleep in a whole skin: but it is inquisitive, what it
is that is pleasing to God, and agreeing to his Will, and nothing that is so,
can really be to our prejudice.

2. The attentive Conscience Observes the Person in whom it is; that he may not
swerve from, but square both Heart and Life according to that Rule which is
given to him. A good Conscience has a very good Eye, and a very quick sight; it
has an inspection upon the whole Man. It Observes what comes in at the Doors of
the External Senses, and whether there be a Covenant made with the Eye, and the
Ear be deaf to Vanity, and especially to all manner of solicitations to evil.
It observes how the Members are Employed, that Sin and Satan may not abuse
them, and turn them into Weapons of unrighteousness, for then our own Members
will be Weapons to destroy us. Nay, it Observes our very Hearts. Those motus
primo primi, those very first stirrings of Corruption in the Heart will not be
long unespied by a watchful Conscience. It looks with a very jealous eye upon
our hearts, because they are so treacherous, and their Natural deceitfulness is
but in part Cured: And its care is, that nothing may steal away our Affections
from that God who does infinitely best deserve them; and that we may not be
biassed by any base, carnal, low ends in any of our Actions, but that God may
be Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, Rev. 1. 8.

3. The attentive Conscience takes notice of the wiles and devices of the evil
One. It very well remembers how the Serpent beguiled our first Parents through
its subtilty; and therefore keeps a strict Guard against that Adversary. It
furnishes us with the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, whereby we
may repel Satan in his Assaults. Does he tempt to Pride? Conscience says It Is
Written, God resists the Proud, and gives Grace to the Humble: 1 Pet. 5. 5.
Does he tempt to Covetousness? Conscience says, it is written, Covetousness is
Idolatry, and for this things sake the wrath of God comes upon the Children of
Disobedience, Col. 3. 5, 6. Does he tempt to injustice? Conscience says, it is
written, Let no Man go beyond, or defraud his Brother in any matter, because
the Lord is the avenger of all such, 1 These. 4. 6. Does he tempt to
Uncleanness? Conscience says, it is written, Whoremongers and Adulterers God
will Judge; and no Whoremonger nor unclean Person has any Inheritance in the
Kingdom of Christ, and of God, Ephesians. 5. 5. An attentive Conscience meets Satan
at every turn, and is a very great Defense against him, for it directs us to
God, in whom our strength lies, and to the Armor of God, which being put on,
we shall stand against the wiles of the Devil, Ephesians. 6. 11.

4. The attentive Conscience heeds the Spirit of the Lord in his Holy Motions
and Suggestions. There are two ways whereby the Spirit of God may be known, He
glorifies Christ, and he leads to Holiness: He glorifies Christ, John. 16. 14.
He, that is the Spirit of Truth, shall glorify me, says Christ, for he shall
receive of mine, and shall show it unto you. Those that talk of the Spirit, and
trample Christ under foot, and count his Blood a common thing, certainly are
guided by a false Spirit: the Holy Ghost always glorifies Christ, Teaches that
he is the only Redeemer and Mediator, by whom we have access to God, and that
we could never have had admission into the Holiest of all, but by his Blood;
and whatever Benefits we receive, they are the Fruit of his purchase. And as
the Spirit Glorifies Christ, so he leads to Holiness, therefore he is called
(...), the Spirit of Holiness, Romans 1. 4. When the Spirit accompanies
Ordinances or Providence, and we find in our selves more than Ordinary
strivings to purge us from what does pollute us, and strong endeavors used to
persuade us unto a thorow-Sanctification. Conscience takes Notice of the
Spirits Operation, and bids us to yield to him, and by no means to thwart and
grieve him.

If now you demand, how Conscience may be made thus attentive? I Answer,

1. Deafen your Ears against persuasions to evil. Adam hearkened to Satan, we
have been the more apt to hearken to him ere since, and not to regard our own
Consciences. If you heed not Conscience, Conscience may at length not heed you;
if your Ears are open to the Tempter, and deaf to Conscience, Conscience may at
length be dumb to you, and suffer you to go your own way.

2. Cumber not your selves about many things. Foelix qui potuit boni,
Fontem visere lucidum.
Foelix, qui potuit gravis,
Terrae solvere vincula.
Boethius de Consolat. Philos. met. 12. page 1. 6.

While Marth. was cumbred about much Serving, Conscience was not so attentive
as it should have been to the Word of Christ; therefore Christ prefers Mary
before Martha, for she sat at his Feet and heard his Word, and according as
Conscience was persuaded it was her Duty and Interest, she minded the One thing
needful, and made choice of that better part, which could not be taken away
from her, Luke 10. 39, 42.

3. Pray that the Lord would open your hearts. When Lydia's heart was Opened,
then she attended to what was spoken by the Apostle Paul, Acts 16. 14. The
Seeing Eye, and the Hearing Ear, the Lord has made even both of them. Beg that
he would thoroughly awaken Conscience, and keep it awake Scoffers do say, that
we do make Prayer a Drug in all our prescritps. I confess we do so, and are not
ashamed of it; to Pray, is to call in the help of the great Physician, without
whom all means that are used must needs be ineffectual for our Cure. Every good
gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of Lights; and therefore
Conscience can be made to see, and to be attentive by no other. Thus of that
Third particular, The goodness of Conscience lies in its being Watchful end
attentive.

4. The goodness of Conscience lies in its tenderness. A great deal of
tenderness there is in the World: how tender are many in points of Honor! They
cannot put up any thing that looks like an Affront, but demand satisfaction:
their hearts rise against any that stand in their Light, or lessen their
Repute; nay, some are so tender of their Fame, that they will venture even Life
it self to secure it. How tender are others of their Estates, they will part
with their Eyes almost as soon as part with their Wealth: Their Gold is their
Confidence and their God. Others are tender of their Relations, Wives,
Children; how careful are they that no harm befall them, and especially of
their own Flesh they are tender; the Body can lack nothing, but many
sollicitous thoughts are spent about it, for its supply, and if it be in any
danger, for its security. But all this while where shall we find any tenderness
of Conscience? Some do look upon this as an Argument of a mean Spirit, others
fancy this tenderness to be be needless, and that it only betrays want of wit,
and will be prejudicial to our Interest. But certainly since God is so tender
of his Honor and Authority, and since he will so severely punish them that
break his Commandments: Conscience cannot be over tender in this matter; we are
truly the more wise, the more tender we are. Some do think, the English word
Righteous, is derived from Right-wise. I am sure the Righteous Man is the right
wise Man: he whose Conscience is stupid, is in the worst sense foolhardy.

The tender Conscience has these ensuing Properties whereby its tenderness may
be known.

1. The tender Conscience is afraid of Secret sins as well as Open; of
heart-sins, as well as those which appear in the Conversation. Open sins are
worse than Secret in this regard, because of scandal; but in secret sins there
is a more fixed resolution many times against Reformation. When sin retires to
the Heart, and is not so much taken Notice of by any breaking forth in the
Practice, its strength may be greatest, just as an Oven, unto which Wicked Men's
hearts are compared, Hos. 7. 7. is then hottest when it is stopped closest. Sin
may Reign most absolutely in the Heart, which is its Throne when it is not at
all discerned by the Eye of others. Thus it is said of the Persian Kings, that
none were more absolute Monarchs, and yet they were very seldom seen by the
People. Apud Persus Persona Regis sub specie Majestatis occulit^r Justin. lib.
1.
A tender Conscience is afraid of open sin, because hereby the way of Truth may
come to be evil spoken of; it is afraid of secret also, because as these when
they prevail do commonly abound more in Number; so besides; the Lord, who is
most offended at them, is privy to them. O the Foolish contempt of God, when
his Eye is despised, and only Man's is feared. God hates sin ten thousand times
more than Man can hate it, and can likewise inflict ten thousand times a greater
punishment. Solomon tells us, the Lord requires the Heart, Prove. 23. 26. My
Son, give me thy Heart: a tender Conscience dares not allow sin so much as a
Lodging there, though it seem content never to show its Face abroad.

2. A tender Conscience is afraid of little sins as well as great. As Camels
are not swallowed, so Gnats are strained at: Quicquid nunc parvi pendendo
transimus, palpando tegimus, dissimulando negligimus, quanto illic cruciatu
vindex flamma consumet? Vtinam magis nunc daret quis capiti meo aquos, and
oculis meis fontem lachrimarum, forte enim non reperi^et ignis exurens, quod
interim fluens lachryma diluisset. Bern. de Dil. Deo. p. mihi 408.
Little sins are great enough, if unrepented of, to undo the sinner; there is
no sin so little, but there is a need of the Blood of Jesus to make an
atonement for it. When we speak of the degrees of sin, we should think of the
degrees of torment in Hell: though some places in Hell are hotter than others,
yet none are cool; those that are least of all tormented, shall be tormented
for ever, and shall have no cause to brag of ease. So, though some sins are
more evil and heinous than others, yet there are none but what are very bad,
and if made light of, will prove heavy enough to sink the Soul into
condemnation. A tender Conscience is persuaded of all this, and does not cry
concerning any sin, Is it not a little one? A little Leak in a Ship is feared
and stopped; a little fire in an undue place is feared, and quenched; a little
sin by a tender Conscience is not allowed, but mortified. Little sins are not
without their peculiar Aggravation, for we stand with God in a small matter;
this Argues great carelessness and neglect of him. And hence that saying holds
true. Quo levius mandatum eo gravius peccatum. The easier the Command, the more
is the transgression aggravated.

3. A tender Conscience is afraid of the Occasions of Evil; it knows very well
how vehement the bent of corrupted Nature is; and upon this score it is
unwilling we should come where there is forbidden Fruit, lest, that Fruit be
lusted after, and then eaten. He that ventures upon Occasions of sin, it is a
sign that there is a secret hankering after it, and then no wonder if he fall
into it; or at least, that he has high thoughts of his own strength to
withstand any Temptation; and such self-confidence is ordinarily punished by
Divine withdrawings, and then to be sure Temptation will be prevalent. Peter
cried out, though all men should be offended because of thee, yet will I never
be offended: and afterward, though I should dye with thee, yet will I not deny
thee, Mat. 26. 33. 35. He unadvisedly follows Christ to the Highpriests
Palace, and being there, his sinful fear discovers it self, he denies his
Master, to secure himself; he denies him thrice, and that with a Curse and Oath
that he never knew him, verse 74. See what became of all his Confidence. A
tender Conscience is always accompanied with self-diffidence, and causes us
upon this score to keep far off from what is evil. God puts no trust in his
Servants, yea, his Angels he charge with folly; surely then we have Reason to
distrust our selves. Enter not into the way of the Wicked, says Solomon, go not
in the path of Evil Men, avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away,
Prove. 4. 14, 15. All Occasions of sin are heedfully to be avoided. Tender
Conscienced Joseph, as he hearkened not to his Mistress, so he cared not to be
with her, Genesis 39. 10. He thought it was not good to come too near that fire,
(so a naughty Woman is set forth, Prove. 6. 27.) for fear at last he might catch
some heat.

4. A tender Conscience if it suspect any thing to be sin it will forbear, till
satisfied. It Is better a great deal not to go to the utmost bounds of Christian
liberty then to go beyond it: better an indifferent thing should be abstained
from as unlawful, than that which is really unlawful should be ventured upon as
if it were indifferent. The Israleites when newly planted in Canaan, were so
tender that when they did but suspect, that the Reubenites, and Gadites, and
half Tribe of Manasseh, had built an alter for Burnt-Offerings, they they
presently come out against them: for as there is but one Mediator, so there was
to be but one Altar for Burnt-Offerings, namely, That which was made by Gods
own appointment, Josh 22. This unsatisfiedness concerning some things, which
yet we cannot peremptorily pronounce to be sinful, is I grant an argument of
infirmity and weakness in the Conscience; but truly it is bonum signum ex mala
causa a good sign from a bad cause, it argues a true fear of sin; when not only
all known sin, but that which is suspected to be so, is eschewed.

A tender Conscience is not bold and venturous, it is afraid of Errors in
Judgment, as well as wickedness in practice. As Malice and Wickedness is
compared unto leaven, 1 Cor. 5. 8. so likewise error and false Doctrine, Mat.
16 12. Then understood they how that he bad them beware, not of the leaven of
Bread but of the Doctrine of the Pharisees and Sadduces. Since Error is like
unto Leaven; is of an insinuating and spreading Nature, and Christ himself
says Beware; no wonder if a tender Conscience be cautious, and flies from
those who publish diverse and strange Doctrines. 'Twas a notable saying of
Augustine, Quae est enim peior mors animae quam libertas erroris? omnes pacem
quam omnis doctus and indoctus intelligit praeponendam esse discordiae,
diligamus and teneamus unitatem. Hoc jubent Imperatores quod jubet and Christus
quia cum bonum jubent, per illos non jubet nisi Christus. Aug. Epist. 166 ad
Donat.
That the liberty of Error is the Souls death.

5. A tender Conscience takes notice of Gods anger while it hangs in the
threatenings, and before that anger break forth, urges unto deep humilation.
Thus Josiahs heart was tender and he did humble himself before God, when he
heard his words denounced against Jerusalem, and the inhabitants thereof, and
did rend his Clothes and wept before the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 34. 27. A tender
Conscience is not satisfied unless contrition be true, such as God calls by
that Name; and such as he has promised reviving to, Esaiah 57. 15. it is not
satisfied unless the Heart be rent as well as the Garment, and be broken off
from sin, as well as broken for it. Oh how will a tender Conscience bring sins
to Remembrance! twill lay on load and not spare, to this end that Christ may be
prized who alone can give rest. David cries out Innumerable evils have
compassed me about, my Iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not
able to look up, they are more then the hairs of my Head, therefore my Heart
fails me, Psalm. 40. 12. and then he adds ver. 13. Be pleased O Lord to
deliver me, O Lord make have to help me.

6. A tender Conscience is afraid of casting any of Gods Commands behind the
back, but presses a respect unto all the Lords precepts. David was truly tender
when he said, I esteem all thy Commandments concerning all things to be right,
Oh that my ways were directed that I might keep thy Statues! then shall I not
be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy Commandments, Psalm. 119. 5, 6.
128. It Is said concerning Zachary and Elizabeth, that they were both Righteous
before God, walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord
blameless, Luke 1. 5, 6. A tender Conscience bids us eye such copies as these;
and write after them. No Ordinance of Gods institution, but God is ready to own
it, and to be found in it, if he be sought in a due order; and therefore no
Ordinance is to be neglected. To live in the omission of any duty which God has
Commanded, is to cut off a golden pipe whereby Grace may be conveyed to us; and
herein we do not consult our own good.

You see how the tenderness of Conscience discovers it self. But the great
question will be, How may Conscience be made thus tender? surely a question
needful to be resolved. For tender Consciences where are they to be found?
stupidness of Soul is an Epedimicall malady it is the disease of the Age, and
the nearer the world approaches to its end, the more is this Disease likely to
prevail. For such a security will go before the burning of the World at the
last day, as went before the drowning of it in the days of Noah. The profane
among us have so much lost, that they laugh at tenderness of Conscience.
Multitudes of professors, their Consciences can swallow almost any thing: they
can live in pleasures, and care about the World more then about the better
part, they can fulfill their fleshly lusts, and yet Conscience is so wretchedly
blind and dumb that at present it does not disquiet them. Nay the Wise Virgins
themselves slumber. Believers many of them have lost their first tenderness;
and therefore more then we are aware of are concerned in this question, How may
a Conscience be made tender? I answer.

1. Study better the Nature of Sin. I will boldly say that a stupid Conscience
knows not what sin is; if once 'twere understood; it could not possibly be made
light of. All that are hardened in sin, are deceived by it. Therefore the
Apostle gives that caution, Heb. 3. 13. Exhort one another daily while it is
called to day lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. As
God is an incomprehensible good, so sin is an incomprehensible evil.
Philosophers have measured mountains,
Fathomed the depth of Seas of States, and Kings,
Walked with a staff to heaven, traced fountains:
But there are two vast, spacious things,
The which to measure it does more behove,
Yet few there are that sound them; Sin, and Love.
Hebert. Agony. page 29.

No Creature can fully understand it: only God, who knows how good himself is,
knows how evil sin is; which is directly opposite and contrary to him. But
though we cannot sound the bottom of this evil, no more then we can dig to the
Earths Center: yet much is discovered by the Word of God. Sin is worse then
the Devil, for it made him a Devil. Take sin from the Devil, he will be a
glorious Angel: if sin get into a glorious Angel 'twil turn him into a Devil
presently. Sin will make us like the Devil if we go on in it, and bring us into
the same state of unalterable misery.

But let us view sin a little with relation to God. It Is a daring of his Power
and Presence, a bold challenging of the Almighty to do his worst. It Is an
affront of his Majesty; a casting off of his Authority; Let us break his bands
asunder, and cast away his cords from us, Psalm. 2. 3. It Is a robbing him of his
Glory, which is so dear to him, and which he is so unwilling to give to
another. It Is a slighting of his Goodness, which is so vast and large that it
should attract the Love and Hearts of all; and which alone can satisfy and be
beatifical to the Soul of Man. It Is an injury to his Justice, contrary to his
Holiness, denies his Truth, makes him a Liar, for neither Promises nor
Threatenings are believed. Nay, Sin strikes at the very Being of God: for if
hating our Brother be murdering of him, Ah! what is hatred of God to be
called? No wonder that the Lord is so angry at sin, and turns those that will
by no means turn from it, into Hell; and makes them for ever to bewail their
Rebellion against him. If Sin were but rightly understood, Conscience would be
tender of offending; we should not dare to be so venturous upon so great an
evil. Would you grieve for sin? cry out, What have I done? would you be tender
and afraid to sin, when tempted; say, What am I about to do? how much shall I
do against God? how much shall I wrong my own Soul?

2. That Conscience may be tender, see him that is invisible. Moses did thus by
the eye of Faith, and this made him so tender, that he refused to be called the
son of Pharoahs Daughter: he esteemed the reproach of Christ greater Riches
than the Treasures of Egypt, and chose rather to suffer Affliction with the
People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin which are but for a season,
Heb. 11. 24. -- 27. The thoughts of God, do disturb the stupid Conscience;
therefore wicked men care not to speak, or hear, or think of him. But Believers
endeavor to imitate David, who said, I have set the Lord always before me;
and this makes and keeps Conscience very tender. Look up often to God, and the
frequent viewing of him will increase both Fear and Love. David having studied
well the Omni-presence of God, and perceived that in every place God was
perpetually by him; he desires to have his heart and thoughts searched, and
tried, and every wicked way in him discovered; and Conscience is so tender,
that he dares and cares to go in no way but the way that is everlasting, Psalm.
139. 23, 24.

See God in every ordinance; then Conscience will tell you he is jealous about
his worship, that he is a Great King; and has said, Cursed be the deceiver,
who having a male in his flock, voweth and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt
thing, Mal. 1. 14. See God in every providence; then Conscience will tell you,
that mercies are not to be abused, nor consumed upon your lusts; and that
afflictions are sent to take away your Sin. See God in every Temptation; how
easily then will Conscience silence the Tempter, by telling him, it is not safe
to provoke the Lord to his very face, it is not wisdom to forfeit his Favor, to
incurr his Anger, for such poor things as Satan offers; his greatest offers are
but poor; and oh how far does the Lord outbid him!

3. That Conscience may be tender, Bewail the stupidness of it, and cry to have
it cured. Follow God with restless importunity; Lord enlighten my eyes and
awaken my Conscience, lest I sleep the sleep of death. He will be angry with
you if you should think that you can cure your selves of this malady; you
cannot please this Physician better than to make use of him. You have great
encouragement to seek unto him; for he has expressly said, A new Heart will I
give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the
Heart of stone out of your flesh, and I will give you an Heart of flesh, Ezekiel.
36. 26. The stone in the heart and the stupidness of the Conscience are
diseases near a kin; nay the one does include the other: a stony Heart implies
a senseless Conscience, and an Heart of flesh a Tender-conscience. Hope in this
word of Promise; He is faithful that has made it: Never any yet have found the
Lord backward to heal, that were indeed weary of their Distempers.

4. That Conscience may be tender, Eye the examples of Saints whose tenderness
in Scripture is commended. How tender was Joseph! though his Mistress tempted
him, and he a Servant; though he was a young man, and Single; though
opportunity offered it self, and there was a great probability of secrecy in
reference to his Master; though he was likely to be accused of an attempt to
Ravish, if he did not consent to commit Adultery, and hereby his Masters rage
might endanger his life; Yet Conscience was so tender that he did not dare to
do so great a wickedness. O Joseph though thou had a beautiful outside, yet
thy inside, thy Heart was much more amiable! How tender was Job, there was none
like him in the Earth: he feared God and eschewed evil: and throughout chap.
31. you may read with what care and Conscience he Eschewed it. He was so
watchful against uncleanness that he made a Covenant with his eyes; he was so
just, that he did not despise the cause of his own Servants. He was so
Merciful, that he carried himself like a Father to the Poor, and like a guide
and Husband to the Widow. He was so free from revenge, that he rejoiced not at
the destruction of him that hated him, neither did he lift up himself when evil
found him.

Unto these Scripture instances I shall add another, concerning one of the
Fathers. (k) He that writes the life of Anselmn, relates this passage, and
ushers it in with this Preface. My Conscience bears me witness that I lie not.
He feared nothing in the World more than to sin. We have often heard him
profess that if (...) the one hand he should see the horror of sin, and on the
other the pains of Hell, and must necessarily be plunged into one of the two;
he would choose Hell rather than sin. Another thing also which may seem no less
wonderful, he was wont to say, He had rather be in Hell being innocent and free
from sin, than being defiled and polluted possess the Kingdom of Heaven. This
tenderness of others may make us wonder at our selves; and if seriously
considered, might be a means, to prevent our making so bold with sin any more;
it is not good in dally with Divine wrath, nor to play with Hell fire.

5. That Conscience may be tender, avoid every thing that is of a stupifying
Nature. Whatever does defile, ^ Nihil in mundo quantum peccare timebat. Saepe
illum (...) veritatis testimonio profitentem audivimus, Quod si hinc pecc^^^
horrorem; hinc inferni dolorem corpor aliter cerneret, and necessa^^ uni eorum
immergi deberet: prius infernum quam peccatum a^^^teret. Aliud quoque non minus
for san aliquibus mirum, dicere^ lebat, viz. malle se puram a peccato, and
innocentem gehennam ^^bere, quam peccati sorde pollutum coelorum regna tenere.
De ^^ Ansel. l. 2. in Oper. Anselm.
apt to harden. Sins against knowledge that are committed presumptuously, how
do they waste the Conscience! when Satan can draw us to these, he gives us such
a blow as stuns us. David after his folly with Bathsheba, how stupid was he!
after he had defiled the Wife how strangely did he carry it toward Vriah the
Husband! And thus stupid he does continue, till Nathan the Prophet is sent to
startle him. One would have thought that as soon as ever the Prophet proposed
the parable of the Ew-lamb, that David's Conscience should have made
application, but it was so stupid that it did not, till Nathan deals plainly
with him for his sin and his ingratitude. Oh let every one cry out, Keep back
thy Servant from presumptuous sins, let not them have Dominion over me, Psalm.
19. 13.

6. That Conscience may be tender, Remember how smarting sin has been to
others. See how it has put others upon the wrack, that you may grow wise by
their harms. What made Pashur to have his name changed to Magormissabib, but
because sin made him a terror to himself and to all that were round about him.
'Twas sin brought Cain to such a condition, that he cried out, my punishment is
greater than I can bear, Genesis 4. 13. Nay how have the Saints themselves been
wounded by Sin, and groaned under the burden of it. My sore ran in the Night,
says the Psalmist, my Soul refused to be comforted, I remembered God and was
troubled, I complained and my Spirit was overwhelmed, Selah. Psalm. 77. 2, 3. So
Psalm. 88. 7. Thy wrath lies hard upon me, and thou have afflicted me with all
thy Waves. Hark how the Prophet Jeremiah cries out in the Name of the Church; I
am the man that has seen affliction by the Rod of his wrath, he has brought
me into darkness; be turns his hand against me all the day; he has hedged me
about that I cannot get out; he has made my chain heavy; also when I cry and
sho^^ he shuts out my Prayer: He was unto me as a bear lying in wait, as a
Lion in secret places; he has filled me with bitterness, he has made me
drunken with Wormwood. Oh let Conscience think of this darkness, and chain,
and gall, and Wormwood, which are the dismal effects of sin, and so be afraid
of it.

7. That Conscience may be tender, Let Death and Judgment be still within
view. I am persuaded that was one reason why wickedness and security was so
great in the old World, because it being ordinary for men to live seven or
eight, or nine hundred years they did banish the thoughts of their latter end:
but be you wise to consider it. The Apostle Paul professes concerning himself:
I dye daily, 1 Cor. 15. 31. that is, he did not only dye more to sin and to the
World every day, but he continually looked upon himself as mortal, and at no
time did he grow secure as if he were out of the reach of Death. It argued some
tenderness in the Consciences of the Herodot. l. ^.
Egyptians of old, whose custom it was at the end of their Banquets to bring in
the Image of a dead carcass made of Wood, and to carry it about unto the
guests, and to say, (...) Look unto this when thou a^^ Feasting, for after thou
art Dead thou shall be like it. (...) the Lord did but teach you (and teach you
he would (...) you were desirous to learn) that holy Arithmetid^ whereby you
might be able to number your days aright, you would apply your Hearts unto
Wisdom, Psalm. 90. 12. Death would have a mighty influence upon your
Consciences, especially if that which follows after judgment, were believingly
considered. Conscience would stop thee when about to sin, if it ask thee, and
thou do think of these two questions seriously. If I sin, when I come to dye
will it not be matter of trouble to me? When I am judged how shall I answer for
it? many Consciences awake at Death, all must needs awake at Judgment, the
Meditation of Death and Judgment would help much to awake them immediately.

8. That Conscience may be tender, meditate much upon Eternity. Our Thoughts
may endeavor to reach Eternity, but they are quickly swallowed up and lost in
the vastness of it. Eternity is the word of all others that has an awakening
sound. What is not to be done and suffered for. the obtaining of Eternal
Joys? How weak should all arguments be to persuade us to that which will bring
us to ETERNAL Woes? O Conscience! get this word into thy Mouth, and be always
ringing it in sinners Ears. Eternity! Eternity! then thou thy self wilt be more
tender, and wilt also bear the greater sway. O tell all that time is short and
the fashion of this world passes away, 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30. and that it is madness
(which nothing can be an Hyperbole to set forth) when they may be happy for
ever, not to consent to their own happiness; and when they are warned to flee
from Everlasting misery, wilfully to throw themselves into it. Thus of that
fourth particular, the goodness of Conscience lies in the tenderness of it.

5. The goodness of Conscience lies in its faithfulness in Witness-bearing. As
we are not to bear false Witness concerning our Neighbor, so neither ought
Conscience to bear false witness concerning our selves. Conscience must not be
like Fame; Tam ficti pravique tenax, quam nuncia very. Speaking more Ordinarily
what is feigned, than what is true. God, whose Officer Conscience is, is a God
of Truth, and the Word, which is given for its Direction, is the Word of Truth;
and if that Conscience Flatter us, it will but injure us; if it deal
Faithfully, though it speak never so terribly, it may do us a great kindness.
You must know that a good Conscience may Accuse as well as Excuse. It Accuses
indeed of evil, but it is not evil that it does Accuse, Neque magis vitio verti
potuit conscientiae postea, cum just accusavit and condemnavit, quam ipsi legi
and Judici summo qui idem fecit post ingressum peccati; non ante. Tantum vero
abest conscientiae accusatio justa ab omni justa reprehensione, ut a
peccatoribus imprimis requiratur, tanquam unica via de peccatis admissis agendi
paenitentiam, Ames. De Conscien. l. 1. c. 12.
but a part of its Duty; and truly this is Necessary unto our Humiliation and
Amendment.

1. The Accusations of a good Conscience are just, sin is the ground of those
Accusations; and the better the Conscience is, the more immediately there will
be a smiting of the heart, after the prevailing of a Temptation. Thus David's
heart quickly smote him after he had numbered the People, and he said, I have
sinned greatly in that I have done, and now I beseech thee, O Lord, take away
the Iniquity of thy Servant, for I have done very Foolishly, 2 Samuel 24. 10. And
when a good Conscience Accuses, it is not easily satisfied; 'twill not be quiet
till there be a confession of sin before God, a loathing of it, and pardon and
healing are obtained through our Lord Jesus. While David kept silence, that is,
refused ingenuously to confess his fault, his Conscience was clamorous, and his
Bones waxed old through his roaring all the day long; and his moisture was
turned into the drought of Summer, Psalm. 32. 3, 4. but at length he has Peace,
v. 5. I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and my Iniquity have I not hid, I said,
I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the Iniquity
of my sin, Selah.

2. And as the Accusations of a good Conscience are just, so it will Excuse, if
there be good Reason for it. It will call Grace, Grace, if it be true, though
it be but weak. God does not despise the day of small things, neither ought
Conscience. It ought not by taking notice only of sin, and over-looking the
Spirits work in the Soul, to go about to break the bruised Reed, and quench the
smoking Flax. It must be granted that Believers Consciences do bring in a
false Testimony against them at some seasons; and they make bold to call
themselves Hypocrites, and to affirm that there is nothing in them but what may
be found in Reprobates. But this is no part of Consciences goodness, and they
are to be reproved; because upon every light ground they are so apt to question
their Estate, and to rank themselves among the Hypocrites; in doing thus they
gratify Satan exceedingly, and hinder their own Edification, because they are
ever questioning whether the Foundation be rightly laid; and God has little or
no thanks from them, though in giving them the least measure of saving Grace,
he has done more for them, than if he had put Scepters into their hands, and
Crowns of pure Gold upon their Heads.

But you will ask, how may Conscience be made thus Faithful in its Testimony? I
Answer,

1. If you would have Conscience bear witness truly, neither add unto, nor
diminish from the Word of God. Call not those, Sins, which are not
transgressions of his Laws; and call not those, Duties, which he never
commanded. God has so fully revealed his mind in his Word, that whatever is not
expressly contained in it, or by firm consequence deducible from it, Conscience
is not to take notice of, either as Truth or Duty. Look not into false Glasses,
which Satan will be apt to set before you. The Scripture is the true Glass, and
it is the thankful Glass too, which mends the eyes of them that look into it.

2. Look well into your selves; be willing to take notice of the evil in you as
well as the good (and which is needful to be added for the sake of humbled
Souls) be willing to Observe that good which God has wrought in you, as well as
the evil which you labor under.

3. Let it be your earnest request at the Throne of Grace, that your own Hearts
may not deceive you. As Satan is a lying Spirit, so your own Spirits are false
to you, and are ready to join with him. God is able to discover you unto your
selves; though the Heart be so deceitful above all things, that the Prophet
cries out, who can know it? Yet the Lord searches the Heart, and tries the
Reins, Jer. 17. 10.

4. Be willing that Conscience should speak truth, whether that truth make for
you or against you: That was a bad temper of Ahab, who hated Micajah, because
he Prophesied not good concerning him, but evil, 1 Kings 22. 8. and because he
could not endure to hear of Evil, at length he feels it, and there was no
Remedy: When Conscience does speak most against you, in some Respects, it is for
you; because whatever you aile, there is a Remedy provided in the Gospel. To
know the truth of your Condition if it be bad, does not make it worse, but is
one good step unto the alteration of it for the better. That Is the Fifth thing,
A good Conscience is Faithful in Witness-bearing.

6. The goodness of Conscience lies in the purity of it. Nothing in the Soul of
Man can be said to be good, in a Scripture-sence, unless purged; for as the
whole Soul is Corrupted by Nature, so renovation in the whole is needful; our
Understandings are not good till Sanctified; to depart from evil is
Understanding: our Affections are not good, till cleansed; our Consciences are
not good, till purged. I do not, I dare not affirm, that this purity of
Conscience in this Life is so complete, as to exclude all manner of defilement:
in this sense, who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin?
Prove. 20. 9. But that which the Gospel accounts purity of Conscience, lies in
these particulars:

1. Where the Conscience is pure, no sin is concealed or covered. If we cover
sin, God will not cover it; we shall not be of the Number of those Blessed
ones, whose Transgressions are forgiven, whose Iniquities are covered and to
whom the Lord will not impute sin. A pure Conscience therefore, without any
guile or reservation, confesses all before God; and as it confesses all it
knows, so it is willing to know more, that more may be acknowledged and
bewailed. Job, among other Arguments, uses this, and 'twas a strong one, to
prove the purity of his Conscience; that he had not covered his Transgression
as Adam, by hiding his Iniquity in his Bosom, Job 31. 33. He that conceals a
Thief, sides with him; and he that hides sin, it is a sign his heart is not
turned from it. A pure Conscience is free and open, does not mince or
extenuate, but aggravate Iniquity: It can appeal to God concerning its
unwillingness to conceal any of his Enemies (for Men's Lusts are Gods Enemies,
and their own too) and it can challenge Satan to Name a sin which it is not
ready to acknowledge.

2. When the Conscience is pure, every sin is hated. Hatred is never better
placed than upon sin. Our Brother is not to be hated; nay, we are forbid to
hate our Enemy: but sin we may hate without sparing. David tells us, that
through Gods Precepts he got Understanding, therefore he hated every false way,
Psalm. 119. 104. By the Word his Conscience was Informed and Sanctified, and
this Universal Hatred of sin followed. Hatred is an Affection which aims at
Destruction, and when it is high it is against the whole kind. Thus Haman hated
Mordecai, and thought it scorn to lay hands on Mordecai alone, but sought to
destroy all the Jews that were throughout the whole Kingdom of Ahasuerus, even
the People of Mordecai, Esth. 3. 6. The pure Conscience strikes at the whole
kind of sin: Est intentio Odii, nocere; nec cessat in laesione peccati, sed in
exterminio: vere poenitens juratus est in mortem peccatorum. Guil. Parisiensi.
De Rhetor. divin. c. 23.
wherever it is, whether in the Mind, in the Will, in the Affections, in Word,
in the Actions. What Moses speaks concerning Idolatry, it does apply unto all
sin, Deuteronomy. 7. 26. Thou shall utterly detest it, and thou shall utterly abhor
it, for it is a cursed thing.

3. When the Conscience is pure, The whole Image of God is desired, and that
the Soul may be like unto him in all things, wherein it is its Duty to resemble
him. What the Moral Philosophers say concerning the Mortal Virtues, that they
are inter se concatenatae, that they are linked together, holds certainly true
concerning those Graces which are wrought by the Spirit of God; they are so
linked together, that you cannot have one in truth but you must have all in
some measure. This is a sweet Truth to a pure Conscience, for all Grace is
longed after. Therefore Christ's fullness is eyed, and prized, and application
is made to him, that out of that fullness we may receive, and Grace for Grace,
John 1. 16. That is, that we may receive Graces answerable to those Graces
which Christ has received of his Father for us: Thus the Wax does receive
Character for Character from the Seal, and the Child Member for Member from the
Father, though not of the same bigness and proportion. The pure Conscience is
not double minded, it is not partly for God, and partly for Mammon; partly for
Christ, and partly for Satan. But this is the desire that the God of all Grace,
would work every Grace in Truth, and make all Grace more and more to abound.

4. When the Conscience is pure, the Mystery of Faith is held fast: The Apostle
joins Faith and a good Conscience together, 1 Timothy 1. 19. Holding Faith and a
good Conscience, which some having put away, concerning Faith, have made
shipwreck. And 1 Timothy 3. 9. Holding the Mystery of the Faith in a pure
Conscience. Whoever are truly purified, do prize the Gospel and the Mysteries
of it; they admire the contrivance of Man's Redemption by Christ Jesus, and are
persuaded since his Blood is the Blood of God, that it is sufficient to purchase
lost Souls, and to purchase the lost Inheritance. The Mystery of Regeneration
they are acquainted with, and the absolute Necessity of it. And though
Justification by the Imputed Righteousness of Christ be Argued against, as
absurd, by deluded Papists, and their wretched followers; though the work of
the Spirit in renewing and changing of the Heart, be derided by Profane Wits;
nay, by some that would be accounted Masters in Israel; A pure Conscience
notwithstanding retains these Mysteries. Thus the Church of Pergamus, though
they dwelt where Satan's Seat was, yet they held fast Christ's Name, and did not
deny his Faith, and that even in those days wherein the Faithful Martyr Antipas
was slain among them, Rev. 2. 13.

5. Where Conscience is pure, God is Served in sincerity, and there is a
willingness to live honestly. The Apostle tells us, that he Served God from his
Forefathers with a pure Conscience, 2 Timothy 1. 3. he did not Preach a new God,
but the same which Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets were the
Servants of. This God he Served with a perfect Heart, and with a willing Mind;
his Conscience did bear him witness, that his very Soul was engaged in the
Lords Work; and that he was very well pleased both with his Master, and with
that business which his Master had Employed him in: and they were not his own
things, but the things of his Lord which were sought by him. And as a pure
Conscience engages to the Service of God, so to the living honestly, Heb. 13.
18. We trust we have a good Conscience in all things, willing to live honestly.
Where such a Conscience is, that of the Apostle is heeded, Romans 13. 12, 13. The
night is far spent, the day is at hand, that is; the present time (which is
compared to the night because most are asleep in it, and much wickedness lies
hid and is not yet disclosed) the present time is far spent; is almost come to
an end; and the day is at Hand, that is, the day of Judgment when all secrets
will be brought to Light; Let us therefore cast off the works of Darkness and
let us put on the Armor of Light, let us walk honestly as in the day, not in
Rioting and Drunkenness, not in Chambering and Wantonness, not in strife and
Envying, and make no Provision for the Flesh to fulfill the Lusts thereof.

6. Where Conscience is pure, a greater measure of Holiness is aspired unto,
and endeavored after. Though sin does remain in a sanctified Heart, yet does
it not remain quietly, Conscience deals hardly with it, as Sarah did with
Hagar, Abraham's Egyptian Concubine, and is not satisfied, till it is turned out
of doors: though Grace is incomplete, yet compleatness is desired, the promises
of Sanctification are looked upon as very great and precious, and they are
pleaded; that the Divine Nature, may more and more be partaken of by them, and
the Corruption that is in the world through lust more fully escaped. A pure
Conscience will not suffer us to rest in that Grace which is already attained,
but causes us to press toward the mark: and to cleanse our selves from all
filthiness both of the Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the fear of
God, 2 Cor. 7. 1.

But now it is to be inquired, How Conscience may be made thus pure? unto which
I answer.

1. The Word of God is like a fire to purify, Jer. 23. 29. Is not my Word like
Fire says the Lord? and like an Hammer that breaks the Rock in pieces? the
word is compared to an Hammer, because as the hammer does break the Rock, so
does the Word the the Heart, though never so hard and senseless; it is compared
also to fire; because like fire, it does both give light, and refine, and
purify the Conscience. Year Clean says Christ, but how? through the word
that I have spoken unto you, John 15, 3. Let the Word of Christ therefore dwell
in you richly, 'twill be an Excellent and effectual Antidote against sin and
temptation: when your Hearts stand in awe of the Word of God, as David's did,
how will it preserve you from defilement!

2. Affliction is like a Furnace to refine, That Conscience may be pure,
Affliction is to be improved. The Rod of Affliction, though it seem to be dry
and withered, yet like Aaron's, 'twill bud and blossom, and bring forth the
Fruits of Righteousness, Heb. 12. 11. Now no chastening for the present seems
to be joyous, but grievous, nevertheless afterward it yields the Peaceable
Fruits of Righteousness unto them that are Exercised thereby: And before the
Apostle informs us, that it is God's design in Afflicting, to refine and
purify, v. 9, 10. We have had Fathers of our Flesh, who Corrected us, and we
gave them Reverence, shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of
Spirits, and live? For they verily for a few days chastened (...) after their
own pleasure, but He for our profit, that we might be partakers of his
Holiness. The smart of Affliction does help very much to awaken Conscience, and
to discover the evil and danger of sin; and then sin is found to be ten
thousand times more bitter when we reflect upon it, than ever was fansied to be
sweet in the time of Temptation. We may indeed with submission pray against
Affliction, and entreat that gentler ways may be used to sanctify us, and we
may take the more comfort, and our sincerity will be the more Evident, when
milder Methods are effectual. One of our English Poets speaks Excellently to
this purpose. Herbert. Discipline, page 173, 174.


Throw away thy Rod,
Throw away thy Wrath.
O my God,
Take the gentle path.
For my hearts desire
Unto thine is bent:
I aspire
To a full consent.
Not a word or look
I affect to own,
But thy Book,
And thy Book alone.
Though I fail, I weep:
Though I halt in pace,
Yet I creep
To the Throne of Grace.
Then let wrath remove,
Love will do the deed;
For with Love
Stony hearts will bleed.
Love is swift of foot;
Love's a Man of War,
And can shoot,
And can hit from far.
Who can escape his bow?
That which wrought on thee,
Brought thee low,
Needs must work on me.
Throw away thy Rod,
Though Man frailties has,
Thou art God:
Throw away thy Wrath.
But if the Father of Spirits sees it meet and needful to use the Discipline of
the Rod, it concerns us to hear the Voice of it, and understand the meaning:
and this it always speaks, and that very plainly, that our Consciences, and
indeed all within us, should be more clean and Holy.

3. The Blood of Christ purges the Conscience from dead works. This is the
Fountain which in the Gospel is set open for S^n, and for Uncleanness. It Is He
who has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his Blood, Rev. 1. 5. So,
Heb. 9. 14. How much more shall the Blood of Christ, who through the Eternal
Spirit Offered up himself without spot to God, purge your Consciences from dead
works to serve the Living God. Though our Lord aimed at our Justification, and
the Remission of sin, when he shed his Blood, and Sacrificed himself for us,
yet he had our sanctification and cleansing also in his eye. Upon this Account
the Apostle Peter tells us, That he bear our sins in his own Body on the Tree;
that we being dead unto sins, might live unto Righteousness, 1 Pet. 2. 24. And
we read, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. that Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for
it, that he might Sanctify and cleanse it, and present it to himself a
glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it
should be Holy and without blemish. Apply this Blood unto your selves, be
persuaded that it has a sanctifying virtue; and pray for purity, as that which
is a great part of Christ's purchase, as well as your own Perfection.

4. If you would have Conscience pure, you must not resist, but yield unto the
Spirit of Christ. It Is his Work, not only to show sin, but to slay it: he
convinces of sin, and also Mortifies the deeds of the Body, Romans 8. 13. If ye
live after the Flesh, ye shall dye; but if ye through the Spirit do Mortify
the deeds of the Body, ye shall live. The Power of sin is great, and this Power
is strengthened by the Principalities and Powers of Darkness, who do endeavor
to keep up sins Dominion: So that if the Spirit of the Lord did not show the
exceeding greatness of his Power, our Hearts and Consciences would still remain
defiled; we should never have our Fruit unto Holiness, nor the end everlasting
Life. I have done with that sixth particular, The goodness of Conscience lies
in the purity of it.

7. The goodness of Conscience lies in the calmness and peace of it. What the
Apostle speaks concerning the wisdom which is from above, That it is first pure,
and then peaceable, may be applied unto a good Conscience: first, it is pure,
then peacable; there may indeed be purity without peace; but there cannot be
true peace without purity. There is a false peace which is too commonly found
in the ungodly and the Hypocrite; this peace sin does not disturb, but
increase: and by this peace the strong man armed does keep possession. But true
peace is peculiar unto them that are sanctified; and when once they have
attained unto it, they are brought as it were within the Suburbs of Heaven, and
see the dawning of that Light which is everlasting. That you may the better
discern this true peace of Conscience I shall set it forth in these particulars:

1. True peace of Conscience is founded upon the Blood of God. So Christ's Blood
is called, for as he was made of the seed of David according to the flesh; so
he is expressly affirmed to be over all God blessed for ever, Romans 9. 5. There
could be no remission of sin without shedding of blood, and no other blood
would serve the turn: the blood of Bulls and goats would not take away sin,
Heb. 10. 4. Nay supposing that Man's blood had been shed for us, it would not
have been expiatory. Shall I give my first born for my transgression? the fruit
of my body for the sin of my Soul? Mic. 6. 7. Nothing but what satisfies the
justice of God, will satisfy and pacify the Conscience; and bring it to a
well-grounded tranquillity: but it is the blood of Christ alone that satisfies
divine justice; Conscience therefore can have no true rest till that blood be
applied. Luthers Conscience could never be quieted with Popish penance and
severities, but when he came to understand that great Article of Christianity,
Faith in the Blood of Jesus. In cord meo iste unus regnat articulus, scilicet.
Fides Christi, ex quo, per quem, and in quem omnes meae diu noctuque fluunt
refluuntque theolicae cogitationes. Luther, in Epist. ad Gal. praefat.
Oh then the storm was laid; by applying this blood of Christ, he was able to
joy in God through the Lord Jesus by whom he had received the atonement. Where
the Blood of Christ is not known and trusted, there cannot possibly be true
peace.

2. True peace of Conscience supposes reconciliation with God. As long as there
is no peace above with God, there can be no true peace within. Where this is,
the covenant of peace has been taken hold of, and the terms of reconciliation
have been submitted to. The Apostle tells us that God is in Christ reconcileing
the World unto himself, not imputing their trespasses to them: Nay, though
himself be the party injured by sin, though he be unsought to, though he has no
need at all of the sinner, and be so infinitely high above him; yet he stoops
so low as to beseech him to be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. and he does assure
transgressors though never so great, that if they rely upon Christ for pardon,
and are broken for sin, and consent to turn from all their wicked ways and
thoughts; he will multiply forgiveness, and will have mercy upon them. Now when
these terms are consented to, and Faith and Repentance are wrought in the
heart, God is now no longer a Foe, but a Father. All this is supposed in peace
of Conscience: it is consequent upon peace with God, and cannot go before it. We
must be the Sons of God, before we can know we are so, and rejoice in our
Adoption.

3. True peace of Conscience, is always joined with Righteousness: just as the
stars of the same Constellation part not, but rise and set and keep together.
The Holy Ghost has joined Righteousness and Peace: Romans 14. 17. The Kingdom of
God is not meat and drink, but Righteousness and Peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost. Righteousness is put first to show that all Peace and Joy is false
without it. There must be the Righteousness of Christ imputed; and there must
be Holiness and Righteousness imparted where true peace is. The fruits of
Righteousness are called peaceable in Scripture, because Conscience is so well
satisfied in reflecting upon them. If any known wickedness be practiced in the
life, or so much as loved and regarded in the heart; as it will be a bar to
communion with God, so 'twill be an effectual impediment unto peace of
Conscience. Isa. 57. 20, 21. The wicked are like the troubled Sea when it
cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. There is no peace says my God
unto the wicked.

4. True peace of Conscience, is not without a Scripture-ground to warrant it.
Upon this account it is called the fruit of the Lips, Isa. 57. 19. I create the
fruit of the lips, peace, peace; because it is built upon that word which the
Lord has spoken. The good Conscience does argue from Scripture-premises, and
draws both a sweet and a safe conclusion. There are indeed a great many
paralogisms or false ways of arguing; as when we argue our state to be good
because Members of the visible Church, and Professors of Religion; because we
engage in ordinances and have a name that we live. But a good Conscience uses
other Mediums. It observes what are the Characters of Believers, which are not
to be found in any Hypocrite in the world; and finding these in the Heart, it
does justly conclude a man to be a right Believer. From our prizing Christ
above all, it argues we have Faith in him. From our loving of God, and desiring
after him, it argues that we were first loved of him, 1 Pet. 2. 7. 1 John 4.
19. From our Repentance and Hatred of Sin, it argues that Iniquity shall not be
our Ruin. From our being Spiritually Hungry, it argues we shall be filed with
good things. From our Hearts being in Heaven, it argues our Treasure is there;
and that there is a place preparing for us. Such things as these are sound
evidences of a good state; and that peace that is thus warranted, is highly
Rational: and though the Rain descend, and the Floods come, and the Winds
blow, and beat never so vehemently, they will not be able to disturb it.

5. True peace of Conscience is spoken by the Spirit of God: therefore it is
called the peace of God. Phil 4. 7. The peace of God which passes all
understanding shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus. God is
said to speak peace to his people, and he does it by his Spirit, Psalm. 85. I
will hear what God the Lord will speak, for he will speak peace to his People
and to his Saints: but let them not turn again to folly. Est haec salutatio,
Gratia and Pax; etc. nova and inaudita mundo ante praedicationem Evangelii,
haec duo vocabula universum comprehendunt Christianismum; Gratia remittit
peccatum, pax tranquillam reddit conscientiam. Duo diaboli nostri qui nos
excruciant sunt peccatum and conscientia. Sed haec duo monstra Christus ^icit
and conculcavit in hoc saeculo and suturo. Luther. in Epist. ad Gal. c. 1.
God speaks peace in that he promises good things to his Saints, and in that he
assures them they are Saints; and that these promises belong to them. If the
Holy Ghost did not help the Conscience, when it is looking into us and prying
after Grace, and the Evidences of the new Creature; we should never be able to
discover any thing. Satan and our own hearts together would so confound us,
that our doubts would be invincible: and we must needs be strangers to peace.
Saints in Scripture have begged of the Lord to examine and to prove them; and
not without reason: it is from him we have eye salve to discern our condition,
that we may not on the one hand say we are rich and increased with Goods, when
we are Empty and Miserable: nor on the other hand, say we are Empty, when we
are partakers of the unsearchable Riches of Christ.

6. True peace of Conscience is ever accompanied with a Spiritual combat, in
which the Spirit does lust against the Flesh; to be at peace with the Flesh and
the Lusts of it, is in effect to make a Covenant with death and to be at
agreement with Hell. The Apostle therefore tells us that in all true Believers,
the Flesh is opposed by its contrary the Spirit, Gal. 5. 17. The Flesh lusts
against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, and these two are
contrary the one to the other. By Spirit here we are to understand the
spiritual and regenerate part in the Saints. That which is born of the Spirit
is Spirit. There is not only a combat between Conscience and the Flesh in
sincere Believers; but there is a Combat in their very Hearts and Wills:
Lusting or Desiring is an act of the Will; now because it is said the Spirit
Lusts against the Flesh, it is a sign the Heart is weary of it. The Will would
fain have the Flesh and the Affections of it crucified. Peace of Conscience
cannot be where sin is liked and cherished. When Satan does object against a
Believer the remainders of corruption, Conscience has this to plead and reply,
that these relics of the old man are a very Body of Death which Believers
sigh and groan to be delivered from, Romans 7. 24. O wretched man that I am who
shall deliver me from the Body of this Death?

But here it may be asked, how may this true peace of Conscience he attained? I
shall say something at present, though afterward I shall have occasion to speak
to this matter.

1. Would you have peace of Conscience; be humbled more deeply, and grieve more
heartily because of sin. The Apostle does not only say be afflicted, but mourn,
but weep, let your laughter be turned to mourning and your joy to heaviness,
Jam. 4. 9. He uses several words importing the same thing, to show that it is
not a slight sorrow which sin calls for, nor a little humiliation which will
usher in peace. Our Lord calls the mourners blessed, for they shall be
Comforted: and the Prophet tells us that the high and lofty one that inhabits
Eternity, will dwell with them that are of an humble Spirit, and to this end,
that they may be Comforted; to revive the Spirit of the humble and to revive
the Heart of the Contrite Ones. Oh reflect upon your selves, call to
remembrance how much evil, and how little good has been done by you all your
days: those evils which have been done how have they been aggravated; and that
good that has been done, how has it been lessened by your manner of doing it!
look so long on sin till you find your Hearts break and melt, till you are
utterly displeased with your selves. This is the way to have a kind look and a
good Word from God. When Ephraim repented, did smite upon his Thigh, to show
that sin was matter both of his sorrow and indignation, when he was ashamed and
confounded in himself; What does the the Lord say? Is Ephraim My dear Son? is
he a pleasant Child? for since I spoke against him I do earnestly remember him
still, therefore my Bowels are troubled for him and I will surely have Mercy on
him says the Lord, Jer. 31. 19. 20.

2. If you would have true Peace of Conscience acquaint your selves better with
the Gospel. The Gospel is called the Gospel of Peace, the Word of
Reconciliation. Christ is called the Prince of Peace, and the Father, The God
of Love and Peace; and Ministers are styled the Ambassadors of Peace, that
Preach glad tidings of good things. Though upon Mount Sinai there be nothing
but blackness, and Darkness, and Tempest, though the Law does bind the sinner
under the Curse, and cause the Heart to quake and tremble; yet upon Mount Sion
we may behold Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and that Blood of
sprinking which speaks better things than that of Abel, Heb. 12. 24. In the
Gospel Christ is set forth as a propitiation, and through him God is ready to
forgive, and Plenteous in Mercy and Redemption. Here Is good news indeed to see
all things thus prepared toward an union and agreement; and all that is
required of transgressors is, that they should expect peace no other way but by
Christ Jesus, and that they should consent to rebel no more. Now when the
Conscience observes, that Christ is alone relied on for reconciliation, and
nothing else is trusted in; and that the Heart is grieved at its Rebellions,
and now is willing to yield it self to God; Peace hereupon follows.

3. Be not strangers unto that duty of self-Examination. The reason why sinners
are not troubled is, because they do not know themselves, nor the danger of
that Estate in which they are: and the reason why Saints have not Peace, is
because they are not so well acquainted with themselves as they should be, they
do not so well understand what an happy change the Lord has wrought both
relative and real; both in their condition, and in their Heart and Spirits.
What delving* and digging, and turning up the bowels of the Earth to find out
Silver and Gold! And surely it is worth our while to ransack and search our
selves thoroughly, if that we may find what is much more precious then Gold that
perishes. The Apostles command is express: Examine your selves, prove your own
selves, and the end wherefore they were thus to examine and prove, was, that
they might know themselves, whether they were in the Faith, whether Christ were
in them yea or no, 2 Cor. 13. 5. And while you are thus upon trial of your
selves, since a mistake may undo you for ever; cry, that the Lord who knows
you, would teach you to know your selves; and that you may think of your selves
as he does.

4. Plead the Promises of strengthening Grace. For the more strong you are in
Grace the more evident the Truth of it will be. The Lord has promised you shall
grow up as Calves of the stall, and that you shall thrive as Willowes by the
watercourse. The Righteous shall flourish like a Palm Tree, and grow like a
Caedar in Lebanon; those that are Planted in the House of the Lord, shall
flourish in the Courts of our God, Psalm. 92. 12, 13. and all this to show that
the Lord is upright, and there is no Unrighteousness in him, v. 15. So that
these Promises may with confidence be pleaded, and God will not be backward to
fulfill them. The more Grace you have, the more 'twill be exercised, and the
more it is exercised, the more plainly you will be able to discern it, and
consequently have the greater Peace and Comfort in it. Those that have little
Grace, and are full of doubts, should strive after so much Grace as to be past
doubt.

5. Love the Commands of God and do them. If once your Hearts are pleased with
the Laws of God, it is a sign that you are indeed in Covenant, and that the Lord
has put his Laws in your minds, and written them in your Hearts, and has been
Merciful to your Unrighteousness. Hearken to the Psalmist, Great Peace have
they that Love thy Law, Psalm, 119. 165. Love of the Law will make us careful
to keep it; and this is the way to have the Lord manifest himself to us, as he
does not manifest himself to the World, Joh 14. 21. He that has my
Commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me, and he that Loves me
shall be loved of my Father, and I will Love him and will manifest my self to
him, and v. 23. If a man Love me he will keep my Word, and my Father will love
him, and we will come to him and make our abode with him. The manner of the
Father and Sons making their abode in us, we are not so well able to apprehend;
but the effects of this in-dwelling are more evident, and Peace is one of those
effects. Abound in Obedience and the work of God, for that is the truest Peace
where there are most of Fruits of Righteousness, Isaiah 48. 18. Oh that thou
had harkened to my Commandments! then had thy Peace been as a River and thy
Righteousness as the Waves of the Sea.

6. Be sure that you connive not at any known sin. For this will be sure to
hinder Peace, I am afraid that in most doubting (I dare not say in all) and
complaining Souls, that there are some lusts or other that they deal gently
with, and these Absaloms do disturb their Peace. They indulge to their
passions, inordinate Affections, Pride, Sensuality, Covetousness; and it is no
marvel that they are strangers to peace. It Is not more natural for Water to
extinguish Fire, than for allowed sin to hinder peace of Conscience. It
exceedingly grieves the Spirit of the Lord, from whom peace flows, and he will
suspend his influences, and will neither quicken nor comfort if himself be
quenched and grieved. Had Sampson peace in the lap of Delilah? or Herod peace
in the embraces of Herodias? such things may please the flesh, but they wound
the Spirit, and are a trouble to the Conscience. If you set up idols in your
hearts, and the stumbling block of your iniquity before your face, God will
answer you accordingly, and no peace will he speak till you repent, and turn
from your idols, and turn away your faces from all your abominations, Ezekiel. 14.
3, 4, 5, 6.

7. Beg earnestly to be sealed by the spirit unto the day of Redemption. The
Apostle tells the Ephesians, that after they Believed, they were sealed with
the holy spirit of Promise, which is the earnest of our Inheritance, Chap. 1.
13, 14. This sealing of the Spirit as it does imply Sanctification, and setting
us apart for God from profane uses, so also an intimation that we are
Sanctified, in Order to our being fitted for an incorruptible and undefiled
Inheritance. As it is the Spirit which does convince the World of sin, so it is
he who does convince the Saints that they have Grace and Righteousness. O
therefore pray, that this Comforter may come and abide in you for ever; for
though you have the Privy Seal really upon you of Gods foreknowledge and
Election; though you have the Seals of the Covenant administered; nay, though
you are Sealed with the Image of God in effectual Calling and Regeneration; yet
till this Sealing Spirit does make it Evident, you will not have Peace. Thus of
that seventh Particular, The goodness of Conscience lies in the Calmness and
Peace of it.

8. The goodness of Conscience lies in this, That it is void of Offense. The
Apostle does profess, that herein he did Exercise himself, to have a Conscience
void of Offense, both toward God, and also toward Man, Acts 24. 16. A good
Conscience has Respect unto both Tables of the Law: Godliness and Honesty are
both Commanded; that is, a regard to God, and to our Neighbor. -- Phlieg asque
miserrimus omnes
Admonet, and magna testatur voce per umbras,
Discite justitiam moniti and non temnere Divos.
Virgil. Aeneid. 6.

A good Conscience takes Notice what the Lord chiefly calls for, namely, our
Reverence, our Faith, our Love, our Delight; and is not satisfied with any
External Acts of Worship, unless these Internal and more acceptable pieces of
Service are given to him. It Is careful also that our Duty toward Man be
performed, because the Commands which enjoin this have the stamp of Gods
Authority upon them; and we cannot sin against our Brother, but we sin against
the Lord, in whose Image Man is made, and who has Commanded us to Love our
Neighbor as our selves. A good Conscience will not suffer any to be careless
of those Duties of Mercy and Righteousness toward Men; because God is so
strict, as to those, that he will permit the external Acts of his own Service
to be omitted, rather than Mercy should not be shown. Go ye and learn that,
says Christ, I will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice: That is, Mercy rather than
Sacrifice. q. d. If Sacrifice cannot be Offered, but Mercy must be Neglected,
let me be without Sacrifice, rather than thy Brother that needs it, be without
Mercy.

Two things are here to be Observed: A good Conscience is void of Offense, in
that it will neither give Offense, nor take it.

1. A good Conscience is afraid of giving Offense. What is the Work of Satan?
It Is to Offend God as much as he is able, and to be putting stumbling blocks
before Men, that hereby they may fall into sin. Now, surely Satan is in no wise
to be imitated. A scandalous Life, and a good Conscience cannot stand together.
How express and full is that Command, 1 Cor. 10. 32? Give no Offense, neither
to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God. Those that are
within, are not to be Offended, lest they be grieved and discouraged: Those
that are without, are not to be offended, lest they be confirmed in their
prejudices against Religion, and hardened in their wickedness: Therefore we are
to walk circumspectly, to Act as upon a Theater, where many Eyes behold us, and
all to this end, That we may be blameless and harmless, the Sons of God,
without Rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation, among whom we are
to shine as Lights in the World, Psalm. 2. 15.

2. A good Conscience will take no Offense; that is, not at God, not at Christ,
not at Religion; whatever it sees done by Men, or whatever it beholds come to
pass by the Providence of the Lord. A good Conscience likes not Religion the
worse, though there be never so many Hypocrites; for all the Men in the World
cannot so much inveigh against Hypocrites, as Christ does speak against and
threaten them. It likes not Truth the worse, though never so many are led away
with the Error of the wicked; though so many were turned Arrians, yet
Athanasius stood up for the Godhead of our Lord Jesus. A good Conscience likes
not Christ the worse, though never so many Apostatize; nor Holiness the worse,
though every where spoken against; nor Christianity the worse, because of the
Cross and Persecution.

But here two Questions are to be resolved, how taking, and how giving offense
may be prevented?

Would you take no Offense?

1. Labor after a greater measure of Understanding; those that are in the
dark, or whose Eyes are dim, are more apt to stumble, A clearly enlightened
Conscience will weigh things well, and will easily perceive how unreasonable
it is to take offense at Religion for the miscarriages of Professors, which
Religion does so much condemn, and not in the least encourage or allow of: How
unreasonable it is to take offense at the Gospel of Christ, because of the
Cross, since the Cross is so needful, is so much sweetened? and the sufferings
of this present time are not worthy to be compared with that glory that is to
be revealed, Romans 8. 18.

2. Let your Love be stronger and stronger; this will lift you up above, and
carry you over all difficulties, and stumbling blocks. They that Love the Law
of the Lord, the Psalmist tells us, that nothing shall Offend them, Psalm. 119.
165. Jacob's Love toward Rachel hindered him from taking offense at any thing;
his Wages are changed, he must serve fourteen years; yet Love made all to be
swallowed. Love to God and to his Word, will make you content with any thing;
you will know how to want, and how to abound; how to go through Honor and
Dishonor, good Report, and evil Report: Love will break through all
difficulties, and make you follow hard after God.

3. Consider the Happiness of those that are not Offended, Mat. 11. 6. Blessed
is he whosoever shall not be Offended in me. When Discouragements are mighty,
and Temptations are strong to make us forsake our Lord, and yet we cleave to
him, he takes it the more kindly, and we shall in no wise be losers.

But, Secondly, Would you give no Offense? Then,

1. Seriously think of the danger of scandal: thou that do harden a sinner,
or grieve a Saint, 'twere better a Millstone were hanged about thy Neck, and
thou cast into the depth of the Sea, Mat. 18. 6. Scandal does mightily Heighten
Transgression, and the punishment hereafter will be proportionable.

2. Be encouraged with this, That scandal is possible to be avoided. You may
Live so, as to be Blessings in the places where you Live, and justly an Offense
to none. I do not say, you may Live wholly free from sin, but you may be kept
from gross and scandalous sins altogether. Sanctorum vitam inveniri posse
dicimus sine crimine; s^^ peccato autem qui se vivere existimar, non id agit ut
peccatum (...) habeat, sed ut veniam non accipiat. Augustine.
Samuel had carried himself so, that the Israelites could not charge him with
any miscarriage. I have walked before you from my Child hood unto this day;
behold, here I am, bear witness against me before the Lord, and before his
Anointed, Whose Ox have I taken? Whose Ass have I taken? Whom have I
defrauded? Whom have I Oppressed? Or of whose hand have I received any Bribe to
blind my Eyes therewith? 1 Samuel 12. 2, 3. So the Apostles, 1 These. 2. 10. Ye
are witnesses, and God also, how Holily and Justly, and unbalmeably we behaved
our selves among you that Believe: that is, You that were most Acquainted with
us, and did most Observe us, could spy nothing scandalous or blameworthy in
us. He that writes the Life of Mr. Robert Bolton, tells us, that he walked so
with God, that he could not be taxed with any gross or scandalous sin from his
Conversion to his Dissolution, which was about thirty Years. Be encouraged by
such Examples, and the same Grace which wrought such effects in them, can work
the same in thee.

3 Plead the Honor of Religion, and Gods own Name as an Argument to prevail
with him to preserve you from scandalous Iniquities. Tell him you desire to be
kept without Rebuke, that his Name may be secured from Blasphemy, and that his
Doctrine may in all things be Adorned.

Thus have I at large Discoursed concerning the first thing which I proposed. I
have told you wherein the goodness of Conscience lies, and how it may be
attained.

In the Second place I am to tell you wherein the Acts of a good Conscience,
and the Acts of the good Spirit of God are to be distinguished the one from the
other: And before I show the difference between them, I shall lay down these
ensuing Propositions.

1. All that good, whether Light or Grace, or Peace that is in the Conscience,
is wrought by the Spirit of God: As Gifts are from the Spirit, so is Grace most
certainly from the same Spirit, and all that comfort which has any Reason or
Foundation proceeds from this Comforter. Whatever means have been effectual to
the bettering of the Heart and Conscience, it is from the Spirit they have had
their Efficacy. Whatever then we discern in our selves that is truly good, we
must eye the Spirit as the Efficient of it, and without his working it would
never have been in us at all, 1 Cor. 12. 11. But all these works that one and
the selfsame Spirit, dividing unto every Man severally as he will.

2. When ever Conscience does its Duty, and Acts as is ought, it is certainly
Acted by the Spirit. As the Spirit does insuse the Habits of Grace, so it is he
that does produce them into Act and Exercise; as he does cast the Seed of God
into the Heart, so he makes that Seed to grow, and to bring forth Fruit. I
Labored, says the Apostle, yet not I, but the Grace of God which was with me,
1 Cor. 15. 10. If in a Natural sense we are said to Live in God, and move in
him also. Surely the Spirit of God is the Author of all spiritual Life, and of
all spiritual and Holy Motions.

3. Conscien^e though never so good must arrogate nothing to it self, but all
praise is due unto the Lord. For it is he that makes the difference between the
best and the worst Conscience, and the best would be the worst if he did not
make a difference. A good Conscience is said to bear witness in the Holy Ghost,
Romans 9. 1. And as it bears witness in the Holy Ghost, so it move to Duty,
checks from Sin, encourages upon Welldoing; and all this it does in the Holy
Ghost, by his illumination and assistance.

4. It Is true that the Spirit of God does make use of Conscience very much in
his dealing with us. He deals with us as those which have such a power as
Conscience, and that are in a capacity of reviewing our selves; and applying
what is spoken either by way of Terror or by way of Consolation; and if the
Spirit aid us, we shall review and apply to some purpose.

Having laid down these things, I distinguish between the Acts of the Spirit,
and the Acts of a good Conscience, thus.

1. The Spirit of God is the Principal Agent; the good Conscience Acts under
him. As in the work of Conversion the Act of the Minister, and the Act of the
Spirit are vastly different. The Minister is a worker together with God, that
is, he is honored so far, as to be employed as an instrument to good; but
what is his Words or Arguments to raise the dead in trespasses and sins? it is
the Spirit that causes Life to enter into the dead dry bones. He that plants is
nothing, and he that waters is nothing; so truly unless the Spirit did second
Conscience, its acting would be insignificant, it would be little or not at all
heeded: nay, it self would become dull and heedless.

2. The Spirits motions do differ from the impulses of Conscience. Where the
Spirit of the Lord does move more immediately, his motions are with greater
power and with greater Liberty. The ungodly themselves are not altogether
strangers unto the Power of the Spirit. How does it check them, and restrain
them; and dam up the stream of Corruption for a season, as long as it is put
forth! but chiefly this power is apparent in them that are effectually called.
The Spirit impelling them to come to God, does bring them quite home; his
impulse shall fetch them out of the farthest Country, and bring them to their
Fathers house. Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is power; and where the
Spirit of the Lord is, there is Liberty, 2 Cor. 3. 17. The Spirit not only
moves us to obey, but also enlarges our hearts that we may run the way of the
Lords commandments.

3. The Spirits Convictions differ from the Accusations of Conscience, as the
Cause and Effect, as the Antecedent and the Consequent. The Spirit first sets
sin in order before our eyes, and then Conscience does accuse and reproach us
because of it. And where the Spirit does by a more immediate operation, give a
sight of sin, and bring it to remembrance; Oh how is the heart affected! What
self-abhorrency and abasement! what Sorrow and Shame! what Knocking of the
Breast, and Smiting upon the Thigh is there! Surely (says Ephraim) after I was
turned I repented, and after I was instructed I smote upon my Thigh; I was
ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my Youth,
Jer. 31. 19. Now 'twas the Spirit that did thus instruct and turn him. Thus
Ezekiel 36. 27. I will put my Spirit within you. And it follows, ver. 31. Then
shall ye remember your evil ways, and your doings that were not good; and
shall loath your selves in your own sight, for your iniquities and for your
abominations.

4. The Spirits witness concerning our adoption, differs from the witness of
our own Spirits, from the testimony of our own Consciences. The Apostle speaks
very plainly of a twofold witness, that of Our Spirits and that of Gods Spirit,
Rom 8. 16. The Spirit it self bears witness with out Spirits, that we are the
children of God. This witness of the Spirit does not lie only in his declaring
in the Scriptures what kind of Persons are the children of God; but he also
helps Believers to see that they are such kind of persons; and then enables
them to draw the conclusion that they are Children, and Heirs; Heirs of God,
and Joint-heirs with Christ unto the incorruptible and undefiled inheritance.
Now the difference between the witness of the Spirit, and that of Conscience
touching our adoption, is in these particulars,

1. The Spirits witness is more clear, Consciences more conjectural. As we see
things ten thousand time more plainly by the Light of the Sun, than by a dim
Lamp that burns by us; and yet by that Lamp we may see something.

2. The Spirits witness causes greater Boldness and Confidence than that of
Conscience. When the Spirit of Adoption is sent into the heart, it makes
Believers to come with Boldness to the Throne of Grace; and to cry Abba Father,
that is, Father Father: the word is doubled to show with what confidence the
Spirit makes it to be spoken, Gal. 4. 6. Then they draw nigh with high Hopes,
and raised Expectations, that their Father will deal bountifully, give
liberally, and though they open their mouths never so wide, that yet they shall
be filled with his fullness.

3. The Spirits testimony is more firm, and not so easily questioned; that of
Conscience is more apt to be cavill'd at by Satan. If I see a thing plainly in
the day time, I know I see it; and though many should question whether I saw or
no, yet I make no question: nay though some distracted persons that are kept in
darkness and chains, should say they see when they don't, yet I know I see when
I do. The Spirits testimony does make things thus clear; And the objections of
the Accuser of the Brethren, it is evident they are but cavils. Thus says the
Apostle We have known and believed the love that God has to us, 1 John 4. 16.
But the testimony of Conscience Satan will be more bold to question, and will
start an hundred things whereby a weaker Faith may be puzzled, and the heart
still kept under doubts and fears.

4. The Spirits testimony produces joy, that of Conscience at best only a
calmness and tranquillity. I confess the Apostle says the testimony of
Conscience was his rejoicing, but you must know, that he had also received the
witness and earnest of the Spirit; so that he had more than Consciences bare
testimony. The joy that the Spirit creates by his assuring Believers of their
adoption, is unspeakable and full of glory. It Is such as no Tongue can utter,
and no Heart can conceive it but such as have had a taste and experience of it.
It Is not merely a negative thing, or freedom from trouble, but positive and
carries with it such a delight as is not to be found in the highest sensuality.
The Malefactor is at peace when he receives a pardon; but if he be not only
pardoned but Preferred, this causes joy. The Spirit lets the Soul see it is
pardoned, and preferred to be a Child of God, an Heir of Glory, and gives a
taste how Gracious the Lord is, this causes not only peace but joy and triumph
of Spirit in the God of Salvation.

I come now to the third thing I proposed, to give you the reasons why it
should be every ones great care to have good Conscience.

1. We can have no Communion with God without a good Conscience. unless our
Hearts are sprinkled from an evil Conscience we cannot draw nigh to him,
neither will he draw nigh to us: Though we say with never so great confidence
that we have Fellowship with God, if Conscience knows that we walk in
darkness, and we allow our selves in the works of darkness; the Holy Ghost
gives us the lie to our face, and we do not the Truth, 1 John 1. 6. There
cannot be a question asked of greater importance than this, wherein does man's
happiness lie? and the truest answer unto this question is, Man's felicity does
lie in Fellowship with God. Therefore the happiness of the triumphant Saints
is so full because they are admitted unto so near Communion with God. Therefore
the Misery of the damned is so great, because they are banished from the Lords
presence, and despair of ever coming near to him, or enjoying of him. And
therefore the happiness of militant Saints is imperfect, because the remainders
of sin in them do hinder them from enjoying so much of God as otherwise they
might enjoy. But, where Conscience is evil there is no enjoying of God at all:
Where there is no true Holiness, sinners are without God in the World, they
spend their Money for that which is not Bread, and their labor for that which
satisfies not, Isa. 55. 2. They only have recourse to broken Cisterns that can
hold no water; but they neglect, and by their iniquities are kept at a distance
from the Fountain of living Waters. Thus that which is the Hell of Hell they
undergo on Earth, and yet such is their stupidness, they are little, if at all
concerned.

2. Without a good Conscience no service that we perform can be acceptable. A
bad Conscience is like the dead Fly in the Apothecaries Ointment, that spoils
the whole. This was it that made the Lord to speak thus to Israel of old, Isa.
1. 11, 12, 13. To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me? I
am full of Burnt-Offerings, and the fat of fed Beasts, and I delight not in the
Blood of Bullocks or of Lambs, or of He-Goats. When ye come to appear before
me, who has required at your hands, to tread my Courts? Bring no more vain
Oblations, incense is an Abomination to me: the Sabbaths and calling of
Assemblies I cannot away with: it is Iniquity even the solemn meeting. When ye
spread forth your hands, I will hide mine Eyes from you: yea, when you make
many Prayers I will not Hear. And the reason of all this was, because their
Consciences were defiled with Blood, with injustice, with unmercifulness, with
oppression. Thus also Isa. 66. 3. because their Consciences were defiled by
choosing their own way and their souls delighted in their abominations, the Lord
says, He that kills an Ox, is as if he slew a man; he that sacrifices a Lamb,
is as if he cut off a Dogs neck; he that offers an Oblation, as if he offered
Swines Blood; he that burns Incense as if he blessed an Idol. Two things are
absolutely necessary unto the acceptance of our services, one is the Mediation
of our Lord Jesus, and therefore our sacrifices, though never so spiritual, are
said to be acceptable through Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 5. and the other, the
cleansing of Conscience from all known and allowed sin, for iniquity will
separate between us and our God, and make him hide his face from us.

3. Without a good Conscience there can be no quiet or Peace but will prove
exceedingly to our prejudice Mala and tranquilla conscientia sicut nihil pejus
ita nihil i^foelicius, haec est illa quae nec Deum timet nec hominem reveretur.
Bern. De Conscien. cap. 3. page 1109.
The mirth of distracted and phrantick persons makes us ready to weep, because
we know how little reason there is for it; and thus unreasonable is security
and peace, where there is an evil Conscience. Sin is such a Master, as none of
its Servants have cause to be very jocund. When Death and Hell, (which is the
wages of sin) is paid, then I am sure 'twill be sad day with sinners, and all
their jollity will be turned into the height of anguish and tribulation. Art
thou without a good Conscience, and yet art quiet? thy quietness is thy
Disease. As there is a Natural Lethargy whereby Bodies sleep unto natural
Death, so there is a Spiritual Lethargy whereby Souls sleep unto Eternal Death:
and they wake not till the sight of an angry God upon the Judgment Seat, and
the feeling of the unquenchable flames of Hell awake them. He had a bad
Conscience that said Soul take thine ease; and so had he, that fared
sumptuously every day, but their ease did them harm, and was a means to bring
them unto these torments where no ease is to be looked for: Ah woe unto sinners
that are at ease! the ease of the simple does slay them, and the prosperity of
Fools destroys them, Prove. 1. 32.

4. Without a good Conscience it is impossible that we should be truly good our
selves, If Conscience be bad, all things else within us are likely to be a
great deal worse. If this which should restrain from sin connive at sin, how
will iniquity abound! if this which should be urging unto duty does not it self
do its Duty, how will duty be cast off! there will quickly be a saying unto God
depart from us for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways; what is the
Almighty that we should serve him? Job 21. 14, 15. To say that a man has no
Conscience, is as much as to say that a man has no goodness. When a sinner is
indeed turned unto God, one of the first things that is wrought upon in him is
his Conscience; and the more Holy he is, still his Conscience does become more
Pure, and wakeful, and tender. When a sinner that is almost persuaded to be a
Christian, falls back again, and becomes as vile, nay, viler than ever; his
Conscience rings him many a sad peal to prevent his relapse, and it is sometimes
a great while before his Conscience can be charmed. But if once this is laid
into a Dead sleep, the lusts of the Heart will grow impetuous and strong; the
affections will be vile, and at length there may be a running out to all
excess of Riot in the Conversation. Certainly if Conscience be bad the whole
man is defiled; if Conscience does exercise no Authority for God, sinners will
fulfill the desires of the Flesh and of the Mind, and will walk according to
the course of this World, according to the Prince of the Power of the Air, the
Spirit which works in the Children of Disobedience.

5. Without a good Conscience, as nothing is good in us, so nothing is good or
pure to us. The Apostlet else us that unto the pure all things are pure, but to
them whose Minds and Consciences are defiled there is nothing pure, Tit. 1. 15.
A bad Conscience defiles every thing. A man that is Conscious to himself of
loved and regining sin, whatever Creatures he uses, he abuses; his Food, his
Estate, his Health, his Strength are all impure to him, because his Corruptions
are served with all these, his blessings are turned into Curses because he
makes a sinful and Cursed use of them. Nay not only things secular, but also
things sacred, even the Ordinances of God, are profaned and polluted by an
evil Conscience, Prayer is turned into an Abomination, and the Lord calls it
Howling, Hos. 7. 14. They have not cried unto me with their Hearts when they
howled upon their beds. The word becomes a savor of Death unto Death, the Eyes
being shut, and the Ears closed, and the Heart being more hardened under it.
Receiving the Lords Supper is turned into a being guilty of the Body and blood
of the Lord and Eating and Drinking Damnation to our selves, 1 Cor. 11. Thus a
bad Conscience which suffers sin to rule without any considerable disturbance,
spoils all we do, turns good into Evil; and the better things are in themselves
makes them so much the worse to us. As dirty hands foul all they touch,
And those things most, which are most pure and fine:
So our clay-hearts, even when we crouch
To sing thy praises, make them less divine.
Yet either this,
Or none thy portion is.
Herb. Misery, p. 93.



6. Till Conscience be good how extremely dangerous is our Estate? We are the
Children of Wrath, the Sons of Death, Condemned already, not sure to be a day
or hour out of that place of Torment, where the Worm does not dye, and the Fire
none can quench. When the Lord speaks to the Ungodly, his mouth is full of
threatenings, his words are woes and curses, and not one syllable of
Encouragement or hope does he give them as long as they are resolved to
continue in their wickedness. Indeed, if they are willing to have their
Consciences and Conversations cleansed, then he declares himself inclined to
Mercy, and to make them white as Wool or Snow, though before red like Scarlet,
or like Crimson, Isa. 1. 16. 18. But as long as Conscience is secure, and the
sinner is resolved and obstinate, alas! God is angry with him every day, the
Vial is continually filling fuller, and more wrath is treasured up against the
day of wrath. If the sinner turn not, the Lord has whet his Sword, he has
bent his Bow, and made it ready; and who knows how soon the Arrow may be shot,
that may dispatch the sinner in the twinkling of an Eye, and both kill and damn
together.

7. If Conscience be not good, how great and intolerable may be the torture of
it when it is awakened! Solomon tells us, That the Spirit of a Man may sustain
his Infirmities, but a wounded Spirit who can bear? These wounds are made by
sin, as the Meritorious cause;e and by the hand of God himself, as an Holy,
Righteous, Dreadful, Sin-revenging Majesty. The buffetings of Satan indeed are
sometimes very troublesome and terrible; but what are the buffetings of a
Creature, if compared with the blows and wounds of Him that is Almighty. When
God shall say to a sinful soul, Behold, I am against thee, Ezekiel. 5. 8. When God
shall run upon a Transgressor as a Giant, and break him with breach upon
breach, surely his hands will not be strong, his heart will not be able to
endure. 'Twas a saying of Luther, Animus male sibi conscius potius in mill
rerum formas verteretur, ac citius per saxa, per ignes, per ahaeneos montes,
denique ad Diabolum ipsum ferretur; quam ad Deum accederet. Luther. Tom. 1. In
Genes. c. 43.
That an evil Conscience being indeed wounded, had rather be turned into a
thousand forms, had rather venture upon Rocks, and Flames, and Mountains of
brass; nay, upon the Devil himself, than have to do with God. The Design of
which passage is, to show how terrible the Lord is unto a guilty and enraged
Conscience. Such are said to be Drunken, but not with Wine, unless it be the
Wine of Astonishment: and they are compared to a wild Bull in a Net, being full
of the Fury of the Lord, and the Rebuke of God, Isa. 50. 20, 21.

If you look into Scripture, you may find the Saints themselves complaining of
these wounds in their Consciences. Listen to Job, Chap. 6. 2, 3, 4. O that my
grief were thoroughly weighed, and my Calamity laid in the Balances together:
For now it would be heavier th^^ the sand of the Sea; therefore my words are
swallowed up, for the Arrows of the Almighty are within me, the Poison whereof
drinks up my spirit, the terrors of God do set themselves in array against
me. The Psalmist speaks to the same purpose, Psalm. 88. 14, 15, 16. Lord, why
castest thou off my soul, why hidest thou thy Face from me? I am Afflicted and
ready to die from my youth up, while I suffer thy terrors I am distracted, thy
fierce wrath goes over me, thy terrors have cut me off. And if Saints have
drank so deep of this Cup of Trembling, oh how bitter may it be to sinners! Est
intus animi vigor,
Arce conditus abdita.
Haec venena potentius
Detrahunt hominem sibi
Dira, quae penitus meant,
Nec nocentia corpori
Mentis vulnere saeviunt.
Boethius. l. 4. Met. 3. page mihi. 122.

As therefore you would avoid the Lords contending with you, which will make
your spirits fail before him, it should be your care to have a good Conscience.

8. A good Conscience, as it will make those that have it to be better and
better themselves, so it will render them exceedingly beneficial, and make them
blessings unto others. A good Conscience, like Rebecca of old, is weary of the
Daughters of Heth, and is not satisfied unless the Flesh be (like the house of
Saul) growing weaker and weaker, and the Spirit be (like the house of David)
growing stronger and stronger. Conscience puts the Saints upon following on to
know the Lord, and following harder after him; and though the least Grace
deserve Infinite and Eternal thanks, and Conscience urges unto praise, yet
withal it adds, that the highest measures of Holiness are not to be rested in,
but still there must be a growing up into Christ in all things, until we
arrive unto a perfect stature in his Kingdom.

A good Conscience will also make us public Blessings unto others. Vir bonus
est commune bonum.
It considers we are not Born, or Newborn only for our selves. It will make
us beneficial to the Church, and to the World.

1. To the Church. If there were more of Conscience it would hinder
Animosities, Contentions, Divisions, Declinings, the decay of Love, and of the
Power of Godliness. Conscience is for Peace and Unity, and for walking as
Saints and Brethren. Men's Passions and Interests put them upon those courses
that tend to Dividing and Destroying the Church of Christ.

2. To the World. A good Conscience will make us to put on Bowels, and to
compassionate Mankind; 'twill hinder us from Offending them, and hardening them
against Religion; 'twill make us pray for, and endeavor the gaining and saving
of them. It will cause our Light so to shine before Men, that they seeing our
good Works, may Glorify our Father which is in Heaven; and at length they may
be brought to desire to become themselves of the Number of his Children. I have
done with the Reasons of the Doctrine. I come now to the Application.

USE 1. Shall be of Reproof. If it should be the care of all to have a good
Conscience, alas, whose heart may not smite him? who has not Reason to
acknowledge that a sharp Reproof is but justly due? Conscience in these last
and worst days seems to have left the Earth; and truly, till there are better
Consciences, there may not be better days; or if there should be better times,
they would but prove a Judgment; For if Men's Hearts are stupid under Adversity,
Prosperity is not likely to awaken them. The Lord looks down from Heaven upon
the Children of Men, to see if there be any that do understand and seek him,
Psalm. 14. 2. But what kind of Hearts and Consciencs have the most of Men! God
is surely Angry, and his Messengers are to be Reprovers, and they must Reprove
sharply, that they may touch the Conscience to the quick. And who knows but
that the word in their mouths may be quick and powerful, sharper than any
two-edged Sword, piercing, even to dividing asunder of the Soul and Spirit, of
the Joints and Marrow, and may be a discerner of the thoughts and intents of
the heart, Heb. 4. 12.

My Reproof I shall Direct unto several sorts of Persons.

1. They are to be Reproved, whose Consciences are Ignorant. They are Ignorant
of God, and Ignorant of themselves, and which is worse, they care to know
neither. Though God be the most Excellent Object that can be known, though
without Knowing him there can be no enjoying him, though the knowledge of God
be Transforming, and change us into his Image and Likeness; yet how many are
willingly Ignorant! they care not to know him, nor his will, nor what he is
able to do, either for them or against them. There is a black veil upon their
hearts, so that they see not their Happiness, nor their Misery. This makes them
unconcernedly, and without fear to turn their backs upon Christ and Heaven, and
to make great speed after Satan in those ways that lead unto utter perdition.

They are miserably unacquainted with themselves, they see not in what state
they are, they know not whither they are going. They despise their own ways,
that is, they take no more Notice of their own doings, than we do of those whom
we most of all contemn; And as for their hearts they are Terra incognita, like
Land never yet Discovered. They may truly say that their Hearts were born with
them, that the Hearts have been bred up with them, and that they have carried
their Hearts up and down with them at their days, and yet they and their Hearts
are utterly unacquainted. Oh that these dark Consciences would but consider
these three things.

1. How much evil there is in Ignorance. Let Papists say, That it is the Mother
of Devotion, the Scripture speaks otherwise, That it is the Parent of
Wickedness. The Prophet having said, there was no knowledge of God in the Land,
presently adds, by swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and
committing Adultery, they break out, and Blood touches Blood, Hos. 4. 1, 2.
intimating, that Ignorance of God was the cause of all the other abominations.
So Jer. 9. 2, 3. They be all Adulterers, an Assembly of Treacherous Men; they
bend their Tongue like their Bow for lies, but they are not valiant for the
Truth, and they proceed from evil to evil. Now, from whence is all this? They
know not me, says the Lord. Certainly the Sons of Men are alienated from the
Life of God, and encouraged in wickedness through the Ignorance that is in
them. When Conscience is Blind, what is there to lay restraint upon Corrupted
Nature? And if there be no restraint, the desperate Corruption of it will
quickly appear, and wickedness will be done with greediness, Ephesians. 4. 18, 19.

2. How inexcusable is this Ignorance, considering the Light that shines, and
the means of Knowledge. The Advantage of the Jews was great in that the Oracles
of God were committed to them, Romans 3. 1, 2. herein they were privileged above
the other Nations, that the Lord had given his Word unto them. But we have an
Advantage above the Jews, because the Revelation of the Lords Will, and of his
Glory is much clearer under the New Testament than it was under the Old. How
fully has God spoken to us in these last days by his Son! Life and Immortality
are brought to light by the Gospel, Death and Destruction are discovered.
Christ Crucified is Preached, who is the Lord of Life and Glory, and a Savior
from Destruction. Oh, how are they without Apology, who shut their Eyes against
so glorious a Light, and will not know those things which are of so high
concernment to themselves! Oh, you dark and heedless Souls, you may be wept
over, as Christ did over Jerusalem, because you will not know, in this your
day, the things that belong to your Peace, though quickly, in a way of
Judgment, they may be hid from your eyes, Luke 19. 41, 42.

3. This Ignorance, as light as you make of it, is destructive. None ever did
hit upon the way to Life before they were aware: The blind will never enter in
at the straight Gate, but must needs go on in that broad Road that leads to
Death and Hell. Solomon speaks expressly, Prove. 29. 18. Where there is no Vision
the People perish. You read also, Hos. 4. 6. My People are destroyed for lack
of Knowledge. When the Lord does save any, he gives them an Heart to know
himself and his Son Christ Jesus; but if the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them
that are lost, 2 Cor. 4. 3.

I know many Ignorant sinners look upon their Ignorance as their excuse for
their wickedness; but how can Ignorance excuse them, since they are glad of
their Ignorance, are not desirous to know; nay, hate the Light, which might
discover their evil deeds? VV^ are told, that this is the Condemnation, that
is, t^^ cause of sore Condemnation, that Light is come in the World, and Men
love Darkness rather than Light because their Deeds are evil, John 3. 19. It Is
a common thing for Ignorant ones to have a Blind and presumptuous trust and
confidence in God, and nothing more usual in their mouths than this: He that
ma^^^ us, will save us. But let such hearken to the Prophet (...) tremble, Isa.
27. 11. It is a People of no understanding, therefore he that made them will
not have Me^^y on them, and he that formed them will show them (...) Favor.

2. They are to be Reproved, whose Consciences are large, and can swallow
almost any thing. Such (...) suck in with greediness the loosest Principles;
and how are they pleased with an Argument craftily managed by a Profane Wit,
against that preciseness which the Gospel does require! How do they grudge
their time and pains to God, and to their Souls! But to the World, and to their
Lusts they are exceeding Liberal* These large Consciences do stretch Christian
Liberty even to a most sinful Licentiousness. Quod libet id ^^cet. They will
plead for any thing to be Lawful, which they like, though never so much to be
condemned Some will plead for sports upon the Lords day, other for vain and
foolish talking and jesting, others for Oficious lying, others for perjury to
save a man's s^^ from damage. This largeness of Conscience, how largely has it
spread it self! But the larger Conscience is, the narrower will be our
Obedience; the less (...) be done for God, and more against him; the less (...)
be done in Order to Salvation, and more toward me^ eternal destruction. I
would here propose these three things unto them whose Consciences are of so
great a latitude.

1. This largeness of Conscience argues great contempt of God and of his Will;
there is not a standing in aw of him and of his word. His word is very strict,
his commands holy, and requires that we should walk (...) exactly and
circumspectly, this is to be wise; to do otherwise is to discover the most
dangerous folly. Ephesians. 5. 15. What manner of persons, says the Apostle, ought
ye to be, in all holy Conversation and Godliness! 2 Pet. 3. 11. But
notwithstanding all this, large consciences live at random, as if preciseness
were more ado than needs; and as if the Lord did but jest in his Holy Precepts,
and those terrible threats which back them; but they to their cost shall find
and feel he is in good earnest.

2. This largeness of Conscience is a shrewd sign that sinners are in the broad
way. They that can swallow camels, it is easier for a Camel to go through the
eye of a needle, than for them to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. The Scribes
and Pharisees of old, did omit the weightier matters of the Law, Judgment,
Mercy and Faith; But Christ does denounce a woe unto them, Mat. 23. 23.
Largeness of Conscience discovers a great carelessness of the soul, and too
great an indifferency what becomes of it for ever: And what souls are likely to
miscarry if such be not? We must work out our Salvation with fear and trembling
if we will be saved.

3. The larger Conscience is, and the more is swalowed at present; the greater
hereafter will the account be. We are all Stewards, which must shortly give an
account of our stewardship: and though a^ present some, like the steward in the
Gospel, many take their Bills, and write Fourscore, or Fifty for an Hundred;
Yet our Lord who will call us to an Account, will be exact in reckoning, and
cannot be deceived by us. His judgment is according to Truth, Romans 2. 2. And
oh how many things will he condemn at the last day, which sinners defend at
present! 'Twill be indeed a day of Light and Manifestation, both of things and
persons. Many persons that went for Saints, will then be unmasked and found
Hypocrites, and have their sad portion with the Hypocrites; And many things
that where counted no sins, will be found great sins, and the lighter they were
made of, the more heavy and damnable they will prove unto the sinner. A large
Conscience therefore take heed of. Attend unto the Law and to the Testimony,
which does discover evil; and be afraid of every evil way.

3. They are to be reproved whose Consciences are at peace, but that peace has
no solid and good foundation. The most of sinners in the world, have this false
peace in their own Spirits; sometimes they are a little awakened, but are
quickly hushed asleep again, by that evil One who does destroy souls by
thousands, and by millions, by carnal security. Transgressors when first they
venture upon sin, their Consciences recoyl upon them; but by degrees they grow
senseless: Custom in sin, and Quiet in sin, do go commonly together. Primum
quando homo peccat videtur ei importabile, processu temporis grave videtur:
paulo post and leve judicat, and cum crebris ictibus verberetur, vulnera non
sentit, verbera non attendit. In brevi vero temporis spacio, non solum non
sentit, sed and placet, and dulce fit quod amarum erat, and asperum vertitur in
suave. Ad extremum non potest avelli, quia consuetudo vertitur in naturam; and
quod prius ad faciendum erat impossible jam impossible est ad continendum.
Bernard, De Consc. c. 3. page 1109.
One of the Fathers does excellently describe, how the ungodly arrive unto this
false peace. At first, says he, sin does seem intolerable, afterward, only
heavy, after that being frequently given way to, and Conscience stunned by many
wounds; makes no great matter of them: in process of time, sin is not
burdensome at all but pleasant; at last it is turned into a second nature; and
the sinner can no more be drawn from it, than the Ethiopian can change his
skin, or the Leopard his spots, Jer. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin,
or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good that are accustomed to do
evil.

A great many not only Profane, but Professors, are concerned in this reproof;
and have no better than a false peace of Conscience. Here therefore I am to
show what that peace of Conscience is, which is false; and also how
unreasonable it is, to give entertainment to it. A false peace of Conscience I
shall describe to you in these particulars:

1. That peace of Conscience is false where Sin and Misery were never seen.
They who never perceived any harm in sin, and wonder why the Lord in his word
does speak so much against it, and why his Ministers cannot let men quietly
alone in the commission of it; who never looked so far as to behold that eternal
death and destruction that is threatened to be brought upon the workers of
iniquity; these are at peace because they do not apprehend what reason they
have to be troubled: there is sufficient cause of grief, and fear, and horror,
only they want an eye to see it, so as to be indeed affected. There are some
that are such fools, as to make a mock of sin; and count it a pastime to do
wickedly. These do no more understand what sin is, nor the Hell which the Holy
God has entailed upon it, than the madman understands what he does when he
casts Firebrarnds, and Arrows, and Death, and says am I not in sport, Prove.
26. 18. Others though far from being indeed justified, think they are
righteous; though sick after a deadly manner, yet imagine they are whole, and
undervalue the great Physician. Both these sort of Persons have peace, but it is
without ground, for the former do grossly mistake sin, and the later do as
grossly mistake themselves.

2. That peace of Conscience is false, where the strong man armed keeps
possession: where Satan works and rules without resistance. Our Lord says When
the strong man armed keeps his Palace, his goods are in peace, Luke 11. 21.
By the strong man we are to understand the Devil; by his Palace we are to
understand the sinners heart; because as a King reigns and commands all,
(especially in his Palace) so the Devil bears sway in the hearts of the
ungodly. And a false peace and quiet, is the great means whereby the Devils
Rule and Government is upheld. If you are careless and unconcerned whom you are
led by, it is certain that the Devil leads you; for none are led by the Spirit
of God, without great sollicitousness, and fear of being misguided; and strong
cries that they may be guided by his counsel unto his Kingdom and Glory. Satan
is called the Prince of the Power of the Air, the Spirit which works in the
Children of Disobedience. If you make nothing of disobeying the Word of God, if
you walk according to the course of this world, and fulfill the desires of the
flesh, and the carnal mind, Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. it is a sign, that Satan does command
you, and your peace is far from being true.

3. That peace of Conscience is false, where there is a walking after the
imagination of the evil heart. Those words do sound like Thunder, Dreadfully
rattling in the air; Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20. And it come to pass when he hears the
words of this curse, that he bless himself in his heart saying, I shall have
peace though I walk in the imagination of mine heart. The Lord will not spare
him, but then the anger of the Lord, and his jealousy, shall smoke against
that man; and all the Curses that are written in this Book shall lie upon him,
and the Lord shall blot out his name from under Heaven. The heart of man is
foolish, deceitful, wicked, desperately wicked; it is a very sore judgment to be
given up to our own hearts lusts, and to be suffered to walk after our own
counsels. Sinners need not other enemies, they are forward enough to go astray
of their own accord, and to ruin themselves; let them follow their own hearts,
and they will infallibly come to Hell in the conclusion. If any therefore do
walk in the way of their hearts, and please and gratify their own sinful
affections, and say they shall have peace; they speak without book, without
Gods book I am sure.

4. That peace of Conscience is false, where the soul is intoxicated with
sensual Delights and Pleasures. Thus the rich man was at peace, whose ground
brought forth plentifully, who resolved to pull down his barns and to build
greater, that he might bestow all his Fruits and his Goods: and since there
were Goods sufficient for many years; he was clearly for taking his Ease, for
Eating and Drinking and making merry, Luke 12. 16. -- 19. One great cause of
Sodoms security, was, their giving themselves over unto sensuallity: Whoredom
and Gluttony and Drunkenness, do take away the heart; such consider no more
than if they were brutes, nay, they come short of brutes, even the most stupid
of them. Isa. 1. 3. The Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib; but
Israel does not know, my People does not consider. Sensual Pleasures, as also
Worldly cares, do overcharge the heart, so that there is no trouble or
concernedness about eternity; and while they dream not of any such thing, the
day of the Lord does come on them like a snare. Luke 21. 34, 35. And take heed
to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and
drunkenness and cares of this Life, and so that day come upon you unawares; for
as a snare shall it come upon all them that dwell on the face of the whole
Earth.

5. That peace of Conscience is false which is built upon present dispensations
of Providence. Sinners are apt to argue wrong, both from prosperity and from
adversity, that their state is good, and so put a cheat upon their own Souls.
Some are persuaded that because the Lord loads them with external blessings,
this is a certain sign of his love. But the Holy Ghost informs us, that the
ungodly prosper in the World, and increase in Riches, that they are not in
trouble like other men, that they have more than Heart could wish, Psalm. 73.
12. Daniel tells us, that even Kingdoms are given to the basest of men, Dan. 4.
17. Luther said concerning the Turcicum imperium quantum est, nihil est nisi
panis mica quam dives pater familias projicit canibus. Luther. Tom. 2. in Genesis
in cap. 21.
Turkish Empire that it was but a morsel cast unto a Dog. And if whole Kingdoms
are given to the ungodly, who can argue himself a Saint, and loved of God, from
his worldly enjoyments? it is not the having of the World, but sitting loose
from it, looking upon our selves as Strangers and Pilgrims in it, and improving
it for God, that will argue we are indeed his Children.

On the other side some are persuaded, because afflicted at present, that it
will be well with them in the Life to come. But wicked men may also be
afflicted. God does distribute sorrows to them in his Anger, so that they are
as stubble before the Wind, and as chafe which the storm carries away, Job
21. 17, 18. It Is not then our being corrected that will prove us Children but
our receiving of Correction and being humbled and reformed by it; though never
so often in the furnace, if we are not at all Refined we are but Reprobate
Silver.

6. That Peace of Conscience is false which is built upon External profession
and Privileges. Thus of old many because they were called Jews, did rest in
the Law and made their boast of God, though at the same time they did break the
Law, and dishonored God by their presumptuous Transgressions, Romans 2. 17. 23.
Many now a days are called Christians, and beguile themselves with an empty
name. It will not advantage any to name the name of Christ, if they will not
depart from iniquity; to call him Lord, Lord, if they are resolved still to
rebel against him. They had great Peace and confidence, who said Lord, Lord,
we have Eat and Drunk in thy presence, and thou have taught in our Streets. And
yet both their peace and confidence were without ground, the door is shut
against them, they are excluded from the Kingdom; for, they were
notwithstanding all their Profession, workers of iniquity, Luke 13. 26, 27. By
such a profession iniquity has the greater aggravation, (w) he is most
inexcusably ungodly, who has most of the form, but nothing of the Power of
Godliness.

7. That peace of Conscience is false, that is built upon External
Righteousness, and escaping the more gross pollutions of the World. The
Apostle Paul before his Conversion, was, touching the Righteousness of the Law
blameless, Phil. 3. 6. that is, his Conversation was so agreeable to the letter
of the Law, and so free from any foul and scandalous sin, that men could not
blame him. But though he was thus blameless, yet he was graceless; and though
he thought himself to be alive, and his state to be good and safe, yet he was
deceived, as he found afterward. That Pharisee had a false peace, who said,
God I thank thee, I am not as other Nos vero quid respondere pro nobis
possumus? tenemus Symbolum and evertimus confitemur munus salutis pariter and
negamus. Ac per hoc ubi est Christianit as nostra, qui ad hoc tantummodo,
Sacramentum salutis accipimus, ut majore postea praevaricationis scelere
pecc^mus? Salvian. De Gub. Dei. l. 5. page mihi, 195,
men are, Extortioners, unjust, Adulterers, or even as this Publican. I fast
twice in the week, and give Tithes of all that I possess, Luke 18. 11. but all
this was insufficient to prove him justified.

There were two great faults in the Righteousness of the Pharisees, and of all
those who resemble them. One is that their Righteousness was only external, so
their lives were but blameless, they minded not what lusts reigned in their
Hearts. The other is, that their Righteousness was trusted, in as that which
was sufficient to commend them unto God, whereupon they slighted the sufferings
and satisfaction of Christ. It Is unreasonable for any to be at peace who go no
further than a Pharisee, (if they go quite so far;) for our Lord speaks
expressly, Mat. 5. 20. Except your Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

8. That peace of Conscience is false, that is founded upon some lazy wishes
after Grace and Holiness. There may be in unregenerate Hearts, especially at
some times, some pangs of desire and inclinations to that which is good, but
their desires to continue bad, are stronger and do bear down all their
inclinations to good which are much more feeble. Agrippa cried out to Paul
before a great multitude, and before Festus who a little before had charged
both Paul, and consequently Christianity it self with madness. Almost thou
perswadest me to be a Christian, Act. 26. 28. Here was an inclinableness to
Religion, but 'twas born down by a stronger propension to Worldly greatness and
Pleasures. A Woman may have some kind of good will, and Affection for a Person,
and yet when it comes to the upshot, refuse to have him for an Husband; so
sinners may have some fluttering good thoughts and wishes for Christ and Grace,
and yet utterly refuse to give themselves wholly to the Lord Jesus, or to be
indeed and throughout sanctified.

Oh how many that say they desire after Grace, and to be rid of sin, are
deceived in and by themselves! they know not what they say, nor whereof they
affirm. Sin in the general they desire to be freed from, but come to particular
sins which are for their profit, for their credit among carnal men, for their
ease and pleasure, these they will not let go. Not considering who Christ is, they
are inclined to him; but when they are told, that as he is a Redeemer, so a
Ruler, and that he must bring their very Thoughts and Affections into captivity
and obedience, that they must submit to the holiest Commands, and not be
ashamed or afraid to confess Him, though it cost them never so dear. Here they
make a demurr, and then have no real mind to be his Disciples. Oh deceive not
your selves with lazy desires after Holiness, where there is a more vehement
and fixed desire to wallow still in your filthyness and pollutions.

9. That peace of Conscience is false which is founded upon some confused and
general apprehensions of the mercy of God in Christ; but this use only is made
of this mercy, encouragement is taken from it to continue in sin. It Is the
commonest thing in the World for sinners to gagg their Consciences with the
mercy of God and the Death of Christ. They have sinned, but God is Merciful,
and Christ has dyed for sinners, even for the chief of them. And upon this they
quiet themselves; they use these Truths as charms to cast Conscience into a
sleep, that it may not be disturbed it self, nor disturb them. But such would
do well to consider, that though the Scripture speak glorious things of Divine
Grace and Mercy; yet there is not in the whole Book of God one promise of Mercy
made to sinners who are Resolved to go on still in their wickedness. The Lord
will not save the ungodly in their sins, but from their sins; and if they will
not be saved from Sin, they shall not be delivered from Wrath.

Where God does proclaim his Name: The Lord Merciful and Gracious,
long-suffering, abundant in loving kindness, goodness and truth, forgiving
Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin, keeping Mercy for thousands, to rap off the
fingers of presumptuous Souls from catching hold of what is not their Portion;
it is added, and that will by no means clear the guilty, Exodus 34. 6, 7. Guilty
does not Relate unto past Guilt, for that is supposed in that expression,
Forgiving Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin. But by Guilty we are to understand
them who are Resolved to Contract fresh guilt by an Obstinate continuance in
evil doing; while they are of this mind, they have nothing to do with Mercy and
Christ, for they prefer their Lusts before both, and so are unlikely to be the
better for either hereafter; since because of both they presume to grow worse
and worse at present.

10. That Peace of Conscience is false, where the Sinners heart is afraid of a
searching Ministry. It Is said concerning the Prophet Amos, that the Land was
not able to bear his words, Amos 7. 10. Which Argued, though Israel was secure,
yet their security was Carnal and groundless. Sincerity loves plain dealing,
but Falsehood is afraid of it. If you cannot endure these Preachers that Rebuke
sharply, that apply home, that threaten terribly, that warn faithfully, that
examine and try impartially; it is a sign your Peace is Founded upon the Sand,
and quickly your Building will be overthrown. Man cannot serve thee, let him go,
And serve the swine, there there is his delight,
He does not like this Virtue, no;
Give him his dirt to wallow in all night:
These Preachers make
His head to shoot and ache.
Herbert, p. 93.

If those Preachers are most acceptable, that never come within a Mile of your
Consciences but leave you asleep as they found you, how certain is it that the
Blind lead the Blind, and though they go jolly together, yet they are going
toward perdition. It Is a startling place, Jer. 5. 30, 31. A wonderful and an
horrible thing is committed in the Land: why, what is the Matter? The Prophets
Prophecy falsely, and my People love to have it so. I must add also, that
though you do attend upon the most awakening Ministry, if you please your
selves with giving a bare attendance, and with countenancing the strictest
ways; but in the mean while you apply Truths to others, this concerns such and
such, but take no notice how you are concerned your selves; let me tell you
plainly, that your Peace is not right, but a most dangerous stupidity.

Thus have I described and Discovered what is a false Peace of Conscience. In
the next place I am to show you how unreasonable it is to give Entertainment
unto such a kind of Peace.

1. Conscience is at Peace, but God speaks trouble. When sinners bless
themselves God curses them; when they promise much good to themselves, God
threatens ten thousand times more evil. The Psalmist tells us, that the Reason
why many ungodly ones are secure, is, because they think God to be altogether
such an one as themselves, Psalm. 50. 21. They see no evil in sin, and they
think the Lord sees none neither; they love sin, and they think God does not so
much hate it, or at least, that he will connive at their wickedness. Can there
be a more gross mistake? And how unreasonable is that Peace which is grounded
upon such a mistake! No, secure Soul, know, God hates sin infinitely more than
thou can love it; and though thou flatter thy self in thy own eyes for the
present, He will Reprove thee, and set thy sins in Order before thee. Oh now
consider this, ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be
none to deliver. All thy Blessing of thy self cannot make thee Blessed; all thy
promises to thy self are vain, for thou can not perform one of them. But the
Lord both can and will fulfill his threatenings, and cause the curse denounced
to overtake thee.

2. As long as a false Peace does last, Satan is unlikely to be cast out.
Awakened and troubled Souls are afraid of being under his Power, and in time
look after Deliverance; but they that are secure, will swallow his Baits, and
follow this Enemy as long as he Sails with the stream of Corrupted Nature, and
tempts them to that which their own wicked hearts delight in. And is it not sad
to be in possession, and at the Command of so Cruel an Enemy? A Believers Heart
is the Temple of the Holy Spirit, but the Heart of a wicked Man is the hole of
the Old Serpent. Oh the danger that such are in to be stung to death, and
destroyed every moment. The Jews did boulster up themselves with this, That
they were Abraham's Seed, and they were foolishly confident that God was their
Father: But Christ speaks plainly, Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the
Lusts of your Father ye will do, John 8. 44. The Devil is a Father to all
presumptuous souls, they do his Will, and will be his Prey.

3. This false Peace is very provoking, and makes the breach between God and
the Sinner still wider. Barely to sin does not so much incense, as to make
Light of it, and not to be troubled after sin has been committed. The Apostle
tells us, that men's hardness and impenitency, causes them to treasure up unto
themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and the Revelation of the Righteous
Judgment of God, Romans 2. 5. If a Servant commit a fault, and afterward laugh
in his Masters Face, this is more insufferable than the fault it self. Thou
that can forget God days without Number, and yet art at Peace; thou that
can neglect the Lord Jesus and his Benefits, and yet art at peace; that can
Live without the Word and Prayer in secret, and when thou prayest with others,
thy Heart is absent, and yet art at peace: Thou that can be Intemperate,
Sensual, Unclean, Covetous, Proud, Slothful, and yet art at peace: Alas, how
much is God thine Enemy; how bitterly do thou provoke him unto Anger! The
lighter sin is made of, the heavier 'twill be sound, and the weightier Gods
indignation.

4. This false Peace will be but short, Job 20. 4, 5. Know not thou this of
Old, since Man was placed upon the Earth, that the Triumphing of the wicked is
but short, and the Joy of the Hypocrite but for a moment. This false peace can
last no longer than Life, and Life is hasting to a Conclusion, as the swift
Ships unto the Haven, and as the Eagle does unto the Prey. How small is that
satisfaction which the hungry man takes in a Dream of a Feast, He Dreameth,
says the Prophet, and behold, he eats, but he awaketh, and his Soul is
empty, Isa. 29. 8. Secure Souls do Dream that God is a Friend, but when they
awake they will find him an Enemy; they Dream that they are whole, but when
they awake they will find that they are sick; and if Hell wakes them they will
find their case altogether Desperate, and their Disease past Cure: They Dream
that they are Rich and increased with good things, but when they awake they
will perceive themselves empty and miserable. False peace may fitly be compared
to a Night-vision, for as there is no real ground for it, so it is but of very
short continuance.

5. This false peace is threatened with sudden destruction. Solomon tells us,
Prove. 29. 1. He that being often reproved hardneth his Neck shall suddenly be
Destroyed, and that without Remedy. And the Apostle speaks to the same purpose,
1 These. 5. 3. When they shall say, Peace and Safety, then sudden Destruction
comes upon them as travel upon a Woman with Child, and they shall not escape.
Have you never taken notice of a Man Laboring under the Falling Sickness? He
seems as well as any person in the World, eats as heartily, walks as strongly
as another; but upon a sudden down he falls, foams at Mouth, beats his Breast,
and becomes a spectacle of great horror. Sinners that have a false Peace, look
cheerfully, go up and down from day to day quietly, as if no danger were near
them, but at length Death seizes upon them, and it seizes on them suddenly,
for it finds them utterly unprepared, and the first death is immediately
followed by the second; and if we could see them in Hell, Ah, how should we
behold the Case altered! How are they brought into Desolation as in a moment,
and utterly consumed with terror! Psalm. 73. 19. All their vain hope is turned
into a most tormenting despair, all their false joy and peace is changed into
inconceivable agonies and vexation of Spirit.

6. This false peace of Conscience will very much heighten the Torment that
shall follow. As Heaven will be the Sweeter to Believers, because of their
foregoing Sorrows, Sufferings, and Temptations; so Hell will be the more Bitter
to the Ungodly, because of their Confidence that they should escape it. They
that have a false peace, do come many of them with an expectation to have the
door of Heaven open to receive them: Lord Lord open unto us, as if they should
say, Lord Lord, We are at the door, and therefore let us have admission into
thy Kingdom. But when they find the door shut, and shut for ever against them;
and instead of a place in Heaven, they are thrown down into one of the hottest
places in Hell: Oh what weeping and wailing, will be the consequent! Death was
the worse to the Amalekite that brought tidings of Saul's death to David,
because he expected a reward for his news. 'Twas more grievous to Agag to be
hewed in pieces by Samuel before the Lord, when he came forth delicately, and
said, surely the Bitterness of Death is past. So Hell will be the more
intolerable unto them, who fully reckoned upon it that they were secured from
those burnings.

When a sinner that is in a false peace all his days, is chased out of the
world; and beyond his expectation, nay, contrary to his expectation is turned
into a flaming Hell: We may conceive him thus speaking. Little, ah little
indeed, did I think that this was the place I was going to. I did not imagine
the Judge had been so Righteous, the Trial at his Tribunal so Strict; and that
so few would have been saved. I did not imagine 'twas so ordinary for Souls to
be deceived, and that there was so much counterfeit grace in the world. I
thought my self safe, when I was farthest from it; and never perceived my
mistake till now it is too late to correct it. I dreamt of Heaven, but am in the
lowest Hell; I hoped to be saved, but must be a damned wretch to all Eternity.
Oh that I had waked before! How happy had I been, if a right trouble of
Conscience had been in the room of a false peace! Woe is me that I flattered,
and by flattering did undo my self! And now what course shall I take? Ah this
totally confounds me, that no course can be taken for my relief. Heaven now I
see, but so far off that I can never get thither; and out of Hell there is no
Redemption. So much be spoken by way of reproof to them whose Consciences are
in peace, but that peace has no good ground upon which it is builded.

4. They are to be reproved who offer violence to their Consciences, and very
ordinarily do sin against them. Conscience speaks once, twice, thrice, speaks
in the name of the Lord, tells them of Life and Death; of the Life that will be
lost, and the Death which will be incurred by sin; and yet these Transgressors
go resolutely on in an evil course, and hate to be reformed. They do in effect
speak to their Consciences as the children of Judah did to the Prophet, Jer.
44. 16. As for the word which thou have spoken to us in the name of the Lord,
we will not hearken unto thee. Let Such consider and that seriously,

1. Sinning against Conscience is the way to Cauterize and Sear it. It Is bad to
have a dull Conscience, which does its office so remissly, that no good effect
at all follows; this only Almost persuades a man to that which is good, only
Almost disswades a man from that which is evil. It Is worse to have a stupid
Conscience, which takes no notice of thousands of sins, unless some very crying
ones be committed, and that commission followed with some grievous Plagues. But
it is worst of all, to have a seared Conscience; which is not at all moved
though there be a giving full way to the most foul abomination. Cauteriata
conscientia est quae nulla ratione commovetur, ne atrocissimis quidem
flagitiis; and in iis praecipue reperitur qui p^stquam fuerint illuminati,
sceleratae vitae sese dediderunt. Ames. De Conscient. lib. 1. c. 15.
Such a kind of Conscience, as one observes, is to be sound especially in those
who have been enlightened, but contrary to that Light do sell themselves to do
wickedly. Where Conscience is seared, Light is extinguished: there is no Grief
or Shame because of sin, but an impudence and rejoicing in evil; the mind is
reprobate, and the affections vile, and iniquity is committed with Greediness.
Even some Philosophers have called this searedness (...), because the heart is
senseless like a stone, and (...) because such sinners become like brute Beasts
made to be taken and destroyed, 2 Pet. 2. 12.

A Sinner whose Conscience is seared as with an hot iron, how does he stand
ready for the Devils service! and commonly he is employed in the vilest pieces
of Satan's Drudgery. When Richard the third did Murder his two Nephews, that he
might come to the Throne; he employed a couple of villains to perpetrate that
murder, who were so senseless as to stick at nothing. When Beelzebub has any
eminently and egregiously odious work of darkness to be done, he does set a man
with a seared Conscience about it; such an one is likely to do the business
effectually. Such Transgressors declare their sin as Sodom, they openly bid
defiance to Heaven; and how soon may the Just and Jealous God by some
remarkable stroke destroy them. What a madness is it to sin against Conscience,
since this has so great a tendency unto the fearing of it!

2. Sinning against Conscience may bring you to despair. If Conscience be not
seared by Sin, it may be so wounded, as that a cure may be conceived
impossible. The Soul in a great agony may cry out, My breach is wide like the
Sea, and who can heal me? Great is the sin, great is the horror of Despair.
What the Poet says concerning Envy, may very truly be applied unto
Desperation: Siculi non invenere Tyranni Majus tormentum. The Sicilian Tyrants
(though infamous for their cruelty) never invented a Torment comparable. When
Despair has once seized upon the Conscience, then indeed there is Hell above
ground. A Despairing sinner is the truest and likest picture of a damned
Reprobate. The deplorableness of such a state wherein hope leaves a sinner, and
he gives over himself and all for lost, I shall set forth in these particulars,

1. A Despairing Conscience remembers God, and is troubled: it sees frowns in
his Face, and how terrifying is his Voice! for he speaks unto such sinners in
his wrath, and vexes them in his sore displeasure. Then says Luther, Verus
terror nascitur cum Dei irati vox auditur, h. e. cum sentitur conscientia. Tum
enim Deus qui antea nusquam erat est ubique, and qui prius dormire videbatur,
omnia audet and videt: and ira ejus sicut ignis ardet, furit, and occidit.
Luther. Tom. 1. in Genesis c. 12.
There is true Horror, when the voice of an angry God is heard, and perceived
by the Conscience; then the Lord who was thought to be no where, is every
where; and he that did seem to sleep before, does now hear and see all things;
and his Anger like the Fire does burn and rage and kill all before it. A
despairing sinner apprehends what a terrible enemy the Lord is, and then to
think that this Lord is his Enemy, and that justly; and withal, that he is now
irreconcilable, oh how does this confound him.

2. A Despairing Conscience looks upon the creatures and finds them all
miserable comforters. Judas in temptation thought thirty pieces of silver a
great matter, but when he was seized upon with Despair, he flung away the
silver as that which was altogether unprofitable, Mat. 27. 3. 5. Love of money
had wounded him, and money it self could not heal him, nor buy a medicine for
him. Riches say to the despairing Conscience; We are not able to deliver in
this day of the Lords anger: Pleasures say, Help is not to be found in us, it is
not in our power to sweeten that cup of trembling, which is filled with the
wine of Gods indignation. Honors and worldly Greatness say, We cannot skreen
thee from Him that is higher than the highest, and who if he will not withdraw
his anger, the proudest helpers must stoop under him, Job. 9. 13.

3. A despairing Conscience remembers sin and those threatenings that are
denounced against it, and is overwhelmed. Oh the mountains of guilt which it
does behold! and these are high; trespasses are grown up unto the Heavens, and
then it applies all the Curses, all the evils that it reads in the Book of God
unto it self: there is a roll opened before it, written within and without,
with Lamentations and Mourning and Woe: to allude to that place, Ezekiel. 2. ult.
Wherever the despairing sinner goes he is dogged, and followed with Legions of
sins, and Conscience is still tormenting it self with such sad thoughts. How
shall all these be answered for? How shall that vengeance be undergone which so
many iniquities and so heinous, do deserve?

4. A Despairing Conscience looks upon Christ and the Gospel, and is more than
ordinarily tormented to think there is help for others, but for it self none to
be found. It calls to mind that once the door was open, and the sinner was
invited to come in but refused, but now concludes the door is shut eternally;
once the Spirit strived, but being resisted, is departed for good and all, so
as never to return again. Once says the despairing soul, I had a day of Grace,
but I did not know it, I did not improve it; but now am overtaken by an
Everlasting Night, and shall never see day more. The Prince of Peace, the
Gospel of Peace are hid from me, the hopes of Peace are quite gone. I have
outdone the very Devils themselves, and may expect if it be possible, to be
more miserable; they never refused one offer of Mercy, but I thousands; they
never slighted a pardon, but I have slighted it, and was unwilling to be
reconciled to God, they never rejected a Redeemer, but I have rejected him, and
preferred vanity, nay, sin which is of such a damnable Nature, before the only
Savior.

5. A despairing Conscience remembers Death and Judgment, and Eternity, and
then there is even a Roaring out for Anguish, something like unto the yellings
of those that actually are in the burning lake. Ah how shall I bear the wrath
of the Almighty when all of it shall be stirred up? What ease can I expect in
Everlasting Flames? How shall I bear the society of the Devil and his Angels?
How shall I endure to be tormented for ever, in the presence of the Holy
Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb? Rev. 14. 10. It Is not more certain I
must dye, than it is certain I must be judged; it is not more certain I must be
judged, than it is certain I must be damned; it is not more certain I must be
damned, than it is certain that my damnation will be Everlasting. This is the
Language of a despairing sinner: and since to despair is to be upon such a
wrack, how are they to be reproved that sin against Conscience which has a
tendency to despair?

6. They are to be reproved, who go about to wound and to ensnare the
Consciences of Others. How careful was the Apostle not to cast a snare upon the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 7. 35. nor to enjoin that as necessary where the Lord had
not imposed a necessity, and a little after he sticks not to say, that they who
sin against the Brethren and wound their weak Conscience, do sin against
Christ, 1 Cor. 8. 12. And if I am not by an imprudent use of my Christian
liberty, to embolden another to venture upon sin against Conscience, surely
much less may I do this either by constraint or by persuasion. If it argue
want of Love, and be a great sin, to impair the Estate, to blemish the
reputation, to hurt the body of my Brother, how much worse than all this, is it
to wound his Conscience? Those who have no mercy to the Souls of Others, surely
have little to their Own, and they will make bold with their own Consciences,
who have no care, no tenderness in reference to the Consciences of their
Brethren.

Several sorts of persons are here concerned, as being injurious to others
Consciences.

1. False Prophets are injurious to the Consciences of others: These do speak
perverse things to draw away Disciples after them, the Apostle deals very
sharply with these, he calls them Dogs, and bids us beware of them. Phil. 3. 2.
Beware of Dogs, beware of evil workers. No wonder that Paul styles them Dogs,
since Christ before had called them Wolves, nay ravening Wolves. False
Prophets, especially strike at Conscience, and endeavor to mis-inform That;
and if once they can prevail so as to make the Conscience put darkness for
light, and light for darkness, a lie for Truth, and Truth for a Lie; how may
souls be carried away! truly so far at length as to fall into damnable
Heresies, and also into gross impieties and wickedness. Those deceived and
deceiving ones spoken of, 2 Pet. 2. They walked in the lusts of Uncleanness,
they counted it pleasure to Riot, their Eyes were full of Adultery and could
not cease from sin, their Heart was exercised with Covetous practices, and
while they talked of Liberty they were themselves the Servants of Corruption.

2. Dawbers with untempered Mortar are concerned, Conscience is little
beholding to them, for they heal the wound of it slightly crying Peace, Peace,
where there is no Peace, Jer. 6. 14. How miserable is the condition of
unfaithful Ministers, and likewise of those Souls that belong to their charge.
The Watchman that gives not warning, the Blood of Souls indeed will lie upon
his Head, but this implies that such Souls do also peris^ Ezekiel. 33. 7, 8. O Son
of Man I have set thee a Watchman unto the House of Israel, therefore thou
shall Hear the Word at my Mouth, and shall warn them from me. When I say to the
wicked man thou shall surely dye, if thou do not speak to warn the wicked
from his way; that wicked man shall dye in his iniquity, but his Blood will I
require at thine hand. If an unskilful Physician has need of a new Churchyard,
what shall be said of an unskilful or unfaithful Preacher? I will not affirm he
has need of a new Hell, but I am sure he will help very much to fill the Old
one. Those that make the way to Heaven broad and easy, and regeneration
needless, and the Death of Christ an encouragement to continue in sin, and the
Mercy of God so large that 'twill put up any thing, and will certainly be
extended unto any that cry Lord have mercy upon us: These are Dawbers, enemies
to Conscience, they build a Wall, that shall be rent with a stormy wind in
fury, and brought down to the ground, and they shall be consumed in the midst
of it, Ezekiel. 13. 13. 14.

3. All enticers unto Wickedness are cruel Enemies to the Consciences of
others. If there be a Devil incarnate, he is such an one whose business is to
tempt those to sin whom he has to deal with. When any persuade you to
intemperance, to uncleanness, to injustice, or any other iniquity, they do in
effect persuade you to make deep wounds and gashes in your own Spirits, to
wrong your own Souls, and to go along with them toward the lake that burns,
and burns for ever with Fire and Brimstone. Oh the cruelty of those that stir
up others to sin! Oh the folly of them that are prevailed with by these
wretched and evil instruments of the Prince of Darkness! I have done with that
first Use by way of reproof.

USE. II. Shall be of Direction. And here I am to show, first how secure
Consciences may be awakened and wounded, and secondly how wounded Consciences
may be cured and comforted.

1. How secure Consciences may be awakened. Though there is many a bad Spirit
which does prevail at this day, yet none does more prevail than the Spirit of
Slumber: closed Eyes, drowsy Souls, senseless Hearts are every where to be met
with. Though so much has been spoken, though so much has been done, though so
much has been felt and suffered in order unto our awakening; yet whose
Conscience is indeed starled? Prophets have been full of Power by the Spirit of
the Lord, and of Judgment and of might to declare unto evil doers their
Transgression and their sin, Mic. 3. 8. Calamity and Judgments have been
strange, unwonted and extraordinary, and it might have been thought that such a
Plague and Flames as have raged in London, would hardly have left one secure
sinner, but all would have learned to fear that God, who is so Righteous, and
who knows how to take a course with them that provoke him unto jealousy. But
alas, like Pharaoh of old, upon the least respite the generality of sinners do
harden their Hearts, and their Consciences sleep sounder than ever. Now in
order unto your being awakened, follow these directions:

1. Think of that Great and Glorious Majesty which by sin is affronted, and
which all the sin that is in the World is committed against; He is the blessed
and only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; he is clothed with
Honor and with Majesty, and covers himself with light as with a Garment; the
Heaven is his Throne, the Earth is his Footstool; the whole world in
comparison with him is but as the Bucket, and the small dust upon the Balance,
and all the Nations of the Earth before him are as nothing, and vanity, Isa.
40. 15. 17. The greater the person is that is affronted, that affront is the
greater crime. God is the highest and greatest of all, Oh how vile and heinous
a thing is it to sin against him. Sinner! would thou have thy Conscience
awakened? believe seriously that There is a God, Oh what work would this Truth
make were it but firmly credited! That famous Bruce of Scotland who Robertus
Brusius. Vir genere and virtute nobilis, Majestate vultus vener abilis, qui
plura animarum millia Christo lucrifecit, cujus anima, si ullius mortalium
(absit verbo invidia) sedet in coelestibus.
gained many thousands of Souls to Christ; was wont to say, I think it a great
matter to believe that there is a God. And not only believe that God is, but
that he is so Glorious as his word proclaims him, this may make thee tremble.

Now no sin in the World can be committed wherein this God is not concerned.
Those sins against Man, are more against God than against man: therefore David
after he had murdered Vriah, and defiled Bathsheba, looks beyond these, as
high as God himself and cries out, against thee, thee only have I sinned, and
done this Evil in thy sight, Psalm. 51. 4. He takes notice how God was struck at
in that injury he had done to his Neighbor, and is wholly swallowed up in that
consideration, and this helped very much his awakening and contrition. To how
many thousands of Millions do all thy sins amount? and there is not one of them
but has been an act of Rebellion against the () Altar Damascenum. Lord of
Heaven, if this were pondered, it might cool thy Courage and trouble thy
Conscience.

2. Think how dreadful the Power of this God, and his wrath being joined
together must needs prove: in Scripture these two are joined and both together
are engaged against the ungodly, Ezra 8. 22. The hand of our God is upon all
them for good that seek him, but his Power and his Wrath is against all them
that forsake him. If wrath be without Power it is contemptible; if Power be
without wrath it may not be at all hurtful, but when Wrath and Power meet they
may well be trembled at. The Wrath of a King is as the Roaring of a Lion, as
the messengers of Death. What then is the Anger of God? this wrath to show the
heat and greatness of it, is likened unto Fire, and it burns worse than any
other Fire, for it burns to Hell it self, Deuteronomy. 52. 32. A Fire is kindled in
mine Anger and it shall burn to the lowest Hell. And if you would understand
the Power of this Anger, know that there is no withstanding it, and Oh how
dismal are the effects of it in both Worlds!

This Anger of God has brought upon sinners Cursing, and Vexation, and Rebuke,
and has made them quickly to perish because of the Wickedness of their doings:
it has smitten them with a Consumption and a Fever, and an Inflammation, and
Extreme Burning; with the Pestilence, and Sword, and Blasting, and Mildew, and
has made the Heaven over Sinners Heads like Brass, and the Earth under their
Feet like Iron. It has made them when they went out one way against their
Enemies, to be smitten and to flee seven ways before them, and their carcasses
to become meat to the Fowls of the Air, and the Beasts of the Earth. This Anger
of God has stricken the ungodly; with madness and blindness, and astonishment
of Heart. So that life has been a burden, no rest or ease at all could be
found, so that in the morning they have said, would God it were Evening, and in
the Evening would God it were morning, because of the fear and trembling of
their Hearts, the failing of their Eyes, and the sorrow of their Minds. All
this is spoken of at large, Deuteronomy. 28.

But these are not all, nor the most heavy effects of Divine displeasure.
Indeed we are safe from man's Anger after Death, we cannot feel or be concerned
at what Man can do when we are in the Grave. There the Wicked cease from
troubling, there the weary be at rest, there the Prisoners rest together, they
hear not the voice of the oppressor. Job 3. 17. 18. But Gods Anger will follow
after us into the other World, and then will be found most heavy. That Wrath to
come is most of all amazing, for then as it will be intolerable to be born, so
'twil be impossible to be appeased. Consider all this and be affrighted, and
say with the Psalmist. At thy Rebuke O God of Jacob, the stout Hearted are
spoiled, none of the men of Might have found their Hands. Thou even thou art to
be feared, who may stand in thy sight when once thou art Angry?

3. That Conscience may be awakened, consider seriously that you are always
under the Eye and Power of God, so that he can do with you what he pleases. You
cannot hide your selves from him, nor defend your selves against him. Though
you dig into Hell, thence can his hand take you, though you could climb up to
Heaven, and make your nest among the Stars, yet thence he can bring you down,
Amos 9. 2. Your breath is in His hand, dare you to provoke him? and he can take
it out of your Nostrils, without asking you leave, or giving you the least
warning. You have no Lease of your Lives, but are Tenants at will in these
Cottages of Clay; the Lord can turn you out, and require your Souls at your
hands at his own pleasure.

God has most Sovereign Power, he is the only absolute Monarch, because all
others are subject to himself. Whom he will he Kills, whom he will he keeps
alive, whom he will he sets up, whom he will he puts down, whom he will he
saves, and whom, and when he will he can destroy for ever. He does according to
his pleasure in the Army of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth, and
none can stay his hand, or say to him, What do thou? Dan. 4. 35. Surely it is
not safe by thy stupidness of Conscience any longer to engage this God against
thee.

4. Firmly Believe, that it is not more certain thou art a sinner, than it is
certain that the Lord of Heaven is displeased with Thee, Thee in particular.
Thou that have an hard Heart, and a senseless Conscience, I am to tell thee
heavy Tidings, Gods Soul does hate Thee, and he is Angry with thee every day.
If God should permit one of thy Old Companions in Wickedness to rise from the
Dead, to tell thee that his wrath abides upon thee, and that thou art making
haste unto the place of Torment, would not this startle thee? Or if an Angel
from Heaven should meet thee with a Flaming Sword in his Hand, and tell thee,
the way that thou take is perverse before God; and naming thy Name, John,
Thomas, Richard, should say plainly, that the Lord is thine Enemy; how would
this affect thee? Why, the Word tells thee this; and that is a more sure word
of Prophecy. How expressly is it said, Woe to the wicked, it shall be ill with
him: Upon the wicked God shall rain Snares, Fire and Brimstone, and an horrible
Tempest, this shall be the Portion of their Cup, Psalm. 11. 6.

5. Look upon God as the Lord of Hosts, that thy Conscience may shrink and be
afraid. Many Legions of Angels are at his Service, his beck commands them, they
are his Ministers to do his pleasure, Psalm. 103. 21. And these Angels do so
excel in strength, that one of them was able to destroy in one Night, an
hundred fourscore and five thousand of the Assyrian Army, Isa. 37. 36. All the
Devils in Hell God can Employ, and they are very forward to be the Instruments
of his Wrath and Revenge upon the workers of Iniquity. The Men of the Earth are
at his Command, and he can stir up their Spirits, and bring whole Armies of
them against the People of his Indignation. The Beasts of the Field, the Fowls
of the Air; nay, the most inconsiderable Creatures he can make terrible, so as
to tame the proudest of his Adversaries. Those Locusts spoken of by Joel, when
God does Marshal them into an Army, how terrible are they? Like the noise of
Chariots on the tops of Mountains shall they leap, like the noise of a Flame of
Fire that devoureth the stubble, as a strong People set in Battle array, before
their face the People shall be much pained, all Faces shall gather blackness,
Joel 2. 5, 6. The Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapor, and Stormy Winds fulfill Gods
Word. The Thunder and the Lightnings say unto him, Here we are; being ready to
consume the Rebellious against him. The Lord is very terrible in himself, oh
dreadful to have an Omnipotent Enemy! But when besides his own Power, he has so
great an Host at Command, how should sinners tremble before him!

6. Look back and see what Security has brought upon others. Stupidness of
Conscience has been the forerunner of the most astonishing Judgments that ever
were inflicted. Read the Story of the old World, and the Drowning of it: Was it
not terrible, when all the Fountains of the great Deep were broken up, and the
Windows of Heaven were opened, and the Rain was upon the Earth for forty Days
and forty Nights together, Genesis 7. 11, 12? Oh, what crying, and what climbing
was there to avoid that Deluge, but all in vain; the Waters prevailed
exceedingly, fifteen Cubits above the highest Mountains, and all flesh dyed
that moved upon the Earth: Fowl, Cattle, Beast, Creeping thing, and every Man.
But Security went before this Flood that swept all away. They Eat, they Drank,
they Planted, they Builded, they Married, and were given in Marriage, even to
the Day that Noah entered into the Ark. The like sottishness and unsensibleness
was in Sodom and Gomorrah, before the Lord Rained Fire and Brimstone, bringing
Hell out of Heaven for their signal overthrow, who had been sinners before the
Lord exceedingly. Like sins will have like ends; and if thy Conscience is
stupid as the Sodomites were, thou may be destroyed suddenly, and signally as
they were.

7. That Conscience may be awakened, consider how unlikely it is that Divine
Patience should last much longer toward you: Do not think that his patience
toward his Enemies will be like his Mercy toward his Children, and endure for
ever. You have found him long-suffering, it is Foolish presumption to think he
will be ever suffering. Laesa Patientia fit furor, Abused Patience may quickly
become Fury. Hippolytus, Magne regnator Deum
Tam lentus audis scelera tam lentus vide^!
Ec quando saeva fulmina emittes manu,
Si nunc serenum est?
Seneca.

in the Tragedy, when his Mother-in-Law made an Incestuous motion to him,
wondered at the patience of Heaven, and that she was not presently struck dead
with a Thunderbolt. It may be Matter of great Admiration, that stupid sinners
have been spared all this while: Oh, let them not reckon that they shall be
still spared, though they continue in their provocations. Sottish and Senseless
sinner! the Devil who temps thee to sin, would fain drag thee to Hell
immediately; but it is that God whom thou offendest, that hinders him, and
exercises forbearance, to see if at length thou will be led to Repentance.

But if thou art stupid still, God may quickly suffer Satan to have his will
upon thee, and, which is worse, cause his own wrathful Vengeance to take hold
on thee. Do thou think that the Spirit of the Lord will still strive, if he
meet with nothing but resistance? do thou think that Mercy will still be
offered if that Offer be nothing else but rejected? Do thou think that the
day of Grace will still continue if it be eat and drunk, and slept and played,
and sinned away? Do thou consider how easy it is for God to destroy thee? And
if he does it, he will ease himself of a Burden; For he is pressed with thy
Iniquities as a Cart is pressed that is full of sheaves, Amos 2. 13. Nay, he
threatens to do it, which should make thee (as secure as thou art) horribly
afraid; concerning those Sinners that did refuse and rebel; that did refuse to
turn, and did resolve to rebel: Thus says the Lord, the Lord of Hosts, the
Mighty One of Israel, Ah, I will ease me of mine Adversaries, and avenge me on
my Enemies, Isa. 1. 24.

8. That Conscience may be awakened, Behold and Know thy self. To understand
our selves is a great part of Wisdom; to live and die Ignorant of our selves,
Miser nimium,
Qui cunctis notus moritur,
Ignotus moritur sibi.
Seneca.

is not to see what is our Happiness, what is our Misery, till it is too late to
obtain the one, to avoid the other. How do the ungodly mistake every thing!
They mistake sin, for they think it pleasant: they mistake the World, for they
think 'twill make them happy; they mistake Satan, for they think there is no
harm in yielding to his Temptations; they mistake the Lord, for they think him
an hard Master, and his Commands grievous; they mistake themselves, for they
think they are what they are not, and that they are not what they are. Look
therefore into your selves, Sinners, and there are five things you should take
notice of, which may help very much to startle Conscience.

1. Take Notice of your Guilt Ah, how have your offenses abounded? You have
Sinned alone, you have Sinned in Company, you have Sinned in every place, in
every Relation, in every Capacity, in every Employment; nay, you have Sinned in
every Duty that you have performed unto God himself. How should such Guilty
Souls tremble! We blame the stupidness of a Malefactor, that is in Prison for
several Crimes, the least of which is enough to Hang him. Oh, blame thy self
for being unconcerned at thy many thousands of Transgressions, the least of
which is enough to damn thee.

2. Take Notice of thy weakness. Art thou, O Man, a Match for God? Have thou an
Arm like the Lord? Or can thou Thunder with a voice like him? Can thou deck
thy self with Majesty and Excellency, and array thy self with Glory and Beauty?
Can thou cast abroad the Rage of thy Wrath, and behold every one that is
proud, and abase him? Job 40. 9, 10, 11. Poor Worm, thou dwell in a House
of Clay, whose Foundation is in the dust, thou art no more able to stand
against God, than dried stubble before devouring flames, or Chaff before the
fiercest VVhirlewind.

3. Take Notice of thy Mortality: How quickly may thy breath go forth, and thou
return to thy Earth, and all thy thoughts perish? Psalm. 146. 4. How soon may
thou be hid in the dust, and thy face bound in secret? Do not thou Observe
Men as great, as young, as rich, as strong as thy self carried to their Graves?
Why should thy Conscience be secure, as if thou were sure to be out of the
reach of Death for these several Years? It does infinitely concern thee to
awake to Righteousness presently, and to work for God and for thy Soul, while
it is day, for the Night is coming, is just at hand, and there is no Wisdom,
nor working in the Grave, whither thou art apace going.

4. Take Notice of the Immortality of thy better part, thy Precious Soul: It Was
a notable saying and observation of Hierocles upon Pythagoras. (...), that is,
It Is the wicked man that is unwilling his soul should be immortal.


Thy Body indeed must lie senseless in the Grave till the last day, but thy
Spirit must return to God who gave it. As the Spirits of Just Men immediately
after death are made perfect in the Heavenly Jerusalem; so the spirits of the
Ungodly are thrown into Hell when separated from their Bodies; for the soul has
been the principal subject of sin, and most Active in wickedness, and therefore
does more early begin to be tormented. The Sodomites are said to be now
suffering the Vengeance of eternal fire, Jude 7. which shows plainly, that
their Souls are now in Hell, for if their Bodies and Souls were asleep
together, they would not truly be said to suffer that vengeance.

5. Take notice of the eternal Duration both of Soul and Body after the
Resurrection: Body and Soul, which Death does part, must be joined again; and
as they have been Companions together in Sin, so they must share together in
Everlasting Punishment. Thou may be weary of thy Being, sinner, and wish thou
had never had it, or that it might be taken away; but thy wish will not be
granted. Thou must endure as long as God does, and since thou must Be for ever,
Awake, awake, that thou may not be for ever miserable.

9. That Conscience may be awakened, Behold how the Judge stands before the
Door, James 5. 9. the coming of the Lord draws nigh, and is still nearer and
nearer. Yet a little while and he that shall come will come and will not tarry,
Heb. 10. 37. Oh think of that day when the World shall be on Fire about your
Ears, when the Lord shall come with Clouds and every Eye shall see Him, and all
the kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him; when the Sun shall become
black as a sackcloth of hair, and the Moon shall be like blood; when the Heaven
shall depart as a scroll when it is rolled together, and every Mountain and
Island shall be removed out of their places; when the Lord Jesus shall sit upon
his great white Throne, and all the dead both small and great shall stand
before him, and shall be judged according to their works, Rev. 20. 11. 12.
Consider seriously,

1. How glorious the Judge will be at that day: he will come attended with
Legions of Angels. Oh the Majesty and Brightness of our Lord, when he shall
appear the second time! he appeared the first time in the form of a Servant,
because he was to be obedient unto Death for the sins of men; but then he will
be seen as he is, 'twill be evident to all, that he is the Son of God, and
(...) the Brightness of his Fathers glory.

2. How powerful will this Judge be found! All the Devils, and the Reprobate
world will be then together, and yet they will not be able to make their part
good against him; but he will Judge and Condemn, and put the Sentence which he
passes upon them, in Execution.

3. How Righteous will the whole proceeding of this Judge at that day be! Every
mouth shall be stopped, and every sinner speechless. Oh then the Evil of sin
will be made Manifest; and how Righteous it is for the Lord, to Sentence the
Wicked unto Everlasting Fire. Whom He Condemns, every one will Condemn; and
they shall not choose but Condemn themselves.

4. After the Judge has past Sentence, he will be inexorable: no Cries, no
Tears will prevail with him to Repeal it. Those that then are Condemned, can
never be Justified, can never be saved. Oh what is that Misery which is
Extreme, as to the Measure; and as to the Duration of it, Everlasting!

5. Thou in Particular must give Account of thy self unto this Judge. All must
appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, and that All includes thee. Every
one of us must give account of himself to God, Romans 14. 12. And Oh secure
sinner, if all must be judged according to their Works, begin now to tremble
that thy works have been all so bad; what kind of Sentence is likely to be past
upon thee? Is thy Worldliness, and Uncleanness, and neglect of God and Christ
and Duty; and thy stupidness of Conscience, notwithstanding all this, likely to
be rewarded with Heaven? No, no, that which is thy due (and thy due shall be
given thee) is everlasting Destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his Power.

10. Take some encouragement, that it is not too late to awake as yet, though
Conscience hitherto has slept securely. Thy Glass is not yet run, thy Sun is
not yet set, thy Day is not yet ended; there may be possibly an Inch of thy
Span of time remaining; Oh sleep no longer, but up and be doing thy main
business. When the ship was drowning the Mariners come to Jonah, with a just
rebuke, What meanest thou O sleeper? Jon. 1. 6. When Souls are sinking, and
when sinners are damning, there is much more reason to say to Conscience, what
meanest Oh Sleeper! Awake before it be quite too late. Call upon God to awaken
you thoroughly; he can make the sleepy, nay, the dead to hear his voice: Joh. 5.
25. Verily, verily, I say unto you, the hour is coming, and now is, when the
dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live. So
much be spoken (and Lord make what has been spoken Effectual!) to awaken secure
Consciences.

In the second place I am to show how wounded and awakened Consciences, may be
Cured and Comforted. And here it will be needful first to show you some
mistakes about trouble of Conscience, which are very common; Secondly to
discover when Conscience is troubled after a right manner; Thirdly how Comfort
is to be applied in that trouble.

For the first of these, namely, the mistakes about trouble of Conscience; they
are these following.

1. That is not right trouble of Conscience which is only the product of, and
lasts no longer than Affliction. When Pharaoh was under the smart of the Rod,
he cried out I have sinned; but this was not real trouble for sin, for as soon
as ever the Rod is taken off, Pharaoh is as resolved to sin as ever. The metal
while the Fire burns, is Liquid, and you may cast it into any form; but take
away the Fire, and it becomes hard as ever. Such kind of metal are many
hearts, while in the Furnace of Affliction, how melted and tender do they seem;
but when taken out of that Furnace, then they quickly cool and become perhaps
more obdurate than before. Who would have thought (though so indeed it was)
that the Israelites, who when God slew them, did seek him, and returned and
enquired early after him, and remembered that he was their Redeemer and their
Rock; should all this while only flatter him with their Lips, and that their
Hearts should not be right with him nor steadfast in his Covenant?

2. That is not right trouble of Conscience which is only sorrow after the
world: Tristitia mundi est quum propter terrenas afflictiones animos despondent
and luctu opprimuntur; tristitia autem secundum Deum quae Deum respicit, dum
unicam miseriam ducunt excidisse a Dei gratia; ac timore judicii ejus perculsi,
peccata sua lugent. Calvin.
this kind of sorrow is so far from having a promise of life made to it, that
the Apostle affirms, it works death, 2 Cor. 7. 10. There is a great sorrow in
thy Heart, and it appears in thy very looks, but what is the cause of it? If
hard times trouble thee, but an hard Heart is no affliction; if crosses and
losses in the World perplex thee, but the loss of thy Soul, is not at all
feared, neither is there any care taken to prevent it; if thy poverty in the
World do grieve thee, but thou do not sorrow at all because destitute of the
true Riches, how can thou call any of this a right trouble? The Israelites
did weep and Howl, but the cause was, they wanted Corn and Wine, and so they
had but these things in Plenty, they could be well contented to live without
God, Hos. 7. 13, 14. Every pensive sinner is not penitent, nor fit to be
comforted; their very pensiveness is a very great sin, as long as sin is not,
but only worldly crosses the cause of it.

3. That is not right trouble of Conscience, where there is only a slavish
fear of punishment, but love to sin does still remain in strength. Where there
is slavish fear and no more, there is an hatred of God, and a secret wish to
get from under his Power, the slave you know hates his Master, and wishes he
might be at liberty, and never see or serve him more: there is also an hatred
of the Commands of God, and a repining and murmuring at the strictness of them.
Sin is dear as ever, and a grief there is because of those threats which
terrify and hinder the free commission of it. If such a Soul might have its
wish, It should not be Oh that I might be turned to God* and that my ways were
directed to keep his Statutes! but it should be, Oh that I might have liberty
to do as I list, and that there were no such thing as the Word and Will of God
to be observed! where such a Spirit is (which the Heart-searching God perfectly
understands) abstaining from the outward act of sin, signifies not much. The
Merchant in a Storm cannot be said to hate his goods, because he flings them
overboard, he is sorry because driven to such a strait: and when he comes
ashore wishes as much for his goods as ever.

4. That is not right trouble of Conscience, which Sinners being impatient
under, do fly for Comfort to the Creatures. If thou art indeed wounded, the
same hand that gave the wound must bind it up, I wound, and I heal, says God.
Deuteronomy. 32. 39. If sensual delights, if Sports and Pastimes, if carnal Company,
if immersing thy self in worldly business can divert, and by degrees chase away
thy trouble, it is a sign 'twas never true. Right sorrow is not assuaged but by
Spiritual means. 'Twas a wise course and resolution of those, Hos. 6. 1. Come
let us return unto the Lord for he has torn, and he will heal us: he has
smitten and he will bind us up.

5. That is not right trouble of Conscience, where there is an utter despair of
Mercy. Cain was troubled, and so was Judas, and the trouble of both (especially
of the latter) was unconceivably great, but despair spoiled it. I grant indeed
that souls truly penitent may have Temptations, and very strong ones to
despair, but there is an unseen hand in their greatest Terrors and Dejections,
which keeps them from being swallowed up in that gulf quite, though sometimes
they are upon the brink of it. Cranmer in his last Prayer cries out, I have
sinned more than Tongue is able to express, but shall I despair? God forbid.
Thou art a Gracious Lord, and thy Mercy does thrust away none who ask for a
Remedy of sin, and comfort in their misery. Despair does thwart the design of
the Gospel which is to extol the Riches of Divine Grace, as super abounding,
where sin has most abounded; and to set forth Christ as a Savior to the
uttermost.

When the Spirit does give a sight of sin, he opens a door of hope, and lets in
a beam of Light, whereby (e) In Coelum terramque plusquam fando exprimi possit,
offendi; Desperabo igitur? Absit. Tu ^lemen^ natura Deus cujus neminem
aversatur misericordia, qui abs te peccati remedium, ac solatium miseriae and
aerumnarum petit.

Mel. Adamus, in vita Cranmeri.


the possibility of Mercy is discovered. The trembling Jailer, did not say, I
am sure I shall be damned, but what shall I do that I may be saved? Act. 16.
30. this very inquiry shows that some possibility of Salvation was conceived.
Satan indeed endeavors to shut the door of hope, and to overwhelm the Soul,
but he is not to be harkned to Satan put it into the Heart of Judas to betray
Christ, and afterward he put it into his Heart to despair, and how effectual
was his despair to his destruction. By no means therefore entertain despairing
thoughts, for they come from Hell and lead thither.

6. That is not right trouble of Conscience which is only the effect of
prevailing Melancholy. This humor prevails exceedingly at this day, and those
who never had experience of it cannot imagine the torment that is in it. Burton
speaks feelingly, No torture of Body like unto it; strappadoes, hot Irons,
Phalaris Bulls are not comparable. All Fears, Griefs, Suspicions, Discontents,
as so many small brooks are swallowed up and drowned in this Euripus, this
Irish Sea, this Ocean of misery. This is the Quintessence of humane Adversity:
all other Diseases whatsoever are but flea-bitings to Melancholy in extent,
it is the pith of them all. A Melancholy man is that true Prometheus, which is
bound to Caucasus, the true Tityus, whose Bowels are still devoured by a
Vulture, for he is fed upon by Anxieties and Griping cares continually. But
though Melancholy be so tormenting, it very much differs from trouble of
Conscience, and is not so intolerable. You will ask me how Melancholy and
Spiritual trouble differ? before I tell you how, I would lay down two things.

1. It Is an Argument of an Ignorant and Profane Spirit, to say, that all
trouble of Conscience is nothing else but Melancholy. Such who are of this
mind, do make a mock of sin, and of the Convictions of the Spirit, and of the
terrors of the Lord, and slight the great Physician of Souls: for if all
trouble be from Humors in the Body, other Physicians may serve the turn.

2. Melancholy and trouble of Conscience are sometimes joined together; and
they may be mutually the Occasion of each others increase. If the Conscience be
wounded, and the Body Distempered with this black Humor at the same time,
Satan has the greater Advantage. The soul will not easily admit of Comfort, but
is more inclined to meditate terror; and the wounds of Conscience will be the
more smarting, and longer before Cured.

I shall now show the difference between trouble of Conscience and Melancholy,
in these particulars:

1. In Melancholy the Body may plainly be perceived to be out of Order; either
no sleep at all, or a perpetual drousiness, the Spleen swelled or pained, a
sourness in the stomach, and a Cloud seems to dwell in the Brain. But trouble
of Conscience may be, and is found in those who are of the most excellent
Constitution, and even in the time of the firmest Health. The Goalor, it is very
likely, had a strong Body, and no Distemper that we read of upon him; yet his
Conscience is wounded, and how sollicitous is he to escape Hell!

2. In Melancholy there is great Confusion; no rational account can be given of
trouble. The Soul is like one in the dark, or that is blindfold, and is
exceedingly buffeted, but knows neither the Hand nor the Instrument from whence
his smart comes. But a troubled Conscience can easily assign a cause of its
trouble. Ask the Apostle Paul the reason of his trouble, he will Answer, I was
a Blasphemer, and a Persecutor, and Injurious. Demand of the Corinthians, what
Afflicted them? They will Answer, they had been Fornicators, Idolaters,
Adulterers, Effeminate, Abusers of themselves with Mankind, etc. 1 Cor. 6. 9.
Troubled souls do understand their Guilt and Plagues.

3. In Melancholy the great thing desired is ease and quiet, that the horrible
darkness may be dispelled, and the former serenity may return. But in right
trouble of Conscience, not only Peace, but Peace upon a good ground is longed
for; the present trouble is preferred before security in wickedness, that was
formerly. Ay, and Grace as well as Peace is begged. Troubled David does not
only cry out, Restore unto me the Joy of thy Salvation, and make me to hear
Joy and Gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may Rejoice; but also,
Create in me a clean Heart, O God, and renew aright Spirit within me, Ps. 51.
8, 10, 12.

4. In Melancholy, Trouble does often come by Fits, when Fumes ascend unto the
Head (which by the heat of them may sometimes be perceived) and do disorder the
Fancy and Imagination: Melancholia est imaginationis depravatio a
phantasmate-melancholico exorta quo detentus, uni cogitationi absque surore and
sebre cum tristitia and metu inhaeret. Ejus origo dependet a certa quidam
Spirituum animalium dispositione ex humoris melancholici permissione producta,
ad quam sequitur phantasma tenebricosum dictum, quod intellectus postea objecta
obversans, hoc delirium and animi angorem excitat.
then there is some stinging and perplexing thought which renders Life and all
the enjoyments of it bitter and uncomfortable. But trouble of Conscience is
more without intermission; it does not depend upon the ebbing or flowing of any
Humor in the Body. Load is laid on by the Spirit of God, and the burden
presses continually until the Comforter take it off. The Psalmist says, that
his sore ran in the Night, and ceased not, Psalm. 77. 2. So Psalm. 38. 6. I am
troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the day long.

5. Melancholy makes a Man to fear every thing almost, though there be no just
ground of fear. When he goes to Bed he fears he shall die in his sleep, and
not Live till Morning: Though in never so good a Trade, he fears that God will
blast him in his Estate, and that he shall fall into extreme poverty.
Melancholy persons are tortured with a fear of being Distracted, and running
stark Mad many times; and then they think what a sad spectacle they shall be
when they are in Bedlam; and if Professors, how much Religion will be
Reproached upon their Account. Many times they fear the appearing of the Devil
in some terrible shape, and that thereby they shall be frighted out of their
wits. It Is ordinary for them to have sad fore-boding thoughts of ill to
themselves; as that some grievous Calamity is not far off from them, or theirs,
and that their lives will be very short, and within a little while they shall
be in another World. They can hardly hear of any that have Hanged or Drowned
themselves, but they fear Quos male habet hic morbus, tristes sunt and
solitarii, formidulosi, and pertinaces, phantasias quasdam sibi faciunt quae
nec sunt, nec esse possunt, falsa multa imaginantur, timent non metuenda, sine
causa moerent animumque macerant.
they shall do the like one time or other. I might spend a whole day in naming
the fears of these sorrowful souls. And if Fear have Torment, as the Apostle
speaks, 1 John 4. 18. How tormenting is Melancholy that is so full of Fear!

But a troubled Conscience eyes and fears the Wrath of an Almighty God, and
that principally, Psalm. 88. 7. Thy wrath lies hard upon me, and thou have
afflicted me with all thy waves, Selah. And v. 16, 17. Thy fierce wrath goes
over me, thy terrors have cut me off, they came round about me daily like
water, they compassed me about together. It Is not Poverty, Disgrace, Death that
is so much dreaded, but a Jealous, and highly provoked God is terrible: and
therefore when the Lord promises to revive such Consciences, he says, he will
cease to be Angry, and to contend, Isa. 57. 16. For I will not contend for
ever, neither will I be always wrath, lest the Spirit fail before me and the
Souls which I have made.

6. In Melancholy there are strange hurryings in the Heart; it is snatched and
carried away, and some amazing thoughts are upon a sudden injected about
Spiritual things; but there is no Scripture-ground alleged for them Some under
this Distemper will cry out, they are mere Hypocrites; and as if they had
looked into the black Book of Gods Reprobation, will peremptorily say, their
Names have been written there from everlasting. Others will cry out, that the
day of Grace is past and gone, and that God has sworn concerning them in his
wrath, that they shall never enter into his Rest. Now, as the God of Heaven
does walk upon the Wings of the Wind, so Satan, the God of this World, does
walk upon these Melancholic winds, mixes himself with them, and terrifies the
Soul with the fear of Damnation. And oh with what astonishment does a poor
Melancholic Creature think of being damned everlastingly! Many times Satan
tells them, that the longer they Live, they will but fill the Vial fuller of
wrath, and but add more fuel to that Fire, which must be their Portion for
ever, and hereupon follow temptations to self-murder; and upon all convenient
Occasions, when they are alone, by Water, or see a Rope, or a Knife, Do it, Do
it, is violently urged in upon them. But if you ask these Melancholy souls, why
they conclude themselves Hypocrites and Reprobates; not one Scripture can they
produce to prove it.

Whereas on the other side, in trouble of Conscience the Conviction is plainly
grounded on the word of God. The awakened VVorldling hears his Covetousness
called Idolatry; the awakened VVhore-monger perceives evidently that no unclean
Person shall inherit the Kingdom of God. The awakened Swearer reads that his
Oaths will make him fall into condemnation: They believe those threats, and
know that they are guilty, therefore they are Afflicted, and look out after a
Remedy, and cry to be turned from their Iniquities, and Reconciled unto God.

7. In Melancholy, Druggs are profitable; gentle Remedies (for violent are by
no means to be used) (...). Hippocrates. Aphor.
may be blessed to give ease. But as for trouble of Conscience, Hei mihi quod
nullis dolor est Medicabilis Herbis; Alas, no Herbs can here at all avail. The
whole College of Physicians would be here at a loss. When the Italian Doctors
came to Visit Spira in his distress, He spoke these words: Alas, poor Men, how
far wide are you? Do you think that this Disease is to be Cured by Potions?
Believe me, there must be another manner of Medicine: It is neither Plasters
nor Drugs that can help a fainting Soul, cast down with the sense of sin, and
the wrath of God. It Is only Christ that must be the Physician, and the Gospel
the Soul-Antidote. But here I must add, that where the trouble is mixed, partly
from Melancholy and partly from a wounded Conscience, proper Physic, (and
especially a wellordered Diet and Exercise) must be used for the one, as the
blood of Christ is the alone suitable Remedy for the other.

8. Melancholy alone never alienates the Heart from sin. Several that Labor
under this distemper, in their lucid intervals will be as vain as any; nay,
sometimes they have strange and strong inclinations to Uncleanness, and too
much yield unto them; they will most Prodigally mispend their time, which is
much more precious than Gold that perishes, and exceedingly give way to
sensuality, and the pretense is their Melancholy. When in their doleful fits
they have been afraid of Hell, and have concluded they should be damned as
certainly as either Cain or Judas; yet when that fit of Melancholy is over, how
will they yield unto Temptation! they are as proud as before, as passionate and
worldly as ever, and none of this troubles them. This Malady also does mightily
indispose them to Duty, it makes the Heart like a stock or stone: Indeed this
blockishness, where there is Grace, is a burden; but in others not so. Duty
only is a Burden, not their indisposition to it.

But now trouble of Conscience, if right, helps much to break that League
between the Soul and Corruptions; it causes great tenderness and fear of sin,
and very much incites to Prayer and other Holy Duties which God has Commanded,
and wherein Communion with him is to be enjoyed. 'Twas said of Persecuting
Saul, as soon as the Lord had struck him to the ground, and he was pricked in
his heart Behold he Prays, Acts 9. 11. When the Waters, that is, troubles,
came into David's Soul, when he was sinking in the deep Mire, where there was
no standing, how earnestly does he cry out, Save me, O God! Nay, he did cry
till his Throat was dried, and though his eyes failed, yet he waited for the
Lord, Psalm. 69. 1, 2, 3.

Having thus spoken of the mistakes about trouble of Conscience;

I am in the Second place to discover, when Conscience is troubled after a
right manner, so as that it may be proper to apply Comfort from the Gospel.
This right trouble I shall set forth in these particulars:

1. Some special sin, perhaps, more heinous than Ordinary, is usually at first
Discovered, and charged home by the Spirit upon the Conscience. The Apostle
Paul, before his Conversion, was Riding to Damascus, but the Lord met him in
the way, and the first sin he was charged with, was that of Persecuting the
Church of Christ, Acts 9. 3, 4. As he journied, and came near Damascus,
suddenly their shined round about him a Light from Heaven, and he fell to the
Earth, and heard a Voice, saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why Persecutest thou me?
Those Jews that were awakened by Peter's Sermon, were charged with taking
Christ, and Crucifying, and slaying him with wicked hands, Acts 2. 23. Thus the
Woman of Samaria, who had had five Husbands, is told of her Living in Whoredom
with a man that was not her Husband, John 4. 18. Thus commonly the work begins;
some more gross sin, as lying, swearing, drunkenness, self-pollution, or the
like is discovered, and that is like a dart shot in the Conscience; causing a
great deal of trouble and cannot easily be shaken off. Haeret lateri lethalis
arundo. Virgil. Ae^ead. 4.


2. After one sin is discovered and Conscience begins to be perplexed,
innumerable other transgressions are brought to remembrance. Just as when a
debtor is arrested by one Creditor, all the others are ready to come upon him.
The Eye of Conscience being truly opened to see one sin, presently is able to
discern thousands. David after his being awakened by the Prophet Nathan, looks
first upon his filthiness and blood guiltiness, but a great many other sins
also stared him in the Face. Therefore as a man beset by all together, he cries
out for the pardon of all, Psalm. 51. 9. Hide thy face from my sins, blot out
all my Transgressions, Oh how did his iniquities swarm about him and sting him,
when he said, Psalm. 40. 12. Innumerable evils have compassed me about, my
iniquities have taken hold upon me that I am not able to look up, they are more
than the hairs of my Head therefore my Heart fails me.

3. Where right trouble of Conscience is, the impure streams are traced up to
the fountain, and the Corruption of Nature is acknowledged and bewailed.
Contrite David looked thus far, Psalm. 51. 5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity,
and in sin did my Mother conceive me. And the Apostle Paul took notice of that
evil which was present with him, which was so great an impediment unto his
doing of good, Romans 7. How can we be rightly humbled till this Corruption of
Nature be seen? but when we perceive that Satan is not principally to be blamed
for our wickednesses, but our own selves, and that what does defile us does not
come from below, but from within, this will make us to be filled with the
greater self abhorrency. Every man is Tempted, says the Apostle James, when he
is drawn away of his own Lust and enticed, chap. 1. 14. Evil Thoughts,
Adulteries, Murders and such like Abominations, Christ tells us, proceed out
of our own Hearts, Math. 15. 19. Oh this does exceedingly afflict the Soul
which is rightly troubled; that all those thousands of sins which have been
committed, are but the offspring of a corrupted Heart and Nature, and not one
is to be laid at any other door.

4. The Conscience when rightly troubled is convinced of that sin of Unbelief,
and the great Evil that is in it. It Is the work of the Spirit to convince the
World of Sin and Unbelief is especially discovered, John 16. 8, 9. When the
Comforter is come he will reprove the World of Sin, of Righteousness, and of
Judgment; of Sin because they Believe not on Me. Not believing in Christ is a
great sin in it self, and it binds all the sinners other iniquities fast upon
him, Hoc peccatum (non crediderunt in me) quasi solum sit praecaeteris posuit,
quia hoc manente caetera detinentur, and hoc discedente caetera remittuntur.
Augustine. Tract. 95. in Johan. page mihi 474. Tom. 9.
for there is no other way to receive Remission of sins, but by Believing in
the Lord Jesus. Him only has God set forth to be a propitiation through faith
in his blood, Romans 3. 25. It Is a damning thing to transgress the Law; but to
be deaf to the Gospel, and to reject Christ is a great deal worse, for this is
to sin against a Remedy, and to slight an offer of Life and Peace. How Glorious
is God in his dear Son! how does his Wisdom, and Power, and Grace, and Love,
and Righteousness, and Truth shine forth in him! now notwithstanding all this
to be offended at Christ, not to Reverence the Son, not to receive him though
he offers benefits of inestimable value, this must needs increase guilt, and
heighten wrath exceedingly. If a Prince should, after his subjects had played
the Rebels, and he had them at his Mercy; offer a pardon to them, and they
should refuse it and choose rather to continue rebels still; their not accepting
the Princes Clemency, would incense him more to their destruction, than their
forgoing Rebellion. We are ready to pity Tantalus, (l) who as Homer says was
thus punished; he stood in a lake with Water up to his chin, but when ever he
stoopt to quench his thirst with the water, it presently sunk away from him.
Brave Fruit also is said to grow just over his Head, but when he stretched out
his hand to take it, the Wind did carry it away from him. But now let us
suppose that the water might have been drunk, and Tantalus would not have
stoopt a little for it, and that Fruit might have been eaten, but though it
grew within his reach, he would not have been at the pains to have stretched
forth his hand to plucked it: Who would have pitied (i) (...)
(...),
(...) --
(...), etc.
(...),
(...).
Homer. Odys. 11. page mihi 321.

Tantalus then? every one would have blamed his folly in not taking what was
brought so near to him. This is the case of the Unbeliever, the Word is nigh
him, Romans 10. 8. Christ is nigh him, the Bread and Water of life is brought to
his very mouth, but he will taste of neither, though he so much needs both, and
may have both freely.

The Conscience therefore is troubled for unbelief, for the sinners rejecting
Christ in times past, that when such great Salvation was offered, it should be
neglected; and that the Lord Jesus should stand so long and knock so often at
the door, but it was kept shut and barred against him. Oh 'twere just says the
sinner, for Christ to go away, and never to give so much as one knock at my
Heart again, and, now I see my Need of his Salvation, utterly to deny that
Salvation to me.

5. When the Conscience is rightly troubled. The Anger of the Lord, and the
Curse of his Law are a very great burden. Sin has been committed, Commands
Holy, Just and Good have been transgressed, and Christ who alone can appease
Divine Anger, satifie for transgression, and Mediate a Peace, has been
contemned; well therefore may the Sinner be afraid. How great and how fierce is
this wrath of the Almighty! there is never a single sin but makes the sinner
liable to the Curse of the Law, and how Cursed a wretch, do iniquities ten
thousand times ten thousand, many times told, render him? every transgression
makes the Lord Angry, to how great an height then is that anger by Millions of
transgressions raised! The awakened sinner sees the Lord whetting his
glittering Sword, and his hand taking hold of vengeance, hereupon fear does
come upon him, and pain as of a Woman in travel. How scalding are the Drops of
the Lords wrath, what then are the full showers? If God run upon any like a
Giant they must needs be broken with breach upon breach.

I dare not say that the anger of the Lord does lie alike heavy upon all
awakened Consciences and truly humbled Souls, nor that these terrors of Soul
are equal in all that are brought home to Christ. Though all humbled sinners
are made with Ephraim to bemoan themselves, yet some are made to bemoan
themselves much longer, and much louder than others. Levi taken from the
Receipt of Custom, and Lydia, felt not that we read of, such Agonies and
Terrors of Conscience as Persecuting Saul, and the trembling Jailer. All the
vessels of Mercy are not of the same temper, and that which cannot abide the
Fire, it is sufficient that, as under the Old Law, it pass through the Water,
Numb. 31, 23. As to these Legal terrors I would say these five things.

1. These terrors in themselves are a punishment, and therefore not to be
desired in so great a degree, we are not to be fond of them, though when they
are upon us, we must desire support under them, and that they may prosper unto
the end whereunto they are appointed, namely, to wean us from our lusts, and
drive us out of our selves, unto the Lord Jesus.

2. These Terrors being a Punishment, surely are not saving Grace. Reprobates
have had them in a great measure. O Judas! thou had an Hell upon Earth by
Reason of legal Horror, before thou wentest to thy appointed place: and it is
possible to exceed in regard of these. Therefore the Apostle takes care in
reference to the incestuous Corinthian, that he should not be swallowed up with
over much sorrow, 2 Cor. 2. 7.

3. Barely from these Terrors of the Law, none can conclude that they shall
certainly be joined to the Lord Jesus. They are not always forerunners of
Faith, but sometimes they issue in despair, and sometimes they wear off, and
sinners become more hardened and confirmed in their wickedness. Thus it was
with Pharaoh notwithstanding all his trouble and fear at some times of the
Lords anger.

4. Those that complain for want of these legal Terrors are really under them
in a more remiss degree, for those who are perplexed with doubts and fears
about their Eternal state, and think because they never were sufficiently
troubled, that they never yet closed with Christ, what are these afraid of but
Gods anger, and his Curse which by sin has been deserved?

5. Do not go about to direct or Counsel the Spirit of the Lord. If he bring
thee home by a more gentle way, and give thee a sight of thy Remedy as soon
almost as of thy sin and misery thou have the more cause to be thankful, but
withal to be the more vigilant and watchful; for if wrath has not lain so hard
upon thee, thou will be the more subject to make bold with sin afterward, and
art not likely to be so fearful to incur Divine displeasure for the future.

6. Where the Conscience is rightly troubled, the sinner is filled with grief
and shame because of 'its iniquities. God complains of the Children of Israel,
that they were Impudent and hard hearted. Ezekiel. 3. 7. But the troubled Soul is
confounded before God, the humbled sinner thinks thus, that if the World did
know all the sins which he has been guilty of, he should be ready to wish
himself out of the World, but Gods knowledge signifies more than if All
Creatures were acquainted with his abominations. I do not wonder at that
expression, Jer. 3. ult. We lie down in our own shame, and our confusion
covers us. How foul does sin make us! how unlike to God! how monstrously to
resemble the unclean Spirit! what high and horrible ingratitude is there in
sin! is this the requital for all the Lords goodness? is this the return for
millions of mercies? shame upon this grows great, and sorrow goes hand in hand
with it. We read that a voice was heard upon the high places, weeping and
supplication of the Children of Israel, for they have perverted their way, and
they have forgotten the Lord their God, Jer. 3. 21. Behold O Lord, says the
Church, for I am in distress, my bowels are troubled, my heart is turned
within me; why what ails her? I have grievously rebelled, this made her sighs
many, and her Heart faint, Lam. 2. 20, 22. Sin does best deserve sorrow because
it is so great an evil, and there is such encouragement in Scripture here to
spend our grief. And the troubled Soul gives sin the greatest share; and is
sorry after all, that it is so little sorry. Hark to one of our English Poets.
Herbert page 158. Grief.


O who will give me tears? Come all you springs,
Dwell in my head and eyes; come Clouds and rain:
My grief has need of all the watery things,
That Nature has produced. Let every vein
Suck up a River to supply mine eyes,
My weary weeping eyes too dry for me,
Unless they get new conduits, new supplies
To bear them out, and with my state agree.
What are two shallow fords, two little spouts
Of a less World? The greater is but small,
A narrow Cupboard for my griefs and doubts,
Which want provision in the midst of all.
Verses, ye are too fine a thing, too wise
For my rough sorrows: cease, be dumb and mute,
Give up your feet and run into mine eyes,
And keep your measures for some Lovers lute,
Whose grief allows him Music and a rhyme:
For mine excludes both measure, tune, and time:
Alas, my God!
7. Where Conscience is rightly troubled, the sinner accuses and condemns
himself. He holds up his Hand at Gods Bar, and cries Guilty of his own accord;
Satan my hold his Tongue, for one that is troubled in Spirit is forward enough
to be his own Accuser. We say commonly in Humane Courts of Judicature, Nemo
tenetur accusare seipsum. No Man is bound to accuse himself. But it is otherwise
in the Court of Conscience: Here it is a known Rule, Accuse thy self, and
confess thy Crime, that thou may be pardoned, 1 John 1. 9. If we confess our
sins, he is Faithful and Just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness. How large have broken hearts been in acknowledging their
Offenses, and the aggravations of them; they have not spared to speak, and to
tell all they knew against themselves; they have called themselves Rebellious,
Revolters, Wicked, Foolish, Ignorant Beasts before God; all this has showed
how they have disliked and abhorred themselves.

And as they have accused, so they have been forward to pass a Judgment, and to
condemn themselves. When the Jews Crucified Christ, they accused him, cried
out against him, as a Deceiver, and condemned him to that Ignominious Death.
Troubled souls deal thus with the Flesh, and its Lusts and Affections: They
accuse the Flesh, as being enmity against God; they cry out, that they have
been deceived by the Flesh, and they condemn the Lusts of it to be Crucified
and slain; and further say, because the Flesh has been pleased and served, they
themselves deserve to be everlastingly condemned. In the greatest severities
they cry out, the Lord is Righteous; nay, if he should inflict the Vengeance of
eternal flames upon them, they grant his ways would be but very equal.

8. Where Conscience is rightly troubled, the sinner despairs in himself. It Is
a great sin to despair of Mercy and Salvation; but to despair of saving our
selves by any strength or worth of our own, this is but needful. The awakened
Conscience sees that our own wisdom is insufficient to guide us in the way
Everlasting; that our own Righteousness has innumerable defects in it, and
dares not lean upon it. When Daniel had done his very best, he dares not trust
in it, Chap. 9. 18. We do not present our Supplications before thee for our
Righteousnesses, but for thy great Mercies; as if he should say, our
Righteousnesses are imperfect and small, they are not the ground of our hope;
but our expectation is from thy great Mercies. It Is a true saying of Luther,
Nunquam tantum operum potest inveni^i, ut conscientiam reddar pacatam, sed
semper desiderat plura; imo in illis ipsis quae secit, peccata invenit. Luther.
in Epist. ad Gal. c. 4.
That Conscience can never be satisfied with our own Works and Righteousness,
for it still desires and wants more, and finds a great deal amiss in what has
been done already. If we were to be Justified by our own Works, an enlightened
and troubled Conscience would be like the Horse-leaches Daughter, and still
cry, Give, Give, and could never be satisfied.

The sinner that is truly troubled, despairs also in his own Srength as well as
Wisdom and Righteousness: He sees that he has no Power to believe, and that he
cannot come to the Lord Jesus, unless drawn to him by the Father. He cannot
beget himself, in a Spiritual sense, no more than he was able to do it in a
Natural. Fletcher does well set forth this in these Verses. Christ's victory,
page 50.


Who is it sees not that he nothing is
But he that nothing sees? What weaker breast
Since Adam's Armor failed, dares warrant his;
That made by God of all the Creatures best,
Strait made himself the worst of all the rest.
If any Strength we have, it is to ill;
But all the good is Gods, both Power and Will.
The dead man cannot rise, though he himself may kill.
9. Where Conscience is rightly troubled, this trouble does begin to estrange
and wean the heart from sin. The sinner sees evidently that he has been
grossly mistaken in his Lusts, and woefully deceived by them. They promised him
pleasure, but have paid him in Gall and Wormwood; they promised him profit,
but have undone him; he has none of the true and enduring Riches, and his Soul
is in great danger of being lost for ever; hereupon he is not so fond of them
as before: His Love abates, and begins to be turned into aversation and Hatred.
He says, I have sinned, and perverted that which is right, and it has not
profited me, Job. 33. 27. nay, instead of profiting, it has been exceedingly
Mischievous; and now sin begins to be looked upon with an ill eye. When Ephraim
perceived that his Idols could not help him, nay, provoked the Lord unto
Jealousy and Anger against him, he flings them away to the Bats and to the
Moles, as things unworthy to be VVorshipt, or so much as look on; and says,
What have I to do any more with Idols? Hos. 14. 8. Then trouble does work
kindly when sin it self is disliked, and the soul with an indignation and
detestation cries out, what have I to do any more with so great an evil?

10. When Conscience is rightly troubled, the sinner is very inquisitive to
understand what he must do to be saved. Thus the Jailer, Acts 16. 29, 30. came
trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas, and brought them out, and said,
Sirs, what must I do to be saved? So Acts 2. 37. Now, when they heard this,
they were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter and the rest of the
Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? And Saul, as soon as thoroughly
awakened, is at the same enquiry, Acts 9. 6. And he trembling and astonished,
said, Lord, what will thou have me to do? The Question is no longer, Who will
show us any of the Worlds good? The Question is no longer, What shall we eat,
or what shall we drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed? But the main enquiry
is, What course must be taken to have sin covered? Gods anger removed, the
immortal and precious Soul saved? That is, delivered from everlasting burnings,
and brought to an incorruptible Inheritance. These are the chief Matters which
all should mind, and truly they who think it not worth the while to enquire
about Salvation, it is a sign they have not set so much as one step in the way
to it, but all their days their feet have been going down to Death and Hell.

11. Where Conscience is rightly troubled, the sinners heart will consent to
any Conditions and terms of Peace and Reconciliation with God. There is a Beam
of Spiritual Light which shines into his Soul, so that he sees all things after
another manner to what he did formerly. He sees God to be another kind of Foe
and Friend than heretofore he thought him, and Christ to be a better Lord and
Master than heretofore he did imagine. He comes to God, and says, Lord, be
Merciful, be my Father, and let the Lord Jesus become a Savior to me; and
write down what Articles thou please, I will subscribe them, only help me to
do it with my very Heart. When he hears that Command, Cast away every
Transgression, he presently cries out, Lord, let not any Iniquity have the
dominion over me. When he hears that all the Precepts of the Lord are to be
kept diligently, he cries out, Oh that my ways were directed to keep thy
Statutes. When he hears of the Necessity of Conversion, he cries out, Turn thou
me, O Lord, and I shall be turned. When he hears what 'twill cost to be
Christ's Disciple, and how he must deny himself, and take up his Cross, he
cries out, Oh, let me never be Offended, but count all things loss, that I may
win Christ. The Chimes do not more presently follow the Clock, than the truly
humbled Soul does upon its understanding the will of God, desire to submit unto
it. It Is willing to do any thing, to be any thing, to bear any thing, to
forbear any thing, so the favor of God, and an Interest in the Lord Jesus may
be Obtained. Thus you see when Conscience is troubled after a right manner.

In the next place, I am to direct, How troubled and afflicted Consciences are
to be Comforted. And before I begin, I have need to cry out, The Lord give me
the Tongue of the Learned, that I may know how to speak a word in Season to him
that is weary! Isa. 50. 4. O you Afflicted Souls, that are tossed in a Tempest!
your Affliction is of all the deepest, the Tempest that you are in does beat
most hard upon you. You have not to deal with an Arm of Flesh, nor only with
the Powers of Darkness, but the Lord himself has bruised you. Now, for your
Relief, I am to bring forth the sweetest Comforts of the Gospel; I am to Preach
unto you the unsearchable Riches of Christ: I am to tell you of Love that has
Height, and Length, and Depth, and Breadth, and passes Knowledge. I am to
display the Mercy of God, which is great toward humbled sinners as the Heaven
is high above the Earth. But more particularly, I would lay these following
things before you.

1. This trouble of Conscience that you are under, is really the work of the
Spirit, the Comforter. Even under Conviction, and while in distress of Soul,
you are really in a Comforters hand. There is a great deal of difference
between the wounds of an Enemy and the lancings of a Surgeon; the latter are
the better born, because in order unto a perfect Cure, and Ease, and Health.
Three things are here to be Observed.

1. These Convictions of the Spirit are a great mercy. The Children of Men
would all of them lie still, and at last die in their wickedness, if the Spirit
did not awaken some of them. It Is a kindness to be told of our danger while
it is possible to get out of it. You groan and complain because of your Guilt;
you fear the wrath of God, and desire his loving kindness. I may say truly, you
are highly favored, for how many round about you fearlesly provoke the
dreadful God to his Face, and turn to their wicked course, as the horse rusheth
into the Battle. Now sin is a burden, your condition is much better than when
you made light of it, and saw no harm like to follow upon it. It Is good for us
to see the avenger of blood pursuing us, as long as the City of Refuge is open
to receive and shelter us from that avenger.

2. These convictions are in order unto Consolation. Comfort is that which is
proper and suitable to the Mourners; and rest unto the weary and heavy laden.
To go by Hell gates to Heaven is not to go at all out of the way. The Lord does
bring Souls within the Suburbs of Hell sometimes, that they may be the more
afraid of sin all their days, that they may value peace of Conscience at an
higher rate, and adore the Grace of God in catching them as fire brands out of
the burning; Jonah cried unto the Lord out of the Belly of Hell, and when his
Soul fainted within him, Chap. 2. 3, 7. And surely his being heard and helped
did the more affect him. Oh, do not think much to Sow in Tears, as long as the
promise is, you shall Reap in Joy, Psalm. 126. 5.

3. It may marvellously support you under your trouble, that you do Judge and
Condemn your selves. The Apostle expressly says, that such shall not be Judged,
that is, condemned with the World, 1 Cor. 11. 31. They that accuse themselves,
invalidate Satan's accusations against them; and they that condemn themselves go
the way to prevent Gods condemning them. He will not throw into Hell those who
are continually sentencing themselves thither, and see no possibility of Help
but in Rich and Free Grace; and who, as they Judge themselves for past sins,
are desirous also for the future to be kept from Offending.

2. For the Relief of a troubled Conscience, take Notice of the love of God
toward the World, in sending Christ into it. God so loved the World, that he
gave his only Begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish,
John 3. 16. See also 1 John 4. 10. Herein is Love, not that we loved God, but
that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the Propitiation for our sins. This
Love of God toward the World is Matter of great Encouragement if it be rightly
improved: It shows how great a kindness God has for Mankind; He has contrived a
way for their Redemption and Salvation, he has provided a Mediator for them,
which he did not do for the Angels that fell from him, Heb. 2. 16. He took not
on him the Nature of Angels, or he took not hold on the Angels, (...), but he
took on him the Seed of Abraham. Whatever Christ did for Man's Salvation, 'twas
the will of God he should do it. The whole work of Redemption is called a doing
of the will of God, Heb. 10. 7. Sacrifices and Offerings being insufficient to
take away sin: Then said I, lo, I come; in the Volume of thy Book it is written
of me to do thy Will, O God. Nay, the Father is said to Love Christ upon this
Account; partly, because he laid down his Life to save Men from Eternal Death,
John 10. 17. Because I lay down my Life, therefore does my Father Love me. Now,
you know Christ's Life was given, that it might be a Ransom for many.

All this shows the good will of God toward Man, and how ready he is that Man
should be brought near unto him, and enjoy him, and be eternally happy in that
enjoyment. This Amor Benevolentiae, this Love of good will in God, and desire
after Man's welfare, was taken notice of by the Angels, and they are brought in
Admiring and Magnifying the Lord, when Christ a Savior was Born into the
World, Luke 2. 13, 14. Suddenly there was a Multitude of the Heavenly Host
Praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the highest, on Earth Peace, Good
will toward Men. Let all this encourage drooping Spirits, and banish those
thoughts of God which Satan is apt to inject, and which are utterly unworthy of
his Love and kindness toward Man.

3. Study that great Mystery of Godliness, God manifest in the Flesh. Eye the
Incarnation of the Son of God, John 1. 14. The Word was made Flesh, and dwelt
among us, and we beheld his Glory, the Glory as of the only begotten of the
Father full of Grace and Truth. God is the Fountain of Grace, but being made
Man, Man has access into that Fountain: and the Son of God shows himself to be
truly the Redeemer and Christus Apostolis inde agnitus est pro Filio Dei, quod
complementum omnium quae ad spirituale Dei regnum pertinent, in se haberet,
denique quod in omnibus vere se praestiterit Redemptorem and Messiam, quae
maxim insignis est nota qua discerni ab aliis omnibus debuit. Calv. in Johan.
c. 1.
Messiah, because he is abundantly, nay, infinitely able to furnish with all
Grace, whosoever come to him. 'Twas Magnum hoc mysterium, Verbum caro factum
pro paucis aut levibus noxis editum orbi non fuit. Mel. Adamus in vita Cranmeri.
Cranmer's Comfort in his last Prayer, that this great Mystery, God manifest in
the Flesh, was not only for a few, or light Offenses. The greatest of
Transgressors may from hence be Encouraged, both the Godhead and Manhood of
Christ are to be eyed, and truly it may be very reviving to contemplate both.

1. The Godhead of Christ. And if he be God, how safely may he be trusted in?
The Apostle tells us, that by Him were all things Created that are in Heaven
and in Earth; Visible and Invisible, whether they be Thrones or Dominions, or
Principalities or Powers, all things were made by him, and for him, Col. 1. 16.
He is said also, to uphold all things by the Word of his Power, Heb. 1. 3.
surely then his hand is not shortened, that it cannot save. Christ is affirmed
to be over all God Blessed for ever, Romans 9. 5. Let not any imagine, that he is
only God by Office, for he is also styled the true God and Eternal Life, 1
John 5. 20. And if the Scripture say, that he is the true God, let not any
Corrupt mind be so bold, as to assert that he is God improperly so called.
Until we look as high as the Godhead of our Lord Jesus, we cannot find
whereon our Faith may rest, nor wherewith our Consciences may be satisfied.

In Scripture, God and Blood, Jehovah and Righteousness are joined together.
God is said to have Purchased the Church with his own (...)
Blood, Acts 20. 28. And Jer. 23. 6. This is the Name whereby Christ is called,
Jehovah, or, the Lord our Righteousness. As his blood could not have been shed,
if he had not been Man, so the shedding of it would not have been sufficient
for the Redemption and Purchasing of the Church if he had not been God. Because
he is God, therefore his Righteousness being imputed unto sinners is sufficient
for their Justification, though they have none of their own that is worth
naming. The Apostle Magnifies the Gospel, because therein the Righteousness of
God is Revealed from Fairh to Faith, Romans 1. 17. It Is called the Righteousness
of God, not only because God the Father does accept of it as perfect and
sufficient, but because it is the Righteousness of Christ, who is truly God as
well as Man, and from whose Deity is derived such a value and virtue unto his
Sufferings and Obedience. Surely the more we view the Godhead of our Lord
Jesus, the firmer will be our recumbence upon him, and the less shall we be
afraid of the Enemies of our Salvation, since he can so easily subdue them.

2. The Manhood of Christ, as well as his Godhead must be eyed. How often in
the Gospel is he called the Son of man, Luke 19. 10. The Son of Man is come to
seek and to save that which was lost. The Son of man must be lifted up that he
might draw all men to him, John 12: 32, 34. The Apostle tells us there is but
one Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2. 5. By taking
our Nature upon him he is become near a kin to us, and is not ashamed to call
us Brethren, Heb. 2. 11, 12. Both he that sanctifies and they that are
sanctified are all of one. Christ who sanctifies, has the same humane nature
with Beleivers who are sanctified, for which cause he is not ashamed to call
them Brethren, saying I will declare thy Name unto my Brethren, in the midst of
the Church will I sing praise unto thee. With what boldness may the Children of
men come to the Lord Jesus, who was in all things made like them, that he might
be a Merciful and Faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people, Heb. 2. 17. Ruth emboldned her self
to speak unto Boaz, Spread thy skirt over thine handmaid for thou art a near
kinsman, Ruth. 3. 9. Our Lord Jesus is near a kin to us, it belongs to him to
redeem both us and our lost Inheritance; we may with confidence desire him to
spread his skirt over us, and to betroth us unto himself for ever.

4. For the comforting of a troubled Conscience, take notice of that complete
satisfaction that Christ has made unto Divine Justice, by offering up of
himself upon the cross for sin. Behold the Lamb of God slain, and taking away
the sin of the world. Three things are much to be studied by those that are
wounded in their spirits. Christ's suffering of Death his overcoming of Death;
and his seconding his sufferings with his perpetual intercession.

1. His suffering of Death. The Apostle takes much notice of the person who
died, he was altogether innocent; he died indeed for the unjust, but himself
was just and righteous. The penitent Thief spoke Truth upon the Cross, when he
rebuked his fellow, saying, Do not thou fear God seeing thou art in same
condemnation, and we indeed justly, for we receive the reward of our deeds, but
this man has done nothing amiss, Luke 23. 40, 41. Therefore he is likened
unto a Lamb without blemish and without spot. He was made sin indeed, and a
Curse for us; but he had no sin of his own, whereby the least Curse or
Punishment could be deserved. Christ was innocent; and Oh! how high and great a
Person was he? He being in the form of God, and thinking it no robbery to be
equal with God, yet humbled himself in the form of a Servant, and became
obedient to Death, even the Death of Cross. Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8. And since he
that was the Mighty God did thus humble and abase himself, there is no sin so
great but his humiliation may make satisfaction for it.

I do not wonder that the Apostle speaks so highly concerning the knowledge of
Christ Crucified. Here is the ground of man's Comfort and Salvation. When I
behold the Son of God who has the same Essence, Power, Glory, and Eternity with
the Father, stooping so low as to become Man: when I behold him not only a Man,
but a Man of Sorrows and acquainted with grief all his days; and read that at
last he was wounded and bruised, and slain for sin, I may be satisfied that
here is enough suffered to satisfy the justice of God to the full. Sin indeed
did rise high because committed against God, and it has been heightened by many
agrravations; but the Son of God, did stoop low when he became Man, and still
was more and more abased till he came to the lowest degree of his humiliation;
besides his sufferings were aggravated, for he knew before hand all that was to
come upon him, John 18. 4. He knew all the bitter ingredients and dregs of
wrath that were in that Cup which he was to drink off to the very bottom; and
in the midst of his sufferings his Father hides his face which made them so
much the greater. Oh who can conceive the weight that lay upon our Lord, when
all the iniquities of his whole Church lay upon him at once, and being under
all deserted, did roar out My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me?

Now if it be inquired, what the end of Christ was in his suffering of Death?
the answer must be, 'twas, that he might put away sin, his Blood was shed for
the remission of sin, and to deliver us from that wrath which by sin was
merited. Oh sweet Scripture, Romans 5. 8. But God commends his love toward us
in that whilst we were yet sinners Christ died for us, much more then being now
justified by his Blood we shall be saved from wrath through him. Our Lord was
delivered for our offenses; he was stricken for our iniquities, and it is
evident that he did undergo to the full whatever was required, and paid the
uttermost farthing of our debt, for he cried out upon the cross, (...), It is
finished, and then gave up the Ghost, Joh. 19. 30.

2. The troubled Conscience should not only take notice of Christ's suffering
Death, but also of his overcoming Death in his Resurrection. The Apostle in his
triumph of Faith, speaks of the Elect being secured from the charge of sin by
the Death of Christ, but rather by his Resurrection, Romans 8. 33, 34. Who shall
lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that justifies, who is he
that condemns? it is Christ that died; yea, rather that is risen again. If he
had been still in the grave all our hopes would have been buried with him. If
Christ be not raised your Faith is vain, ye are yet in your sins, 1 Cor. 15.
17. He was for our debt arrested as it were, and thrown into the grave, and
being come out again we may conclude, that justice has no more to demand, and
as our Surety he has no more to pay. Christ being raised from the dead, dies
no more; death has no more dominion over him, Romans 6. 9. His Resurrection
shows that his dying once was sufficient.

3. Christ seconds his sufferings with continual intercession. Porro hanc
intercessionem carnali sensu ne metiamur; non enim cogitandus est supplex
flexis genibus, manibus expansis Patrem deprecari: sed quia apparet ipse
assidue cum morte and resurrectione sua, quae vice sunt aeternae
intercessionis, and vivae orationis efficaciam habent ut Patrem nobis
concilient atque exorabilem reddant, merito dicitur intercedere. Calvin. in
Epist. ad Romans c. 8.
When he had by himself purged our sins, he sat down on the right hand of the
Majesty on High, and he ever lives to make intercession for us. It Is looked upon
as a great matter to have a friend in Court, that may speak a good word for us
to an earthly King, but how much more a privilege is it to have such a friend
as the Lord Jesus is, in the Court of Heaven, ready to back our Prayers with
his own intercession, which is ever prevalent? but troubled Souls may fear that
Christ prays not for them, since he says, I pray for these, I pray not for the
World, but for those which thou have given me, for they are thine, John 17. 9.
To this I reply; that Christ prays for all that believe in him, Neither pray I
for these alone, but for all them that shall believe on me through their word.
Now those troubled Souls that have no confidence in the Flesh, but are willing
to receive Christ as he is offered in the Gospel, these are to be counted among
Beleivers in him, and therefore may be encouraged by his intercession. Nay the
Scripture speaks expressly, that He made intercession for the Transgressors,
Isa 53. 12. That was one of his petitions upon the Cross, Father forgive them
for they know not what they do, Luke 23, 34. and these Transgressors for whom
Christ interceded, it is very likely were those who were charged with murdering
of Christ, and were pricked in their Hearts, Act. 2. and brought unto true
Repentance.

5. For the comforting of an afflicted and troubled Conscience observe, how
plainly the Gospel does affirm that Christ is both able and willing to save.

1. It Is very evident that Christ is able to save, no guilt so great as to
exceed the merit of his Blood, his Blood cleanses from all sin, 1 John 1. 7.
and that though it be of never so deep a dye, Isa. 1. 18. Though your sins be
as scarlet they shall be white as Snow though they be red like crimson they
shall be as wool. No spiritual malady is hujus medici opprobrium, the reproach
of this Physician. What cures has he wrought, what sins has he pardoned! How
many that were once heinous transgressors on Earth before their Conversion, yet
notwithstanding were reconciled and regenerated by his Blood and Spirit, and
are now triumphing with him in his Kingdom! Oh you troubled Souls! be
encouraged that help is laid upon one that is Mighty, that is able to save unto
the uttermost, those that come unto God by him, Heb. 7. 25. The belief that
Christ can help will you have an influence upon you. The Leper came to Christ
upon a persuasion that Christ could make him clean, though he had no assurance
that Christ would do it. Lord if thou will, thou can make me clean, says the
Leper; Christ presently answers, I will be thou clean, and immediately his
Leprosy was cleansed, Mat. 8. 2, 3.

2. It Is very evident also that Christ is willing to save, because this is most
doubted of by troubled Spirits, I shall prove it by these arguments.

1. He declares himself willing to save the disobedient if they would but
consent to their own Salvation. Romans 10. ult. All the day long have I stretched
forth my hand to a stiff-necked and gainsaying people. He stretched forth his
hand as proffering pardon and life to them, and as being ready to receive them
if they had been minded to return. He tells the obstinate inhabitants of
Jerusalem, that he would often have gathered them, but they would not be
gathered, Mat. 23. 37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets
and stonest them that are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy
Children together as an hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, and ye
would not: and if he be willing to gather the obstinate, surely the penitent he
will not refuse; those that desire and are willing to fly under his wings for
shelter.

2. He promises that he will give rest to the heavy laden; that he will in no
wise cast out any that come to him. Hark how general the invitation is, Ho
every that thirsts come to the waters; and these waters of life may be had
without money and without price, Isa. 55. 1. They that labor, they that are
heavy laden, and all that labor and are heavy laden, are called to come to
Christ, and he assures them they shall find rest to their Souls, Mat. 11. 28,
29. One said, Mallemus carere sole, coelo, terra, omnibus Elementis, etc.
Selneccerus, in Paedag. Christian.
We had better want the Sun, the Heavens, the Earth, and all the Elements; yea,
and Life it self, than that one sweet Sentence of our Lord Jesus, Come unto me
all ye that Labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

3. Christ was sent by his Father, and did come himself to this very end, that
he might save. It Is certain the Father sent him to save, and that both Jews and
Gentiles, Isa. 49. 6. And he said, it is a light thing that thou should be my
Servant to raise up the Tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of
Israel: I will also give thee for a Light to the Gentiles, that thou may be
my Salvation to the ends of the Earth. Surely our Lord is willing to do that
which his Father sent him on purpose that he might do. He himself came to this
end, that he might save; nay, he seeks as well as saves, which shows his
willingness to save indeed. When the Shepherd seeks after the lost Sheep, we
conclude him willing to find it, and to bring it home to the Fold: And when the
Woman seeks after the lost piece of Silver, we conclude she is willing to get
it again. And Christ seeking after Sinners, and following them with his
Messengers and Word, and his Spirit which strives with them; certainly he is
very willing that those who are dead should be made alive, and who are lost
should be found, and made partakers of his Salvation.

4. All fullness dwells in Christ on purpose that he may impart of it. He
charges them that are Rich in this World to be ready to Distribute, and willing
to Communicate; and can you think that he is a Niggard of his own Riches? He
counseled even lukewarm Laodicea to come to him for Goldtryed in the Fire,
that she might be Rich indeed, as before she was in her own Opinion. He is
ready to satiate the weary, and to repenish every sorrowful Soul.

5. It Is for his Fathers Honor and his own Satisfaction when any are saved.
Therefore Christ is most willing to save. God is Honored hereby; the Apostle
gives us plainly to understand that when any obtain Redemption, and
forgiveness, and are accepted in the Beloved, This is to the praise of the
Glory of the Grace of God, Ephesians. 1. 6. So v. 12. That we should be to the praise
of his Glory, who first trusted in Christ. It Is an Excellent passage of Luther,
Et si ego indignus qui eripiar and salver, Tu tamen dignus qui lauderis,
glorificeris, ameris in saecula; At laudari non poteris, nec miserecordia
glorificatur, nisi sint quos eripias a morte and salves ab inferno. Luther.
Tom. 2. 76. a.
Though I, Lord, am unwortthy to be delivered and saved, yet thou art worthy to
be praised, and Glorified, and loved for ever; but thus praised thou will not
be, nor thy Mercy Glorified, unless there are some whom thou do save and
deliver. It Is also for the satisfaction of Christ to save, Isa. 53. 11. He
shall see of the travel of his Soul, and be satisfied. When a Woman is in
strong pain, who can in Reason question her willingness to be delivered? Surely
she is desirous to see of the Travel of her Body, and how joyful is she when a
Child is Born into the World? The new Birth, and the Salvation of sinners, is
the Fruit of the Travel of Christ's soul; surely he is willing to see this
Fruit. Away, away with unbelieving Doubts! He is willing to save, be you but
willing to be saved, and you shall in no wise miss of Salvation.

6. For the Relieving of a troubled Conscience, take Notice of the Holy Ghost,
whose Office is to be a Comforter, John 14. 16. I will pray the Father, and he
shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, even the
Spirit of Truth, etc. There is great care taken by our Lord, not only that his
Church may be safe, but also that she may have Peace and Joy, and Comfort, even
in this Vail of tears. These are some of the words which he speaks: Peace I
leave with you, my Peace I give unto you; I will not leave you comfortless, let
not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid, John 14. 18. 27. and John
15. 11. These things have I spoken to you, that my Joy might remain in you, and
that you Joy may be full. The Prophets of the Lord are Commanded to speak
Comfort to his People, Isa. 40. 1, 2. Comfort ye, Comfort ye my People, says
your God, speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her that her warfare
is accomplished, and her Iniquity is Pardoned. And it is the work of the Spirit
Powerfully to apply and set home these Comfortable words, that they may be
effectual unto Consolation. Let humbled Souls Observe these two things.

1. The Spirit of God, who is a Comforter, is promised unto all that ask him.
Some of you know what that Natural Affection is which Parents bear to Children:
Affections descend, Parents love their Children ordinarily better than Children
do their Parents. Now, with what readiness, with how good a will do Earthly
Parents give Bread unto their hungry Children; and Christ expressly says, that
with much more readiness will our Heavenly Father give his Holy Spirit unto
them that ask him, Luke 11. 13. This Scripture does give sufficient warrant
unto any breathing to go unto God for his Spirit to enlighten, to convince, to
renew and change, and at last to comfort them with as much confidence, as
Children go for Necessaries unto the most tender Earthly Fathers.

2. These consolations of the Spirit especially belong unto those who are
troubled as you are. The broken Vessel is fit for the Oil of Joy and Gladness
to be poured into it, Isa. 61. 1, 2. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me,
because the Lord has Anointed me to Preach good tidings to the Meek; he has
sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to Proclaim Liberty to the Captives, and
the opening of the Prison to them that are bound, to Proclaim the Acceptable
Year of the Lord, to Comfort all that mourn. The Spirit does delight to comfort
them that are cast down, for these will not take up with other Comforts, they
prize the Spirits Consolations, they cry Grace, Grace, when they receive them,
and walk humbly and warily afterward, being afraid to lose such precious things
by fresh Trangressions.

7. For the Comforting of a troubled Conscience, Behold and Wonder at Gods
condescension, in that he does entreat sinners to be Reconciled, 2 Cor. 5. 20.
Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we
pray you in Christ's stead be Reconciled unto God. You cannot imagine that He
who has been so bitterly provoked by you should be so ready to forgive you, and
so willing to be Friends with you; but you would do well to observe, that after
the Lord had promised Mercy and abundant Pardon to sinners willing to forsake
their evil ways and thoughts, he presently adds, that his Mercy shall be
extended to them, though they were not able to conceive it. My thoughts are not
your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, says the Lord. That is, you must
not measure my Mercy by yours, nor think that I am able and willing to put up
and forgive no more than you. You are easily provoked, but I am slow to Anger;
you are hardly Reconciled, but I am ready to forgive. I am willing to remit the
greatest wrongs, and to receive the wrong-doers into favor, if they do but
sincerely return to me, and are willing for the future to please and serve me.
As the Heavens are high above the Earth, so are my ways of Kindness and
Compassion, higher than your ways; and my thoughts than your thoughts, Isa. 55.
8, 9.

When there is a difference between any, the Inferior commonly entreats the
Superior to be Reconciled; but here the Lord, who is infinitely above us,
entreats Us to be Friends, that are infinitely below him. He that does the
wrong commonly entreats him whom he has wronged; but here the Lord, who has
been Injured and Affronted, and Offended, and can most easily be Revenged, does
entreat them that have done the Injury. He that is at the Mercy of another,
commonly entreats him at whose Mercy he lies; but here the Lord, who has
absolute Power to do what he will with Offenders, and can Glorify himself in
their Eternal Destruction, does entreat them to be at Peace, and to Repent,
that they may be saved. Finally, he that is the depending Person commonly does
entreat him upon whom he has such dependence: but here the Lord, who has no
dependence at all upon sinners, nor any need at all of them, does yet entreat
them to come to him, who have such entire dependence upon him, that they cannot
live or move or be without him, and cannot be happy but in the enjoyment of
him. Oh what manner of Grace and Kindness is this! and how may drooping spirits
be revived, and encouraged to hope in such a God: read the parable of the
prodigal and see him by necessity driven home to his Fathers house, behold his
Father running to him, embracing him though he had spent all among Harlots and
in Riotous living, and then give a guess how much more willing the Lord is to
receive returning sinners.

8. For the right comforting of a troubled Conscience, Study well the Covenant
of Grace. The Covenant of works is not to be laid hold upon by any of the
fallen Children of Adam; this promises life indeed but it is upon condition of
perfect and perpetual conformity both of Heart and Life unto the Law of God.
But the Covenant of Grace is vastly different from that first Covenant. Sinners
may lay hold on this new Covenant, and they cannot please the Lord better than
by so doing; and therefore choosing the things that please him, and talking hold
on his Covenant are joined together, Isa. 56. 4. If sinners being convinced of
their lost estate by their iniquities, are willing to receive Christ to be
their Prince and Savior, and to turn and give themselves to God; he has
engaged in this Covenant to be their God and Father, to give them Grace and at
last Glory and in the mean while to withhold no good thing from them. In this
Covenant of Grace observe these four things, all which may be helpful unto your
Consolation.

1. This Covenant is well ordered, 2 Samuel 23. 5. He has made with me an
Everlasting Covenant ordered in all things, and sure this is all my Salvation,
this is all my desire. It Is admirably suited unto the state and desires, and
wants of those that are taken into Covenant. They have no righteousness or
works of their own that they may rest upon: but here is a perfect Righteousness
provided, even the Righteousness of Christ made theirs? as their sins were
made his by imputation. The Apostle Paul speaks plainly of the Blessedness of
the man to whom the Lord imputes Righteousness without works, Romans 4. 6. and 2
Cor. 5. ult. He has made him to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might
be made the Righteousness of God in him. As they have no Righteousness, so
they are sick of Spiritual Plagues, but in this Covenant God has promised to
cure them, Isa. 57. 18. I have seen his ways and will heal him, I will lead
him also and restore comfort unto him and his mourners. They need cleansing
because of their manifold defilements. But God promises, that he will sprinkle
clean water upon them and make them clean, and from all their filthiness, and
from all their Idols he will cleanse them. They are weak and unable to do their
duty, and persevere in well-doing, but God promises to renew their strength, so
that they shall run and not be weary, and walk and not faint, Isa. 40. ult.

2. This Covenant is sure. It Is confirmed by the Sacraments which are the Seals
of this Covenant; it is confirmed by the oath of God, Heb. 6. 17. 18. (s) Quam
impossible est ut Christus in sua justitia non placeat, tam impossible ut nos
fide nostra qua illi inhae^emus, non placeamus, Luther. Tom. 2 p. 485. a.
Wherein God willing more abundantly to show to the Heirs of Promise the
immutability of his Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath, that by two immutable
things, wherein it was impossible for God to lie, we might have strong
consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold on the hope set before us.
When God swears in his wrath, it may make obstinate sinners to Tremble; but
when he swears in his Love, it may cause humble sinners to Rejoice. And not
only the Oath of God but the Death of Christ the Testator makes this Covenant
sure. A Testament though alterable while men are living, yet it is of force when
they are dead, Heb. 9. 16, 17. Our Lord Jesus the Testator has undergone Death
and has bequeathed unto all brokenhearted sinners, that come to him and are
willing to be wholly His; Pardon, and Grace, and Peace, and Glory; and
therefore all this shall be surely given them.

3. The Covenant is Everlasting, the things therein promised are durable, and
that love which humble and believing Souls have an interest in, is
unchangeable. The Covenant shall never fail on Gods part, Isa. 54. 10. The
Mountains shall depart and the Hills be removed, but my kindness shall not
depart from thee, nor the Covenant of my Peace be removed, says the Lord, that
has Mercy upon thee. And he has engaged it shall not fail on the part of his
People, Jer. 32. 40. I will make with them an Everlasting Covenant that I will
not turn away from them to do them good (but how Lord if they fall back and
deal treacherously?) No, says he, I will put my Fear into their Hearts, that
they shall not depart from me.

4. The Promises of this New Covenant are made good for the Lords own sake, not
for ours, well may it be called a Covenant of Grace, for whatsoever is given by
virtue of it is bestowed freely. Let free Grace be well studied, and all
objections from unworthiness will fall to the ground: God never pardoned any
because they did Deserve a pardon, but all that he has pardoned, had they been
dealt with according to their sins had been condemned everlastingly. O you
troubled Consciences hark how the Lord speaks, Isa. 43. 24. 25. Thou have made
me to serve with thy sins and even wearied me with thy iniquities, One would
have thought that hereupon God should have said, I will now make thee to groan
under my wrath, and my wearied patience shall be turned into fiery indignation.
Oh no the Lord instead of breathing forth anger, abounds with Kindness, I even
I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for my own sake, and will not
remember thy sins. And as for his own sake he promises to pardon the guilty, so
also to cleanse and renew the defiled; A new heart will I give you, and a new
Spirit will I put within you, I will put within you my own Spirit, and he shall
cause you to walk in my Statutes: I will save you from all your Uncleannesses,
Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27, 28, And then it follows v. 32. Not for your sakes do I this,
says the Lord God, be it known to you, be ashamed and confounded for your own
ways, O House of Israel.

9. For the relieving of a troubled Conscience, heed those encouragements and
assurances which are given unto such as desire after Grace and Holiness. Christ
pronounces them blessed that Hunger and Thirst, that is, which desire earnestly
after Righteousness, Mat. 5. 6. God has promised to fulfill the desires of them
that fear him. But those under trouble of Spirit are full of Holy desires; let
them not be dismayed, all their desire is before God, and their groaning is not
hid from him. I told you before, that a lazy wish after Grace signifies nothing
where there is stronger desire to continue in sin, and that desire keeps a man
under the power of sin and hinders his turning unto God. But this is certainly
true, that a true desire after Grace, does argue Truth of Grace. If you ask me
how true desires after Grace may be known, I shall answer in these particulars.

1. True desires after spiritual things are grounded upon Judgment and
Understanding. David's mind was enlightened to see the goodness, al sufficiency,
and glory of God, and therefore he cries out my Soul Thirsts for God, for the
living God, Psalm. 42. 2. Through the precepts of the Lord he got understanding,
and perceived the Evil of sin, and upon this followed Hatred of it, which does
include a desire to have it totally subdued.

2. True desires after spiritual things are not to be diverted, but do prevail
whatever is cast in the way. Let the World and the God of it make never so big
offers, all is undervalued in comparison of the favor of God, and fellowship
with him, Psalm. 73. 25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none on
Earth that I desire besides thee. All things else are counted loss, and dung
compared with the Lord Jesus, and the Pearl of price.

3. True desires are Universal, after All kind of Grace. Strength against every
Corruption is longed for, and it is looked upon as a blessed thing to be filled
with all the Fruits of Righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the Glory
and Praise of God, Phil. 1.

4. True desires put Souls upon earnest seeking. There will be frequency and
fervency in Prayer, a serious attendance upon God in his Ordinances, pains will
not be grudged, that are taken for the securing of a Soul, for the obtaining
such excellent things as the Loving kindness of God, the Grace of his Spirit,
and a Kingdom that cannot be moved. One thing have I desired of the Lord that
will I seek after, Psalm. 27. 4. I might also add that these desires are
permanent, not pangs that soon wear off; but they do abide: there is also grief
and pain, because there is so little of that which is desired, so little life
and softness of heart, and purity; and though never so much is given, yet they
are unsatiable here on Earth. These desires will be fully satisfied with no
less than the seeing of God face to face above, Psalm. 17. 15. As for me I will
behold thy Face in Righteousness, I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy
likeness.

10. For the comforting of an afflicted Conscience cast your eyes upon those
notorious Sinners Deus non fictos sed veros peccatores salvat, quia non ficta
sed vera est ejus misericordia, Luther. Tom. 2. p. 187. a.
which have obtained Mercy. Was Saul an ordinary sinner, that had been a
Blasphemer? or David that had been guilty of Murder and Adultery? or Solomon
that is charged with idolatry? or the Corinthians that abused themselves with
mankind, besides several other abominations? What Miracles of free Grace are
these! and yet it has not done the most it can. Let us suppose a greater sinner
than any mentioned in Scripture, he is not too great for God to forgive, if
himself is willing to forsake his wickedness. The Lord has proclaimed his Name.
34. 6, 7. He is a God Merciful, this may relieve us when sensible of our
misery; he is Gracious, this may encourage us against our vileness and
unworthiness; he is Long-suffering, this may keep us from sinking into despair
though 'twas long before we thought of turning to him: He is abundant in
Goodness and Truth, though we are never so empty here is enough to fill us: He
keeps Mercy for thousands, his Treasures are not exhausted by former ages, we
may go to him and be enriched, he forgives iniquity transgression and sin. Let
none then say there is no Hope, of what sorts or sizes soever their sins be.

But here let me Caution again, that no sin be secretly cherished, for if the
cause of trouble remain, how can Conscience be truly Comforted? In good earnest
set upon the Mortification of all the Members of the Body of sin, but
especially pluck out the right Eye, and cut off the right Hand. Let not thy
Soul spare any Lust, 'twill be more fatal to thee than Readiness sparing Agag,
which cost him his Kingdom. Herbert does very Ingenuously and truly tell us,
that Peace of Conscience is not to be attained, unless there be a flight of
sin. The Church, page 117. 118.

Sweet Peace, where do thou dwell? I humbly crave,
Let me once know;
I sought thee in a secret Cave,
And asked if Peace were there.
A hollow wind did seem to answer, No:
Go seek elsewhere.
I did; and going did a Rainbow note:
Surely thought I,
This is the Lace of Peaces Coat:
I will search out the matter.
But while I looked, the Clouds immediately
Did break and scatter.
Then went I to a Garden, and did spy
A gallant flower,
The Crown Imperial: Sure, said I,
Peace at the root must dwell.
But when I dug, I saw a Worm devour
What showed so well.
At length I met a reverend good old man;
Whom when for Peace
I did demand, he thus began:
There was a Prince of Old
At Salem dwelt, who lived with good increase
Of Flock and Fold.
He sweetly lived; yet sweetness did not save
His Life from Foes.
But after Death, out of his Grave
There sprang twelve stalks of Wheat:
Which many wondering at, got some of those
To Plant and Set.
It prosper'd strangely, and did soon disperse
Through all the Earth,
For they that taste it, do rehearse,
That Virtue lies therein;
A secret Virtue, bringing Peace and Mirth
By flight of sin.
Take of this Grain, which in my Garden grows,
And grows for you;
Make Bread of it: and that repose,
And Peace, which every where
With so much earnestness you do pursue,
Is only there.
I have laid down several grounds of Consolation for troubled Consciences, it
will be needful now to Answer some Objections they are wont to make against all
that Comfort which is tendered to them.

Object. 1. Some do cry out, that their sins are, primae Magnitudinis, of the
first Magnitude; that guilt which they have contracted is so vast, and
themselves are so inexcusable in their wickedness, that they cannot let it once
enter into their thoughts, that ever God should pardon or save such provoking
wretches and rebels as They have been. They call to remembrance what they have
been, and what they have done; their Iniquities which they have committed have
been of a very heinous Nature; and as to their Number, what was said concerning
Abraham's Seed, may very well be applied here; they have been so many as the
Stars of the Sky in multitude, and as the Sand which is by the Seashore
innumerable. To speak Truth, the Greatness of sin is the grand Objection
against Comfort.

Answ. 1. When the greatness of sin causes perplexity, behold how much greater
the Mercy of the Lord is. This Mercy is high as Heaven, what can thou do?
deeper than Hell, what can thou know? The measure thereof is longer than the
Earth, and broader than the Sea: But yet as great as it is, it does not give the
least encouragement to presumption, but against despair and despondency it may
be a mighty Antidote. Contemplate the Mercy of God in Christ; eye his
sufferings, which were very great; eye the greatness of him that suffered, and
then you will see sin Peccatum est sicut Magnus Goliath, and omnibus viribus
oppugnat Conscientiam; sed si credas in Dominum Jesum pro te morruum, senties
peccatum stipula levius and infirmius. Luther. Tom. 3. p. 367. b.
exceeded by the sufferings of Christ, and the Mercy of God. Hark to the
Apostle, Romans 5. 20. Moreover the Law entered that the Offense might abound, but
where sin abounded, Grace did much more abound, that as sin has Reigned unto
Death, even so might Grace Reign through Righteousness unto Eternal Life by
Jesus Christ our Lord. Though Souls are sensible never so much of the abounding
of sin, Grace does superabound; let Man do as much as he can in a way of
wickedness, the Lord can outdo him in a way of Grace and Mercy.

That is a notable promise, Mic. 7. 19. having said, Who is a God like unto
thee, pardoning Iniquity, delighting in Mercy? it follows, thou will cast all
their sin into the depth of the Sea. In the deepest part of the Sea, the
greatest Mountains, if they could be cast in, would be swallowed up as well as
Mole-hills. Divine Mercy is such a depth, it can cover the greatest sins as
well as the smallest; and being once cast into this depth, they shall never
rise again unto the sinners Condemnation, any more than things cast into the
deepest part of the Ocean can ever be fetched up again.

2. In Scripture you may find the greatness of sin used and pleaded as an
Argument for the obtaining of Mercy and forgiveness. Listen to the Psalmist,
Psalm. 25. 11. For thy Namesake, O Lord, pardon my Iniquity, for it is great;
this is a strong Argument, for the greater sin is, the more Glorious is the
Lords Name and Grace in passing it by. Just as it is more for a man's Honor to
forgive the Debt of a Thousand pound than of a few pence only. The Lord is
willing to Honor his own Mercy, and ready to forgive much: But he expects that
they to whom much is given, should love much, as there is very good reason.

Object. 2. Those in trouble of Conscience do Object, They fear it is now too
late to come to Christ, and turn to God; indeed if they had accepted of
invitations in time, it might have been well with them, but now they are afraid
the Sun is set and will never rise more; and that the day of Grace is past and
gone, and that the Night of Darkness and Trouble upon their Souls is but the
sore-runner of the blackness of darkness for ever.

Answ. 1. Who tells thee that the day of Grace is past? If it be Satan, surely
such a Liar is not to be believed; besides he contradicts himself, for
heretofore he used to tell thee, 'twas time enough hereafter to Repent. If it
be the sad surmise of thine own heart, surely such an Ignorant and deceitful
heart as thine is not to be credited, as if it were infallible. If God tells
thee so, then it is either in his Word, but thou can not show the place where
he has said it; or by some extraordinary Revelation; but this thou can not,
if sober-minded, pretend unto.

2. Remember some have been called at the eleventh hour of the day; nay, the
Thief upon the Cross but one moment before Night; who then can peremptorily say
that the day of Grace is past, as long as Life remains? Let not presuming
sinners make an ill use of this which has been said; for they that put off
Repentance because of the lasting of the day of Grace, before they are aware,
may drop into the Grave and Hell, and then they will Repent for ever, that they
did not Repent sooner; but their Repentance will be too late, and to no purpose.

3. If your need of Grace be seen, and Christ and Grace are valued above Gold
that perishes, and all the Pleasures and Honors of the World, which are only
for a season: The day of Grace is so far from being past, that Grace is really
wrought in you. If the Spirit had not been, and were not still really at work
in you, you would not have such desires to be Sanctified throughout, as well as
Justified from all Offenses.

Object. 3. Some do further say, that they are Judicially hardened; they can
think of God and Christ, and Sin, and Death and Hell, and yet their hearts are
no more affected than if they were stocks or stones; upon this they conclude,
that God has spoken concerning them, as he did concerning Israel of Old, Isa.
6. 10. Make the heart of this People fat, and make their Ears heavy, and shut
their Eyes, lest they see with their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and
understand with their Heart, and Convert, and be healed.

Answ. 1. Your dullness and unaffectedness may possibly proceed not so much from
your Hearts, as from distemper and cloudiness of your Heads: and if in all
things else you find a kind of stupidness, and unconcernedness even about your
worldly matters also: you must not from distemper of Body conclude the judicial
hardening of your Hearts.

2. Those in Scripture which were judicially hardened, never complained of their
hardness, but this is your complaint and burden. Pharaoh and the Pharisees
were both hardened in a way of judgment, but though Pharaoh was sensible of
other Plagues, yet not at all of this which was incomparably the worst of all
the Plagues of Egypt; he cries out, pray to the Lord to take away the Locusts,
the Frogs, the Thunder and Hail; but never, pray to the Lord to take away the
Heart of Stone from him. And as for the Pharisees, they thought themselves
Righteous, and whole, and slighted a Physician and Savior, for they thought
they could do well enough without him.

3. You are not altogether past feeling, because you feel your own hardness,
and it is a mercy that you know this Plague of your own heart. Oh go to the
Physician who has promised to cure it, and to give an heart of Flesh to you.
This is Gods way and method to make sinners sensible of their hardness, that he
may soften them; of their blindness, that he may give them Eye Salve; of their
filthiness, that he may cleanse them; of their guilt that he may pardon them;
of their emptiness that he may fill them.

Object. 4. They under trouble of Spirit do further object, alas we are not
able to come to Christ, though our Eternal Salvation does lie on it; our
Consciences are wounded but we cannot come for cure and ease.

Answ. 1. Is this a small matter, that God has made you sensible of your
natural inability? how many do mistake, and think they have a power to help
themselves, and this hinders them from seriously applying themselves unto Him
that alone is able to save. You see, and say, you have no might, it is well, a
promise belongs to you, Isa. 40. 29. He gives Power to the faint, and to them
that have no might, he increases strength, i. e. To them that see they have no
might, for all have really none.

2. Though you cannot come to Christ for Grace and Comfort, yet the Father can
draw you; and have not you an Heart to cry to him to do this for you? What Is
your Language in secret Prayer? Is it not Draw me, and I will run after thee?
Is it not Turn thou me, and I shall be turned? Thus spoke the Spouse, Cant. 1.
Thus spoke Ephraim, of Old, Jer. 31. and both were heard; nay, the Lord says, I
have surely heard Ephraim, surely your cries for drawing and turning shall not
be in vain.

3. You say, you are not able to come to Christ; but are you willing to come to
him? Yes, pray who has made you able to be thus willing, but only that God who
works to will of his own good Pleasure? If you are willing to come, you are
able to come; for your coming lies in being willing. If you are willing to have
the Son, you have him, and Life by him, Non pedibus sed affectu, non migrando
sed amando venitur ad Christum. Augustine.
for it is with your Wills that you receive him, and so have Power to become the
Children of God. The Apostle tells us; That with the Heart man believes unto
Righteousness, Romans 10. 10. By the Heart, in Scripture, is commonly meant the
Will; so that if the Will consents to have Christ, as Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption: Here is indeed that Faith which is Justifying
and Saving. Christ having taken the Will, has taken the main Fort, that by
Nature stands out against him, and Commands the whole Soul.

Object. 5. Some under trouble of Conscience cry out, They have been
enlightened, and under Conviction heretofore; but since their Illumination and
Convictions they have fallen away; and therefore now they conclude, there is
nothing remains, but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment, and of fiery
Indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries.

Answ. 1. All backsliding, though gross, is not the unpardonable sin. David
and Peter were both enlightened, both did fall, and that into gross wickedness,
and yet both Repented, both were pardoned, and restored to favor, and both are
now in Glory.

2. Even Back-sliders are called upon to return. The Children of Israel had
played the Harlots with many Lovers, they had spoken and done evil things as
they could, and yet many times in one Chapter, Jer. 3. they are called after to
come home to God, from whom they had so deeply Revolted: though therefore you
ought to mourn, and be in bitterness for your Apostacies and unstedfastness,
yet you must not mourn without hope.

3. Promises are made to Back-sliders, if they return, of Mercy and Healing,
Jer. 3. 12. Go and Proclaim these words toward the North, and say, Return,
thou backsliding Israel, says the Lord, and I will not cause mine Anger to
fall upon you, for I am Merciful, says the Lord, and I will not keep Anger for
ever. And v. 22. again he says, Return ye backsliding Children, and I will heal
your backslidings. O you poor sinners, that are troubled for your
backslidings, catch hold of these words, as Benhadad's Servants did of the
words of the King of Israel, and say, Behold, we come unto thee, for thou art
the Lord our God.

Object. 6. After all, some may say, Though we cannot deny that we are willing
to part with every sin, and to have our Hearts cleansed; though we desire God
to be our Father and Portion, and Christ to be our Prince, and Head, and
Savior, and Husband; yet we are afraid our Hearts are not right, because all
this may be merely for fear of Hell, and because unless we do all this, it is
impossible that Hell should be escaped.

Answ. 1. You ought to be afraid of Hell: Why is such a dreadful place spoken
of, but that the Sons of Men might dread the coming thither? Our Lord Exhorts
his Disciples to fear God upon this very Account, that he was able to destroy
both Body and Soul in Hell, Luke 12. 5. Mat. 10. 28.

2. A fear of Hell never, that we read of, carried Reprobates very far, or
surely not so far as to make them willing to cast away every sin, and to accept
of whole Christ, and to give up themselves, Bodies, Souls, Health, Strength,
Time, all to him, as appears in Felix, Agrippa, Herod, and others.

3. If you desire Cleansing and Sanctification, it is a sign that sin it self is
a burden to you, as well as the Punishment of it feared by you: If this might
be otherwise avoided, could you be contented to be slaves to sin still?

4. I grant, it may be said concerning prizing of Christ, choosing of God, and
endeavoring to please him in all things; that you must go to Hell if you don't
do all this. But where does the Scripture say, that though you do all this, you
may go to Hell after all? It Is true, unless you are sincere, you must go to
Hell; but it does not follow, that though you are sincere, you may go to Hell
notwithstanding.

5. Do not you look upon the Lord as all-sufficient? as the chiefest good? Do
not you see an emptiness in all the Creatures, and the evil that is in sin? Is
not sin hated, the Creature scorned in comparison of this God? If so, it is a
sign that the goodness of God does take you, and affect your Hearts, as well as
the fear of Hell affright you.

6. If there be a will to be Sanctified throughout, and to be turned with your
whole Heart unto God; this is not the product of slavish Fear of Hell, but is
really the work of the Lords Spirit. It Is he that works both to will and to do
of his good pleasure, Phil 2. The most startling Truths, and astonishing
considerations would never be able of themselves to make you willing to divorce
your Lusts, and to accept of Christ upon Gospel-terms If therefore you are
brought unto this, that you prize the Lord Jesus at so high a rate, as to
consent to part with every sin for his sake, and to follow the Lamb in what way
soever it shall please him to lead you; you may warrantably conclude, That the
Spirit has been at Work in you, and having begun a good work in you, he will
complete it. And you may confidently say, with David, Psalm. 138. 8. The Lord
will perfect that which concerns me; thy Mercy, O Lord, endures for ever,
forsake not the work of thine own hands.

USE IV. Of Exhortation. Let it be the care of you all to have a good
Conscience. The Apostle Paul in the Text is set forth as a good Example for all
to follow, as a very fair Copy for all to write after. It is Counsel ordinarily
given to Tradesmen, Keep your Shops, and your Shops will keep you. So I may
say, Look well to your Consciences, and your Consciences will look well to you.
If there be an Heaven upon Earth, it is a good Conscience; if there be an Hell
upon Earth, it is a bad Conscience. I shall second my Exhortation with these
following Arguments:

1. He that has a good Conscience can look upward to God with Confidence, 1
John 3. 21, 22. Beloved, if our Heart condemn us not, then have we confidence
toward God, and whatsoever we ask we receive of him, because we keep his
Commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight. With what
boldness may such come to the Throne of Grace! For God is their Friend, nay,
their Father, and how infinitely does he surpass all other Parents in Wisdom,
Affection, Tenderness, Sufficiency! and therefore expectation may be raised to
a great height of receiving much from him.

A good Conscience sees smiles in Gods Face: Fury is not in him, all his wrath
is taken away, and his Countenance does behold the upright, Psalm. 11. ult. God
is in Covenant with these upright ones, and with Joy they may study the
Attributes of God, and see how all are engaged for them. He is Wise for them,
Good for them, Faithful for them, All-sufficient for them; nay, his Justice,
being satisfied by his Son, is for them too. He is Infinite, Eternal, and
unchangeable, and all this makes for them; and how great is their Happiness,
that such a God is theirs! David's Meditation of God was sweet; God was his
Joy, nay, his exceeding Joy. The Lord being his Portion, how does he exult in
his spirit, saying, The lines are fallen to me in pleasant places, yea, I have
a very goodly Heritage, Psalm. 16. 5, 6.

2. He that has a good Conscience can look inward with Satisfastion. The
dissatisfaction of a bad Conscience is great, and most Afflicting; when a Man
retires to himself, and is tortured by himself, and his self-reflecting
thoughts prove as so many stings to pierce and pain him; what a case is that
Man in? These kind of Tribulations find a Man out, and there is no flying from
them, as Augustine Inter omnes tribulationes animae humanae nulla est major
quam conscientia delictorum, nam si ibi vulnus non sit, sanumque sit ^^^us
hominis quod conscientia vocatur, ubicunque alibi passus fuerit tribulationes,
illuc confugiet, and ibi inveniet Deum. Si autem ibi requies non sit propter
abundantiam iniquitatis, quid facturus est homo? quo confugiet? fugiet ab agro
ad civitatem, a publico ad domum, a domo ad cubiculum, and sequitur tribulatio.
A cubiculo jam quo fugiat non habet nisi interius ad cubile suum. Porro si ibi
tumultus, si fumus iniquitatis, si flamma sceleris non illuc potest confugere:
pellitur enim inde, and cum inde pellitur a seipso pellitur, and ecce hostem
suum invenit, quo confugeret. Seipsum quo fugiturus est? Quocunque sugar it;
se, talem trahit post se and quocunque talem traxerit se, cruciat se. A seipso
sunt tribulationes quae, inveniunt hominem nimis; acerbiores enim non sunt; at
tanto sunt acerbiores quanto sunt interiores. Augustine. Enarrat, in Psalm. 45.
Tom. 8. page mihi 419.
Observes, and more inward they are, they are the more bitter.

But now he whose Conscience is good, as Solomon speaks, is satisfied from
himself. Fragilibus innititur qui adventio laesus est; exibit gaudium quod
intravit: at illud ex se ortum, fidele, firmumque est; cascit and ad extremum
^sque prosequitur. Seneca, Epist. 98.
He has Meat to eat which the World knows not of; his sincere endeavor to do
the will of God satisfies him better than the choicest Fare and Delicates.
Luther, whose Conscience was clear, who Preached Christ purely, and Loved
Christ sincerely, has one strange Expression, Miser sit qui possit, ego
nonpossum. Let him be miserable that can be miserable, I for my part cannot be
miserable. His God and his Conscience were such a Feast, and Joy and
Satisfaction to him, that he knew 'twas not in the Power of Earth or Hell to
daunt or hurt him.

Oh, what unutterable contentation is there in the Heart, that upon reflection
and search, finds it self the Temple of the Spirit, the Habitation where the
Father and the Son do make their abode: That finds it self Clothed with white
Raiment, Christ's Righteousness, Enriched with that Gold tried in the Fire,
Rev. 3. 18. made partaker of the Divine Nature, Adorned with the Image of God,
filled with the Graces of the Spirit, and thereby sees it fitting for the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light.

3. He that has a good Conscience can look downward, and see himself secured.
Never any one with a good Conscience went to the place of Torment, but only
those who refused to have a good Conscience, or made shipwreck of it. Though
Hell be prepared for the Devil, yet he has not the Keys of that place, but they
hang at Christ's Girdle, Rev. 1, 18. I am he that Lives, and was dead, and
behold I am alive for evermore, Amen, and have the Keys of Hell, and of Death.
And certainly, since Christ has the Keys of Hell, no Believers, whose
Consciences are truly good, shall be flung in thither, for these are the
Members of his Body; and the Head loves his Members too well, to suffer them to
be thrown into Everlasting fire.

A good Conscience by the eye of Faith looks down, and takes Notice of the
Damned in their Misery, sees them groaning under the fierceness of the
Almighty's wrath, sees them fed upon by the Worm that dies not, and tormented
in that flame which shall never be extinguished, and bound fast in those Chains
of Darkness, which shall never be unloosed; and then rejoices to see it self
safe under the wing of the Lord Jesus; rejoices in that Deliverance and
Salvation from future wrath, whereof Christ is the Author.

4. He that has a good Conscience can look upon his outward comforts and take
comfort in them. What he has is not a Snare to him, but attended with a
blessing; upon this score the Psalmist says, a little that a Righteous man has
is better than the Riches of many wicked, Psalm. 37. 16. A good Conscience does
in a great measure cure that vanity and vexation of Spirit that is in the
Creature; for when these outward enjoyments are given with the Divine Blessing
then as Solomon speaks no sorrow is added with them.

The upright man does taste the love of God in the Food he eats, and though it
be but a dinner of Herbs, yet this love makes it better than a stalled Ox with
the Lords Curse and Hatred. He feels the love of God in the Clothes he wears
and though of coarser cloth, yet they are better than the Purple, and fine
Linen and costly array of that rich man, that received all his good things in
this present world, and after was turned into Hell poor and naked. All the
gifts he receive are indeed blessings to one that is Righteous, for he has the
Giver with them, and is brought still nearer unto the Giver by them.

5. He that has a good Conscience can look upon adversity without dread. When
the Apostle was pressed out of measure even above strength, yet a good
Conscience was his rejoicing, Bias the Philosopher being asked what was
difficult? answered (...). Diogen. Laert. in vita Biantis, p. mihi. 60.
To bear with fortitude a change in our condition for the worse. Now a clear
Conscience will be very helpful unto such Fortitude and Patience. Job is of a
sudden stripped of his glory, robbed of his vast estate, and though a Prince
before, made poor to a Proverb, and yet Conscience bears him up, and makes him
able to say. The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, blessed be the name of
the Lord, Job. 1. 21. Sir Henry Wotton has a very good description of an happy
life, wherein he shows that a good Conscience is the best armor, and the
safest retreat whatever happens.

How happy is he born and Taught
That serves not another will,
Whose armor is his honest Thought,
And simple Truth his utmost skill!
Whose passions not his masters are,
Whose Soul is still prepared for death
Untied unto the World by care
Of public fame, or private breath.
Who envies none that chance does raise,
Nor Vice has ever understood
How deepest wounds are given by praise
Nor rules of State but rules of Good.
Who has his Life from rumors freed
Whose Conscience is his strong retreat,
Whose state can neither flatt'rers feed
Nor ruin make oppressors great.
Who God does late and early pray,
More of his Grace than Gifts to lend,
And entertains the harmless day
With a Religious book or Friend.
This man is freed from servile bands
Of hope to rise or fear to fall,
Lord of himself though not of Lands,
And having nothing yet has all.
A good Conscience will tend very much to fix the Heart, so as that evil
tidings shall not be so terrifying and dismaying. Hark what the Psalmist says,
Unto the upright there arises light in obscurity, surely he shall not be moved
for ever, he shall not be afraid Justum and tenacem propositi virum
Si fractis illabatur orbis
Impavidum ferient ruinae.

of evil tidings, his heart is fixed trusting in the Lord, Psalm. 112. 467.

6. He that has a good Conscience can look upon all the baits of the Tempter
and despise them. Satan is not able to compel and force us to sin; neither has
he power to determine the will of man to that which is evil; as the Lord has to
determine it unto that which is good, for then sin would principally lie at
Satan's door, as all the Glory of that good which is done by us, is to be
ascribed unto God. The Devil did not thrust the forbidden fruit into Eve's
Mouth, whether she would or no; but only did cunningly and strongly persuade
her to eat of it. In like manner he deals with us, he lays his baits Vnam esse
omnium rem pulcherrimam, eoque pulchriorem si vacet populo, neque plausum
captans, se tantum ipsa delectet. Quinetiam mihi quidem laudabilior a videntur
omnia, quae sine venditatione and sine populo test fiunt, non quo fugiendus
sit (omnia enim been facta in luce se collocari volunt) sed tamen nullum the
atrum virtuti conscientia majus est. Cicero. Tuscul. Quaestion. l. 3. page
mihi, 146.
before us, and endeavors our ruin by offering what does please us.

But a good Conscience is deaf unto the Devil, and scorns his offers, for his
offers are to the loss of the Righteous man. What are the riches of the World
which Satan talks so much of, compared with the unsearchable Riches of Christ?
what are the pleasures of sin, compared with peace of Conscience? what are all
Earthly advantages and preferments compared with Communion with God, and the
Light of his Countenance?

A good Conscience is firmly persuaded that it is good for us to draw near to
God, Psalm, 73. ult. to be near to Him is for our Honor, Interest, Safety,
Delight and satisfaction, and hereupon the Believer rejects Satan with an Holy
contempt and indignation; for he see^ it is folly as well as wickedness to leave
his Fathers House where there is bread enough and to spare, and to go feed upon
busks in the far Country.

7. He that has a good Conscience can look upon death with desire, which is so
exceeding terrible unto others. The Believer may indeed be willing to live that
he may serve his generation according to the will of God, and that he may do
that for Christ on Earth which he cannot do when he comes to heaven; but his
Conscience being pure and peaceable, having an assurance what a kindness death
will do him, He does with the Apostle desire to be dissolved and to be with
Christ, which is far better, Phil. 1. 23.

There is profit, pleasure and honor in a Believers departing, no wonder if he
desires to depart. There is profit in it, to dye is gain says the Apostle, he
gains more grace in the instant of his dissolution, than he got all his days
before; for upon death his Spirit is made perfect in Holiness. There is
pleasure in death, for sometimes it is sweetened with ravishing transports of
Spirit, and it is the Porter to open the gate into full and Everlasting joys,
having put an end both to sin and sorrow. Finally, there is honor in Death,
for the Believer having fought a good Fight, and finished his course, and kept
the Faith, he goes to receive the Crown of Righteousness.

8. He that has a good Conscience can look into Eternity and be filled with
joy unspeakable and glorious. That is one of the Richest jewels in the Crown of
Life that it fades not away. The good Conscience looks up to Heaven, fixes its
eye upon God, sees that bosom in which the sanctified Soul must lie and Da
Pater omnipotens menti conscendere sedem!
Da fontem lustrare boni! da luce reperta
In te conspicuos animi defigere visus!
Disjice terrenas nebulas and ponder a molis,
Atque tuo splendore mica; Tu namque serenum,
Tu requies tranquilla piis. Te cernere finis,
Principium vector, dux, semita terminus idem.
Boethius, de Consolat. Phil. l. 3. met. 9. page mihi 88.

rest forever. After millions of years are spent, praise will be continued,
delight will be as green and fresh as ever, there will be no loathing of that
heavenly Manna; after so many thousands of ages as there have been minutes
since the Creation, Joy in heaven will be as far from an end, as it was when
first of all it did begin.

Mortality and change, are the disgrace of all temporal delights and pleasures,
but a good Conscience rejoices (and well it may do so) in a better and enduring
substance; it sees how sure, how near Eternal Life is, and upon this follow
raptures of pleasure.

Cyprian Exultabunt Sancti in gloria, videbunt Deum and gaudebunt. Ibi non
gustabunt quam suavis sit Dominus sed implebuntur and satiabuntur
dulcdinemirifica; nihil eis deerit, nihil oberit, omne desiderium eorum
Christus praeens implebit. Non senescent, non* abescent, non putrescent:
amplius perpetua sanitas foelix Eternitas be atitudnis illius sufficientiam
confirmabunt. Non erit concupiscentia in membris, non ultra exurget rebellio
carnis, sed totus hominis status pudicus and pacificus, sana ex integro Natura
sine omni macula and ruga deinceps permanebit. Erit denique Deus omnia in
omnibus, and illius praesentia omne animae and corporis implebit appetitus.
Cyprian. Sermon. de Christ. Ascens.
does excellently set forth this full and Everlasting happiness of the Saints
in Heaven. They (says he) shall see God and Rejoice and be Delighted, they
shall Enjoy that Glory, and be swallowed up in that Joy for Ever-more. There
they shall not only taste how sweet the Lord is, but shall be filled and
satisfied with his wonderful sweetness, nothing shall be wanting, nothing shall
be hurtful, Christ being present will satiate all their longing. They shall not
grow old, or weak, or dye any more: There will not be Concupisence in the
Members, nor Rebellion in the Flesh against the Spirit, but Man's Nature will be
fully restored, and Sanctified and Healed, and so will remain without any spot
or wrinkle Everlastingly. Finally, God will be all in all, and his immediate
and glorious presence will so abundantly fill the Saints, that they shall not
be able to desire more.

You see now in several respects how desirable it is to have good Conscience,
wheresoever such a Conscience looks, upwards, downwards, inwards, forwards,
still there is peace and Consolation. Oh look into your Consciences, and see
what they are, whether good or bad; and oh that all bad Consciences may be
utterly restless till they are made good ones.

USE IV. Of Advice unto them whose Consciences are good, which have been
cleansed and quieted by the blood of Christ, and by the Word and Spirit of
Grace. My Advice is in these particulars:

1. Be very thankful for this unspeakable Gift of a good Conscience. The
largest Empire in the World, a Crown of pure Gold upon the Head, is nothing
near so great a Blessing as a pure and peaceable Conscience. I may use the
Angels Salutation to the Virgin Mary, unto every Saint that has such a
Conscience. Hail, thou that art highly Favored! The Lord is with thee, Blessed
art thou among the Sons of Men. It Is a Mercy, and a great one, to have a good
Name, to be in good Health, to have good Eyes, and other Senses perfect; to
have good Natural Parts, to have a competency of the good things of this Life,
to Live in good and Peaceable Days; but to have a good Conscience, is better
than any of these, nay, than all these put together. To excite you unto
Thankfulness for a good Conscience, think of three sorts of Persons: Of the
Secure, of the Troubled, of the Damned.

1. Think of the secure, what woeful work are they employed about, they sin
boldly, and dare to be damned for that love which they bear to their Fleshly
and Worldly Lusts: How? say they, must we part with these, if we will go to
Heaven! Nay, we will keep them, though we go to Hell along with them. These
secure sinners are like one that lies down in the midst of the Sea, or as he
that sleeps upon the top of a Mast: They are like unto Solomon's Drunkard, they
strike themselves, but say, they are not sick; they beat themselves, but for
the present feel it not, Prove. 23. 34, 35. And who is it that makes you to
differ from the most Profane and stupid sinner upon the Face of the Earth?
Admire and Magnify that distinguishing Grace and Love which has granted you a
well-grounded Peace, when so many Thousands only cry Peace to themselves, but
are every moment in danger of Wrath and Hell, and everlasting Trouble.

2. Think of the troubled in Spirit, to make you the more thankful for a good
Conscience. While your Souls are at ease in the Arms and Embraces of the Lord
Jesus; how many complain of broken Bones! How many do make their Beds to swim,
and water their Couches with their Tears! How many cry out, that Terrors are
turned upon them, and pursue their Souls as the wind, and that when they call
unto the Lord, he is so far from regarding, that with his strong hand he does
oppose himself against them, Job 30. 15. 20, 21. Meditate well upon the torture
of a wounded Spirit, and then let all that is within you bless the Lord for
Healing you.

3. Think of the Damned, whose Consciences are in a perpetual Rage, who are
Racked with Despair, and whose Torment shall never end. They are Fettered in
the same Chains of Darkness with the Apostate Angels, and these Chains are
Everlasting. Ah, now their Wounds are incurable, because their Physician all
their days was slighted, and their Wounds were made light of, and no Healing is
to be at all expected. And you that are Saints, if Rich Grace had not taken
hold of you, would have been of the number of these miserable Souls; if you had
been dealt with according to your deservings, you would have been weeping and
wailing in outer Darkness that are now rejoicing in Hope of the Glory of God,
surely such differencing Kindness calls aloud for Praise.

2. You that have a good Conscience be Compassionate to them whose Consciences
are evil: They need your Pity, because they have none to themselves, and your
pity may not be altogether unprofitable to them. Reprove them for their evil
ways with mildness and wisdom, and faithfulness; hate them not so much, as to
suffer sin to lie upon them, Lev. 19. 17. Cain indeed did say, Am I my Brothers
Keeper? But be you of a contrary Spirit; if you see your Brother go in the Road
to Hell, warn him, and by warning endeavor to stop him. If your Neighbors
House were on Fire at Midnight, and he himself fast asleep, oh, what pains
would you take! How would you pull him out of his Bed, how loud would you cry,
Fire, Fire, to wake him! Alas, the sinner with a secure Conscience is in a far
worse case; he is fast asleep upon the brink of the burning Lake; and have you
nothing to say to him? Oh, that you would put on Bowels, and speak for Souls,
and prevent their being lost for ever.

And because your speaking of it self must needs be ineffectual, cry vehemently
unto the Lord to Second you, and speak with Mighty Power, Awake, awake, you
that sleep, and arise from the dead and live for ever. And let your Reproofs
and Prayers be followed with such an Holy, Harmless, Heavenly, Self-denying
Conversation, as may tend unto their Conviction. If the Profane, if the
Persecuters, if Carnal Professors had but a good Conscience, it would be better
for the Nation, better for the Church, better for particular Believers; and ah,
how good would it be for themselves!

3. Be very sensible that a good Conscience is matter of the Devils Envy,
therefore it concerns you to be Vigilant, for he will endeavor to wound it.
Satan could behold the Rich Man in brave Apparel, and his Table sumptuously
Furnished, and tumbling in wealth and Pleasures, and yet he did not Envy him;
he knew that these things could not make him Happy, and would be so far from
hindering, that they would rather further his eternal Misery. But to see any
with a good Conscience, vexes and grieves the Devil; which as it shows that
there is a great Excellency in such a Conscience above all Earthly good things,
so it should make you stand upon your Guard against this Adversary.

You must know, that although Grace cannot be totally lost, yet a good
Conscience may be both Defiled and Disturbed. David's sin polluted him,
therefore he prays to be washed thoroughly from his Iniquity, and to have his
Heart cleansed. His sin also broke his Peace, therefore he Prays for the Light
of God's Countenance, that the Bones which were broken might Rejoice, Psalm. 51.
If you do not watch and pray, that you may not enter into Temptation, if you
are not strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might; if you do not put on
the whole Armor of God, that you may be able to stand against the wiles of the
Devil, up-upon a sudden he may take Advantage, and draw you to some, perhaps,
grosser sins; and this may make you to go in the bitterness of your Souls
mourning to your Graves. If it had not been for his abominable fall, David's
latter part of his Life might have been sweeter; and, for ought I know, his
Crown in Heaven brighter.

4. Be sure with all keeping to keep the good Conscience. Curandum est nobis
atque hoc in omni vita sua quemque a recta conscintia transversum unguem non
oportere discedere, Cicer. ad Atticum l. 13. Epist. 20.
Let not the Apple of the Eye, let not Life it self be preserved with greater
care. Skin for skin, and all that a Man has will he give for his Life. And
truly, skin for skin, and all that we have, we should give, rather than make
shipwreck of a good Conscience. Oh, never Repent of your Uprightness, hold fast
your Integrity, whatever comes on it.

I Read concerning Brutus, that stout maintainer of his Countries Liberty, when
all his Endeavors were to no purpose, and the Cause which he thought so good,
had such bad success, and he found himself vanquished by Antonius, he Repented
of his Virtue, and cried out, O Virtue, I Served thee as a real thing, but thou
art only an empty Name. (c)(...). Te colui Virtus ut rem, ast tu nomen it ane
^s!


But be you more fixed, and better settled, and whatever you lose, keep a good
Conscience. And that you may do thus, follow these Directions.

1. Vigorously maintain the Combat against Corruption: Only sin can harm the
Conscience, and therefore strive against it. Abstain from Fleshly Lusts, for
these War against your Souls, 1 Pet. 2. 11. Have a special Eye to in dwelling
sin, for that is a worse Enemy by far than Satan; set upon the work of
Mortification in good earnest, hide the Word in your hearts, that it may
Antidote you against sin: Derive Virtue from Christ Crucified, to Crucify the
Flesh with the Affections and Lusts of it, and call in the aid of the Spirit
against the deeds of the Body. Conscience will be kept in greater purity and
Peace, the weaker sin is, and the more it is an underling.

2. Sit loose from the World. If Galeacius Caracciolus had loved his Honor and
great Estate in Italy, he would not have kept his Conscience undefiled from
Rome's pollutions. The Apostle Paul, whose Conscience was good, professes, that
he Gloried in the Cross of Jesus Christ, by whom the World was Crucified to
him, and he unto the World, Gal. 6. 14. He looked upon the World as a grand
Imposter: he saw no Form nor Comeliness in it, that he should desire it; nay,
he perceived how sin had brought a Curse upon it; no wonder if he slighted it.
You cannot Serve God and Mammon. You must cast the World out of your
Affections presently, and consent to let it go out of your Possession too, when
called to part withit, if you would keep a good Conscience.

3. Study the Vanity of Men, and be not afraid of them. The fear of Man
brings a Snare, says Solomon. Fear of the Papists made Spira wound his
Conscience, and brought him into a fearful Case. Cease ye therefore from Man,
whose breath is in his Nostrils, for wherein is he to be accounted of? Isa. 2.
ult. Be not afraid of the terror of your adversaries, neither be troubled, but
Sanctify the Lord of Hosts in your hearts, let him be your fear, and let him
be your dread, if you would secure your Consciences.

4. Pray much to be upheld. Commit the keeping of your Souls unto God in well
doing, for he is Faithful: Beg that he would never leave you, nor forsake you,
but keep you by his Mighty Power unto Salvation. It is not in vain to seek unto
him, for he is of Power to establish you, Romans 16. 25. He is able to keep you
from falling, and to present you faultless before the Presence of his Glory
with exceeding Joy, Jude 24.

5. Hold fast Faith, that you may keep a good Conscience; firmly believe that
Life and Immortality which is brought to light by the Gospel, and then by
patient continuance in well doing you will seek for it. The Lord grant unto you
the Spirit of wisdom and Revelation, the eyes of your Understanding being
enlightened, that you may more thoroughly and certainly know what is the hope of
your Calling, and what the Riches of the Glory of that Inheritance which is
above; this will be a strong inducement to keep Conscience, and heart, and
Conversation, and all clean, that you may grow more and more meet for that
Inheritance. You see the way to keep a good Conscience, which was the fourth
word of Advice.

5. You that have a good Conscience be not Acted only by Conscience; but let
Love (d) constrain you also to Obedience. It Is said of Titus, That he accepted
the Exhortation, but was more forward of his own accord, 2 Cor. 8. 17. Heed
your Consciences telling you of your Duty, but let your hearts be forward (b)
Qui legem dat amantib^s,
Major lex a mor est sibi.
Boethius.

of their own accord to perform your Duty. The high mettal'd courser does not
stand in need of whip or spur, loosen the reins, he will run swiftly because he
does delight in running. Oh let your hearts be enlarged by love to the Lord,
and delight in your duty, and then you will run the ways of his Commands, and
so running you will at length obtain the prize. Thus have I handled at large
the second Doctrine. To have a good Conscience should be every ones greatest
care. This is the point I principally intended to prosecute. I shall be very
brief in those which do remain.

Doct. 3. The third Doctrine is this, A good Conscience will make men set
themselves as before God continually. I have lived says the Apostle, in good
Conscience before God. Hark unto David, Psalm. 119. 168. All my ways are before
thee, and Psalm. 16. 8. I have the Lord always before me. Job speaks after the
same manner, chap. 31. 4. Does not God see my ways and count all my steps? And
Elijah speaking of the Lord of hosts, adds, before whom I stand, 1 King 18. 15.
These men had a great sense of God upon their Spirits, and so should we; and a
good Conscience will still be putting us in mind in whose presence we
continually are.

In the handling of this Doctrine I shall first prove, that we are always
before God. Secondly, how we are to look upon God when we set our selves before
him. Thirdly, what it is thus to set our selves before God. Fourthly, why a
good Conscience will make us to do thus. And fifthly, Apply.

In the first place I am to prove, that we are always before God.

There are several degrees of the presence of God, the highest degree of all is
his presence with Christ's humane Nature; a second degree is his presence with
the Angels and triumphant Saints in his Kingdom and Glory, by whom he is seen
face to face; a third degree is his presence vouchsafed unto his Saints
Militant on Earth, whereby they are quickened, strengthened, and abundantly
encouraged. But besides all this, there is a general presence of God whereby he
fills both Heaven and Earth, so that nothing can be hid from him, Jer. 23. 24.
Can any bide himself in secret places that I shall not see him, says the Lord?
do not I fill Heaven and Earth, says the Lord?

Three things are here to be remarked.

1. God is so every where present as that he perfectly knows what is in us and
done by us. He does possess our very Reins, searches our very hearts, all the
hidden things of darkness will one day be brought to light, and the Counsels of
men's hearts be made manifest, 1 Cor. 4. 5. Though good works are done never so
secretly, God sees and will reward them openly; though wicked works are done
never so closely, he sees; and they shall be openly punished.

2. God is so every where present, as that we are continually under his Power:
the Psalmist tell us, that his Kingdom rules over all, Psalm. 103. 19. His Eyes
run too and fro to show himself strong on the behalf of them whose hearts are
perfect with him. And he is (...) mighty to beat down and to destroy his
Enemies, he can make destruction to come upon them like a Whirlewind, and
though they may promise themselves safety, yet they can in no wise secure
themselves against his Almighty hand.

3. God is every way present by his very Essence: oh the incomprehensible
immensity of his being! He is not far, says the Apostle, from every one of us,
Act. 17. that is, he is really near us, for in him we live, and move, and have
our being. Nos gentes nationesque distinguimus; Deo una domus est mundus hic
totus. Reges tantum regni sui per officia ministrorum universa novere: Deo
indiciis opus non est, non solum in oculis ejus sed and in sinu vivimus. Cuncta
deo plena sunt. Minutius Foelix p. mihi. 80.
You must not imagine that the Essence of God is divided, so as to be part in
Earth and part in Heaven; but after an unconceivable manner, it is whole in it
self, whole in all things, whole in every thing, it is whole within all, whole
without all, it is not mingled or defiled with any thing, it is no where
included, no where excluded, nothing does or can contain it, and yet by it all
things are contained: surely then this God does compass our paths wherever we
go, and is acquainted with all our ways, Psalm. 139. 3.

In the second place I am to show you, how we are to look upon God when we set
our selves before him.

1. We are to look upon God as our Maker. 'Twas a complaint made by Elihu, Job
35. 10. None says, where is God my Maker? He is the former of our bodies, and
the Father of our Spirits. (...) we are his off spring, and we should be often
enquiring to what end he made us, which was that we might yield fear, and
service, and love, and praise, to him that gave us our beings; and if we thwart
the end of our Creation, and serve our lusts and Satan, who are our Makers
Enemies, he may repent of making us, as he did concerning the old World, and
then destruction will follow.

2. We are to look upon God as our Owner. We are not our own; who can lay claim
to us? Satan by right cannot, all that dominion that he has over us, is by
usurpation, and our being so foolish and wicked as to subject our selves
voluntarily to him. But the Lord is by right our owner: to him we are debtors,
and owe all that we have and are. We are not just unless we yield our selves
to him.

3. We are to look upon God as our Ruler. 'Twas a very profane brag of those,
Psalm. 12. 4. Who is Lord over us? God ought to be acknowledged as our Lord; and
if he be not obeyed as such, he will show himself a Lord by breaking us if we
will not bow before him. We should often be asking our selves, whose servants
we are? if sins, if Satan's, we should propound another question, What wages
these are likely to give us? and should we toil and work hard to make our
selves miserable, and bring our selves to Death and Hell?

Only the Lord has a right to rule us. We should still be enquiring what his
will is; and since he is the supreme Sovereign of Heaven and Earth, and is so
Holy, Righteous, Gracious, his will should never be thwarted by ours; but we
should endeavor to do it on Earth as it is done by those in Heaven. There is
abundant sweetness at present in being not wedded to our own wills, in obeying
the Lords will, besides the future infinite recompense of reward, He that does
the will of God abides for ever, 1 John. 2. 17.

4. When we set our selves before God, we are to look upon him, as our
preserver. It Is of his Mercy that the Children of men are not consumed, their
provocations are many but he being full of Compassion spares them. Our sins
have been crying out against us all our days, and Satan would fain have
destroyed and devoured us long ago, but God is Rich in Goodness and
forbearance, Romans 2. 4. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Master crib,
and shall we never consider to whom we are beholding? he is the God of our
lives, and the Father of every Mercy which we receive; it is both our duty and
interest to walk worthy of, and suitable unto his Care and Kindness, especially
if we are Believers: for then he is not only the Father of our Mercies, but our
Father likewise, Falsa theologia est, Deum iratum esse agnoscentibus peccata
sua: talis enim Deus nec in coelo nec usquam est, sed est idolum perversi
cordis quia verus Deus dicit, Nolo mortem peccatoris. Luther. Tom. 4. 383. a.
and being always under our Fathers eye, we should follow him as dear Children,
Ephesians. 5. 1.

5. We are to look upon God, as Him who alone can make us happy. Sin cannot do
it, for it has a quite contrary effect, how many millions has it undone and
made miserable for ever, and daily it is undoing more. The World cannot make us
happy, for if the world had had power to do this, Solomon being exalted to the
top of worldly greatness, and having so much of wealth and Earthly pleasures
that he could not desire more; would not in the midst of all have cried out,
all is vanity and vexation of Spirit, and there is no profit under the Sun,
Eccle. 2. 11.

The Lord can satisfy the Soul of man though other things cannot. He can
supply all our needs according to his Riches in Glory by Christ Jesus, Phil. 4.
19. he can do more then our Souls can desire or conceive, nay exceeding
abundantly above all that we either ask or think. Let us be persuaded that if
ever we are happy God must make us so, and that he makes us happy no other way
but by giving himself, and Communicating his Grace to us in his Son, and this
will cause us to cleave unto him.

6. We are to look upon God as one that is very jealous of us, lest, we go a
whoring after other Lovers, we are really idolaters if we love other things
more than God, and Idolatry is Spiritual Adultery; and if Jealousy be the rage
of man, how much more is the Lords jealousy to be feared? we should call that
Wife impudent with a witness, that should commit lewdness before her Husbands
face. Spiritual whoredom is never committed, but God looks on. Oh how daring
are the Children of men! Think of Gods jealousy when your hearts are about to
depart from him, and to be taken so exceedingly with the things of the world.
Hark to the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 22. Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy, are we
stronger than He?

7. When we set our selves before God, we are to look upon him as our Judge,
and he will judge without respect of Persons. He is an all-observing witness at
present, who is to be a Judge hereafter. He will bring every person and every
work into Judgment, with every secret thing whether it be good or whether it be
evil. Eccles. 12. ult. If this were seriously thought of 'twould make us fear
him and keep his Commandments. Let us set our selves as before our Judge
continually, then we shall be diligent that we may be found of him in peace
without spot and blameless.

In the third place I am to tell you what it is to set our selves before God.

1. Then we indeed set our selves before God when we are firmly persuaded of
his presence, and are suitably affected. There is no attribute of God that we
are less able to deny, then his Omnipresence, and yet how rarely are our
hearts awed by it. We should watch over our hearts and thoughts, and strive
against the vanity, and wickedness, and impertinency of these, as those that
are persuaded we are before an Heart-searcher. Who knows our thoughts a far
off, Ps. 139. 12.

If there could not a proud, or lustful, or foolish thought arise, but men
might discern it; should we not be ashamed, and take more pains to keep our
hearts clean? and is not the Lords presence and knowledge more to be regarded
then man's? in like manner we should set a watch before the door of our Lips,
and ponder the path of our Feet, because there is not a word in our mouths, but
God knows it altogether, and the ways of man are before the Eyes of the Lord,
and he pondereth all his goings, Prove. 5. 21.

2. Then we set our selves before God, when we hear what he speaks. Our Lord
tells us, He that is of God, hears Gods words, John 8. 47. he has an Ear to
hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches. And that Man after Gods own heart
professes, Psalm. 119. 161. My Heart stands in awe of thy Word. The Lord has a
special regard unto them that tremble at his Word, who seriously enquire what
his Will and Commands are, and dare not to transgress them: but certainly they
do contemn both the Lord and his Presence, who, like those, Psalm. 50. 17. Do
hate Instruction, and cast his Words behind them.

3. Then we set our selves before God, when we Observe how he looks upon us,
whether he frown, or cause his Face to shine. Jacob told his Wives, I see your
Fathers Countenance is not toward me as before, Genesis 31. 5. And they who have
a sense of God upon their Spirits, if Gods Countenance be not toward them as
before, how are they troubled! When the Lord for a moment did hide his face
from David, that moment seemed an Age, nay, an Eternity; therefore he cries out,
How long will thou forget me, O Lord, for ever? How long will thou hide thy
Face from me? Psalm. 13. 1. But when God did manifest himself to him, the Light
of his Countenance did put a greater gladness into his heart, than the joy of
Harvest. We are not to regard what Men say of us, or how they look upon us,
but we are to mind Gods approbation or dislike. He is a Jew that is one
inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the Heart, whose Praise is not of Men,
but of God, Romans 2. ult.

4. Then we set our selves before God, when we take Notice what he does. David
cemplains of, and threatens the ungodly, Psalm. 28. 4. Because they regard not
the Work of the Lord, nor the Operation of his Hand, he shall destroy them, and
not build them up.

We should mind diligently what God does to us; that we may comply with his
design in all, even the severest of his Dispensations.

What he does for us; that his goodness may have an Holy and good effect upon
us, and we may Answer his Loving kindness by Gratitude and Obedience.

Finally, what he does to others before us; that we may receive Admonition by
all the Examples that are given us, 1 Cor. 10. 11. Others Experience of the
Lords faithfulness should make us trust in him; others Experience of the Lords
severity should make us cautious of provoking him, 1 Cor. 10. 6. Now, these
things were our Examples, to the intent we should not Lust after evil things,
as they also Lusted.

5. Then we set our selves before God, when we live by Faith upon him. David,
when he set the Lord before him, because he saw God at his right hand,
concluded, He should not be moved, Psalm. 16. 8. The Lord was his Rock, and his
Fortress, and his Deliverer; his God, his Strength, in whom he was resolved to
trust, his Buckler, and the Horn of his Salvation, and his high Tower, Psalm.
18. 2. He that Lives not by faith forgets God, and his heart draws back from
him. But he that sets the Lord before him, and considers his Promises and his
power, cannot but look upon him as worthy to be relied upon: and this is the
way to be kept in perfect peace, Isa. 26. 3. Thou will keep him in perfect
Peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee.

6. Then we set our selves before God, when we desire Fellowship with him. This
fellowship is a Riddle to the World, but the Saints find it a most real
happiness. We are to set our selves before the Lord, as weak, and indigent,
and miserable; and to implore the happiness of his favor in his dear Son, and
that he would communicate his Grace for the strengthening of us with strength in
our Souls, and the supply of all our wants. Who can indeed look upon God, and
not desire to taste and see how Gracious he is? David followed hard after him,
and cries out, My Soul thirsts for God, for the Living God; when shall I come
and appear before God? Psalm. 42. 2.

7. Then we set the Lord before us, when we refer all unto his Glory; when we
aim at this as our great End, that he may be Magnified and Exalted. We woefully
forget God when we seek our selves and our own things; when we chiefly design
our own praise and Profit. Set him indeed before you, and then his Honor, and
the enjoyment of him, will be the great Mark you will aim at; and indeed his
Honor and your Happiness are joined together, that you cannot seek his Honor,
but you must also at the same time seek your own Happiness; and you cannot do
any thing to his Dishonor, but it is also to your selves destructive.

In the fourth place, I am to give you the Reason, why a good Conscience makes
Men to set themselves thus before God.

1. Not to set our selves before God, is exceedingly to Affront him: If we were
in the Presence of an Earthly King, and should take no more Notice of him, or
not so much Notice of him as of another Man, surely he would ill resent it. God
is the King of Glory, and if his Presence is not regarded, we make no more of
him than if he were an Idol, which has Eyes, but sees not; Ears, but hears not;
and in whose power it is not to do either good or evil.

2. Not to set our selves before God, is to thwart the End that he aims at,
both in his Word and Works. His Works are many and great, that we might stand
in awe of the Worker; and in his Word he has told us what a God he is, that we
might fear before him.

3. To set our selves before God, is the way to keep up the Authority of
Conscience; the Word in Consciences Mouth will be more heeded, when our Eyes
are open to look upon that Holy and Powerful God, whose Officer Conscience is.

4. To set our selves before God, is both for our Delight and Advantage: The
Presence of God is terrible indeed to the evil Conscience; but those whose
hearts are cleansed, are glad that the Lord is ever with them. With what
satisfaction and Triumph did the Church speak those words, Psalm. 46. 7. 11. The
Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our Refuge, Selah. And the profit
which we reap from a sense of this Presence, is very great; for when we hear,
and pray, and perform other Duties, as in the Lords presence, then they turn to
good Account; but when God is not regarded, to be sure, we are not at all
Advantaged; nay, our very Duties do but increase our guilt and hardness.

USE 1. Of Reproof.

1. How are they to be blamed, who instead of setting themselves before God,
Banish the thoughts of him, and Live without him in the World! This
forgetfulness of God is the Root of presumption and boldness in sin, when there
is no sense or fear of the Lords Eye or Hand, then the hearts of the Sons of
Men will be be fully set in them to do evil. This forgetfulness of God
encourages also to Hypocrisy; and so the whited Sepulcher do but appear
beautiful outwardly to the Eyes of Man; the Hypocrite is not concerned at the
Eye of God, which sees all that filthiness and rottenness that is within.

2. How are they to be blamed, who instead of having recourse to God, who is
just before them, place their confidence in the Creatures.

The Papist is concerned, who prays to Saints and Angels: it is said indeed for
his defense, that we speak unto Courtiers to intercede for us to a Prince, and
therefore we must speak unto the Saints departed, to Intercede for us to God.
But I shall retort this similitude thus. Suppose thou were just before a King,
and he should give thee leave, and command thee to Offer thy Petition to him,
would it not be unreasonable then to send to a Courtier that is a Thousand
Miles off, to speak a good word for thee? God is just before thee, and has
commanded thee to call upon him, and is ready to hear; the Saints in Heaven are
a great way off, their Mediation is needless. Blind Papist, open thy eyes, and
see God near thee, and thou will never pray to Saints and Angels more.

The Protestant also is concerned; for he also places his Confidence in the
Creature, when he looks upon his Wealth as his strong City, and his dependence
is upon things visible, and not as it ought to be, alone upon the invisible God.

USE II. Of Exhortation. Let Conscience have this Effect upon all of you, to
make you set your selves before God.

1. This will make you to abhor your selves. Quantisper extra terram non
respicimus, propria justitia, sapientia, virtute pulchre contenti, nobis
suavissime blandimur, and tantum non semidei videmur. At si semel coeperimus
cogitationem in Deum erigere, and expendere qualis sit, and quam exacta
justitiae, sapientiae, vitutis ejus perfectio ad cujus amussim conformari nos
oportet: quod antea in nobis falso justitiae praetextu arridebat, pro summa
iniquitate mox sor descet: quod mirisice imponebat sapientiae titulo, pro
extrema stultitia foetebit: quod virtutis faciem prae se ferebat, miserrima
impotentia esse arguetur, adeo divinae puritati male respondet quod videtur in
nobis vel absolutissimum. Calvin. Instit. l. 1. cap. 1.
Job 42. 5, 6. Mine Eye sees thee, wherefore I abhor my self, and Repent in
Dust and Ashes. The view of Gods Power, Wisdom, Holiness, Justice, will make
your Weakness, and Folly, and Defilement, and Guilt to be the more apparent.

2. This will make you to resist Satan, and to contemn the things of the World,
which he Offers to you. God is ready to give you Power against the Tempter, and
all that he Offers is nothing less than nothing and Vanity, compared with the
All-sufficient God. David, when his Eye was cleared, and he saw God, no longer
Admired the Prosperity of the wicked, but said, Whom have I in Heaven but thee?
and there is none on Earth that I desire besides thee, Psalm. 73. 25.

3. This will make you to have an eye to your Hearts, because God looks into,
and requires these; and to be more Spiritual and Lively in all your Duties, and
more generally to please him in all your Actions. When you consider seriously,
that He does beset you behind and before, and does lay his Hand upon you, Psalm.
139. 5. You will be afraid to provoke him, lest that Hand do crush you in the
very act of the next Transgression.

4. If you set your selves before God, this will make you to be the better
contented when outward comforts are taken from you. Outward Comforts may be
rejoiced in, but for Gods sake; God is to be rejoiced in for his own sake. And
his goodness and fullness being still the same, he is as much to be delighted in
when the Creatures are gone, as when they are present. When the Figg-trees did
not blossom, and there was no Fruit in the Vines; yet the Prophet says, I will
Joy in the Lord, and Rejoice in the God of my Salvation, Hab. 3. 17, 18.

5. This will make you Fearless of Men, nay, undaunted in the hour of your
Dissolution: When you are in the Valley of the shadow of Death, you will fear
no evil as long as you see that God is with you; and Death will be so far from
separating you from his Presence, or from his Love, that 'twill send you nearer
to him than ever, and admit you to a fuller enjoyment of him, than can be
vouchsafed to any under the Sun. Thus of that third Doctrine, A good Conscience
makes men to set themselves before God continually.

Doct. 4. The Fourth Doctrine is this,

That a good Conscience has a great and lasting influence upon the life and all
the Actions.

I have lived says the Apostle, in all good Conscience, and that unto this
day, so Heb. 13. 18. We trust we have a good Conscience in all things willing
to live honestly. Such a Conscience is well instructed in that lesson, Tit. 2.
11. 12. For the Grace of God which brings Salvation, has appeared unto all
men, teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, and Righteously, and Godly in this present world.

In the handling of this Doctrine, I shall first show how a good Conscience is
concerned in the Life and Conversation. Secondly, Instance in several kinds of
Actions, that a good Conscience has an influence upon. Lastly, Conclude with
the Application.

In the first place I am to show how a good Conscience is concerned in the Life
and Conversation. This will appear in these following particulars:

1. There is no action but Conscience is to examine. Every action is a step one
way or other, and Conscience is to see which way every step has a tendency,
whether upward toward the Hill of the Lord, or downward toward the lake of
Fire.

There is no action but Conscience will be wounded with it, if it be a work of
darkness, and Conscience may reap satisfaction from it, if it be a work of
Righteousness.

2. Conscience if good, will not admit of loose principles.

It will not argue licentiously from the Righteousness of Christ, which alone
is imputed to us for our justification, that therefore there is no necessity of
inherent Holiness.

It will not argue from the superabundant Grace of God that therefore we may
safely continue in sin, Romans 6. 15, 16. What then, shall we sin because we are
not under the Law but under Grace? God forbid, Know ye not that to whom ye
yield your selves Servants to obey, his Servants ye are to whom you obey,
whether of sin unto Death, or obedience unto Righteousness?

A good Conscience will not argue from the falls of Saints recorded in
Scripture, that we may venture to fall as they did; but contrarily concludes
since such eminent Saints have fallen, it does concern us to look to our
standing, and not to be high minded but fear.

Finally, it does not argue because Gods Covenant is Everlasting, and his love
unchangeable, that therefore we may live as we list; but on the contrary it
tells us that because the Lords love is so great and unchangeable, he is to be
loved the more by us, and followed more fully, and more willingly obeyed.

3. Conscience if good, will not abuse Christian liberty.

The nature of this is not to be mistaken, it is not a liberty to make provision
for the Flesh, nor to walk after the course of the World, nor to mispend your
precious time, nor to omit, or do the work of the Lord negligently. They that
take such a liberty take that which God never gave them, and by this liberty
they become slaves and vassals to the Devil who employes and leads them captive
at his pleasure.

But Christian liberty lies in being free from the bondage of Corruption, from
the Curse of the Law, and the Power of Darkness, and in having freedom of
access to God through Christ, and in being enlarged by the Spirit to run the
ways of his Commandments.

Christian liberty is an holy thing. A good Conscience therefore is the more
watchful, lest we go beyond the bounds of Christian liberty, and venture upon
what is unlawful, or use lawful things unlawfully; for so it is possible, nay
usual, licitis perire even in these things to perish. To Eat, to Drink, to Buy
to Sell, to Plant, to Build, to Marry and to be given in Marriage, were none of
them in themselves unlawful, yet when the old world, and Sodom were thus
employed, and these things were only minded, and spiritual things neglected, a
Flood came and swept away the one; and Fire and Brimstone did destroy the
other, Luke 17. 26, 27, 28, 29.

4. A good Conscience looks well to the Principles of our Obedience.

That it springs from a renewed nature, for unless we are made good Trees, how
can we bring forth good Fruit? that it proceeds from Faith, for by Faith we
must believe what we do to be according to the will of God, and by Faith we
must desire strength from our Lord Jesus to do that will which is discovered to
us.

Our Obedience also must flow from love, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. The love of Christ
constrains us to love, not unto our selves but unto him that died for us.
Love is the first and great Command, and that which makes us to yield obedience
to all the rest.

And we must be acted by Fear as well as Love, a childlike reverence and awe of
God, how circumspectly will it make us walk! Job feared God and eschewed evil.

Finally. our Obedience must spring from gratitude, and a sense of our
obligation to serve the Lord who has so loaded us with innumerable benefits.
All the mercies and deliverances which God did work for, and extend to Israel
were to induce them to observe his Statutes and to keep his Laws. Psalm. 105. 45.

5. A good Conscience has a regard unto the matter of our actions. That this be
agreeable unto the Word of God. This word is the rule we are to walk by; that
peace and mercy may be upon us.

There is a word which God will do, his word of Promise he will accomplish, his
word of Threatening he will execute; and his word of Prophecy he will fulfill.

There is a word which he will have us to do, and that's the word of Precept. A
good Conscience respects the precepts of the Law, the sum of which is to Love
the Lord with all our Heart, and Soul, and Mind, and Strength, and our
Neighbor as our Selves, Mat. 22. 37. 39. This Law is not made void but
established by Faith, even in the Covenant of Grace the Lord promises to write
this Law in our Hearts, and says he will put his spirit within us, to cause us
to walk in his Statutes, and to observe his Judgments, and do them.

The Gospel has precepts also as well as the Law, which a good Conscience
knows are to be obeyed. And if we will indeed obey the Gospel, we must believe
on Jesus, we must repent from dead works, we must live by Faith, we must give
all diligence to make our Calling and Election sure, we must love our Brethren
as love is a new command, and enjoined upon a new motive, namely the great love
of Christ. We must engage in all the Ordinances and Institutions of our Lord
Jesus; finally, we must hold fast our profession without wavering whatever
troubles upon that score do overtake us.

6. A good Conscience Eyes the Manner of our Obedience, That it be out of
choice. David did choose the way of the Lords Precepts, he considered these
precepts, esteemed them concerning all things to be right, and preferred them
before all the False and destructive ways of sin.

Obedience must not only be out of choice, but it must be universal in regard
of the object, all the commands be respected, and in regard of the Subject, the
whole man must be under obedience; and as this obedience must be yielded to God
without delay, so we must be sure to stick unto his testimonies and persevere
unto the end. If ye continue in my word (says Christ) then are ye my Disciples
indeed, John 8. 31.

But after we have done our best and most, we must humbly and believingly look
unto Jesus, for the covering of our imperfections, and that we and our
performances may be accepted.

7. A good Conscience looks to the End of our obedience, and that the design of
our actions be as it ought. And our end should be not only the obtaining of a
reward, but the Glory of God, John 15. 8. Herein is my Father glorified, that
ye bring forth much Fruit, so shall ye be my Disciples, we should aim also at
the credit and adorning of the Gospel, and the good of men. Good living is for
the benefit of others in more regards than one. Men are benefited by our good
works of Justice and Mercy, and such like, and our doing of these works may
help to convince them that there is an excellency and efficacy in the Gospel,
which brings forth Fruits that be so excellent. You see how a good Conscience
is concerned in the Conversation.

In the second place, I am to instance in several kinds of actions which a good
Conscience has an influence upon.

1. A good Conscience has an influence upon our holy duties.

It is not satisfied unless we begin the day with these; God should have our
first thoughts, and our affections and praises should be our morning sacrifice.
In the morning we should direct our prayer unto him, and look up, Ps. 5. 1, 2,
3. The Scriptures are to be searched that our Hearts may be instructed,
quickened, purified, strengthened, and revived by this word of Grace.

A good Conscience will not suffer holy duties to be done negligently; it knows
how treacherous the heart is, and therefore watches over it that it may engage
in the Lords service, and not start aside like a deceitful bow.

Non venitur ad bonam conscientiam nisi per cordis custodiam; Cor ad vitam se
vertit aut ad mortem; velle peccare malum, peccare pejus, in peccato persever
are pessimum; nolle poenitere, mortale. Bernard. de Interior. dom. cap. 24.
Conscience will not be put off with words, that are good or with a bended
knee, or a lifted up Eye, or a sigh now and then, but looks that Holy desires
be strong and stirring, that Faith be acted upon the promises of God, who is so
ready to be found of them that seek him with their whole Heart. Deuteronomy. 4. 29.

A good Conscience looks upon holy duties as things of grand concernment, if
these are well done it will be well with us, if ill done, it will be ill with
us for ever. In your Trades you are getting a livelihood, but in your duties
you are or should be minding a better and enduring substance. What does deserve
your pains and time, and serious endeavors, if the favor of God, and the
fullness of Christ, and an Heavenly Kingdom do not? what manner of duties should
ours be, since we aim at such things in the doing of them?

2. A good Conscience has an influence upon the works of our Callings.

It will not allow of an unlawful Calling; and that is to be styled an unlawful
Calling, in which a livelihood is gotten by serving and gratifying the lusts of
men. The Harlots way is unlawful, and Stage Players is little better. It Is a
wicked thing to live by the sins of others, and by helping to undo and ruin
them for ever.

And as the Calling must be Lawful, so it must be Lawfully managed. A good
Conscience will take care that there be not an over eagerness after wealth,
which is of a perishing Nature; for the time is short, and therefore they that
Buy, must be as though they possessed not; and they that use this World, as not
abusing of it, for the Fashion of this World passes away, 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31.

And as for unjust and dishonest gain, a good Conscience can by no means allow
it. Do Justly, is a Law so deeply engraven in the heart of Men by Nature, and
so often required in the Scripture, that where injustice is, we may conclude
there is no goodness or tenderness in the Conscience. Bona conscientia est, si
habet in cord puritatem, in ore veritatem; in action rectitudinem. Bernard.
De Conscien. cap. 4. page mihi 1099.
When this is indeed awakened, though other sins do fly in the sinners face,
yet if any thing has been gotten wrongfully, this in a special manner is a
burden, neither is there any rest till Restitution be made, either to the
Person wronged, or if he cannot be found, unto the poor. That Scripture should
ever be Ringing in our ears, in all Trading and Business, 1 These. 4. 6. That no
Man go beyond or defraud his Brother in any matter, because the Lord is the
avenger of all such.

And not only Injustice, but Idleness in the Calling is to be shunned: for
this Idleness is the way to cloth a Man with Rags, and exposes to innumerable
temptations. It Is a good answer to the tempter. Non licet, non vacat, It Is not
lawful, neither am I at leisure to do what thou would have me.


3. A good Conscience has an Influence upon our Words and Discourses: for a
great part of Pure and Undefiled Religion does lie in brideling of the Tongue,
James 1. 26. Our Communication should be such as may administer Grace unto the
Hearers.

A good Conscience will not admit of Impiety in our Discourse, and certainly
Oaths and Curses are very impious. Lesser Oaths are not to be sworn, but
greater; as by the God of Heaven, the Blood and wounds of the Lord Jesus, argue
sinners to be daring; and how fearful is it to hear them calling upon God to
damn them! Such things Argue that there is no good Conscience.

Neither will this admit of Impurity in our Communication; for filthy and
foolish talking is condemned, Ephesians. 5. and is a sign of a corrupt and unrenewed
heart, out of the abundance of which the mouth speaks.

Finally, a good Conscience will not suffer us to be Injurious to any in our
Discourses; by Defaming, by Backbiting, by Slandering of them. Those that take
up Reproaches against their Neighbors, and spread them; their own mouths
condemn them, and plainly prove that they are not Citizens of Zion, Psalm. 15.
1, 2, 3.

4. A good Conscience has an Influence upon our Time, that it may be well and
wisely Husbanded: This is more precious than Gold that perishes, and if the
Goldsmith does look upon all gold as worth saving, surely every moment of Time
is worth Redeeming.

That which makes other things of less value, namely, the shortness of their
continuance, makes Time of greater value: It Is the more to be prized, because
'twill so quickly be at an end. A good Conscience will make us pass the time of
our Sojourning here in fear, 1 Pet. 1. 17. It will not allow any time to sin
(though indeed sin will be apt to steal time away.) It will not allow the
World to ingrosse all our time, but 'twill be Liberal of time, that the Soul
and Eternity may be provided for.

5. A good Cnoscience has an influence upon our Natural Actions; as Eating,
Drinking, Sleeping, etc. It takes care that there be not excess in these: If we
Eat to Gluttony, and Drink to Drunkenness, we are rather Beasts than Men, and
surely far from being Saints: And if we sleep too much, we seem to lie buried
all that while, and while too much in our Beds, we are but unprofitable
Burdens of the Earth.

And as Excess in these Actions is avoided by a good Conscience, so the glory
of God is the End unto which they are Directed, 1 Cor. 10. 31. Whether ye eat
or drink, or whatever you do, do all to the Glory of God.

6. A good Conscience has an Influence upon your Recreations. You must not,
says Conscience, be Prodigal of your Estates, nor of your time in these: You
must not needlessly torment, and be cruel to the Creatures which groan
sufficiently already under the sin of Man; you must take heed of Passion in
your Recreations. A good Conscience will put us in mind that we must Recreate
our selves, that we may be more fit for business; if therefore Recreations
justle out Duty, or indispose us to it, the End of them is not obtained.

I might also add, that a good Conscience will take Notice of our garb; and if
you will but hearken to it, it will tell you plainly, That Men and Women
Professing Godliness, should not go in such kind of gay Attire, as the Rogues
and Ranters, and Whores of the Town wear.

7. A good Conscience will have an Influence upon your Carriage in your
Relations. All Relations call for Duty, and unless we do our Duty, and are good
in our Relations, we cannot be said to be good in reality.

The great Fundamental Relation is between Man and Wife. A good Conscience
therefore will take care that these Yoke-fellows come together in an Holy
manner; it will not allow of Incest, or Marrying within forbidden degrees; no
force must be used, nor marrying contrary to the consent of Parents, nor must a
Believer be unequally Yoaked with one that is none, 2 Cor. 6. 14. For if the
Family at first be not piously erected, God may be so much provoked, that it
may Labor and Travel under the Burden of his Anger ever after.

A good Conscience will make the Husband, Loving, Careful, Tender of his Wives
Person, and especially of her Soul. A good Conscience will make the Wife
Affectionate, Faithful, to Reverence her Husband, and to be Subject to him in
every thing. A good Conscience will make Parents to bring up their Children in
the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord; and 'twill make Children to Honor, and
to Obey their Parents, and to be a support, and a Comfort to them. A good
Conscience will make Masters to give unto their Servants that which is Just and
Equal, considering they have a Master in Heaven, with whom there is no respect
of Persons: and 'twill make Servants with good will to do Service as unto the
Lord, and not unto Men; it will stop their mouths when about to Answer again,
it will make them diligent, and to show all good Fidelity, that they may adorn
the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things.

8. A good Conscience has an Influence upon your Behavior, both in Prosperity
and Adversity.

In Prosperity 'twill make you take heed of forgetting God, Idolizing the
Gifts, and lightly esteeming the Giver: 'twill make you take heed of being high
minded, and trusting in uncertain Riches: You have little Reason to be puffed up
because you have more thick Clay than others, and to look upon them therefore
with scorn and contempt; you should contemn your own Riches, but not your poor
Brother, who may, perhaps, be much Richer toward God than you. These Riches,
because uncertain, are not to be trusted in: it is easier for a Camel to enter
into the Eye of a Needle, than for them who trust in Riches, to enter into the
Kingdom of God.

In Adversity a good Conscience will make you to beware of Impatience under the
Rod, Incorrigibleness by it, and of Inconstancy and drawing back from God after
the Rod is taken off from you.

9. A good Conscience will have an Influence upon you, in reference to your
Company. It will make you to shun Erroneous Company, lest you be led away with
their Errors, and embrace diverse and strange Doctrines: and to flee from
Profane Society, for if these are not avoided, you will never keep the Commands
of God to any purpose; and if you love them, and will not leave them, you are
likely to go to Hell for Company along with them.

10. A good Conscience will make you Useful in your Generations: 'twill make
you Merciful to the Bodies of others, giving them what is needful, to your
Power, and not barely saying, Depart in Peace, be ye Warmed and Filled, James
2. And not only Merciful to the Bodies, but especially to the Souls of others:
and how much good may you do to Souls by being Public Spirited, much in Prayer
for them, giving Counsel and Reproof to them, and being exemplary in all Holy
conversation and godliness before their Eyes!

11. A good Conscience will make you daily to walk with God, and to die daily:
that day that you do not walk with God, but neglect him and his Service, and
venture to sin against him, you have Reason to cry out with that Roman
Emperor, Diem perdidi, I have lost a day. You should every day also consider
your latter end, Live as Strangers and Pilgrims. Quid in mundo stabile? quid
firmum? Quale istud bonum quod semper timeas amittere? quod vel auferendum abs
te metuas, vel a te relinquendum scias? Quis illius volupt at is fructus qui
statim ut cessaverit videbitur tibi non fuisse? Age jam transactum vitae tuae
tempus animo revolve, Nonne tibi umbra videtur, and instar somnii tenuis, etc.
Quod si haec possumus hic dicere ubi quamvis brevis, tamen quia praesens est
vita ista magni penditur; Quid in futuro dicturi sumus, ubi majori aetatis
scientia transactum omne pro nihilo est? Augustine. Epist. 142.
A good Conscience by putting you in mind of Death and Judgment which will
follow after Death; will make you to walk every day with an Holy
Circumspection, and to be diligent, that you may be found of God in Peace, and
that your latter end may be Peace.

I come now to the Application.

USE I. Of Information. If a good Conscience has such an Influence upon the
Life and Conversation, then Learn, if the Conversation be bad, Conscience must
needs be bad also. If wickedness be Ordinarily practiced in the Life, it is a
sign either that Conscience is stupid, and takes little notice of what is done;
or if it does observe, yet it is without power to restrain and hinder it.

2. Learn what an Happiness it is to a Nation, to have much of a Good Conscience
among them. This will hinder Wars, and Fightings, and Confusion: this will
hinder Injustice, and Oppression, and Uncleanness: This would cause Unity and
Peace, turning our Swords into Plough-shares, and our Spears into
Pruning Hooks, and prevent our hurting and destroying one another any more;
Isa. 11. 6, 7, 8, 9. Those are Enemies to the common Good, who endeavor to
debauch the Consciences of men; for they go the ready way to fill the places
where they live with all Impiety and Unrighteousness.

USE II. Of Advice, which shall be in the words of the Psalmist: Show that you
have indeed a good Conscience, by departing from Evil, and by doing Good, Psalm.
37. 27.

1. Depart from Evil. There cannot possibly be a greater Evil than Sin; this is
the procuring Cause of all other evils: there had never been any such thing as
Sickness, Pain, Death, Hell, if Sin had never been. Sin dos alienate from God,
Col. 1. 21. It Is a most base Employment, we cannot be engaged in fouler and
filthier work, than in working of Iniquity; and is there any good that comes of
it? No, no, the works of Darkness are Unfruitful. Romans 6. 21. What fruit had
ye then in those works whereof ye are now ashamed? All will repent of these
evil works sooner or later; the sooner the better: for to repent in Hell will
be too late.

Mind therefore your Consciences bidding you cease to do Evil, else Evil will
be extremely aggravated: But if Evil be forsaken, the great Bar to Mercy is
removed, and God is ready to pardon and be at peace with you, Isa. 55. 7.

2. Learn to do well. Conscience will be pleased if God be pleased; God is a
Gracious Lord, compare Him and Sin together, Him and Satan together. His
Commands are not grievous, he is ready to help you to do whatever he requires,
and to work all your works in you and for you, Isa. 26. 12. Your work, if
truly good, will be wages, because of that Peace and Joy at present to be
found in the way of Righteousness: for by good works it appears that Faith is
of the right kind; is the Faith of Gods Elect.

Finally you must be judged according to your Works. Rev. 22. 12. Behold I
come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give to every man according as his
work shall be. As you would stand at that day, up and be doing the work of the
Lord now. I have done with that fourth Doctrine; A good Conscience has a great
and lasting Influence upon the Life, and all the Actions.

Doct. 5. The fifth Doctrine is this: A good Conscience steels a man's Heart
with courage, and makes him fearless before his Enemies. Paul earnestly beheld
the Council: He was not afraid to face them, because his Conscience was clear.
Nay, we read that Foelix the Judge trembled, while Paul the Prisoner was
confident: the reason was, because the Judge had a bad Conscience, which flew
in his face when he heard of Righteousness, Temperance and Judgment to come,
Act. 24. 25. but the Prisoner being acquitted by a good Conscience, did not
tremble but rejoice at the thoughts of Judgment to come. When Bradford was
brought before the Chancellor, he thought to brow-beat him, but could not;
Bradford looked him steadfastly in the Face, and out-look'd him, and then
looked up to Heaven: I do not wonder that he did not fear the the Look of a
Popish Bishop, who was not afraid (as it appeared afterward) of a fiery Faggot.

Now the grounds why those that have a good Conscience are Fearless, be these:

1. The Strength of God who is engaged for them, is everlasting. Isa. 26. 4. In
the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.

2. As his Strength, so his Covenant and Kindness are also everlasting. Isa.
54. 10. For the Mountains shall depart, and the Hills be removed, but my
Kindness shall not depart from thee, nor the Covenant of my Peace be removed,
says the Lord that has mercy upon thee. Nothing shall be able to separate
Believers from the Love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8. ult.

3. Let the weakness of Enemies be considered. Why should he that has a good
Conscience be afraid of a Man that shall die, and of the Son of man that shall
be made as Grass?

4. As Enemies are weak, so they are limited; they are absolutely under Gods
Power, they are as a staff in his hand, and cannot move or strike but as he
pleases. Let not the Axe boast it self against him that heweth therewith: Isa.
10. 15. Why should a good Conscience be afraid of the Axe, since the Lord (in
whose hand the Axe is,) is so sure and great a Friend?

5. There is an excellent Promise, That what Men do mean for Evil, shall turn
to Good: Nay, all all things shall work together for good to them that love God
Romans 8. 28. God does admirably overrule the Sins of men, and does make these
subservient to his own Glory and the Good of his people. Bonum est ut mala sint
aliter non sineret Deus ut mala essent, non sinit autem nolens utique sed
volens. Augustine.
The Selling of Joseph was the Preservation of Israel; the Persecuting of the
Christians the Enlargement of the Church; the Killing and Death of Christ the
Redemption and Salvation of Mankind.

USE I. Of Encouragement to the Saints; the Lord takes care to secure them from
Fear as well as Harm. His Spirit dwells in them to comfort them, and Conscience
is commanded to speak Peace unto the Sons of Peace in the Lords Name. Injuste
torqueris? quid nunc diceres si just? nullum nempe tormentum conscientia majus
est illa incolumi externa haec despicito: intra te est consolatur tuus. Quosdam
career ad insignem gloriam, alios ad eximiam fortunam, multos ad coelum misit,
ad sepulchrum omnes: nullum cepit quem non redderet. Petrarch.


USE II. Of Caution. Take heed of wounding Conscience, for that will make you
exceeding timorous. If you comply a little in a sinful way, and use any
unlawful Means for securing of your selves, this will spoil your Peace and
your Confidence, and you must expect greater straits to make you see the folly
of the Course you have taken. And 'twill be very sad to have a Storm without,
and a Tempest within at the same time.

USE III. Of Terror to Believers Adversaries; There is very good reason why
Fear should seize upon them: they are engaged in bad work, they have a bad
Conscience, and their End if they go on in this way they are in, will be a bad
End. God made known his Power and got himself a Name in the destruction of
Pharaoh, who was a bitter Enemy unto Israel.

Doct. 6. Those that are truly Conscientious love their Enemies, and wish them
no worse than if they were their Brethren. This is the sixth and last Doctrine.
Paul said, Men and Brethren. The Reasons of this Doctrine are these.

1. The Command is express and plain, to love Enemies. Mat. 5. 44. But I say to
you, love your Enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate
you, and pray for them that despitefully use you and persecute you.

2. Those who now have a good Conscience, were once Enemies, and yet they were
loved; though now the Children of God, yet there was a time that they were the
Children of wrath even as others, Ephesians. 2. 3. Though now they have obtained
Mercy, yet there was a time wherein they had not obtained mercy. They should
compassionate Enemies, since Divine Compassion was showed to them even when
they were Enemies.

3. Enemies may be converted, and become Friends to God and to his People.
Stephen had a Love to his Enemies when Stoning him to death, and prays for
them: his Prayer was heard, and Saul that was consenting to his death, was
afterward converted, and became an Apostle, and labored more abundantly than
all the Apostles, to spread the Gospel of Christ Jesus.

4. When Enemies are loved, there is great Peace and Sweetness in such a
temper: this is a great Evidence of Sincerity, and the Heart is emptied of that
Malice, Envy, Revenge, which are greatly torturing as well as very sinful.

5. To Love Enemies, makes us very like unto our Heavenly Father, for he is
kind unto the unthankful and to the evil; he makes his Sun to shine upon the
evil and upon the good, and sends Rain upon the just and upon the unjust, Mat.
5. 45.

The Use that I shall make of this Doctrine, shall be in these three
particulars.

1. If the Conscientious love their Enemies, surely they will much more love
their Brethren. How much is Love called for in the Gospel! what Motives are
used to persuade to it! It Is the Mark upon the Sheep of Christ, that they love
one another; and He that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him, 1 John
4. 16.

2. Because so little love, we may conclude there is but little Conscience.
Pigri mortui, miseri eritis si nihil a metis; Amate sed quid amatis indete.
Amor Dei amor proximi Charitas dicitur, amor mundi, amor hujus saeculi.
Cupiditas dicitur cupiditas refraenetur; charitas exicetur, charitas been oper
antis dat ei spem bonae conscientiae. Augustine. Tom. 8. Enarrat. in Psalm. 31.
page mihi 188. and 186.
Love is grown cold, and therefore surely Iniquity does abound, and Conscience
is grown dead.

3. To revive Conscience is the way to Unity and Peace. It Is sad to see the
Members of Christ at variance among themselves. While one cries out, I am of
Paul, and another I of Apollo, and another I of Cephas; it is a sign they are
all carnal, and walk as men, 1 Cor. 3. 3, 4. it is a sign there is little of
Conscience.

Conscience if good, is an Enemy to Strife and Division; it is against perverse
Disputing, and that Pride and Passion and Selfishness with which those Disputes
are managed. A good Conscience charges them in whom it is, as they will approve
themselves Subjects of the Prince of Peace, and Children of the God of Peace,
and make it evident that they understand the Gospel of Peace; that they take
care to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace, Ephesians. 4. 3.

The Conclusion.
THus have I finished all the Doctrines which I raised from the words of my
Text. I hope I have not been all this while beating the Air, or Plowing upon a
Rock, and losing my Labor. My Hearts desire and Prayer to God for this whole
Congregation, is, that they may be Awakened, Converted, Built up, and Saved! I
have spoken many words to you.

Now I shall address my self unto Conscience within you, and desire it to speak
all my words over again. Satan be dumb and tempt no more! Or if he will not be
dumb, be you deaf to his Temptations. Be silent, O thou Flesh, and persuade no
more unto that which is unto the Souls Ruin! But let Conscience be heard in
what it speaks in the Name, and from the Word of God.

O Conscience, rouse up thy self, understand thy Power, know thy Office, lift
up thy Voice, and do thy Duty. Tell this Congregation thou have something to
say to every Mothers Child of them, and command them to hear thee, or else
threaten to Reproach them in Hell for ever for their refusing to hearken.

1. Then speak unto the Ignorant. Cause a dreadful sound in their Ears, Hic
consentiamus mala facinora conscientia flagellari; multos fortuna liberat
poena, metu neminem; quia infixa nobis ejus rei aversatio est quam natura
damnavit; ideo nanquam fides latendi fit etiam latentibus; quia coarguit illos
conscientia and ipsos sibi ostendit. Seneca. Epist. 97.
Tell them that their danger is greater, because they do not apprehend their
danger; and that if they are Ignorant of God and Christ, they have none of that
Knowledge, which is Life Eternal, John 17. 3. Say, How long ye simple ones will
ye love simplicity! and Fools hate Wisdom! Turn you at my Reproof; and use the
means to obtain Understanding, and especially ask it of God, that he may pour
out his Spirit unto you, and make known his Words unto you, Prove. 1. 22, 23.

Tell the Ignorant that the Devil is the Ruler of the darkness of this World,
and therefore those that are in darkness are under the Devils power; bid them
look unto Christ Jesus for Light, and for Redemption, that they may be rescued
out of Satan's hand, and made free indeed.

2. Speak, O Conscience, to the Profane, tell them that it is not more certain
that God is Holy than that he is their Enemy; they Declare themselves open
Rebels against the great and glorious Majesty of Heaven and Earth: And he has
threatened to break such with a Rod of Iron, and to dash them in pieces like a
Potters Vessel, Psalm. 2. 9. Tell the Notorious Drunkards and Swearers, and
Whore-mongers, and Sabbath Breakers, that their sins at last will find them
out, that wickedness will be found, and felt to burn as the fire, and that God
must needs be infinitely too hard for all that harden themselves against him.

Oh, call unto these Frantic, self-destroying sinners to stop presently, lest
the very next step be into the bottomless Pit of woe, out of which there can be
no Recovery. Roar in the Ears of those Ranting, Roaring Fellows, and let them
not Eat, or Drink, or Sleep, much less sin in quiet, for thee; tell them that
there is but an hairs breadth between them and Death, between them and Hell;
and inform them that it is possible, even for the most Profane to be saved, if
they come and submit to the Lord Jesus, and break off their sins by
Righteousness.

3. O Conscience, speak unto the Civilized sinners that trust in their own
Righteousness. Tell them that the Prophet counted his Righteousnesses as filthy
Rags, Isa. 64. 6. And ask them how they dare to trust in theirs? Convince them,
that it is not enough to escape the more scandalous wickednesses, for the
Pharisee was not an Extortioner, nor Unjust, nor an Adulterer, he Fasted and
Prayed, and gave Tithes of all that he Possessed, and yet all this could not
Justify him.

Tell them that they are not so whole, but they need Christ the Physician, and
must needs die without him as well as others: Tell them that their very Hearts
must be renewed, and taken off from sin and the Creature, and turned unto God,
else they must of Necessity perish.

4. Speak, O Conscience, unto Hypocritical Professors, tell them that that
which is highly esteemed among Men is abomination many times in the sight of
God: Say to them in the words of the Apostle, and be sure to speak home, Gal.
6. 7, 8. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, for whatsoever a Man Sows, that
shall he also Reap: He that sows unto the Flesh, shall of the Flesh Reap
Corruption.

Tell them that their Secret sins, their secret Intemperance, and Uncleanness,
and Dishonest dealing is set in the Light of Gods Countenance, and though they
may shut their own Eyes, and not see God, yet they cannot shut Gods Eyes, nor
hinder him from seeing them: Tell them that Hypocrisy is most hateful, and
that as Hell is prepared for the Devil and his Angels, so in a special manner
for the Hypocrite and the Unbeliever.

5. O Conscience, speak unto the Rich in this world, and tell them how hard
it is for them to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, and as long as they love the
World, and desire it more than Communion with God, it is utterly impossible.

Bid them to think of the Rich Man in the Gospel, that went from a great
Estate, and from a full Table, and a brave House, and sumptuous Fare, unto a
place of Torment: Put them in mind that the Love of Money is the root of all
evil, and that wealth has proved unto Millions, only like a weight to sink
them into Destruction and perdition. Bid them mind a Treasure in Heaven, which
is infinitely better than Gold and Silver which are Corruptible.

6. Speak, O Conscience, to the Poor, and tell them 'twill be sad for them to
be miserable in both Worlds; 'twill be sad to receive evil things here, and ten
thousand times worse hereafter. Bid them take heed of Lying and Stealing, and
trusting in any sinful course for a Livelihood, but persuade them to seek first
the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, that all other things which are
needful may be added to them, Mat. 6. 33.

Charge them to be Poor in Spirit, to be contented with their Condition without
murmuring against God, or envying at those who have more than themselves; and
above all things to endeovour that they may be rich toward God; Rich in Faith,
and then they will be Heirs of the Kingdom, which the Lord has promised to them
that Love him, James 2. 5.

7. O Conscience, speak unto Traders of all sorts, tell them, that false
Weights, and Measures, and Balances are an abomination in the sight of God.
When they are about to Cheat, give them a check, and assure them that an Estate
gotten by fraud is attended with a Curse.

Be with them in their Shops, and at the Exchange, observe how they Buy and
Sell, and examine all their gains; bid them to mete the same measure unto
others, that they would have mete unto themselves; and to do as they would be
done unto, Mat. 7. 12.

Tell them that it is the height of Madness to venture the losing of their Souls
for a pound, or for a shilling, or for Sixpence unjustly gained, since Christ,
who knew the value of Souls, says, that a Soul is more worth than the World,
and all the Wealth of it put together.

8. Speak, O Conscience, unto Back-sliders, tell them that it had been better
for them never to have known the way of Truth and Righteousness, than after
they have known it to turn from the Holy Commandment delivered to them, 2 Pet.
2. 21.

Call them Dogs for returning to their Vomit, and Swine, for wallowing again in
their former Mire. Tell them that where there was but one unclean Spirit
before, they are likely to be possessed with seven now; and the latter end will
be worse with them than the beginning.

9. O Conscience, speak unto them that are truly humbled for sin, and are
willing to have Christ upon any terms, and tell them that God is rich in Mercy,
ready to forgive freely the Debt of many thousand Talents.

These are the Sons of Peace, and therefore let thy Peace, and thy Lords Peace
come and abide upon them. Futurae beatudinis non est certius testimonium quam
bona conscientia; mundus enim volubilitate circumvoletur, ploret, ridea pereat,
transeat; nunquam conscientia mercessit. Bernard. lib. de Conscen. c. 4.
Those that mourn for their Iniquities, and hate every false way, and are
desirous to be washed and Sanctified by the Spirit of Christ, as well as
Justified and reconciled by his Blood: oh, be sure to comfort them, tell them
that the Lord will not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax,
until he send forth Judgment unto Victory, Mat. 12. 20. Bid them not to be
cast down, not to be disquieted, but to hope in the Lord, and praise him, who
is so nigh to them that are of broken Heart, and saves such as be of a
contrite Spirit.

10. Lastly, O Conscience, speak one word to the Preacher himself; and speak
effectually. Thou that Teach others, be sure to Teach and Learn thy self.
Practice not the sins thou cryest out against, neglect not the Duties thou
urgest others to perform. Be not like those who dig in Mines, and enrich
others, but are poor themselves: Or like that Statue in Greece, which showed
the way to Thebes and Athens, but it self stirred not. Oh, take heed, lest
after thou have Preached Christ and Conscience unto others, thou thy self be
found a castaway.

FINIS.
A Poem out of Mr. George Herbert, Called Longing, page 142, 143, 144, 145.
WIth sick and Famisht Eyes,
With doubling Knees and weary Bones,
To thee my cries,
To thee my groans,
To thee my sighs, my Tears ascend*
No end?
My Throat, my Soul is hoarse;
My heart is withered like a ground
Which thou do curse.
My thoughts turn round,
And make me giddy: Lord, I fall,
Yet call.
From thee all pity flows.
Mothers are kind, because thou art,
And do dispose
To them apart:
Their Infants them, and they suck thee
More free.
Bowels of pity, hear!
Lord of my Soul, love of my mind,
Bow down thine ear!
Let not the wind
Scatter my words, and in the same
Thy Name!
Look on my sorrows round!
Mark well my Furnace! O what flames,
What heats abound!
What griefs, what shames!
Consider Lord; Lord, bow thine ear,
And hear!
Lord Jesu, thou did bow
Thy dying head upon the Tree:
O be not now
More dead to me!
Lord hear! Shall he that made the ear,
Not hear?
Behold, thy dust does stir;
It moves, it creeps, it aims at thee:
Will thou deferr
To succor me,
Thy pile of dust, wherein each crumb
Says, Come?
To thee help appertains.
Have thou left all things to their course,
And laid the reins
Upon the horse?
Is all locked? has a sinners plea
No key?
Indeed the World's thy book,
Where all things have their leaf assigned:
Yet a meek look
Has interlin'd.
Thy board is full, yet humble guests
Find nests.
Thou tarriest, while I die,
And fall to nothing: thou do reign,
And rule on high,
While I remain
In bitter grief; yet I am I styled
Thy child.
Lord, did thou leave thy throne,
Not to relieve? how can it be,
That thou art grown
Thus hard to me?
Were sin alive, good cause there were
To bear.
But now both sin is dead,
And all thy promises live and bide:
That wants his head;
These speak and chide,
And in thy bosom pour my tears,
As theirs.
Lord JESU, heal my heart,
Which has been broken now so long,
That every part
Has got a tongue!
Thy beggars grow; rid them away
To day.
My love, my sweetness, hear!
By these thy feet, at which my heart
Lies all the year,
Pluck out thy dart,
And heal my troubled breast, which cries,
Which dies.

