A short Survey of our JULIAN ENGLISH YEAR; With the Definition, Deviation,
Dimension, and manner of REFORMATION.
Speculum Anni. A Solar year. Definition. Dimension.

Deviation.

A True year is the Suns total race or revolution through the whole Zodiac,
from any one point or degree to the same.

It contains three hundred sixty five natural days, five equinoctial hours,
forty nine minutes, and sixteen seconds or sections, which are the sixtieth
part of a minute.

Julius Caesar, Romes Dictator and Emperor, finding their Calender very faulty
and variously embolized with more or less intercalations, at the ignorant
Augurs and Priests pleasures, by advice of S^sigenes a skillful Mathematician
of Alexandria in Egypt, constituted the year about forty four before Christ's
birth, to be three hundred sixty five days and six hours complete, taking in
ten minutes and forty four Seconds too much, which he reputed an inconsiderable
Atome; yet in one hundred thirty four years, it makes one entire day lacking
one minute and forty four seconds: but in lieu of the said six hours, he added
or allowed one day ( Feb. 24. when the Hebdomaticall letter is dupled) every
fourth year called Bissextile, because then are two sixth days of March
Calends. This the whole Empire observed, which South-Brittain being a branch
thereof, has kept unaltered to this day: so since his Institution, 1700 years
ago, have resulted about thirteen days; which should be subtracted or taken
back, to bring the times in their proper stations as they were then or at
Christ's birth.

Gregorian Account.

To correct this obliquity or aberration, P. Gregory 13. in the Council of
Trent, A. 1582 by direction of Aloysius Lilius a learned Astronomer, struck often
ten days (which should be two more as Lily advised) regulating the reformation
according to the times of the first General Synod at Nice, A. 325. when Sol
entered Aries at the Vernal Equinox, March 21. as the Records testify: This
alteration was made Oct. 4. and the next day inscribed Oct. 15. The first
Reformation is called Julian or Sesigenean, the last (which is no new, Era or
Account, but a necessary Note or Animadversion on the former) the Gregorian or
Lilian: but both Roman (one Imperial, the other Papal) and both somewhat
erroneous, as is premonstrated. This latter all Christendom (except England)
observes, being no point of Religion, but civil computation, which some
Parliaments have consulted to do; but because ten or twelve days defalked at
once, may breed much alteration in Conrracts, Bonds, and payment of Rents, they
refused to alter or amend it.

Manner of reforming.

Howbeit an easier way will do it without the least inconvenience to any, if
all Bissextil years be barred for forty four together (when we shall meet with
the Foreign Account, which will then be eleven days before us, by omitting one
Leap year, A. 1700.) or fifty two to substract thirteen days, and be two days
before them, which is rightest; for what prejudice can accrue, if all years so
long run equal, sans adding one day every fourth: The Tridentine Fathers
decreed to forbear a Leap year at end of each Century (as A. 1700. 1800. 1900.
but none A. 2000) because in one hundred thirty four years results one day,
which in four hundred makes about three, and this will keep it right in their
cue or course for ever. The like Proviso by Act or Edict will do it here, if
the State please, that no Bissextil or Leap year be kept in England for forty
four years next ensuing (which will jump with them) or fifty two (which will
fully reform) but afterward to be held every fourth year, except at end of each
hundred thirty and fourth year for ever: Or else thus, Except at end of every
hundred year for three hundred years together, and at end of each four hundred
year, to be kept again as before.

Some short Annotations to explain or elucidate the Premises, which in a few
points may happily seem obscure.
Annotations.

I. AS Creation according to our Julian English year, the Vernal Equinox (now
March 10.) befell April 21. and the Autumnal (now Sept. 13.) on Oct. 25. So the
Estivall Solstice (now June 13.) on July 23. and the Hyemal, (now Dec. 1^.) on
Jan. 23. for the seasons in 5686. years past to this year 1656. have
anticipated 42 days and ten hours from Caesar's reformation twelve days and
sixteen hours; since Christ's Incarnation twelve days and eight hours, as all
Artists by exact calculation shall find true; because in every forty five years
there result eight hours complete, and in a hundred thirty four years, one
entire day, as is fore-shewed.

II. From this deformity or obliquity arise two maine incongruities, 1. That
the twelve last days in every month since Christ's time, usurp the room of the
twelve first in the next; so about 2500 years hence (if the World shall so long
last) every one will wholly possess the place of his next neighbor; which is a
Turkish Solaecisme in Astronomy, whose Summer months in very few years take
up their Hybernals in the Winter rooms; and contrarily, not caring in what
seasons they celebrate their Pseudo-Festivals. 2. That our Christian Feasts are
not observed in the same set seasons they should be, but twelve days too late;
for Christ is storied to be borne on the shortest day (as his Forerunner John
Baptist on the longest) when Sol entered Capricorn, which befell Dec. 25. but
now by anticipation of twelve days falls on Dec. 13. so by right, Christmas day
should be set where Dec. 13. stands, and Epiphany in place of it; the like
obliquity occurs in all other Festivities, which some Sects no more regard then
Infidel Mahometans; but these incongruities will easily be redressed by barring
of Leap years for fifty two years.

III. A conformity to the common Calender current in all Christendom, by
prohibiting Leap year but 44 years will much facilitate commerce with Foreign
Nations, and cut off the duple difference of Stilo veteri and novo, which makes
much confusion in letters, accounts, and transactions among Merchants, to their
ineffable benefit.

Cur Anni errorem non corrigit Anglia notum.
Cum faciant alii; cernere nemo polest.
Why England does not the years known error mend.
When all else do; no Man can comprehend.

