GOD'S Terrible Voice IN THE CITY:

Wherein you have I. The sound of the voice, in the Narration of the two late
Dreadful Judgments of Plague and Fire, inflicted by the Lord upon the City of
London, the former in the year, 1665, the latter in the year 1666. II. The
interpretation of the voice, in a Discovery, 1. Of the cause of these
Judgments, where you have a Catalogue of London's sins. 2. Of the design of
these Judgments; where you have an enumeration of the Duties God calls for by
this terrible voice.


By T. V.

Micah 6. 9. The voice of the Lord cries unto the City, and the Man of wisdom
shall see thy name: Hear ye the Rod, and who has appointed it. Printed in the
Year 1667.

TO All such of the CITY, WHO Have seen the Desolations OF LONDON BY The late
Judgments of PLAGUE and FIRE.
IT might have seemed more seasonable unto some, if a work of this nature had
come forth unto view more immediately after the sound of Gods terrible voice,
and execution, at least, of the last dreadful Judgment of the Fire; because if
a Man strikes whilst the Iron is hot, it is likely to make the more deep
impression, which when it grows cool, grows hard and unmalleable; and if the
hammer of the Word had been used, when London was newly come forth of the
Furnace, some might think they would have yielded the more easily unto it is
strokes, and the better have received the fashion, which this Hammer would work
them unto; and that, since the fresh and lively remembrance of the judgment is
more worn off, it is to be feared, that they are more cooled and hardened, and
therefore in likelihood, it will be more difficult to effect a due impression
of the Judgments by the Word upon them: yet, besides that it was not in my
thoughts to attempt this Work, until the greatest part of the Winter was spent:
I may further add, that, though a discourse concerning the Plague, would have
been most seasonable under the Judgment it self, when people who were generally
taken off from their trading, had room and time for retirement and
consideration, more than ever they had in their lives before; and therefore
were more likely to lay to heart, what might be spoken or written unto them on
that Subject: yet the reason is not the same in the Judgment of the Fire,
which (however startling and astonishing) was so far from giving them retiring
time for consideration, as the former Judgment of the Plague had done, that it
did engage them unto more labourious works than ever they had, not only while
London was burning, in removing what they could save of their goods from the
Fire; but also since, in looking out new Habitations, and fitting their Houses
and Shops for Trades; which has given them occasion for so much distraction,
that I fear they could hardly settle their minds to read and consider so
seriously as they should, what the Lord has been doing with them, and speaking
unto them by this Terrible Voice, which has sounded so loud in their ears: but
by this time, I hope, that the most have attained to some kind of settlement,
at least so much, as to give them leave to sit down and ponder upon the meaning
of God, in these strange and dreadful Judgments of Plague and Fire in the
City; and therefore this Book may be more seasonable unto the most, than if it
had been written, and presented to them immediately after the Fire had burnt
them out of their habitations. Friends, It is high time for all of you to
retire your selves, and bethink your selves, and wisely to consider Gods
dealings with you, to open your ear, and labor to understand these speaking
Judgments, least if God be provoked, by your deafness, and incorrigibleness, to
speak a third time, it be in your utter ruin and desolation. If these Papers
be any ways helpful to revive in your memories the Judgments themselves, by
the Historical Narration which here you have of them; to work your hearts to
some sense of sin in discovery of the cause; and to persuade you unto a ready
compliance with Gods design in the declaring of what God now expects from you,
after such dreadful executions; as yours will be the benefit: so I desire that
God may have the whole glory; and that you would make this return for my help
of you, to help me with your prayers, that I may be the more helpful to you in
mine, who am

Your dearly affectionate friend and servant in the Lord. T. V.

Gods terrible Voice IN THE CITY.
Psalm 65. part of the fifth Verse. By terrible things in righteousness will thou answer us.
INTRODUCTION.
SHall a Trumpet be blown in the City, and the people not be afraid? Shall
there be evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? The Lion has roared,
who will not fear? the Lord God has spoken, who can but Prophecy? Am. 3. 6.
8. When the Pharisees spoke to our Savior to rebuke his Disciples for their
loud praises of the Lord with Hosanna's, he tells them, If they should hold
their peace, the stones would immediately cry out, Luke 19. 39, 40. And we read
in Habakkuk, Chap. 2. 11. Of the stone crying out of the wall, and the beam out
of the timber making answer. Certainly we in London have lately heard the cry
of stones and walls, of timber and beams in their fall and flames; I mean in
the late Dreadful Fire which has laid out Jerusalem in heaps; or rather we
have heard the Voice of God in this and other terrible things which have come
upon us; Let none then rebuke, if one so unfit do make an attempt to speak
something of the meaning of Londons Fire, or of Gods Terrible Voice in this and
other Judgments, when by the mouth of Babes God can declare his Will.

SECT. 1.
By terrible things in righteousness will thou answer us.
THis whole Psalm breathes forth nothing but grace and goodness unto the people
of God, from the beginning of it to the end; yea, in the verse of my Text where
God speaks most terribly and righteously in the Judgments and Destructions
which he brings upon their Enemies, yet he is called the God of their
Salvation, and those terrible things by which God speaks, are not only a
righteous answer unto their Enemies sins, but also a gracious answer unto his
peoples prayers. By terrible things in righteousness will thou answer us.

I shall not speak of terrible things in the restrained sense, as they befall
the Enemies only of Gods people, and the wicked, whilst the righteous do
escape, and it may be hereby are preserved; but as they may befall any people,
not excluding Gods people, whom the Lord may answer by terrible things in
righteousness.

Two Doctrines we may observe.

Doct. 1. That God does sometimes speak unto a People by terrible things.

Doct. 2. That when God does speak most terribly, he does answer most
righteously.

First, That God does sometimes speak unto a People by terrible things.

Here I shall show: 1. How God may be said to speak. 2. What those terrible
things are by which God does sometimes speak. 3. Why God does sometimes speak
unto a People by terrible things; and then apply.


1. How God may be said to speak.

God being a Spirit, has no Mouth nor Tongue properly as men have, who have
bodies, and therefore his way of speaking is not like ours (though sometimes he
has created a Voice in as articulate sound as if it had proceeded from the
mouth of man to declare his will) but there are several ways in which God has
spoken and does speak unto the Children of men, by which he does as really and
effectually make known his mind, as if he spoke with man's voice.

1. God has spoken formerly unto men immediately, in extraordinary ways, and
that sometimes more terribly; as when he gave the Law upon Mount Sinai, when
the Mount burned with fire, and there was blackness, and darkness, and tempest,
thundrings and lightnings, and the sound of the Trumpet exceeding loud, and the
voice of words so exceeding terrible, that it made the whole Camp to tremble;
and Moses himself said, I exceedingly fear and quake, Exodus 19. 16. Heb. 12.
18, 19, 20, 21.

This way of Gods speaking the Children of Israel were not able to bear,
therefore they desired that Moses might speak unto them, but that God would not
speak unto them thus any more, least they should die, Exodus 20. 19.

At other times God spoke with a more still and gentle voice, and in a more
mild way, as when he spoke to Samuel in the night, he thought at first that it
had been the voice of Eli, 1 Samuel 3. 4, 5. Thus God spoke unto Abraham, unto
Jacob, unto Moses, to whom it is said, he spoke face to face, as a man speaks
to his friend, Exodus 33. 11.

God spoke also in an extraordinary way to his Prophets of old, when he made
known unto them his counsel, that they might declare it unto the people:
Sometimes he spoke unto them with an audible voice, which he created when no
Shape was seen; sometimes by Angels, who appeared in bodies, which they laid
down again when they had delivered their message; sometimes by Dreams and
Visions in the night; sometimes by Urim and Thummim; sometimes by more secret
Inspirations of the Spirit.

In the last days of Gods extraordinary speaking, he spoke by the most
extraordinary person, namely, by his own most dearly beloved and only begotten
Son, Heb. 1. 1, 2. whom he sent out of his bosom to declare himself, Ioh. 1.
18. and reveal what he had heard of the Father, Ioh. 15. 15. who brought life
and immortality to light by the Gospel, and made known Gods purpose and Grace
in man's Salvation, 2 Timothy 1. 9, 10. and uttered such things as were kept secret
from the foundations of the world, Mat. 13. 35. The Gospel began to be spoken
of by the Lord Jesus himself, and was continued and confirmed by his Apostles,
who were his Witnesses, to whom God also did bear witness with signs and
wonders, and diverse Miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his
will, Heb. 2. 3, 4.

2. And now, though not so immediately, and in such extraordinary ways, yet
still God does speak unto the Children of men. There are two ways of Gods
speaking now unto men; namely, his Word and his Works.

1. His Word contained in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, which
holy men wrote as they were inspired by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. 21. And thus
God speaks either externally by his Word alone, or internally with his Word
by his Spirit.

1. God speaks now unto men externally by his Word alone, to some more
silently, unto whom he gives his Scriptures only to be read, and brings to
their view his written Word alone, without the advantage of other Ordinances,
which might more powerfully declare unto them his will.

Unto others he speaks more audibly, where the Gospel does sound in their ears,
and wi^h the Scriptures God sends his Ministers to preach unto them.

God speaks by his Ministers, who are his Watchmen, in his Name to warn the
people of his Judgments temporal and eternal, which in the Scriptures he has
threatened, Ezekiel. 3, 17 18, etc. Isa. 63. 6. who are the Lords Ambassadors, 2
Cor. 5. 20. from whom they have a Commission to preach the Gospel, and declare
the glad tidings of Salvation unto all such as repent, and believe, and yield
up themselves unto the obedience of the Word.

Ministers stand in the room of Christ; and it is well for us that God speaks
unto us by Ministers, because we should not be able to endure, should he speak
unto us immediately by himself; should he speak unto us with an audible voice,
as he did to the Children of Israel on Mount Sinai, when he gave the Law, this
would be so terrible, that with them we should desire to heat Moses, and choose
Ministers rather to speak unto us; yea, if Christ Jesus himself should come
down from heaven, however he might have been heard in his state of Humiliation,
when his Deity was so much veiled; yet if he should now appear in the glory he
has with the Father; or as he appeared unto John his Beloved Disciple, when
his eyes were as a flame of fire, and his countenance like the Sun when it
shines in its full strength, and his voice like the sound of many waters: I
say, if Christ should thus appear and preach unto us, such a dread and
amazement would fall upon us, that we should fall down dead at his feet, as his
Disciple John did, Rev. 1. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Therefore it is better for us in
this state of weakness, that God speaks to us by Ministers, men of like
passions and infirmities with our selves, whom we may be able to bear, and
whose words notwithstanding our weakness, we may be able to hear.

2. God does now also speak unto men internally with his Word by his Spirit,
when God sends his Spirit with his Word for Conviction only, or some Common
work: thus God calls upon the wicked, who sit under the preaching of the Word,
moves and strives with them by his Spirit, but they resist the spirit, stifle
Convictions, and will not hearken to his calls and motions, Genesis 6. 3. Act. 7.
51.

But especially God speaks with his Word by his Spirit, when he sends his
Spirit for Conversion, and to effect a saving change: thus God speaks when he
calls blind sinners out of darkness into his mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2. 9.
quickneth dead sinners, putting into them a new Principle of spiritual life,
Ephesians. 2. 1. rescueth enslaved sinners out of Satan's snare, 2 Timothy 2. 26.
delivering them from the power of the Devil, and translating them into the
Kingdom of his dear Son, Col. 1. 13. when by his Spirit he draws sinners,
Ioh. 6. 44. and joins them unto Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 6. 17. God speaks unto
men with his Word by his Spirit, when he does thus effectually call them; and
he speaks unto men also by his Spirit, when he graciously visits them which
are called, when he teaches, melts, warmeth, quickneth, strengthens, and
refreshes them by his Spirit, as they sit under the influence of his
Ordinances, when he speaks peace unto their Consciences, shows them his
reconciled Face, sheddeth abroad his love in their hearts, and gives such
sweet comforts and ravishing joy as is unspeakable, and full of Glory, Ioh. 6.
45. Ioh. 14. 26. Luke 24. 32. Psalm. 143. 11. Ephesians. 3. 16. Act. 3. 19. Psa. 85.
8. Romans 5. 5. Psa. 94. 19. 1 Pet. 1. 8.

2. God speaks unto men by his Works; and that either by his works of
Creation, or by his works of Providence.

1. God speaks by his works of Creation; the Heavens have a voice and declare
Gods glory, Psa. 19. 1. and the Earth has not only an ear to hear, Isa. 1. 2.
but also a tongue, as it were, to speak Gods praise. We read of the Seas
roaring, and the Floods clapping their hands; of the Mountains singing, and the
Trees of the wood sounding forth their joyful acclamations; yea, beasts and all
cattle, creeping things and flying fowl, Dragons and all Deeps, Fire, Hail,
Snow, Rain, and stormy wind, as they fulfill his Word, so they speak, and in
their way declare what their Maker is, or rather in them, and by them, God does
speak, and make known something of himself, Psa. 148. 7, 8, 10. etc.

We read of the Voice of the Lord in Power, the Voice of the Lord in Majesty,
the Voice of the Lord upon the waters, the Voice of the Lord dividing the
flames of fire, the Voice of the Lord shaking the Wilderness of Cadesh,
breaking the Cedars of Lebanon, and the like, which is the Voice of the Lord in
the terrible noise of Thunder, Psa. 29. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

And there is no one work of the Lord (though not with such a noise) which does
not with a loud voice, as it were, in the Name of the Lord proclaim unto the
Children of men, how great and glorious the Lord is, who has given it its
being, and use, and place in the world: especially the work of God in the Make
of man, his body the members and senses, his Soul the powers and faculties,
does without a tongue speak the praise of that God, who curiously framed the
body in the womb, and immediately infused the living soul, Psa. 139. 14, 15.
Zach. 12. 1.

2. God speaks by his Works of Providence, and that both merciful and
afflictive.

1. God speaks by his Merciful Providence, by his patience, and bounty, and
goodness, he calls men unto repentance, Romans 2. 4. He gives witness of
himself, in giving rain and fruitful seasons, Act. 14. 17.

Gods providing mercies, Gods preventing mercies, Gods preserving mercies, Gods
delivering mercies, the number of Gods mercies which cannot be reckoned, the
order and strange method of Gods mercies, which cannot be declared, the
greatness of Gods mercies in the kinds and strange circumstances, which cannot
be expressed, do all with open mouth call upon men from the Lord to repent of
their sins which they have committed against him, and to yield all love,
thankfulness, and obedience unto him.

2. God speaks by his afflictive Providence: There is a voice of God in his
Rod, as well as in his Word, Mic. 6. 9. Hear the Rod, and who has appointed
it; when God chasteneth, he teaches, Psalm. 94. 12. When God lifts up his
hand and strikes, he opens his mouth also and speaks; and sometimes opens
men's ears too, and seals their instruction, Job 33. 16.

Sometimes God speaks by Rods more mildly, by lesser afflictions; sometimes God
speaks by Scorpions more terribly, by greater Judgments, which leads to the
second particular.

SECT. II.
2. What are those terrible things by which God does sometimes speak?
THe word in the Original is (...) from (...) which signifies, he feared:
Terrible things are such great Judgments of God, as do usually make a general
impression of fear upon the hearts of people.

Take some instances.

1. The Plague is a Terrible Judgment by which God speaks unto men. The Hebrew
word is (...) from (...) he spoke. It is a speaking Judgment; where God sends
the Plague, he speaks, and he speaks terribly; the Plague is very terrible, as
it effects terror; the Pestilence which walks in darkness, is called the
Terror by night, Psalm. 91. 5, 6.

The Plague is very terrible, in that

1. It is so poisonous a disease; it poisons the blood and spirits, breeds a
strange kind of venom in the body, which breaks forth sometimes in Boils, and
Blains, and great Carbuncles, or else works more dangerously, when it preyeth
upon the vitals more inwardly.

2. It is so noisome a disease; it turns the good humors into putrefaction,
which putting forth it self in the issues of running sores, does give a most
noisome smell: Such a disease for loathsomeness we read of, Psa. 38. 5, 7, 11.
My wounds stink and are corrupt, my loins are filled with a loathsome disease,
and there is no soundness in my flesh; my lovers and my friends stand aloof
from my sore, and my Kinsmen stand afar off.

3. It is so infectious a disease; it spreads it self worse than the Leprosy
amongst the Jews; it infecteth not only those which are weak, and infirm in
body, and full of ill humors, but also those which are young, strong,
healthful, and of the best temperature; and that sometimes sooner than others.
The Plague is infectious, and greatly infectious, whole Cities have been
depopulated through its spreading, many whole families have received infection,
and death one from another thereby, which is the third thing that renders the
Plague so terrible.

4. It is so deadly; it kills where it comes without mercy; it kills (I had
almost said certainly) very few do escape, especially upon its first entrance,
and before its malignity be spent; few are touched by it, but they are killed
by it: and it kills suddenly; as it gives no warning before it comes, suddenly
the arrow is shot which wounds unto the heart; so it gives little time of
preparation before it brings to the Grave: Under other diseases men may linger
out many weeks and months; under some diverse years; but the Plague usually
kills within a few days; sometimes within a few hours after its first
approach, though the body were never so strong and free from disease before.

The Plague is very terrible; it is terrible to them that have it; insomuch as
it usually comes with Grim Death, the King of Terrors, in its hand: and it is
terrible to them which have it not; because of their danger of being infected
by it; the fear of which has made such an impression upon some, that it has
rased out of their hearts, for the while, all affections of love and pity to
their nearest Relations and dearest Friends; so that when the Disease has
first seized upon them, and they have had the greatest need of succor, they
have left their friends in distress, and flown away from them, as if they had
been their Enemies.

2. A Deluge by Water is a Terrible Judgment: There have been several Floods
which we read of in Histories, that have suddenly broken in upon some places,
and overwhelmed Habitations and Inhabitants together.

But God never did, and never will speak so Terribly by a Deluge of Water, as
by the great Deluge in the days of Noah, when the whole world was drowned
thereby, excepting Noah, and those which were with him in the Ark.

And because the Judgment was so dreadful, and the History so affecting, I
shall set it before your eye out of Genesis 7. from the 11th ver. to the end of
the Chapter. In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second month, and
the seventeenth day of the month, in the same day were all the Fountains of
the Great Deep broken up. God withdrew the bounds which he had set to the great
Sea, so that the waters covered the earth as they did at the beginning; and the
Windows of heaven were opened, out of which God looked forth in anger upon the
earth, and powered forth a Viol of his wrath, causing it to rain forty days
and forty nights in dreadful showers, accompanied, as is probable, with stormy
winds, and hideous tempest, which put the world into a fright and amazement;
when the Element of Air seemed to be changed into water, and such a Torrent
flowed in upon them on every side; we may guess what fear they were
overwhelmed withal; but Noah and his Family were got into the Ark, and the
Lord shut them in; then the waters increased, and bare up the Ark, and it was
lift up above the earth, and the waters increased, and prevailed greatly upon
the earth, (...) and the Ark went upon the face of the waters, so that all the
high Hills and Mountains were covered fifteen Cubits: Then all flesh died,
fowl, and cattle, and beast, and every thing that creeped or moved on the
earth, and every man, and Noah only remained alive, and they that were with him
in the Ark. God spoke then terribly indeed unto the wicked world by the Flood,
which devoured them all together in the midst of their security and sin; but
God has promised he will never speak thus by water any more.

3. Fire is another terrible thing, whereby God sometimes calls to contend by
with a sinful People: Fire is very dreadful when it has a Commission from God,
and meets with much combustible matter, and prevails without resistance. God
spoke terribly by Fire unto Sodom and Gomorrah, when he rained Fire and
Brimstone on those Cities, and consumed them. See Genesis 19. from the 24th ver.
to the 29th, The Lord rained fire and brimstone out of heaven, and overthrew
those Cities and the Inhabitants together; and when Abraham looked toward Sodom
and Gomorrah, and the Land of the Plain, he saw the smoke of the Country go up
like the smoke of a Furnace.

God spoke terribly, though not so terribly to Jerusalem, when he suffered
their City to be set on fire by the Babylonians, and their Temple to be burnt
to the ground. See Ier. 52. 12, 13.

But the most fearful Instances of Gods Terrible Voice by Fire are yet to come:
Thus God will speak by Fire unto Spiritual Babylon, which may easily be proved
to be Rome, from Rev. 17. 18. She being the then great City, which reigned over
the Kings of the earth. Babylons burning with fire you may read, Rev. 18. 8, 9,
10, etc. Therefore shall her Plagues come in one day, Death, and Mourning, and
Famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire; for strong is the Lord God
who judges her: And the Kings of the earth who have committed fornication, and
lived deliciously with her, shall bewail her, and lament for her, when they
shall see the smoke of her burning; standing afar off for fear of her torment,
saying, Alas! alas! that great City Babylon! that mighty City! for in one hour
is thy judgment come. etc.

God spoke terribly by fire when London was in flames, of which in the
application; but he will speak far more terribly when Babylon shall be in
flames; and not only in part, but wholly, and utterly, and irreparably burnt
and turned into ashes: when not only the City shall be consumed, but also the
Whore her self shall be hated and made desolate, and devoured with fire by the
Kings of the earth, Rev. 17. 10.

The last instance of Gods speaking terribly by fire will be the last day, when
the Lord Jesus Christ, the Judge of Quick and Dead, shall come down from heaven
in flaming fire, to take vengeance on all those that know not God, and obey not
the Gospel, 2 These. 1. 7, 8. And the Apostle Peter tells us, that the heavens
and the earth are reserved in store for fire against this day: when the Heavens
shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements melt with fervent heat,
and the Earth, and all the works therein shall be burnt up, 2 Pet. 3. 7, 10.
Then God will speak terribly by fire, and above all, most terribly to the
ungodly world, when he will sentence them unto, and cast them into the Fire of
Hell, where they must dwell with devouring fire, and inhabit everlasting
burnings.

4. The Sword is a dreadful Judgment, whereby God speaks sometimes very
terribly; especially when he draws it forth against his own and his peoples
Enemies. Hear how terribly God speaks, as in, Deuteronomy. 32. 39, 40, 41, 42. See now
that I, even I am he, and there is no God with me; I kill, and I make alive; I
wound, and I heal; neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand: For I
lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live for ever. If I whet my glittering
Sword, and my hand take hold on Judgment, I will render vengeance to mine
Enemies, and reward them that hate me; I will make mine Arrows drunk with blood
(and my Sword shall devour flesh) and that with the blood of the slain, and of
the Captives, from the beginning of revenges upon the Enemies.

When God furbusheth his Sword, and whets it; when God girdeth his Sword upon
his thigh, and marches against his Enemies; when he draws his Sword, and
makes slaughter with it; when his Sword devoureth much flesh, and is made
drunk with the blood of the slain; when God gives Commission to the Sword,
saying, Sword, go through such a Land; as Ezekiel. 14. 17. And powers out his fury
on the Land in blood; as ver. 19. So that the Sword is bathed in blood, and
garments are rolled in blood, and the Land is soaked in blood; when blood is
powered forth like water, and dead bodies are cast forth into the open field
without burial; and God makes an invitation to all feathered fowl to gather
themselves together, and feast themselves upon the carcasses of the slain; as
Ezekiel. 39. 17, 18, 19, 20. When God comes with died garments from Bozrah, Isa.
63. 1. When he gathers the Nations, and brings them into the valley of
Jehoshaphat, and thither causes his Mighty Ones to come down against them,
Joel 3. 2. 11. When the day of Gods indignation does come, and he makes such
slaughter amongst his Enemies, that the Earth does stink with their carcasses,
and the Mountains do melt with their blood, Isa. 34. 2, 3. When God treads
the Wine Press of his wrath without the City, and the blood comes out of the
Wine Press even to the horses bridles, Rev. 14. 20. In a word, when the Lord
shall come forth upon his White Horse with his Armies, and shall destroy the
Beast, and all the Powers of the earth that take part with him: as Rev. 19.
from the 11th ver. to the end: Then God will speak terribly indeed against his
Enemies by the Sword; then he will roar out of Zion, and utter his voice from
Jerusalem, and that in such a manner, as will make both the heavens and the
earth to tremble, Joel 3. 16.

And indeed God speaks with a Terrible Voice wherever he sends the Sword, and
makes the Alarm of War to be heard; as sometimes he sends it amongst his own
people for their sin, 1 Kings 8. 33.

When God brings into a Land a people of another Language and Religion, of a
fierce countenance and cruel disposition, and gives them power to prevail, and
bring the Land under their feet, so that the Mighty Men are cut off by them,
and the Men of Valor crushed in the gate; the young men fly and fall before
them, and there is none to make any resistance; when they break in upon Cities,
plunder houses, ravish Women and Maids, strip, and spoil, and put all to the
sword, the young, with the grey-head, cruelly rip up women with-childe, and
without any pity on little Infants, dash them against the stones. God speaks
more terribly by such a Judgment, than by Plague or Fire.

5. The Famine is a dreadful Judgment, whereby God speaks sometime unto a
people very terribly; when God stretches upon a place the lines of confusion,
and the stones of emptiness; as Isa. 34. 11. When God sends cleanness of
teeth into Cities; as Amos 4. 6. When God shoots into a Land the evil Arrows
of Famine, and it becomes exceeding sore, this is one of the most dreadful
Judgments of all Judgments in this world, far beyond Plague, or Fire, or
Sword. See how pathetically the Famine amongst the Jews is described by
Jeremiah in his Lamentations, Chap. 4. from the 4th ver. unto the 12. The
tongue of the sucking Child cleaves to the roof of his mouth f^r thirst; the
young Children ask for bread, and no man breaks it unto them. They that feed
delicately are desolate in the streets. They that were brought up in scarlet
embrace dunghils. For the punishment of the iniquity of the daughter of my
people is greater than the punishment of the sin of Sodom, that was overthrown
in a moment, and no hand stayed on her. The Nazarites were purer than snow;
whiter than milk; they were more ruddy in body then Rubies; their polishing was
of sapphire: their vtsage is blacker than a coal; they are not known in the
streets; their skin cleaves to their lones, it is withered, it is become like
a stick. They that be slain with the sword, are better than they which be slain
with hunger; for these pine away stricken through for want of the fruits of the
Earth. The hands of the pitiful women have sodden their own Children, they
were their meat in the destruction of the daughter of my people. The Lord has
accomplished his fury, he has poured out his fierce anger.

6. The sixth terrible Judgment is a Famine of the Word, which is threatened,
Am. 8. 11, 12. Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will send a Famine
in the Land, not a Famine of Bread, nor a thirst for Water, but of hearing the
words of the Lord: And they shall wander from Sea to Sea, and from the North to
the East, and they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall
not find it.

A Famine of the Word is a worse judgment, than a Famine of Bread; indeed few
do really think so, because the most judge according to sense; but that it is
so, is evident to a Man of faith and consideration; for as the soul is more
excellent than the body, and the concernments of the other life, far beyond the
concernments of this life: so the provisions for the soul are more excellent
than the provisions for the body, and the means of getting eternal life to be
preferred before the means of preserving temporal life; and therefore by
consequence the dearth and scarcity of provisions for the soul must needs be a
greater judgment, than a scarcity of provisions for the body. Unto which I
might add, that the Famine of the word does usually bring with it many temporal
judgments; The burning of the Temple at Jerusalem, and the failing of Vision
was accompanied with slaughter by the sword, and captivity of the Land.

7. And lastly, God speaks most terriblie unto a people when he sends diverse of
these Judgments together, as Lam. 1. 20. Abroad the sword bereaveth, at home
there is death, when enemies without, Plague and Famine within. God speaks
terribly, when Fire and Sword goes together, or Sword and Famine; or Famine
and Plague, or Famine of Bread, and Famine of the Word.

These are some of the terrible things by which God does sometimes speak.

SECT. III.
Why is it that the Lord does speak unto a people 3. by such terrible things?
THe reason is, because people don't hearken unto him, speaking any other way,
God speaks once, yea twice, but men perceive it not, Job 33. 14. Gods gentle
voice is not heard or minded, therefore he speaks more loudly and terribly,
that people might be awakened to hear. Particularly God speaks thus terribly,

1. Because People do not hearken to the voice of his word and messengers; God
speaks audibly by Ministers, and when they are not regarded, he speaks more
feelingly by judgments; he speaks first by threatenings, and when they are
slighted, he speaks by executions. God first lifts up his voice and warns by
his word, before he lifts up his arm and strikes with his Rod; when men grow
thick of hearing the sweet calls of the Gospel, God is even forced to thunder,
that he may pierce their ear; when God speaks to the ears and they are shut,
God speaks to the eyes and other senses, that his mind may be known; especially
when men obstinately refuse to hear, God is exceedingly provoked to execute his
terrible judgments upon them, see Zach. 8. 11, 12. But they refused to hearken,
and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their ears that they should not hear:
yea they made their heart like an Adamant stone, least they should hear the
Law, and the words which the Lord of Hosts had sent in his spirit by the former
Prophets: Therefore came there a great wrath from the Lord of Hosts. So also
when God gave up Jerusalem to desolation and ruin, see the sin which provoked
the Lord hereunto. 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. They mocked the messengers of God, and
despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord
arose against his people, till there was no remedy.

2. Because they do not hearken to the voice of his goodness and mercies. The
goodness and forbearance of God does speak unto men from him, and call upon
them to forbear sin for shame, to repent and return to him, Romans 1. 4. But when
men despise the riches of his goodness, and deafen their ear unto the language
of his mercies, and trample his patience under foot (though God has appointed
a day of wrath hereafter, wherein he will reckon with the whole ungodly World
together, and give them the just demerit of their sin, yet) sometimes his
patience is turned hereby into fury, and his anger does break forth into a
flame, and consumes them by the blow of dreadful temporal judgments.

3. Because they will not hearken to the voice of lesser afflictions; when Gods
word is not heard, he speaks by his Rod; when his Rod is not heard, he shoots
with his arrows and strikes with his sword; and if lesser afflictions be not
minded, then God speaks by more dreadful awakening judgments: as the sins of
men do precede the judgments of God: so usually lesser judgments do precede
greater judgments; and as there are degrees and steps which men usually do make
before they arrive to a great height in sin, Nemo repent fit turpissimus: so
there are degrees and steps which God usually does take, in inflicting his
judgments for sin. Look into one place for all, which shows how God does
proceed from less to greater judgments, Lev. 26. from the 15. v. to the 40 th.
when his statutes are despised and Covenant broken, first he threatens to send
upon them consumption, and a burning ague, then he threatens that they shall
fall before their enemies; and if they will not hearken to his voice in these
judgments, he threatens to punish them seven times more for their sins; and to
make the Heavens as Iron; and the Earth as brass; and send a dearth amongst
them. And if they will not yet hearken, he threatens to send wild beasts,
which should devour their children and Cattle. And if they would not be
reformed by these things, but still would walk contrary unto him, he threatens
to walk contrary unto them, and to punish them yet seven times more for their
sins: he threatens to bring a sword upon them to avenge the quarrel of his
Covenant; and when they should be gathered together in their Cities, to send
the Pestilence amongst them; and hereunto to add the Famine. And if they would
not yet hearken unto God, but still walk contrary unto him, he threatens that
he will walk contrary unto them in fury* and make them eat the flesh of their
Sons and their Daughters, and lay wast their Cities, and make their Sanctuaries
a desolation; and upon them that are left alive he threatens to send such
faintness of heart, that they should flee at the sound of a shaken leaf, and
fall when none pursued them; and that they should pine away in their iniquities
in the Land of their enemies. Thus God proceeds by steps and degrees in the
execution of his fierce anger upon a rebellious People, when God speaks by
ordinary diseases and is not heard, then sometimes he sends a Plague; and if
after a Plague, people will not return to him that smites them, nor seek to
pacify Gods anger which is kindled against them; but walk so much the more
contrary unto him, he may walk contrary to them in fury, and send fire into
their Cities to devour their habitations. And if the voice of the Fire be not
heard, he has other judgments in readiness, Sword* Famine and the like. And if
temporal judgments be n^^ heeded, he will bring upon them eternal judgments.

God is not heard any other way, therefore he does speak by such terrible
things.

SECT. IV.
The Application. God speaks sometimes to a People by terrible things.
THese few last years have given sad instances hereof in England, especially
the two last years in our City of London.

The voice of the Lord has been in the City, it has been loud and full of
terror; the Lord has come forth against us with armed vengeance. Frowns have
been in his brow; death and desolation in his looks; thunder has been in his
voice: flames of Fire in his hand: Hab. 3. 5.
the Pestilence has gone before him, and burning Coals at his feet: Psalm. 18.
13, 14.
He has sent forth his Arrows which have scattered us, and shot forth his
lightnings which have discomfited us; The Lord has thundered in the Heavens,
and the highest gave his voice, hailstones and coals of fire: Isa. 29. 6.
the Lord has visited us with storm and tempest and great noise, yea he has
caused his glorious voice to be heard, Isa. 30. 30.
and showed the lighting down of his arm, with the indignation of his anger:
and with the flame of devouring Fire, with scattering and tempest and
hailstones: then the furrows of the Earth were seen, and the foundations of
the City were discovered, the Earth also shook, because he was wrath, and the
Inhabitants of London trembled, because of his fierce anger; Psalm. 18. 45 7. 5.
then the snares of death compassed us, and the fears of hell gat hold on us,
Isa 7. 2.
and our hearts were moved within us, as Trees when they are moved by the Wind.
Dreadful have Gods late judgments been in London, the noise of which has gone
forth, not only throughout the Land, but also unto the outermost parts of the
World.

Three things we should remark in this terrible voice of Gods judgments.

1. The Judgments themselves. 2. The Cause of the Judgments. 3. The Design of
the Judgments.
In the first, we have the sound of the voice.

In the two last, the Interpretation of the voice.

1. Concerning the Judgments themselves. Here I might speak of the judgment
executed, August 24th 1662. when so many Ministers were put out of their
places; and the judgment executed March 24th 1665. when so many Ministers were
banished 5. miles from Corporations, the former by way of introduction to the
Plague which sometime after did spread in the Land, but chiefly raged in the
City; the later by way of introduction to the Fire, which quickly after did
burn down London the greatest Corporation in England. These judgments having
been so lately, and general in the Land; and I presume so generally known, with
all their circumstances; that it would be needless to give here a Narration of
them. But this I must say, I could wish they were as generally believed to be
judgments; and accordingly laid to heart: for I fear that the great
insensibility, which people have been under of these judgments; because they
have not reached the Flesh; and their sottish inconsideration of Gods dreadful
displeasure herein, has provoked the Lord to send such judgments as have come
nearer to sense: that they might perceive God was angry indeed before, and that
his greater displeasure in the former might be known by his more sensible
displeasure in the latter.

Let London seriously consider whether her Gospel privileges were not her best
defense against temporal calamities; and whether since her slighting, abuse and
forfeiture, and Gods seizure and stripping her so much of these, she has not
been laid naked to those heavy strokes of extraordinary judgments which she
has lately received.

London had the Gospel, Ordinances powerful, pure, plentiful Ministers
excellently qualified and rarely furnished with ministerial abilities; London
had as many burning and shining lights as any one such spot of ground under the
cope of heaven.

Not to speak of their abilities for preaching and defense of the truth, such
gifts of prayer London Ministers had, which were no small defense of the City,
as I believe no City in the World could parallel.

O what prayers have there formerly been in London Pulpits, especially on days
of solemn humiliation! how have the spirits of Ministers been carried forth
sometime in prayer for several hours together, (without tautologies and vain
repetitions) in such variety of affectionate enlargements, and with such
raisedness and transports of spirit; as if they had been just leaving the body,
and going to live and abide with God, and would converse no more with men or
worldly things!

In their confessions of sin, how have they raked into the dunghill of a rotten
heart, and laid abroad its inward filthiness? how have they traced the
footsteps of its deceitfulness, through the maze and wilderness of its many
windings and turnings? how have they peirced into the very bowels of sin, and
ripped it up as it were to the backbone, bringing forth its very entrals to open
view? how have they anatomized as it were the body of death in all the parts
and members of it, discovering withal the several diseases of every part, with
their cause, and manner of working? and all this in such pathetical cutting
expressions, accompanied with such brokenness and bleeding of heart, as no form
can imitate or effect.

In their supplications for the pardon of sin, for spiritual and heavenly
riches, O with what feeling and fervor did they express themselves? O with
what faith and importunity did they wrestle and plead at the Throne of Grace
for such favors beyond the importunity of poor prisoners through the grates,
or poor beggars at the doors, when they are most earnest for relief? yea how
did they besiege God as it were, and seem as if they would scale the walls of
Heaven it self, and take the Kingdom of Heaven with violence and force? how
have they even pressed in upon God with the dint of argument, and laid hold on
him with the hand of faith, resolving not to let him go without a blessing?

In their supplications for the Church and Land, they have behaved themselves
as if they had no private concernments. But how did they bear London upon their
hearts when they came to the throne of grace? what yearning bowels had they
toward and for the City? how many tears have they shed in bewailing her sins?
how have they stood in the breach, when the Lord has been coming forth against
this place? how have they held his arm when it has been lifted up to strike?
how have they stood weeping between the Porch and the Altar, crying spare thy
People O Lord, and do not destroy London! and many times have they prevailed to
appease Gods wrath and turn away his fierce anger which has been kindled
against us.

Gospel Ordinances, and Gospel Ministers were the safeguard of London, the
glory and defense. But when the Ordinances were slighted, and the Ministers
were mocked and misused by some who called themselves Professors, and both were
fallen so much in the esteem of the most; and London did not yield the fruit
which God looked for under such dressing, (of which more when I come to speak
of Londons sins) God is provoked not only to call for some of his Messengers
home to himself, but also to suffer the rest which were most conscientious to
be thrust into Corners.

This, this did presage London's near approaching ruin and desolation, though
few did believe it, and because they did not believe it, and were insensible of
Gods wrath in this judgment: therefore their danger was the greater of the
other judgments which have come upon them: when so many stakes were plucked out,
no wonder if the hedge be broken; when so many Pillars were removed, no wonder
if the building tumble to the ground.

But I proceed to give a narration of the later judgments of Plague and Fire.

SECT. V.
THe Plague so great, so lately, should not be forgotten; yet lest the fire
more lately, and propotionably more great, and the amazing fears, which since
have risen within us, should shuffle former thoughts out of our minds, and raze
out the impressions, which by the Plague we had, and should labor to retain to
our dying hour: therefore I shall give a brief narration of this sad judgment,
and some observations of mine own (who was here in the City from the beginning
to the end of it) both to keep alive in my self and others, the memory of the
judgment, that we may be the better prepared for compliance with Gods design
in sending the Plague amongst us.

It was in the year of our Lord 1665. that the Plague began in our City of
London, after we were warned by the great Plague in Holland in the year 1664.
and the beginning of it in some remote parts of our Land the same year; not to
speak any thing whether there was any signification and influence in the
Blazing-star not long before, that appeared in the view of London, and struck
some amazement upon the spirits of many: It was in the month of May that the
Plague was first taken notice of; our Bill of Mortality did let us know but of
three which died of the disease in the whole year before; but in the beginning
of May the bill tells us of nine, which fell by the Plague, just in the heart of
the City, the other eight in the Suburbs. This was the first arrow of warning
that was shot from Heaven amongst us, and fear quickly begins to creep upon
peoples hearts; great thoughts and discourse there is in Town about the Plague,
and they cast in their minds whether they should go if the Plague should
increase. Yet when the next weeks Bill signifies to them the disease from 9 to
3. their minds are something appeased; discourse of that subject cools; fears
are hushed, and hopes take place, that the black cloud did but threaten, and
give a few drops; but the wind would drive it away. But when in the next Bill
the number of the dead by the Plague is mounted from 3 to 14, and in the next
to 17, and in the next to 43, and the disease begins so much to increase, and
disperse.

Now secure sinners begin to be startled, and those who would have slept at
quiet still in their nests, are unwillingly awakened. Now a great consternation
seizes upon most persons, and fearful bodings of a desolating judgment. Now
guilty sinners begin to look about them, and think with themselves into what
corner of the Land they might fly to hide them. Now the profane and sensual, if
they have not remorse for their sins; yet dread and terrors, the effects of
guilt, they could not drive from them; and if by company, and carousing, and
soft pleasures they do intoxicate and smoothen their spirits in the day; yet we
may guess what dread does return upon them if they give but any room for
retirement, and what hideous thoughts such persons have in the silent night,
through fears of death which they are in danger of. Now those who did not
believe an unseen God, are afraid of unseen arrows; and those which slighted
Gods threatenings of eternal judgments, do tremble at the beginning of his
execution of one, and not the greatest temporal judgment. Now those which had
as it were challenged the God of Heaven, and defied him by their horrid oaths
and blasphemies, when he begins to appear, they retreat, yea fly away with
terror and amazement. The great Orbs begin first to move; the Lords and Gentry
retire into their Countries; their remote houses are prepared, goods removed,
and London is quickly upon their backs: few ruffling Gallants walk the streets:
few spotted Ladies to be seen at windows: a great forsaking there was of the
adjacent places where the Plague did first rage.

In June the number increases from 43 to an 112. the next week to 168. the
next to 267. the next to 470. most of which increase was in the remote parts;
few in this month within, or near the walls of the City; and few that had any
note for goodness or profession, were visited at the first: God gave them
warning to bethink and prepare themselves; yet some few that were choice were
visited pretty soon, that the best might not promise to themselves a
supercedeas, or interpret any place of Scripture so literally, as if the Lord
had promised an absolute general immunity and defense of his own people from
this disease of the Plague.

Now the Citizens of London are put to a stop in the carrier of their trade;
they begin to fear whom they converse withal, and deal withal, least they
should have come out of infected places. Now roses and other sweet flowers
wither in the Gardens, are dis-regarded in the Markets, and People dare not
offer them to their noses, lest with their sweet savor, that which is
infectious should be attracted: Rue and Wormwood is taken into the hand; Myrrh
and Zedoary into the mouth; and without some antidote few stir abroad in the
morning. Now many houses are shut up where the Plague comes, and the
inhabitants shut in, lest coming abroad they should spread infection. It was
very dismal to behold the red Crosses, and read in great letters, Lord have
mercy upon us, on the doors, and Watchmen standing before them with Halberts,
and such a solitude about those places, and people passing by them so gingerly,
and with such fearful looks, as if they had been lined with enemies in ambush,
that waited to destroy them.

Now rich Tradesmen provide themselves to depart, if they have not
Country-houses, they seek lodgings abroad for themselves and families, and the
poorer tradesmen, that they may imitate the rich in their fear, stretch
themselves to take a Country journey, though they have scarce wherewithal to
bring them back again. The Ministers also many of them take occasion to go to
their Country places for the Summer time; or it may be to find out some few of
their Parishioners that were gone before them, leaving the greatest part of
their flock without food or physic, in the time of their greatest need. (I
don't speak of all Ministers, those which did stay out of choice and duty,
deserve true honor) possibly they might think God was now preaching to the
City, and what need their preaching; or rather did not the thunder of Gods
voice affrighten their guilty consciences, and make them fly away, lest a bolt
from Heaven should fall upon them, and spoil their preaching for the future:
and therefore they would reserve themselves, till the people had less need of
them. I do not blame many Citizens retiring, when there was so little trading,
and the presence of all might have helped forward the increase and spreading of
the infection; but how did guilt drive many away, where duty would have engaged
them to stay in the place? Now the high ways are thronged with passengers, and
goods, and London does empty it self into the Country; great are the stirs and
hurries in London by the removal of so many families; fear puts many thousands
on the wing, and those think themselves most safe, that can fly furthest off
from the City.

In July the Plague increases, and prevails exceedingly, the number of 470.
which died in one week by the disease arises to 725 the next week* to 1089 the
next, to 1843 the next, to 2010 the next. Now the Plague compasses the walls
of the City like a flood, and pours in upon it. Now most Parishes are
infected, both without and within; yea there are not so many houses shut up by
the Plague, as by the owners forsaking of them for fear of it; and though the
Inhabitants be so exceedingly decreased by the departure of so many thousands,
yet the number of dying persons does increase fearfully. Now the Countries keep
guards, left infections persons should from the City bring the disease unto
them; most of the rich are now gone, and the middle sort will not stay behind;
but the poor are forced through poverty to stay and abide the storm. Now most
faces gather paleness, and what dismal apprehensions do then fill the minds,
what dreadful fears do there possess the spirits, especially of those whose
consciences are full of guilt, and have not made their peace with God? the old
drunkards and swearers, and unclean persons are brought into great straits;
they look on the right hand, and on the left, and death is marching toward
them from every part, and they know not whither to fly that they may escape
it. Now the Arrows begin to fly very thick about their ears, and they see many
fellow-sinners fall before their faces, expecting every hour themselves to be
smitten; and the very sinking fears they have had of the Plague, has brought
the Plague and death upon many: some by the sight of a Coffin in the streets
have fallen into a shivering, and immediately the disease has assaulted them,
and Sergeant Death has arrested them, and clapped too the doors of their houses
upon them, from whence they have come forth no more, till they have been
brought forth to their graves; we may imagine the hideous thoughts and horrid
perplexity of mind, the tremblings, confusions, and anguish of spirit, which
some awakened sinners have had, when the Plague has broke in upon their
houses, and seized upon near relations, whose dying groans sounding in their
ears have warned them to prepare: when their doors have been shut up and
fastened on the outside with an Inscription, Lord have mercy upon us, and none
suffered to come in but a Nurse, whom they have been more afraid of, then the
Plague it self: when lovers and friends, and companions in sin have stood
aloof, and not dared to come nigh the door of the house, lest death should
issue forth from thence upon them; especially when the disease has invaded
themselves; and first began with a pain and diziness in their head, then
trembling in their other members; when they have felt boiles to arise under
their arms, and in their groins, and seen blaines to come forth in other parts:
when the disease has wrought in them to that height as to send forth those
spots which (most think) are the certain tokens of near approaching death; and
now they have received the sentence of death within themselves, and have
certainly concluded, that within a few hours they must go down into the dust;
and their naked souls, without the case of their body, must make its passage
into eternity, and appear before the highest Majesty, to render their accounts,
and receive their sentence: None can utter the horror, which has been upon
the spirits of such, through the lashes and stings of their guilty consciences,
when they have called to mind a life of sensuality, and profaneness, their
uncleanness, drunkenness, injustice, oaths, curses, derision of Saints, and
holiness, neglect of their own salvation; and when a thousand sins have been
set in order before their eyes, with another aspect, than when they looked upon
them in the temptation; and they find God to be irreconcileably angry with
them, and that the day of grace is over, the door of mercy is shut, and that
pardon and salvation (which before they slighted) is now unattainable; that the
grave is now opening its mouth to receive their bodies, and hell opening its
mouth to receive their souls; and they apprehend, that they are now just
entering into a place of endless woe and torment, and they must now take up their
lodgings in the inferior regions of utter darkness, with devils and their
fellow damned sinners, and there abide for evermore in the extremity of misery,
without any hopes or possibility of a release; and that they have foolishly
brought themselves into this condition, and been the cause of their own ruin;
we may guess that the dispairful agonies, and anguish of such awakened sinners
has been of all things the most unsupportable; except the very future miseries
themselves, which they have been afraid of.

In August how dreadful is the increase? from 2010 the number amounts up to
2817 in one week; and thence to 3880 the next; thence to 4237 the next; thence
to 6102 the next; and all these of the Plague, besides other diseases.

Now the cloud is very black, and the storm comes down upon us very sharp. Now
death rides triumphantly on his pale horse through our streets, and breaks into
every house almost where any inhabitants are to be found. Now people fall as
thick as leaves from the trees in Autumn, when they are shaken by a mighty
wind. Now there is a dismal solitude in London-streets, every day looks with
the face of a Sabbath day, observed with greater solemnity than it used to be
in the City. Now shops are shut in, people rare and very few that walk about,
in so much that the grass begins to spring up in some places, and a deep
silence almost in every place, especially within the walls; no rattling Coaches,
no prancing Horses, no calling in Customers, nor offering Wares; no London
cries sounding in the ears; if any voice be heard, it is the groans of dying
perions, breathing forth their last, and the funeral knells of them that are
ready to be carried to their graves. Now shutting up of visited houses (there
being so many) is at an end, and most of the well are mingled among the sick
which otherwise would have got no help. Now in some places where the people did
generally stay; not one house in an hundred but is infected; and in many houses
half the family is swept away; in some the whole, from the eldest to the
youngest; few escape with the death of but one or two: never did so many
husbands and wives die together; never did so many parents carry their children
with them to the grave, and go together into the same house under earth; who
had lived together in the same house upon it. Now the nights are too short to
bury the dead, the whole day though at so great a length is hardly sufficient
to light the dead that fall therein into their beds.

Now we could hardly go forth, but we should meet many coffins, and see many
with sores, and limping in the streets; amongst other sad spectacles, methought
two were very affecting: one of a woman coming alone, and weeping by the door
where I lived (which was in the midst of the infection) with a little Coffin
under her arm carrying it to the new Church yard; I did judge that it was the
mother of the child, and that all the family besides was dead, and she was
forced to coffin up and bury with her own hands this her last dead child.
Another, was of a man at the corner of the Artillery-wall, that as I judge
through the diziness of his head with the disease, which seized upon him there,
had dashed his face against the wall, and when I came by he lay hanging with his
bloody face over the rails, and bleeding upon the ground; and as I came back he
was removed under a tree in More-fields, and lay upon his back; I went and
spoke to him; he could make me no answer, but ratled in the throat, and as I
was informed, within half an hour died in the place.

It would be endless to speak what we have seen and heard of some in their
frenzy, rising out of their beds, and leaping about their rooms; others crying
and roaring at their windows; some coming forth almost naked, and running into
the streets, strange things have others spoken and done, when the disease was
upon them: But it was very sad to hear of one who being sick alone, and it is
like phrantick, burnt himself in his bed. Now the plague had broken in much
amongst my acquaintance; and of about 16. or more whose faces I used to see
every day in our house, within a little while I could find but 4. or 6. of
them alive; scarcely a day past over my head for I think a month or more
together, but I should hear of the death of some one or more that I knew. The
first day that they were smitten, the next day some hopes of recovery, and the
third day that they were dead.

The September, when we hoped for a decrease, because of the season, because of
the number gone, and the number already dead; yet it was not come to its
height; but from 6102. which died by the Plague the last week of August, the
number is augmented to 6988 the first week in September; and when we conceived
some little hopes in the next weeks abatement to 6544; our hopes were quite
dashed again, when the next week it did rise to 7165. which was the highest
Bill; And a dreadful Bill it was! and of the 130. Parishes in and about the
City, there were but 4 Parishes which were not infected: and in those, few
people remaining that were not gone into the Country.

Now the grave does open its mouth without measure. Multitudes! multitudes! in
the valley of the shadow of death, thronging daily into eternity; the
Churchyards now are stufft so full with dead corpses, that they are in many
places swelled two or three foot higher than they were before; and new ground
is broken up to bury the dead.

Now Hell from beneath is moved at the number of the guests that are received
into its chambers; the number of the wicked which have died by the Plague, no
doubt, has been far the greatest, as we may reasonably conclude without breach
of charity; and it is certain that all the wicked, which then died in sin, were
turned into Hell; how then are the damned spirits now increased? some were
damning themselves a little before in their oaths, and God is now damning their
souls for it, and is passing the irreversible sentence of damnation upon them.
Some were drinking Wine in bowls a little before, and strong drink without
measure; and now God has put another cup into their hands, a cup of red Wine,
even the Wine of the wrath and fierceness of the Almighty; some were a little
before feasting their senses, pleasing their appetite, satisfying the desires
of the flesh, and being past feeling had given themselves up to lasciviousness,
to work all uncleanness with greediness; but now their laughter is turned into
mourning, and their joy into howling and woe; Now they have recovered their
feeling again, but instead of the pleasures which they felt, and their sensual
delights, which took away the feeling of their consciences, they are made to
feel the heavy hand of God, and to endure such anguish and horror, through the
sense of Gods wrath, as no tongue can express. Now the Atheists believe there
is a God, and the Anti-scripturists is convinced of the truth of Gods Word, by
the execution of Gods threatenings in the Word upon them. Now the covetous and
unjust, the malicious and cruel, the scoffers and profane begin to suffer the
vengeance of eternal fire; and the ignorant person with the civil, who are
unacquainted with Jesus Christ are not excused; yea the hypocrites, with all
impenitent, and unbelieving persons, are sent down to the place of weeping: and
surely hell wonders to see so many come amongst them from such a City as
London, where they have enjoyed such plenty of such powerful means of grace;
and place is given to them, even the lowest and hottest, where Judas and others
are of the chiefest note.

Yet Hell does not engross all that dye by the visitation; some there are
(though not the first or most) who have room made for them in the mansions,
which are above; the Plague makes little difference between the righteous and
the wicked (except the Lord by a peculiar providence do shelter some under his
wing, and compass them with his favor as with a shield, hereby keeping off the
darts that are shot so thick about them) yet as there is little difference in
the body of the righteous, and of others: so this disease makes little
discrimination, and not a few fearing God, are cut off amongst the rest; they
dye of the same distemper, with the most profane; they are buried in the same
grave, and there sleep together till the morning of the resurrection: but as
there is a difference in their spirits, whilst they live: so there is a
difference and the chiefest difference in their place and state after their
separation from the body. Dives is carried to Hell, and Lazarus to Abraham's
bosom, though he dyed with his body full of sores: Devils drag the souls of
the wicked after they have received their final doom at the Bar of God, into
utter darkness where there is weeping, and wailing and gnashing of teeth: but
Angels convey the souls of the righteous into the heavenly Paradise, the new
Jerusalem which is above, where God is in his glory; and the Lord Jesus Christ
at his right hand; and thousand thousands stand before him, and ten thousand
times ten thousand administer unto him; even an innumerable company of Angels,
and where the spirits of all just men and women made perfect were before
gathered; where there is fullness of joy, and rivers of eternal pleasures
running about the Throne of God, the streams of which do make glad all the
Inhabitants of new Jerusalem. Now the weak prison doors of the body are broken
down; and the strong everlasting Gates of their Fathers Palace are lifted up;
and the Saints are received with joy and triumph into glory, and they come with
singing into Zion, and everlasting joy in their hearts, and all sorrow and
sighing does fly away like a cloud, which never any more shall be seen. Now the
vail is rent, and they enter the holy of holies, where God dwells, not in the
darkness of a thick cloud, as in the Temple of old; but in the brightness of
such marvelous light and glory, as their eyes never did behold, neither could
enter into their heart to conceive; there they have the vision of Gods face,
without any eclipse upon the light of his countenance; there they have the
treasures of Gods love opened, and his arms to receive them with dearest and
sweetest embracements; which kindles in their hearts such a flame of love, so
ravishing and delightful, as words cannot utter; there they are entertained by
the Lord Jesus Christ, whom in the World they have served, and he that showed
them his grace, which they have wondered at, when they were in the body, does
now show them his glory, which they wonder at much more: There they are
welcomed by Angels, who rejoice if at their conversion, much more at their
coronation; there they sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom
of their Father; there they find Moses, and David, and Samuel, and Paul, and
all the holy Martyrs and Saints, which have dyed before them, amongst whom they
are numbered, and placed, who rejoice in their increased society.

And as there is a great difference between the condition of the souls of the
righteous, and the wicked, who dyed by the same disease of the Plague, after
their death and separation, so there is a great difference between the carriage
of their spirits at their death, and upon their sick Bed. Some wicked men are
stupid and senseless, and are given up to a judiciary hardness, and dye in a
sleep of carnal security, out of which they are not awakened, till they are
awakned in the midst of flames: others more sensible, and considering what has
been, and what is coming upon them, are filled with unexpressible terror,
through the roarings and tearings of a guilty accusing conscience, and the
fore-thoughts of that horrible unsupportable torment they are so near unto. Now
scaring dreams do terrify them, and fearfulness of the bottomless Pit, and the
burning Lake below does surprise them, and some breaks forth in the anguish
of their despairing souls; Who can dwell with devouring Fire, who can inhabit
everlasting burnings? and however jovial and full of pleasure their life has
been, yet at their latter end they are utterly consumed with terrors. But mark
the perfect man, and behold the upright, the end of that Man is peace,
whatsoever storms they have had in their passage through a rough Sea, the wind
blowing, and the waves roaring, and sometimes have been ready to sink through
opposition and discouragement, sometimes have been overwhelmed with grief and
doubtings, sometimes have been dashed upon the Rocks of terror, and perplexity:
yet now they are come to the haven of death, the Winds are hushed and still, the
Waves are smooth and silent, the storm is over, and there is a great calm upon
their spirits; they are past the Rocks, and are out of the danger they feared,
when they are in the greatest danger of approaching death.

It was generally observed amongst us, that Gods people who dyed by the Plague
amongst the rest; dyed with such peace and comfort, as Christians do not
ordinarily arrive unto, except when they are called forth to suffer martyrdom
for the testimony of Jesus Christ. Some who have been full of doubts, and
fears, and complaints, whilst they have lived, and been well; have been filled
with assurance, and comfort, and praise, and joyful expectation of glory, when
they have layn on their deathbeds with this disease. And not only more grown
Christians, who have been more ripe for glory, have had these comforts: but
also some younger Christians, whose acquaintance with the Lord has been of no
long standing.

I can speak something of mine own knowledge concerning some of my friends,
whom I have been withal; I shall instance only in the house where I lived. We
were eight in Family, three Men, three Youths, an old Woman, and a maid: all
which came to me, hearing of my stay in Town, some to accompany me, others to
help me. It was the latter end of September before any of us were touched; the
young ones were not idle, but improved their time in praying, and hearing, and
were ready to receive instruction; and were strangly born up against the fears
of the disease and death, every day so familiar to the view. But at last we
were visited, and the Plague came in dreadfully upon us, the Cup was put into
our hand to drink, after a neighbor Family had tasted it, with whom we had
much sweet society in this time of sorrow. And first our Maid was smitten, it
began with a shivering and trembling in her flesh, and quickly seized on her
spirits; it was a sad day, which I believe I shall never forget; I had been
abroad to see a friend in the City, whose Husband was newly dead of the Plague,
and she her self visited with it; I came back to see another, whose Wife was
dead of the Plague, and he himself under apprehensions that he should die
within a few hours; I came home, and the Maid was on her Deathbed; and another
crying out for help, being left alone in a sweating fainting fit. What was an
interest in Christ worth then? what a privilege to have a title to the Kingdom
of Heaven?

But I proceed. It was the Monday when the Maid was smitten; on Thursday she
dyed full of tokens; on Friday one of the Youths had a swelling in his groin;
and on the Lords day died with the marks of the distemper upon him; on the same
day another Youth did sicken; and on the Wednesday following he died: on the
thursday night his Master fell sick of the disease, and within a day or two was
full of spots; but strangely beyond his own, and others expectations recovered.
Thus did the Plague follow us, and came upon us one by one; as Job's Messengers
came one upon the heels of another: so the Messengers of death came so close
one after another, in such dreadful manner, as if we must all follow one
another immediately into the Pit. Yet the Lord in mercy put a stop to it, and
the rest were preserved. But that which was very remarkable in this Visitation,
was the carriage especially of those Youths that died, who I believe were less
troubled themselves, then others were troubled for them. The first Youth that
was visited being asked by his Father, concerning the provision he had made for
his death and eternity; told him, he hoped if he died, he should go to Heaven:
being asked the grounds of his hopes, said, the Lord had enabled him to look
beyond the World; and when he was drawing near to his end; boldly enquired
whether the tokens did yet appear, saying that he was ready for them; and so a
hopeful bud was nipt; but let not the Father or the Mother weep, and be in
sadness for him, he is I don't doubt with their Father, and his Heavenly
Father, which may be their comfort. The other also was a very sweet hopeful
Youth; so loving and towardly, that it could not choose but attract love from
those that were acquainted with him. But the grace he had gotten in those
years, being I suppose under seventeen, did above all beautify him, and stand
him in the greatest stead: in his sickness he had much quiet and serenity upon
his spirit; and lay so unconcerned at the thoughts of approaching death, that I
confess I marvelled to see it; the sting and fear of death, were strangely
taken out through the hopes which he had of future glory; yet once he told his
Mother he could desire to live a little longer, if it were the will of God; she
asked him why he desired it? he told her he desired to live till fire and
faggot came, and above all he would fain die a Martyr: she said if he died now
he should have a Crown; he answered, but if he died a Martyr he should have a
more glorious Crown: yet he was not unwilling to receive his Crown presently;
and went away with great peace and sweetness in his looks, to his fathers
house: and I could not blame the Mothers grief for the loss of such an only
Son; but to be so immoderate was not well; now I am sure it is time to dry up
tears, and lay aside sorrows for the loss of him, who has been so long filled
with joys in the heavenly mansions.

I might speak of the carriage of the master in his sickness under the
apprehensions of death; when the spots did appear on his body, he sent for me
and desired me to pray with him; told me he was now going home, desired me to
write to his friends, and let them know, that it did not repent him of his stay
in the City, though they had been so importunate with him to come away: but he
had found so much of Gods presence in his abode here, that he had no reason to
repent: he told me where he would be buried, and desired me to preach his
funeral Sermon on Psalm. 16. ult. In thy presence there is fullness of joy; and
at thy right hand there is pleasures for evermore. But the Lord raised him
again beyond the expectation of himself, friends, or Physician. Let him not
forget Gods mercies, and suffer too much worldly business to crowd in upon him,
and choke the remembrance and sense of God's goodness so singular; but let him
by his singularity in meekness, humility, self-denial, and love, zeal, and holy
walking, declare that the Lord has been singularly gracious unto him. But when
I speak of home concernments, let me not forget to look abroad; the Plague now
increases exceedingly, and fears there are amongst us that within a while
there will not be enough alive to bury the dead; and that the City of London
will now be quite depopulated by this Plague.

Now some Ministers, formerly put out of their places, who did abide in the
City when most of Ministers in place were fled and gone from the people, as
well as from the disease, into the Countries, seeing the people crowd so fast
into the grave and eternity, who seemed to cry as they went for spiritual
Physicians; and perceiving the Churches to be open, and Pulpits to be open, and
finding Pamphlets flung about the streets, of Pulpits to be let, they judged
that the Law of God and nature did now dispense with, yea command their
preaching in public places, though the Law of man (it is to be supposed in
ordinary cases) did forbid them to do it. Surely if there had been a Law that
none should practice Physic in the City, but such as were licensed by the
College of Physicians, and most of those, when there was the greatest need of
them, should in the time of the Plague, have retired into the Country, and
other Physicians who had as good skill in Physic, and no license should have
staid amongst the sick, none would have judged it to have been breach of Law,
in such an extraordinary case to endeavor by their practice though without a
license, to save the lives of those who by good care and Physic were capable
of a cure; and they could hardly have freed themselves from the guilt of
murder of many bodies, if for a nicety of Law in such a case of necessity they
should have neglected to administer Physic: the case was the same with the
unlicensed Ministers which stayed, when so many of the licensed ones were gone,
and as the need of souls was greater than the need of bodies; the sickness of
the one being more universal and dangerous, than the sickness of the other; and
the saving or losing of the soul being so many degrees beyond the preservation
or death of the body: so the obligation upon Ministers was stronger, and the
motive to preach greater, and for them to have incurred the guilt of
soul-murther, by their neglect to administer soul-physick, would have been more
heinous and unanswerable, that they were called by the Lord into public: I
suppose that few of any seriousness will deny, when the Lord did so eminently
own them, in giving many seals of their Ministry unto them.

Now they are preaching, and every Sermon was unto them, as if they were
preaching their last. Old Time seems now to stand at the head of the Pulpit,
with its great Sith, saying with a hoarse voice, Work while it is called to
day, at night I will mow thee down. Grim Death seems to stand at the side of
the Pulpit with its sharp arrow, saying, Do thou shoot Gods arrows, and I will
shoot mine. The Grave seems to lie open at the foot of the Pulpit; with dust in
her bosom, saying, Louden thy Cry
To God,
To Men,
And now fulfill thy Trust:
Here thou must lie,
Mouth stopped,
Breath gone,
And silent in the Dust.


Ministers now had awakning calls to seriousness and fervor in their
ministerial work: to preach on the side and brink of the Pit, into which
thousands were tumbling; to pray under such near views of eternity, into which
many passengers were daily entering, might be a means to stir up the spirit more
than ordinary.

Now there is such a vast concourse of people in the Churches, where these
Ministers are to be found, that they cannot many times come near the Pulpit
doors for the press, but are forced to climb over the pews to them: And such a
face is now seen in the Assemblies, as seldom was seen before in London; such
eager looks; such open ears, such greedy attention, as if every word would be
eaten, which dropped from the mouths of the Ministers.

If you ever saw a drowning Man catch at a rope, you may guess how eagerly many
people did catch at the Word; when they were ready to be overwhelmed by this
overflowing scourge, which was passing thorough the City; when death was
knocking at so many doors; and God was crying aloud by his judgments; and
Ministers were now sent to knock, cry aloud, and lift up their voice like a
Trumpet: then, then the people began to open the ear and the heart, which were
fast shut and barred before: How did they then hearken, as for their lives; as
if every Sermon were their last; as if death stood at the door of the Church,
and would seize upon them so soon as they came forth; as if the arrows which
flew so thick in the City would strike them, before they could get to their
houses; as if they were immediately to appear before the Bar of that God, who
by his Ministers was now speaking unto them. Great were the impressions which
the Word then made upon many hearts, beyond the power of Man to effect, and
beyond what the people before ever felt, as some of them have declared. When
sin is ripped up and reproved, O the tears that slide down from the eyes! when
the judgments of God are denounced, O the tremblings which are upon the
conscience! when the Lord Jesus Christ is made known and proffered, O the
longing desires and openings of heart unto him! when the riches of the Gospel
are displayed, and the promises of the Covenant of grace are set forth and
applied, O the inward burnings and sweet flames which were on the affections!
now the Net is cast, and many fishes are taken; the Pool is moved by the Angel,
and many leprous spirits, and sin-sick-souls are cured; many were brought to
the birth, and I hope not a few were born again, and brought forth; a strange
moving there was upon the hearts of multitudes in the City; and I am persuaded
that many were brought over effectually unto a closure with Jesus Christ;
whereof some dyed by the Plague with willingness and peace; others remain
steadfast in Gods ways unto this day: but convictions (I believe) many hundreds
had, if not thousands, which I wish that none have stifled, and with the Dog
returned to their vomit, and with the Sow, have wallowed again in the mire of
their former sins. The work was the more great, because the instruments, which
were made use of was more obscure, and unlikely, whom the Lord did make choice
of the rather, that the glory by Ministers and people might be ascribed in full
unto himself.

About the beginning of these Ministers preaching, especially after their first
Fast together, the Lord begins to remit, and turn his hand, and cause some
abatement of the disease.

From 7155 which dyed of the Plague in one week* there is a decrease to 5538
the next, which was at the latter end of September, the next week a farther
decrease to 4929. the next to 4327. the next to 2665. the next to 1421. the
next to 1021. then there was an increase the first week in November to 1414.
but it fell the week after to 1050 and the week after to 652. and the week
after that to 333. and so lessened more and more to the end of the year: when
we had a Bill of 97306. which dyed of all diseases, which was an increase of
more then 79000, over what it was the year before: and the number of them which
dyed by the Plague was reckoned to be 68596 this year; when there were but 6
which the Bill speaks of who dyed the year before.

Now the Citizens, who had dispersed themselves abroad into the Countries,
because of the Contagion, think of their old Houses and Trades, and begin to
return, though with fearfulness and trembling, least some of the after-drops of
the storm should fall upon them: and O that many of them had not brought back
their old hearts and sins* which they carried away with them; O that there had
been a general repentance and reformation, and returning to the Lord that had
smitten the City: The Lord gave them leisure and Vacation from their Trades;
for the one necessary thing* which had they improved, and generally mourned for
sin, which brought the plague upon the City, had they humbly and earnestly
sought the Lord to turn from his fierce anger, which was kindled against
London, it might have prevented the desolating judgment by Fire: But alas! how
many spent their time of leisure in toys and trifles, at best about feeding and
preserving their bodies, but no time in serious minding the salvation of their
souls; and if, some were a little awakned with fear, whilst the plague raged so
greatly, and they looked upon themselves to be in such danger; yet when they
apprehended the danger to be over, they dropped asleep faster than before; still
they are the same or worse than formerly: They that were drunken, are drunken
still; they that were filthy, are filthy still; and they that were unjust and
covetous, do still persevere in their sinful course; couzenilng, and lying,
and swearing, and cursing, and Sabbath-breaking, and pride, and envy, and
flesh-pleasing, and the like God-displeasing, and God-provoking sins, (of which
in the Catalogue of London's sins) do abound in London; as if there were no
signification in Gods judgments by the Plague; some return to their Houses, and
follow their worldly business, and work as hard as they can to fetch up the
time they have lost, without minding and laboring to improve by the Judgment,
and Gods wonderful preservation of them: others return, and sin as hard as
they can, having been taken off for a while from those opportunities and free
liberties for sin, which they had before: most began now to sit down at rest in
their houses when the Summer was come, and the Plague did not return; now they
bring back all their Goods they had carried into the Country because of the
Plague; they did not imagine they should be forced to remove them again so soon.

Thus concerning the great Plague in London.

SECT. VI.
I Proceed now to give a Narration of the judgment of the Fire; in which I
shall be more brief, it being dispatched in fewer days then the Plague was in
months.

It was the 2. of September 1666. that the anger of the Lord was kindled
against London, and the Fire began: It began in a Bakers house in Pudding-lane
by Fishstreet-hill: Psa. 21. 9.
and now the Lord is making London like a fiery Oven in the time of his anger,
and in his wrath does devour and swallow up our habitations. It was in the
depth and dead of the night, when most doors and* senses were locked up in the
City; that the Fire does break forth and appear abroad; and like a mighty Giant
refresht with Wine, does awake and arm it self, quickly gathers strength, when
it had made havoc of some houses; rusheth down the hill toward the Bridge;
crosses Thames Street, invadeth Magnus-Church at the Bridge foot, and though
that Church were so great, yet it was not a sufficient Barracado against this
Conqueror; but having scaled and taken this Fort, it shoots flames with so
much the greater advantage into all places round about; and a great building of
houses upon the, Bridge is quickly thrown to the ground: Then the Conqueror,
being stayed in his course at the Bridge, marches back toward the City again;
and runs along with great noise and violence through Thames Street. Westward,
where having such combustible matter in its teeth, and such a fierce Wind upon
its back, it prevails with little resistance, unto the astonishment of the
beholders.

My business is not to speak of the hand of man; which was made use of in the
beginning and carrying on of this Fire. The beginning of the Fire at such a
time, when there had been so much hot weather, which had dried the houses, and
made them: the more fit for fuel; the beginning of it in such a place, where
there were so many Timber houses, and the shops filled with so much combustible
matter; and the beginning of it just when the Wind did blow so fiercely upon
that corner toward the rest of the City, which then was like Tinder to the
Sparks; this does smell of aPopish design so hatched in the same place where the
Gunpowder plot was contrived, only that this was more successful. The world
sufficiently knows how correspondent this is to Popish principles and
practices; those, who could intentionally blow up King and Parliament by
Gunpowder, might (without any scruple of their kinds of conscience) actually
burn an heretical City (as they count it) into ashes: for besides the
Dispensations they can have from his Holiness, or rather his Wickedness the
Pope, for the most horrid crimes of Murder, Incest, and the like; It is not
unlikely but they count such an action as this meritorious (in their kind of
merit) which, in the issue, they will find to merit the flames of eternal
Fine, instead of a Crown of Glory, which I wonder that in their way they can
have the least hopes of. I believe that the people will now take more heed of
them and their ways; and instead of promoting their cause, I hope that a
contrary effect is produced; and that the before Indifferency of a generation
more newly sprung up, who did not know them, is now turned into loathing and
detestation of such a religion, as can allow of such practices* My work is not
to declare what has been proved against the Papists before the Honorable
Committee of Parliament appointed to enquire into their insolences; and the
proofs which have been given in concerning the Fire, and who have been
accessory thereunto.

No, I would rather endeavor to turn peoples eyes from men to God; for whoever
were the instruments, God was the Author of this evil, which has come upon
us; there being no evil in the City (that is, evil of punishment) which the
Lord, as a righteous, and the supreme Judge, does not inflict. And surely more
of the extraordinary hand of God, than of any men, did appear in the burning of
the City of London. God could have prevented men, by discovering their plots
(as he did that of the Gun powder treason) before they had taken effect. God
could have directed and given a blessing unto means for the quenching of it
when it was first kindled. God, who has the winds in his Fist, could have
gathered in the Wind, and laid it asleep, or so turned it the other way, that
it should have been a defense to the City* or God who has the Clouds at his
command, and the Bottles of Heaven in his hand, could have gathered his thick
Clouds together, and squeezed them; opend his Bottles, and poured down Rain in
abundance upon the City, so that if the wind had blown as it did, it should
have blown water upon the fire, which would quickly have put it out. But the
Heavens at that time were Brass, no showring Clouds to be seen: the Fire
begins, is quickly taken notice of, though in the midst of the night; Fire,
Fire, Fire does resound the streets; many Citizens start out of their sleep;
look out of their windows; some dress themselves, and run to the place. The
Lord Mayor of the City comes with his Officers; a confusion there is: council
is taken away: and London, so famous for wisdom and dexterity, can now find
neither brains, nor hands to prevent its ruin. The hand of God was in it* The
Decree was come forth: London must now fall: and who could prevent it? No
wonder, when so many Pillars are removed, if the Building tumbles; the prayers,
tears, and faith which sometimes London has had, might have quenched the
violence of the fire; might have opened Heaven for rain, and driven back the
wind: but now the fire gets mastery, and burns dreadfully; and God with his
great Bellows blows upon it, which makes it spread quickly, and go on with
such force and rage, overturning all so furiously, that the whole City is
brought into jeopardy of desolation. That night most of the Londoners had taken
their last sleep in their houses; they little thought it would be so when they
went into their beds; they did not in the lest suspect, when the doors of their
ears were unlockt, and the casement of their eyes were opened in the morning,
to hear of such an enemies invading the City* and that they should see him,
with such fury, enter the doors of their houses, break into every room, and
look out of their casements with such a threatening countenance. As it is said,
Lam. 4. 12. The inhabitants would not have believed that the adversary should
have entered the gates of Jerusalem: so the Inhabitants of the City would not
have believed that the Fire should have entered and prevailed to burn London to
the ground.

That which made the ruin the more dismal, was, that it was begun on the Lords
day morning: never was there the like Sabbath in London; some Churches were in
flames that day; and God seems to come down, and to preach himself in them, as
he did in Mount Sinai; when the Mount burned with Fire; such warmpreaching
those Churches never had; such Lightning dreadful Sermons never were before
delivered in London. In other Churches Ministers were preaching their Farewell
Sermons, and people were hearing with quaking and astonishment: Instead of a
holy Rest which Christians have taken on this day; there is a tumultuous
hurrying about the streets toward the place that burned, and more tumultuous
hurrying upon the spirits of those that sat still and had only the notice of
the ear, of the quick and strange spreading of the Fire.

Now the Train-bands are up in Arms watching at every quarter for Outlandish
men, because of the general fears and jealousies, and rumors that Fireballs
were thrown into houses by several of them, to help on and provoke the too
furious flames. Now Goods are hastily removed from the lower parts of the City;
and the body of the people begin to retire, and draw upwards, as the people did
from the Tabernacles of Corah, Dathan and Abiram, Number. 16. 27, 31, 32.
when the earth did cleave asunder and swallow them up: Genesis 19.
or rather as Lot drew out from his house in Sodom before it was consumed by
fire from Heaven. Yet some hopes were retained on the Lords day that the Fire
would be extinguished, especially by them who lived in the remote parts; they
could scarcely imagine that the Fire a mile off should be able to reach their
houses.

But the evening draws on, and now the Fire is more visible and dreadful:
instead of the Black curtains of the night, which used to be spread over the
City, now the curtains are Yellow; the smoke that arose from the burning parts,
seemed like so much flame in the night, which being blown upon the other parts
by the wind, the whole City at some distance seemed to be on fire. Now hopes
begin to sink, and a general consternation seiseth upon the spirits of people;
little sleep is taken in London this night; the amazement which the eye and ear
does effect upon the spirit, does either dry up, or drive away the vapor which
used to bind up the senses, Some are at work to quench the fire with water;
others endeavor to stop its course, by pulling down of houses; but all to no
purpose: if it be a little allayed, or beaten down, or put to a stand in some
places, it is but a very little while; it quickly recruits, and recovers its
force; it leaps, and mounts, and makes the more furious onset, drives back its
opposers, snatcheth their weapons out of their hands, seiseth upon the
Water-houses and Engines, burns them, spoils them, and makes them unfit for
service. Some are upon their knees in the night, pouring out tears before the
Lord, interceding for poor London, in the day of its calamity; but alas I fear
there are too few weeping Ieremiah's at the throne of grace: too few Moses's to
stand in the gap, too few Jacob's to wrestle with the Lord, and hang about his
arm. Londons sins were too great, and Gods anger against the City was too hot,
so easily and presently to be quenched and allayed; and if by the intercession
of some, a mitigation be obtained, so that the Lord does not stir up all his
wrath, utterly to destroy the place, as he did Sodom and Gomorrah; yet none can
prevail to call back that wrath, and reverse that decree which is gone forth
against the City: The time of Londons fall is come; the Fire has received its
commission from God to burn down the City, and therefore all attempts to hinder
it are in vain.

On the Lords day night the Fire had run as far as Garlick-hithe in
Thames Street, and had crept up into Cannon-street, and levelled it with the
ground; and still is making forward by the waterside, and upward to the brow
of the hill, on which the City was built.

On Monday Grace Church Street is all in flames, with Lumbard-street on the
left hand, and part of Fen-church-street on the right, the Fire working (though
not so fast) against the wind that way: before it were pleasant and stately
houses, behind it ruinous and desolate heaps. The burning then was in fashion
of a Bow, a dreadful Bow it was, such as mine eyes never before had seen; a Bow
which had Gods Arrow in it with a flaming point; It was a shining Bow; not like
that in the cloud, which brings water with it, and withal signified Gods
Covenant not to destroy the world any more with water: but it was a Bow which
had Fire in it, which signified Gods anger, and his intention to destroy London
with Fire.

Now the Flames break in upon Cornhill, that large and spacious street, and
quickly cross the way by the train of Wood that lay in the streets untaken
away, which had been pulled down from houses to prevent its spreading: and so
they lick the whole street as they go: they mount up to the top of the highest
houses; they descend down to the bottom of the lowest vaults and cellars; and
march along on both sides of the way, with such a roaring noise, as never was
heard in the City of London; no stately building so great, as to resist their
fury: the Royal Exchange it self, the glory of the Merchants, is now invaded
with much violence; and when once the fire was entered, how quickly did it run
round the Galleries, filling them with flames; then came down stairs,
compasses the walks, giving forth flaming volleys, and fills the court with
sheets of Fire; by and by down fall all the Kings upon their faces, and the
greatest part of the stone-building after them, (the Founders statue only
remaining) with such a noise, as was dreadful and astonishing.

Then, then the City did shake indeed; and the inhabitants did tremble, and
flew away in great amazement from their houses, least the flames should devour
them; Ratle, ratle, ratle, was the noise which the Fire struck upon the ear
round about, as if there had been a thousand Iron Chariots beating upon the
stones: and if you opened your eye to the opening of the streets, where the
Fire was come, you might see in some places whole streets at once in flames,
that issued forth, as if they had been so many great Forges from the opposite
windows, which folding together, were united into one great flame throughout
the whole street; and then you might see the Houses tumble, tumble, tumble,
from one end of the street to the other with a great crash, leaving the
foundations open to the view of the heavens.

Now fearfulness and terror does surprise the Citizens of London; confusion
and astonishment does fall upon them at this unheard of, unthought of Judgment.
It would have grieved the heart, of an unconcerned person, to see the rufull
looks, the pale cheeks, the tears trickling down from the eyes, (where the
greatness of sorrow and amazement could give leave for such a vent) the smiting
of the breast, the wringing of the hands; to hear the sighs and groans, the
doleful and weeping speeches of the distressed Citizens, when they were
bringing forth their wives (some from their child bed) and their little ones
(some from their sick bed) out of their houses, and sending them into the
Countries, or some where into the Fields with their goods. Now the hopes of
London are gone, their heart is sunk; now there is a general remove in the
City, and that in a greater hurry than before the Plague; their goods being in
greater danger by the Fire, than their persons were by the sickness. Scarcely
are some returned, but they must remove again, and not as before, now without
any more hopes of ever returning, and living in those houses any more.

Now Carts, and Draies, and Coaches, and Horses, as many as could have entrance
into the City were laden, and any money is given for help 5 l. 10 l. 20 l. 30
l. for a Cart, to bear forth into the Fields some choice things, which were
ready to be consumed; and some of the Countries had the conscience to accept of
the highest price, which the Citizens did then offer in their extremity; I am
mistaken if such money do not burn worse, than the Fire out of which it was
raked. Now Casks of Wine, and Oil, and other commodities are tumbled along, and
the owners shove as much of their goods as they can toward the Gate: every one
now becomes a Porter to himself, and scarcely a back either of Man or Woman
that has strength, but had a burden on it in the streets: It was very sad to
see such throngs of poor Citizens coming in, and going forth from the unburnt
parts, heavy laden with some pieces of their goods, but more heavy laden with
weighty grief and sorrow of heart, so that it is wonderful they did not quite
sink under these burdens.

Monday night was a dreadful night, when the wings of the night had shadowed
the light of the heavenly bodies, there was no darkness of night in London, for
the Fire shines now round about with a fearful Blaze, which yielded such light
in the streets, as it had been the Sun at noon day. Now the Fire having wrought
backward strangely against the Wind to Billings-Gate, etc. along Thames Street
Eastward, runs up the hill to Tower-Street, and having marched on from
Grace Church Street, makes further progress in Fen-Church-Street, and having
spread its wing beyond Queen-hithe in Thames Street Westward, mounts up from
the Waterside through Dowgate, and old Fish-street into Watling-street: but
the great fury of the Fire was in the broader Streets; in the midst of the
night it was come down Cornhill, and laid it in the dust, and runs along by the
Stocks, and there meets with another Fire, which came down Thred-needle-street;
a little further with another, which came up from Wall-brook; a little further
with another, which comes up from Bucklers-bury, and all these four joining
together, break into one great flame at the corner of Cheap Side with such a
dazzling light, and burning heat, and roaring noise by the fall of so many
houses together, that was very amazing; and though it were something stopped in
its swift course at Mercers Chapel, yet with great force in a while, it
conquers the place, and burns through it, and then with great rage proceeds
forward in Cheapside.

On Tuesday was the Fire burning up the very bowels of London; Cheapside is all
in a light fire in a few hours time) many Fires meeting there, as in the
center; from Soper-lane, Bow-lane, Bread-street, Friday-street, and Old-change,
the Fire comes up almost together, and breaks furiously into the Broad-street,
and most of that side of the way was together in flames, a dreadful spectacle!
and then partly by the Fire which came down by Mercers Chapel, partly by the
fall of the Houses cross the way, the other side is quickly kindled, and does
not stand long after it. Now the Fire gets into Blackfriars, and so continues
its course by the water, and makes up toward Paul's Church, on that side, and
Cheap Side Fire besets the great building on this side, and the Church though
all of stone outward, though naked of houses about it, and though so high above
all buildings in the City, yet within a while, does yield to the violent
assaults of the conquering flames, and strangely takes Fire at the top; now the
lead melts and runs down, as if it had been snow before the Sun; and the great
beams and massy stones, with a great noise fall on the Pavement, and break
through into Faith-Church under neath; now great flakes of stone scale, and
peel off strangely from the side of the Walls; the Conqueror having got this
high Fort, darts its flames round about, now Pater-noster-rowe, Newgate-market,
the old Baily, and Ludgate Hill have submitted themselves to the devouring
Fire, which with wonderful speed rusheth down the Hill into Fleet Street. Now
Cheap Side Fire marches along Iron-monger-lane, old Jury, Lawrence-lane,
Milk-street, Wood-street, Gutter-lane, Foster-lane: Now it runs along Lothbury,
Cat-eaten-street, etc. From Newgate-Market, it assaults Christ-Church, and
conquers that great building, and burns through Martin's lane toward
Alders-gate, and all about so furiously, as if it would not leave a House
standing upon the ground.

Now horrible flakes of fire mount up the sky, and the yellow smoke of London
ascends up toward Heaven, like the smoke of a great Furnace; a smoke so
great, as darkened the Sun at noonday, (it at any time the Sun peeped forth, it
looked red like blood) the Cloud of smoke was so great, that travelers did
ride at noon day some miles together in the shadow thereof, though there were
no other cloud beside to be seen in the sky.

And if Monday night was dreadful, Tuesday night was more dreadful, when far
the greatest part of the City was consumed: many thousands who on Saturday had
Houses convenient in the City, both for themselves, and to entertain others,
now have not where to lay their head; and the fields are the only receptacle,
which they can find for themselves and their goods; most of the late
Inhabitants of London lie all night in the open Air, with no other canopy over
them, but that of the Heavens: The fire is still making toward them, and
threatens the Suburbs; it was amazing to see, how it had spread it self
several miles in compass; and amongst other things that night, the sight of
Guild Hall was a fearful spectacle, which stood the whole body of it together
in view, for several hours together, after the fire had taken it, without
flames, (I suppose because the timber was such solid Oak) in a bright shining
coal as if it had been a Palace of gold, or a great building of burnished
Brass.

On Wednesday morning, when people expected that the Suburbs would be burnt, as
well as the City, and with speed, were preparing their flight, as well as they
could with their luggage into the Countries, and neighboring Villages. Then
the Lord has pity on poor London; his bowels begin to relent; his heart is
turned within him, and he stays his rough wind in the day of the East wind;
his fury begins to be allayed; he has a remnant of people in London, and there
shall a remnant of houses escape; the wind now is hushed; the Commission of the
fire is withdrawing, and it burns so gently, even where it meets with no
opposition, that it was not hard to be quenched, in many places, with a few
hands: now the Citizens begin to gather a little heart, and encouragement in
their endeavors to quench the Fire. A check it had at Leaden Hall by that
great building; a stop it had in Bishopsgate-street, Fen-church-street,
Lime-street, Mark-lane, and toward the Tower; one means, under God, was the
blowing up of houses with Gunpowder. Now it is stayed in Lothbury,
Broad-street, Coleman-street; toward the gates it burnt, but not with any
great violence; at the Temple also it is stayed, and in Holbourn, where it had
got no great footing; and when once the fire was got under, it was kept under,
and on Thursday the flames were extinguished.

But on Wednesday-night, when the people late of London, now of the fields,
hoped to get a little rest on the ground, where they had spread their beds, a
more dreadful fear falls upon them than they had before, through a rumor that
the French were coming armed against them to cut their throats, and spoil them
of what they had saved out of the Fire; they were now naked, and weak, and in
ill condition to defend themselves, and the hearts, especially of the females,
do quake, and tremble, and are ready to die within them; yet many Citizens
having lost their houses, and almost all that they had, are fired with rage and
fury: and they begin to stir up themselves like Lions, or like Bears bereaved
of their whelps, and now Arm, Arm, Arm, does resound the Fields and Suburbs
with a dreadful voice. We may guess at the distress and perplexity of the
people this night, which was something alleviated when the falsness of the
alarm was perceived.

Thus fell great London, that ancient City! that populous City! London, which
was the Queen City of the Land, and as famous as most Cities in the world; none
so famous for the Gospel and zealous profession of the reformed Religion. And
yet how is London departed like smoke, and her glory laid in the dust? how is
her destruction come, which no man thought of, and her desolation in a moment?
how do the Nations about gaze and wonder? how does the whole Land tremble at
the noise of her fall? how do her Citizens droop and hang down their heads? her
Women and Virgins weep, and sit in the dust? Oh, the paleness that now sits
upon the cheeks! the astonishment and confusion that covers the face, the
dismal apprehensions that arise in the minds of most, concerning the dreadful
consequences which are likely to be of this fall of London? How is the pride of
London stained, and beauty spoiled! her arm broken, and strength departed? her
riches almost gone, and treasures so much consumed? The head now is sick? and
the whole body faint; the heart is wounded, and every other part is sensible of
its stroke; never was England in greater danger of being made a prey to a
foreign power, than since the firing and fall of this City, which had the
strength and treasure of the Nation in it. How is London ceased, that rich
City! that joyous City! one corner indeed is left, but more than as many houses
as were within the walls are turned into ashes.

The Merchants now have left the Royal Exchange; the buyers and sellers have
now forsaken the streets: Grace Church Street, Cornhill, Cheapside, Newgate
Market, and the like places, which used some time to have throngs of
traffiquers, now are become empty of inhabitants; and instead of the stately
houses which stood there last Summer, now they lie this Winter in ruinous
heaps. The glory of London is now fled away like a Bird, the Trade of London is
shattered and broken to pieces, her delights also are vanished, and pleasant
things laid waste; now no chaunting to the sound of the Viol, and dancing to
the sweet Music of other Instruments; now no drinking Wine in Bowls, and
stretching upon the beds of lust; now no excess of Wine and banquettings; no
feasts in Halls and curious dishes; no amorous looks, and wanton dalliances; no
ruffling silks, and costly dresses; these things in that place are at an end.
But if houses for sin alone were sunk, and fuel for lust only were consumed,
it would not be so much; but the houses also for Gods worship, (which formerly
were a bulwark against the fire, partly through the walls about them, partly
through the fervent prayers within them) now are devoured by the flames, and
the habitations of many who truly fear God, have not escaped; and in the places
where God has been served, and his servants have lived; now nettles are
growing; owls are screeching; thieves and cutthroats are lurking: A sad face
there is now in the ruinous part of London: and terrible has the voice of the
Lord been, which has been crying, yea roaring in the City by these dreadful
judgments of the Plague and Fire, which he has brought upon us.

Thus you have the Narration of the judgments themselves.

SECT. VII.
2. Concerning the Cause of these Judgments; why has the Lord spoken by such
terrible things, in the City of London?
IN giving an account hereof, I shall make use of the second Doctrine observed
from the words:

That when God speaks most terribly, he does answer most righteously.

They are Gods judgments, and therefore they must needs be righteous judgments;
Can there be unrighteousness in God? No, in no wise: for how then could he be
God? How then could he judge the world? Let God be true, and every man a liar.
Romans 3. 5, 6. Let God be righteous, and all the world unrighteous: for light
may more easily depart from the Sun, and heat be separated from the fire; and
the whole creation may more easily drop into nothing, than God cease to be just
and righteous, in the severest judgments which he does inflict upon the
children of men.

If any profane mockers do reply against God, and reflect upon his
righteousness and goodness toward his own people, because these judgments have
fallen so sore upon London, the Glory of the Land, yea of the World, for the
number of godly persons (as in scoff they call them) which dwell in it; if God
were so righteous and favorable to the Godly, would he bend his bow, and shoot
so many arrows amongst them as he did in the visitation by the Plague, whilst
he suffered so many notoriously wicked persons to escape? would he send the
Fire to consume so many habitations of the Godly, whilst the houses of the most
vicious and vile were preserved? I shall labor to stop the mouths of such, who
are ready to open them against the King of Heaven, by proposing to
consideration these following particulars.

1. That Gods way is sometimes in the Sea, and his paths in the great Waters;
and his footsteps are not known. Psalm. 77. 19. That his judgments are
unsearchable, and his ways past finding out. Romans 11. 33. And that even then
he is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works, Psalm. 145. 17. And
when clouds and darkness are round about him, righteousness and judgment are
the habitation of his Throne. Psalm. 97. 2. And when his judgments are a great
deep, his righteousness is like the great Mountains. Psalm. 36. 6. We do not
understand all the mysteries of nature, neither are we acquainted with all the
mysteries of State; and if there be some mysteries in Gods way of governing the
World, and distributing temporal mercies and judgments, which we do not
apprehend in every thing the meaning of, and cannot so fully trace Gods
righteousness and goodness therein, let us say it is because our eyes are shut,
and that we are covered with darkness: Therefore let us shut our mouths too,
and seal up our lips with silence, not daring in the least to utter any thing
which may derogate from these attributes in God, which are as inviolable and
unchangeable as his very Being. This might be said if the reason were more
abstruse than it is.

2. But secondly, the reason of Gods judgments and righteousness therein, with
the salve of his goodness toward his own people, may be apprehended, if we
consider.

1. That these Judgments of Plague and Fire are both of them National judgments.

1. The judgment of the Plague was National; in as much as London was the chief
City, in as much as the Kings Court was here, and most Countries had relations
here; and all Countries had concernments here: moreover the Plague was not only
in London, and Westminster, and and places near adjacent, but it was dispersed
into the Countries at a farther distance, as Cambridge, Norwich, Colchester,
and other Towns, where it raged either the same or the next year, as much
proportionably as it did in London.

2. The Judgment of the Fire which burned down only the City, and left
Westminster and the Suburbs standing, and did not reach into the Countries, yet
was a National judgment, because London was the Metropolis of the Land, because
the Beauty, Riches, Strength, and Glory of the whole Kingdom lay in London: and
it was not the inhabitants of the City who alone did suffer by this fire, but
the whole Land more or less, do and will feel the smart hereof.

2. These Judgments then being National: it is not unreasonable to say, that
National sins have been the cause of them: and if so, we may readily find a
reason of Gods righteousness in these proceedings; when the sins of the Land
are so obvious and so heinous. He is a great stranger in England, that does not
know how wickedness has abounded in these later years; his eyes must be fast
shut, who does not see what a deluge of profaneness and impiety has broken in
like a mighty torrent, and overflowed the Land; that has not taken notice of
those barefaced villainies which have been committed amongst us, which is a
great question whether any ages before us could parallel; we read in Scripture
of Sodom and Gomorrah, and the wickedness sometime of Jerusalem; Profane
Histories and Travelers make mention of Rome, Venice, Naples, Paris, and other
places very wicked, but who can equal England, which calls it self Christian
and Protestant, for such desperate and audacious affronts and indignities which
have been offered to the Highest Majesty, by the Gallants (as they are called)
of our times: How was Hell as it were broke loose, and how were men worse than
those which in our Saviors time were possessed with devils, who cut themselves
with stones, and tore their own flesh; even such who went about like so many
Hell Hounds and incarnate devils, cursing and banning, swearing and
blaspheming, inventing new oaths, and glorying therein, delighting to tear the
name of God, and to spit forth their rancour and malice in his very face? and
can we then be at a loss for a reason of Gods righteousness in his thus
punishing England, by beginning thus furiously with London? When there were so
many Atheists about London, and in the Land, who denied the very being of God,
when so many Gentlemen (who looked upon it as one piece of their breeding, to
cast off all sentiments of a Deity) did walk our streets, and no arguments
would work them to a persuasion of the truth of Gods being, shall we wonder if
the Lord appears in a terrible way, that he might be known by the judgments
which he executes? When so many denied the Divine Authority of the Scriptures,
the very foundation of our Christian faith, and reckoned themselves by their
principles amongst Turks, Pagans, and other Infidels, however they called
themselves Christians, and hereby put such an affront upon the Lord Jesus
Christ, the only Son of the most high God, is it strange that the Lord should
speak so terribly to show his indignation? when there was such blowing at, and
endeavors to put out that light, which would show Men the way to Heaven; such
hatred and opposition against the power of godliness; when the name of a Saint
was matter of derision and scorn; when there was such wallowing in filthy
fornication, and adultry, in swinish drunkenness and intemperance; when such
oppression, bribery, such malice, cruelty, such unheard of wickedness and
hideous impiety grown to such a height in the Land; may not we reasonably
think that such persons as were thus guilty, being in the Ship, were a great
cause of the storm of Gods anger, which has made such a shipwreck.

The Plague indeed when it was come, made little discrimination between the
bodies of the righteous, and the bodies of the wicked; no more does grace; the
difference is more inward and deep; it is the soul begins to be glorified
hereby, and has the seed of eternal life put into it, when it does pass the
new birth; but the body is not changed with the soul, the body remains as it
was, as frail and weak, and exposed to diseases and death, as before, and as
the body of any wicked person; and therefore the infectious disease of the
Plague, coming into a populous City, the bodies of the righteous; amongst the
rest, receive the contagion, and they fall in the common calamity; there is a
difference in the manner of their death, and a difference in their place, and
state after death, as has been spoken of before, but the kind of death is the
same.

So the fire does make no discrimination between the Houses of the godly, and
the Houses of the ungodly, they are all made of the same combustible matter,
and are enkindled, as bodies infected, one by another; indeed the godly have
God to be their habitation, and they are Citizens of the new Jerusalem, which
is above, a City which has foundations, whose builder and maker is God; an
abiding City, which the fire cannot reach, and their persons are secured from
the flames of eternal fire in Hell, but they have no promise nor security for
the preservation of their Houses from fire here in this World. The judgments of
the plague and fire being sent, work according to their nature, without
distinguishing the righteous.

But if we further enquire into the reason, why the plague was sent the last
year, and such a plague as has not been known this forty year, which raged so
sorely, when there was no such sultriness of weather (as in other years) to
increase it; and why the fire was sent this year, and such a fire as neither
we, nor our forefathers ever knew, neither do we read of in any History of any
so great in any place, in time of peace; what shall we say was the cause of
these extraordinary national judgments, but the extraordinary national sins. It
was an extraordinary hand of God which brought the plague, of which no natural
cause can be assigned, why it should be so great that year, more then in former
years, but that sin was grown to greater height; and that a fire should
prevail, against all attempts to quench it, to burn down the City, and that
judgment just following upon the heels of the other; what reason can be
assigned, but that Englands sins, and Gods displeasure has been extraordinary;
God is a God of patience, and it is not a light thing will move him; he is slow
to anger, it must needs be then some great provocation which makes him so
furious; he is highly offended, before he lifts up his hand; and he is
exceedingly incensed, before his anger breaks forth into such a flame; for my
part, I verily think, if it had not been for the crying abominations of the
times, which are not chiefly to be limited to the City of London, and if the
means of Gods prescription, according to the Rule of his Word, which England
sometime could, had by England been made use of, that both Plague and Fire had
been prevented.

3. Moreover it may be said that some particular persons by some more peculiar,
and notorious sins in the City may have provoked the Lord to bring punishment
upon the whole place, if the Land were not so generally profane and wicked, the
heathen could say.

(...).

A whole City may be punished for the wickedness of one Man; yea we read of
David, though so good a man, yet when he numbered the people (a small sin in
comparison with the sins of some others in our days) God was provoked to send
such a dreadful Plague, not on himself, but upon his people, that there dyed
70000 men by it in three days, and David said, I have sinned and done wickedly,
but these sheep, what have they done? 2 Samuel 24. 10-18.

4. If it be enquired how Gods mercy to his people does appear, when these
judgments have fallen so heavy upon many of them?

I Answer,

1. Those of his own people, who have fallen by the Plague, are received to
greater grace and mercy in Heaven, than here they were capable of, and they are
moreover delivered from evil to come, which has since, and may further come
upon us.

2. Those whose houses have fallen by the fire, the Lord could, and confident I
am, the Lord has made them greater gainers another way, they have lost it may
be much in temporal things, but they are or may be, if they be not wanting to
themselves, gainers in spiritual things, which are of a higher and more
excellent nature; I have known and heard of many of Gods people whose houses
are burnt, and goods spoiled, who have taken the loss with so much
cheerfulness, humility, meekness, patience, contentment, and thankfulness that
any thing was saved, if it were only their lives, that it has been my wonder
and joy; to gain such a spirit has more of good, than the loss of all
external enjoyments has of evil.

3. Further, if these judgments have fallen upon Gods people, we must know that
they have their sins, which have deserved them, possibly some have begun now to
comply with the wicked in their wicked ways, it may be they were grown more
loose in their walking, and formal in the service of God, and their hearts more
set on the World, of which sins more largely when I come to speak of the sins
of the City; and the sins of Gods people have more heinous aggravations, than
the sins of the wicked, being committed against clearer light, dearer love,
sweeter mercies, stronger obligations, and therefore provoke God the more to
wrath; therefore he threatens his own people especially to punish them when
they transgress, Am. 3. 2. You only have I known of all the Families of the
Earth, and therefore I will punish you for your iniquities.

5. Besides, they may have need of awakening judgments to rouse them, and
humble them for sin, to loosen and wean them from the World; and it is in love
and faithfulness, that God does inflict such judgments upon them.

6. Lastly, we must remember, that it is Gods usual course to begin with his
own house, 1 Pet. 4. 17. Judgment begins at the House of God.

5. To conclude, Do any of the ungodly question Gods righteousness, because in
these common calamities, they have hitherto survived and escaped?

1. It is but an ill requital and ill use, which they make of Gods patience and
goodness which he has exercised toward them, that hereby he might lead them
unto repentance, Romans 2. 4, 5.

2. Let them stay a while, and God will answer them himself, and give them an
experimental conviction of his righteous judgments, 1 Pet. 4. 17, 18. If
judgment begin at the house of God, what shall the end be of them that obey not
the Gospel? and if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and
sinners appear? we read Psalm. 75. 8. Of a Cup of red Wine in the hand of the
Lord, he may give his people to drink the top of it, but the most bitter and
dreggish part, which is at the bottom, the wicked shall wring forth and drink;
if God whip his children with rods, he will scourge his enemies with scorpions.

I am persuaded that the notoriously ungodly of this generation will not go out
of this World, without some remarkable temporal judgment; and that the Lord
will make them feel something even here, what an evil thing, and a bitter it is
so audaciously to fly in the face of the great God, by their hideous oaths and
blasphemies, by their horrid wickedness and abominations, whereby they do as it
were challenge God to do his worst against them; and when God does draw forth
his glittering Sword, and make ready his sharp arrow upon the string; when God
does cloathe himself with fury, as with a garment, and his hand does take hold
on vengeance; when their iniquities are grown fully ripe, and the day of their
visitation and recompense is come, how then will these sinners of England be
afraid, and what amazing terror will there then surprise this vile generation?
Can their hearts endure, or their hands be strong in the day that the Lord
shall deal with them? Ezekiel. 22. 14. Then the Lord will roar from his holy
habitation, with such a terrible voice, as shall make their ears to tingle,
their hearts to quake and tremble; he will roar like a Lion, and tear them in
pieces, when there shall be none to deliver. If the shaking of his rod has
moved them, and the beginning of his judgments, which he has executed upon
others, has affrighted them; what will their behavior be when the scourge is
laid upon their own backs, and judgment shall fall upon their own heads? Surely
the judgments intended purposely for the most ungodly, are not yet come; yet,
as they are like to be exceeding great, because more of pure, and unmixt wrath
will accompany them: so they are like to be very near; because they are filling
up the measure of their wickedness so fast, and they seem to be arrived even to
the uttermost of sin; surely their judgment does neither linger, nor slumber,
but is upon the wing, hastening toward them; surely the arm of the Lord is
awakened, and lifted up on high, and though infinite patience does hold it up a
little while, to try whether the judgments already executed upon others, before
their eyes will work any good effect upon them, so as to awaken them, and stop
them, and turn them from their evil ways; yet, if they proceed in their
sinful course, his arm I am persuaded will come down with such force and fury
upon them, that their destruction shall be remarkable to all that are round
about them: and I have much of that persuasion, that the Lord will as it were
hang up many of the villains of our times, who have been guilty of such
treachery and rebellion against the great King of heaven, as it were in chains,
and make their punishment here as notorious as their sins have been, that the
whole World may hear and fear, and take heed of such vile practices: I suppose
they may not now expect it, nor fear it, no more than the old World did their
drowning, or Sodom and Gomorrah did their burning, because deceitful sin has
hardened their hearts; long custom in sin, with impunity has seared their
consciences, as with a hot Iron: but then they are in the greatest danger, when
they sleep with the greatest security; when Men grow desperately hardened
against often, and all reproofs, by word, and rod too, what follows, but
sudden destruction and that without remedy? Prove. 29. 1. and when men cry peace
and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon them, as travel upon a Woman
with child, and they shall not escape, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3. And if some of this
untoward and wicked Generation do drop away without a remarkable temporal
destruction; God will make his righteousness evident to them, in the other
World, when he claps up their souls close Prisoners in the lowest dungeon of
Hell, appointing black Devils to be their Jaylors, flames of fire to be their
clothing, hideous terrors and woe to be their food, Cain, Judas, and other
damned tormented spirits to be their companions, where they must lie bound in
chains of darkness, till the judgment of the great day; and when the general
assize is come, and the Angels have blown the last Trumpet, and gathered the
elect to the right hand of Christ, then they will be sent with the Keys of the
bottomless Pit, and the Prison will be opened for a while, and like so many
Rogues in Chains, they shall together with all their fellow sinners be brought
forth, and find out the dirty flesh of their bodies, which like a nasty ragg
they shall then put on, and with most rufull looks, and trembling joints, and
horrible shreeks, and unexpressible confusion and terror, they shall behold
the Lord Jesus Christ, whom in life time they despised and affronted, come down
from Heaven in flaming fire, to take vengeance upon them, who will sentence
them to the flames of eternal fire, and drive them from his Throne and presence
into utter darkness, where they must take up their lodging for evermore. Then,
Then there will be a clear revelation of the righteous and dreadful judgments
of this great God unto the world, and upon this accursed generation.

But more fully to clear up the reason of London's judgments, and the
righteousness of God herein; God has indeed spoken very terribly, but he has
answered us very righteously. London was not so godly, as some speak by way of
scoff: no! If London had been more generally godly, and more powerfully godly,
these judgments might have been escaped, and the ruins of the City prevented;
No! it was the ungodliness of London, which brought the Plague and fire upon
London. There was a general Plague upon the heart, a more dangerous infection,
and deadly Plague of sin, before there was sent a Plague upon the body; there
was a fire of diverse lusts which was enkindled, and did burn in the bosom, some
t^mes issuing out flames at the door of the mouth, and at the windows of the
eyes of the inhabitants, before the fire was kindled in the City, which
swallowed up so many habitations. We have fallen, thousands of persons into the
grave by the Plague, thousands of houses, as a great monument upon them, by the
fire; and whence is it? we are fallen by our iniquities. Hosea 14. 1. the Crown
is fallen from our heads; and what is the reason? because we have sinned
against the Lord. Lam. 5. 16. God has spoken terribly, but he has answered
righteously; as he gives great and especial mercies in answer unto prayer: so
he sends great and extraordinary judgments in answer unto sin; there is a
voice and loud cry, especially in some sins which enters into the ears of the
Lord of Sabbath. 1 Samuel 5. 4. When God speaks by terrible things, he makes but
a righteous return to this cry.

And though these Judgments of Plague and Fire are National judgments, and may
be the product of National sins, and I verily am persuaded, that God was more
highly provoked by some that dwelt out of the City, than with those which dwelt
in it, I mean the profane and ungodly generation, who chiefly did inhabit more
remotely; and that God, being so provokt, was the more ready to strike, and let
his hand fall so heavy upon London; yet since many of the ungodly crew were got
into the City it self, and most in the City, that were not of them, and did not
dare to commit their impieties, yet made themselves guilty, by not mourning for
them, and laboring in their place what they could after a redress; and since
London it self has been guilty of so many crying sins (as I shall endeavor to
show.) Gods righteousness in the terrible things of London will be evident,
especially if we consider

1. That God has punished London no more than their iniquities have deserved.

2. That God has punished London less than their iniquities have deserved.

1. God has punished London no more than their iniquities deserved; Great sins
deserve great Plagues; and have not the sins of London been great? Let us make
an inquity after Londons sins.

Here I shall offer some sins to consideration, and let London judge whether
she be not guilty, and whether the Lord has not been plaguing her, and burning
her, and possibly, yea probably will bring utter ruin and desolation upon her,
except she see and mourn and turn the sooner: It is out of dear and tender love
to London (with whom I could willingly live and die) that I write these things
to put them in mind of their sins, that they might take some speedy course for
a redress and turning away the fierce anger of the Lord which is kindled
against them for sin, lest he next proceed to bring utter ruin upon them:
surely they have not more reason to think that Gods anger is turned away since
the fire, than they had to think it was turned away after the Plague; but
rather they may conclude, that though the fire of the City be quenched yet the
fire of Gods anger does burn still more dreadfully, than the other fire; and
that his hand is stretched out still to destroy. Therefore, O all ye
inhabitants about Lond^n open your eyes, and ears, and hearts, and suffer a
word of reproof for your sins; and deal not with this Catalogue of your sins as
Iehojakim did with Ieremiah's roll, who burnt it in the fire, not being able to
bear his words; but do with it as John did with his little book, eat it and
digest it, though it be bitter in the mouth, as well as in the belly; it is
bitter Physic, but necessary for the preservation of a sick languishing City,
which is even ready to give up the Ghost.

And here I shall begin with more Gospel-sins, which, though natural conscience
is not so ready to accuse of, yet in the account of God are the most heinous
sins: And I would have a regard not only to latter, but also to former sins,
which, possibly, may now be more out of view, and forgotten, and which some may
be hardened in, because the guilty have not been so particularly and sensibly
punished (though Gods sparing of them has been in order to their repentance)
or their punishments in some kind has been accounted by them no punishments,
or their punishments have been mistaken, and their hearts have swelled against
instruments made use of by God therein, instead of accepting of the punishment
of their iniquity, and humbling themselves deeply before the Lord. I say I
would call to remembrance former sins, as well as latter, which are more
visible now and apparent: for as God, being so slow to anger, has not been
quickly moved to such indignation; but, as we have reason to think, that his
wrath has been a long time boiling in his breast, before it was raised to this
height as to boil over, and pour down Plague and Fire upon the City of
London: so we may reasonably infer, that sins committed by London long ago,
were the fuel put under, that caused this boiling of his anger, which, because
other judgments have not wrought the kindly effect of repentance, the Lord has
been provoked to express this way, which has been more feeling and dreadful.
Moreover when I reckon up London's sins, I would not reflect alone upon any one
party, in as much as all parties have sinned, and I believe the Lord has been
offended with all, as in his judgments he has made no difference, that all
might be awakened to see their faults with sorrow and shame. And if it were
fit, I would begin here with my self, being persuaded that my sins, more then
thousands of others, have helped to fill up the Viol of Gods anger; but as I go
along, I shall endeavor by the grace of God to apply to my self the sins which
conscience will accuse of, that I may bewail and amend: and I would beseech
every one of you, that cast your eyes upon these lines, to do the like, and to
compare them with those lines, which are written in the Book of your
consciences, and where you find a transcript, read and read again, consider
and lay to heart, get to your knees, confess and labor to drop, at least some
tears into the Bottle, which if this little Book might help gather from your
eyes, and you could be persuaded to pour forth such waters before the Lord,
they might help to quench the violence of the Fire of Gods anger, which we have
reason to fear is still burning against us.

SECT. VIII.
A Catalogue of London's sins, which have provoked the Lord to speak with so
terrible a voice in the City.
1. THe first sin of London is slighting of the Gospel. The Gospel in England
has above this hundred years shined forth out of the clouds of Popery and
Antichristianisme, which before did overspread the Land; and in no place of
England has the Gospel been preached with greater power and purity than in
London; and what entertainment has it found? has it been valued according to
its worth and excellency? has it been received as if it had come down from the
God of Heaven, expressing his love and good will toward the children of Men,
as if it had brought such good news and tidings, as salvation by Jesus Christ?

Read the elogium which the Apostle Peter gives of the salvation made known by
the Gospel, 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11, 12. Of which salvation the Prophets have
enquired, and searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace that should come
unto you: searching what, or what manner of time the spirit of Christ which was
in them, did signify when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ,
and the glory that should follow: unto whom it was revealed, that not unto
themselves, but unto us they did minister the things, which are now reported
unto you, by them that have preached the Gospel unto you, with the holy Ghost
sent down from Heaven, which things the Angels desire to look into. The
Prophets of old did enquire and search, but did not so clearly understand the
Gospel, as now it is revealed, our Savior tells his Disciples, Luke 10. 24.
That many Prophets and Kings had desired to see the things which they saw and
had not seen them, and to hear the things, which they did hear, and had not
heard them; for indeed this mystery was hid from ages and generations which God
then made manifest unto the Saints, Col. 1. 26. And the Apostle Paul tells us,
that though the ministration of the Law were glorious, in so much that it made
the face of Moses to shine, unto whom the Law was revealed upon the Mount, yet
that it had no glory, in comparison with the ministration of the Gospel, whose
glory did so far excel, 2 Cor. 3. 7, 10. the mysteries of Gods wisdom and
love revealed in the Gospel, being so glorious, surely are worthy of
acceptance and esteem, especially when the Angels who are not so much
concerned, desire to look into these things, unto whom it is said, Ephesians. 3. 10.
Is made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God. And yet these great
things, which have been reported by them, who have preached the Gospel, with
the Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven, have been undervalued in London. The
Gospel has been slighted in London, and though some have been more notoriously
guilty, yet who can altogether excuse themselves from this sin? Now that the
conviction may be more full, I shall charge the sin more particularly.

1. The ignorant persons in London have been guilty of this sin, the light of
the Gospel has shined about them, but they have mufled up themselves in
darkness, and suffered Satan to keep them hood-winked, least the light of the
glorious Gospel should enter, and lead them out of his snare; thousands in the
City have been affectedly ignorant: though they have had means of knowledge, so
near, and so easy to come by, multitudes have perished out of London, and
multitudes still remain in their ignorance. O the neglect that there has been
of learning Catechisms! and how few have endeavored to acquaint themselves
with the Principles of the Christian Religion, that they might have the more
full and clear understanding of the Gospel?

2. The vicious and profane have been guilty of slighting the Gospel, how many
such persons have there crowded, and are still crouding out of London into
Hell, when the light of the Gospel shined upon them, which would have guided
them in the way to Heaven: because this light has been too troublesome in its
discovery, and reproof of their dear and sweet sins; they have hated it, and
endeavored to fly as far as they could from it, or to shut their eyes as hard
as they could against it.

3. The civil persons also have been guilty, there have been many sober
Citizens, and Matrons, civil youths, and virgins, who have been free from the
gross pollutions, which are in the World through lust, who have been diligent
in their calling, just in their dealings, courteous, and sweet natured in their
demeanor, and yet without the least degree of the power of godliness, without
which it is impossible they should be saved, alas! none of these have given any
warm welcome unto the Gospel in their hearts, which has been so long preached
in the City; the kindness of a friend has been esteemed by them, but the
kindness of God has not been regarded: if a Messenger had come and told them
how they might save their estates, when in danger of loss, or how to save their
relations when in danger of death; O how welcome would such a messenger and
tidings have been? but when Ministers have preached the Gospel unto them, which
tells them how they should save their souls, in danger of death and hell, such
tidings have had no relish with them, as if they had no souls, or were in no
danger: the light has shined before them, but there has been a cloud in their
eye, they could not discern it; or they have looked upon it afar off, they have
not drawn near, and brought it home, and set it up in their bosoms, that they
might order themselves, and whole conversations, according to its guidance and
direction.

4. The Hypocrites have been guilty of this sin, these have drawn nearer to
this light, than any of the former; so near, that they have seemed to be
clothed with its beams, they have lighted their Lamps hereby, and have shined
forth in a glorious blaze of an outward profession, yet there has been even in
these an inward secret disrelish of the Gospel, especially of some things in
it; there have been some secret rooms in their hearts into which they would not
suffer the light to enter, least it should discover those beloved Dalilah's
which there they have nourished and brought up, they have been rotten at the
Core, and have had some unmortified lust within, which the World has not taken
notice of; so that if the Gospel has been received by them, it has been only
in the outward form, not in the inward power; if the light has been received,
it has been without its heat and life. Hence it has come to pass that some of
these Hypocrites, who seemed to be Stars of the first magnitude, have proved
only Blazing-stars and Commets, which in a short time have fallen and sunk into
wild opinions, or fearful Apostasy.

5. The Errone us have been guilty of this sin; some and not a few in London,
under this glorious Sunshine of the Gospel, which has come from Heaven, have
lighted a Candle at the Fire of Hell, and labored to set it up in opposition
to the true Light of the Gospel, crying out, New Light, new Light. Satan
himself has appeared in London like an Angel of Light, and employed his
Emissaries and wicked instruments (who have seemed to be Ministers of
righteousness, but have had a wolfish ravenous heart under the dress and
clothing of the sheep) to vent many damnable and destructive opinions in our
Church, under pretense of new discoveries and revelations of the spirit; and
though this false and Taper-light could never abide the test, and put forth any
beams of convincing truth, but darkened and disappeared upon the approach of the
Sun, where it shined in its power; yet too many whose eyes were too fore to
look upon the glorious beams of the Sun, and yet withal their hearts too
fearful to remain wholly in the dark without any show of light, did withdraw
themselves from the former, and sought after the later in dark corners, where
alone such rotten wood could seem to shine, and such candles could give forth
any light, and choosing night rather than day* they followed these false
wandering fires, though they were led by them into many a precipice.

It is sad to remember, and seriously to consider what errors and strong
delusions have abounded and prevailed in our Gospel-daies. How many false
teachers have there been among us, which have crept in at unawares? how many
Jesuits and Priests sent from Rome and other places, to rend and tear our
Protestant Church to pieces, that they might make way for the introduction of
Popery, at least to cast a disgrace upon Protestantism, and delude many of us
with the opinions they have broached, and to confirm their own in their
delusions; thus many cunning and learned Jesuits have disguised themselves in
the habit of Tailors, Shoo-makers, and of other mechanical Tradesmen, that they
might seem to the people to have been taught those things by the Spirit, which
have been the product of much study; thus these cursed villains, of old
ordained to condemnation, have privily brought in damnable heresies, some
calling themselves Quakers, others Ranters, other Seekers, others Antinomians,
others Brownists, others Anabaptists; putting themselves into any shapes, that
they might mis-lead, and the better lie in wait to deceive poor souls; some
denying the Lord that bought them, setting up the fancy of a Christ within them
for their Savior; others denying the foundation, undermining the Divine
Authority of the Scriptures; others laboring to overthrow the Doctrine of
Justification, and striking at most fundamental Doctrines in the Christian
faith; and all of them endeavoring to undermine the ministry of Christ's
institution, and sending, calling them Antichristian, Baals Priests, False
Prophets, doing what they could to bring them and their ministry out of esteem,
that they might the more effectually prevail with the people to receive their
false doctrines, and arm them hereby against an undeceivement; and sweetning
their poison with good words and fair speeches, they have deceived the hearts
of the simple, so that many did follow their pernicious ways, by reason of
whom the way of truth has been evil spoken of, and what ever good words they
had, they were but feigned words, whereby they made merchandise of souls, Whose
judgment now a long time lingreth not, and whose damnation slumbreth not. 2
Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3.

These the Apostle calls spots and blemishes, sporting themselves with their
own deceivings, Wells without Water, Clouds carried about with a Tempest,
Raging waves of the Sea, foaming out their own shame, Wandering stars, unto whom
is reserved blackness of darkness for ever. 2 Pet. 2. 13, 17. Iud. 13.

And yet many of these were hearkened unto, and adheared unto by too many in
London, rather than the true Gospel Ministers, commissioned by the Lord Jesus
Christ himself, and ordained according to the Prescription of his Word.

Then many Laymen, some gifted, (who would have given a better account of
their gifts at the great day had they kept their station) and some without
gifts, but with a great measure of ignorance and confidence, did step up
sometimes into Pulpits, often took upon them to preach in private, invading the
office, and intruding into the work of Christ's Ambassadors, which he has
appointed a peculiar office for, and which he has set a hedge about more than
any other office we read of in Scripture; but they ventured to break over the
hedge, I am confident to the affronting and displeasing of the great King,
whose representatives in the world his Ambassadors are; and not only silly
women were led captive by the deceivers which crept in when so many took
liberty to preach, but also men who professed themselves to be wise, and to
have attained to a degree of light above the vulgar; yet forsaking the
Ministry and Ordinances of Jesus Christ, appointed to continue unto the end of
the world, for the instructing, perfecting, and establishment of Saints in
knowledge and faith, they became fools and children, tossed to and fro with
every mind of doctrine, by the slight of them which led them aside. Ephesians. 4. 11,
12, 13, 14.

Now all these persons have been slighters of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the
Ignorant, the Profane, the Hypocrite, and the Erroneous; and if you place them
all in one company, how few will there remain in London, that have sincerely
and heartily embraced the truth as it is in Jesus, and upon whom the Gospel
has made a powerful and saving impression? And even amongst those that have
been affected and converted by the preaching of the Gospel, and had it greatly
in esteem at first hearing and believing; how was their esteem of the Gospel
fallen, and their affection cooled? did not Gospel Ordinances begin to loose
their worth and excellency, and grow tedious and wearisome unto them? O how
generally unthankful was London for the Gospel privileges and liberties! yea,
many began to be very nice and wanton, and the Gospel was not relished, unless
it were served up with such neatnesses and dressings, in which some Ministers
possibly did too much endeavor to please themselves and the people, and then
the sauce was more relished than the food it self; and the appetite of many
was so spoiled, that plain wholesome soul-saving truths would not down with
them. Londoners began to be glutted with the Gospel, and like the Israelites in
the Wilderness, their souls began to loathe the Mannah which came down from
Heaven; a strange curiosity there was in spiritual pallates, which in many
turned to a loathing of the food, in so much that the Gospel became a burden
unto them, and thence it was that many turned away their ears from the truth,
and were turned unto errors, and they could not endure to hear sound doctrine,
but having itching ears, heaped up unto themselves teachers according to their
lusts. 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4.

And those that continued steadfast in the truth, did not duly prize the Gospel,
none of them according to its dignity and worth. No wonder then if God grows
angry at such contempts and affronts as were hereby offered unto him, and
eases them so much of their burden, and withdraws the food so much, which they
grew so weary of: No wonder that he suffers so many of their teachers to be
thrust into corners, and so much withdraws the beams of that light which was so
much abused, and when they are not sensible of his displeasure in this, no
wonder if he sends the Plague and Fire, to awaken them unto a sensibility.

When the King sent forth his servants to call the guests to the Wedding-feast,
and they make light of it and excuse themselves, and go away, one to his Farm,
another to his Merchandise, and the remnant took his servants and entreated
them spightfully and slew them: The King was wroth, and sent forth his Armies
to destroy those murderers, and burn their City. Matthew. 22. from v. 1. to v. 8.
God has sent forth his fervants to call Londoners to this Feast; how many
invitations have they had to come unto Christ, to accept of him, to save them,
and feed upon him, from whom alone they can get any Spiritual nourishment; but
how many in London have had their excuses, they have been following their
Merchandise and other business, and could not come; and what entertainment his
servants has had; the Lord knows: I do not say that London has entertained
them despightfully, and slain them; but have not their message been slighted by
London? and is it a wonder then if the King that sent them be wroth, and send a
Fire to burn down the City? No greater favor could be showed, no greater
privilege could be enjoyed, than to have the Gospel powerfully preached, and
ordinances purely administered; but has it been generally so accounted in
London? has not Merchandise, and thriving in the world (which yet they have
not thrived in) been preferred before this by many thousands in the City? when
God has been at such an expense to work out a way for man's salvation; when he
has discovered such wonders of astonishing Love in sending his only begotten
Son out of Heaven to cloth himself in our flesh, that therein he might
purchase life and salvation for us who were sunk so low from our Primitive
state by sin, and were exposed to death and wrath, and unavoidable endless
misery in Hell; and has sent his Ambassadors of peace to bring unto us the
glad tidings hereof, and in his name to make known the thing, the Author, the
terms, the way; and to entreat us that we would accept of life and
reconciliation to God, who without any injury to himself could ruin us
everlastingly, and get himself a name thereby; and yet when the Gospel is
preached that we should undervalue and slight both messenger and message;
surely this has been an affront to the Lord, who has sent his Ambassadors on
this errand, and does carry with it such ingratitude as cannot be paralleld.

No doubt but this sin of slighting the Gospel is a prime sin, which has
provoked God against London, to come forth in such fury; and if London do not
repent the sooner, and labor to recover its relish and esteem for the Gospel,
and make more evident demonstrations of it, I fear the Lord will quite remove
the Gospel from them, and then nothing is like to follow but desolation and woe;
God does not remove his glory at once but by steps; first the glory of the Lord
departs from the Inner-court, to the Threshold of the house, Ezekiel. 10. 3, 4.
from the Threshold of the house to the Door of the Eastgate. v. 18, 19. then it
goes from the midst of the City, and stands upon the Mountain, Chap. 11. 23.
The Gospel is the glory of London, and has the glory of the Lord made none of
these removes? is it not come forth of the Innercourt? has it not left the
Threshold? is not a departing of it quite from the City threatened? will any
thing recover it, if we do not recover our appetite, and prize, and cry after
it.

If the Gospel go, God will go, the Gospel being the sign and means of his
special presence, and woe be unto us when God shall depart from us. Hos. 9. 12.
And if God depart with the Gospel, farewell peace and prosperity in England,
nothing I dare be confident but temporal misery and ruin will be the
consequent; if the Eclipse bring such misery, what will the quite darkning of
the Sun do?

2. The second sin of London is Vnfruitfulness in such a fertile soil. This
sin has been an attendant upon, and a consequent of the former.

London was not only a Goshen, but an Eden* God chose out London to be his
Garden; he has hedged it, planted, watered, pruned and manured it; no place in
the world has had more plenty of the means of grace; God has given the former
and the latter rain, and sweet dews of Heaven both morning and evening did fall
upon this place, in the morning seed was sown, and in the evening the hand was
not withdrawn; plentiful and powerful has preaching been in London, in
season and out of season, on the Sabbath day, and on the week day; but has
London answered all Gods care and cost? has not God come for many years
together, Luke 13.
seeking fruit, and found nothing but the leaves of profession? has he not
often threatened to cut down the unfruitful Trees, and not suffer them to
cumber his ground any longer? and when through the intercession of the
Vine-dresser, he has spared them this year and another year, has not the same
unfruitfulness still remained? what could the Lord have done more to his
Vineyard than he has done? Isa. 5. 4, 5, 6
wherefore then when he looked for Grapes, brought it forth only leaves, or
wild Grapes?

And is it then to be wondered at, if the Lord pluck down the hedge thereof,
that it might be eaten up by the wild Boar and Beast of the field, if he break
down the wall thereof, and make it waste and desolate? Is it to be wondered at,
if he withold the Clouds that they rain not on it, and suffer briars and
thorns to spring up in it, where the Plants did grow? The Vine when it is
unfruitful, Isa. 15.
is the most unuseful of all Trees, it is fit for nothing but the fire, and the
Lord has threatened to gather the unfruitful branches, and to cast them into
the fire and burn them; Ioh. 15. 6
and the Earth which drinks in the rain that often falls upon it, and
instead of herbs meet for the use of him by whom it is dressed, brings forth
nothing but briars and thorns, Heb. 6. 7.
God rejects and curses, and in the end burns.

O the unfruitfulness of London! O the briars and thorns which have flourished
in this ground, whereby the seed of the Word has been choked! O the hemlock,
the thistle, and the wormwood, that have sprung up in the furrows of the
field! O the tares that have abounded and overtopped the wheat, and how little
good Corn has there been brought forth! O the wild Olive Trees which have
grown up in Gods Garden, and wild Figs and wild Grapes, which the
Figg-Trees and Vines of God have yielded unto him! O the leanness of his sheep
in such fat pasture! O the barrenness! the barrenness! of London under such
plentiful showers of the Word! instead of the fruits of righteousness, which
are to the praise and glory of God, there have been the fruits of
unrighteousness and wickedness, which are to Gods dishonor; Gal. 5. 19*24.
instead of the fruits of the spirit, which are love, joy, peace, gentleness,
meekness, temperance, goodness, faith; there have been the works of the flesh,
fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, hatred, variance, emulations, wraths,
strifes, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and
such like; of which the Apostle tells us, that they which do such things, shall
not inherit the Kingdom of God.

And those who have not abounded in the grosser works of the flesh, very few of
them have been very fruitful in good works. London has had the means of
grace, and yet most of them without grace, few of them have much grace; London
has had powerful Ordinances, but but what powerful effect have they produced?
what have they to show of all their Prayers, and Sermons, and Sacraments? have
they attained unto a great measure of mortification? is grace grown up to a
great height? what evidences, what experiences have the best got, which they
might have got, had they been more diligent?

Give me leave a little more particularly to instance the unfruitfulness of
London in regard of repentance, faith, love and new obedience, the fruit which
God so much looks for, and so much delights in.

1. Where have been the fruits of Repentance in London? Calls there have been
to repentance frequent, fervent: reason for repentance, sins numerous, heinous:
need of repentance that judgments temporal, eternal, might be diverted, that
pardon, happiness might be obtained: and yet O the impenitency and
hard-heartedness of London! few bleeding hearts under the sharp sword of the
Word; little tenderness under the most melting discourses; few converts and
penitent persons did the most powerful preaching (especially before the Gospels
eclipse) bring forth in London: converting work was at a great stand, though
there were so many unconverted persons in the City: and by the impenitency and
hardness of heart in London, Gods treasures of wrath have been filled up, which
in some measure he has opened in these late judgments, that he has inflicted,
and yet the great day of his wrath is still to come, Romans 2. 4, 5.

2. Where have been the fruits of Faith in London? how has unbelief abounded,
the great Gospel sin, more dangerous than any other, and more heinous in London
than in any other place? O the thick vail of unbelief which has hid Gospel
mysteries, and things afar off from the eyes of this people! O the evil heart
of unbelief which has shut the door against the Lord Jesus Christ, who has
knocked so long for entertainment! O the sottishness of London, to believe no
more, when truths have been made so plain and clear; when promises have been
made known so great and sure; when Christ has been preached and tendered; and
when Heaven has been revealed and proffered; and when all have such need, for
the most to shut the eye, and ear, and heart, and through unbelief to refuse!
to give God the lie, and turn upon him the back; to give Christ a wound, and
tread his blood underfoot; to give the spirit a repulse, and send him away
grieved from the heart, as men do by their unbelief; this sin does provoke the
Lord to great displeasure.

3. Where have been the fruits of love in London? O the want of love to God,
and one to another! the grace of love is necessary and sweet and has been much
pressed, but little exercised in London; there has been much love of the
World, but little love of the Father; hatred of the brethren has abounded, but
there was little brotherly love; burning anger there has been, little burning
love; burning lusts, little burning love; inordinate carnal love, little true
spiritual love; carnal love has exceeded the bounds, but spiritual love has
been in a very low degree: and when love in London has waxed cold, is it a
wonder if Gods anger has waxed so hot, and broken forth into such flames, as
we have seen?

4. Where have been the fruits of new obedience in London? and expression of
love to Jesus Christ by keeping of his commandments, though his commandments
are not grievous?

3. A third sin of London, is hypocrisy in the profession of religion. This sin
exceedingly prevailed in the late times, when profession of religion was grown
into fashion: religion was near in the mouths of most, but far from the reins:
there was a general face of religion, but it was no more than skin-deep; It was
seated in the countenance, not rooted in the heart: how many painted sepulchers
had* we in London, outwardly fair and beautiful, inwardly full of rottenness
and wickedness? how much sounding brass had we then in our streets? a great
noise and stir hypocrites did make, but they were hollow at heart; our gold was
most of it counterfeit; water we had instead of wine, and dross instead of
silver.

O how was religion abused! some made it a stirrup to get up by into the seat
of honor; others made it a cloak to cover their covetous practices; many base
and wicked designs were carried on under pretense of religion.

It would ask too much time to set forth hypocrites in all their shapes, and to
paint hypocrisy in all its colors. London has formerly abounded with
hypocrites, and more lately it has not been free. If Hellfire be the portion
especially of hypocrites hereafter, Matthew. 24. 51. No wonder then if God be
angry with a place for this sin here.

4. The fourth sin of London, is Formality and lukewarmness in the Worship of
God. There was much formality when there was no Form; and I suppose that Forms
have not quickened unto more liveliness; there was a face of Worship indeed in
London; and was there not only, or little more than a Face in most places? God
is Holy and Jealous, a great King, and his Name is dreadful, Mal. 1. 14. God is
a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth,
Joh. 4. 24. But has his Worship been accordingly in London? has there been
that spiritual Worship which he requires? Let London seriously reflect upon
their carriage toward God in their Devotions; have they had a due awe and
dread of the great Name of God upon them, when they have seemed to draw near
unto him? have they worshipped him with reverence and godly fear? outward
reverence some have used, more than he has required, in bowing at Names and
before Places; but have they had inward reverence and fear of God upon their
hearts? have they clothed themselves with Humility, when they have come into
his presence? has there been inward fervor and delight accompanying their
outward acts of Worship?

Alas! how formal has London been, especially of late in Gods Worship? they
have prayed, but what kind of Prayers have they been? could they deserve the
name of Prayers? were those prayers likely to prevent Judgment, or turn away
wrath? some Confessions of sin have been made, but so general and formal,
that they have been very unlikely to work up the heart to sorrow and
repentance: and where some have been more particular, has not much formality
cleaved to them? where has hearty grief for sin, and sorrow been to be found?
would not a small Viol hold all the tears that have dropped from the eyes of
great Assemblies, even in the day of their most solemn Humiliations? has not
sin been rolled under the tongue, when Confession of sin has been at the end
of it? Have not the Confessions of many been such as if they came to ask leave
to commit sin, rather than humbly to bewail it? at least have they not taken
leave, whatever their Confessions have been? Petitions have been made for
pardon, and grace, and sanctification, but has it not been Lipprayer, without
hearty desire? has it not been in such a manner, as if they did not much care
whether they did speed or no? as if they could make shift well enough without a
Pardon? as if they had no need of Grace and Holiness; but they must say
something for Form and Custom? has there not been an enmity in the hearts of
many against that which they have seemed to desire with their lips? Who have
stirred up themselves to lay hold on God? Who have wrestled in Prayer with
fervent desires, with Faith, and Importunity? Hearing there has been in
London; but how little Believing? how little relishing the Word, and receiving
it with Love? Singing there has been, but how little Joy and Melody of the
heart in the Lord?

O how formal and lukewarm has London been? how much of the Laodicean temper
have they had in all Ordinances? And might not God say to London, as he did of
old to Jerusalem, Isa. 1. 11, 12, 13, 14. To what purpose is the multitude of
your sacrifices unto me? etc. Such services are to no purpose; they are vain
Worship, and do not attain the end thereof, either to profit him that offers
them, or to please him unto whom they are tendered; can such formal services be
effectual to procure pardon or peace? can they bear up the spirit in a day of
trouble? will not the Morning cloud and early dew of such Righteousness flee
away and vanish upon the approach of the Sun? will not such Spiders webs be
broken to pieces by a stormy wind? how do Formalists behave themselves as if
they had no Religion when they fall into trouble? when God thunders by his
Judgments, what can a cold, formal, empty prayer do? when Death appears before
them with a grim countenance, what comfort can such reap by reflection on such
services? what Evidences for Heaven can they gather from any of their outside
Devotions?

And are not they to as little purpose in regard of God? may not God say unto
them of their Fastings and Prayers, Did you fast unto me? did you pray at all
unto me? Zach. 7. 5. Or as here to the Jews, That he was full of their
Services, even to a loathing; that he took no delight in them, and who has
required these things at your hands to tread my Courts? Bring no more vain
Oblations, Incense is an abomination unto me, I cannot away with your
Assemblies, my soul hates them, they are a trouble to me, I am weary to bear
them. The Lord is much offended with formal, hypocritical Services; hereby they
flatter and mock him, and is he taken with flatteries? Such services are like a
dead, cold, black, mangled, rotten, stinking Carkase without the Soul and
spirit, which must needs be very unsavory and displeasing; they are like the
lame, blind, halt, sick Cattle, which were not fit to be offered up in
Sacrifice under the Law, Mal. 1. 8. If ye offer the blind for Sacrifice, is it
not evil? and if ye offer the lame and sick, is it not evil? Offer it now unto
thy Governor, will he be pleased with thee? And will God then be pleased? Such
persons when they seem to serve God with their Outward man, they serve the
Devil and their own lusts with their Inward man; God has the Form sometimes,
the Devil has the Power; God has the show, the Devil has the substance; God
has the bark, the rind, the shell, the Devil has the kernel; God has the
Cabinet, the Devil gets the Jewel; they give God the Devils leavings and refuse
as it were of their own lust; for they spend the strength and vigor of soul
and body in serving the Devil, and gratifying their own lusts; and then think
to put God off with any thing; giveing him only some dead, cold, faint, empty,
heartless, lifeless, outward services; and even in them they are sweyed by some
carnal Motives, which are the secret spring to the wheel of all external
services. And O how abominable is all such Worship in the sight of God? Has
not Formality in Worship, been one sin of London, which has helped to fill up
the Ephah? when the means God has appointed for the turning away of his anger
is used in such a manner that it self becomes a provocation, no wonder if his
wrath break forth without remedy.

5. A fifth sin of London is Division amongst Professors; different persuasions
have made wide breaches and divisions in London, and through Divisions have
arisen great animosities and contentions, unto the shame of Christianity and
the Protestant Religion; and has not God been provoked to anger hereby? has
not he contended with Professors, and by the common scourge he has brought
upon them, called aloud unto them for a union, and more hearty accord and
affection then formerly they have had? and has not he given them liberty and
opportunity, had they minded and cared to make use of it, for meeting together
in order unto healing? but have professors of different parties been sensible
of Gods meaning in the scourge upon their backs? have they hearkened unto Gods
call? have they laid hold of, and improved opportunities for closing up their
wide breaches? I hope some closing in affection there has been amongst some;
but how rarely has it been to be found? and when there are such breaches still
amongst us, is it not just with God to make further breaches upon us, as he
has done by his judgments?

6. A sixth sin of London is neglect of Reformation.

Neglect of 1 Personal 2 Family 3 City 4 Church
Reformation.

1 Neglect of Personal reformation in Heart. Life.


1. Who in London have seriously and very diligently endeavored the
Reformation of their hearts? when so unclean, and polluted, who have labored
to get them washed? when such roots of bitterness have been springing forth,
and such weeds of Lust have been growing there, who has endeavored to pluck
them up? outward neatness there has been in London, washing, and rincing,
rubbing and scowring; but O the inward sluttishness! they who have had clean
houses, and clean garments, and clean faces and hands, have had foul hearts:
who have taken care every day to rince and scowre their inside? to bring their
hearts to the fountain set open for sin and uncleanness; and to cleanse
themselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, that they might arrive
every day unto greater perfection in holiness? they who have been careful to
dress their bodies every day, have been very careless in dressing their hearts,
neglecting to put on the white robes of Christ's righteousness which alone can
cover their spiritual nakedness and deformity; and to get the jewels of grace,
which alone can adorn the soul, and render it amiable in the sight of God.

Heart work, is hard work; and it is so hard that most have let it alone; they
have been discouraged with the difficulty; the opposition of Satan and Lust to
this work has been so strong, that they have been quickly overpowered upon
their first attempts and endeavors after a change and rectifying of the
disorders, which they have perceived.

Heart work, is secret work; many have employed themselves in the more open
work of religion; few have taken pains with their hearts in secret; many take
heed to their tongues, what they speak, and before whom; to their hands, what
they do; to their feet, whither they go; but few take heed to their hearts*
Murder, Adultery, Theft, and the like sins have been committed in the heart by
many, who would have been afraid and ashamed of the outward acts.

O the unwatchfulness there has been in London over the heart! Citizens have
watched their gates, and watched their streets, and watched their houses; but
how few have watched their hearts, what comes in, and what goes forth? how
few have set a watch before the door of their lips, and ears, and other senses,
which are the inlets of sin; and upon their hearts, from whence are the issues
of sin? how few have kept their hearts with all diligence? how few have
labored to govern their thoughts, to rule their passions, to subjugate their
wills to Christ, and to deliver up all their affections to his dispose and
obedience? Heart reformation has been much neglected.

2. Who in London have endeavored Life-Reformation as they should? how few
have there been effectually persuaded to put away the evil of their doings from
before the eyes of the Lord, to cease from evil, and have learned to do well?
How few have broken off their sins by Repentance, and thoroughly amended their
ways, measuring out their actions, by the Rule of the word? how few have got
the Law of God written in their hearts, and the transcript thereof in their
lives, exemplifying the precepts thereof in their conversations? how few in
London have been like so many Epistles of Christ, in whom the will and grace of
their Master might be read? who have trodden in Christ's steps, walking as he
walked, and followed him in the way of obedience and self-denial? who have
shined like so many lights in dark places and times, adorning their profession,
and living as becomes the Gospel?

Great irregularities there have been in the lives of most Londoners, little
Gospel-reformation; little making Religion the business; little holy exact
living. If a stranger had looked into our City, and observed the lives of the
most, and not known them to have had the name of Christians, would not he have
judged them to be Heathens, yea many of them in their dealing to be worse then
Turks and Infidels? Thus Personal Reformation has been neglected.

2. A great neglect there has been of family reformation in London; How few
have with Ioshuah resolved, and accordingly endeavored that they and their
houses should serve the Lord? how few have set up Religious worship in their
families? have not many hundred houses in the City been without family prayer
in them from one end of the week to the other? and is it strange that the Lord
has burned down those houses, wherein the inhabitants would not vouchsafe to
worship him? And where there has been some prayer in many families, it was but
once a day, and that so late at night, and when the body has been so tried,
and sleepy, and the soul so dull, and unfit for Gods service, that the prayers
have been no prayers, or lost prayers, such, which instead of pleasing him,
have provoked him to anger? how few did labor to instruct their families;
Catechize their children and servants, to bring them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord? has not God threatened to pour out his wrath upon
irreligious families? Ier. 10. 25.

3. Neglect of City-reformation; have not the Magistrates of London been faulty
here? let them ask their own consciences, whether to the uttermost of their
power according to the trust and opportunity the Lord has put into their
hands, they have endeavored the Reformation of the City? whether as Gods
underofficers, they have improved their interest for the promotion of Religion
in the zealous exercise of it? yea whether they have put the Laws made, in
execution against Sabbath Breakers, swearers, drunkards, endeavoring to find
out and punish such offenders?

4. Neglect of Church-reformation; And is there no blame to be laid upon
Church Officers? has there been that zeal for, and faithful execution of
Church Discipline according to the Rules of the word? has not the Lord Jesus
Christ been affronted in his Kingly office by some, who have imposed precepts
of their own upon men's consciences, instead of vigorously endeavoring the
execution of his; and taken the power of the Keys out of the hands of those
unto whom the Lord has entrusted it, hereby rendering the execution of
discipline impossible according to the Laws of Christ? have not the tender and
most conscientious lain under the censures of some, rather then the openly
profane and scandalously wicked?

Neglect of Reformation am I speaking of? nay have not many, who call
themselves Ministers, endeavored rather the overthrow, then the promotion of
it? have they not had girds in their Pulpits at holiness and zealous
profession; which they have seconded by a conversation of dissoluteness,
malicious opposition and persecution of those especially who have been the most
religious? Sad neglects there have been of reformation in London; and that when
London lay under such obligations to reform: as Christians they were obliged by
baptismal and renewed vows: as Protestants of the Reformed religion, they were
obliged to endeavor a reformation: by Mercies they were obliged; an^ have they
been under no other obligations? And has not the neglect of reformation,
notwithstanding all obligations, rendered them guilty of disingenuity,
infideliy, yea of perjury it self? I verily believe this is the great sin God
is scourging London for; God is contending for a Reformation; and if they do
not endeavor it more vigorously the sooner, I fear he will bring desolation
upon them.

7. A seventh sin of London, is fearful Apostasy, and a spirit of compliance
with the sins of the times. How many in London who formerly were great
profestours, have discovered themselves to be rotten hypocrites? who casting
off the sheeps clothing, and laying aside all profession, have given themselves
up to dissoluteness, and licentious living? formerly they have seemed true
penitents, and to be washed from their iniquities; but they have returned with
the dog to the vomit, and with the Sow that is washed to the wallowing in the
mire, 2 Pet. 2. ult. formerly they have been swept a little within; and
garnisht outwardly with a fair profession; but the unclean spirit has
returned, and without any great difficulty has entered with seven worse
spirits, and defiled them more then before, and made their last state worse
then their first. Mat. 12. 43, 44, 45.
I speak not so much of those who worship God in this Mode or that Mode, and of
alterations herein; but of those who sometimes professed religion, and now do
not worship God in any mode at all, but wholly addict themselves to their
lusts, and are ashamed to be called, or thought to be religious.

They would not now look like a Saint, or speak like a Saint, much less live
like a Saint. Thus have many in our days cast off all fear of God, and devoted
themselves with the Hellhounds of the times to the service of the Devil;
resolving to do what in them lies to promote the interest of his Kingdom. And
if some are a little more awkward in his service, and not altogether so like
him, and such apt Scholars presently, as others whose education has been in
his School from their childhood, yet they learn very fast, and wonderful is
their proficiency in a short time; and in regard of Apostasy they come nearer
the Image of the Devil, than those that have been always tutored by him.

Now for any in London to forsake God, that they might serve the Devil; to draw
off from the ways of Holiness, that they might walk in the ways of
Wickedness; does cast a great slurr upon God and his ways. They do in effect
say, That the Devil is a better Master than God; and that the way of sin that
leads to Hell is more eligible than the way of Holiness, which alone can
bring to Heaven. The Lord threatens, that his Soul shall have no pleasure in
such Apostates, Heb. 10. 38. It is a Meiosis, and we are to understand, that
the Lord is highly displeased with such persons.

See how God pleads with Apostatizing Israel, Ier. 2. 9, 10, etc. Wherefore I
will yet plead with you, says the Lord. Pass ye over to the Isles of Chittim,
and see, and send unto Kedar, and diligently consider, if there be any such
thing? Has any Nation changed their gods, which yet are no gods? But my people
have changed their glory for that which does not profit! Be astonished O ye
Heavens at this, and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate, says the Lord;
for my people have committed two great evils; they have forsaken me the
fountain of living waters, and have hewn out unto themselves broken cisterns,
that can hold no water: And hence follows, v. 15. The young lions roared and
yelled upon him, and laid his land waste; his Cities are burnt without
inhabitant: and v. 17. Thou have procured these things unto thy self, because
thou have forsaken the Lord thy God: and v. 19. Thy own wickedness shall
correct thee, and thy backslidings shall reprove thee; know therefore and see
that it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God,
and that my fear is not in thee, says the Lord God of hosts. And may not God
thus plead with the Apostates of London, and punish them as he did his people
of Israel?

8. The Eighth sin of London is deafning the Ear against all Gods Calls. The
Lord has called upon London by his Ministers, but they have been like the deaf
Adder which will not hearken to the voice of the Charmer; they have stopped
their ears, and turned away their shoulder, and made their heart like an
Adamant stone. God has called by his Mercies; but this voice has been too
low, and they have slept the more securely in sin. God after other Means has
called by Afflictions, first lighter, then heavier; and yet how many in London
have, and still do walk contrary unto God, and will not return to him that has
smitten them? They have been incorrigible under all Gods correcting Rods. When
God spoke by the Plague, they were a little awakened, but quickly dropped asleep
again; when the plague was a little over, they return to their Trades again, to
their sins again, but they do not return unto the Lord. And when the Judgment
of the Plague was so much lost and ineffectual for their good; this no doubt
has provoked God so quickly and unexpectedly to turn his hand upon them, and
bring the Judgment of the Fire; and if they will still walk contrary to God,
they must expect that God will walk contrary to them, until he have consumed
them.

9. A Ninth sin of London is Profaneness, and a loose and frothy spirit,
especially in the Youth and springing generation. I do not tax all; for I am
confident there is a serious and godly Youth growing up. But O that there were
not reason to say, that the generality of Youth is profane and wicked, as well
as those who are grown more mature in wickedness! And this Profaneness has
showed it self In
1 Profane using Gods Name. 2 Profane breaking of Gods Day. 3 Profane scoffing
at Gods People.


1. In profane using of Gods Name. How grossly has the third Commandment been
broken in the City? how has the great and dreadful Name of the Lord God,
which should make men to tremble in the mention of it, and command their
spirits into aw and reverence, been vainly taken by many, and used to fill up
the sentence of their ordinary discourse? And not only so; but how has the
Name of God been tossed in the black mouths of the Children of darkness, and
even torn in pieces by their hideous Oaths and Execrations? What an hellish
noise has the sound of full-mouthed Oaths, made sometimes in the streets;
enough to make the hair stand on end, of one who has a sense of the greatness
of that Majesty upon his spirit, which hereby is so audaciously affronted? Oh
the Swearing that has been used by Londoners in buying and selling! Many
Parents have been so addicted to this sin in their Families, that their little
Children have no sooner learned to speak, but they have also learned of them to
swear by the Name of God, which has been all the teaching of God that they
have given them; a devilish teaching indeed; which hereafter they will curse
and bann them for in Hell.

But if you should have laid your ears unto the Taverns, and Alehouses, and
Whore-houses, and other Devil-houses once standing in London; and harkened to
the speeches of many of the Devils Imps, in their drinking and gaming, and
other lewd practices, especially when a little crossed and vexed; Oh what
language of Hell might have been heard! How have those cursed Villains, in the
heat of their wine and anger, shot vollies of Oaths in the face of the God of
Heaven! and whetting their tongues like a sharp sword, they have not feared to
wound the name of God, when they have received any injury from men. O what
poison of Asps has there been under their lips? but a worse poison of sin in
their hearts, from the evil treasure and abundance of which, these oaths and
blasphemies have proceeded.

But who can find words to set forth the evil of this sin, which has not the
temptation of pleasure, advantage or honor, as other sins have; and therefore
is a great argument of a monstrous wicked heart? And who can express Gods
displeasure for this sin, for which he makes sometimes a whole land to mourn?
And has not this sin provoked the Lord to utter his angry voice in Plaguing
and burning the City, that they might fear to abuse his Name any more?

2. In profanc breaking of Gods day. Sabbath breaking was an ordinary sin in
London. I say not, it was so much broken in doing the ordinary works of the
particular callings, but in that which was worse: How many did spend the
Sabbath in eating to excess, and drinking till they were drunk, in sleeping, in
walking into the fields, in sports and recreations? Many wholly neglected the
worship of God on that day; and instead of that, did the Devil more service on
the Lords day, then all the days of the week besides.

The many weeks of Sabbaths which London had in the time of the Plague,
methinks did reprove London for their profaning of the weekly Sabbath: And the
great fire, (I will not call it bon-fire because so destructive to London.)
which was begun in the City on the Lords day did reprove London for those
lesser fires, (I will not call them bon-fires because so offensive to God)
which not long before were kindled in the streets on that day which called for
other kind of work. Not to speak any thing whether there were any just occasion
for those fires and ringing of bells, (most of which were melted before they
were rung so generally again) and such a show of mirth and rejoicing at that
time.

The Citizens carrying forth their goods, and lying in the fields, with grief
and fear, might put them in mind how often they had walked out into those
fields on the Lords day for their recreation; when they should rather have been
hearing the word preached, or if that were over, repeating it in their own
families, giving and receiving instruction, or in their closets at the throne
of grace, or employed in meditation. As God delights in those that call his
Sabbaths a delight, and makes sweet promises to them; so he is highly
displeased with Sabbath breakers, and has denounced severe threatenings against
them, Jer. 17. 27. If ye will not hearken to me to hallow the Sabbath day; I
will kindle a fire in the gates of Jerusalem which shall devour the Palaces
thereof, and shall not he quenched.

3. In profane scoffing at Gods people. The name of a Saint, and Godly man,
has been ridiculous to many profane Spirits in London, and used by them in a
way of reproach. How have Gods people, especially the more strict and zealous,
been made the drunkards song, and laughed at in the streets? Horrid impiety! as
if it were matter of more shame to be like the Holy God, than to be like the
Foul Devil! and to be employed in the work of angels, than to drudge in Satan's
chains!

No wonder if God is angry with such a place where such vipers have had their
abode: Profaneness is a great sin that has brought ruin upon us.

10. A tenth sin of London is Pride. This sin being so odious to God; so
destructive where it abounds; and so universal in London; I shall speak of it
the more largely, both in regard of the inward workings, and the outward
expressions of it: which when opened, I believe there are none that will be
able to say they are wholly free from it.

1. In regard of the inward workings of pride. Oh how has the poison of this
sin envenomed the spirits of the most in a very high degree? How many
self-admirers have there been in London, who have been puffed up with an
overweening conceit of their own excellencies? What high, touring, swelling
thoughts have they had of themselves? What secret self-pleasing, and lifting up
themselves in their own esteem? Some esteeming themselves for that which is
matter of shame; admiring themselves for their own wit and parts, when they
have lain fallow, and not been employed for God, or when they have been
employed to his dishonor: when they have been wise, but it has been to do
evil: when they have been men of understanding, but it has been to practice
iniquity: when they have had cunning craftiness, but it has been to deceive,
to defraud and overreach; or to plot and contrive others mischief; when they
have had a ripe wit, quick understanding, rich fancy, fluency of speech; but
the employment has been about toys and trifles, or that which is worse; when
the vent has been in foolish, empty complements and courtship, jesting with
Scripture, scoffing at the religious, or in dirty and obscene discourses.

Others have admired themselves, for that which really they never had but only
in their own imagination. Some for their parts and learning; thinking
themselves great scholars when none have thought so but themselves: others for
their grace and godliness, when their silver has been dross; and their grace
either counterfeit in whole, or so mixed with unperceived corruption, that upon
examination they might find themselves very poor, in that which they thought
themselves so much enriched with; and if they looked to the root and principle
of their actions, they might find great flaws, and deficiency in those things
which they had the highest conceit of.

How many in London have had very honorable esteem of themselves; preferring
themselves above others, yea above the whole world? Few have measured
themselves by the rule, but measured themselves by their own fancies, or by
other men's esteem. How many have thought themselves to be something, when they
have been nothing, and rejoiced in their actions as excellent, and admirable,
not from their own proof and trial of them by the word, but from others
acceptance and commendations, and by comparing them with the actions of other
men, whom they have conceited themselves to exceed? O how have some lifted up
themselves above others, looking upon themselves as far more worthy without any
real ground? their eye has been upon their own good things, overlooking the
secret evil, because it cannot be seen by men: and their eye has been upon
others evil things; overlooking the good which has been out of ready view:
their eye has been upon their own best things, and upon others worst things,
aggravating their faults, and extenuating their own. Thus they have in their
thoughts brought others down through uncharitableness, and lifted up themselves
upon the ruins, which their uncharitableness has made in others worth: and
when they have had greater esteem because of their greater show, this opinion
of themselves has been confirmed; whereas in truth, others who made less show,
and had less esteem, have had more sincerity, and secret hidden excellency.

I might further trace the inward workings of pride in the self-love which it
has effected; What a marvelous affection have proud persons had toward
themselves, notwithstanding their ugliness, and spiritual deformity, the
rottenness and corruption within them? and many lusts of their hearts? all
which pride has covered and a thousand faults in themselves; as charity does
cover a thousand faults in others: Pride has put a fair gloss and Varnish upon
all, and represented men to themselves as very lovely and amiable. Pride also
has chosen for such, their friends, who have been loved, not according to the
worth which those persons have had, but according to the estimation those
persons have had of their worth; which if those have fallen in estimation,
these have fallen in affection.

I might show the workings of Pride, in the hatred, anger, spite, revenge
which it has effected, when it has met with disesteem or slighting: the grief
at the substraction of its fuel, and provision; the sollicitous thoughts, and
cares concerning, and eager progging, and pursuit after others commendations;
the storm of commotion and disturbance which this wind has raised, when the
tide of Applause has run another way: the complacency and delight it has
yielded in drinking out of a full stream of others esteem, in chewing the Cud,
and revolving in the mind the praise of men. But so much concerning the inward
workings of Pride.

2. Concerning the Outward expressions of Pride, and that,

1. In the Speech: London has been grossly guilty in Boasting and Vainglory.
What company could you come into almost, but you should find many boasting
spirits? some foaming out the shame of their own praise, in high expressions,
and direct self-commendations (without any regard to Gods glory,
self-vindication, example, or excitement; in which cases, modestly and
sparingly, to do it may be lawful and a duty) but they have done it only to be
well thought on, and admired: Others driveling out their own praises more
sliely and indirectly; but a Christian of eyes and brains, might easily
perceive that the drift and scope of the discourse has been Self, and a tacit
begging of a good opinion. As if one should say, Pray friends, think a little
better of me; pray have me higher in your esteem; for to say the truth, by this
I give you to understand that I am a very worthy person. Many we shall find
very forward to declare their own goodness, but few faithful in speaking forth
the praises of God; yea many there have been who have discommended themselves,
not that they might fall, but rise in esteem. Thus some rotten-hearted
hypocrites as full of pride as they can hold, and some sincere in the main, yet
too much like them, have spoken so meanly of themselves, and so much against
themselves as none other would do; and what has been the design? even that
they might be accounted humble: and therefore they have taken care in their
self-commendations, to speak of nothing but common infirmities, concealing
their more gross faults; and those common infirmities, in a mourning and
complaining way, as if they were very sensible of them; as if affected,
afflicted, and burdened with them (as the humble, sincere Christian is indeed)
that they might be esteemed for sensibility of small faults; and then they have
taken care to do it, not to those that are more rigid, severe and quicksighted
Christians, that would quickly have smelt out their pride; but unto those,
which they have looked upon as the most tender, charitable persons, who are
ready hereby to advance them higher in esteem; or weaker Christians, who are
ready to confess more evil of themselves. And when they have thus spoken
against themselves, they have not really thought so, but the contrary; but they
have spoken so, that they might be contradicted, and commended to their faces;
if they thought they should have fallen in esteem by such words, they would
have held their peace, but because they supposed discommendation might most
effectually promote esteem, and draw out a good word, therefore they have used
it. Proud Hypocrites speak ill of themselves that they may be accounted humble;
they cannot endure to be humble; they care not for the grace, yea they hate it;
yet they would be thought to have it, because it does promote esteem: they love
the reward of humility, but they care not for humility it self, they love
humility in others, because such persons will stoop to them; but they love not
humility in themselves, for they will stoop to none.

Thus some also out of a secret design of pride have discommended others
behind their backs, that they might be thought to exceed them, whom they could
correct, and find fault withal; they have labored to bring down others that
they might set up themselves. And the same design of Pride they have had in
commending others to their faces, and exalting them in words above themselves,
not from a real esteem which they have had of them above themselves, but only
that they might draw forth a commendation from them.

Such expressions of pride have been to be found in Professors, and have been
more latent; but I shall speak of the more gross and open expressions, which
have been general in the City. We read of the pride of the Daughters of
Jerusalem, Isa. 3. 16, etc. They were haughty, and walked with stretched forth
necks, and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they went, and making a
tinckling with their feet: and what was it they were proud of? See from v. 18.
to v. 25. Their ornaments, their Cauls, their Tires, their Chains, their
Bracelets, their Mufflers, their Tablets, their Head-bands, their Rings, their
Jewels, their changeable suits of Apparel, and the like. And has there not
been this pride in London? Were not the Daughters of London like the Daughters
of Zion for pride, and haughtiness? Was there any place in England that could
show such pride of Apparel as London could show, which the Female sex were not
only guilty of? Was there any fashion, though never so antic and apish, which
London did not presently imitate? Who can count the Cost which has been
lavished out in Clothing, and rich Apparel? some pinching their Bellies and
Families to lay it out on this Lust.

This Pride of Apparel is very shameful and absurd, Clothes being the Badge of
Apostasy, which were not made use of till after the fall, therefore the word
(...) which signifies Clothing, comes from (...) He prevaricated; and it is as
if a Thief should be proud of his Shackles, or any Malefactor of his mark of
disgrace: At least the gaudy attire of many persons has signified the
emptiness and frothy mind within; and that they have had nothing to set them
forth but their Clothes.

I might also add; the pride, which the daughters of London have had of their
Beauty, though it be but skin-deep, and the Body but a skinfull of dirt, and
the choycest beauty without discretion, like a Jewel hanged at the ear or nose
of a Swine: And the Lord knows what monstrous, and defiled, and deformed
insides, the most of those have had, who have been so fair and adorned
outwardly. Many in London have been proud of their fine clothes and fair faces;
and others of their fair Shops, and stately houses; Pride has hung about the
neck like a Chain, and covered them like a garment, instead of the clothing
and Ornament of Humility, which before God is of so great price.

Now God is highly offended with the sin of Pride, God resists the proud, 1
Pet. 5. 5. (...), he does as it were set himself in battle array against them.
Pride goes before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall, Prove. 16.
18. Pride was one of Sodoms sins, which City was burnt with fire from Heaven,
Ezekiel. 16. 49. The Scriptures speak of Three Cities that were burnt for this sin
of pride among other sins, namely Sodom, Jerusalem, and Babylon: And may not
London come in for a fourth? The botches, and blains, and loathsome sores in
the bodies of many, when the Plague was in London; and the burning of so much
fuel of pride, by the Fire, methinks were a very loud reproof and rebuke of
London for this sin.

11. An eleventh sin of London, is fullness of Bread, or intemperance in
eating: this was another of the sins of Sodom. God did feed London with the
finest of the Wheat, and gave plenty of Corn, and Flesh, and other Provisions;
but how have they abused Plenty by their Intemperance and Luxury? O the
excessive Feasting in Halls, and private Houses of them whose Estates have been
more plentiful! What indulging has there been to the Appetite, as if
self-denial in regard of the Appetite were no duty, or an enemy, and with the
Poor to be shut out of doors? What curiosity of Palate, and daintiness have many
in London had, so that Air, Earth, Sea, must be ransackt to please them, and
all would not do? What loathing have they had of ordinary food? Many good
creatures of God must be cut and mangled, and spoiled, to make them new dishes;
which however pleasing, have but spoiled their stomachs, and bred diseases in
their bodies. Some have not eaten much, but have been so choice, that scarce
any food has pleased them; and that not, through sickness of body, but
wantonness of mind: others have been pleased with their food and overpleased,
and all their pleasure has been therein; All whose God, as the Apostle speaks,
Phil. 3. has been their belly. Such like the Rich man, Luke 16. 19. have fared
sumptuously and deliciously every day; O the excessive cost that some have
bestowed upon their Tables daily! O the excessive quantity of Meat that some
have devoured! O the excessive time that has been wasted in pampering the
flesh! What rioting and banqueting has there been daily in London, many
feeding themselves without fear; as if gluttony were not any sin at all? How
many have been like fed Horses in the City, or like fatted Oxen, who as the
Apostle James speaks, have lived in pleasure and been wanton, and nourished
themselves as in a day of slaughter, Jam. 5. 5. and as Hos. 13. 6. According to
their pasture so were they filled; they were filled, and their heart was
exalted, therefore have they forgotten Me.

This kind of Intemperance has so strangely brutified many, that they have
been even degenerated into Beasts, only that they have been more unusefull; for
hereby they have unfitted themselves for all kind of service, as if they were
born only to eat: but withal they have prepared themselves for those ruining
and slaughtering Judgments which have come upon the City.

12. A twelfth sin of London is Idleness; a consequent of the former; only that
Idleness has been more general: this was also a sin of Sodom; I will not say
but many Citizens of London were diligent in their Calling, but how many idle
Vagrant persons were there in the City? What Idleness in many of the Youth, if
not held in the more strictly, and some breaking forth, and lavishing away
stolen time, which was not at their own dispose whatever strictness was used?
Moreover what an ill example for idleness, did many Governors themselves give
to their children and servants? When Masters were idle abroad, no wonder that
Servants were idle at home; when Mistresses were idle in their Chambers, no
wonder if the Kitchen did imitate.

Though eating, and drinking, and clothing were necessary, and called for some
time; yet the excess of time spent about these things, if not worse, was no
better than idle time. Many especially of the Females in the City have spent so
much time in the Morning in their beds, if not in sleeping, at least in idle
foolish Fancies, and so much time after in neat and curious dressing their
bodies, that they have had no time before Dinner for Prayer or Reading, no time
to dress their Souls: and the Afternoon being far spent in eating and drinking,
the rest of the time has run away either in Visitings or Entertainments,
wherein (if not worse) vain, idle, unprofitable things have been the chief, if
not the only subject of their discourse: and by that time they have again
refreshed themselves with food at night, they have been too sleepy and unfit
for Prayer, and the Service of God. And thus many careless Women in the City
have lived in ease and idleness from one end of the Week, and one end of the
Year unto another. But methinks the Lord has by his terrible things in London,
spoken unto them much in the same language as he did, Isa. 32. 9, 10, 11. Rise
up ye Women that are at ease, hear my voice ye careless Daughters, give ear to
my speech; many days and years shall ye be troubled ye careless Women: tremble
ye Women that are at ease, be troubled ye careless ones, strip ye, make ye
bare, and gird sackcloth upon your loins.

But I would not charge this sin of idleness only upon the female sex: many men
have been more shamefully guilty, especially those who have misspent so much
time in gaming, (not to speak of excess in eating and drinking, and other
time-consuming sins which are reproved in their proper place) O the time that
many have spent in gaming! Some recreations wherein the body is exercised, may
be lawful and necessary at some time; so they do not steal away too much of
their time and affections; but for men to sit at games as hard as scholars at
their books, what rational plea can be used for such wicked idleness? Thus
silver, and gold, and great estates have been consumed; and O the golden hours,
the days, and nights, and precious time, that have been lost in gaming! Thus
some have run out of all, and removed into the Country to hide their shame,
after their high port in the City; some have gone into the high ways, not to
beg, but to do that which is far worse, which in some has had a dreadful
conclusion. And not only this kind of Idleness has brought poverty, but also
that heedless, slothful spirit, which many of the City have had in their
callings; which has made them blemishes to the City, and has been an helper
on of our ruin.

13. A thirteenth sin of London is unmercifulness, another of Sodom's sins.
Ezekiel. 16. 49. She strengthened not the hands of the poor and needy. I shall not
blame the whole for this sin, for the charity of London has sounded throughout
the land, and throughout the world. But yet have not many of the great men of
the City been guilty of unmercifulness, who though more able, yet have been
less forward to contribute to the relief of such as have been in distress? It
has been the comfort of some who have lost much by the fire, that they had
saved what before they had given to the poor, by putting it out of the reach of
moth, or rust, or thieves, or flames of fire. But oh what marble bowels have
some had toward the poor! so that they could, (whatever abundance they had by
them beyond what themselves did make use of) as freely part with so many drops
of their blood, as pieces of money, though to help some of the needy and
distressed members of Jesus Christ: not considering that the Lord Jesus is the
Heir of all things, and whatever estate they had, they were but his stewards;
and that relief of the needy is a debt, which though man cannot require it of
them, yet God can: and is it unequal if for want of payment of Gods debts
(which they owed out of their estates, by virtue of Gods command, to the poor)
the Lord has dispossessed them of his houses, and burnt them with fire, and
taken away part of the estates which he gave them because they have employed
them no more for his glory.

14. A fourteenth sin of London is Uncleanness, another sin of Sodom; their sin
indeed was unnatural uncleanness. I would hope that this sin has been little
known and practiced in the City. But Fornication and Adultery have been too
common. Indeed there has not been that boldness and impudency in this sin as
elsewhere; there has not been that whores forehead so generally in London, and
declaring the iniquity like Sodom: but let the consciences of many Londoners
speak, whether they have not been secretly guilty of this sin? Would it not be
a shame to tell of the chambering and wantonness, and privy leudness which has
been committed in London? suppose that in all the remaining Churches the sin of
uncleanness should be reproved; and all, both men and women that have been
actually guilty of it, should be forced by an inward sting of conscience (as
sometimes those were upon the words of our Savior that accused the woman taken
in Adultery) immediately to go forth out of the place: what a stir would there
be in some Churches? what an emptying of some Pews? what a clearing of some
Isles? and how few would there be remaining in some places?

Suppose a visible mark were put by God upon the foreheads of all Adulterers in
the City of London, as God put a mark upon Cain after he had been guilty of
murder; would not many who walk now very demurely, and with much seeming
innocence, walk with blushes in their cheeks? would not many keep house and
hide their face, and not stir abroad except in the night? or if in the day,
would they not shuffle through the streets, and hate the fashion of little hats,
and the court-mode of wearing them behind their head; and rather get such whose
brims are of a larger size, which might the more conveniently cover their
brows? And would not many unsuspected and seemingly modest women also, stain
their cheeks with a vermilion dye upon their husbands or friends search into
their countenance? would not many of them walk with thick hoods, and wear
continually deep fore-head-cloaths, as if they were troubled with a perpetual
head-ake, that they might hide their shame from the view of man?

This sin is so nasty and filthy, that whatever swinish pleasure is found in
the commission of it, usually those that are guilty (unless the brow be brass)
are ashamed that it should be known: the holy and jealous eye of God has seen
them in their filthiness; their secret sins are set in the light of his
countenance, which above all should make them ashamed; Whoremongers and
Adulterers God will judge, Heb. 13. 4. which should make them afraid.

I have heard of Smithfield haunts, and Moorefield walks, whither there has
been too great a resort from the City under the shadow of the wings of the
night, about these deeds of darkness; the words and signs which such lewd
persons have used to signify their minds one to another I am unacquainted
withal: the many Whorehouses, under the name of Alehouses about London, by
report have had too many customers: and if the Constables had been as zealous
at other times, as they were when the strict Press was in the City to disturb
those Conventicles, they might possibly have found more of that Coat, and Tribe
who should have given better example.

If there have not been public Stews in London as in other Cities in the
World; yet have not some made their own houses little better, some men bringing
in their whores in little better than public view? and of the other Sex some
by the open wear of naked breasts, and their light attire and carriage, have
enticed the eye and courtship, and after, basely prostituted their bodies to
the lusts of filthy Ruffians. O the boiling, burning lusts that have been in
London! O the wanton eyes and looks! the speculative uncleanness, and secret
self-pollutions! the obscene and filthy speeches! the toying and lustful
dalliances! and the gross actual uncleann^ss which God has been witness to
every day in London! This sin of uncleanness does debase the spirit made at
first after Gods own image; defiles both soul and body, which should be the
Temple of the Holy Ghost; and renders men unfit for communion with an holy God,
who is of such pure eyes that he cannot approve of the least iniquity; much
less of this, which is so gross; and not only so but does exceedingly provoke
him unto anger and jealousy.

This may be one sin that has brought down such fearful judgments upon the
City; we read of twenty and four thousand men that fell in one day by the
Plague, for the sin of fornication, Number. 15. 9. and have not many thousand
inhabitants and habitations of London fallen for this sin? It is said of the
Israelites, Hos. 7. 6. they have made ready their heart like an Oven, while
they lie in wait, their Baker sleeps all night; in the morning it burns as
a flaming fire. Have not the hearts of many in London been like an Oven for
lust, and themselves like Bakers putting fuel into it, and stirring it up; and
if whilst they have lain in wait, and have not had present opportunity for
satisfaction of their lusts; they have seemed to be asleep; yet no sooner has
the Morning light of a fit occasion offered it self to their adulterous eyes,
but their adulterous hearts have burned within them, and broken forth into a
flaming fire, in the actual commission of the sin.

And has this been the practice only of the Court, and of Westminster side?
has not the cursed Leaven of this common sin of the times, spread it self also
in the City? Therefore the Lord also has made ready his wrath as in an hot
Oven; and though like a Baker he has seemed to sleep while he lay in wait, and
delayed to execute his judgments; yet in the Morning of his great provocation by
this and other sins, his anger has broke forth like a flaming fire, from
whence that fire has been kindled which has burnt the greatest part of London
down to the ground, Ier. 5. 8, 9. When the Israelites were like fed horses in
the morning, every one neighing after his neighbors Wife; The Lord speaks to
them in his wrath, Shall not I visit for these things? shall not my soul be
avenged on such a Nation as this?

15. A fifteenth sin of London is Drunkenness; This sin has been more visible
and apparent; I believe that scarcely any Nation under Heaven has
proportionably more Taverns and Alehouses than England, and no place in England
so many as London, and its adjacent parts: and of all the many thousands of
these houses I believe there has been scarce any but could give many instances
of this sin. Besides the many private houses where this sin has been
practiced. How have men risen early in the morning to follow strong drink, and
continued unto night, till wine inflamed them? Isa. 5. 11. Come ye say they,
and I will fetch wine, and we will fill our selves with strong drink; and to
morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant, Isa. 56. 12. The corners
and beds full of vomit, the reelings about the streets, the contentions and
wranglings, the wounds without cause, the redness of the eyes, and such like
have been to evident a demonstration, of men's tarrying too long at the Wine,
and distempering themselves with excessive drinking, Prove. 23. 29, 30. To be
overtaken with drunkenness is a great sin, which makes men more brutish than
their very Horses, who will not exceed their measure in drinking, except they
be forced to it by Barnacles: and if none in the City had yielded to receive
the drench of a cup beyond the measure without Barnacles upon their noses, I
suppose that with their horses, they would have been more sober; and hereby
prevented many distempers of body, and worse distempers of mind, and which is
worst of all, much dishonor of God, as well as of themselves, which excess in
this kind has been the cause of. But for men to follow after this sin, and
make it their trade and common practice; to delight in it, and seek for their
God and chief happiness, in a cup of Wine, or Ale, and to grow men of might in
drinking; to exceed the bounds by many degrees without reeling, to entice
others to it, yea to force them to drink healths (that ungodly practice) which
would not in the least promote another health, but was likely to destroy their
own, through the excess which such practices do introduce; to take pleasure in
drinking down others under their feet; and after to glory in their shame and
wickedness; this is a sin that does so far exceed brutish, that it becomes
devilish, and does highly provoke the Lord to pour forth his fury like water
upon the places where such sins are committed.

And has not London been guilty of this sin of drunkenness with the
aggravations of it? Have not some of Londons Magistrates been guilty, who
should have punished this sin, and too many Ministers, who should have reproved
it both by word and example of sobriety? And for such to be seen drunk and
reeling in the streets, was very shameful, and a great provocation. Have not
the late judgments in some sort pointed out this sin? the dizziness of head,
and reeling of persons that have been smitten with the Plague; the flaming of
the heart of the City, and reeling of the houses, and tumbling of them to the
ground by the fire, methinks were a reproof of the dizziness and reelings,
about the streets and houses, of such persons as had inflamed and distempered
themselves with excessive drinking.

16. A sixteenth sin of London is perverting of judgment. This is a
God-provoking sin: when none calls for justice, nor any pleads for truth;
when men make to themselves crooked paths, and there is no judgment in their
goings; yea when judgment is turned away backward, and justice stands afarr
off, and truth is fallen in the streets, and equity cannot enter; when truth
fails, and he that departs from evil, makes himself a prey, etc. as the
Prophet speaks, Isa. 59. When Magigistrates are lovers of gifts, and followers
after rewards; when they judge not the fatherless, neither does the cause of
the widow come unto them; then the Lord cries Ah! I will ease me of mine
adversaries, and aveuge me of mine enemies, Isaiah 1. 23, 24. I cannot charge
London deeply with this sin; not having been my self present much in their
Courts of Judicature; and I would hope that justice has taken place here, as
much as in most Cities in the world: but when I read what the Lord says
concerning Jerusalem, Jer. 5. 1. Run ye too and fro through the streets of
Jerusalem, and see now and know, and seek in the broad places thereof if ye can
find a man, if there be any that executes judgment, that seeks the truth,
and I will pardon it: and when withal I consider the dreadful judgments of
God upon the City of London, whereby the glory of the Magistracy and government
of the City is so much stained; I would submit it to enquiry whether there has
not been a failure and perverting of judgment in the City? whether bribes and
rewards have not blinded the eyes, and the edge of the Law has not been turned
against well doers, instead of evil doers? whether the Fatherless and the
Widow have not been sent weeping to their heavenly Father to complain of
injustice? It is not a time to cover faults but to confess and leave them;
least unavoidable ruin come upon us when it will be too late.

17. A seventeenth sin of London is Covetousness. How universally has this sin
reigned in the City? so that it may almost be said of London, as it was of
Jerusalem, Jer. 6. 13. From the least of them even unto the greatest of them
every one is given to covetousness. Those who have been free from gluttony,
drunkenness, adultery, and the like expensive sins; have on the other hand
addicted themselves to the sin of covetousness. I do not charge all, but oh how
almost universal has this sin among tradesmen been? which has evidenced it
self both in their getting and keeping riches.

1. In getting: what eager desires after the world, and their obtaining an
estate by their trades? What studies and consultations, what wracking the
brains, and torturing the wits, to find out the best way of thriving in the
world? what earnest prosecutions have there been, and laborious endeavors,
rising up early, and sitting up late, and wearying the body, and the mind all
the day, eating the bread of carefulness, and mingling the drink with
sollicitousness, crouding up the whole time with worldly business, so that
their own health has been disregarded, as well as the worship of God neglected
in the families of these worldlings; and all to scrape a little worldly riches
together which some have mist of, notwithstanding all their endeavors: and if
they have obtained, yet they have remained more poor in contentment, than when
they were more poor in their estates? for as their estates have increased, so
their desires have increased and been farther off from satisfaction; as they
have enlarged their shops and trades; and wealth has flowed in upon them; so
they have enlarged their desires like Hell, and like the Grave have never said
It is enough: when they have added bag to bag, and house to house, the more
cares, and fears, and sometimes piercing sorrows have accompanied their gains;
but far have they been from finding the contentment and comfort in their riches
that they looked for.

2. This covetousness has appeared in keeping what they have gotten: keeping I
say, for covetous persons have had little heart to spend though in necessary
uses what they have scraped together: they have had wealth, but the use of it
they have not had; it has been to them like a treasure in a chest of which
they had lost the key; or like another man's money in their keeping, which they
must not meddle withal. Whatever abundance they have had in the bag, and in
the coffer, their families have been in want; the table has been penurious;
the back and belly have been pinched; they have lived at a meaner rate than
those that have been of a meaner degree. The poor might starve at their doors,
no pity toward others in want and misery, and the least pity toward
themselves: whilst they have saved, for fear least afterward they should
want; they have all along wanted, whilst they have been saving; and it may be
at last they have lost what they have been keeping, to the unexpressible grief,
and it may be breaking of their hearts, which have been so set upon these
things.

This sin of covetousness in some has had deeper rooting, in most has had too
much footing: and in all has been very heinous and abominable before God. This
sin is termed Idolatry in Scripture, and the covetous are stigmatized with the
name of Idolaters, Col. 3. 5. Ephesians. 5. 5. It is heart idolatry forbidden in
the first commandment. That thing we make a God to our selves, which we chiefly
affect: if it be the world, then we make the world our God; which is
inconsistent with the true love of God the Father the only true God. 1 John 2.
15. Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world, if any man
love the world, the love of the father is not in him. This sin of covetousness
is hateful to God and provokes his wrath, Isa. 57. 17. for the iniquity of his
covetousness was I wroth and smote him. Has not God smitten London with the
plague and fire, among other iniquities, for this iniquity of Covetousness?
When London was eagerly pursuing after the World, and all minding and seeking
their own Interest, without any regard to the Interest of Gods glory and
Kingdom, or care of their soul-interest and salvation, which their worldly
business would not allow time for; did not the Lord send a Plague to put a stop
to their Trade; and gave them time to seek him, and to make their peace with
him in their retirements, which they could not, or rather would not find
before? And when they returned with more eagerness to their Trades, after the
Plague was a little over, that they might fetch up if they could what they had
missed by that intermission; did not the Lord send a Fire to consume much of
that which they had set their hearts upon, and in large legible Letters write
Vanity upon this Idol, which so many had worshipped? Let London consider and
lay to heart this sin of Covetousness.

18. The Eighteenth sin of London is Extortion; thus Covetousness has
expressed it self more grossly in some. I shall not here discourse concerning
Usury; but the extorting Use, which some have taken of those who have been in
want; the taking Use upon Use, and grinding the faces of the Poor in their
distress, no doubt is a great sin, and very offensive to God. How many
Extortioners have there been in London, who have enriched themselves by
impoverishing of others; who panting after the dust of the Earth, on the head
of the Poor, have lent Money to them, not for their help, but to catch them at
an advantage, that so without mercy they might catch away all that they had,
not leaving them so much as a Bed to ly on? Thus some have been like Lions for
Cruelty, and like Evening Wolves unt the poor, tearing their flesh from their
bones, and reserving their very bones to gnaw in the morning, as the Prophet
speaks, Zeph. 3. 3. This sin of Extortion was one of the abominations reckoned
up by the Prophet Ezekiel, for which God was so highly offended with Jerusalem,
chap. 22. 12. Thou have taken Usury and increase, and have greedily gained of
thy Neighbor by Extortion; and have forgotten me; for this and other sins
there mentioned, it is said v. 3. Therefore have I poured out my indignation
upon them; I have consumed them with the fire of my Wrath. Unto this sin of
Extortion I may add several other ways that many in the City have had of
getting Estates, which some may dispute for the lawfulness of, and because so
common and gainful, the sin is little heeded; but when the Lord has been
contending with the whole City, and has inflicted a general stroke upon
Tradesmen, yea one stroke upon another, and has trodden their Trade under his
feet, as seeming to be offended with something therein; methinks they should be
awakened, and open their eyes, and impartially search, and labor to find out
whatever it is that does offend him, whatever seeming disadvantage may come to
them thereby. And if they will not hearken, God can take away the remainder, as
he has done a great part, and so force them to a sense of their sin.

One sinful way of getting Estates, and I am persuaded displeasing to God, is
engrossing and monopolizing of Commodities, which many in London have done,
that having all the Commodities of that kind in their hands, they might make
their own Market, and set their own price upon them; which if they sold as
cheap as otherwise they would do, or as others do when they are shared into
many hands (as possibly some may) I could not condemn the thing: But when by
getting the whole into their hands, they hoist and raise the Price far beyond
the just Value, which they necessitate people to give, and that only that they
might enrich themselves: this I dare confidently affirm to be unlawful; and my
reason is, because hereby they prefer a lesser good, before a greater; namely,
the enriching of themselves, and their Families, before the more public good
of making the Commodity more cheap to the Commonwealth. If they say, the injury
which they who buy of it, will sustain, (they being so many) will be very small
and inconsiderable; but the good they shall get hereby will be great, and they
may be in a better capacity of doing good; I answer, that none ought to do the
least injury for the reaping of the greatest advantage; It being absolutely
unlawful to do evil, that good may come thereby, and the damnation of such
will be just, Romans 3. 8. and consequently a greater injury will come to
themselves, than to those whom they injure; yea, the Injury will be greater,
than the Good, which they obtain. And as for their being in a capacity of doing
more good; I believe that such persons, if they do spend such gains, are more
forward to spend them on their lusts, than to lay them out in Charitable uses;
I have not heard that the greatest Monopolizers in London have been the most
charitable persons.

If I were more acquainted with the mysteries of Trades in the City, I fear, I
might find out more than one Mystery of Iniquity among them. If the Lord would
put into the hearts of Magistrates and Citizens, to look into Trades, and to
consider the equity that they bear, and take some course for rectifying abuses
in them; it might be one way to obtain a more favorable aspect from Heaven;
and the Lord might revive again the Trade of London, which now is dying and
sinking to the ground.

19. A Nineteenth sin of London is Lying. It is said of Nineveh, Nah. 3. 1.
that it was a City full of lies. O the Lies that have been in London! who can
reckon them? Lies in the streets, loud lies, which have been cried, false News
which we daily hear. Lies in the Chambers, secret lies, privy false tales which
are whispered in the ears: Lies in the Shop, trading lies; lies told in buying
and selling: Officious lies, which some tell to do their friends a kindness:
Mischievous lies, which some tell to do another an injury. We read of some,
that bend their tongue like their bow for lies, that will not speak the truth,
but teach their tongue to speak lies, Jer, 9. 3, 5. How many Liars have there
been in London? What age is free from this sin? The Children have learned to
lie, as soon as they have learned to speak. What house has been free? How have
Tradesmen been guilty of lying, which some account a necessary adjunct to their
Trade, without which they could not live? How many Servants have excused one
another and themselves when they have committed faults, with their lies? But of
all lies, mischievous lies have been the worst, which some have invented to do
an injury to their neighbor; such lies are more immediately begotten by the
Devil the Father of lies, and such liars are his most genuine Offspring. But
all lies in a sense are mischievous lies; they are mischievous to the party
that tells them; even the Officious liar cannot do so much kindness to his
Friend by his lie, as he does injury to himself: What! will a man stab himself
to do his Friend a courtesy? he that wounds his Conscience does worse; he that
gains in his Trade by his lie, loses more than he gains: A bag of Gold is not
to be compared with inward peace, and the favor of God (better than life)
which by this sin is lost. Surely, the Lord, being a God of Truth, is much
offended with this sin of lying. God delights, says Solomon, in them that deal
truly, but lying lips are an abomination to him, Prove. 12. 22. Lying was one
sin of Israel, for which their land did mourn, Hos. 14. 2, 3. And God
threatens to give all liars their part in that lake which burns with fire
and brimstone, Rev. 21. 8. Methinks that one place should make all liars to
tremble. And is not this one sin which some Professors also in the City have
been guilty of, to the shame of their Profession; for which the Lord has sent
the Fire to burn down the City, to awaken us to fly from this sin, as we would
escape the future Fire of Hell?

20. Another sin of London is couzening and defrauding: This sin has been the
product of Covetousness, and the companion of Lying, and how ordinary has it
been among Tradesmen, which many have been so accustomed to, that it has been
as easy to persuade the Ethiopian to change his skin, as to persuade them to
leave off their Couzening? This they have looked upon as even essential to their
Trade, at least as necessary to their Gains; yea some have pleaded a necessity
thereof, to get a Livelihood for themselves and Families. But there is no
necessity of any sin; Duties are necessary, but sins are never necessary, and
the gain which is gotten by sin, is like the gain of a Garment, which has the
Plague in it, which if it bring warmth for the present, quickly also may bring
sickness and death: and if Couzening brings gain into the purse, it presently
brings the Plague into the heart, and quickly will bring the pain and
punishment of Hell.

To defraud another in dealing, is but a more covert way of stealing, and it is
as lawful to take a Purse upon the Highway, as to take a Shilling by fraud in
the Shop; the difference lies only in the degree, the nature of the sin which
is Theft, is the same in both. And the Lord, as he has expressly forbidden this
sin, so he has threatened to avenge it, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6. That no man go beyond or
defraud his Brother (not only in a greater thing but) in any matter, because
the Lord is the avenger of all such. The several ways which Tradesmen have had
of defrauding, would be too large for me to speak of, neither am I so skillful
as to understand. The falsifying of Weights and Measures is gross, a sin
practiced among the Jews of old, which God threatens to punish them for, Hos.
12. 7. Ephraim is a merchant, the balances of deceit are in his hand. And both
their sin and Gods anger are set forth, Mic. 6. 10, 11, 12, 13. Are there yet
the treasures of wickedness in the houses of the wicked, and the scant measure
which is abominable? shall I count them pure with the wicked balances, and
with the bag of deceitful weights? For the rich men thereof are full of
violence, and the Inhabitants thereof have spoken lies, and their tongue is
deceitful in their mouth: Therefore also will I make thee sick in smiting
thee, in making thee desolate, because of thy sins. And was it not thus with
London? Did they not falsify Weights and Measures, and falsify Commodities,
and speak falsely concerning the price of them, and take unconscionable gains,
and yet profess kind usage of their Customers, whom they did most exact upon?
But if I could, I should not open the cunning ways which some have found out,
of defrauding and overreaching, least any should learn, and be enticed to
practice the sin by the very reproof of it, as I have heard some have done.

Now such persons, who have gotten their wealth by defrauding and overreaching
their brethren, bring themselves into such a snare of the Devil, that very few
ever get out, but are dragged by him thereby into hell; because it is not bare
grieving for this sin, which is necessary to the obtaining of a pardon; but
restitution is necessary; they must refund, they must restore, either to the
parties themselves, or to the poor, what they have gotten wrongfully, if they
be able; if not, as much as they have, otherwise they cannot be saved. No
salvation came to Zacheus till he was resolved upon restitution of what he had
wrongfully gained, Luke 19. 8, 9. God smites his hand at dishonest gain, Ezekiel.
21. 13. and this is one sin which I believe God has smitten London for.

21. The one and twentyeth sin of London is Prodigality and Profuse spending;
Some have spared too much through covetousness, others have spent too much
through prodigality. Liberality is a great virtue; and bountiful charity an
excellent grace, which London has not been without; but prodigality is a great
sin. Thus some have spent above their degree, lavishing out their Estates on
their tables, on their houses, on their clothes; but the worst prodigality
has been, in that which men have lavished out in the satisfaction of their
lusts, in drunkenness, gaming, whoring, and the like; and especially those, who
have spent profusely that which has been none of their own, but what they have
taken up on credit of others; have been most grossly guilty of this sin.

And unto this sin of prodigality and profuseness, I may refer the sin of
excessive mirth and jollity, which has been in London, there is an harmless
mirth which is lawful; and there is a spiritual cheerfulness, which is the
duty of Christians: though in times of great sin and affliction of Gods people,
sackcloth and mourning does become Christians, and some expressions of joy
which are more carnal, should be much forborne: But I am speaking of the mirth
of such, who have had the least ground for mirth of any, namely the wicked,
unto whom no peace nor joy in that estate does belong: for Them to be so
excessively merry and Jovial, and frolic, expressing it in their profane,
obscene, and scurrilous jesting; in their music, singing, and dancing; in
their ranting, roaring, and carousing; in many wastfull and profuse ways of
spending; when the Church is in sackcloth, and lies a bleeding; as too many in
London have done; surely God has been offended with this, and has been
provoked to send down his judgments, to alter the cheer of London, and hereby
to put them into mourning, which they were so averse unto.

Had they foreseen the Plague, and how many of them should have fallen by it,
surely it would have damped their mirth; had they foreseen the burning of the
City of London; and that their houses should have fallen by the fire; surely
their laughter would have been turned into heaviness. These judgments they
could not foresee; but future Judgment far more dreadful, they might have
foreseen, which should have made an impression of sorrow upon them if possibly
by repentance they might avoid and escape it. Be afflicted, and mourn, and
weep, let your laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy into heaviness,
Jam. 4. 9. Such mourning if for sin might be a means to prevent future
miseries, and eternal woe and weeping; others they have reason to mourn for
those miseries which will come upon them. Go to now ye rich men, weep and howl,
for the miseries that shall come upon you, Jam. 5. 1. but for profane wicked
persons to sing, and rejoice just upon the brink of the grave and hell, is very
unreasonable and an aggravation of their other sins.

22. The twenty second sin of London is envying. And this sin was to be found
not only in Women, which envied others that exceeded them, in beauty of body,
in clothes, and dressing, and such like toys; but also in men, who envied them
who were of the same trade, which had better houses and shops, more custom and
wealth than themselves, as Hesiod (...):
(...).


Yea this envying was to be found among many Ministers, who envied others that
had better parts, and more learning, greater applause, and more auditors than
themselves. There was a spirit among us which lusted to envy, Jam. 4. 5. which
besides the great torment that it brings to the spirit where it reigns, is a
very great provocation to the Lord.

23. The twenty third sin of London is slandering and backbiting, which has
been the consequent of the former. The ninth commandment has been exceedingly
broken in London, especially in a private way of bearing false witness against
the neighbor, and wounding his reputation by a slanderous tongue: some
inventing lies, and raising slanders, which they have in their consciences
known to be false; others taking up slanders, readily believing them without
any just proof. This sin you have set forth with a caution to take heed of such
persons, Ier. 9. 4, 5. London has been full of backbiters and tale-bearers,
and too many professors have been guilty of this sin: few have entertained
backbiters with an angry countenance, which as the wind drives away rain,
would have driven them out of sight. I might here add the hatred of one another
that has been in London (much through slanders) the emulation that has risen
from hatred; the wrath that has risen from emulation; and the wrath of God
which has arisen from these and other works of the flesh, spoken of, Gal. 5.
19, 20.

24. The twentyfourth sin of London is murmuring: and that not only in want,
and under losses and crosses but also in fullness and plenty. Many Farmers in
the Country have murmured at the plenty and cheapness of Corn; many tradesmen
in the City have murmured at the plenty of the commodities which they have
dealt in; because however such plenty is a public and unspeakable mercy, yet
they have had the less private advantage which has been chiefly regarded by
them. Yea some in their murmuring have wished for a Plague, that the survivers
might have the better trade; And I have heard that a Fire also has been wished
for, to take off the plenty of such commodities, that the remainder might bear
the higher rate. Is it a wonder then if God have sent Plague and Fire which
some have called for by such murmuring speeches? The Israelites in the
Wilderness were plagued for their murmuring; and the murmuring company of
Corah, that were not swallowed up with him were consumed by a fire from Heaven.

25. The twenty fifth and last sin of London, which I shall speak of, is Carnal
security; another of Sodoms sins. It is said of the Sodomites, Luke 17. 28, 29.
In the days of Lot, they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they
planted, they builded: But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained
fire and brimstone from Heaven, and destroyed them all. When London had
provoked God so highly by so many sins, yet how secure were they before his
judgments broke forth upon them, they eat and drank, they bought and sold,
etc. They sat at ease, and put far from them the evil day, as Amos 6. they
were still, and at rest, little expecting such changes as have come upon them,
and taking little care to prevent them: they were secure and trusted in arms of
flesh, broken reeds which have always failed. And I might add here as a cause
of the security of some, the presumptuous confidences of future events which
belong only to God to foreknow; which some have taken upon them so absolutely
to determine as if they had looked into the book of Gods decrees, or had an
infallible revelation from him of what should come to pass. O the good days
that some have looked for upon the presumption of what they had no ground for*
Great expectations many had of the Fall of Antichrist and Babylon in the year
1666. and other events, limiting times, which God has not clearly revealed,
which is an entrenching upon Gods prerogative, and I believe a greater
provocation than such persons are aware of. This may be one reason why London
is fallen instead of Babylon, in this year of such expectation and presumption.

By this time it may be the Reader may be wearied with reading, as I am with
thinking and writing of Londons sins. But how has the Lord been wearied with
the bearing of them, how has he been pressed with the weight of them, as a
Cart is pressed that is full of Sheaves? Amos 2. 13. If when you have read of
Londons judgments, withal you consider Londons provocations, you must needs
acknowledge that God is righteous in that he has punished London no more than
they have deserved for these sins.

2. GOds Righteousness will further appear, if we consider that he has
punished London less than her iniquities deserved.

1. God might have punished London deservedly with more dreadful judgments
here; and that both in the same and another kind.

1. God might have deservedly punished London worse in the same kind,

1. In the judgment of the Plague; It was a dreadful Plague indeed; but God
could have made it more dreadful; where he shot one arrow, he might have shot
an hundred: he visited many families; he might have visited every family; and
swept every house with the beesome of destruction. Though so many fell, yet I
believe that five parts in six of the inhabitants of London were preserved; God
might have taken away the five parts, and have left but one alive: yea it might
have been said of London, as it was of Israel, Amos 5. 2, 3. The Virgin of
Israel is fallen, she shall rise no more; the City that went out by a thousand
shall leave an hundred. God might have made every hundred that dyed by the
Plague, a thousand; he might have sent out his arrows after all the inhabitants
of London, that were gone into the Country; and smitten them wheresoever he
found them: or he might have met with them upon their return home, and given
commission to Death to lay hold on them as soon as they entered into their doors.
He might have depopulated the City of London by the Plague; so that every house
should have had dead Corpses lying, and none to bury them. He might have made
our Plague wonderful, fearful, and of long continuance.

We that have survived so great a mortality, have reason to say, that
deservedly it might have been greater; that we deserved as much or more to
fall, for our more heinous sins, than thousands that are gone down into the
pit, surely it is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed; he was
merciful in sparing of us; he would have been righteous if he had destroyed us.

Think with your selves, you that are alive, and remain escaped; how fearful
would the Plague have been, if it had come home to your houses; you were afraid
to hear of others houses visited and shut up; what would you have been, if it
had entered your doors? you were afraid when others were struck with the
disease; what would you have been, if you had been struck your selves? Sinners,
what would you have done if the arrow had pierced through your Livers, if under
such guilt and wrath you had been smitten? when you had such a Plague of sin in
your hearts, if you should have had the Plague of Pestilence in your bodies; if
when you were so rotten and corrupt, and defiled inwardly, you should have had
boyls, and blanes, and running sores outwardly; if when conscience was so
filled with guilt; your bodies should have been filled with this disease; In a
word; If when you had the marks of Hell and damnation in your souls, you should
have had the marks of inevitable death in your bodies; Oh the dread that would
have seized upon you! The Judgment of the Plague might have been worse to you;
you might have spent above a year in Hell by this time among Devils and damned
Spirits; you might by this time have been inured to those torments which yet
you could not have endured, but must have endured for ever without any
possibility of deliverance for ever.

Many of you who have escaped, have your Families unbroken, when other whole
Families are swept away. Suppose thy dear Wife had fallen, or thy hopeful
Children had been nipt by death in the very bud, and your Families had been
maimed; the Judgment would have been much sorer on you. None can say but God
might have righteously punished London more severely by the Plague.

2. God might have punished London also more severely by the Fire. The greatest
part of the City is fallen, it might have been the whole: Most of the City
within the Walls is consumed; the flames might have issued forth at all the
Gates, and consumed all the Suburbs too: all the goods might have been burnt
with the houses, and all the Inhabitants with the Habitations.

The Fire, though it burned dreadfully, yet it began at one end; and came on so
slowly, that most of the Inhabitants of London had time to remove themselves,
and the choycest of their goods; some Livelihood was left, and Materials for a
future Trade.

Suppose the Fire had been so sudden, or had been kindled in so many places,
that there had been no possibility of removing any thing, except the persons
themselves. Suppose all the Silver, and Gold, and rich Plate of the City had
been melted by this Fire, that all the Wares and Merchandise, all the Garments,
Beds and Household goods had been turned into ashes; and many thousand Families,
that have been turned out of house had been turned out of all, and quite
bereaved of all their Substance, so that nothing had remained to them for
necessary use, this would have been very sore.

Alas! what would they have done? whether would they have gone for relief?
Would the Court have supplied them? Could the Country have helped and
maintained so many, when so much impoverished themselves, that in many places
they are hardly able to live? Could they have hoped for relief from foreign
Nations? Are not all the World almost our Enemies? Is Charity so warm abroad?
Alas! what would they have done? Must not many of them have pined away in their
wants, and starved under Hedges, for lack of suitable provisions. This would
have been dreadful indeed.

Or suppose they had lugg'd their Goods out of London from the Fire, and the
whole City had been burnt down with all the Suburbs, and no habitations left
standing hereabouts; what would they have done with their goods? where would
they have disposed of them? How could they any ways have continued their
Trades? Where could they have disposed of their persons? How could they have
lived this cold Winter Season? Could they have struck up Booths presently, fit
for themselves to abide in, which would have sheltred them from the injury of
the weather? where would they have had materials, when all was burnt?

Alas! what would they have done? must not their goods have been spoiled by
lying abroad? would not they themselves, who had been used to so much
tenderness, have quickly grown sick, and died in the Fields? would not
thousands have starved for cold? and what Provision could they have had for
food and other necessaries? Besides; would they not have been a prey to Thieves
and Cutthroats? Would not many of their Enemies, who laughed at the fall of
the City, have rejoiced much more, and taken advantage to come upon them in
their nakedness, and butchered them without mercy?

But, suppose the Fire that begun at one corner, had been kindled in every Gate
at the same time; when all the Inhabitants had been asleep in their Houses, and
they had been enclosed with flames, and no possibility of escape, how dreadful
would the Fire have been then? If when they awakened in the Morning they had
seen the smoke ascending round about them, and the Fire drawing near to them;
if both ends of a street had been on Fire together, and they in the midst, and
had heard with the roaring of the Fire, a greater roaring of the People that
were burning with the Houses; O the ruefull looks! Oh the horrible shrieks by
women and children! oh the dreadful amazement and perplexity which would have
been in such a place and case! To be burnt alive is dreadful; but think what
tortures would have been in the spirits of guilty sinners, who had not made
their peace with God, that had slept out the Harvest and day of Grace, that had
made no Provision for death and Eternity! The noise and roaring without, would
have been nothing to the lashes and tearings within them; the Fire in their
Houses would have been but small, in comparison of the fire in their
Consciences; and the flames of Hellfire, which if awakened, they would have
seen just before them.

This Judgment of the Fire might have been more dreadful than it was: Persons
are escaped; Goods and Wealth much saved; Houses standing to receive them;
Trade going on; God might have punished London more sorely in the same kind.

2. God might have punished London more severely in other kinds of Judgments.

1. He might have brought upon them, and upon the whole Land, the Sword of a
Foreign Enemy, as he did upon Jerusalem, and the land of Judea, for their sins,
which being so pathetically set forth by the Prophet Jeremy, 4. v. 16. to the
end, I shall represent to the eye.

A Voice declares from Dan, and publishes affliction from Mount Ephraim, make
ye mention to the Nations; behold, publish against Jerusalem, that Watchers
come from a far Country, and give out their voice against the Cities of Judah:
As Keepers of the Field they are against her round about, because she has been
rebellious against me, says the Lord. Thy way and thy doings have procured
these things unto thee; this is thy wickedness, because it is bitter, because
it reaches unto thine heart. My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at my very
heart, my heart makes a noise within me, I cannot hold my peace, because thou
have heard, O my soul, the sound of the Trumpet, the Alarm of War. Destruction
upon destruction is cried, for the whole land is spoiled, and my curtains in a
moment. How long shall I see the Standard, and hear the sound of the Trumpet; I
beheld, and all the Cities were broken down at the presence of the Lord, and by
his fierce anger; for thus has the Lord said, The whole land shall be
desolate; for this shall the land mourn, and the Heavens above be black. The
whole City shall flee for the noise of the Horsemen and the Bowmen, they shall
go into the Thickets, and climb up upon the Rocks; every City shall be
forsaken, and not a man dwell therein; And when thou art spoiled, what will thou do? though thou cloathest thy self with Crimson, though thou deckest thy
self with Ornaments of Gold, though thou rentest thy face with Painting; in
vain shall thou make thy self fair; thy lovers shall despise thee, they will
seek thy life: for I have heard a voice, as of a woman in travel, and the
anguish as of her that brings forth her first child; the voice of the
daughter of Zion, that bewaileth her self; that spreads forth her hands,
saying, Woe is me now, for my soul is wearied because of murderers. This might
have been the Judgment, and these the Complaints of London and England; which
would have been worse than Plague or Fire. The Plague reached many, but the
Sword might have reached all; the Fire devoured Houses, but the Sword might
have devoured the Inhabitants. The Lord might have brought a Foreign Sword, and
open Invasion; or he might have given up London to a more private sudden
Butchery and Massacre by the hands of cruel Papists, as was feared; which would
have been more dreadful than the Massacre of the Protestants by the Papists in
Paris; because our numbers do so far exceed those which were in that City.

If bloody Papists had come into our Houses in the dead of the Night, with such
kind of Knives in their hands as were found after the Fire in Barrels; and
having set Watch at every Streets end, had suffered none to escape, but cruelly
slaughtered the Husband with the Wife, the Parents and the Children together,
ripping up women with Child, and not sparing either the Silver hair, or the
Sucking Babe; If there had been a cry at midnight, They are come; but no
possibility of flying from them, or making resistance against them; if instead
of heaps of Stones and Bricks in the top of every street, there had been heaps
of dead Bodies, and the Kennels had been made to run down with gore-blood; sure
this Judgment would have been more dreadful than the Plague or Fire, which
have been among us.

2. God might have punished London with Famine, which is a greater Judgment
than the Plague or Sword: If the Lord had broken the whole staff of bread, and
cut off all provisions of food from the many thousand souls that lived in and
about the City; how dreadful would this have been! If a famine had been so sore
in London; that people should have been forced to eat one another and their own
flesh, as it was in Samaria and Jerusalem; If instead of houses in London, God
should have made the people as fuel of the Fire in this judgment, as is
threatened, Esa. 9. 19, 20. Through the wrath of the Lord of Hosts is the Land
darkened; and the people shall be as the fuel of the fire, no man shall spare
his brother; and he shall snatch on his right hand and be hungry; and he shall
eat on the left hand, and not be satisfied; they shall eat every man the flesh
of his own arms: If London had been forced through hunger to eat the flesh of
their own arms, and the fruit of their own bodies, Oh what a dismal face would
there have been in the City! and how would death have been chosen rather than
life; in the by-us-unconceivable pain of gnawing hunger! Those which dye by the
Plague or are slain by the sword, would be counted happy in comparison with
them that live under such a judgment.

Lastly, The righteousness of God in the judgments he has inflicted on
London, appears; in that he might instead of Plague and fire on earth have
punished them with the plagues and fire of hell; which such sins as we have
reckoned up have abundantly deserved. Tire and Sidon now in Hell; Sodom and
Gomorrah under the vengeance of eternal fire, were not guilty of such sins as
London was guilty of.

And what are body plagues here, in comparison of soul plagues hereafter? what
is a fire that burns down a City, in comparison with the fire of hell, which
shall burn the damned, and never be quenched.

God has punished London no more than her iniquities have deserved; God has
punished London less than her iniquities have deserved, therefore in speaking
most terribly, he has answered most righteously.

SECT. 8.
3. COncerning the design of these judgments. What does God mean by this
terrible voice? by speaking such terrible things in the City of London? The
Lord has not only spoken but cried and shouted, he has lifted up his voice
like a Trumpet; and his voice has not been inarticulate and insignificant; but
has had a meaning; and they that have an ear to hear, may understand; for as
the voice of the Lord has cried in the City, so the voice of the Lord has
cried to the City, Mic. 6. 9. The Lords voice cries unto the City, The man of
Wisdom shall see thy name, hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it. Some
take notice of the judgments themselves, and the effects of them upon
themselves and families; They discourse of the Plague, and how many dyed
thereby, that they have lost such a relation, such a friend or neighbor was
visited and dyed quickly; They discourse of the Fire, where it began, how it
increased and prevailed, what day such a street fell, and where their houses
were consumed, what they lost, and how much they saved: And it may be, some
speak of the hands of men, that were suspected to enkindle and carry it on; but
few discourse of the hand of God which sent both Plague and Fire, and what he
means by such strange and dreadful judgments: But the man of wisdom, such as
are wise do consider that these judgments spring not out of the dust, but were
sent down from Heaven, They see Gods Name, and Gods hand that has been
stretched forth upon London. They know that both Plague and Fire have had their
commission from the God of Heaven; otherwise they could not have wrought with
such force and power.

They see Gods Name, that is, the glorious attributes of his name displayed.
God proclaimed his Name before Moses when he caused his goodness to pass before
him; and discovered himself to be the Lord, the Lord God gracious and merciful,
slow to anger, abundant in lovingkindness, goodness and truth, Exodus 34. 6. And
God has proclaimed his Name before London, in causing his judgments to come
upon the City; and has declared himself to be the Lord, the Lord God Holy and
Jealous, a God that can be angry when much provoked, and yet righteous in the
severest judgments which he does inflict. A man of wisdom may see Gods Name in
Londons judgments, and as he may see power and righteousness in Gods name; so
he may see grace and goodness in the name of God, which has passed before the
City; he may see and know that God has a gracious meaning and design of good
to London in these judgments; he may see Gods name, and hear Gods voice, and
what it is that he speaks by the rod.

On that London were thus wise! that they would open their eyes and see Gods
Name! Gods hand so just and righteous; as also open their ears, and hear Gods
voice, and understand Gods design so gracious, and so much for their good! O
that God would open the ears of London, and bend them to the discipline of his
judgments! that with the loss of friends and relations by the Plague, and of
houses and goods by the Fire; they may not lose the good of these Judgments
too, though of another kind, yet of far greater value, which God intends them.

The enquiry then is, What means the Lord by the Plague, and by the Fire in
the City? what does he call for by this terrible voice? and look for in London,
that these judgments may turn to their advantage?

The duties which God expects from London after such desolations by the Plague
and Fire, are these.

1. God expects that London should awake. London has been asleep; both the
foolish and the wise Virgins have been asleep; and when such a voice has come
down in these judgments, which have been revealed from Heaven, crying in the
midnight of their carnal security, Behold, the great God is come forth from his
place, and is entered into London in fury; surely all should awake and arise,
and prepare to meet him, seeing none can flee from him. God has seemed to be
asleep, while he exercised so much patience toward London; his arm slept in
his bosom; but now the Lord has been awakened with the loud cry of England
and Londons sins; his arm has awaked, and put on strength and vengeance.

Awake! then O London awake! open thine eyes, draw thy curtains; come forth of
thy bed; look out of thy windows; Apparitions! Apparitions! strange sights to
be seen; Behold! Heaven is opened, and God is come down upon earth; clothed
with garments of lightning: God is come down in his Majesty, and looks upon
London with a terrible countenance: Behold the amazing terror of God in the
late strange and prodigious Judgments. What! do thou not see him? surely
thou art fast asleep still, thine eyes are closed, the vail is before them.

Awake! London Awake! open thine ears, Hark! Oh the Trumpet that has been
sounding from Heaven over the City exceeding loud! Oh the Thundrings of the
terrible voice of the Angry God! the voice of the Lord has been powerful and
very dreadful: What! can thou sleep under such a noise? surely thou art dead
asleep, dead in sin and security. What will awaken thee, if these Judgments do
not awaken thee? If a shrill and loud trumpet do not pierce thine ears, will
soft music enter? if the sound of Cannons be not heard, can any expect that
Pistols should? It when the Lion roareth in thine ears thou can sleep still,
will soft whispers awaken thee? What will awaken thee if the loud voice of
these judgments do not awaken thee? The Lord called upon thee before by his
Ministers, by his mercies: now he has shouted in thine ears by his Judgments.

Awake! London Awake! Thou have been rouzed out of thine habitation; methinks
thou should be rouzed out of thy security: What! sleep when dying! dying by
the plague, and tumbling into the grave! what sleep when burning! burning by
the fire, and tumbling into desolation! What! sleep in a storm! when winds are
blowing, and waves roaring, sea entering, and ship sinking! What meanest thou O
sleeper! could the Heathen Ship-master say, in such a case, unto Jonah, chap.
1. 5, 6. when he lay fast asleep in the sides of the ship: Arise, call upon thy
God; if God will think upon us that we perish not. And may not I say, What
meanest thou O sleepy London; have thou not perceived the storm that has
beaten so fiercely on thy head? do thou not perceive that thy ship is
shattered and broken? and the Sea is coming in amain, and thou art in danger of
sinking, and that quickly, unless some speedy course be taken for prevention?
And yet can thou sleep still? Awake! arise! call upon thy God, if so be he
will think upon us, that we perish not.

God calls upon sleepy sinners to awake. Suppose you were under the power of
cruel enemies, that had killed your husbands, or wives, or dear children and
friends; and you knew not how soon they might fall upon you, and cut your
throats; could you sleep securely in the same house with such persons?

You are under the power of Tyrannical lusts, which are far worse enemies; you
are under the reigning power of sin, which has brought the Plague into the
City; and whereby some of you have been deprived of these relations; and you
know not how soon sin may bring death upon your selves, not only the first, but
the second death; not only temporal, but eternal death; and deprive you not
only of life, but happiness, and all hopes of the least share in it for ever:
And yet can you sleep securely with sin in your hearts? with such an enemy,
with such a viper in your bosoms?

When the Fire was in London I believe few of you could take much sleep for
diverse nights together; when the Fire was burning in your streets, and burning
down your houses, you could not sleep in your houses least the Fire should have
burned your persons too: And, when the Fire of lust is within you, and burning
within you; when the fire of Gods anger is kindled above you, and burning over
you; and the fire of hell so dreadful and unextinguishable is burning beneath
you; and you are hanging over the burning lake by a twine thread, which ere long
will untwine of it self; and may ere you are aware, and suddenly be cut or
snapt asunder, and then you must drop into the midst of flames; can you sleep
under the guilt and power of sin, when you are in such danger?

Awake! sinners awake! God does not burn you presently, but warns you first; he
burns your houses, that you might awake, and escape a more dreadful fire. Awake!
sinners, when will you awake! how often, how long, how loud shall God call upon
you, before you will arise? Ephesians. 5. 14. Awake thou that sleep, and arise
from the dead, and Jesus Christ shall give thee life.

A little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to rest. What!
can you sleep any longer now? Was not this your tone long ago, when you were
under the calls of the Word? and is it the same under the Rod too? What will
awaken you? or when do you think you shall be awakened, if still you lie down
in the Bed of security, and love to slumber upon the lap of pleasure, and after
a little startle sleep faster than before?

Ministers have preached, and you have slept under their Sermons; but when God
has preached, methinks you should awake. When Paul preached to Felix a Sermon
of Judgment, Felix trembled. God has preached One, nay Two Sermons of
Judgment; and that more feelingly than Paul could; methinks you should awake,
and not drop asleep so soon, because God gives you a little respite to learn
his Sermon, before he preach the third Sermon, which may be your last and
ruining Sermon. If you do not awake by the sound of his Judgments before you,
you shall awake by the sense of his Judgments upon you: If the Plague and Fire
of London do not awaken you, you shall be awakened by the plagues and fire of
Hell, which you shall see and feel, but not be able to flee from, as here you
might do, if presently awakened.

God calls upon sleepy Sinners to awake, and God calls upon drowsy Saints to
awake; and was there not great need? were not the Ionahs gone down into the
sides of the Ship and lying on Pillows? Were not the wise Virgins turning
foolish, sleeping with the rest, untrimm'd and undressed? Had there not of late
a strange torpour and benummedness seized upon the spirits of Gods own people?
Was not the ancient vigor and activity, which once they had in the ways and
Worship of God, much abated and decayed before these Judgments came upon
London?

Awake then ye drowsy Saints, awake! put on your Garments, which you have laid
aside to the discovery of your Nakedness; shake your selves from the dust,
which has covered and sullied your faces, and loosen the bands of sleep. God
has been thundering, your Father has been angry, and displeased with you as
well as with others: Your God has spoken in his Jealousy, and he has spoken
in his fury; he has spoken with a loud voice in righteousness and in Judgment.

Awake! ye Children, your Father is stirring, and knocking, and calling, yea he
has entered your Chamber, and smitten you on this side and that; and yet will
you not arise? He has been crying in your Ears; now he is looking and
harkening whether you will cry in His, and what you will say and do for the
prevention of the ruin of England, which he seems to be threatening. It is high
time to awake out of sleep, for now is the utter destruction of the City and
Nation nearer it may be than you believe or imagine. Awake then, put off your
Clothes of night and darkness, in which you have been sleeping, and put on your
Garments of light. Cloth your selves with humility, and begirt you with all
your graces, and get you to Gods knee, hang about his arm; put your selves in
the breach; It may be the Lord may think upon us, that we perish not.

2. The Lord does now after his speaking by terrible things, expect that London
should stand in awe of him. Gods Judgments made this Impression upon David,
Psalm. 119. 120. My flesh trembles for fear of Thee, and I am afraid of thy
judgments. And see how the Prophet Habakkuk behaved himself, when God spoke
with a terrible Voice, chap. 3. 2, etc. O Lord, I have heard thy speech and was
afraid; when God came down from Teman, the Holy One from Mount Paran, Selah;
when the Pestilence went before him, and burning Coals went forth at his feet;
when the Nations were drove asunder, the everlasting Mountains were scattered,
and the perpetual hills did bow; when the Tents of Cushan were in affliction,
and the Curtains of the land of Midian did tremble: when God did ride upon
Horses, and his Bow was made quite naked: when the Sun and Moon did stand still
in their habitations, at the light of his arrows that went forth, at the
shining of his glittering Spear: when God did march through the land in his
indignation, and walk through the Sea with his horses, and did wound the head
out of the house of the wicked, and did strike through habitations with his
staves: at this, the Prophet is afraid, his Belly trembled, his lips quivered
at the voice, rottenness entered into his bones, etc. And when God has come
down from Heaven, the Holy One from Mount Sion, Selah. When the Pestilence has
gone before him, and burning Coals at his feet, when the Lord drove London
asunder, scattered the Inhabitants, and made the stately buildings to bow and
fall, whose rearing up none can remember; when the Tents of London have been in
affliction, and the Curtains of the City have trembled: when Death has been
riding upon Horses, and his Bow has been made quite naked; when the Heavens
have been astonished at Gods Judgments, and the Sun and Moon have hid their
heads in their Habitations, at the shining of his glittering Spear: When the
Lord has marched through the City in his indignation, has wounded the heads
of so many wicked with his arrows, and struck through so many Habitations with
his staves: Oh how should London tremble and quiver, and stand in awe of this
glorious Majesty, at the voice of these terrible Judgments!

Read and apply what the Lord speaks by the Prophet Isaias, Chap. 33. 13, 14.
Hear ye that are far off, what I have done, and ye that are near, acknowledge
my might. The sinners of Sion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the
hypocrites; who among us shall dwell with devouring fire? who among us shall
inhabit everlasting burnings? v. 18. Thine heart shall meditate terror; where
is the Scribe? where is the receiver? where is he that counted the Towers?

Methinks the sinners now in London should be afraid, and fearfulness should
surprise the Hypocrites; when God has sent so many of their number into the
Everlasting burnings of Hell by the Plague; and by such a devouring Fire has
consumed so many Habitations.

Tremble ye Sinners at this, and be ye horribly afraid all ye workers of
iniquity! God has come down with a shout, the Lord with the sound of a
Trumpet: He has taken his weapons in his hand, and has appeared in London as
a furious Enemy: should not this make the sinners in the City to quake, and
strike a dread upon the spirits of the rebellious? When the Lord has spoken
thus, and done thus; because of our sins, should not London, yea all England,
hear and fear, and do no more so wickedly.

Because God was patient formerly, you presumed: because sentence against your
evil works was not speedily executed; Eccl. 9.
therefore your hearts were hardened and resolved in your evil ways. Because
the Lord kept silence, Psalm. 50.
you thought he was altogether such an one as your selves. You thought it may
be that he took no more notice of you, than you did of him; or that you had no
more reason to fear him, than he had to fear you. You thought it may be, that
God had forsaken the Earth; or had hidden his face, and should never see your
wickedness: And oh how bold have you been, how audacious and fearless in sin?
You were afraid to offend man though a Worm, and yet you have not been afraid
to offend God the King of the whole World. Men's Laws have kept you from some
sins, but the Laws of God have not put upon you the least restraint. You have
lived and sinned as if there were no God, or as if he had been so gentle, and
mild, and merciful, that you might do any thing to him, and he not be
displeased with you: or as if though he were displeased, yet his displeasure
were not to be regarded, and that he had no power to execute vengeance upon you.

But now Gods patience has in a great measure been turned into fury. Now
sinners you may perceive a little that God can be angry; and when his anger is
kindled but a little, if it does express it self so dreadfully; what dreadful
expressions will there be of it, when it breaks forth into an open flame? If
his anger be such in the day of some lighter, temporal Judgments; what will it
be in the day of the Revelation of the treasures of it, upon all the wicked, at
the appearance of Jesus Christ?

But Gods vengeance now in these Judgments should work your hearts to a fear
and awe of this righteous Judge, who has done such executions in the City; it
should bridle and stay you in that fearless course of sin, in which you were
rushing on as the Horse rusheth into the battle.

When Balaams Ass saw the Angel stand in the way with a drawn Sword, he was
afraid, and would not go forward, though spurred on, and beaten by his Master.
And when God stands in the way with his Sword of Judgment which has made such
slaughter already, and is lifted up again to strike you, methinks you should be
afraid, and turn back: It is the way to Hell that God stands in by his
Judgments; and will you break through all into those flames? Oh stand in awe,
and sin not, commune with your own hearts. Consider what has been doing in
London, and who has done these things. You have nearly escaped it may be with
your lives; Oh learn to fear the glorious and fearful Name of the Lord God in
these dreadful Judgments.

And as God does expect that the World and his Enemies should stand in awe of
him; so also much more that the righteous and his people should. Some it may be
when God gave them free access to him, and admitted unto familiarity with him,
and encouraged them to boldness and confidence, and strowed their path with
nothing but Mercy; it may be might abuse his goodness, and forget to mingle
faith and love with due reverence and respect; and began to be too saucy with
God, and peremptory, and did not consider their original and distance, and
forgot the severity which they deserved for sin. Therefore God appears in the
way of these Judgments with such terrible rebukes, that his own people might
be brought unto a due awe and fear of his Name; that if they love him, they may
fear him too; if they pray with boldness, they may pray also with reverence; if
they rejoice in his goodness, they may tremble also at his Judgments.

3. God does expect that London should now search and try their ways. When God
had punished Jerusalem with dreadful Judgments, in the Lamentation of which,
the Prophet Jeremiah does spend a Book, see what use and improvement he calls
upon the People to make hereof, Lam. 3. 40. Let us search and try our ways,
and turn again unto the Lord. This was the practice of David in the day of his
trouble, Psalm. 77. 6. I commune with mine own heart, and my spirit made
diligent search. It has been a day of Gods wrath in London, a day of trouble
and distress, a day of wasting and desolation, a day of darkness and
gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness, as it was in Jerusalem, Zeph.
1. 15. There have been dark and thick Clouds over London, which in part have
broken into dreadful storms and amazing Tempests of Gods anger expressed in
the late Judgments; and all have been the product of Londons sins, which may
yet produce far worse effects: London is then called upon with a loud voice, to
search and find out those sins which have been the troublers of the City. I
suppose that true Citizens would be forward to search after those persons that
had a hand in the first kindling and carrying on the Fire, which burned their
Habitations to the ground: give me leave, and I shall make a discovery of
Londons Incendiaries, how you may find the persons, how you may trace their
footsteps, what marks they bare, what their Names are, and where their abode;
and need I lead you far in the search? The sinners, the sinners of London did
kindle the Fire of London; it was sin which fired the first house, and sin was
like Oil poured upon the flames which put such fury unto them, that none could
withstand until the greatest part of the City was fallen and turned into
ashes: the Swearers, the Sabbath Breakers, the Adulterers, the Drunkards, the
Unrighteous, the Profane and the like sinners have been Londons Incendiaries,
and had a hand in pulling down this and other judgments upon the place where
they lived; and is it hard to find out these persons? are they gone far from
the place of their former abode? the skirts of London are remaining, and if you
turn up the skirts, or turn your eye under them, and look into the houses
standing about the City, may you not find many of these persons, these vile
sinners inhabiting, who are still blowing hard at the Fire of Gods anger, and
pulling hard with cords of vanity and sin, for further judgments? Search,
London search, and find out thine enemies, thy destroyers; have not thou
destroyed thy self? Search, and find out thy sins, which have brought such
mischiefs and ruins upon thee.

Sinners, enter into your closets, retire into your selves, take the candle of
the Lord, and look into your inner rooms, make a strict search into your
hearts, find out those filthy Lusts which lodge in dark corners, and bring them
forth to be slain; read over the old records of your lives, consult the
Register of your Consciences, revolve in your minds your former sins; take the
glass of the Word, and look upon your faces in it, and see how many spots it
will discover which you never before did perceive; not beauty spots, but spots
of deformity, Plague-spots, Death-marks, Hell-tokens, such as will bring upon
you inevitable misery, unless they be wiped off; Take the Rule of the Word, and
measure your actions by it, and you may quickly perceive how much they have
fallen short, how crooked they have been, Rectum est index sui and obliqui:
compare your actions with the straight rule of Gods Law, and you may find out
many irregularities; If you do not find out your sins, your sins will find you
out, and Gods judgments will find you out; and if you be found out in your
sins, woe be to you; O the horror which will be upon your consciences when
ruining judgments are inflicted upon you particularly, and you cannot escape,
when Death looks you in the face, and comes with the sting of sin in its mouth
to devour you! But O the horror you will be under hereafter if you be taken
away in your sins! when your souls shall be summoned, immediately after their
separation, unto the bar of God, where you will be searched and tried, and
condemned to everlasting torment, by an inevitable and irreversible sentence of
the Judge himself: O therefore hearken to the voice of God in these temporal
judgments on the City (after which you still remain alive, through infinite
patience) which calls upon you to search and try your ways, that you may
escape more fearful judgments which may be preparing for you; labor to find
out your sins which are the cause of all judgments, temporal and eternal; and
to help you in your search after sin, read the Catalogue I have given you of
Londons sins, and examine your selves thereby; be very serious, and through, and
impartial in this search; sequester your selves often from all company; ease
your mind of the load of worldly business; leave the carriages at the bottom of
the hill; strive against temptations and indispositions to the work; set your
selves in the Presence of the Heart-searching God; beg the help of his spirit
to discover to you what has displeased and provoked him; search after sin as
offensive to God, and as destructive to your selves, as your worst enemy, as
the cause of Plague and Fire in London, and as that which will bring the
Plagues and Fire of Hell upon you, if it be not found out and subdued.

4. God does expect that London should acknowledge their sins unto him. When
the Prophet had directed the people to search and try their ways after the
execution of such Judgments upon them, Lam. 3. 40. see the following
direction, v. 41, 42. Let us lift our hearts with our hands unto God in the
Heavens: we have trangressed, and have rebelled, etc. thus the Prophet does
confess the sins of Jerusalem, Chap. 1. 8, 9. Jerusalem has greatly sinned,
therefore she is removed. Her filthiness is in her skirts, she remembered not
her last end, therefore she came down wonderfully; and thus the Daughter of
Zion, as she bewaileth her affliction, so she acknowledges her transgression,
v. 17, 18, 20. Zion spreads forth her hands, and there is none to comfort
her. The Lord is righteous, for I have rebelled against his commandment. Behold
O Lord for I am in distress, my bowels are troubled, mine heart is turned
within me, for I have grievously rebelled. Thus Daniel after dreadful
judgments makes confession of the sins of the people of Israel, chap. 9. 4,
5, 6. I prayed unto the Lord, and made my confession, and said, O Lord the
great and Dreadful God, we have sinned and committed iniquity, and have done
wickedly, and have rebelled, even by departing from thy precepts and thy
judgments: neither have we hearkened unto thy servants the Prophets, which
spoke in thy name to our Kings, our Princes, and our Fathers, and to all the
people of the land, and v. 11, 12. Yea all Israel have transgressed thy law, by
departing, that they might not obey thy voice; therefore the curse is poured
upon us, and the oath that is written in the law of Moses the servant of God,
because we have sinned against him: And he has confirmed his word which he
spoke against us, and against our judges that judged us, by bringing upon us a
great evil: for under the whole Heaven has it not been done, as it has been
done upon Jerusalem.

God does expect that London should find out their sins, and having found them,
that they should make confession of them: O that the Profane and ungodly
generation in London, whose sins have been enumerated in the Catalogue, would
be persuaded to get alone by themselves, and consider their evil ways, and
what the consequents of their sins have been in bringing down temporal
Judgments, what the consequence of their sins is like to be, even the bringing
upon them eternal Judgments, and that they would fall down and prostrate
themselves at Gods foot, and covering their cheeks with shame and blushing,
because of their filthiness and foul sins under the view of so holy an eye,
that they would acknowledge their transgressions unto him not only in general,
but also particularly with their heinous aggravations! O that with an inward
deep sense, with a bleeding, broken heart, they would fill their mouths with
confessions! that they would take to themselves words and say, We have rebelled
against thee O Lord, and done wickedly, and grievously offended thee; so
foolish have we been, and ignorant of thee, we have been worse than beasts
before thee; the Ox acknowledges his owner, and the Ass his master; but,
though we are thy creatures and live upon thy bounty, and are daily at thy
finding, yet we have not acknowledged thee, and have had less consideration,
than those creatures, who have had no reason; we have been a sinful people,
laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers, children that have been corrupters,
who have forsaken thee, and by our wickedness provoked thee to anger. We have
been stubborn and disobedient; serving thine enemies, the devil and our own
lusts, but have neglected, yea refused to serve and worship thee in our
families and closets, living as if there had been no God in the world. We have
seldom if ever taken thy Name into our mouths, unless it has been in vain,
unless in our Oaths and Curses. We have profaned thy Sabboths, and defiled
thine ordinances, and have often been more wicked on the Lords day, than any
day of the week besides. When we were children we disobeyed our Parents, but
disobeyed thee much more, who did command us to honor them; when we were
children in years, we were grown Men and Women in sin; when we were weak in
body, we were strong in spirit to commit iniquity; we learnt the trade of sin
before any other, and were apt Scholars in the School of the Devil, when dull
and blockish to learn any thing, which was good; we were wise to do evil, when
to do good we had no understanding; our iniquities have increased over our
heads, faster than our years have done: Since we have been governors of
others, we have had no government upon our own spirits, and have endeavored to
lead those under our charge with us in the way to Hell, instead of laboring to
draw them into the way of Heaven, by our example, command, and persuasions; and
we have filled up all our relations with sin, instead of filling them up with a
duty. If we have not murdered any with our hand, we have murdered many with our
tongue, swords have been in our lips, and bitter reviling speeches in our
mouths, heart murder we have been guilty of, O the inordinate anger that has
boiled in our hearts! O the envy and malice which have gnawed our spirits, and
been working daily within us! and especially those persons have been most hated
by us, who have had thine image upon them, and have been best beloved by thee;
we have scorned them, and looked upon them as mean-spirited people; we have
separated them from our company, as those who damp and spoil our mirth by their
words and looks of reproof; yea, we have persecuted them as seditious and
factious persons, when in truth it was their holiness and conversation that did
contradict and condemn our wicked practices, which did stir up our anger
against them; we have scoft at them, who have prayed for us, and we have looked
upon them, and dealt with them as our enemies, because so to our lusts, who
were the best friends to our souls, and above all things desired our Salvation.
Thou have given us Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and plentiful provisions for our
body, but we have abused thy mercies by our intemperance and luxury: we have
been guilty of drunkenness and gluttony; we have indulged our flesh and sensual
appetite; we have lived in pleasure and been wanton; we wallowed, like so many
swine, in the mire and dung of some filthy sins, which it is a shame to speak
of; we have had eyes and hearts full of lusts and adultery, and have broken
forth into such vile actual sins of uncleanness, as would raise blushes in
modest cheeks to hear but the mention of; we have been unjust and unrighteous
in our dealing, have wronged and defrauded our neighbor, though thou have
threatened to be avenged on all such persons; O the lies we have spoken, the
slanderous backbiting speeches we have uttered! O the coffeehouse,
murmuring, envying, evil concupiscence, inordinate affection, and wicked
distempers which have been in our spirits! and though we have broken all thy
Laws, and are guilty of such notorious sins, yet O the impentency and hardness
of our hearts! though no Salvation is attainable but by Christ, who is freely
tendered unto us, yet O the unbelief of our hearts, and neglect of our own
Salvation! We have sinned, we have sinned against thee, and what shall we do
unto thee, O thou preserver of men!

God expects that London should make Confession of their sin, and it could be
wished that London would join together like one man in this work; but if this
cannot be, and they want common mouths to open their hearts and sins before the
Lord in particular Confession, let every one of them be a Mouth to himself, and
get into his Closet, and there acknowledge Londons sins; and if those who are
most guilty, do neglect this work, let Gods people do it in their room, and
confess not only their own sins, but also the sins of the profane and wicked
where they live, and that not only because God is dishonored, but also because
they are in danger of being ruined by the unbewail'd sins of others.

5. God does expect that London should be humble under these Judgments. God
inflicted Judgments on the children of Israel in the Wilderness, to humble
them, Deuteronomy. 8. 16. and he promises after the sorest distresses which he brings
his people into for their sins, to remember his Covenant, if their
uncircumcised heart be humbled, Levit. 26. 40, 41, 42. Yea he promises to
exalt such in due time, who humble themselves under his mighty hand, 1 Pet. 5.
6. Gods mighty hand has been stretched forth upon London, God expects that
London should be humble; he has humbled them by his Judgments, he expects
that they should humble themselves under his Judgments; God has stained the
Pride of London, he expects that they should let down their plumes; he has
brought them down, and he expects that they should lie low; he has brought
Poverty upon many of them in regard of their Estates, and he expects that all
of them should be poor in regard of their Spirits; he has made many of them
mean in regard of their Condition, and he expects that their disposition and
affection should be accordingly: God has laid many Persons in the dust by the
Plague, and he has laid many Houses in the dust by the Fire, and he expects
that those which survive and remain after such Judgments should lay themselves
in the dust for their sins. Humble thy self them, O London, humble thy self
before the Lord, lick the dust of his feet, put off thy Ornaments, and gird
thee with Sackcloth, cloth thy self with Humility. God has spit in thy face,
will thou be proud of thy beauty again? he has burnt the City with Fire, will thou be proud of thy Buildings and stately Edifices any more? he has consumed
much of the fuel of thy pride, and he expects that thy pride should be abated,
and that thou should abase thy self, and humble thy self before him.

6. God does expect that London should accept of the punishment of their
iniquity. Levit. 26. 40, 41, 42. If my people shall confess their iniquity, and
the iniquity of their Fathers, and be humbled, and accept the punishment of
their iniquity, then will I remember my Covenant, and remember the land. God
expects that London should justify him in the severest Judgments which he
has inflicted upon them; as they should acknowledge their sins, so they should
acknowledge their demerit, and that the Lord has punished them no more, yea
that he has punished them less than their iniquities have deserved: As they
should bring a bill of Indictment against themselves, so they should bring a
bill of Acquittance of God; God expects that they should say, as Neh. 9. 33.
Thou art just in all that is brought upon us; for thou have done right, but we
have done wickedly. Or as Dan. 9. 7, 8. O Lord, righteousness belongs unto
thee, but unto us confusion of faces, because we have sinned against thee. Let
not London murmr or repine, let not London find fault and complain of God,
because of his Judgments, Lam. 3. 39. Why does the living man complain, a man
for the punishment of his sin? God has opened his mouth, and spoken terribly,
but let London shut her mouth, because God has spoken Righteously; God has
spoken with a loud Voice, let London be in deep silence; I was dumb, I opened
not my mouth, says David, because thou did it, Psalm. 39. 9. When Nadab and
Abihu the two Sons of Aaron were consumed with Fire from Heaven, for offering
strange Fire before the Lord, It is said, that Aaron held his peace, Lev. 10.
1, 2, 3. So when God has consumed the City of London with Fire, for the sins
of the Inhabitants, let them hold their peace, because they have deserved it.
Let London be still, and know that God is righteous; let London lay her hand
upon her mouth, and her mouth in the dust; let London close up her lips, and
seal them up with silence; or if she open them, let her mouth be filled with
Confessions, not with Complaints; or if she complain, let her complain to God,
but let her not complain of him; if she complain, let her complain against her
self, but let her not complain against God; let her complain of her own sin and
wickedness, but not of Gods Judgment so righteous. Let London wonder it is no
worse with her, when both her sin and her danger was so great; let her wonder,
when God was so angry, that he should put any restraint upon it; that when
wrath was come forth, that it proceeded no further; let her wonder that the
Plague did not quite depopulate her, and that the Fire did not wholly consume
her; let her wonder it is so well with her, that she is not made a Desolation,
and say, It is the Lords mercies we are not consumed, Lam. 3. 22.

7. God does expect, that London should mourn for her sins. We read, Ier. 3.
21. A voice was heard upon the high places, weeping and supplications of the
house of Israel. When the terrible voice of Gods Judgments has been heard in
London, God does hearken for the voice of Weeping and Supplications; this Gods
voice does call for; when breaches were made in the City of David, Isa. 22. 9.
then did the Lord of hosts call to weeping, and to mourning, to baldness, and
to girding with sackcloth, v. 11. and when instead hereof there was joy and
gladness, eating flesh, and drinking wine, the Lord is so angry, that he
threatens, surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till you die, v.
13, 14. See also what the Lord calls for to the Daughter of Sion under her
Judgments, Lam. 2. 18, 19. Let tears run down like a river day and night, give
thy self no rest, let not the apple of thine eye cease: Arise, cry in the
night, in the beginning of the Watches pour out thine heart like water before
the face of the Lord. God does not only expect that his Ministers and Priests
should weep between the Porch and the Altar, when sore Judgments are upon his
Land, as Joel 2. 17. but also that the People should weep too, that the
Bridegroom should go forth of his Chamber, and the Bride out of her closet, as
v. 16. that people should be afflicted, mourn and weep, that their laughter
should be turned into mourning, and their joy into heaviness, Jam. 4. 9. He
expects that those which escape his Judgments should be like Doves upon the
mountains, every one mourning for his iniquities, as Ezekiel. 6. 16. London may
mourn for her Judgments which have been so dreadful, but God expects they
should mourn more for his displeasure, which has been the cause of these
Judgments, and most of all for their sins, which have been the cause of his
displeasure.

Weep, London, weep for thy sins, which have been so many and provoking; let
thine eye affect thine heart: When thou look into thy Burying places, and
think how many of thy people have lately there taken up their habitation; it
should draw tears from thine eyes to think of thy sins, which opened the doors
of those Lodgings unto them: Methinks, when thou passest through thy ruinous
Habitations, and see the heaps of Stones at the top of thy streets, when thou
viewest thy half-Churches and bare Steeples, and ragged Walls, and open Vaults,
and the dismal Solitude in those places, which not long ago were full of
people, it should fill thine heart with sorrow for thy sins, which have kindled
such anger in the breast of God, as to send the late dreadful Fire, which has
made such desolations.

Mourn, London, mourn, put on Sackcloth, thou see in part what an evil thing
and a bitter it is, to offend a Holy and Jealous God; the effects of sin here
are fearful sometimes, what evil is there is sin then which is the cause of
thy Ruins. God looks now that the sinners of London should become Mourners: We
read of a Mark which was set upon the foreheads of them in Jerusalem, which did
mourn and cry out for the Abominations that were done in the midst thereof, and
they were separated from temporal destruction which was brought upon the rest,
Ezekiel. 9. 4. 6. God does set a mark upon them that mourn in London for the sins
of London, and however he may deal with them in regard of temporal Calamities,
be sure he will separate them, and preserve them from eternal destruction.

Methinks, the fall of London calls for a Mourning like the Mourning of
Hadadrimmon in the Valley of Megiddo, where Josiah fell in battle, Zach. 12.
11. And there should not only be public mourning, but also private mourning,
and secret mourning; Families apart, and Persons apart: It becomes Christians
now, after such strokes of Gods wrath, to keep secret Fasts, to bewail Londons
ruins, especially to bewail Londons sins; their eyes should weep in secret
places, for the Abominations committed in the City, and bedew Gods feet with
their tears, that if possible they might turn away his displeasure.

8. God does expect that London should labor to pacify his anger. When God
threatened to send the Sword, and to cut off from Israel the head and the tail,
the branch and the rush in one day, and to send the Famine so sore that they
should eat every man the flesh of his own arm, yet it is said, For all this his
anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still, Isa. 9. 14, 17,
20, 21. And now God has executed his Judgments of Plague and Fire in London,
have not we reason to fear that his anger is not yet turned away, but his hand
is stretched out still? When the houses of London were consumed, which were the
fuel to the late Fire, then the Fire quickly went out; and if the sins of
London had been consumed with the houses, if the Inhabitants of the City had
not brought forth their sins, when they were forced to leave their goods
behind unto the flames, then we should have reason to think that the Fire of
Gods anger was gone out, and his wrath turned away from the escaped remnant of
London, insomuch as the sins of London have been the fuel, as it were to this
Dreadful Fire; but when so much sin after such Judgments is saved alive,
untouched, and unmortified; when the Plague of sin does rage so much after the
Plague of Pestilence is removed; and the Fire of lust does burn so much, when
the other Fire is extinguished; when Londoners who have taken new houses, have
brought into them their old hearts, and live in the practice of their old sins;
when the Swearers, and Profane, the Drunkards and Unclean, the Covetous,
Unrighteous, and loose Livers still persevere in their wicked courses, and no
Judgment will put a stop to them, but they grow more hardened and
incorrigible, when as it is said, Ier. 5. 3. the Lord has stricken them for
sin, but they are not grieved, consumed them, but they refuse to receive
correction, making their faces harder than a rock, and refuse to return: what
can we conclude, but that Gods anger does still remain, yea is more enraged by
this aggravation of their wickedness, and that he is stretching forth his hand
to give them another blow.

God does expect that London should use some means to pacify his anger; and he
gives them time for it by the pauses which he m^kes between his Judgments,
being still slow to anger, and unwilling, if he be not even forced unto it,
utterly to destroy this place, where his Name has been called upon. O that
London would be persuaded unto this Duty, which does so much concern their
safety and happiness: when the Fire was in London, and it burned so furiously
and dreadfully on the Monday, and Tuesday, Londoners hearts were sunk within
them, having little hopes of getting victory over this conqueror, which marched
through their streets, and therefore little resistance was made, but all were
busily employed in flying from him, with their goods; but when the fury of the
Fire was something abated on the Wednesday, and they began to conceive any
hopes that it might be extinguished; then they pluck up their spirits, and join
their forces, and many thousand hands are at work in drawing waters, and
pouring them upon the Flames, and their pains through Gods blessing was not
unsuccessful: The Fire of Gods wrath which shall devour the wicked and burn
them everlastingly, will be so furious and dreadful that the hearts of the
damned will sink under it without the least hopes of ever extinguishing this
Flame, or flying from it when it has once got hold of them: And therefore they
will not attempt, but let alone all endeavors for ever to turn away Gods
displeasure, and to put out the unquenchable Fire of Hell: but the Fire of Gods
wrath and anger here may be put out, and the flames of his anger may be turned
into flames of Love; Gods anger which has been so hot against London may be
cooled, his wrath alleviated and his displeasure removed: there is Hope in
Israel concerning this thing, God is not yet grown so furious that he will not
be spoken unto, he is easy to be entreated, and therefore London may be
encouraged in their endeavors to pacify his anger. Let them not say as Israel
of old, Jer. 2. 25. There is no hope, no, for I have loved strangers, and after
them will I go. Though Gods anger be not yet turned away, yet it may be turned
away; and though one hand be stretched out to destroy you, yet the other hand
is stretched forth to save you; for he stretches forth his hand all the day
long, to a disobedient and gainsaying people, Romans 10. 21. O Labor then to
pacify Gods anger, to quench this Fire; arise and gird your selves with
humility; pluck up your spirits, and stir up your selves to lay hold on God,
and stop him in the march of his Judgments; bring forth your buckets, draw
water, and pour it forth before the Lord; let your eyes be like Fountains of
tears, the voice of weeping, and mourning for sin, does turn Gods bowels within
him, Ier. 31. 18, 19, 20. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, Thou
have chastised me, and I was chastised, etc. and when he repented after such
chastisements, and was ashamed of his sin, God does relent, and his bowels are
moved for him, Is Ephraim my dear Son! is he a pleasant Child? for since I
spoke against him, I earnestly remember him still, therefore my bowels are
troubled for him; and I will surely have mercy upon him says the Lord. If
London would be chastised, and receive the impressions of grief and shame for
their sins by these Judgments, Gods bowels would be moved, and his fierce
anger would be changed into tender compassions; and though he has spoken
terribly against London, yet he would now speak comfortably unto her, he would
earnestly remember her, and make her glad according to the days wherein he
has afflicted her, and the years wherein she has seen evil; there is an
excellent virtue in the tears of true repentance accompanied with the blood of
Christ, applied by faith to quench the fire of Gods anger.

Sinners, God is angry with you, Psalm. 7. 11. God is angry with the wicked
every day, and it is worse to have God angry with you, than all the men in the
world; his favor is better than Life, his displeasure is worse than Death: to
have God angry with you, who is so Just and Jealous, who is so potent and
furious, is very dreadful; if the wrath of an earthly King be like the roaring
of a Lion, what is the wrath of the King of Heaven? and when his anger is
stirred up by your sins, and blown into a flame, and breaks forth upon you,
what will you do? you cannot hide your selves in any place where his all seeing
eye will not find you; you cannot fly into any place, where his
stretched-forth arm will not reach you; you cannot gather such strength as to
make head against him, and defend your selves from the strokes of his
vengeance, who can stand in his sight when once he is angry? Psalm. 76. 7. O
then labor to pacify his anger, you cannot fly from him, O then fly unto him;
you cannot stand in his sight when he is angry, O then fall down at his feet;
make peace with this adversary, whilst you are upon the way, before he deliver
you to the officer Death, and cast you into the prison of Hell.

Sinners, Gods patience does as yet hold his arm; and his mercy calls upon you
to repent, and he invites you to make your peace with him, Isa. 27. 4, 5. Who
would set the briers and thorns against me in battle, I would go through them, I
would burn them together; or let him take hold on my strength, and make peace
with me, and he shall make peace with me. You will be like briers and thorns,
which will easily take fire, and quickly be consumed in the time of Gods anger;
and if briers and thorns do offer to contend with devouring Fire, what will be
the issue, but the burning of them up without remedy; you will find it sharp
and painful for your feet, if you kick against the pricks; you will dash out
your brains, if you run your head against a Rock, or a brazen wall; none ever
hardened themselves against God, and prospered; none ever fought against the
God of Heaven by their sins, but they were wounded, and in the end destroyed;
sin, when it is finished, brings forth Death, and wrath, and misery for ever:
O then lay hold on Gods strength, and make peace with him; run to him, take
hold of the Scepter of grace and reconciliation, which is held forth unto you;
take hold of his arm, and plead with him for mercy; take hold of his Son who is
offered to you, who is set forth to be a propitiation for the remission of sins
which are past through the forbearance of God, Romans 3. 25. as yet God has
forborne you; as yet you are on this side of the Grave, and Hell, and there is a
possibility of turning away Gods anger which is kindled against you, of flying
from that wrath which is pursuing of you, of escaping those miseries which are
preparing for you; and therefore lay hold on Christ who is freely tendered unto
you, who is able and willing to save you, and make your peace with the Father,
and to procure a pardon for you; and further to move you, you are not only
offered peace and reconciliation, but you are entreated to be reconciled,
Ministers entreat you, yea God himself, and Jesus Christ by us, does entreat,
and pray, and beseech you, that you would accept of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.
20. Be astonished O ye Heavens! and wonder Oye Angels! Be astonished much more
ye Sinners! and be rapt up with admiration O ye Rebels! the King of glory
against whom you have rebelled, and who could crush you so easily without any
injury to himself, is not only willing to lay aside his anger, but also
entreats you to accept of reconciliation; heartily embrace Jesus Christ upon
his own terms, and the work will be done, otherwise the fury of the Lord will
be so much the more provoked, and the Fire of his anger will break forth into
such a flame, as none shall be able to quench; otherwise the Lord will be so
much the more enraged against you, and meet you like a roaring and devouring
Lion, or like a Bear bereaved of her Whelps; and rent the Caul of your heart,
yea tear you in pieces, when there shall be none to deliver, Hos. 13. 7, 8.
Psalm. 50. 22.

9. God does expect that London should turn from her evil ways, 2 Chronicles. 7.
14. The Lord makes a sweet promise under the dreadful Judgments of Famine or
Pestilence, which sometimes he sends upon his people for their sins, If my
people which are called by my name shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek
my face, and turn from their wicked ways: then will I hear from Heaven, and
forgive their sin, and will heal their Land. God does not only expect that
Londoners should now acknowledge their sins, and humble themselves, and mourn
for their sins; but also that they should turn from them, otherwise pardon, and
healing, and his favor is not to be obtained, neither are further Judgments
likely to be prevented; they must confess and forsake their sins, if they would
find mercy, Prove. 28. 13. the wicked must forsake their way of sin, and turn
unto the Lord, and then he will have mercy, and abundantly pardon, Isa. 55. 7.
God threatens to go on to punish such as go on to transgress, Psalm. 68. 21. He
will wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalp of such as go on still
in their trespasses.

Break off then your sins by repentance, and cast away all your transgressions
from you; put away the evil of your doings from before the holy and jealous
eyes of God; cease to do evil; cleanse your hands you sinners, and purify your
hearts ye wickedly-minded; wash your selves in the fountain of Christ's blood
set open to you, that you may be cleansed from all filthiness of flesh and
spirit, and be partakers of holiness, and the divine nature; Deny all
ungodliness and worldly lusts; abstain from flesh-pleasing sins, which war
against the soul^^ and be not conformed to the wicked cust^^es of wicked men,
neither follow this ungodly generation to do evil, much less run with them to
the same excess of riot; but be ye transformed by the renewing of your minds,
and live soberly, righteously and godly in this present evil world; and let the
time past of your lives be sufficient wherein you have wrought the will of the
flesh, and served diverse lusts, and cast a blot upon the profession of
Christianity: now be blameless, and harmless, and unrebukeable in the midst of
a crooked and perverse Nation, cast off the works of darkness; lay aside your
night-vail of ignorance; put on the robes of light; walk honestly, as in the
day, shining as lights where you live; forbear all works of darkness and sin;
and as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation.

Sinners, turn from your evil ways, otherwise iniquity will be your ruin.

1. Drunkards turn from your evil ways; overcharge not your selves with
excess, where God allows you enough for use; Look not upon the Wine when it is
red, when it gives its color in the Cup, when it sparkleth and moves it self
aright: At last it biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder, Prove. 23.
31, 32. wounds and woe are the issue of excessive drinking, v. 29. this sin may
be sweet and pleasing to the eye and appetite in the temptation; but it will
wound and sting the conscience, worse than an Adder or Serpent can do the body,
in the reflection; God has put bitterness into the Cup by his Judgments, and
will you drink as deep as before? are you resolved to taste the ^reggs that lie
at bottom? the Cup has poison in it, soul-poison, and will you drink of it
still, though you murder and destroy your souls for ever by this sin? the Cup
has wrath in it, the wrath of an angry God; and is it good for you to drink
off the Wine of Gods wrath? Drunkenness has been your sin, and if you go on,
God threatens that Drunkenness shall be your punishment, Jer. 15. 12. Speak
unto them this word, thus says the Lord, every bottle shall be filled with
Wine; Drunkards like this very well, they are very well pleased that their
bottles shall be filled with Wine, that they may empty them, but understand the
meaning, v. 13, 14. Thus says the Lord, I will fill all the inhabitants of the
Land with Drunkenness; and I will dash them one against another, even the
Fathers, and the Sans together: I will not pity, nor spare, nor have mercy, but
destroy them. Drunkards, you reel and fall sometimes with your sin; God will
make you reel and fall by his Judgments, and dash you one upon another, yea
dash you in pieces, and destroy you without pity or mercy. Will you not forbear
your Cups, and excesses, God will put a Cup of trembling and astonishment into
your hand; he will put Gall and Wormwood into your Cup, and make you taste the
bitter effects of this sin; if he do not severely scourge you for this sin
here, he will be sure to torment you for this sin for ever.

Turn ye Drunkards from your evil ways; vomit up your sin by repentance; weep
and mourn for all your sinful mirth and jollity; and take heed of returning
with the Dog, and licking up the Vomit which you have disgorged: avoid the
occasions of this sin; shun the company of such as have been your tempters;
take heed of coming into the places where you have been drawn in to commit it;
make a Covenant with your feet that they may never lead you out of the way of
God, into such places, where you have been so often overtaken; curb and
restrain your appetite, take some kind of holy revenge upon your selves; deny
your selves some things which are lawful in themselves, because occasions of
sin unto you; and instead of filling your selves with Wine, or strong Drink
unto drunkenness, and excess; labor to be filled with the spirit, and by the
spirit to mortify this and all other deeds of the body, and rather let the
wicked wonder at you, and speak evil of you for your sobriety, than God hate
you, and bring destruction upon you for your intemperance.

2. Adulterers Turn from your evil ways; come out of the unclean bed; wallow
not any longer in this besmearing mire: are you fallen into the ditch, get up
and come forth with speed, and wash your garments from the spots, which they
have received; are you taken in the net, and ensnared in adulterous
embracements, deliver your selves like a Roe from the net of the Hunter, and
like a Bird from the snare of the Fowler; Lust not after the beauty and
enjoyment of Adulterous Women; let not the soft and sweet language of their
lips entice you; nor the sparkling motions of their eyes inflame you; put not
fire into your bosoms, and take heed of walking upon burning Coals; why will
you consume your body, and time, and substance, which cannot be redeemed? why
will you bring upon your selves a wound and dishonor which cannot be wiped off?
Why will you be like Oxen which go to the slaughter, and be such fools, as to
bring upon your selves destruction?

Turn from your evil ways; dare not to go forward in that way which leads unto
death and hell. Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled, but
Whoremongers, and Adulterers God will judge, Heb. 13. 4. God has shot his
arrows into the City, and wounded many Adulterers for this sin, that had before
defiled and wounded themselves by it; and will you go on till a dart pierce
through your Liver? the beginning of the sin is sweet like honey, but will not
the end of it be more bitter than wormwood? and if a little short pleasure of
the flesh be so desirable, will not the extreme endless pain, it will produce,
be intolerable? can you be content to lie so many millions of years under the
horrible tortures of Hell, for a little present sensual delight, which when
reaped, cannot yield you satisfaction? is it sweet to fall into the arms of an
adulterous woman; and will it not be bitter, yea a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of the Living God, Heb. 10. 31. especially when he is irreconcileably
angry, and his anger burns like fire which is devouring, and unquenchable? you
have seen the Fire which has burnt down the City how dreadful it was; the
fire of Lust within you, is worse; and the Fire of Hell beneath you, which is
preparing for you, and unto which by this sin you are hastening, is a thousand
fold more dreadful; (of which more by and by) and yet will you go on? O Turn
from your adulterous ways; come not near the door of such houses, where you
have had incentives to Lust, and opportunities for such lewd practices; make a
Covenant with your eyes, the spark is caught at the eye, not only from it, but
also by it; the spark that falling upon the tinder of an adulterous heart, puts
it into a flame; do not look upon the Maid or Woman, that you may not think; do
not think, that you may not lust; do not touch, that you may not desire to
taste; do not toy, least you be caught; do not come too near the brink, least
you fall into the stream before you are aware; take heed of speculative
uncleanness, as you would be kept from actual uncleanness; take heed of
self-pollutions, as you would be kept from adultery with others; avoid
occasions of this sin, come not into such Company and places where you may have
opportunity to commit it; flee youthful lusts which war against the soul;
keep your minds pure and chaste; resist the first suggestions to this sin;
quench the fire, when it begins to kindle; look to the issue and consequents of
this sin; remember that the holy eye of God is upon you, in your most secret
retirements, and he will ere long call you to an account.

3. Swearers, turn from your evil ways. Remember the Third Commandment, unto
which a Threatening is annexed, of Gods charging guilt especially upon the
breakers hereof, Exodus 20. 7. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God
in vain, for the Lord will not hold him guiltless, that takes his Name in
vain. The very use of the Name of God irreverently, is a breach of this
Command; but to swear by the Name of God in ordinary discourse, is a gross
breach of it; which as it affronts God highly, so it will bring Condemnation
certainly upon the guilty, that do not repent and forbear. When God has made
your Mouths, and given you tongues to speak his praise, which then are your
glory; will you profane the Name of this God, and turn not only the glory of
God, but also your own glory into shame and dishonor, and that when you have
not the motive and incentive as to flesh-pleasing sins? Herbert.

Take not his Name, who made thy mouth, in vain;
It gets thee nothing, and has no excuse:
Lust and Wine plead a pleasure, Avarice gain:
But the cheap Swearer through his open sluice
Lets his soul run for naught, as little fearing:
Were I an Epicure, I could hate swearing.
Look into Deuteronomy. 28. 58, 59. what threatenings the Lord does denounce there
against such as do not fear his Name; and surely it is for want of fear and awe
of Gods Name, that any are so bold as to swear by it, or take it in vain: If
thou will not fear this glorious and fearful Name, THE LORD THY GOD, then the
Lord will make thy Plagues wonderful, and the Plagues of thy seed, even great
Plagues, and of long continuance, and sore sicknesses, and of long continuance,
etc. Has not God plagued and burned the City of London, amongst other sins,
for this of Swearing? and yet will you swear still, and provoke the Lord to
further wrath? when you have seen in part how fearful the Name of God is, in
the Judgments which he has executed, will you go on still to profane his
Name? Do you not fear future Judgments? will not the Name of God be displayed
more dreadfully before you, when he opens the Treasures of his wrath, and sends
his Son in flaming Fire, to take vengeance upon sinners, and yet will not you
fear this Name of God?

Swearers, with what confidence can you pray to God? what hopes can you have
when you use Gods Name in Prayer, that you shall have the least audience or
acceptance, when you abuse his Name so much, and cast such dishonor upon it by
your Oaths? If you do not pray now, as Swearers seldom do, will you never be
driven to your knees? will you never be brought to such extremities that no
creature shall be able to give you any relief? and with what face can you then
look up to God? will not your callings upon the Name of God be in vain, as you
have taken his Name in vain? will not God laugh at your Calamity, and though
you cry and shout, will not he shut out your Prayer, and bar the door of Mercy
upon you for ever?

Swearers, turn from your sin; make a Covenant with your mouth; set a Watch
before the door of your lips; use Gods Name in Prayer, and reverently in
discourse; do not swear by it, or take it in vain any more; get an awe of this
Name upon your hearts, which will be an excellent means to keep you from this
sin.

4. Liars, turn from your evil ways. We read Acts 5. at the beginning, of
Annanias and Sapphira, who were smitten with sudden Death for the sin of Lying;
it is said, they fell down at the Apostles feet, and gave up the ghost. And
has not the sin of Lying been one ingredient in the meritorious Cause of the
fall of so many persons and houses by the Plague and Fire in the City of
London? This sin of Lying, the Apostle does in especial caution the Colossians
and Ephesians against, after the wonderful grace of God in the renovation of
them according to his Image, Col. 3. 9. Lie not one to another, seeing ye have
put off the Old man with his deeds: And have put on the New man, etc. Ephesians. 4.
24, 25. Having put on the New man, which after God is created in righteousness
and true holiness. Put away lying, and speak every man truth to his Neighbor.
And this sin I may caution Londoners against, after the dreadful anger of God,
expressed in the Desolations which he has made amongst them by his late
Judgments; Lie not one to another any more, but speak every one Truth to his
Neighbor. The Lord is a God of truth, and he cannot lie; do you labor to be
men of truth, such as will not lie: The Devil is the Father of Lies, and Liars,
Ioh. 8. 44. and which is most eligible, to be Children of God, or Children of
the Devil? A lying tongue, is one of the seven Abominatitions which the Lord
hates, Prove. 6. 16, 17. And is there any good you can get by your lying,
comparable to the evil of rendering your selves hateful and abominable in the
sight of God? Is it needful for you sometimes to speak lies? Is it not a
thousand fold more needful for you always to speak truth? are you likely to
gain so much by the former, as by the later? what is a little outward Emolument
in comparison with inward Peace? are you likely to lose so much by the later,
as by the former? what is the loss of external, temporal things, in comparison
with the loss of your Souls and Happiness for ever? Is it needful to lie that
you may excuse your faults? this makes them double. Herbert.

Nothing can need a lie;
A fault which needs it most, grows two thereby.
Parents, warn your Children against this sin of Lying; do not spare the Rod of
Correction where you find them guilty; pass by twenty other faults rather than
this; Lying is the first link in the Chain of a thousand gross sins; rap off
their fingers from the first link, least the Chain after grow too strong for
you to break.

Masters, indulge not your Servants in this sin, the resolution of David was,
Psalm. 101. 7. He that works deceit shall not dwell in my house; he that
tells lies shall not tarry in my sight. Especially take heed of leading
Servants to this sin by your Example; above all of putting them upon this sin,
by your persuasions or commands; for, besides the guilt of their sin which
hereby you incurr; your damage is like to be more than your advantage by their
lies; If you put them upon lying for you, they will put themselves upon lying
to you; and if you deceive others in some things by the former, they are likely
to deceive you, deservedly, in greater things by the latter.

Young ones, take heed of Lies; do nothing as may need the cloak and excuse of
a lie; and if you be overtaken with a fault, never deny it when examined, but
with sorrow acknowledge it as you would gain favor with God and man: Take heed
of this sin betimes; lay aside lying before it grows into a Custom, which will
be hard to leave. Old ones, break off this sin, before you be dragged by the
chain of this sin into the Fire of Hell, which is the threatened punishment
thereof, Rev. 21. 8. Be not too hasty in speech, least this sin issue forth at
the door of your lips, before you are aware; speak always as in the hearing of
God, who knows whether your words and heart do agree, and who will one day call
you to an account for this sin, and except you repent, punish you for it
severely in the Lake of Fire and Brimstone.

5. Slanderers, turn from your evil ways. The sin of slandering is one of the
worst sorts of Lying; and the teeth of slanderers are compared to spears and
arrows, and their tongue to a sharp sword, Psalm. 57. 4. and when they utter
their slanders, they bend their bow, and shoot their arrows, they whet their
sword, and wound therewith the reputation of others, which they are bound to be
as careful of as their own, Psalm. 64. 34. Slanderers are false-witnesses, who
lay to the charge of others such things as they know not, Psalm. 35. 11. they
are Lions, who tear in pieces the good Name of others; they are Serpents, whose
words are stings, and full of deadly poison; they are compared to mauls, and
swords, and sharp arrows, Prove. 25. 18. yea, they are like mad men, who cast
about firebrarnds, and arrows, and death, Prove. 26. 18. By this sin, you wound
others, and are guilty of tongue-murder; but you wound your selves more, I mean
your Consciences, and are guilty of self-murder, of soul-murder; and the poison
of such speeches is not so venomous and deadly, in regard of your Neighbors
good name, as it is in regard of your own spirits, which are envenomed, and
will be destroyed hereby, without the application of the blood of Christ for
pardon and healing.

Slanderers, forbear your backbiting, slanderous speeches; forbear devouring
words, which swallow up the good name of your neighbors; let not your throats
be like open Sepulchers, to entombe their Reputation: Take heed your tongues do
not utter slanders and reproaches, devised by your selves; be careful also
that you do not spread such Calumnies as others have devised. Receive not any
accusation against your Neighbors without good proof; drive away backbiting
tongues with an angry countenance; and if you must hear of others faults, let
love conceal them as much as may be from the knowledge of others; rather speak
to themselves what you hear, and reprove them, (if the things be scandalous)
with prudence, love, and a spirit of meekness. Remember the command, Tit. 3. 2.
Speak evil of no man. And take heed of the sinful practice of the Women
described, 1 Timothy 5. 13. They learn to be idle, wandering about from house to
house; and not only idle, but Tatlers also, and busiebodies, speaking things
which they ought not. Where your tongues have been instrumental to wound
others, and your selves withal, by slanderous speeches, make use of the same
instrument for healing; labor to heal your selves by Confession of your sin to
God, and to heal others by acknowledging to them the wrong you have done them;
labor to lick whole their fame, and by good words to promote their esteem,
which you have unjustly taken away. Labor for so much humility and brotherly
love, as to be as tender of their good Name and fame as your own, and in honor
to prefer them above your selves, which will make you ready to hide their
faults, and keep you from evil furmises, and evil slanderous speeches.

6. Revilers, turn from your evil ways. Reviling and slandering often go
together, as proceeding both from the same root of malice and hatred; yet
sometimes the malice is kept more close; when War is in the heart, and
mischief is inwardly devised, and the Name secretly wounded with slanders
behind the back, the tongue does flatter, and like a Honeycomb does drop
nothing but sweet words before the face. The sin of Reviling is open, and spits
forth rancour and malice into the face, and breaks forth into bitter speeches,
for the shame and disgrace of such persons against whom they are spoken, though
Revilers disgrace themselves more by the weakness, and ill government of
spirit, which hereby they discover.

Revilers, refrain your angry bitter speeches; Let all bitterness and wrath,
and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking, be put away from you, with all
malice, Ephesians. 4. 31. Do not quarrel and contend, do not break forth into brawls
and clamours, and bitter reviling speeches, against such as give you no
occasion, but desire to live at peace with you; and if others are angry and
quarrel with you, labor to pacify their anger, do not stir up the coals by
your bitter retorts; when you are reviled, revile not again, like our Savior,
1 Pet. 2. 23. Render not evil for evil, nor railing for railing, but
contrariwise blessing, 1 Pet. 3. 9. The second blow breeds the quarrel, and the
second reviling word breeds the strife; give to a hard speech the return of a
soft answer, Prove. 15. 1. A soft answer turns away wrath, but grievous words
stir up anger. And Prove. 25. 15. Long forbearance is of great persuasion, and a
soft tongue breaks a bone: there is a marvelous force in a meek reception of
bitter speeches to appease anger, and molifie the spirits of those which are
most fierce; whereas grievous and bitter returns stir up unto greater
contention; Revenge not your selves with the hand, neither revenge your selves
with the tongue; revile not your enemies, but love them, and pray for them, and
do good to them, feed and cloth them, and heap coals upon their head, Matthew.
5. 44. Romans 12. 19, 20. Be gentle showing all meekness to all men, Tit. 3. 2.
especially revile not your friends, take heed of stirring up strife in the
house where you live; be of a peaceable disposition; above all, take heed of
reviling Christ's friends, Gods children; revile not the Saints, remember that
no revilers, especially such revilers that persevere in that sin, shall inherit
the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 10. and when the Lord Jesus comes at the last
day, he will execute judgment upon the ungodly, for their hard speeches which
they have spoken against him, in speaking against his people, Jude 15.

Revilers govern your tongues, If any man among you seem to be religious, and
bridleth not his tongue, that man's religion is vain, Jam. 1. 26. would you
govern your selves well according to Scripture rules, bridle and govern your
tongues, Jam. 3. 3, 4. Behold we put bits into the Horses mouths that they may
obey us, and we turn about their whole body. Behold also the Ships, which
though they be so great, and are driven of fierce winds, yet they are turned
about with a very small helm, withersoever the governor lists. Put a bit
upon this little member, and you may the better have all the rest at command,
and keep your selves in, when otherwise vented passions like wild horses
without rains may carry you into many a precipice; when otherwise the fierce
storms of your minds may break forth, and drive you upon rocks and shelves, and
shipwreck both soul and body together. There is a world of iniquity in the
tongue, which defiles the whole body; the tongue is a fire, which sets on
fire the whole course of nature, and it self is set on fire of Hell, y. 6. get
the former fire quenched, get the heat of your tongues cooled, as you would
escape the latter fire, I mean the fire of Hell, from whence the former fire
does proceed, and unto which it will certainly bring you. The tongue is full of
deadly poison, it is an unruly evil which no man can tame, when by art the
wildest beasts may and have been tamed, v. 7, 8. others cannot tame your
tongues, but you may get them tamed your selves: put them under the government
of Christ, and he will tame them, get your passions tamed within, and you may
tame this member which is the instrument that they make use of to vent
themselves in your revilings; keep guard and sentinel before the door of your
lips, and watch your words that you offend not with your tongues.

7. Persecutors turn from your evil ways: Forbear persecuting the people of
God, who desire your good, and are the best safeguard and defense by their
prayers and faith of the places where they live, from miseries and destruction;
is it good for you to hew at the bough on which you stand, over such a deep,
into which if you should fall, it will be impossible for you to recover your
selves again? is it good for you to pull at the Pillars of the house, which if
you pluck down, will bring the house upon you, and bury you in its ruins? is
it good to put your selves under the burdensome stone which will grind you to
powder? suppose whilst you are breathing forth threatenings against any of
Christ's Disciples, and are in the heat of your rage and furious persecution of
them, you should hear such a voice as Paul did from Heaven, Sinners, sinners,
why persecute you me, would it not cool, and stop you? you may hear this voice,
if you will open your ear unto the word; It is Christ you persecute in his
Disciples; it is Christ you wound through their sides, you would do the same to
him as the Jews did, were he alive amongst you, and you had the same power as
sometimes was put into their hands against the Lord of life. I will not charge
London with, and therefore need not warn them generally against the sin of
persecution of Gods people, because they have been a shelter to them when the
times have frowned most upon them; but are there none have need of this
warning? are there no Iudas's amongst them, none of Paul's spirit before his
Conversion?

Persecutors forbear this sin, which makes you as like the Devil as any that I
know, and locks you fastest in his arms; which is the very next door to the sin
against the Holy Ghost* which will bring upon you swift destruction; which will
sink you into the lowest parts of the bottomless pit; which will lash and sting
your Consciences with horrible scourges hereafter, if they be not awakened with
horror here; turn from this sin before it be too late; Imitate Paul* and
become friends to them against whom you have expressed so much enmity and
spite.

8. Covetous persons turn from your evil ways* God has smitten you for the
iniquity of your covetousness, do not go frowardly on in this sin; he has
subtracted much of the fuel of this sin, and burnt it in the fire, let there
be a greater decay in your lust of Covetousness, than there has been in any of
your estates. Covetousness is one of the sins which the Apostle would not have
so much as named amongst the Saints, Ephesians. 5. 3. It is a sin if it reign,
which is inconsistent with the truth of grace, and power of Godliness, because
it is Idolatry, Col. 3. 5. and the Apostle tells us expressly that Covetous
persons shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 9. 10. yea that the wrath
of God shall come upon them, Ephesians. 5. 6.

Covetous persons turn from your sin, get this earthly member mortified: get
your hearts loosened from those things, which you have hitherto made your God,
and in which you have sought for your chiefest felicity.

Have you little in the world? be contented with the portion which God gives
you; you have as much as God sees fit for you, Heb. 13. 5. Let your
conversation be without covetousness, and be content with such things as you
have, Covetousness may not heal your poverty any more, than riches can heal
your Covetousness.

Have you much in the world? do your riches increase? set not your heart upon
them; make use of what God has given you without such pinching and
self-denial which the Lord Jesus never commanded in his* precepts of that
kind; God never gave riches to save, but to use; take heed of exceeding the
bounds in spending, and do not spare the moderate use of what you have for fear
of future wanting; use part of your estates for your selves in what is needful
for the body, and suitable to your degree and quality* lay aside part for your
posterity, and lay out part in the help of those in necessity* for relief of
the poor, whereby you will lay up for your selves a good foundation for the
time to come, and at last, lay hold on eternal life* 1 Timothy 6. 18, 19.

9. Unrighteous persons turn from your evil ways. God has been righteous in
his Judgments, because you have been unrighteous in your dealings; and as his
Judgments are a reproof of your sin, so are they a warning to you to leave it.
Unrighteous gains will yield you little advantage in the issue: See what the
Apostle James speaks of the wealth which men get in such a way, Chap. 5. 2, 3,
4. Your riches are corrupted, and your garments Moth-eaten: Your Gold and
Silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and
shall eat your flesh, as it were fire: ye have heaped treasure together for the
last days; Behold the hire of your laborers which have reaped down your
fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, cries, and the cries have entered
into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath. The curse of God goes along with
unlawful, unrighteous gains; and is like Moth and Rust to corrupt and canker
them; they bring a fire into the flesh and bones, which will eat and torment;
they pierce men through with many sorrows, and at their latter end utterly
consume them with terrors, if their conscience be awakened; Unrighteous
persons do not heap up such treasures of wealth, as by sin they heap up
treasures of wrath against the last day: the wrongs, which they do to others,
cry with a loud voice to God, and the Lord will be the avenger of all such as
are defrauded. Let them that have been unrighteous then be unrighteous no more:
you cannot wrong others so much by this sin, as you wrong your selves; shake
your hands of dishonest gains: make restitution of what you have defrauded
others, as you expect salvation, non remittitur peccatum, nisi restituctur
ablatum. This is a hard saying to some, who have no other wealth, but what they
have gained in a dishonest and unrighteous way; but will it not be harder to
suffer the vengeance of Eternal fire for this sin? is it not better to
impoverish your selves that you may be just and honest whilst you live, than
to be damned, and thrust into a place of torment when you die? you must leave
what you have; if God do not take away what you have by some temporal Calamity
before, be sure Death will strip you of all; and is it not better for you to
part with it your selves to the just owners, when this is the way to obtain
pardon and peace, and an Inheritance which is of a thousand fold more value?
And do not fear but God will make provision for you whilst you abide in the
world, if you resolve to be honest, and put your trust in him, who has the
dispose of the Earth, and the fullness thereof. Be righteous for the future, do
not swerve a hair from the Rule of Right; what you would that others should do
unto you, do unto them, this is a Principle inscribed upon the heart by Nature,
and this is the Law and the Prophets, Matthew. 7. 12.

10. Hypocrites, turn from your evil ways. Methinks the terrible voice of God
should affrighten you, under your Hypocritical shows, and outside Devotions:
Methinks you should now bend your hearts to please the Lord, and approve your
selves chiefly to him, who has expressed so much displeasure against sinners,
and is most highly offended with Hypocrites; what good will a Form do you,
without the Power of godliness? what good will shows do you, without sincere
and substantial service? what benefit will you get by counterfeit Graces, if
your Graces be not real? if your Repentance, and Faith and Love, and the like,
be feigned, how uneffectual will they be to procure pardon, and peace, and
salvation? are you content to lose all your Bodily Exercise, and to have all
your heartless lifeless Duties rise up one day in Judgment against you? What
advantage will you get by a bare Profession of Religion, especially in such
times when profession if it be strict is discountenanced, and Professors if
their Lamp shine with any brightness, and they carry any great sail, expose
themselves to danger? And if you have not Sincerity, which alone can yield you
the true and sweet fruits of Religion, you are like to lose all, and of all
others to make your selves most miserable; you may suffer from Men, because you
have a Profession, and you will suffer from God, because you have no more than
a Profession: What then? should you cast off your Profession? No; so you would
turn Apostates; and may fall into the sin against the Holy Ghost, which will
bring upon you inevitable Damnation; but lay aside your hypocrisy, and become
sincere; be that in truth, which you are in show; labor for sincerity in
regard of your State, and labor for sincerity in regard of your Duties.

Sinners, God calls upon all of you to turn from your evil ways by his
thundering Voice.

Turn presently: let the time past be sufficient wherein you have fulfilled the
desires of the flesh and the mind; go not a step forward in the way of sin,
least you meet with destruction suddenly, and perish without remedy.

Turn universally, say not of any sin, as Lot did of Zoar, It is a little one,
cast away all your transgressions; and let no iniquity have dominion over you
for the future.

Turn heartily, from an inward Principle of hatred to sin, and love to God, and
not from outward Considerations, and merely upon the account of sins dreadful
consequents.

Turn constantly, and with full purpose of heart never to return unto your evil
ways of sin any more.

10. The Lord does expect after such Judgments that London should seek him:
That they should not only turn from their evil ways, but also that they should
turn unto him that has smitten them, and seek the Lord of Hosts, Isa. 9. 13.
We read, Am. 5. 2. The Virgin of Israel is falen, she is forsaken, and none to
raise her up: whereupon God calls to this duty, v. 4, 5, 6, 8. Thus says the
Lord to the house of Israel, Seek ye me, and ye shall live; but seek not
Bethel, etc. seek the Lord, and ye shall live, least he break forth like fire
in the house of Joseph, and devour, and there be none to quench; seek him who
made the seven Stars, and Orion, and turns the shadow of death into the
morning, etc. the LORD is his Name: and it follows, v. 15. It may be the Lord
will be gracious unto the remnant of Joseph. And when this Duty is neglected,
see the Threatening, v. 16. Wailing shall be in all streets, and they shall say
in all the high ways, Alas, alas! and they shall call the Husbandmen to
mourning, and such as are skilful of lamentation, to wailing. And now London is
fallen, does not the Lord call upon them, that they would call upon him, and as
they would turn away his anger, and prevent their utter ruin, that they would
seek him who can turn the shadow of death into the Morning, and the blackest
night of affliction into a day of Prosperity and Rejoicing.

London, seek the Lord, that ye may live, that there may be a reviving after
the years of such death and ruins; seek the Lord, before the decree bring
forth some other Judgment, and ye pass away like Chafe before the Whirlwinde,
in the day of the Lords fierce anger; it may be the Lord will be gracious to
the remnant of this great City. God expects that London should now pray at
another rate than heretofore they have done. It is said, Dan. 9. 13. All this
evil is come upon us, yet made we not our prayer unto the Lord our God; and
when God had consumed Israel because of their iniquities, the Prophet
complains, Isa. 64. 7. There is none that calls upon thy Name, that stirs
up himself to take hold of thee. Had the Prayers of London been such as they
should have been, such as they have been, the Desolations of London might have
been prevented: God expects that London under such Chastisements, should pour
out Prayers before him, Isa. 26. 16. God has spoken terribly unto them, he
expects that they should cry mightily unto him. God expects that London should
meet him in the way of his Judgments, not only with weepings for their sins,
that they have provoked him unto so great displeasure, but also with
Supplications for his Mercies. When Jacob was devoured, and his dewlling place
laid waste, Psalm. 79. 7. you have their prayer, v. 8, 9, etc. O Remember not
against us former iniquities, let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us, for
we are brought very low: Help us O Lord God of our salvation, for the glory of
thy Name: deliver us, and purge away our sins for thy Names sake. And the
Church under desolating Judgments does in prayer express her self very
pathetically, Isa. 63. 15, etc. Look down from Heaven, and behold from the
habitation of thy holiness, and thy glory, where is thy zeal, and thy strength,
the sounding of thy bowels, and thy mercies, are they restrained? Doubtless,
thou art our Father, etc. We are thine, return for thy servants sake, etc. and
chap. 64. 9. Be not wroth very sore, O Lord, neither remember iniquity for
ever, behold, see, we beseech thee, we are all thy people. God has been
pleading and contending with London by his Judgments, and God does look that
London should plead with him in prayer for his Mercies.

London, seek the Lord of Hosts, who has come forth against you in battle, and
wounded you with his sharp arrows, and yet has not laid down his weapons; get
to your knees; hang about Gods feet and arms; fill your mouths with arguments
to stay him in the course of his Judgments; let not the Apple of your eye
cease from weeping, that you have displeased him; and let not your tongue cease
from humble and earnest Entreaties, that he would pardon you, and remove his
displeasure from you.

Seek the Lord humbly; put your mouths in the dust, if so be there may be any
hope; God hears the Cry of the Humble, and will not despise their Prayer, Psalm.
10. 17. Psalm. 102. 17.

Seek the Lord diligently: He has promised to be found of all them that
diligently seek him, Heb. 11. 6. God looks for earnest, hearty, fervent Prayer:
There is a sweet Promise which God makes to his Peoples prayers after his sore
Judgments which he had brought upon them: Ier. 29. 11, 12, 13. I know the
thoughts, that I think toward you, says the Lord, thoughts of peace, and not
of evil, to give you an expected end. Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall
go, and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you: And ye shall seek me and
find me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart.

Seek the Lord believingly; mingle your Prayers with Faith, and make use of the
Mediation of Christ, that you may prevail.

11. God calls upon London, by the voice of his Judgments, to prepare for
greater troubles. The face of God seems to threaten greater troubles, there is
little sign that Gods brow is smoothened now, more than it was before the Fire;
there is little evidence of the appeasement of Gods anger: The face of the
times seem to threaten greater troubles; the Cloud over London and England is
still very black, and seems to be thicker than it was before.

Gods own people are like to undergo greater troubles: some of them have
endured much, but they are like to endure much more; some of them have suffered
deeply, but they are like to suffer greater things more generally: they have
been brought low by affliction, but not so low as others be; when others of
Gods people are stripped of all, they enjoy a comparative prosperity: they are
not so low as they deserve to be; their Gospel-reproaching sins deserve far
greater severities: they are not so low as they may have need to be; they may
need greater troubles, to unite them more one to another in their affections*
to further their sanctification, to wean and loosen them more from the World;
to humble them for, and purify them more from sin; to exercise and brighten
more their graces: they are not so low as possibly they must be before they be
exalted; the Night is the darkest before the Day breaks; the storm is the
fiercest many times in its last blast; and the afflictions of Gods people are
the sorest before God gives them deliverance; God lays his people most low,
when he intends their highest exaltation: surely, the expected shock is not yet
over, and Gods Peoples most dreadful sufferings seem most immediately to be
threatened, they seem to be near, very near, even at the doors. The intent of
the late Judgments by Plague and Fire, seems plainly to be for the fitting and
preparing of them for more smart and heavy strokes. If God had permitted those
expected sufferings to have come upon them more suddenly, they might have found
them more unready; God has given them time to prepare, and awakening warnings
to prepare; and when will they be ready to suffer like Christians, like
Protestants, if now they be not ready?

The Profane and wicked Generation in the Land are like to endure greater
troubles, as has been shown page 80, 81, 82. and when the storm of Gods anger
does break down upon them, are there no drops likely to fall upon London? Is
not the whole Land likely to be in danger of ruin, when God does deal with the
ungodly and wicked Crew, whom he spares for some time, whilst he punishes so
severely the more righteous? The troubles of London have been great, but
methinks it is evident, that London is in danger of greater troubles; therefore
they have need to make preparation, which they have had such awakening calls
unto. Some possibly may think the bitterness of Londons troubles is over,
because their troubles have been so bitter; that the sharp Winter cold is gone,
when it was so sharp in the midst of Winter, and the Sun had got to some
height; but March can bring in as cold nipping Frost, as December and January
did; and when the Spring of Prosperity is expected by some, they may find the
sharpest part of the Winter of troubles to be behind. Prepare therefore London
for greater troubles.

12. God does expect that London should trust no more in arms of flesh, but in
himself alone. By these Judgments God has shown to London the weakness and
insufficiency of arms of flesh what broken reeds they are. Some put their trust
in men, and their great expectation of relief and comfort has been from their
friends; by the Plague God has shown, how frail and weak man is, how like
grass or a flower that quickly withers, or is cut down; how like glass or a
bubble which is easily broken and vanishes; many have lost by the Plague their
chief friends upon whom they have had all their dependence, and the Lord has
shown how insufficient a foundation man is for any ones trust and confidence,
therefore he calls aloud to London to cease from man, whose breath is in his
nostrils, for wherein is he to be accounted of? Isa. 2. 22. not to trust in any
of the sons of men, in whom there is no help; and the reason is, because their
breath goes forth, they return to their dust, in that very day all their
thoughts perish, Psalm. 146. 3, 4. Some put their trust in their wealth and
riches. Prove. 18. 11. the rich man's wealth is his City, and a high wall in his
own conceit. God has by the Fire, which has consumed so much of the wealth of
the City, shown how insufficient a foundation wealth is for any man's
confidence, he has made it evident that riches are uncertain, and that they
fly away with Eagles wings, sometimes whilst the owners are looking on; may
not that which is threatened, Psalm. 52. 5. 7. be spoken of many in London, that
God has rooted some of them by the Plague out of the Land of the living,
plucked and forced others out of their habitations by the Fire, and taken away
their stay and prop from them, of whom it may be said, Lo these are they that
made not God their strength, but trusted in the abundance of their riches, and
strengthened themselves in their wickedness.

London trust no more in arms of flesh, but trust in God alone: It is better to
trust in the Lord, than to put confidence in men; it is better to trust in the
Lord, than to put confidence in Princes, Psalm. 118. 8, 9. God is knocking off
your fingers from all things here below, his will is that you should put your
trust in him; which is one promised effect of great desolations and
afflictions, that you should labor after; Zeph. 3. 12. I will also leave in
the midst of thee an afflicted, and poor people, and they shall trust in the
Name of the Lord. You were not so forward to trust in the Lord when you had
greater abundance, endeavor to trust in him, now you are brought into greater
poverty and affliction: his Infinite Power, Wisdom, loving kindness, his
promise, truth and faithfulness are a strong bottom for your trust and
confidence in God. Trust in him at all times, in the worst of times; when your
danger is greatest, he will be your help and shield, Psalm. 115. 11. he will be
your refuge under oppression, and present help in time of trouble, Psalm. 46. 1.
he will be your rock and fortress, your high tower to defend you, or your
deliverer to redeem you out of all your troubles: trust in God alone for all
things: if you make use of creatures, do not lean and stay upon them, for they
will slip from under you; but stay your selves on God. O the peace and quiet
which this will yield in shaking troublesome days! when others hearts tremble
within them, and are moved like leaves upon the approach of danger, you shall
not be afraid of evil tidings, but have your hearts fixed trusting in the Lord,
Psalm. 112. 7.

13. God does expect that London should have Death in continual remembrance:
This God expects from the Judgment of the Plague, the Death of so many
thousands a week in London, gave such a spectacle of Mortality, and Preached
such a Sermon in the City, as should bring the remembrance of Death into their
minds every day of their lives; the death, if it were but of one or two should
put you in mind of your later end; but when you have seen so many go down into
the pit before you, it should inscribe the remembrance of death more deeply
upon your minds, the record of which you should look daily into: the gates of
the City in the year of the Plague seemed to have this inscription upon them,
All Flesh is Grass; Let that word sound every day in your ears, and remember
your bodies are exposed to the stroke of death every day; and though you have
outlived the Plague, that yet Death has you in the chase, and will ere long
(you know not how soon) overtake you; remember your glass is running, and will
quickly be run out; and therefore all the days of your appointed time, as you
should remember; so you should prepare for your great change.

God expects that the remaining inhabitants of London should be prepared well
for death now, when they have had death so much in their view: some of you have
been sick of the Plague and brought to the very brink of the Grave, all of you
have been in danger of the Plague, when the disease was so sore and raging: I
fear most of you were unprepared for death at that time, and had you dyed then,
that it would have been with horror: and I believe that there are few of you,
but did in the time of your fears and danger, make vows and promises, if the
Lord would shelter you from the arrows, which flew about you, and spare your
lives then; that you would lead new lives, and be more careful to prepare for
your change; so that Death should not take you so unprovided any more: God
expects the fulfilling of your promises; and that you should live up to the
vows, which you made in the time of your distress; and so provide your selves
whilst you are well, that the messenger of Death may have a welcome reception,
when ever he summoneth you to leave this world.

14. God expects that London should retain great impressions of Eternity. You
have had the door of Eternity set wide open in your view, when so many were
thronging in at the door, and I believe you had deeper apprehensions of
Eternity in those days, than ever you had in your lives; take heed that those
impressions do not wear off, and that you lose not those apprehensions,
especially when you are drawing every day nearer and nearer thereunto. Think
often of the vast Ocean of Eternity without bottom or bank on the other side,
into which the whole stream of time will empty it self; and how quickly the
small rivulet of your appointed days may fall into it: Think often of the
unalterable state of Joy or Misery, which you must enter into at the end of
your course: think how thin and short the pleasures of sin are in this life, in
comparison of the horrible and endless torments of hell; and how light and
momentaneous the afflictions of Gods people are here, in comparison with the
exceeding and eternal weight of glory prepared for them in Heaven, 2 Cor. 4. 17.

15. God does call upon London by the Fire which burnt down the City to secure
themselves against the Fire of Hell. London's Fire was Dreadful, but the Fire
of Hell will be a thousand-fold more Dreadful. The Fire of London was kindled
by man; be sure some second cause was made use of herein; but the Fire of Hell
will be kindled by God himself, Isa. 30. 33. Tophet is ordained of old, for the
King it is prepared, he has made it deep and large: the pile thereof is Fire
and much Wood, and the breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone does
kindle it. The Fire of London burnt the houses of the City, and consumed much
of the goods; but the Fire of Hell will burn the persons of the wicked, Matthew.
15. 41. Depart ye cursed into everlasting Fire. The Fire of London did burn
most, but not all the houses in the City, some are yet remaining, but the Fire
of Hell will burn all the persons of the wicked, not one of them shall escape
and remain. The Fire of London was extinguished, and did last but four days;
but the Fire of Hell will be unextinguishable, it will burn for ever, it is
called everlasting Fire, in which the damned must lie and burn eternally,
without any possibility of ever getting forth. If you had known before of
Londons Fire, where it would begin, and how it would spread, and seize upon
your houses, surely you would have taken some course for the prevention of it:
you know before of the Fire of Hell, the Word of God has revealed it; O take
some course for prevention of it, at least for securing of your selves against
it: when the Fire was burning in London, you did fly from it, least it should
have consumed your persons as well as houses; O fly from the Fire of Hell, into
which your persons will be thrown if you go on in sin; fly from the wrath which
is to come; fly unto Jesus Christ who alone can deliver you.

16. God does call upon Londoners by the Fire to be like Strangers and Pilgrims
in the World. God has burned you out of your habitations, that he might loosen
your affections from houses, and riches, and all things here below; that he
might unsettle you, unhinge, unfix you, that you might never think of Rest and
Settlement in the Creatures, as long as you live: God calls upon you by this
Judgment, to take off your hearts from this world, which is so very uncertain,
and to be like Strangers and Pilgrims upon the earth, who are to take up your
lodging here but a few days and nights in your passage to the other world; God
expects you should live as those who have here no certain dwelling place, and
therefore that you should not lavish away too much of your thoughts, and
affections, and time about these uncertain things, which are of so short a
continuance, and with which you cannot have a long abode; God has by his
Judgments crucified the World very much before you, and he expects that the
world should be crucified in you; God has poured contempt upon the world, and
set a mark of disgrace thereon; he has cast dirt upon the face where you
fancied before so much beauty to lie; and he expects that you should fall in
esteem, and grow out of love with the world, and never go a whoring from him to
the creatures any more.

17. God calls upon London to make him their habitation. Psalm. 90. 1. Lord thou
have been our dwelling places in all generations. God is the hiding place, and
he is the dewlling place of his people; you have lost your dwellings by the
Fire, make God your habitation, and dwell in him, to whom you may have constant
resort, and in whom you may have a sure abode. Get possession of this house by
your union to God through his Son; and when you are in, keep possession, abide
in this honse, do not wander from him, and turn your selves out of doors by
breaking of his household laws; make God your home, and labor to be much
acquainted at home; spend your time with God, and give your hearts to him: Rest
and repose your selves in God daily; look for all your provisions in him, and
from him; walk in him and with him. Make God your habitation.

18. God calls upon London to seek after an abiding City. Heb. 13. 14. We
have here no continuing City, but we seek one to come. London has reason to
say the former, therefore let London do the later: you have seen the City fall
by the Fire, seek after a City which has more lasting foundations, and is of
such strong building, that neither time can wear and weaken, nor flames of Fire
reach and consume. I mean the New Jerusalem, which is above, the Heavenly City,
whose builder and maker is God; there are Mansions, abiding places for the
Saints, Ioh. 14. 2. there the wicked will cease from troubling, and the weary
will be at rest, seek: after this City, labor for a title to it, lay up your
Treasure in it, get your affections set upon it; above all Trades drive a Trade
for Heaven, which in the issue will yield you the best returns.

19. God does expect that London should labor to build his House. The neglect
of Gods House, I believe has been a great cause of the fall of so many Houses
in the City by Fire. God expects that now you should endeavor the building of
his House; otherwise, I do not think that God will build again your Houses: you
may have an Act of Parliament for building the City, and set Workmen about it;
but unless God do enact it too, the building will never go forward; unless God
build the City, the Workmen will labor in vain. Read and consider the
Prophecy of Haggai. Set about the work of Reformation more vigorously;
especially in the House and Worship of God.

20. God does expect that Londoners should dedicate themselves and Families
unto him. You have broken your Baptismal and other Vows, and God has made
great breaches upon you for your Infidelity; now renew your Vows, give up your
selves to God, avouch him to be your God, and avouch your selves to be his
People, and live accordingly: Take up Ioshuah's resolution, that whatever
others in the Land do, that you and your Families will serve the Lord: Make it
your only business in the World to serve God; let Religion have an influence
upon all your actions; do nothing without the Warrant of Gods Precept; let your
Conversation be such as becomes the Gospel; govern your Families in the fear
of God; fill all your Relations with duty; learn more righteousness by Gods
Judgments, and be quickened by them unto a more holy and strict walking.

And if you yield such Fruits as these, which God expects after his plowing and
harrowing of you; if you open your Ear to the Terrible Voice of the Lord which
has uttered it self in the City, and with full purpose of heart set about the
practice of the duties he expects and calls for; then you may hope that he will
yet build you up and plant you, that he will close your breaches, and raise up
your ruinous Habitations; that he will make you glad according to the Years
wherein he has afflicted you, and give you to see good days, instead of those
evil which you have seen and felt; then the Lord will rejoice over you to do
you good; and make London like Mount Zion, where he will pitch his Tent, and
take up his Habitation; then he will compass you about with the Bulwark of
Salvation, and prevent those further utterly Desolating Judgments which you
are in danger of; yea the Lord will be as a wall of fire round about you, and
the Glory in the midst of London, from whence his Praise and your Fame shall
sound throughout the whole World.

FINIS.
Soli Deo Gloria.

