

THE ENGLISH-MANS TREASVRE.

With the true Anatomy of Man's Body Compiled by that excellent Chyrurgion Mr.
Thomas Vica^^ Esquire, Sergeant Chyrurgion to King HENRY the 8. To King EDWARD
the 6. To Queen MARY, and to our late Sovereign Queen ELIZABETH, and also
chief Chyrurgion to St. Bartholmewes Hospital.

Whereunto are annexed many Secrets appertainin^ to Chyrurgerie, with diverse
excellent approved Remedi^^ for all Captains and Soldiers, that travel
either by Water or Land: And likewise for all Diseases which are either in Man
or Woman: with Emplaisters of especial Cure: with other potions and drinks
approved in Physic.

Also the Rare Treasure of the English Bathes: written by William Turner Doctor
in Physic.

Gathered and set forth for the benefit and Cure of the Poorer sort of people,
who are not able to go to the Physicians: By WILLIAM BREMER, Practitioner in
Physic, and Chyrurgerie.

And now ninthly much augmented, corrected and enlarged, with almost a thousand
approved Waters and Medicines, meet and necessary for Physic and Chyrurgerie:
as also Ointments and Plasters, with especial and approved Remedies for the
Plague, and Pestilent Fever, which never came to light before this present; By
W. B. Practitioner in Physic and Chyrurgerie.

With a necessary Table for the ready finding out of any secret therein
contained.

Printed as London by B. ALSOP, and THO: FAUCET, dwelling in Grubstreet near
the lower Pumpe: 16^^

TO THE RIGHT VVORpfull: Sir ROWLAND HAYWARD Knight, President of little St.
Bartholmewes in West-Smithfield, Sir Ambrose Nicholas Knight, with the rest of
the Worcester: Masters and Governors of the fame; William Clowes, William Beton,
Richard Story, and Edward Baily, Chyrurgions of the same Hospital, wishes
Health and Prosperity.
AMong the people in times past, it was common, to praise and extol by
Pictures and Epigrams, the famous deeds of all such persons, whosoever in any
virtuous quality or Liberal Science excelled. Sulpitius Gallus among the
Romans, was highly renowned for his singular cunning in Astronomy, by whose
means Lucius Paulus obtained the victory in this Wars against Persius.
Pericles also among the Athenians, was had in great admiration and honor, for
his profound knowledge in Philosophy, by whom the whole City of Athens was
from care and woe delivered, when they supposed their destruction to be near
at hand, by a black darkness, of some admiration hanging over their City. How
honorably was Apelles the Painter esteemed of mighty ALEXANDER, by whom only
he desired to be Painted? But amongst all other Arts and Sciences, whose praise
in times past flourished and shined most brightly, Chyrurgerie among the
Grecians lacked not his Praise, honor and estimation. For did not that worthy
and famous Captain of the Greeks, Agamemnon, love dearly, and reward
bountifully, both Podalerius and Machaon, through whose cunning skill in
Surgerie, thousands of the worthy Greeks were saved alive and healed, who else
had dyed and perished? And further, here to speak of Philometur, of Attalus,
of Hiero, of Archelaus, and o^ luba, Kings of famous memory, who purchased
Eternal praise, by their study and cunning in Physic and Surgerie. But now in
these our days Envy so rules the roast, that Physic should be condemned,
and Surgerie despised for ever, but that sometimes pain bids Battle, and
care keeps skirmish in such bitter fort, that at the last his Alarm is
sounded out; Now come Physic, and then help Surgerie. Then is remembered the
saying of JESUS the Son of SYRACH, which is notable, Honor the Physician and
Chyrurgion for necessity; whom the Almighty God has created, because from the
highest comes Medicine, and they shall receive gifts of the King. Wherefore
we exhort the wise man, that he in no time of Prosperity and Health, neglect
those noble Arts and Mysteries of Physic and Chyrurgerie, because no Age, no
Person, no Country, can long time lack their helps and Remedies. What is it
to have Lands and Houses, to abound in Silver and Gold, to be decked with
Pearls and Diamonds, yea, and to rule over Nations and Countries, and to lack
Health, the only Jewel and greatest treasure of man's life and delight?
Consider then (we beseech your Worships) what praises are due to such noble
Sciences, which only work the causes of this aforesaid Health, and how much
the Weale-publike are bound to all them, whose cares and Studies daily tends
to this end. Amongst whom here is to be remembered, Mr. VICARY Esquire, Sergeant
Chyrurgion to two Kings and two Queens of famous memory: whose learned work
of Anatomy, is by us (the forenamed Surgions of St. Bartholmewes in west
Smithfield, newly revived, corrected, and published abroad to the commodity of
others) who be Students in Chyrurgerie: not without our great study, pains and
charges. And although we do lack the profound knowledge, and sugared
Eloquence of the Latin and Greek tongues, to deck and beautify this work,
yet we hope the studious Reader shall thereby reap singular commodity and
profit, by reading this little Treatise of the Anatomy of Man's Body; the which
is only grounded upon Reason and Experience, which are two principal roots
of Physic and Chyrurgerie. As it is granted by Galen, in his third Book De
Methodo medendi. And we who daily work and practice in Chyrurgerie, according
to the deepenesse of the Art, as well in grievous Wounds, Ulcers, and
Fistulaes, as other hid and secret diseases upon the Body of Man, daily used by
us in St. Bartholmewes Hospital, and other places, etc. These poor and
grieved Creatures, as well Men, and Women, as Children, do know the profit of
this Art to be manifold, and the lack of the same to be lamented. Therefore
Galen truly writes, saying: That no man can work so perfectly as aforesaid,
without the knowledge of the Anatomy: For (says he) It is as possible for a
Blind man to carve and make an Image perfect, as a Chyrurgion to work without
error in a Man's body not knowing the Anatomy. And further, for as much, as
your Worships are very careful for those poor and grieved Creatures within
the Hospital of St. Bartholmewes, etc. whereof Mr. VICARY was a member. We
are therefore now the more encouraged to dedicate this little work of the
Anatomy, being his and our Travels, to you as Patrons of this Book, to defend
it against the ravenous jaws of Envious Backbiters, which never cease by all
unlawful means, to blemish and deface the works of the Learned, Expert, and
well disposed persons. And we shall not only thank your Worships for so
doing, but also pray unto Almighty GOD to requite your goodness, and receive
you into his protection and keeping.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, EDMOND WRIGHT, Lord To the Right Worshipful, Sir
NICHOLAS RAINTON Knight, President; To the right Worshipful, Sr. MAVRICE ABBOT
Knight; To the Worshipful, MARTIN BOND Esquire, Treasurer: And to the
Worshipful, Alderman HARRISON, Alderman SOAME, and others the Governors of
the Hospital of little St. Bartholmewes near West- Smithfield, London: T. F.
wishes Health and Happiness.
Right Hon: and Worshipful,
THis Book has been Eight several times imprinted, and as at the first
time, so ever since in every Impression in has been dedicated to the
Governors of your Hospital: The Excellency and necessity of it easily
appears by the often reprinting thereof: And the times now requiring a Ninth
impression, I would not so much forget my self or wrong You, as to Publish it
without due Dedication to your Honor and Worships. If You please to vouchsafe
it Patronage, and my Service in the Dedication thereof your acceptance, I shall
ever rest obliged;

Ready to do your Honor, and Worships service: T. F.

To the Reader.
Dear Brethren and friendly Readers, we have here according to the truth and
meaning of the Author, set forth this needful and necessary work concerning
the Anatomy of Man's body, being collected and gathered by Mr. Thomas Vicary,
and now by us the Chyrurgions of St. Bartholmews Hospital revived, corrected
and published. And albeit this Treatise be small in volume, yet in commodity it
is great and profitable. Notwithstanding, if the things therein contained be
not discreetly and wisely studied and applied, according to the true meaning of
the Author, we have to tell you hereof, that therein is great peril, because
through ignorant Practitioners, not knowing the Anatomy, commonly does ensue
Death, and separation of Soul and Body.

Furthermore, whereas many good and Learned men in these our days, do cea^e
to publish abroad in the English tongue, their Works and travels, it is, for
that if any one fault or blemish by fortune be committed, either by them or the
Printer escaped, they are blamed; yea, and condemned for Ignorant men, and
errours-holders. But now we cease here from these points, to trouble the
gentle Reader with long Discoursing, for whose sakes and commodities we have
taken these pains: Wishing that men more skillful and better learned would
have borne this burden for us. Craving only thus much at your hands, for to
correct our faults favorably, and to report of the Author courteously, who
sought (no doubt) your commodities only, and the profit of the Commonwealth
without praise and vainglory of himself. Thus the Chyrurgions aforesaid
commit you to the blessed keeping of Almighty God, who always defend and
increase your studies and ours,

Amen.
THOMAS VICARIE to his Brethren, practicing Chyrurgerie.
HEreafter follows a little Treatise (entitled A Treasure for Englishmen)
of the Anatomy of Man: made by THOMAS VICARY, Citizen and Chyrurgion of London,
for all such Brethren of his fellowship practicing Chyrurgerie: Not for them
that be expertly seen in the Anatomy: for to them Galen the Lantern of all
Chyrurgions has set it forth in Canons, to the high glory of God, and to the
erudition and knowledge of all those that be expertly seen and learned in the
Noble Science of Chyrurgerie. And because all the noble Philosophers writing
upon Chyrurgerie, do condemn all such persons as practice in Chyrurgerie not
knowing the Anatomy; therefore I have drawn into certain Lessons and small
Chapters, a part of the Anatomy, but touching a part of every member
particularly: Requiring every man that shall read this little Treatise, to
correct and amend it where it shall need, and hold me excused for my bold
enterprise, and accept my goodwill toward the same.

O Lord which made the lofty Skies,
work in our Rulers hearts:
Always to have before their eyes,
safe guard to godly Arts.
Now he that is the perfect guide, does know our helps were here alone;
By homely style it may be spied, for rules in Rhetoric have we none.
Our heads do lack that filed phrase, whereon fine wits delight to gaze;
If any say, we deserve here blame, we pray you then amend the same.
THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.
PART. I. A Discourse of Chyrurgerie; as also, a Description of the Anatomy of
Man's Body, by Mr. T. Vicary Esquire, etc. PART, II. Of things necessary for a
Chyrurgion, etc. PART. III, and IV. Of Wounds, and their Cure, etc, PART. V. Of
the Rare Treasure of the English Bathes, by W. Turner, Doctor of Physic, etc.
PART. VI. A Treatise of the Judgment of Vrines, etc. PART. VII. A Physical
Discourse, how a man should order himself, etc. PART. VIII. Of the making of
diverse Waters, etc. PART. IX. Of the making of Unguents, or Ointments, etc.
PART. X. Of the making of sundry Emplaisters, etc. PART. XI. Of Medicines and
Remedies to heal all Diseases (by the grace of God) curable. As also the
virtue of diverse Herbs, Plants, and Drugs, etc. by G. E. PART, XII. A brief
Treatise of the Pestilence, By W. B.
A TREASVRE FOR ENGLISHMEN. Containing the Anatomy of man's body: Compiled by
Thomas Vicary Esquire, and Sergeant Chyrurgion to King Henry the 8. to King
Edward the 6. to Qu. Mary, and to our late gracious Sovereign Lady, Queen
ELIZABETH. And also, chief Chyrurgion of St. Bartholmewes Hospital for the
use and commodity of all unlearned Practitioners in Chyrurgerie.
CHAP. I. Here I shall declare unto you shortly and briefly, the sayings and
determinations of diverse ancient Authors in three Points, very expedient for
all men to know, that intend to use and exercise the Mystery or Art of
Chyururgerie. The first is, to know what Chyrurgerie is: The second is, how
that a Chyrurgion should be chosen: And the third is, with what properties a
Chyrurgion should be endued.
FOr the first, which is to know what thing Chyrurgeris is. Herein I do note
the saying of Lanfranke, whereas he says: All things that man would know, may
be known by one of these three things: That is to say, by his Name, or by his
Working; or else by his very being and showing of his own properties. So then
it follows that in the same manner we may know what Chyrurgery is, by three
things. First, by his Name, as thus: the Interpreters write that Surgery is
derived out of these words, Apo tes chiros, ca^ touergou, that is to be
understood: a hand working, and so it may be taken for all handy Arts: But
Noble Ipocras says, that Chirurgerie is hand-working in Man's body, for the
very end and profit of Chirurgerie is hand-working.

Now the second manner of knowing what thing Chyrurgery it, it is the saying of
Avicen; To be known by his being, for it is verily a Medicinal Science. And
as Galen says, He that will know the certainty of a thing, let him not busy
himself to know only the name of that thing, but also the working and the
effect of the same thing.

Now the third way to know what thing Chirurgerie is, it is also to be known
by his being or declaring of his own properties, the which teaches us to
work in man's body with hands, as thus: In cutting and opening those parts that
be whole, and in healing those parts that be broken or cut, and in taking away
that that is superfluous, as Wartes, Wennes, Skurfulas, and other of like
effect.

But further, to declare what Galen says Surgery is, it is the last
Instrument of Medicine: that is to say, Diet, Potion, and Surgery: of the
which three says he, Diet is the noblest, and the most virtuous: and thus he
says. Whereas a man may be cured with Diet only, let there be given no manner
of Medicine. The second Instrument, is Potion: for and if a man may be cured
with Diet and Potion, let there not be ministered any Surgery, through whose
virtue and goodness, is removed and put away many grievous infirmities and
Diseases, which might not have been removed nor yet put away, neither with
Diet nor with Potion. And by these three means, it is known what thing
Surgery is. And this suffices us for that point.

Now it is known what thing Chirurgerie is, there must also be chosen a man
apt and meet to minister Surgery or to be a Surgeon. And in this point
all Authors do agree, that a Surgeon should be chosen by his Complexion,
and that his complexion be very temperate, and all his members well
proportioned. For Rasis says: Whose face is not seemly, it is impossible for
him to have good manners. And Aristotle the great Philosopher, writes in his
Epistles to the Noble King Alexander (as in those Epistles more plainly does
appear) how he should choose all such persons as should serve him, by the
form and shape of the face, and all other members of the body. And furthermore
they say, he that is of an evil Complexion, there must needs follow like
Conditions.

Wherefore it agrees, that he that will take upon him to practice as a
Chirugion, must be both of a good and temperate complexion, as is before
rehearsed: and principally, that he be a good liver, and a keeper of the holy
Commandments of God, of whom comes all cunning and grace, and that his body
be not quaking and his bands steadfast, his fingers long and small, and not
trembling: and that his left hand be as ready as his right, with all his
limbs, able to fulfill the good works of the soul. Now as here is a man
meet to be made a Chirurgion^: (and though he have all those good qualities
before rehearsed) yet is he no good Surgeon, but a man very fit and meet
for the practice.

Now then to know what properties and conditions this man must have before he
be a perfect Surgeon. I do note four things most specially, that every
Surgeon ought for to have: The first, that he be learned: The second, that
he be expert: The third, that he be ingenious: The fourth, that he be well
mannered. The first (I said) he ought to be learned, and that he know his
principles, not only in Surgery, but also in Physic, that he may the
better defend his Surgery; also he ought to be seen in natural Philsophy,
and in Grammar, that he speak congruity in Logic, that teaches him to
prove his proportions with good reason: In Rhetoric, that teaches him to
speak seemly and eloquently: also in Theoricke, that teaches him to know
things natural, and not natural, and things against Nature. Also he must
know the Anatomy: for all Authors write against those Chirurgions that work
in man's body, not knowing the Anatomy: For they be likened to a blind man, that
cutteth in a Vine tree, for he takes more or less then he ought to do. And
here no^e well the sayings of Galen, the Prince of Philosophers, in his
Estoris. That it is as possible for a Surgeon (not knowing the Anatomy) to
work in man's body without error, as it is for a blind man to carue an Image
and make it perfect. The second, I said, he must be expert: For Rafus says: He
ought to know and to see other men work, and after to have use and exercise.
The third, that he be ingenious and witty: for all things belonging to
Surgery may not be written, nor with letters set forth. The fourth, I said,
that he must be well mannered, and that he have all these good conditions here
following.

First, that he be no Spouse-breaker, nor no Drunkard. For the Philosophers
say, amongst all other things, beware of those persons that follow
Drunkenness, for they be accounted for no men, because they live a life
bestiall: wherefore amongst all other sorts of people, they ought to be
sequestered from the ministering of Medicine. Likewise, a Surgeon must take
heed that he deceive no man with his vain promises, for to make of a small
matter a great, because he would be accounted the more famous. And amongst
other things, they may neither be flatterers nor mockers, nor privy backbiters
of other men. Likewise, they must not be proud, nor presumptuous: nor
detracters of other men. Likewise, they ought not to be covetous, nor
nonyggard, and namely amongst their friends, or men of Worship, but let them be
honest, courteous, and free both in word and deed. Likewise, they shall give no
counsel except they be asked, and then say their advice by good deliberation,
and that they be well advised before they speak, chiefly in the presence of
wise men. Likewise, they must be as privy and as secret as any Confessor, of
all things that they shall either hear or see in the house of their Patient.
They shall not take into their cure any manner of person, except he will be
obedient unto their precepts: for he cannot be called a Patient, unless he be
a sufferer. Also that they do their diligence as well to the poor as to the
rich. They shall never discomfort their Patient, and shall command all that be
about him that they do the same, but to his friends speak truth as the case
stands. They must also be hold in those things whereof they be certain, and
as dreadful in all perils. They may not chide with the sick, but be always
pleasant and merry. They must not covet any woman by way of villainy, and
specially in the house of their Patient. They shall not for covetousness of
money, take in hand those cures that be incurable, nor never set any certain
day of the sick man's health, for it lies not in their power: following the
distinct counsel of Galen, in the Aphorism of Hypocrates, saying: Oporter
seipsum non solum.

By this Galen means, that to the cure of every sore, there belongs four
things: of which, the first and principal beloneth to God: the second, to the
Surgion: the third, to the Medicine: and the fourth, to the Patient. Of the
which four, and if any one do fail, the Patient cannot be healed: then they
to whom belongs but the fourth part, shall not promise the whole but be first
well advised. They must also be gracious and good to the poor, and of the rich
take liberally for both. And see they never praise themselves, for that
redoundeth more to their shame and discredit, then to their fame and worship.
For a cunning and skillfull Surgeon, need never vaunt of his doings, for his
works will ever get credit enough. Likewise, that they despise no other
Surgeon without a great cause: for it is meet, that one Surgeon should
love another, as Christ loves us all.

And in thus doing, they shall increase both in virtue and cunning, to the
honor of God, and worldly same.

SIC TRANSIT GLORIA MVNDI.


OF THE ANATOMY. CHAP. II. The Anatomy of the simple Members.
ANd if it be asked you how many simple Members there be, it is to be
answered, Eleven, and two that be but superfluities of Members: and these be
they, Bones, Cart^lages, Nex^es, Pannicles, Ligaments, Cords, Arteirs, Veins,
Fatness, Flesh and Skin: and the superfluities be the Hairs and Nails. I
shall begin at the Bone, because it is the Foundation and the haidest Member of
all the Body. The Bone is a cosimile Member, simple and spermaticke, and cold
and dry of Complexion, insensible, and inflexible: and has diverse forms in
Man's body, for the diversity of helpings. The cause why there be many Bones in
man's body, is this: Sometime it is needful that one members or one limb
should move without another: another cause is, that some defend the principal
members, as both the Bone of the Breast, and of the Head: and some to be the
Foundation of diverse parts of the Body, as the Bones of the ridge and of the
Legs: and some to fulfill the hollow places, as in the Hands and Feet, etc.

The Gristle is a member simple and Spermaticke, next in hardness to the Bone,
and is of complexion cold and dry, and insensible, The Gristle was ordained for
six causes or profits that I find in it: The first is, that the continual
mooving of the hard Bone might not be done in a juncture, but that the Gristle
should be a mean between the Ligament and him. The second is, that in the
time of concussion or oppression, the soft members or limbs should not be hurt
of the hard. The third is, that the extremity of Bones and Joints that be
grisly, might the easier be foulded and n^wved together, without hurt. The
fourth is, for that it is necessary in some mean places, to put a Gristle, as
in the throat bowl for the the sound. The fifth is, for that it is needful
that some members be holden up with a Gristle, as the lids of the Eyes. The
sixth is, that some Limbs haus a sustaining and a drawing abroad, as in the
Nose and the Ears, etc.

The Ligament is a member consimple, simple, and spermaticke, next in hardness
to the Gristle, and of complexion cold and dry, and is flexible and insensible,
and binds the Bones together. The cause why he is flexible and insensible, is
this: If it had been sensible, he might not have suffered the labor and
mooving of the Joints: and if it had not been flexible of his bowing, one
Limme should not have moved without another. The second profit is, that he be
joined with sinews, for to make Cords and Bawnes. The third help is, that he
be a resting place to some sinews. The fourth profit is, that by him the
members that be within the Bone be sustained, as the Matrixe and Kidneys, and
diverse other, etc.

The Sinew is a consimiler member, simple and spermatick, a mean between hard
and soft, and in complexion cold and dry and he is both flexible and sensible,
strong and tough, having his beginning from the Brain, or from Mynuca, which
is the Marrow of the back. And from the brain comes seven pair of Nerves
sentatine, and from Mynuca comes thirty pair of Nerves motive, and one that
is by himself, that springs of the last spondell. All these sinews have
both feeling and mooving, in some more, and in some less, etc.

A Cord or Tendon is a consimple or official member compound and spermaticke,
sinowy, strong and tough, meanly between hardness and softness, and meanly
sensible and flexible and in complexion cold and dry. And the Cord or Tendon
is thus made: The sinews that come from the brain and from Mynuca, and go to
moan the members, is intermingled with the Lygaments, and when the sinews and
Lygaments are intermingled together, then is made a Cord. And for three causes
I perceive why the Cords were made.

The first is, that the sinew alone is so sensible, that he may not suffer the
great labor and travel of moving, without the fellowship and strength of the
Ligament that is insensible, and that lets his great feeling, and brings
him to a perfect temperance. And so the Cords move the limbs to the will of
the soul. And this Cord is associated with a simple f^e^h, and so thereof is
made a Brawne or a Muskle, on whom he might rest after his travel: and this
Brawne is called a Muskle. Then when this Cord is entered into this Brawne, he
is departed into many small threeds, the which be called Will: and this Will
has three properties: The first is in length, by whose virtue that draws it
has might. The second in breadth by whom the virtue that casts out has
might. The third, in thwartnes, in whom the virtue that holds has might: and
at the end of the Brawne those threeds be gathered together to make another
Muskle, etc.

Now I will begin at the Arteir. This Arteir is a member consimile, simple and
spermaticke hollow and finowie, having his springing from the heart, bringing
from the heart to every member, blood and spirit of life. It is of complexion
cold and dry. And all these Arteirs have two coats, except one that goes to
the Lungs, and he has but one coat that spreads abroad in the Lungs, and
brings with him to the Lungs blood with the spirit of life to nourish the
Lungs withal: And also that Arteir brings with him from the Lungs air to
temper the fumous heat that is in the heart. And this Arteir is he that is
called Arteria Venalis, because he has but one coat, as a vain, and is more
obedient to be delated abroad through all the Kings, because that the blood
might the sooner sweat through him: whereas all other Arteirs have two coats,
because one coat may not withstand the might and power of the spirit of life.
Diverse other causes there be, which shall be declared in the Anatomy of the
breast, etc.

The Vein is a simple member, in complexion cold and dry, and spermaticke,
like to the Arteir, having his beginning from the Liver and brings from the
Liver nutritive blood, to nourish every member of the body with. And it is so
to be understood, that there is no more difference between these two vessels
of blood, but that the Arteir is a vessel of blood spiritual or vital. And
the Vein is a vessel of blood nutrimentall, of the which Veins, there is
noted two most principal, of the which, one is called Vena Porta: the other is
called Venacelis, of whom it is too much to treat of now, until we come to the
Anatomy of the Womb, etc.

The Flesh, is a consimile member, simple, not spermaticke, and is engendered of
blood congealed by heat, and is in complexion hot and moist. Of the which is
noted three kinds of fleshes; that is to say, one is soft and pure flesh: the
second is Musculus, or hard and brawny flesh: the third is Glandulus, knotty,
or kurnelly flesh. Also the commodities of the flesh, be indifferent, or some
be common to every kind of flesh, and some be proper to one manner of flesh
alone. The profits of the flesh be many, for some defend the body from cold as
death clothes: also it defends the body from hard things coming against it:
so through his moisture he rectifyeth the Body in Summer, in time of great
heat.

Wherefore it is to be considered, what profitablenesse is in every kind of
flesh by himself. And first of simple and pure flesh, which fulfilleth the
concavities of void places, and causes good form and shape: and this flesh is
found between the teeth, and on the end of the yard. The profit of the Brawny
flesh or Musculus flesh, shall be spoken of in the Anatomy of the Arms. The
profits of the Grandulus flesh are these. First, that it turns the blood into
a color like to himself, as does the flesh of a woman's pappes turn the
menstruall Blood into milk. Secondly, the Grandulus flesh of the Testikles,
turns the blood into Sparme. Thirdly, the Grandulus flesh of the cheeks,
that engenders the spettle, etc.

The next is of Fatness, of the which I find three kinds. The first is
Pinguedo, and it is a consimiler member, not spermaticke, and it is made of a
subtle portion of Blood congealed by cold: and it is of complexion cold and
moist, insensible, and is intermingled amongst the parts of the flesh. The
second, is Adepper, and is of the same kind as is Pinguedo, but it is departed
from the flesh besides the Skin, and it is an Oil heating and moysting the
Skin. The third is Auxingia, and it is of kind as the others be, but he is
departed from the flesh within forth about the Kidneyes, and in the Intrailes,
and it helps both the Kidneyes and the Intrailes, from drying by his
^^^tiosity, etc.

Then come we to the Skin. The Skin is a consimile member of official,
partly spermaticke, strong and tough, flexible and sensible, thin and
temperate: whereof there be two kinds: One is the Skin that covers the
outward members: and the other the inner members, which is called a Pannicle,
the profitabless of whom, was spoken in the last lesson: but the Skin is
properly wovent of L^reeds, Nerves, Veins, and Arteirs. And he is made
temperate, because he should be a good deemer of heat from cold, and of
moystnesse from dryness, that there should nothing annoy or hurt the Body, but
it gives warning to the common wits thereof, etc.

The hairs of every part of man's Body, are but superfluity of members, made of
the gross sum or smoke passing out of the viscous matter, thickened to the
form of hair. The profitablenesse of him is declared in the Anatomy of the
heard, etc.

The Nails likewise, are a superfluity of members, engenbred of great earthly
smoke or fume resolved through the natural heat of humors, and is softer
then the bone, and harder then the flesh. In complexion they be cold and dry,
and are always waxing in the extremity of the fingers and toes. The vtility of
them are, that by them a man shall take the better hold: also they help to
claw the body when it needs. Lastly, they help to divide things for lack of
other fools, etc.

CHAP. III. The Anatomy of the compound Members, and first of the Head.
BEcause the Head of man is the habitation or dwelling place of the reasonable
soul of man, therefore with the grace of God, I shall first speak of the
Anatomy of the bead.

Galen says in the second Chapter De juvamentes, and Avicen rehearses the
same in his first Proposition and third Chapter, proving that the head of man
was made neither for wits, nor yet for the Brains, but only for the Eyes. For
beasts that have no heads, have the organs or instruments of wits in there
breasts. Therefore GOD and Nature have reared up the head of man only for the
eyes, for it is the highest member of man: and as a Beholder or Watchman
stands in a high Tower to give warning of the Enemies, so does the Eye of man
give warning unto the common Wits, for the defense of all other members of
the body.

Now to our purpose. If the question be asked, how many things be there
contained on the Head, and how many things contained within the head? As it is
rehearsed by Guydo, there be five containing, and as many contained, as thus:
The hair, the skin, the flesh, the Pannicles, and the Bone; neither rehearsing
Vein nor Arteir. The which Anatomy cannot be truly without them both, as thou
shall well perceive both in this but especially in the next. And how in this
Lesson I shall speak but of Hair, Skin, Flesh, Veins, Pannicles, and Bones,
what profit they do to man, every of them in his kind. Of the hair of the
Head, (whose creation is known in the Anatomy of the simple members) I do
note four vtilities why it was ordained. The first is, that it defends the
brain from too much heat, and too much cold, and many other outward noyances.

The second is, it makes the form or shape of the Head to seem more
seemelyer or beautifuller. For if the Head were not haired, the Face and the
Head should seem but one thing, and therefore the hair forms and shapeth
the Head from the Face.

The third is, that by color of the hair, is witnessed and known the
complexion of the Brain.

The fourth is, that the fumosities of the Brain might ascend and pass
lightlyer out by them. For, if there were a sad thing, as the skin, or other
of the same nature, as the Hair is, the fumosities of the Brain might not
have passed through it so lightly, as it does by the Hair.

The Skin of the head is more Lazartus, thicker, and more Porrus, then any
other Skin of any other member of the body. And two causes I note why; One
is, that it keeps or defends the Brain from too much heat and cold as does
the Hair. The other, that it discusseth to the common wits of all things that
noyeth outwardly, for the hair is insensible. The third cause why the skin
of the head is more thicker then any other skin of the body is this; that it
keeps the brain the more warm, and is the better fence for the Brain, and
it binds and keeps the Bones of the head the faster together.

Next follows the Flesh, the which is all Musculus or Lazartus flesh, lying
upon Pericrantum without mean. And it is made of subtle Will, and of simple
flesh, Sinews, Veins and Arteirs. And why the flesh that is all Musculus or
Lazartus in every member of a man's body was made, is for three causes. The
first is, that by his thickness, he should comfort the digestion of other
members that lie by him The second is, that through him every member is made
the formelier, and takes the better shape. The third is, that by his means
every member of the Body, drawing to him nourishing, the which others withold
to put forth from them, as it shall be more plainlyer spoken of in the Anatomy
of the Womb.

Next follows Pericranium, or the covering of the Bones of the Head. But here
it is to be noted of a Vein and an Arteir that comes between the Flesh and
this Pericraniam, that nourishes the utter part of the head, and so enters
pri^ily through the Commissaries of the Skull, bearing to the Brain and to his
Pannicles nourishing: Of whose substance, is made both Duramater, and also
Pericranium, as shall be declared in the parts contained in the Head. Here it
is to be noted of this Pannicle Pericranium, that it binds or compasses all
the Bones of the Head, unto whom is adjoined Duramater, and is also a part of
his substance, he wheit they be separated, for Duramater is nearer the Brain,
and is under the Skull.

This Pericranium was made principally for two causes: one is, that for ^is
strong binding together, he should make firm and stable the feeble
Commissaries or seames of the Bones of the Head. The other cause is, that it
should be a mean between the hard bone and the soft flesh.

Next, is the Bone of the Pot of the head, keeping in the Brains, of which it
were too long to declaire their names after all Authors, as they number them
and their names, for some name them after the Greek tongue, and some after the
Arabian: but in conclusion all this to our purpose. And they be numbered seven
bones in the pan or Skull of the head. The first is called the Coronall bone,
in which is the Orbits or holes of the Eyes, and it reaches from the brows
unto the midst of the head, and there it meets with the second bone called
Occipissiall, a bone of the hinder part of the head called the Noddle, of the
head, which two bones Coronall and Occipissiall, be divided by the
Commissaries, in the midst of the Head. The third and fourth Bones be called
Parietales, and they be the Bones of the ^ideling parts of the head, and they
be divided by the Commissaries, both from the foresaid Coronall and
Occipissiall. The fi^^-and Art bones be called, Petrosa or Mendosa: and these
two bones lie over the bones called, Parietales, on every side of the head one,
like Skales, in whom be the holes of the cares. The seventh and last of the
^ead is called Parill^arie or Bazillarie, the which Bone is as it were a wedge
unto all the other seven Bones of the head, and does fasten them together. And
thus be all numbered. The first is, the Coronall Bone: the second, is the
Occipissiall: the third and the fourth, is Parietales: the fifth and the sixth
is Petrosa, or Mendosa. And the seventh is Parillarie, or Bazillarie. And this
suffices for the five things containing.

CHAP. IIII. In this Chapter is declared the five things contained within the
Head.
NExt under the Bones of the Head within forth, the first thing that appears
is Duramater, then is Piamater, then the substance of the Brain, and then
Vermy forms and Letemirabile. But first we are to speaks of Duramater,
whereof, and ^ow it is sprung and made: First, it is to be noted of the V^yne
and Arteire that was spoken of in the last Chapter before, how privily they
entered through the Commissaries, or seames of the Head, and there by their
Union together, they do not only bring and give the spirit of Life and
m^^riment, but also do weaue themselves so together, that they make this
Pannicle Duramater. It is holden up by certain threeds of himself, coming
through the said Commissaries, running into Pericranium or Pannicle that
covers the Bones of the Head. And with the foresaid Vein and Artier, and
these threeds, coming from Duramater, is woven and made this Pericranium.

And why this Pannicle Duramater is set from the Skull, I note two causes. The
first is, that if the Duramater should have touched the Skull, it should
lightly have been hurt with the hardness of the Bone. The second cause is,
that the matter that comes of wounds made in the Head piercing the Skull,
should by it the better be defended and kept from Piamater, and hurting of the
Brain. And next unto this Pannicle, there is another Pannicle called Piamater,
or Meek-mother, because it is soft and tender unto the Brain. Of whose
creation, it is to be noted as of Duramater: For the original of their first
creation is of one kind, both from the Heart and the Liver, and is Mother of
the very substance of the Brain. Why it is called Piamater, is for because it
is soft and tender to the Brain, that if nourishes the Brain and feeds it,
as does a loving Mother, unto her tender Chi^^^ or Babe, for it is not so tough
and hard as is Duramater.

In this Pannicle Piamater is much to be noted of the great number of Veins
and Arteirs that are planted, ramefying throughout all his substance, giving to
the Brain both spirit and life. And this Pannicle does circumvolue or lay all
the substance of the Brain: and in some place of the Brain, the Veins and
the Artiers go forth of him, and enter into the divisions of the Brain, and
there drinks of the Brains substance into them, asking of the Heart, to them
the spirit of life or breath, and of the Liver nu^riment. And the aforesaid
spirit or breath takes a further disgestion, and there it is made animal by
the elaboration of the spirit vital, is turned and made animal. Furthermore,
why there be no more Pannicles over the Brain then one, is this: If there had
been but one Pannicle only, either it must have been hard or soft, or mean,
betweens both: If it had been hard, it should have hurt the Brain by his
hardness. If it had been soft, it should have been hurt of the hard Bone.
And if it had qeene but meanly, neither hard nor soft, it should have hurt the
Brain by his roughness, and also have been hurt of the hard Bone. Therefore
God and Nature has ordained two Pannicles, the one hard, and the other soft,
the harder to be a mean between the soft and the Bone: and the softer to be a
mean between the harder and the Brain it self. Also these Pannicles be cold
and dry of complexion, and spermaticke.

Next is the Brain, of which it is marvellously to be considered and noted,
how this Piamater divides the substance of the Brain, and lappeth it into
certain selles or divisions, as thus: The substance of the Brain is divided
into three parts or ventricles, of which the foremost part is the most. The
second or middlemost is less: the third or hindermost is the least. And from
each one to another be issues or passages that are called Meaces, through whom
passes the spirit of life too and fro. But here ye shall note, that every
Tentricle is divided into two parts, and in every part God has ordained and
set singular and several virtues, as thus; First, in the foremost Ventricle,
God has founded and set the common wits, otherwise, called the fine Wits,
as Hearing, Seeing, Feeling, Smelling, and Tasting. And also there is one part
of this Ventricle, the virtue that is called Fantasy, and he takes all the
forms or ordinances that be disposed of the ^^ue Wits, after the meaning of
sensible things. In the other part of the same Ventricle, is ordained and
founded the imaginatiue virtue, the which receives of the common Wits the
form of shape of sensitive things as they were received of the common Wits
without-foorth, representing their own shape and ordinances unto the
memoratiue virtue. In the middle Sell or Ventricle, there is founded and
ordained the Cogitatiue or estimatiue virtue: for he rehearses, shows,
declares, and deemeth those things that be offered unto him, by the other
that were spoken of before. In the third Ventrickle and last, there is founded
and ordained the virtue Memoratiue: in this place is registered and kept those
things that are done and spoken with the senses and keep them in his treasury
unto the putting forth of the five or common Wits, or Organes, or
Instruments of animal works, out of whose extremities or lower parts
springs Mynuca, or Marrow of the Spondels: of whom it shall be spoken of in
the Anatomy of the Neck and Back.

Furthermore it is to be noted, that from the foremost Ventricle of the Brain,
springs seven pair of sentatiue or feeling Sinews, the which be produced to
the Eyes, the Ears, the Nose, the Tongue, and to the Stomach, and to diverse
other parts of the Body: as it shall be declared in their Anatomies. Also it is
to be noted, that about the middle Ventrikle is the place of Vermi-formis, with
kurnelly flesh that fills, and Retemirabile, a wonderful Cause under the
Pannicles, is set or bounded with Arteirs only which come from the Heart, in
the which the vital spirit by his great labor, is turned and made animal.
And ye shall understand, that these two be the best kept parts of all the
Body: for a man shall rather dye, than any of these should suffer any manner of
griefs from without-forth, and therefore God has set them far from the
Heart.

Here I note the saying of H^ly Abba, of the coming of small Artiers from the
Heart, of whom (says he) is made a mavelous Net or Caul, in the which Caul
is enclosed the Brain, and in that place is laid the spirit of feeling, from
that place has the Spirit of Feeling his first creation, and from thence
passes other members, etc. Furthermore ye shall understand, that the Brain
is a member cold and moist of complexion, thin, and meanly viscous, and a
principal member, and an official member and spermaticke. And first, why he
is a principal member, is because he is the governor or the treasury of the
five Wits: And why he is an official member, is, because he has the effect
of feeling and stirring: And why he is cold and moist, is, that he should by
his coldness and moystnesse, abate and temper the exceeding heat and drought
that comes from the Heart. And why it is moist, is, that it should be the
more indifferenter and abler to every thing that should be reserved or gotten
into him. And why it is soft, is, that it should give place and favor to the
virtue of stirring. And why it is meanly viscous, is, that his sinews should
not be let in their working, through his overmuch hardness.

Here Galen demands a question, which is this: Whether that feeling and
moving be brought to Nerves by one or by diverse? Or whether the aforesaid thing
be brought substantially or rather judicially? The matter (says he) is so
hard to search and to be understood, that it were much better to let it alone
and pass over it.

Aristotle entreating of the Brain, says: The Brain is a member continually
moving and ruling all other members of the body, giving unto them both feeling
and moving: for if the Brain be let, all other members be let: and if the
Brain be well, then all other members of the body be the better disposed.

Also the Brain has this property, that it mooveth and follows the moving
of the Moon: For in the waxing of the Moon, the Brain follows upwards, and
in the wane of the Moon, the Brain discendeth downwards, and vanishes in
substance of virtue: for then the Brain shrinketh together in it self, and is
not so fully obedient to the spirit of feeling. And this is proved in men that
be Lunaticke and Mad, and also in men that be Epulenticke or having the Falling
sickness, that be most grieved in the beginning of the new Moon and in the
latter quarter of the Moon. Wherefore (says Aristotle) when it happens that
the Brain is either too dry or too moist, then can it not work his kind, for
then is the Body made cold^ then are the spirits of Life melted and resolved
away: and then follows feebleness of the Wits, and of all other members of
the Body, and last Death.

CHAP. V. The Anatomy of the Face.
THE Front or the Forehead, contains nothing but the Skin and Musculus
flesh, for the Pannicle underneath, it is of Pericranium, and the Bone is of
the Coronall bone. Howbeit there it is made broad as if there were a double
bone, which makes the form of the brows. It is called the Forehead or Front,
from one ear to the other, and from the roots of the ears of the head before
unto the Brows. But the cause why the brows were set and reared up was, that
they should defend the eyes from uoyance without-foorth: and they be ordained
with hair, to put by the humor or sweat that comes from the head. Also the
brows do help the eye-liddes, and do beautiffe and make fair the face, for
he that has not his brows haired, is not seemly.

And Aristotle says, that ouer-measurable Brows betokens an envious man.
Also high brows and thick, betokcneth hardiness: and brows with little
hair betokens cowardice: and meanly, signifies gentleness of heart.
Incisions about this part, ought to be done according to the length of the
body, for there the Muscle goes from one ear to the other. And there if any
incision should be made with the length of the Muscle, it might happen the brow
to hang over the eye without remedy, as it is many times seen, the more pity.
The Brows are called Supercilium in Latin, and under is the eyelids, which
is called Cilium, and is garnished with hairs. Two causes I find why the
eyelids were ordained. The first is, that they should keep and defend the Eye
from Dust and other outward uoyances. The second is, when the eye is wrary or
heavy, then they should be covered and take rest underneath them. Why the
hairs were ordained in them is, that by them is addressed the forms or
similitudes of visible things unto the Apple of the Eye. The Ear is a member
seemly and griftly, able to be solden without, and is the Organ or Instrument
of Hearing: It is of complexion cold and dry. But why the Ear was set up out
of the head, is this, that the sounds that be very fugitive, should hirke and
abide under his shadow, till it were taken of the Instruments of Hearing.
Another cause is, that if should keep the hole that it stands over, from
things falling in that might hinder the Hearing. The Sinews that are the
Organes or Instruments of Hearing, spring each from the Brain, from whence the
seven pair of Sinews do spring, and when they come to the hole of the Ear,
there they w^i^he like a Winepresse: and at the ends of them, there be like the
head of a Worm, or like a little tease, in which is received the sound, and so
carried to the common wi^^. The Eyes be next of nature unto the soul: for in
the Eye is seen and known the disturbances and griefs, gladness and joys
of the Soul, as Love, Wrath, and other passions. The Eyes be the Instruments
of sight. And they be compound and made of ten things: that is so say, of seven
Tunicles or Coats, and of three humors. Of the which (says Galen) the Brain
and the Head were made for the Eye, that they might be in the highest as a
Beholder in a Tower, as it was revearsed in the Anatomy of the Head. But diverse
men hold diverse opinions of the Anatomy of the Eyes: for some men account but
three Tunicles, and some six. But in conclusion, they mean all one thing. For
the very truth is, that there be counted and reckoned seven Tunicles, that is
to say, Sclirotica, Secondina, Retyna, Unia, Cornua, Arania, and Conjunctiva:
and these three humor. That is to say, Humor, Virtus, Humor Albigynus, and
Humor Chrystallinus.

It is to be known how and after what manner they spring: You shall
understand, that there springs of the Brain substance of his foremost
Ventrikles, two Sinews, the one from the right side, and the other from the
left, and they be called the first pair, for in the Anatomy, they be the first
pair of sinews that appear of all seven. And it is showed by ^ales, that
these (...) was be hollow as a Reed, for two ca^^ses. The first is, that the
visible spirit might pass freely to the Eyes. The second is, that the form of
visible things might freely be presented to the common wits.

Now mark the going forth of these sinews. When these sinews go out from
the substance of the Brain, he comes through the Piamater, of whose
substance he takes a Pannicle or a Coat: and the cause why he takes that
Pannicle, is to keep him from noying, and before they enter into the Skull,
they meet and are united into one sinew the length of half an inch: and then
they depart again into two, and each goes into one Eye, entering through the
brain Pan, and these sinews be called Nervi optici. And three causes I
find why these Nerves are joined in one before they pass into the Eye. First,
if it happen any diseases in one Eye, the other should receive all the visible
spirit that before come to both.

The second is, that all things that we see should not seem two: for if they
had not been joined together, every thing should have seemed two, as it does
to a Worm, and to other Beasts.

The (...) is, that the sinew might stay and help the other. But hereupon
Lanfranke accords much: saying, that these two sinews came together to the
Eyes, and take a Pannicle both of Piamater and of Duramater, and when they
enter into the Orbit of the Eye; there the extremities are spread abroad, the
which are made of three substances: that is to say, of Duramater, of Piamater,
and of Nervi optici. There be engendered three Tunicles or Coats, as thus: Of
the substance that is taken from Duramater, is engendered the first Coat that
is called Secondina: and of Nervi optici, is engendered the third Coat, that is
called Retina: and each of them is more subtilier then other, and goes about
the humors without mean. And it is to be understood, that each of these three
Tunicles be divided, and so they make fire: that is to say, three of the parts
of the brain, and three of the parts outward, and one of Pericranium, that
covers the Bones of the head, which is called Conjunctiva.

And thus you may perceive the springing of them as thus Of Duramater springs
Citrotica (...) Cornua. Of ^iamater, springs Secondina and Vnia. And of Pervi
Optici springs Conjunctiva. Now to speak of the humors which be three, and
their places are the middle of the Eyes: of the which, the first is ^u^hor
^^trus, because he is like ^la^^e, in color very clear, red liquit, or
thin, and he is in the inward side next unto the Brain: and it is thin,
because the mi^ritine blood of the Christalline, might pass, as water through
a sponge should be cleansed and made pure, and also that the visible spirit
might the lightlyer pass through him from the Brain. And he goes about the
Chrystaline Humor, (...) meet with Albuginus Humor, which is set in the
uttermost part of the Eye. And in the midst of these Humors Vltrus, and
Albuginus, is set the Chrystaline Humor, in which is set principally the sight
of the Eye. And these Humors be separated and involued with the Pannicles as
aforesaid, between every Humor a Pannicle. And thus is the Eye compound and
made. But to speak of every Humor and every Pannicle in his one order and
course, it would ask a long process, and a long Chapter: and this is
sufficient for a Surgeon. Now to begin at the Nose: You shall understand,
that from the brain there comes two Sinews to the holes of the brain pan,
where begins the concavity of the Nose, and these two be not properly
Sinews, but Organes or Instruments of smelling, and have heads like teates or
paps, in which is received the virtue of smelling, and representing it to the
common wits: Over these two, is set Colatorium, that we call the Nosthrils:
and is set between the Eyes, under the upper part of the Nose. And it is to be
noted, that this concavity or ditch was made for two causes. The first is, that
the air that brings forth the spirit of smelling might rest in it, till it
were taken of the Organe or Instrument of smelling. The second cause is, that
the superfluities of the Brain might be hidden under it, until it were
cleansed: And from this concavity there goes (...) holes down into the mouth,
of which there is to be noted three profits.

The first is, that when a man's mouth is close, or when he eats or sleeps,
that then the air might come through them to the Lunges, or else a man's mouth
should always be open. The second cause is, that they help to the relation of
the form of the Nose: for it is said, a man speaks in his Nose, when any of
these holes he stopped. The third cause is, that the concavity might be cleansed
by them, when a man snuffeth the Nose, or draws into his mouth inwardly. The
Nose is a member consimple or official appearing without the face, some what
^licable, because it should the better be cleansed. And it is to be perceived
that it is compound and made of Skin and Lazartus flesh, and of two Bones
standing in manner triangle-wise, whose extremities he joined in one part of
the Nose with the Coronall Bone, and the nether extremities are joined with two
Gristles, and another that divides the Nosthrils within, and holds up the
Nose.

Also there be two concavities or holes, that if one were stopped the other
should serve: Also there is in the Nose two Muscles to help the working of his
Office.

And Galen says, that the Nose shapeth the Face most: for where the Nose
lacks (says he) all the rest of the Face is the more unseemly. The Nose
should be of a mean bigness, and not to exceed in length or breadth, nor in
highness. For Aristotle says, If the Nosthrils be too thin or too wide, by
great drawing in of air, it betokens great straitness of heart and
indignation of thought. And therefore it is to be noted, that the shape of the
members of the Body, betokens and judges the affections and will of the
soul of man, as the Philosopher says. The Temples he called the members of
the Head, and they have that name because of continual moving. And as the
Science of the Anatomy means, the spirit vital is sent from the heart to the
brain by Arteirs, and by Veins and nutrimentall blood, where the Vessels
Pulsati^es in the Temples be lightly hurt. Also, the Temple have ^ents or holes
inwardly, wherein he takes the humor that comes from the Brain, and
brings the Eyes asleep: and if the said Holes or Dents be pressed and wrung,
then by trapping of the humor that continues, he makes the tears to fall
from the Eye.

The Cheeks are the sideling parts of the Face, and they contain in them
Musculus flesh, with Veins and Arteirs, and about these parts be many Muscles.
Guido makes mention of seven about the Cheeks and ouer-lip.

And Haly Abbas says, there be twelve Muscles that move the nether Iaw, some
of them in opening, and othersome in closing or shutting, passing under the
Bones of the Temples: and they be called Temporales: And they be the right
noble and sensatiue, of whose hurt is much peril.

Also there be other Musculus for to grind and to chew. And to all these
Muscles comes Nerves from the Brain, to give them feeling and moving. And
also there comes to them, many Arteirs and Veins, and chiefly about the
Temples, and the angles or corners of the Eyes and the Lips. And as the
Philosophers say, the chief beauty in man is in the Cheeks, and there the
complexion of man is most known, as thus: If they be full, ruddy, and meddled
with temperate whiteness, and not fat in substance, but meanly fleshie, it
betokens hot and moist of complexion: that is, Sanguine and temperate in
color. And if they be white colored, without meddling of redness, and in
substance fat and soft, quavering, it betokens, excess and superfluity of
cold and moist: that is flegmaticke. And if they be brown in color or cyfren,
yeallow, read and thin, and leave insubstance, it betokens great drying
and heat: that is choleticke. And if they be as it were blown in color, and
of little flesh in substance, it Betokens excess and superfluity of dryness
and cold: that is Melancholy And as Avicen says, the Cheeks do not only
show the diversities of complexions, but also the affection and will of the
Heart: for by the affection of the heart, by sudden joy or dread, he waxes
either pale or red. The bones or bony parts, first of the cheeks be two: of
the Nose outwardly, two: of the upper Mandible, two: within the Nose three, as
thus: One deviding the Nosthrils within, and in each Nosthrill one, and they
seem to be rolled like a water, and have a hollownesse in them, by which the
air is respired and drawn to the Lungs, and the superfluity of the Brain is
purged into the mouth^wards, as in before rehearsed. But Guido and Galen says,
that there be in the face nine bones, yet I cannot find that the nether
Mandible should be of the number of those nine: for the nether Mandible
accounted there, proves them to be ten in number: Of which thing I will hold
no argument, but remit it to the sight of your Eyes. The parts of the mouth are
five, that is to say, the Lips, the Teeth, the Tongue, the Vuila, and the
Pallet of the mouth. And first to speak of the Lips, they are members
consimile or official, full of Musculus flesh, as is aforesaid, and they were
ordained for two causes, one is; that they should be to the mouth as a door to
a house, and to keep the mouth close till the meat were kindly chewed. The
other cause is, that they should be helpers to the pronouncing of the speech.
The Teeth are members consimily or official, spermaticke, and hardest of any
other members, and are fastened in the Cheek bones, and were ordained for three
causes. First, that they should chew a man's meat, ere it should pass down,
that it might be the sooner digested.

The second, that they should be a help to the speech: for they that lack
their teeth, do not perfectly pronounce their words.

The third is, that they should serve to beasts as weapons. The number of them
is uncertain: for some men have more, and some less: they that have the whole
number, have two and thirty: that is to say sixteen above, and as many beneath
as thus: two Dwallies, two Quadripulles, two Canniens, eight Morales, and two
Causales, the Tongue is a carnous member, compound and made of many Nerves,
Ligaments, Veins and Artiers, ordained principally for three causes.

The first is, that when a man cateth, the Tongue might help to turn the meat
till it were well chewed. The second cause is, that by him is received the taste
of sweet and sour, and presented by him to the common Wits. The third is,
that by him is pronounced every speech The fleshie part of the Tongue is white,
and has in him nine Muscles, and about the root of him, is Glandulus, in the
which be two wells, and they be ever full of spettle to temper and keep moist
the Tongue, or else it would ware dry by reason of his labor, etc. The Vuila
is a member made of spongeous flesh, banging down from the end of the Pallet
over the gullet of the throat, and is a member in complexion cold and dry, and
oftentimes when there falls rawnesse or much moystnesse into it from the
Head, then it hangs down in the throat, and lets a man to swallow, and
it is broad at the upper end, and small at the nether. It was ordained for
diverse causes. One is, that by him is helped the sound of speech: for where the
Vuila is wanting, there lacks the perfect sound of speech. Another is, that
it might help the prolation of vomits. Another is, that by him is tempered and
abated the distemperance of the air that passes to the Lungs. Another is,
that by him is guided the superfluities of the Brain, that comes from the
coletures of the Nose, or the superfluities should fall down suddenly into the
mouth, the which were a displeasure. The Pallet of the mouth contains nothing
else but a carnous Pannicle, and the Bones that be underneath it has two
divisions, one along the Pallet from the division of the Nose, and from the
opening of the other Mandible under the nether end of the Pallet, lacking half
an inch, and there it divides overthwart, and the first division is of the
Mandible: and the second, is of the Bone called Pi^illary or Bazillary, that
sustaineth and binds all other Bones of the head together. The Skin of the
Pallet of the mouth is, of the inner part of the stomach and of Mire, and of
Isofagus, that is the way of the meat into the Stomach. The way how to know
that such a Pannicle is of that part of the stomach, may be known when that a
man is touched within the mouth, anonhe begins to tickle in the stomach,
and the nearer that he shall couch unto the throat, the more it abhors the
stomach, and oftentimes it causes the stomach to yield from him that is
within him, and when a man does vomit.

Also in the mouth is ended the uppermost extremity of the Wesand, which is
called Mire, or Isofagus: And with him is contained Trachia arteria: that is,
the way of the air, whose holes be covered with a lap like a tongue, and is
gristly, that the meat and drink might slide over him into Isofagus: the which
gristle when a man speaks is reared up, and covers the way of the meat,
and when a man swalloweth the meat, then it covers the way of the air, so
that when the one is covered, the other is discovered. For if a man open the
way of the air, when he swalloweth, if there fall a crum inco it, he shall
never cease coughing until it be up again. And this suffices for the Face.

CHAP. VI. The Anatomy of the Neck.
THE Neck follows next to be spoken of. Galen proves, that the Neck was
made for no other cause but for the Lungs, for all things that have no Lungs,
have neither Neck nor voice, except Fish. And you shall understand, that the
neck is all that is contained between the head and the shoulders, and
between the chin and the breast. It is compound and made of four things, that
is to say, of Spondillis, of Servic^bus, of Gula, and of Gatture, the which
shall be declared more plainly hereafter: and through these pass the way of
the meat and of the air, but they be not the substance of the Neck.

The Spondels of the Neck be seven: The first is joined unto the lower part of
the head called Paxillary, or Bazillary, and in the same wise are joined every
Spondell with other, and the last of the seven, with the first of the Back or
Ridge: and the Lygaments that keep these Spondels together, are not so hard
and tough as those of the back: for why? those of the neck be more feebler
and subtiller. The cause is this, for it is necessary other while that the head
move without the neck, and the Neck without the Head, the which might not
well have been done if they had been strong and boystrous. Of these aforesaid
seven Spondels of the Neck, there springs seven pair of Sinews, the which
be divided into the head and into the visage, to the Shoulders and to the
Arms. From the hole of the first Spondell springs the first pair of
Sinews, betweeen the first Spondell and the second, and so forth of all the
rest in like manner as of these. Also these Sinews receive subtle will of the
sinews of the brain: of which the Will, and Sinews, and Flesh, with a
Pannicle, make the composition of Muscles, Lazartes, and Brawnes, the which
three things are all one, and be the Instruments of voluntary moving every
member. The Muscles of the Neck after Galen, are numbered to be twenty, moving
the Head and the Neck. Likewise it is to be noted, that there be three manner
of fleshes in the Neck: the first is Pixwex, or Seruisis, and it is called of
Children, Gold hair, or yeallow hair, the which are certain Longitudinals,
lying on the sides of the Spondels, from the head down to the latter Spondell.
And they are ordained for this cause, that when the Sinews be weary of over
much labor with moving and travel, that they might rest upon them as upon a
Bed.

The second Flesh is Musculus, from whom springs the Tendons and Cords that
move the Head and the Neck, which be numbered twenty, as is before declared.
The third Flesh replenisheth the void places, etc. The third part of the Neck,
is called Gutture, and it is standing out of the throat boll. The fourth part
is called Gula, and the hinder part Cervix, and has that name of the
Philosophers, because of the Marrow coming to the Ridge bones. It is so
called, because it is as it were a servant to the Brain: For the Neck
receives and taksth of the brain, influence of virtue of moving, and sends
it by sinews to the other parts of the body downwards, and to all members of
the body.

Here you shall understand, that the way of the meat, and Mire, or Isofagus,
is all one thing: and it is to be noted, that it stretches from the mouth to
the Stomach, by the hinder part of the Neck inwardly, fastened to the Spondels
of the Neck, until he come to the first Spondell, and there he leaves the
Spondell, and stretches till he come to the foremost part of the Breast, and
passes through Diafragma, till he come to the mouth of the stomach, and
there he is ended. Furthermore, it is to be noted that this Weasand is
compound, and made of two Tunicles or Coats (that is to say) or the inner and
of the utter. The utter Tunicle is but simple, for he needs no Retention but
only for his own nourishing: but the inner Tunicle is compound, and made of
Musculus Longitudinall Will, by which he may draw the meat from the mouth into
the stomach, as it shall he more plainly declared in the Anatomy of the
stomach. Furthermore, Cana Pulmonis, via, trachia, Arteria, all these be one
thing (that is to say) the Throt-boll, and it is set within the Neck, besides
the Wesand, toward Gula, and is compound of the Gristle, knit each with other.
And the Pannicle that is mean between the Wesand, and the Throt boll, is
called Ismon.

Also ye shall understand that the great Veins which ramefic by the sides of
the Neck, to the upper part of the head, is of some men called Gwidege, and of
others, Venae organices: the incision of whom is perilous. And thus it is to
be considered, that the neck of man is compound, and made of skinny Flesh,
Ligaments, and bones: and this suffices for the Neck and the Throat.

CHAP. VII. The Anatomy of the Shoulders and Arms.
AND first to speak of the Bones: It is to be noted, that in the Shoulder
there be two Bones, (that is to say) the Shoulder bone, and the Kannell-bone,
and also the Adiutor bone of the Anne, are joined with the Shoulder-bones, but
they are not numbered amongst them, but amongst the Bones of the Arms. In the
composition of the shoulder, the first Bone is, Os Spatula, or Shoulder blade,
whose hinder part is declined toward the Chine, and in that end it is broad
and thin, and in the upper part it is round, in whose roundnesse is a
Concavity, which is called the Box or coope of the shoulder, and which enters
the Adiutor bones, and they have a binding together with strong flexible
Sinews, and are contained fast with each Bone called Clauicula, or the Cannell
bone. And this Cannell bone stretches to both the shoulders; One end to the
one shoulder, and another to the other, and there they make the composition of
the shoulders. The bones of the great arm, (that is to say) from the shoulders
to the fingers ends, be thirty: the first is, the Adiutor bone, whose upper end
enters into the Concavity or Box of the Shoulder bone: it is but one Bone
(having no fellow) end it is hollow and full of Marrow, and it is also crooked,
because it should be the more able to gripe things, and it is hollow, because
it should be lighter and more obedient to the stirring or moving of the Brawnes.

Furthermore, this Bone has two eminences, or two knobs in his nether
extremity, or in the juncture of the Elbow (of the which, the one is more
Rising then the other) and are made like unto a Pully to draw water with, and
the ends of these Bones enter into a Concavity proportioned in the uppermost
ends of the two Fo^^lbones, of which two Bones, the less goes from the Elbow
to the Thumb^, by the uppermost part of the arm, and the greater is the nether
bone from the Elbowe to the little Finger. And these two Bones be contained
with the Adiutor bone, and be bound with strong Ligaments, and in like manner
with the Bones of the Hand. The which Bones be numbered eight, the four
uppermost be joined with the four nethermost toward the Hands: and in the
third ward of Bones, be five, and they are called Ossa Patinis, and they are
in the Palm of the hand. And to them be joined the Bones of the Fingers and
the Thumbes, as thus, in every Finger three Bones, and in the Thumb two bones,
(that is to say) the Fingers and Thumb of every hand fourteen, called Ossa
digitorum: in the Palm of the Hand five, called Patinis, and between the Hand
and the Wrist eight, called R^sete, and from the Wrist to the shoulder, three
Bones: all which being accounted together, ye shall find thirty bones in each
Hand and Arm. To speak of Sinews, Ligaments, Cords, and Brawnes: here first
ye shall understand, that there comes from Mynuca, through the Spondels of
the Neck, four sinews, which most plainly do appear in sight, as thus: one
comes into the upper part of the Arm, another into the nether part, and one
into the inner side, and another into the utter side of the Arm, and they
bring from the Brain, and from Mynuca, both feeling and moving into the Arms,
as thus: The sinews that come from the Brain and from the Marrow of the Back
that is called Mynuca, when they come to the juncture of the shoulder, there
they are mixed with the Ligaments of the self shoulder, and there the
Ligaments receive both Feeling and moving of them, and also in there meddling
together, they are made a Cord or a Tendon.

Three causes I find why the sinews were meddled with the Lygaments. The first
cause is, that the littleness of the Sinews, which many ways be made weary
by there continual mooving, should be repressed by the insensiblenesse of the
Ligaments: The second is, that the littleness of the Sinews should be
through the quality of the Ligaments: The third is, the feebleness of the
Sinew, that is insufficient, and too feeble to use his Office, but by the
strength and hardness of the Ligaments.

Now to declare what a Cord is, what a Ligament, and what a Muscle, or a
Brawne, it is enough rehearsed in the Chapter of the simple members: but if you
will through the commandment of the Will or the Soul, draw the Arm to the
hinder parts of the body, then the utter Brawne is drawn together and the
inner enlarged, and likewise inwards, when the one Brawne does draw inwards,
the other does stretch: and when the Arm is stretched in length, then the
Cords be lengthened: but when they pass the juncture of the Shoulder and of
the Elbow, by three fingers breadth or thereabout, then it is divided by
subtle Will, and meddled with the simple flesh, and that which is made of it is
called a Brawne. And three causes I find, why that the simple flesh is meddled
with the Cord in the composition of the Brawne.

The first is, that the aforesaid Will might draw in quiet through the
temperance of the flesh.

The second is, that they temper and abate the drought of the Cord with his
moystnesse, the which drought he gets through his manifold moving. The third
is, that the form of the Brawne members should be the more fair, and of
better shape: wherefore God and Nature has clothed it with a Pannicle, that
it might the better be kept: And it is called of the Philosophers, Musculus,
because it has a form like unto a Mouse. And when these Brawnes coms near a
Joint, then the Chordes spring forth of them, and are meddled with the
Ligaments again, and so mooveth that Joint. And so ye shall understand, that
always between every two Joints, is engendered a Brawne, proportioned to the
same member and place, unto the last extremity of the fingers, so that as well
the least juncture has a proper feeling and mooving when it needs, as has
the greatest. And after Guido, there be numbered thirteen in the Arm and Hand,
as thus: four in the Adjutor, mooving the upper part of the Arm: and four in
the Focles, mooving the fingers. Now to speak somewhat of the Veins and
Arteirs of the arm: it is to be understood, that from Venakelis, there
comes two Branches, the one comes to the one Arme-pit, and the other
comes to the other. And now mark the spreading, for as it is of the one, so
it is of the other, as thus: when the branch is in the Arme-pit, there he is
divided into two branches: The one Branch goes along in the inner side of the
arm, until it come to the bough of the Arm, and there it is called Bazilica,
or Epatica, and so goes down the Arm till it come to the wrist, and there it
is turned to the back of the Hand, and it is found between the little finger
and the next, and there it is called Salvatella. Now to the other Branch that
is in the Arme-hole, which spreads to the utter side of the shoulder, and
there he divides in two, the one goes spreading up into the carnous part of
the Head, and after descends through the Bone into the Brain, as it is
declared in the Anatomy of the head. The other branch goes on the outward side
of the Arm, and there he is divided into two also, the one part is ended at
the hand, and the other part is folded about the arm till it appear in the
bouget of the arm, and there is called Sephalica, from thence it goes to the
back of the hand, and appears between the Thumb and the foremost finger,
and there it is called Sephalica Ocularis.

The two Branches that I speak of, which be divided in the hinder part of the
shoulders, from each of these two (I say springs one, and those two meet
together and make one Vein which appears in the bough of the Arm, and there
it is called Mediana, or Coadialis, or Commine. And thus it is to be
understood, that of Vena Sephalica, springs Vena Ocularis, and of Vena
Bazilica, springs Vena Salvatella, and of the two Veins that meet,
springs Vena Mediana, and in ramefying from these five principal Veins
springs innumerable, of the which a Surgeon has no great charge: for it
suffices us to know the principals.

To speak of Arteirs, you shall understand, that wheresoever there is found a
Vein, there is an Arteir under him: and if there be found a great Vein, there
is found a great Artier, and whereas is a little Vein, there is a little
Artier: for wheresoever there goes a Vein to give nutriment, there goes an
Artier to bring the spirit of life. Wherefore it is to be noted, that the
Artiers lie more deeper in the flesh then the Veins do: for they carry and
keep in them more precious blood then does the Vein, and therefore he has
need to be further from dangers outwardly: and therefore, God and Nature have
ordained for him to be closed in two Coats, where the Vein has but one.

The Breast of Thorax, is the Arc or Chest of the spiritual members of man,
as says the Philosopher: where it is to be noted, that there be four things
containing, and right contained, as thus. The four containing, are, the
Skin, Musculus flesh, the Pappes and the Bones. The parts contained, are, the
Heart, the Lunges, Pannicles, Lygaments, Nerves, Veins, Artiers, Mire, or
Isofagus. Now the Skin and the flesh are known in their Anatomy. It is to be
noted, that the flesh of the Pappes, differs from the other flesh of the
body: for it is white, glandulus, and spongeous: and there is in them, both
Nerves, Veins, and Artiers, and by them they have Coliganes with the Heart the
Liver, the Brain, and the Generatiue members. Also there is in the Breast, as
old Authors make mention, lxxx. or xc. Muscles: for some of them be common to
the Neck, some to the Shoulders, and to the Spades; some to Dyafragma or the
Mydriffe: some to the Ribs, some to the Back, and some to the Breast it
self. But I find certain profitablenesse in the creation of the Pappes, as
well in man as in woman: for in man it defends the spirituals from annoyance
outwardly: and another by their thickness they comfort the natural heat in
defiance of the spirits. And in women, there is the generation of Milk: for in
women there comes from the Matrix into their Breasts many Veins, which bring
into them Menstruall blood, the which is turned through the digestive virtue,
from red color into white, like the color of the Pappes, even as Chilley
coming from the stomach to the Liver, is turned into the color of the Liver.

Now to speak of the Bones of the Breast: they be said to be triple or three
fold, and they be numbered to the seven in the Breast before, and their length^s
according to the breadth of the Breast, and there extremities or ends be
gristly, as the Ribs be. And in the upper end of Thorax is an hole or a
concavity in which is set the foot of the Furkle-bone or Cannel-bone, and in
the nether end of Thorax, against the mouth of the Stomach, hangs a a
Gristle called Ensiforme, and this Gristle was ordained for two causes. One is,
that it should defend the stomach from hurt outwardly. The second is, that in
time of fullness, it should give place to the stomach in time of need when it
desires, etc.

Now to speak of the parts of the Back behind forth: There be twelve
Spondels, through whom passes Mynuca, of whom springs twelve pair of
Nerves, brings bath feeling and mooving to the Muscles of the Breast
aforesaid. And here it is to be noted, that in every side there be twelve
Ribs, that is to say, seven true and five false, because these five be not so
long as the other seven be: and therefore called false Ribs, as it may be
perceived by the sight of the Eye. Likewise, of the parts that be inwardly, and
first of the Heart, because he is the principal of all other members, and the
beginning of life: he is set in the midst of the Breast severally by
himself, as Lord and King of all members. And as a Lord or a King ought to be
served of his Subjects that have their living of him, so are all other members
of the Body subjects to the Heart: for they receive their living of him, and
they do service many ways unto him again. The substance of the Heart is as
it were Lazartus Flesh, but it is spermaticke, and an official member, and the
beginning of life, and he gives to every member of the Body, both blood of
life, and spirit of breath, and heat: for if the Heart were of Lazartus flesh,
his mooving and stirring should be voluntary and not natural, but the contrary
is true: for it were impossible that the Heart should be ruled by Will only,
and not by Nature. The Heart has the shape and form of a Pineapple, and the
broad end thereof is upwards, and the sharp end is downwards: depending a
little toward the left side.

And he it is to be noted, that the Heart has blood in his substance, whereas
all other members have it but in their Veins and Arteirs: Also the Heart is
bound with certain Ligaments to the back part of the Breast, but these
Lygaments touch not the substance of the Heart, but in the ouer-part they
spring forth of him, and is fastened as a aforesaid. Furthermore, the Heart
has two Ventricles, or Concavities, and the left is higher then the right, and
the cause of his hollownesse, is this: For to keep the blood for his
nourishing, and the air to abate and temper the great heat that he is in,
the which is kept in Concavities. Now here it is to be noted, that to the
right Ventrickle of the Heart, comes a Vein from the great Vein called
Venakelis, that receives all the substance of the blood from the Liver. And
this Vein that comes from Venakelis, enters into the heart of the right
Ventricle, as I said before, and in him is brought a great portion of the
thickest blood to nourish the heart with, and the residue that is left of this,
is made subtle through the virtue of the Heart, and then this Blood is sent
into a Concavity or pit in the midst of the Heart, between the two Ventricles,
and therein it is made hot and pured, and then it passes into the left
Ventricle, and there is engendered in it, a Spirit, that is cleerer, brighter,
and subtiller, then any Corporal or Bodily thing, that is engendered of the
four Elements: For it is a thing, that is a mean between the Body and the
Soul. Wherefore it is likened of the Philosophers to be more liker heavenly
things, then earthly things.

Also it is to be noted, that from the left Ventricle of the heart springs
two Arteirs: the one having but one Coat, and therefore it is called Arteria
Venalis: And this Arteir carries Blood from the Heart to the Lungs, the which
Blood is vaporous, that is tried and left of the Heart, and is brought by this
Artery to the Lungs, to give him Nutriment, and there he receives of the Lungs
air and brings it to the heart to refresh him with.

Wherefore Galen says, that he finds that man's Heart is Natural and
friendly to the Lungs: For he gives him of his own Mutrimentall to nourish
him with, and the Lungs reward him with air, to refresh him with again, etc.

The other Artier that has two Coats, is called Vena Arterialis, or the Great
Artery, that ascends and discendeth, and of him springs all the other
Arteirs that spread to every member of the Body: for by him is united and
quickened all the members of the Body. For the Spirit that is retained in them,
is the instrument or treasure of all the virtue of the Soul. And thus it
passes until it come to the Brain, and there he is turned into a further
digestion, and there he takes another Spirit, and so is made animal, and at
the Liver nutrimentall, and at the Testikles generatiue: and thus it is made a
spirit of every kind, so that he being mean of all manner operations and
workings, takes effect. Two causes I find why these Arteirs have two Coats.
One is, that one Coat is not sufficient, nor able to withstand the violent
mooving and stirring of the Spirit of life, that is carried in them.

The second cause is, that the thing that is carried about from place to place,
is of so precious a Treasure, that it had the more need of good keeping. And of
some Doctors, this Artier is called the Pulsatiue Vein, or the beating Vein:
for by him is perceived the power and might of the Heart, etc. Wherefore God
and Nature have ordained, that the Arteirs have two Coats. Also there is in
the Heart three Pellikles, opening and closing the going in of the Heart blood,
and spirit in convenient time. Also the Heart has two little Ears, by whom
comes in and passes out the Air that is prepared for the Lungs. Also there
is found in the Heart a Cartilaginous Auditament, to help and strengthen the
self Heart. Also the Heart is covered with a strong Pannicle, which is called
of some Capsula Cords, or Paricordium, the which is a strong case, unto whom
comes Nerves, as to other inward members. And this Pannicle Pericordium,
springs of the upper Pannicle of the Midriffe. And of him springs another
Pannicle called Mediastinum, the which departs the Breast in the midst, and
keeps that the Lungs fall not over the Heart. Also there is another Pannicle
that covers the Ribs inwardly, that is called Plura, of whom the Midriffe
takes his beginning. And it is said of many Doctors, that Duramater is the
Original of all the Pannicles within the Body: and thus one takes of another.

CHAP. VIII. The Anatomy of the Lungs.
THE Lungs is a member Spermatick of the first Creation, and his natural
complexion is cold and dry, and in his accidental complexion he is cold and
moist, lapped in a Neruous Pannicle, because it should gather together the
softer substance of the Lungs, and that the Lungs might feel by the means of
the Pannicle, that which he might not feel in himself. Now to prove the Lungs
to be cold and dry of kind, it appears by his swift stirring. for he lies
ever waving over the Heart, and about the Heart. And that he is cold and moist
in reward, it appears well, that he receives of the Brain many cold
matters, as Cataries and Rheumes, whose substance is thin. Also I find in the
Lungs three kinds of substance. One is a Vein coming from the Liver, bringing
with him the Crude or raw part of the Chylle, to feed the Lungs. Another is
Arteria Venealis, coming from the Heart, bringing with him the spirit of life
to nourish him with. The third is Trachia Arteria, that brings in air to the
Lungs, and it passes through all the left part of them to do his Office.

The Lungs is divided into five Lobbes or Pellikeles, or five portions (that is
to say) three in the right side, and two in the left side. And this was done
for this cause, that if there fell any hurt in the one part, the others should
serve and do their office. And three causes I find, why the Lungs were
principally ordained. First, that they should draw cold wind, and refresh the
Heart. The second, that they should change and alter, and purify the air
before it come to the Heart, lest the heart were hurt and annoyed with the
quantity of the air. The third cause is, that they should receive from the
heart the fumous superfluities that he puts forth with his breathing, etc.

Behind the Lungs, toward the Spondels, passes Mire or Isofagus, of whom it is
spoken of in the Anatomy of the Neck. And also there passes both Veins and
Arteirs, and all these with Trachia Arteria, do make a Stoke, replete unto the
Gullet, with the Pannicles, and strong Ligaments, and Glandulus flesh to
fulfill the void places. And last of all: is the Midriffe, and it is an
official member made of two Pannicles and Lazartus flesh, and his place is in
the midst of the body, over-thwart or in breath under the region of the
Spiritual members, departing them from the Matrix.

And three causes I find, why the Midriffe was ordained. First, that it would
divide the Spirituals from the Nutrates. The second, that it should keep the
vital color or heat to descend down to the Nutrates. The last is, that the
malicious fumes reared up from the Nutrates, should not noy the Spirituals or
vitals, etc.

The womb is the Region or the City of all the Intrails, the which reaches
from the Midriffe down unto the share inwardly and outwardly from the Reins
or Kidneyes, down to the bone Pe^ten, about the privy parts. And this Womb is
compound and made of two things (that is to say) of Syfac, and Myrac; Syfac is
a Pannicle, and a member spermaticke, official, sensible, Sinowie, compound of
subtle Will, and in complexion cold and dry, having his beginning in the inner
Pannicle of the Midriffe. And it was ordained, because it should contain and
bind together all the Intrailes, and that he defend the Musculus, so that he
oppress not the Natural members. And that he is strong and tough, it is
because he should not be lightly broken, and not those things that are
contained go not forth, as it happens to them that are broken, etc. Myrac
is compound, and made of four things (that is to say) of Skin outwardly of
Fatness, of a Carnous Pannicle and of Musculus Flesh. And that it is to be
understood, that all the whole from Syfac outward, is called Myrac, it
appears well (by the words of Galen) where he commands, that in all wounds
of the Womb, to sewe the Syfac, with the Mirac, and by that it proves, that
there is nothing without the Syfac but Mirac. And in this Mirac, or utter part
of the Womb, there is noted eight Muscles, two Longitudinals, proceeding from
the sheeld of the stomach, unto* Os Pecten: two Latitudinals coming from the
backwards to the Womb: and four Transverse, of the which, two of them spring
from the Ribs on the right side, and go to the left side, to the Bones of
the Hanches, or of Pecten: and the other two spring from the Ribs on the left,
and come over the womb to the right parts, as the other before does.

Here is to be noted, that by the virtue of the subtle will that is in the
Musculus Longitudinall, is made perfect the virtue attractiue: and by the
Musculus Transverse, is made the virtue retentius: and by the Musculus
Latitudinall, is made the virtue expulsive. It is thus to be understood, that
by the virtue attractiue, is drawn down into the Intrales, all superfluities,
both water, wind, and diet. By the virtue retentiue, all things are
withheld and kept, until Nature have wrought his kind. And by the virtue
expulsive is put forth all things, when Nature provokes any thing to be done.
Galen says that wounds or incisions be more perilous in the midst of the
womb, then about the sides, for there the parts be more tractable then any
other parts be. Also he says, that in wounds piercing the womb there shall
not be made good incarnation, except Sifac be sewed with Mirac. Now to come to
the parts contained within: First, that which appears next under the Sifac is
Omentum or Zirbus, the which is a Pannicle covering the stomach and the
Intrailes, unyla^ie^ with many Veins and Arteirs, and not a little fatness
ordained to keep moist the inward parts.

This Zirbus is an official member, and is compound of a Vein and an Arteir,
the which enters and makes a line of the utter Tunicle of the stomach, unto
which Tunicle hangs the Zirbus, and covers all the Guts down to the share.

Two causes I find, why they were ordained. One is, that they should defend the
Nutratiues outwardly. The second is, that through his own power and virtue, he
should strengthen and comfort the digestion of all the Nutrates, because they
are more feebler then other members be, because they have but a thin womb
or Skin, etc. Next Zirbus appears the Intrails or guts of which Galen says,
that the Guts were ordained in the first Creation to convey the dross of the
meat and drink, and to cleanse the body of their superfluities. And here it is
to be noted, that there be fix portions of one whole Gutte, which both in man
and Beast begins at the nether mouth of the stomach, and so contains
forth to the end of the Fundament. Nevertheless he has diverse shapes and
forms, and diverse operations in the Body, and therefore he has diverse names.
And hereupon the Philosophers say, that the lower womb of a man, is like unto
the womb of a Swine. And like as the stomach has two Tunicles, in like
manner have all the Guts two Tunicles. The first portion of the Guts is called
Duodenum; for he is 12. Inches of length, and covers the nether part of the
stomach, and receives all the dross of the stomach: the second portion of
the Guts is called Iejunium, for he is evermore empty, for to him lies
evermore the Chest of the Gall, beating him sore, and draws forth of him all
the dross, and cleanses him clean: the third portion or Gut, is called Yleon,
or small Gut, and is in length fifteen or sixteen Cubits. In this Gut
oftentimes falls a disease called Yleaca Passio. The fourth Gut is called
Monoculus, or blind Gut, and it seems to have but one hole or mouth, but it
has two, one near unto the other, for by the one all things go in, and by
the other they go out again. The fifth is called Colon, and receives all the
dross deprived from all profitablenesse, and therefore there comes not to
him any Veins Miseraices, as to the other. The sixth and last, is called Rectum
or Longaon, and he heis ended in the Fundament, and has in his nether end
four Muscles, to hold, to open, to shut, and to put out, etc. Next is to be
noted of Mensenterium, the which is nothing else but a texture of inmunerable
Veins Miser^ices, ramefied of one Vein called Porta Epates, covered and
defended of Pannicles and Lygaments coming to the Intrails, with the back
full of farnesse and Glandulus flesh, etc.

The stomach is a member compound and Spermaticke, sin^^wy and sensible, and
therein is made perfect the first digestion of Chile. This is a necessary
member to all the Body, for if it fail in his working, all the members of the
Body shall corrupt.

Wherefore Galen says, that the stomach was ordained principally for two
causes. The first, that it should be to all the members of the Body, as the
earth is to all that are engendered of the earth, that is, that it should desire
sufficient meat for all the whole Body. The second is, that the stomach
should be a sack or Chest to all the Body for the meat; and as a Cook to
all the members of the Body. The stomach is made of two Pannicles, of which
the inner is Nerveous, and the utter Carneous. This inner Pannicle has
Musculus Longitudinals, that stretches along from the stomach to the mouth,
by the which he draws to him meat and drink, as it were hands. And he has
Transverse will, for to withold or make retention. And also the utter
Pannicle has Latitudinall will, to expulse and put out: and that by his heat
he should keep the digestive virtue of the stomach, and by other heates given
by his Neighbors, as thus. It has the Liver on the right side, chasing and
beating him with his lobes or figures: and the Spleen on the left side, with
his fatness and Veins, sending to him Melancholy, to exercise his appetites:
and about him is the heart, quickening him with his ^rtiers: Also the Brain
sending to him a Branch of Nerves to give him feeling. And he has on the
hinder part, descending from the parts of the back many Lygaments, with the
Artiers joined to the Spondels of the Back. The form or figure of this
stomach is long, in likeness of a Goorde, crooked: and that both holes be in
the upper part of the body of it, because there should be no going out of it
unadvisedly of those things which are received into it. The quantity of the
stomach commonly holds two Pitchers of water, and it may suffer many
passions, and the another mouth of the stomach is narrower then the upper, and
that for three causes. The first cause is, that the upper receives meat great
and boisterous in substance, that there being made subtle, it might pass into
the nether. The second is, for by him passes all the meats, with their
chilosity from the stomach to the Liver. The third is, for that through him
passes all the dross of the stomach to the guts. And this suffices for the
stomach, etc.

The Liver is a principle member, and official, and of his first creation
spermaticke, complete in quantity of blood, of himselfs insensible, but by
accidence he is insensible, and in him is made the second digestion, and is
lapped in a sinowie Pannicle.

And that he is a principle member, it appears only by the Philosophers, by
Avicen and Galen. And it is official as is the stomach, and it is of
spermatick matter, and sinowie of the which is engendered his Veins. And
because it was like in quantity, Nature has added to it crudded blood, to the
accomplishment of sufficient quantity, and is lapped in a sinowie Pannicle. And
why the Liver is crudded, is because the Chile which comes from the stomach
to the Liver, should be turned into the color of blood.

And why the Liver was ordained, was because that all the nutrimentall blood
be engendered in him. The proper place of the Liver is under the false Ribs
in the right side. The form of the Liver is gibbous or bunchie on the back
side, and it is somewhat hollow like the inside of an hand. And why it is so
shapen, is, that it should be pliable to stomach, like as a hand does to an
Apple, to comfort her digestion, for his heat is to the stomach, as the heat
of the fire is to the Pot or Cauldron that hangs over it.

Also the Lungs is bound with his Pellikles to the Diafragma, and with strong
Ligaments. And also he has Coliganes with the stomach and the Intrailes, and
with the Heart and the Reins, the Testikles and other members. And there are
in him five Pellikles, like five fingers. Galen calls the Liver Messa
Sanguinaria, containing in it self four substances. Natural and
Nutrimentall. The Naturals is sent with the blood to all parts of the body, to
be engendered and nourished. And the Nutrimentals be sequestrate and sent to
places ordained for some helpings. These are the places of the Humors, the
blood in the Liver, Choler in the Chest or Gall, Melancholy to the Spleen,
Phlegm to the Lungs and the Iunctures, the watery superfluities to the Reins
and Vesike. And they go with the Blood, and sometime they putrify and make
Fevers, and some be put out to the Skin, and be rosolved by sweat, or by
Scabs, by Pushes, or by Impostumes.

And these four natural Humors (that is to say) Sanguine, Choler,
Melancholy, and Phlegm, be engendered and distributed in this manner: First, ye
shall understand, that from the Spermaticke matter of the Liver inwardly, there
is engendered two great Veins, of the which, the first and the greatest is
called Porta, and comes from the concavity of the Liver, of whom springs
all the small Veins Miseraices: and these Miseraices, be to Vena Porta, as the
branches of a Tree be to the stock of a Tree. For some of them be contained
with the bottom of the stomach: some with Duodenum, some with Jejunium, some
with Yleon, and some with Monoculus, or Saccus. And from all these Guts they
bring to Vena Porta, the succosity of Chiley, going from the stomach, and
distribute it into the substance of the Liver. And these Veins Miseraices, be
innumerable. And in these Veins begun the second Digestion, and ended in the
Liver, like as it is in the stomach the first Digestion.

So it proves that Vena Porta, and Vena Miseraices, serve to bring all the
succozity of all the meat and drink* that passes the stomach to the Liver,
and they spread themselves thorough the substance of the Liver inwardly, and
all they stretch toward the gibous (or bowing part of the Liver,) and there
they meet, and go all into one Unity, and make the second great Vein, called
Vena Ulis, or Concava, or Vena Ramosa: all is one, and he with his Roots
draws out all the blood engendered from the Liver, and with his branches
Ramefying upwards and downwards, carries and convayeth it to all other
Members of the Body to be nourished with, where is made perfect the third
digestion. And also there goes from the Liver Veins, bearing the superfluites
of the third Digestion to their proper places, as it shall be declared
hereafter. Now to speak of the Gall, or of the Chest of the Gall: It is an
official member, and it is supermaticke and sinowie, and has in it a subtiill
Will, and it is a purse or a Panniculer Vesikle in the hollownesse of the
Liver, about the middle Pericle or Lobe, ordained to receive the Choleric
superfluities which are engendered in the Liver: The which purse or bag has
three holes or Necks; By the first he draws to him from the Liver the
Choler, that the Blood be not hurt by the Choler. By the second Neck he
sends to the bottom of the stomach Choler, the further the Digestion of the
stomach. And by the third* Neck he sends the Choler regularly from one Gut
to another, to cleanse them of their superfluities and Dross: and the quantity
of the purse, may contain in it half a pint, etc.

And next is the Spleen, or the milte, the which is a supermaticke member, as
are other members: and official, and is the receptory of the Melancholious
superfluities that are engendered in the Lives: and his place is on the left
side, transversly linked to the stomach, and his substance is thin. And two
causes I find, why he was ordained there. The first is, that by the
Melancholius superfluities which are engendered of the Liver which he draws
to him he is nourished with. The second cause is, that the nutritive Blood
should by him be made the more purer, and clean, from the Dross and thicking
of the Melancholy, etc.

And next of the Reins and Kidneyes: It is to be understood that within the
Region of the Nutrites backwards, are ordained the Kidneyes to cleanse the Blood
from the watery superfluities, and they have each of them two passages or
holes, or Necks: By the one is drawn the water from Venakelis, by two Veyns,
which are called Vencae Aemulgentes, the length of the finger of a man, and
issues from the Liver: and by the other is sent the same water to the Bladder,
and is called Poros Urithides.

The substance of the Kidneyes is Lazartus Flesh, having Longitudinall will,
and their place is behind, on each side of the Spondels, and they are two in
number, and the right Kidney lies somewhat higher then the left, and is bound
fast to the back with Lygaments. The Philosopher says that man's Kidneyes are
like the Kidneyes of a Cow, full of hard Concavities, and therefore the sores
of them are hard to cure. Also they are more harder in substance, then any
other fleshly member, and that for two causes. One is, that he be not much
hurt of the sharpness of the Urine. The other is, that the same Urine that
passes from him, might the better be altered and cleansed through the same.
Also there comes from the heart to each of the Kidneyes, an Artier, that
brings with him Blood, heat, spirit, and Life. And in the same manner there
comes a Vein from the Liver, that brings blood to nourish the Kidneyes,
called Blood Nutrimentall.

The grease of the Kidneyes or Fatness, is as of other inward members, but it
is an official member, made of thin Blood, c^ngealed and crudded through
cold, and there is ordained the greater quantity in his place, because it
should receive and temper the heat of the Kidneyes, which they have of the
biting sharpness of the Water.

Now by the Kidneyes upon the Spondels, passes Venakelis; or Venacua, which is
a Vein of great substance: for he receives all the Nutrimentall blood from
the Liver, and from him passes many small Pipes on every side, and at the
Spondell between the shoulders, he divides himself whole in two great
branches, the one goes into the one arm, and the other into the other, and
there they divide themselves into many Veins and branches, as is declared in
the arms.

CHAP. IX. The Anatomy of the Haunches and their parts.
THE Haunches are the lower part of the Womb, joining to the Thighs and the
secret members. And three things there are to be noted thereof. The first is of
the parts containing: the second is of the parts contained, and the third is of
the parts proceeding outward. The parts containing outwardly, be Myrac and
Syfac, the Zirbus and the bones. The part contained outwardly, a^e the Vez^ke,
or Bladder: the Spermaticke vessels, the Matrix in women, Langaon. Nerves,
Veins, and Artiers, descending downwards; the parts proceeding outward, are
the Buttocks and the Muscles, descending to the Thighs, of which it is to be
spoken of in order. And first of the parts containing: as of Myrac, Syfac, and
Zirbus, there is enough spoken of in the Anatomy of the Womb. But as for the
Bones of the Hanches, there be the parts of the back three Spondels of Ossa
sacri, or of the Hanches: and three Caitailiginis Spondels of Ossa Cande,
called the Taile-bone.

And thus it is proved, that there is in every man thirty Spondels, and thus
they are to be numbered: in the Neck seven, in the Ridge twelve; in the Reins
five: and in the Hanches six: And it is to be noted, that every Spondell is
hollow in the midst: through which hollownesse passes Nuca from the Brain,
or the Marrow of the Back. And some Authors say, that Mynuca is of the
substance that the Brain is of: For it is like in substance, and in it self
gives to the Nerves both the ver^ue Moving and Feeling.

And also every Spondell is holden on every side, through the which holes, both
Arteirs and Veins do bring from the Heart and the Liver both Life and
nourishment, like as they do to the Brain: and from the Pannicle of Mynuca,
or the Marrow of the back, through the holes of the sides of the Spondels,
springs forth Nerves motives, and there they entermeddle themselves with the
strong Lygaments that be insensible, and so the Lygaments receive that feeling
of the Nerve, which the Nerves takes of Mynuca. And by this reason many
Authors prove, that Mynuca is of the same substance that the Brain is of, and
the Pannicles of the Nuca is of the same substance of the Pannicles of the
Brain, etc. And each of these Spondels be bound fast one with another, so
that one of them may not well be named without another. And so all these
Spondels together, contained one by another are called the Ridge-bone, which is
the foundation of all the shape of the Body. They with the last Spondell be
contained or joined to the Bones of the Hanches, and they be the vpholders of
all the Spondels. And these Bones be small toward the Tale bone, and abroad
toward the Hanches, and before they join and make Os Pectinis. And so they
be broad in the parts of the Isles, and therefore some Authors calls it Ilea.
And each of these two Bones toward the Liver has a great round hole, into
which is received the Bone called Vertebra, or the Whorlebone. Also besides
that place there is a great hole or way, through the which passes from above
Musculus Veins and Artiers, and go into the Thighs. And thus it is to be
noted, that of this Bone Pecten, and the Bone Vertebra, is made the juncture of
the Thigh.

Now to speak of the parts contained, the first thing that comes to sight is
the Bladder, the which is an official member, compound of two Nervous
Pannicles, in complexion cold and dry, whose Neck is carnous, and has Muscles
to withhold, and to let go: and in man it is long, and is contained with the
yard, passing through Peritoneum, but in women it is shorter, and is contained
with the Vulua. The place of the Bladder, is between the bone of the Share and
the Tayle-gut, called Longaon, and in women, it is between the aforesaid bone
and the Matrix.

And in it is implanted two long vessels coming from the Kidneyes, whose names
be Porri Urikcides, bringing with them the Urine or water from the Kidneys to
the Bladder, which privily enters into the holes of the Pannicles of the
Bladder, by a natural mooving between Tunicle and Tunicle, and there the
Urine finds the hole of the nether Tunicle, and there it enters privily into
the concavity of the bladder, and the more that the Bladder is filled with
Urine, the straiter be the two Pannicles comprised together, for the holes of
the Tunicles be not even one against another, and therefore if the bladder be
never so full, there may none go back again. The form of it is round, the
quantity of it is a Pitcher full, in some more, in some less, etc.

Also there is found two other vessels, called Vaza Seminaria, or the
Spermaticke Vessels. And they come from Venakelis, bringing blood to the
Tostikles, as well in man, as in woman, the which by his further digestion it
is made sperme or nature in men: they be put outward, for the Testikles be
without, but in women it abides within, for there Testikles stand within: as
it shall be declared hereafter.

Next follows the Matrix in women: the Matrix in women is an official
member, compound and Nerveous, and in complexion cold and dry: and it is the
field of man's genertion, and it is an instrument susceptiue, that is to say, a
thing receiving or taking: and her proper place is between the Bladder and the
Gut Longaon, the likeness of it, is as it were a yard reversed and turned
inward, having Testikles likewise, as aforesaid. Also the Matrix has two
Concavities or Selles, and no more, but all Beasts have as many Selles as they
have Pappes heads. Also it has a long Neck like an Vrinall, and in every
Neck it has a mouth, that is to say, one within, and another without. The
inner in the time of conception is shut, and the utter part is open as it was
before: and it has in the midst a Lazartus Pannicle, which is called in
Latin Tengito: And in the creation of this Pannicle, is found two vtilities.
The first is, that by it goes forth the Urine, or else it should be shed
throughout all the Vulva: The second is, that when a woman does set her Thighs
abroad, it alters the air that comes to the Matrix for to temper the heat.

Furthermore, the Neck that is between these two aforesaid mouths, in her
concavity has many involusions and pleates, joined together in the manner of
Rose leaves before they be fully spread or ripe, and so they be shut together
as a purse mouth, so that nothing may pass forth but urine, until the time of
childing. Also about the middle of this neck be certain Veins in Maidens,
the which in time of deflowring, be corrupted and broken. Furthermore, in the
sides of the utter mouth, are two Testicles or Stones, and also two vessels of
Sperme, shorter then man's vessels, and in time of Coyt the Woman's sperme is
shead down in the bottom of the Matrix. Also from the Liver there comes to
the Matrix many Veins, bringing to the Child nourishing at the time of a
woman's being with Child: and these Veins, at such time as the Matrix is void,
bring thereto superfluities from certain members of the Body, whereof are
engendered woman's Flowers, etc.

And forasmuch as it has pleased Almighty God to give the knowledge of these
his Mysteries and Works unto his Creatures in this present World. Here I
^^ppose to declare what t^ing Embreon is, and his Creation. The noble
Philosophers, as Galen, Avicen, Bartholmeus, and diverse others, writing upon
this matter, say: That Embreon is a thing engendered in the Mothers womb, the
original whereof is, the Sperme of the Man and of the Woman, of the which is
made by the might and power of GOD, in the mothers womb a Child: as hereafter
more at large shall be declared. First, the field of Generation called the
Matrix, or the Mother, is known in the Anatomy, whose place is properly
(betwixt the Bladder and Longaon) in the Woman, in which place is sown by the
Tillage of man, a covenable matter of kindly heat: For kindly heat is cause
officient both of doing and working, and Spirit that gives virtue to the Body,
and governs and rules that virtue: the which Seed of generation comes from
all the parts of the Body, both of the Man and Woman, with consent and will of
all Members, and is shead in the plac^ of Conceiving, where through the virtue
of Nature, it is gathered together in the Celles of the Matrix or the Mother,
in whom by the way of the working of man's Seed, and by the way of suffering of
the Woman's Seed mixed together, so that each of them works in other, and
suffers in other, there is engendered Embreon. And further it is to be noted,
that this Sperme that comes both to man and woman, is made and gathered of
the most best and purest drops of Blood in all the body, and by the labor and
cha^ing of the Testikles or Stones, this Blood is turned into another kind, and
is made Sperme. And in man it is hot, white, and thick: wherefore it may not
spread nor run abroad of it self, but runs and takes temperance of the
Woman's sperme which has contrary qualities: For the woman's sperme is thinner,
colder, and feebler.

And as some Authors hold opinion, when this matter is gathered into the right
side of the Matrix, then it happens a Male kind, and likewise on the left the
Female, and where the virtue is most, there it favors most. And further it
is to be noted, that like as the Renet of the Cheese has by himself the way
or virtue of working, so has the Milk by way of suffering: and as the Renet
and milk make the Cheese, so does the sperme of Man and Woman make the
generation of Embreon, of the which thing springs (by the virtue of kindly
heat) a certain Skin or Caul, into the which it lappeth it self in,
wherewith afterward it is tied to the Mothers womb, the which covering
comes forth with the birth of the Child: and if it happen that any of the
Skin remain after the birth of the Child, th^^ is the Woman in peril of her
life.

Furthermore, (if is said) that of this Embreon is engendered the Heart, the
Liver, the Brains, Nerves, Veins, Arteirs, Cords, Lygaments, Skins, Gristles,
and Bones, receiving to them by kindly virtue the menstruall blood, of which is
engendered both flesh and fatness. And as writers say, the first thing that is
shapen, be the principals: as is the Heart, Liver, and Brain. For of the Heart
springs the Artiers: of the Liver, the Veins: and of the Brain, the Nerves:
and when these are made, Nature makes and shapeth both Bones and Gristles to
keep and save them, as the bones of the head for the Brain: the Breast Bones,
and the Ribs, for the Heart and the Liver. And after these springs all
other members one after another: and thus is the Child bred forth in four
degrees, as thus. The first is, when the said Sperme or Seed is at the first as
it were Milk. The second is, when it is turned from that kind into another
kind, is yet but as a lump of Blood, and this is called of Ipocras, Fettus.
The third degree is, when the principals be shapen as the Heart, Liver, and
Brains. The fourth and last, as when all the other members be perfectly
shapen, then if receives the Soul, with Life and Breath, and then it
begins to move it self alone, Now in these four degrees aforesaid, in the
first as Milk, it continues sevendayes: in the second as Fettus, nine days:
in the third, as a lump of Flesh engendring the principals the space of nine
days: and the fourth unto the time fo full perfection of all the whole
members, is the space of eighteen days: So is there six and forty days from
the day of Conception, unto the day of full perfection and receiving of the
Soul, as God best knows.

Now to come again to the Anatomy of the Haunches: Then come we to Longaon,
otherwise called the Taile-gut, whose substance is Pannicular, as of all the
other Bowels: the length of it is of a span long stretching nigh to the Reins,
his nether part is called Annis, (that is to say) the towell: and about him is
found two Muscles, the one to open, the other to shut. Also there is found in
him five Veins or Branches of Veins, called Venae Emoraidales, and they have
Colliganes with the Bladder: whereof they are partners in their grieves.

And when this Longaon is raised up, then ye may see the Veins and Artiers,
and Sinews, how they be branched and bound down to the nether parts: the
parts proceeding outwardly, are Didimus Peritoneum, the Yard, the Testlkles,
and Buttocks. And first, it shall be spoken of the Yard, or of man's generatiue
members, the which dureth unto that part that is called Peritoneum, the which
place is from the Coddes, unto the Fundament, whereupon is a se^^e. Wherefore
says the Philosopher, man's Yard is in the end and term of the share.

The Yard is an official member, and the Tiller of man's generation, compound,
and made of Skin, Brawnes, Tendons, Veins, Arteirs, Sinews, and great
Lygaments: and it has in it two passages, or principal issue, one for the
Sperme, and another for the Urine. And as the Philosophers say, the quantity of
a common yard, is eight or nine Inches, with measurable bigness proportioned
to the quantity of the Matrix.

This member has (as Avicen says) three holes, through one passes insensible
polisions and wind, that causes the Yard to rise: the other two holes is
declared before. Also the yard has a Skin, and about the head thereof, it is
double, and that men call Praeputium; and this Skin is moveable, for through
his consecration the Spermaticke matter is the better, and sooner gathered
together, and sooner cast forth from the Testikles: for by him, is bad the
most delectation in the doing. And the foremost part of the head of the Yard
before, is made of a brawny flesh, the which if it be once lost, it is never
restored again, but it may be well skinned, etc.

The Coddes is a compound member, and an official, and though it be counted
amongst the generatiue members, yet it is called a principal member, because
of generation. This Purse was ordained for the custody and comfort of the
Testikles and other Spermaticke vessels: and it is also made of two parts, of
the inner and of the utter.

The utter is compound and made of Skin, and Lazartus. Longitudinall and
Transversall, in like manner as the Myrac. The inner part of the Cods is of the
substance of the Sifac, and are in similitude as two pockets drawn together by
themselves, and they differ not from the Syfac: and there be two, because if
there fall any hurt to the one, the other should serve. The Testikles or stones
be two, made of Glandulus flesh, or Curnelly flesh. And furthermore, through
the Didimus, comes the Testikles from the Brain, Sinews, and from the Heart
Artiers and from the Liver Veins, bringing unto them both feeling and
stirring, Life, and Spirit, and Nutrimentall blood, and the most purest blood
of all other members of the Body, whereof is made the Sperme by the labor of
the Testikles, the which is put forth in due time, as is before rehearsed.

The Groynes be known: they be the empty Iunctures, or purging place unto
the Liver, and they have curnelly flesh in the plying or bowing of the Thighs.
The Hippes have great brawny flesh on them, and from thence descend downwards,
Brawns, Cords, and Lygaments, mooving and binding together the Thighs, with
the Haunches themselves.

CHAP. X. The Anatomy of the Thighs, Legs, and Feet.
THE Leg reaches from the Joint of the Thigh unto the extremity of the Toes,
and I will divide it in parts, as the Arms were divided. One part is called
Coxa, or Thigh, and that is all that is contained from the joint of the Haunch
unto the Knee. The second part is called Tibia, and that reaches from the Knee
to the Ankle. The third is the little foot, and that is from the Ankle, unto
the end of the Toes. And here it is to be noted, that the Thigh, Leg, and
foot, are compound, and made as the great Arm or hand, with Skin, Flesh,
Veins, Artiers, Sinews, Brawnes, Tendons, and Bones, whereof they are to be
spoken of in order.

Of the Skin and Flesh there is enough spoken of before. And as of Veins and
Arteirs in their descending downwards, of the last Spondels they be divided
into two parts, whereof the one part goes into the right Thigh, and the other
into the Left: And when they come to the Thigh, they be divided in other two
great Branches: the one of them spreads into the inner side of the Leg, and
the other spreads into the utter side, and so branching, descend down to the
Leg, to the Ankles, and Feet, and be brought into four Veins, which be
commonly used in letting Blood, as hereafter follows.

One of them is under the inner Ankle toward the heel, called Soffena, and
another under the under Ankle, called Siarica, and another under the Hamme,
called Poplitica, the fourth, between the little Toe. and next, called
Renalis. And it is to be noted of these four great Veins in the Legs, of
the manifold dangers that might fall of them as often it happens. There be
many other branches which a Surgeon needs not much to pass upon. The
Sinews spring of the last Spondell, and of Os Sacrum, and passes through the
hole of the bone of the Hippe, and descends to the Brawnes, and mooveth the
Knee and the Hamme, and these descend down to the Ankle, and move the Foot,
and the brawnes of the Feet move the Toes in like manner, as is declared in
the bones of the Hand. The first is called Coxa, that is the Thigh Bone, and he
is without a fellow, and he is full of Marrow, and is round at either end. The
roundnesse that is at the upper end, is called Vertebrum, or Whyrlebone, and
boweth inwards; and is received into the box or hole of the Haunch bone: and
at the lower end toward the Knee, there it has two rounds, which be received
into the Concavities of the bone of the Leg, at the Knee, called the great
Fo^sels. There is also at the Knee a round bone, called the Knee-panne. Then
follows the Leg, wherein is two bones, called Focile Major, and Focile
Minor, the bigger of them passes before, making the shape of the shinne, and
it is called the Shin-bone, and passes down, making the inner ankle. The
less passes from the Knee backwards, descending down to the utter Ankle, and
there forms that Ankle, etc. The bones of the Feet are six and twenty: as
thus. First, next the Ankle bone, is one called in Latin Orabalistus: Next
under that, toward the Heel is one, called Calcani: and between them is
another bone, called Os Nauculare. In the second ward there be four bones
called Raceti, as be in the hands. In the third and fourth wards be fourteen,
called Digitori: and five called Pectens, of the extremities of the Toes, next
to the Nails. And thus be there in the Foot, six and twenty bones, with the
Leg from the Ankle to the Knee, two in the knee, and one round and flat bone,
and in the Thigh, one. And thus you shall find in the whole Leg and Foot
thirty bones. And this shall serve for young Practitioners.

Thus far the Anatomy.
DIVERSE THINGS VERY necessary for every Chyrurgion to have in a readiness.
PART. II.
ANd first, for Instruments: as, Novacula. Sealpellum. Forficis. Volsella.
Specillum. Latum Specillum. Stylus. Acus. Canalicula Forata. Habena ad membra
laqueo intercipienda. Fascia. Panniculi linei ad vulnera abliganda. Lintea
concerpta. Auriscalpium. Forcipes ad dentes evellendos. Ferramentum quo eroli
dentes, eraduntur. Uncinus, or ( as Celsus calls it) Hamulum retusum.


For Medicines.
HE must have in readiness Powders, Unguents, and Emplasters; they serve to
stop Bleeding, to conglutinate Wounds, to cleanse foul and rotten Ulcers, to
mollific hardness, to produce a Cicatrix, and Skin, to remove away all
excrescent and corrupt Flesh, to cease pain, to strengthen Fractures and
Luxations.

For Powders.
THey are of three sorts: The first, is to stay Bleeding, as that which is
framed of Bolus Armoniae, of Rosis, of Mastiches, and Pollin.

The second is, for Fractures of the Scull, and hurts of other Bones, and is
called Pulvis Cephalicus, and is framed of R^dicibus ireos, of Aristolochiae,
of Myrrh, Aloes, and such like.

The third is, to remove away excrescent and corrupt Flesh; as Alumen ustum, of
Pull. praecipit. Mercurii, and such like.

For Unguents.
HE must have Unguentum Basilicon, which does humect, digest, and cease pain.

Unguentum album Rhasis, which does Refrigerate, cool and dry.

Unguentum Aureum, called of some Regis, which does Incarnate and conglutinate
Wounds together.

Unguentum Dialthea simplex, which does Calefie, soften, humect, and also cease
pain.

Unguentum Apostolorum, which does deterge, mollify, dry, and remove away
corrupt and superfluous Flesh: And of like faculty almost is Mundificativum ex
apio, and Aegyptiacum.

For Emplasters.
DIachilon compositum, which does ripen A^ost^^es, and does mollify and
resolve hardness, and does digest, and also absterge.

Diacalciteos, commonly called Di^p^l^a, which does conglutinate Ulcers,
produces Cicatrix and ekians, and according to the opinion of Galen, is very
fit for the curing of Phlegm.

Empl^strum de B^t^nica, which is also called D^ ^^nua, it does unite and join
together the fractures of the skull, it covers the bones with flesh, it
draws out Spells and splinters of bones, it does also absterge, digest and
dry, with the like.

Of five Herbs which a good Chyrurgion ought always to have.
THere be five Herbs that a good Surgeon ought to have all the year, and
they be good for wounded men, and these Herbs must be dried and made into
powder, and so kept all the year, viz. Mouse ear, Pimpernell, Avence,
Valerian, and G^ntian, of each a like quantity, but take of Mouse-eare the
weight of all the other herbs, when they be dried, take demi* spoonefull in
vntiment, or in some other liquor which is according to the sickness, and let
him drink it, and the Medicine is as good as a Salve for any wounded man, as
may be had for to heal him. Also the herbs that draws the wound, are
Occui^s Christi, M^ther, Buglosse, red Cole wort^, and Orpine. Th^se be the
sovereign pepper heathes for the Fest^r, herb Robert, Buglosse, Sa^nacle,
Hem^ropes, M^rrell, Rue, and Sav^^^, but take good heed of these hea^bes, and
ye shall work the better.

OF WOVNDS. PART. III.
A Definition of Wounds by their causes.
A Wound is a solution, seueration and recent bre^ch of unity, of that that
before was a continuity without putrified matter, which corruption gives the
name of an Ulcer in the solution, and no more a Wound

The causes of Wounds (...) viz First by the violence of bo^^^^ without (...)
we simply call an I^c^s^d wound as when it is (...) Instruments. Secondly, we
call it a Stab or (...) by the force of Daggers and the like. Thirdly, we call
(...) Contus^d wounds, caused by violent use of the object, (...) some weighty
thing cast as a Stone, or struck (...), or their similies) against the subject
re^^^^^ng (...) forces, differing in their ap^ellations be the diversity of
(...) cau^es.

Or secondly, wounds are caused by (...) that is (...) Biting, scratching and
the like, (...) for these (...) they differ in their ap^ellations.

^^so the (...) of Wounds, are taken (...) inflicted, or from th^^ (...) of the
place wherein they are (...) the place makes difference thus: either they
happen in the similar parts, as the Flesh, Artery, Vein, etc. or in the
organicall or isntrumental parts, as some entire and whole bulk, truncke, or
fully complete member, or limb, viz. The Head, Neck, Breast, Belly, etc.
Wounds of the Head grow more particular, because that parts belonging thereto
be of more note; as the Face, Nose, Lips, Eyes, and Ears: wounds of the
limbs, are of the Shoulders, Arms, Thighs, and L^gs. Of the similar parts
also, some are Sanguine, as the flesh, whose wounds are either simple, deep,
hollow, plain, or proud with flesh. The Spermaticke likewise, are either hard
or soft; the soft parts, as the Veins, Arteries, and Sinews, being wounded,
we call them wounds of the hurt part; the hard are the Bones, a breach of
which, we call a wound in the Bone.

So Wounds derive their Nominations from the cause, place and similitudes
thereof.

What Wounds are.
VVOunds are these, which in Latin are called Vulnus, of the vulgar Vulner,
and they are of two kinds, that is, Simple and Compound: the simple are those,
that are only in the Flesh: the compound are those, where are cut Sinews,
Veins Muscles, and bones, and these are of diverse and sundry kinds, and the
difference that is among them, is by the variety of the place where they are
wounded, and by the difference of the weapon wherewith they were hurt. For some
go right, some overthwart, that offend diverse places of the body: the simple
are of small importance, if they keep them clean and close shut Nature will
heal them, without any kind of medecin: but those where veins are cut, had
need of some Art or Practice, with the which they must stop the blood, and in
any wise not to suffer the wound to remain open but to sow it up very close,
so that the vein may heal, and those where sinews are hurt are of great
importance, and would be healed with great speed, so the Sinews may join with
more ease. But those where bones are hurt, are of great importance, for if the
Bone be separated from the other, of necessity it must be taken forth before
the Wound be healed: So that by this means every one may know, what Wounds are
and their kinds.

In the Curing of green Wounds consists a five-fold scope or intention.
THe first, is to draw out that which is sent into the Body, whether by Bullet,
Wood, Bone, or Stone; or Arrows, Darts and such like. The second, is a
Conjunction and uniting of parts divided. The third, is a retaining of those
parts united in their proper seat. The fourth, is a Conservation of the parts
of the substance. The fifth, is a Prohibition and mitigation of accidents.
For the first intention, it is performed either with fit and convenient
Instruments, or with attractive Medicines, whereby things that are infixed are
drawn out. Which Medicines are these: Radix Aristolochiae. Arundis. Anagallis.
Thapsia. Ammoniacum. Saga Poenum. Dictamnum. Ranae combustae, Or Emplastrum
Avic^^nae, so much commended by G^ydo.


The second and third intention, is performed by binding and Ligature, if the
Wound be simple and small, and in a place where it may fitly be performed, yea,
although it be la^^^ so it may be easily bound, as in the Muscles of the Arm,
and such like; but if it happen that Ligature will not serve, then must be
added the help of the Needle, being very careful to handle the party gently,
and to place it in his due seat.

The fourth intention, is performed and accomplished, by appointing of a fit
and convenient Diet, according to the strength of the Patient, and greatness
of the affect and disposition of the whole body: for a thin Diet and cold, does
very much avail in resisting of Symptoms, we also add Blood-letting and
Purging of humors to avoid accidents, also the part is to be contained in his
due place, and a Cataplasme fra^ed with the whites of Eggs, and other cooling
things, are to be applied, and sometimes to be fomented with astringed Wine.

The fifth intention, is in the correcting of accidents, which is Fl^x of blood,
Dolor, Tum^r, Paralysis, Convulsion, Fever, Syncope, Delerium, and Itching.

But this is to be observed in the Flure of blood: whether it has flowne
sufficiently or no; if otherwise the Flux is to be suffered; for after a
sufficient Flux, the wound does remain dry, and is so much the nseacute;erer
cured and the less Symptoms follow, as Phlegmon and such like: and if the
wound bleed not sufficient, we must open a vein for revulsion, according to
the greatness of the affect, and the nature of the wound: especially when
through pain or other cause we fear inflammation or a Fever.

How a sick man should Diet himself being Wounded.
A Wounded man, or a man sore beaten being sick, must be kept from Milk,
Butter, Cheese, Herbs, Fruits, Fish, (except fresh water Fish) Women,
Garlic, Onions, Leekes, Peason, etc. also diverse sorts of meat must he not
eat, as Beef, water Fowls, Goose, or Ducke, nor drink to much strong Wine.
But may eat Porke, Mutton, Chicken, Hen, or Capon.

REMEDIES FOR all Captains and Soldiers that Travel, either by Water or by
Land. PART. IIII.
THere are thee Infirmities that offend the Soldiers in the Camp, above all
the rest, the which are these: Fevers, Wounds, and Fluxes of the body: the
which thou may help in this order following, with these Medicines: That
Quintessence of Wine, our Balsamo, Magno, Licore, Quintessentia, and Spice
Imperial: And the order to use them is thus; When any has a Fever or Flux,
then presently when the Disease begins, let him Blood in one of the two
Veins under the Tongue, cuffing it overthwart, and this thou shall do in the
Evening: then the next morning, take a Doze of your Imperial powder mixed with
Wine, and this you may do without any Diet, or straigth order: that being
done, give him three mornings together, half an ounce of our Quintessence
solutive, with Broth: but if it be a Flux, and that the Pattent is not
cured, let him stand in a cold Bath of Salt water of the Sea, three or four
hours or more, and he shall be perfectly help.

Than as concerning Wounds, as well as Cuts as thrusts, and as well Galling
with Arrows, as Harquebush-shot, and other sorts, thou shall cure them thus.
The first thing that thou shall do to them is to wash them very clean with
Wine, and then dry them well, then put therein our Quintessence of Wine, and
presently join the parts together, and sow or stitch them close, then put
thereupon five or six drops of our Balsamo, and upon the wound lay a cloth wet
in our Magno Licore as hot as ye may suffer it, and this ye shall do the
first day: then the next day follow this order. First, put thereon our
Quintessence and a little of our Balsamo, and then our Magno Licore very hot,
and never change that medicine. And this done, the wound shall be whole with
great speed and in a quarter of the time that the common Chirurgions is able to
do it, by the grace of God.

A rare secret, the which this Author did send to a very friend of his being in
the Wars: the which helps all wounds either by Cut, Thrust, galling with
Arrows, or Hargubush-shot, or otherwise.
THe first thing that ye shall do, is to wash the Wounds very clean with
Urine, and then dry it very well: then put therein Quintessence of Wine, and
presently join the parts close together, and stitch or sow them well; but in
any wise sow nothing but the Skin: for otherwise it will cause great pain:
Then put thereon five or six drops of our Balsamo, and upon the Wound, lay a
cloth wet in our Magno Licore, as hot as they can suffer it, and this do the
first day. Then the next day follow this order. First, put thereon our
Quintessence and then a little of our Balsamo: and then anoint it very well
with our Magno Licore, as hot as it may be suffered: Never changing this
Medicine until it be whole.

Of Wounds in the Head, with fracture of the Bone.
VVOunds at the Head with fracture of the Bone, of the common Physicians and
Chirurgions, are counted ^i^^icile to be healed, because thereunto belongs
great Art or Cunning: For they open the Flesh, and raise the Bone, with many
other things, of which I count it superfluous to entreat of, because that many
be helped without them. For always when the Physicians or Chirurgions do
offend the Wound for alteration or corruption, Nature it self will work very
well, and heal it without any aid. But with our Medicines they may be helped
with much more speed, because they let the alteration, and defends them from
Putrefaction, and mittigateth the pain. And the order to Cure those kind of
wounds are thus. The first thing that is to be done in those Wounds, is to
join the parts close together, and dress them upon the wound with our Oleum
Benedictum, and upon the Oil lay clothes wet in our Magno Licore, as hot as
you can suffer it: And so with these Remedies thou shall help them quickly:
because our Oleo Benedicto takes away the pain, and keeps it from
putrefaction and creposueth. Our Magno Licore digesteth, mundifieth, and
incarnateth and heals. And therefore this is the best Medicine that can be
used in these wounds. For hereof I have had an infinite of Experiences, the
which has been counted miracles: and therefore I have let the world to
understand thereof, that they may help themselves it need shall serve.

Of Wounds in the Head, where the Bone is not offended.
VVOunds in the Head, where the Bone is not hurt, are not of so much
importance, but are easily to be helped: for you shall do nothing, but to
keep it from putrefaction, and defend it from inflammation, which are easy to
be done, and so Nature will work well with great speed. To keep the wound
from putrefaction, you must annoint it round about with our Oleum
Philosophorum, Deterebinthina, and Sera. And to keep it from inflammation, you
shall wash it with our Quintessence, and upon the wound dress it with our
Magno Licore: thus doing, thy cure shall prosper happily, and shall not need to
take away any blood, nor yet to keep any diet, nor yet to keep the house, but
to go where you think good, without any peril or danger: and this order have
I used a long time, as diverse of my friends can testify.

Of Concussions or Bruises, as well in the Head as any other place,
COncussion or Bruises in the head or any other place of the body, of the
ancient Physicians has been counted dangerous to heal, for they say, that
Concussions must be brought to putrefaction, and turned into matter, which
opinions I do allow, for by me those Concussions or bruises is very easy to
be dissolved without maturation: And that I do with our Oleo Benedicto, and
Magno Licore, as much of the one as of the other mixed together, and made very
hot as you can suffer it, and then wet clothes twice a day, and in three or
four days at the most they shall be dissolved: and this it does, because this
Remedy assubtiliateth the humors, and opens the Pores, and draws forth
the matter that is run into the place offended, and so by those means they
shall be helped with this remedy: I have cured hundreds, when I was in the
wars of Africa, in Anno 1551. when the said City was taken and destroyed by
the Camp of Charles the fifth, Emperor.

Of Wounds in the Neck and the order to be used in curing them.
VVOunds in the neck are very hard so be cured, and long before they heal,
and this comes, because next are all the ligaments of the head, as bones,
sinews, veins, flesh, and skin, all instruments that hold the head and the
body together, without the which a man cannot live, and therefore those wounds
are so perilous to be healed, seeing thereunto runs so great a quantity of
humors, that they will not suffe^ the wound to be healed.

The true way therefore so help those wounds, is to stitch them well in his
place, and dress it upon the wound, with clothes wet in Oleum Benedictum one
part, and Magno Licore three parts, mixed together, as hot as you can suffer
it. And upon the cloth lay the powder of Mille-foyle, and this thou shall do
once in 24 hours, and so that shall help them quickly: giving you great
charge that you change not your Medicine; For it mundifieth, incarnateth, and
heals the wound without any further help, for I have proved it an infinite
and many times.

Of Wounds in the Arms, and their importances and Medicines.
VVOunds in the Arms are dangerous, for that there also are a great number of
Sinews, Cartylagines, Veins, Mus^les, and other dangerous things, as it is
well seen in wounds in the arms, how that thereunto runs abundance of
Humors, and there comes alteration. Inflammation, and Impostumation, which
hurts the Patient much. Therefore in this case, I will show thee a rare
secret, wherewith th^n shall help any sort of wound in the Arm, without any
alteration, and with a little pain, and the secret is this, Dress the Wound
upon the upper parts with our Magno Licore, very warm^, without any tenting at
all, and this do once a day, and no more, and in no wise change your Medicine;
for with this thou may help all Wounds in the Arms with great speed, and
it is one of the greatest secrets that can be used for the wounds in the arms:
and proved by me infinite times.

Of Wounds in the Legs, and their parts.
VVOunds in the Legs are in a manner of the same quality as those in the arms,
because the Legs are of their proper quality and nature, compounded of ye like
substance that the arms are: that is, in Skin, flesh, Muscles, veins,
sinews, and Bones: And these, when they are offended or wounded, are very
perilous, because unto them runs great quantity of humors, and in the
Legs are certain places deadly (as men say) as the hinder part of the calfe
of the Leg, and the middle of the inner part of the thigh, the ankle, and the
foot, are all places troublesome and curious to heal when they are wounded,
and therefore to heal them according to the manner of the Ancients, it were
great trouble to the Surgeon: and pity to see the pain of the Patient.
Wherefore in any wise use not the Medicines of the Ancients. But when thou have
occasion, join unto the skill of thy Art the use of these Medicines, our
Quintessentia, Balsamo, Magno Licore, Oleo di Rasa, Oleo Benedicto, Oleo
Philosophorum. Any of these, or such like, which are incorruptible, which by
their proper quality assubtiliateth concussions, pierces to the bottom of the
Wounds, keeps the flesh in his natural Caliditie and humidity, preserves
from Putrefaction, and naturally makes the Flesh to join and grow together,
and that in a short space. Therefore consider well, which works better
Effect, ours; or the Ancients, and use them at thy discretion.

A Discourse upon old Wounds, which are not yet healed; with their Remedies.
When that Wounds are ill healed, and that therein comes Impostumations, and
that the part of the wounds be indurated and full of pain, then use this
secret of our Invention, which was never yet seen nor heard of the Ancients,
nor yet of our time, but of us. When thou find such a cause, wash the Wound
well, and make it clean round about, and then wash it with our Quintessentia
Vegetabile, and Bathe it well through, for that the said Quintessentia does open
the Pores, and assubtiliateth the matter, and causes the humor to come forth.

This being done, annoint it all over with our Magno Licore, and this done,
within three days the Patient shall feel great ease, and in short time after
he shall be whole. This is one of the most noblest Medicines that can be made:
For it takes away the hardness, heals the Wound, and comfort the place
offended.

A rare secret to heal Wounds of Gunshot, Arrows, or such like, in the Wars,
when have is required.
IF thou will cure these Wounds, presently join the parts together, and wash
it with our Aqua Coelestis, and Oleum Balsamo, of our invention, and lay a
Cloth wet in the same thereon.

To heal a Wound quickly.
VVAsh the Wound well with our Aqua Balsamo, and close it up, and thereupon lay
the cloth of the Oil Frankensence, and so by this means thou shall heal any
great Wound quickly: For I have proved it infinite times, to my great credit.

To heal a Wound quickly, that is in danger of any Accidents.
VVOunds in some parts of the Body are very dangerous of Life, and especially
where the Sinews or Veins be (cut or pierced) or Veins or Muscles be hurt,
or Bones broken, and by an infinite of other particulars, which being open or
ill-healed, the Patient may be in danger of life, because the wind enters in,
and causes pains and inflammation; and therefore to avoid all these aforesaid
matters, so that the wound shall have no detriment, use this remedy. First
join the parts close together, and put therein our Quintessence, and lay a
cloth wet in our Baulme, and bind it fast that the air come not in, for it is
very hurtful. You shall understand, that these be two of the best experienced
Medicines that may be found: because our Quintessence does assubtiliate the
Blood, and takes it forth, and takes away the pain. And the Baulme does
warm and comfort the place offended. And will not suffer any Matter to run
thereinto by any means: for this is most true, as I have proved diverse and
sundry times, and always have had very good success.

To stay the flux of Blood in Wounds.
When there is a flux of Blood in any wound by reason of some vein that is
cut, and that the Surgeon would stop it, it is necessary, that he put into
it our Quintessence, and then so stitch it by very close and hard, and upon the
wound strowe the blood of a Man dried, made in powder, and lay upon the wound a
cloth wet in our Baulme artificially, very warm, and upon that bind the
wound very straight with Ligaments, and twice a day wash it with our
Quintessentia, and round about it annoint it with our Baulme, and also cast
thereon our secret powder for wounds, and that do, Morning and Evening every
day without opening the wound, and in short time it will remain well, giving
you charge that the wounded person do keep no straight Diet, because Nature
being weak relaxeth the Veins, and that causes the flux of blood.

Another for the same.
FIrst, stitch the Wound close, then cast thereon man's blood, and bind it
somewhat hard, so let it remain four and twenty hours: And when you unbind
it, take heed you remove nothing, and cast thereon more dried blood, and
annoint it round about with Oleum Philosophorum Deteribinthina and Cera, and
bind it again other four and twenty hours, and then bind it gently, and
annoint the wound with Oil of Frankensence, and in short time it will be
perfectly whole.

A defense to be laid upon Wounds.
TAke perfect Aqua Vitae of good Wine, what quantity you will, and put therein
Hipericon, Mill-soyle, Viticella, and Bitonie, and then let it stand certain
days close stopped, and when ye will vss it, wet a cloth therein, and lay it
round about the Wound, and thou shall have thy intent, to the great
satisfaction of the Patient.

A secret Powder for Wounds.
TAke Hipericon flowers and leaves, Mill-soyle, and Viticella, and stamp them
well together, and strew it upon the Wound, and round about the wound when it
is dressed, and it does defend it from accidents.

To make a resolutive Plaster of great virtue. This Plaster is to resolve
Tumors and hardness, if it be laid thereon very hot, and when it is cold,
to lay on another, and this you shall do till the hardness be resolved: and
it is made in this Order.
TAke common Ashes, that are well burnt and white, and finely searced, one
pound, Clay beaten in fine powder half a pound, Earab one ounce: mix all
these in an earthen dish on the fire with oil of Roses, in form of a liquid
Unguent, and that ye shall lay upon the place grieved, as hot as ye may
suffer it, and change it Morning and Evening, and ye shall see it work a
mavelous effect. Moreover, when the Pelechie comes forth of a diseased,
let him be folded in the same remedy very hot, and in four and twenty hours
ye shall be help, if ye be first well Purged: for this is a great secret
which I have revealed. This word Pelechie, is (as it were certain spots) like
those which we call Gods tokens, the which commonly come to those that have
the Pestilent Fever.

To make a maturative Plaster of great virtue. This maturative does open an
Impostume without Instrument or pain: And the order to make it is this.
TAke the yolke of Eggs, two ounces, white Salt finely ground, one ounce,
Hens ^ung that is liquid and red like Honey, one ounce: Mix all these well
together without fire, and when you will bring an Impostume to superation, and
break it, lay on this Plaster morning and Evening, a little, and in short
time it will draw forth the Impostume, and break it, and heal it without any
other help^. Keep this as a secret.

A Composition of great virtue against all Ulcers and Sores.
TAke Oil of Vyfrioll that is perfect, as much as you will, and put it into a
Glass, with as much Oil of Tartar made by dissolution, and so let it stand
ten days: Then take one scruple of that, and one ounce of pure Aqua Vitae,
and mix them together, and therewith wash the hollow Ulcers, and they will
heal in short time. It helps any crude kind of Scab or sore that is caused
of the evil quality or nature.

A Note of a certain Spanyard, wounded in the head at Naples.
There was a certain Spanyard called Samora, of the age of four and thirty
years, of complexion Choleric and Sanguine, the which was wounded in the
left side of the head, with incision of the Bone. Also ye shall understand,
that in Naples the air is most ill for wounds in the Head, by reason that it
is so subtle, and for that cause the Doctors did fear the Cure: Nevertheless
I dressed him with our Magno Licore, and Balsamo Artificio, keeping the wound
as close as was possible, anointing it only upon the wound, and so in
fourteen days he was perfectly whole, to the great wonder of a number of
Chirurgions in that City.

For to heal Hurts and Wounds.
TAke Mallows and sees them well, and when they be sodden, take and stamp
them, and take old Barrowes grease and clean Barley meal, and mingle the
Juice, the Meal and the Grease all together, and make a Salve thereof, it is a
ready healer.

To stanch the blood of a Cut.
TAke a good handful of Nettles and bruise them, and then lay them upon the
wound hard bound with a cloth, and it will stint presently.

Another for the same.
TAke Hogs-dung hot from the Hog, mingle it with Sugar, and lay it to the Wound.

For to staunch the blood of a Wound.
TAke a Linen cloth, and burn it to powder, and bind it to to the Wound or
Vein that is hurt.

The Lord Capels Salve for Cuts or Rancklings, coming of Rubbings: It is also
good Lip-salve.
TAke a pound of May-butter and clarify it, then take the purest thereof: also
take three ounces of English wax, and two ounces of Rozine, and clarify them
by themselves, then boil them all together, when it is boiled, cool it, and
after keep i^ in the Cake, or otherwise as your Salve.

For to draw and heal a Cut.
TAke the Juice of Smalledge, the Juice of Bugle: of each a quantity: take also
Wax, Rozen unwrought, Sheep Suet, Deeres suet, of each a like quantity,
Sallet oil, Turpentine, but a little; Fry them all, and scrape a little Lint,
and lay a little salve upon the Lint, and put it in the Cut, and then lay a
Plaster over it.

A Salve for fresh Wounds.
TAke Harts-grease and Turpentine, of each four Ounces: oil of Roses,
Frankensence and Masticke, of each one ounce, and so make your Salve.

A Salve that cleanses a Wound and heals it.
TAke white Turpentine unwashed four ounces, the yolke of an Egg, and a
little Barley meal and so make a Salve.

To kill dead Flesh.
TAke the Juice of Smalledge, and the yolke of an Egg. Wheaten flower, a
spoonefull of Honey: and mingle all these together, and drop it into the Sore,
or otherwise make a Plaster: Fine Sugar scraped into powder will do the ^ame.

A Plaster for old Sores.
TAke Litarg^ of Gold, one pound, oil of Roses two pound, white Wine a pint,
Urine a pint, Vinegar half a pint, Wax, Frankensence, and Myrrh, of each
two Drams, and so make your Plaster according.

For Canker, Fistula, Warts, or Wounds, new or old.
TAke a Gallon and a half of running Water, and a pe^ke of Ashen ashes, and
sees them, and make thereof a Gallon of Lie, and put thereto a gallon of
Tanners woose, and powder of roch Allome, and Madder a pound: and sees all
these, and let your pan be so great, that it be little more then half full,
and when it rises in the seething, stir it down with a ladle, that it run
not over, and let it stand three or four hours till it be clear, and all
that is clear strain it through a good thick Canvasse, and then wet therein
a ragged cloth, and long Lint, and lay it on the sore, and this is good for all
the Diseases aforesaid.

A Salve for any Wound.
TAke Housleeke, Marigold leaves, Sage, Betonie, and garden Mallows, of each
one handful, stamp them, and strain them, then take the juice, half a pound
of fresh Butter, one peny-worth of fine Turpentine very well washed, one
peny-worth of Aqua Composita, and an Oxe-gall, mix them all together, and
boil them moderately upon the Imbers, and so make a Plaster.

To help the Ach of a Wound.
FOr Ache of a Wound, stamp Fennel. with old Swines Grease, and heat it and
bind it thereto, Recip. the juice of Smallage, Honey, old Swines gret^e, and
Rye meal and apply it Plasterwise.

To heal Wounds without Plaster, Tent, or Ointment, except it be in the Head.
Stamp Fennel, Yarrow, Buglosse, ana. white Wine, and drink it 2 or 3 times
a day till you be well. Mix Swines grease with Honey, Rye meal, and Wine, and
boil it and use it, if it heal too fast, put in the juice of Bryonie a
little, bruise Isop and put in while the wound is raw is very good.

To heal a Wound that no scarre or print thereof shall be seen.
Roast Lilly roots, and grind them with Swines grease, and when the wound is
healed, anoint it therewith often.

Thus much concerning the Cure of Wounds.
OF THE BATH OF Bathe, in England. PART. V.
The rare Treasure of the English Baths. Written by WILLIAM TVRNER, Doctor of
Physic. Gathered and set forth for the Benefit and Cure of the Poorer sort of
people, who are not able to go to the Physicians, by WILLIAM BREMER,
Practitioner in Physic, and Chyrurgerie. CHAP. I.
ALthough there be a very excellent and wholesome Bath within the Realm of
England, yet for all that, I reckon that there are many in the North parts,
which being diseased with sore diseases, would gladly come to the Bath of
Bathe, if they knew that there were any there whereby they might be helped, and
yet know not whether there be any in the Realm or no. Wherefore, seeing that I
have writ of the Baths that are in foreign Countries, therefore I thought
good to show the virtues of our own Bathes: For if they be able to help men's
Diseases, what shall men need to go into far Countries to seek that remedy
there which they might have at home.

The Bath of England in the West Country, in Sommerset-shirs, in a City called
in Latin Bathoma, and Bathe in English, of the Bathes that are in it. This
City of Bathe is fifteen miles from Wells, and fifteen miles from the Noble
City of Bristowe. The chief matter whereof these Bathes in this City have
their chief virtue and strength, after my judgment is Brimstone, and of my
judgment are diverse other, which have examined them as I have done, when I was
at the Bathes with a certain man diseased of the Gout, I went into them my
self with my Patient, and brought forth of the place next unto the Spring,
and out of the bottom, flyme, mud, bones, and stones, which altogether smelled
evidently of Brimstone, if that a man may judge the matter of the effect, may
gather that Brimstone is the only matter in these Bathes, or else the chief
that bears rule in them: for they dry up wonderfully, and heal the Gout
excellently, and that in a short time, as with diverse others, one Miles
Somelines, one of my Lord of Sommersets Players can bear witness: which
things are no light tokens that Brimstone bears the chief rule, seeing that
neither by smelling nor tasting, a man can feel no other matter or Mines to
reign there.

If there be any thing lightly mingled with the Brimstone which I could not
perceive, it must be Copper: for whilst I walked about the Mountains, out of
the which the Bathes do spring, I found here and there little pieces of
Marquesteth and stones, mingled with Copper, but I could by no sense or wit
perceive, that the Bathes had any notable quality thereof: then seeing that
there cannot be found any other Minor or matter, to be the chief ruler in
these Bathes then Brimstone, we may gather, that these Bathes are good for all
those diseases, which all learned Physicians write, that all other Bathes,
whose chief ruler is Brimstone, are good for.

Aetius writing of natural Bathes, wherein Brimstone is either the only
Minor, or matter of them, or chief matter thereof, says thus as follows
hereafter. The Bathes of brimstone soften the sinews, swage the pain that a
man has in desiring to go often unto the stool, and when he comes, he can
either do little or nothing. They scowre and cleanse the skin: wherefore
they are good for the white Morphew, and black, for the Leprosy, and for all
Scabs and Scurffes, for old sores and bot^hes, for the falling of humors into
the joints, for an hardened Milt, or the Cake in the left side, for an hardened
Mother, for all kind of Pals^es, for the Sciatica, and for all kind of Itch or
itching. But the Bathes of Brimstone hurt the Stomach and mar it: thus far
writes Avicen.

Agricola in his Books of those things which flow out of the earth, writes
thus of Bathes of Brimstone. The Bathes of Brimstone do soften the sinews and
do heat, they are good therefore for Pals^e, for places pulled in too much,
or stretched too far forth: for the shaking or trembling of any member, and
they swage ache, and draw out Swelling of the limbs, and drive and scatter
them away. They are good therefore for the Gowte in the hands, for the Gowts in
the feet, and for the Sciatica, and all other diseases in the joints: they
swage also the pains in the Liver and Milt, and drive away the swelling of
them both: they scowre away freckles, and heal Morphewes, and Scabbes: but
they undo and overthrow the Stomach. Then seeing (as I said before) our Baths
of Bathe, have their virtue of Brimstone, they that are diseased in any of the
above named diseases, may go thither, and by the help of Almighty God be
healed there.

When those Bathes have of long time been known, even about a thousand
years, either the vnlearnednesse, or the enuiousnesse of the Physicians, which
have been in times past, is greatly to be rebuked, because either for lack of
learning, knew not the virtues of these Bathes, or else for enuiousnesse, would
not send the sick folks, whom they could not otherwise heal unto the bathes,
for all men can tell, very few in times past have been by the advice of the
Physicians sent unto the bathes, but now in this our light and learned time,
after that so many learned Physicians have so greatly commended these bathes, I
doubt whether the niggardly liberality, or the unnatural unkindness of the
rich men of England is more to be dispraised which receiving so many good
turns at Almighty God, now after that they know that the bathes are so
profitable, will not bestow one halfe-penny for Gods sake upon the bettering
and amending of them, that the poor, sick and diseased people that resort
thither, might be better and sooner helped when as they are there. There is
money enough spent upon Cockfightings, Tennis plays, Parkes, Banquettings,
Pageants, Plays, and serving only for a short time, that pleasure of times,
but of private persons which have no need of them, but I have not heard tell
that any rich man has spent upon these notable bathes, being so profitable for
the whole Commonwealth of England one groate these twenty years.

He that has been in Italy and Germany, and had seen how costly and
welfauoredly, the bathes are trimmed, and appointed there in diverse and sundry
places, would be ashamed that any stranger which had seen the bathes in
foreign lands should look upon our Bathes, for he would think that the
stranger would accuse us Englishmen of three things, of grossness and brutish
ignorance, because we cannot trim our Bathes no better: of unkindness, because
we do so lightly regard so high and excellent gifts of Almighty God: of
beastly filthiness, because we make no partition between the men and the
women, whilst they are in bathing, but suffer them contrary both unto the law
of God and man, to go together like unreasonable beasts, to the destruction
both of body and soul of very many.

If there be any liberal Duke, Earl, Lord, Knight, Esquire, or other gentle,
or no gentle honest man, that will bestow any cost upon the bettering and
amending of these Bathes, I will for my part, because I have no store of other
riches, help the matter as forward as I can with my counsel, which is this.

First and before all other things, my counsel is, that every Bath have an
hole in the bottom, by the which, the stopple taken out, the Bath should be
cleansed and scoured every four and twenty hours, at the least once, and that
I would advise to be done at eight a clock in the afternoon, that against the
morning it might be full of fresh and wholesome water against the time the
sick folk come to it in the morning, and so should they be a great deal
sooner healed of their old diseases, and in less jeopardie in taking of new,
which may easily come unto a man, if he go into a Bath, wherein a sick man,
namely if he be sick in a smiting or infectiue disease, has continued.

It were also meet, that every Bath had a Covering about it, or at the least
it should be so builded, that in the time of foul weather it might be covered;
Notwithstanding I would least such places should be open, that the Vapors might
go out, that they that have ill Heads be hurt with the Vapors which are too
much holden in. I think also that it were necessary that certain Lofts should
be builded right over some part of the first or principal Bath, that honest
women and other which would not gladly be seen in the Baths, might ever have
(as often as they need, Fresh water drawn unto them) through an hole,
wherewith they may have to bathe themselves in Vessels of wood, made for that
purpose: Provided with all foresight, that not one drop of the water which they
in the Lofts have occupied, fall in again into the principal Bath, but be
conveyed out by some other convenient way.

For the bringing of this matter surely to pass, it were best that the Lofts
should be so builded, that only a Bucket might go down into the has, saving
that little portion (whereby water may be drawn up through, to serve them that
are in them, and such a fit place might be devised to draw water through, that
it might serve for half a dozen Chambers above, or more. This were also
necessary, that in one of the Bathes, should be builded over the hottest place
that there is, a little house, after the manner of a Seaffold, very near unto
the Water, after such a manner, that the hot Vapor might strike hot upon
certain places of man's body; For this manner of reserving of the hot vapors,
is much better for some kind of Dropsies or Govets, then the water it self is,
therefore these things is not to be forgotten. This were also necessary, that
not only certain several bathing places should be appointed for women alone,
but also that others should be appointed for such persons severally, as are
sick in smitting, infectious, or horrible diseases.

Furthermore, because Almighty GOD has shapen and made Herbs, Stones, Gummes,
Metals, and Medicines, of diverse other things, principally for Man. It is to
be thought that his Will is, that the same should sometime serve such Creatures
of his, as man cannot well want: wherefore as it is well done, that Herbs and
Medicines made of diverse other things, should be given to the Beasts that serve
us: so that I think it were not amiss, if that we made the Bathes after they
have served man, for whom they were principally made, serve also to help
Horses: for performing whereof, I would wish that one or two Bathes in some
convenient place, might be drawn out from one or two of the hottest Bathes,
and then would I have so devised, that the Horses that have diseases in the
Legs and Joints, might stand in the Bath almost unto the belly, and that other
that have other diseases, might stand higher in the water: which thing may
easily be brought to pass; ^f that two holes be made with stopples, the one
higher, and the other lower, that a man may set the Horses as deep or as
shallow as he list, the water increasing or decreasing, according to the
holding in, or letting out of the water.

I think verily, that the Bathe of Brimstone within the space of a Month,
heals Splents, Spa^e^^s, and all (...) hard lumps, and swellings, if they be
not very old, (...) and Found^ing farces, or Fashions, or all such like
diseases that are without. If the Horses by the advice of a cunning
Horse-leache, have given the in a convenient drink before they come to the
Bathes, and ordain for them such Emplasters and Powders as are meet for them
to use in the Bathing time: but whilst they stand resting themselves out of
the Bathe, my advise is, that they that have not much money to bestow upon
Horse-leaches, that they lay in good quantity, the Slyme and Grounds of the
Bath, upon the sore places of the Horses, all that time that they are out of
the Bath, resting them in the stable, between o^e Bathing time and another.
But I would not that the Horse should be exercised in the Bathing time, for
that is not my meaning: For I would that a Horse should be as well exercised as
a man, and so much more as he is stronger then a Man, except the diseases be
in his Feet, and then are they more measurably to be exercised.

And for the Diet that men should keep at this, Bath of Bathe, hereafter
ensues, with diverse other necessary Rules needful to be observed of all those
that enter the said Bath.

CHAP. II. Certain Rules to be observed of all them that will enter into any
Bath, or drink the water of any Bathe.
THe Counsel of learned and wise Physicians is, that they should not at any
time go into any Bath, to seek remedy for any sickness, except it be such a
one that almost the learned Physicians despair of the healing of it: if God
have smitten you with any disease, before you go to any Bath, for the healing
of it, call to your remembrance, ^o (...) ^^^en and wherein you have displeased
GOD, and if any of your sins come to your remembrance, occupy the same no
more, but be earnestly sorry for it, and ask GOD mercy for it, intending and
promising by his mercy and grace, never to ^all into the same again. This
Counsel is agreeing with that which is written in the 38. Chapter of
Ecclesiasticus; in this manner. My Son in the time of thy sickness, fail
not (but that thou pray to Almighty GOD) for he will help thee: Leave off all
sinning, and show out thy straight Hands, and cleanse thy Heart from all sin,
and deal Alms, and then give place to the Physician, and let him come unto
thee, as one that God has sent unto thee. And a little after he does plainly
declare, that Sickness comes from the punishment of sin, where he says:
He that will sin against his Maker, uses to fall into the hands of the
Physician. As Christ in the fifth of John does also mean, when he said unto the
blind man he had healed, Go and sin no more, least worse things chance unto
thee. Howbeit, we may judge no man to be a greater sinner then another,
because he is oftener sick then common sort be: for God sends unto good men
oftentimes sickness, not for the sins they have done more then other men,
but to keep them in good order, that the flesh rebel not against the spirit.
For if that many infirmities had been a sure token that a man were a great
sinner, then should T^^othie, which had many infirmities and sicknesses, as
Paul writes, been a very great sinner: but he was not so, therefore that
argument is not true.

But whether Sickness come for to punish sin, or to hold a man in good
nature and obedience, all Sickness comes of God: Wherefore, for whatsoever
cause it comes of, before ye ask any help of any worldly Physician, ye
must make your Prayers to Almighty GOD; (as the good King Ezechias did,) and if
it be meet for you to be healed, you shall be healed as he was.

Then after ye have confessed your self unto Almighty GOD, and to such as ye
have offended; in the Name of God Ask counsel of some learned Physician who
is sent of God, and not of some selfe-made Idol, who is only of himself: if
he can (using all the lawful means commonly w^nt to heal such diseases as
ye are sick on) and if ye feel your grief no better, then it shall be high
time to go to the Bathes as to the shot Anchor.

Before ye go to the Bathes, in any wise ye must go to some learned
Physician, and learn of him, by the help of the telling, what Complexion you
be of, and what Humor or other thing is the cause of your disease, and there
after his Counsel, use such Diet as shall be most fit for your Complexion and
sickness. Let no man enter into any bath before his body be purged or cleansed
after the advice of some learned Physician, for if any man go into the bath
^^purged, he may fortune never come home again: or if he come home again, he
comes home most commonly with worse diseases then he brought to the bath
with him.

Ye may not go into the bath, the first day that you are come to it, but you
must rest a day or two, and then go into the bathe.

There is no time of the year that is more fit to go into the most part of
all the bathes, then are the Months of May and September: but the Spring time
is better then any other time is.

The best time of the day is an hour after the rising of the Sin, or half
an hour: but before ye go into the bathe, if your disease will suffer you,
ye must walk an hour, or at the least half an hour before you go into the
bath

But you must at no time go into the bath, except ye have been at the
stool, either by nature or by (...), ye may take a Suppository, or a Glister,
and for a gr^^^ need Savanorolla suffers Pits, but he will not suffer that he
that is so purged, enter into the bath, for the space of (...) hours.

The same also would at the least every Bather should have a stool once in
three days: wherefore if any man be hard of nature, and cannot abide
Suppositories and Glisters, he pardons the Patient, if he be once purged, or
go to the stool once in three days, which thing scarcely any other writer
that I have read will do, neither would I counsel to defer the going to
stool so long, if there be any means possible to make a man go to the
stool, without his great pain.

If that he be counseled to go twice on a day in the bathe, he must see he
go not into it, till seven hours be past after your dinner, and tarry not so
long in it in the afternoon as you did before.

The common time of tarrying in the bath, is commonly allowed to be an hour,
or more or less, according to the nature both of the Bath, as also of the
Patient.

Let no man tarry so long in the Bath that he be faint or weak, but let him
come out before that time.

Ye must always go into the bath with an empty stomach, and as long as you
are in it, you must neither eat nor drink saving that for a great need
require the contrary.

Some grant that a weak person may eat a little bread steeped in the juice of
Pomegranats, Barberries, or Rilts, or in the Sy^^^s made of the same.

Some Physicians suffer a man that cannot abide hunger so long, to take ere he
go in, two spoonfuls of raisons well washed oftentimes with two parts of
water, one of wine, or so much of delaied or ^atred wine, as much as (...)
holden in a spoon, or a few Prunes ^odden and steeped in water (...) two
spoonfuls of ^rummes of breas, washed oftentimes with water or wine, tempered
as I told before or a to^^e put into such water: but let no man drink in the
bath except he sw^^^ in the bath, or be in danger of founding or else ye must
all (...) time that ye be in the bath abstain from all (...) and drink.

As long as you (...) in the bath, you must (...) your head well that you take
no cold, for it is very perilous to take cold in the head in the Bath, as
diverse reasons may be laid to prove the same.

When you come out of the Bath, see that ye cover your self well that ye take
no cold, and dry off the Water on your bode with warm clothes, and go by and
by into a warm bed, and sweat there if you can, and wipe off the sweat
diligently, and afterward sleep, but ye must not drink any thing until
dinner time, except ye be very faint: then ye may take a little Suger-candy,
or a few Raisins, or any such thing in a small quantity that will slake thirst:
for Galen in the 14 De Methodo medendi, commands that a man shall not eat
nor drink by and by after the Bathe, until he has slept after his bathing.

After that ye have sweat and slept enough, and be clearly delivered from the
heat that you had in the Bathe, and afterward in the Bed, then may you rest
and walk a little, and then go to dinner; for by measurable walking, the
vapors and windiness that is come in the Bath is driven away.

If the Patient cannot walk, then let him be rubd quickly, and if he can
suffer no rubbing, then at some time it were good to take a Suppositorie,
either of root or of a beete, with a little Salt upon it, or a Suppository of
Honey, or a Suppositorie of a Flower deluce, or of salt Bacon, or white Soap.

After all these things, then shall you go to dinner, but you must neither
eat very much good meat, nor any evil meat at all. Wherefore you must rise
from the Table with some good appetite, so that you could eat more if you
would.

The meats that are commonly of all Physicians allowed that write of Diet that
belongs to Bathes, are, Bread of one days baking, or two at the most, well
leavened, and thoroughly baked, small Birds, and other birds of the fields and
mountains that are of easy digestion, but Waterechanters ye must not touch,
Kids flesh, Veale and Mutton, of a Lamb of a year old, new laid Eggs,
Pheasants, Partriges, Capons, Chickens and young Geese. The meats that are
forbidden, are salt Beef and Bacon, Pigeons, Quails, Pyes, and Pasties, and
such like meats, Cherries, and all such fruits, Garlic, Onions, and all hot
spices, and all cold meats, as are the most part of Fishes: howbeit, diverse
may be well allowed, so they be well dressed.

Milk is not to be allowed much: but if that the Patient be so greedy of it,
that in a manner he long for it, then let him take it two hours or thereabout,
before he take any other meat, and he must drink after it.

White wine that is small is allowable, or Wine being delayed with the third or
fourth part of sodden water, according to the Complexion of the Patient: Some
use to steep bread in strong Wine, when as they can get no other Wine.

Beware that in no wise ye drink any water, and especially cold water, and so
should ye forbear from all things that are presently cold, namely, when ye
begin first to eat and drink. Let therefore both your meat and drink be in
such temper, that they be not cold but warm, lest when as ye are hot within
by your bathing and sweating, the cold strike suddenly into some principal
member and hurt it.

They that are of a hot Complexion, and of an open nature, and not well
fastened together, ought not to tarry so long in the bath, as other ought that
are of colder and faster complexion.

If that any man between meal times be vexed with thirst, he may not drink
any thing, saving for a great need he take a little Barley water, or Water
sodden with the fourth part of the juice either of sour or mild sweet
Pomgranates, with a little Sugar: a man may use for a need, a little Vinegar,
with Water and Sugar, if he have no disease in the Sinews, nor in the Joints.

A man that is very weak, or accustomed much to sleep after dinner, an hours
and a half after that he is risen from the Table, he may take a reasonable
sleep.

All the time that a man is in them, he must keep himself chast^ from all
women, and so he must do a month after, after the counsel of diverse learned
Physicians, and some for the space of forty days, as Pantheus and Aleardus
would, namely, if they come out of the Chauldron.

It were meet that in every four and twenty hours the Bath should be letten
out, and fresh water received into the pit again, for so shall you sooner be
healed, and better abide with less jeopardy, abiding in the Bath.

It is most meet for them that have any disease in the head, as a Cathaire or
Rhemne, coming of moist cause and not very hot. For them that have Palsies, or
such like diseases, that they cause a bucket to be holden over their heads,
with an hole in it, of the bignesss of a man's little finger, about four foot
above their heads, so that by the Reed or Pipe made for the nonce, the water
may come down with great might upon the mould of the Head: if they have the
Cathaire, and upon the nape of the neck, if the Patient be sick of the
Palsy, or any such like disease.

The clay or grounds of the Bath is better for the Dropsy then is the water
alone: it is also good for shrunken swelled, and hard places, and for all old
and diseased places, which cannot well be healed with other medicines: The
matter is, to lay the grounds upon the place, and to hold the same against the
hot Sun, or a warm fire, until it be something hand, and then to wash away
the foulness of the Clay, with the water of the Bath: this may a man do as
often as he lift. Some Physicians counsel, that between the bathings, when a
man is twice bathed upon one day, in the time that the Patient is out of the
bath, to use his plaistering with the Clay: but if the person be any thing
weak, I counsel not to go twice into the Bath, but either once, or else to
be content with the plaistering of the mudde or grounds of the Bath.

It were good wisdom for them that cannot tarry long at the Bathes, either
for heat or for cold, to take home with them some of the grounds, and there
occupy it as is afore-told.

There are certain learned men, which reckon that the hot breath or vapor
that rises up from the Bathe, is much more mightier then the water of the bath
is, and it is true: therefore it ware well that they which have any Dropsy,
and especially a Tympanie, should sit over such a place of the Bath, that they
might receive into the moist diseased place, the vapor of the bathe, either by
an holed froole, or by some other such like manner of thing, well devised for
that purpose.

If any poor man by the heat of the dryness of the Bathe cannot sleep
enough, let him eat Lettice, or Purflaine, or the feeds of Poppy, called
Chesbowle, in some places of England, or let him eat Sugar and Poppy seed
together, let this be done at night. He may also if hoe cannot get the
aforesaid things, seethe Violet leaves and Mallows, and bathe the vtter-most
parts with that they are sodden in. These are remedies for poor ^olke that are
not able to have a Physician with them to give them counsel: Let the rich use
such remedies as their Physicians shall counsel them.

If any poor man be vexed with any insufferable thirst, let him take a little
Barley and seethe it long, and put a little Sugar unto it: or let him take the
juice of Orange, or take a little of it with a little Sugar.

If any poor man catch the Head ache, let him take a little Wormelade if he
can get it, or Coriander Comfits: or if he can get none of these, let him take
the white of an Enge, and beat it with Vinegar and Rose water, or with the
broth of Violets, or Nightshade, or with any of them, and a little Vinegar,
and lay them in a cloth unto the temples of his head, and forehead.

If any poor man be burned so much, let him take a Glitter made with
Mallows, Beetes, and Violet leaves, or let him seethe Prunes with Barley a
good while, and Raisins, putting away the stones, and eat of them or let him
use Suppositories sometimes, made of roots, either of Beetes, of Flower
de-Luce, or of white Soap, or of salt Bacon.

If any man sweat too much, let him use colder meats than he used before,
with Vinegar or Verjuyce; and let them also eat Sheepes-feete, and
Calves-feete, with Verjuyce or Vinegar.

If any man have the burning of his water when he makes it, let him an hour
after he is come out of the Bathe, annoint his Kidneyes with some cold
Ointment, as is Infrigidus Galeni* or if you cannot come by that, let him
seethe Violet leaves. Poppy-heads, Raisins. Licorice and Mallows together,
strain them, and put some Sugar in the broth, and drink of it a draught
before Supper.

If any be troubled with the Rheum which he has caught in the Bath, let him
parch or bri^tle at the fire Nigella Romana and hold it in a cloth to his
Nose, and let him set cups or ^oring glasses to his shoulders, without any
scorching, and let him drink sodden water with Barley, and with a little Sugar.

If any man have any appetite to eat, let him use the sirrups of Ribles or
Barberian, or the sirrup of unripe Gra^es; or use Verjuyce or Vinegar to
provoke appetite in due measure, and now and then if ye can get it, let him
take a little Marmalade, or of the sirrup of M^^to or Wormwood Roman. (These
have I written for poor, folk.) Those that are rich, by the advice of the
Physicians, may have other Remedies enough against the forenamed accidents,
that chance in the time of their bathing.

If thou be rid of thy disease by thy bathing, offer unto Christ in thy pure
members, such offering of Thankesgiving, as thou may spare, and give him
hearty thanks, both in word, urinde and deed, and sin no more but walk in
all kindness of life and honesty, as far as thou shall be able to do, as
long as thou shall live hereafter.

But if thou be not healed the first time, be patient, and live virtuously till
the next bathing time, and then if it be to the glory of God, and for thee most
profitable thou shall the next bathing time be healed by the grace of God of
whom comes all health both of body and soul.

Some if they be not healed whilst they be in the bathing, cry out both upon
the Bath, which heals many other of the same Diseases that they are sick of,
and of the Physician also that counseled them to go to the Bath, such men
must learns, that they must not appoint God a time to heals them by the Bathe,
and that when as the Bath has dried up, and washes up by Sweating, and
subtle through blowing the evil matter of the disease, that it is one days
work or two, to make good humors to occupy the place of such evil humors
as have been in them before. Therefore let such be patient, and for the space
of a Month keep the same diet that they kept at the Bath, and if God will
they shall have their desire, but not only these, but all others that are
heales for a month at the least, the longer the better, must keep the same
diet that they kept it the Bath, as touching meat and drink, and if it be
possible also from the use of all Women

When as you go homewards, make but small Iourneyes, and beware of sursetting
and of cold, and when you are at home, use measurable Exercise daily, and
honest mirth and pastime, with honest company, and be ware of too much study or
carfulness.

Thanks be to God for all his Gifts.
A Brief Treatise of Vrines, as well of Man's Vrines as of Woman's, to judge by
the Color which betokens Health, and which betokens Weakness, and also
Death. PART. VI.
IT is showed, that in the fore-parts of the Body dwells Sickness and
Health: That is, in the Womb, in the Head, in the Liver, and in the Bladder,
in what manner thou may know their properties, and thereof thou may learn.

When Bubbles do swim on the top of Urine, they proceed of windy matter
included in viscous humidity, and signify ^^wnesse and indigestion in the
Head, Belly, Sides, ^eynes, and parts thereabouts, for in these especially,
hu^^ours are multiplied and do ascend to make pain in the Head.

Resident Bubbles does signify ventositie in the Body, or else a Sickness
that has continued long and will continue, unless remedy be found; but
Bubbles not Resident but does break quickly, signifies Debility or Weakness.

Bubbles clea^ing to the Vrinall, signifies the body to be repleat with evil
humors.

Bubbles does also signify the Stone in the Reins of the Back.

A Circle which is green of color of Urine, does signify wavering (...) the
H^^^, and (...) the stomach. This color in a ^^aver does (...) od^^^ing of
Choler. And if it continue it will cause an Impostume, the which will engender
the Frenzi^.

A black circle in Urine, signifies Mortification.

If any filthy matter do appear in the Urine, it comes from the Lungs and
sometimes from the Liver, and it may come from breaking of some Impostume, but
for the most part it comes from the Ulcers of the Bladder or the Reins, or
from the passages of the Urine, then the urine is troubled in the bottom and
stinketh, he has a pain in his lower parts and especially in the parts
aforesaid, when he makes water, and chiefly in the end of the yard, and
commonly there is with this the Strangurie which is hardly to be cured, unless
it be in the beginning.

If it come from the Reins, there is pain in the Loins, the Back and the
Flank.

If from the Liver the pain is only in the right side.

If in the Lungs, the pain ^^^tcom the Brost with a cough and the breath
stinketh.

If from the Bladder, the pain is about the share.

If a man's urine he white of morning, and red before meat, and white after
meat, he is whole: and if it be fat and thick it is not (...). And if the
Urine be ^^^^ly thick, it is not good to like: and if it be thick as spice,
it betokens Head ache.

Urine that is two days red, and at the tenth day white, betokens very good
health.

Urine that is fat, white, and may, betokens the Fever Quartaine.

Urine that is bloody, betokens that the Bladder is hurt by some rotting that
is within.

A little Urine all Fleshie, betokens of the Reins: who pisseth Blood
without sickness, he has ^ome Vein broken in his Reins.

Urine that is ponderous, betokens that the bladder is hurt.

Urine that is bloody in sickness, betokens great evil in the Body, and
namely in the bladder.

Urine that falls by drops, above, as it were great boules, betokens great
sickness and long.

If white gravel does issue forth with Urine, it does signify that the
Patient has or shall have the Stone engendered in the Bladder, and there is
pain about those parts.

If the gravel be red, the Stone is engendered in the Reins of the Back and
Kidneyes, and there is great pain in the small of the Back.

If the gravel be black, it is engendered of a Melancholy Humor.

Note, that if the gravel go away, and the Patient find no ease, it shows
that the Stone is confirmed. Also know ye, that if the gravel go away, and
the pain go away likewise, it signifies that the Stone is broken and wydeth
away.

Women's Urine that is clear and shyning in the Vrinall like silver, if she
cast often, and if she have no talent to meat, it betokens she is with Child.

Women's Urine that is strong and white with stinking, betokens sickness in
the Reins, in her secret Receipts, in her chambers full of evil humors, and
of sickness of her self.

Women's Urine that is bloody and clear as water under, betokens Headache.

Women's urine that is like to Gold clear and mighty, betokens that she has
lust to man.

Women's urine that has color of stable cleansing, betokens her to have the
Fever Quartaine, and she to dye the third day.

Women's urine that appears an color of Leave, if she be with Child,
betokens that i^ is ^a^d within her.

Hereafter follows all the Vrines that betokens Death, as well the Urine of
Man as of Woman.
IN a hot Axes, one part red, another black, another green, another blew,
betokens Death.

Urine in hot axes, black, and little in quantity, betokens Death.

Urine colored all over as Lead, betokens the prolonging of death.

Urine that shines raw and right bright, if the Skin in the bottom shine not,
it betokens death.

Urine that in substance having Fleeting above (as it were a dark) Sky
signifies death.

Urine darkly shyning, and dark with a black Skin within, betokens a
prolonging of death.

Urine that is the color of water, if it have a dark Sky in an Axes, it
betokens death.

Urine that has dregs in the bottom meddled with blood, it betokens death.

Urine black and thick, and if the sick loath when he goes to the Privy,
and when he speaks overthwart, or that he understands not aright, and these
sicknesses goes not from him, it betokens death.

Hereafter follows sundry Waters and Medicines, meet for Physic, and
Chy^urgerie, As also Ointments and Plasters. PART. VII.
A Man may govern himself, at four times in the Year, so that he shall
have no need of Letchcraft, as thus: Ver, begins the Eight Ides of March,
and ends the Eight Ides of May, at what time waxes the good sweet juice of
Sanguine through good meats and drinks, and good savours. Summer does begin
the Eight Ides of May, and ends the Eight Ides of June, at which time
begins the bitter juice of Choler, then use cold meats, and drinks, and
forbear women.

Autumn Harvest, begins the Eight Ides of June, and ends the Eight Ides
of November, at which time waxes Melancholy, then be purged by a Medicine
Laxatiue, and afterward use light and disgestible meats and drinks, such as
increase Sanguine,

Hiemps Winter, begins the Eight Ides of November, and ends the Eight Ides
of March, at which time waxes fleagme, through weakness of humors, and
corruption of Air, then the pose begins to grow, then heat is in the veyn
then is pricking in the sides, then use hot meat and drinks, as Pepper,
Ginger, and wash not thy head.

Letchcraft is Surgery, to heal man of all manner of sickness, and to
keeps him whole, so far as craft may. Letchcraft is in two manners, that is
both Physic and Surgery.

Letchcraft and Surgery each of them has two parts, viz. Theoricke and
Practique, Theoricke to know and practice to work, the ground of Theorique,
Theoricke is to know the Elements, and humors that comes of them, which is
for man's health or against it: Letchcraft teaches us causes, effects, and
Signs, Signs to know the causes and effects: and therefore I treat of
signs, and many signs does belong to Physic and Surgery, as Crisses,
Urine, Pounces, Vomits, Sege, and other.

Surgery is in Wounds, Impostumes, and Algebro, and Surgery holds
four parts, viz. wounds and Impostumes, Algebra and Anthonte. Antidotary is
the fifth: which is a kind of Salues against all kind of Sores that belongs to
Chyrurgery: Algebra is broken bones, and bones out of joint: Antidotory of
Surgery is in Waters, Powders; Oils, Ointments, and Emplaisters most
principal, some must be repercussiue, some Mole^^catiue, some Maturatiue,
some generatiue, and some Corosiue: Anatomy is to know the Body of man,
thorow-out, and all his members, within and without, two members has every
manner of man, viz. principal, and official, and four principal every man
has, viz. Brain, and heart Liver, and stones, the Brains has the head and
neck: the heart has the Lungs, Breast, and Midriffe: the Liver has the
stomach and other members down to the Reins, as Guts, Gauls, and the Kelle
Vein, and Milt, ^he Milt upon the left side, and the Gaul upon the Liver: the
Stones has Raines, Bladders, and other Privities: and these are the four
principal members: Brain, Heart, Liver, and Stones and without Brain, Heart
and Liver, no man may live: and without Stones may no man engender three things
in the Stones is cause of engendring; He^t, Wind, and Humors: Heat comes from
the Liver, Spirit from the Heart, and Humors from the Brains, that man is made
of, if any of these four be faulty, that man may not as he should kindly
engender: These six virtues are rooted in the Liver; viz. Attractiue,
Digestive, Deminsiue, Expalsiue, Retentiue, and a Simulatiue, that is in the
English, drawing, and breaking out, putting, holding, and liking; For first,
Nature draws in that which it needs to live by, and then all to break it,
and then departs the good from the bad, and holds to it the good, and then
deals the good to all the members of the Body: Official members be those,
that have certain Offices in man's body, where ever they be, as the Eye to
see, the Ear to hear, the Hand to touch, the Mouth to speak, the Feet to
go, and many such other. Also such are called members as branches from the
principal to the official, as the Arm, or Leg, that rooteth in the
principal and brancheth to the officialls: and so Nerves, Artiers, Veins,
Lygaments, Cords, Bones, Pannicles, and Gristles, Flesh and Skin to teach
them their Office: But Nerves, Veins, and Artiers be most needful for they
be Wells and Roo^es of all other Nerves coming from the Brain, and Artiers
from the Heart, and Veins from the Liver into all the body: Nerves gives to
the Body feeling, and mooving, and Arteirs leaving, and Veins increasing. A
Vein has but one Tunacle and an Artier has two, in the one runs blood,
and in the other spirits and all beating Veins be Artiers, the which I call
Pulses, and all other be simple Veins, and all such members saving Flesh
alone are melancholieus, and their nature is Sperme, but flesh is Sanguine, and
therefore it may be sodered be it never so much cut, but the other said
members because their matter is Sperme, may never be sodered if they be much
cut. And thus much at this time I say of Anatomy.

And now will I speak of Wounds, which is the second part of Surgery, one
of these four intentions has every Surgeon. The first is, to contain
that, that is evil, loosed: The second is, to loose that, that is evil
contained: The third is, to take away that, that is too much: The fourth is, to
increase that, that is too little. In these four entents stands all
Surgery. The first is in Wounds, the second is Impostumes, the third and
fourth Algebra holds: Wounds be in many manners Simple, and Compound: Simple
in the flesh alone, and compound in seven manners. There the vi^. things that
lets a wound not lightly to heal, viz. Empostumes discrased, hollownesse,
or bitten by a venomous Beast, and these lets a Surgeon soon to heal a
wound, and it a Sinew be cut or pricked, or wound to the Bone, or if the wound
be hollow, or else dicrased with a Fever, or bruised, or made by venomous
Beasts, then may thou not as thou would close up a wound, and if a wound
lack all these seven things, then it is simple.

Medicine is Letchcraft, both Physic and Surgery, to help and to keep
man's body, as craft and nature may, and every one of them has first his
Theoricke, perfectly to know and afterward his Practique, cunningly to work:
the grounds of both his Qualities, Elements, and Humors, and signs most
needful both of Urine and Pulses.

The Nine Tastes.
SAlt, Sharp, and Bitter; Sower, Savory, and Eager: Sweet, Walloweth, and
Fatty: Three of them be of Heat, three of Cold, and the last three be of
temperature. A cut chaseth, heateth, and fleyeth: Temperature delights,
Lycorise, A^nis, Ginger, Worm wood, and Sugar: these be Ensamples: a cut
raweth, heateth, and fleyeth, and Nature there against ripeth, and twineth, and
puts out: make your Medicine such, that for one putting out, double twining,
and foure-riping. Melancholy is dry and cold, sower, and earthly colored, his
Urine is thin and discolored, his Pulse is straight, and short in digestion,
and full stomach, loathsomeness, and sower belching, swelling womb, and
sides, heavy dead, and fluggy limbs, and Melancholious Urine comes of a
young wench that fails her flowers, or have them not as she ought to have.
Fleame, cold and moist, white, and weak in colors, his Urine is discolored
and thick, his Pulse is short and broad, raw stomach, and full, loathsome,
and unlusty, watery mouth, much spitting, heavy head, and fluggy, and slombry,
and cold hands and feet, and namely in the Night: Sanguine is moist, and hot,
sweet, and ruddy colored, always his Body is full of heat, namely in the
Veins, and they be swelling, and of face he is ruddy, and in fleepe be
seems fiery: Medicine for him is blood let upon the Currall or Liver Vein,
and simple diet, as Tyson, Water-Grewell, and sower bread. Choler is hot, and
dry, yellow, green and bitter, his Urine is discolored, and thin, his Pulse
is long and straight, much watch, heavy headache, and thirst, bitter mouth,
ane dry singing ears, and much gnawing in the Womb, and other while
coffiffenesse, and burned Sege, and vomit, both yellow and green, as is that
color.

Each Humor may cause a Fever or an Impostume, and then the Urine is more
colored and the liquour thinner: and ever as that sickness de^^eth, the Urine
waxes thicker, and the color lower till it come to Cytrin or subrufe.

Melancholy causes a Quartaine, and Fleame a Quotidian. Sinec and Causon have
ever Continewes, the other three may be so, and other while Interpolate,
continue ever holds on, and Interpolate rests other while; continue is with
the Veins, and Interpolate is without the Veins, both two ways may be
simple and also compound, simple of one matter, and one place, or compound of
diverse places,

The Tertians of these Fevers be such, as the same humors be of, and also
Urine and Pulse: All saving they be stronger in Fevers and Impostumes then
they be without, and therefore their Medicine must be more discreet, but
generally Diet thus: Sower bread, and Water grewell, and Tyson, and fleyed Fish
and Wine, and Almond milke^, and all white meat saving whay, general
digestive in Summer, and in hot time as in Orizacia, and general digestive in
Winter, and all cold time as Oxcineile: And general expulsive is,
desuccarosarum, a cut with Turbit, and Scamony, ana. Scruple two, and general
doem^ary is insquiamany, and double-medled with Populions and fament him with
Rose, ana. double Sugar slaketh thirst.

Signs of Sickness by Egestion.
IF the meat come from a man in manner as he did eat it, the Stomach is
weak, and the Bowels be lubricated, and it is an evil sign.

If the Egestion look like Earth, it is a sign of death.

If the Egestion do not stink, it is an evil sign,

If the Egestion do look like lead, it is an evil sign.

If the Egestion be black as Ink, it is an evil sign.

If the Egestion be black, and look like Sheep trickles, there is
abundance of adust Choler, and pain in the Spleen.

If the Egestion be yell^^^, and no Saffron eaten before, the body is repleaf
with Choler and E^^en water.

If the Egestion have strains of blood, there is impediment in the Liver and
the Bowels.

If the Egestion be bloudish, there is viceration in the (...).

If the Egestion look like shaving of Gut^, beware then of (...) Flux and
^chiliry of the Body.

If a man be (...) Laxatius it is not good, for in such persons can be no
strength but much weakness.

If a man be costiue and cannot have a natural gestion once a day, he cannot
be long without Sickness.

Signs of Life or Death by the Pulses.
SPigmos is named the Pulses, and there be twelve Pulses the which do take
their Original at the Vital spirits: Three of which belong to the Heart, the
one is under the left Pap, the other two do lie in the Wrests of the arms
directly against the Thumbs.

The Brain has respect to seven Pulses, four be principal, and three be
Minors, the four principal are thus situate, in the Temples two, and one
going under the Bone called the right Furkcle, and the other does lie in the
corner of the right side of the Nose, one of the three Minor Pulses in the
corner of the left side of the Nose: And the other two lie upon the Mandibles
of the two Jaws, the Liver has respect to the two Pulses which lie upon the
Feet.

By these Pulses, expert Physicians and Chyrurgions by their knocking and
clapping, do judge what principal member is diseased or whether the Patient
be in danger.

If any of the principal pulses do not beat truly, keeping an equal course
as the minute of a clock, then there is no peril in the Patient so be it they
keep a true course; or puise without any pause or stopping; which is to say,
if the Pulse give five knockes and cease at the sixth knock: or else seven and
pause at eight, or else knock ten and leap over the eleventh, and begin and
the twelfth, the Patient is in peril, else not; for it is not in the agility,
as t^^ swift or tardie beating of the Pulse, but in the pausing of the same
contrary to its course, that the Patient is in peril.

In such causes let the Physician be circumspect, and careful, for Sincopies
in the Patient, let him sit upright in his Bed with Pillowes, and let one fit
at his back to give him drink and let the Patient smell to Amber greece or
Rose water and Vinegar, or else rub the Pulse with Aqua Vitae.

Also, when you touch the Pulse, mark under which finger it strikes most
strongest, as thus, If the Pulse under the little finger be feeble and weak,
and under the rest more weak, it is a token of Death: But contrariwise, if
under the little finger strong, and under every finger stronger, it is a good
sign.

Also, if the feel the Pulse under the fore finger until the eleventh stroke
and it fail in it is a good sign, but if he beat swift and unorderly an
evil.

OF WATERS. Here follows ni^ precious Waters, and first to make Water of
Philosophers. PART. VIII.
TAke Isope, Pennyriall, Avence, Century, and break them in a Mortar, and put
them under the cap of a Stillatorie, and distill them, and that water has many
virtues which may be proved by assayes. Take Pimpernell, Rue, Valerian,
Sedwall, Aloes, and of the Stone called Lapis Calumniaris, and break them, and
lay them in the water of Philosphers, and let them be boiled together, until
the third part be wasted of the said Waters, and after the said water shall be
strained through a linen cloth, and then close all in a Vial of glass, nine
days. This is a precious water to drink four days together with a fasting
stomach, for him that has the Falling sickness, and let him be fasting six
hours after, and this Madicine is in our judgment the truest medicine against
all manner of Goutes, and against Palsies, as long as it is not dead in the
limbs or member of a man. Item, this water drunk in the morning, is most
helping to Wounds fettered, so that it be washed therewith. Item, this water
drunk fasting, will destroy all manner of Fevers or Aches, of what manner
soever they come to a man. And trust to this Medicine verily, for it is the
best Water for these diseases aforesaid that may be, as proved by the
Philosophers, for it is one of the nine Waters.

The second Water is called Poetalis, and aqua Dulcedimus Occulorum, and it is
made in this manner as hereafter follows.
TAke Egrimony, Saturion, Celendine, and the stone called Lapis Calumniaris,
and beat it all to powder, and Tutty, and then put them under the Cap of the
Stillatorie, and distill thereof water by an ea^^e fire, and this water has
many virtues in it; for be the Eyes never so sore, they shall be cured and
healed with this water. Item, this water drunk with a fasting stomach,
destroys all manner of Venom or poison, eaten and drunk, and causes it to
be cast out of the mouth. Item, this water quenches the holly fire, so that
there be linen clothes wet therein, and laid on the sore, but you must also
note, that this water in fire is of black disposition.

To make Aqua Vitae
TAke Isope, Rosemary, Violet, Verven, Bitony, Hearbe-Iohn, Mouseare, Planten,
Avence, Sage, and Fetherfoy, of each a handful, and wash them, and put them in
a Gallon of white Wine, and so let it stand all night clean covered, and then
on the morrow distill it, and keep the water well. This water is good for the
Megrim in the Head, and for the Impostume in the head, and for the Dropsy in
the Head, and for the Fever in the head, and for all manner of Aches and
sickness in the Head.

To make Aqua Magistralis.
TAke the roots Pyonie, the roots of Turpentine, the crops of Fennel, of
Egrimonie, Honysuccle, Celondine, Rewe, Chickweed, Pimpernell, Phillippendula,
the tender leaves of the Vine, Eufrase, Sowthistle, Redroses, Strawbery leaves,
and Verven, of each alike quantity, and bray them in a Mortar, and put therein
good white Wine 9. days, and then put thereto a pint of woman's milk that
does nurse a Man-child, and as much Urine of a manchild of a year old, and as
much pured Honey, and put them all together, and let them stand three days so,
and then distill as ye will in a Stillatorie, and keep well this water in a
Glass vessel, that no Air come thereto, and if you will occupy this water,
wash thine eyes therewith, and use it, and if ever man be helped of the disease
of Eyes, this will help him in short time.

A precious Water for Eyes that seem fair, and yet be blind.
TAke Smalledge, red Fennel, Rue, Verven, Byttony, Egrimony, Sinckfoile,
Eufrase, Sage, Pimpernell, and Selondine, of each a quarterne, and wash them
clean, and stamp them small, and put them in a brass Pan and powder of
Tuttie, of Pepper, of Ceruse, and a pint of white wine, and put it to the
Herbs, and two or three spoonefuls of Honey, and seven spoonefuls of the
Man-child, and temper them together, and boil them over the fire a little, and
strain it through a cloth, and put it into a Glass, and stop it well, till you
will occupy it, and when you will use it, put it into thine eyes with a
Feather; and if it wax thick, temper it with white wine, and then use it
often.

A Water that will make one to see, that did never see.
TAke Rosemary, Smalledge, Rewe, Verven, Mather, Eufrase, Endive, Houseleeke,
Fulwort, red Fennel, Selantine, of each a like half quarterne, and wash them
clean, and lay them in white Wine a day and a Night, and then distill them in
a Stillatorie, the first water will be like Gold, the second like Silver, and
the third will be like Balm, and that is good for all sores of the eyes.

To make another Aqua Vitae.
TAke Nutmegs, Gallingale, Spikenard of Spain, of each two pennyworth and of
Cloves, Grains, Ginger, of each one penny worth, two penny worth of Annys,
take and bray them all in a brass Mortar, and then take a handful of wild
Sage, and of the other Sage, Rosemary, Isope, Sauery puliall, royal puliall of
the Mountain, Sothernwood, Horehound, Wormwood, Egrimony, Bettony, Iuy
leaves, of each a like handful, and two penny worth of Quibebes, and bruise all
these in a Mortar, and then take three Gallons of good red Wine, and put it
into a brazen pot, and then put the Spices and Herbs therein, and set the
Stillatory above, and close it well, and take fair Paste, and put it about the
brinkes hard with thy hand, and make it clean well and sadly thereto, and when
it does begin to wax hot, put cold water above in the Stillatorie, and when it
does wax b^te, let the water run out at the Conduite, and put in new cold
water, and so do as often as ye shall think good, but look that the fire be
not too great, for if it be, then will the water come up, and if there come up
smoke of the Stillatorie with the Water, then is the fire too much, and if it
be not, then it is well tempered.

The virtue of the third Water.
TAke Mustard seed Pimpernell, Crow^oof, and the clote of Masticke, and all
these well bruised, and meddled together, with the blood of a Goat, and put
thereto good Alleger a little, and so let them stand three days, and then put
them under the cap of a Stillatorie, and still it, and this water will help a
man of the Stone if he drink thereof: and if he drink thereof every day
fasting, the stone shall void from him as it were sand. Item, this water drunk
fasting makes good blood, good color both in man and woman. Item, this Water
drunk with Castorie, destroys all manner of palsy, if it be not dead, in
the Sinews or members. Item, it will heal ascald head, and make the hair to
grow, if it be washed therewith. Item, if a man be scalded wash him with this
water, and in 9. days he shall be whole, and of all other Medicines it
comfort best the Sinews for the Palsy.

The virtue of the fourth Water.
TAke young Pigeons, and make them in powder, and meddle them well with
Castorie in powder, and a little Aysell, and lay it under the Cap of the
Stillatorie, and distill water thereof, this water drunk with a fasting
stomach, helps the Frenzy and the Tysicke, within 9. days it will make them
whole. Item, this water drunk fasting, is a good true medicine against the
falling Evil, if the Sick have had it but few years, it shall help in on
warrantise: give it him to drink three days in the morning fasting, as is
aforesaid, and he shall be whole by Gods grace, of what manner of kind soever
it come. Item, this water drunk fasting, makes good color in the face of man
or woman, and it cleanses the womb, the stomach, and the breast of all evils
that is congealed within them and comfort all the veins, and draws the
root of the palsy out of the sinews, and out of the joints and nourishes
nature in him. Item, if a man or woman before called in a sinew or joint it
heals them again^. Item, this water being drunk fasting, heals any man or
woman of the continual Fever, but take heed that no woman with child drinks of
this Water. Item, this water drunk with Isope, puts away all sorrow from
thy heart, and causes man or woman well to sleep, well to digest his meat,
well to make water, and well to do his sege. Item, if a man will wash himself
with this Water, it will draw away the hair from any place of man, and destroy
it, that it shall not grow there any more on warrantise.

The virtue of the fifth Water called Aqua Lasta.
TAke Isope, Gladion, Avence, Sothernwood, of each a like quantity, and stamp
them in a Mortar, and put them in a Stillatorie, and still them to water, and
this water drunk in a morning fasting, is good against all manner of Fevere
hot or cold. Item, this water being drunk fasting, is the best medicine
against the flux of the womb, and cleanses the belly of all ill humors, and
keeps a man in health, and helps the Palsy, but it must be drunk fasting,
and as hot as may be suffered.

To make the sixth water called Dealbantiums.
TAke Mole warpes and make them in a powder with Brimstone, and take the Juice
of Selondine, and so let them stand certain days, and after lay it in a
Stillatorie, and still water of water of it, this water will make any black
beast white, that is washed therewith nine times in nine days, or any place in
him, that a man will have white: Also this water meddled with Wax and Aloes, it
heals all manner of Gouts, if the Patient be anointed therewith. Also this
water helps the sickness called Noli me tangere, but a plaster thereof must
be laid to the sore. Also it helps a man of the Strangle, if a plaster
thereof be laid to the sore. Item, it heals scald Heads, if they apply a
plaster thereof to the sore. Item, a plaster thereof heals burning with
fire. Item, this with Lapis Calumniaris, helps perfectly a sickness called
the Wolf, but the plaster must be changed two times in a day, but let no man
nor woman drink any of this Water.

The seventh Water called Aqua Consuitivae.
TAke Pimpernell, and stamp it in a Mortar, and lay it in a Stillatory, and
still water thereof. Item, this Water washes away all Wounds in a man's body.
Item, this water drunk fasting with Ginger, is a good Medicine against the
Tysicke, and will cleanse the Breast from all evil Humors.

The eight Water called Aqua Huplaciam, the double Water.
TAke Mustard Seed, Pepper, and Sinamon, of each a like, and beat them in a
Mortar, and put thereto Aqua Consuetudo, and lay them under the Cap of the
Stillatorie, and distill Water thereof, and these be the virtues thereof, and
if it be drunk fasting it is the best Medicine against the Tysicke, and all
diseases of the breast, and it must be drunk in the morning cold, and at
Evening hot as ye may suffer it, and it will make him to sleep and have good
rest. Item, this water being drunk with Castorie is good against the Sickness
called Epilentia, viz. the Morbus Caducus. Item, this water being drunk
fasting, comfort all the Members that be stricken with the Palsy, and
comfort the sinews of the Head and the brain.

Water of Pimpernell, the ninth water.
TAke the seed of Pimpernell, and put it in red wine, and then after put it in
the Sun, and then break it in a Mortar, and then press out the Oil through
a clean cloth, this water or oil being drunk fasting, heals a man of the
sand or gravel in the bladder, for it will break the Stone within him. Item,
this water being drunk, sustaineth and lightneth all the members of man of
what disease soever he be grieved with.

To make water of Sage, the tenth Water.
TAke Sage, and Pollyon, of each a like quantity, and break them in a mortar,
and put them in a Stillatorie, and distill water thereof, this Water drunk
fasting, eats away all manner of sickness. Item, this water sodden with
Castory and drunk fasting, of all Medicines in the world, if prolongeth most a
man's life. Item, if a man before called, do this nine days, and he shall be
whole, but it must be taken with warm water. Item, this water being drunk
fasting, draws away all evil in the stomach or womb. Item, it is good
against the Scabbes, and causes a man to have good blood, and good color in
the face. Item, this water being drunk hot in the morning, or in the day,
heals any manner of evil in a man within three days, if the Patient be in
any wise curable.

The making of Waters, and first of green Waters.
TAke white Wine a pint, the waters of Roses, and Planten, of each six
ounces, Orpiment one ounce, Verdigreas^ half an ounce, etc.

Another green Water.
TAke the waters of Honey suckles, Planten, and Roses, of each half a pint,
Orpiment, Allome, Ceruse, and Verdigrease, of each two drams, white Wine, Juice
of Planten, of each half an ounce, and it is done.

Waters for old Ulcers.
TAke white Wine, and running Water of each a pint; Frankensence, and Allome,
of each one ounce, Deco^ted in Balmarn for three hours space, and it is done.

A good Drink for the Gummorium Passio.
TAke Bursa Pastoris, Planten, of each two handfuls, take the Juice thereof in
a pint of good Ale, and drink if three times in a day, for three days.

A water for old Ulcers in the Arms.
TAke Smiths water a quart, burnt Allome one pound, Salarmoniac one ounce,
Galls two ounces, Tartary, Copperas, of each one ounce, distill all these with
^hreds, and so keep the water to your use.

A Water for a Canker.
TAke Bugle, Fennel, and Rosa-Solis, of each a like, and take as much in
quantity of Honey-suckle flowers, as also all the other herbs, and let them
be clean picked and so distilled in a Stillatorie, and so keep it close, for
it is a precious water.

A Femicorie Water.
IS to be drunk in the Morning, at Noone, and at night, it is much worth
against Dropsies, and Sweating sickness, it purges Fleame and Choler, and
Melancholy, and it brings forth heat, and dry Sickness, and it is good for
the pain of the Head, to wash it and drink it.

A Water of Rosemarie.
IT has more virtues in it then a man can tell, one is if a man have an Arrow
or Iron within him, wet a tent and put into the wound, and drink the same
water, and it shall avoid out, and it helps all Wounds inward and outward,
the Canker the Fester, and it kills the Worms in man or Child, and all
manner of Impostumes inward and outward, it helps the ^ysicke, and Flux
white or bloody, it is a great help for a woman with Child to drink thereof,
it makes clean the Face, or any where it ye wash it therewith.

Water of Verven.
IF it be distilled in the later end of May, it has virtue to spring Choler,
and to heal Wounds, and to clear the Eyesight, it is a principal thing to
compound Medicines.

A Locion for a sore Mouth.
YOu must take of Honey-suckle-water half a pint, Planten and Rose Water, of
each four ounces, Honey of Roses two ounces, Alloes one ounce, white Copperas
and Vinegar, of each half an ounce.

A Water for a sore mouth.
TAke Lapis Calaminaris beaten into fine powder, and put in a pint of white
Wine, then take a pottle of water, and Rosemary, boil it in the water till it
be half sodden away, then strain the water from the Rosemary, and put it into
the white Wine, and so it is done.

A compound Water.
TAke first Pimpernell, Rue, Valerian or Sedwall, Alocelipis cap, and break
them, and lay them in this said water following: Take Isop, Pelyall, R^yall,
Anyseedes and Cenforie, and beat them in a mortar, and after put them in a
Stillatory and distill water of them, which is virtuous: and let them boil
together, and after that strain them that the water may go from them, and
close this water in Vials of glass, by the space of nine days, and give to
him that has the Falling evil four days, fasting six hours: and this is
the truest medicine for this Disease that we can find, except the mercy of
God; and this Water drinking is good for the Palsy, if it be drunk fasting:
also it is good for all Gowtes like wise, in the time that they be mortified in
the members and limbs of a man: it is very helping to Wounds that are festered,
it they be washed therewith, it destroys all manner of Fevers.

Behly Water.
TAke Water a pottle, Suger-Candy four ounces, let them seethe: then put in
four ounces of Verdigrease in fine powder, and let it seethe.

A good Barley water for all Diseases of the Lungs, or Lights.
TAke half a pound of fair Barley, a gallon of Water, half an ounce of
Licorice, Fennel seed, Violets, and Parsly-seed, of each a quarter of an
ounce: red Roses a quarter of an ounce: dry Hysop and Sage, of each a penny
weight, six leaves of Hearts tongue, a quarter of an ounce of Figg^s and
Raysins: Seethe all these in a new pot of cold Water, and then strain them
clear from it and drink it: the same cools the Liver, and all the members:
drives away all evil heat, slaketh thirst, causes to cast out much, purges
the Lights and Spleen, the Kidneyes and Bladder, and causes to make water
well: and especially, it is good for all Agues that come of heat,

A good Drink for the Pox.
TAke Selendine and English Saffron, the weight of a halfepeny, and a farthing
worth of Grains, a quart of long Pepper, a penny weight of Mace and stale Ale,
stamp your herb, and pound your Saffron, and mingle them together, and then
drink it.

Doctor Stevens Water.
TAke a Gallon of Gascoigne wine, then take Ginger, Galingall, Cammomill,
Cynamon, Nutmegs, Graynes, Cloves, Mace, Anniseeds, Carraway seed, of every of
them a dram, then take Sage, Mynts, red Roses, Time, Pellitory of the wall,
wild Margerum, Rosemary, Peny-mountaine, otherwise wild Time, Cammomill,
Lavender, of every of them a handful, then beat the Spices small, and bruise
the herbs, and put all into the Wine and let it stand 12, hours, stirring it
diverse times, then distill it in a Limbeck, and keep the first pint of the
water, for it is the best, and then will come a second water, which is not so
good as the first.

The virtues of this Water be these, it comfort the spirits, and preserves
the youth of a man, and helps the inward diseases coming of cold, against
the shaking of the Palsy: it cures the contraction of Sinews, and helps
the conception of women that be barren: it kills the worms in the belly: it
helps cold Goutes: it helps the Tooth ach: it comfort the stomach very
much: it cures the cold Dropsy: it helps the Stone in the Bladder, and the
reins in the back: it cures the Canker: it helps shortly a stinking breath,
and whosoe^er uses this said Water, it shall preserve him long. Take but one
spoonefull of it once in seven days, for it is very hot in operation: it
preserved Doctor Steven very long, who lived a hundredth years lacking but two,
and ten of them he lived bed rid

A very good drink for the Cough.
TAke a quart of white Wine, and boil it with Lycorice, Anniseeds, and
Sugar Candy, of each a like quantity, putting therein ten Figs of the best,
till it be half consumed, and so preserve thereof to drink Evening and
morning three or four spoonefuls warmed.

A restorative made of the Herb Rosa Solis, with other things, and gather it
in June or July.
THis herve Rosa Solis, grows in Marish ground, and in no other place, and it
is of a hoary color, and grows very lows, and flat to the ground, and it
has a mean long stalk growing in the midst of it, and seven branches
springs out of the root round about the stalk with leaves colored, and of
a mean length and breadth, and in no wise when this Herb should be gathered,
touch not the Herb it self with your hands, for then the virtue thereof is
gone, ye must gather and pluck it out of the ground by the stalk, ye must
lay it in a clean basket, the Leaves of it is full of strength and nature, and
gather so much of this herb as will fill apostle pot or glass, but wash it
not in any wise, then take a pottle af Aqua Composita, and put them both in a
large pot or vessel, and let it stand hard and fast stopped, three days and
three nights, and on the fourth day open it, and strain it through a fair
linnencloath into a clean glass or pewter pot, and put thereto a pound of
Sugar small beaten, demi. pound of Licorice beaten to powder, and demi. pound
of Dates, the stones taken out, and they cut in small pieces, and mingle them
altogether, and stop the glass or pewter yot well, so that no air come into
it in any wise. Thus done ye may drink of it at night when ye go to bed,
demi. spoonefull mixed with Aqua vitae, or stale Ale, and as much in the morning
fasting, and there is not the weakest body in the world that is wasted by
Consumption or otherwise, but it will restore him again, and make him to be
strong and lusty and to have a good stomach, and that shortly, and he of she
that uses this three times together, shall find great remedy or comfort
thereby, and as the patient does feel himself, so he may use it.

OF VNGVENTS. PART. IX.
The making of Ointments, and first of Vnguentum Basilicum.
TAke Oil half a pound, Wax, Colophonie, of each two ounces, Turpentine,
Pitch, Perosine, and Cowes suet, of each two pound and a half, Frankensence,
Myrrh, of each half an ounce, and so make your Unguent.

The golden Unguent, called, Vnguentum Aureum.
TAke yellow Wax four ounces, Oil one pound, Turpentine, Colophonie, and
Rozen, of each one ounce, Frankensence and Masticke, of each half an ounce,
Saffron a dram, and so make an Unguent.

To make a drying Unguent, called Vnguentum Calliminaris.
TAke the Stone called Lapis Calaminaris, Deeres Suet, and Wax, of each four
ounces, oil of Roses half a pound, Camphere two drams, and so make your
Unguent according to Art.

To make the white Ointment called Vnguentum Album Rasis.
TAke oil of Roses half a pound, Wax two ounces, Ceruse six ounces, the
whites of three Eggs, and Camphere a dram: and after these things be melted
and commixed together, you must wash it with Rose Water.

To make Vngueutum Lytargerii.
TAke oil of Roses one pound, Litarge of Lead one pound, Vinegar half a
pound, Camphere two drams: and so make your Unguent.

To make Vnguentum Lypcione.
TAke the juice of Honey succles a quart, Honey a pint, white Copperas half a
pound: and so make your Unguent.

To make the Incarnative Unguent.
TAke oil of green Balm two pound, Wax, and Perofine, of each half a
pound, Deeres suet four ounces, Frankensence and Myrrh, of each two ounces,
Turpentine of four ounces, the yolks of four Eggs, and so make your Unguent.

Another Incarnatiue Unguent.
TAke Deeres suet, oil of Roses, Rosen, Pitche, Litarge of Gold, Frankensence
and Myrhe: of each four ounces.

To make Unguentum Viride.
TAke Offingie Porsine one pound, Verdigreace two ounces, Sall-gemme, half an
ounce, and so make your Unguent.

Another Unguent.
TAke burnt Allom and Vinegar, of each two ounces, Offingie Porsine six
ounces, and so make an Unguent.

A drying Unguent.
TAke oil of Roses one pound, Wax six ounces, Litarge of Gold and Silver,
Bdeltum, gum Ammoniac, red Coral, Dragons blood. Deeres suet, Masticke of each
two ounces, Camphere half an ounce, and so make your Unguent.

An Unguent against the Morphew.
TAke quick Brimstone six drams, oil of Tartary four drams, Ceruse,
Vnguentum Cytrium, of each two drams, oil of Roses, six drams, the white of
an Egg, as much Vinegar as needs, and so make your Unguent.

An Unguent called Rosye.
TAke Rozen, Turoentine, and Honey, of each half a pound, Linseed and
Fenekriks, of each one ounce, Myrrh one ounce, Sercoll one ounce: let them all
be made in fine powder, and so make an Unguent thereof.

An Unguent for Ulcers in the Arm.
TAke Litarge of Gold and silver, Ceruse, of each two ounces: Balarmouiac half
an ounce, Lapis, Calaminaris, Dragons blood, of each one ounce, Frankensence,
Mastick, of each ^al^e an ounce, Tartary, Sall^gemme and Camphere, of each two
drams: Turpentine washes in Rose Water, and Wax, of each two ounces, oil of
elders, half an ounce, oil of Bays two drams, oil of Violets and of Poppie,
of each four drams: and so make your Unguent.

An Unguent against Cabes.
TAke Storax liquide, two ounces, Bay Salt in fine powder, and oil of Roses,
of each one ounce, the juice of Orenge^, as much as shall need, and so make
your Unguent according to Art.

An Unguent called the gift of God.
TAke Orras powder, Sall gemme, Sall, Nitrie, of each one ounce, a Stone called
Lapis Magnates, two ounces, Lapis Calaminaris, two ounces, Wax one pound, Oil
three pound: and so make your Unguent according to Art.

A precious Unguent.
TAke Ceruse washed one ounce, in an ounce of Vinegar, burnt Lead four ounces,
Litarge two ounces, Myrrh one ounce, Honey of Roses two ounces, oil of Roses
six ounces, the Yolks of six Eggs, and Wax as much as needs, and so make
your Unguent.

Another Unguent against Cabes.
TAke the juice of Salle^me, Femitary, Borage, Scabi^us, and Dockes, of each
three ounces, Litarge of gold washed, Ceruse, burt Brass, Brimstone, Bay salt,
burnt Allom, of each half an ounce, oil of Roses two ounces, Storax liquide,
Turpentine, of each one ounce, Vinegar four ounces, Ossingie Perosine, one
pound and a half: and so make your ointment.

To make the green Ointment called Vnguentum Viride.
TAke Wax one pound, Perosine one pound, Frankensence half a pound, gum
Arabic half a pound, Verdigrease, two ounces, Honey four ounces, oil Olive
two pound: and so make your Unguent according to Art.

An Unguent to increase Flesh.
TAke the gum Dragagant, and dissolve it in Rose Water, and so make it in form
of an Unguent.

An Unguent to heal the Serpigo.
TAke Pepper, Bay Salt, Tartary, Verdigreace, Allumines ynke, of each half an
ounce, Ceruse, Litarge, and Quicksilver well killed, of each two drams, of
Osingie Perosie, as much as needs.

An Unguent for Fistuleas.
TAke Myrrh, Masticke, Alloes, and Epatike, of each two ounces, the juice of
Salendine, Planten, Honey of Roses, and Vinegar, of each a like quantity: and
make thereof an Unguent.

A cold Unguent.
TAke oil of Roses, and Wax, of each two ounces, the ^u^e^ of red Gowrd
leaves, Night shade leaves, of each two ^^^ces, Ceruse washed, burnt Lead
washed in Rose water, or Planten water, of each half an ounce, Fea^kensence
two drams, melt all together, and decoct it a little: and then take it from the
fire, and put it into a Leaden Mortar, wherein you must labor it a good while,
and so make your Unguent.

An Unguent for a sawse fleame Face.
TAke May butter one pound, Hony-suckle flowers, three handfuls, stamp the
flowers, and the butter together, and lay it in fuse for six days space: then
melt it and strain it, and put thereto quick Brimstone, the weight of twelve
pence, finely powdered, and so reserve it.

An Unguent for the Piles.
TAke Mollene, Archangell, red Fennel stamped small, of each like quantity,
and as much Ossingie as of the Herbs: Mix all these together, and lay it a
rotting a week space: then strains it and keep it for that use.

Another Unguent for the Piles.
TAke ^arrow, and May butter, and stamp them together, and apply them as hot
as may be suffered.

To make Unguentum Lipcium.
TAke a quart of Juice of Hony-sucles, and a pint of Honey, and half a pound
of white Coperas, and seethe them on the fire, and let them boil till it wax
black: then put in your Copperas in fine powder.

To make Vnguentum Fanscome.
TAke Wax one pound, Rozen, Colophonie, of each two pound, Pitch one pound,
Cowes suet, one pound, May-butter half a pound, Honey two pound, Oil two
pound, Turpentine four Ounces, Verdigrease and Ceruse four Ounces: and so
according to Art work it.

To make Vnguentum Aegyptiacum.
TAke Honey a pint, Vinegar a pint, Allom half a pound, Verdigreace two
Ounces, in fine powder: and so make your Unguent.

To make Vnguentum Dunfinnitive.
TAke two Ounces of Litarge of Gold, two drams of Lapis Calumniaris, and four
ounces of Terra sigillata, and powder them small: then take a pint of Oil,
and put thereto half a pound of Wax, and melt it with your Oil, and then
take it off the fire, and put in your powders, and when it is cold almost, put
in four drams of Camphere in fine powder.

To make an Unguent for the Skerby.
TAke a Gallon of red Vinegar, and one pound of the root of Briony, and sees
therein till it be consumed: then take the root thereof and beats it with
Oxsingie, and beat it very fine: then take one ounce of Arguentum vivum well
killed, and labor them altogeter very fine, and so anoint therewith.

To make an Unguent for Ulcers in Childrens faces.
TAke Litarge and Ceruse, of each five ounces: the leaves of Ash, and Vine
leaves, of each three ounces, oil of Roses one ounce, Wax half an ounce:
relent your Oil and Wax together, and beat your Litarge and Ceruse, and
mingle them with two yolks of rotted Eggs.

To make the Sinnitive Ointment.
TAke Turpentine four Ounces, Hearts grease, or the Marrow of a Heart two
ounces, oil of Roses one ounce, white Frankensence half an ounce, oil of
Spike two drams, and half a dram of Mynium: and so work it.

To make an Unguent for the Itch.
TAke three handfuls of Allecompany roots, seethe them in three Gallons of
water till they be soft: then take the Roots and scrape them, and take the
white of them to the quantity of a pound, and beat them with one pound of
Barrow hogs grease, and a quantity of Salt, and a little Saffron; and so
bring them to an Ointment.

To make an Ointment for the Morbus.
TAke two ounces of Vermillion, two ounces of Quicksilver, two ounces of Oil
of Bay, two ounces of Bores, grease, half an ounce of Vinegar, four yolks of
Eggs: and let them altogether be labored.

To make the Dunsymitive Unguent.
TAke Oil Olive one pound, Rozen one pound, Lapis Calaminaris one pound, Wax
half a pound, Turpentine and Sheep suet, of each a quarter of a pound.

To make Vnguentum Dulsum.
TAke Sheep suet five pound, Rozen in powder one pound, roch Allom in powder
one pound, and a quart of white Wine, boil them altogether: And if you will
make it red, you may put into one ounce of Vermilion in powder.

To make Vnguentum Bassillicon.
TAke Wax one pound, the best Pitch one pound, Rozen half a pound, Colophonie
one pound, Cowes suet one pound, Oil two pound, May-butter half a pound,
Turpentine four ounces, yolks of four Eggs: Make all these in an Unguent
according to Art.

To make a Mundifigitive.
TAke Smalledge a little bag full, one pound of Exingie, three pound of
Rozen, a quarter of a pound of Wax: Stamp your Smalledge and Oxingie together
in a stone Mortar: then put it into a great Pan, and set them upon the fire
till it be hot: then strain them through a cloth into a fair pan, till they
begin to wax cold, then fleet it off with a slice, till you come to the
water: then put in the Rose Water and Wax all together upon the fire, and let
them boil altogether, then strain them through a Linen cloth: and so make
your Mundifigitive.

To make Vnguentum Rosine.
TAke Honey two pound, Rosen one pound and a quarter, Turpentine two pound,
Frankensence one ounce, Fenekrike Semminis ben, of each two ounces, Myrrh and
Sercole, of each two ounces in fine powder.

To make Gibsons Incarnative.
TAke green Broom two pound, Wax and Rosen, of each half a pound, Dear
sust four ounces, Frankensence, and Myrrh, of each two ounces, Turpentine and
the yolks of Eggs as much as needs.

To make a yellow Incarnatiue.
TAke one pound of Rosen, half a pound of Frankensence, a quarter of a pound
of Wax, half a pound of sheep suet, half a pint of oil Olive, half a
pound of Turpentine, and so make your Unguent.

To make another Incarnative.
TAke oil of Roses twelve drams, Rosen two ounces, Turpentine eight ounces,
Wax six ounces, melt the Wax, Rosen, and Oil together, and in the boiling
put in your Turpentine, and the Juice of Valerian, and so let it be cold, and
as you occupy it put in oil of Turpentine, and so keep it.

To make an Unguent for the Piles.
TAke Barrowes grease half a pound, burnt Allome one ounce, and the yolke of
an Egg hard roasted, put these together, and make an ointment, and annoint your
sore as hot as you can abide it.

Another fumetive Vnguentum.
TAke half a pound of Dear suet, half a pound of Wax, one pound of oil of
Roses, half a pound of oil Olive, of Lapis Caluminaris and Camphere two
ounces, and so make your Unguent according to Art.

For the black Iaundies.
TAke a quantity of great Worms, a quantity of Herbe-grace, a quantity of
Arsmart, and the green of a Goose turd.

To make Vnguentum Foscovem.
TAke oil Olive one pound, Saffron four drams, Colophonie, Pitch. Naviles,
Gum, Seropine, of each two Ounces, Masticke, Oblibanon, and Turpentine of
each one ounce, Wax a quarter of a pound, melt your oil, and then your Wax,
and then put in the Colophonie, and after stir^e your Pitch, Naviles, and your
Gum, Serapine, and last your Turpentine, Masticke, and Olibanon, every thing
being bruised, except your Pitch, and Turpentine, when you put in your powders,
he ever stirring it with your spittle till it be full dissolved.

Vnguentum Veride.
TAke Small-gemme two ounces, Verdigreace two ounces, Masticke one ounce,
Olibanon one ounce, May-butter one pound, oil Olive one pound, Wax one pound,
and so make your work.

Unguent Posteleris.
TAke Galbom one ounce, Gum Ammoniac one ounce, Mera one ounce, Masticke one
ounce, Apopany one ounce, Litarge Aure four ounces, Arestologia one ounce,
Olibanon on ounce, Bidelion one ounce, Verdigreace half an ounce.

An Ointment for the Stone and Collicke to be made in May.
TAke the buds of Broome-flowers, near the shutting, half a pound of them
picked from the staikes, and beat them in a mortar very small: that done,
mingle them with clarified May-butter, as much as you shall think meet; and
so keep it close in a vessel eight days, then seethe it and strain it, as
the other before, and there with annoint the Patients grief very warm,
Evening and Morning.

OF PLASTERS. PART. X.
To make a resolutive Plaster of great virtue. This Plaster is to resolve
Tumors and hardness, if it be laid thereon very hot, and when it is cold, to
lay on another, and this you shall do till the hardness be resolved: and it
is made in this order.
TAke common Ashes that are well burnt and white, and finely searced, one
pound, Clay beaten in fine powder, half a pound, Carab one ounce: mix all
these in an Earthen dish, on the fire, with Oil of Roses, in form of a Liquid
Unguent, and that ye may suffer it, and change it Morning and Evening, and ye
shall see it work a marvailous effect. Moreover, when the Pelechie comes
forth of a diseased, let him be folded in the same remedy very hot, and in
four and twenty hours ye shall be help, if ye be first well purged: for
this is a great secret which I have revealed. This word Pelechie, is (as it
were certain spots) like those which we call Gods tokens, the which commonly
come to those that have the Pestilent Fever.

To make a maturative Plaster of great virtue. This maturative does open an
Impostume without Instrument and pain: And the order to make it, is this.
TAke the yolks of Eggs, two ounces, white Salt finely ground, one ounce,
Hens dung that is liquid and red like Honey, one ounce: Mix all these well
together without fire, and when you will bring an Impostume to superation, and
break it, lay on this Plaster Morning and Evening, and little, and in short
time it will draw forth the Impostume, and break it, and heal it without any
other help, Keep this as a secret.

A Plaster Bessilicon.
TAke white Wax, Rozen, Pine, Cowes suet, Stone pitch, Turpentine, Olibany, of
each these one ounce, and of Oil as much will serve the turn.

Another Plaster.
TAke Balm, Bittony, Pimperuell, of each of them a handful, lay them in a
Fuse in a pottle of white Vinegar two days, then let them be boiled strongly,
till the third part be consumed, put thereto Rozen one pound, white Wax four
ounces, Masticke one ounce, Turpetine demi pound, and so make your Plaster.

The Mellilote Plaster.
TAke Mellilote ten handfuls, let it be small stamped, and laid in Fuse four
days in a pottle of white Wine, and then boil it strongly, till the third
part be consumed, then let it cool, and put thereto Rozen two pound, Perosine
one pound demi, Wax one pound, Dear suet demi pound, Masticke one ounce,
Frankensence four ounces, and is make your Plaster according to Art.

The Musiledge Plaster.
TAke March Mallows roots, Fenekrike, and Lipseed, of each one pound, lay
them in fuse in three quarts of water, three days, then boil it over the fire
a little, and so strain it to a Musilage, and take thereofore pound demi, and
of Lytarge of Lead four pound, of good Ole six pound, put all over the fire
in a great vessel, and so let it boil with a soft fire, ever stirring it till
it come to the form of a Plaster according.

Another Plaster.
TAke the the Juice of Bittany, Planten, and Smalledge, of each Demi pound,
Wax, Rozen, and Turpentine, of each demi pound, Pitch four ounces, and so
make your work.

A plaster of Camphere.
TAke common Oil demi pound, Wax four ounces, Seruse one ounce, Camphers
demi ounce, and so make your work.

A Spiced Plaster.
TAke white Wax one pound demi, Perosine one pound, Colophony four ounces,
Rozen demi pound, Dear suet demi pound, Cloves and Mace four ounces, Saffron
demi ounce, red Wine and water of each a quart, boil these together till they
come to a Plaster.

A Plaster called Apostolicum.
TAke white Lead and red, of each one pound, Oil four pound, stir them
altogether, and boil them with a soft fire, to the form of a Plaster,
according to Art.

A Drying Plaster.
TAke Oil of Roses, Deeres suet, of each one pound, Terra Sigillar, Lapis
Caluminaris, Seruse, of each one pound, Sanguis Draconis, three ounces, and
Incense of each one ounce: Turpentine four ounces, Camphere half an ounce,
and so make a Plaster.

A Plaster for the Gowt Arteticke.
TAke Oxium, Saffron of each one dram, in fine powder, tempered in the yolks
of three Eggs hard boiled, and oil of Violets, or Roses, Plaister-wise,
applied to the painful place, and it eases.

A Plaster to slake pain.
TAke crummes of white Bread four ounces, temper them with sweet Milk, and
the yolks of four Eggs hard boiled: and take of oil of Roses three drams,
and in the making put thereto a little Turpentine and Saffron two drams, in
fine powder.

A Plaster against the coldness of the Nerves.
TAke Wax two ounces, Euforbium, Castoris, of each half an ounce, Sheep
suet, and Pitch of each one ounce, Turpentine ^ dram: and so make your work
according to Art.

A good cold drying Plaster.
TAke Oil one pound, Wax ten ounces, Seruse and Lytarge of Gold, of each
four ounces, boiled with a soft fire in Furnace wise.

A red Plaster.
TAke Wax, Deeres suet, of each one ounce, Lapis Calaminaris, Bolearmony of
each one dram, Turpentine one ounce, Camphere a dram: put altogether, and so
make a Plaster.

A black Plaster.
TAke Wax and Oil, of each a pound, Ceruse and Litarge, of each five ounces;
Terra Sigillata, one ounce: boil all together till it be black, and like a
Plaster.

A black Plaster for old Sores.
TAke Litarge of Gold, and Ceruse, of each one ounce: the Cinders of Iron.
Quilled story fererie, six drams, Oil of Roses four ounces, new Wax one
ounce, strong Vinegar two draws: and so make it according to Art.

A Plaster to dissolve hard things.
TAke Gum Ammoniac, Serapine, Boelium, Oppopenacie: of each one ounce, oil of
Spike five drams, Turpentine two drams: the mell of Fennikrike, and Linseed: of
each one ounce, the mell of Lupianes, as much as needs, and so make your
Plaster.

Another black Plaster.
TAke Oil one pound, Wax and Ceruse, of each half a pound, and so make a
Plaster according to Art.

A Plaster against old Sores.
TAke Oil twelve ounces, Litarge of Gold half a pound, Vinegar six ounces,
Ceruse Colophonie, Perosine, Pitch, Goats Suet, of each two ounces, Dragons
blood, Terra sigillata, of each one ounce, Wax two ounces and a half: and so
make a Plaster.

A cold Plaster.
TAke Litarge of Lead one pound, Oil four pound, Vinegar two pound, boil
them to a Plaster.

A Plaster to draw an Apostume.
TAke Galbanum, and Gum Ammoniac, of each one pound dissolved in four pound of
Sugar, for four days together, and then boiled till the Vinegar be consumed
with a soft fire, according to Art.

A Plaster for the Lords mark de Wiser
TAke Virgin Wax two pound, Perosine two pound, Galbanum, and gum Ammoniac, of
each half a pound, Pitch four ounces, Deeres Suet, Ceruse, of each half a
pound: Clovas and Mace, four ounces, Saffron, to the weight of twelve pence,
red Wine and water of each two pintes: Boil these things till the Licour be
wasted away, and so make a Plaster thereof according to Art.

The white Musilage Plaster.
TAke pure good Oil eight pound, Litarge of Lead side pound and a half,
Mussilage of March mallow Roots, and of Fennekrike and Linseed two pound:
Boil all together, to the form of a Plaster, with a soft fire, ever stirring
it, then take and wash it in three or four waters, and it will be very white.

A Spiced Plaster.
TAke Wax and Perosine, of each one pound, Crossine half a pound, Colophony
two Ounces, Frankensence and Goats Suet of each four ounces, Cloves and Mace,
Oil of Turpentine, and Oil of Spike, of each one ounce, Saffron half an
ounce, red Wine two pound: and so make pour Plaster according to Art.

A Plaster for old Sores.
TAke Litarge of Gold, one pound, oil of Roses two pound, white Wine, a pint,
Urine a pint, Vinegar half a pint, Wax, Frankensence, and Myrrh, of each
two drams, and so make your Plaster according.

A Sparadrope.
TAke Oil a pound, white Wax three ounces, Ceruse ten ounces, Litarge of
Gold, four ounces, boil all these in form of a Plaster.

A drying Plaster.
TAke Jacobs Plaster, half a pound, Unguentum Lapis Caluminaris, one pound,
and so make a Plaster.

Oliver Wilsons Plaster.
TAke a pottle of Oil, Wax two pound and a quarter, white Lead in powder two
pound, of Storax callamitic, one ounce, Bengawin one ounce, Labdanum, one
ounce, Masticke, one ounce, of Camphere, four drams, and so make a Plaster.

To make a Sparadrope.
TAke Oil a quart, white Lead one pound, the grounds of Verine four ounces,
of white Copperas, two ounces, white Wax three ounces, Vinegar a pint,
Camphere, three penyworth: and so make your Plaster according.

To make the Mellilote Plaster.
TAke Rozen eight pound, Wax two pound, Sheep Suet demi pound, the Juice of
Mellilote a gallon clean strained, let your Rozen, Wax, and Sheep Suet be
molten, and clean strained into a fair Pan, and then put to your Juice of
Mellilote, and set it over the fire and stir it well together till be like a
Plaster, then take it off the fire, and put to it a pottle of red Wine, by a
little and a little, ever stirring it, till it be almost cold, and labor it
well in your hands for heaving out the Wine, and so make it in roules and keep
it.

To make a Seare-cloth.
TAke Wax one ounce, and a dram of Euforbimn, and temper it with oil Olive at
the fire, and make thereof a Searcloth to comfort the sinews.

To make the Plaster called Flowesse.
TAke Rozen, and Perosine, of each half a pound, virgin Wax, and
Frankensence, of each a quarter of a pound, Masticke one ounce, Hearts tallow a
quarter of a pound, Camphere two drams, beat all these to a powder, and boil
them together, and strain it through a fair cloth into a pottle of white Wine,
and boil them all again together, and then let it cool a little, and then
put to it four ounces of Turpentine, and stir them all together till it be
cold, and so make it in rowles according to Art.

Another Plaster.
TAke two pound of Wax, two pound of Rozen, four pound of Perosine, a quarter
of a pound of Deeres suet, two ounces of Clo^es, two ounces of Mace, a quarter
of an ounce of Saffron, one pound and a half of Olibanon, and a Gallon of red
Wine, and put all these into a fair Pan, and set it over the fire. four or
five hours, till ye suppose that the Wine be sodden a war and then take it
off the fire, and stir it till it be cold, and roll it.

To make the Plaster Occinicione.
TAke a quarter of a pound of Comin, as much Wax, as much Pitch, as much
Rozen, and of Saffron one ounce and a half, of Masticke one quarterne,
Galbanum half a quarterne, Turpentine one ounce, Incense half an ounce,
Myrrh a quarter, Salarmoniac a little, first take the Salt, and let it lie in
good Vinegar, and stamped in a Mortar till it be well moystned all Night and
more, then take the Vinegar, and the Gums therein and set it on the fire, till
the Gummes be well melted, then strain it and set it on the fire, and let it
sees until the Vinegar the second part thereof be wasted, and so that there
be but the third part left, then melt the Pitch and scumme it, put thereto the
liquour that is left, then melt the Wax and put it to the Rozen, and the
Turpentine and then take the Masticke, Incense, and Myrrh: but look that all
the Gums be beaten in powder, or that you cast it in, and see that you stir
it fast, when that they be well molten and meddled, look that you have a fair
Basin of hot water, and suddenly cast it in, then wring it out of the water,
then chafe it against the fire as if it were Wax: and annoint your hands with
oil of Bay, and look ye have the Saffron in fine powder: and the other that
was not put in before, and when you have put in all the eight powders, make it
up in Rowles.

To make a Plaster Inplumhie.
TAke Oil one pound, Litarge half a pound: and look that the Litarge be
fine, then set it on the fire: and let it boil until it wax brown, but not
so long that it wax black: then take it from the fire, and make it in Bowls.

A Plaster of Camphere.
TAke Camomill oil half a pound, white Wax four ounces, Ceruse one pound,
Camphere half an ounce, and so make your Plaster.

To make a noble Plaster, for a soon as the Plaster is warm, the pain will
be gone, and it is called a Spice-Plaister.
TAke Wax two pound, Dear Suet one pound, Perosine four pound, Cloves and
Mace two Ounces, Saffron one ounce, Rozen two pound, Pitch four ounces, now
melt that which is to be molten, and powder and serse that which is to be
powdered and sersed, and melted altogether over a soft fire, except your Clowes
and Saffron, and then take a quart of red Wine, and by a little and a little
pour it to the salve, stirring it well together, and when it is clean molton,
strain it into a clean Pan, and then put to it your powder, Cloves, Mace, and
Saffron, casting it abroad upon the said Ingrediance, and stirring it well till
it be cold, then make it in rowles.

To make a special Plaster for all manner of cold Aches.
TAke Perosine four pound, Rozen, and Wax, of each two pound, Galbanum as
much, Olibanon as much, Masticke, and Myrrh, of each two ounces, red Wine
four pound, but your Masticke, Myrrh and Wine* in the cooling, it has been
prooved, and when you need it, spread it on a Leather.

To make a Plaster that Sir William Ferrington let a Squire that was his
Prisoner go for, quite without ransom.
TAke one pound of Litarge of Gold, and make thereof small powder, and serse it
well, then take a quart of oil of Roses, and a pint of white Wine, and half
an pint of old V^rine, very well clarified, and half a pint of Vinegar, and
boil all these on the fire, but put in the V^rine last, this Plaster will
heal a Marmele, and a Canker, and Fester, and Wounds, and all other sores, if
thou put thereto one ounce of Wax, Ollibanon, and Myrrh, of each a dram.

To make Coulman Plaster.
TAke oil Olive four pound, red Lead, and white, of each one pound, boil
them together till it wax black, and then put thereto Pitch one pound, and
make it in rowles.

To make the Mellilote Plaster.
TAke the Juice of Mellilot, and Camomill, of each one pound, of Wax one
pound, Rozen three pound, Sheep suet a pound and a half, white Wine two
pound and a half, and so make them all in a Plaster according to Art, for it
is good.

To make the Deaguloune Plaster.
TAke Oil two pound, strong Vinegar one pound and half. Litarge of Gold one
pound, Verdigreace one ounce, boil them together till they be red, and so make
it in rowles.

A Plaster for all manner of Sores, and especially for all green Sores.
TAke of fine Sugar and Burnet, and each of them like much, and bruise them in
a Mortar, and wash the Wound with the juice of the same, then take the Herbs
finely beaten, and mingle with them and the juice a quantity of English Honey,
and unwrought Wax so boil them together till it be all of one color, then
take them from the fire and let them stand a while: then put it into a Basin of
fair water, and so work it out into rowles, and lay it on Plasters once or
twice a day.

Another for the same approved.
TAke the Herb Salendine, and House look, of each equal quantity, then
bruise them in a Mortar, and take the mire of them, and put it into the wound,
and annoint the same therewith: that done, fill the wound with part of the
bruised herbs, and so bind it up, and in short time it will heal the sore, as
by proof has been seen.

A Plaster for the Stiche.
Annoint your side with the oil of Mellilote, then make a Plaster for the
same Mellilote upon a piece of Leather, and change it but one a week.

A Plaster for the Ph^rifie.
Stamp well in a Mortar, four ounces of the roots of wild Mallows well
sodden, put to it an ounce of Butter, and an ounce and a half of Honey, of
Pigeons dung two drains mingle all together; and ^^nt right hot upon the pai^e,
and soon after the corruption will break.

A Plaster for the Collicke and Stone.
TAKe Peritory, Camomill, ground I vie leaves; Cummin: stamp them, and boil
them in white Wine, and make a Plaster thereof, and put it about the Reins
(...) hot as may be suffered, and see that it lie close round about behind and
before.

A Plaster for the Headache, and for hot Agues.
TAke red Mintes, Leavened Bread of Wheat, and white Vinegar: Make thereof a
Plaster and say it to your Forehead, for it helps ^i^eases in the Head, and
also hot Agues.

A hot drawing Plaster, called Flowis.
TAke Rozen, Perosine, of each half a pound, white Wax four ounces,
Frankensence, four ounces, Masticke, one ounce, Dear suet four ounces,
Turpentine four ounces, Camphere two drams, white Wine a Pottle: and so make a
Plaster.

A Plaster called the virtue of our Lord.
TAke oil Olive one pound, white Wax two drams, Galbum, Ermony, Opponacke two
ounces, Litarge half a pound, Almons one dram, Verdigreace one ounce,
Aristoligam Longuam one dram, Myrrh, Masticke, of each one ounce, Lorell bays
two Drams, Increse white one Dram: Make the Plaster in this manner: take and
temper the Galbum, Opponacke, Ermony, in good Vinegar, two days natural, and
the other things to be provided each by himself: then take the Wax, and melt
it with Oil in a Kettle, and the Gummes dissolved in Vinegar, in another
vessel upon the fire, till the Vinegar be sodden away: then strain it upon
the said Oil, as strongly as you can stir it well: and then put in the
Verdigreace, the Astrologium, and the other Gummes that were not put in before,
then it is made. It heals all wounds new or old, and it does heal more then
all other Plasters, or Ointments.

A Plaster for a sore Breast that must be broken.
TAke one handful of Groundsill, a pint of sweet Milk, and a handful of
Oatemeale, and seethe them together. Make a Plaster thereof, and lay it to it
as hot as the Patient may suffer it, and at every Dressing put too more Milk:
this use no longer then it breaks.

A Plaster to heal it.
TAke one pound of Bores-greace, and three Garlic heads, stamp them in a
Mortar till they be fine, and put bath into a box, and put thereto Bean
flower, to the quantity of two Eggs: bray them together, and lay them to the
Breast.

To make a Seare-cloath.
TAke Rozen, and Perosine, of each four ounces, Wax two ounces, Ollibanon two
ounces, Masticke half an ounce, Turpentine two ounces, and so make your
Plaster.

OF MEDICINES and Remedies. PART. XI.
Here follows diverse Medicines and Remedies for to heal all Diseases
curable, by the grace of God; as also the nature and property of certain
Herbs and Plants belonging thereunto. And first a most excellent Remedy to
help the Flux of the Body, with a certain discourse thereon.
THE Flux of the Body is caused of superfluous heat conceived in the
Stomach, the which makes a continual solution inwardly, as ye may see by
experience of those that are troubled therewith: for so long as the cause is
not taken away, all their meat does run into the matter, the which if it be
so, that is true which I do say, that the fluxes are a distemperance of the
body, caused of hot and corrupt humors in the stomach, and therefore if thou will cure it, it were necessary to extinguish the heat, and so take away the
corruption, the which thou shall do with the redness of Mart Mylletare
written in this Book following, for that is the most sovereign remedy that
can be found. But first ye shall take twelve grains of our Petra
Philosophalla, with half an ounce Mel Rosatum, and then take four mornings
together one scruple of the redness of Mart, with half an ounce of Sugar
Rosate, and therewith thou shall work miracles.

For Perbreaking, and for Flux.
Sees Roses in Vinegar, or Tamarindes, or Gauls, and while it is hot wet
therein Wool, and lay it on the stomach for Vomit, and on the Navill for
Flux, and on the Reins for appetite.

Aleanet, is to sooder Wounds.

Aspaltum, is Tar of Indie, it has virtue to draw and sooder for if the
powder thereof be strowed on a dry Wound, it will soon close it, though it be
both broad and deep.

Oats, has virtue to abate swelling, and to make things soft.

Asarum, makes women to have their terms, opens the Veins of the Urine,
and makes a man well to piss.

Asarum, with Honey sleyeth Worms dissolveth Winds, and warmeth the stomach,
cleanses the Liver, and Veins of the Guts, and reins of the Mother, it
puts away Fever quotidian, and helps the stinking of venomous Worms.

Bolle, if it be good is as it were white redded.

Ballestianes, is the flow^ of the Powgraner, and Psidia, is the rind, and it
has virtue to restrain as Bolle has.

Brancha Urona, has virtue to make soft, or to rypen Empostumes.

Bistorta, or Tormentill, has virtue to strain together, comfort, and
confound.

Bedellion, has virtue to constrain together, it helps the Empostume, both
within and without, it breaks the stone, and beats the Cough.

Cadamen, is the roots of Parcely, that has virtue to dissolve, to consume
and to draw.

Camfere, ought to be kept in Marble, Alablaster, Lyntseed, or Anyseed: it is
good for the Gomora, and to abate a man's courage.

Coloquintida, has virtue to purge Phlegm and Melancholy, and for the
Toothache, seethe it in Vinegar.

Cassia fistula, a Gargarisme made thereof, and of the Juice of Morell,
dissolveth the Empostume in the Wezend, and also for swelling in the Cheeks.

Ceruse, is good to engender good flesh, and to fret away evil flesh.

Capers, is good to de^te cold Humors, in the mouth and stomach.

Concube and Quibebes, the powder hereof with the juice Borage is good for the
cold Rhume and to comfort the Brain.

Dragagant, is of three kinds, and the white is the best in cold Medicines,
and the red in hot.

Euphorbium, his virtue is to dissolve, to draw, to ala^e, to consume, to purge
Fleame, and Melancholy.

Esula, is the rind of Eleberus Albus, or Peritory of Spain, it has virtue
to purge Fleame and Melancholy, and it is the best that purges next to
Scamonie. Take Esula, five drams, Canell, Fennell-seedes, Anyseedes, and use
this with warm Wine, or other broth,

Gum Arabic, the white is cold, the red is hot in Medicines.

Gariofiolate, is Ade^^^e his virtue is to open, dissolve, and consume, whilst
he is green, the Gollicia passie.

Hermadactilus, the whitest is the best, it has virtue to dissolve, consume,
and draw, and they principally purge Fleame.

Jarus, Barba, Aron Calves feet, Cuckoo pintell, the leaves, and the roots,
and the gobbets about the roots be of good virtue, and the Root should be
cloven, and dried, they have virtue to dissolve and lake.

Ipaguistidos, is Gobbets, that are found by the root of the Dog bryer, it
has virtue to strain together.

Jempus, is the fruit thereof, it has virtue to dissolve, and consume: for the
Strangury Illiaco, drink Wine wherein it was sodden.

Licium, is good with the juice of Fennel for sore Eyes.

Litarge, is good to close together and to cleanse.

Lovage seed with Cinnamon, is good for the Liver, and Spleen, and wind in the
Guts and stomach.

Mamia, is good to make Blood clean.

Mumia, has virtue to strain together.

Medeswece, green or dry, brings Menstruum, and cleanses the Mother.

Mora, is the fruit of the Cicomore Tree, it has virtue to dissolve, consume,
and make clean, it is good for the Ovinffe, and for costiuenesse.

Nitrum, the whiter the better, it has virtue to dissolve, and wipe away filth.

Opponax, if it be clear, and draw to Cytrin color, it is good, it has
virtue to dissolve and consume.

Oppium, that is not hard nor soft, is good, it has virtue to make one fleepe.

Organum flowers, is good powdered to make Luxe, to dissolve, and to consume,
and the powder put within and without, abateth blown cheeks,

Oxificentia, Phenicon, Dactilus Indie, Tamarindus, they that be good, be
neither too moist nor too hard, and be some what black, and some what sower,
the Ryne nor the Seed shall not be used in Medicines, it has virtue to purge
Choler, to make Blood clean, and to abate unkind heat.

Os de cord Cervi, is the bone of the Hearts heart, on the left side, it is
good to purge Melancholy Blood, and Cardiacle, and Sinicapos, or Sincapos, with
the Juice of Borage, and Os Sexi, will make the Teeth white.

Periatory, or Pellatory, shall be gathered in Winter, and his virtue is to
dissolve, consume, and draw.

Dog Fennel, the root is good for the Strangury, Oissury, and stopping of the
Liver and Spleen.

Pineapples, the Kernels do moysten and open, and is good for the Disease in
the Breast, or Cough, or Etike, or Consumption, and to increase good blood.

Damsons, be cold and moist, in the third degree; gather them when they be
ripe, and clean them in the Sun, and spring them with Vinegar above, and
then ye may keep them two year in a vessel: their virtue is to cool a man,
and make his Guts light, and therefore they be good in Fevers, against the
costivenesse that comes of dryness, or of Choleric humors in the Guts,
when they be ripe to cut, and when they be dry, soake them in water, and eat
the Prune, and drink the water.

Psilium is cold and moist in the third degree; his virtue is to make soft and
light, and to cool a Man's body, and to strain together.

Periatory, while it is greens has virtue to dissolve and consume the winds
in the stomach.

Purslene, is good both raw and sodden, to abate unkind heat in Chollericke
men.

Pitch liquide, has virtue to dissolve and consume.

Ponticum, is good for the stopping of the Liver, and Spleen, that comes of
cold.

Storax, has virtue both to comfort, and consume, and to fasten Teeth, and
comfort the Gummes.

Squilla, is a Sea Onion, and that is found by himself is deadly, his virtue
is to purge, and to dissolve, but the outer, and Inner parts shall be cast
away, for they be deadly, and that which is in the midst, shall be put in
Medicines, and it has more virtue raw than sodden.

Seeds within the berries of Elder, is good to purge Fleame. Sravisacre, has
virtue to dissolve, consume, draw, and purge, Fleame and Lytarge and to put
away heaviness of the heart, and if it be put in his nose.

Seapium, is good, and has virtue to dissolve, consume, draw, and laxe, and
heal, it is good for fallins down of the Mother, with suffumigation, or
supositor, and for the terms of secondine dead Child.

Saracoll, if it be with sad, it is good it has virtue to strain together
and to sooder. Drink Calamint sodden in Wine, for coldness of the stomach,
and stopping of the Liver and Spleen, Reins and Bladder, and Illaco passie.

Saterion, his root is green, has virtue to unloose man's nature.

Saligem, his virtue is to dissolve, and consume.

Scabiouse, while he is green, has virtue to dissolve, consume, and cleanse.

Dragons, take the root, and cleave it, and dry it in the Sun, ye may keep
it two years, meddle the powder of Dragons with Soap, and wet a Tent therein,
and put it deep into a fester, and it will cleanse and enlarge it, and if there
be a bone in it, it will draw it out, or else loose it that ye may take it
out lightly.

Seen, is to purge Melancholy and Epilencie, and Fever quartaine, and Emerodes
for the Spleen, Liver, and Cardiacle sodden in water, and put to Sage, and
make a Syrope, or the Juice of Borage and Sugar.

Terra sigillata, terra sarasincia, trara argenta, is all one manner of earth,
his virtue is to constrain together.

Turbith, if it be hollow, small and of an Ash Color, and gummie, it is good,
it has virtue to dissolve, and draw humors from the uttermost part of a man's
body, and namely Fleame, for the Gout and Illiaca, and Podegra, and Chiragra,
give him fours scruples of Turbith mingled with some other Medicine.

Taplia, or faiters Herb, his virtue is to purge above and beneath both
green and dry, for it is never given by himself, he that stampeth it let him
hide his Face and eyes that he see not. Also heal or keep close his
Testacles, or else they will swell, with this Herb beggars do make them seem
on the Dropsy, and be nothing like.

Tartar is the Lees of Wine, and has virtue to dissolve, and wipe away filth,
and to abate away a man's fatness.

Take small powder half of four drams, and cast thereto the powder of
Masticke, to abate his egernesse, and give the powder with Dia Penedion, or
with same other delicate electuary.

Terbentine, a fugimation thereof, is good for the subfumigation of the Mother.

Virga Pastoris, or Sheepeheards rod, has virtue to strain together, to
cool, and to fill that is empty, and is good for the Flux.

Bryona, or wild Neppe, is hot and dry, the root thereof makes a woman to
have her terms, and delivers a dead Child or secondine.

Ginger, comfort the heart, and make good digestion.

Sugar, is temperate, hot, and moist, his virtue is to moysten and nourish, and
to loose, if it be mingled with cold things to cool.

The excellent virtues of Cardus Benedictus.
IT is very good for the Headache and the Megrim: For the use of the juice of
the powder of the Leaves, preserves and keeps a man from the Headache, and
heals it being present, it quickneth the sight if the Juice of it be laid on
the Eyes. The Powder sta^ches blood that flows out of the Nose, or comes out
of the Lungs: the breath of it taken with Wine, makes an appetyte. It is good
for any Ache in the body: it strengthens the members of the body, and
fasteneth loose sinews and weak. It is also good for the Dropsy: it breaks
also the Stone, and breaks an Impostume: it preserves one from the
Pestilence, if the powder be taken in water four and twenty hours before a
man come to the infected place. It is good for the dizzinesse of the Head: It
helps the memory: It helps thick hearing: It is good for short winds, and
the diseases of the Lungs: Some write that it strengthens the Teeth: others
write that it brings down Flowers, and provokes sleep, and helps the
Falling sickness. It is also good for falls and bruises: the Leaves provoke
sleep: the powder is good against all poison, the same put into the Guts by a
Glyster: It helps the Collicke, and other diseases of the Guts, and the
wounds of the same. They write also that the water of Cardus Benedictus helps
redness, and the ^^ching of the Eyes, and the Juice does the same: the Leaves
bruised are good for the biting of Serpents: for Burnings, and for Carbunckles.
There is nothing better for the Canker, and old festering sores: the Leaves are
good for Fomentations: and to be sitten over, being sodden in water, that the
Vapor may come to the diseased places, against the stones and stopping of
flowers.

A discourse as concerning Corns in the feet or elsewhere with their remedies.
THis Callowes matter is a certain hot humor, the which nature would
discharge her self of, and when that humor is driven forth of nature, it
goes into the lower parts into the end of the Toes, for in that part of the
Toes that skin is called Epidarma; is hard, and will not suffer if to pass or
exalars, and there many times it engenders a Tumor in the skin with great
hardness, and many times that Tumor does increase and cause such pain, that
it does not only hinder their going, but hinder them from their sleep in the
Night, and this kind of Tumor is called commonly Callo, or Corns in English;
and I thought it good to call them crest, because they are always growing and
is of great importance among Chirurgions, for an infinite number of persons are
troubled therewith, and therefore I will show thee our secret to help them
quickly and with great ease, which secret was never known of any. First ye
shall pare them with a sharp Knife unto the bottom, and there ye shall find
a certain thing like matter, but if ye find no matter, ye shall pare it
until blood does appear, then touch it with the Oil of Sulphur, and then
dress it without Balsamo Artificiato, once a day until it be whole, Keep this
as a secret.

An experimented Science for hoarsenesse, though it has long lasted.
TAke a soft Nightkerchiffe, and warm it, take also a Head-pillow, warm the
same also, and bind it with the Kerchiffe about the Head all Night: do this
three Nights o^ after the other, and keep thy self warm, and beware of Cold
Drinks, and Air, and it shall furely go from thee without hurt, this same is
also good for the Flixe and Cough: give the Patient also Lycorice in his mouth.

Against Hoarsenesse, go into the Hot-houss, and when thou have half Bathed,
drink a good draught of warm water: this is often proved.

Garlic sodden and eaten, makes a clear voice, and drives away Hoarsenesse
and the old Cough.

If a man stand in fear of the Palsy.
LEt him eat every Morning two or three grains of Mustar seeds, and two
Pepper corns: the same is assured for the same disease.

Of the cause of our Sciatica, and how ye may help it.
THE Sciatica is a Disease so called, because it comes in that place of the
Body called Scio, and it is caused of an evil quality and gross Humors that
are strayed in that place, because they cannot pass down. And this is seen
by experience daily: for where that pain is, there is alteration, and the cure
thereof is with Glysters, Vomits, Purgations, and Unctions, because the
Glysters does evacuate those places next unto it, and so eases the Humor: the
Vomit cleanses the stomach, the Purgation does evacuate the body downwards,
the Unctions dissolve the wind, and by these means thou may help the
Sciatica, as I have done many times to my great credit and satisfaction of my
Patient.

A Medicine for the Gowte.
TAke a pint of white Wine, a quart of running water, a quantity of Barley
flower and let them boil together: then put there^o half a pound of black
Soape, and let all seethe till it be thick, then put thereto the yolks of
four Eggs, and when ye will use it, drive it on a cloth Plaister-wise, hot.

A special Remedy against the Gowt.
TAke Turbit chosen, a groate weight, Ginger chosen, and pared, two penny
weight, Setwall, Hermoda^till, of each three penny-weight: Powder Benedicta,
four penny weight: and make it in powder, and use it when you begin to wax
constipaty or bound: Use these Herbs daily in your Pottage or Broth: take
Herbon two handfuls, Scabious, Mectfellen, Borage, of each one handful: Aven,
Planten, Langdebeefe, of each a quarter of a handful, wash them and bind them,
and cast them into the Pot.

A Plaster for the same.
TAke Vnguentum Merciatum, Agrippe Dial^ee, Ol^i Genesti Lauxi, an ounce:
Emplaistrum Oxi croxi^ one ounce, Tero pariter, R^^in^ pim parissimi pariter
sed resolvenda dissoluentur, Et fac magdalione: take your powder in days and
times convenient, at the first time two penny-weight, and after as you think
expedient.

Stubbes Medicine for the Gowte.
TAke a quart of red Wine Lees, a quarter of a pound of bean flower, half a
quarter of a pound of Commine fine beaten, a spoonefull of Bole Armoniacke,
half an ounce of Camphere, which must be put in at twice, and boil them all
together, till they be somewhat thick: then make it Plaister-wise, and lay it
to the pain.

Another Plaster for the Gout.
TAke Occycronium Galbanum, and Melitonum, of each one a pennyworth and still
them: take a pound of stone Pitch, and another pound of fine Rozen, one half
ounce of Camphere, one quarterne of Deeres Suet, half a quarter of a pound of
Commin, and boil them on a soft fire together, and thereof make a Plaster
upon a piece of Leather, using it as the other.

Another for the same.
TAke the Gall of an Ox, and Aqua Compositia, of each a like quantity, as much
of Oil of Exeter, as of both the other, and labor them all together in a pot
with a stick, the space of half an hour: When you have so done, annoint your
palm therewith, then wet a linen cloth therein, and as hot as you can suffer
it, bind it to the sore.

For apricke of a Thorn, or any other thing.
TAke Honey, and a good quantity of Chalk, and of the Gall of a Beast into it,
and boil them together, and make a Plaster of it, and as hot as you can
suffer it; lay it thereunto. Let the Chalk be scraped very small. Approved,

A Remedy for burning and Scalding.
TAke the white Wool of the belly of an Hare, and if it be raw, lay it
thereto, and it will never away till such time it be whole.

Another for the same.
TAke a Thistle called S. Mary Thistle, stamp it and strain it, and take
thereof two spoonefuls, and put to this three spoonefuls of Cream, and mix
them together, and annoint the Patient therewith.

To kill a Tetter or Ring-worme.
TAke the root of a red Dock, the root is very red, and slice it, and lay it
in Vinegar a Night, and after lay it upon the Tetter, and tie it with a cloth
hard, and it will kill the Tetter. Approved.

For a wind or a Collicke in the belly.
TAke a Rose Cake and toast it at the fire, with Vinegar thrown upon it, and
lay it as hot to your belly as you may suffer it.

For the Collicke.
TAke Mustard, Figs, and Vinegar, stamped together, and lay it to the belly
of the diseased, cold, in manner of a Plaster, and it shall help.

Against the Shingles.
Annoint the Shingles with the juice of Mynts, and it will heal them.

To heal a wound in ten days, as by proof has been seen.
Stamp Camphere with Barrowes grease, and put it into the wound, and it will
heal it. Approved.

For ache in the Back.
TAke Egremont and Mugwort, both Leaves, and Roots, and stamp them small,
then mingle them well with old Deeres Sewet, then smeere or annoint the grieved
place therewith very warm, and after roll it by hard.

For to heal in four days the scalding with water or any other thing,
without Plaster or Ointment, it has been tried and found true.
TAke an Onyon and cut him overthwart, and wring out the juice upon the scalded
place doing so every day ^^^ise, it will heal it quickly.

To heal the Itch.
TAke of Lapacinum Acutum, or of Sorell, and boil it in water, and wash
therewith the diseased person: or else take the roots of Laurel, and being
well brayed with Salt and bread, annoint therewith the body. The like effect is
done with the decoction of Egrimony and Sage, made with Rain water, and
washing therewith the sick person.

To heal Sores or Tetters.
TAke of Wax of Ganabrinum, in powder, and of Oil of Roses, as much as shall
be sufficient? Make thereof an Ointment. Or else bray Cockle and Brimstone, and
mix them with Vinegar, and make an Ointment.

To remedy the swelling of the Legs.
TAke the Juice of Walwort, of Wax, of Vinegar, of Barley, Meal, of each a
like quantity: Boil it, and make a Plaster, and bind it upon the sore.

A good Drink to strengthen the heart and all the members, if a man drink
half an Egg shell full of it morning and evening, with as much good wine.
TAke the best Aqua Vitae that you can get, and take a piece of fine Gold, and
make it glowing hot ten times, and squench it again, the more you squench it,
the stronger waxes the water and better. Then put it into the same Aqua Vitae,
and half a quarter of an ounce of Saffron, and a quarter of an ounce of
Cynamon, both beaten: let them stand four days well ^opped, and stir it
every day once: but when you will take it, then let it stand (...) ^ns^irted
that it may be clear. This water warmeth the cold stomach, gives strength to
all the members, specially to agee folks that have been over long sick,
whose strength is consumed (...) for it comfort and strengthens the heart
out of measure.

A special Medicine to cause sleep.
TAke a spoonefull of Oil of Roses and spoonefull of Rose water, and half a
spoonefull of red Vinegar, and temper them all together; then with a fine
linen cloth annoint the Patients head.

An ^^sie Remedy for the Toothache.
TAke a s^ice of the Root Acorus, of some called in English Gladen, of other
Galanga, which grows in waters and marshes, this must be laid green upon
the Tooth. A piece of the green root of Torm^ntill does it likewise.

For swelling in the Throat.
TAke white Frankensence, and cast a piece of it upon hot coals, then put a
Thimble over it, and let the smoke thereof go into the Throat: that helps,
and is often times experimented and proved.

For the Canker in the mouth.
TAke half a pint of Ale, and a sprig of Rosemary, and sees them together,
and skim your Ale. And then put in a piece of Allom as much as a Nut, and a
spoonefull of Honey, and two spoonefuls of Honey suckle water.

To make the Face fair and the Breath sweet.
TAke the Flowers of Rose-mary, and boil them in white Wine, then wash your
face with it, and use it for ^o drink, and so shall you make your Face fair,
and your breath sweet.

A Remedy for a red face or a red nose.
TAke Litarge of Silver, and Brimstone, of each like much, and sees them in
Rose water, and Vinegar, and then with a linen cloth wet in the said Vinegar,
lay it to the sore.

A Remedy to qualify the Coppered Face that is u^curable.
MAke a Bath with the flowers of Cammomell, Violets, Roses, and Flowers of
water Lillies, then annoint the place with Anguentum Album, Campherarius, and
mix that ointment with a little yellow Brimstone, and Quicksilver killed with
fasting spittle, and annoint the Face withal.

A special good diet for all copperous Faces.
Abstain from all salt things, spiced, fried, meats, and roasted meats: also
from drinking of Wine, for it is very evil: also Onyons, Mustard, and Garlic
are very naught: in st^^d of which, you m^st take Purs^aine, Sorrel, Lettice,
Hops of Borrage, with Succor^ or endive in Portage, or otherwise: Also it is
necessary to be laxatiue, and in sleeping to lay your head hye.

An easy Remedy to make the Teeth white.
TAke Vinegar of Squiles, and dip a little piece of Cloth in it; and rub the
Teeth or Gummes withal: the said Vinegar fastneth the Gummes, comfort
roots of the Teeth, and makes a sweet breath.

To take away the stinking of the mouth.
Ye must wash your mouth with Water and Vinegar, and chew Masticke a good
while, and then wash thy mouth with the decoction of Annis-seeds, Mints, and
Cloves, sodden in Wine. If the stinking of thy mouth comes of a rotten tooth
the best is (...) have it drawn out.

A Remedy for sore Eyes.
TAke the Juice of Fennel, and drop thereof into the Eyes, Evening and
Morning, and it shall heal the grief and pain.

A proved Medicine for the bleeding at the Nose, called the Lady Mary's
Medicine.
TAke the shell of an Egg, the meat being very clean out, and put it into
the fire till it be burnt very black and ready to break, then take it out,
and make thereof fine Powder, whereof ye shall blow through a Quill part
thereof into the Nose that bleedeth, and it shall stanch.

Against a stinking Breath.
MElt Honey, Salt, and Rye flower well together, and therewith rub the Gummes
twice or thrice, then wash it with fair water, and it will help thee.

Eor an evil breath.
Sees two ounces of Commin in fine Powder, in a pottle of white Wine, unto a
quart: Then keep it, using to drink a little thereof warm at Night, the
space of fifteen days, and it will help.

For the Headache, and clensing of the same.
CHew Pellitory of Spain in thy mouth, it will cleanse the Head, and also take
away the Ache or pain.

To heal a swollen Face, that is hurt or marred by reason of some strange
Scorching, which only chances when the Sublime is not good.
TAke the Juice of Barba Iovis, (in English Singreene) and rub your face with
it twice or thrice a day. You may do the like with the Juice of Purs^ains: but
if your Face were too much marred or hurt, take forty or fifty yolks of Eggs,
and put them in a frying Pan upon a great fire, and get s^^e Oil out of them,
wherewith you shall annoint your Face.

To make an aching Tooth fall out of himself, without any Instrument or Iron
Tools.
TAke wheat flower, and mix it with the milk of the herb called in Latin
Herba Lactaria, in French Tintemaille, or Herb Alerte, in English Spurge, that
has milk in it: in Greek, Tithimales, which is an Herb well enough known,
and thereof make as it were a paste or dow, with the which you shall fill the
hole of the Tooth, and leave it in a certain time, and the tooth will fall out
of it self. Also if you wash your mouth every month once with Wine wherein
the root o^ the said herb has been sodden, you shall never have pain in
your Teeth. Also the decoction or powder of the flowers of a Pomegranate Tree,
being put in your mouth and between your Gums fasteneth Teeth.

To kill Lice and Nits in the Head.
TAke the powder or scraping of Hearts horn, and make the Patient to drink it,
and there will not Lice nor Nits breed in his head, but if you will straw the
said power upon his head, all the Lice and Nits will dye.

To remedy or to help Blood-shotten eyes, coming by any Rheum, Fluxion, or
such other like cause.
TAke the tops or ends of Wormwood, which is an hea^^ well enough known, and
stamp it, mixing it with the white of an Egg and Rose water, and make thereof
as it were a Plaster, and syred it upon a linen cloth, which you may lay upon
the eye where the blood is, or else upon both, and do this at night when you
go to bed, and the next morning take it off, and you shall see that this
Plaster shall have drawn to it self all the blood, and all the red^^sse that
was in your Eyes, and so you shall be quit of it.

For the Toothache.
TAke the Roots and Leaves of Chickweede, and boil them in water, with the
which you shall wash your mouth well, and hold it in your mouth a certain
space, and it will take away your pain.

To fasten the Gummes and loose Teeth.
TAke a little Myrthe, and temper it with Wine and Oil, and wash your mouth
withal, and you shall see a wonderful experience. The Myrthe also kills the
worms in man's body, and being chewed in the mouth, makes a sweet breath.

To take away the Toothache.
TAke Hysope, and make thereof a decoction with Vinegar, and it being hot, wash
your mouth withal, and the pain of the Teeth shall go away. The Hysope also
being stamped and incorporated with Honey, and a little Ni^^ina, kills the
Worms in a mane body.

Against the Crampe.
TAke and beat Brimstone and Vervine together, and so bind it to your Arm, or
other place grieved, and it shall kill it, for having the pain again.

A Remedy for the Collicke.
TAke Siuet, and rub your Navill therewith, and champe Rosemary in your
mouth, and it eases the Collicke straight way.

A Powder for the Collicke and Stone.
TAke Parcely-seed, Saxifrage, Alisander, Coryander, the Kernels of
Cherry-stones, Smalledge seeds, Lovage, the roots of Phillipendula, of each a
dram: Bay Berries, Iuy-berries, of each a dram: put to all these as much Ginger
as they all weigh, and add thereto half an ounce of Commin: this Powder is to
be taken in Ale, half a dram of once, thrice a day.

A Remedy for the Collicke.
TAke a quantity of Br^me-seed, Grouncell-sede, Parcely-seed, Alisander seed,
As^en-key^seed, Lepthorne seed, or Berries, Phillipendula dried, Saxifrage
dried, Mouscare dried, Growobicke dried, mix them together in drink, and
drink it Morning and Evening, fasting.

A Medicine for the Collicke.
TAke Pimpernell, Musterd, Crowe^oote, Gaur^op^re, Masticke, and bruise them
together well, and mingle them together with the blood of a Goat, and put
thereto good Alligre a little, and let them stand certain days after your
discretion, and put them under a sti^latory, and distill a water thereof, this
water is good for the Stone, whether that it be red or white, plain or sharp,
or if it be hardened: If the Patient do drink thereof every day fasting, the
stone shall break and go out like sand. Also if scald Heads be washed
therewith, it will heal them, and there shall grow new haire^ and if the
scabbes ^e washed therewith, of what manner so^^er it (...) he shall be whole
within thr^^ days or nine at the furthest. Also (...) water drunk fasting,
makes a man to have a good color, and good blood above all other Medicines.
Also this water drunk with Ca^forie^ twice in one day, destroys all Palsies,
which is not dead in the sinews and members, for it comfort sinews
principally.

For the Collicke and Stone.
TAke half a pint of white Wine, and a good quantity of white Soap, scrape
it, and put it into the white Wine, and make it luke warm, and drink it once,
twice, or thrice, as the Patient needs, prooved.

A Powder for the Stone.
TAke the Seed of Gromell, Broom, Saxifrage, Alisander, Parceley and Fennel,
of all these seeds like quantity, beat them very finely together, and so
drink half a spoonful of powder, or a spoonefull at a time in a draught of
good Ale, and let it be luke warm in any wise.

For the Collicke.
TAke Parceley, Watercresses, Pellatory of the Wall, unset Time, of each a
handful, a dish of sweet B^tter let the herbs be clean washed, and sees
them in a quart of running water, let your water be taken up against the
stream, let them sees till you may make a Plaster thereof, then temper them
together with a handful of Wheat branne, and make a Plaster, and let it be
laid to the Patients belly beneath the Navill, and let him put in his pottage,
Pellatory of the Wall, and let the Patient make water, strained through a fair
cloth, and thereby ye shall know and pe^ceine, whether it does him good or
not, and let him use this three or four times.

A Medicine to purge the Head.
TAke Masticke, Peritory of Spain, tame Cressis Seed, Cockle-seede,
Stavisacre, both the kinds of nee^ing powder, white and black, Ginger,
Sinamond, of each half a dram in fine powder, and mixed together, and put it
in a little bag of fine linen cloth, and let the Patient hold one of these
bags in his mouth a good space, but these bags must first lie in Fuse a
pretty while in Vinegar, and it will draw out Rheums from the head wonderfully,
and when he has done, he must wash his mouth well with Wine or Ale.

A Medicine for a scald Head.
TAke Daysie Roots, and Ale, and stamp them with as much May-butter as needs,
and annoint the sore head therewith.

For the Headache.
TAke a good handful of Red-Rose leaves dried, and a good quantity of Cummin
grossly bruised, and a good handful of Camomill gro^sely shred, and a
quantity of brown leavened Bread: then mix them, and put it into a Linen
cloth, then quilt it, and set it into a hot Dish, upon a Chasing dish, and
sprinckle the bag with Rose water and Vinegar, and turn it in the dish till
it be as hot as may be suffered, to be laid to the noddle of the Neck: and let
it lie till it be cold, and so use another, and keep his head so hot as he
may sweats.

For pain of the Head.
TAke Marromand press out the Juice of it, and let me Patient take of it in
his Nose.

For deafness in the Ears.
TAke the Juice of Coleworts, and mix it with warm water, and drop it into
thine Ears, and it will help.

To make Honey of Roses, called Mel Rosarum.
TAke four pound four ounces of Honey clarified, and two pound of the Juice
of Red-Roses: and let them boil together till it be like a Sirrope.

Another making thereof.
TAke a pottle and half a pint of Honey well clarified, with a pottle of
white or red Wine, two pound of Red-Rose leaves: Boil the Rose Leaves and Wine
till half be wasted, and then put in your Honey: and let it boil till it be
somewhat thick, and in color like a Syrrope.

For the Pockes.
TAke the Juice of Peny-Ro^all, and young Tausie, and give the sick party to
drink.

A true Medicine for the Jaundies.
TAke a handful of Chery Leaves, sees them in a pint of Milk, and let them
boil well: Then strain it, and drink agood draught thereof to Bedwards, and
in the morning fasting, and the Iaundies shall avoid from you by siege: or else
drink in the morning this following. Take the wood Bayberries, pill the upper
shell with the leaves from it, and take the second shell that is yellow, put
thereof as much as a Walnut into a cloth, and sees it with a pint of water,
let it be well boiled, and let it cool, and then drink it, this has been
experimented.

A Remedy for the Stone.
TAke the Stones of Medlers, and lay them upon a hot T^^estone: after that you
have rubbed and dried them in a fair cloth, then being dried upon the
til^stone, beat them into powder, then take a parcel of Time and pars^y and
place it upon the fire with Beer and Butter, and throw in half a spoonefull
of the said powder: and hereof you must drink a good draught fasting in the
morning, and eat nor drink nothing else for three hours after.

For the Liver that is corrupted and wasted.
TAke a good quantity of Liverw^rt and bruise it a little, and then sees it in
good strong Woort, with a quantity of Rubeth, and use this medicine, and thou
shall be whole.

For heat in the Liver.
TAke the Juice of sower Apples and sweet Apples, of each a pound or more, as
much as you think best, and two pounds of Sugar, mingle these things together,
and lettheth boil on a simple fire till it be thick as a Syrrope, and use
this course every day fasting, with luke warm water.

For to make hair grow.
TAke and sees Mallows roots and all, and wash the place where Hair
lacks, and it shall grow.

For to take away Hair.
Take Horse aches and burn them to powder, and mingle it with Eysell, and
touch the place where the Hair grows, and it shall grow no more there.
Approved.

To know whether a woman shall conceive or no.
TAke of the ruin of Hare, and having fried and consumed it in hot water, give
it to the woman to drink in the morning at her breakfast, then let her stand
in a hot Bath, and if there come a grief or a pain in her belly, she may very
well conceive.

To make a barren woman bear Children.
TAke of these little Sea fishes called in Latin Pollipodes, and roste them
upon the coals with our Oil, and let the woman eat of them, and it shall
profit and helps very much, having in the mean time the company of a man.

To make a woman have a quick Birth.
TAke leaves of Dictarij, and stamp them, or else make powder of them, and
give the woman that labors drink of it with a little water, and she shall
be delivered incontinent without any great pain or grief.

For all manner of Lamenesse or swellings.
TAke a handful of Time, a handful of Lavender cotton, and a handful of
running Strawberries that be like to a string, and so cut them small, then beat
them in a Mortar, with four or five young Swallows taken out of the nest very
fligge and quick, (...) them together until ye see never a feather of them
whole. that done, take a penny worth of May butter clarified, and mingle it in
the Mortar with Herbs, and so let it stand four and twenty hours before
they sees: when you have sodden it, use it as before you are taught, as well
in preserving of it, as in using of it.

Eor to stay the Laxe or Flux.
TAke Plantine, otherwise called Weybred-leaues and roots, and wash them in
fair water, and then stamp them, and take a good quantity of the Juice and
put it to old ale, and make a Posset therewith, and after take the ale Posset,
and clarify it upon the fire perfectly, and then let the Patient drink it
blood warm, in the morning and evening, without taking of other drink, the
space of two hours either before or after.

A special Remedy for the Stone.
TAke a quantity of Anniseedes, Lycorice, Fennel roots, and Parsley roots,
Reysons, and Currants, and let all these be boiled in Whay, from a pottle to a
quart.

For the sweating Sickness.
Ye must take a good spoonefull of Treacle, three spoonefuls of Vinegar, five
spoonefuls of water, and two spoonefuls of the Juice of sinckfoyle, swing them
all together, and drink them luke warm.

For him that pisseth Blood.
TAke a good quantity of Rue, otherwise called herb Grace, and dry it so that
you may beat it to powder, and then take the powder and drink it with Ale:
and it will change the rine.

For the Canker in the Mouth.
TAke white Wine, and a pennyworth of Ginger in powder, and let them sees a
walme together, and wash the (...) place with a feather, and drink not in one
hour after, and ye shall have ease in seven days, on warrantise.

A powder for the same.
TAke Sage Pimpernell of each a like quantity, and half so much Parcely, as of
them both, shred them and stamp them small, and put thereto a little burnt
Allome, and then take it up, and dry it, and beat it to powder and keep it,
for it never failed.

To know the Fester and Canker.
Here you may learn whereof, and of what manner the Fester comes, and also
the Canker, it comes of a sore that was ill healed, and breaks out again,
and if it be in the flesh, there does come out water, if it be in the ^inews,
there comes out brown lie: and if it be in the bone, there comes out as it
were thick blood. A Fester has a narrow hole without and within, and a Fester
is seldom seen, but it has more holes then one, and the Canker has always
but one hole.

For a Canker in the body.
TAke the roots at Dragons and cut them in small pieces, and lay them to dry,
and make powder thereof, and take a penny weight of that powder, and put it in
water all Night, and on the morrow power out that water, and put thereto
white wind and then sees it well, and let the Patient drink thereof warm,
and in three days he shall be whole.

For a Canker in a woman's Pappes.
TAke the Dung of a white Goose, and the juice of Salendine, and b^ay them
together, and lay them to the sore, and it will kill the Canker, and heal the
Pappe.

A good powder for the Canker.
TAke Copperas, and Roch Saunders, and Verdigreace, and Salarmoniac, and beat
them to powder in a brazen Mortar, of each a like quantity by weight, and put
the powder in a vessel, and seethe it on a charcole fire till it glowe, and
then take it down, and let it cool, and after make powder thereof and that
powder shall destroy the Canker, on warrantise.

A good feate for the Canker, Fester, Botches and Sores, old and new.
TAke Virgins wax, Barrowes grease molten, ana one pound, Pero^ien demi.
ounce, and of Masticke, and Ollibanon ana one ounce, of Veride demi. ounce,
Pitch demi. pound, beat all these* and put them in a Pan, and melt them, and
when it is molten look that the Veride be ready beaten, and put it in and
stir it fast for cleaving to the bottom of the vessel, and then take it
down, and set it cool, and so ye may strain it, and wet the pan that it
shall be strained into for cleaving thereto, and with a feather put away the
corruption, and take heed to a sore that is ill healed, and that the place
breaks not out again, for being five weeks old and more, it is both perilous
and doubtful of a Canker.

To slay the Canker or Marmoale.
TAke a pecke of the Ashes made of Ashen-wood, and ashes of Oate straw, and put
hot water on them, and make a gallon of Lie, and put thereto two handfuls of
Barkedust, and let it stand a day and a night, and then cleanse it through a
canvasse, and then take the same dust, and put it in again, and put thereto as
much Allome, and half as much of Madder crops; and put them in a pot, and let
them boil almost to half, and ever stir it, that it grow not to the
bottom, nor ru^^e over, and after cleanse it through a cloth, and let it
cool, and when it is cold take a quantity thereof, and wet a linen cloth
therein and lay it to the sore.

For the Canker in the mouth.
TAke seven spoonefuls of Honey, and clarify it in a pewter Dish, and then put
it demi pint of white Vinegar, and roch Allome, the quantity of a Hasell nut,
and a spoonefull of Bay Salt, and let all these boil together, a quarter of an
hour, and then take of dryes Rose leaves, and Sage, ana a handful, let them
sees together the space of a quarter of an hour, and let the Patient wash his
mouth therewith, and lay the ^^^ues to the sore, and if the liquour be too
thick to wash your mouth with, then take running Water and white Vinegar, and
a spoonefull of Honey, and boil them well as before.

To make a red Water to slay the Canker.
TAke three handfuls of Rue, bray it in a Mortar, and put thereto a quart of
Vinegar, and Madder one ounce, and take half a penny worth of Allome, and
beat it to powder and put thereto, and let it so rest nine days or more, and
then take them out, and then strain them through a cloth into a clean glass,
and stop the vessel close, and keep it.

To take away the Canker.
TAke Martlemasse B^^fe that hangs in the Roof, and burn it to powder, and
put the powder into the Sore, and it will slay the Canker.

For the Canker in the mouth.
TAke Herb Grace, Lavender, Cotton, Sage, Honysuckle leau^ ^ Rosemary, and
ana, wash them and stamp them with a little roch Allome, and a little English
Honey, and put them into a fair Dish, and when ye dress a sore mouth
therewith, take as much as ye think will serve, and take a few Sage leaves
and wash thy mouth, and lay it to thy Gummes, and i^ ye put thereto a little
Pepper, and Bay salt, it will be the better.

A powder for the Canker.
TAke one quarter of a pound of Roch Allome, and burn it in an earthen
vessel, that there come no ashes thereto: then take Argo, one half ounce, and
one quarter of an ounce of Bolearmoniacke, and make all these in fine powder
alone, and then mix them altogether, and put them into a Bladder, and keep it
close: and when ye will minister it, wash well the sore with the water, and
then lay on the Powder, and so dress it once in the day, and it shall help
him.

For Canker, Fistula, Warts, or Wounds, new or old.
TAke a gallon and a half of running Water, and a pecke of Ashen-ashes, and
sees them, and make thereof a gallon of Lie, and put thereto a gallon of
Tanners woo^e, and powder of Roch Allome, and Madder, a pound: and sees all
these, and let your pan be so great, that it be little more then half full,
and when it rises in the seething stir it down with a ladle, that it run
not over, and let it stand three or four hours till it be clear, and all
that is clear strain it through a good thick Canvas, and then wet therein a
ragged cloth and long lint, and lay it on the sore, and this is good for all
the diseases aforesaid.

A good Medicine for the Canker and Sores.
TAke a pottle of clean running water, or white wine, Sage, Rosemary, and Sink
foil, of each a handful, Allome one ounce, boil all together till half a
quarter be consumed, and for the Canker put in a little white Coperas and
Camphere.

For the Canker in the mouth.
TAke Plantine, Bittony, Egrimony, Violets, and Wood-bind, and boil them in
Wine or Water, with Isope, Pyony, Pimpernell, and green Walnuts, and therewith
wash four times in a day, and hold it in your mouth hot, and therewith wash.

For Canker old or new, or Marmole.
TAke Smalledge, Wormewood-greene, Walnuts, Lillies, Broom Crappes, white
Hazell, red Nettle, Sage, Selfe-^eale, Pimpernell, the root of Floure-deluce,
Planten, ground Ivy, Wallwoort, Mouse-eare, Celondine, Mintes, Bittony,
Egrimony, Violets, Charvell, Colwortes, Avence, stamp all these, and rot them,
and fry them in Barrowes grease, Sheep tallow, and Honey, and make thereof an
ointment with Turpentine, Wax, Rozen, Pitch, Gum, Frankensence, burnt Allome,
and powder of Tanners bark.

For the Canker.
TAke the powder of Saden, Honey, and cream, and white wine, and mix them
altogether, and melt them over the fire, and when it is hot, with a linen
cloth wash therewith thy mouth, and when the Sore is well washed, put thereof
into the grief, with Lint, as hot as may be suffered two times a day, and be
whole.

For a Canker in a man's body, and save the man.
TAke the roots of Dragons, and cut them, and dry them in gobbets, and make
powder of them, and take a 9. d. weight of that powder, and sees it in white
Wine, and let the sick drink thereof warm, fasting, and in three days he
shall be whole.

For the Headache.
TAke Hemlockes, and sees them, till they be as thick as Pappe, and lay them
where the pain is: Let them lie all Night and on the morrow lay another of the
same heat, and do so three or four times, and it is done.

Another for the same.
ALso take and make Lie of Veruen, or Bytton, or Worme-wood, and therewith wash
thy Head thrice a week, and it shall do thee much good, and take away the
Ache.

Another for the same.
TAke the Herb called Bursa Pactoris, and bruise it, and lay it to the heart
of thy Foot, and it helps both the Headache, and the Toothache.

Another for the same.
TAke Bitton, Veruen, Sel^ndine, Waphroade, Rewe, Wallwoort and Sage, and a
quantity of Pepper, and Honey, and sees them all together in water, and strain
it through a cloth, and drink it Fasting.

Another for the same.
Stamp Bittony, and lay it on thy Head under the Cappe or bind it to thy head.

Another for the same.
TAke Sage, Bittony, and Rewe, with Wormwood, ana, sees these in fair water,
and then put out the same water into a vessel, and then grind the same Herbs
in a Mortar small, a^^ then take of them and of the liquor, and ^e^per them
with Wheat Branne, and with the rest of the liquor w^sh thy head, and then lay
a Plaster thereof upon the Mould, and let it lie there a day and a night, and
do so three or four times. Item, ye may take roots and leaves of Primroses,
fresh Butter, and Tar boiled together.

Another for the ssame.
TAke Avence, Pigeons dung, and Wheat flower, ana one ounce, and temper them
with the white of an Egg, and bind to thy grief.

Another for the same.
TAke Bittonic and Camomill, ana a handful, and sees it in a pottle of Wine
to a quart, and wash thy head with the liquor, and if it be the Megrim, it
shall help thee.

Another for the same.
TAke Frankensence, Doves dung, and flower of Wheat, ana one ounce, and temper
them together with the white of an Egg, and lay a Plaster thereof where the
grief is,

Another for the same.
TAke the white of an Egg and beat it well, and take away the froth, and put
thereto Rose Water, and the powder of Alablaster: then take Flax and wet
therein, and lay it to the Temples, and when it is dry, wet it again: use it
three or four times.

Another for the same.
TAke, Verven, Bittony, Wormwood, sees them well, and wash the Patients head,
and after that make a Plaster, and lay on the over part of the Head on this
manner: take the same Herbs b^foresaid when they are sodden, and wring out
the Juice (...) them, then take the Herbs and stamp them in a Mortar, and
temper them with the water they were sodden in, and put thereto Wheat branne
to cover the Juice of the herbs that it go not out, then take a garland of
Linen cloth, that will go about thy head and bind the Plasters in it, as hot
as the Patient may abide it, and then put on a cappe over that.

Another for the same.
IF the pain come of hot humors, take a quantity of House-leeke, and distill
it as much as you please, and with the same water wash thy Temples, and the
Forehead, and then dippe a linen cloth therein, and lay it on thy Forehead, or
thy temples.

Another for the same.
TAke Margerom, and green Iuy leaves, Bittony, and Verven, of every one two
handfuls, cut them small, and beat them in a Mortar and sees it in two penny
worth of fresh Butter, and stir it till it wax very green, and so let it
stand nine days in an earthen pot, then sees it again, and stir it well
and strain it, and keep it in a fair vessel, and when you need warm a
little thereof in a Sawcer, and annoint your Temples therewith.

Another for the same.
TAke a quart of white Wine, and Horehound, two handfuls, and Camomill, one
handful, and boil them together, and therewith wash thy Head: then take
Wheat bran, and put to the herbs, and boil it, and make a Plaster and lay
it to thy head.

Another for the same.
TAke the Juice of Salondine, and good Vinegar, mingled, and made hot, and with
a sponge or a linen cloth lay it to thy forehead, it quenches great heat,
and purges it that it come no more.

Another for the same.
TAke the Juice of Pimpernell, and put thereto May butter, and frye them
together with a soft fire, and keep it, and therewith annoint the Head and
Temples.

To cleanse the Head.
TAke Alloes one ounce, Myrrh half an ounce, Garlic four drams, Saffron in
powder, half a penny worth, and mingle them together in fine powder: then take
the Juice of Coleworts, and put them to your powder, and make it as thick as
pappe, and somewhat more stiffer, and make Pil^s thereof, as big as small
Pease, and when you go to Bed, take four of them, and roll them in fine
powder of Lycorice, and cast them into your mouth, and swallow them down.

For the Headache coming of the stomach.
TAke Fumitory, Camomill, and Roses, and seethe them in white Wine, and make a
Plaster, and lay it hot thereto.

For Ache in the hinder part of the Head.
Stamp Sage with the white of an Egg, and temper it with Vinegar, and lay it
thereto.

A principal Medicine for the Head.
TAke Commin a quantity, and lay it in Vinegar one night, and on the Morrow put
out all the Vineg^r, saving a little ^o keep moist, and fry it in a pan, and
bind it in a linen cloth about thy head, and by the grace of God, ye shall
be whole.

For a man diseased in the Liver and Spleen.
TAke Barrowes grease, and Ashes make of Ashenwood, ana one pound, and running
water a Gallon, and ^eeth them till they be half^ wasted, and then strain them
through a cloth into a vessel and let it stand so all night, and then on the
morrow, fleet of the grease, and cast away the water, and melt the grease, and
stir it often, and put it into Boxes, and when you need annoint the Spleen
therewith.

A Drink to be used after this Ointment.
TAke the roots of young Ashen plants, clean washed, one handful and
Wormwood, ana and let them sees in Wine, from a gallon to a pottle, and let
the Patient drink thereof, at Morning cold, and Evening hot. Probatum.

A Plaster for the Spleen.
TAke dry Lillies, March Mallow roots, Alexander seed, of each one ounce, of
the bark of Elm, the bark of Ash, Broom ^oode, of each two ounces: all
these being in powder, let them be sodden in strong Vinegar, and so let them
sees, till they be sodden dry: then put thereto powder of Cummin demi. Dram:
powder of the bark of Capers, one ounce demi. Powder of Rewe, three drams,
then afterward put thereto Gum Ammoniac one ounce three drams, dissolved in
Vinegar, and then with wax Turpentine, as much as shall suffice, and make
thereof a Plaster for the Spleen.

A principal Medicine for the Head.
TAke Commin a quantity, and lay it in Vinegar one night, and on the morrow put
out all the Vinegar, saving a little to ^eepe it moist, and fry it in a pan,
and bind it in a linen cloth about thy head, and by the grace of God, ye
shall be whole.

For a man diseased in the Liver and Spleen.
TAke Barrowes grease, and Ashes made of Ashen wood, ana one pound, and running
water a Gallon, and se^th them till they be half wasted, and then strain them
through a ^^oth into a vessel, and let it stand so all Night, and then on the
morrow, fleet off the grease, and cast away the water, and melt the grease, and
stir it often, and put it into Boxes, and when you need annoint the Spleen
therewith.

A Drink to be used after this Ointment.
TAke the roots of young Ashen plants, clean washed, one handful, and
Wormwood, ana, and let them sees in Wine, from a Gallon to a pottle, and let
the Patient drink thereof, at Morning cold, and Evening hot.

A Plaster for the Spleen.
TAke dry Lillies, March Malow roots, Alexander seed, of each one ounce, of
the bark of Elm, the bark of Ash, Broom seed, of each two ounces: all
these being powder, let them be sodden in strong Vinegar, and so let them sees
till they be sodden dry: then put thereto powder of Cummin demi. Dram. powder
of the Bark of Capers, one ounce demi. Powder of Rewe, three drams, then
afterward put thereto Gum Armo^iac, one ounce three drams, dissolved in
Vinegar, and then with Wax, Turpentine, as much as shall suffice, and make
thereof a Plaster for the Spleen.

Another for the same.
TAke the tops of Acornes, Rose leaves, El^ander-seede, Commin seed
preparated, of each one ounce, Strado Arabiae, Galanga, of each two ounces,
Salinter, I. Salt^eeter demi ounce terrified, mix them and put them in a
bag, quadrant, quilted, or basted.

A Drink for the same.
TAke the Juice of Licoris, one ounce, Fennell-seed, A^nis-sede, and Juniper,
ana demi ounce, pownd it in a Mortar, and drink (...).

For the Spleen.
TAke three spoonefuls of the Juice of Iuy leaves, in white Wine or else of the
Juice of Egrimony, and drink it three or four mornings fasting, and ye shall
be whole.

To purge and amend the Heart, Liver, Spleen, Stomach, Lunges, and Brain.
TAke La^gde-beefe, Alexander, Watercresses, young Mallows, Bourage, red
Fennel roots, Parcely roots, Mercury, Hearts tongue, Nippe, and Clar^, and
make thereof pottage, or else st^w a Cou^e, with a piece of Surloyne of Beef
chopped, in small pieces, with Retsons, or Currants, and a little Sugar, and
color them with S^^ders, and keep the ^^ew pot close, use this Medicine, when
the Moo^e is in signs expulsive.

To dissolve the hardness of the Spleen.
AMoniacum dissolved in very sharp Vinegar, and stricken upon Leather
Plaister-wise, and applied to the Spleen, will ^^llifie the hardness thereof,
and it may lie thereto seven weeks and never be removed.

A Sovereign Medicine for the Spleen, and to cleanse the body.
TAke Hart's-tongue, wild Hoppes, Lettice, Bourage, with the flowers of
Fumitory, Parcely roots, seethe all these in Whay, and clarify it with whites
of Eggs, and strain it, and drink it first and last, during a month, and it
shall help your Spleen, and cleanse your blood, and comfort you many ways for
your health.

For the Spleen.
TAke Camomill flowers, wheatebranne, and a pint of white Wine, boil them
together, and put them in a bag, then take oils of Violets, of Linseed, of
Lillies, ana a pennyworth, annoint therewith, and put your bag hot thereto.

For Ache in the Back.
TAke a great Onion, or two ^id roast them in the imbers, then stamp them, and
strain them out of the Juice, and mix it with as much Malmesse as Iuyes, and
drink thereof blood-warms, first and last: Probatum.

To stay the Back, and help him that consumes.
TAke the roots of Parcely, Fennel, Camfire, and of Bourage, Planten, Bursa
Pastoris, and Knot-grasse, and make broth with them of young Hens, Capon, and
Mutton, Rabbets Veale, and put thereto a Date or two, and ye may sees them in
posset Ale made of white Wine.

Another for the same.
TAke white Archangell, Comtry flowers, white Lillies, white Roses, white Holly
hocks, Knot-grasse, Clary, and stamp them, and take a pottle of Mushadine, and
a pint of Ale, with the pith of an Ox back, and three capped Dates, the
stones taken out, and beat them in a Mortar small, and then put in some of
your Muskadine, and grind it, and some of your Ale, and stir it, and sees
the rest thereof, also the yolks of three new laid Eggs, the strings taken
out, and beat them well, and put thereto Sinamon, two pennyworth, and hol^
Mace, one pennyworth, and sees all these to a quart.

For the Bladder and the Reins.
TAke the se^^es of Planten beaton in a Mortar, and sees them in Wine, and
drink thereof alone.

To stay the Back.
TAke the pith of an Ox back and scald it, and then strain it out of the
skin, and ^hred Nippe, and beat it in a Mortar with the said pith very small,
and then put thereto a quart of Milk, and strain it, and then sees it with
five or six Dates, and a grain of Ambergris, and powder of Ginger, and let
the Patient use it often.

For Ache in the Back and Leg.
TAke the marrow of an Ox, and oil Olive three spoonefuls, and the yolks of
Eggs, and Butter, ana, Pepper one ounce then take the milk of a woman, and
mingle it together, and annoint the sick therewith.

To take away the pain of the Reins of one that is low brought.
TAke three quarts of white Wine, and boil therein a red Cock, and put
thereto a handful of red Nip, a quantity of Clary, and the roots of red
Fennel, Hart's-tongue, a stick of Synamon bruised, Dates, great and small
Raisins, with a few Prunes, sees all these together, till the strength of the
Cock be in the broth, and put therein one ounce of Manus Christi, and use this
Morning and Evening luke warm.

A Plaster for the Reins.
TAke Callamint, Camomill, Wormwood, Peritory, Hockes, and bray them in a
Mortar, with Oil, or Butter, or Deeres and Sheep suet, and grease of a
Boar, or Barrow-hogge, with a quantity of Commin, and lay it in a Plaster
both behind and before.

For all Diseases in the Back.
TAke the roots of Dasies, of Planten, of Bursa pastoris, of Centimodum, and
the Cups of Acorns, ana a handful, and of Bolearmoniac two ounces, and of
Harts-horne burnt, ana, and also a Bucke Conie that is fat, and let all these
be sodden together in white Wine and water, as much Wine as water, till the
Cony be con^umed, from the bones of the flesh, then take away the flesh and the
bones from the broth, and so let the broth stand till it come to a Ielly, and
when you are in your bed, cause your Back to be therewith anointed by a
Chafingdish of coals, three nights together, and lay thereon a warm linen
cloth, and it shall help you by Gods grace.

For pain in the bladder, and to make it whole for ever.
TAke three roots of Smalledge, and wash them fair and clean, and cut them
small, and sees them in a quart of fair water, till three parts of the water
be consumed, then strain it, and take four drams of the powder of Bittony,
and put thereto, and drink the said water.

Against running of the Reins.
TAke one pound of Iordaine Almonds, and blanch them, and parch them, and grind
them right small and make Almond milk thereof, with a pint of Rose Water, and
a pint of Planten water, and then seethe it with Sugar, and Sinamond, and when
it is cold put thereto a dram of Masticke in fine powder, and use thereof to
eat and be whole, Probatum est.

A Syrope for the Back,
TAke the roots of Emila Compana clean scraped, and slice them thin, and lay
them in fair running water three days, and shift them every day, then at
three days and take them out, and put them in a gallon of fair running water,
with a quart of Honey, of Lycorice one ounce, scraped clean and sliced, and of
Anniseed one ounce, clean rubbed from the dust, let all these be boiled with a
soft fire, and take out the roots out of the liquour, washing them one by one,
and when they be cut lay them on a fair dish, and so let them lie 24. hours,
and then take the roots and weigh them, and for every pound of your roots,
take a pottle of Muskadine, and white ^a^tard, and put your roots therein, and
put thereto two pound of fine white Sugar, two or three whole Maces, boil all
these to a Syrope, with your root, and then put it into a pot, and when you
occupy it, let the Patient eat of the roots, and drink a spoonefull of
Syrope, with your roots, and then put it into a Pot, and when you occupy it,
let the Patient eat of the roots and drink a spoonful of Syrope after if,
Morning and Evening. Probatum est.

To provoke Menstruum Mulieris.
TAke powder of Peeter, Bittony, Yarrow-seed, in white Wine and drink it.

Another.
TAke M^gwort, Selondine, Marigold, Vernen, Nippe, ana nine crops three days
before the change, and three days before the full of the Moon.

Another.
TAke Germander, and the roots of red Madder, and seethe it in Ale, and give
it her to drink or else take Radices, Et femem pionae, red Sanders and Sugar,
and use it as aforesaid.

Another.
TAke Cotula Fetuda, the which is like Camomill, but it ^^inketh, and make a
fomentation thereof.

Another.
TAke the Juice of Mercury, and Honey, and flower of Cockle, as much as will
incorporate it, and make thereof little balls, and give her one or two of them,
and she shall have Menstrum, also it shall after dispose her to conceive, for
it has seldom failed, and is well proved.

Another.
TAke the black seed of Pion^e, and bruise them one by one to the number of
nine, and pick the black buskes, and in a Mortar break them to powder, eat
and drink the said powder at times above said in the second Medicine. Pro
cadem.

Another.
TAke the roots of Gladion, and Arsmart, and seethe them in good white Wine,
or Vinegar, and when they be well sodden, take them from the fire, and let the
woman sit over it, so that the air may strike vy, and none got away, for this
is proved.

Another.
TAke Bittonie, Puliall, Riall, Centory, ana a handful, seethe them with Wine
or water, till the two parts be wasted, and then cleanse it through a cloth and
drink it.

Another.
TAke Balm, Margerom, Isope, Marigolds, ana a handful, and seethe them from a
pottle to a quart upon a soft fire, and so take it and drink it every morning
fasting, and if it be bitter, put thereto Sugar, and use it.

To stop Menstruum Mulieris.
TAke the blackest holly-hocks that ye can get, and take the flowers thereof,
and ma^e them in powder, and drink them, and wash the place with the water of
Lovage.

Another.
TAke the water of Oak leave distilled, half a pint of Rose water, ana and
Syrrupe of Quinces six ounces, and let her drink thereof first and last.

Another.
TAke Horse-dung, and sees it in good Vinegar, and put it into little bags
of linen cloth, and lay the one upon the Reins of the back, and the other
between the Nauill, and the privy place, as warm as she may suffer it, and
let her drink every Morning and Evening Synamon till she be whole.

Another.
TAke the roots of Glad^^^n, and sees them well in Wine, or water, and
receive the fume thereof: It never failed.

To stop white Menstruum and red.
TAke the Juice of Planten, and of Bursa Pastoris, and ^w^ whites of Eggs well
beaten among the Juice, and put thereto Bolearmoniac one ounce, and of Terra
sigillata, demi ounce, and a portion of Bean flower, and make it thick upon
the fire, and draw thereof a Plaster upon thin cloth, and lay it to her Back
and Navill.

Another for the while.
TAke the inner rind of the Slo^tree, Sumatch, Balestianes, the rind of the
Pomegranate, Planten, Knot-grasse, the inner rind of the red Bryer, and a
little French-Bolearmoniac, and boil all these in red Wine, till half be
consumed, and let her drink it fasting, Et restringer fluxum Menstruum.

Another for the same.
TAke the foot and Leg of Hare, and bake it to powder hair and all, and
drink it, and it restrains the same.

Of Fearne.
THe root is good to be drunk, and laid too Plaister-wise, for Wounds that
are made with Reeds, and in like manner, the root of the Reed drunk, and
laid Plaister-wise to the ^^re, where Fearne sticks, the powder is good to be
strowed upon moist (...), which are har^ to be covered with ^^in, and ill to be
healed; the juice pressed out of the Fearne root, laid too with Rose Water, or
other cold water, is good for all manner of burning or scalding, perfectly and
sure.

To take away heat and inflammation of a Member.
TAke the waters of Planten and Purslaine, of each two ounces, and the water of
a little herb called Vernsenlarie, two ounces, Liturge and ^eruts in fine
powder, of ^uch four drams, Camphere three (...) all (...).

A Locion for inflammation of Balam.
THe waters of Planten and Roses, of each two ounces, Tuthers, prepriat a dram,
Verdigreace six drams, Allome half a dram, Camphere two drams, Honey of Roses
two ounces, burnt Lead six drams weight: and it is done.

A Locion for a sore Mouth.
TAke running water a pint, Vinegar half a pint, Honey four ounces, Bay
leanes one ounce, Galingale one dram: Let all these be decocted to the form of
a Syrope.

A preparative.
TAke Syrope of Violets, Endiffe, and of Femitory, of each two ounces, and of
common Decoction four ounces,

To make Vergent milk.
TAke Litarge of Lead one pound, with Vinegar a pint, (...) in Fuse three
days, and then drawn with woollen shreds, and so keep it in a Vial by it
self close: then take four ounces of Conduit-water, and one ounce of Allome,
and one dram of Camphere: and melt all over the fire, and keep the water by it
self in another Vial, and when you will use it put both these waters
together, of each like quantity, and it will be like milk,

Another of M. Doctor ^axleys.
TAke Litarge of Silver half a pound, with Vinegar a quart: Boil these
together till half be wasted, and then draw the Liquor, from the Litarge with
woollen ^hreds: and so keep it to your use in a Vial close; take also of
Camphere three drams. Musk four grains: against all these things put one
ounce and a half of Oil of Tartary, and put all in a pint of Rose Water, and
boil it till the third part be consumed: and then draw the rest with woollen
^hreddes, and keep it to your use, in a Vial close, and when you will use it,
take a very little bottle-Glasse, and fill it half full of the first Water,
and fill it up with the second Water and it will coagulate together, straight
ways marvellously as white as Milk, and also it takes away the spots and
Feeckles in the Face, if it be often applied thereto.

A Plaster for the Collicke and Stone.
TAke Peritory, Camomill, ground Iuy-leaues, Cummin: stamp them, and boil
them in white Wine, and make a Plaster thereof, and put it about the Reins as
hot as may be suffered, and see that it lie close round about behind and before.

A Plaster for the Headache, and for hot Agues.
TAke red Myntes, Leavened Bread of Wheat, and white Vinegar: Make thereof a
Plaster, and lay it to your Forehead, for it helps diseases in the Head, and
also for hot Agues.

A comfortable Powder for the Heart.
TAke Synamon, Ginger, of each three ounces, grains of Paradise, long Pepper,
of each two drams: Saffron one dram, Sugar four ounces: and so make your
Powder.

Another Remedy that breaks the stone, which being used a certain time; will
cause the stone broken, never after to harden in the bladder.
TAke a pound of Gromwell, a pound of Saxefrage seed: and a pound of
Coliander, with a quarter of a pound of Soras, white and red, and grind all
these in a Mortar very small, and so keep it, using to eat thereof in your
Pottage, every day a spoonefull.

Another proved Medicine for the Stone.
TAke Time, Dam^ons, Bean Cods, Pellitory of the wall, Saxefrage, like
quantities, and steep them one night in white Wine, then distill them, and use
to drink thereof.

Another remedy for the Stone, and to cause the voydance of Urine.
TAke Pellitorie of the Wall, Sothernwood, and sees them in Water or white
Wine, with a quantity of Sheep Suet: till it be tender, then put the herbs
and fallow in a linen bag, and lay it warm to the bottom of the belly, using
this, you shall find remedy.

A proved Medicine to avoid the Urine that has been long stopped, also for
the Stone.
TAke Radish roots, one if it be of bigness and strong, is sufficient, and
scrape it very clean, and lay it in white Wine, a night in steep, then
strain the Wine, and give the Patient to drink, and he shall void water.

A very good water for the stone, proved.
THe water of Strawberries, with the leaves distilled, and so used by draughts,
as other drink.

To break the Stone.
Dry the stones of a Cock a year old, and beat them into fine powder, and
give the diseased thereof to drink in white Wine, but if he have the Charward,
then give it to drink with good water.

The Lady Gath, her Medicine against the Plague.
TAke Abaunce, Turmintell, Sage, Spermint, and Violet leaves, of each one
handful, and stamp them in a Mortar very small, when you have so done,
strain them through a strainer with red wine, claret or white, whether you can
most easily get, and luke warm, give of this water to the diseased to drink.

Against the new Ague, by D. Langdon.
TAke Sortell, Sowthistill, Endive, Dandelion, Succor^e, croppes of Fennel
with Mallows, with Violet leaves of each one handful, and sees them all in a
gallon of stale Ale, to a pottle, with skimming, that done, strain out the
liquor, and make thereof an Ale posset, and let the Patient drink thereof as
often as he is a thirst, putting into every draught as much Treacle as the
bigness of a Bean, and ye shall be healed.

To kill the Paulsie.
Drink the root of Valerian in powder, and it will destroy the Palsy, so
that ye eat no Hog flesh.

A remedy for the Dropsy.
SCrape an Elder root very clean, and break it in many pieces, or shred it
into white Wine, and let it steep therein, then drink the Wine, and it will
heal your Disease.

Against stopping of the Pipes.
TAke Hisope, Mintes, Rose-mary, Daisies, and Consond, of each like quantity,
and sees them with Ale in Lycorice, and use it Morning and Evening.

Against Hoarsenesse.
TAke a good quantity of a Verveine, and sees it with Lycorice in fair water,
then strain the water, and use no other drink with your meat until you find
remedy.

To cause good fasting of meat.
Drink wine sodden with Sentory, and Plantins, Evening and Morning, and it
shall help you.

For the yellow Jaundise.
TAke the reddeft Docke roots that ye can get, and being washed clean, put
them into a vessel of good Ale, and when it is stale, let the diseased drink
no other drink to his meat but ale, and it shall help.

Doctor Argentines Medicine for the Stone.
TAke the red bark of an Ivy tree dried, and beaten into fine powder, and
after searse it through a fine Searse: also take a like quantity of black
Ieat, beaten and searsed in like manner, and being mingled together, drink
thereof with Wine or Ale, blood warm, five or six times.

For Worms in the Belly.
AGainst the Worms in the Belly, take Onyons and pill them, cut or slice them
small, power Spring Water over them: Let it stand all Night, and in the morning
drink that water, and it drives away all worms: power the same water upon
the Earth where the Worms are, and within half an hour, they will all creep
out of the Earth.

Another for the same.
LIkewise if one eat Garlic Fasting, it kills and drives out Worms out
of the Body. Or else drink distilled water of Knot-grasse, or Shanie-grasse.
The same kills worms also: how beit it works more in young then in old
folks.

An approved Remedy for a Woman that has her Throws before her time.
Sees a good handful of whole Cheruill in a quart of Claret Wine, and when
the Herbs be well sodden, wring them into the Wine, and cleanse it, and make
thereof an Hypocras with Sugar, Cynamon and Ginger, of Smouane, and give her
thereof warm at times needful. And it shall expulse the pain. Approved.

A Drying Powder for old Sores.
TAke the round Astrologia, Frankensence, and Allome: of each two drams in fine
Powder.

A Powder for the Strangury.
TAke Ivy Berries dried over the Fire between two stones, and Alisander
seeds, of each a like quantity: and make a Powder thereof to be used in a
draught of good Ale.

For Gomora Passie.
R. Cassia extracted half an ounce, Venice Turpentine, three drams, washed, in
Rose Water oftentimes, the powder of Rubarbe one dram and a half, and with
sufficient of Sugar, make it in round Bal^es.

For a sore Leg that is swollen with the Axis or Ague.
TAke B^are leaves and bind them upon your Legs, and it will make them water.

For the Collicke and Stone.
TAke unset Leekes, unset Time, and Parcely, and make pottage of it with
Mutton: it is also good for the Mother.

Eor a Megrim in the Head.
TAke a cloth and warm it very hot, and cha^e the nape of your neck, and
your temples, a mornings.

For the Ague or Axis.
TAke a quart of Red wine, and a quart of Milk, and still them, and give it to
the Patient to drink, when the Axis come upon him, but the milk must be taken
as it comes from the Cow.

For the Toothache.
TAke nine Pepper corns, and five Corns of Bay Salt, and some English honey,
and break your Pepper corns, and beat them ^ll in an Oyster shell, then make
little balls of lint, and dippe them in the Honey, and lay it unto your tooth,
or rub your teeth with Allome heaten.

For a sore Breast.
TAke a Red rose cake, and white Wine in a dish, and set it on a Cha^^ngdish of
coals, and turn the cake up and down in the dish, and lay it to the breast as
hot as may be suffered and use this three or four times, till it be whole.

For a sore eye that burns and is watrie.
TAke Hem^ockes and distill them, and take the water and lay it to your eyes,
and take a little Lint, and dippe it in the water, and so lay it unto your eyes
as you lie upright in your bed.

For to stop the Bloody Flux.
TAke a pint of Milk, and a pint of water, and let them boil together over
the Fire, until it come all to a pint: and let the Patient drink it Morning
and Evening.

For the Strangulion.
TAke Reddish leaves, and seethe them in Ale, and give it to the Patient to
drink, and it will cause him to make water.

For a Fellon.
TAke Rue, and Soape, Salt, Soo^e, and Boares grease: and stamp them together,
and lay it to the Fellon.

For the Stone.
Beat the stones of Medlers into powder, and drink it with stild Milk, or
with white Wine.

A Medicine well proved for the Megrim.
TAke the Iuy^e of Nightshade, and as much Vinegar, with crummes of leavened
Bread, and the white of two Eggs, a quantity of Bolearmoniac, a quantity of
Sage, and Dragons tail: All these are to be made Plaister-wise upon Flax, and
lay it upon your grief; also Village to be stilled is very good.

A Medicine for the Ague.
TAke a quart of good Ale, and a quantity of Bay leaves, and seethe them from a
quart unto a pint, and give the Patient to drink half an hour before the
Fit come upon him.

For to heal a sore Eye, that is hurt with a small Pocke.
TAke the Marrow of the pinions of a G^^se-^ing cold, a quantity of Honey, new
taken out of the Comb, in the blue, and mingle it together, and lay it on the
Patients Eye-^idde, and it will heal it.

For a sore Eye with a Pin and a Web.
TAke white Allome, and Running-water, and boil it together in an Egge-shell,
till it be half consumed.

For a sore Eye that Itcheth and pricketh.
TAke Running water a quart, and put in white Copperas, a Rosemary sprigge, and
a spoonefull of Honey, and let it boil to a pint, and then drop a little into
the Eye: and keep it after him Rubbing or touching.

For a Ciatica or Ache in the Bones.
TAke Rue, and of red Nettles, of each a handful, Commin, black Soap, and
Frankensence, of each a quantity, boil all these together, and make a Plaster
thereof, and lay it to the grief.

Another for the same.
TAke a la^full of Nettles, another of Neppe, seethe them in Chamber-lye, and
put therein a handful of Bay Salt, and a quantity of black Soape, and let
them boil well together, and lay it to the grief.

For the Stone.
TAke Turpentine of Ieane, make it in little balls, and roll it in fine Sugar,
and swallow it down whole.

For the Collicke.
TAke a thin Ashencuppe, and lay therein a lain of Rue in the bottom, and
power a few hot ^mbers upon that, and so lain upon lain, until the Cup be
full, and then clappe another thin Cup upon it, and lay it unto the
Collicke, and it will immediately take away the grief.

For Sore Eyes.
TAke Fennel roots, white Daisie roots and leaves, and lay it in white Wine,
and wash your Eyes with it.

To stop a great Laske.
TAke a pottle of fair water, and put therein a Cony fleade, well washed, and
quartered, and let it be well skimmed when it does sees: then take a good
handful of Almonds vnblanched, and the stones of great Raisins, and beat them
in a Mortar with some of the broth in the Pot; and vnstrained put them in: then
take half an ounce of whole Cinnamon, a handful of Blackberry leaves, a
handful of Planten with the roots thereof, the Pot being clean skimmed; put
the aforesaid gredience therein, and let the Patient drink thereof Morning and
Evening, or at other convenient times in the day.

Analliter, if the aforesaid Broth be warmed with a god of Steel, when it is
cold, it is so much the better.

To cause one to make Water.
TAke Parceley and seethe it in white Wine, and drinks it Morning and Evening.

For the Wind Collicke.
TAke Commin-seede, or fine Cod seed, and beat them to Powder, and put it into
Ale, Beer, or white Wine, and drink it, and it will make one Luskatiue.

For to make Water for the same.
TAke Broomeseed, and beat it to Powder, and drink it with Muskadine, ^any
other Wine.

For to bind one from the Laske.
TAke a pennyworth of Roch Allome, and sees it in a pint of white Wine, and
drink it.

To kill the Toothache, or a Ring-worme, or a Tetter.
TAke Oil of Broom, and annoint the Gums at the root of the Tooth where the
pain is: It must be used after this manner: Take a piece of ol^ Broomesticke,
the older the better, and light it, and hold it downward, and it will drop
that which is yellow, and annoint your Gummes with it, or put it in the hollow
Tooth.

For a broken Head.
TAke unwrought Wax, and a little Sugar, and running Wawater, and boil it in
a Sawcer, and make a Plaster, and be whole.

For Chilblaines in the Feet or Hands.
TAke Sheep Suet, and unwrought Wax, and Rozen: and boil it in a Sawcer,
and make a Sal^^, and it will heal them.

For a Stitch.
TAke Ground sill, and dry it, and put sweet Butter into it, and put it where
the pain is, as hot as may be suffered: Or take Oats (the blackest that you
can get) and fry them with red Vinegar, and lay it as hot as may be suffered
where the pain is.

For an Ache or a Bruise.
TAke oil of Peeter, it must be used after this manner: Take a stool, and
when that you are Rising or going to Bed, sit with your Back toward the fire,
you must have a great fire, and where the pain is, you must rub it with some
of the Oil all downwards, and they that do dress you, must dry their hands
well against the fire and chafe it.

For to skin a sore Finger, or broken Skin.
TAke Neruall Oil, or Rose Oil, or Camomill Oil, or Pompilion, and annoint
your Finger or shinne with it, and it will be whole.

For a cold Ague.
TAke a spoonefull of Vinegar a spoonefull of Aqua-Vitae, and a little Treacle
with long Pepper, and warm this blood-warme, and so let the sick person
drink it, when the cold comes, and let him walk if he be able, if not, laid
down and made to sweat.

For a vehement Cough in young Children.
TAke the Juice of Parcely, powder of Cummin, Women's milk, and mix them
together; then give the Child to drink thereof, and afterward make this
Ointment following: Take the seed of He^pe or Flax, and Vennycrit^e, and
seethe them in common water, then press out with your hands the substance of
the Herbs, which you shall mingle with Butter, and so annoint the Childs
breast with it as hot as may be.

A singular Ointment which heals all Burning with Fire, not leaving Circratis
or Scarre where it has been.
TAke the white of two Eggs, two ounces of Lucia Alexandrina, two ounces of
Quick Lime washed in nine waters, one ounce of new Wax, with as much oil
Roset as shall suffice: and make-thereof an Ointment.

A perfect Remedy against the Collicke, and to make a man piss, that has
been three or four days without making water, and that in the space of half
an hour, and it will break the Stone within ten or twelve days.
TAke fine powder of Virgo Aurea, and put a spoonefull of it in a new la^e Egg
soft roasted, and give the Patient to drink thereof in the Morning at his
Breakefast, and let him not eat at the least in four hours after, and then
shall he make water in half an hour: If he use this continually, the space of
ten or twelve days, as is aforesaid, he shall piss out the Stone without
pain or grief.

To make white Teeth.
TAke Lemmons and make stild water of them, and wash your Teeth with it, for it
is a sovereign thing: Or if you will not make the water, take the Liquor of
them, which is also good for the same purpose, but the water is better, because
it is finer: so that in the Stilling it lose not his force.

To make a clear voice.
TAke Elder berries, and dry them in the Sun, but take heed they take no
moisture: then make powder of them, and drink it every Morning Fasting with
white Wine.

To make a Perfume suddenly in a Chamber where a sick man lies.
TAke a little Earthen Pot, and put into it a Nutmeg, two scruples of the
stick of Cloves, and two of the stick of Cinnamon, and four of storax
Calamity, Rose Water, or water of Spike, or some other sweet water, and seethe
it: then put it into a pot-shar^, with a few hot Ashes, and coals under it,
and set it in the Chamber, and the smoke thereof shall give a sweet, amiable,
and hearty savor.

A very sovereign Salve for old Sores.
TAke Wax four pound, May butter one pound, Pitch one pound, Rozen a pound,
Snailes in the shell a quart, Pimpernell, Chickweede, Smalledge, Ragworth,
Alehouthe, Marigolds, Red cross Campians, Valerian, Tutson, Selfe-heale, red
Archangell, Sage, and Planten: of each of all these two handfuls; this Salve is
to be made in May, when these herbs are best to be gotten. First stamp the
Herbs and the Snailes in a stone Mortar, then set them over the fire, and
seethe them with the Butter, then strain them through a cloth, and set it on
the fire again, and put in the R^zin, the Pitch, and the Wax, and boil them:
and then put it into an Earthen pan, and when it is cold, take the crust that
stands upon it, and put it up, and use it when there is need, and the
thinnest water beneath you may cast away.

A Medicine for a swelling in the Cheek.
TAke a handful of wild Mallows, and sees them in running water till they
be very tender, then take it out of the water, and swing it in a cloth until
it be dry, then shred it upon a Trencher with a Knife, and take a handful of
Camomill flowers, and bruise them in a morfer, then mix the flowers and the
Mallows together, and put some oil of Roses to it, then make two little
bags of fine linen cloth, and fill them with the gear aforesaid, and lay it
to the grief as warm^ as ye can suffer it, and so change the bag as you
shall have cause, and always keep it warm, and by the grace of God it will
help you.

Another for the same.
TAken pint of white Wine, and half a handful of Camomill flowers, and
seethe them in the white Wine, and wash your cheek, both within and without
the same, as hot as you can suffer it, which is very good also.

A Medicine for the Mother.
TAke a pint of Malmsie, a little cur^ie of Commin-seede and Coliander seed,
and a Nutmegge, beat these together, and then seethe them to half a pint,
with a little white Suger-candie, you must take a spoonefull at a time.

A Medicine for a Stitch or Bruise.
TAke three quarts of small Ale, and one pennyworth of Figs, and one
pennyworth of great Reisons, and cut the stones out of them, and one
pennyworth of Licorice, of Isope, of Violet leaves, and of Lettice, of each
one handful, and seethe them from three quarts to three pints, and strain it,
and so let the person drink it, and after make this Plaster following, ^a^e a
quantity of horse-dung, and a quantity of Tar, fry it, and put a little Butter
and Vinegar into it, and make a Plaster, and lay it to the side.

A Remedy for Wartes.
FIrst, with a pair of Sizers cut off the heads of the Warts, and then rub
them with Garlic and Bay Salt stamped both together, do this six or seven
times, and lay over them a little plate of Lead, or rub them with Allome
water, and Bay Salt, nine times, this infirmity does come of gross and evil
humors.

A Remedy for a wild or running Scabbe.
TAke Mercury mortified with Fasting spittle three ounces, incorporate it with
oil of Bays, and annoint the body, or else take Mercury mortified three
ounces, of the powder of Brimstone two ounces, of the powder of Enula Campana
two ounces, confect these together with Barrowes grease, and annoint the body
often.

A Remedy for a Fellon.
THis infirmity does come of a venomous matter, and other while it comes of
an inferiall cause, or of an exteriall, the interiall cause comes of some
evil humor, the exteriall cause does come of some venomous stinging of a
Worms, if it do come of an evil humor eat Treacle, and make a Plaster of
Treacle and lay it upon the place: or take the white of a raw Egg, and put in
salt to it, and beat it well together, and make a Plaster thereof and lay it
to the same,

A remedy for Worms in the belly.
TAke the juice of Lauender-Cotton, and put to it the powder of Worme-seed, and
drink it three times every Morning fasting, and drink not one hour or two
after, the usage of eating Garlic kills all Worms in the body.

A remedy for sore Eyes.
TAke the white of two Eggs, and make a Plaster with it, put to it a little
Honey, and after that, put to it flax or towe, and to bedward lay it over
thine Eyes, and let it lie all night and in the Morneing wash thine eyes with
cold water, and a ^n^ cloute, do this three nights one after another.

A remedy for Scalding with Water.
TAke the juice of House leeke, and dip a linen cloth in it, and lay it upon
the place: Also boil Ammoniac, and Camphere is good when it is dissolved in
the Oil of Roses, and lay upon the place, the water of Purslaine, and Myrtils,
Ceruse, and the white of raw Eggs, and such like, be very good for all manner
of scalding.

A remedy for Burning with fire.
TAke the white of a raw Egg, and beat it with Oil of Roses one ounce, then
put to it the juice of Housleeke one ounce, of Nightshade, and of Planten of
each of them half an ounce, of the rust that is under the Anvile of a Smith,
two ounces, compound all these together and wash the place often: and then take
Popilion, and no^e to it a little of the oil of Roses, as much of Planten
juice, and incorporate all together and make Plasters, or else take the
ointment of Ceruse, and ointment of Seracine, named in Latin, Vnguentum
scricinum, and Popillion is good, and such other like.

A remedy for the Toothache.
ANd if it come of any cold cause, chewe often in thy mouth the root of
Hore^ound, and if it come by Worms, make a candle of Wax with Henbane seeds,
and light it, and let the perfume of the Candle, enter into the Tooth, and gape
over a dish of cold water, and then may you take Worms out of the water and
kill them on your nail; the Worms is little greater then a worm in a man's
hand, and beware of pulling out any tooth, for pull out one and pull out more;
to mundis^e the Teethe, wash them every morning with cold water and roche
Allome.

A Remedy for the Flux.
TAke of Sugar rosset made of dry Roses, of Trissindall of each one ounce and
a half, mix these together, and eat it with meat, or drink it with
drinks, but the best remedy that I could find, is to take three handfuls of
Saint John's Woort, as much Planten, and as much Cre^^is, and sees these in a
gallon of Rain water or red Wine to a pottle, and strain it, and then put to
it two ounces of Sinamon beaten, and drink thereof often.

A remedy for the Cappes.
TAke the oil of sweet Almonds one ounce, and annoint the place, and any of
these things following is good, the powder of the rind of Pomegranets, the
Marrow of a Calfe, or a Heart, the fatness of a Capon, Goose, or Ducke, and
such like.

A Remedy for the Shingles.
OF Rose Water, and Planten water, take of either of them half a pint, of
white Wine as much, put these together and wash the place often: or else take of
red Worms that come out of the Earth, and bray them in a mortar, and put to
them a little Vinegar, and make plasters, etc. Or else take flowers of
Camomill, of Rose leaves, of Violets, the weight of either of them one ounce,
of Myrtles, of Sumake, of either of them one ounce and a half, seethe all
these in white Wine and make a Plaster, and lay it to the place, or else make
the ointment of Ceruse: I have taken House leeke and have stamped it with a
little Camphere, and put to it white Wine, and have laid it to the place and
have healed the Patient; and the Oil of Roses, or the Oil of Violets is good
for this impediment, mixed together with the white of Eggs, and the juice of
Planten.

A Remedy for a Tetter.
TRose de Arsmeg is good, and if it come of blood, exhaust two or three ounces
of blood, or more if need shall require, and that Age, time and strength will
permit, and if it be Lupte, cut off the heads of them, and rub them with Salt
and Garlic stamped together, and lay over them a plate of Lead.

Another Remedy for a Tetter.
TAke Oil of Wheat, and mix it with the Oil of Eggs, and with a man's urine
wash and annoint the skin, or else take the water of Burres, or seethe Burres
in water, and leas^ the body.

A Remedy for the Kibes.
FOr the ^ibes beware the Snow do not come to the heels, and beware of cold,
and neither prick nor pick the Kibes, but keep them warm with Woollen
clothes, and to bedward wash them with Urine or Neates-foote oil.

A Remedy for Hoarsenesse.
TAke the water of Scabious, Fennel, Licorice, Buglosse, of ^^ch of them a
pint, of Sugar Candy a pound, and seethe the^ together: and Morning and
Evening drink nine spoonfuls (...) a time.

A Remedy for the Mother.
TAke of Bittonie leaves half an ounce, stamp it small, and drink it with
white Wine, and smell to Galbanum and Sarapine, and make perfume of Juniper or
old Leather, and sit over it: Or else take Pyony seeds three drams, drink it
with Mellicrate. If the Mother do fall out, first wash the place twice or
thrice with white Wine: Or else take of Juniper cut in pieces three ounces, of
Myrtles three ounces; Seethe therein Running water, and wash the place two or
three times: then take of Galbanum three drams, drink it with red wine: Every
thing that will help the falling out of the Fund^ment, will help this
impediment al^o.

A Remedy for the Itche.
TAke of salt water a gallon, and seethe it with three handfuls of Wheaten
bread crumbs that is leauened, and wash the body with the water twice or thrice:
Or else wash the Body in the Sea two or three times: Or else take the bran made
of Co^cle seeds three handfuls, of the powder of Brimstone two ounces: Sees
these in a pottle of white wine Vinegar, and wash the body therewith three or
four times.

A Remedy for the Flux.
TAke a Sponge, and seethe it in a pint of Muscadine, and wring it out, and
let the patient sit over it, as hot as they can suffer it, and cover them warm.

A Remedy for falling out of the Fundament.
FIrst beware of taking cold in that place, and beware of Costiffnesse and
keep the Arse and Buttocks warm, and sit not on the cold Earth, nor upon
stone or stones, nor upon any hard thing, but take somewhat under thy
Buttockes, not only for falling out of the Lo^gation or Arsegut, but for all
other infirmities that may be in the Longation engendered.

A Remedy for the same.
TAke of Myrtles three ounces, of Juniper cut in small pieces four ounces:
seethe them in water, and wash the place, and after that, make a perfume of
Juniper, and ^it over it: Or else make a Perfume of Benga^in, Myrrh, or
Frankensence: or else take the inward rind or bark of an Oak, seethe it in
water with Galls, and wash the place, and drink of Gal^anum with stale Ale,
and lay the substance of it to the Navill: It is good for falling of the
Mother: Also for these Impediments in a man's Fundament or Arse, it is good to
annoint the place with Oil of Lineseeds.

A Remedy for the Ache.
TAke of Balms, Camomill, Horehound, Pennyriall, garden Bittony, Mother of
Time, Marigold, leaves, and Houseteekes: of each of them a handful, stamp
them all together in a mortar, and strain^ them through a fair cloth, and so
boil them with a pint of Sallet oy^e moderately upon the Embers, and when you
do annoint the Patient, put to the salve a little Oye-gall, and a little
Aqua-vitae.

A Remedy for the Itch.
TAke a quantity of Brimstone, and a quantity of Allome, and burn them on a
fire-sho^ell over the ^^re, and beat them very small and boil them with Bores
gre^se, and so annoint the Itch.

A precious Powder for a Web in the Eye.
TAke two drams of Th^ty Neporate, and of Sadrangon two drams, of Sugar one
dram: and bray them well together, till ^hey be very small, and cast a little
of that Powder into the eye at once, and be whole.

Another for the same.
TAke ground Ivy beaten, for it destroys the Web in the Eye well and soberly,
if it be put in once a day.

A precious Medicine for sore Eyes.
TAke Violets, Myrrh, and Saffron, and make of them a plaster, and lay it to
the sore Eyes: if they be great or swollen, it will ease the Ache and swelling.

A Medicine for the Headache
TAken spoonefull of the juice of Bittonis, mingled with as much Wine, and as
much Honey: and put nine Pepper corns in it, and drink four days, and it
will drive it away for ever.

A profitable Medicine for Deafness of the Ears.
TAke Bittonie and Hore-hound, and stamp them both in a Mortar, and wring out
the juice, and let the Patient lie on his side, and power it into his Ear: for
this a prooved Medicine.

A Medicine to staunch bleeding at the Nose.
TAke Bittonie and Salt mingled together, and put it in the Nose, and it will
staunch the blood.

A Medicine for the Toothache, or for Worms in the Teeth.
TAke Pepper and stamp it, and temper it with good Wine, and suppe thereof
warm, and hold it in the mouth till it be cold, and then spit it out, vs^
this often.

A Medicine for stinking Teeth or a stinking Breath.
TAke two ^^^^fuls of Cu^^^in, stamp it small, and sees it it in Wine, and
drink if fifteen days together.

A Medicine to make Teeth white.
TAke Honey, Salt, and Ri^-meale: mingle them together, (...) froth the Teeth
therewith.

A Medicine for the Cough.
TAke ^age, Rue, and Pepper, and seethe them with Honey and eat thereof a
spoonefull first and last.

A Medicine for diseases in the side.
TAke little Balls sodden of Redwortes, and burn them in a new Earthen pot:
and then grind them to powder: after that gather it together with Honey, and
mingle them together, and plaster it to the sore.

A Medicine for the Morphew.
TAke water of Burrage, and water of Femitorie, mingled together by even
portions: and let the sicks drink it at morning and evening, and he shall be
whole within fourteen days.

Another for the Morphew
TAke Mustard seed, and Salt, and stamp them together, and temper them with
Vinegar, and annoint therewith.

For the heat in the Kidneys.
TAke Housleeke and Planten, and do not wash them, but wipe them with a
cloth, and beat them, and put to juice (...) water, and Wine-vineger, and
Woman's (...), and take the Herbs and put them into clothes, and dye the
clothes with thread like a couple of Bals, and you must (...) when you do use
it) have one to do it for you in the morning when you are in your Bed: and the
party must take the Bals and dip them in this liquor, and so bathe your
^idnies; and as soon as one of the Bals is vote with doing of them, take the
other, and is use it an hour^ every morning.

A Medicine for one that bloodeth often.
MAke a (...), and take off the Cur^, and take Li^e^-wort and beats it, and put
the juice thereof into the posset^^take, and drink it morning and evening
warm.

Another to staunch bleeding at the Nose.
TAke ^^learmo^la^, and the white of an Egg, and Vinegar and beat them
together, and make Plasters thereof, and lay them to your Temples.

Another to staunch the bleeding of a Cut or Wound.
TAke Hogs-dung ^^te from the Hog, mingle it with Sug^r, and lay it to the
wound.

For to kill Worms in the belly.
TAke Mares-milke, and white it as ^^te us you can have it from the Mare, in
the morning fasting.

For one that is bruised with a Fall.
TAke Stone-pitch and beats it, and drink it with white Wine, Sack, or
M^lmesey; and if you have none, then take some other li^our: then melt
Parm^^it^^, and anoint the place where the Bruise is.

To make a Poultis for swelling.
TAke the crum of white Manchet, and seethe it in milk till it be thick: then
put in a piece of new Butter about the quantity of a walnut, or somewhat more.

A Medicine for one that is broken.
TAke a quantity a Comfrey, a quantity of Kneehome, a quantity of Knotted
grass, a quantity of Ribervorum, and a quantity of Polipody: stamp them all
together, and strain them in Ale, and then give the patient the same to drinks
cold, and trusse him up with some bo^ster, and let his diet be but competent,
eschewing all slippery meats, as Butter and such like; provided always, that
the patient keep his bed six or seven days, lying upon his Back, and
sometimes hold his belly with his hand.

For the shrinking of the Sinews.
TAke the marrowe of a Horse bone and the crops of Elders, and as much of Sage,
and chop them together, and boil them in the Marrow, and then strain out the
Herbs, and put to the liquor one spoonefull of Honey, two spoonefuls of
Aqua-Composit^, and a quantity of Pepper, and boil it again, and keep it for
your use.

A Salve to take dead flesh out of a Sore.
TAke a spoonefull of Vinegar, and a spoonefull of Honey, and a quantity of
Verdigreace, and as much Allome, and boil all these together, and keep it for
your use.

For the staying of the flux.
TAke a new laid Egg, and take off a little of the top of it, and power out a
little of the white, and fill up the Egg with Aqua-composita, and stir it
together, and r^st it, and sup up the Egg in the morning fasting: till you be
well use this.

For the Piles.
TAke Maril^masse beef, and dry it, and beat it to powder, and then put it
into a chafing dish of coals, and set it in a chair, and sit over it.

For the falling of the Evalow, or other pain in the Throat.
TAke a handful of red Sage, a spoonful of Dill-seed, apiece of leaven: boil
these in a little new milk till it be thick: then lay it on four fine
clothes, and lay one cloth to the nape of the Neck, and another to the
throats, and to each temple one, and bind the clothes, and do this as often as
need shall require: for it has bin proved.

A Medicine for a sore Throat.
TAke a pint of Milk half a handful of Collumbine leaves, half a handful
of Gasell* a dozen leaves of Sinkefoyle, and two Jews ears; (and boil them)
and so the party must use it evening and morning, and gargale it in his
throat.

For weakness in the Back.
TAke Clary and Dates, and the pith of an Ox, and put them together, and then
put to them Cream, and Eggs, and grated bread, and fry them together, and
strew Sug^r on it, and eat it in the Morning fasting, and you must put some
white Sanders in it also, when you temper it together.

For all manner of evil in the Head.
TAke Rue and stamp it with strong Ay^ill; mingle it and wash thy head
therewith.

For the Carbunckle or Impostume in the Head.
TAke Wormwood, Origanum, Mayron, by even portions, and sees them in sweet
Wine, and after that wring out the ju^^e, and lay it to the Ears of the sick,
with two spunges as hot as ^e may suffer it; use this two or three times, and
he shall be whole.

To take away Pock-holes or any spot in the face.
TAke white Rose water and wet a fine cloth etherein, and set it all night to
freeze, and then lay it upon your face till it be dry: also take three Puppies
the reddest you can get, and quarter them, taking out the Garbage: then distill
them in a quart of new milk of a red Cow, and with the water thereof wash your
face.

For the Sciatica.
TAke the gall of a Bull, a quart of Woort: boil it to a pint, then put in a
pint of Vinegar, Fran^insence, one ounce in powder, of Honey half a pound, of
Commine half a pound in powder; boil it thick: spread it on leather; lay it
too very hot two or three days: and lay a linen cloth between the skin and
the plaster, this plaster will serve many times, proved.

To restore a man to Nature, that is in a Consumption.
TAke the eldest Cock you can get: s^ald him, draw him, and cut him all in
pieces, and put it in a glass pot: stop him as fast as you can, and put among
these pieces Clo^es, Mace, small Raisons, and Salt: then put this Glass into a
great pot, and let all these seethe together till they be a gelly: then strain
it into a clean vessel, and give it to the Sick, first and last, bloud-warme.

To restore the Brain.
TAke powder of Bittonie, and use it in your Pottage: it will restore the
brain, and destroy the stone.

Another for the same
TAke an Egg and roast him hard, peele him, and clea^e him in two, and as hot
as you are able to suffer it to lay it to your Temples.

A good medicine to clarify the Head and purge the evil Humors clean away.
TAke unset Hysop, unset Time, and pound them, and wring them into your drink,
and drink thereof every day. Probatum est.

For a Fellon.
TAke Hearbgrace, rusty Bacon, sowrs leaven, and Sna^les with shells on their
backs, taking them out of their shells, and beats all these together, and lay
it to the grief.

A Medicine to stop the Flux.
TAke half a pound of Almonds and blanch them, and stamp them in a Mortar
small, and then take twelve yolks of new laid Eggs roasted hard, and put them
in a mortar and bray all together, and then take a pint of strong red Vinegar,
for it is best, and put it into the same, and mingle them well together, and
then put all into a fair pot of Earth, and stamp^ it well, and take thereof
five or six spooneful^ at once, warmed in a pewter dish, and drink it three
or four times a day, if it be needful.

A Medicine for an Impostume in the Body.
TAke Centorie, Rosemary, Worme-wood, and Horehound and make them in a syrrup
with white Wine, and let the sick drink thereof, and it shall cause the
Impostume to go down, and when it is broken, let him drink of the said
syrrup warm.

A Medicine for the yellow Jaundies.
TAke white Spanish Soap, and a little stale Ale in a Cup, and rub the Soap
against the cups bottom till the Ale be white, then shane in a half penny
weight of Ivorie, and let the sick drink it at Morning, and last at Evening
till they be whole.

A Medicine for all manner of Aches.
TAke Sage, Row, Wormwood, Sorell leaves, Horehound red Nettles, and stamp
them all together, and mingle them with May-butter, and let it stand so ten
days, often fry them, and strain them clean, and then melt therewith Incense,
and this serves for all manner of Aches.

A Medicine for the Wind collicke.
TAke half a spoonefull of dry Oreng^ Pills beaten to powder, and half a
spoonefull of Anniseeds beaten to powder, and put them into Ale or Beer, and
drink it when the pain does take you, walk upon it, and by Gods help it will
drive it away.

For faintness in the Stomach, or the Morphew.
TAke a quantity of Amb^^ beaten to powder, and a quantity of English Saffron
in powder likewise, and put it into white Wine, and drink it seven or eight
times.

A Medicine for the Collicke and Stone.
TAke of ^ovage, Smalledge, Pellitorie, Fe^it^rie, and Stone-woort, or Sone
crop, of each of all these one handful, and two groats-worth of Stone-powder,
or of the Oxe-gall: boil all these with a pottle of white Wine: and make three
bags, and put these Herbs in the bags, and lay them as ^ote as may be
from the Huckle-bone forwards, and so apply them hot still with the broth of
the Wine, and then you must drink Possets of white Wine abundantly, made with
Parceley roots and Mother of Time.

Another Medicine for the same.
TAke a black Flint stone, and let it be red hot, and let it break, and put it
into a pint of white Wine, and then there will be on the top white foame: so
let it stand for half an hour, and then drink it, and it will by Gods grace
help you.

For the pain at the Stomach.
TAke a peny-pot of Malmesey, and a little Butter, and heat it, annoint your
stomach with it: then take a Rose cake, and dip it in the Malmesey, with the
Butter, and lay it where the pain is.

For to stay one from Vomitting.
TAke a quarter of a pint of Rose Water, and three spoonefuls of white Wine,
and put them both into a Posnet with a few sops of white bread, a piece of
Sugar, and a piece of Butter: and eat thereof first and last.

A Medicine for one that is in a Consumption, or for any disease at the Heart,
or any part of the Body.
TAke a quart of Sack, and put into it a Nutmeg, a Race of white Ginger, a few
Grains, and half a grain of Long Pepper, and beat them all to powder: three
Bittony leaves, three tops of Rosemary, and a few Cloves bruised; Set all these
to the fire, with a Date finely cut into it, and so burn it: and in the mean
time get a new laid Egg, and beat it fine, with three spoonfuls of Rose water
and when that the Wine is well burnt, then brew them together out of one Pot
into another, with a little Sallet oil, and a good piece of Sugar.

A Medicine for the Stone and Strangulion.
TAke a quart of Milk, and a handful (...) Bay leaves, another of Time,
another of red Sage, another of Parcely, and a quart of Malm^^y, and a little
Rosemary* and boil them all together, from a quart to a pint: But yet let the
Milk and the Herbs be boiled all whole together, from a quart to a pint:
before the Malmesey come in.

For the Stomach that is bound.
TAke Sage, Neppe, vnset-Time, Violet leaves, Iso^ of each one handful: and
three pintes of Ale, and seethe the Herb and the Ale together, and skim it
clean, till it come to quart; then take it off the fire, and strain it
together through a fair Linen cloth: then take a pint of Malmesey, and sees
that that was strained and the Wine together a little, and put thereto a
quarterne of Sugar, three pennyworth of Cloves and Mace, and then drink it.

Another for the same.
TAke of Hart's-tongue, of Liuer-wort, of Penny-ryall, of tops of young
Rosemary, and of Charnell, of these one handful, half an ounce of Grains,
two peny-worth of Mace, and a Nutmeg.

For the Wind-Collicke.
TAke two new laid Eggs, and beat the white and the yolk together, with a
quantity of Pepper bruised, and lay it upon a piece of Fl^^e, both at your
back, as also at your belly where the pain is, and this is apresent remedy.

An excellent Medicine for the Wind-collicke.
TAke a quart of white Wine, two ounces of Parcely soede, Time, Phillippendulo,
Charnell, Saxifrage, of each two handfuls, and boil all these together from a
quart to a pint, and then drink thereof, morning, noone, and evening.

An inward Medicine for the pain in the bottom of the belly.
TAke Scuruy-grasse, and Scabby-arse, wash them and pick them very clean, and
stamp them, and drink it luke-warms with white Wine, or any other drink that
you like best at morning and evening, first, and last, also you must annoint
your body with Oil of Masticke.

An outward Medicine for the same, being taken both together.
TAke Gardus Benedictus, called the Blessed Thistle, two handfuls clean
picked, shred and washed, and half a pound of unwashed Butter, and vn^alted as
if comes out of the Chearne, a quantity of French Mallows shred, two
pennyworth of Rose water, and boil all these together in a new Earthen pot,
and let it be close stopped, and then put it in a clean linen cloth, and lay it
where your pain is, and let it be the thicker spread where the pain is most,
then take a red cloth and put it thereto aloft of all as hot as ever you can
suffer it, this must be taken at seven, eight, or nine of the clock going to
bed, and let it tarry on till the same time that you go to bed again, then
lay more of the same.

Good Man Murfords Medicine for the pain in the stomach concerning lacking of
wind: Davis.
TAke the Light, the Liver, the Heart, the Kidneys, or the Milt of a Fox, wash
them with water, and then lay them in a quantity of Rose water, the space of
half a day or thereabouts, and turn them up and down, and day the water out
of them with a linen cloth, then put them in an Earthen pan, and put some
white Sugar-Candie, A^^yseeds, and green Lice-rice being beaten, and so
strained upon it, and so let it be put into an Oven and dried, then beat it to
powder, and mingle all these aforesaid things with it, and drink it with white
Wine, or any other drink lukewarm.

For the Cough^.
TAke Brimstone beaten in powder half an ounce, and put it in a new laid Egg
soft rested, mingle it well together, then put to it Bengawin, the bigness of
a Pease, lightly stamped and drink it in the morning at your breakfast: make
as much again at night when you go to bed, and you shall be whole at the
second or third time, if it h^^e holden you long, take it the oftener.

For the Cough^.
TAke two or three Garlic heads, well made clean, stamp, them well, then
put to them Hogs s^^t, and stamp them well anew; and at night when you go
to bed-w^^me well the ^oales of your feet, and annoint them well with the s^id
confe^tion and then warm them again as hot as you may endure, rubbing them
well a pretty space, and being a bed, let your feet be bound with a wa^^e
Linen cloth. and rub also the ^mal^ of your Leg^es with the said Ointment:
By this means you shall be healed in three Nights, be it never so great.

An Ointment for the Collicke and Stone.
IN May when Broome-flowers be near the shooting forth then take half a
pound of them, and pick them clean from the stalks, and beat them in a
Mortar very small, and mingle them with May, butter, and so keep it close
eight days in a Vessel: and then see ^he (...) and strain it, and annoint
the place greeved where it is, and so rest with thy Ointment warmed.

Another for the same.
TAke two handfuls of Time, and pownd it, and strain it together with a pint
of Ma^^^ey, and a little of an Egg, and a little new Butter, two penyweight of
English Saffron: and let it be Milk warm, and drink the one half in the
Morning, and the other in the Evening, and keep you warm.

A Medicine for the Stone and Strangulion.
TAke red Bramble berries before they be black, and Juice berries, and
Acornes, and put them in a Pot, and dry them until they be ready to be beaten
to powder: and take C^^^a^-^erseed, and P^^^^lyseed, and ^ro^^e^seed, and
Cor^^nderseed, Broomeseed, and the seed of the Nut-tree, and the inner pith of
Ash-keyed: and take of all these a like portion, and beat them to powder, and
mingle them together with Li^our of double qu^ntity and so use to drink it
Evening and Morning, sodden in Posset-Ale, made with white Wine: and put of the
powder often in your Pottage when you eat them, and so use it continually till
you finds ease.

Take not this water following, till the Stone break away by Shivers.
TAke Rosemary and wild Time, and seethe them with running water and Sugar,
from a quart to a pint; and so drink it till your water be clear.

For the Stone.
TAke Sa^^frage, and Rosemary, of each a like quantity, and seethe it in white
Wine, till all the herbs be thoroughly sodden: then strain it, and drink it
cold Evening and Morning.

Another for the same.
TAke ^^o^^ell, Parcly, red Nettle, Violets, and put them into a Mortar, and
bray them: and take the Kernels of Cherrystones, and bray it by it self, and
seethe all together in white Wine, and drink it Morning and Evening.

A Salve for any Wound.
TAke Snailes with shells, and sprinkle a little salt on them, and let them
soowre themselves in the salt all night, and in the Morning beat them small to
powder, and a handful of House-leeke, and beat it by it self, and put the
Juice into the powder: and then take a spoonful of fine Honey, and a little
fresh Butter, and boil them moderately upon the I^^bers, and ann^ynt with it,
and make a Plaster of it, and if the flesh wax proud, you must wash it with a
little white Wine: or with Allome, fresh Butter, and Beer boiled together.

A Drink for the Head which is out of course.
TAke a pottle of strong Ale, ^eeth it and skimme it: then put in Lauender
Cotton, Sothernwood, Scuruigrasse, Scabbiarse, of each one handful: Boil all
these from a pottle to a quart, and strain it, and put in two ounces of the
sirrope of Roses, and drink every morning a dozen spoonfuls, and if you have
any Ache in your Neck, take Oil of Dyll, oil of Veruen, and oil of bitter
Almonds: of each one ounce, and mingle them altogether, and anoint your self
evening and morning.

To stop a Laske, or the Flixe.
TAke three or four new laid Eggs, and roste them hard, and take out the
yolks, and lay them in a Dish, and strew them over with beaten Cinnamon, as
much as the party can abide to eat, and put thereto a little red Wine
vinegar; and so let the Patient eat it. If you cannot get red vinegar, take
Claret.

To make Oil of Elder flowers, good for a fall, or a Bruise.
TAke Sallet oil, and put therein a good sort of ^lder flowers, and set them
in the Sun in the Summer time, and so keep it.

To heal the Dimnesse of the Eyes.
TAke Rosewater, and Sugar; tempered with it, and let it fall by drops into the
Eyes, and it will help the Dimnesse of them.

For a stroke in the Eye.
TAke the juice of Smalledge, and of Fennel, and the white of an Egg, and
mingle them together, and put them in the Eye,

For a Bruise.
TAke a handful of Mallows and sees them in fresh Gre^^e, and strains them,
and put thereto after they be strained a quantity of Aqua-^ite, and annoint
the bruised place before the fire therewith.

For a ^ore Mouth.
Take a Cuttle-bone, and Masticke, and make powder thereof, and put it in
Vinegar and white Wine, and seethe it, and wash thy mouth therewith.

For the watering of the Eyes, and Darkness thereof.
TAke May butter Honey, by even portions, and seethe them together, and after
put in the white of an Egg, and put it cold into the Eye.

For an old Sore.
TAke white leauened Bread, and Hearbe-grace, and stamp them alone fine, and
then stamp them both together: and so make a Plaster.

For a Fellon.
TAke Honey and the yolke of an Egg, and Wheat flower and mix all together,
and then stamp Rue and put the juice thereto.

For an Itche.
Take Planten, and Sorrel, as much of the one as the other, make Juice
thereof, and put thereto as much Vinegar, as the quantity, of the said Juice,
and so annoint the place.

Another for the same.
TAke Quicksilver two peny-worth, and kill it with fasting-spittle in a dish,
beating it well together, and put thereto four pennyworth of Oil of Bays,
and to annoint the place, this Receipt will also kill Lice in the Head or body.

A Medicine for a sore Leqqe.
TAke unwrought Wax, and as much Sheep ^allow, and seethe them together with
a little quantity of white Copperas, and so make a plaster thereof.

Master Arthur Edwards Receipt for the precious Ointment which came from Persia
and Muscovia, which is bood for all Aches.
INprimis, Ba^-leaues young ^^ps, Rosemary tops, Spikene, Knotgrasse, R^bworth,
Planten, young Elder tops, Lauendercotten, Valeriane, Woodbine,
Strawberrystrings, ^utson^leaues, Walnutleaues, the tops of Burrage, Sage
virtue, Roman worm wood, Water-^ittonie, Cardus Benedictus, Smalledge,
Camomill eight ounces, Red Risi eight ounces, unset Tims five ounces, of all
these Herbs let there be taken four ounces of every herb, which may be two
handfuls of every one when they be picked clean, for all these herbs the
best time is in May, or June, and being gathered clean picked and stamped, you
are to put them into three quarts of Neates f^^te Oil, eight ounces of S^^le^
oil, which is half a pint, eight ounces of May-butter, four ounces of
Cloves to make it smell, this being ^one, let them stand a fortnight or three
Weeks, till you may get twenty four live Swallowes-young or old, and as soons
as you have them kill them, and cut off the top^ of the tail feathers, and
wing feathers, and then st^^pe them, and put them into your Oil, this being
done, take a close Kettle of Copper with a close Cover, and put in all these
things, and then the said Kettle with all before written, to be set on the fire
in another Kettle of boiling Water, and to boil in the water the sp^r^ of
fenn^ haures: Then take it off and strain it hard through a strong Ca^^as
cloth, as hard as may be, being hot from the fire, but better it were to have
a Press for the same purpose: This being pressed out, put it again over the
fire as before, then boil it five or six hours, then take a pound of
unwrought Wax, cut it and shred it fine, and boiling over the fire, put in the
Wax to the rest, and so boil it two hours, and in the boiling you may take
(...) some with a spoone, and put it into a Saw^er till it be cold, so shall
you see if it be thick enough by tasting it in your fingers, if it be too
thin, put in more Wax at your pleasure, and being boiled the time aforesaid,
then power it forth into a fair large Earthen pot to ^^le, then take it and
cut it in pieces, and take it out that the water in the bottom may be powered
out, then boil it once more, an hour or a little more and so power it into
Gally pots and keep it, for it is good for all Aches.

A Remedy for Deafness of the Ears.
TAke old Sallet oil of Oli^es, and take young Mice that be naked, fresh cast
without hair, and put them in the same Oil, and let them lie (...) in the
same till they be rotten, and take a piece of bombaste and dippe the same in
the Oil, and put it in the Pat^ents ^ares.

A Medicine for the Collicke and Stone.
TAke Nettles, the leaves, and stalks of the same Nettles, seethe the same
unto the third part in a new Pot, and then strain the same liquor through a
fine linen cloth, and drink of the same every Morning and Night, a Cup or
Glass full, for the space of nine days: After the same, take the blood of a
(...) G^^te, and distill the same, and drink of it nine days as beforesaid,

A Remedy for a Cold.
TAke a pound of Raisons of the Sun, and stone them, four ounces of white
Sugar, and beat them in a mortar of stone, and in the beating you must cast in
some fine Licorice powder, and half a spoonful of Rosewater, and then it will
be like a Marmelade, and eat it at sundry times.

A Medicine for the Cough.
TAke two spoonefuls of Aqua-vitae, one spoonefull of Honey, half a spoonefull
of White Sug^r-Candy, a little Sinamon, and three corns of long Pepper, beaten
altogether and boiled, till it be like a Treacle.

An Ointment that will drive away Lice from a man's body.
TAke an ounce of the groundings of oil Olive, and two ounces of the
groundings of Renish-wine, and one ounce of Aruement, and sure are thy body
with it.

A very good Drink^ for an Ague, if one shake.
TAke a quart of strong Ale, and put therein nine Bay-leaues, and seethe it
till come to a pint and then take out the Bay-leaues, and put therein one
pennyworth of Treacle, a halfe-penny worth of Pepper, stirring it well
together, and let it then seethe again one walme, and so take it off the
(...), and let the Patient drink it as hot as he can, and be covered as warm
as be may abide, the space of six or ^^uen hours. Probatum est.

Another Drink for the Ague.
TAke a pint of Ale and put therein one pennyworth of long Pepper, and four
or five field Daysie roots and then seethe the same well together, and then
let the Patient drink the same as hot as he may suffer it, and walk till he
sweat it he be able, or else laid down and covered very warm that he may
sweat well.

Also Burreleaues, and Baysalt beaten together and bound about the wrist of the
Patient is good for the same.

A drink for one which is troubled with a pain in his Back and makes water
that one may cut it with a knife, which the Doctor says, is by reason he is
troubled with a Worm in the bottom of his belly.
TAke the tender tops of Broom, the roots of Parcely. Fennel and Smalledge,
of each one handful, a handful of Purselaine, wash them ^leane, and then
seethe them in a gallon of new Ale, till a quart thereof be cousumed, the which
being so done, take it off the fire and strain it into a vessel, and keep it
close stopped three or four days, and then let the Patient drink no other
drink for the space of a week.

For an Ague. By Doctor Turner
TAke Featherfew, Wormwood, and Sorrel, of each a good great handful, stamp
them and strain them hard, and put thereto as much Sugar in weight as the
juice weighs, and put them in a strong Glass in a Skillet of warm wator,
the space of four and twenty hours before you give it to the Patient, and
their give it twice a day two spoonefuls at a time in Ale or Posset-ale.

For the Back.
CLarie is good for the Back, and pills named Pillula agretiva majores, and
pillula de serapino. And these oils be good for the back, Olium de piperibus,
Olium philosophorum, and cerotum Andromachi. And I have prooved these Oils to
be good, the oil of Mardine, the Oil of Alablaster, and the oil of water
Lillies, in hot causes: the oil of Poppy is very good in cold causes.

For a Scurffe in the Body.
THis infirmity does come of a chollericke and Melancholy humor. For this
matter, I take two ounces of Boares grease, then I do put in one ounce of the
powder of Oystershells burnt, and of the powder of Brimstone, and three ounces
of Mercury mortified with fasting spittle, compound all these together, and
annoint the body three or four times, and take an easy Purgation.

A worthy Balm.
REcipe Aqua-^ite four ounces, Terobinthine one pound, oleum vitre Roman
four ounces, and draw this Balm well in Limbecke glass, for this will do
much pleasure in wounds.

For sucking Children having the Morbogallico.
REcipe Elecompane, the roots of red Docke, Epithemie, the leaves and flowers
of the Violets, boil all these in water till the strength of the Herbs be in
the water, then take a Sp^nge and wet it in this decoction, and wash the
Childs body, especially the sore places, and give to the Nurse this following:
Take Epitime, Polipodie, Violet flowers, Borage, Langdebeefe; and then boil
all these herbs in a perfect oil, and let her drink this all day and no
other, and this shall discharge, as it has done, thanks be to God, etc.

A S^are-cloth for Aches.
REcipe oil two pound, white Lea^e and red Lea^e ten ounces, Wax six
ounces, Goose grease, and Capons grease, half an ounce: seethe all till it be
black.

To make a Poultis.
TAke Mallows and stamp them and sees them in Fennel, and Camomill, and
oil of Roses, and crumbs of Bread.

An oil for the Gowte, and for the Sinews that be shrunk up.
TAke me three ounces of Turpentine, and two ounces of Yeltate Brimstone, and
four new-laid Eggs, the yolks of them: A quantity of red Nettles, of the
tops of the seeds of them: take me a young Whelpe of an ebrage Hound, the
fattest you can get, take and scald him, and draw out of his Guts as much of
the Fat as you can, and roast him and the oil is good for the disease
aforesaid: Approved very good ^^vers times.

To take away War^s.
TAke Sauen and Orpiment, and Corks vevie, and powder them together, and this
shall take away the Warts.

To make a cold Ointment.
TAke Litarge of Lead one pound and a half, and a pint of oil Oliffe, and a
quart of Vinegar.

Another cold Ointment.
TAke a little Salt and Verdigrease, and the white of an Egg, and grind^ them
together in a mortar of Brass.

For the Ague. P. Bucke.
TAke Sentorie flowers two spoonfuls, Cam^mill, Tansie, and red Coleworts, of
each two handfuls, two peny-worth of Treacle, a little Saffron in powder, and
four or five spoonfuls of English Hon^e: Boil all these in three pintes of
white Wine, and a pottle of Running Water, till the third part be consumed:
then strain it hard, and Drink none other all the while the heat holds
you, three or four times very warm, if need require.

For the Ague.
TAke unset Isope and Camomill of each two handfuls, Violets, Strawberies,
Sinkefoyle, Endiffe, and Planten root^ and all; of each a handful, a penyworth
of French barley, and so much Currants; Boil these in three quarts of running
water to three pintes: strain it, make Almond milk with it, put in Sugar, let
the Child drink while it lasts warm.

For the Collicke and gripings in the Belly.
TAke and give the Patient Ieane Treakle, and powder of Cloves, well sodden in
good Wine, and let them drink it warm.

Another for the same.
TAke the root of Lilly, and Horehound, and sees it in Wine, and give the
Patient to drink thereof warm: for Probatum est.

A plaster for the same.
TAke Lynseed, and stamp them, and Docke le^^es: and sees them well in water
and make a Plaster, and lay it to the grief very warm. Probatum est.

For the Stone in the Reins or in the Bladder.
TAke and make a Bath with Parcely and Alysanders, Politorie, Fennel,
Sax^frage: and let the Patient sit therein up to the N^^^ll: and let them
drink the Powder of these seeds, and the Herbs, with warm white Wine, for
this is a principal practice for this disease. Probatum est.

Another for a gross, or a strong Person.
TAke and seethe seven heads of Garlic, in fair water, a good while, and let
the Patient drink thereof, three or four days together: Probatum est.

For the Stone.
TAke and drink the Juice of Saxifrage, use it in the Morning fasting three or
four days, and it shall away.

For evil in the Bladder.
TAke A^^^, Parcely and Fennel, of all alike: put them and temper them with
water and drink it, and it shall help thee well to Piss, and it shall ^ast
out the Stone, and heat well thy stomach.

Powder to break the Stone.
TAke the blood of the heart of a Kid, and of a Fox the blood of the heart, of
both a like quantity: take the bladder of a Boar, and all that is therein, and
put this blood thereto, take the juice of Saxifrage, and juice of Parcely, of
each like quantity: and put these in the Bladder also, and h^ng up the Bladder
in the smoke over the fire, until, such time it be congealed together as hard
as a stone, and make power thereof: and drink it with hot Licour, when thou will, first and last: and this shall break the stone to powder.

For the Stone.
TAke Perstone, unset Leekes, and Ramso^s, of all a like quantity: Boil them
and clarify them with the ^^^tes of Eggs, and then take the juice, and drink
it with Wine or Ale, in double so much in Wine or Ale as she juice is.

Another for the same Disease.
TAke a handful of Bay Berries, and the shell of an Egg, when the Chicken is
new hatched out of it, and bray them together: then take the powder, and put it
into Ale or Wine, and give sick to drink, and with the grace of God it shall
make him whole.

For to make a man piss that cannot.
TAke a quart of Renish wine, and a piece of Venice soape, as much as a Walnut,
and seethe them well together, from a quart to a pint, and drink it, and it
shall make thee piss lustily, by Gods grace.

A Medicine for to keep Teeth from stinking, and to make them white.
TAke Salmit^io, Roch-Allome, distill them together, and with a cloth or Cotton
wet in this water, rub your Teeth.

For the Toothache.
TAke a little long Pepper, and beat it small, and take a little Honey, and a
little Ale or Beer, and boil them together, and put a little All^^^ unto it:
and when it is boiled, put it in a cloth, and lay it to your G^^mes.

A Medicine that the Toothache shall never vex you more.
TAke twenty leaves of Iuie, a little long Pepper, and boil them with a
handful of Salt in old Wine, and then put the Licour when it is well boiled,
into your mouth, on that (...) that is vexed with the Ache, and you shall prove
that the Ache shall be destroyed, in Sempiterna Secula.

To make a Powder to whiten Teeth, and fasten them, and to heal the Toothache.
TAke the fourth part of a red Coral, and that which the Frenchmen do call
Pyrote, and cut it small, and dry it on the Harth with small heat: then make
powder of it, putting thereto one part of Masticke, and a little fine Sugar;
All which things being beaten into powder, you must mingle them together, and
keep it for your usage, and rub thy Teeth, therewith when it pleases thee.
Also when your Teeth do ache or wax loose, rub it with the same powder, and
keep it a while in your mouth, and you shall see mavelous operation.

For all manner of Toothache.
TAke the juice of ground Iuy, and put thereof in thine Ear, on the same side
that thy T^^th aketh, and it shall ache a while, but it shall soon leave aching,
and be well.

Another, and if thy Tooth be hollow.
TAke the inner-side of the Elder bark, and shred it fine, and take a little
gross Pepper, and good Mustard, and mingle them together, and put them in a
little Linen cl^^te, and make little balls or pellets of them, and boil them
in Vin^ger, and as hot as then can suffer it lay it to thy Tooth: and if thy
Tooth be hollow, put it into thy Tooth, and when it is cold take another: and
this use till the pain be gone, Probatum est.

A Medicine for Teeth.
TAke the leaves of H^^, a pot full, and seethe them in water till they be all
to sodden: then power it in a ^aire Basin, and hold over thy mouth, gasping,
and if thy Cheeks be too much swollen, it shall slake, look that thou have
clothes over thy Head, and all about the Basin, that no air pass out, but
into thy mouth, Probatum est.

Another for the Toothache.
TAke a peny-worth of Sanguis Draconis: Item, Ob O^ti Terra Sigilaro wij Ragd
Gallis: Beat them single by themselves, as they be written before: After that
mingle them with good Vinegar: then take four toasts of a Rye loaf of the
bottom, and let them be made hollow, and let the Medicine be mingled together,
and let two of them be laid, one to the Temples of thy head, another to the
Ly^t of thy Ear, and when they be dry, lay the other unto it, and it shall
help you, Probatum est.

Another for the same.
TAke a Brick and burn it red hot, and put it in a Pas^e of water: So that
it be half covered in the same: then take He^bane-seed, and cast it upon the
upper part of the Brick, and hold your Head over it, casting a Cloth, or
covering over your head, that no steame of the smoke go out, when you open
your mouth over it, and it will help you for ever, Probatum est.

A Powder to make white Teeth.
TAke Rosemary, two ounces and a half, and Date stones, Harts-borne, of either
a dram, red Coral, two stones, of Roch Allome one ounce: a piece of Scarlet or
Linen cloth, and rub your Teeth with the same: But all these aforesaid must be
beaten to small powder, before ye lay the Scarlet to rub your Teeth with it,
which if you try, ye shall prove that the operation thereof shall make your
Teeth as white as Snow.

For smarting or pricking in the Eyes.
TAke the white or an Egg, and the juice of House-leeke, and woman's milk,
beat them well together, and strain it through a cloth, and then drop thereof
in thine Eyes.

For blood-shotten Eyes, and other diseases in the Eyes.
TAke the juice of Wormwood and Planten, Rose water, and Woman's milk, the
white of an Egg, and beat them well together: and dress thine Eyes
therewith, for it is very good therefore.

For eyes that be red, and full of blood.
TAke the white of an Egg, and swing it in a Dish, heave out the stream
thereof, then take Wax and wet in the white, and lay it above thine Eye to
keep the sight: After take Fennel and Houseleek and stamp them together, and
make a plaster, and lay it from thy Nose to thy Forehead, all about thy
temples: Use it three nights or four, and it shall heal thee.

For the Eyes that be red with Itching.
TAke five drops of clear water, and so much white Copperas; Make it small,
and put it in the water, and let in stand and rest a while, then take half a
drop, and annoint thine eye therewith, if it be strong put to more water.

A precious water for Eyes.
TAke Smalledge, and red Fennel, Rue, Ver^en, Bittonie, Egrimonie;
Sinckefoyle, Pimpernell, Eufras, Sage, Selondine, of each a quarterne, wash
them clean and stamp them, put them in a fair Brazen pan, and take the
powder of two and twenty Pepper corns fairly scarced, and a pint of good
white Wine, and put the Herbs thereto, and three spoonfuls of liffe Honey, and
five spoonfuls of knave Child Urine of an Innocent, and meddle them together
well, and boil them a little over the fire, and strain them through a cloth,
and put it in a vessel of Glass, and stop it fast with Leather.

For eyes that be Running.
TAke the water of Roses, and Camphere well ground, and meddle them together,
and let them stand together three days natural and with it wash thine eyes
cleers and it is profitable for many other diseases for the Eyes.

For eyes that be Blasted.
TAke water of Planten, water of Roses, the white of an Egg, and mingle them
together, and wash your eyes there with, and again laying it upon your Eye,
this will surely help.

A Medicine for sore Eyes.
TAke an Egg that is hard roasted and pluck out the yolke, in whose place ye
shall put Sugar, that is small beaten as hot as ye can suffer it, and when
ye have taken away the Eggeshell cut the Egg the longest way in parts, and
within a little while after take a cloth, and strain out the juice of the same
Egg, and therewith annoint thine eye with a feather, or else let it drop into
your eyes in the morning, and at night when ye go to bed, and your pain
shall be clean taken away.

An excellent good Water to make clear eyes and sight, if your eyes be not
pure and clean.
TAke S^londine, Eye bright, red Fennel, red Roses, Sin green, Maiden-haire,
Rue, of every of these herbs two ounces, then put thereto half an ounce of
Aloes, and still all these together in your stillatorie, then take the water
when it is stilled, and wash your eyes therewith, and ye shall have a very
clear eye sight. Probatum est.

A precious Medicine to take away the Web in your eyes.
TAke the gall of a Hare, and a little quantity of purified Honey, and temper
them together, then take a feather, and annoint your eyes where the Web hurts
you, and ye shall feel amendment.

A very good Medicine for a Pearl in the Eye, or Pin and Web.
TAke fine white Ginger and grind it upon a Whetstone, and beat fine a little
white Coperas, and put to it, and when the Patient goes to bed, put some of it
with a quill into your eye, and when it has been there a while, take ground
Iuie beaten and strained with woman's milk, and put three or four drops into
the eye evening and morning, after the Ginger and white Coperas has been in
the eye half an hour.

For watering of your eyes.
TAke the juice of Planten tempered with Rosewater, and drop it warm into your
eyes, the same office works Rosewater, the Juice of Lilly roots, with the
Juice of Planten.

For the Pin and the Web.
TAke a newlaid Egg, and roast it blew hard, and pick him, then cut him in
sunder and take out the yolke, and take as much Roch Allome to the quantity of
a Nut, and put it in the Egg, and two drops of Honey, then take the Egg, the
Allome and the Honey, and put it in a fine linen cloth, and hold it fast
together till the Honey and the Allome be dissolved, and strain it through into
a vessel, and so drop it into your Eyes.

To make a stinking Breath sweet.
TAke the juice of Mints or else the water of Rue, Commin, Coriander, Licorice,
Sinamon, ana. z. four, seethe these in Wine, and give him to drink that has
a stinking breath, and certainly it will be sweet.

A Medicine to make one to have a sweet breath.
TAke the power of Sage an ounce, Rosemary blossoms three ounces, Gilliseres
five drams, Sinamon one dram, Nutmeg a dram, Musk a little quantity, then take
so much Honey as is sufficient to make these foresaid Compositions into a
corporation like to a Marmalade, eat of this fasting and at night a little
quantity at a time, so shall your breath be mavelous sweet, and it ye go
into any suspected place of the Pestilence, or any other corrupt air, if ye
eat a little of this Medicine next your heart, it shall defend you from all
manner of jeopardy.

A Medicine to destroy a stinking Breath.
TAke three handfuls of Commin, beat them in a brazen mortar to powder, then
take a pottle of Wine, and put this powder into it, and let it seethe till it
come to a quart, then drink first and last of this Wine, as hot as ye may
suffer it, for the space of fifteen days, and your breath shall be as sweet
as a Nut.

For a stinking Breath.
TAke Pu^^on of the Mountain, that is called Hill-wort, a good handful, and
wash it clean, and shred it small, and grind it in a Mortar, and put thereto
half an ounce of powder of Pepper, and one ounce of powder of Commin, and
mingle them together, and put them in a pottle of good Wine, and seethe them
till the half be wasted, and let the sick use this after meat, and not
before One in the afternoon.

A Medicine for a Canker.
TAke a handful of Woodbine, Time, Isope, Sage, of each a like, two or three
crops of Rosemary, and then take a spoonful of Honey, and put all these into a
pottle of fair^ water, and seethe them all together, and in this seething, put
thereto a good stone of Rock-Allome, as big as a pretty Walnut, amd with this
water wash well your mouth, this is also very good for the Toothache,

For a Canker in the mouth.
TAke the Juice of Planten, Woodbine, a little Roch allome, Vinegar, Rosewater,
and wash thy mouth where the Canker is, and it shall be whole within a few
washings.

For a dry Canker.
TAke Hart^-^orne, and Egge-shels, and burn them to powder, then wash whereas
the Canker grows, and after that yae have washed it, cast into it of this
powder, and it shall be remedied.

For a Canker in the Mouth.
TAke the powder of the root of C^londine, of dry Roses, Vinegar, water of
Hony-suckles, and seethe all these together till they be thick, and therewith
annoint the place where the Canker is, and it shall be whole in short space.

For the Canker in a woman's Pappe.
TAke Coluer-dung, powder of Borrot, Wheat, Honey, Virgin-waxe, flower of
Barley, and of Beans, and Linseed, seacute;eth all these together in white Wine
or Vinegar, putting thereto Rams fallow, and make a Plaster thereof, and it
shall be whole in short space, if ye lay it to the Pappe.

For the Canker.
TAke a ^^ou^e that will wind about thy Leg, and put therein thy fasting
digestion, and bind it to the soar, till it stink ^ouly two days, then
change it, and do so twice or thrice, till the Worm come out, and lie on the
clouts.

Another for the same.
TAke Hearbe-water, Scabious, Canker-wort, and seethe them in stale Ale, and
drink it Even and Morn hot.

Another.
TAke the Feet, the Head, and the guts of a Crane, dried in an Oven to powder,
and put that powder upon the Canker and it will kill it.

For the Quotidian Fever or Ague.
TAke and give the Patient a Vomit purgation, even when you think his fit will
come, and when the fit is clean gone, give him a little supping made with
these Herbs, Succorie, Endiffe, Fennell-rootes, Parcely roots, a little Time
and Sauorie, made with a Chicken or a little Mution: for this comforaeth Nature
well after this Purgation.

Another for the same.
TAke and give the Patient before the fit do come upon them, two penny weight
of the powder of Bay Berries, with a soft Egg, or in stead thereof gross
Pepper, for it is very good therefore.

For the Fever Quartaine which takes one every third day with a sore fit.
TAke Parcely the roots and all, wash it fair and clean, and take out the
pithe in the midst, and then stamp it well, and put thereto new laid Eggs,
and half a peund of H^gges blood, seasoned with Salt, and take a good Hen and
stuff her therewith, and then bake her in a Pie, and let the Patient eat
thereof. For it takes away the Quartain Ague by little and little, and does
comfort the heart, and does provoke good appetite, Probatum est.

Another proved Medicine for this Disease.
TAke Camomill, or Centory, stamp them, and drink them with Wine: for these
two Herbs has often helpen this and of Ague, Probatum est.

A Medicine for an Ague o^ Quartaine.
TAke Sothernwood and mi^ce ti small, and put a little Sallet oil into a
Saucer, and put thereto this foresaid Herb, and let it lie an hour or two in
it, and set it on the fire, and there let it simper a little, and annoint thy
wrists and the soles of thy Feet, and the nape of thy Neck, and down between
thy shoulders, and this must be done before the fit comes, and in three times
this doing you shall be whole.

A Plaster to take the Ague or any other ache out of a Woman's Breast in the
time of her Childbearing, if it come.
TAke the yolke of an Egg, and a little quantity of Wheat flower, and a
quantity of Honey, as much as the yolke of the Egg, and beat those together,
till it be like a Salve: then make a Plaster thereof, and lay it to the Breast
that is grieved, and it will heal it without doubt. Probatum est.

A Principal water for the Palsy.
TAke a pint of water of Juniper, and of Ambrose, as much Fennel water, and
of Parcely, and Laurel leaves a pint, of Cowslip water as much, Rosemary and
Lauender water, five peny-worth of the best Aqua vite, a pint of White Wind,
four ounces of the powder of Sinamon: Mingle all these together, laying them a
night in a vessel of earth, or Timber, and in the morning after, still them
with a soft and easy fire; this water is exceeding good, and of great
efficacy, to purge steame, and to confort a cold stomach, and for rising and
swelling at the heart, and especially it is a helping and relieving against the
Palsy, if it be drunk ere ye wash, and chafe the limbs therewith, of him or
her that is vexed with the Palsy, and it will ease them.

For the Palsy.
TAke Rosemary, Sage, herb Magdalen, of either of them a handful, of
Camomill flowers three handfuls, and make white Sallet oil, as ye make Oil
of Roses.

For the dry Coughe.
TAke Herselue, and Comfrey, and eat thereof three days or four with Honey.

A good Fumigation forth French Pox confirmed.
TAke Synaper two ounces, of Frankensence, of Liquid St^rax, ana a dram and a
half, and mingle them: the manner how to minister this suffumigation is this;
You must set your Patient naked under a straight Canopie, and you must lay upon
the Coals the first part of your foresaid Receipt, and the Patient must
enforce himself to receive the smoke, keeping the fire between his Legs
till be begin to sweat: and so doing the space of four days, till his Teeth
begin to ache.

Pills against Morbo.
TAke of all the Mirabulines ana threee drams, of Troskes, of Colloquintida, of
Masticke, of Digredium, ana two drams of Nigula, of Organy, of Cummin, ana two
drams, of black Elibore, one dram, of Spike, of Euphorium, of Harts-horne
burnt, of Sall-gemme, ana half a dram of Maiden hair, of the Coddes of Seney,
of Pollytricon, of Galitricon, of the flowers of Rosemary, of Harts-horne, of
Epithiam, ana one dram, of Coryanders, of Ann^seed, of Polipodium, ana six
drams, of good Triacle six drams, of Agaricke in Traskes, and of washed Aloes,
ana ten drams, of the Spices of Hieta, De octo Rubijs of the spices of
Diarodam Albatis, ana eight drams: Make a pas^e of Pills, with the juice of
Femitory, and honey of Roses, one dram.

To make your Drink.
TAke twenty ounces of Pockwood, being turned of a Turner very small, which put
into an Earthen Pot of two Gallons, and put thereto eight pound of Running
water, the best you can get, and let it stand in soake four and twenty hours,
the Pot being covered, then take and stop the Pot with Paste, so close that no
air may go out, you must keep the strength in it, and that is your chiefest
help, and with the point of your Knife make a hole in the Paste, and therein
put a peg of wood, which is to give it air, at times in the boiling, for
breaking of the pot: and thus let it boil on a soft fire of Coals, the space
of six hours, in which time it will be consumed to a pottle; and that will
serve you for your Drink, to take Morning and Evening for four days, against
which time you must make more. After the first seething, sees the same wood
again, with the like quantity of water and time likewise: and that is for your
common Drink, to serve at all times till you make new.

To make your Biscuit.
TAke four and twenty pound of the purest Wheat Flour, which you can get, and
put thereto one pound of fine Sugar, and so make your Biscuit, which will serve
for your turn all the time of your Diet.

A Receipt, and a Sovereign Diet for the French Pox. Proved.
FIrst, prepare a Chamber, which make so close that no air come into it, and
defend all ill savours out of it, and therein to be twelve days together,
before you do begin your Diet, every day forbearing of eating and drinking
Flesh and lose* on the thirteenth day you must begin your Diet, and then to
take a Purgation of Cassia Fis^ula, or of Scamonia, to make your Body empty,
keeping your Bed, sweating temperately, without any prov^king: which sweating
is your greatest remedy, in the which your Sweat, you shall drink of your
second drink as often and as much as you lift: and of your first drink you
must drink every Morning at five a clock, and Evening at eight a clock,
eight ounces at a gulpe warm, saving on the days you take your Purgation: On
which days, drink all of your second Drink, desiring always to be merry and
light-harted, in occuping to smell to dried Orenges, hot Bread, Vinegar of
Roses, Mustard, and Apples: and after this manner, you must keep your Chamber
thirty days together, and never to take Air, and at fifteen days you must
take another Purgation like to the first, and that day to drink all of your
second Drink: and in like manner, another Purgation the thirtieth day: on
which day, you may take Broth of a Chicken, or of Mutton, and by little and
little take the Air, and drink good drink.

The order of your Fare.
EVery day take a quantity of a Chicken, and seethe it in water, and put
thereto Borage leaves, or Borage Flowers without other Spices or Salt, or any
other thing: which Chicken eat to thy Dinner, and every day eat three ounces
of Biscuit, and no more; that which you leave of your Biscuit, eat at night,
with a few Raisins of the Sun, and your Dinner must be at ten a clock
before noone, and your Supper at five a clock at after noone: and at your
Dinner you may dippe your Biscuit in your Broth (if you will) and so drink your
Drink as aforesaid, and this is your Fare and Diet for the space of thirty
days, and no other.

A marvailous secret to preserve a man from the Plague, and has been proved
in England of all the physicians, in that great and vehement Plague in the
year 1348. which crept through all the World: and there was never any which
used this secret, but he was preserved from the Plague.
TAke Aloe Epaticum, or Sicotrine, fine Sinamon and Myrrh, of each of them
three Drams, Cloves, Mace, Lignum Aloes, Masticke, Bole-armoniack, of each of
them half a dram: let all these things be well stamped in a clean Mortar,
then mingle them together, and after keep them in some close vessel, and take
of it every Morning two penny-weight, in half a glass of white Wine, with a
little water, and drink it in the Morning at the dawning of the day: and so
may you (by the grace of God) go holdly into all infection of the air and
Plague.

A sovereign Drink to preserve one against the Plague or Pestilence.
TAke the quantity of a Dram and an half of Powder Imperial, a dram of
Triakle and of Dragon water, and Sorrel water, of each of them an ounce, and
drink it with Ale in the Morning Fasting, and if one have taken the Infection
within 24. hours before, yet by Gods grace he shall escape it. This has been
truly proved in the last great Visitati^n.

Another for the same.
TAke a dram of Methridatum, and give it the Patient with Dragon water, white
Wine, or some other liquor to drink, when he supposes himself infected first.

Another Preservative against the Plague.
TAke seven or eight leaves of Sorrel, and wash them in fair Water and
Vinegar, and steep them in the said Water and Vinegar a good while, and eat
them Fasting

A good Drink to be used to those that are infected with the Plague.
TAke Berries of Idle (that are ripe, gathered on the North side of the Tree)
and dry them in the shadow: then stamp them to powder, then take a dram of the
same Powder, and temper it well with two ounces of Planten-water, or white
Wine, and let the sick person drink a good draught thereof, and remain in
his Bed, and sweat as much and as often as he can, after he has taken it,
then warm a cl^ane shirt for him to put on, (and if his shirts may be shifted
often, it will be the better after his sweating) and like wise his sheets and
Bed-cloathes, if it may be, if not, at the least his sheets and shirt: and in
using of this for the space of three days together, he will dye or mend
without all doubt, (by Gods help.) This has been often and truly proved.

To provoke sleep to the sick person: Take a good quantity of Woman's breast
Milk, and put thereto a little quantity of Aqua-Vitae, stir them well
together, and moysten the Temples of the Head of the Patient, and the Nostrils
well therewith, and let it be laid on with some Feather, or some fine linen
cloth, and this will do much good. It is proved.

And if it happen, that the sick person find himself greatly grieved, and
that any Swelling begin in any place to grow sore, then take Elder leaves, red
Bramble ^eaues, and Mustard seed, and stamp them all together, and make a
Plaster thereof, and lay the same to the Sore, and this will both draw and
heal. Or take two handfuls of Scabious, and stamp it in a Mortar, then temper
it well with two ounces of Swines grease, that is salted, and the yolke of an
Egg, then stamp them all together, and laid thereto, will draw exceeding well.

For all Aches or pains in the Joints where ever they be a very true and well
approved Medicine.
TAke all the whole horn of a Bucke, that he casts of the later, the better,
take away the Scalpe, and take nothing but the Horn, cut it in Shivers or
pieces, then boil it in a gallon of fair water until it come to a pint or
some thing more, then cast away the pieces of Horn, and let that in the
vessel stand till it be cold, which will then be like a Ielley, and when you
will make use thereof, warm some of it in a Saw^er or other convenient thing,
and annoint the grieved place therewith by the fire, Morning and Evening, and
let it soake in by the heat of the fire, using it nine or ten times: Thus (God
willing) it will thoroughly cure it for ever.

To make a Seare-cloth for all manner of Aches.
TAke half a pint of Sallet Oil, a quarter of a pound of white lead, an
ounce and a quarter of white Cerues, boil the Lead in the Oil till it is
clear, then put in the Cerues, and boil it till it is stiff, and so make it
in Rowles, and keep it for your use.

A most excellent and approved Cure for the Sciatica.
TAke a pint of the best Aqua Composita you can get, an Oxes Gall, and an
ounce of Pepper beaten into Powder, boil them all together till half the Aqua
Composita be consumed, apply the same on a Cloth as a Plaster to the place,
and so let it continue there for the space of 12. hours, use it 4. or 5. times
if need be for it will give help.

An approved and incomparable Cure for the Palsy.
TAke Lavender and boil it in fair Water, then strain it, and then drink
half a pint thereof daily first and last for the space of a Fortnight
together, and it will cure you.

An excellent Receipt for the Strangury.
TAke a good pint of Aqua Composita, put therein a handful of Ivy leaves,
keep the Vessel well stopped, and the Ivy Leaves will consume therein, use
to drink thereof three or four spoonefuls at a time Morning and Evening first
and lass five or six days together; and you shall find a marvailous help
thereof.

A complete Cure for a Tetter or Ring-worme.
Stamp Celadine, and apply it to any Tettar or Ring-worme shifting it twice
every Day with new for the space of a Fortnight; and it will kill it quite.

An excellent Cure for the Rheum.
RVbbe the leaf of a Marigold between your fingers, and put the same into
your nose, and let it stay there a pretty while, and it will bring forth
abundance of humors out of your Head, and if you use it, you shall be much
eased of the Rheum in a short time.

A Medicine for the Mother.
TAke white Wine, heat therein a Brionge roots; Let the Woman troubled with
the pains of the Mother, drink thereof going to Bed, once a Week use it, for
it will help you vndou^tedly. Probatum est.

An Exquisite Remedy for the Spleen.
TAke the rind of an Ashen Tree, and boil it in Wine, let the party tormented
with the Spleen drink thereof Fasting, six or seven Mornings together, and
it will perfectly help them; and if you annoint the grieved place so long with
an Oyntmet called Deathea every Morning and Evening. It is an excellent Remedy
likewise.

An excellent Medicine for the Gowte, and to draw out all Evil Humors out of
the Head, or for pain in the Eyes or Ears, or Impostumes.
TAke half a pound of Pitch, and half a pound of Rozen finely beaten, and
clean searsed, half a pound of the best Frankensence, beaten and searsed
also, a quarter of a pound of Sheep Tallow, an ounce of Mace, and a quarter
of a pound of Cummin seed: All these made into fine powderand an ounce of
Lapadanum: All these put together must boil an hour, the Pitch must be first
put in, and then the rest of your Stuff: when it is boiled take Sheep Skins
finely towed, make Soles thereof for your Feet, and we are them within your
stockins a month or six weeks, and then make new again.

An excellent Diet drunk for all inward Diseases.
TO the first boiling. Sasafrase, of each one ounce. TO the first boiling.
Salsaperrilla, of each one ounce. TO the first boiling. Pollipodum* of each one
ounce.


Liquorice one ounce. For the second Boiling. Harmodactile -- one quarter of an
ounce. For the second Boiling. Egrimont, of each a handful. For the second
Boiling. Bettony and of each a handful. For the second Boiling. Campithy. of
each a handful.


For the third Boiling. Sena, two ounces. For the third Boiling. Sti^hados,
demi ounce. For the third Boiling. Epithimum. three drams.


Sweet Fennel Seeds. two ounces. For the fourth Boiling. Maiden hair a
quarter of an ounce. For the fourth Boiling. Ce^erach demi ounce.


If the Body be cold and moist you may put toth woods, an ounce of China, and
among the Herbs a quarter of a handful of Cardus Benedictus.

Slice a China and Salsafrasse, and Salsaperrilla, and bruise the Polipodium in
a Mortar and infuse them in a gallon of Spring water 24, hours.

The first Boiling.
THen boil the Sassafrase and Salsaperilla and Polipodum first alone, an hour
and a half in an Earthen Pipkin close covered.

The second Boiling.
THen put in the Herbs and the Lycorice and the Hermoda^tile, and boil them
with the Woods an hour.

The third Boiling.
THen restore the Water to her first quantity, including in quantity a pint of
white Wine or Muskadine, if you will have it purge more; and so let it boil an
hour longer.

Then put in the Sena Sticados, Epithinium, Maydenhai^s, Ceterach, and sweet
Fennel Seeds, and boil them with all therein a quarter of an hour.

Then take it from the fire, and let it settle three or four hours.

Then strain it out, and put the Drink into a Bottle or other close Vessel,
and drink thereof half a pint at a time in the Morning.

In the Summer time it will not keep good above 4. days and in the Winter not
past six days.

Another excellent good Diet Drink.
TAke a pecke and half of Seascurbut grass, pick it and wash it, and dry it
well; take also Scabias, Bittany, and water Crosses of each a good handful,
stamp them and strain them and let the Juice thereof stand in a Glass all
Night, then take two good handfuls of yellow Dock roots, two ounces of China
roots sliced, one ounce and a half of sweet Fennel seeds bruised, and a
stick^ of Lycorice sliced.

Put all these Ingredients in a Boulter Bag, and bind a flint stone to the Bag
to make it sincke.

Then take a Rundlet of six gallons and put the Bag into it, then put the
juice of those Herbs aforesaid into the Rundlet with six gallons of new
Beer, and let it work; and when it works over, let that which is wrought
over be put into the Vessel again.

Another excellent Physic Drink.
TAke Cardus Benedictus, Wormwood, and Scabias, of each four handfuls,
Succory, Scabias, Marigold flowers, and the leaves of Angelica tops and roots,
Turmentile and Pimpernell, of each three handfuls, Sage 6. handfuls, Juniper
berries bruised 8. ounces: all these to be brued with 36. Gallons of Beer, and
when it is a week old, drink a draught thereof in the Morning.

An excellent Medicine for the Iaundise.
TAke six Earth-wormes, ^^it them and scour them from their filth and ^limy
matter, cut them in pieces or chop them, make pottage of them with water and
Datmeale: eat the same for 12. days together, and it will perfectly cure the
Iaundize.

A rare Medicine for the sharpness of the Urine.
TAke a quart of new Milk from the Cow, and the whites of 18. Eggs, beaten
very thin, mingle those Whites and the Milk together, distill them with a
^o^t fire, but let it not be too nearly stilled, but that it may have a good
deal of moisture in it, when you have done stilling it, then put into it as
much Sugar Candy as you shall think good to sweten it, and a stick of
Lycorice scraped and bruised, then drink thereof the quantity of a wine pint
in the Morning Fasting, and if it be in the heat of Summer, drink as much
also about four of the Clock in the Afternoon.

An excellent Fomentation for the Stone.
TAke a Platter full of Pigeons Dung, of the newest you can get, and a good
handful of Feather few bruised in your hands, fry them together in a Frying
Pan, putting thereto a little Honey (let that be last) let it Fry a good while,
then put it in a Canvas bag about half an Ell long, and a handful broad,
and lay it as hot as you can suffer if along your side from the Back to the
privy parts; and if it help not at the first, take it again, and it shall by
Gods grace make you well,

An excellent and approved Remedy for the Cough of the Lungs.
TAke two Gallons of fair running water, to which quantity take two handfuls
of clean Barley well picked, 24. Re^sons of the Sun stoned, and of Currants,
of each a quarter o^ a pound, Lycorish shred, Ginger shred, and Sugar Candy of
each two ounces, Anniseeds, Fennell-seeds, Coriander-seeds, and Cummin-seeds,
of all together, a quarter of a pound beaten in a Mortar, Isope roots, Parcely
roots, and red Fennel roots, of each a handful, boil all th^se together in
the gallon of water abouesaid, till half the water be wasted, then strain it
well, and drink thereof a good draught first and last.

An excellent and sure Remedy for a swelling or sore Throat.
NOte the place of the Tree, or poast, Hogs Trough, or any thing where a Swine
rubs it self, rub your hand thereon and presently rub your throat with that
hand twice or thrice, or rub your hand upon the bare ground, and then presently
rub your Throat with that hand, do it three times together, and it will help
you, or if you can get a piece of that part of the Tree hog Trough or stone
where the Hog has rubbed, and rub your Throat with it.

An excellent Salve to cleanse and to heal Wounds.
TAke Smalledge, Petty-morrell, and Whay bread, of the Juice of each of them a
like quantity, take also of life Honey, and of the whites of Eggs, of each a
like quantity of the Juice of the Herbs; then take fine Wheat flower and
mingle them well till they be as thick as Pappe, these will swage the, burning
or ranckning of Sores or Wounds in any case. But let not this Medicine or the
Sore come near the fire.

An excellent Remedy to stanch vomiting Incorporated.
TAke the Leaven of white past, a good quantity of Spear Mints, and the
quantity of a Nutmegge, of the Oils of Mace, beat them in a Mortar, and when
you have incorporated or made it into Pass spread it on a cloth, and heat it
hot at the fire, and lay it to the mouth of the stomach.

An excellent Remedy for the Headache or Megram.
TAke Frankensence, put it in a Chafingdish with coals, take also a handful
of fine Towe or Flax, and tossed it in the smoke of the Frankensence, and as
the smoke cease, put in more Frankensence, and open the Towe in the Smoke,
till it be warm, then lay the Towe to the Temples of the head and on the
Brows, bind a Kerchiefe over it and so go to Bed, use this and it will help
you.

Another for the Headache, A Medicine worth Gold.
TAke the Juice of Ground Ivy, and out of a spoone or sawcer snuff it up into
your Nose with a Quill.

An excellent Medicine for the Spleen.
TAke Wormwood, Mallows, Camomill, and Melitots of each a handful, boil
them in fair water till half the Liquour be wasted, then put thereto a good
^^^dfull of wheaten Bra^, and boil it to the thickness of a Plaster, quilt
it on a linen cloth and apply it to the side as hot as you can suffer it, and
removing it often.

An excellent help for sore Eyes.
TAke Ground Ivy, otherwise called Alehoose Celadine, and ^aisies, of each a
like quantity, stamped and strayned with a little Sugar, Rose-w^ter, put
thereunto and dropped with a Feather into the Eyes, takes away all manner of
Inflammations spots, Webs, Itchings, smartings, or any grief whatsoever in the
Eyes, yea, though the sight were well nigh gone.

An excellent Remedy for an old pain or grief, in the Head.
TAke Bay Salt and Cummin seeds, of each a like quantity, stamp them well
severally by themselves, and as much brown Fennellseeds as either of them,
stamp that with the rest altogether, then with pure Vinegar of Rose water mix
and stir them altoghether in a dish over the Chasing-dish with hot Coals,
then lay some of the same hot upon a linen cloth, and so apply to the hinder
parts of the head at Night, when you go to bed, bind it fast on that it fall
not off, use this in the same manner 8. or 9. Nights together; it will not
only help the same perhaps with 3. or 4. times so doing, but also it will
clear the sight and draw the Humors clean^ away, that runs out of the Head
into the Eyes, and try of the same, this is a precious Medicine.

An excellent Remedy for heat in the Back.
TAke a good handful of Henbane, and so much Towe as will serve to wrap the
Henbane in, w^t the Towe in water, and then wrap the Henbane in the Towe, and
rake it up in Embers till it be well coasted: then take it out and mingle it
with a little Vinegar of Roses and the white of an Egg; mingle them all well
together, then spread it on a Cloth and lay it warm to your Back.

An excellent Remedy for the swelling in the Stomach.
TAke of Century and Wormwood of each a quarter of a handful, Sage and red
Mints, of each a great handful; Sees them in Beer^ from a Pottle to a quart,
drink thereof Morning and Evening.

A Remedy for the Toothache.
TAke Frankensence, Onyon seeds, and Henbane seeds, burn them together in a
Cha^^ngdish with Coals, let the s^^ake thereof be conveyed through a Tunnell
to the aching Tooth.

An excellent Purgation and very gentle.
TAke eight or ten Prunes, half a sawcerfull of Reisons of the Sun stoned,
the tops of Rosemary, and Bay leaves, of each a few, a little Mace, and three
Crowns weight of Sena, boil all these in fair water, with a good big
Chicken, until it be boiled enough, then strain it, and take a spoonefull of
it, and mingle it with an ounce and a half of Syrope of Roses, Salutine, and
so drink it blood-warme, the Sena must not be put in till the rest be boiled
enough, and it may not boil too much.

An excellent Remedy for the Lungs that are perished.
Boil green Broom in Ale, and when you mean to drink it, put thereto the
quantity of a Haste nutshell of Treacle, a half pennyworth of long Pepper
bruised, and a spoonefull of Aqua Composita, drink thereof twelve days
together first and last every Spring time; Also, Long-wort boiled in new Milk
does well.

An excellent Remedy to kill and heal a Cankar.
Boil the leaves of wild Idle in Wine, and lay it on the Cankar, is a sure
Bemedy.

An excellent Cure for the biting of a Mad Dog.
TAke wild Sage, Maifellon, otherwise called Knot-^rasse, ^arrow, otherwise
called Mitte^olium night shade, which has the purple flowers, and Lilly
roots, of each of all these a handful, distill them in May, and to every five
spoonefuls of water thereof, put one spoonful of Treacle, and let the party
bitten drink thereof.

An excellent Medicine for an Ache or grief in any Limb.
TAke Raisins of the Sun, and the stones being taken out stamp the Raisins,
and apply them as a Plaster to the grieved parts and it will soon procure
ease, and if you use it in the same manner five or six times, it will
thoroughly cure you of that Ache.

A very good remedy for an Ache in the bones, or any part of the body.
Anoint the place with good Aqua Composita by the fire, and let it drink in,
do it three or four times together, then at the last time while it is wet
cast upon the wet place the Powder of Ol^^anum, then lay a linen cloth upon
it and few it fast, and ^o let it ^ye on three or four days, and in that time
(God willing) it will be well.

An excellent cure for the Crampe.
MAke a King of an Oxes borne, or of a Cowes, or of a Sea horse tooth, or of
the pis^le of a Sea horse, and wear it.

A Cure for a Scald Head.
TAke the leaves, branches, and buds of Brambles, boil them in fair Running
water till the half be consumed, then take it from the fire and wash the sore
Head therewith Morning and Evening, then dip the cloth in the water and lay to
it, use this and in short space it shall heal it with Gods grace.

An absolute and approved Medicine to Cure the redness of the face.
Boil the roots of Lillies in fair water, and therewith wash and rub the
face Morning and Evening, and it will help it.

An excellent Medicine for the Falling sickness.
TAke three Nails made in the Vigill of St. John the Baptist, commonly called
Midsomer Eve, drive them into the ground so deep, that they be not seen in
the place where the sick party fell naming the parties name while it is in
doing, it will drive away the disease, which Misaldus credibly reported.

An Admirable remedy for benumbed Limbs.
CAuse an Earthen pot of a Gallon to be made with four Feet, three inches
long, which pot must be full of small holes both bottom and sides like a
Garden watering Pot, it must be so wide in the Mouth, as you may easily put in
your hand, cause also another pot to be made, into the which you may set the
pot full of holes, in this pot full of holes must be very well nealed and
Leaded within for that no Liquor may soake into it, then take Cick-weede in
June when she stalk waxes hard, take the leaves, flowers, and seeds thereof,
cut them small together so many as will fill the pot full of holes, put them
therein, and in the midst of the Herbs put three Oxegalls, and into every
Gall put three Cloves, then put the same pot with the Herbs into the other
pot without holes and cover them both very close round about that no Air get
into any of them, then bury them in the ground for the space of forty days,
then take them out, and you shall have a perfect oil distilled from the
Herbs which Oil preserve to annoint the benumbed Lymbes with it, and they
shall with Gods help recover their former strength, approved to be very true.

To stanch bleeding in any place.
Stamp Primrose-leaues and apply it to the place that bleedeth, and it will
stanch the bleeding.

A Remedy for the Bloody Flux.
TAke the floxe that is shorn from Scarlet, dry it and make it into Powder,
drink half a spoonefull thereof in red Wine, use this five or six times, it
will certainly and soon help you of the bloody Flux.

For pain or swelling in the Throat, a very good remedy.
TAke Iewes-Eares that grows upon old Elder, and is to be had at the
Apothecaries, let it lie in steep in Ale a whole night, drink thereof once or
twice a day till you be amended.

An excellent Remedy for a Pin or Web in the Eye.
TAke two Eggs, roast them blew hard, slit them in half, long-wise, take out
the yolks and put as much white Copperis as a hazell nut between the halfes
of the whites, then close them together again, and lay them in the Embers till
the Copperis ^e melted, then take them out and wring them between two
trenchers, let the water that comes out drop upon a clean Whetstone, and
ever as it drops rub upon the whetstone a race of Ginger, keep that water in a
Vyall glass, and lying upon your back drop some of it into the Eye with a
feather, this in twice doing will help it.

An excellent Dyet-drinke for the Dropsy.
TAke Scurbut grass, a pecke of Brooklime, and water Cresses, of each twelve
handfuls, Wormwood, and horse Radish, of each two handfuls, Scabious, and
Hysop, of each six handfuls, Grains and Long Pepper of each an ounce, and put
them into a boulter bag, and put it into five Gallons of Eight shilling
Beer, and when it is Eight days old, drink thereof and of no other.

An excellent Remedy for a Loosnesse in the body.
TAke the Gelly of an Egg, and mingle it with the water of red Oak buds and
Sinamon, bake it on a Tile stone, and eat that Cake at any time of the day,
this will stay any looseness though it be bred to the bloody flux, if the
party be so weak that he cannot eat the Cake, then let him boil the Oak
buds water in Milk and ever as it rises up put in a spoonful of the Oak
buds water, and let the party drink of the same at any time of the day.

A Remedy for an Impostume.
TAke Barley, dry Beans, and of Liquorice sliced, of each a like quantity,
boil them in fair water, drink a good draught thereof with Sugar every
Morning fasting, and at night going to bed, five or six days together or
more. It will draw out any Impostume, and cause you to avoid or cast out the
same.

An excellent Cure and Remedy for a sore* Breast
Boil two or 3 handfuls of Mallows in water till they be tender, then take
them out of the water, and put in a quart of thick Ale grounds, and a pint of
white Wine, let it so boil a good while, then thicken it with Crumbs of
leavened wheaten bread, and when it is almost ready put in of Mutton suet, the
quantity of a Hens Egg, and so apply the same very warm to the Breast.

An excellent remedy for the Fever or Ague, especially in a body of a weak
Constitution.
TAke a pint of the best Muskadine, make a tossed of such bread as you do most
affect, put your tossed into the Muscadine and eat the tossed, then drink a
little of the Muscadine, so as the tossed and the Muscadine be eaten and drunk
together, and take a spoonful of gross Pepper, take a little in a spoone to
swallow down with the Muscadine till you have taken all the Pepper, and so
eat and drink so long as your stomach will well receive it, though it be
with striving to drink the whole pint off, this must be done about three
hours before the fit do come, and abstain the next meal before the fit, and
after the taking of this Medicine, go to bed and sweat upon it. This may be
given to any man or woman that has the Ague, yea though a woman with Child or
that gives suck.

Another for an Ague in one that has a strong body
TAke of the best Venice Treacle, or pure Methridate the quantity of a Hazill
Nut, or for want thereof as much of London Treacle as a Wall nut; take also 6 or
7 spoonfuls of the best Aqua-vite, and according to the age and strength of the
party, one spoonful of gross Pepper, and as much of the powder of red Sage,
mix all these together, let the party eat this with a spoone by little and
little an hour before the fi^, and sweat upon it by walking if he be able, or
else go to bed and sweat there, to dry up the viseous or ^ymie humor which is
the cause of the Diseases, let the party abstain the next meal before to
starve the Disease.

Another for the Ague.
TAke the juice of a roasted Orange, with a little burnt Sack before the fit.

An excellent Remedy for the Stone in the Bladder, to provoke Urine from one
that makes water but by drops.
TAke life Honey and Renish wine, of each a quart, Saxifrage, Philapendula, and
Pellitory of the wall, of each a handful, still all these in Balma Maria, with
a very flow fire, keep it in a cold place in P^w^er or Earthen vessels, and
drink thereof the quantity of half a pint every morning fasting, and
afterward eat the quantity of a Walnut, of life Honey and use to fast, and
walk an hour after it.

Another excellent Remedy for the Stone.
TAke a pint of Milk, and put into it a pint of wild Mallow leaves let them
boil together a quarter of an hour, then make Posset-drinke of Ale or Beer,
take of the Curds and the Mallow leaves, then set your Posset to boil again,
and put into it a good stick of Liquorish well bruised, one spoonful of
Annifeeds, and half a spoonful of Parcely^eeds well bruised, and so of Sugar
Candy the quantity of and small Wallnut, boil all these to the quantity of
half a pint or less, then strain it, and at your going to bed drink it
bloodwarme, putting into it a quarter of a grated Nutmeg.

An Injection for the Stone.
TAke a quart of Barley-water, and boil therein a handful of Mallow-leaues,
and as much of Violet leaves till half the water be consumed, then put thereto
3. spoonfuls of Mel-rosarum, let the party take it as an Injection with a
Searinge.

An easy yet approved Medicine for the Stone.
TAke a pottle of Ale and a flint stone taken from the Chalk and beaten to
powder, and a peny-worth of Reddish roots, boil all these together to a
quart, then strain it thrice and drink thereof evening and morning.

An excellent Remedy for the Cough of the Lungs, for the Liver, and for a
Consumption.
TAke of Long wort 6 good handfuls with both your hands, and of Liver wort 5
handfuls, Mayden-haire a pound and a half, beat these^ severally, and take of
each Juice a like quantity, then mix them together and then put thereto half
a pound of white Sugar Candy finely beaten, put thereto also a quarter of a
pint of the best Sallet oil you can get, then put all these into a glass,
and shake it together every day for the space of a week that it may Conce^t
together, take 2. spoonfuls of ye same every Morning fasting, and likewise
before dinner and before Supper, and also at other times between meals if you
will with a stick of Liquorice spunged all the end, and so to suck it from the
Liquorice.

An excellent Cure for a sore Throat.
TAke Sage, Rosemary, Woodbine-leaues, red Fennel and Peny-royall of each a
handful, boil all these in a pottle of running water till it be half wasted,
then put into it half a pint of Vinegar and a good piece of Allome, then let
all these be boiled together till the Liquor be wasted to a pint, then let the
Patient wash his mouth warm, and if it be for a sore Throat, take a stick of
Liquorice and spring the end of it very soft, and bind a soft rag about it,
and therewith being dipped in the abouesaid water, wash the ^o^e and it shall
cleanse it, and heal it, by the grace of God.

Another for a swollen or sore Throat, a sure remedy.
Boil five leaued Grass in Spring water, and gargle it warm, it is an
excellent and an approved remedy.

An excellent Medicine for an Ache, swelling, Spraines, and for the
strengthening of any Sinew in any part of the body.
TAke Butter unwashed, and unsalted, and Honey, of each a like quantity to every
quarter of a pound of each of them, put so much Saffron, finely beaten as will
lie upon a great, melt them together, and dip therein a piece of white unshorn
Bayse, wring it a little, and so apply it warm to the place grieved.

For a stripe in the Eye, or an humor fallen into the eyes.
TAke a new laid Egg, make a hole in the top of it, take out the white, and
beat it into a water, then take a spooufull of the Juice of Hous^eek, and put
into the Egge-shell, and as much of the white of the Egg, and half as much
Rose water, and a little Sugar, set it on the Imbers, and let it sees, then
strain it through a fair linen cloth, and with a feather drop thereof into the
eye.

Another for dimme-sighted eyes*
TAke a dish over a hot seething pot, and there will be a dewye water on the
inside of the dish, which water keep in a glass, and when you have occasion
to use it, drop a little thereof into the Eyes, and it will help it
marvailously.

Another for watering Eyes of pains in them, or distillations that comes from
the Head.
TAke a piece of raw Beef, not too thick nor too thin, steep it all Night in
good Aqua vite, apply it to the Temples or forehead, till the next day without
removing it all night, use this three or four nights.

For one that uses to Swound or faint at the heart, an excellent remedy.
TAke Rosemary, Sage, Bittony, and Margerom, of each a handful, seethe them in
a Gallon or more of faire-water, till half the water be consumed, then take
away the Herbs, and put to the said water a good pint of Honey, then scumme
it well, then put thereto an ounce of Sticado tied in a fair linen cloth, so
let it sees a little while, and then take it out of the said water, and put in
an ounce of Sinamon, three quarters of an ounce of Nutmegs, and as much Ginger
in Powder, drink a good draught thereof warm, first and last, for the space
of six or seven days together, and then it helps perfectly.

To draw out a Splinter of Wood or Iron, or other things out of the Flesh.
DIp a tent in the Juice of Valerian, and put into the Wound or sore as deep
as you can, and tie the Herb Valerian being stamped upon the sore with a
lynnen cloth that it remove not off, this will not only draw out the Wood,
Iron, or other things out of the Flesh, but will also cure the sore.

An excellent remedy for one that is Broken bellyed or burst.
TAke 9 red Snayles, put them betweens two tyles, so that they slide not away,
so dry them in an Oven, then make them into Powder, then give the quantity of
that powder of one of those Snayles in a draught of white Wine to the party
grieved every other morning fasting, till it be all done, and let the party
neither eat nor drink for two hours after, if these first nine Snayles, do
not thoroughly help, let the party begin again in the same manner.

An excellent help for those that cannot hold their Water.
TAke the Bladder of a Sheep, dry it thoroughly and beat it into powder, put
it into four or five spoonfuls of Vinege^ or water, give it the party going to
bedward to drink that cannot hold their wa^er, and it will remedy it.

Certain tokens of Death in a sick Man.
IF the Forehead of the sick party wax red, his Brows fall down, his nose
wax sharp and cold, his left eye become little, the corner of his eye run,
if he turn to the wall, if his Ears be cold, if he may suffer no brightness,
if he pull strawes or clothes of the bed, if he pick his Nostrils often with
his fingers, if he wake much, being a young man, or sleep much being an old
man, these are most certain tokens of Death.

An excellent remedy for the removing of a Wenne.
Bind fast the Wen, then take verdigrease. Brimstone, ^ope, Oil of Eggs,
Allome, and Honey, of each a like quantity, temper them well together and apply
it thereto; it will both drive away the Wen and heal it.

For a Timpany.
TAke a pint of Broom Ashes, either of green or dry, and a quarter of an
ounce of Sinamon bruised, ^i^t the Ashes, and let a pint thereof and the
bruised Sinamon lie in steep all night in a pottle of White Wine, then let it
run through a gelly bag twice or thrice till it run clear, put in some Sugar,
and a tossed unto it, drink thereof thrice a day, in the Morning fasting, and an
hour before Supper, and an hour after Supper.

For one that is in a Consumption.
TAke four ounces of Shavings of Harts-horne, one ounce of the Shavings of
Ivory, put in a Pipkin with a Gallon of fair water, let it stand on the fix
twelve hours in fusing and boiling softly close covered, then take twenty
Eggs in their Shells, crack their Shells, and put them in a dish with Salt,
and let them stand an hour, and purge themselves, then pull them from their
shells, washing them till they be clean, then put them in the Pipkin to the
Harts-horne, and let it boil two hours, then put in a good handful of
Raisons of the Sun stoned, half an ounce of Liquori^e scraped and sliced, and
a blade or two of Mace, boil all these till it come to a quart of Liquor, then
put in half a pint of White Wind, six spoonfuls of Rosewater, two peny-worth
of Saffron powdered, boil all a little while, then strain if, or run it
through a gelly bag, if you please you may sweeten it as you like it, put a
little Salt in it, when it is cold it will be a Ielly, you may take it cold or
warm three or four spoonfuls at a time, in the Morning fasting, at four of
the clock in the afternoon, and when you go to bed. If you do thing this too
troublesome you may boil the Eggs in Broth or Milk, so you boil them a good
while and so drink the Broth or Milk as you like best, they are exceeding
strengthening and will do you great good if it please God to give blessing to
it.

To make a woman's Dugs little round and hard.
LEt a woman that has her Dugs or Pays over great flaging or hanging down,
annoint them often with the Juice of Savory it will draw them up; and make them
little, round and hard, and seem as the Dugs of a Maid.

For Lamenesse in the Joints.
TAke of good Aqua Composita and Oil of Roses, of each a like quantity, and
mix them well together, and annoint the grieved therewith Morning and Evening,
until he be well which will be within a little after, but rub the place with
warm clothes well before.

An excellent Antidote against the Plague or Poison.
TAke two Walnuts, two Figs, twenty leaves of Rue, and one grain of Salt,
stamp them and mix them all together, eat it in the morning fasting, and you
shall be safe from the Plague or poison that day.

An excellent Preservative against the Plague.
TAke Sage, Herb grace, Elder leaves, and Bramble leaves, of each a handful,
take also a quart of white Wine, and a good race of Ginger beaten small or
grated, stamp the Herbs with the Wine and the Ginger, then strain it through
a cloth, take a spoonful of this Medicine every morning fasting, for nine
days together, after the first spoonful you shall be safe for twenty four
days, and after the nynth spoonful, you shall be safe for two months. But if
it shall happen that you be stricken ere you drink of this, then take a
spoonful of the water of Bittony, with a spoonful mingled altogether and
drink it, it will expel the venom, and if the sore do appear, then take
Bramble leaves and Elder leaves, of each a like quantity, stamp them and make
a Plaster thereof, and lay it to the sore, and it will heal it with Gods
help.

How to break a Plague sore.
TAke black Snayles and leauened Bread, stamp them together make a plaster
thereof and apply it to the sore, and it will break.

For a pain or swelling in the Privy parts.
TAke or white Wine, Vinegar, and Cow-^ung, boil them to a Poultis, and when
it is ready, put thereto a little oil of Roses, and if the grief do proceed
of a cold cause, put thereto some Camomile flowers and apply it hot.

Another for the Cods that are swollen.
Beat Comminseeds into Powder, Barley Meal, and Honey, of each a like
quantity, fry them together with a little Sheep suet, heat it and bind it
as a plaster about the Cods.

For the pain of the Mother.
Beat Nettleseeds into Powder, and drink a spoonefull thereof, or some what
more, in good Wine asswageth all pain of the Matrix and grief of the Mother.

For an Ache in the Joints, a Plaster.
TAke a good quantity of the Inner bark of Elder, boil it in your own Urine,
make a plaster thereof, and apply it to the place grieved, as hot as you can
suffer it.

For the Ache in the Back.
TAke Camomill and Mallows, of each a handful, seethe them in running water
till they be soft, then chop them small and put thereto a handful of Damask
Rose leaves, then boil all in a pint of the Oil of Roses, and being warmed
annoint the Back therewith Morning and Evening, then make a plaster of the
Herbs and apply it to the Back.

Another special good Medicine for the same.
TAke a pound of new Wax unwrought, Stone pitch and Rosen, of each a quarter
of a pound, Venice Turpetine, or other ordinary Turpetine two spoonfuls, white
Lead half a pound, Sheep suet, and Dear suet, of each half an ounce finely
chopped, boil all these together, with a pint of Oil Olive till it come to a
Salve, then spread it on the fleshy side of white leather, and so apply it very
warm.

For a Burning or Scalding.
TAke five or six spoonefuls of Sallet-oyle, and as much of Running water,
beat them together till they be well incorporated, then annoint the place
therewith, and then lay thereon a Wort lease, it will both ^^ake it, and heal
it.

Another being a most excellent Medicine for the same.
TAke of the herb Periwi^^kle, fry it in a pan with fresh Butter, or fresh
Grease and Sheep dung newly made, when it is well fried strain it through a
cloth, and it will be like Salve, then spread it on a Linen cloth as broad
as the sore is, and apply it thereto. It will cure it, though it were scalded
or burnt to the guts, if it be taken in time, and renew the plaster Morning
and Evening.

An excellent help for the Piles.
BVrne two or three Brickes red hot, and put them into a Pan in a close
Stove, sprinkle Vinegar upon them and let the party sit upon the Stove that he
may receive the fume thereof into his fundament, use this three or four times
if need require.

Where Medicines effect, give God the glory.
A necessary and brief Relation of the Contagious disease of the Pestilence,
with the Causes, Signs, and Cures of the same. By W. BORASTON of Salop,
Practitioner in Physic and Chyrurgerie. PART. XII.
Wherein is showed the Causes with most certain Preservatives against the
Infection thereof.
THis contagious Sickness called the Pestilence, is no other thing then a
pressure, Contagion and Whip, which GOD out of his indignation uses to
chastise men for their Transgressions, as it is written in the 28 of Deuteronomy.
saying; If thou will not obey the voice of the Lord thy GOD, and keep and do
his Commandments; the Lord shall make the Pestilence to cleave unto thee. For
God the Creator of all things is the chief and principal moouer of all things
created, and uses them as secondary means to execute Punishment against the
offenders. So that the Pestilence is either Supernatural, and immediately
comes from God to Man: or Natural, as when God punishes Man, he performs
it by his Creatures.

Also the Pestilence supernatural, is to be understood two manner of ways,
that is to say; either when God does it wholly from himself, or else
permissiuely he suffers Satan to punish Man, for the reasons aforesaid: He
being the most cruel Enemy both of God and Man, who grieveth and repineth at
man's felicity, and enviously seeks to extirpate and root out all Mankind.
Even as the History of Job testifies. So that his power is also twofold,
viz. He either does this office of himself, or else by Inchanters or Witches,
( Exodus. 7, Chap. and 8,) of whom Christ spoke, Act. 8. Math. 7.

The Pestilence natural, is also taken two manner of ways: Then one generated
from an Astrall Impression, the other, from the Microcosmus or little worlds
Imagination. The Pestilence of Impression, proceeds from the Firmament of
Heaven, when God punishes man by second causes, he uses the Conjunction of
Saturn and Mars, and other Stars, and Eclipses for correction; even as a
Father chastifeth his Child with the rod. The arsenicall Sulphurious,
Antimoniall, Napellosous, and Cicutosous beams of the Stars, infects the
nutriment both Spiritual and Corporal. This is the generation of Pestilence,
proceeding from the influence Astrall.

Lastly, Paracelsus in his Book De occulta Phylosophia, says; That of
Imagination springs the Pestilence, as is there instanced between two
Brothers.

Also it is reported, that a man having the Heme^hodes and the Pestilence
together, aspecting another being found, infecteth him also; yea, very many
much more, by the intuition and earnest beholding of women, Que simul
Menstruorum and Peste laborant. Moreover, by the breath, heat, sweat, smell,
habitation, and garments from the Sick, the Pestilence is propogated, and
creeps from one house unto another, and infecteth the Inhabitants thereof, so
that i^ proceeds of an invisible essence, Spiritual and Astrall or not of
any humor or Liquor only.

Presages and Judgments, taken from the Superior bodies, and Constellations
of the Heavens.
AMongst all other bodies Celestial, there are two, called evil and
malicious, which are Saturn and Mars, as aforesaid; by whose bad influence
manifold infirmities, especially of the Pestilence arises: For Saturn through
Cold, causes Rheumes, Elephantia, etc. Mars by reason of Heat, brings forth
Fevers Pestilentiall, spitting of Blood, Plurisies and such like. Consider
well, the entering of the Sun into Aries, by true Equation of the houses and
Planets, for that influence has more domination, then have all other
influences of the whole year beside, (except the superior Conjunctions of the
Planets, or some great Eclipses.) And this entering of the Sun into Aries,
passes all entrings of the Sun into any other sign. Therefore, consider how
the Lord of the sixth house in the figure disposed, for he is the Lord of the
Sickness viz. You must consider, whether he be impedite or no. And if he be
impedite, there shall be many Sicknesses according to his nature and his house,
that is the sixth house.

As for example, be it in case that Saturn is Lord of the sixth house, and some
Earthy sign is in the same house, the^ most commonly the sickness of that
year, shall be of like nature, that is cold and dry. And over this you must
consider, whether the Lord of the sixth house has any aspect with the Lord of
the house of Death; to him, then most commonly the end of those sicknesses that
are cold and dry, shall be death.

And likewise, as it is declared of the entering of the Sun into Aries. So
must it be said of the conjunction of the Sun and Moon through all the
year, marking every nature of the Planet being in the sixth house. If there be
any, and the aspects to those two houses aforesaid*

Also consider, whether this entering of the Sun into Aries or any of the
conjunctions of the Luminaries, be in the eight house or no, for then it shall
be much worse. Note also, that if the Eclipse of the Sun or Moon be in any
Angles of the Nativity of any person, or in any of the Angles of the revolusion
of his Nativity, then he shall suffer sickness according to the nature of the
same Angles. And if the Eclipse be in Medio C^^li, he shall suffer hurt in his
honor and fame. And if it be in the Ascendent, he shall be grieved in his body,
and so forth of the other houses. But it shall be the worser in case the
Eclipse be in the ascendent, especially if it be the Eclipse of the Sun, for
that is the more dangerous of the two. For as much as the effect of the Eclipses
of the Moon is always finished in the space of one year at the most, sometime
in less, and for the most part in three months. But the effects of the
Eclipse of the Sun is very long or it come to pass. Sometimes twelve years,
as Ptolome in his Centiloquio witnesses.

The Astrologians take the judgment of the year, by the entering of the Sun
into Aries in the first minute. And if it then happen, that all the ill Planets
be in the eight house, which is the house of Death, they say; that year shall
arise a Pestilence and diverse other sicknesses, according to the nature and
conditions of those Planets. And if the Moon in the same entering, be near
unto the conjunction of the Sun, that is to say, within two, or three, or
four degrees: That year shall be a death of Pestilence Universal, and that
shortly after that Conjunction; especially at the coming of the Moon and
evil Planets to infortunes: and as the infortunes be, the effects shall so
appear, be they more or less.

Furthermore, you must consider the great conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter,
in the 13 degree of Scorpio, as it was in the year 1625, in the last of
August, which conjunction changed from an Ayrie triplicity into a watery, and
it was in a watery Sign, whereof there chanced very much rain, and thereupon
followed excessive humectation and moystning of man's body, which by and by
turned to putrefaction, and thereupon ensued many perilous and corrupt
Feauers, Pestilence and Agues, as Philerus and many others have related,
specially because the conjunction of Saturn was exalted in the North above
Jupiter, which Saturn is of ill influence.

Furthermore, there are assigned seven Prognostics, presages, or signs of
the Pestilence, more common and usually observed, as hereafter follow: viz.
FIrst, when in a Summer day, the Weather is often changed, as in the morning
like to rain, and after stands still cloudy, and at last, the wind turns
into the South.

The second is, when often in the time of Summer, the days shows wholly
obscured, as if it would Rain and yet not rain, and then if it do so
continue long, it is to be feared a great Pestilence will after ensue.

The third Sign is, when there are many Flies upon the Earth, for this
signifies that the air may be venomous and infected.

The fourth Sign is, when the Stars do see me often to fall, for it is a
token that the air is corrupted by many venomous vapors, which ascends.

The fifth sign is, when Comets do seem to flys in the air as it appears
in Meteors, and that those happens, when the Comet appears, it signifies
Bloodshed, Wars, etc. Vnde versus. Mors furit, urbs rapitur, Sevit mare, Sol
operitur.
Regnum mutatur plebs pefte fame ^ruciatur.


The sixth sign is, when many Thunders and Lightnings happens, and especially
from the South part.

The seventh is, when many Winds proceeds from the South part, for they be
foul and unclean: when these signs appear, a great Pestilence is much to be
feared, except our Lord Omnipotent avert it.

Means to prevent Infection, the Causes and Prognostics, being already
declared.
NOw shall it be directed, by what means every man ought to preserve himself
from this infection. And according to the speech of David saying, that a man
ought Diverte^e a malo, ad bonum, to turn from evil and do good. And most
humbly, Peecata sui confiteri, to confess his sins; for in the time of
Pestilence, Penitency and Confession are to be preferred before all other
Medicaments, and withal to change the place for a more air. But if it cannot
be done conveniently, in as much as possible may be, let all causes of
corruption be euitated and avoided, and consequently Venerie. Also the Wind
proceeding from the Meridian or South point, is contagious and infectiue
naturally: Therefore in the time of the Pestilence, the Windows on the same
side the house ought to be shut until one of the clock in the afternoon, and
let the Windows be open toward the North-part. For the same cause, let there
be no evil sents or smells, as from Stables, streets, and fields, where dead
carcasses corrupted and putrified may annoy you, and chiefly putrified Waters,
as from sinckes and houses of Office, for Paracelsus says; Omne putrifactum
mere est venenum. And most commonly we find they dye in greatest number, where
the air is corrupted with those annoyances; For Sicut per odorem, aromaticam
cor and spus recreantur, ita ex nocivo fetore debilitantur. Therefore the house
is to be kept, that no infectiue air enter therein, especially that which is
humide and moist, which naturally causes putrefaction in the house or places
where one sleeps: For prevention thereof, the same house or places ought to
be ayred with fires, of Wood, yielding clear flame, and withal to fumigate
the rooms with these Herbs and seeds subscribed, Bayberries, I^niper, Vbery,
Organy, Wormwood, Isope, Rue, Mug wort, and of Lignum Al^es, let these fumes
be inspired and taken at the mouth and Nosthrils, so that it may penetrate into
the inferior and inward parts.

Let alll Superfluity and overmuch repletions be refrained, for Avicen in 4
Canonis, says; Illi qui repletionem semper curant p^riodum and finem vitae
suae abreviam.

Likewise, the common Bath is to be avoided; for Modicum fermentum totam massam
corrumpi^. Finally, communities and concourses of people are also to be left
off, as much as possible may be; least the breath of the infected be received.
But in case they cannot be shunned, let these Remedies be used which hereafter
follow.

The first Preservative.
When one arises in the Morning, by and by let him eat a little Rue, washed
in clean water, and sprinkled with Salt, with one or two Walnuts well cleansed.
If that can not be had, let him eat some Bread or a toast intin^ted with
Vinegar, especially in a Turbid or cloudy day. Also in the time of Pestilence,
it is better to stay within doors, then to go abroad into any Town or City,
and let the house especially in the Summer, be sprinkled with Vinegar, Roses,
and Vine leaves; also it shall be good oftentimes in the day, to wash the hands
with water and Vinegar, and afterward to cleanse the face, and to sm^ll unto the
hands washed, as aforesaid. It shall be also a wholesome course as well in
Summer as Winter to smell unto sour things. And for those that are visitors of
the sick, to take a sponge or piece of bread steeped in Vinegar, and to hold
to the Nose or Mouth; for all Acetosus and sower things do so close the
powers, and passages of the humors, that no venomous air can enter therein, as
by experience I have often found. Also if you take Rue, Wormwood, Sage,
Marigolde, of each three handfuls, infuse them wholly in a gallon of Ale newly
^^^^ed up, and paste it close that no air breath out, and after that is ^^^^ed
for 12 hours, take six or seven spoonefuls thereof mixed with the best
Venice Tr^^^e in quantity of a Bean, and moderately walk thereon, and do
thus every Morning before you go ^oorth of your house, as long as the
Sickness continues, and renew your Drink as occasion requires to prevent
the impression of the contagions air.

Another Preservative.
TAke Aloes clean washed in Rose Water half an ounce, of good Myrrh, of
Saffron, of each two drains, of Bole-Armoniack prepared one scruple, of
Seed-pearle one scruple, of the syrrup of Lemons as much as will make it in
form of paste made in Pills, and take thereof every Morning the weight of a
groat, fasting; and within one hour after, to take a little thin Broth, Ale
berry, or white Wine, and fast thereon three hours after, and then to use your
accustomed diet.

Another.
But if the body be very costive and distempered therewith, th^n may ye use
these Pills in quantity as aforesaid; Every morning for four of five days
together if need require, and prepared as thus: Take of Rheubarbe, Myrrh, of
each one dram, Aloes two drams, Zeadorie root, Saffron, of each one scruple,
syrrup of Roses solutive, as much as will suffice to make it in form of Pills,
and to take them in manner as before directed.

Another Preservative.
TAke of Methridate, conserve of Roses, of each half all ounce, Bole Armoniack
prepared two drams, mix them together, and take thereof as much as a Nut at
once, and fast thereon two or three hours after.

Or else you may take of Treacle of Andromachus, and of Methridate, of either
two drams, of conserve of Roses, three drams, Bole Armoniack prepared two
scruples, of the seeds or roots of Angelica two scruples, of the seeds of
Citrons half a dram, of the sirrupe of Lemons, half an ounce, mix all
together, and take thereof the quantity of a Hassell nut, in the morning or at
any time of the day, else (if you go into any throng of people) and fast a
while after it.

There are also many other preservatiues more costly, yet far more powerful in
their effects, which may be had at the hands of the Chemists, as Potus
Pestilentialis Paracelsus, whereof one dram being taken in the morning fasting,
and to sweat thereon, is a preservatiue for the Pestilence for six days.

The second preservative is, Sulphur sublimed with Myrrh and Aloes, half a
dram with Sugar thereof being taken in the morning, preserves a man all that
day from all Astrall impression.

The third preservatiue is, Zenechthon Paracelsi, which being hanged about the
neck, hinders the attractiue power of the Microcosmus, or little World,
which is Man.

The fourth, against the intuition or venomous aspects of women, and men as
aforesaid. Is Chelidonia gathered in the full of the Moon, and carried about
one.

The fifth, for them which are visitors of the sick, let them hold in their
mouth Frankensence, and withal let the infected at the same instant hold also
in their mouth of the roots of Imperitoria.

The sixth, is the essence of Hearts and S^orkes blood.

The seventh which is most potent and powerful, is Alexipharmacum Spagiricum,
whereof being taken in a morning, the quantity of a Bean or less, with Sugar
or in any other convenient liquor, has a mavelous effect.

Also for correction of the air, R. Sulphuris lib. ss. Thuris zi. ss. Assa
fetidae z. ss. Pulverizantur and misceantur.

To this Powder add a double quantity of the Cortex or shells of Bayberries, of
white Amber half a quart. Take of this Powder two drams, and cast it upon
coals, and make a perfume thereof daily twice or thrice.

For want of this Powder you may take the wood of Juniper, and use it in like
manner, but it is nothing so good as the powder.

Rules to be observed in Common Communities.
SVch things as do rarifie and subtle the spirit inferior, are Saffron,
Cassia, Fistula, Planten, with mirth in measure, these do specially serve in
common communities, and Companies, where quickly one is infected of another.
The eyes are obscured and darkened by an infectiue air, if a man carry not the
foresaid things or such like in his hand. Therefore it shall be a safe course
to wash the eyes, mouth and hands oftentimes in the day, with Rose water mixed
with Vinegar as aforesaid, but if both cannot be had, let Vinegar alone be
used. This being observed, thou may with more security enter into any company.

To keep the body soluble is thought to be an effectual remedy, if it be not
laxatiue naturally, let it be provoked artificially by suppositors, for which
purpose also serves the Pillulae Pestilentiales which may be had at the
Apothecaries. Let there be also fire made in the house, because it much
hinders Celestial impression, and clarifieth the air.

To take Treacle is also profitable and good, as well for the sick as whole. I
mean the right Venice Treacle, or Treacle of Andromachus (or Ieane-Treacle) if
it be administered twice in a day with pure and clear Wine, Beer, or Rose
water, in quantity of a small Bean or Pease at each time, mixed with two
spoonfuls of any of the foresaid Liquors: Let Dinner be deferred until
Midday, whereby the Treacle, may have its operation in the body. Then choose a
good mess of meat with pure Wine, drink is to be taken often in the day, but
not much at once, because, Nimia Superabundantia putrifactionem humorum inducit.

Beware of all hot things in meats, as Pepper and Garlic; for although
Pepper purges the brain of Phlegm, and likewise of Spiritual Members from
Viscous and clammy humors, yet it heateth overmuch, and Calefaction and heat
causes Putrefaction.

Bitterness is more wholesome then hot Odours or Savours: Garlic, although
it purges also Phlegm and casts forth evil humors, provokes appetite to
Meat, and permits not any dry air to enter; because it perturbateth and
vexes the eyes, and heateth the Head of every one which often uses the same;
therefore it cannot prove agreeable: For the Pestilence through the use of hot
things is oftentimes augmented and increased. All kind of meats by so much
easy they are of digestion, so much better they are. In the morning boiled
meats are more to be commended, but in the evening roasted. Brothes and Pulps
are to be eschewed, except they have some pleasant sowernesse; for sower meats
in time of Pestilence serves to all Medicines. In like manner all fruits must
be refrained, except those of a sower taste, as Cherries, Pomgranuts, or little
quantity of a Pear or Apple in place of Medicine, for most fruits commonly
induces putrefaction. As for Spices which are commonly used, and convenient,
are Ginger, Sinamon, Cumin, Mace and Saffron, with these are made sauces for
the richer sort. The poorer folks may eat Rue, Sage, Walnuts, Parcely minced
and mixed together with Vinegar. These do hinder putrefaction.

Likewise, beware ye dread not death overmuch, but think well to live: For he
that dreads overmuch, shall imagine he feels pricking and moving thereof at
the cleansing places in his own conceit, when he feels nothing.

Having set down sundry means for prevention. It shall be convenient to
speak of some signs and tokens, whereby a man may judge whether he be
infected with the Pestilence or no, and they are these that follow.

THe first, is great pain and heaviness in the Head.

The second, when the body is inwardly affected with heat, and the outward
parts cold and ready to shake, and is thirsty and dry withal.

The third is, difficulty of breathing, and that with pain.

The fourth sign is, he has a great desire to sleep and can hardly refrain
it: Sometime want of sleep and cannot obtain it.

The fifth is, pain and swelling in the stomach, breaking forthwith stinking
Sweats.

The sixth sign is, diverse, and heavy looks of the Eyes, seeing all things of
one color; as green, or yellow, and the color of the eyes are also changed,

The seventh sign is, loss of appetite, unsavory taste, bitterness of the
mouth, sower and stinking.

The eight is, wambling of the stomach, and a desire to vomit, and sometime
vomitting humors bitter and of diverse colors.

The ninth is, the Pulse beats swift and deep.

The tenth is, heaviness and dullness in all the body, and faint, and weak
limbs.

The eleaventh is, the Urine most commonly is troubled, thick like Beasts
water, and stinketh, but smell it not if you love your health; but oftentimes
the water does not show at all, especially in the beginning of the sickness.

The twelfth and last sign and surest of all other is, there arises in the
Neeke, under the Arm, or in the flank a tumor or swelling, or in some other
part of the body, there appears a red, greenish, or blackish colored sore:
This is an apparent sign of infection with the Pestilence.

As Soon as by the signs and tokens aforesaid, if any one perceives himself
to be infected with the venomous quality of the Pestilence, let him take of the
foresaid Potus Pestilentialis Paracelli, in quantity agreeable unto the age of
the Patient, that is to say; If he be above Fourteen, he may take there of at
a time, half an ounce or a good spoonefull; But if he be of younger years,
two drams, or more or less according to the condition and respect of the
Patient, and let him be well covered in his bed with clothes, and sweat
thereon for four or 5 hours after. Within six hours after that, let him
take the like dosse, and again let him sweat. After six hours are past, let
him take the third dosse; especially, if the Patient feels and perceives any
punctions or prickings remaining: For which the third dosse (God willing) all
the venom will be expelled and driven forth.

For three days following (the venom expulsed,) every morning the Patient
shall take one dosse of the said liquor or drink, whereby nature may be
corroborated and comforted. Alexipharmacum Spagiricum will perform the same,
of which you may give unto them that are above Fourteen years one dram, but
unto them that are younger half a dram, and that thrice in four and twenty
hours space. And for three days one dosse every Morning in Wine,
Rose-vineger, or other appropriate waters.

And when the Apostumation of the Pestilence comes forth, a Cataplasme of
Figs, and the fruit of Alkakengie, of each a like quantity bruised together,
shall be applied thereon, and it will break it presently; For Venenum, venenum
attrahi^.

And this you must remember, that if the Botch arise near unto the heart
before you sweat, that then you apply this defensatiue unto the heart upon a
fine linen cloth thinly spread, as broad as will cover the heart, which
Medicine is thus prepared.

Take of good Treacle of Andromachus, half a dram, red Sanders, of Terra
lemnia, half a scruple, Rose Water and of Vinegar, of each as much as will
suffice to make an Unguent, and let it be applied as above directed.

When the Apostume first appears, you may (if you please) take Walnuts, or
Filberdnuts, Figs and Rue beaten together, and apply it thereto.

Also, when the said Apostume breaks and the venom penetrateth. the heart,
whose sign is perceived by the line from the Center or midst point of the
Apostume leading to the heart: Bruise then some of the green plant called Vua
inversa, or Leopards bane, and apply thereto; but if it cannot be gotten green
but withered, then macerate it in Wine or Vinegar, and apply it after the same
sort, and let it be repeated twice or thrice over: for this does extract and
draw out the venom mightily, the Patient being in an agony; and do revoke and
call him back as from the Grave, and drives many into admiration thereof.

Against the Symptoms of the Pestilence.
IN Constipations and Costiuenesse of the belly, the Patient may use some
Purgative Medicine; except it be at such time when the Botch or Carbuncle
appears, or any other Sores of the Pestilence growing toward ripeness, for
if it be done, then it will contrary to nature prove her intention.

But the second day after Sweating, if no Botch or sore appears, then may he
use either Sena or Rhewbarb, or the extract of either. They that have any of
the Fluxes of the bowels, called Diarthea, or Disenteria, joined with the
Pestilence, morning, Noone and at night, they may take half a scruple of
Crocus Martis, in the extract of Acorus Luteus, to the full effecting of the
cure. They that are vexed with burning heates, let them dip linen clothes in
Rosewater vitriol, and with the juice of Semper vive, and apply to the pulses,
and when the same clothes are dried, let them be wet again in the same liquor
and applied in like manner.

And if the Patient be very dry and thirsty, give him of this Iulip three or
four spoonfuls at once, viz. Take of Rosewater, of the waters of Endive,
Buglasse, Sorrel, sharp Vinegar, and of the juice of Lemons of each four
ounces, of Sugar one pound, boil them a little with a gentle fire, and when it
is cold, give thereof to drink three or 4 spoonfuls at once. Or else, take of
the waters of Roses and of Buglasse, of each three ounces, of the Sirrup of
Endive and Lemons, of each two ounces, of the Oil of Vitriol one scruple, mix
them, and take them as aforesaid. If the Patient cannot sleep, if after
vomitting Bozoardicks, and other means fit to evacuate gross humors, a man
may give the Patient Laudanum Paracelsi, three grains thereof in Cardus
Benedictus water, or for want thereof the Temples of the Patient may be
anointed with this Ointment. Take of Vnguentum Populionis, of Vnguentum
Rosarum, of Vnguentum Alabastrinum, of each half an ounce, of the Oils of
Violets and of water Lillies, of either two drams, of Opinm one scruple or two,
first dissolved in Rose water, and then together mixed; annoynting the Temples
therewith, will both cause sleep and stay raging. Or if you will you may use
this.

Take of the sirrup of Violets, of the Sirrup of Lemons, of the sirrup of
Poppie, of each one ounce, of Diascordium three drams, let them be mingled
together, and give thereof sometime to the Patient to drink for the foresaid
purposes.

If through the heat of the stomach, the Mouth, Throat and Tongue be hot, dry
and fu^rod. Take French Barley, Sinckfoyle, Violet and Strawberry leaves of each
one handful, of Woodbine and Columbine leaves, half an handful: Boil all
these in a quart of fair water, and to the same Liquor strained out put,
thereto of Diamor^^^ and of Mel rosarum, of either two ounces, of the Oil of
Sulphur as much as will a little sharpen it, and let the Patient with some of
the same liquor warmed, gargarize and wash his Mouth, Tongue and Throat.

Of Fleubotomie.
FLeubotomie may be used once in a month, exceptage or any other cause
prohibit it, as in women with Child, or on them that are brought low by
sickness, or on them that are subject to any flux of the Belly, or on them
which are already infected with the Pestilence, and the Botch or Sore grows
toward ripeness.

Let Blood-letting be done upon the vein Basilica, whether it be in the right
or left Arm, before he eat or drink, and after the opening of the same let
the Patient be jocund, merry, and cheerful, and to drink Wine or Beer, but
always ^emperately. Neither is it lawful nor convenient to sleep the same
day that the Vein is opened, if any feels himself infected with an
Impostume, then let him altogether refrain sleep and prevent it by walking,
for in sleep, heat inwardly induces the Venom unto the Heart, and other
Spiritual Members, in such sort, that scarce any Herb may revoke the same
venom unto its former estate, which thing happens not, as long as a man is in
motion.

But it may be some men will ask, of whom is sleep to be avoided? What if he
should have a continual sleep? To this I briefly answer, that in the time of
Pestilence, if any have an appetite to sleep presently after he have eaten any
thing, then such desires ought to be vindered for a space, either in the Garden
or Fields for an hour, and then with natural sleep the body may have for one
hour its natural refection and rest.

Therefore Avicen says; That if a man will sleep, he ought to drink a good
draught before his sleeping, because in sleep he attracteth and draws many
humors, and those evil humors are repelled by the humor of a good draught:
But again, if a man shall ask, when a man is Infected how he ought to know
it. To this I say and answer, that a man that is infected, the same day he
shall not eat much; because he is repleat with evil humors, and presently
after Dinner he has a desire to sleep, and perceives a great heat with
coldness, he has great pain with coldness, and has great pain in the
former part of the head, but all these are put away by mooving hither and
thither, and for to walk he is not able by reason of overmuch vnweldinesse
and sluggishnesse of body, for a man infected has always a desire to sleep,
because the venom internal does perturbate and trouble the spirits vital, so
that it always tends to rest, by these si^nes and all others before related,
a man may always perceive himself to be infected. If he will not give credit
unto it, let him make trial for half a days space, and presently he shall
feel the Apostume under his Arms or about the groine, or else about the
Ears. Therefore the chiefest remedy is, if a man perceive all these tokens in
the time of Pestilence, that he shake off sleep as I have said before, for as
by the reasons before also alleged it is manifest, that in sleep the Spirits
vital does rest, but the venom is scattered, through the membrands from one
place unto another, as I have often observed. This being truly marked, when a
man finds himself infected, as soon as possible may be, let him let blood
in as ample manner that he almost faint thereon; for the taking of small
quantity of blood stirs up the venomous quality more forcibly. If a man will
not cut many veins at once, then he shall suffer to go over the same vein
incided as before said, even unto the retardation and staying of the Blood.

Also he that is let blood, whether he be infected or not, he must also shun
sleep the whole day even till midnight. And always in the same part of the
body that the Apostume shall appear, shall be made the incision of a vein.

As for Example.
If the Apostume shall appear under the right Arm, Phlebotomie shall be made
in the middle part of the same Arm, from the vein Mediana; but if under the
left arm the Apostume shows it self, then must you open the Mediana, as
aforesaid, in the same Arm, or the Hepatica, that is to say; in the vein
about the middle finger. If the Impostume be about the Groyn, let a vein be
opened in the Foot, about the Heel on the same side. If the Apostume be in the
Neck, Phlebotomize the Cophalica, about the Thumb in the hand of the same
side, or the Mediana of the same Arm, or in the hand on the same side about
the lesser finger. If it shall appear about the the Ear, incide the Cophalica
on the same side, or the vein which is between the forefinger and the
thumb, least many venomous vapors invade the brain. Or the vein which is
about the lesser finger, or about the Article, which of Physicians is called
Basilica. If the tumor shall appear about the shoulder blades, heart and
Throat: Use scarifications with applicaton of Ven^osits; And first let blood on
the Median. If the Apostume appear on the back, open the vein called Pedia
Magna. And all these may be let blood, if a man have not slept before the
knowledge of the Apostumation: But if he feel such Apostumations after
sleeping, then bleeding ought to be made on the contrary part, as if the
Apostume appeared in the right arm, the Basilica or Liver vein; or Mediana in
the left arm, shall be opened.

And if the Apostume shows under the right arm, let it be as it is spoken of
the left arm, and so of other places in which the Apostumation appears, and
whenever blood-letting is to be used, let it be always done in opposite
manner: And if he that have been let blood be very weak, then may he sleep
after the midst of the day, and before the midst of the day, he ought to be in
continual motion, either riding or moderately walking.

And if afterward, the Botch increases fear not: For it is a token, that
nature puts out the venomous quality, and restores a man to soundness,
then may you apply such remedies thereto as is above mentioned.

And if any there be, that shall receive benefit and recovery by these
directions; First let him thank God that has created Medicine of the Earth to
heal his people: and secondly, pray for me a sinner, the writer of this little
Treatise, for to that intent I took the pains.

A Medicine for the Plague, or for sickness of the Soul.
TAke a quart of Repentance of Ninevie, and put thereto both your handfuls of
fervent Faith in Christ's Blood, with as much Hope and Charity, of the purest
you can get in Gods shop; a little quantity of each, and put it into the
vessel of a clear Conscience, and let it boil well in the fire of Love, so
long till thou see (by the Eye of Faith) the black foame of the love of this
World stink in thy stomach: then skim it clean with the spoone of faithful
Prayers: that done, put in the powder of Patience, and take the Immaculate
cloth of CHRIST'S pure Innocence, and strain all together through it, into
Christ's Cup: then drink it burning hot betimes next thy Heart: this done,
rest from the beastly Conversation used in times past, upon the Bed of Christ's
pure Innocence, and cover thee warm, with as many clothes of Amendment of
life; as God shall strengthen thee to bear, that thou may sweat out all the
vile poison of Covetousness, Idolatry, and the participation thereof, with all
kind of Whoredom, beggarly Pride, Oppression, Extortion, Usury, Prodigality,
Swearing, Lying, and Slandering, Envying, Wrath, Sedition, Sects, Theft,
Murder, Drunkenness, Gluttony, Sloth, with such like, sweat clean out of thy
Heart, thy Head, thy Bones, and thy Body: with all the other powers or parts of
thee: and ever wash thy Heart, and Eyes, with pure Humility, mixed with the
Fear of God, and lay the sweet Camon-ill of good Conversation hard to thy
Nose, least then should smell more then thine own. And when thou feel thy
self altered from all those aforementioned vices, take the powder of Say well,
and lay it upon the top of thy Tongue, to savor thy mouth withal, and the
Ears of the hearer: but drink thrice as much Do well daily: And then take
the Oil of Good works, mixed with the same Mercy that God has willed us to
use, and annoint therewith thine Eyes, thine Ears, and thy Lips, thine heart,
and thy Hands thoroughly: that they may be light, nimble, qui^k and ready, to
minister unto the poor, and dispersed members of Jesus Christ, ever as you are
able, and see occasion, but beware thou take not Wind in the ministering
thereof, least deadly dust of Vain glory, and Hypocrysie, do thee much harm,
and to keep^ a diet for thy Heads sake, use the hot Broth of Holiness; and
Righteousness continually, and feed thy self well, with the spoone of godly
Meditations in Gods holy Word; then annoint thy self with the Oil of Gods
peace; this done arise from Sin willingly, and take up Christ's Cross boldly,
bear it thankfully, and walk the course worthily, and thou shall live
everlastingly, etc.

A Prayer.
O Eternal God, and most sure comfort and consolation in all Afflictions,
which healest the sick Souls oppressed with Sin, which ministrest merciful
Medicines to the repentant Heart, and do refresh the sinful sinners, that
thirst after thy precious goodness, most humbly we beseech thee have respect
to our deadly diseases, and purge them with that spilling of thy most precious
Blood, that we may be made clean and sound in thy sight, to receive thy
healthful salvation of our Souls, and to rest with thy holy Congregation, and
heavenly Fellowship in thy glorious and everlasting Kingdom, already purchased
for us, Amen.

FINIS.
A very necessary Table, wherein the Reader may find out very readily any
Medicines or Cures, contained in this Book.
PART. I. OF Chyrurgerie and what it is. Containing also the Anatomy of Man's
Body, with all the several Parts thereunto belonging very diligently treated
on; by Mr. Thomas Vicary Esquire, Sergeant Chyrurgion to King Henry 8. K.
Edward 6. Q. Mary, Q. Elizabeth, etc. divided into ten Chapters. Fol. 1 PART.
II. Of things necessary and useful for every Chyrurgion to have in a
readiness; as Instruments, Medicines, Powders, Unguents, Emplaisters, Herbs,
etc. Fol. 58 PART. III. Of Wounds; as first, a Definition by their Causes.
Secondly, what they are. Thirdly, their Cure, consisting of a five-fold scope
or intention. Lastly, how one wounded, should be restrained from diverse mea^es
in his Dye^. Fol. 61 PART. IV. Of Remedies very useful and necessary for all
Captains and Soldiers that travel either by Land or Wa^er, to heal all
Wounds of what kind soever they be of, or in any part of the body (by Gods
grace) if they be curable. Fol. 65 PART. V. Of the rare Treasure of the English
Bathes, written by W. Turner Doctor of Physic. And set forth, for the benefit
and Cure of the Poorer sor^ of people, who are not able to go to the
Physicians: by W. Br^mer, Practitioner in Physic and Chyrurgerie. Fol. 79
PART. VI. A brief Treatise of Urines, as well of Man's urine as of Woman's, to
judge by the Color which betokens Health, which betokens Weakness, as
also Death. Fol. 95 PART. VII. A Physical Discourse, showing how a man may
governs himself at Four times of the year, etc. Of the Nine Tastes. As also,
signs of Sickness by Egestion, with judgment of the Pulses by their
disorderly beating. Fol. 99 PART. VIII. Of the making and virtue of diverse and
sundry Waters, very useful and necessary both for Physic and Surgerie, for
the curing of many Diseases. Fol. 106 PART. IX. Of the making of diverse and
sundry Unguents, or Ointments, for many several Diseases, etc. Fol. 119 PART.
X. Of the making of many, diverse and sundry Emplaisters, for the Curing of
several Diseases, etc. Fol. 130 PART. XI. Of Medicines and Remedies for to
heal all Diseases cureable (by the grace of God); And first, a most excellent
Remedy to help the Flux of the Body, with a Discourse thereon. Fol. 143 For
Perbreaking and for Flux; As also, the Property and virtue of certain and
diverse Herbs, Plants, and Drugs for several uses, tending both to Physic
and Surgery. Fol. 144
A
FOr Ache in the Back and limbs, Fol. 180 Against the new Ague, by D.
Langton, 189 For the Ague or Axis, 192 A medicine for the Ague, 193 For an Ache
or a bruise, 196 For a cold Ague. 197 A Medicine for all manner of Aches. 213
Master Arthur Edwards Receipt for the precious Ointment which came from Persia
and Muscovia, which is good for all Aches. 222 A very good Drink for an Ague
if one shake. 224 Another drink for the Ague. 225 For an Ague. By Doctor
Turner. Ibid. For the Ague, by P. Buck, 227 For the Ague. 228 A Medicine for an
Ague or Quartaine. 239
B
A Remedy for Burning and Scalding, fol. 154. and 201 For ache in the Back.
155 A proved Medicine for Bleeding at the Nose, called the Lady Mary's
Medicine. 158 Another for the same. 206 To help a stinking Breath, 6 several,
fol. 158, ibid. and 236, ibid, etc. For him that pisseth Blood. 167 For Ache in
the Back. 179 To stay the Back, and help him that consumes Ibid. For the
Bladder and the Reins. 180 To stay the Back. Ibid. For all diseases in the
Back. 181 For pain in the Bladder, and to make it whole for ever. Ibid. A
Syrope for the Back. 182 A Locion for inflammation of Balam. 186 For a sore
Breast. 192 To stop the Bloody-Fluxe. ibid. For a Ciatica or Ache in the Bones.
194 A Medicine for one that bleedeth often. 208 Another to stanch the bleeding
of a Cut or Wound. Ib. A Medicine for one that is broken. 209 For weakness in
the Back. 210 To restore the Brain. 212 An inward Medicine for the pain in
the bottom of the Belly, fol. 216 An outward Medicine for the same, being
taken both together, Ibid. A Drink for one that is troubled with a pain in
his Back and makes water that one may cut it with a knife which the Doctor
says, is by reason he is troubled with a Worm in the bottom of his Belly,
225 For the Back, 226 A worthy Balm, Ibid. For evil in the Bladder. 229
C
THe excellent virtues of Cardus Benedictus, 149 For Corns in the feet, or
elsewhere, with their remedies, 150 For a wind or Colic in the belly, twelve
several remedies. Fol. 154, ibid. and 161, ibid. ibid. and 162, ibid. and 194,
and 195. 214, 216, ibid. A Water for the same, 159 For the Canker in the mouth,
eight. fol. 157. 167. 169. 170, ibid. and 171. 237, ibid. Powders for the same,
three. fol. 167. 238. 170 Against the Crampe, 160 A Powder for the Colic and
Stone, 161 For the Collicke and Stone, three, fol. 162. 214. 223 An Ointment
for the Colic and Stone, 218 To know the f^ster and Canker, 167 For a Canker
in the body, 168 For the Canker in a woman's Paps, Ibid. and 238 A good freate
for the Canker, Foster, Botches and Sores, old and new, 168 For Canker,
Fistula, Warts, or Wounds, new or old. ibid. To slay the Canker or Marmole. 169
To make a red Water to slay the same, ibid. A good medicine for the Canker and
Sores, fol. 171 For a Canker old or new, or Marmole, ibid. For the Canker,
five. fol, ibid. and 237, 238, ibid. etc. For a Canker in a man's body, and save
the man. 172 For a dry Canker. 237 For Chilblaines in the Feet or hands. 196
For a vehement Cough in young Children, 197 A perfect remedy against the
Colic, and to make a man p^sse that has been 3 or 4 days without making
water, and it will also brake the Stone within ten or 12 days, 197 A Medicine
for a swelling in the Cheek, 199 A Remedy for Chappes, 202 Medicines for a
Cough, 207 Another for the same, 217 Another, ibid. Another, 224 For the dry
Cough, 240 To restore a man to nature, that is in a Consumption, 212 A Medicine
for one that is in a Consumption, or for any disease at the Heart, or any part
of the body, 215 A remedy for a Cold, 224 For the Colic and gripings in the
belly, 228 Another, Ibid. A plaster for the same, Ibid.
D
A Good Drink to strengthen the Heart and all the Members, if a man drink
half an Egge-shell full of it morning and evening, with as much good Wine. 156
Medicines for Deafness in the Ears. fol. 163 Another. 206 Another. 223 A
Remedy for the Dropsy, 189 A drink for the Head which is out of course, 220
E
REmedies for sore Eyes, fol 158 Another, 194 Another, 201 Another, 206
Another, 234 A Remedy to help bloodshotten Eyes, coming by any Rheum,
fluxion, etc. 160 For a sore Eye that burns and is watery, 192 To heal a sore
Eye that is hurt with a small Pocke, 193 For a sore Eye with a Pin and a Web,
ibid. For a sore eye that itcheth and pricketh, 194 A precious powder for a Web
in the Eye, fol. 205 Another for the same. 206 To heal dimnesse of the Eyes.
220 For a stroke in the Eye. Ibid. For the watering of Eyes and darkness
thereof. 221 For smarting or pricking in the Eyes. 233 For blood-shotten Eyes,
and other diseases in the Eyes. Ibid. For eyes that be red and full of blood.
Ibid, For Eyes that b^ red with itching, Ibid. A precious Water for Eyes. ibid.
For eyes that be running. 234 For eyes that be blasted. ibid. An excellent good
Water for to make clear the Eyes and sight. ibid. A precious Medicine to take
away the Web or Pin in the Eye. 235 A very good Medicine for a Pearl in the
Eye, a Pin or Web, and eyes that water. Ibid.
F.
TO make the face fair, and the breath sweet. 157 For a red Face, or red Nose,
Ibid. A remedy to qualify the coppered Face. ibid. A special good Diet for
all coppered faces. ibid. To heal a swollen face, etc. 195 Of Fearne, and its
quality. 185 For a Fellon, fol, 193 Another for the same, 200 Another, 205
Another, 212 Another, 221 A singular Ointment, which heals all burning with
Fire, etc. 197 For the Flux, 202 A Remedy for the Mother, 204 Remedies for
falling out of the Fundament, ibid. Another for the same, 205 A Remedy for the
Ache, ibid. For one that is bruised with a Fall, 208 For staying of the Flux,
210 To stop the Flux, 213 To make Oil of Elder flowers, good for a Fall, etc.
220 For the Quotidian Fever or Ague, 238 For the Fever Quartaine that takes
one every third day with a sore fit, 239 Another for the same, ibid,
G
A Medicine for the Gout, 152 A special remedy against the Gout. ibid. A
plaster for the same, ibid. Stubbes his Medicine for the Gout, 153 Another
plaster for the Gout, Ibid. For Gomora Passio, 191 An Oil for the Gout, and
for the Sinews that be shrunk up, 227
H
AN experimented science for Hoarsnesse, though it has long lasted, fol. 151
Another for the same, 189 A Medicine to purge the Head, 163 For the Headache,
ibid, For pain of the Head, Ibid. To make Honey of Roses, called Mel. Rosarum,
164 Another making thereof, ibid. For to make Hair grow, Ibid. For to take
away Hair, ibid. For the Headache, fol. 172 Another, Ibid. Another, ibid.
Another, ibid. Another for the same, 173 Another, Ibid. Another. Ibid. Another.
Ibid. Another, Ibid. For the Headache, 174 Another, Ibid. Another, Ibid.
Another, ibid. Another, ibid. Another for the same, 175 Another, Ibid. Another,
ibid. To cleanse the Head, 175 For the Headache coming of the stomach, Ibid.
For Ache in the hinder part of the Head, ibid. A principal Medicine for the
Head, 176 To purge and amend the Heart, Liver, Spleen, Stomach, Lungs, and
Brain, 178 For Megrim in the Head, 191 For a broken Head, 196 A remedy for
Hoarsenesse, 203 For all manner of evil in the Head, 211 For the Carbuncle or
Impostume in the Head, Ibid. A good Medicine to clarify the Head and purge the
evil Humors clean away, 212
I.
TO heal the Itch, 155 Another, Ibid. For an Itch, 221 Another for the same,
Ibid. A true Medicine for the Iaundies, 264 A Medicine for an Impostume in the
Body, 213 A Medicine for the yellow Iaundies, Ibid, For the black Iaundies,
128
K.
A Remedy for the Kibes, 203 For the heat in the Kidneys, 208
L.
TO remedy the swelling of the Legs, 155 To kill Lice and Nits in the Head,
159 For the Liver that is corrupt and wasted, 165 For the heat in the Liver,
Ibid. For all manner of Lamenesse or swellings, 166 For to stay the Laxe or
Flux, ibid. For a man diseased in the Liver or Spleen, 176. A drink to be
used after this Ointment, ibid. For a sore Leg that is swollen with the Axis
or Ague, 191 For to bind one from the Laske, 195 To stop a Laske, or the
Flux, 220 A Medicine for a sore Leg, 222 An Ointment that will drive away
Lice from a man's body, 224
M.
TO provoke Menstruum Mulieris, fol. 182 Another, 183 Another, Ibid. Another,
Ibid. Another, ibid. Another, Ibid. Another, ibid. Another for the same, 184
Another, ibid. To stop Menstruum Mulieris, 184 Another, ibid. Another, Ibid.
Another, Ibid. To stop white Menstruum and red, 185 Another for the White,
Ibid. Another, Ibid. To take away heat and inflammation of a Member, ibid. A
Locion for a sore Mouth, 186 A Preparative, ibid. To make Vergent milk, ibid.
Another of M. Doctor Yaxleys, Ibid. To cause good tasting of meat 190 A
Medicine well proved for the Megrim. 193 A Medicine for the Mother, 199 Another
for the Mother, 204 A Medicine for the Morphew, 207 Another, ibid. For a sore
Mouth, 221 For sucking Children having the Morbo gallico, 226
O
TO make a cold Ointment. Fol. 227 Another for the same, ibid.
P
IF a man stand in feate of the Palsy, 151 For the Pox, 164 A Plaster for the
Colic and stone, 187 A Plaster for the Headache, and hot agues, ibid. A
comfortable Powder for the Heart, ibid. The Lady Gath her Medicine against the
Plague, 189 To kill the Palsy, ibid. Against the stopping of the Pipes, ibid.
To make a Perfume suddenly in a Chamber where a sick man lies, 198 For the
Piles, 210 To take away Pockholes, ora^y spot in the face, 211 To make a
Poultis, 227 For to make a man piss that cannot, 230 Another, 195 To make a
Powder to whiten Teeth, and fasten them, etc. 231 Another for the same, 232 A
plaster to take the Ague, or ache out of a woman's Breast in the time of her
Childbearing, if it come. 240 A Water for the Palsy, ibid. For the palsy,
Ibid. Remedies for the French Pox, look folio 241, 242, 243. etc.
Preservatives for the Plague, look folio 243, 244, 245, etc.
R
TO take away the pain of the Reins, of one that is low brought, 180 A
plaster for the same, 181 For running of the Reins, 182
S
AGainst the Shingles, 154 Another, 202 To heal in 4 days the Scalding with
water, etc. 155 To heal Sores or Tetters, ibid. A Medicine to cause sleep, 156
To take away the stinking of the mouth, 158 For a Scald-head, 163 A powder for
old Sores, 191 Powders and remedies for the Stone, look fol. 164, 166. 188,
190, 191, 193, 194, 215, 218, 219, 228, 229, 230 For the Sweating sickness,
166 Remedies for the Spleen, look fol. 177, 178, 179 A powder for the
Strangurie Ibid. For the Strangulion, 193 For a Stitch, fol, 196, 199 A Salve
for all Sores, 198 For a Bruise, 221 For a wild running Scab, 200 For Scalding
with water, 201 For diseases in the Side, 207 For shrinking of Sinews, 209 A
Salve to take dead flesh out of a Sore, Ibid. For the Sciatica, 151, 211 For
faintness and pain in the Stomach, fol. 214, Ibid. 215, 216, 217 For a
Scu^ffe in the Body, 226 A Seare-cloth for Aches, 227
T
FOr a prick of a Thorn, fol. 153 To kill Tetters or Ringwormes. fol. 154,
155, 195, 203 For swelling in the Throat, fol. 156 Remedies for the
Toothache, fol, 160, 192, 202, 206, 231 To whiten Teeth, to sweeten and to
fasten them, folio 151, 160, 198, 207, Ibid 232 For Worms in the Belly, fol.
190. 201, 208, etc.
Hereunto is added almost 100 of especial Receipts and Medicines approved by a
Noble Lady and Countess of this Kingdom, whereof she made experience and
practice for the good and benefit of others, beginning at folio 246, etc.
FOr all Aches or pains in the Joints where ever they be, a very true and
well approved Medicine, Fol. 246 To make a Seare-cloath for all manner of
Aches, Ibid. A most excellent and approved cure for the Sciatica, ibid. An
approved and incomparable cure for the Palsy, 247 An excellent Receipt for the
Strangurie, ibid. A complete cure for a Tetter or Ring-worme, ibid. An
excellent cure for the Rheum, ibid. A medicine for the Mother, 248 An
exquisite remedy for the Spleen, ibid. An excellent medicine for the Gowt, and
to draw out all evil Humors out of the Head, or for pain in the Eyes or
Ears, or Impostumes, ibid. An excellent Diet drink for for all inward
Diseases, 247 Another excellent good Dye drink, 250 Another excellent Physic
drink, 251 A medicine for the Jaundise, ibid. A rare Medicine for the sharp of
the Urine, ibid. An excellent Fomentation for the Stone, 252 For the Cough in
the Lungs, ibid. An excellent and sure Remedy for a swelling or sore Throat,
ibid An excellent Salve to cleanse and to heal Wounds, Fol. 253 A good Remedy
to staunch Vomiting incorporated, ibid. For the Headache or Megrim, ibid.
Another remedy for the Head ache, a medicine worth gold, 254 An excellent
Medicine for the Spleen, ibid. A good help for sore Eyes, ibid. An excellent
Remedy for an old paint or grief in the Head, ibid. A remedy for heat in the
Back, 255 An excellent Remedy for the swelling in the Stomach, ibid. A remedy
for the Toothache ibid. An excellent Purgation and very gentle, 256 An
approved remedy for the Lungs that are perished, ibid. An excellent remedy to
kill and heal a Canker, ibid. An very good Cure for the biting of a mad Dog,
ibid. An excellent Medicine for an Ache or grief in any limb fol. 257 A very
good remedy for an Ache in the Bones or any part of the body, ibid. An
excellent cure for the Crampe, ibid. For a Scald Head, 258 An absolute and
approved Medicine to cure the Redness of the face, ibid. An excellent Medicine
for the Falling sickness, ibid. An admirable remedy for benumbed Limbs, ibid.
To staunch bleeding in any place, 259 A good remedy for the bloody Flux, ibid.
For pain or swelling in the Throat, an approved good remedy, 260 An excellent
remedy for a Pin or Web in the Eye, ibid. An excellent Diet drink for the
Dropsy, ibid. An excellent remedy for a loosnesse in the Belly, 261 A remedy
for an Impostume, ibid. An excellent Cure and remedy for a sore Breast, ibid.
For an Ague in one that has a strong body, 262 An excellent Remedy for the
Fe^ver or Ague, especially in a body of a weak Constitution. 262 Another for
the Ague, 263 An excellent Remedy for the Stone in the Bladder, to provoke
Urine from one that makes water but by drops, Ibid. Another excellent Remedy
for the Stone, ibid. An Injection for the Stone, Ibid. An easy yet approved
Medicine for the Stone, 264 An excellent Remedy for the Cough of the Lungs, for
the Liver, and for a Consumption, Ibid. An excellent Cure for a sore Throat,
ibid. Another for a swollen or sore Throat, a sure Remedy, 265 An excellent
Medicine for an Ache, swelling, (...), and for the strength (...) of any Sinew
in any par^^ the body, ibid. For a stripe in the Eye, or an humor fallen into
the Eyes, Ibid. Another for dim sighted eyes, ibid. Another for watering Eyes
of pains in them, or distillations that comes from the Head, 266 For one that
uses to Swound or faint at the Heart, an excellent Remedy, ibid. To draw out a
Splinter of Wood or Iron, or other things out of the Flesh, ibid. An excellent
remedy for one that is Broken bellyed or Burst, 267 An excellent help for
those that cannot hold their Water, ibid. Certain tokens of Death in a sick
Man, ibid. An excellent remedy for the removing of a Wenne 268 For a Timpany,
Ibid. For one that is in a Comsumption, Ibid. To make a woman's Dugs little,
round and hard, 269 For Lamenesse in the Joints, ibid. An excellent Antidote
against the Plague or Poison. ibid. An excellent Preservative against the
Plague, 270 (...) to break a Plague sore, Ibid. For a pain or swelling in the
Privy parts, ibid. Another for the Cods that are swollen, 270 For the pain of
the Mother, 271 For an Ache in the Joints, a Plaster, Ibid. For the Ache in
the Back. Ibid. Another special good Medicine for the same, ibid. For a
Burning of Scalding, 272 Another being a most excellen Medicine for the same,
Ibid. An excellent help for the Piles, Ibid. PART. XII. Being a Treatise of
the Pestilence, by W. B.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by B. ALSOP and THO: FAUCET, dwelling in Grubstreet, near to
the lower Pumpe. 1641.


