An Humble DECLARATION To the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons in
Parliament Assembled, touching the transportation of Gold and Silver, and other
abuses practiced upon the Coins and Bullion of this Realm presented the 12th
day of April, 1643.

Wherein is Declared the great mischeifes that have befallen the Commonwealth,
by the abovesaid misdemeanors.

By THOMAS VIOLET of London Goldsmiths.

LONDON, Printed by R. H. 1643.

MAY it please this Honorable Assembly, to take into their consideration, the
great mischiefs and inconveniences that have happened unto this Kingdom, and
most especially since the first year of his Majesty's Reign, by the exporting
of Gold and Silver into Foreign parts, to the inestimable damage of the
Commonwealth, by the great abuses of many Goldsmiths and others, in culling
and sorting the heavy current Coins of this Kingdom, to the end to transport
or melt down the same; and in buying and selling Gold and Silver above the
price of the Mint; by which means they fore-stall the Mint, and with the Gold
and Silver thus bought, for the most part furnish Merchants and others to
transport the same, being either the species and pieces of Forreinge Gold and
Silver, or the current Coins of Gold and Silver of this Kingdom.

Which Offenses being of a high and transcendent nature, and such as by the
Judgment of Parliament, 5 Richard 2. chap. 2. tend to the ruin and
destruction of the Commonwealth; for which causes all former ages have been
very careful to prevent these mischiefs.

And nevertheless the covetousness of many men has been such, that
notwithstanding all these Laws and several proceedings, and Sentences had and
given against them in an extraordinary way in the Court of Star Chamber; They
have of late years transported so much Gold out of the Kingdom, that as it is
credibly conceived by those that pay and receive great sums of money, there
is not the tenth part of the Gold left, that was in the Stock of this Kingdom
in the beginning of his now Majesty's Reign, so that our new and old Gold is
ten times more plentiful in France and in Flanders than it is with us in
England, to the unspeakable loss of this Kingdom.

That in the Ninth, Tenth and Eleventh year of his now Majesty's Reign, His
Majesty being informed, and taking notice of the plenty of English Gold and
Coins current in France, and of the abuses and disorders above mentioned,
befalling the Coin and Bullion of the Kingdom, and taking the same into
serious consideration, by the advice of His Privy Council directed, that the
transporters of Gold or Silver, the melters down of the current Silver Coins
of this Kingdom, the buyers and sellers of Gold and Silver at above the price
of the Mint, their Agents Instruments and Assistants, should with all diligence
be found and severely punished, according to the Laws: which care of His (and
those that endeavored therein) nevertheless for some time took no effect: and
notwithstanding it was generally conceived and understood (as the truth was)
that great quantities of Gold were weekly carried into France; yet were the
Instruments used therein so few and secret, and the ways and means for the
transporting the same so cunningly and closely contrived, that the same could
not either by the intercepting of Letters, or by the Merchants or Factors Books
of accounts, or the Books of the Goldsmiths (as formerly it had been in the
case of the Dutchmen, about the year 1618.) be found out or discerned, for the
Letters were for the most part written in Ciphers and Characters, and
subscribed and signed by strange and unknown names, and yet well known to the
Factors and Correspondents; and for the contents of the Letters, they made
mention of Needles, Blades, Gloves, Ribbon, roles of Tobacco, and such like
things to be sent over, and meant by those names: and for the accounts, the
same was entered in the accounts kept of Exchangers, so that no man upon
perusal of such Books, could find any other thing mentioned but Bills of
Exchange: others kept double accounts; and such as had been less wary and
close, presently upon the first report of the first that was questioned
touching transportation, cancelled and defaced all such Books as could any
ways manifest their dealings in the same; and though diverse Merchants Books of
accounts were seized on, by order from the Lords of the Privie-Councell, and
under Examination in the Hands of St. John Banks His Majesty's then Attorney
General, Mr. Diconson and Mr. Trumball then Clerks of his Majesty's Council,
and diverse others, yet nothing could be proved by their Books.

Now His Majesty and the Lords finding that the abuses and offenses above
mentioned, were acted by, and passed through so many hands, and grown to such a
height that the same could not be reformed without exemplarie punishment, and
considering the discovery and prosecution of all offenses of this nature so
secretly and cunningly contrived as aforesaid, would very hardly (if at all) be
discovered and found out with any diligence of such as were not acquainted with
the said contrivances:

Hereupon this Declarant, being by some detected before the Lords of His
Majesty's Privy Council, to be a transporter of Gold and Silver, and
therefore suffered a long imprisonment (with peril of his life, and loss of
much of his estate, abroad and here) was by His Majesty and diverse Lords of
the said Council commanded and enjoined to attend and prosecute in this
business of transportation of Gold, for the service of His Majesty and the
Commonwealth, for which he was to receive his enlargement, with promise of his
Pardon.

And further, to more encourage him therein, a promise in his Majesty's name
was declared by the then Lord Keeper Coventry, Mr. Secretary Cook, and other
officers of State, that this Declarant, besides his enlargement and pardon,
should as well have satisfaction of such money as he should expend in the
discovery and prosecution of Delinquents for the foresaid offenses, as also to
receive a reward for his time taken and spent in this service, out of the Fines
of such Delinquents as should by other testimonies then of this Declarant be
proved to be offenders: Upon which Commands and Promises of the Kings Majesty,
and to preserve and keep himself from the evils then depending on him, he
undertook this service, as Sr. John Banks now chief Justice of his Majesty's
Court of Common Pleas, Sr. John Cook, besides diverse others of honor and
quality, very well know.

And thereupon this Declarant attending his Majesty's said Attorney as well with
such names as this Declarant had presented touching the premises, as with such
as some others had named for transporters; soon after, his Majesty's said
Attorney, 22 June 11o. Car. filed a Bill in the Star Chamber against diverse
persons that had offended touching the premises and after, the 30th of the said
June, another Information was exhibited against other offenders in the
Star Chamber.

That both these Informations were prosecuted in the Star Chamber, and brought
to sentence by the great care and diligence of his Majesty's said Attorney, as
this Remonstrant humbly conceives; but so as all the endeavors and labors of
making the discovery, and finding out the witnesses, and bringing them from
France and other places, and the charges thereof, rested wholly upon this
Declarant, and all other necessary Fees for Counsel and other attendances was
disbursed by this Remonstrant, for no other person disbursed one penny in or
about the said service; in the prosecution of which service, and to bring
fourteen offenders to be censured in the Star Chamber, besides three which
were Pardoned by His Majesty; it cost the Declarant above 2000l. above six
years since disbursed, there having been examined in Court above one hundred
Witnesses, found and brought up at this Declarants proper cost and charges as
aforesaid, and about three years time spent in the daily attendance of that
service.

Both these Informations, by the continual attendance charge and industry of
this Declarant, and the great and due care of his Majesty's then Attorney, were
(notwithstanding many difficulties, in respect of some witnesses to be found
and brought out of France,) made fit and brought to hearing in the
Star Chamber, within the space of about a year and a half, viz. in Hillary
Term in the twelfth year of His now Majesty's Reign; and there were found
guilty, and censured by the Lords, such persons and such Fines set upon them as
follow, viz.

25 Jan. 12 Car. In the first Cause.
Charles Frank 4000l Robert Ellis 4000l Isaac Romeere 3000l Jacob Delew 1000l
Roger Fletcher 1000l Rich. Cockram 1000l John Parrat 2000l 17 February 12 Car.
In the second Cause.
Peter Herne 2000l Jo. Terry 2000l Timothy Eman 2000l Isaac Brames 1000l Henry
Futter 500l Henry Sweeting 500l John Perrin 100l

The total of the said Fines amount to the sum of 24100l.

Sr. John Wollaston Knight, and William Gibs Esquire, both Aldermen of the City
of London, being informed against in this Information, by his Majesty's then
Attorney General; procured his Majesty's gracious Pardon, and so were
discharged.

Many others there were that were Delinquents, and charged by the said Bill,
besides those who were sentenced, some whereof were taken off by order of the
Lords, as charged only with selling Silver above the price of the Mint, and
Peter Fountain who was informed against for transporting of Gold, procured his
pardon upon payment of 1100l.

After all these proceedings at this Declarants cost and expenses, the
Delinquents being fined at 24100l. this Declarant being informed that there was
way made by the Merchants to some of the Lords to have these Fines mitigated,
and them installed in a manner to nothing, (diverse Merchants and others
informing the Lords, that it was no prejudice to the Commonwealth to transport
Gold and Silver) hereupon this Declarant attended the Lord Keeper Coventry and
Mr. Secretary Coze. and they acquainted His Majesty therewith, and told His
Majesty, that if the Fines were mitigated, it would but in effect give license
to transport Gold and Silver, and desired His Majesty to signify His pleasure
to the Lords, that the offenders should be committed to the Fleet if they would
not pay their Fines, and not go at liberty as they did: Whereupon His Majesty
was pleased to send a Message to the Lords in Star Chamber by the Earl of
Holland, that His Majesty's pleasure was, that the transporters of Gold should
pay their Fines imposed on them by the Lords in Star Chamber, or else the
Warden of the Fleet to take them into custody; and that there should be no
mitigation of their Fines, for that would but encourage the transportations of
Gold and Silver, by which means no treasure would be left in the Kingdom:
notwithstanding which express Command from His Majesty, (though this
mitigation was forborne for a while) yet shortly after the said offenders
managed their business in that manner, that they got themselves off the
24100l. for 1720l. and 1100l. more Mr. Fountain paid; in all 2820l. only John
Parrat his Fine, who was a chief Instrument in the discovery of these
offenders, remained on him still without mitigation at all.

By which the transporting of Gold and Silver has rather been slighted and
licensed then hindered, it having cost this Declarant more in the prosecution
than was paid in by the said mitigation; the effect of which mitigation in
manner aforesaid, has been, that many of those who transported Gold before the
filing of these two Bills, have since followed it more than ever, as this
Declarant believes, knowing they can get more in a month by transporting of
Gold into France and Flanders, than they shall pay according to like mitigation
to get off, were it proved against them.

In the time of this employment (by His Majesty's Command) the Declarant did
receive diverse interruptions in the prosecution of the transporting of Gold and
Silver, and was imprisoned and detained close prisoner for many days, by one
Mesy and Stockdale Messengers, by warrant signed under Mr. Secretary Windebanks
hand, only for proceeding against transporters of Gold and Silver.

And some others, in doing their duties in seizing Gold and Silver water-borne,
according to several Statutes, have been sued and imprisoned to their great
oppressions, contrary to the Laws of this Kingdom.

That soon after these two Bills already censured in the Star Chamber, at this
Declarants cost, his Majesty's then Attorney Sr. John Banks filed a third Bill
against transporters of Gold and Silver, and for melting down the heavy
current silver Coins of this Kingdom; but by reason of the great charge and
disbursments to bring the two former Bills to sentence, the Declarant was
unable to proceed any further till he could receive satisfaction from his
Majesty, according to His promise to this Declarant, for the moneys he had
disbursed in that service, which this Declarant did from time to time sue for.

First expecting the same out of the said Fines according to the said
Declaration, until such time as the same was reduced to the small mitigation,
as aforesaid, and that all disposed to his Majesty's service: whereupon this
Declarant was enforced to Petition his Majesty for satisfaction according to
His Promise formerly made to this Declarant, as aforesaid; which Petition His
Majesty 10th March 1638. referred to the now Bishop of London then Lord
Treasurer, the Lord Cottington, and Sr. John Coke, principal Secretary, who
calling unto them Sr. John Banks his Majesty's then Attorney General, were to
consider thereof, and make report to His Majesty in their opinions what
satisfaction they thought fit to be allowed for his service; but their
Lordships, though often therein attended by this Declarant, and moved therein
by Sr. John Coke (who had principal charge from His Majesty touching this
service) to take the said Petition into their considerations; yet nothing was
therein done by their Lordships, to his great damage and discouragement to
proceed further in this service, that so much concerned the Commonwealth, and
all trade; and thereupon the Declarant being disabled thus, all proceedings
upon the third Bill ceased.

That besides the fourteen offenders sentenced in Star Chamber and pardoned,
as aforesaid, there are many other Merchants, Goldsmiths and others, that have
transported Gold and Silver out of the Kingdom, that have sold Gold and Silver
at above the price of the Mint, that have furnished much light gold, English
and Foreign, and great quantities of Gold and Silver to Merchants and others
to transport, that have culled and melted down the weightiest current Silver
Coins, as shillings, sixpences and half crowns, all which offenses are against
the common Laws of the Kingdom, and several Proclamations, as may appear by
what shall be hereafter declared: which Laws for the discovery and prosecution
appoint, that such as prosecute and bring to discovery any of the aforesaid
offenses, are to have a moyitie of what they can prove to be transported, as
what they seize, and to be water-borne to transport: And the wisdom and
policy of State has, upon free and general Pardons at Parliaments, exempted
it out of the free pardon, thereby the more to terrify and restrain men from
venturing in that kind, to transport gold or silver, or to melt down the
current silver coins of the Kingdom.

That diverse Goldsmiths of London are become Exchangers of Bullion of gold and
silver, and buy it of Merchants and others, pretending to carry it to the Mint;
but indeed they are the greatest instruments for transporting that are, and, in
a manner, they are only those who furnish transporters with English and
foreign gold, Spanish money, Rix-dollers, Pistollets, Cardacues; culling and
melting down the current silver coins of this Realm for plate and silver
thread: and no doubt, when a true representation of the abuses of such
Goldsmiths, Finers, and Wyre-drawers, as has been formerly, and is daily
practiced by many of them, shall be made appear; this Declarant doubts not
but this high Court will think fit to take the same into consideration, and
provide some means to restrain them from doing the Commonwealth that damage
as formerly has been done.

That some of the Goldsmiths make it their use and practice to buy light
English gold of shopkeepers and others, which by the Laws of this Kingdom,
wanting beyond remedy, ought to be bought as Bullion, and upon the sale, ought
to be defaced, and newcoyned in the Mint: But they take another way; for they
sell all this gold to transport, though it want 4. 5. or 6 grains above the
allowance, and that a 20s, piece will not make 19s. to be coined in the Mint;
yet the Goldsmiths will not abate above 2d. or 3d. and sometimes but 1d. in
the piece, let the gold want what it will; by which means they out-give the
Mint: And the gold which the Goldsmiths buy of the Subjects, thinking it is to
carry to the Mint to be newcoyned to pass in current payment, they put it into
a dead Sea, never to be made use of in our Commonwealth: For weekly French and
English have bought up this gold, let it be as light as it will, at 19s, 9d.
19s, 10d. and 19s, 11d. and so after that rate for all other gold, to the value
of many hundred thousand pounds; for by the Goldsmiths rule, the Mint is
always last served, as being the worst Chapman, and giving least for it; for
after all hands are full, both for transporters, Plate-workers, Finers, and
Wyre-drawers; then that, which they cannot vent otherwise, comes into the
Mint; which the Officers of the Mint know very well: and if gold and silver
never came into the Goldsmiths hands, (which Merchants sell to them, believing
they carry it all to be coined) far more gold and silver would come into the
Mint, than now does.

For, many thousand of dollers and Spanish money they furnish yearly Merchants
with, that trade for Norway and Denmark and other parts, to transport silver
for those parts, to the great weakening of the stock of this Kingdom, and
hindrance of the sale of our woollen commodities, which (before that pernicious
way was found out) those Countries vented much of. Besides the hindrance of the
sale of our commodities, the King is hindered of his Custom; for the Merchants
drive a trade inward and outward, and so pay the King no custom: For instance;
Hambrough-Merchants bring great quantities of Rix-dollers from Hambrough and
other parts of Germany, and pay no Custom, because the State has ever made
gold and silver free to be imported without Custom, which the Merchants
usually sell to the Goldsmiths, and the Goldsmiths for the most part sell to
the Merchants that trade in Norway and Denmark: which dollers are closely
packed in some part of the ship, and so no Custom paid, either for bringing in
the silver, or sending it out; and no commodities, in a manner, other than
silver, are transported into those parts by the said Merchants, considering the
quantity of their return; For what they want in goods exported from hence,
they must make up in money: If great returns of commodities from Norway and
Denmark, and few commodities exported from hence, the Balance must be made up
with silver; for no Nation will give us commodities; but there must be a
balance for goods imported, by goods exported, or by treasure.

That from the year 1621. many Goldsmiths and Casheers of London culled the
weighty shillings and six-pences, to make into plate, silver-wyre, and to other
manufactures: for most of that time, we having wars with Spain, little or no
silver came from thence; so likewise has little or no silver from France in
that time: and no silver could be brought out of Holland, by reason it went so
high by Plachart; for Starling-silver passed in Holland for 4d per ounce higher
than it made in our Mint, sterling being in Holland at 5s. 4d. per ounce; so
that no silver could be imported from Holland to supply our mint: which the
Goldsmiths and others perceiving, presently fell a culling the silver moneys
current: and the money being coined in the mint at 5s. 2d. the Goldsmiths,
Finers, and Wyre-drawers did raise it up to 5s. 3d. per ounce, and melted down
all the weighty shillings and sixpences and lest none to pass betwixt man and
man, but light moneies and clipped; and did exceed the rate of the mint, by
giving for Starling 5s. 3d. per ounce, and 5s. 3d.. per ounce, and sometimes
more: by which means there was no silver brought into the mint for ten years,
to speak of, (but the silver which came from Wales) to the great damage of the
Subject, and benefit of themselves: this will appear by the mint-books. And if
some stricter Laws be not made than are yet in force, if silver should not
come from Spain, the Goldsmiths and Casheers would presently fall to their old
way of culling of the current silvermoneys again. All these several offenses
are humbly presented to this high Court to take into their just considerations,
that the said offenders may be found out, and some strict Law made to deter
others from practicing the like for the future.

And this Remonstrant humbly shows, that in the prosecution of this service,
which so much concerns the Common wealth, he has expended 2000l. as before
he has declared.

His humble prayer is, that if this honorable House shall command him to
proceed in this service for the Commonwealth, that out of the Fines of the
Delinquents, which shall be proved to be offenders, he may be reimbursed the
said several sums he has formerly laid out, and damage for his forbearance
for his service formerly done about the transporters, and such other sums as
he shall expend in the prosecution of this service to bring up witnesses and
other necessary expenses, out of the Fines of such as he shall bring and prove
to be Delinquents.

In projects, as the Wine, Salt, Soape, Tobacco, and many of the like nature,
where private men cozen the Commonwealth; yet all these offenses this
Declarant humbly conceives, put together, are not of so prejudicial
consequence to the Commonwealth as the transporting of Gold and Silver, the
culling and melting down the current Silver money of this Kingdom, the
selling of Silver and Gold above the price of the Mint: for in Projects one man
cozeneth another, but the stock remains in the Kingdom; but for a man to act
any of these foresaid offenses, tends to the destruction of trade, robbing
the Kingdom of the treasure: And to keep the Mint from coining, is as to let
the water out of the Cysterne, and yet to let none in, and then the same will
quickly be drawn dry.

It is to be feared, that the industry of many ages cannot replenish the
Kingdom with so much Gold as has been transported out of it since the first
year of His Majesty's Reign; for it is an infallible rule, that where Gold
and silver is over-valued, thither will it be transported by merchants and
others, for it continually resorts where it is most made of; and if you seek
to raise it here, the remedy is worse than the disease, for then you take from
the Gentry, and all settled Revenuers, as much of their means as you raise the
current money; for if Gold should be raised in England, for example, the 20s.
to 26s. as it is in France; either higher or lower; you should buy no more at
your market for 26s. than you could before for your 20. and contrariwise, if
your 20s. were but 14s. you should buy as much for your fourteen shillings, as
when it passed at 20. so that whenever money is raised, the loss falls
most upon the Nobility and Gentry and certain Revenuers, who lose so much out
of their inheritance, which they have let out in lease, as money raised.

The Declarant humbly conceives, the easiest way to fill the Kingdom with
Gold, which it wants, is, according to the pattern of the Statutes of 14 Ed.
3. cap. 21. in case of transporting of woolls, To enjoyne the Merchants
Adventurers, Turkey-merchants, and exporters of Corn, Fish, or any manner of
ammunition, or the like; and Merchants that deal in other commodities of the
Kingdom with other Countries, to bring into this Realm a proportion of gold
upon the return of the Merchandise: by which means the Commonwealth in time
may recover this great mischief under which it suffers; and if not speedily
stopped, there will not be left Coin to maintain Trade.

All merchants that trade for Spain, know, that when the West India fleet
comes not into Spain, the trade for that year is lost; and no money, no
trade. If this be an infallible rule for Spain, which suffers so much for the
forbearance of bringing in of treasure for one year, and is supplied the next
out of the Indies, and till their Fleet come home, no dealing with Merchants;
This Declarant does humbly present, how much more it does concern this
Kingdom, which has no West Indies to supply the Treasure transported, to
provide and carefully keep in the Kingdoms stock, which once transported,
cannot be drawn back, but upon unreasonable terms; which will impoverish all
the Gentry to an inestimable value; and as long as it remains out of the
Kingdom, all trading and commerce decays, the subjects are unable to pay
Subsidies and other duties, and it is one of the greatest mischiefs that can
befall the Commonwealth.

And at this present in France, the native Merchants there match us with such a
point of policy, that it would be hard for our merchants to be master of; for
since the raising of our 20s piece to 26s there, this Declarant humbly desires
it may be taken into consideration, how they have advanced the price of their
commodities according to their advanced moneys, to the full sum of 6s in the
pound more then they were before: and as for Wines of the growth of France,
they are so dear, that they cost the Merchants there above 30 in the hundred,
more then they did before Gold was raised; and yet our cloth and other
commodities are little raised there: by which means most of the Wines, and
Linen, both cut-work and black bonelace, and other such like commodities in
France, are imported into this Kingdom, only in return of Gold transported
for France: The like those of Flanders have filled England with Thread,
cut-works and Flanders-laces, both Silk and Thread, and many other unnecessary
commodities, which for the most part are stolen in without paying of custom,
and draines the Kingdom of its money both in City and County, most of the said
commodities being bought in France and Flanders, with the Gold transported out
of this Kingdom, to the value of many hundred thousand pounds; most of the
commodities which have been returned from France and Flanders for our Gold,
being utterly useles in a thriving Commonwealth. And to give a stop to these
mischiefs, will require great and sound deliberation, for coin is the treasure
of the Kingdom and public measure of all commerce, and the vital spirits of
all trade in the Kingdom, and therefore ought tenderly to be preserved.

It is recorded, that one of the greatest works Queen Elizabeth did for this
Kingdom, was the reducing of the moneys, when they were embased, to Sterling:
and doubtless it is as great a benefit to settle a Law for the bringing in of
gold for exportation of some commodities, to replenish that loss which the
Commonwealth has received by exportation thereof.

All men know that no great design can be done without money, in Commonwealth
or Kingdom: which made the French King lately, when the wars were between
Spain and them, to set such a rate upon Gold, that they drained all
Christendom of gold; and it is believed, they do esteem (having most of the
gold of Christendom in their Kingdom) the possession of it to be as good a
strength as any ammunition they can have; for it makes them capable of any great
action. All Merchants, and others, that have been at Paris, know, what great
sums are taken up there, and in other places of France, by the King, of
Bankers and others, for his wars; which is raised with that expedition and
ease as is incredible, but to those that know it; and most of the payments paid
in gold, which is a great benefit saving convoy, one wagon of Gold being as
much in value as fifteen in Silver, which, as that Kingdoms business stands,
saves much in the portage; and if they had not drawn in our gold, they could
not have done those great businesses as they have done; and they found it to be
true, that it was one great point of putting the Kingdom into a posture of
defense, by filling it full of treasure: the consideration of it, this
Remonstrant humbly leaves to this House.

Now that general Laws and Statutes from time to time have provided against
transporting of gold, or melting down the current coin, and buying silver and
gold at above the price of the Mint, appears by Statutes 9 Ed. 3. both
forbidding the transporting of the gold of the Kingdom, and the melting down
the current silver coins, by Goldsmiths or others, into plate.

Stat. 14. Rich. 2. cap. 12 Commissions made through the Realm, for to enquire
of such as had conveyed the money of England out of the Kingdom, to the
prejudice and damage of the King and Realm.

Stat. 17. Ric. 2. cap. 1. There shall be no melting of the current money to
make any thing, by Goldsmiths or others, upon pain of forfeiture.

2 Hen. 4. cap. 4. No person to transport gold or silver, either in coin or
bullion, upon pain of forfeiting as much as they might.

4 Hen. 4. cap. 10. No Goldsmiths or other person to melt down the current
silver coins of the Kingdom, upon pain of forfeiting four times the value.

9 Hen. 5. cap. 1. All Statutes heretofore made touching the good and lawful
government of Gold and Silver, and not repealed, to be in force.

2 Hen. 6. cap. 6. Upon a grievous complaint made in Parliament, that great
sums of Gold and Silver were transported into Flanders and Bordeaux out of
this Kingdom, it was ordered and enacted, that no Gold or Silver should be
transported out of the Realm.

And because it is supposed, that the money of Gold is transported by
Merchants-aliens, It is ordained, that the Merchants-aliens shall find
security with sureties in the Chancery, that they shall not transport gold or
moneys out of the Kingdom, upon pain of forfeiting the sum or the value; and
if any do contrary, and that duly proved, and he so doing be gone over Sea,
then his pledges shall pay the King his said forfeiture; whereof he that the
same espied, and thereof gave notice to the Treasurer or the Kings Council,
shall have the fourth part.

2 Hen. 6. cap. 12. To the intent that more money be brought into the Mint, It
is ordained, that neither the Master of the Mint, nor Changer for the time
being, neither sell nor cause to be sold, nor alien to no other use, but apply
the same wholly to coin, according to the tenure of the Indenture made betwixt
the King, and Master of the Mint.

4 Hen. 7. cap. 13. Item, Where in a Parliament begun and holden at Westminster
the 16 of January, the 17 of Ed. 4. No person to carry Gold or Silver either in
Bullion or coin, nor Jewels of gold, but such persons as be dispensed with by
the Statute of Hen. 4. upon pain of felony, to be heard and determined as
other felony is; the which Statute to endure from the feast of Easter the 18
of Ed. 4. unto the end of seven years next ensuing: Since the which 7 years
expired, the Gold and Silver coin of this Realm has and daily is conveyed
into Flanders, Normandy, Britany, Ireland, and other parts beyond the Seas, as
well by Merchants-strangers as by Denisons, to the great impoverishing of the
Realm, and greater is like to be, without remedy thereof hastily provided. The
King our Sovereign Lord, the premises considered, by the advice of his Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the prayers of the Commons in the said Parliament
assembled, and by the authority of the same, have ordained and enacted and
established, That the said Statute made in the 16 year of Ed. 4. be and stand
a Statute good and effectual, with all the premises in the same observed and
kept and put in due execution, from the feast of the Purification of our Lady,
which shall be in the year of our Lord 1489. to endure to the end of 20 years
next ensuing.

1 Hen. 8. cap. 13. An Act made, that whosoever shall carry any gold or silver
or jewels out of the Realm, shall forfeit double the value, the one half to
him that shall seize it, or therefore sue by action of debt at the Common Law.
This Act to endure to the next Parliament.

5 and 6 Ed 6. cap. 19. An act touching the exchange of gold and silver, that
whosoever gives more for gold and silver then it is or shall be declared by the
Kings Proclamation, shall suffer imprisonment by the space of one year, and
make fine at the Kings pleasure, the one moity to His Majesty, the other moity
to be to the party that seizes the same, or will sue for it by Bill, Plaint,
or Information or otherwise.

1. A Proclamation against giving for light Gold more then is current, 21o
July, 17o Jaci.

2. A Proclamation against melting English money, 18o Maii. 9o Jaci.

3. A Proclamation against buying and selling Gold and Silver, at higher prices
then the Mint, 14o Maii. 10o Jaci.

4. A Proclamation against transporting of Gold, 23o Maii. 10o Jaci.

5. A Proclamation against profit for Gold and Silver, and melting English
money for Plate; Waste in Gold and Silver, 4o Febi. 19o Jaci.

6. A Proclamation against transporting Gold and Silver, and melting down the
current coins of the kingdom, 25o Maii. 3o Cari.

From all which Statutes and provisions it may be gathered, that the current
money and Bullion of the kingdom, is the Subjects, only to use between man and
man, but not to abuse: for no man by the Law can buy or sell them by way of
Merchandise at higher rates than they are Proclaimed; if he do, he is finable by
the Law: he that washes, clippeth or lesseneth the current coins, commits
treason: He that exports the treasure of the kingdom, either in Bull on or
current Coin, being taken, loses them: he that melts down the current Gold or
Silver of the kingdom for plate or other manufactures, commits a forfeiture;
and transporting of Treasure has formerly been made felony, as by the several
Statutes and Laws to this purpose appears.

By these and diverse other Laws and Statutes, His Majesty's predecessors have
endeavored the retention and preservation of the Coin and Treasures within
this Kingdom, but could hitherto never effect it.

And of late, the easy escape of Delinquents for these offenses, which have
been taken, has given the boldness to offenders to go on: and Time, the
truest Schoolmaster, has taught all ages to know, that little penalties could
yet never interpose betwixt the Merchant and his profit.

FINIS.

