A Pleasant and Compendious HISTORY OF The first INVENTERS and INSTITUTERS of
the most Famous Arts, Mysteries, Laws, Customs and Manners in the whole WORLD.

TOGETHER, With many other Rarities and Remarkable things Rarely known, and
never before made Public. To which is Added, Several Curious Inventions,
peculierly Attributed to England and Englishmen.

The whole Work Alphabetically Digested, and very helpful to the Readers of
History.

Licensed October 29th 1685. R. L. S.

LONDON, Printed for John Harris, at the Harrow against the Church in the
Poultrey, 1686.

Price Bound One Shilling.

The PREFACE TO THE READER.
REader the Work I have undertaken is great, as it is useful, a Subject worthy
the perusal of the Ingenious, and such a one as till now one Vollum
Comprehended never: In this small Treatise you will find the Original of those
Arts and Sciences which have not only made the memories, of their Inventors
grateful to Posterity, but enriched the World, and rendered Mankind more
Aselebrate, such as may be termed the main distinguishment between us and
Creatures Irrational; for as heat and moisture are the genuin products of
things below; so Arts and Sciences are those that elevate our Souls and make
them more refined; raise us above the common level to an improvement of that
knowledge which the Divine Wisdom has implanted in us, nor were they found out
and brought to perfection without a studious Industry extraordinary care and
vigilence, not only of private men, but of Kings and Princes, who finding means
to retire from the grand affairs of State, brought forth Births of Ingenuety
worthy the Travels of their Royal Parents, nor have the greatest Men on Earth
been less proud to own and Exercise them, whose names amongst those of other
Famous Inventors, you will find Recorded in the following Pages, with the time
and place; digested into the most taking Method, and Alphabetically desposed
the readier to be found on all occasions. So that, as in a Mirror may be seen
by whom, when, and through what Inducements all Sciences, Arts, Crafts or
Trades of Manufacture etc. were brought out of the Gloomy recess of Un-original
night, and exposed in their Perfection to the Sons of men; sure his Spirit must
be mean who is not desirous to be satisfied from whence that Occupation was
derived by which he does subsist, and how from thence it has been handed down,
and much Improved to his advantage. Men are desirous greatly to know their
Pedigree as far as Times Record will let them See into the number of their
Ancestors, and are apt to give him great aplause whose Prudence and Industrey,
laid the Foundation of an Estate, and why not the same in this case? for
certain it is that every Judicial Inventor in the very moment he brought that
Invention to Light, laid the Faundation especially of Earthly Felicity, whereon
Millions have builded Estates and Competencies, nor as I have hinted, have they
in their Grandeur been unwilling to own it, nor as great as they, declined to
improve what has by such means been communicated ot them; wherefore hoping this
Book will meet with as ready acceptance, as with willingness it was Written to
accommodate the Ingenious of what Art, Science or Profession Soever.

I Remain, Reader, yours to Serve You, J. H.

An Alphabetical Table.
A
Arithmetic or Numbers. Page 2 Art of Memory. Astrology. 3 Alchimia or
Alchimy. 5 Authors of the first Names of Countries. 6 Amphitheaters and
Theaters. 7 Amber first found. 9
B
Bible, the Reading of it at Dinnertime. Books, by whom first Made, and where
first Published. 10 Building. 11 Bells. Banquets and Delicate Dishes, where
begun. Baths. 12 Bondage or Slavery. Barbers to shave and round, by whom
instituted. 13
C
Coin, the antiquity of it. The Carpenters Art. 14 Commonwealths; the several
ways of the administration of them. 15 Councills. Charms, the first Teacher of
them. 17 Consulls. The Chattering of Birds, the first observer of it. Christ
all. 18 Crowns or Garlands. 19 Cities. 21
D
Dictator, or Great Master in Rome, who was the first. The Decemviri, or the
Rule of Ten men. 24 Democracy, when it began. 25 Divination, natural and
artificial. 26 Dreams, the first expounder of them. 27 Dedication of Churches,
the great antiquity of it. 27 Divorcement. 28 Dials, when and by whom first
found out. 29
F
Fire, the admirable way of first finding it out. 30 Funerals, the various
manners and rites of them among several Nations. 31
G
Grace, or the Hollowing of the Table and Meat. 35 Godfathers and Godmothers,
by whom first Ordained. Good and bad Angels, their Offices. Grammar. 36 Greek
old Letters. 38 Guns, when first invented. 39 Geometry. Games, the several
sorts of them. 40
H
Herbs, the wonderful use of them, and effects wrought by them; the first
Inventer of such Medicines that were made with them. 44 The Hebrew Letters. The
Harp. the 2d. 35 Husbandry, the first inventors of the Instruments of it. Of
the Plow, and who first YoakedOxen to draw it. Wine, and Wine-Taverns, where
and by whom first set up. Ale. The way of Making Oil, Cheese and Honey, and by
whom first found out. Histories. 2d. 36 Hunting and Fishing. Warrens and Parks,
by whom first made. 2d. 39
I
Iron and Brass. The Smiths Forge, by whom first found out. 2d. 40 The
Institution of the Anointing of Kings and Priests. 2d. 41
L
Of the Law, the three Kinds of Laws, viz. Natural, National and Civil. 2d. 42
Lots, the Casting of them. Looking-glasses, the several sorts of them, and the
strange way of first finding out Glass. 2d. 44. Lamps. 45 Laws of Mourning,
etc. 45 Lead. Letting of Blood, of whom first learned. 47 Linen or Flax; with
the art of Weaving. Labyrinths or Mazes. 48
Letters, the first inventors of them. 49 Libraries. 52 Legends of Saints. 54
M
Money. 55 Marriage or Matrimony, the strange and different customs of several
Nations observed in it. 55 Mahomet's Sect, the first Rise, Growth, and Increase
of it. 58. Music, the ancient use of it in Peace and War. 60 Magic. 62 Monks
and Friars, etc. 63 Martyrs, giving the Histories of the Ten great
Persecutions, and of the Martyrdom of the Apostles. 64 Of the four Monarchys of
the World, their rise, growth, and period. 72 Measures and Weights. 74 Men
Deified. 75 Men first called Christians, when and where. Myrh. 76
N
Necromancy. Pyromancy. Hieromancy. Hydromancy. Geomancy. Chyromancy. Palmisty,
their Description and Authors of them. 77 Navall Fights, etc. 78 Nets, the
first Inventer of them. 79 Notaries, the first appointer of them. Nuns, etc. 80
O
The Oath called Jones Stone, which the ancients Swore by, etc. 81 Orders of
Chivalry or Knighthood, the several sorts. 1. Of the Garter. 2. Of the
Anunciation. 3. Of the Golden Fleece. 4. Of St. Michael the arch Angel. 5. Of
the Holy Ghost. 6. Of the Bath, the full description and History of them, with
the first institutors thereof. 84 Obilisci or Pyramids, by whom first
instituted. 90 Ointments, when first used. 92 The Original of the Heathen Gods.
93 The Opinions of the Philosophers concerning the Birth of Man. 94
P
Physic, the first inventor of it, etc. 96 Painting, the first finder of it
out. 98 Paper, the first maker of it. Parchment. Printing, when, where, and by
whom it was invented. 100
Poetry, the antiquity of that curious art. Prose. Pope Jone. The Purple
Color. 106
Pardons, the first proclaimer of them. Parishes, when, by whom, and where they
were first appointed. 107
Philosophy. 108 Prayer, Preaching, who Preached the first Sermon. 111
R
Rhetoric, by whom invented. 113 Relics, where and by whom first instituted.
115 Ringing of Bells, by whom first ordained. Royal Ornaments of the Romans.
116 Rome, the remarkable History of the taking of it, eight times, and by whom.
117
S
A Satyr, a Poem against Vice, the first inventor of it. 121 Of the Twelve
Sybils, their Names, where and how wonderfully they Prophesied and Predicted
the Birth of our Savior, etc. with other curious things. 123 Of Ships, the
several sorts of them, and who made the first. 131 Saluting with Kisses, the
antiquity of the custom, etc. Silk, who first spin'd and weaved it. 134 The
Septem Viri, or the seven Electors of the Emperor of Germany, their Names,
etc. 135 Of Sanctuaries, etc. 138 Swaring, the first Ordainer of it. 139
T
Temples or Churches, when and by whom first Built. 140 Triumphs, the first
Enterer with them. 142 Truce, the first institutor of it. 143 Tragedies and
Comedies, the first beginning of them. 144
V
Virmilion or Red-Lead, where and by whom first found. Vows, the custom of
making of them. Voices, which were used to be given in Elections. 147
W
Writing, etc. The Winds, the first Observer of them. 150 The seven Wise men of
Greece, etc. Of the seven Wonders of the World. 151 An Appendix. 155
THE INTRODUCTION.
ARts are the only helps toward Humane Perfection. Those therefore which are
the helps toward the easiness, maturity, and perfection of Arts, deserve best
of Mankind. Whence it is that God would not suffer the first devisers, so much
as of Shepards Tents, of Musical Instruments, of Iron Works, to be unknown to
the World: The last whereof, even Heathen Antiquity has in common judgment
continued without much difference of Name, tell this day; although I cannot
believe that any of the Heathen Gods were so ancient. Yea hence it is, that the
Holy Ghost challenges the faculty of manuary skill, to his own gift; as being
too good for nature, and ^oo meritorious of men. That Bezalell and Aholial
could work curiously in Gold and Silver, for the material Tabernacle is from
Gods spirit, and not theirs: How much more is this true in those sciences which
are so Essential to the spiritual House of God. I subscribe therefore to the
judgment of them, that think God was the first Author of Letters, whether by
the hand of Moses, as Clement of Alexandria reports from Eupolemus, or rather
of the ancient Progeny of Seth, in the first World, as Josephus. Wherefore we
cannot but think them worthy, that have applied themselves wholly to adorn and
garnish this mortal Life with their Inventions, and to accomplish the feeble
indigence of our condition, by the diligence of their Provision: as they that
have excogitated and imagined any Art whereby the Common Wealth of the World is
preserved; or any other Mysteries or Crafts to the maintenance, and comfort of
the Body. Howbeit they are worthy to have greater commendations, that by their
subtle devices have found out the Liberal Sciences, whereby the Divine and
Imperial part, called the Soul of Man, is beautified: yet we may not therefore
forget Writers of meaner things, but are out of duty bound to make some worthy
memorial of their benifits, declaring our kindness toward them; to the intent
that others might be encouraged, to interprise the achievement of like
endeavors to the great aid and preferment of the Common wealth, considering
that such devices shall be Registered to perpetual fame and renown, and to the
profit of many, and ease of all men, it were therefore in my Opinion both a
point of detestable unkindness, and a part of extreme inhumanity, to defraud
them of their praise and perpetual memory, that were Authors of so great a
benifit to the universal World. In consideration for the further completing of
our English Youth, I was moved to take in hand, to draw into a brief and easy
Alphabetical Table, what I have in my Reading found copiously gathered
together, without any such method, in several Authors of the first inventors of
such arts as are never to be forgotten.

A Pleasant HISTORY OF The first Founders and Inventors of the Greatest ARTS
and MYSTERIES in the WORLD, etc.
A
GOD when he had finished the World, did Create the first Man ADAM, of the
Earth of the Field of Damascus. Thus Adam made by God, Marrying of his Wife Eve
was Author and Beginner of the whole posterity and Lineage. The Beasts, after
they were all Created in their kind, were Named by Adam, with the same Names.
He made the first Leather-coats for himself and his Wife Eve, our old Mother.

Arethmatick or Numbers, as some say, were invented by Pythagoras, others say
by Mercury: Jovius supposed that Pallas formed them. The manner of counting
years in Greece, was by Olympiads, which contained the space of five years, as
the Romans did Lustra, which contained the same Number of years: sometimes by
Nails. For every year the Consul or chief Judge called Praetor, in the Ides
of September, fastened a Nail in the Wall of Jupiters Temple, next joining to
the. Temple of Pallas, to signify the space of years. And we use to Write our
Numbers with these seven Letters, C. I. D. L. M. V. X. or with these Figures,
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9.

The Art of Memory was found by Simonides in Thessaly: For when he was invited
to a Noble Man's House called Scopa, it chanced that he was sent to speak with
two young men at the Gate, when immediately the Banqueting House fell, and
destroyed all the Guess. Then he, because he reme^^^red in what order and place
every one sat, delivered every one his Friend to be Buried, by which he
perceived the order of the Art of Memory. Cyrus King of Persia, excelled in
Memory, who could call every Man in his Army by his Name. Cyrus the Ambassador
of Pyrrhus, the day after he came to Rome, saluted every order of Nobles by
their proper Names. Mithridates could speak Twenty-two Languages. Julius Ceaser
could read, endite, and hear a Tale at the same time.

Astrology, the occasion of the inventing of this Art was, that in it Learned
men through their observation of the Celestial Bodies, wherein the whole
moveable course of the Heavens, the rising, going down, and order of the
Planets might be comprehended. Some put the invention of this Art on the
Egyptians, others on Mercury, but Josephus concludes, that Abraham instructed
them and the Chiddees in it, and thence it came into Greece, as Phericides,
Pythagoras, Thales acknowledges, that they were Disciples to the Egyptians.
Pliny will have Atlas to be the first Founder or contriver of it, which
occasioned the Poets to feign that he bears Heaven upon his Back. Sernius
would have Prometheus to find it out. Nevertheless all these (as I suppose)
were the beginners of this faculty, every man in his own Country where he
dwelled: for even from the beginning of the World, the Sons of Seth devised
first the science of the Stars, and for as much as they feared least their Art
should perish, before it came to the Knowledge of men (for they had heard their
Grandfather Adam say, that all things should be destroyed by the Universal
Flood) they made two Pillars, one of Stone, the other of Brick, to the intent
that if the Brick wasted with Water or Storms, yet the Stone should preserve
the Letters whole and perfect, and in their Pillars they Graved all that
concerned the Observation of the Stars. And therefore it is probable that the
Egyptians and Caldees learned Astrology of the Hebrews, and so consequently,
it spread it self amongst other Nations. Endimion was the first that found out
the course of the Moon, the reason of her being Eclipsed, Pythagoras observed
the course of Venus. Archimedes found the use of the Sphere.

Alchimia or Alchimy, signifies infusion or steeping; for Chimia in Greek,
denotes Infused. There is a great controversy when Alchimy was invented: For
neither Pliny (though he was otherwise a most diligent Author) nor any Greek or
Latin Author make any mention of it, but I believe that it is very ancient;
for Suidas writes that the Art of Alchimy endured till the time of the
Argonantes, when Jason went to take away the Golden Fleece; which was nothing
else than a certain Book that taught to turn other Metals into Gold: for those
that invented that story, conceating its name invented the Golden Fleece. The
Egyptians professed this Art very much, in the Reign of the Emperor
Dioclesian, who hating them because they made an insurrection, Burned their
Writings concerning their destilling of Gold and Silver, least (as he feared)
they being made Rich by this Art, and having gotten good store of Wealth, they
should Rebel again. The Emperor Dioclesian was Created in the year 287; so
that this Art was rather renewed than new.

The Authors of the first Names of Countries, were, some of the most eminent of
them, as follows, Arphaxad was the first Founder of the Arabians. Lud of the
Lidians: of the Children of Cham were Chus, that named the Aethiopians; and
Mesre the beginner of the Egyptians. Chanaan of whom the Cananites had their
name: The Linnage of Chus was Seba, whereof the Sebees came; and Evila of whom
came the Evilites. And in the like manner we must believe, that of them came
all other Nations and People of the World, which are now increased, that they
can scarcely be numbered. Of or from the Air Anaximenes supposes all things to
have had their beginning. Metrodorus affirms the Universal World to be
Eternal, without beginning or end. Epicurus one of Democritus Disciples,
puts two causes Attomes, or Motes, and vacuity and emptiness, of these he
says the four Elements come. These are the Opinions of the Philosophers that
were men without the knowledge of God: But (as Moses and Josephus record) the
Scripture concludes, that in the beginning God made all things of nothing; as
St. John says, all things were made by him. And therefore (as Lactantius
writes) let no man be curious in searching, of what material God made these
great and wonderful Works, for he Formed them all of nothing, by the power of
his mighty Word. Of the same Opnion is Plato in his Book called Timeus.

Amphitheaters and Theaters, were certain places, as Scaffolds with Pentises,
wherein the People of Athens stood to behold the Enterludes that were showed:
and they were made like half a Circle, with Benches one above another, that
they might without any impediment see the Plays; Dionysius did first institute
them in Athens: in the midst of the Scaffold or Theater stood the Stage,
wherein Comedies, Tragedies, with other Shows were exhebited to the common
sort. Of whom the Romans took example, to make such Scaffolds. Caius Curio, at
his Fathers Burial, Builded two Theaters of Timber after such a fashion, that
they might in time of Enterludes stand one contrary to another; in such wise
that neither Play should disturb one the other: And when it pleased him he
turned them together, and made an Amphitheatre, which was a round Scaffold full
of Benches of diverse heights; wherein he set forth a Game of Sword Players.
Cains Julius Colsar Builded the first Amphitheatre in the Field consecrated to
Mars; In which were set forth shows of Wild Beasts, and Sword Players, for the
custom was that such as were condemned to Dye, or taken Prisoners in War,
should be cast there to the wild Beasts to be devoured and slain. It was
strewed with Sand, least the Blood of those which were slain should defile them
that fought, or discourage them: and therefore, there were certain appointed
for to toss and strew about the Sand.

Amber, as Diodorus witnesses, was found in the Isle Basilea, which lies
against Scythia, above Galatia in the great Ocean, where it was first cut up,
and was never found or seen in any place before.

B
BIBLE, the Reading of part of it at Dinner time, has been of a long
continuance, which did proceed from the Godly Doctrine which Christ instructed
his Disciples in, at all times, but chiefly at his last Supper, wherein he
Treated of the perfection of all the mysteries of Religion. And thus our
Fathers, to keep in memory such an wholesome instituion, did bring in this
manner of Reading the sacred Scripture before or after Meals.

Books, which contain the monuments of ingenious Wits, and a Register of all
valiant Prowefs, as Laertius expresses, were first published at Greece. Gellius
says is was Pisitratus that made the first Book, and exhibited it to be Read
openly. But Josephus writes that it was the Hebrews and Priests of Egypt and
Chaldee that first set them forth. The Athenians multiplied the number of
Books, which Xerxes carried from thence into Persia; and Seleucus King of
Macedony caused them (many years after) to be conveyed to Athens again, after
that Ptolomeus King of Egypt collected together 700000. Books, which were all
Burnt at the Battle of Alexandria.

Tell Building, men at the first lived like wild Beasts, in Caves, and also Fed
on Fruits and Roots of the Earth: but after they perceived the necessary use of
Fire against the vehement extremity of cold: some began to edify Cottages of
Boughs and Trees, and some dug Caves in the Mountains, and by often
experiencing such means, they attained to a greater perfection in Building with
Walls, that they did get up with long Props, and did wind them about with small
Rods, and so daubed them: and to keep out the Storms, they covered them with
Reeds, Boughs or Fen-sedges,. Thus in process of time they came to the Art of
Building, which as Diodorus says, is ascribed to Pallas: But we are rather to
believe, that either Cain or Jubal, the Son of Lamech, found out this Art.

Bells came first from the Hebrews, where the High Priest or Bishop had in the
skirts of his uppermost Vestments little Bells to Ring, when he was in the Holy
place within the Veil.

Banquets and delicate Dishes, were begun in Jonia, and after that Gluttonous
custom was taken up in other Countries; though that there were Laws made in
Lacedemonia by Lycurgus, and in Rome by Faunius, for the abolishing of such
excessive Feasting. But I could wish there were some good Law prescribed for
good Hospitality: For I believe there was never so little as is in these times.

Baths, of which those that were hot, were used first privately of all men,
according to their degree and ability, for the preservation of their Health:
but in process of time they builded common Baths and Hot-houses for to Sweat
in; and the Noble did Bath and Wash with the Common; and at last men and women
were permitted most Laciviously to Bath together. Most notable Baths were they
that Agrippa, Nero and Titus Vespasian, with other Emporours made, as Julius
Capitolinus writes, they were great, and most gorgeously dressed, with several
places of Pleasure, to maintain excessive Riot for all sorts of people.

Bondage or Slavery, I find that it began amongst the Hebrews, and had its
Original proceeding of Canaan the Son of Cham; who, because he had Laughed his
Father Noah to scorn, as he lay dissolately when he was Drunk, was punished in
his Son Canaan with Bondage and Thraldom. The order of Manumission in old time
was in this manner: The Lord or Master took the Bondsman by the head, or some
other part of his Body, saying, I will this Fellow be-free, and so dismissed
him. Pliny was of opinion, that Bondage began in Lacedemonia.

Barthers, to shave and round, were instituted by the Abantos, because their
Enemies in War should have no occasion to pluck them by the Hair. P. Ticinius
Mena brought them into Rome the 354th year after the Building of the City,
before they were unshaven.

C
COIN, of what Mettle soever it was made (as appears by Josephus) is very
ancient; and Cain the Son of Adam was very covetous in gathering together
Money. Herodotus affirms that the Lydians first Coined Silver and Gold to buy
and sell with. For before the Seige of Troy, as Homer sings, men used to change
one Commodity for another. Yet in the time of Abraham there was Money current,
for he bougt the Cave to Bury his Wife Sarah of the Hittite, Ephron, for 40
Shekels of Silver which was before the Seige of Troy many years.

The Carpenters Art, as Pliny writes, was first invented by Daedalus with
these following Tools, the Saw, the Axe and Plumline, whereby the evenness of
the squares are tried, the Augore or Wimble, the Square, the Line, the
Shaving-Plain, the Pricker or Punch, were devised by Theodore a Samian; Ovid
writes, that Talus, Daedalus Sisters Son invented the Compass, and Fashioned
the Saw in imitation of the Backbone of a Fish; but Daedalus envying that a
Boy being his Apprentice, should excel his Master, cast him down out of a
Tower (as Ovid writes) and slew him. Pythagoras a Samian, devised another
manner of Rule then this that we commonly use, fit for all manner of Buildings,
as Victrnuius declaireth in his 9th Book of Archetecture. Though in my judgment
the invention of this Art ought rather to be referred either to the Hebrews
which used such Arts before Daedalus time, and more especially in the curious
Building of the Tabernacle; or else to the Tyrians who were reputed in this
mystery to have excelled the Hebrews. For which cause Solomon wrote to the King
of Tire for Workmen to Build the Temple.

The Commonwealths administration, was after three several ways, as Plato
divides it; Monarchy, where one Rules. Aristocracy, where the most eminent
Persons Govern. Democracy, or Popular State, where the common People have a
stroke in Ruling of the Publick-weale. Principality or Regal Government was
first begun by the Egyptians, who could not long subsist without a King or
head Ruler: There Reigned first as Herodotus writes, Menes; and their manner
was to choose him amongst the Priests of their Religion: and if it Fortuned
that any stranger obtained the Relme by conquest, he was compelled to be
consecrated a Priest, and so was the Election Legitimate, when he was King and
Priest. The Diadem which was the token of the Honor Royal had its first
institution from Libes Bacchus. The Athenians ordained the state of a
Commonwealth, that was Governed by the whole Commons as Pliny writes, although
they also had Kings, whereof Decrops Diphyes which Reigned in Moses time, was
the first. For as Justine writes, every City and Nation had at the first a King
for their chief Governor; which attained to that dignity by no Ambition or
Favor, but by his singular desert. As concerning the institution of the
Commonwealth, where the Commons bear the sway; I suppose it began amongst the
Hebrews, who were Ruled by a popular State many years before that Athens was
Built.

Councils, the custom of assembling of them, to take deliberation of things
doubtful, or of serious Affairs, are of great Antiquity, as well amongst the
Hebrews as other Nations: They either called for Humane or Divine Affairs, for
the latter, by such a manner of Council Matthias surrogated and substituted in
the Stead of Judas, into the number of the Apostles. And by Council holden at
Jerusalem, the Apostiles discharged the Gentiles of Moses Law. Cornelius was
the first, that called together any Council; and that was in Rome, of 600
Bishops and as many Priests, with a great multitude of Deacons.

Charms, or the manner of the driving Evil Spirits out of Persons that were
possessed with them, King Solomon taught, as Josephus witnesses, and he saw it
done by Eleazar in his time, before Vespation the then Emperor, writ the
manner of Healing them.

Consuls in Rome took their beginning from the Banishment of Tarquinius, for
the horrid Crime and notorious Rape of Lucretia, committed by his Son Junius
Brutus, and Lucius Targuinius Collatinus were the two first that had the Name
and Title of Consuls, of the consultation and the provision that they made for
the Commonwealth. They ruled the Empire, conducted Armies; and by these
Officers because they were annual, the year was counted.

The Chattering of Birds, was first observed by Caras. The Divinations by
looking on their Feeding, was devised by Theresius a Theban, and Pythagoras
understood the mystery of their flights.

Crystal is a stone that is congealed of pure Waters, not with cold but by a
power of Divine heat, whereby it does retain its hardness, and never gives
again or melts, but receives diverse colors, this is the opinion of
Diodorus. But Pliny supposes that it proceeds from the Ice extremely frozen,
who first found it out is unknown.

Crowns or Garlands Moses made many of them, and he was many years before
Bacchus, of whom Pliny writes that he did invent and wear the first Garland
made of Ivy on his Head; and afterward it grew to be a custom, that when they
Sacrificed to any of their Gods, they were to be Crowned with a Garland, so was
the oblation also. At the first the manner was in all Plays and Sacrifices, to
make Garlands of Boughs of Trees. And after they were garnished with variety of
flowers among the Siconians, by Pausias and Gliceria his Lemman, not long after
Winter Garlands, that he called Egyptian, which were made of Wood or Ivory,
died with many colors, began to be worn. And in process of time they made
Crowns of Brazen plates guilt or covered with Silver, called for their
thinness, Garlands. Lastly, Craesus the rich did first set forth in his Game
shows, or Crowns with Silver or Golden Leaves, and consequently there were
invented several sorts of Crowns, as the Triumphant Crown, that the Emperor or
grand Commander ware in his Triumph; this was first made of Olive, and
afterward of Gold. The Murall and Wall Crown, that was given to him that first
scaled the Walls. The Camp Crown, that was the reward of him that first
adventured Valiantly into the Camp of his Enemies. The Navall or Sea Crown,
that was set on his Head, that first Boarded his Enemies Ship. And all these
were of Gold. The Obsidional Crown, that was worn of him that delivered a City
Beseiged, it was composed of Grass. There was also a Civil Crown, which was a
Sovereignty which a Citizen gave to him, that had valiantly preserved him from
his Enemies; this was made of Oken Branches. And this manner of Crown the
Athenians did first devise, and gave it to Pericles. There were moreover Crowns
of Pearls, French Crowns, and Garlands composed of the Ears of Corn, which as
Pliny writes, were first in use amongst the Romans, Garlands made of Cinnamon,
Woven and Embossed with Gold; Vespasian did first consecrate in the Capitol,
in the Temple of Peace. In some space of time, the excess of Crowns grew to be
such, that the Grecians in their Banquets, Crowned both their Heads and their
Cups also, whereof the Jonians were Authors. Pliny writes that with one of
these sorts of Crowns, Cleopatria empoisoned Antonie. And Artaxerxes is also
said to have used Crowns of Garlands in his Feasts.

Cities, the occasion of Building of them is thus reported. For when men, as
is said before, had gathered themselves into several Cottages, they lived in
distinct Houses, which made them begin to think of gathering wealth for the
support of their Families. But seeing themselves daily robed and spoiled by
those that were stronger, they were forced to join themselves together in a
Company, and to dwell within a certain compass of ground, which they either
Walled, or Trenched about. Afterward it is said that Cecrops built Athens, and
by his own name called it Cecrepia. Phoroneus built Argos, though the
Egyptians affirm that Diopspolis was long before. Trason first made Walls and
Towers. But Josephus says that Cain was the first that built a City, and called
it Enochia, after the name of his Son Enoch; and after the days of Noah by the
advice of Nimrod, there were certain men that built a very high Tower, which
was called Babel. Tents were invented by Jabal the Son of Lamech. Among the
Phenicians they were found out by Seculus. Houses of Clay were first invented
by Doxins the Son of Gellius, who took his example from the Swallows Nests.
Brick building was invented by Eurialus and Hyperbolus brethren at Athens,
though others attribute it to Resta the Daughter of Saturn. Tile and Slate were
the invention of Synarus of Agriopa in the Isle of Cyprus. Quarries were
invented by Cadmus in Thebes: But the invention of such Arts is more fitly
thought to be referred to Cain, or the posterity of Seth, who made two pillars,
one of Brick, the other of Stone. Notwithstanding, it is not denied, but those
aforesaid Persons began their inventions, in the Countries where they lived.
Marble was used in building by the Nobility of Rome, for to show the costly
magnificence: so that Scaurus being a public Officer in Rome, caused 360
Marble Pillars to be carried for the making of one Stage, whereon an Interlude
was to be played. Lucius Crassus was the first that had Pillars of Marble.
Lepidus made the Gates of his House of Numidian Marble. In Graving Marble,
Dipoenus Scilus was the first that flourished, before the Reign of King Cyrus
in Persia.

D
DICTATOR, or great Master in Rome, Largius was Created the first, which Office
was of the highest in Authority: and as Dionisius believes, it was taken out
of the Greeks, amongst whom Elymnetae had the same power that the Dictator had
in Rome. T. Livius referred the Original of them to the Albanes: and the
Carthaginians had also their Dictators. This Magistrate was never used saving
in great dangers of the Commonwealth, and it continued but six Months: during
that power all other Magistrates were Abrogated, except the Tribunate or the
Frovostship of the Commons. The Consuls duty was to name and proclaim him, and
that no time but in the Night.

The Decemviri or the Rule of ten men, endured amongst the Romans but for three
years, by reason of the outrageous Lust of Appius Claudius against the Maid
Virginea, they were deposed, and Consuls (whom we have formerly mentioned)
supplied their room: in the 310 year of the City, in their place instead of
Consuls were chosen Marshals or Provosts of Armies, whom they named Tribunus,
Aulus Sempronius, Attacinus, L, Attilius Longus, and T. Cecilius Siculus.

Democracie began in Rome, when the Authority of the Commons became daily more
Seditious, and confedracies increased, in such a manner that C. Cunues so
brought it about and ordered it, that the Commonality Married with the
Nobility, and the Tribunes by their earnest instance and suit, caused that the
high Officers were permitted to them of the common sort. At the year 355 of the
building of the City, P. Licinus Caluus was made Tribune of the Army, the
389th year, L. Sextus Lateranus attained the Consulship the 399th year, Cains
Marcus Lateranus was created Dictator. From this manner of Government it was by
Sylla and Marius brought to one Ruler or Prince again; thus has Rome had all
kinds of Administration of the Commonwealth.

Divination is reckoned to be of two sorts; the one Natural, the other
Artificial, Natural, is that which is occasioned by a natural commotion or
stirring of the mind, which happens sometimes to men when they are asleep;
sometimes by a kind of fury or rapture of the mind, as it was with the Sybils;
of the same nature were the oracles of Appollo and Jupiter Hammon. Artificial
those which proceed from conjectures, old considerations and observance of the
entrails of Beasts, flying of Birds, casting of Lots, etc. The inspection of
the Bowels of Beasts was invented by the Hetrurians, which chanced thus. It
happened that a man going to Plow, chanced to raise up a deeper Furrow then he
was wont to do: One Tages upon a sudden arose out of the Earth, that taught
them all the mysteries of Sooth-saying. Divination by looking on Birds was
found out by Tiresias the Theban. Orpheus added Divination by other Beasts.
Numerius Suffusius was the first that invented the casting of Lots.

Dreams, The first expounding of them, Pliny ascribes to Amphichon. But Trogus
assigns it to Joseph Son to Jacob. Clement writes that the Telmesians were the
first interpreters of it, it is no great matter who were; for the little credit
that is to be given to them.

Dedication of Churches is of great antiquity: For Moses did sanctify the
Tabernacle; and Solomon consecrated the Temple that he builded at Jerusalem.
And Esdrus after, when they returned from the captivity of Babylon, new
hallowed the Temple again. From them we receive our Rite of dedicating of
Churches. I cannot be so positive as to write certainly, where the first Church
of the Christians was built, but by all conjectures, it was edified by the
Apostles in Aethiopia, where St. Matthew Preached; or in the lower India, where
St. Bartholmew taught; or in Scythia where St. Andrew Preached the Word of God,
where they doubtless either caused new Churches to be edified, or else
transposed the Idols of the Temples, abolishing superstition, and Planting the
true Religion of Jesus Christ. Although it is not against reason to suppose
there was a Temple or House of Prayer appointed by St. James at Jerusalem. In
Rome the first that I Read of, was consecrated by Pius Bishop of Rome, in the
Street called Patricius, at Novatus Baths, in honor of the Virgin Prudentia,
at the request of Praredis her Sister. And after Calitus built a Temple to the
Virgin. Mary, in a place beyond Tyberis, and instituted a Churchyard in
Appius-Street.

Dinorcement when it first began, Wedlock was not so sincerely and reverently
observed of the Romans; which although it be an occasion that Women should more
earnestly keep their chastity, yet our Religion does scarcely permit it. One
Spurius Servilius, the year after the City of Rome was Founded 522. (Marcus
Pomponius, and Cain Papyrius being Consuls) first sued a divorce from his Wife,
because she was Barren: For which Fact, although he affirmed openly before the
Censors that he did it only because he would have issue, yet was he for it
scandalized and evil spoken of, by the common People. This decree of divorcing
was taken out of the Laws of Moses, which made the first constitution of that
Statute; yet was there this difference. For by Moses it was only Lawful for the
Husband to forsake his Wife; but the Romans decree gave them both like liberty.

Dyals was first found out by a Milesian amongst the Lacedaemonians, which
declaired the hours by the shadow of the Hand. It was a good while ere that
they were used in Rome; but in the twelve Tables, there was only rehearsed the
rising and going down of the Sun; and a few years after, Noon or Midday was
found. And this was only on clear days, when they might perceive the course and
altitude of the Sun. The first Dyall was set up on a Pillar openly, which stood
behind the common Pulpit, or Bar, called Rostra, at the charge of Valerius
Messala, then Consul in the first Punick Battle. The water Dyall was first used
in Rome by Scipio Nasica, to divide the hours of the Day and Night, who were
the inventers of Clocks, Sand-Dyals and Hour-Glasses is yet unknown.

F
FIRE was first struck out of a Flint by Pirodes. Prometheus taught first to
keep it in Matches. Pliny writes how the spies in Armies and Camps, or else the
Shepards devised Fire by rubbing of two pieces of Wood together. Laurel and Ivy
are best for that use. Bellows were found by Anacharsis, as Strabo writes.
Candles the Egyptians invented. Fire and Water were given for Signs of the
chastity of the Maids of Rome and Greece, before they came to Bed to their
Husbands, which Elements as they have the power to purify and cleanse,
signified thereby that they should be chaste and honest of their Bodies.
Minerals, or the manner and rites of Burials in several Countries, were of
sundry and various Fashions: as the Massegetes and Derbians, judged them that
dyed in Sickness to have been very wretches; and therefore when their Parents
and Kindred were Aged, they strangled them and Eat them, supposing that it was
better that they should devour them than the Worms in the Earth. The Alban's
that dwelt by the Mount Caucasus, took it for a mortal crime, once to name
those that were departed. The Thracians kept solemnly the Funerals of the Dead
Corpse of men, with great joy and solace, for that they were discharged by Death
from humane miseries, and rest in eternal Felicity; and contrariwise at the
Birth of their Children they expressed great sorrow and lamentation, because of
the calamities that they must sustain in this miserable Life. The Women in
Judia, take it for a great honor and triumph to be Buried with their Husbands,
which privilege is granted to her that loves him best. There are other diverse
manners of Burying amongst the Pagans and Heathens, which forasmuch as they
exceed the bounds of humanity, and have in them no hope of a Resurrection, I
shall here omit. The Romans, because the Dead Corpse that were killed in Battle,
were after their buryal dug out of the ground; instituted the manner of
burning the carcasses of men departed; which rite was Executed on Sylla, chief
of all the House and Kindred of the Cornelians, who feared least he should be
served as he had used Marius. They had also in Rome a manner of defying or
hollowing of their Emperors bodies, after this manner: when the Emperor was
dead, and his body reverently buried, with great exequies, they Formed an Image
of the Emperor, pale, as though he was sick, and laid it at the Gate of the
Palace, in a bed of Ivory; and the Physicians resorted thither to the bed six
days continually: the Lords of the Senate, and Noble Ladies and Matrons
standing on every side of the bed. The seventh day the young Lords and
Nobility, bare him on their Shoulders in the bed, first into the old place of
Judgments, called Forum Vetus, and then into the Field, called Campus Martius,
where they chose their Magistrates and high Officers, where they laid him in a
Tent built for the same purpose, like a Tower, and filled it with dry Wood and
sweet Ointments, and after they had finished the Rites and Ceremonies of their
Law, he that should succeed in the Empire, put a Firebrand to the Tent, and
then others did the like. And after all was burned they let fly an Eagle out of
the top of the Turret, which, as they supposed carried the Soul of the Emperor
to Heaven, and from thenceforth they honored him as a God. Commendations to
the honor of the dead bodies at Funerals, Valerius Publicolia first made in
praise of Brutus, and that was long before the Greeks had any, notwithstanding
Gellius writes that Solon ordained that Law in Athens, in the time of
Tarquivius Priscus. The Romans used to praise the Women at their Burials,
because they were once contented to give their Golden Jewels to make a Boule to
send to Delphus, to the God Appollo. Horatius the Poet and Servius write, that
the Romans used customably after a Burial, to renew the Sacrifices and Solemn
Rites of the Funeral, which they named in Latin, Novem Diales. The Massilians
in France passed and spent the day of their Burials, with private Oblations and
Feastings of their Kindred, without any manner of Lamentation or Sorrow. In
Burials the old Rite was, that the dead Corpse was bourn before, and the People
followed after, as one should say, we must all dye, and follow after him, as
their last words to the course did express. For they used to say, when it was
Buried, these words, Farewell, we shall come after thee: and of the following
of the multitude, they were called Exsequies. Although used at Kings and
Noble-mens Funerals, to go before with Tapers and Torches, which custom we
keep still.

G
GRACE, or the Hollowing of the Table and Meat is derived and was begun from
the imitation of our Savior Christ, when he used the same way of sanctifiing
of the five Loaves in the Wilderness, and at Emaus also, where he did
consecrate the Table in the presence of his Disciples: So was likewise he form
of saying Grace after Supper, taken from that custom which Christ commonly
kept at his Suppers. The manner to Read a part of the Bible before or after
Dinner time or Supper, has also been of a long continuance, and did prooceed
from the Godly Doctrine that Christ instructed his Disciples in, at all times,
but chiefly at his last Supper, wherein he Treated of the Mysteries of our
Religion. From whence our Fathers, to keep in memory such a wholesome
institution, did introduce this manner of Reading the Scripture before or after
Meat.

Godfathers and Godmothers were ordained by Iginius Bishop of Rome, for to be
witnesses of the Sacrament of Baptism that it was received.

Dood and bad Angels, according to the Ancient received opinion, are not only
to every man, but also to every singular place and Family, were allotted two
Angels, by some called the Bonus vel malus Genius; whereof the one went about
to endamage Mortals, the other with all its endeavor, studied to do them good.
These are said to invade particularly every Family, to convey themselves into
humane Bodies, to imbezell and destroy their Health, to procure Diseases, to
illude their Hearts with Pannical and Fantastical Visions and horrid Dreams.

Grammar, next the invention of Letters ordinarily succeeds, both because it is
the Foundation and Ground whereon all other Sciences rest, and for as much as
it takes the name of Letters; for Gramma in Greek signifies a Letter in
English. Grammar is an Art that does consist in Speaking and Writing without
Fault or Error, so that every Word have his due Letters, and as Quintilian
determines, is divided into two parts, the way to speak congruously, and
declairing of Poets; as Tully writes, there is required in a Grammarian the
dedication of Poets, the knowledge of Histories, the exposition of Words, and a
certain utterance of Pronounciaiton. Grammar took its beginning from marking
and observing what was most fit and unfit in communication, which thing men
counterfeiting in their speech, from thence this Art took its Rise, even as
Rhetoric was perceived; For it is the duty both of the Grammarians and Orators
to have a regard and respect how to speak. Hermipus says that Epicurus first
taught the Art of Grammar, and Plato espied and perceived first the commodity
and profit of it. In Rome it was nothing esteemed till one Crates Malotes was
sent by King Attalus to teach it between the second and third Battles of the
Punicks, a little before the death of Eunius the Poet. It is of all other
Sciences the most useful, for it shows a way to attain all the rest of the
liberal Sciences. Neither can any man come to attain to any eacellency in any
Art, unless he have first his principles of Grammar, perfectly known, well
digested and thoroughly perceived. Therefore in old time Grammarians were called
Judges and allowers of all other writers, and for that cause they were called
Critici. In this Art excellent Didymus, and Antonius Enipho, unto whose School
Marcus Cicero resorted diverse times after his affairs in the Law were ended:
Nigidius, Figulus, Marcus Varro, Marcus Valerius Probus, and the arrogant
Palemon, with many others of the Greeks, of which Aristarchus, Aristotle, and
Theodoces were the chief.

Greek old Letters, were the same that the Romans use now, as Pliny
conjectureth by a certain Brass table that came from Delphos, which was
dedicated and hanged up in a Library in the Temple of Minerua at Rome in his
time. They were brought into Italy by Evander, and the Arcadians which came
into Italy to Inhabit there; of the Grecians Xenophon, Thucidedes,, Herodotus,
Theopompus, flourished most in writing Histories.

Guns, which of all other Instruments of War have been most destructive to
Mankind, were invented by a certain Almain, whose name is not known, he found
them out after this manner: it chanced that he had in a Mortar, powder of
Brimstone that he had beaten for a Medicine, and covered it with a stone, and
as he struck Fire, it Fortuned that a spark fell into the powder: suddenly
there arose a great flame out of the Mortar, and lifted up the stone wherewith
it was covered, a great height: which he perceiving, he made a Pipe of Iron,
and tempered the Powder, and so finished this deadly Devilish Engine, and
taught the Venetians the use of it, when they Warred at Candius Dyke against
the Genvates, which was in the year of our Lord 1380. For this invention he
received this benifit, that his Name was never known, least he might for this
Abominable device, have been evil spoken off and cursed, whilst the World lasts.

Geometry the Egyptians gloried to have first invented. This Art contains
the description of Lengths, Breadths, Shapes and Quantities. In this knowledge
Strabo excelled, in the time of Tiberius and Ptolomie. In the time of Trajan
and Antoninas Measures and Weights were found out by Sydonius, about that time
Procus Reigned in Alba, Aza in Israel, and Jeroboam in Jerusalem.

Games, the Principal of them amongst the Greeks were the Olympiads, which were
kept every fifth year in the Mount Olympus, and instituted by Hercules in the
honor of Jupiter. In this Game Corylus an Arcadian won the first prize; though
others say Herculus was the first that won it: there was Wrestling, Running
with Horses, and on Foot, Journying, Leaping, Coursing with Chariots, the
contention of Poets, Rhetoricians, disputations of Philosophers. The manner was
there to proclaim Wars, and enter Leagues of Peace; the reward of the Victor
was a Garland of Olives. The second Shows were those called Pythia, which were
in honor of Apollo, in memorial of his vanquishing of the great Dragon Pytho,
that was sent by Juno to persecute his Mother Latona. The third Game was the
Isthiny, devised by Theseus in the worship of his Father Neptune, environed
with a dark Wood of Birch Trees, they that won the Victory had a Garland of
Pine Tree. The fourth was the Nemei, named of the Forest of Nemea: This Feast
those of Argos kept solemnly in reverence of Hercules that slew the mighty
Lion, whose Skin he wore for a Coat of Armor. Pyrrhus Dance, was a Dance that
the Lacedaemonians practiced with Youth, as soon as they came to be five years
of Age, as a prepairation to greater affairs in War. It was first instituted in
Creet by one of the Sybills Priests; they Danced in Armor, and with Weapons on
Horseback. Naked Games were invented by Lycaon. Funeral Plays by Acastus,
Wrestling by Merany, Dice, Tables, Tennis, and Cards were found out by the
Lidians, a people in Asia, and began neither for Gain nor Pleasure, but for the
good of the Commonwealth. For there being a very great Dearth and want of
Provision in the Country, so that the people having not enough to supply their
necessities, were forced one day to take their Meat moderately, and another day
by course they applied themselves to such sports, to drive away the tediousness
of the Famine Chesse was invented in the year 3635, by a certain wise Man named
Xerxes, to show to a Tyrant that Majesty and Authority without strength and
assistance, without the help of Men and Subjects, was casual to many
calamities. There is a Game also that is played with the Postem-bone of the
hinder Foot of a Sheep, Goat, Fallow or a Red Dear, it has four chances, the
Ace-point, and he that cast that, laid down a Penny, or as much as was
concluded by the Gamesters, the other side was called Vetus, and he that threw
it won Six, or as much as was laid down before; the other two sides were called
Chius and Senio, he that threw Chius was three, and he that threw Senior was
four. Some ascribe the finding out of Cards and Chessa to Palamades.

H
HERBS, doubtless Nature, the Mother and Governess of all things (as says a
Learned Author) did produce Herbs, as may appear by many examples, partly for
the delection, and partly for the health and preservations of Men's Bodies.
Axanthus an Histiographer (as Pliny records, writes how a Dragon revived his
young Faun that was slain, by virtue of an Herb called Balin: and the Hechewall
it is reported of her, if a Wedge be driven into the hole of her Nest, (for she
makes her Nest in the hollow or hole of a Tree, that she works with her
Beak, till she makes it fall out, with an Herb that she geteth for that
purpose: and it is not to be disputed but that some of the Indians at this day,
live only by Herbs. Appianus writes that the Parthians, which Anthony put to
flight, constrained by extreme Famine; they chanced to eat a certain Herb,
whose nature was to make them that eat it to forget all other things, and only
to dig up stones, as if they would do some great matters; but after some
extreme Labor they dyed. Though we acknowledge an inexpressible virtue to be
in Herbs: not to discourse further of such strange or wonderful stories, we
shall only express that most Authors agree that Chyron Son to Saturnus, was the
first inventer of such Medicines, as were made with Herbs.

The Hebrew Letters which are now in use, according to St. Hierom's opinion,
were invented and devised by Esdras: For before that time the Hebrews and the
Samant's used all one Characters.

The Harp, It is said to have been found by Mercury; who as he walked by the
River Nylus, after an Ebb, he found a Tortoise all withered, and nothing
remaining but the Sinnews; which as he fortuned to strike on them, made a
certain sound: after the form of which, he fashioned a Harp, and according to
the three times of the years, Summer, Winter, and Spring, he put to it three
strings, a Treble, a Base, and a Mean. This Instrument he gave to Appollo, and
Appollo delivered it to Orpheus: some think Amphion found it. I find that the
Harp has seven strings, to resemble the seven Daughters of Atlas; whereof
Mara, Mercury his Mother, was one. And then after that, were the other two
added to represent the nine Muses. Some referr the Original of the Harp and
Pipe to Appollo, for his Image in Delos (as they write) had in the right Hand a
Bow, and in the left the Goddesses of Favor, whereof one had a Harp, another a
Shalume, the third a Pipe.

Husbandry was invented amongst the Egyptians by Dionysias, amongst the Greeks
by Triptolemus, In Italy by Saturn, though Virgil will have Ceres to be the
first inventer of it; Pilulnus taught them to Bake and Grind, Triptolemus and
Briges the Athenian, were the inventers of the Plough; and Dionisius was the
first that Yoaked Oxen to draw it. Instruments of Husbandry were first invented
by Ceres. Wine was found out by Dionisius, for he is said first to perceive the
Nature of the Wine, and that he taught men how to make use of it, and to press
the Wine out of the Grape. Others say that Icarius the Father of Penelope found
it out first in Athens, who was afterward slain by the Husbandmen when they
were Drunk. Dencalion first found out the Wine above Mount Aeina in Sicilic.
Aruntus a Tyrant being Banished out of his Country by Lucimon, whom he had
bred up of a Child, carried Wine first into France. Wine Taverns were first set
up by the Lydians, a People of Asia. Stophilus was the first that informed men
to mingle Wine with Water: Ale is said also to have been invented by Bacchus,
who taught it to the Northern Nations, to supply the want of Wine. In Greece
Pallas found out the Olive, and the way of making Oil. Aristeus gathered the
Curds of Milk, and made Cheese: he found out the way also of making Honey.
Cherry Trees were brought out of Pontus by Lucullus, the year of the City 680
Zizipha and Tuberes, two kinds of Apple Trees St. Papinins conveyed out of
Syria and Afric, into Italy in the time of Augustus.

Histories of all other writings, are the most commendable, because they inform
all sorts of People, with notable examples of living, and do excite those that
are Noble to pursue such heroical enterprises, as they read to have been done
by their Ancestors; and also they do discourage and Lame wicked Persons from
attempting any heinous deeds or crime, knowing, that such acts shall be
registered in perpetual memory, to the honor or infamy of the doers, according
to the desert or undesert of their endeavors. Pliny says that Cadmus Milesius
first writ Histories amongst the Grecians, which contain the Actions of Cyrus
King of Persia. Albeit Josephus supposes it to be probable, that Histories
were begun by the old writers of the Hebrews; as in the time of Moses, who
wrote the Lives of many of the most ancient Hebrews, and the Creation of the
World: or else to the Priests of Egypt and Babylon; For the Egyptians and
Babylonians have been reputed of a long continuance the most diligent writers;
in so much that their Priests were appointed for that purpose, to preserve
things that were worthy to be had in memory.

Hunting and Fishing, the Phenecians first found out. Warrens and Parks were
made first by Fulvius Hirpinus, and now they are every where in use, I am sure
too much in England, to the so great damage of Pastures, that might Feed other
Cattle, more benificial to the Commonwealth.

I
IRON and BRAS (as Strabo writes) a certain People named Thelchines first
wrought on. The Smiths Forge some think the Calybians found, and some suppose
they were the Cyclops Vulcans Smugs, which first used the Smiths craft.
Diodorus is of opinion, that the Iclei Dactyli and Vulcan were the first
inventers of Iron, and of all Mettalls that are wrought with the Fire.
Sothering of Iron Glancus found. But as I take it, that all these before named,
sound the use of such things in their own Countries. For it is not to be
questioned but that the use of all such Mettalls was perceived in the beginning
of the World by Tubal-cain which was Son to Lamech, expert and exercised in the
Smiths craft. Clement refers the tempering of Iron to Delas.

The institution of the Anointing of Kings and Priests, was to signify, that
they were especially favored of God, and like as Oil lies aloft in the Water,
or other Liquor, so the Office of a Priest, and Dignity of a Prince, surmounts
all other degrees of Ministers, both in the active and also contemplative life.
When Moses had builded the Tabernacle, he was commanded to make a confection of
holy Ointment, wherewith both the work and vessels of Priests, and also of
Kings, which were called to that Office or Dignity, ought to be Anointed: so
that it came to pass, that the Anointing was the very token and difference,
whereby Kings were known amongst the Hebrews, as the Emperors in Rome were
known by their Purple Robes. Aaron and his Sons were the first Anointed
Priests; and Samuel Anointed Saul first King over Israel, and so consequently
it grew into a custom that Priests and Kings were Anointed.

L
THe Law is a constant and perpetual good thing, without which no House, no
City, no Country, no Estates of Men, no Natural Creature, nor the World it
self, can consist firm and stable: For it obeys God; and all other things,
Air, Water, Land, and Men, are in obedience to it. Chrysippus calls it a
knowledge of all Divine and Humane Affairs, commanding equity, and expulsing
wickedness and wrong. There are of Laws three kinds: one Natural, that is not
only appropriated to man, but also it concerns all other living things either
in the Earth, Sea, or Air; as we perceive in all kinds of living Creatures,
naturally a certain familiarity of Male and Female, procreation of Kind, and a
proclinity to nourish the same; the which proceeds from a Natural Law
engrafted in them: Nature her self, that is God was the Author of this. The
second is Named the Law which all men use generally throughout the World; as to
show a man the way, to communicate to men the commodity of the Elements, Water
and Air; to this kind appertains the Law of Arms; and it is called in
Latin Ius Gentium-Civil Law is of every Country or City, as of the Romans,
Lacedaemonians, Athenians, etc. This consists in decrees of Princes, Statutes,
and Proclamations. The chief and principal Laws were promulgate by God,
confirmed after the most pure and perfect manner, stable, constant, and subject
to no transmutation. After the example of these, Man has invented Laws to
defend and preserve good men, and to punish and keep wicked Persons in good
Order. Such Laws Ceres made first, as Diodonus writes: but others suppose it to
be Rhadamantus; and afterward others in diverse Countries devised and ordained
Laws: as in Athens, Draco and Solon, in Egypt Mercury, in Creet Minos, in
Lacedemonia curgus, in Tire Tharandus, in Argos Phoroneus, in Rome Romulus, in
Iltaly Pythagoras; or after the mind of Dionisius, the Arcadians that were
under Evander as their Sovereign Lord and chief Captain. Notwithstanding the
very true Author of Laws is God, which (as has been said) first planted in us
the Law of Nature; and when it was corrupted by Adam and his posterity, he gave
the Written Law by Moses to reduce us again to our first state and true
instinct of Nature, which was before all other, as Eusebius declaireth.

Lotts, the casting of them Numerius Suffusius devised first at Preneste.

Looking-Glasses of Silver were invented by Praxiteles, in the time of Pompey
the Great: there were also invented Looking-Glasses of Steel, Lead,
Christal-Glass, which one Sydon is reported to have been the first inventer of.
Glass was found out in Phenicia, being ingendered in the River which is called
Belus; and it happened on this occasion: A Merchants Ship being fraighted with
Saltpeter, came to that place, and as they were prepairing their Meat on the
Sands, they could not find Stones to bear up their Vessels, so that they were
fain to lay great pieces of Nitre under them, which being set on Fire, and
mingling with the Sand, there appeared great flakes of melted Glass.

Lamps and Hanging Lights began of the Candles, that Moses set up to burn in
the Tabernacle.

Laws of Mourning, of Obit's, Funeral Exequies that are performed over dead
Bodies, were the institution of Polugius, although Isidore ascribes the
Original of it to the Apostles, and he himself did augment the Rites, that we
use at this time. Ambrose supposes that Mourning proceeded from the Custom of
the Hebrews which Lamented Jacob Forty days, and Moses the space of Thirty
days, for that time was but counted sufficient for the Wife to weep in. It was
also the custom of the ancient Romans to mourn. For Numa Pompilius assigned
Oblations to the Infernal Gods for the dead, and did inhibite that a Child
under the age of three years should be bewailed, and that the elder sort should
be mourned no more months then he had lived, if any were married within that
space again it was counted for a great reproach: Wherefore Numa ordained that
such as left of Mourning before the day limited should offer a Cow that was
great with calf for expiation. If that Rite were used now adays, and namely in
England, we should have small store of Veals, there be so many that Marry
within the space of time prescribed. Plutarch writes that the Women in their
Mourning laid aside all Purple, Gold, and Sumptuous or rich Apparral, and were
clothed both they and their kindred in White Apparel, like as at that time
the dead body was wrapped in White clothes. The white color was thought
fittest for the dead, because it is Clear, Pure, Sincere, and least defiled,
and when the time of their weeping was expired, they put on other Vestures. Of
this Ceremony (as I take it) the French Queens tool occasion, after the death
of their Husbands the Kings to wear only white clothing, and when there was
any such Widow, she was commonly called the White Queen. The Jews ended their
Mourning after Thirty days. The Englishmen use altogether Black, which they use
for the most part to wear a whole year, unless it be because of a general
Triumph of a New Magistrate, or when they are toward Marriage. The Manner of
washing the bodies of the dead especially of the Nobler sort and the anointing
of them, was received from our Ancesters which used to wash the bodies of the
dead, and it was the Office of them which were nearest of the Kindred, to do it.

Lead was brought by Miducritus out of the Islands against Spain, called,
Cussitrides, as Strabo writes.

Letting of Blood was Learned of the Water-horse in Nylus: For when he was weak
and distempered, he used to seek by the River side for the sharpest stalks of
Reeds, against which he stroke a Veign of his Leg, with great violence and so
eased his Body by that means of the corrupt and fuperfluous blood: and when he
had so done he covered the wound with the Mud.

Linen or Flax, as Pliny Writs; was invented by the beautiful Lady Arachne of
Lydia, she taught also the way of Knitting Nets to take Beasts, Fish and Fouls.
Minerva instructed the People of Athens in spinning and weaving of Wool: but in
one place Pliny seems to ascribe the Art of Weaving to the Egyptians.

Labyrinths, which we may call Mazes were certain intricate and winding Works,
with many entries and doors, in such a manner, that if a Man were once entered,
he could not sind the way out, except he had a perfect guide, or else a clew of
thread to be his conduct. There were four of them most notable, as it is
reported: The first was in Egypt, and was called of some the Palace of the
King Motherudes, of some the Sepulcher of Mexes: but there are others that say,
it was builded in honor of the Sun, by King Petesucus, or Tethoes: Herodotus
will have it, that it was the common Tomb of the Kings of Egypt; this stood a
little from the Pool of Mirios. The Second was made in Crete, by Daedalus, at
the Commandment of King Minos wherein Theseus of Athens slew the Minotaure. The
Third was wrought in the Isle of Lemnos by Smilus Rhodus, and Theodorus,
Carpenters of the same Country. The Fourth Porsena, King of the Hetrucians;
caused to be made and set up in Italy for his Sepulcher, It was all of Free
Stone and Vaulted.

Letters, concerning the first inventors of them; Authors are at some variance,
Diodorus says they were found by Mercury in Egypt, others say one Menon an
Egyptian devised them. Instead of Letters the Egyptians used to declaire and
signify the intents and conceits of their minds by the Figures of Beasts,
Fishes, Fowls, and Trees. Pliny says that he thought that the Assirians
excogitated the Letters which Cadmus brought out of Phenicia into Greece, which
were but sixteen in number. A b c d e g i l m n o p r s t u. To these Palumedes
in the Battle of Troy added four more. Aristotle says that there were 18.
Hermolaus is supposed to have added the Letter y. Herodotus writes how that
the Phenicians that came with Cadmus to inhabit Thebes, brought Letters into
Greece, which were never seen there before. Some will have the Aethiopians to
have invented them, and then to have taught them to the Egyptians, that were
one of their Provinces. But Eumolphus writes very wisely, that the Original of
Letters were from Moses, who was long before Cadmus days, that he taught the
Jews Letters, and that thence the Phenicians received them, and the Greeks
Leared of them, which thing is conformable to Pliny's opinion: For Jury is a
part of Syria, and the Jews were Syrians. Nevertheless I have it from Josephus,
that writing was before Noah's Flood, for the Sons of Seth (as we have
expressed) wrote in two Pillars, one of Brick and another of Stone, the Science
of Astronomy; whereof that of Stone in the time of Josephus remained in Syria.
Philo ascribes the inventions of them to Abraham. Numbers were used to be
written with these seven Letters, C. I. D. L. M. U. X, or with these Figures,
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. which because they are so Familiarly used, we shall
not need further to declaire. Letters were first brought into Italy by Evander,
and the Arcadians which came into Italy to Inhabit there, as Ovid writes in his
Book de Fastis, the Hetrurians also had a form of Letters by themselves,
wherein the Youth of Rome were instructed, as well as in the Greek Letters,
which one Demeratus a Corinthian taught the Hetrucians. And like as the
Grecians had enlarged the number of their Letters, so the Italians following
their example, put to theirs, f. k. q. x. y. z. h. which h. is no Letter, but a
sign of aspiration: f. they received of the Aeolians, which both amongst the
Romans and Aeolians had the same sound and pronounciation, that p. with an
inspiration has, which we use in writing Greek words; And afterward Claudius
Caesar as Quintilian writes, appointed that it should be taken in the place of
u. Consonant, as fulgus for vulgus, fixet for vixit; and even so our English
men use to speak in Essex, for they say Finegar for Vinegar, Feal for Veal, and
contrariwise, a Vox for a Fox, Vour for Four: and in process of time it was
used for ph. in Latin words k. was borrowed of the Greeks, but any eminent
Author seldom uses it in writing Latin. q. was added because it has a
grosser sound then c. The Letter x. we had also out of Greece (although as
Quintillian judges) we might well forbear it, forasmuch as that they either
used for it c s. or g s. Likewise y. and z. were sent from the Grecians, and
are used of us only to write Greek words. In Letters are contained the Treasure
of Knowledge, by them the most notable things are preserved in fresh
remembrance.

Libraries, which are the Monuments of ingenuous Wits consist in Books, which
were first published in Greece. Gellius says it was Pisistratus that made the
first Book, and exhibited it to be read openly. Josephus will have it
otherwise, that the Hebrews and Priests of Chaldee set forth the first Books.
The Athenians multiplied the number of them, which Xerxes carried from thence
into Persia, and Seleveus King of Macedonia caused them many years after to be
conveyed again to Athens. After that Ptolomeus King of Egypt collected
700000 Books, which were all burnt at the Battle of Alexandria. Nevertheless
S^rabo records that Aristotle did institute the first Library, and left it to
Theophrastus his Disciple, and taught the Kings of Egypt how they should order
their Library: Theophrastus left it to Molus, and of him Scepsis received it.
There was also a very ancient Library at Pergamus. In Rome Afinius Pollio had
the first Library, which Employed the great Wits in study, to the ample
furtherance and commodity of that Commonwealth. At this time the World
flourishes with Libraries to introduce ingenuous Persons to a more sudden
perfection.

Legends of Saints, were made in the year of our Lord 800. by Paulus Diaconius
and Isuardus a Monk, at the desire of Charles the great. And for as much as the
Persecutions were so great, that in the time of Dioclesian the Emperor, there
were put to death 1700 Christians, within thirty days space they could not
particularly write all their Lives, but made general Legends of Martyrs,
Confessors, Virgins; which the Fathers commanded to be read in the Church on
such Saints days.

M
MONEY was first Coined in Rome, 547 years after the City was Built, the first
Coin was named a Ducat. Phedon began Silver Coin in the Isle of Aegina, which
was Minted in Rome 454 after the City was Built, the print of it being a
Chariot with two Horses. Janus caused Base Coin to be made, with a Face to the
one side, and a Ship on the other, that he might gratify Saturn who arrived
there in a Ship by perpetuating his memory to posterity. Serius Tullius Coined
Brass with the Image of a Sheep and an Ox.

Marriage or Matrimony, Antiquity reports that Cecrops King of Athens first
ordained, and therefore the Poets feigned him to have two Faces.
Notwithstanding the customs of Marriage were not alike in all Countries, nor
kept after the same manner. For amongst the Indians, Numidians, Egyptians,
Hebrews, Persians, Parthians, and almost all the Barbarians, every one Married
according to the substance or riches which they enjoyed. The Seythians, Scots,
and Athenians, at first used the Women in common publicly like Beasts: the
Massagers Married their Wives, but they also used them in common. Amongst the
Arabians, it was the custom that all the Kinsmen should have but one Wife, and
he that came to meddle with her, should set his Staff at the Door. The
Assyrians and Babilonians bought their Wives in the Market for a price, which
custom still remains amongst the Arabians and Saracens. The Nazomons when they
are first Married, use to suffer their Wives to be Layne withal the first
Night by all their Guests, and after that, keep them entire to themselves.
There were a certain People of Afric that were wont to offer such Maids that
were to be Married to the King of their Religion, to deflowre such as he
pleased. It was also the custom amongst the Scots, that the Lord of the Manner
was to Lie with the Bride the first Night, which custom remained till it was
abolished by Malcolme the third. Marriage amongst the Romans was kept
inviolable till divorcement began. The Rites of Marriage were various in Rome;
and the manner was that two Children should Lead the Bride, and a third bear
before her a Torch of White-Thorn in honor of Ceres, which custom was also
observed here in England, saving that in place of the Torch, there was carried
before the Bride a Basin of Gold or Silver; a Garland also of Corn Ears was
set upon her Head, or else she bare it on her Hand; or if that were omitted,
Wheat was scattered over her Head in Token af Fruitfulness; also before she
came to Bed to her Husband, Fire and Water were given her, which having power
to purify and clease, signified that thereby she should be chaste and pure in
her Body. Neither was she to step over the Threshold, but was to be bourn over,
to signify that she lost her Virginity unwillingly, with many other
superstitious Ceremonies, which are too long to rehearse. Marriage began first
in Paradise, where God joined Adam and Eve together, before they knew Sin, that
by the congression and company of these two Sexes and Kinds, their issue might
be enlarged to replenish the World.

Mahomets Sect, questionless is one of the most Diabolical of all other, as
well for the filthiness of all unlawful Lusts, as also for other outrageous
naughtiness that it is so strangely possessed with, to the great mischief of
Christendom, and increase of their own infidelity. Of this most superstitious
Sect, Mahomet, Born in Arabia, or as some report in Persia was the Author: his
Father was a Heathen Idolater, and his Mother an Ismaelite, which caused her to
have the more insight into the Law of the Hebrews. This wicked Plant brought up
and fostered under his Parents, and instructed like a Mungrell in either of
their Laws, became expert, being of a quick and ready Wit: after the Death of
his Father and Mother, he was a Servant to one Abdemonaples, an Ismaelite, who
put him in trust with his Merchandise, and other Affairs; and after his death,
he Married his Mistress. There he fell into acquaintance with the Monk Sergius
an heretic of Nestorius Sect that fled from Byzance into Arabia and by his
Council and advice this Mahomet about the year of our Lord 520; and the twelfth
year of the reign of the Emperor Heraclius, began in Arabia to found a new
Sect, and by Seditious Sermons seduced many people in several Countries. He
conquered through the assistance of the Arabians diverse lands and subdued them
as Tributaries, and compelled them to live after the Tradition of his Laws,
that he gathered out of the New and Old Testamants, and diverse Herisies of the
Nicoluits, Maniches, and Subelians: He died in the 40 th year of his age, his
body was carried by the Saracens into a City of Persia called Mecha, and put
into a Coffin of Iron which through the attraction of a Lodestone (to those
that know not the Sympathy of Nature) makes it to seem as if it hung
miraculously. This Sect increases more and more. partly through the discord of
Christian Princes; and by reason of our greivious sins, which has caused us
Christians to feel the heavy hand of God upon us.

Music by the Testimony of the Ancients is of great Antiquity for Orpheus and
Linus being both of the Linnage of the Gods, were both of them incomparable
Musicions. The Invention of Music some do ascribe to Amphion the Son of
Jupiter by Antiope, others do ascribe the finding of it to Dionisius; others
say that it was first brought out of Creete, and being perceived by the ringing
and shrill sound of Brass, was brought at last to Number and Measure, others
ascribe it to the Arcadians; but it is most generally affirmed that Mercury
found out the Notes and Concords of singing. He also as we have already
mentioned was the first that invented the Harp. Shalms were at the first made
of Cranes-legs afterward of a great Reed. Dardanus Tezenius used first to play
on them, Pan found out the Pipe of small Reed, to delight and please his
Mistress, Syrinx Timarias was the first that played on the Harp and Lute with
Ditties; and Amphion was the first that sung to the Lute. The Troglodites, a
People of Aethiopia, were the first that found out the Dulcimer. Pises, a
Tyrrhen, or Tuscan found out the brazen Trumpet, and the Tuscans were the first
that used it in War. Others say that it was Dyrcaeus an Athenian, who taught it
the Lacedaemonians, who maintaining a long War against the Messenians, had this
answer from the Oracle of Appollo, that if they would win the field, they must
have a Captain of Athens. The Athenians in despite sent them Dyrcaeus; a lame
fellow, with one eye, who notwithstanding did receive him and made use of his
Counsel, who taught them to play on Trumpets, which were so dreadful to the
Messenians, because of the strangness of the noise, that they fled, and so the
Lacedaemonians became immediately Victorious. The Arcadians were the first that
brought Musical Instruments into Italy; and some do write that the
Lacedaemonians in War did use Clarions, Shalms Rebecks, to the intent, that when
they were ready to sight, they might be kept in better order. Halyalies King of
the Lydians, had in the battle against the Milesians, Pipers and Fiddlers
playing together; the Cretians when they went to War had Lutes going before
them to Moderate their pace.

Magic took its beginning from Physic, and was the invention of Zoroastes
King of the Bacthrians, who reigned eight hundred years after the Seige of
Troy, The same time that Abraham and Ninus reigned, about three Thousand one
Hundred Fourscore and five Years, after the Creation of the World. Lactantius
and Eusebius think it was set forth amongst other divelish Sciences, by the
evil Spirits, and Pliny calls it of all the Arts the most deceiptful. It is
compacted of Physic, superstition, and the Mathematical Arts. The Thessalians
were especially accused, with the frequent use of this practice, the first
Writers of this Art were said to be Hosthunes, Pythagoras, Empedocles,
Democritus, Plato, who with diverse others Sailed into far Countries to learn
it: Wherein Democritus was reported to have been the most famous, three hundred
years after the City was builded, in which time, Hippocrates published the Art
of Physic.

The Monks those of Olivet, sprung up as a Fruit of disorder, the same year
that the variance was amongst three Bishops, and were instituted by Barnardus
Ptolomeus, the year of our Lord 1407. under Gregory the 12th: The faction of
Grandimonsers, began by Steven of Anern, in Aquitane or Guyen, the year of our
Lord 1076, under Alexander the Second, and had their Title of the Mountain
where their Abbey stood. A little after the same time Robert Abbot of Molisme,
in Cisterium a Forest in Burgundy, did insinuate the order of Cistercians;
though some ascribe it to one Ordingus a Monk, that persuaded Robert to the
same, about the year of our Lord 1098. under Urbane the Second; of this order
was the great Clark St. Bernard. The other orders of them as also of the
Hieronymians, Canons, White-Friers, Crouch-Friers, to mention them as they are
so numerous, would be too tedious.

Martyrs, of them our Savior Christ was the first Witness, and was incarnate,
to be so for the Truth, he had for his Blessed and True Testimony, the envy of
the Jews; insomuch, that they persecuted him to the vile Death of the Cross,
for his most sacred record and report of the Truth; and they did no less pursue
the Apostles and Messengers of the Truth: For when they following the Example
of their Master, did openly declare the word of Truth, and namely Peter did
sorely rebuke the wickedness of the Jews, for putting to Death our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, the Author of Life, advertising of them to repent and
amend. The Jews were so furious, that they Murdered Stephen, as the Acts of
the Apostles testifies, because he was a Fervent and Zealous Witness of the
Truth. This Stephen did two years continually, after Christ's Death, dispute
with all the Learned men of Alexandria, Cyrene, Cilicia, and Asia, and by
Heavenly Wisdom confounded all their Worldly Reason and Humane Learning, for
which they were so poisoned with Malice against him, that they violently Thrust
him out of the City, and then cruelly stoned him to Death. Thus Stephen was
the first open maintainer and defender of our Christian Religion. Afterward
St. Luke the Evangilist found such bitter and sharp persecutions did burst out
against the Christians that were in Jerusalem, that they were enforced to stray
abroad, and were scattered throughout all Jewry and Samaria, saving that the
Apostles remained and Sojourned at Jerusalem. Notwithstanding this persecution
was a great furtherance of the Gospel, by reason they ceased not, but Preached
still the Word every where to the great advance, and augmentation of the number
of the Faithful. Amongst the Heathen Nations Nero in the 13th year of his
Reign, was the first that persecuted our Religion universally, and put St.
Peter and St. Paul to Death, and consequently many other Innocents were slain
cruelly: For out of a Bloody mind he had, he could not spare his own Country;
but either for displeasure of the ruinous Houses, which he was exasperated to
behold, or else desirous to see a resemblance of the Burning of Troy, he set on
fire the most part of the City of Rome, with so huge a flame, that it burnt
six Days and six Nights continually, to the Impoverishing of many Thousands of
the Citizens. Then to mitigate that shameful and abominable Crime, he forged
false Witnesses, that the Christians were guilty of that Enormious Fact; and
so, Thousands of Innocents for Religion were most cruelly put to Death for the
Tyrants pleasure; and to obdurate and harden himself in mischief, he proclaimed
an open Persecution against all that professed the Name of Christ. Not long
after, Domitian in the 12th year of his Reign renewed another Persecution; he
caused St. John to be put into a Vessel of burning Oil, whereof he received no
hurt. Trjan raised a third. The fourth Marcus Antonius. Lucius Anrelius
Commodus stirred up. The fifth Persecution was under the Emperor Severus.
Maximinius procured the sixth. Decius the seventh. The eighth Valerius. The
ninth began under the Emperor Aurelianus. The tenth was by the Command of the
Emperor Dioclesian and Maximianus Herculeus: this Persecution was far more
cruel and general then any of the rest; insomuch, that Dioclesian in the
occient, and Maximinian in the occident, destroyed all the Churches, and
tormented the Christians with most horrid Cruelties. The Books of Scripture
were Burned, Churches plucked down, Christian Magistrates that were in any
Office were deposed, Soldiers were enforced to deny their Faith; or else to be
deprived of their Estates, or loose their Lives. Neither were the three cruel
Tyrants, Mezentius, Licinus and Maximinianus behind for their parts, but were
as insatiate for Christian Blood. As concerning the Martyrdoms of the Twelve
Apostles we shall relate as follows. James the Son of Zebedee, called Major,
for that he was chosen to be an Apostle, was sent to convert Spain, from
whence by reason of the Obstinacy of the People, he returned shortly to Preach
in Judea, where through the Malice of a Jewish Bishop called Abiathar, he was
accused and Beheaded by the consent of Herod Agrippa. His Body was conveyed by
his Disciples first to Jerusalem, and from thence to Spain, where it remains
in Compostella, a Famous Pilgrimage. James the Son of Alpheus, called Minor,
for that he was last chosen, he was Bishop of Jerusalem, and that for the space
of Thirty years; and then as he was Preaching in the Temple, he was thrown down
by the Pharisees, and by them stoned to death; he was Buried by the Temple.
Simon by our Savior called Peter, through the indignation of Nero, because he
was too hard for, and had overcome Simon Magus Sorcerie, was Crucified with his
Head downward. Saul, after his conversion called Paul, who, after that he had
endured and escaped many dangers and torments, as being Whipped with Rods, put in
the Stocks by Philipus, Stoned in Lystra, delivered to wild Beasts in Ephesus,
Bound and Beaten in Jerusalem: at last he came to Rome, where by the
commandment of Nero, he was Beheaded (for that he was a Roman Born) the same
day that St. Peter was crucified. Philip after he had Preached throughout the
whole Country of Scythia, and converted a great part thereof, in the space of
twenty years, was at last in the City of Hierapolis (when he had there extirped
the Herisie of the Hebaeonites) fastened to the Cross, and put to a cruel death.
Bartholomew went to Preach in India, and afterward came to Albania, a City of
Armenia the greater, where he converted the King of that City, and destroyed
the Idols. Wherefore by the Commandment of Astiages Brother to King Polimeus,
whom he had converted, he was Flead alive. His Body was afterward brought to
Italy, and is, as some say at Rome. Andrew Simon Peter's Brother went first to
Preach in Achaia, and afterward in Scythia: but Lastly he was taken at Patras
a City of Achaia; by Egeas, Pro-consul of that Province: Who because that he
had Converted his Wife Maximilla, cast him in prison, where he was most
Tyrannically beaten, stretched out, and bound upon a slope Cross, to augment
his Torment and so he dyed. Thomas Preached the Gospel to the Parthians, Medes,
Persians, Hyrcanians, Bragmans, and converted a great part of India. He was by
the Infidels thrown into a burning Furnace, and is said to have come out
unhurt. Finally, because he prayed to God to destroy the Idol of the Sun, which
the Infidels would have compelled him to Worship, he was by them thrust through
with Spears and Swords. Matthew after he had Preached much in Judea, he went
into Aetheopia, and there converted the greatest part of the Country. As he
had newly ended his Prayers and was lifting up his hands to Heaven by the
Alter, by the Appointment of the King of that Country, certain Villains came
behind him, and run him through with their Swords. Judas called Thaddeus after
the Ascension of our Lord, was sent by Thomas to heal Albagar King of Edissa:
Afterward. he Preached in Pontus, and Mesopotamia, and converted many cruel
and barbarous People. Lastly he came to Persia where for confounding of their
Idols, he was suddenly run upon, and murdered by the Pagan Bishops of that
Country. He was buried at Netre a City of Armenia. Simon, called Chananeus,
Brother to Thaddeus, and James the less; after he had Preached in Egypt,
returned to Jerusalem: Whereof by the consent of the Apostles, he was made
Bishop after the death of his Brother James. As touching his Martyrdom some
say, that he suffered with his Brother Judas Thaddeus in Persia, others that he
was through the envy of the Heretics, accused before the Consul Atticus, and
therefore Crucified as his Master was. Mathyas after the Ascension of our
Blessed Lord and Savior, was chosen by the Apostles to supply the room of
Judas; he was born at Bethlem, and was descended of the Tribe of Juda. He
Preached for the most part in Judea, where at last he was falsely accused of his
enemies for Perjury, and was therefore condemned to be stoned to death by two
men: after which torment one cut him with a Hatchet, which finished his
Martyrdom.

The Four Monarchies of the World, were in successive order as follows, the
First was of the Assirians, by Ninus, about the year of the World, 2220.
augmented by the Queen Semiramis, and afterward it endured the Term of 1300
years, it was translated by Arbactus to the Medes: and there having endured 350
years, it was left by Astyages, and exterpated by Cyrus. The Second Monarchy
was of the Persians, the year of the World, 3425 which after it had endured 191
years, was lost by Daryus, and extirpated by Alexander the Great. The Third
Monarchy was of the Grecians, founded by Alexander the Great, in the year of
the World 3634, and before Christ, 320 years, after whose death it was divided
amongst the Prefects, which in his life time he had appointed in diverse
Countries: by which division Selenius King of Assyria, Ptolomeus King of
Egypt, Antigonus King of Asia, Cassander of Macedonia and Greece: all which
Countries were after subdu^^ by the Romans. The Fourth Monarchy or Empire was
of the Romans, founded by Julius Caesar, in the year of the World 3914, after
the building of Rome 706 years, and before Christ 47 years. This Monarchy
flourished about the space of 470 years, till that after the death of
Theodosius the Great, it was divided by his two Sons into two Empires: Arcadius
was Emperor of Constantinople, which Empire endured (though afterward much
diminished by the Invasions of Barbarous Nations) until the year of our Lord
1453, and then was quite lost by Constantine and, conquered by Mahomet the
second Emperor of the Turks. Honorious was Emperor of Rome, which Empire
shortly after, in the year of our Lord, five hundred seventy-five, and about
the ninth Month of the Reign of Augustus, was utterly ruinated by Othacar King
of the Goths. And long after in the year of our Lord 801, it was restored by
Charles the great, and by him united to the Crown of France, and by his
successors Translated into Germony, (...) here it yet remains as a shadow
only, or representation of the Majesty of the Ancient Roman Empire.

Measures and Wrights were found out by Sidonius (as Entropius writes) The same
time that Procus Reigned in Albany, Ahaz in Judah, and Jeroboam in Jerusalem.
Some write that Mercury devised them in Greece; Pliny ascribes it to Phidon of
Argos; Gellius to Palamades; Strabo to one Phidon of Elis in Arcadie. Diogenes
says, that Pythagoras taught the Greeks Weights and Measures, but Josephus
affirms, that Cain first found them out.

Men Deified, were such as from whom had been attained any special or singular
commodity or favor, to the furtherance or advantage of the common Livelyhoods
of others, such were Builders of Cities, or Ladies excelling for their
Chastity, such as were puissiant in Arms, were more especially honored for
Gods; as the Egyptians had Isiis, the Assyrians Neptune, the Latins Faunus,
the Romans Quirine, the Athens Pallas, the Delphians Appollo, the Grecians
Jupiter, the Assyrians Belus, and many Countries had diverse other Gods; and
some, which is a shame to speak, Worshipped Brute Beasts, and took them for
Gods; by reason whereof the Greeians had the opinion, that the Gods had their
beginning of men. And thus, when men withdrew their fantasies from Images, to
the Spirits invisible, they were persuaded that there were many Gods, and of no
lesser number than mortal men: not to Discourse further of the Opinions of the
Philosophers which were various and dangerous to be mentioned. I shall only set
down what Plato says, that there is but one God, he writes that this World was
Created by him; and that he was called God because he is so merciful and
bestows his Blessings so freely on men, from whom they receive all things
good and profitable; God himself being the principal Fountain of all Goodness.

Men were first called Christians when Philip Converted and Baptized the
Samaritans, and a certain Evunuch of Candaces, Queen of Aethiopia; this Evunuch
Converted the Queen with her Family, and a great part of that Country to the
Faith of Christ. Afterward in Antioch the Faithful named themselves
Christians.

Myrrh, which is an humor congealed and constipated together with heat, is
brought out of the Eastern parts, and chiefly out of Carmania: Pompeius in his
Triumph over the Pyrat's or Robbers of the Sea, brought it first into Rome.

N
NE-CROMANCY is said to be such a kind of Magic as is for the raising up of
the Dead; as in Lucan one raised from Death, told the Adventures of the Battle
of Pharsalia. Pyromancy is one part of it which predicted things by the Fire
and Lightning; as Tenaquilla, the Wife of Tarquinius Priscus, prophesied that
Servius Tullius should be King of Rome, because he saw the Fire environ his
Head. The finding of this Pliny refers to Amphiaraus. Hieromancy, that is a
kind of prophecieing by the Air, as by flying, feeding, singing of Birds, and
strange Tempests of Wind and Hail. Hydromancy was a prophesying by Water, as
Varro Write, ththat a Child did see in the Water the Image of Mercury; and in
150 Verses told all the success of War against Methridates King of Pontus.
Geomancy was a Divination, by opening of the Earth Chiromancy is a
conjectureing by beholding the lines and Wrinkles of the hand, commonly called
Palusistry. The Sages or Wise Men of Persia which in their Language were named
Magi, being strangely addicted to the honoring of their false Gods, were so
extremely foolish that they professed openly, that they could not only by the
observation of the Stars know things to come, but also by the already mentioned
pretended Arts, that they could bring to pass what they would, which illusions
and false persuasions of theirs it becomes all true Christians for to eschew
and abhor.

Naval Fights Minos made the first for Honor and Profit, Merchandise being
instituted to furnish Men with necessaries, by way of Exchange: but after Money
was coined it was made use of more for private Wealth. The Naval or Sea Crown
which was of Gold, was first set on his head which boarded his enemies Ship.

Nets were first said to have been invented by Arachne of Lydia, she taught the
way of Knitting them to take Beasts, Birds, Fish and Fowl, she also Invented
Flax, and Linen as Pliny writes.

Noah made the first Altar. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, did make their Offerings
rather from their devotion, then from any Priestly Authority.

Notaries, were appointed in Rome by Julius the first of that name, their
Office was then to write the lives of Godly Martyrs and Confessors, to Register
them for a perpetual example of constant and virtuous living. Though, I am of
Opinion that it was the Invention and de^ice of Clement, who Ordained seven
Notaries, to Inroll the notable Deeds of the Martyrs. And Antherius afterward
did more firmly rectify them. But this now amongst other Offices is perverted
to other worldly affairs.

Nuns, or the custom of Consecrating of Virgins, to make Vows of Chastity, was
instituted by Pius the first, who also ordained that none should be made,
before they were Twenty five years old; and that they might be Consecrated at
no time but in the Epiphany or Twelfth-day, Easter Even, and on the Feasts of
the Apostles, unless it were when any professed, were in point of dying. And
Sotherus caused that a Decree was made that no such prosessed should touch Cope
or put Incence into the Censors the year of our Lord God 175. It seems to
have taken it is Original from the Apostles which is proved by St. Paul's words,
where he says let no Widow be chosen, before she be Threescore years of age,
with diverse of the like sayings.

O
THE Oath called Jones Stone, Which the Ancients swore by and Held so Sacred,
was after this manner, he that swore was to hold in one hand a stone, and then
to pronounce these Words, If Knowingly I deceive, Jupiter cast me from my Gods,
from my Country, and from all happyness, as I cast away this Stone.

The Orders of Chivalry, most whereof continue at this day amongst Princes are
as follows. The First and antientest of these Orders of Chivalry or
Knighthood, is the Order of the Garter, Instituted in the year of our Lord 1348
in Bordeaux, chief City of the Dukedom Guyne in France, by Edward the Third
King of England, and then possessor of the Dukedom: which order he consecrated
and dedicated to St. George: though the motive of the institution thereof,
proceeded from the Loss of a Garter, which he supposed to have been the
Countess of Salsburies. And it happened in this manner: As one day he was
entertaining her with pleasant Discourse, a Garter chanced to unloose and fall
down, at the Kings endeavoring to take it up, the Noblemen were supprised
with a sudden Laughter: At which the Countess Blushed, to perceive her self
rendered so Rediculous, and withal being displeased at some more than
seemingly Familiarity that had passed, she said sharply to the King, and the
rest, Honi soit qui maly pense: which in English, is, Evil to him that Evil
thinks. The King to pacific the Countesses displeasure, said, that before it
were long, those Noblemen which had made a Jest, and Laughing at the Garter
sallen down, should esteem themselves much honored to wear it for a mark of
Chivalry, and thereupon ordained the said Order, and consecrated it to St.
George, and made thereof Twenty-six Knights, and ordained that they should wear
their Cloakes of Violetcolour Velvet; their Hoods of Red Velvet, and under the
left Knee a Blew Garter, Buckled with Gold, Garnished with precious Stones, and
about it Wrought those words of the Countess of Salshuries; to this Splendor
he added a collar of Gold, full of Red and White Roses, with the Image of St.
George hanging thereon: and about those Roses were also Written the same words
in the Garter. There are of this order (as has been said) Twenty-six Knights,
of which the Kings of England are Sovereigns: and it is so much esteemed for
its Excellency, that Eight Emperors, Twenty-two Foreign Kings and Dukes, and
diverse other Noblemen have been of it. About their Necks these Knights wear a
Blew Ribbon, at the end of which hangs the Image of St. George, upon whose
day the installation of the new Knights is commonly celebrated, being the
Twentythird of April. And although it was first ordained at Bourdeaux, yet
King Edward determined the place of the solemnization thereof to be at the
Church of Windsor, here in England; where at the same time he Founded Cannons,
or a Cannonry, for the better prosperity and greater flourishing of the Knights
of the Order.

The second Order of Antiquity, is of the mnnunciation, instituted Anno Dom.
1356, by Amide the sixth of that Name; Duke of Savoy Sur-named the Green Knight.
The Knights of this Order wear a great Collar of Gold, made winding, with three
Laces, wherein are enterlaced these words, Fert, Fert, Fert, every Letter
importing its Latin word, thus, F. Fortitudo, E. Eius, R. Rhodum, T. Tenuit:
That is, his force has Conquered Rhodes: At this Collar hangs the Image of
our Lady, and an Angel saluting her; from whence it is called the Order of the
Annunciation. The Collar is Fifteen Links, to show the Fifteen Mysteries of the
Virgin, each Link being Interwoven one with the other, in form of a
True-Lovers-Knot. The number is Fourteen Knights, the Solemnity is held
annually on our Lady Day, in the Castle of St. Peter in Turin. This Duke
ordained this Order in Memory of Amide the great Duke of Savoy, who succored
the Knights of St. John, when they took the Isle of Rodes from the Turks, in
the year of our Lord 1310.

The third in Antiquity, is the Order of the Golden Fleece, Founded upon the
Table of the Golden Fleece, that Jason with the other Argonant's went to seek
in the Isle of Colchos, which is as if we should say that he went to the Mine
of Gold, or else in Analogy to Gideons Fleece, as some will have it. This
Order was first instituted by Philip the Second, Surnamed the good Duke of
Burgundy, in the year 1430: the complete number of which Order were at the
first Twenty-five Knights, but raised afterward by the said Philip to
Thirtyone: and now there are as many as the King of Spain shall be pleased to
invest with it. They wear a Collar of Gold, Interlaced with Iron, seeming to
strike Fire out of a Flint, the word's ex ferro flamman, at the end hangs the
Fleece, or Toisond'or: Their Cloaks and Hoods are of Scarlet, guarded with
Embroidery like flames of Fire. Philip appointed for the celebrating of that
Order on St. Andrews day, being the Thirtyeth of November. But the Emperor
Charles the Fifth, (Heir of the House of Burgundy, and chief of that Order)
changed their Apparel, and ordained that their Cloaks should be of crimson
Velvet, and their Hoods of Violet colored Velvet, and that underneath they
should wear a Cassock of cloth of Silver.

The fourth in Antiquity, is the Order of St. Michael the Arch Angel,
instituted by Lewis the Eleventh of France, the first day of August, in the
year 1469, and ordained that of that Order there should be Thirty-six Knights,
which afterward were augmented to Three-hundred Gentlemen of Name and Arms, of
whom he himself was chief and Sovereign, and after him his successors Kings of
France. the Brothers and Companions of this Order were bound at receiving of
them, to forsake and leave all other orders, if they were of any, either of a
Prince or any Company, only excepting Emperors, Kings and Dukes, which besides
this Order, might wear that Order whereof they were chief, with the agreement
and consent of the King and Brotherhood of the said Order of other Emperors,
Kings and Dukes. And for the cognissance of this Order, and the Knights
thereof, he gave to every one of them a Collar of Gold, wrought with
Cockleshells, Interlacing one another with a double pointing Ribbon of Silk,
with Golden Taggs; the word, Imensi Arenor Oceani, which King Francis the
First, because of his Name, changed into a White-Friers, or Franciscans Girdle,
made af a Twisted cord, and caused to be hanged on that collar a Tablet of St.
Michael upon a Rock, conquering the Devil. Of the institution of this Order, is
a Book made containing Ninty-eight Articles, wherein are set down the things
whereunto the Knights of the Order are subject.

The fifth Order, is that of the Holy Ghost, instituted by Henry the Third,
King of France, on Newyearsday, in the year 1579. It was called by the name of
the Holy Ghost, because this Henry was on a Whitsonday chosen King of Poland.
Of this Order is written a Book, containing the Articles whereunto the Knights
thereof were bound. Among which I have principally noted one, that is, to
defend and sustain the Clergy: For that the King does give to every one of them
the Rent of certain Abbeys, Religious Houses, or other Spiritual Lands, whereof
they shall allow a certain Stipend, to the entertaining of such a number of
Religious persons in every Religious house under him, and for that benefit are
sworn at the entering into the said Order, always to defend the Spirituality,
and to maintain the Clergy in their priveledges; but how they keep their Oath,
it is easily to be discerned in every place of their spiritual possessions:
with which I have been often times very much dissatisfied in, (for having
oftentimes tried the courteous demeanor, that commonly Religious Men use to
Strangers that come to visit their houses:) I have diverse times been
sufficiently informed by the Religious, how the King has given the rents and
Possessions of their Houses to the Knights of his Order, with the conditions
already rehearsed, which Knights allow them such bare exhibition, that by
reason it is not sufficient to entertain the fourth part of the number of them
appointed, many of them are constrained to forsake their houses, and beg, or
else they must starve. The Pope considering what dismembring of Church Lands
arriseth from this Order in the Realm of France, would not grant the
Confirmation thereof: but notwithstanding the Popes mislike thereof it is still
maintained. The Collar of this Order is of Flowers de Lys, and Flames of Gold
with a Cross, and a Dove on it Pendant, representing the Holy Ghost, Wrought in
Orange tawny Velvet, garnished about with Silver Beams, which the Knights of
that Order wear upon their Cloaks, before their heart. Their Robe is a black
Velvet Mantle, poudred with Lillies and Flames of Gold and Silver. None are
admitted to this Order, who cannot prove their Nobility by three Descents at
least.

The Sixth Order, is of the Bath, brought first into England 1399 by Henry the
Fourth; they are Created at the Coronation of Kings and Queens, and at the
Installation of the Princes of Wales. Their Duty is to Defend true Religion,
Widows, Maids, Orphans, and to maintain the Kings Rights.

Obelisci or Pyramids, which may be called long broches or Spires, were great
and huge stones in Egypt, made by Masons, from the bottom smaller and smaller,
of a large length, they were consecrated to the Sun, because they were long
much like to the beams of the Sun. The First of them was instituted by Mitres,
who reigned in Heliopolis being commanded by avision to make it, and so it was
recouded and written on the same. King Bochis set up four, that were every one
of them 48 Cubits long: Ramesis (in whose time Troy was destroyed, reared up
one, Forty cubits in length, and another of 819 Foot, and every side was four
cubits broad. Ptolomeus Philadelphus made one at Alexandria of four cubits. And
Pheron set up two in the Temple of the Sun, of a hundred cubits length a piece,
and four cubits broad, on this occasion it fortuned that this King, for a great
crime that he had committed. was stricken blind, and continued so ten years, and
after by Revelation at the City Bucis, it was told him that he should receive
his sight, if he washed his Eyes with the water of a Woman, that was never
defiled with any strange Man. but was always content with her Husband. First
he tried his own Wife, and afterward many others, till at last he received his
sight, and Married her by whose Urine he was healed, and was recovered, and all
the other with his first Wife he caused to be burnt. Afterward for a
remembrance he made his Oblation with the two aforesaid Pyramids in the Temple
of the Sun. Augustus Caesar brought two of these Broches or Spires to Rome, and
set one in the great Tiltyard or Lists, called Circus. The other he set up in
the field called Campus Martius.

Ointments, Pliny is of opinion, that they were used long before the Battle of
Troy; for Jacob sent to his Son Joseph in Egypt Ointments: and Moses that was
three hundred and fifty years before the Siege of Troy, makes mention of
Ointments, concerning the Sanctification of the Tabernacle, and the Priests of
the Old Testament. Pliny and Solinus report, that Alexander, when he conquered
the Army of Darius, found amongst other Jewels, spoils and things of value a
Casket of Ointments, that he highly esteemed of. But Herodotus affirms that
they were frequently used long before Darius time. For Cambyses Son to Cyrus
sent Ambassadors to Aethiopus King of the Macrobians, with great presents,
whereof a Box of Ointments was one. It is not certain when they first were used
in Rome: but I find in Pliny, that the five hundred sixty fifth year of the
City, Antiochus being Vanquished, P. Licinus Crassus, and Julius Caesar, then
Censors, commanded that no Foreign or Strange confection of Ointments should
be sold in the City.

The Original of the Heathen Gods, as the Scripture has it, Ephesians. 6. was,
When the Spirits of the air (the Rulers of this World) began to give
Prophetical answers out of Images, made to resemble mortal men. and by their
wicked Subtlety, did pretend themselves sometimes to be of the Number of good
Spirits, sometimes Celestial Gods, sometimes the Souls of Valiant Lords: they
brought Men into such error and perplexity, that in a short space they did
alienate their hearts from the Religion and Reverence of the true God, and so
deluded them as to make them to repare to them for help, and to inquire their
Oracles and Answers; which of purpose had doubtful understandings, least their
Ignorance should be perceived. By these deceitful means they were by diverse
Nations Deified, and sundry people after diverse manners chose them for Gods,
and with great reverence Worshipped them. These spirits of the Air that gave
such doubtful answers to them that euquired any question of them, were at the
coming of our Savior Christ all destroyed. For when he was carried into
Egypt, which was a Country full of Superstition and Idolatry, all the Idols
of that Nation were overthrown and Fell to the ground at his coming. And in
the time of Adrian the Emperor, both their wicked Sacrifices were abolished,
and also the Oracles of Appollo at Delphos, of Jupiter Hammon in Egypt, with
the like vanities were subverted.

The Opinions of the Philosophers, concerning the birth of Man, Were diverse
(Diodorus records) that they spoke of two sundry manners of birth, and first
stock of Mankind: for they which contend that the World was not generate and
without any danger of Corruption, say also that Man has been in a certain
Perpetuity, without Beginning. Of this Opinion were Pythagoras, Xenocrates, and
Aristotle, with other Peripateticks, affirming that all things in the Eternal
World, which have been, or shall hereafte come to pass, are by Generation
endless, and without Beginning, and have only a circuit or course of
Generations, wherein both the Birth, and natural resolution of things may be
perceived. Others suppose this World had both an Original cause of Being and
shall also end by Putrefaction, they hold Opinion that Man had a time of his
Generation.

P
PHYSIC, some referr the invention of it to Appollo, because the moderate heat
of the Sun, seems to be the repeller of all Sickness. Others attribute the
finding of it to the Egyptians; but the enlarging of it to Aesculapius, who,
besides other more rare Experiments, found out the way of drawing of Teeth. In
Rome, Archagathus of Peloponesus was the first Physician. In Egypt and Babylon
they used no Physicians, but brought the Sick Persons into the Streets and
Public places, that so the Passengers might tell them what manner of Medicine
or Diet was good for them: neither was it Lawful for any Man to pass by, till
that he had spoke with the Patient. Afterward the Egyptians did so distribute
the Art of Physic, that every Disease had a distinct Physician to look after
it; one for the Head, another for the Eyes, others for other parts according as
they excelled. Of Medicines made by Herbs, we have already in another place in
part discoursed. Chiron the Son of Saturn as he was reported to have been so
knowing in the virtue of Herbs, may be Accounted to have been one of the first
inventers of Salves for Wounds and Sores: he found out the Herb called
Centaurie, wherewith he cured the Wound that he had received from Hercules's
Arrows falling on his Feet as he was handling of his Quiver. Mercury found out
the use of Moly, and Achilles the virtue of Yarrow. Medicines made with Honey,
were from Sol the Son of Oceanus: several Herbs also very necessary for
Medicines; were discerned from those cures Beasts out of an instinct of Nature
made on themselves. Dittany by the Hare, which being Wounded with an Arrow, by
the sudden Eating of it, is said to drive it out of her Body. Celandine, which
is an Herb which is much used for the cure of decayed Sight, was first
perceived by the Swallow, that uses to Heal the Eyes of her Young-ones with it.
The Boar in his Distemper cures himself with Ivy. The Storke first taught men
the use of Glisters, who finding her self very full, purges with her crooked
Bill in her Fundament. The Weesel in combat with the Serpent preserves it
self with Rue, and the Stork with Origany; and in the same manner, Nature has
taught other Creatures particular Medicines for their Distempers.

Painting, as Pliny expresses, Gyges a Lydian did first invent, he devised
Portrature in Egypt. In Greece Phyrrhus the Cousin of Dadolus, according to
Aristotle's mind. But Theophrastus says, that Polignotus an Athenian was the
instituter of it: yet Pliny neither agrees with Theophrastus nor yet with
himself; for in the Thirty-fifth Book he says, that Polignotus a Thalian, did
first Paint Women in single Apparel, and trimed their Heads with Kalls of
sundry colors. The Egyptians say that they had that Art Six-hundred years
before it arrived at Greece: And the Greecians affirms that it was begun by
the Siconians, and some of the Corinthians. Albeit, the most Authentic Authors
affim it took its original from the drawing of a man with Lines, in the process
of time it was made more glorious with colors. Drawing of Pictures with Lines
and Shaddows Philodes an Egyptian, or Cleanthes a Corinthian devised.
Telephanes a Siconian, and Ardices of Corinthus found this Art first, without
colors; and Cleophantes of the same Country invented colors: Appollodorus
was highly esteemed for the Pensil. In the same expertness Timageras, Pythyas,
Polignotus, Aglaophon, with others that Pliny recites in his Twelft Book
excelled. And Baphael Sanctus, as also Vrbinate was very lively in expressing
of the Face: since many others that stood on their Shoulders have perpetuated
their Names.

Paper, before the invention of it, men used to Write in Leaves of Date Trees,
and sometimes on the Bark of Trees. Afterward they Wrote their minds publicly
on Plates or Sheets of Lead, and their private Affairs in Tables of Wax; for
Tables as Homer expresses were before the Sige of Troy. Paper was first devised
by King Alexander, as Varro says, it was first made of Fenny Rushes, that grew
in the Marsh ground of Egypt. But Pliny will have it that it was used in the
time of King Numa that Reigned Three-hundred years before Alexander, and his
Books which were found in a Chest of Stone in a Field, by L. Pitilius a Scribe,
which were Written in Paper. In process of time, Paper that we now use, was
invented; it was made of Linnen-cloath, beaten together in Mills for that use.

Parchment, as Varro Writes, was found in Pergamus, although the Jewish
Historians (as Josephus expresses) used Parchment: they Wrote also in Goats and
Sheeps Skins in former times as Herodotus declares.

Printing, that rare Art and Mystery, which has preserved the best Authors
from the danger of corruption, was first found out in Germany at Mogunce, by
one John Cuthenbergus a Knight; he invented also the Ink that PRINTERS Use,
sixteen years after Printing, which was in the year of our Lord 1458. One
Conradus an Almaine first brought it into Rome: Nicholas Johnson a Frenchman,
did very much polish it, and now it is dispersed through most parts of the
World. This Noble Art was first to Print Letters in Tin, Lead, and other mixed
Metal; it is a Divine and Heavenly invention: but it would have been more
Mavelous if it had not been so common. It is strange and scarcely to be
spoken, but it is as true as truth it self, that one Printer may Print so many
Letters in one day, that the swiftest Scrivner or Writer is not able to do so
much in a year. This Art was at the beginning in great Admiration, and of no
less Lucre and Profit. It was first undertaken with more boldness and
confidence then any certainty, and it was about Eeighteen years afterward,
before it was common in Italy. But by the industry of man's Wit, it grew to
that perfection, that it is now arrived to. Truly it had gone ill with all good
Discipline (if it were now to have its beginning, seeing that for the most part
people are grown so effeminate, and such epicures, for here Learning is not
Al-a-mode, many of our Gentry will scarce take up Books if they lay in the
Highways, which in times past were valued more then if every Leaf had been
in Beaten Gold, that the greatest sums of Money would have been given for them.
If this Art had not been found out in a convenient and happy time, the Noble
Acts of all Nations had never been so manifest to the Word: In like manner the
memory of Ancient antiquity had not been so restored, and the Divine Wisdom of
the Philosophers had been in danger of being lost, whatsoever has lain
obscure in a few written Copies these many Ages is now by this Art set forth to
all immortality.

Poetry is a most excellent Art, for it comprehends all other Sciences: This
Art is only given of Nature by a Divine inspiration, without which Democritus
affirms there could never be excellent Poets; for it proceeds not so much
from Art or Precepts, as from the Divine inspiration and Spiritual power; and
therefore Ennius called Poets Holy, because they have a special prerogative.
The beginning of this Art is very Ancient, and as Eusebius says, it flourished
first amongst the Hebrews, that were long before the Greeks. For Moses the
great Captain of the Jews, at that time he led the Children of Israel out of
Egypt into the Land of Promise, passing the Red Sea, which by the power of God
gave place to them, inspired by the Holy Ghost made a Song of Hexameter Verses,
to render thanks to God for that deliverance. And David the Holy Prophet of
God, after he was dispatched and freed from all his troublesome and dangerous
affairs in War, and had escaped the Assaults and Conspiracies of Treason,
living in happy and prosperous times of Peace, devised many pleasant Tunable
Hymns for the praise of God in sundry kinds of Meter. For as St. Hierome
says, the Psalter of David is in as good Number and Measure, as either the
Greek Planudes, or the Latin Horace: sometimes in Alcens Numbers, sometimes in
the Meter of Sappho, sometimes with half measures. What is more stately and
high then the Song of Moses in Deutrinomy, and of Isaiah? more ancient then
Solomon's? more perfect then Job? we may more highly ascribe the invention of it
to the Hebrews: it is nevertheless to be acknowledged that Orpheus and Linus,
and after them Homer and Hesiod did publish and adorn this Art with all manner
of rich Furniture. The Romans received it not till of latter times; for Livius
Andronicus (as Tully writes) in the year 513, after the City was Builded (Cains
Claudius Cento, and Marcus Tuditanus being Consuls) set forth the first
Interlude or Fable, a year before Ennius was Born. Before those days it was so
despicaple, that if one had professed himself to be a Poet, he was imagined to
be as bad as a Murderer. The Author of Meter was Almighty God, who
proportioned the World, with a certain order as it were a Meter: For there is
none (as Pythagoras taught) that can possibly doubt, but that there is in
things Heavenly and Earthly, a kind of Harmony; and unless it were governed
with a formal concord and described number, how could it so long continue? all
other instruments that we poscess, are all fashioned by a manner of Measure.
Diodorus assigns the invention of Meter, which the Poets by a Spiritual
influence used in their Works, to Jupiter, to the Almighty God. Of Meters there
are diverse kinds that have their Name either of the thing that is described
therein, (as Heroical Meter is so called of the Wars of Noble men that are
contained in it) wherein also Appollo gave his Oracles, therefore Pliny says
we have that Meter of Pythius Oracle, or of the inventour as Aesclepiadicall,
or of the quantity of Jambicks, because it consists of a short and long,
which Archilocus first invented, of the number of Feet as Hexameter and
Pentameter, which is also called Elegaical. The Shepards Song Daphus the Son of
Mercury was first expert in: others in process of time made a further progress
in this Art.

Prose, as Pliny expresses, was first writ by Phiresides a Syrian, in the time
of King Cyrus. For it is not to be questioned, but that he that write Histories,
write also Pross first; and Pheresides was long after Moses, which was 688
years after Joatham King of the Jews. In whose time the Olympiads began; and
this Pheresides (as Eusebius writes) was but in the first Olympiad.

Pope Jone, she was after the time of Charles the Great, in the year from the
Birth of Christ 154. She Governed the Apostolical Seat two years, some months
and days, she held this for a Maxim. Nascitur indigne per quem non nascitur
alter;
Indigne vinit per quem non vinit et alter.


The Purple Color was found as Pollux writes upon this occasion: Herades
being in Love with a Beautiful Lady named Tyro, as he walked by a Sea Cliffe,
his Greyhound chanced to find a She Will called a Purple; and when he had cracked
it with his strong Teeth, the orient color of the Blood remained on his Snout:
which flesh pleasant color the Lady espying, threatened Hercules, that she
would never admit him to enjoy her, untell he brought her a Cloth dyed with
that precious color. Hercules, willing to accomplish his Ladies desire, got
the Purple Fish, and carried the Blood to his Sovereign Lady. And after this
manner the Purple color first began amongst the Tyrians. The Emperors of Rome
were the first that wore the Purple Robes, which have since been so honored by
Princes, so as it is now accounted for the Royal color.

Pardons were first proclaimed by St. Gregory: This seed Sown by him, grew to a
ripe Harvest in the time of Boniface the Ninth, who Reaped much Money for that
Chafe.

Parishes, after that the Priesthood was ordained, both least the care should
be overgreat, and also that every man might know what his charge was, and how
far his Office extended, Dionisius in the year of our Lord 267, devised both in
Rome and other places, Churches, Churchyards, and Parishes to Curats, and
Diocesses to Bishops, and commanded that every one should be contented with his
prescript bounds.

Philosophy, which Tully calls the studdy of Wisdom, the searcher of Virtue,
and expulser of Vice, (according to diverse opinions) was brought first out of
Barbary into Greece, by Persia the Magi, for so they called their Wise men that
excelled in Knowledge; in Asia the Chaldees; in India the Gymsophists; so
called because they went Naked, of which Faction one Budas was chief. In France
the Druider, in Phenice Ochus, in Thrace Xamolxis and Orpheus, in Libia Atlas.
The Egyptians affirm that Vulcanus the Son of Nylus found the first principles
of Philosophy. Lacertus Writes that Philosophy began in Greece, that Maseas and
Linus were the first Learned men; but Eusebius will have it, that Philosophy,
like all other Sciences, sprung amongst the Hebrews, and from them the Greek
Philosophers, which were a Thousand years after Moses, which derived their
Knowledge from them. Philosophy, the Name of it was not used amongst them till
the time of Pythagoras, for he called himself a Philosopher, and the studdy of
Wisdom Philosophy: whereas formerly it was named Wisdom, and they that
professed it had the Title of Wise men. There are three parts of it, one called
Natural, another Moral, and the faculty of disputing called Logic: The Natural
is of the World and the contents thereof, which Arthelaus brought out of Jonia
into Athens. Moral reformeth the Life and Manners of men; this part Socrates
traduced from Heavenly things, to the use of Life, to discern good and bad.
Logic inventeth reason on both parts; it was first said to have been found out
by Zeno Eliates: others devide Philosophy into Five parts, Natural,
Supernatural, Moral, Mathematical, and Logic.

The Potters Craft, that works things in Clay and Earth, Chotibus an Athenian
is said first to have invented, as Pliny Writes in his seventh Book, but in his
Thirty-fifth Book he ascribes the Original of it to Dibutades at Corinth, whom
he says by the help of his Daughter invented this Art, who after she
understood that her Lover was to depart into a strange Nation, for the tender
Love that she bore to him, she drew his Image on a Wall after the form of his
shadow by Candlelight, which her Father filled and Fashioned with Clay, and
made it into a figure and resemblance of his Body, and dried it with the fire,
and set it in the common Hot-house where the Maids and Women kept their Baths;
and there it remained till Mummius destroyed Corinth. Demeratus Father to
Tarquinius Priscus, King of the Romans, first brought it into Italy.
Lisistratus a Serenian, invented the making of Moulds, and found the way to
work Images in them. The Potters Wheel or Frame (as Ephorus writes) Anacharsis
a Philosopher of the Country of Scythia invented. The chief Workmen in this
Art were said to have been Demopholus, and Gorgosus.

Prayer was from the Beginning, Abel, prayed, Noah, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
with other Patriarcks fought God by prayer in all their doubtful affairs, and
gave thanks for the good atchieving of them. Moses and Aaron with others, as
Anna the Wife of Helcanah gave us an example of Prayer. But Christ is the first
that showed us any special form of prayer; as appears in the Gospel of St.
Matthew. There were devised by one Petrus Heremita of the City of Amiens, Beads
to say the Ladys Psalters on, in the year of our Lord 1090. The same Peter the
Hermit was the occasion that Pope Urbane stirred up the Christians to make a
Voyage into Asia; at which time Jerusalem was recovered.

Prreaching, or the first Sermon was by Moses when he had received the Ten
Commandments, he then assembled the people together, and acquainted them with
the will of God: St. John the Baptist preached in the Wilderness of Jury, and
so did our Savior himself, and gave Authority to the Apostles and Disciples by
special Commandment to do the same.

Prisons, Fetters, Stocks, Gines, Staves, with the like Instruments to punish
Malefactors. Ancus Martius (as Livy says) did first appoint them to keep men
in Fear and good Order.

R
RHETORIC (Diodorus says) was invented by Mercury: But Aristotle affirms that
Epedocles was the first Author of the Oratorial Art. We may be sure, that not
long after men were Formed, they received from God the use of Speech, wherein,
when they perceived some words to be profitable, and some to be hurtful in
uttering of them; they appointed and compiled an Art of Speech or
communication, called Rhetoric. Rome was the Seat of Eloquence, where it was
never forbidden, but in process of time (as it was found to be profitable and
honest) was had in such high estimation and so many partly for their defense,
Glory and Ambition, employed their studies in it with such earnest endeavors,
that very many of the Commonalty were promoted into the degree of Senators,
and achieved much honor by it; Cornx and Thisias, being Sicilians, gave the
first precepts in Writing of this Science, and their Counthey-man Leontinus
Gorgias succeeded them: Demosthenes was the principal amongst the Grecians:
amongst the Romans M. Tullius Cicero, who had no fellow. Now as touching the
effect and property of it, there are in it (as Cicero writes) five parts; first
to invent Matter to speak, then for him that is to deliver his speech, formally
to order his devices, next to polish it and furnish it with Elegant terms and
choice words, and to have his speech and oration in perfect memory; and last of
all, to utter and express it with a comely gesture and posture, in such a
manner as to delight; with the convenient and pleasant treatableness of it,
which should as it were teach and plainly declare the things, and move the
passions and affections of the Auditors and Judges, either to pity or favor;
or if the cause permit or time require, to excite them either to mirth, or to a
grave severity, as the occasion shall require. In terms of this faculty, we
make this difference, we call him that defends matters, and pleads causes
an orator. A Rhetorition, is he that teaches and professes to be a School
master in that Art. A Declamater, he that is employed in feigned causes, either
for his own exercise, or to instruct others therein.

Relics were first instituted by Cletus and Anacletus, Bishops of Rome, who
seriously went about to reverence those Martyrs, whose innocent Blood was spent
for Gods cause. To this purpose they appointed a place where the Martyrs should
severally have their Sepulchers apart from the Lay People, and by decree he was
denounced accursed and sacreligious, that by word or deed hindered men's
devotions from visiting the Tombs of the Apostles. Upon this institution
Calistus the first Builded a Church, beyond Tyber, a Church in honor of our
Lady: and Constantine the Emperor edified to St. Peter, St. Paul, and St.
Lawrence Temples. This matter was by Gregory the Saint set forward, to increase
Devotion: for he appointed the Lettanies of Saints, with Ora pro nobis, to be
sung with Masses on Solemn days in the chief Temples of the City, promising
them that repaired thither at such Solemn Feasts, Remission of their Sins by
his Pardon.

Ringing of Bells, were first ordained by Sabinianus that the people might be
assembled together to hear Divine Service at certain hours of the day: and John
the 22d decreed, that Bells should be tolled every day three times Morning or
Evening, that every one should say three times the Ave-Maria.

Royal Ornaments of the Romans, were Fardels of Rods, the Axe, the Garland of
Gold, the Chair of Ivory, the Kyrtil or Cope, Charriots, Trapped Horses,
Mantles of State, Embroidered Gowns, with all other Royal Apparel, the Tuscanes
were very early in their choice of rich Habits, whom Tarquinius Priscus subdued.

Rome, has been taken Eight times; First by the Gauls under the conduct of
Captain Brennus, the year of the Foundation of the City 365, and the year of
the World 4835 and the year before Christ 364. This Brennus is by the Britain
and English Chronicles reported to have been a Britain, and Brother to
Belinus, King of Britain; but neither the Chronicles of Rome nor of Gaul do
express any such matter. Rome was the Second time taken by Alaricke, King of
the Goths, after he had held his Seige before it for the space of two years:
Which befell the year of the Foundation of the City 1164, the year of our Lord
412, and the 25 year of the Emperor Honorius. It is written in the Chronicles
of Constantinople; and in other Histories, that as Alarick (being a Christian)
Marched with his Host toward Rome, a certain Monk, of a Holy Life, came to
him, who having Audience admonished and councelled him to break off that evil
purpose, and to remember that he was a Christian. and that for Gods sake he
would moderate his Wrath, and that he would not take pleasure in the shedding
of Christian Blood, since that Rome had not in the least respect offended him:
unto whom Alricke answered, thou must understand, Man of God, that it
proceeds not of mine own will, that I go against Rome, but contrarily i will
assure thee that every day there comes unto me a Man, which constrains and
importuneth me thereunto, saying unto me hasten thee, go against Rome, destroy
it utterly, and make it desolate. At which words the Religious Man being
astonished durst not reply, and so the King persued his enterprise. Rome was
Thirdly taken by Genserick, King of the Vandals, the year of the Foundation of
the City 1208, the year of Christ 456, who Sacked and Burnt it in many places,
this was in the Emperor Marcians time. Rome was Fourthly taken by Totila King
of the Goths, who because he could not obtain peace of the Emperor Justinian,
commanded the Citizins to avoid the City, and afterward burnt, and sacked, all
the whole City; defaced the Walls, and the Capitol, and rendered it almost
desolate, insomuch that it could never since be repaired according to the first
Form, although a while after, Bellisarius Peopled and repaired a Great part
thereof. And recalling the old Inhabitants, very much Fortifyed and
Strengthened the Walls. This desolation happened the year after the Foundation
of the City 1300; after Christ 548, in the 21st year of the Emperer Justinian.
Rome was the Fifth time taken by the same Totila King of the Goths; after that
Belisarius had repeopled and repaired it. It was the Sixth time taken by the
Moors and Sarazens followers of Mahomet in his Law, which in great Multitudes
came into Italy, and in the year of our Lord 333, Gregory the Fourth then
fitting in Rome, and governing the Empire, Lewis the First beseiged it, took
and Sacked the City, profaning the Temple of St. Peter: Lading their Ships
with Plunder and Prisoners. Rome was the Seventh time taken by Henry the Fourth
of that name Emperor of Germany, Gregory the Seventh then sitting in the
Chair: this time Rome was also most cruelly Destroyed, by reason that both the
Armies of the Pope and the Emperor Skirmished, and Fought for a long time
within the City, and the Capitol, which was then again repaired; this was in
the year of our Lord 1082: Anthony writes that Rome was very much endamaged at
this time also, by reason of the lamentable execution performed by the Normans
on the Popes side, and the Germans for the Emperor. Rome was last taken by
Charles Duke of Bourboun: who being slain as he scaled the Walls at the first
Assault, the Soldiers being without a head, in revenge, committed all manner
of Enormities, and Barbarous cruelties, saving that they burnt not the
Churches, though they spoiled and robbed them without any consideration of
their Holiness: For a great part of the Army were Germans, and most of the
Germans Lutherians, this ruin happened in the year of our Savior 1527,
Clement the Seventh, then sitting in the Chair.

S
A SATYR, is a Poem that sharply rebukes Vice, not regarding of any Persons.
There are two kinds of Satyrs, the one which was both amongst the Greeks and
Romans, in Ancient times used for the diversity of Meters much like a Comedy,
but that it is more wanton. Demetrius of Tharsus and one Menipus a bondman,
whom Marcus Varro did counterfeit, were expert in this way of writing. The
Second manner of Writing of Satyrs was railing, only ordained to enveigh
against Vice, they were devised of the Romans upon this occasion. When the
Poets that wrote the old Comedies, used to handle for their Arguments not only
feigned matters, but also things really done, which although at the first was
tolerable, yet afterward by reason that they were so sharp and bitter,
against every one that they pleased to have a fling at, there was a Law made,
that no man should afterward reprehend any person by name. The Romans in the
place of these Comedies, substituted such Satyrs, as they had newly invented:
afterward began the new Comedi, which concerns generally all men of mean
estat; and has less bitterness and railing, but is more pleasant and full of
pastime for the Auditors. Of these Comedies Menander and Philemon were Authors,
who abated of the tartness and crabbedness of the old writings, of them
Caecilus, Nevius, Plautus and Terentius, learned to compile Comedies, although
(as Quintilian will have it) they never arrived to the least proportion of
their Patrons, because as he writes they never attained to the least proportion
of their Patrons, because the Latin tongue is not so fit to receive the
Ornaments of Eloquence, as the Greek tongue is. The Satyrs had the names of
Barbarian Gods that were Rude, Lascivious, and Wanton in behavior; In this
form of writing Lucilius, Horatius, Persius, Juvanal, were the most eminent.

The Twelve Sybils, the First was of Persia named Samberta, or Persica, She
amongst other Prophesies said, The Womb of the Virgin shall be the Salvation
of the Gentiles. The Second was of Lybica; one of her Prophesyes was, The day
shall come that men shall see the King of all living things, and a Virgin Lady
of the World shall hold him in her Lap. The Third was Themis surnamed Delphica,
for that she was Born and Prophesied at Delphos: Her Predictions was, A Prophet
shall be Born of a Virgin. The Fourth was, Cumaea, born at Cimeria a City of
Campania in Italy, she Prophesied, that God should be Born of a Virgin, and
converse amongst Sinners. The Eifth was Famous Erythrea, who had her Birth at
Babylon: who more especially Prophesied a great part of our Christian Religion,
in certain Verses recited by Eusebius, the first Letters of every of which
Verses being put together; make the words, Jesus Christ, Son of God, Savior.
These Verses were Translated into Latin by St. Austine. Lib. 18. and the 23 in
his Book de Cinitate Dei: the substance whereof follows. The Earth shall
sweat the signs of Judgment: From Heaven shall come a King which shall Reign
for ever, that is to say, in humane Flesh, to the end, that by his presence he
shall judge the World, so the unfaithful as well as the faithful shall see God
with their eyes aloft amongst his Saints; and in the end of the World the Souls
of Men with their Bodies shall appear; whom he shall judge when the roundness
of the Earth untiled, shall be full of Clods of Earth and Grass; Men shall cast
away their Idols, and all their precious Jewels, the World shall be consumed
with fire, he shall pierce the inferior parts, and break the Gates of Hell;
then to the flesh of Saints shall be given free and clear Light, and the evil
shall be burned with Eternal fire: all Secrets shall be opened, and every one
shall know the secret of his Neighbor, and God shall discover the Consciences
and Hearts of all men: then shall there be Lamentation and gnashing of Teeth,
the Sun and the Stars shall loose their Light, the Firmament shall be
dissolved, and the Moon shall be darkened, the Mountains shall be thrown down,
and the Valleys shall be made equal with them; there shall be nothing in the
World higher then another, Mountains and Valleys shall be made plain, all
things shall cease, and the Earth shall be dried unto powder and dust, the
Fountains and Rivers shall be burned likewise: Then shall a Trumpet sound from
Heaven. Diverse other things were Prophesied by this Sybil, and because they
were obscure, and therefore not to be comprehended by the Gentiles before they
came to pass; she said they shall think me a false and blind Prophetess, but
when that they shall see these things accomplished, they will remember me, and
call me not false Prophetess, but the Prophetess of the Almighty God. The Sixth
was Samia, Born in the Isle of Samos; she said, he being rich shall be Born of
a poor Maid; the Creatures of the Earth shall adore him, and praise him for
ever. The Seventh was called Cumana, because she prophesied at Cumas, a Town of
Campania in Italy; her prophecy was, that he should come from Heaven, and
reign here in poverty; he should Rule in silence, and be Born of a Virgin. She
is affirmed to have Written nine Books of the Sybils, they were all presented
by an old Woman to Tarquinius Superbus, but he not willing to pay so great a
Sum of Money as was demanded, denied them: whereupon the old woman being vexed,
Burned three of them, requiring as much Money for the other six, as for all:
which being denied, she also Burned the other three, asking as much for the
other three remaining as for the rest, which Superbus amazed, gave, and the old
Trot vanished. The Books contained manifest prophesies of the Blessessed
Kingdom of Christ, his Name, his Birth, and Death: they were burned by the
Arch Traitor Stilico, so that those Prophesies which are now extant, are only
such as are extracted out of other Writings. The Eight was Helle-spontica, Born
at Marmisea, in the Territory of Troy; her Prophecy was, that a Woman shall
descend of the the Jews, called Mary, and of her shall be Born the Son of God,
Named Jesus, and that without Carnal copulation; for she shall be a Virgin
before and after his Birth, he shall be both God and Man, he shall fulfill the
Laws of the Jews, and shall add his Law thereunto, and his Kingdom shall
remain for ever. The ninth was of Phrygia, and Prophesied in the Town of
Ancire: one-of her sayings were, The Highest shall come from Heaven, and shall
confirm the Counsel in Heaven, and a Virgin shall be showed in the Valley of
the Deserts. The tenth was Albunea, Surnamed Tyburtina, because she was Born at
Tyber, Fifteen Miles from Rome; her Prophesies was that the invisible Word
shall be Born of a Virgin; he shall converse amongst Sinners, and shall of them
be despised. Lactantius Finuianus rehearsed diverse of their Prophesies, without
making any particular mention of them: it is the opinion of some that they are
to be referred more especially to Sibylla Samberta, who Wrote Twenty-four Books
in Verse, chiefly Treating of the coming, miracles and life of Christ,
whereunto the sayings of all the other Sybils are conformable. St. Austine
likewise in his Twenty-third Chapter of his Book de Cinitate dei, recites
these Prophesies as follows: Then he shall be taken by the wicked hands of
the Infidels, and they shall give him Buffets on his Face with their
sacrelegious Hands, they shall Spit upon him with foul and accursed Mouths. He
shall turn unto them his Shoulders, suffering them to be whipped; yea he shall
hold his peace, not speaking one word, to the end, that none shall know from
whence his Words proceed. He shall also be Crowned with Thorns; and they shall
give him Gall to eat, and Vinegar to drink: Behold the Feast that they shall
make him, insomuch that the ignorant and blind People shall nevertheless not
know their God conversing amongst Men: But they shall Crown him with Thorns,
mingling for him Gall and Vinegar: then the Veil of the Temple shall be rent,
at Midday it shall be dark Night for the space of three hours. So the Just
shall dye the Death, and this Death or Sleep shall continue three days: and
when he shall have been in the Bowels of the Earth, he shall rise again and
return to Life. Lactantius, Lib. 4. Chap. 15. rehearses these Prophesies of
them: He shall raise the Dead, the Impotent and Lame shall walk and run nimbly,
the Deaf shall hear, and the Blind shall see, the Dumb shall speak: and that
with five Loaves and two Fishes, he should nourish in the Desert Five-thousand
men, and the fragments thereof should be sufficient to satisfy many more. Many
other things were foretold by these Sybils, as well of the ruins of great
States, as of what they predicted of Christ. The Eleventh they called
Epyrotica: some were of opinion that she should be the same that Phrigia was,
she came from Troas to Dodona, where she Prophesied, and was like the other
denominated from the place: others write that she was called Phaenni, so writes
Johannes Tsetses: she Prophesied that the true word should proceed from a
Virgin, how he should willingly come down from Heaven, and seem poor to the
World: yet should govern all things, whose Rule and Kingdom should never cease,
and that he should be both God and Man, and that this his Kingdom should
principally reside in the Souls of Men; whom he would govern and save to
another life, thus Laelius Cleophassis, and others affirm. Colophonia Lampusia
was the Twelfth, she came out of Greece, from Colophonia a City of Jonia, she
Prophesied of the changes of Kingdoms, and Inundations, Earthquakes, and of
Wars: she said that God was only to be adored, that he was angry at Vice, and
punished it that he did delight in holy and upright men: She Prophesied also,
that the whole World should be Burnt, and wished them to adore that God while
they lived here, which could punish them so severely hereafter for their
contempt.

The First Ship. which was called the Arc, Noah made, wherein he preserved
from the danger of the Water, all the Living Creatures that were to multiply
the World, and that was the first Pattern that all others made their Ships
after. Strabo Writes that Minos King of Creet had the first Rule of the Sea;
but Diodorus affirms that Neptune had the Empire of it before him, for he
invented the feat of Rowing in Boats, and gave directions as to the making of a
Navy, and was made Admiral of it by his Father Saturn. Pliny reports that King
Erichthr as first devised Boats, and Rowed in them in the Red Sea: some Write
that the Trojans used them first in the Narrow Seas, called Hellespontus: some
imagine that they were invented in the English Sea, and covered with Leather
and Hides of Beast. Danaus was the first that used any Ship when he Sailed out
of Egypt into Greece, as Pliny records, although some suppose it to be the
Samotracians, and some Atlas that found it. Jason made the first Galley, which
Sesostrias King of Egypt used after him, Aeytheus invented the Barge with two
order of Oars on a side; Amocles of Corinth, that with three course of Oars on
a side; the Carthaginians that with four Oars on a side; and Nesichthon of
Salamis, that with sive Oars on a side, which the Romans made in the first
Punick Battle; Zinagoras a Syracissan devised that with six rows of Oars.
Hippius a Tyrian conceived the making of the Lighter. The Cyrenians invented
the Hoy or Gallion. The Phenicians the Keel or Demy-Bark. The Rhodians the
Brigantine. The Cyprians completed the Bark. The Germans the Boats of one
piece. The Illyrians the Cock-Boat or Lighters. Rhudders were invented by the
Copians, the broad Oars the Plateans devised. Sails Icarus found the use of,
but Diodorus says it was Aeolus. Daedalus invented the Mast, and the
Cross-piece whereunto the Sail is fastened. Ferry-Boats the Athenians or the
Salaminians are said to have found: Close Galleys were invented by the
Thasians. The Tyrrhenes devised the Anchors, and Eupalamus made it with two
points of Teeth; but some refer it to Anacharsis, who also invented the Tackle
of a Ship. The Stern of a Ship Piseus devised. Tiphis found out more perfectly
the use of the Stern after the example of the Kite, which in her flying turns
all her Body with the turning of her Tail. Minos Fought the first Battle on
the Sea. Merchandise was first instituted to furnish men with Necessaries, by
way of Exchange: but after when Money was Coined, it was made use of more for
men's private Wealth, then for any common profit, and for that cause, Cicero
calls it a Servile Craft: Although Plutarch writes that Thales, Solon,
Hippocrates and Plato were occupied and employed in this Art. The Carthaginians
as Pliny expresses in his seventh Book, were very early in it, but Diodorus
will have Mercury to be the first that was cunning in it. Pliny in his tenth
Book, says that Liber otherwise called Dionysius, invented the Trade of
Merchandise. And therefore it may be imagined that the Carthaginians Learned
the Trade of Merchandise of Dionysius: But the Hebrews (as Josephus affirms)
used Buying and Selling in the time of Noah; and Joseph was Sold to Merchants,
and carried into Egypt.

Saluting with Kisses, this custom is very Ancient, for it was the manner of
the Hebrews to kiss strangers at their first meeting, as Jacob kissed Rachel,
before he expressed that he was of her kindred; and Laban, after he knew him to
be his Sisters Son, embraced him with his Arms and kissed him. The Romans
custom was to kiss their kinsfolk, but afterward it was extended to further
familiarity, and is now too often used Laciviously; Although in Rome it was an
Ordinance, that the women should kiss their kindred, (...) that if she had
drank any (...) to the Law made (...) drinking of Wine, by (...) might be
discovered, and (...) her intemperance.

(...) proceeds from Worms the Spinning and Weaving of it, Pamphila the
Daughter of Platis, devised in the Isle of Coos.

The Septemviri, or the Seven Electors of the Emperor of Germany, and of the
Peers or Paires of France, The Election of the Emperors of Germany is in the
manner following, the Seven Princes Electors called Septemviri, meet early
about fix of the clock in the Romanco, there they Consult until nine, from
thence they go in solemn order into St. Bartholomews: of them there are three
Ecclesiastical, and and four Temporal; the three Ecclesiastical that is to say
the Archbishop of Mentz called the Arch-Chancellor of High Germany, being the
first; next the Archbishop of Collen, called the Arch-Chancellor of Italy: and
then follows the Archbishop of Tryers, called the Arch Chancellor of France,
all in their State befitting so great a Majesty: Then the four Temporal that is
to say, the Marquess of Brandenburg, great Chamberlain of the Empire, with a
Massy Key of Gould: then the Duke of Saxony Lord high Marshall, bears the
Sword before the Emperor, and is likewise Arch-Sewer in carring the Plate to
the Table; then the Elector of Bohemia the Taster, or else Cup Bearer to the
Emperor for the Triumph. These are the only Electors of the Emperor, they
afterward descend from their seats, and there before the Audience take a
Solemn Oath, one after another in these following words. I do Swear upon this
Evangelist before me, that with all my Faith which I owe to God, my diligence
and care which I owe to the Emperor, without former reward, or future hope of
greater Honor, that I will choose with all my Faith and Truth a Just and fit
Man for the Kingdom of Rome, as much as in me Lies, After these and many
other ceremonies: they proclaim him King of the Romans, Heir of Augustus, and
Emperor of Germany. In the Realm of France, to be a Peer is the greatest
Dignity under the King, for that in many things they have almost equal
Authority with Kings, for Peer in the French tongue signifies equal. But
because it will be too pro lixe a subject to discourse of all their
Prerogatives, it shall suffice only to number them, and each of their Offices
at the Sacring or Coronation of a new King. These ancient Peers are twelve in
number, whereof 6 are of the Clergy, and six are Laymen: the 6 of the Clergy
with their offices at the Coronation, are the Archbishop and Duke of Reins,
who has his accustomed charge to anoint and consecrate the King: the Bishop
and Duke of Lacon, whose office is to bring the holy Ampoule, or divine Water,
wherewith the King is anointed; the Bishop and Duke of Langres, whose office is
to bring the Scepter and the hand of Justice, the Bishop and Earl of Beanais,
brings the Kings Cloak, the Bishop and Earl of Chaalous, attends with the
Kings Ring; the Bishop and Earl of Noyon, waits with the Kings Girdle. The six
Temporal Peers with their Offices at the Coronation, are the Duke of Burgundy.
Dean or chief of the rest; whose Office is to carry the Kings Crown: the Duke
of Guyen carries the 1 st. square Banner; the Duke of Normandy brings the 2d.
square Banner, the Earl of Toulouse carries the Kings Spurs; the Earl of paigne
has the mannagement of the Royal Banner, or the Standard of War: the Earl of
Flanders brings the Kings Sword. And although the first five temporal
Peerdoms are united to the Crown, and the sixth be united to another Prince, yet
at the Kings Coronation there are other Noble men appointed to supply their
room and Offices. These are the twelve ancient Peers, although since their
creation others have been made, which though they have like Authority to judge
in the Court of Parliament, yet they want Offices at the Kings Coronatian, and
bear not that Majesty that the other Peers do, for that they are not of so
great Antiquity.

A Sanctuary (as Statius writes) was made first by Hercules Nephews in Athens,
and was called the Temple of Mercy. For then it was not lawful to take any man
violently, that repaired thither for Assistance and Protection: Notwithstanding
whatsoever is otherwise expressed by Profane Authors questionless Moses who
was long before Hercules, did institute three Franchised Towns, whether it was
permitted for them to go, that had done any Murder unawares; or by
Chance-Medly. Next after him Romulus ordained a Sanctuary in Rome, to increase
his Citizens, and to have the greater number to build and people the City.
There was a Sanctuary in the Isle Calvaria, dedicated to Neptune, and another
in Egypt at Campus consecrated to Hercules; and another at Osyris. and in
Syria, one hallowed to Appollo. There were many others in Christendom; King
Henry the 8 th. (amongst his other reformations) because of the great crimes
and enormities that were committed concerning them, thought fit amongst his
other devastations to put them down.

Swearing, was first ordained by the Emperor Justinian, which was that men
should swear by the Sacred Writ the Gospel: and now a days all that swear,
lay their hand upon the Book and kiss it, saying, So help me God, etc. Because
as the Gospel of our Religion and Faith, may for no cause be violated; so an
Oath in no case may be broken.

T
TEMPLES or, as they were afterward called Churches as Diogenes supposes,
were caused first to be built by Epimenides in Crete. But Victruvius affirms,
that one Ptthius a Carpenter, made the first Temple in Prienc, in the Honor of
Pallas. Herodotus says the Egyptians Instituted Temples first. In Rome,
Romulus builded the first Temple, to the worship of Jupiter Feretrius. To
Almighty God Solomon the King of the Hebrews, builded the first Temple 3102,
years after the Creation of Adam in Jerusalem. Amongst other Temples that of
Ephesus, built in a noble City so called was very famous. It was in the
Country of Jonia, it was built in the 32d. year of the Reign of King David, by
Androchus the Son of Codrus King of Athens. The Amazons and most part of Asia,
did contribute to the Erection of it in honor of Diana; the like whereof was
not in all the World; and therefore it was accounted amongst the seven wonders
of the World: it was building 215 years. It was placed in a Miry ground for the
better avoiding of Earthquakes: There were 127 Pillars in it, made of their
Kings one by one, which were in height 60 Foot; whereof 36 were carried with
most admirable workmanship. The length of the whole Church was 425 Foot, and
the breadth 220. All that took this Church for Sanctuary had great immunities
and privileges: there were also so many Gifts and Monuments given to this
Church from all Natians and Cities, that none in all the World might be
compared to it for Wealth. St. Paul Preached at Epesus three years, and
Converted many to the Faith. St. John also, the Evangelist dyed in this City.
But this sumptious building was destroyed and set on fire in the Reign of
Galienus the Emperor, by one Erostratus, who having performed many noble
Exploits in War, and otherwise, when that he perceived himself to have been
deprived both of reward and fame, to leave a continual remembrance of his Name
for one flagitious and horrible Act, did with great fires and monsterous flames
consume this fair Church, and reduced it to Ashes, thinking thereby (as has
been said) to have been remembered to perpetuity; but he was mistaken, for there
were general Edicts and Proclamations made, that no man should presume upon
Pain of Death, so much as to put his Name in any Writing or Chronicle, to the
intent that he might have been Buried with an everlasting Oblivion.

Triumphs, the first of them was entered by Dionysius, when he was replenished
with the spoils of many Countries, afterward they were received of sundry
Nations, as the Captains of Carthage upon their great successes, Triumphed.
Romulus, after he had conquered Acron King of Ciniveus, was Crowned with
Laurel and carried in a Chariot with four Horses, entered into the City of
Rome Triumphantly, and dedicated his prey and spoils to Jupiter, as Dionysius
writes. Although, Eutropius says, that Tarquinius Priscus first Triumphed
after his conquest of the Sabines. Camillus was led in a solemn Triumph with
white Horses in a Gilded Chariot, his Brows incircled with a Garland of Gold,
all the Captains following the Chariot, with Chains and Fetters about their
Necks; and the Senate going before into the Capitol of Jupiters Temple, where
they offered a white Bull, and then returned. It was Lawful for none to
Triumph, but such as were Dictator, Consul, or Praetor. Although, Cneus
Pompeius, (as Cicero writes) Triumphed, though he was but of the Order of
Knights.

Truce, which was called a covenant of Peace for a Season, was instituted by
Lycaon; it was made sometimes for years, as the Romans made a Truce with the
Veientes for Forty years; with the Cerites for a hundred: sometimes a Truce was
made for hours, as Caius Pontius a Samnite, required of the Dictator of Rome a
Truce for six hours. Leagues of Peeace Theseus is said to have ordained in
Greece; Diodorus assigns them to Mercury; but the truth is, they were in
frequent use long before that time in Assyria and Egypt, and namely amongst
the Hebrews, for Jacob made a League with Laban; and Moses offered conditions
of Peace to the Princes of the Countries, by whom he passed: and after him
Joshua confirmed a Bond of Peace with the Gibeonites. The ceremonies and manner
of the making and confirmation of the Leagues of sundry Nations, were
diversifyed according to their several customs.

Tragedies and Commedies, had their beginning of the oblations, as Diodorus
writes, which in old time men devoutly offered for their fruits to Bacchus. For
as the Altars were kindled with fire, and the Goat laid on it, the Quire in
honor of Bacchus sung this Meter called a Tragedy; it was named so, either
because a Goat, which in Greek is called Tragos, was the reward appointed for
him that was Author of the Song, or because a Goat is so noisome and hurtful to
the Vines, whereof Bacchus was the first inventer, which Sacrificed to Liber;
or of the Grounds or Dregs, which in Greek is called Tryx, with which the
Stage Players used to Paint their Faces, before that Aeschylus devised Visards.
But the first inventer of them after the mind of Horace, was Thespis-Quintilian
says, that Aescylus set forth the first public Tragedies, though he
acknowledges that Sophocles and Euripidus did adorn and furnish them more
gallantly. In Rome Livius Andronicus made the first Tragedy, wherein Accius,
Paccunius, and Seneca excelled. The Comedies began at what time (the Athenians
being not yet assembled into the City) the Youth of that Country, used to Sing
solemn Verses at Feasts, abroad in the Villages and Highways, for to get
Money: They were so named of the Greek word Comos, for a Banqueting, or Come a
Street, and Ode a Song, yet it is uncertain amongst the Grecians who invented
them first. In this kind of Writing, Aristophanus, Eupolis, and Cratinus were
the most eminent; in a Tragedy, Noble Persons, as Emperors, Kings, Princes,
Dukes, Lords, etc. are brought in with a high Style. In a Comedy, Amorous
dalliances, Love affairs, Diversity, several Tunes, Cheats, etc. are most
concerned.

V
VERMILION or Red-Lead, was first found in Ephesus, by Gallus an Athenian. This
color was in Rome esteemed for Holy, insomuch that on their Feastival days,
they Painted the Face of Jupiters Image with it, and the Bodies of them that
Triumphed.

Uows, the custom of making of them, was borrowed from the Hebrews, which used
to make Vows to God; and diverse other Countries of the Gentles more blindly
used to make such Vows to their false Gods.

Uoyces, which were used to be given in great consultations, Judgments and
Elections were first ordained by Palamedes.

W
WRITING, after the manner of the Egyptians, was instead of Letters, by
Herogliphicks to make use of the Images of Beasts, Birds, etc, declaring their
minds by the shapes and figures of them: As by the Be they signified a King
Ruling his Commons and Subjects with great moderation and gentleness; by the
Goshauk, they meant a speedy performance of their affairs, and so for other
things.

Watches and Wardings, were first appointed by Palamedes. Watchwords were first
used in the Battle of Troy; at the same time when Simon found out Beacons and
Fires.

Wine, which proceeds from the Vine (Diodorus writes) that Dionysius did first
perceive the nature of it, and taught the Grecians to Plant it, and to press
the Wine out of the Grape, as Saturn did in Italy. Some would have it to be
Icarins the Father of Penelope, that found the virtue of the Grape in Athens;
who is reported to have been slain by the Husbandmen when they were Drunk.
Atheneus in one place writes, that Orestus Son to Dencalion, first discovered
the Vine about Mount Aetna in Sicily. In another place he says, that it was
found in the City Plinthina in Egypt. Aruntes a Tirrhen, banished out of his
Country by Lucinon, whom he brought up of a Child, carried the first Wine into
France. But before all these, Noah was the first that either Tilled the Land,
or Planted the Vineyard; and when that he had tasted too much of the Fruit of
the Grape, he was Drunk. Wine Taverns were set up first by the Lydians, a
people of Asia, which also found out and invented diverse Games. Staphylus (as
Pliny says) was the first that allayed Wine. But for all these generally
entertained Opinions the Poets will have Bacchus to be the first deviser and
God of it, and that he taught those Countries how to make Ale of Barley which
had no Grapes growing, into this Drink the Germans afterward put Hops and
called it Beer.

The Winds were first observed by Aeolus, as it is reported from the
prognostication of the Inhabitants of the Islands about Sicily, who by the
smoke of the said Isles three days before, were said to know what Winds they
should have. Aeolus for his great insight into the Nature of them, has by the
general consent of Poets, the Dominion over them attributed to him. The Winds
as some divide them, are said to be four, according to the four principal
Regions of the Air; those that are more curious in their search and inquiry of
their Natures, will have them to be no less then eight. And especially one
Andronicus Corestes, who Builded a Terret in Athens, and set on every side of
it, the Images of the Winds graven, against the Rigion whence the Winds came,
they were placed on Pillars of Marble, and in the middle he set a Brazen Image
of Triton, which he had made so, that it would turn with a Gust and stand with
its Face toward the Wind that blew, being so devised as to point with a Rod to
the Image of the said Wind; which has been since imitated and used in most
Countries; for it is an usual custom to set up Weather-cocks or Fans, to show
out of what Quarter the Wind blows.

The seven Wise Men of Greece, who lived (as one says) when there was a
scarcity of Wisdom, were as follows, Bias he was born in the Haven Town of
Prieane, in the Country of Jonia. Solon was of the Island of Salamine: Chilo
was of Lacedemonia; Cleobolus had his birth at Lindus in the Isle of Rhodes:
Pittacus was of Mitylene in the Isle of Lesbes: Thales received his first
breath at Miletum in Greece: the last of them was Periander King of Corinth.

The wonders of the World, were reputed seven of the same number of the Wise
men of Greece. The first were of the Walls of Babylon built by Semeramis of
stone joined together with a strange kind of slimy and gluish Mortar, which
grew in the Mines of those Countries; and especially in the Lake, where stood
in time past Sodom and Gomorrah, now called Asfatilda. These walls according
to the Town, were built in a quadrangle, and contained in circuit (as says
Pliny in the 26th chapter of his sixth Book) 60 miles, so that every square was
fifteen miles long, they were 200 foot high, and 15 foot thick. To build these
walls were hired by Semiramis, out of diverse Countries for a long space 300000
men. The Second was the Pillar of the Sun, offered by the Gentiles unto
Jupiter. This Pillar stood in the Isle of Rhodes, and was made of Iron in the
form of a man, of incredible greatness, insomuch that a man could scarce Fadom
the great finger thereof. After it had stood 56 years, it fell down by reason
of an Earthquake, and so lay till the Island was won by the Souldan of Egypt,
who carried as much metal away as loaded 900 Camels. The Third, were the
Obelisci or the Piramids of Egypt of which we have already discoursed. The
Fourth was the Mansoleum of Mansolus King of Caria, Husband to Artimesia: this
woman for the great love she had to his Memory, burnt his body, drunk his ashes
beaten to a powder, thinging no Sepulcher so worthy of him as her own body, the
remainder of the powder which she found it impossible for her to drink, she
buried in his Famous Tomb. This Monument was of a most excellent kind of
Marble, it was 411 feet in circute, and 25 cubits high, it was environed with
36 Pillars, most curiously carved. The Fifth was the Temple of Diana at Ephesus
of which in 'its proper place we have also discoursed more at large. The Sixth
was the Image of Jupiter Olympus, in Achia all of Porphyry, an infinite number
of little pieces being wonderfully joined together: this Statue or Image
besides the excellency of the work, was more especially admired for the
greatness thereof, and was the more Famous, by reason that the Games called the
Olympiades were there kept. The Seventh was the Tower Pharos, nigh to
Alexandria in Egypt; built by Ptolomeus Philadelphus King of Egypt, to direct
the Passengers which way to approach the Haven thereabouts, by burning of pitch
or other light materials: This Tower was of a marvelous height, and of singular
Workmanship; the building whereof cost according to our Money 4800000 Crowns,
some Authors set down for the Eight Wonders, the Gardens and Orchards upon the
walls of Babylon.

AN APPENDIX.
Rare Inventions peculiarly attributed to England and Englishmen.
MASONS Carving in Stone and erecting statly Piles with the like Materials. The
Art of curious Painting and Glazing with Glass now in use, were First showed to
the English by one Joanes A Benedictine in the year of Christ, 728. and since
by Improvement brought to the perfection they are at present found to be in.

The Famous Invention of Printing being found out in Germany was First brought
into England by William Caxton a Mercer, who in the Reign of King Edward the
Fourth kept a Printing House in Westminster Abbey by the Permission of Simon
Islip Abbot of that Place, and the First Book there Printed was Tullies Offices.

Coaches were Invented by Monsieur Pedarus a Frenchman and brought into
England in the year 1559. though Charriots are of a longer standing.

Watches, were the Invention of a German, and the Invention brought into
England Anno, 1580. The Famous Inventers and Improvers were Cornelius Van
Dreble, and Janus Torrianellus, the first Clocks were brought into England,
much about the same time.

The Pendulum was Invented by Mr. Hook, Fellow of the Royal Society Famous in
the Mathematics and Mechanical Improvement.

All sorts of Optiek-Glasses and Tubes as the Telescope, the Invention of the
Famous Galileo the Microscope, etc. were first brought to perfection in England
by the aforesaid Mr. Hook.

Antonio Bonele an Italian, first taught the English to Spin with a Destaffe,
in the twentieth year of King Henery the seventh.

Fine Spanish-Needles were first made in England, in the Reign of Queen Mary by
a Negro in Cheapside, who refused to communicate his Art, but in the Eighth
year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, Elias Corous a German made it known to the
English.

The first English Coach-Maker is Recorded to be Walter Ripon, who in the year
1564 made a Coach for the Earl of Rutland, and a hollow turning Coach, in the
year 1585 for Queen Elizabeth.

In the Tenth year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, Richard Dryer brought into
England the Invention of making Earthen Fire-pots, Furnaces, transportable
Ovens for baking Earthen ware, and had the first sole profit by Pattent, in the
year 1555.

Making of Eopperas, was first practiced in England by Cornelius de Voss, a
Merchant, in the year 1587.

William Saunders a Fishmonger was the first that brought our Celestial and
Terestial Globes to perfection.

William Mathews in the Fifth year of Queen Elizabeth, was the first English
Artist, that made fine Knives and Hafts, marked with the Half Moon for the
Propriety of which, he had the Queens Paten.

About the same time, the way of making Pins, was found out by the English
which before were brought in by Strangers, to the value of 60000 Pound a year.

One Bourass made first the Engine, for Scale-Boards.

One Ross, is reported to have made the First Bandore in England, and to this
day that called the Ross Viol, is accounted the best.

The Engine for Clock-Wheels is an English Invention of about one hundred years
standing, as likewise that for the speedy cutting down Wheels for Watches.

Chains for Watches, is said to be the Invention of one Mr. Tomackee.

The First Inventor of Knitting of Worsted Stoekings in England, was William
Rider a London Apprentice, who in the Reign of King James the First, presented
a pair of his own Knitting to the Earl of Pembrooke.

The late serviceable Moddel of Shipping, is affirmed to be the Invention or
Direction of the Famous Sir Walter Raleigh

Other late Inventions there are, to whom as their Inventors, the English lay
claim, as an Engine for raising Glass, an Engine for Spinning Glass, an Engine
for Cutting Tobacco, the Rouling Press, the Art of Damasking Linen, and
Watering of Silks, the way of seperating Gold from Silver, and Brass. Boulting
Mills, Making Caine Chaires, the curious Art of Coloring and Marbling of
Books, making of Horn ware, and the Engine to Extinguish Fire, and the like.

Thus Reader it apears that the Industery of our Predecessors was great,
whereby they brought so many Rarities to perfection and left their further
Improvement to Posterity.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by John Harris, at the Harrow against the Church
in the Poultrey.
[1] A Discourse of Divine Providence.

1. In General: That there is a Providence exercised by God in the World.

2. In Particular: How all Gods Providence in the World, are in order to the
good of his People.

By the late Learned Divine Stephen Charnock, B. D. sometimes Fellow of
New-Colledg in Oxon.

Price Bound 3 s.

[2] COme and Welcome to Jesus Christ, Or, a plain and profitable Discourse on
John 6. Verse 37. Showing the Cause, Truth and manner of the coming of a Sinner
to Jesus Christ; with his happy Reception, and blessed Entertainment.

Prince Bound 1 s.

[3] A Discourse upon the Pharisee and the Publicane. Wherein several great and
weighty things are handled: As the Nature of Prayer, and of Obedience to the
Law, with how far it obliges Christians, and wherein it consists: Wherein is
also shed the equally deplorable condition of the Pharisee, or Hypocritical and
Self-righteous Man, and of the Publicane, or Sinner that lives in Sin, and in
open violation of the Divine Laws: Together with the Way and Method of God's
Free Grace in Pardoning Penetent Sinners; proving that he justifies them by
imputing Christ's Righteousness to them.

Price Bound 1 s.

[4] SIghs from Hell, Or, The Groans of a Damned Soul. Discovering, from the
16th of Luke, the Lamentable state of the Damned. And may fitly serve, as a
Warning-Word to Sinners, both Old and Young, by Faith in Jesus Christ, to avoid
the same place of Torment. With a Discovery of the Usefulness of the
Scriptures, as our safe Conduct for avoiding the Torments of Hell. All three by
John Bunyon, Author of the Pilgrims Progress.

Price Bound 1 s.

[5] THe Saints Comfort, in all, but more especially in Evil Times. Drawn from
Twelve several Texts of Scripture; which are briefly explained in this small
Piece. By T. G. Minister of the Gospel.

Price Bound 1 s.

[6] THE True Fortune Tellers: Or, Guide to Knowledge. Discovering the whole Art
of Chyromancy, Physiognomy, Metoposcopy, and Astrology. Containing, 1. A
Description of the Planets, their power and influence over the Bodies of Men,
Women, and Children. 2. Of the several Lines, Mounts, Marks, Angles, and sacred
Characters in the Hand and Wrist; and by what Planets they are Governed as to
good or bad Fortune. 3. Of Physiognomy. 4. Observations on the Eyes, Eyebrows,
Nose, Ears, Chin, Neck, Hair, Beard, and Face. 5. Metoposcopy, or the
signification of the Lines in the Face. 6. Of Moles and their significations.
7. Of Dreams and their Interpretations. 8. Of Nativities and their Calculation.
9. Of the Rod by which hidden Treasure is found. 10. Of Marriages, and at what
time any Person shall be Married. 11. Rules to know the danger of Death. 12. Of
good and bad Days. 13. The manner of Resolving doubtful Questions, as to
Friends, Marriages, places of Abode, Health, Prosperity or Adversity, Love or
Business. 14. Of Pythagoras his Wheel of Fortune. 15. Of the good and bad days
in each Month relating to Health. To which is added, Aristoteles Observations
of the Heavens, their motion. Of Fiery Metors, Thunder, Lightning, Eclipses,
Commets, Earthquakes, and Whirl-winds. Illustrated with several proper Figures.

Price Bound 1 s.

[7] A Directory for Midwives: or a guide for Women, in their Conception.
Bearing and Suckling their Children. The first part contains, 1. The Anatomy of
the vessels of Generation. 2. The Formation of the Child in the Womb. 3. What
hinders conception and its remedies. 4. what furthers conception. 5. A guide
for women in conception. 6. Of miscarriage in women. 7. A guide for women in
their Labor. 8. A guide for women in their Lying in. 9. Of Nursing children. by
Nicholas Culpepper.

Price Bound 3 s.


