portrait of Robert Earl of Essex Robert Earl of Essex, his Excellence,
General of ye Army. Employed for the defense of the Protestant Religion, the
safety of his Maties Person, and of the Parliament: the preservation of the
Lives and Liberties of the Subjects. Aetatis suae. 56.


THE HEARSE OF THE Renowned, THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT EARL OF ESSEX and
Ewe, Viscount Hereford, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Bourchier. and Lovaine,
sometime Captain Lord General of the Armies raised for the defense of King
and Parliament.

As it was represented in a Sermon, preached in the Abbey Church at
Westminster, at the Magnificent Solemnity of his Funeral, October. 22. 1646.

By RICHARD VINES.

Eccles. 12. 5. Man goes to his long home, and the mourners go about the
streets.

Published by Order of the House of Peers.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Abel Roper at the Sign of the Sun
against Dunstans Church in Fleet Street. 1646.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The House of PEERS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable,
I Have performed what service I am able to the memory of the renowned Lord,
deceased, And to the Commands of that Right Honorable and Noble Triumvirate
which gave being to this Sermon. And to your Lordships by whose Order I have
adventured upon this Publication: All men (except such whose either morosity or
malignity does account, vetera in laud, praesentia in fastidio) must
acknowledge the worth, the valor, the faithfulness which lie under the Robes
you wear, and that it is not a mere borrowed Opinion which makes you
Honorable, but the reflection or rebounding back of that upon you, which went
first out from you: But this Sermon will teach you, that Titles of Honor are
written in dust, and that Princes and great men must fall, their very Monuments
are mortal, and will in time be found as Archemedes his Tomb (by Cicero) in
vepretis, over-growne with Thorns and Briars; and that light of memory which
shines after your Sunset, is but like the Moon which wanes also by degrees: No
glory that is woven in the finest Tapestry of this world but will lose color,
decay, and perish, but saving grace and the knowledge of Jesus Christ is (...)
a possession for eternity, your zealous agency for the Church and State will
carry you as far toward Immortality as any other Chariot in this world. Its as
much as nothing when one can say no more of a man then is said of some great
ones, that they reigned and died. The Genesis 36. 33.
Lord give you hearts actuated with zeal for God, together with a right
temperament of counsels, knowing that you are over a people who (as Tacitus
says) nec tota^ servitutem pati possunt nec totam libertatem, and if your fall
do come before you see, or reap the fruit of your labors: The Lord make you
such as may take comfort with you, and leave Honor behind you, so prays

Your Lordships most humble and unworthy servant, in and for Jesus Christ,
RICHARD VINES.

Die Veneris 23. October. 1646.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That this House gives thanks to
Master Vines for the great pains by him taken yesterday in the Sermon he
preached at the solemnization of the Funeral of the Earl of Essex, deceased:
And he is hereby desired to Print and Publish the same, which is not to be
Printed by any but by Authority under his own hand.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.
I appoint Abel Roper to print this Sermon. Richard Vines.

A SERMON PREACHED At the Solemnization of the Funeral of the Right Honorable
ROBERT Earl of ESSEX, etc.
Right Honorable, etc.
AS that Lot sent forth to attach a particular man, Josh. 7. 16. did move
gradatim, and by steps, taking first the Tribe, then the Family, then the
House, and at last the Man; after which manner of progression, though at fewer
steps, Jonathan was also taken, 1 Samuel 14. 42. So do the trackes or vestigia
appearing to your eye, lead you at two or three removes to the most sad
occasion of this extraordinary and magnificent solemnity. The Escocheons which
are the Index of the Family do speak first, and tell the name of that
honorable Family which this Lot has taken. And this sable field of men,
charged with a stately Hearse, honored with so great a confluence of names and
titles of honor granted either by the Sword or Gown, whether Honorable,
Worshipful, or Reverend; and that in this place, where the Dij majorum gentium
have their Shrines, where the Lions of England have usually put off their
exuvias, and where Majesty and highness have laid up what of Mortality they
had, does proclaim him to be some Prince, or great name of that Family, whom
the Lot has taken.

But then the Military Equipage, the mourning Drum, the broken Lance, the
insignia and Instruments of War reversed, and in a mournful posture; The
Truncheon in a dead hand, do speak the very man. It is Jonathan that is
taken. And shall Jonathan dye that has wrought so great salvation in Israel?
It is (alas) too late to say, shall Jonathan dye, This Jonathan cannot be
rescued by the love of Israel; therefore I must sadly lay the Scene in one that
is already 1 Samuel 14. 45.
fallen: for do not ye know that there is a Prince and a great man fallen this
day in Israel?

2 SAMUEL 3. 38. Know ye not that there is a Prince, and a great man fallen this
day in Israel?
THIS Text presents you with the Hearse of Abner; a Prince and a great man
fallen in Israel: This day presents you with a parallel Hearse of a Prince, and
a great man fallen in England; both of them magnificently attended with the
drooping statelines of public and universal lamentation.

That I may set up some lights about the Hearse of Abner, you may please to call
to mind:

1. His Office. 2. His Project. 3. His Fall. 4. His Funeral.
1. His Office was Captain of the Host, or stylo novo, Lord General of the
Forces of Israel; it was not so much because he touched King Saul in blood,
being Cousin-Germane, as in respect of this high command, that he is called, A
Prince, and a great man.

2. His Project which he had upon the Anvile now at his death, was the
reducement of all Israel unto the Scepter of David; herein his Project
concurred with Gods; but took rise in him, from an ill or suspicious ground.
Ishbosheth does but question him for familiar usage of a Concubine of Saul's
(which if true, was in those times accounted a kind of Crimen Majestatis) and
this heats his blood, for great Instruments will not bear a check) and
thereupon his Stomach brings him off to David. God uses the sins and great
Spirits, or animosities, of great men (though they be not carried by
Conscience) to bring to birth his own purposes and promises made to his David's.

3. His Fall; which was by the hand of pretended revenge, but real emulation;
the spirit of Caesar and Pompey was in Joab, before it was in them: He could
not abide a corrivall or equal. Let great Commanders look to this; Ambition
is a Planet that must have a whole Orb to it self, and is impatient of
Consort.

4. His Funeral; and that was solemn and honorable in Hebron; now the royal
City, and formerly the Sepulchrall of Abraham, Isaac, etc. At which, David was
chief mourner, for he followed the Bed or Hearse, verse 31. and he was the
Orator that made the speech of Lamentation; as he had before done for Saul and
Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1. 19.

Now for the Hersebefore you, let us see how far it paralells with this in
the Text.

1. The Prince or great man fallen this day in England was Captain Lord
General of the Host of England. There is agreement in the Office and Title;
the Text could not be proper to any fallen under our Meridian unto this day:
but unto this new star created by the Parliament, and arising in this
Horizon, about July 1642. and now eclipsed or fallen.

2. His project is written in a copy fairer then the original, and goes far
beyond that of Abner. The reducement of divided Israel into one hive is
somewhat alike in both. But here is no effeminate spark that raises the spirit
of this great man into a flame; no such cause of his engagement, but the
defense of those pupil twins, the two bleeding sisters ready to dye in each
the others bosom, the liberty and property of the Subjects of England.

3. His fall is clear of the disaster in Abners story; he falls not by the
hand of some unworthy and villainous desert or of him, made bold by his
vanquishment or flight, as Pompey did; nor by the just fury of an oppressed
Senate as Caesar did; nor by the arts and stratagems of a treacherous death as
Abner did; The hand of Joab is not in all this; but by an Euthanasy (which
Augustus wished for) a fair death. He dyed in peace.

4. His Funeral for the state of it certainly overmatches the pattern. Here
are the two Houses of Parliament, the map of all England in two globes, pouring
out their sorrows, and paying their kisses of Honorable farewell to his
tutelar sword.

The Princes of the Land that quarter with him in in honor and in blood, do
quarter with his hearse this day in black and mourning.

The flower of the renowned City of London (far surpassing the meanness of
Abners Hebron) do traile their tears after his Hearse, and are come to put
upon him their civicam coronam, their civicall crown of Honor, propter
servatos cives for their saved Citizens.

The reverend Judges and the Worthies of that gown, do present the mourning
tears of the laws that pay this tribute for their freedom from all
Antinomian prerogative.

The honorable soldiery, those great names which while they wore his Orange
in the field, could have daunted death it self, do now in change of color
weep over him (and what marble weeps not in such change of weather?) David
that could take a lion by the beard, yet weeps at the Hearse of Abner.

The gown also has its rank with the sword in this great Army of mourners.
The Assembly of Divines whose prayers he sometimes valued and requested, need
not be distreined for their contributions of tears and grief, they must wrap
up in a cloth, and lay up behind the Ephod this Goliah'-conquering sword in
memory of a very cordial and noble Patron.

Lastly, what should I say of those stars that come not into any
constellation. I mean persons of quality not within the ranks, yet within the
line of this Lamentation, together with that infinite multitude of all sorts,
from Cedars to the hysop, that do not only come to fill their eyes, but to
empty them? I must conclude, to say as the crier of the Ludi saeculares at
Rome, (which were but once in a hundred years.) Come and see that which ye
never saw before, Plin. l. 7. c. 28.
nor shall ever see again.

If yet it be replied that Abners Funeral has one point or two of State above
us, David a mourner, David an orator. I say but this; The tears of David were
at this time in great part Compurgators of that suspicion which he might lie
under; of having a finger in that wherein Joab had his hand, which kind of
tears we have not, nor could wish to have, though David's; only in the orator,
David, that made the speech we are exceeded; and I am glad that such a State
as this is inferior and deficient in nothing, but that wherein my poor
service lies.

By this unparallelling parallel, you may easily see that my discourse will be
divided between two noble Generals: and first let us come to the Text, wherein
David speaks something of the dead, and something to the living.

Of the dead. That a Prince and great man is fallen this day in Israel.

To the living. Know ye not. It concerns you to Vatablus in Annot.
know, or I would have you take notice both of it, and that I am weak this
day, though anointed King, and that the sons of Zeruiah are too hard for me,
so that I cannot execute justice at present upon the bloody hand that has
given us this stroke.

Concerning that which is spoken of the dead, therein you shall find the
reason or spring of the tears of this lamentation. A Prince and a great man
fallen, and fallen, this day in Israel. This day in-Israel has the Emphasis in
it. In this nick of time wherein Israel was upon the point of reducement by the
agency and useful contributions of this great man, who seemed to be the only
Pilot that could have put the ship into quiet harbor, or at least a very great
steers-man in the work. This day is he fallen, and so Israel, if not more
alienated by his fall, yet remains in distraction and unsettlement: and this
day wherein I cannot give them just reparation, if they should demand it of
me; if any shall deny that there is any accent or emphasis in the word this
day in Israel, do but borrow the reflection of light from the story, and that
will clear it.

I shall not crumble that I have to say into literal and syllabicall minutes,
least I be of their number: qui Gallius. Doct.
verborum minutijs rerum frangunt pondera, but will draw up the matter into
this theme or head;

The fall of a Prince and a great man in the time of his agency and usefulness
for the settlement of the distractions of Israel, is just reason of a sad and
solemn lamentation.

This point I will open by parts, and those words. Know ye not, shall bring up
the uses of it, in the rear.

1. The subject of this lamentation is a Prince and a great man.

Prince to our English ears, sounds the first masculine branch or surcle
shooting from the stem of Majesty. But the Scripture which speaks no Treason,
gives this title to Captains in War, and generally to men (...), in headship or
power, whether Military Judge. 4. 2. 2 King. 9. 5.
or Senatorian; yea, though a man be but the foreman of his rank.

Great man is a note of some singular eminency above the ordinary trees of the
wood, and is a title given even to a Nabal that has 3000. sheep and 1000. 1 Samuel 25. 2.
goats, which is the meanest rank of greatness.

But where a great man is added to a Prince, it may well import as much as
magnificent, a man of powerful interest, great valor, honorable
achievements, noble activity in his place. Magnus is an addition or hatchment
by which Alexander, Pompey, Carolus, etc. have been surnamed, for their great
services or exploits. So that a man by his orb or place he is set in, is
Princeps: but by his influence and beams of worth, raying from him upon the
sublunary Commons, he is Magnus. It is an excellent conjunction, a Prince and
great man. According to style of honor with us, a man may be noble by birth,
descent, or blood. And though I be none of the new Switzers, that could wish
Princes Cantoned into the common level; yet I may put you in mind that
Antiquity of Race is but a Moss of time growing upon the back of worth or
virtue: And if a man carry not the primigeniall virtue with him, which first
made his race noble, he is but a flower by change of soil degenerated into a
weed, as having nothing in him but the wax or matter, without the form and
stamp of Nobleness. And you know also that Nobility is often times the
creature of a Prince his fancy; which when there is no intrinsecall worth to be
the supporter of it, is (as Charren says) but Nobility by parchment. It Is a
Cap. d^ Nobilitate.
brave consociation, when the goodness and activity that makes you great, is
as high as the place which makes you Princes: for if that crazy fancy take a
man which possessed some great ones; they would be called Gods, and personate an
ostentation of greatness above men; it may bewray pride and madness; but can
never so far deceive the sense of underlings, but that they will say as the
Cobbler did to Caligula, in that state and humor, that he was (...) a great
Dotard. It is the acting of your power and place, which makes you great. I
cannot teach you to be princes, Fortuitum est; but I can tell you how to be
great men: not great in the glass which Parasiticall flattery holds before
you, but indeed; and that is thus: Fill the sphere of your activity, the Church
and State, the Town or Country, with the powerful and benign influences
that flow from intrinsecall worth: make the times the better for you:
Constrain by your example your inferiors to know God, and reform their
Families. Let not Profanesse hide it self under the wing of your patronage,
nor lessen it self by the greatness of your examples. Impartial and speedy
Justice, with sweet refreshing Mercy, will make you great men in the
Commonwealth; Zeal and Syncerity for God and his House, will make you great men
in the Church. He that will be a great man, must draw his lines to the center
of public good: private ends never make a great man.

2. The subject of this Lamentation is, one Prince, one great man. Ye are
called (as some interpret the word,) the Corners of the people; the Shields,
the Gods, the Saviors, the Shepherds of the people, the Ministers of God for
Good, Benefactors, etc. Now the fall of one great Tree makes a great gappe in
the hedge; the Eclipse of one of the greater ruling Luminaries benights the
world. Our Lives, Liberties, etc. are all bound up in you: we poor men steal
into our Graves, with no greater noise than can be made by a branch of
Rosemary, or a black Riband: No body takes notice of the Gloeworme, that goes
out in the hedge bottom: No Comet or Prodigy, or Earthquake tolls us the
knell of our departure; but one of you is carried forth by the tears of all
ISRAEL, provided that you be what your Names import, public men, common
Sanctuaries of the oppressed, Cities of Refuge, Altars of protection; for
otherwise you may be such as that your death would be more worth then your
lives, and then, though you may be able to put men into black, you cannot put
them into mourning: your death cannot be worth a tear, when your lives are not
worth a prayer.

3. The subject of this Lamentation is, a Prince and A great man fallen. Death
is a fall from every thing but grace: some do fall from a higher Scaffold;
great men fall diverse stories, from Honor, Riches, Offices; others from the
surface of a level ground, having nothing to fall from but naked life. Saints
dye, the gods do fall: I need not stand to prove it, there is not one of you
great men, but shall be the proof of this point shortly. The Law of Death runs
thus: All Honors, Titles, etc. to the contrary, in any wise notwithstanding:
and there is no Prerogative to check this Law. I will not garnish this
Deaths-head with fine fragments of Poetry, and such stuff: nor would I at all
set it before you as a standing dish, were I not surrounded with so great a
Corone of Princes and great men: and happily some of you may be of Lewis the
Eleventh his mind, that charged all about him that they should not name the
terrible word Death; which yet you must hear of; for it is the way of all the
earth; the house of all the living; your long home, or house of perpetuity: of
which its said, Job 3. 14. 1 King. 2. 2. Job 30. 2^ Luciannecy.
Kings, Counselors, Princes, small and great, are there; and there (...):
their bones and skeletons have no Inscription or Titles of Honor remaining on
them.

The way to this house of all the living, is (as one says) sanguinea, or
lactea; the bloody or the milkie; that is, the common, natural, or usual way.

The former is trodden by great men: the Prince in my Text was sent home this
way; and so was the first man in the world that dyed. The Sword hangs in a hair
over the heads of great ones, who are often cut Adrian the fourth Acts and
Monum.
off by the hand of emulation and animosity. That slaughterhouse of Rome
(where it has been practiced by the Popes themselves, who (as one of them
said) do rather succeed Romulus, making his way by blood, then Peter) has sent
out cruel Emissaries to cut off famous men by a meritorious knife. How happily
may you the Worthies of our Israel call to mind the goodness of that great God,
who has bound the hands of such assassinating blood-suckers from executing
their fury upon you, all this while, that you by renowned industry and zeal,
have given provocations to Rome and Hell.

The Common way is trodden by you great ones too: for ye Gods do die, and ye
Princes shall fall like other men. If you run your Genealogies high enough, you
will find your selves but as other men, in the fretum or narrow sea of
Mankind that divided the two Ocean worlds, the Arc of Noah: and thence if ye
hold your way upward, you will be found the sons of Adamah, common dust: And
you that are the highest dust, raised up a puff of wind of Honor above other
men, are laid, like the small dust, with one drop of rain. There is a great
Arbiter of all things, that can thunder the proud Emperor under his bed, and
write the great King at three or four words into trembling: That can send
Adrian the fourth Acts and Monum.
a Fly to fetch the Triple Crown before his Tribunal, and make a hair, or the
kernel of a Raisin, as mortal as Goliath his spear: That can unspeake the whole
world into nothing, and blow down a great bubble with an easy breath: That by
drawing one nail, can throw down the stateliest building, and undresse your
souls by unpinning one pin. If he take the Bridle off the head of that fire
that is in you, it presently burns you up, by a Fever. If he loose the water, it
drownes you, by a Dropsy. If he lay his hand upon your mouth, he takes away
the airy difference between sleep and death. He says to Moses, Go up and die:
and it follows after, Moses my servant is dead. Every man has a day which is
called His day: and death never makes return, 1 Samuel 28. 10.
Non est inventus in baliva nostra.

4. The subject of this Lamentation is a Prince and a great man fallen in the
time of his agency and usefulness for the settlement of the destractions of
Israel. The key of the story unlocks the sense of these words This day in
Israel. It was a time that the promise of God to David was at the birth, and
the Midwivery of Abner was offered. Let Abner otherwise be what he will for a
man; God may use an Egyptian midwife to bring forth the child of an Israelite.
But this great man falls in the very nicke of time, before the good issue of
his designs. Let me point out this Observation to you:

Its not unusual, that great builders catch a fall when they are upon the
scaffold about their work.

Oh how it amazeth the faith of Gods people, when the star that led them out of
their own Country, goes out of sight before it have brought them to their
journeys end. That youngling world of Reformation in Luthers time, had a sore
temptation, when it must see the fall (as I may say) of the Electour of Saxony
and others that were pillars of hope. Moses must live no longer then to bring
Israel into the plains of Moab: himself is allowed but a prospect of that he
hoped to have enjoyed, and to have brought Israel into We are not without
presidents: our eyes have seen some of our greater lights eclipsed, pleno orb,
when they have been at their Full. The great God that hides his Counsels, knows
his Works from the beginning to the end, and he takes off such Instruments that
he may show that he does not need, is not tied to any tool: for he made the
great world without any. When he says Faciamus, he speaks to himself alone;
not to himself and man. Thus he makes way for some other Providence to come
upon the Stage, and brings about his Work by a more crooked Instrument, which
we imagined should be done by a strait one. So Israel is speedily reduced to
David, though Abner fall. Or he humbles his people just before his promises
take effect; and first strikes them dumb before he open their mouths in a
Benedicite; that the lowliness of his handmaidens may break forth into a
Magnificat: or the time is not yet come that Israel is to be brought out of
Egypt: and therefore though Moses begin to rescue the Israelite, and slay the
Egyptian, yet he must flee for it, and be hidden for Forty years. Or else he
pulls the stool of our confidence from under us, because we sit down upon it:
or else pulls up the sluice of some judgments which have been hindr'd by some
Lot or great man, or whatsoever it be. We see that God writes the Names of our
best and greatest men in the shell, and takes them away by a kind of
Ostracisme. All the help, hope, and comfort is, that God has all instruments
eminently in himself, and can raise up a Joshua in steed of Moses. Wherefore
if his Disciples cannot cast out the evil Spirit, let us come to himself, and
make our selves as sure of his Word by faith, as he is sure of his word by
promise; for though Joseph die in Egypt, yet he lays his bones at stake, that
God will surely visit his Israel, Genesis vlt. ver. 25.

5. All this that has been said, a Prince, a great man fallen at such a time,
is just reason of sad and solemn lamentation; and therefore David and Israel
is in this mourning posture: such a man whose influence had a large
circumference or sphaere while he lived, is followed by an honor and sorrow of
the same compass when he dies: You Princes and great men, death will tell what
the world thought of you; while you live (it may be) Sycophants and flatterers
lay their eggs in your ears, and hatch monstrous opinions in you of your
greatness. Such Rooks usually build in the highest Trees; and on the other
side, envy and detraction may breath upon the glass of your reputation, that
it shall not (while you live) report so clear an Image of you, but death will
make thorow-lights in you; that you shall be seen on both sides; sorrows will
not, cannot be tongue-tyed; you will then begin to reap your due. Then the
world breaks out into these expressions; He was a brave man, He was a great
Courtier, that could not be curbed with a white staff, to be of counsel to
subvert the freedoms of his Country; He was a Captain that could draw a line,
but not to the ignoble center of his private ends; He was a Justice that would
scatter the drunkards from their Ale-bench, and did not understand the language
of a bottle or a basket; He was a Nehemiah, whose kindnesses were great which
he showed to the house of God, and the Offices thereof; He was a Minister that
could not only thunder in his Doctrine, but lighten in his Life; He was a
Papinian (a great Lawyer) but he would not defend Imperial and arbitrary
exorbitances, though he dyed for it; He was a man that appeared and stood for
the truth, and for God in the worst times, when the Summer birds were hidden in
their hollow Trees; He was a man firm and fixed, and studied not the neutral
art of putting off the cap to one, and making a leg to another. And is not this
a brave Echo, are not such men worthy of the Honorable tears of Israel? or
else Israel has reason to mourn for the senselessness and stupidity of their
own hearts. And for the State and honor of mourning, it is an ancient
solemnity credited by time, and great examples, yea, and almost the common
sense of mankind. For both Egyptians and Israelites concur in weeping for
Jacob, whose Exequies were performed in great Equipage when he was cared out of
Egypt; and not to instance in more examples, its said of Hezekiah, that all
Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem, did him honor 2 Chronicles. 32, 33.
at his death, and laid him up in the highest Cell of the Sepulchers of David's
sons, such is the convictive Majesty of goodness, that this idolatrous-hearted
people follow their great Reformer to his grave with honor. De purgat. lib. 1.
c. 3.


In vain does Bellarmine go about to prove out of these solemnities, that
they are done ad juvandas animas. We find no Law of sacrifices for the dead,
these expressions are but civil indexes of honorable sorrows, a debt owing
to Worthies while they lived, and the remainder paid at their death: Like the
after-beames of the Sun, which follow him to his bed; and we were unworthy
heirs of their famous acts, if out of their own goods we could not allow them
answerable interrment; and if any Cynicke in his morosity shall say, that it
matters not, humine an in sublimi putrescat, Let him enjoy a Philosophical
rotting in what ditch he please; we know, there is the burial of an Ass; the
graves of the common people, which is something above that 2 Chronicles. 21. 20.
and higher yet, there is a burial in the City of David, but not in the
Sepulchers of the Kings, and amongst the Sepulchers of the Kings, There are
lower and higher Cells. Honor will follow after worth and merit even into its
grave. We do not lay up the carcass of every Cole-ship with that respect as
that of Drakes was; though confessedly the one must rot, as well as the other.

So much for the opening of the point; Now I come to the words, Do you not
know, by their hand to serve in the uses of this point.

1. Know ye not, You Princes and great men that ye must fall. 2. Know ye not,
You lower Shrubs, that these Cedars must fall.
For you that are Princes and great men, I may say of you as X^rxes weeping,
said of his vast Army, within these few lusters of years, there shall not be
one of you standing, but all fallen, and let me set this deaths-head before
you: For I have no other dish, nor am I likely ever to entertain such a
Table-full of so great guests while I live again; let it therefore,

First, Humble you, and give me leave to follow the chariot of your greatness,
with (...), remember that you must fall. Greatness has need of some
correctives. You are such Pictures, that if one stand of the one side of you,
You are Gods; but if he look upon you on the other side, You are men, and must
dye like men: this takes you one step lower; nay, we may go lower yet; For man
being in honor without understanding, is like the beasts that perish. We are
all proud; pride is the shirt of the soul, which it puts off last when it
shifts: And every rising ground of authority or power, makes us rise in
thoughts. The very bramble, if it get a snatch of authority, will be talking of
his shadow. Oh that you had the meeknes of that Moses, whose face did shine,
but he knew not that (I speak this by allusion) the skin of his face did
shine. I would that but every tenth thought of your rising, was accompanied
with one thought of your falling: And yet you have more reason to have death in
your eyes then other men, because the Venice Glasses, and China metal of your
fine and tender bodies, will not abide so great a stroke as other earthen pots
of courser metal; I will not offer to you those complements with death,
whereof we read good store, in use among great men; as the boy that cried,
Memento te mortalem; or that, of presenting several sorts of Marble to the
Emperor upon his Coronation day, that he might then choose which he would have
for his Tomb, etc. But let me press the sense of your falling condition to
humble you. I do not mean by humility a moral familiarity or courtesy
toward those of lower rank, which yet is agracefull condescency of Greatness:
But I mean, a stooping to the reproves of the Word of God, brought unto you
by the Ministers thereof, who are but earthen vessels like your selves: Submit
your cheek to reproofs, for your own fins, and of your Families. Let not your
iniquities take sanctuary in your greatness; Frown not your Chaplains into a
mealy-mouthed baseness, so that they dare no more make a dark or oblique
reflection upon your darling sins, then take a Bear by the tooth. If you will
bleed out your ill blood, you must pull off your Velvet sleeve, and let the
^^me be bare to the point of the knife: Keep no State against God, though he
speak thunder and lightning by the mouth of dust like your selves. A man never
makes worse use of his greatness, then by it to cast a muzzle over the mouth
of sound and searching reproves. And it is a just judgment of God upon such
men, that they should have Prophets, that will say to Ahab, Go up and prosper.

Secondly, Quicken you to activity in your places while you live, that you may
serve your generation according to the will of God before you dye, and see
corruption; otherwise, you are but blind lights in golden Candlesticks: You are
in great debt, both to the Church and Commonwealth, they have trusted you with
all they have, and your bond is good; but yet be not offended, if they call
hard upon you to pay your debts, for you are mortal men, and we know not what
Heirs or Executors you may leave behind you. The Creditor is oftentimes broken
in the Debtors death; Get death into your minds, and it will put life into your
actions; what you found made of poor Brick, leave in stately Marble, and be
not like many, who while they are rising, appear very active and stirring men;
but when they are up, do freeze into a benumbed slownesse, like Bells that
strike thick when they are rising, and afterward when they are at full pitch,
are set; put your selves on with this spur, I must shortly dye: How should I
live fruitfully? The night will come, how should I labor while it is day? I
wish well to things that are good: but (Been ^ogitare est been somniare) a good
thinker is but a good dreamer; nothing more sads and duls the heart when one
comes to dye, than his neglect of such opportunities which Gods providence, or
his own place have p^t into his hand of receiving and doing good. Not is there
a sharper corrosive, than the reflection upon those days and times that have
passed over him, Male, aliud, nihil, agentem. The highest hills are the
barrennest ground, and I would that saying did not so truly square to great
Ones (that is) that the goodliest Trees, as Cedars, etc. do either bear none,
or the worst Fruit. Great parts and abilities without exercise and putting
forth are but secret and unknown Mines of Silver and Gold, which lie hid in an
unfruitful and unprofitable soil. And therefore, you the great and Noble
Worthies, in whose hands are the Public Faith, the Public Mercy, the Public
Justice, and the Public Peace; be good, and (let your goodness make you) quick
dispensers of what you have in Stewardship, because the time is short, and the
word read rationem may be given suddenly, look upon us as mortal men, who
shall not live long to receive, and upon your selves, who shall not live long
to give the fruits of your hands. And because the Occasion invites me, let me
propound an object to your charitable justice, that is, the relief of those
great sufferers who have bin great doers, I mean the first adventurers with
this great Commander, when he first cut through the Alps. As for the great and
doubtful matters that are under your hand, I would not be thought so rash, as
to wish you to precipitate: A Pilot among shelves and rocks may be too quick; A
Cunctator sometime saved the Commonwealth; only thus I may pray, that when the
Haven lies fair before you, and is without bar, you may fortiter occupare,
set in stiffly, lest new waves, raised by cross winds, carry you back into the
Main again.

3. Arm you against your fall that the day thereof may be to you (as the
Passion-day of the Martyrs was called) the birthday of Eternity. Nequaquam
morte mortemini, was the inlet of our sin and misery, and keeps the door open
to sin still; The Epicure has his Armor against death: a senseless
consideration of it, as of a nothing, or a not being. The great Spirit has his
Armor too; A contempt of death out of principles of Valor and Honor; but
neither of these Armours can keep the arrow from the quick; There is a
terrible clause in the Statute of dying, And after that the judgment. Nor yet
will I go about to arm you with this meditation, that we shall have a shorter
journey from death to life again, than we had from not being, unto life, or
that which is cited by Gerard out of Luther, that all the time that has run,
or shall run out from the beginning, to the end, shall seem to Adam when he
rises again, but tanquam somnus unius horae, as the sleep of the body for one
hour; But if you will break the fall, which else will break you, then you
Gods must become Saints (for all Gods are not Saints) the death of Saints is
more precious then the death of Gods; Grace is special bail against death,
there is no gall and vinegar in it to be drunk by them, for whom Christ has
already drunk it: Death (says the Apostle) is yours, because contributory and
subservient to your happiness; That life which is hid with Christ in God, is out
of the reach of death, our Savior proves Abraham to be living, because God had
long after his death, said, I am the God of Abraham. Those that are confederate
with God in Covenant, must always live, that the Covenant may not be dissolved
by the death of the one party. There is a way then to break the teeth of death,
and to be immortal: Have God for your God; labor to have something in you
that is immortal besides your very souls; lay up for your selves a treasure
beyond the sea of death, that when this membrana dignitatis (as Seneca calls it)
a thin skin of honor breaks, you may not be quite bankrupts; enrich your souls
with the power of godliness, which is profitable to all things. The place of
Princes, the magnificence and great works of great men; The faith and godliness
of poor men do make a rare composition. Do not in stead of disarming death,
arm it rather against you, by putting a sword into the hand of it. The more
service that you may do by the advantage of ground you stand upon, the heavyer
will your accounts be, if your greatness be made a Stage and Theater for to act
the parts of luxury, lasciviousnes, oppression upon. What difference is there
between such gods, and those in Homer, of whose drunkenness and adulteries
there is frequent mention; let me speak one word to you, young Noblemen, and
Gentlemen, Learn you the way of godliness, that may free you from the
looseness and vanity incident to greatness; for when you have given florem
Diabolo, the flower of your time to lusts of youth; your fall may come before
you can so much as give faecem Deo, the dregs thereof to God.

I conclude this point with that which one observes upon Gods seeing all the
works that he had made, that they were very good, for then immediately (says
he) followed the Sabbath, or rest of God, which (though our salvation be not of
works) may signify thus much to you, that when you shall come to a retrospect
upon your ways and works, and find them so empty of, and contrary unto God,
there can be no expectation of a Sabbath or rest unto your souls; and
therefore, wash ye, make ye clean, etc. Isa. 1. 16, 17.

The second, Know ye not, is spoken to you, the lower shrubs. You are to know
that your great men may fall in the very time of their usefulness and service
for your good. In their loss, bewail your sins: for though you feel not the
stroke while the wound is fresh and green, yet afterward you will find the
want of such as are worthy instruments, when we expect they should do great
things; God by taking them away, interrupts the cast. Put not therefore your
trust in Princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no salvation; for his
breath goes forth, and in that very day his thoughts perish, Ps. 146. 3, 4.
even his projects and intentions for your good, dye in the womb, and are
abortive. If we lean hard upon the reed, it breaks the sooner, and we are
laid flat on the ground. God will not let his people enjoy that long, which
they prize too much, some worm shall smite that gourd, and it shall wither;
and though many great men are not likely to be blasted by the confidence of the
people, yet our sad experience teaches us, that we smell too much to our
sweetest flowers, and so wither them.

I Shall now come to the parallel Hearse of that Prince and great man fallen
this day in England, of whom, though modesty it self may without blushing
speak in a magnificent style, yet have my thoughts waved me too and fro, it not
being easy to be moderatour of the Arguments that are for speech, or silence:
Not because the matter will surpass the work-manship, and the copiousnesse of
the subject shame, the penury of my expression; but because on the one hand it
is argued, that Funeral Encomiastickes of the dead, are very often confections
of poison to the living; for many, whose lives speak nothing for them, will
draw the example into consequence, and be thereby led into hope, that they may
press a hackny Funeral Sermon to carry them to Heaven when they dye;
especially, if such for whom no file could be rough enough while they lived, be
smooth-filed when they are dead: on the other hand it may be said, That though
common graves have no inscription, yet Marble Tombs are not without some
Epitaph. Heroical examples should not go with a common pass, but with a
Trompet. David afforded this Honorary to Saul and Abner, and (which is to be
observed) he drew not any line in their pictures with a black coal, which yet
he might have done, for both of them had too much shadow if he would have used
it; but he dealt with them as the Painter did with Antigonus, who had but one
eye, he drew his Picture, imagine lusca halfe-faced, and so buried the
deformity out of the beholders sight.

Neither is this all, which makes me stand in a slippery place, but the various
senses and censures too, which are very likely to be found in this great
multitude: Some that hated the sound of his Drums and Trumpets, will not
patiently endure the Ecchore-sounding to their disaffected ears. And some
again are indifferently content to hear some good words of his Epitaph,
because it begins with Hic jacet, here he lies; as Caracalla said to them that
desired, that some honors might be spent upon his Brother Geta, now dead out
of his way: Sit divus (says he) modo non sit vivus, honor him as you will, so
as he does not live. The most voices will doubtless vote, that it is needless
to set up a Candle to the Sun, for his story is yet alive in all men's
memories, and the stage whereon he acted it, is yet warm. The truth is, I had
rather leave him to the history, which I hope the honorable Houses have
bespoken, and to that Homer that shall be the praco of this Achilles. But
because his name would sometime have passed me clear through all Guards, and
probably has not as yet lost that virtue; and that this State and presence
speaks him with more eloquence, then I, so that I can but run the hazard of
being an imperfect interpreter by word, of that honor, which your selves do
speak by signs. And since death has put him beyond pride, all beyond envy,
and my self beyond flattery, what if we make a short Index of his Story, and
audit his d^bentur in the mean time, not drawing him in full proportion, but as
Ezekiel pourtrayed the City of Jerusalem upon a Tile, which will indeed be more
suitable to the posture we are in; for deep sorrows make no long orations,
Leves loquuntur curae, ingentes stupent.

Since then it must be so, jacta est alea; I shall impose upon my self this
law, not to build his Monument of common stones, nor trouble my self and you,
to gather such flowers to cast upon his grave, as grow in common fields, nor
descend or stoop to any thing which is beneath Heroical.

His Nobility and his Nobleness, though they might each of them adorn his
Monument, yet the third, which is his Excellency, is the transcendent.

For his Nobility; He was sprung of an exceeding fair, an ancient Stem, which
does branch forth into the great and Noble Families of the Princes and great
men of England, and he was the third of this Title which was inoculate into
that Stem, by Q. Elizabeth of famous memory, But Titles of Honor must dye as
well as men; and because this renowned stream carries it is name no further, I
shall omit all matter of Heraldry, as not becoming me at this time and place.

His Nobleness was of a high and honorable elevation; He was a man of fixed
principles, and of a masculine resolution, of an inviting familiarity in a
stately presence; too generous to be cruel, too great a Patriot to be Courted;
his compass without trepidation or variation, had constantly stood right to
that Pole; the good of his Country, which he kept in his eye, both when he wore
the Gown, and Sword: He was fide Romana and Anti-Romana, of Roman
faithfulness, and of Anti-Roman faith: A Senator that honored his Robes. The
tears of England, of his servants, of his tenants, do speak him in a better
language then the most eloquent Marble is able: Though tenants tears be no
commendation to a living landlord, yet are they credit to the dead.

The Character of his Excellency, may be that which David sometime gave to
Abner, the great man in my Text; Art not thou a valiant man, and who is like
thee in all Israel? When the time was come that Ianus Temple must be opened
here in England, by the Porter that only has the key of it, Necessity, and
those orphane sisters (before spoken of) Liberty and Property were to choose
their Guardian, Champion and Vindex; you the Honorable Trustees, looked out
for a Dictator, in whose hands you might deposite, the very being, safety,
freedom, lives, Senatus populique Romani, of the Parliament and people of
England, and happily pitched your eye and choice upon this man, who was stirpe
and ingenio bellicosus, One that had honor to give credit to the Cause he
undertook, reputation to vindicate his undertaking from contempt of enemies;
Interest, whose Drum could press an Army; dexterity to manage the Sword,
Counsel to direct it, Valor to use it, and faithfulness to discharge it. And
he was the man you then resolved to live and dye with. It was the greatest
honor in the world, to be credited with the infinite depositum of the life and
being of the Parliament of England. And at this time, when you had assigned
this Theater to act his part upon, it was the highest honor to him, that he
would undertake to Pilot a Ship so laden with so great a fraught, through the
tempestuous and angry Seas which then began to swell and be intractable, when
this poor Kingdom, knew not for the most part, how to wear Buffe and Steel,
until taught by him; in whom that ancient Chivalry and Valor of England
(which had left it is Monuments in France and other parts of the world, but of
later times almost emasculate and grown obsolet) was concentered, and by
transmigration had laid it self up in him: He was the man that was to break
the ice, and set his first footing in the Red Sea; a Hercules, but not in
bivio; a man resolved, when others hung in suspense; fixed, when some stars of
greatest magnitude were moved with trepidation, or erratick. That filled the
breach, when many lay post principa, and behind the hedge. No Proclamation of
Treason could cry him down, nor threatening Standard daunt him: That in that
misty morning, when men knew not each the other, whether friend or foe, by his
arising dispel'd the fogge, and by his very name, commanded thousands into your
service. Such as were for Reformation, and groaned under pressures in Religion,
he took by the hand, and they him: Such as were Patriots, and would stand up
for common Liberties, he took by the hand, and they him, and so became the
bond or knot of both, as the Axletree of the world upon which both the Poles
do move: And this must be his honor alone for ever; for though Joshua also
do admirably when he comes to it, yet it is Moses that first leads forth
Israel by their Armies.

Thus he entered, and for his deportment upon the Stage, and the experience he
gave of himself, who knows not it? Such was his personal valor, as if
nothing but steel had gone to his composition. The instances are famous; In
that great battle at Edgehill, where this Kingdom had her first Crisis upon
a Sabbath day, (our wars have now fulfilled above half a week of years) when
he had lost a wing yet he flew about, Et nullo discrimine, notum, dux an miles
erat; He showed his Army there what a man they had adventured with, in their
first Voyage; No, I prae sequar, Captain, but one whose Valor gave the word
sequimini me, with whose steel (its no disparagement to say, that) his for
ever famous Chieftaines sharpened their edge, and so that hill was made a
standing Trophee, your enemies (Right Honorable) from that day begun to take
you for a Parliament.

I must leave to the large Map of his Story, those many memorables and
victories, which bear his name; for even great places do not always find any
room in a little Map, and shall instance him but in one other particular, that
famous expedition to Gloucester, when we were at a very low water, and this
Eagle had then also moulted his feathers, and having imped them with renowned
Londoners, did fight the greatest part of that long march thither, where the
then Governor whom I may (borrowing Cicero his word) call hujus Regni Stator,
the Stator of the Kingdom of England, (because he took the enemy his horse by
the bridle in his full career, and stopped him, and being resolved to sell that
City to them by the candle) was rescued before the candle dropped, by this noble
Champion, who retreating from that Tropic, fought his way back again through
hunger and hardship: and because this Retreat should not be like an empty field
without some charge, He scattered that great Army near Newbery, and to you this
renowned City, reddidit Legiones, restored your valiant Legions, and restored
England to it self; An unparalleled Expedition.

His Faithfulness was like Touch or Marble without any streaming flaw, no
Honors, Offices, or whatsoever bears the name of greatness could bribe it.
The two Indies would have bin as dirt: He knew the Pole he must sail by, and
steered not by a mercenary Compass. He had espoused the Senate and Liberties
of England, and was resolved, aut liberare fidem, aut solvere animam.

His ends, so far as one may learn the mark by the Archers eye, were not
private interests, respects, or parties, to be served upon the ashes of public
ruins. Talk of gold to soldiers of fortune, He was Themistocles. A right line
drawn from the Center you set him, would have cut the center of his aims and
ends. Had you fallen upon such a Merchant as would have been eccentricke to you,
and have cauponated the war to raise his private interest, or have put in the
great fraught he was trusted with, and consigned the Cargazone, to some Royal
Port, oh, what a Ferall Table of Proscriptions, (like that of Syllae's) might
have bin set up amongst us; and your lives have bin bargained for, and sold as
that Triumvirate did the lives of the Senators of Rome.

His Counsel and wisdom was such as argued him to be a man that knew
conduct; He had a fine finger to find out, and skillful to untie or cut the
knot, In foresight of danger his eyes were open; but when he came to execute
his Councels, his eyes were shut against all impressions of fear and terror.

His love and respect to the Soldiery, such as became a brave Christian. He
would not Turkishly fill ditches, or stop Canon with them. His hand of relief
was not shut or short to rescued prisoners. He affourded honorable respect to
naked and wounded valor. His countenance paid and armed his soldiers, when
sometimes they wanted both: and no wonder if his School bred such a gallant
Infantry which had such a Master, and such an Usher.

In sum. This Camillus was a second Romulus. His Monument needs no
inscription, for his Epitaph is written in the hearts of men. Nothing but
ESSEX, the Great, the Valiant, the Faithful, the Parliaments Essex; the Essex
of England, and the Tutelar thereof: who added to his Noble Coronet all the
Military Crowns, saving that which is called Navall, or the Sea-Crowne, which
is due to another most Noble Worthy, more faithful than the Element he was
then the Master of.

For his death, the Forlorn hope it sent out before it, was but slightly, the
Physicians thought him bailable, but death lay in ambuscado in a full body, and
suddenly surprised him with a dying sleep, and now we are erecting of his
Monument, one of the seven wonders of the World was a Tomb. And if the Noble
and Famous men who fought under his Banner, shall please to be set in for his
supporters, it will be such a Squadron-Monument as will have no Brother in
England, until the time do come (and I wish it may be long first) that the
most renowned and excellent Champion that now governes the sword of England,
must now lay his bones by him, and then there will be the Alpha and Omega of
such a Story as shall render God fearful in praises, doing wonders by the
first hand of him that led us through the untrodden paths of the wilderness,
and by the second hand of him that has made Victory (which Homer calls (...),
a Jack on both sides) to change its name; who if he shall have but one stone
out of each City or strong Hold taken by his Arms, to make his Tomb, it will
be such a Monument that every stone of it will speak a History, and some a
Miracle: Or if that cannot be, it will be enough that he lay his head upon an
immortal Turff taken out of Naseby field: God thought Moses, or rather made
him the fittest man to begin, and lead Israel forth, and he honored Joshua with
the completing of the work, neither does Joshua eclipse the worth of Moses,
nor he the worth of Joshua; and so craving pardon of my boldness with your
patience, I have endeavored to speak wthout reflections upon any, nor did I
mean to tread on the foot or toe of any man, thereby to raise my speech the
higher, as knowing that this Prince and great man needed not to pull down the
stones of any other man's Monument to build his, who had enough in his own
Quarry, as being (nex^ ^^e Honorable Parliament) that first man from whom we
pass to our posterity the conveyancies of our liberty and safety. Et nati
natorum, and qui nascentur ab illis. I have no more but this; He lived a good
General, He dyed a General good; and therefore a lamentation to all Israel,
and so I leave him in his Bed of Honor, and draw the Curtains, and put out the
lights.

Only a word at parting, and first my Lords to you, we may know how great the
Tree that is fallen, was, by the vacuity or void place it leaves behind it. We
look upon you as them that will endeavor to prevent the vacuum by acting from
that noble principle which moves to the universal and common good; the loss
we have sustained is great, though he never had wore Buff but only Parliament
Robes, and they say that when a limb or part of a man is cut off, anima
retrahitur, the soul is retracted. I wish the Philosophy may be verefied in
the retraction of his reality and faithfulness unto you; that so he may
remain among you in quintessence and virtue, being as it were divided among
you, as they say of Romulus, that he was discerpt by the Senate, when he dyed,
and every Senator got a piece of him. Let nothing that was exemplary in him be
put in his grave, that neither we nor our posterity may have cause to write
upon his Statue, as they did upon that of Brutus, utinam viveres.

As for his Military worth; If any shall apply themselves to copy it out, or
some young Noble Spark shall please to go to School to his Monument, their
lesson is, Disce Miles militare, Galba est. Here they shall be taught how to
excel, fide and armis, How to have mettell in their Coat, as well as Color;
How to carry themselves so, as they may legere exercitum, non emere, win an
Army and not press, silence mutinies, or persuade the soldiery with one lord
Quirites, and in a word how to be an Essex, not a Caesar, who converted his
Arms against the Senate, and therefore has a blot in his Copy to this day.

I must conclude with you the most Honorable Senate of England; It would be
too much presumption in me to thank you for this Honor of your presence and
sorrows; Its a great thing to be made immortal by an immortal Parliament:
All the Honor which belongs to your servants and instruments, redounds to you;
what they get or receive is but handed by them to you the owners; should we
write down but fifty to them, when there is a hundred due, the loss would be
yours. It was a stately deportment to entertain the newe^ of this great
Champion and Senator his death, as the old Romans used to entertain sad
tidings, mutatis vestibus, and to honor your sorrow with an adjournment: This
is the way to breed more Essex's: Its Honor that breeds a soldier; Take
honor out of his eye, and you cut off the spurs from his heels. My wishes
are, first, that you may never have occasion to create any more then you have
done by the name of Excellency: secondly, that if you must, there may be such
men, with whom in safety you may lay up your lives, and thirdly, that you may
have the happiness to pitch upon them. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
P. 15. l. ult. for cared, r. carried p. 26. l. 24 r. assigned him p. 29. l. 23
for Christian, r. Chrestaine p. 30. l. 19. put out now. p 32, l. 8. for accord,
r. word.


