A Short Vindication OF THE RELAPSE AND THE Provoked Wife, FROM Immorality and
Profaneness

By the AUTHOR.

LONDON: Printed for H. Walwyn, at the Three Legs in the Poultrey, against the
Stocks-Market. MDCXC VIII.

A Short Vindication of the Relapse and the Provoked Wife, from Immorality and
Profaneness.
WHEN first I saw Mr. Collier's Performance upon the Irregularities of the
Stage (in which amongst the rest of the Gentlemen, he is pleased to afford me
some particular Favors), I was far from designing to trouble either my self or
the Town with a Vindication; I thought his Charges against me for Immorality
and Profaneness were grounded upon so much Mistake, that every one (who had
had the curiosity to see the Plays, or on this Occasion should take the trouble
to read 'em) would easily discover the Root of the Invective, and that 'twas
the Quarrel of his Gown, and not of his God, that made him take Arms against me.

I found the Opinion of my Friends and Acquaintance the same, (at least they
told me so) and the Righteous as well as the Unrighteous persuaded me, The
Attack was so weak, the Town would defend it self; That the General's Head was
too hot for his Conduct to be wise; his Shot too much at Random ever to make a
Breach; and that the Siege would be raised, without my taking the Field.

I easily believed, what my Laziness made me wish; but I have since found, That
by the Industry of some People, whose Temporal Interest engages 'em in the
Squabble; and the Natural Propensity of others, to be fond of any thing that is
Abusive; this Lampoon has got Credit enough in some Places to brand the Persons
it mentions with almost as bad a Character, as the Author of it has fixed upon
himself, by his Life and Conversation in the World.

I think it is therefore now a thing no farther to be laughed at. Should I wholly
sit still, those People who are so much mistaken to think I have been busy to
encourage Immorality, may double their Mistake, and fancy I profess it: I will
therefore endeavor, in a very few Pages to convince the World, I have brought
nothing upon the Stage, that proves me more an Atheist than a Bigot.

I may be blind in what relates to my self; it is more than possible, for most
People are so: But if I judge right, what I have done is in general a
Discouragement to Vice and Folly; I am sure I intended it, and I hope I have
performed it. Perhaps I have not gone the common Road, nor observed the
strictest Prescriptions: But I believe those who know this Town, will agree,
That the Rules of a College of Divines will in an Infinity of Cases, fall as
short of the Disorders of the Mind, as those of the Physicians do in the
Diseases of the Body; and I think a man may vary from 'em both, without being a
Quack in either.

The real Query is, Whether the Way I have varied, be likely to have a good
Effect, or a bad one? That Is the true State of the Case; which if I am cast in,
I don't question however to gain at least thus much of my Cause, That it shall
be allowed I aimed at the Mark, whether I hit it or not. This, if it will not
vindicate my Sense, will justify my Morals; and show the World, That this
Honest Gentleman, in stretching his Malice, and curtailing his Charity, has
played a Part which would have much better become a Licentious Poet, than a
Reverend Divine.

Though I resolve to use very few Words, I would willingly observe some Method,
were it possible; that the World, who is the Judge, might sum up the Evidence
the easier, and bring the Right and Wrong into the shorter (and by consequence
the clearer) View: But his Play is so wild, I must be content to take the Ball
as it comes, and return it if I can; which whether I always do or not, however,
I believe will prove no great matter, since I hope 'twill appear, where he
gives me the Rest, he makes but a wide Chase: His most threatening Strokes end
in nothing at all; when he Cuts, he is under Line; when he Forces, he is up in
the Nets. But to leave Tennis, and come to the Matter.

The First Chapter in his Book is upon the Immodesty of the Stage; where he
tells you how valuable a Qualification Modesty is in a Woman: For my part I am
wholly of his mind; I think it is almost as valuable in a Woman as in a
Clergyman; and had I the ruling of the Roast, the one should neither have a
Husband, nor the the other a Benefice without it. If this Declaration will not serve
to show I Am a Friend to it, let us see what Proof this Gentleman can give of the
contrary.

I don't find him over-stock'd with Quotations in this Chapter: He Is forced,
rather than say nothing, to fall upon poor Miss Hoyden. P. 10.
He does not come to Particulars, but only mentions her with others, for an
immodest Character. What kind of Immodesty he means, I cannot tell: But I
suppose he means Lewdness, because he generally means wrong. For my part, I
know of no Bawdy she talks: If the Strength of his Imagination gives any of her
Discourse that Turn, I suppose it may be owing to the Number of Bawdy Plays he
has read, which have debauched his Taste, and made every thing seem Salt, that
comes in his way.

He has but one Quotation more in this long Chapter, that I am P. 35.
concerned in: And there he points at the Provoked Wife, as if there were
something in the 41st Page of that Play, to discountenance Modesty in Women.
But since he did not think fit to acquaint the Reader what it was, I will.

Lady Brute and Bellinda speaking of the Smuttiness of some Plays, Bellinda
says,

Why don't some Reformer or other beat the Poet for it?

L. B. Because he is not so sure of our Private Approbation, as of our Public
Thanks: Well, sure there is not upon Earth so impertinent a Thing as Women's
Modesty.

B. Yes, Men's Fantasque, that obliges us to it: If we quit our Modesty, they
say we lose our Charms; and yet they know. That very Modesty is Affectation,
and rail at our Hypocrisy.

Now which way this Gentleman will extract any thing from hence, to the
Discouragement of Modesty, is beyond my Chemistry: It Is plainly and directly
the contrary. Here are two Women (not over Virtuous, as their whole Character
shows), who being alone, and upon the rallying Pin, let fall a Word between
Jest and Earnest, as if now and then they found themselves cramped by their
Modesty. But lest this should possibly be mistaken by some part of the
Audience, less apprehensive of Right and Wrong than the rest, they are put in
mind at the same Instant, That (with the Men) if they quit their Modesty, they
lose their Charms: Now I thought 'twas impossible to put the Ladies in mind of
any thing more likely to make 'em preserve it. I have nothing more laid to my
Charge in the First Chapter.

The Second is entitled, The Profaneness of the Stage; which he ranges under
Two Heads.

Their Cursing and Swearing. And Their Abuse of Religion and the Holy
Scriptures.

As to Swearing, I agree with him in what he says of it in general, That it is
contrary both to Religion and Good Manners, especially before Women: But I say,
what he calls Swearing in the Playhouse, (at least where I have to answer for
it) is a Breach upon neither.

And here I must desire the Reader to observe, His Accusations against me run
almost always in general Terms, he scarce ever comes to Particulars: I hope
'twill be allowed a good sign on my side, that it always falls to my turn to
quote the thing at length in my Defense, which he huddles together in my
Charge. What follows will be an Instance of it.

He says in the 57th Page, (where the Business of Swearing is upon the Tapis)
with a great deal of Honesty and Charity, That in this respect the Relapse and
the Provoked Wife are particularly rampant and scandalous.

Would not any body imagine from hence, that the Oaths that were used there,
were no less than those of a Losing Bully at Baggammon, or a Bilk'd
Hackney-Coachman? Yet after all, the stretch of the Profaneness lies in Lord
Foppington's Gad, and Miss Hoyden's I-Cod. This is all this Gentleman's Zeal is
in such a Ferment about.

Now whether such Words are entirely justifiable or not, there is this at least
to be said for 'em; That People of the Nicest Rank both in their Religion and
their Manners throughout Christendom use 'em.

In France you meet with Par Die, Par Bleu, Ma Foy, etc. in the constant
Conversation of the Ladies and the Clergy, I mean those who are Religious even
up to Bigotry it self; and accordingly we see they are always allowed in their
Plays: And in England, we meet with an Infinity of People, Clergy as well as
Laity, and of the best Lives and Conversations, who use the Words I-gad,
I-faith, Codsfish, Cot's my Life, and many more, which all lie liable to the
same Objection.

Now whether they are right or wrong in doing it, I think at least their
Example is Authority enough for the Stage; and should have been enough to have
kept so good a Christian as Mr. Collier from loading his Neighbor with so foul
a Charge as Blasphemy and Profaneness, unless he had been better provided to
make it good.

The next thing he takes to task in this Chapter, is the Abuse of Religion and
Holy Scripture. Now here I think he should first clearly have proved, That no
Story, Phrase, or Expression whatsoever in the Scripture, whether in the
Divine, Moral, or Historical part of it, should be either repeated, or so much
as alluded to, upon the Stage, to how useful an End soever it might be applied:
This I say he should have first put past a dispute, before he fell upon me for
an Abuser of the Holy Scripture; for unless that be to abuse it, I am innocent.

The Scripture is made up of History, Prophecy, and Precept; which are things
in their Nature capable of no other Burlesque than what calls in question
either their Reality or their Sense: Now if any Allusion I have made, be found
even to glance at either of them, I shall be ready to ask Pardon both of God
and the Church. But to the Trial.

The first Accusation lies upon the Provoked Wife, where Rasor is P. 77.
highly blamed by Mr. Collier; for, in the 77th Page, pleading the same Excuse
to an untoward Prank he had newly played, which Adam did heretofore upon a more
unfortunate Occasion: That Woman having tempted him, the Devil overcame him.
How the Scripture is affronted by this, I cannot tell; here is nothing that
reflects upon the Truth of the Story: It may indeed put the Audience in mind of
their Forefather's Crime, and his Folly, which in my Opinion, like
Gunpowder-Treason, ought never to be forgot.

The Line in Rasor's Confession, Pro. W. p. 78.
which Mr. Collier's Modesty ties him from repeating, makes the Close of this
Sentence: And if my Prayers were to be heard, her punishment for so doing
should be like the Serpent's of old, she should lie upon her face all the days
of her life.

All I shall say to this, is, That an Obscene Thought must be buried deep
indeed, if he don't smell it out; and that I find he has a much greater
Veneration for the Serpent than I have, who shall always make a very great
distinction between my Respects to God and the Devil.

He runs a Muck at all. The next he lances at is my Lord Foppington. P. 78.
And here he is as angry at me for being for Religion, as before for being
against it, (which shows you the Man's resolved to quarrel with me): For I
think his Lordship's Words which he quotes about St. James's Church, are beyond
all dispute on the Minister's side, though not on his Congregation's: The
Indecencies of the Place, the Levity of the Women, and the unseasonable
Gallantry of the Men, are exposed in the very Relapse, p. 23, 33.
Lines this Gentleman is pleased to quote for their Profaneness. For though my
Lord Foppington is not supposed to speak what he does to a Religious End, yet
it is so ordered, that his manner of speaking it, together with the Character he
represents, plainly and obviously instructs the Audience (even to the meanest
Capacity) that what he says of his Church-Behaviour, is designed for their
Contempt, and not for their Imitation: This is so notorious, that no Schoolboy
could mistake it: I therefore hope those who observe this Man of Reformation is
capable of giving so good an Intention so pernicious a Turn, will conclude,
when he sat down to write upon the Profaneness of the Poets, he had nothing
less in his Head, than to refine the Morals of the Age.

From the Elder Brother he falls upon the Younger; I suppose, because he takes
me to be his Friend, for I find no other reason for his Quarrel: He accuses him
for assuring his Man Lory, that he has kicked his Conscience down Stairs; and
he observes, he says, by the way, that this Loose Young Gentleman is the
Author's Favorite. Now the Author observes by the way, That he is always
observing wrong; for he has no other proof of his being his Favorite, than
that he has helped him to a Wife, who is likely to make his Heart ache: But I
suppose Mr. Collier is of Opinion, that Gold can never be bought too dear.

The next Flirt is at Worthy and Relapse, p. 51.
Berinthia; and here he tells you Two Characters of Figure determine the Point
in Defense of Pimping. I can pardon his Mistake in the business of Pimping,
because I charitably believe the University may have been the only Place he has
had any Experience of it in, and there it is not managed indeed by People of any
extraordinary Figure: But he may be informed if he pleases, that in this
Righteous Town the Profession soars somewhat higher, and that (out of my
Lord-Mayor's Liberties) there are such things as Worthy and Berinthia to be
found. I brought 'em upon the Stage to show the World how much the Trade was
improved; but this Gentleman I find will not take my Word for it.

Nurse is to have the next Kick of the Breech, and it is for being too Profane.
But that is left for me to quote again: For his part, all he repeats from her
is, That Relapse, p. 96.
his Worship (young Fashion) overflows with his Mercy and his Bounty: He is not
only pleased to forgive us our Sins, but which is more than all, has prevailed
with me to become the Wife of thy Bosom.

This he says is dull: Why so it is; and so is he, for thinking it worth his
finding fault with, unless it had been spoke by somebody else than a Nurse, and
to somebody else than Mr. Bull. But the Profane Stuff he says precedes it,
I Will acquaint the Reader with. She says (speaking to the Chaplain) Roger, Are
not you a wicked man, Roger, to set your strength against a weak Woman, and
persuade her it was no Sin to conceal Miss's Nuptials? My Conscience flies in
my face for it, thou Priest of Baal; and I find by woeful Experience, thy
Absolution is not worth an old Cassock.

The Reader may here be pleased to take notice what this Gentleman would
conster Profaneness, if he were once in the Saddle with a good Pair of Spurs
upon his Heels. I have all manner of Respect for the Clergy, but I should be
very sorry to see the Day, that a Nurse's cracking a Jest upon a Chaplain
(where it has no Allusion to Religion) should be brought within the Verge of
Profaneness: But the next Chapter, about the Abuse of the Clergy, will give
occasion for some more Remarks of this kind.

Amanda comes next, I thought she might have escaped, but it seems with all her
Virtue, she charges the Bible with Untruths, and says,

Good Gods, what slippery stuff are men composed of! sure the Account of their
Creation's false, and 'twas the Woman's Rib that they were formed of.

I Am sorry the Gentleman who writ this Speech of Amanda's, is not here to
defend himself; but he being gone away with the Czar, who has made him Poet
Laureat of Muscovy, I can do no less for the Favor he intended me, than to say
this in his Justification. That to my knowledge he has too much Veneration for
the Bible, to intend this a charge upon the Truth of it; and that it appears
very plain to me, Amanda intended no more to call it in question by those
words, than Mr. Collier's Wife might be supposed to do, if from some
Observations upon his Book, she should say, Sure it is a mistake in the New
Testament, that the fruits of the Spirit are, Modesty, Temperance, Justice,
Meekness, Charity, etc. for my Jeremy is a spiritual Person, yet has not One of
these marks about him.

Worthy follows: And I am P. 80.
threatened with no less than Eternal Damnation, for making him say to his
Procuress (when she had promised to do what he would have her) Thou Angel of Light,
let me fall down and adore thee. But I am not commended for the Answer she
makes him, to put the Audience in mind, she was not supposed to deserve that
Compliment, Thou Minister of Darkness Relapse, p. 91.
get up again, for I hate to see the Devil at his Devotions. If Mr. Collier had
quoted this too, he had given a better Character of me, and I think of himself.

A Page or two farther, he has a snap, as he goes by, at the Provoked Wife. And
here he is at foul Prove. Wife, p. 3.
play again. He accuses Lady Brute for setting down as a Precept, that the Part
of a Wife, is to Cuckold her Husband; whereas her words are these, In short,
Bellinda, he has used me so barbarously of late, I could almost resolve to play
the downright Wife, and Cuckold him.

This indeed is saying, Wives do Cuckold their Husbands (I ask the Ladies
Pardons for Lying): But it is not saying they should do so: I hope Mr. Collier
will ask mine.

Lady Brute in her next Reply to Bellinda, says, what I own at first view seems
much more liable to exception. Yet least the Audience should mistake her
Raillery for her serious Opinion, there is care taken immediately to inform 'em
otherwise by making her reprimand her self in these words to Bellinda. But I
shall play the fool and jest on, till I make you begin to think I am in earnest.

Here, methinks, he should have commended me for my Caution. But he was surly,
and would not.

Young Fashion is next accused for saying to Lory (when he had a prospect of
getting Miss Hoyden) Providence, thou see at last, takes care of men of Merit.

This surely is a very poor Charge, and a Critic must be reduced to short
Commons to chop at it. Every body knows the word Providence in Common Discourse
goes for Fortune. If it be answered, Let it go for what it will, it is in
strictness God Almighty; I answer again, That if you go to strictness, Fortune
is God Almighty as much as Providence, and yet no One ever thought it Blasphemy
to say, Fortune's blind, or Fortune favors Fools: And the reason why it is not
thought so, is because it is known it is not meant so.

Berinthia comes again, and is blamed for telling Amanda, Worthy had taken her
to pieces like a Text, and preached upon every part of her; This is called a
Lewd and Profane Allegory. I confess it has at a glance, the appearance of
somewhat which it is not, and that methinks Mr. Collier might have been content
to have charged it with; but he always takes care to stretch that way that
becomes him least, and so is sure to be in the wrong himself, whether I am so
or not.

Neither the Woman in general, nor any particular part about her, is liken'd to
the Text; The Simile lies between the Manner of a Minister's using his Text,
and Worthy's Flourishing upon his Mistress; So that the Prophanation's got in
the wrong place here again. But supposing the Minister to be as Mr. Collier
would have him, as sacred a thing as his Text, there is nothing here that
Burlesques him; It Is a Simile indeed, but a very inoffensive one, for it abuses
nobody; and as to the Lewdness on it, I refer my self to the Reader here again,
whether this Gentleman does not give us another Instance of his having a very
quick Nose, when some certain things are in the Wind. I believe, had the
Obscenity he has routed up here, been buried as deep in his Churchyard, the
Yarest Boar in his Parish would hardly have tossed up his Snout at it.

Berinthia's Close of her Speech, Now consider of what has been said, and
Heaven give you grace to put it in practice, brings up the Rear of the Attack
in this Chapter. These I own are words often used at the close of a Sermon, and
therefore perhaps might as well have been let alone here. A known
Pulpit-Expression sounds loose upon the Stage, though nothing is really
affronted by it; for that I think in this Case is very plain, to any body that
considers, who it is that speaks these words, and her manner of doing it.
There Is nothing serious in it, as if she would persuade either Amanda or the
Audience that Heaven approved what she was doing: It Is only a loose Expression,
suitable to the Character she represents, which, throughout the Play,
sufficiently shows, she is brought upon the Stage to Ridicule something that is
off on it.

These three or four last Quotations Mr. Collier says are downright Blasphemy,
and within the Law. I hope the Reader will perceive he says wrong.

The next Chapter is upon the Abuse of the Clergy: And here we are come to the
Spring of the Quarrel. I believe whoever reads Mr. Collier, need take very
little pains to find out, that in all probability, had the Poets never
discovered a Rent in the Gown, he had done by Religion, as I do by my Brethren,
left it to shift for it self.

In starting this Point, he opens a large Field for an Adversary to Rove in, he
unbars the Gate of the Town, forgetting the Weakness of the Garrison; were I
the Governor on it, I Would commend him for his Courage, much more than for his
Prudence.

I once thought to have said a great deal upon this Occasion; But I have
changed my mind, and will trouble the Reader with no more than I think is
necessary to clear my self from the Charge of Ridiculing the Function of a
Clergyman.

I am as fully convinced, as the most Pious Divine, or the most Refined
Politician can wish me, how necessary the Practice of all Moral Virtues is to
our Happiness in this World, as well as to that of another. And this Opinion
has its natural Consequence with me, which is, to give me a regard to every
Instrument of their Promotion.

The Institution of the Clergy, I own to be both in the Intention and Capacity
the most effectual of all; I have therefore for the Function all imaginable
Deference, and would do all things to support it in such a kind of Credit, as
will render it most formidable in the execution of its Design. But in this Mr.
Collier and I, I doubt, are not like to agree.

He is of Opinion, That Riches and Plenty, Title, State and Dominion, give a
Majesty to Precept, and cry Place for it wherever it comes; That Christ and
his Apostles took the thing by the wrong Handle; and that the Pope and his
Cardinals have much refined upon 'em in the Policy of Instruction. That should
a Vicar, like St. John, feed on Locusts and Wild Honey, his Parish would think
he had too ill a taste for himself, to cater for them; and that a Bishop, who,
like St. Paul, should decline Temporal Dominion, would show himself such an
Afs, his Advice would go for nothing.

This I find is Mr. Collier's Opinion; and if ever I take Orders, I will not swear
it shall not be mine: But then I fear I shall continue in my Heresy; Three
Articles of which are these:

1. That the Shepherd, who has least Business at home in his House, is likely
to take the most care of his Flock. 2. That he who finds fault with the Sauce
he greedily sops his bread in, gives very good cause to suspect he would fain keep
it all to himself. 3. That he who is strict in the Performance of his Duty,
needs no Other help, to be respected in his Office.
These Pills, I own, are as bitter to the Flesh, as they are agreeable to the
Spirit; but the Physick's sound, and the Prescription is so necessary, that
when nothing else will persuade some people to swallow 'em, I think it is not
amiss, they should be forced down by the Stage. If any Poet has gone farther,
let him answer for it; I Will endeavor to show I have not. And first I Am to
answer for Sir John Brute's putting on a Gown to Abuse the Clergy.

If a Sir John Brute off the Stage should put on a Gown in his Cups, and pass
his Lewdness upon the World, for the Extravegances of a Churchman; This, I own,
would be an Abuse and a Prejudice to the Clergy. But to expose this very Man
upon the Stage, for putting this Affront upon the Gown; to put the Audience in
mind, that there were Laymen so wicked, they cared not what they did to bring
Religion in Contempt, and were therefore always ready to throw dirt upon the
Pilots of it:

This I believe no body but a Man of Mr. Collier's heat, could have mistaken so
much, to quote it under the head, of the Clergy abused by the Stage. But Men
that ride Post, with the Reins loose upon the Neck, must expect to get falls.
When he writes again, he will take up perhaps, and mix a little Lead with his
Quicksilver.

The Justice does indeed drop a word which alludes to the Jolly Doings of some
Boon Companions in the Fenns; and if I had let him drop a word or two more, I
think I had made him a better Justice than I have.

In the Relapse, Mr. Collier complains that his Brother Bull wishes the married
Couple Joy in Language so horribly smutty and Profane, to transcribe it would
blot the Paper too much. I Am therefore put upon the old necessity to transcribe
it for him, that the World may see what this honest Gentleman would pass upon
them as well as me, for Profane, had he as long a Sword in his Hand as the
Pope has in his.

Bull's words are these. I most Relapse, p. 74.
humbly thank your Honors; and I hope, since it has been my Lot to join you in
the Holy Bands of Wedlock, you will so cultivate the Soil, which I have craved
a Blessing on, that your Children may swarm about you, like Bees about a
Honeycomb. These are the words he calls horribly Smutty and Profane.

The next Quarrel's about I don't know what; nor can light of any body that can
tell me. He says, Young Fashion's desiring Mr. Bull to make haste to Sir
Tunbelly; He answers him very decently, I fly Relapse, p. 75.
my good Lord. What this Gentleman means by this Quotation, I cannot imagine;
but I can answer for the other Gentleman, he only meant he would make haste.

He quotes Two or Three Sentences more of Bull's, which are just as Profane as
the rest: He concludes, That the Chaplain has a great deal of heavy Stuff upon
his hands; and his chief Quarrel to me here is, That I have not made him a Wit.

I ask pardon, that I could suppose a Deputy-Lieutenant's Chaplain could be a
Blockhead; but I thought, if there was such a thing, he was as likely to be met
with in Sir Tunbelly's House, as any where. If ever I write the Character of a
Gentleman where a Chaplain like Mr. Collier is to have the Direction of the
Family, I Will endeavor to give him more Sense, that I may qualify him for more
Mischief.

He has now left lashing me in particular, and I only have my share in his
general Stroke upon all such sinful Wretches, who attack P.
Religion under every Form, and pursue the Priesthood through all the
Subdivisions of Opinion. He says, Neither Jews nor Heathens, Turks nor
Christians, Rome nor Geneva, Church nor Conventicle, can escape us. And we say,
They Will all escape us, if he can defend 'em. Priest or Presbyter, Pope or
Calvin, Mufti or Brammen, Ambassador from God, or Envoy from the Devil, if they
have but their Credentials from the other World, they are (with him) all Brothers
of the Sacred String; there is no more Discord than is necessary to make up the
Harmony; and if a Poet does but touch the worst Instrument they play upon, the
Holy Consort of Religion and Morality, he will tell you, is quite out of Tune.

Thus violently does his Zeal to the Priesthood run away with him: Some
Clergyman, methinks, should help to stop him; and I almost persuade my self
there will: There is still in the Gown of the Church of England a very great
Number of Men, both Learned, Wise, and Good, who thoroughly understand
Religion, and truly love it: From amongst these I flatter my self some Hero
will start up, and with the naked Virtue of an Old Generous Roman, appear a
Patriot for Religion indeed; with a Trumpet before him proclaim the Secrets of
the Cloister, and by discovering the Disease, guide the World to the Cure on it.

He may show (if he pleases), That the Contempt of the Clergy proceeds from
another kind of Want, than that of Power and Revenue: That Piety and Learning,
Charity and Humility, with so visible a Neglect of the Things of this Life,
that no one can doubt their Expectations from another; is the way to be
believed in their Doctrine, followed in their Precepts, and (by a most
infallible Consequence) respected in their Function. Religion is not a Cheat,
and therefore has no need of Trappings: Its Beauty is in its Nature, and wants
no Dress: An Ambassador who comes with Advantageous Proposals, stands in no
need of Equipage to procure him Respect. He who teaches Piety and Morality to
the World, is so great a Benefactor to Mankind, he need never doubt their
Thanks, if he does not ask too much of their Money. But here is the Sand, where
Religion runs aground, Avarice and Ambition in its Teachers, are the Rocks on
which it is dashed to pieces. It, with many weak people, brings the whole matter
into doubt. Men naturally suspect the Foundation of a Project, where the
Projector is eager for a larger Contribution than they see is necessary to
carry on the Work. But this Case is so plain, there needs nothing to illustrate
it. It Is the Clergy's Invasion into the Temporal Dominion, that has raised the
Alarm against 'em: It has made their Doctrine suspected, and by consequence,
their Persons despised. I own I have sometimes doubted whether Pharaoh with all
the Hardness of his Heart, would have pursued the Children of Israel to the Red
Sea, as he did, if they had not meddled with the Riches of his Subjects at
their parting; but that Action renewed the Doubts of a Faith so weak as his,
and made him, in spite of all the Miracles he had seen, question whether Moses
had his Commission from God. He paid indeed for his Infidelity, as others may
happen to do upon a parallel Mistake, I wish none have don't already: But I Am
afraid those very Instances Mr. Collier gives us of the Grandeur of the Clergy,
are the things that have destroyed both them and their Flocks.

They owe their Fall to their Ambition; their soaring so high has melted their
Wings; in a word, had they never been so great, they had never been so little.
But lest I should be mistaken, and make my self Enemies of Men I am no Enemy
to, I must declare, my Thoughts are got to Rome, while I am talking thus of the
Clergy; for the Charge is in no measure so heavy at home. The Reformation has
reduced things to a tolerable Medium; and I believe what Quarrel we have to our
Clergy here, points more at the Conduct of some, than the Establishment of the
whole. I wish it may never go farther, and I believe it will not, if those who I
don't question are still by much the Majority, will to so good an End (as the
curbing their Ambitious Brethren, and reforming their Lewd ones) for once make
a League with the Wicked, and agree, That whilst They play their Great
Artillery at 'em from the Pulpit, the Poets shall pelt 'em with their Small
Shot from the Stage. But since Mr. Collier is violently bent against this, I Will
tell him why I am for it. And it is,

Because he has put me in mind, in the first Words of his Book, That the
Business of Plays, is to recommend Virtue and discountenance Vice: To show the
Uncertainty of Human Greatness; the sudden Turns of Fate, and the unhappy
Conclusions of Violence and Injustice: That it is to expose the Singularities of
Pride and Fancy; to make Folly and Falsehood contemptible, and to bring every
thing that is ill, under Infamy and Neglect.

The next Chapter is upon the Encouragement of Immorality by the Stage: And
here Constant is fallen upon, for pretending to be a Fine Gentleman, without
living up to the Exact Rules of Religion. If Mr. Collier excludes every one
from that Character, that does not, I doubt he will have a more general Quarrel
to make up with the Gentlemen of England, than I have with the Lords, though he
tells 'em I have highly affronted 'em.

But I would fain know after all, upon what foundation he lays so positive a
Position, That Constant is my Model for a Fine Gentleman; and that he is
brought upon the Stage for Imitation.

He might as well say, if I brought His Character upon the Stage, I designed it
a Model to the Clergy: And yet I believe most People would take it the other way.
O, but these kind of Fine Gentlemen, he says, are always prosperous in their
Undertakings, and their Vice under no kind of Detection; for in the Fifth Act
of the Play, they are usually rewarded with a Wife or a Mistress. And suppose I
should reward him with a Bishopric in the Fifth Act, would that mend his
Character? I have too great a Veneration for the Clergy, to believe that would
make 'em follow his steps. And yet (with all due Respect to the Ladies) take
one Amor with another, the Bishopric may prove as weighty a Reward as a Wife
or a Mistress either. He says, Mr. Bull was abused upon the Stage, yet he got a
Wife and a Benefice too. Poor Constant has neither, nay, he has not got even
his Mistress yet, he had not, at least, when the Play was last Acted. But this
honest Doctor, I find, does not yet understand the Nature of Comedy, though he
has made it his Study so long. For the Business of Comedy is to show People
what they should do, by representing them upon the Stage, doing what they
should not. Nor is there any necessity a Philosopher should stand by, like an
Interpreter at a Poppet-show, to explain the Moral to the Audience: The Mystery
is seldom so deep, but the Pit and Boxes can dive into it; and it is their
Example out of the Playhouse, that chiefly influences the Galleries. The Stage
is a Glass for the World to view it self in; People ought therefore to see
themselves as they are; if it makes their Faces too Fair, they will not know they
are Dirty, and by consequence will neglect to wash 'em: If therefore I have
showed Constant upon the Stage, what generally the Thing called a Fine
Gentleman is off on it, I think I have done what I should do. I have laid open
his Vices as well as his Virtues: It Is the Business of the Audience to observe
where his Flaws lessen his Value; and by considering the Deformity of his
Blemishes, become sensible how much a Finer Thing he would be without 'em. But
after all, Constant says nothing to justify the Life he leads, except where
he is pleading with Lady Brute to debauch her; and sure no body will suppose him
there to be speaking much of his Mind. Besides, his Mistress in all her Answers
makes the Audience observe the Fallacy of his Arguments. And I think Young
Ladies may without much Penetration make this use of the Dialogue, That they
are not to take all for Gospel, Men tell 'em upon such occasions.

The Provoked Wife is charged with nothing more, except Bellinda for declaring
she would be glad of a Gallant, and Lady Brute for saying, Virtue's an Ass, and a
Gallant's worth forty on it.

I need make no other Defense for the Ladies, than I have already done for the
Gentlemen, the Case being much the same. However, to show how unfair an
Adversary I have to deal with, I must acquaint the Reader, That Bellinda only
says, If her Pride should make her marry a Man she hated, her Virtue would be
in danger from the Man she loved. Now her Reflection upon this, I take to be a
useful Caution both to Mothers and Daughters (who think Chastity a Virtue) to
consider something in their Matches, besides a Page and a Coronet.

Lady Brute's Words are fairly recited, but wrongly applied: Mr. Collier's
mistaken; it is not Virtue she exposes, but her self, when she says 'em: Nor is
it me he exposes, but himself, when he quotes 'em.

He gives me no farther occasion to mention the Provoked Wife, I Will therefore
take this to make an Observation or two upon the Moral of it, it being upon
that account he has called it in question, and endeavored to make it pass for
a Play that has none.

This Play was writ many years ago, and when I was very young; if therefore
there had been some small Flaws in the Moral, I might have been excused for the
Writing, though liable to some Blame for the Publishing it. But I hope it is not
so loose, but I may be pardoned for Both, whether Mr. Collier sets his Seal
to it or not.

As for Sir John Brute, I think there are an Infinity of Husbands who have a
very great share of his Vices: And I think his Business throughout the Play, is
a visible Burlesque upon his Character. It Is this Gentleman that gives the
Spring to the rest of the Adventures: And though I own there is no mighty Plot in
the whole matter, yet what there is, tends to the Reformation of Manners. For
besides the hateful Idea his Figure needs must give of his Character, the ill
Consequence of his Brutality appears in the Miscarriage of his Wife: For though
his ill usage of her does not justify her Intrigue, her intriguing upon his ill
usage, may be a Caution for some. I don't find our Women in England have much
of the Muscovite Temper in 'em: If you will make 'em think you are their Friend,
you must give 'em softer strokes of your Kindness; if you don't, the Gallant
has a dangerous Plea, and such a one as, I doubt, has carried many a Cause.
Religion, I own, (when a Woman has it) is a very great Bulwark for her
Husband's Security: And so is Modesty, and so is Fear, and so is Pride; and yet
all are little enough, if the Gallant has a Friend in the Garrison. I therefore
think That Play has a very good End, which puts the Governor in mind, let his
Soldiers be ever so good, it is possible he may provoke 'em to a Mutiny.

The rest of the Characters, as they have no very great good, so they have very
little mischief in 'em. Lady Fanciful is ridiculed for her Vanity and her
Affectation. Mademoiselle brings to mind what may often be expected from a
Suivante of her Country. Heartfree is caught for his extravagant Railing at
Womankind: And Constant gives himself a great deal of trouble, for a thing that
is not worth his Pains. In short, they are most of 'em busy about what they
should not be; and those who observe they are so, may take warning to employ
their time better.

I have nothing more to answer for in this Chapter, but making the Women speak
against their own Sex: And having the Presumption to bring a Fop upon the Stage
with the Title of a Lord.

This is a bungling Piece of Policy, to make the Women and the Nobility take up
Arms in his Quarrel. I Am ashamed a Churchman should spin his Mischief no finer:
The Sollicitors to the Holy War had almost as good a Plea. But he had one
Consideration farther in this: He remembered he had positively declared, Let a
Clergyman be guilty of what Crimes he would, he was God's Ambassador, and
therefore a Privileged Person, whom the Poets ought never to take into Custody.
This, upon second thoughts, he found would hardly go down, if he monopoliz'd
the Privilege to them alone; and so lest the Company should bring their Charter
to a Dispute, he has opened the Books for New Subscriptions; the Lords and the
Ladies are invited to come in; the Gentlemen, I suppose, may do so too, if they
please; and, in short, rather than the Committee of Religion shall be exposed
for their Faults, all Mankind shall be admitted to Trade in Sin as they please.

But I dare answer for the Laity, of what Quality soever they may be, they are
willing their Vices should be scourged upon the Stage; at least, I never yet
heard one of 'em declare the contrary. If the Clergy insist upon being exempted
by themselves, I believe they may obtain it: But I Am apt to fancy, if they
protect their Loose Livers from being exposed in the Playhouse, they will find
'em grow the bolder to expose themselves in the Streets. A Clergyman is not in
any Country exempted from the Gallows: And Mr. Collier has seen one of his
Brethren peep through a worse Place than a Garret-Window: Nay, (in a Reign he
reckons a Just One) amble through the Town at the Tail of a Cart, with his Sins
in Red Letters upon his Shoulders. A Hangman then may jerk him; Why not a Poet?
Perhaps it is feared he might give him more Sensible Strokes.

I am now come to thank the Gentleman for the last of his Favors; in which he
is so generous to bestow a Chapter entire upon me.

I Am extremely obliged to him for it, since it is more than ever he promised me;
For in the Title of his Book, he designs to Correct the Stage only for the
Immorality and Profaneness of it. And indeed I think that was all his business
with it. But he has since considered better of the matter, and rather than quit
his hold, falls a Criticizing upon Plots, Characters, Words, Dialogue, etc.
even to telling us, when our fine Gentlemen make Love in the prevailing Strein,
and when not. This gives us a farther view of his Studies; but, I think, if he
kept to his Text, he had given us a better View of a Clergyman.

It may, perhaps, be expected I should say more in answer to this Chapter, than
to all that has gone before it; the Sense of the Play being attacked here, much
more than the Moral, which those who will take Mr. Collier's word for my
Principles, must believe I am least concerned for. But I shall satisfy 'em of
the contrary, by leaving the Sense to answer for it self if it can: I Will only
say this for it in general; That it looks as if a Play were not overloaded with
Blunders, when so Pains-taking a Corrector is reduced to the wretched necessity
of spending his Satyr upon Fire and Flames, being in the same Line; and Arms
twice in the same Speech, though at six lines distance one from the other. This
looks as if the Critic were rather duller than the Poet: But when men fight in
a Passion, it is usual to make insignificant Thrusts; most of his are so wide,
they need no parrying; and those that hit, are so weak, they make no Wound.

I don't pretend however to have observed the nicety of Rule in this Play; I
writ it in as much haste (though not in so much fury) as he has done his
Remarks upon it; It Is therefore possible I may have made as many foolish
Mistakes.

I could however say a great deal against the too exact observance of what is
called the Rules of the Stage, and the crowding a Comedy with a great deal of
Intricate Plot. I believe I could show, that the chief entertainment, as well
as the Moral, lies much more in the Characters and the Dialogue, than in the
Business and the Event. And I can assure Mr. Collier, if I would have weakened
the Diversion, I could have avoided all his Objections, and have been at the
expense of much less pains than I have: And this is all the Answer I shall make
to 'em, except what tumbles in my way, as I Am observing the foul play he shows
me, in setting the Relapse in so wrong a Light as he does, at his opening of
the Fable on it.

In the first Page of his Remarks upon this Play, he says I have given it a
wrong Title; The Relapse, or Virtue in Danger, relating only to Loveless and
Amanda, who are Characters of an Inferior Consideration; and that the Younger
Brother, or the Fortunate Cheat had been much more proper; because Young
Fashion is, without competition, the principal Person in the Comedy.

In reading this Gentleman's Book, I have been often at loss to know when he is
playing the Knave, and when he is playing the Fool; nor can I decide which he is
at now. But this I Am sure, Young Fashion is no more the Principal Person of the
Play, than He Is the best Character in the Church; nor has he any reason to
suppose him so, but because he brings up the Rear of the most insignificant
part of the Play, and happens to be the Bridegroom in the close on it.

I will not say any thing here irreverently of Matrimony, because a la Francoise
Bigottry runs high, and by all I see, we are in a fair way to make a Sacrament
on it again. But this I may say, That I had full as much respect for Young
Fashion, while he was a Batchellor, and yet I think while he was so, Loveless
had a part, that from People who desire to be the better for Plays, might draw
a little more Attention. In short; My Lord Fopington, and the Bridegroom, and
the Bride, and the Justice, and the Matchmaker, and the Nurse, and the Parson
at the rear of 'em, are the Inferior Persons of the Play (I mean as to their
business) and what they do, is more to divert the Audience, by something
particular and whimsical in their Humors, than to instruct 'em in any thing
that may be drawn from their Morals; though several useful things may in
passing be picked up from 'em too.

This is as distinct from the main intention of the Play, as the business of
Gomez is in the Spanish Friar. I shall not here enter into the Contest, whether it
be right to have two distinct Designs in one Play; I Will only say, I think when
there are so, if they are both entertaining, then it is right; if they are not,
it is wrong. But the Dispute here is, Where lies the principal business in the
Relapse? Mr. Collier decides it roundly for the Wedding-house, because there is
best Cheer; his Patron, Sir Tunbelly, has got a good Venison-Pasty for him, and
such a Tankard of Ale, as has made him quite forget the Moral Reflections he
should have made upon the Disorders that are slipped into Loveless's House, by
his being too positive in his own strength, and forgetting, that Lead us not
into Temptation, is a Petition in our Prayers, which was thought fit to be
tackt to that for our daily Bread.

And here my Design was such, I little thought it would ever have been
Ridiculed by a Clergyman. 'Twas in few words this.

I observed in a Play, called Love's last Shift, or the Fool in Fashion, a
Debauche pay so dear for his Lewdness, and his Folly, as from a plentiful
Fortune, and a Creditable Establishment in the World, to be reduced by his
Extravagance to want even the Common Supports of Life.

In this Distress, Providence (I ask Mr. Collier's pardon for using the word)
by an unexpected turn in his favor, restores him to Peace and Plenty: And
there is that in the manner of doing it, and the Instrument that brings it to
pass, as must necessarily give him the most sensible View, both of his Misery
past, from the Looseness of his Life; and his Happiness to come, in the Reform
of it. In the close of the Play, he is left thoroughly convinced it must
therefore be done, and as fully determined to do it.

For my part, I thought him so undisputably in the right; and he appeared to me
to be got into so agreeable a Tract of Life, that I often took a pleasure to
indulge a musing Fancy, and suppose my self in his place. The Happiness I saw
him possessed of, I looked upon as a Jewel of a very great worth, which naturally
lead me to the fear of losing it; I therefore considered by what Enemies 'twas
most likely to be attacked, and that directed me in the Plan of the Works that
were most probable to defend it. I saw but one danger in Solitude and
Retirement, and I saw a thousand in the bustle of the World; I therefore in a
moment determined for the Country, and supposed Lovelace and Amanda gone out
of Town.

I found these Reflections of some service to my self, and so (being drawn into
the folly of writing a Play) I resolved the Town should share 'em with me. But
it seems they are so little to Mr. Collier's Taste, he will neither eat the Meat
himself, nor say Grace to it for any body else. I Will try however if the
following Account will recommend it to him.

Loveless and his Wife appear in the start of the Play, happy in their
Retirement, and in all Human Prospect, likely to continue so, if they continue
where they are. As for Amanda, she is so pleased with her Solitude, she desires
never to leave it; and the Adventures that happen upon her being forced to it,
may caution a Husband (if he pleases) against being so very importunate to
bring his Wife (how virtuous soever) into the way of Mischief, when she her
self is content to keep out of it.

Loveless, He Is so thoroughly weaned from the taste of his Debauches, he has
not a thought toward the Stage where they used to be acted. It Is Business, not
Pleasure, brings him thither again, and his Wife cannot persuade him there is the
least danger of a Relapse; He Is proud to think on what a Rock his Reformation
is built, and resolves She her self shall be a Witness, That though the Winds
blow, and the Billows roar, yet nothing can prevail against it.

To Town in short they come, and Temptation's set at defiance. Lead us not into
it, is a Request he has no farther occasion for. The first place he tries his
Strength, is where he used to be the most sensible of his Weakness.

He could resist no Woman heretofore; He Will now show he can stand a Battalion
of 'em; so to the Playhouse he goes, and with a smile of contempt looks cooly
into the Boxes. But Berinthia is there to chastise his Presumption: He
discovers her Beauty, but despises her Charms; and is fond of himself, that so
unmoved he can consider 'em. He finds a Pleasure indeed, in viewing the
Curiosity, but it is only to contemplate the Skill of the Contriver. As for
Desire, he is satisfied he has none; let the Symptoms be what they will, he is
free from the Disease; he may gaze upon the Lady till he grows a Statue in the
Place, but he is sure he is in love with none but his Wife. Home he comes, and
gives her an account of what he had seen; she is alarmed at the Story, and looks
back to her Retirement: He blames her Suspicion, and all is silent again. When
Fate (here is Blasphemy again) so disposes things, that the Temptation's brought
home to his Door, and his Wife has the misfortune to invite it into her House.
In short; Berinthia becomes one of the Family: She Is Beautiful in her Person,
Gay in her Temper, Coquet in her Behavior, and Warm in her Desires. In a word,
The Battery is so near, there is no standing the Shot, Constancy's beaten down;
the Breach is made, Resolution gives ground, and the Town's taken.

This I designed for a natural Instance of the Frailty of Mankind, even in his
most fixed Determinations; and for a mark upon the defect of the most steady
Resolve, without that necessary Guard, of keeping out of Temptation. But I had
still a farther end in Loveless's Relapse, and indeed much the same with that
in the Provoked Wife, though in different kind of Characters; these latter
being a little more refined, which places the Moral in a more reasonable, and I
think a more agreeable View. There; The Provocation is from a Brute, and by
consequence cannot be supposed to sting a Woman so much, as if it had come from
a more Reasonable Creature; the Lady therefore that gives her self a Loose upon
it, could not naturally be represented the best of her Sex. Virtuous (upon some
ground or other) there was a Necessity of making her; but it appears by a
Strain of Levity that runs through her Discourse, she owed it more to Form, or
Apprehension, or at best to some few Notions of Gratitude to her Husband, for
taking her with an Inferior Fortune, than to any Principle of Religion, or an
extraordinary Modesty. 'Twas therefore not extremely to be wondered at, that
when her Husband made her House uneasy to her at home, she should be prevailed
with to accept of some Diversions abroad. However, since she was Regular while
he was kind, the Fable may be a useful Admonition to Men who have Wives, and
would keep 'em to themselves, not to build their Security so entirely upon
their Ladies Principles, as to venture to pull from under her all the Political
Props of her Virtue.

But in the Adventures of Loveless and Amanda, the Caution is carried farther.
Here Is a Woman whose Virtue is raised upon the utmost Strength of Foundation:
Religion, Modesty, and Love, defend it. It looks so Sacred, one would think no
Mortal durst approach it; and seems so fixed, one would believe no Engine could
shake it: Yet loosen one Stone, the Weather works in, and the Structure molders
apace to decay. She discovers her Husband's return to his Inconstancy. The
unsteadiness of his Love gives her a Contempt of his Person; and what lessens
her Opinion, declines her Inclination. As her Passion for him is abated, that
against him's inflamed; and as her Anger increases, her Reason's confused: Her
Judgment in disorder, her Religion's unhinged; and that Fence being broken, she
lies widely exposed: Worthy's too sensible of the Advantage, to let slip the
Occasion: He has Intelligence of the Vacancy, and puts in for the Place.

Poor Amanda's persuaded he is only to be her Friend, and that all he asks, is
to be admitted as a Comforter in her Afflictions. But when People are sick,
they are so fond of a Cordial, that when they get it to their Nose, they are
apt to take too much on it.

She finds in his Company such a Relief to her Pain, she desires the Physician
may be always in her sight. She grows pleased with his Person as well as his
Advice, yet she is sure he can never put her Virtue in Danger. But she might
have remembered her Husband was once of the same Opinion; and have taken warning
from him, as the Audience, I intended, should do from 'em both.

This was the Design of the Play; which I think is something of so much greater
Importance than Young Fashion's marrying Miss Hoyden, that if I had called it
the Younger Brother, or the Fortunate Cheat, instead of the Relapse, or Virtue
in danger, I had been just as much in the wrong, as Mr. Collier is now.

His reason, I remember, why Loveless cannot be reckoned a Principal Part, is,
Because he sinks in the Fourth Act. But I can tell him, If the Play had sunk in
the Fourth Act too, it had been better than it is, by just Twenty per Cent.
However, though Loveless's Affair is brought about in the Fourth Act, Amanda's
last Adventure is toward the End of the Fifth. But this is only a Cavil from
the Formality of the Critics; which is always well broken into, if the
Diversion's increased by it, and Nature not turned Top-side-turvy. If therefore
nothing but the Critics (I mean such as Mr. Collier) find themselves shocked
by the Disorders of this Play, I think I need trouble my self as little to
justify what is past, as I own I should to mend it, in any thing to come; had I
thoughts of meddling any more with the Stage. But to draw to an End.

I have reserved for the Close of this Paper, one Observation (a home one I
think) upon the Unfair Dealing of this Reverend Gentleman; which shows at once
the Rancor of his Venom, the Stretch of his Injustice, and by a Moral
Consequence, I think, the Extremity of his Folly: For sure there cannot be a
greater, than for a Man of his Coat, at the very Instant he is declaiming
against the Crimes of the Age, to lay himself so open, to be hit in the most
Immoral Blot of Life, which that of Slander undisputably is.

To Explain. I beg the Reader will bestow one Moments Reflection upon the Pains
he has taken to make Young Fashion and his Affair pass for the Principal
Concern of the Comedy; which he only has done, in hopes to sink the useful
Moral of the Play, which he knew lay in the other part of it, and would
unavoidably have appeared in Judgment against his Reflections upon the whole,
if he had not taken this way to stifle the Evidence: He therefore carries on
the Imposture to that degree, as at last to slubber over the Conclusive Scene
between Worthy and Amanda, as if there were no Meaning of Importance in it.
Nay, his Rage is so great (to find the Stamp of Immorality he would fain have
fixed upon this Play, so cleanly washed off by the Close of this Scene) that he
cares not what Folly he commits: And therefore in his Heats, rather than
commend it for the Alarm it gives to Lewdness, by Worthy's Reflections upon
Amanda's Refusal, he turns him into Ridicule for an Insipid Platonic: By which
we may guess, had he been in the Fine Gentleman's Place, the Lady would not
have 'scap'd as she did. I Will repeat Worthy's Words, with the Doctor's use of
'em, and so have done.

Sure there is Divinity about her, Relapse, p. 100.
and she has dispensed some Portion on it to me: For what but now was the Wild
Flame of Love, or (to dissect that specious Term) the vile, the gross Desires
of Flesh and Blood, is in a Moment turned to Adoration: The courser Appetite of
Nature's gone, and it is methinks the Food of Angels I require. How long this
Influence may last, Heaven knows: But in this Moment of my Purity, I could on
her Own Terms accept her Heart. Yes, Lovely Woman, I can accept it, for now
it is doubly worth my Care: Your Charms are much increased since thus adorned:
When Truth's extorted from us, then we own the Robe of Virtue is a Graceful
Habit. Could Women but our secret Councils scan;
Could they but reach the deep Reserves of Man;
They Would wear it on, that that of Love might last:
For when they throw off one, we soon the other cast.
Their Sympathy is such --
The Fate of one, the other scarce can fly,
They live together, and together dye.


This Reflection Worthy makes to himself, upon Amanda's having Virtue enough to
resist him, when he plainly saw she lay under a pressing Temptation.

Now when it is considered, That upon the Stage the Person who speaks in a
Soliloquy is always supposed to deliver his real Thoughts to the Audience: I
think it must be granted, there never was a homer Check given to the Lewdness
of Women in any Play whatsoever. For what in Nature can touch 'em nearer, than
to see a man, after all the Pains he has taken, and the Eager Arguments he has
used, lay open his Heart, and frankly confess, had he gained his Mistress, she
had lost her Gallant.

This I thought was a Turn so little suited to Comedy, that I confess I was
afraid the Rigor of the Moral would have damned the Play. But it seems every
body could relish it but a Clergyman. Mr. Collier's Words are these:

Amanda continues obstinate, and P. 227.
is not in the usual Humor of the Stage: Upon this, like a well-bred Lover he
seizes her by force, and threatens to kill her: (By the way, this Purblind
Divine might have seen 'twas himself, not his Mistress, he threatened.) In this
Rencounter the Lady proves too nimble, and slips through his Fingers. Upon this
Disappointment he cries, There Is Divinity about her, and she has dispensed some
Portion on it to me. His Passion is metamorphos'd in the turn of a hand: He Is
refined into a Platonic Admirer, and goes off as like a Town-Spark as you
would wish. And so much for the Poet's Fine Gentleman.

The World may see by this, what a Contempt the Doctor has for a Spark that can
make no better use of his Mistress, than to admire her for her Virtue. This
methinks is something so very extraordinary in a Clergyman, that I almost fancy
when He and I are fast asleep in our Graves, those who shall read what we both
have produced, will be apt to conclude there is a Mistake in the Tradition about
the Authors; and that 'twas the Reforming Divine writ the Play, and the
Scandalous Poet the Remarks upon it.

FINIS.

